
RECOLLECTIONS 

OF  AN 

IRISH   POLICE  MAGISTRATE, 


MY  HERO. 

The  magistrate  to  whom  I  allude  in  the  greater  num- 
ber of  my  sketches,  was  commonly  known  as  Major 
Yokes;  not  that  he  was  a  military  man,  but  I  believe 
he  was  entitled,  when  the  post  of  "  police  magistrate" 
was  first  instituted,  to  bear  this  comparative  rank  in 
the  table  of  social  precedence  laid  down  as  between  civi- 
lians and  military  men  ;  and  hence  almost  all  the  officers 
at  first  appointed  police  magistrates  were  thus  desig- 
nated. But  as  Major  Vokes  became  better  known  and 
more  generally  spoken  of,  his  Christian  name  was 
quoted,  and  Tom  Yokes  was  the  appellation  by  which 
the  most  intelligent  magistrate  that  ever  graced  the 
Limerick  (or  any  other)  bench,  became  popularly  known. 
Thomas  Phillips  Yokes,  of  whom  I  now  write,  boasted 
his  descent  from  an  old  French  family,  spelling  their 
name  in  the  same  manner  in  waich  a  noble  family  of 
the  present  day  now  write  theirs ;  and  T.  P.  Yokes 
always  believed  that  by  thus  changing  the  spelling  of 
his  name  his  grandfather,  Sir  Richard  Yokes,  had  lost 
a  chance  of  obtaining  a  title,  then,  and  still,  extinct. 

1  01 


2     RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

But  all  this  matters  little  to  the  reader,  who  probably- 
only  desires  to  learn  the  condition  of  the  south  of  Ireland 
some  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  when  Limerick,  Clare  and 
Tipperary  were  in  a  state  of  decided  insurrection — when 
encounters  daily  took  place  between  the  soldiery  and 
the  peasantry — and  when  the  local  magistrates,  panic- 
struck  by  the  murder  of  several  of  their  body,  peti- 
tioned the  Government  to  grant  them  official  aid. 

At  this  time  Yokes  was  an  unpaid  magistrate,  resi- 
dent on  his  small  property,  which  he  held  under  lease 
from  his  relative,  the  Earl  of  Carberry.  But  his  activity, 
his  fearless  energy,  had  already  drawn  on  him  the 
attention  of  the  higher  powers.  A  ruffian,  styling 
himself  Captain  Bock,  had  become  the  terror  of  the 
county  of  Limerick  ;  and  so  fearful  had  been  the  deeds 
that  he  had  committed,  that  the  faces  of  women  and 
children  blanched  at  the  mention  of  his  name,  and  men 
cared  little  to  risk  their  lives  in  an  attack  on  this  bold 
marauder  even  when  supported  by  soldiers  and  police. 
Vokes,  however,  rather  laughed  at  their  fears,  and  in- 
effectually endeavoured,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  to 
meet  this  terror  of  the  neighbourhood  face  to  face.  In 
some  way  or  another  his  wish  was  always  baulked,  and 
he  failed  to  encounter  him. 

One  evening  in  autumn,  Mrs.  Y.  having  business  in 
the  city  of  Limerick,  drove  over  there  in  her  jaunting 
car,  accompanied  by  the  wife  of  another  magistrate, 
the  two  husbands  agreeing  to  accompany  them  on 
horseback.  At  the  instant,  however,  of  starting,  the 
gentlemen  were  detained  to  transact  some  pressing 
business,  and  as  the  ladies  were  unwilling  to  be  over- 
taken by  the  shades  of  night,  they  at  once  started, 


MY  HERO. 


3 


their  protectors  promising  soon  to  overtake  them.  So 
away  they  went,  the  distance  only  being  about  seven 
miles. 

Vokes,  after  having  discharged  his  portion  of  the 
duty,  found  that  his  friend  would  be  probably  detained 
an  hour  or  two.  So,  mounting  his  horse,  he  galloped 
on  to  overtake  his  wife,  whom  he  believed  to  have 
nearly  reached  the  end  of  her  journey.  On  arriving, 
however,  at  a. short  distance  beyond  Patrick's-well — a 
village  situated  some  five  miles  from  Limerick — he 
came  up  with  his  wife,  who  in  an  agony  of  fear  related 
to  him  the  fact,  that  she  and  her  companion  had 
just  been  stopped  by  two  footpads  and  robbed  of  their 
watches,  rings,  and  purses ;  and  added,  that  while  one 
tall,  fine-looking  peasant,  armed  with  a  stout  cudgel, 
and  a  knife  conspicuously  stuck  in  his  belt,  had  thus 
rifled  them  of  their  property,  the  other  robber  had 
presented  a  loaded  blunderbuss  at  the  head  of  the 
driver,  and  compelled  him  to  remain  quiescent. 
These  facts  the  coachman  (an  old  retainer)  fully  bore 
out. 

"  Was  he  tall  ?  Had  he  very  black  hair,  and  a  slight 
cast  in  his  eyeT  abruptly  demanded  the  Major. 

"  Yes,  yes  ;  but  had  we  not  better  hasten  on  ?" 

"  Can  you  recollect — had  he  black  stockings,  and  a 
frieze  coat  V*  earnestly  demanded  the  husband,  inatten- 
tive to  everything  else. 

"  He  had.    But  " 

"  Faith,  there's  no  buts.  Here,  Tim,  take  my  horse/' 
throwing  the  bridle  to  the  coachman.  "  Which  way 
did  they  take  ?" 

"  Over  that  way.  Sure,  yer  honor  !  I  see  one  of  them, 

1—2 


4     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

I  do  believe,  yonder  across  the  bog,  going  towards  the 
mountains.  Faith,  I  think  I  could  direct  the  police 
after  them,"  said  the  driver.  But  ere  he  had  well 
concluded  his  sentence,  the  magistrate  had  loudly  ex- 
claimed, "  By  Heavens,  His  he  /"  and  leaping  the  dyke 
beside  the  road,  in  the  next  instant  he  was  seen  rush- 
ing across  the  field  in  the  direction  pointed  out — only 
turning  round  once  to  wave  his  hand,  as  an  order  to 
his  servant  to  continue  his  route  into  Limerick. 

It  is  far  beyond  the  powers  of  my  pen  to  paint  the 
agony  of  the  lady  who  thus,  as  she  believed,  saw  her 
husband  rush  recklessly  into  the  jaws  of  death.  It  is 
beyond  the^graphic  delineation  of  a  mere  narrator  to 
describe  how  earnestly  she  screamed  after  him.  Suffice 
it  to  say,  that  when  she  found  her  efforts  to  call  him 
back  ineffectual,  she  proceeded  into  the  city,  and 
waited  on  the  authorities,  who  instantly  sent  out 
parties  of  police  and  military  to  look  after  the  bold 
but  imprudent  magistrate,  who  had  thus  pursued  the 
object  of  his  unceasing  vigilance,  the  notorious  Captain 
Rock  j  for  such  the  robber,  from  the  description  given 
of  him,  was  now  believed  to  be.  But  all  in  vain.  The 
parties,  one  after  another,  returned,  and  that  night 
and  the  next  day  passed  without  any  intelligence  re- 
specting the  missing  magistrate.  He  was  already 
mourned  as  a  fresh  victim  to  the  lawless  wretches  who 
then  held  the  south  of  Ireland  in  terrorem.  On  the 
second  morning  after  the  robbery  had  taken  place,  an 
order  was  received  by  the  police  officer  in  Limerick, 
to  send  four  men  to  Patrick's-well  station-house  to  re- 
ceive a  prisoner  of  importance.  The  order  was  signed 
T.  P.  Yokes.     All  who  heard  of  it  expressed  their 


MY  HERO. 


5 


wonder  at  his  escape.  Several  of  the  most  influential 
persons  in  the  city  accompanied  the  party  out  to  the 
village,  where  they  found  the  worthy  magistrate 
stretched  out  in  a  deep  sleep ;  his  clothes  torn  and 
covered  with  mud,  his  face  and  hands  unwashed  and  his 
head  uncovered,  for  his  hat  was  gone.  But  even  in  his 
slumbers  he  grasped  tightly  in  his  hand  a  loaded  horse- 
whip, the  only  weapon  he  had  carried  with  him  in 
his  perilous  pursuit.  The  first  echo  of  approaching 
footsteps  aroused  him.  He  started  up,  and  with  a 
cheerful  smile  at  the  alarmed  countenances  of  his 
friends,  led  them  into  the  next  room,  where,  guarded 
by  two  policemen  and  bound  by  strong  cords,  sat  a 
prisoner,  whom  Vokes  announced  as  Captain  Rock, 
the  bold,  the  terror-striking  brigand,  known  by  this 
soubriquet,  his  real  name  being  Fitzmaurice. 

Vokes  seldom  alluded  to  his  deeds  of  daring,  and  it 
was  with  difficulty  the  following  facts  were  elicited 
from  him.  It  appeared  that  after  an  hour's  severe 
running,  the  magistrate  came  to  a  cottage  where,  from 
certain  indications,  he  found  the  robbers  had  partaken 
of  some  drink.  Convinced  of  this,  he  again  set  out  on 
his  arduous  pursuit.  He  came  within  sight  of  them, 
and  the  lesser  peasant,  armed  with  a  blunderbuss, 
turned  round  and  fired,  but  missed  his  aim.  He  then 
threw  away  the  arm,  as  it  encumbered  his  flight,  and 
instantly  separated  from  his  companion,  the  latter 
taking  his  course  towards  the  mountains.  Vokes,  on 
arriving  at  the  spot  where  they  had  thus  taken  opposite 
directions,  took  up  the  blunderbuss  and  followed  Fitz- 
maurice  (for  now  he  was  convinced  that  the  robber 
was  no  less  a  personage)  towards  the  hills.    It  was 


6     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


night,  however,  before  he  readied  them,  and  he  well 
knew  there  was  no  chance  of  overtaking  the  fellow  in 
the  dark ;  so  he  fearlessly  entered  a  cottage,  where  he 
was  hospitably  received,  and  had  a  comfortable  bed  of 
straw  afforded  to  him.  Yokes  often  laughed  after- 
wards at  this  incident,  as  he  felt  fully  convinced  that 
he  was  there  sheltered  under  the  impression  that  he 
was  one  of  the  gang — a  belief  which  his  thorough 
knowledge  of  Irish  strengthened.  At  daybreak  he 
was  again  on  foot,  and  ascended  the  mountain.  Here 
he  frequently  arrived  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of 
the  man  he  sought,  but  each  time  was  disappointed  in 
taking  him.  He,  however,  recollected  that  he  had  an 
old  and  attached  follower  who  had  a  hut  half-way 
down  the  mountain.  Telling  two  or  three  peasants — 
whom  he  affected  to  believe  loyal — that  he  found  that  the 
capture  was  impossible  and  that  consequently  he  would 
return  to  Limerick — he  began  to  descend  as  night  set 
in,  and,  as  he  had  well  surmised,  Rock  was  soon  ap- 
prised of  his  desistance  from  further  pursuit.  Yokes, 
however,  had  no  intention  of  thus  abandoning  his  prey. 
So,  after  thus  publicly  retracing  his  steps  for  about  a 
mile,  he  suddenly  turned  aside  and  entered  his  tenant's 
cottage,  where  he  was  welcomed,  and  the  doors  and 
windows  closely  barred,  lest  his  presence  might  be 
betrayed.  At  daybreak  he  again  awoke,  and  was 
about  to  resume  his  chase,  when  the  farmer's  son  came 
in  and  mentioned  that  he  had  just  passed  Fitzmaurice 
descending  towards  Adare — indeed,  that  most  noto- 
rious character  could  scarcely  be  half  a  mile  off  at  the 
moment.  Yokes  did  not  hesitate,  but  rushed  out,  and 
being  on  the  higher  ground,  soon  perceived  the  object 


MY  HERO, 


7 


of  his  search.  He  had  turned  round,  and  was  now, 
for  some  reason  or  other  (known  only  to  himself),  re- 
ascending  the  brow  of  the  hill.  Yokes,  as  quick  as 
thought,  hid  himself  behind  a  projecting  rock  in  the 
path  over  which  Rock  must  necessarily  pass.  In  a  few 
minutes  more  he  did  so,  when,  suddenly  starting  out, 
the  bold  Major  jumped  forth,  and  before  the  ruffian 
could  look  round,  ,  had  presented  the  muzzle  of  the 
unloaded  blunderbuss  at  his  head,  commanding  him  to 
surrender.  The  other,  believing  that  the  next  moment 
would  be  his  last  if  he  ventured  to  resist,  and  being 
wholly  unarmed,  at  once  surrendered,  and  allowed 
Vokes  to  pinion  him  with  his  horsewhip,  which  he 
still  retained,  and  which,  bound  strongly  and  tightly 
with  his  pocket-handkerchief  and  another  which  he 
had  found  on  the  person  of  the  prisoner,  completely 
fettered  him.  This  done,  he  marched  him  down  to 
Patrick's- well,  taking  care  to  avoid  every  cottage,  every 
spot,  where  any  of  the  peasantry  were  likely  to  be 
found,  well  knowing  that  they  would  rescue  their  captain 
(as  they  styled  him)  if  they  could.  With  the  blunder- 
buss— which,  being  without  ammunition,  was  com- 
pletely harmless — pointed  at  him,  Yokes  marched  the 
boldest  brigand  that  ever  infested  the  south  of  Ireland 
nearly  three  miles,  and  lodged  him  in  the  hands  of  the 
police. 

Within  two  months,  Fitzmaurice  (alias  Captain 
Rock)  was  tried,  convicted,  and  executed  in  the  city  of 
Limerick — a  city  whose  inhabitants  had  long  trembled 
at  the  very  mention  of  his  name. 

Such  being  the  unexaggerated  facts  recorded  of  this 
wonderful  capture — to  which  others  of  a  minor  de- 


8     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

scription  might  well  be  added — it  is  a  matter  of  little 
astonishment  that  the  then  Government  of  Ireland 
offered  the  post  of  chief  magistrate  of  police  to  Thomas 
Phillips  Yokes,  who  subsequently  so  fully  justified  their 
choice,  that  a  considerable  income  was  accorded  to  him  ; 
that  all  the  powers  conferred  by  Sir  Robert  Peel's  Act 
were  bestowed  on  him  ;  that  the  expenses  voted  for 
secret-service  money  were  often  left  to  his  discretion; 
and  lastly,  that  when  he  retired — worn  out  after  thirty 
years'  service — he  was  allowed  a  pension  for  life  of 
1200?.  (Irish)  a  year. 

He  is  dead  and  gone,  and  a  new  style  of  magistracy 
and  police,  under  the  Constabulary  Act,  have  taken 
the  place  of  his  system.  That  the  present  mode  of 
repressing  crime  and  detecting  offenders  is  ineffective 
I  think  the  outrages  which  now  daily  occur,  even  at 
the  moment  I  am  writing,  and  the  mode  in  which  well- 
known  murderers  escape  their  just  doom,  most  plainly 
show.  But  the  few  following  sketches  are  meant 
merely  as  a  picture  of  crime  in  Ireland  as  she  was — 
not  as  she  is  :  to  portray  the  state  of  Munster,  rather 
than  give  a  memoir  of  my  friend. 

That  T.  P.  Yokes  was  estimated,  not  only  in  his  own 
country,  but  throughout  the  whole  British  empire,  the 
following  paragraph,  which  appeared  in  the  London 
Illustrated  News,  most  fully  certifies,  and  at  the  same 
time  bears  out  the  facts  given  in  the  preceding 
sketch  : — 

"In  our  obituary  of  last  month  toe  recorded  the 
death  of  Thomas  Phillips  Yokes,  for  upwards  of  thirty 
years  the  chief  magistrate  of  police  in  Limerick,  a  post 
conferred  on  him  for  his  daring  courage  and  extraordi- 


MY  HERO. 


9 


nary  exertions  in  putting  down  the  rebellious  attempts 
which  threatened  the  south  of  Ireland  in  1820  to  1822. 
Mr.  Yokes,  at  that  period  a  country  magistrate  residing 
on  his  paternal  estate,  single-handed  and  unarmed, 
seized  tlie  notorious  Captain  Rock,  the  terror  of  the 
whole  district.  During  three  days  and  nights  he  pur- 
sued him  through  the  mountain  fastnesses  of  Limerick, 
and  at  length  having  captured  him,  brought  him  in  and 
lodged  him  in  the  county  jail.  He  was  soon  after  tried, 
convicted,  and  executed.  When  Munster  ivas  paralysed 
by  the  murder  of  Major  Going  and  others — when  magis- 
trates shrunk  in  natural  terror,  well  knowing  the  fatal 
consequences  of  activity  —  when  harassed  authorities, 
worn-out  troops,  and  ill-organized  police  held  back  from 
a  task  of  no  ordinary  danger  and  toil,  Thomas  Phillips 
Yokes  boldly  stepped  fonvard  to  put  down  crime,  and 
bring  the  violators  of  the  law  to  instant  and  summary 
punishment.  He  claimed  descent  from  the  Yauxes, 
Lords  of  Gilsland,  and  in  this  belief  he  was  borne  out 
by  the  fact  of  his  grandfather,  Sir  Richard  Yokes, 
having  originally  spelt  his  name  Yaux.  Three  times 
ivere  the  thanks  of  Government  tendered  to  this  officer, 
accompanied  (on  two  occasions)  by  substantial  pecuniary 
marks  of  approval.  He  was  the  last  survivifig  magis- 
trate under  Reels  Irish  Police  Act.  By  his  death  a 
pension  of  9bQl.  a  year  reverts  to  Government." — 
October,  1852. 


10 


THE  BIED'S  NEST. 


To  those  only  who  have  long  resided  in  Ireland  can  be 
known  the  horror  inspired  by  a  "  process  server," — 
the  abhorrence  with  which  these  poor  men  are  looked 
upon  by  every  Patlander.  In  this  quiet  and  orderly 
country,  the  man  placed  in  "  possession  "  of  your  pro- 
perty by  the  formalities  of  the  law  is  not  only  con- 
sidered as  the  mere  tool  of  a  superior  power,  but  is 
often,  very  often,  well  treated.  Nay,  courtesy  goes  so 
far,  that  he  is  frequently  asked,  during  his  forced 
sojourn,  to  join  in  all  the  meals  and  other  comforts 
which  the  house  affords.  Not  so  in  the  sister  country. 
The  unhappy  man  sent  in  to  do  this  unpleasant  duty 
is  not  only  ill-treated  and  abused,  but  often  becomes  a 
victim  of  murderous  ferocity. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  illustrations  of  Irish 
feeling  occurred  some  thirty  years  ago  in  the  county 
of  Clare,  when  a  gentleman  of  high  standing,  good 
estate,  and  old  family,  wTas  so  irritated,  that,  on  his 
house  being  taken  possession  of,  he  actually  got  up  in 
the  middle  of  the  night,  and  set  it  on  fire,  thus  periling 
the  lives  of  the  two  poor  officials  in  charge.  That  which, 
however,  made  the  case  still  worse,  was  the  attempt 
on  the  part  of  the  incendiary  to  cast  the  blame  on  the 


THE  BIRD'S  NEST. 


II 


H  men  in  possession  j "  from  which  charge,  however, 
they  perfectly  cleared  themselves,  and  Mr.  — —  was 
fully  committed  for  setting  fire  to  his  own  house,  a 
somewhat  strange  occurrence  ;  bub  several  cases  of 
thus  destroying  the  security  of  creditors  having  lately 
occurred,  Sir  Eobert  Peel  deemed  it  necessary  to  make 

it  a  felony.     Mr.   was  the  first  party  indicted 

under  the  new  act,  and  would  undoubtedly  have 
escaped,  had  he  not  (as  we  have  said)  endeavoured  to 
destroy  two  innocent  men,  basing  his  accusation  on 
his  own  personal  observation.  This  was  thought  so 
horrible  that  the  law  was  allowed  to  take  its  course, 

and  Mr.   was  hanged  in  Ennis,  as  an  example  to 

deter  those  who  would  thus  savagely  avenge  their  own 
irregularities  on  the  heads  of  those  who  had  never 
injured  them. 

This  striking  fact,  however,  seemed  to  have  little 
effect  on  the  bloodthirsty  nature  of  the  Irish  peasantry ; 
for  in  the  journal  I  was  now  reading  there  was  a 
dreadful  account  of  a  murder  committed  (or,  rather, 
discovered  the  day  before)  on  two  keepers,  near  Kil- 
mallock.  The  bodies  of  the  unfortunate  men  were 
found  in  a  small  river,  about  a  mile  from  the  farm- 
house they  were  supposed  to  be  in  possession  of ;  and 
steps  had  been  taken  to  make  it  appear  as  if  they  had 
perished  by  accident;  but  this  belief  was  at  once 
destroyed  by  their  skulls  being  found  battered  in,  and 
their  faces  so  disfigured  with  blows,  that  it  was  a  task 
of  great  difficulty  to  identify  them. 

The  account  given  by  the  farmer's  family  wras  very 
clear,  and  the  testimony  of  each  member  of  the  circle 
agreed  so  consistently,  that  their  evidence  was  scarcely 


12  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

to  be  doubted.  It  appeared  from  their  statement, 
that  the  two  meu  had  taken  up  their  residence  in  an 
adjoining  barn,  and  that  one  of  the  daughters  had 
carried  them  their  frugal  supper  the  evening  before. 
They  then  seemed  well  primed  with  whisky,  and 
might  be  supposed  to  be  in  possession  of  still  larger 
supplies  of  this  intoxicating  beverage.  The  general 
belief  of  the  family  was,  therefore,  that  the  two  poor 
fellows,  having  got  drunk,  fell  asleep,  and,  on  waking, 
walked  across  the  fields,  to  bathe  themselves,  for  the 
purpose  of  washing  away  their  debauch  ;  but,  unfor- 
tunately, not  being  quite  sober,  they  had  fallen  in,  just 
where  the  stream  was  most  rapid  and  deep,  and  thus 
fell  victims  to  their  intemperance.  The  wounds  on 
their  head  they  supposed  must  have  been  caused  by 
being  dashed  against  some  rocks,  past  which  they  had 
been  carried  by  the  stream. 

The  story  seemed  to  the  local  authorities  to  be 
somewhat  improbable ;  but,  on  strict  investigation, 
they  found  the  footsteps  of  two  men  clearly  imprinted 
in  several  places  between  the  door  of  the  barn  and  the 
river,  where  they  again  appeared  on  the  muddy  and 
slippery  bank.  The  whole  house  was  examined  over 
and  over  again  ;  but  no  weapon,  no  instrument  of 
death,  or  cause  of  suspicion,  could  be  discovered. 
Forty-eight  hours  were  fruitlessly  employed  by  the 
local  magistrates,  the  chief  constable,  and  the  coroner, 
in  seeking  for  some  evidence  ;  but  all  in  vain.  As  a 
last  resource,  they  wrote  to  Yokes,  in  Limerick. 

Of  all  this — beyond  the  paragraph  in  the  news- 
paper— I  heard  nothing  till  the  entrance  of  the  chief 
constable,  who  arrived,  bearing  the  invitation  to  my 
intelligent  friend  to  attend. 


THE  BIRD'S  NEST. 


13 


"  Well,  Mac,  as  they  wish  it,  I'll  go ;  but  you  may 
depend  upon  it,  it's  as  the  people  say.  These  fellows 
got  drunk,  and  slipped  into  the  river.  I'll  order  my 
carriage  directly,  and  you  and  my  relative  here  can 
drive  over  with  me." 

I  began  to  make  excuses. 

"  Oh,  don't  be  getting  out  of  it !    If  you'll  come 

along  we'll  touch  at  ,  and  I'll  show  you  the  finest 

stud  of  horses  in  Ireland.  Come,  don't  be  fancying 
that  there's  any  danger  this  time  !  I'm  only  going 
over  to  see  my  brother  magistrates.  By-the-bye  I'd 
like  to  introduce  you  to  some  of  them.  There's  no 
cause  of  alarm  to  any  one  here,  is  there,  Mac  ?"  turning 
to  the  police  officer. 

"  None  in  the  world,  Major.  Sure,  if  there  had  been 
anything,  we  would  have  discovered  it  without 
troubling  you." 

"  You're  right ;  but  as  they  ask  me,  we'll  just  run 
over  f  and  in  half-au-hour  more,  we  were  en  route. 

I  confess  I  was  not  comfortable.  Yokes  was  far  too 
jovial  to  please  me,  and  he  laughed  at  the  idea  of  this 
murder  so  loudly,  and  pooh-poohed  it  so  strongly,  that 
I  felt  he  was  not  sincere. 

When  within  three  miles  of  Kilmallock,  he,  as  usual, 
got  out  of  his  carriage,  and  mounted  on  horseback, 
making  me  and  his  officer  do  the  same.  To  my 
surprise,  we  found  Sergeant  M'Grath  and  six  mounted 
policemen  waiting  for  him.  The  chief  constable 
seemed  more  surprised  than  myself.  If  there  really 
had  been  a  murder,  a  larger  force  ought  to  have 
been  called  out.  If  the  death  arose  from  accident, 
surely  no  policemen  were  requisite.     The  Major, 


14  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


however,  made  no  remark,  and  we  trotted  across 
the  country,  followed  at  a  distance  by  the  constables 
and  the  carriage.  I  adhered  to  my  old  rule  of  asking 
no  questions. 

Presently  we  came  within  sight  of  the  farmhouse 
where  the  bodies  were  lying.  It  was  surrounded 
by  (at  least)  5000  persons,  many  of  whom  seemed 
strangely  excited.  I  could  not  but  feel  a  sensation 
of  terror  as  I  looked  upon  this  lawless  body.  I 
believe  my  countenance  must  have  betokened  my  alarm, 
for  my  relative  gave  me  a  reassuring  smile.  He  then 
directed  his  sub  to  join  the  policemen,  with  directions 
to  bring  them  round  to  the  rear  of  the  building,  and 
jumping  off  his  horse,  motioned  me  to  do  the  "same. 
I  confess  I  did  so  with  reluctance,  and  when  I  handed 
the  bridle  to  the  boy,  who  had  undertaken  to  hold  the 
animal,  I  must  needs  admit  I  would  have  willingly 
dissuaded  Yokes  from  entering  the  crowd,  who,  as  he 
approached,  gave  three  groans  for  him — a  welcome 
they  poured  forth  with  all  the  venom  of  their  souls, 
for  many  amongst  them  had  reason  to  dread  his  power. 
The  major  took  off  his  hat  with  a  smile,  and  laughingly 
thanked  them,  then  plunged  into  the  midst  of  them. 
Yokes  had  only  a  riding-whip  wdth  him,  and  this  in- 
strument he  did  not  hesitate  to  use,  when  any  one 
attempted  to  bar  his  passage,  or  press  too  closely  on 
him.  Unless  I  am  egregiously  mistaken,  I  read 
murder  and  vengeance  in  the  eyes  of  many.  But  a 
secret  and  unconquerable  dread  of  the  chief  magistrate, 
who  boldly  looked  them  in  the  face,  seemed  to  restrain 
them. 

At  length  we  entered  the  cottage,  in  which  a  couple 


THE  BIRD'S  NEST. 


is 


of  magistrates  and  several  policemen  loitered.  These 
functionaries  assured  Vokes  that,  after  a  most 
lengthened  and  minute  inquiry,  they  could  obtain  no 
clue  to  the  perpetrators  of  the  horrid  deed. 

The  Major  next  interrogated  the  family — a  more' 
intelligent  circle  I  never  saw  in  humble  life.  They 
gave  their  evidence  clearly,  and  one  of  the  poor  girls 
burst  into  tears  as  she  told  her  story.  She  it  was  who 
had  last  seen  the  poor  fellows  now  lying  dead  in  the 
adjoining  barn.  Vokes,  after  hearing  their  account, 
told  them  he  should  doubtlessly  require  their  testimony 
at  the  approaching  assizes  in  Limerick  ;  to  this  the 
whole  family,  consisting  of  the  father,  mother,  a  son, 
and  t^o  daughters,  readily  assented. 

He  next  inspected  the  bodies  of  the  poor  men,  and 
when  a  brother  magistrate  pointed  out  to  him  the  pro- 
bability of  its  having  been  a  mere  accident,  the  chief 
magistrate  seemed  to  assent. 

I  now  hoped  all  was  over ;  but  my  relative  again 
turned  into  the  house.  After  examining  again  and 
again  the  rooms  upstairs,  he  returned  to  the  spacious 
kitchen.  Here  about  a  dozen  persons  were  assembled. 
The  room  itself  bore  a  look  of  comfort.  There  was  a 
good  clock.  The  crockery  and  saucepans  were  clean 
and  ranged  along  the  wall.  A  goose  sat  hatching  her 
eggs  beside  the  fireplace.  A  large  house-dog,  appa- 
rently well  fed,  slept  before  the  hearth.  It  was  one  of 
the  cleanest  Irish  kitchens  I  ever  was  in. 

Yokes  suddenly  called  to  a  policeman  : — 

"Pull  that  goose  out  of  her  nest.  That's  right. 
Take  out  the  eggs.    Ah  !    What  is  the  nest  niads  off 

"  Some  linen,  Major,"  replied  the  constable. 


16  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  Let  us  see  it,  Maloney,"  and  the  next  instant  the 
man  held  up  a  large  linen  sheet  saturated  with  blood. 
It  was  now  dry,  but  there  was  no  mistaking  it. 

"  Seize  the  whole  family  !  Handcuff  them,  and  off 
with  them  to  Limerick.  You  may  take  my  carriage, 
if  you  like  it.  McGrath,  jump  upstairs,  and,  in  the 
little  room  on  the  right,  you  will  find  two  hocky-sticks. 
Take  care  how  you  handle  them,  for  there  is  blood  and 
clotted  brains  that  must  not  be  rubbed  off  them  ;  and 
now,  Mr.  Martin,  I  think  we  have  you,"  said  he,  turn- 
ing to  the  farmer.    "  No  words  !  off  with  him." 

w  Eut,  Major,"  interrupted  one  of  the  local  magis- 
trates, "Martin  is  a  tenant  of  mine,  and  a  highly  re- 
spectable man.    Besides,  he  is  — " 

"A  murderer !" 

"  You  are  mistaken — I'll  bail  him — " 

" 'Faith,  my  dear  friend,  you  can't ;  and  what's more, 
you  shan't.  If  I'm  wrong,  I'll  take  the  blame.  Egad, 
Harry,  I  have  them,"  said  he,  turning  to  me.  "  Well 
be  off  before  the  people  outside  are  aware  of  it,*'  and 
out  we  went.  The  people,  however,  seeing  us  without 
escort  or  prisoners,  believed  that  Yokes's  mission  had 
failed,  and  welcomed  us  cheerfully  as  we  passed  through 
them.  No  time,  however,  was  to  be  lost,  and  even 
before  we  were  well  out  of  sight  of  them,  their  frantic 
cries  showed  they  had  learned  our  acts. 

On  the  subsequent  trial,  one  of  the  sisters  having 
turned  approver  (or,  as  we  call  it,  King's  evidence), 
declared  that  she  had  not  only  seen,  but  assisted  in  the 
murder.  Drugged  heavily  with  whisky,  the  unsus- 
pecting men  had  fallen  fast  asleep,  when  the  son  and 
two  daughters  stole  in  with  the  hocky-sticks  (produced 


THE  BIRD'S  NEST. 


17 


in  court),  and  battered  out  their  brains.  They  then 
tied  their  bodies  in  a  large  sheet,  and  the  father  and 
son  carried  them  to  a  spot  at  least  a  mile  down  the 
river,  where  they  threw  them  in.  A  faint  picture  of 
this  girl — who  now  without  shrinking  described  the 
assassination,  and  by  her  proved  evidence  gave  her 
whole  family  to  the  scaffold — I  have  sketched  in  the 
next  chapter. 

About  six  weeks  after  the  above  scene  in  the  farm- 
house, I  was  ordered  out  with  my  troop  as  an  execution 
party  (a  military  duty  only,  I  believe,  exercised  in 
Irelaud)  and  as  I  could  get  no  one  to  change  with  me, 
I  was  compelled,  much  against  my  own  will,  to  see  old 
Martin,  his  wife,  his  daughter,  and  his  son,  hanged 
over  the  gateway  of  the  new  prison  in  Limerick. 


18 


OUK  COTTAGE  NEAR  LIMERICK. 


My  father-in-law  had  asked  me  most  cordially  to  peas 
a  few  days  with  him  in  his  suburban  residence.  Bo  on 
my  arrival  frofrn  Dublin,  I  ordered  my  hired  car  to 
drive  me  out  to  Eathran ;  and  here  I  arrived  at  about 
eight  o'clock,  p.m.,  one  fine  evening  in  the  month  of 
September.  The  air  was  chilly  ;  the  light  was  fast 
declining  ;  I  was  tired,  and  was  jolted  to  death  by  the 
bad  roads  I  had  traversed.  No  wonder,  then,  that  I 
hailed  with  joy  the  father  of  my  wife,  who,  sitting 
before  a  blazing  fire,  was  making  steady  inroads  into 
a  cooper  of  Sneyd's  best  claret.  As  I  entered,  I  sud- 
denly imagined  I  had  never  seen  a  more  perfect  picture 
of  enjoyment.  Major  Yokes  was  a  good-looking, 
intelligent  fellow,  and  his  countenance — like  a  frontis- 
piece— bespoke  his  many  good  qualities.  But  there 
was  a  bonhomie  in  his  smile,  as  he  pronounced  the 
u  Caid  mille  faltha  "  which  at  once  warmed  the  heart, 
and  guaranteed  the  welcome  he  professed. 

For  about  half-an-hour  we  chatted  cosily  beside  the 
enlivening  flame,  and  arrived  at  that  stage  of  perfect 
contentment,  when  men  least  wish  to  be  disturbed. 
In  a  word,  we  sat  in  that  perfect  tranquillity  and 
bodily  repose  which  only  Englishmen  know — and  they 
only  when,  with  their  handkerchiefs  over  their  knees, 


OUR  COTTAGE  NEAF*  tlMEKICK.  10 

they  sip  cool  claret  before  a  burning  fire.  At  least  it 
used  to  be  so.  On  a  sudden,  Vokes  started,  jumped 
up,  and  rang  the  bell. 

"  You  will  excuse  me  ?  The  fact  is,  I  have  an  im- 
portant witness  to  examine.  Will  you  pardon  my 
leaving  you,  or  shall  I  have  him  in  here  ?" 

"  In  here,  by  all  means." 

"  Send  Michy  O'Hoolaghan  in  !"  said  he  to  the  ser- 
vant who  entered. 

The  servitor  disappeared ;  and  in  a  few  moments 
one  of  the  most  extraordinary  men  I  ever  saw,  entered* 
He  was  short,  ill-clothed,  and  lame.  His  head  was 
out  of  proportion,  and  his  face  decidedly  plain  ;  but  he 
threw  out  bright  glances  from  eyes — so  bright,  so 
intelligent — that  it  was  impossible  to  doubt  his  talent^ 
while  the  sneering  leer  which  often  accompanied  these 
looks,  made  one  naturally  shrink  in  terror  from  him. 

He  now  shuffled  into  the  room,  and  stood  sheepishly 
awaiting  the  orders  of  Major  Yokes. 

"Well,  Michy,  my  boy,  are  you  ready  to  sail  for 
America  I" 

"  Sure  you  know  that  I  am  that  same." 

"  There's  a  fine  ship  of  Spaight's  sailing  on  Monday." 

"Oh,  sure  it's  I  that  know  it,  and  hope  your 
honour  '11  send  Biddy  and  I  in  it.  But  they  tell  me 
young  Moore  is  going  in  her ;  and  if  so,  I  can't ;  for 
sure  it  was  his  father  I  hanged  when  I  turned  ap- 
prover.   Sometimes  I  think  I  was  wrong  ?" 

"  Don't  make  an  omadthawn  of  yourself.  Here^ 
take  a  glass  of  potheen.  Sure,  you're  better  now] 
Ay,  I  thought  so.  Now,  tell  me  what  you've  got  from 
the  girl?" 

2—2 


20  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  May  I  spake  ?"  and  he  leered  knowingly  at  me. 

"  Go  on,"  said  the  Major.  "  It's  all  right — it's  my 
son-in-law.  There,  sit  down,  and  tell  me  all  about  it, 
and  divii  a  lie ;  for,  by  the  cross,  if  you  tell  me  a  lie 
you'll  never  see  Ameriky." 

I  closely  observed  that,  as  Vokes  wished  to  gain 
confidence,  he  increased  his  Irish  accent. 

"  Is  it  me — glorjr  be  to  her  soul ! — is  it  me  would 
tell  your  honour  a  lie  ?  God  speed  your  honour  !  Do 
you  think  that  I'd  turn  upon  the  man  that  saved 
my  life,  and  has  fed  me  ever  since  9  Not  I.  The 
Heavens  forbid.  But,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  couldn't 
get  spache  of  Biddy  M'Grath  to-day.  I've  not  been 
very  well,  and  I've  scarcely  left  the  guard- room." 

"  Oh,  then,  you've  not  been  out  all  day  V 

"Not  I,  fait." 

"  Michy,  Michy,"  said  Vokes,  shaking  his  head 
and  smiling,  "  you're  a  bad  boy,  I  fear ;  you  would 
deceive  me  ?" 

"  Not  I,  nor  the  likes  of  me.  I'll  swear  on  the 
Book  I've  never  stirred  beyont  the  walls." 

"  Where  did  you  drop  this  knife,  you  roofer  ?  Nay, 
don't  tremble  and  start.  I  know  all.  You  met  Biddy 
in  the  back  garden,  and  she  gave  you  the  note  which 
you  have  in  your  right-hand  pocket.  Yes ;  it's  there. 
Dont  shake  and  lie  any  further.  It  comes  from 
Father  Anthony,  and  desires  you  not  to  betray  the 
girl.    You  need  tell  me  nothing." 

Down  went  Michy  on  his  knees,  pale  with  fright. 
I  began  to  fidget ;  and  I  verily  do  believe  I  shared,  at 
that  moment,  the  general  belief  that  Vokes  obtained 
his  information  from  some  infernal  source. 


OUR  COTTAGE  NEAR  LIMERICK. 


21 


u  Oh,  your  honour's  glorv,  don't  be  hard  on  a  poor 
boy." 

The  fellow  was  fifty  years  old ;  but  they  all  style 
themselves  boys  in  Ireland. 

"  Stand  up,  you  bosthoon,  and  if  you  don't  tell  me 
the  whole  truth,  by  my  soul — and  you  know  I  don't 
swear  false — you  shall  see  the  inside  of  the  county 
gaol  before  two  hours  are  over.  It's  not  a  traitor  I'd 
nurse  in  my  own  house.  Sergeant  Beady  (in  a  moment 
the  Sergeant  appeared),  take  Michy  out,  and  bring 
Paddy  Malone  in.  He'll  tell  us  the  truth.  So  good 
evening,  Michy  O'Hoolaghan." 

In  a  moment  the  wretch  seemed  to  recover.  He 
sprang  to  his  feet,  and  roared  rather  than  spoke. 

"Is.  Paddy  Malone  here?  Oh,  then  it's  all  up. 
Oh  then  Major,  it's  not  Paddy  you  shall  trate  with. 
By  the  soul  of  my  mother,  I'll  tell  you  the  truth — I'll 
tell  you  all.  But  don't  let  Paddy  turn  approver  !  Oh 
now,  Major  agra,  you'll  listen  to  me,  won't  you?  and 
his  voice  assumed  the  tones  of  supplication. 

"Well,  we'll  see;  sit  down  again.  Stand  behind 
him,  Sergeant  Ready,  and  if  I  nod,  take  him  off,  and 
bring  Malone.  Harry,  my  boy,  take  a  glass  of  clax*et. 
Now,  Michy,  begin." 

Michy  fidgetted  for  a  time,  and  then  slowly  spoke. 

"  Sure,  I  happened  to  be  strolling  down  the  back 
garden,  and  quite  by  accident  I  met  Biddy  M'Grath." 

"  That's  false ;  you  went  by  appointment."  And 
Vokes  nodded  to  the  Sergeant. 

"  Come  along,  Michy,"  said  the  policeman. 

"  Arrah,  not  so ;  I  knew  I  was  lying — your  honour's 
right.    Only  let  me  stay,  and  I'll  spake  as  I  would  to 


22  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

my  clargy.  (Yokes  nodded.)  Well,  then,  you  see,  I 
met  Biddy  in  the  lower  summer-house,  and  she  tould 
me  all.  It  was  her  brother — you  recollect  Jerry, 
Major?  Well,  it  was  Jerry  who  held  the  cow-keeper 
down,  while  Biddy  and  her  mother  finished  him  with 
hurley  sticks." 

"  And  how  could  Jerry  hold  him  down  so  easily?" 
"  Sure  he  gave  him  lashins  to  drink ;  and  then  he 
took  him  into  the  Linnie,  and  made  him  a  nice  straw 
bed ;  and  when  he  was  fast  asleep,  Jerry  stole  in  and 
stunned  him  with  a  big  stone,  afore  the  women  set-to, 
and  they  finished  him  entirely  J  for  when  the  body  was 
found  in  the  river,  it  was  two  days  before  it  could  be 
recognised,  the  head  was  so  nicely  mashed  up;  and 
even  your  honour — great  glory  to  you  ! — would  never 
have  'dentified  him,  hadn't  you  found  the  process  paper 
in  his  pocket ;  and  then  you  knew  who  it  was." 

"  Well,  I  knew  all  you  told  me  before  from  Malone. 
So  no  thanks  to  you.  Malone  it  was  carried  the  body 
down  to  the  river.    He'll  make  a  good  witness." 

"  Arrah,  your  honour,  then,  wouldn't  take  that 
thief 's  word  before  mine?  Sure,  I've  a  right  to  the 
reward.  Wasn't  it  I  that  cajoled  Biddy  to  come  here  ? 
and  isn't  it  I  that  tould  her  you'd  do  her  no  harm  ?  and 
ain't  she  ready  to  swear  that  the  Macmahons  did  it  ? 
and  ain't  she  plased  with  the  kind  way  she's  treated ? 
and  if  I  did  not  tell  you  at  once,  wasn't  it  for  fear  of 
Father  Anthony  ?  and  sure  I'd  not  have  tould  you  now, 
only  as  Paddy  Malone  is  here,  it's  all  over ;  and  I  claim 
to  be  approver." 

"  Does  Biddy  know  that  you  communicate  with 
me?" 


OUR  COTTAGE  NEAR  LIMERICK. 


23 


"  Not  at  all.  She  believes  I'm  kept  here  to  keep  me 
from  the  O'Kellys,  against  whom  I  swore." 
"  That  will  do." 

Yokes  nodded,  and  the  witness  was  led  out  of  the 
room. 

"  There  goes  the  greatest  villain  in  Ireland.  I'll  try 
a  glass  of  toddy.    The  fellow  makes  me  sick." 
"Who  and  what  is  he?" 

"  He  is  what  we  call  an  approver.  Without  such 
means  we  could  never  succeed  in  obtaining  information 
in  Ireland.  The  history  of  the  fellow  is  simply  this  : 
He  and  his  foster  father  were  taken  up  for  burning  an 
old  woman  in  her  cottage,  and  strangling  a  poor  child 
that  endeavoured  to  escape.  The  case  was  clear,  but 
we  had  no  direct  evidence.  I  sent  for  Michy;  I 
treated  him  as  an  agent,  and  never  pretended  to  sus- 
pect him.  I  gave  him  every  luxury.  One  fine  day,  I 
committed  him  to  the  gaol,  and  desired  him  to  be 
rigorously  treated.  I  affected  to  have  heard  some 
details,  and  accused  him  direct  of  the  murder.  The 
charge  was  too  startling  for  him.  He  believed  I  had 
evidence  to  convict  him.  He  at  once  turned  approver 
(or  King's  evidence,  as  you  call  it  in  England),  and  on 
his  testimony,  corroborated  by  less  important  witnesses, 
his  foster  father  was  hanged.  Since  then  he  has  wormed 
himself  into  the  confidence  of  several  ruffians,  and  be- 
trayed them.  He  has  joined  conspiracies,  and  enabled 
me  to  crush  them.    Michy  is  a  good  tool  in  his  way." 

i:  And  can  you  sleep  beneath  the  roof  with  such  a 
villain]  I  strongly  suspect  he'd  have  even  thrown 
you  over,  if  you  hadn't  got  hold  of  his  partner  in 
crime,  this  Paddy  Malone," 


24.  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  Ha  !  ha  !  ha  !"  roared  Yokes ;  "  come,  that's  good. 
Why,  Paddy  is  safe  in  New  York.    He  escaped  me." 
"He's  not  here,  then?" 

"  Not  a  bit ;  I  only  wish  he  was.  I  merely  hinted 
at  it  to  make  Michy  let  out  the  truth.  But  the  little 
rascal  is  getting  so  false  that  I'll  send  him  off,  after 
the  assizes,  to  America.  He  cant  remain  safely  iu 
this  country.  If  unguarded,  his  life  would  not  be 
worth  four-and-twenty  hours'  purchase.  So  he's  bound 
hand  and  foot  to  serve  the  Government,  who  will  now, 
probably,  give  him  some  twenty  pounds  and  a  free 
passage  to  New  York.  I  confess  he'll  be  a  loss  to  me. 
But  now  you  shall  see  another  sort  of  individual. 
Sergeant  Ready,  bring  in  Biddy  M'Grath ;"  and  in  a 
few  moments  his  orders  were  obeyed. 

The  girl  who  now  entered  was  one  of  the  loveliest 
specimens  of  Irish  beauty.  She  was  neatly,  almost 
coquettishly  dressed.  Her  brown  hair  flowed  down 
her  back,  and  as  she  bobbed  a  curtsey  to  the  Major,  I 
really  thought  I  had  never  beheld  anything  so  en- 
chanting as  her  smile — so  full  of  truth  and  inno- 
cence. 

"  Come  in,  ma  colyeen ;  come  near  the  fire,  and  tell 
us,  have  you  any  news  of  Paddy  Malone  ?  (I  started.) 
I've  made  every  inquiry,  and  I  think  he  may  be  in 
Dublin.  We'll  want  his  evidence  to  convict  the  Mftft- 
mahons.  They'll  never  be  found  guilty  without  more 
witnesses.', 

"  Sure,  Major,  I'm  Here ;  and  I  saw  them  draggiug 
the  body  across  our  field  as  clear  as  I  see  you." 

"  But  your  evidence  must  be  supported,  and  Paddy 
cannot  be  found.    Take  a  glass  of  toddy,  you  look 


OUR  COTTAGE  NEAR  LIMERICK. 


25 


cold  !  By  the  bye,  have  you  not  a  mother  ?  Where 
is  she  i" 

"  It's  myself  don't  know ;  I  think  she's  gone  to 
England." 

"  That's  a  pity ;  for,  you  see,  it's  no  use  taking  up 
these  Macmahons;  they'd  get  off  without  a  second 
witness.  So,  Biddy  agra,  you  can  go  back  to-morrow, 
and  I'll  institute  fresh  inquiries  myself." 

"  God  be  good  to  us, — you  wouldn't  think  any  one 
else  done  it  ln 

"  Well,  I  don't  know.  I'll  go  to  Eathkeale  myself, 
and  inquire  into  it." 

The  girl  turned  deadly  pale ;  the  Major  listlessly 
sipped  his  grog. 

"  Good  night  a  coushla,"  and  he  made  a  sign  to  dis- 
miss her.    She  lingered. 

"  Stay,  Major.  Sure,  as  your  honour  says,  my 
mother  was  with  me,  and  so  was  my  brother,  when  we 
saw  the  Macmahons  dragging  the  murdered  man  across 
the  field." 

"  Well,  but  where  are  they?"  suddenly  demanded 
Vokes. 

"  At  the  cross-roads  in  Cratloe  Wood  !"  replied  the 
girl,  who  the  next  moment  seemed  bitterly  to  repent 
her  candour,  and  would  have  withdrawn  her  state- 
ment. She  again  and  again  declared  she  had  made  a 
mistake,  and  the  Major  apparently  believed  her.  Ser- 
geant Ready  rose  and  conducted  her  out. 

"  What  a  lovely  creature !"  I  involuntarily  ejacu- 
lated. "  How  young  and  innocent  !  Surely  she  can- 
not have  offended  ?" 

"  Listen  !   That  girl,  her  brother,  and  her  mother, 


26  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


committed  the  most  frightful  murder,  only  a  few  weeks 
ago,  that  ever  disgraced  Minister.  This  was  one  of 
the  girls  whom  Michy  told  you,  just  now,  bat- 
tered out  the  brains  of  a  poor  process-server  with 
hurley  or  (as  you  call  them)  hocky  sticks.  Ey  the 
bye,  I've  left  the  identical  sticks  in  your  bed-room  ; 
see  that  they  are  not  touched,  for  there  is  a  portion  of 
the  brains  and  hair  of  the  victim  still  sticking  to  them ; 
they  will  be  produced  in  evidence.  This  girl  was  the 
most  savage  of  the  party,  and  even  struck  the  face  of 
the  corpse,  when  about  to  be  thrown  into  the  water, 
to  prevent  its  recognition.  She  now  wants  to  accuse 
some  neighbours,  who  have  deeply  offended  her,  of  the 
crime,  and  hopes  to  see  them  executed.  But  she's 
quite  mistaken.  After  her  confession  to  Michy,  there'll 
be  no  difficulty  in  getting  her  to  turn  round  *  so  I 
think  now  the  case  is  complete.  But  I  see  you  are 
tired." 

He  rang  the  bell.  "  Take  a  light  into  my  son-in- 
law's  room,  and  send  in  Corporal  Vesey."  That  func- 
tionary arrived. 

"  Take  four  mounted  men  ;  manage  to  arrive  about 
two  o'clock  in  the  morning  at  the  cottage  near  the 
cross-roads  in  Cratloe  Wood.  Bring  Matty  M'Grath 
and  his  mother.  Don't  let  'em  speak  to  each  other ; 
and  lodge  them  in  jail,  with  orders  to  keep  them  6  soli- 
tary' till  I  see  them  in  the  morning.  Be  off!"  and 
away  went  the  Corporal. 

I  now  sought  my  bed-room,  and  found  the  Major's 
English  valet  waiting  for  me.  From  him  I  learned 
that  the  "  gentle  murderess"  slept  in  the  next  room,  and 
that  Michy  had  a  room  to  himself  over  the  kitchen ; 


JwaTOTT  CGLLEftK  LIBRARY 

half-a-dozen  other  witnesses,  generally  speaking,  mur- 
derers, slept  over  the  guard-room — for  so  was  the 
wash-house  called — where  four  policemen  sat  up  all 
night,  as  the  cottage  would  probably  be  some  night 
attacked.  There  was  a  recently-mended  hole  in  my 
shutter,  through  which  a  ball  had  been  fired  (for  I 
must  tell  you  the  whole  cottage  was  on  the  ground- 
floor,  bungalow  fashion),  and  in  the  corner  I  beheld 
the  hocky  sticks  made  use  of  to  destroy  a  human 
being. 

Shall  I  say  how  I  slept  ?  and  when  I  slept  what 
dreams  I  dreamt  ?  No.  Suffice  it  to  say,  I  never  spent 
a  less  pleasant  night,  and  that  I  unhesitatingly  refused 
to  prolong  my  stay,  though  earnestly  pressed  to  do  so 
by  the  hospitable  Major,  at  breakfast  next  morning. 

After  the  meal,  I  drove  back  to  Limerick,  while 
Vokes  went  to  examine  his  newly-arrived  friends  in 
the  county  gaol. 


28 


CAREICKSHOCK ; 

OR 

A  PLEASANT  EXCUB8IOX. 


"  Harry,  my  boy,  you  have  never  been  in  the  county 
of  Waterfordr* 
"  Never  1" 

"  Well,  then,"  rejoined  my  gallant  relative,  Major 
Vokes,  "  you  have  now  a  good  opportunity.  I  have 
some  little  business  to  transact  there,  so  I've  ordered 
ray  travelling  carriage  at  six  in  the  morning.  We 
shan't  be  more  than  two  days  absent,  therefore  don:t 
bring  much  luggage.  The  weather  is  remarkably  fine, 
so  we  shall  have  a  very  pleasant  trip  and  away  went 
my  excellent  friend,  whistling  a  cheerful  air. 

Now,  although  Yokes  took  my  assent  for  granted, 
I  felt  somewhat  doubtful  about  accepting  it.  That  I 
had  often  expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  county  into 
which  he  was  going,  I  fully  admit,  and  for  this  single 
reason,  I  suppose,  he  felt  certain  that  I  should  snap  at 
his  proposal.  But  on  the  other  hand,  though  I  fully 
intended  to  see  Curraghmore,  yet  I  was  by  no  means 
desirous  of  becoming  the  travelling  companion  of  a 
man  against  whom  a  thousand  oaths  of  assassination 
had  been  recorded  ;  and  as  we  were  about  to  traverse 
Tipperary,  a  notoriously   ill-disposed  county,  and 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


29 


going  to  a  spot  hardly  fifteeen  or  twenty  miles  from 
the  scene  of  the  most  savage  butchery  that  ever  dis- 
graced the  annals  of  Ireland,  namely,  the  murder  of 
nineteen  policemen  and  their  officers^  which  had  only 
taken  place  at  Carrickshock  the  week  before,  I  seri- 
ously hesitated  about  accompanying  Yokes.  So  far 
from  it,  I  should  (in  any  other  case)  have  not  only 
given  it  up  myself,  but  have  endeavoured  to  dissuade 
the  worthy  magistrate  from  his  contemplated  journey. 
I  well  knew,  however,  in  his  case,  that  the  more 
vividly  I  pour  tray  ed  the  danger,  the  more  delighted 
he  would  feel  in  courting  it ;  so  I  held  my  tongue,  and 
after  dinner  allowed  myself  to  be  persuaded,  partly  by 
coaxing  and  partly  by  the  fear  of  being  laughed  at, 
into  joining  my  friend.  We  accordingly  started  the 
following  morning  ;  and  after  traversing  the  wretched 
bog  which  stretches  itself  between  Limerick  and  Tip- 
perary,  arrived  in  safety  at  the  latter  town  without 
meeting  with  any  occurrence  worth  noticing. 

Vokes  ordered  a  substantial  breakfast,  and  appeared 
in  high  spirits.  He  did  not,  however,  tell  me  the 
object  of  his  mission,  and  I  refrained  from  inquiring. 
That  it  was  a  pleasing  one  I  drew  an  inference  from 
his  cheerful  manner,  and  I  already  began  to  laugh  at 
my  foolish  fears. 

The  meal  over,  we  descended,  and  to  my  utter 
surprise  I  found  two  horses,  ready  saddled,  standing 
at  the  door.  The  carriage  had  returned  to  Limerick ; 
we  were  to  complete  our  journey  on  horseback.  I 
should  probably  have  asked  some  questions,  but  Vokes 
enforced  silence  on  me  by  a  look,  so  we  mounted 
and  trotted  off  on  the  road  to  Nenagh,  which  my 


30  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

friend  readily  found,  from  the  directions  afforded  to 
him  by  the  ostler  of  the  hotel,  a  most  respectable- 
looking  young  man.  We  had  scarcely,  however,  pro- 
ceed above  three  miles,  when  Yokes  turned,  without 
any  apparent  reason,  down  a  cross-road,  and  rather 
increased  his  speed. 

"What  are  you  about?  Where  are  you  going?" 
cried  I. 

"  Why,  to  Waterford,  to  be  sure  ! " 

u  Why,  I  fancied  you  had  changed  your  mind,  and 
had  intended  to  go  to  Nenagh — at  least,  so  you  said." 

The  Major  burst  out  laughing.  "  Harry,  I  didn't 
think  you  were  so  soft.  Why,  couldn't  you  see,  with 
half  an  eye,  that  the  ostler  was  a  bad  boy — a  spy — so 
I  threw  him  off  the  scent,  by  coming  round  this  way. 
By  this  time  there's  more  than  one  carbine  loaded  to 
shoot  me  on  that  road.  Don't  be  flustered,  there's  no 
danger  here.  Yonder  is  the  main  road,  and  Sergeant 
Magrath  waiting  for  us." 

We  were  now  joined  by  that  active  policeman,  who 
was  well  mounted,  and  admirably  dressed  as  a  groom. 
He  had,  however,  a  pair  of  holsters,  out  of  which  a 
brace  of  pistols  appeared ;  but  as  many  country  gen- 
tlemen in  those  days  carried  arms,  when  riding  through 
the  disturbed  districts,  this  fact  did  not  betray  the 
sergeant's  calling. 

When  we  came  to  a  certain  spot,  just  beyond  the 
thick  woods  of  Banshea,  Yokes  paused:  " There's 
Lismackew  \  just  in  that  corner  poor  Baker  was  mur- 
dered, in  the  middle  of  the  day."  I  confess  this  little 
statement,  and  a  subsequent  full  detail  of  the  assassi- 
nation, with  which  my  friend  favoured  me  as  we  rode 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


31 


along,  did  not  add  much  to  my  comfort,  and  I  began 
to  wish  I  had  remained  within  the  Barracks  at  Limerick, 
where  I  was  at  this  time  quartered. 

Presently,  a  carriage  dashed  passed  us,  surrounded 
by  police.  These  men  I  recognised  as  belonging 
to  Yokes's  especial  force ;  they,  however,  took  no 
notice  of  him,  but  galloped  away  in  eager  haste. 

"  Bless  me,  Major  !  what  does  that  mean  1 " 

"  Oh,  it's  Quin,  the  approver ;  they  are  taking  him 
to  Kilkenny,  to  give  evidence  against  Kennedy,  the 
chief  murderer  at  Carrickshock,  who  will  be  tried  the 
day  after  to-morrow.' ' 

"  But  is  this  witness  so  unwilling  as  to  require  this 
guard  i " 

"By  no  means.  My  men  surround  the  carriage  to 
protect  him  ;  and  even  to  do  that  they  would  not  be 
able,  if  they  had  not  relays  of  horses  to  enable  them  to 
gallop  all  the  way.  They  go  through  no  towns,  and 
they  travel  too  fast  to  be  overtaken," 

"  But  why  i " 

"Harry,  my  boy,  yoivre  as  green  as  any  Englishman 
I  ever  met.  Don't  you  see,  that  if  they  could  be 
caught,  they'd  soon  be  surrounded,  and  the  approver 
dragged  out  and  torn  to  pieces." 

I  shuddered,  and  rode  on  to  Clonmel  without 
uttering  another  word.  Here  we  remained  for  several 
hours,  Yokes  evidently  wishing  to  arrive  late  at  Pill- 
town  (the  cleanest  and  prettiest  village  in  Ireland), 
which  he  now  condescended  to  tell  me  was  to  be  our 
ultimate  destination ;  and  where,  according  to  his 
settled  plan,  we  alighted  at  Anthony's  snug  hotel, 
about  nine  o'clock  the  same  evening.    We  supped,  and 


32  RECOLLECTIONS   OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

went  to  bed.  The  room  in  which  I  slept  was,  however, 
unfortunately,  near  the  stable,  and  I  was  awakened 
more  than  once  by  hearing  the  voices  of  several  persons 
conversing  in  a  foreign  language.  This,  though  an 
annoyance,  but  did  not  utterly  destroy  my  slumbers  ; 
I  was  thoroughly  tired  ;  and  I  did  not  rise  till  nine 
o'clock  next  morning.  Yokes  was  seated  at  the  break- 
fast-table when  I  entered.  He  had  evidently  received 
and  despatched  several  letters  before  I  came  down. 
He  was  sending  off  a  mounted  policeman  as  I  opened 
the  door. 

After  our  meal,  Vokes  proposed  a  stroll  through 
the  village,  at  the  same  time  expressing  his  intention 
to  call  on  some  of  the  cottagers,  whom  he  well  knew, 
as  he  had  resided,  for  some  time  after  his  marriage,  at 
Belline,  a  very  handsome  mansion  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, formerly  inhabited  by  the  brother  of  his  wife, 
then  acting  as  agent  to  the  Earl  of  Besborough,  but 
who  was  now  abroad.  We  entered  a  very  pretty  cot- 
tage, and,  to  my  surprise,  I  found  the  interior  as  clean 
and  neat  as  any  similar  establishment  in  England.  It 
appeared  that  the  noble  landlord  insisted  on  this — he 
might  spare  a  man  who  could  not  pay  his  rent — indeed, 
he  often  did  so.  But  he  inexorably  evicted  a  dirty  or 
a  drunken  tenant,  and  thus  made  Pill  town  the  prettiest 
and  best  village  in  the  South  of  Ireland. 

The  old  woman  whom  we  called  to  see  was  almost 
blind,  but  she  instantly  recognised  Yokes,  and  to  him 
she  related  her  griefs.  Her  grandson  (a  policeman) 
had  been  killed  at  Carrickshock,  and  she  now  hoped 
"the  Major"  would  get  her  a  pension  from  Govern- 
ment.   She  evidently  believed  he  was  all-powerful  j 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


23 


and  I  fancy  she  was  not  very  far  wrong  in  her  con- 
jecture. 

In  the  next  house  we  found  two  handsome  girls. 
They  had  similarly  lost  their  father,  and  the  magistrate 
elicited  important  information  from  their  loquacity. 
I  now  began  to  observe  that  my  friend  was  anxious  to 
ascertain  the  details  of  the  affair,  for  in  every  cottage 
we  visited  he  managed  artfully  to  derive  some  informa- 
tion on  the  subject.  On  two  occasions  the  doors,  as 
we  approached,  were  slammed  in  our  faces,  and  I  could 
not  help  remarking  that  we  did  not  meet  a  single  male 
during  the  whole  time  we  were  out.  On  these  points 
I  questioned  the  Major ;  who  explained  to  me  that  the 
owners  of  the  two  residences,  where  we  had  been  ex- 
cluded, had  both  fallen  at  Carrickshock ;  but  as  they 
belonged  to  the  murdering  party,  their  relatives  refused 
him  admission — looking  upon  him  as  a  dangerous 
monster.  I  expressed  my  wonder  that  they  should 
thus  be  acquainted  with  his  arrival. 

"  My  dear  fellow,  we  had  not  gone  to  bed  last  night, 
when  every  soul  for  ten  miles  round  was  aware  that 
we  were  here,  and  it's  precisely  for  that  reason  all  the 
men  are  out  of  the  way.  To-morrow  or  next  day  we 
shall  probably  see  them  back." 

This  was  by  no  means  reassuring ;  and  though  I 
said  nothing,  I  felt  vexed  at  the  idea  of  remaining  in 
Pilltown  for  several  days  longer,  which  was  evidently 
Yokes's  intention. 

During  dinner,  my  friend  explained  the  affair,  which 
he  was  evidently  investigating.    It  appears  that  about 
a  week  only  before  the  then  present  time,  a  party  of 
nineteen  policemen,  commanded  by  a  chief  constable, 
3 


34  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

went  out  after  dark,  in  order  to  seize  some  arms, 
•which  they  expected  to  find  at  a  certain  farm-honse. 
These  men  were  dressed  in  uniform,  and  armed  as 
soldiers,  and  fine  efficient  soldiers  they  were.  They 
each  carried  a  musket,  a  bayonet,  and  thirty  rounds  of 
ball  cartridge;  their  officer  was  mounted  on  horse- 
back— so  of  course  they  anticipated  no  danger,  even  in 
a  country  where  every  man's  hand  is  against  the  lav/, 
and  where  every  man  (at  least  it  was  so  in  those  times) 
looked  upon  a  policeman  as  his  bitterest  enemy. . 

The  party,  being  disappointed  in  their  search,  were 
returning  home  towards  nightfall,  and  had  arrived  at  a 
spot  on  the  mountains  called  Carrickshock,  when  they 
were  met  by  a  countryman,  who  volunteered  to  tell 
them  where  the  arms  they  were  in  search  of  lay  hid. 
The  chief  constable  fell  into  the  trap,  and  ordered  his 
men  to  turn  down  a  lane,  at  the  end  of  which  the 
peasant  stated  the  weapons  were  buried  (as  is  often  the 
case),  and  to  which  spot  he  would  guide  them.  So 
down  they  marched,  the  commander  going  first,  and 
beside  him  a  civil  officer,  who  had  taken  advantage  of 
the  strength  of  the  party  to  serve  some  notices  of 
eviction,  under  the  shield  of  their  protection.  The 
lane  did  not  exceed  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  in  length, 
it  was  narrow,  and  had  a  high  bank  on  either  side.  It 
was  what  is  generally  styled  a  "  a  borheen "  in  the 
South  of  Ireland,  and  admirably  fitted  for  an  ambuscade. 
Suddenly  the  guide  gave  a  loud  whistle,  and  disap- 
peared. In  an  instant  the  notice-server  fell  dead  ; 
while  on  either  bank  appeared  a  large  party  of  men 
and  women.  Before  the  policemen  had  time  to  come 
to  the  "  present,"  a  volley  had  been  fired  into  them, 


CABRICKSHOCK. 


35 


which  told  with  fatal  effect.  They  fired,  but  it  was 
too  late,  the  crowd  had  now  rushed  down,  and  hemmed 
them  in.  The  chief  constable  was  one  of  the  first 
killed,  and  before  five  minutes  had  elapsed,  every 
policeman  lay  dead  or  wounded  on  the  ground.  The 
former  were  mutilated,  and  dragged  about  with  yells 
of  triumph.  The  wounded  were  pierced  with  innume- 
rable wounds.  The  arms  were  seized  with  avidity, 
and  then  the  murderers  (of  whom  only  three,  I  believe, 
were  killed)  marched  off,  glorying  in  the  act,  and  even 
singing  songs  of  delight.  They  left  behind  them  the 
bodies  of  the  civil  process-server,  the  chief  constable, 
and  nineteen  fine  young  men,  several  of  whom  were 
natives  of  this  town. 

I  naturally  inquired  if  the  assassins  had  been  seized, 
as  they  must  be  known. 

"  Known  1  to  be  sure  they  are  ;  but  what's  the  use 
of  taking  them  up,  when  no  one  will  give  evidence 
against  them?  O  yeS)  you  may  be  astonished,  but 
such  is  the  state  of  Ireland.  The  man's  life  who 
identified  one  of  the  murderers  would  not  be  worth 
half-an-hour's  purchase.  So  Government  has  only  got 
hold  of  one  of  them,  a  certain  Kennedy  ;  but  although 
the  case  is  clear  against  him,  although  it  will  be  as 
clear  as  light,  you  will  see  that  the  jury  will  not  dare 
to  convict  him.  Even  at  this  instant  he  is  standing 
before  them.  But  enough  of  this  ;  let's  go  and  take  a 
ride.  Here,  waiter,  order  our  horses  out,  and  request 
the  landlord  to  come  up." 

Mr.  Anthony  appeared. 

"  Anthony,  I  am  goingto  take  this  young  Englishman 
to  see  Belline,  we'll  take  a  gallop  through  the  Park, 

3—2 


3G  EEC0LLECTI0NS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


and  be  back  in  two  hours.  We  shall  gain  appetites 
by  our  ride,  and  would  like  something  nice  for  supper. 
It  is  now  eight  o'clock,  we  should  like  to  have  it  served 
at  ten.  Can  you  get  us  some  trout  ?  and  mind  there's 
a  cucumber ;  you  know  how  fond  I  am  of  it,  and  if 
it's  not  too  late  for  peas,  let  us  have  some." 

The  landlord  (a  most  respectable  man)  promised  all 
this  should  be  attended  to,  and  we  descended  and 
jumped  on  horseback.  I  observed  that  we  had  military 
saddles,  and  that  holsters  were  attached  to  each.  After 
the  narrative  I  had  just  heard,  I  confess  I  was  not 
astonished  at  this  ;  nor  was  I  so,  when  I  subsequently 
found  that  Sergeant  Magrath  had  a  sword  on,  under 
his  horseman's  cloak. 

We  rode  direct  through  the  grounds  at  Belline,  and 
then  went  on  to  a  road  which  led  abruptly  up  the 
mountains.  There  was  a  wooded  angle  which  hid  the 
onward  course  of  this  mountain  pass.  Yokes  walked 
his  horse  round  it;  but  no  sooner  were  we  out  of 
sight  of  the  main  route,  than  he  uttered  an  exclamation 
in  Irish,  and  galloped  on.  The  Sergeant  did  the  same, 
and  of  course  I  accompanied  them. 

"  Ride  faster,  man,  ride  faster,  we  shall  be  missed  ; 
keep  up,  Sergeant !" 

*  But  why  this  haste  P 

"  You  ride  for  your  life  ;  if  they  overtake  us,  we 
are  dead  men  ;  and  even  as  it  is,  there  may  be  parties 
out  looking  for  us  !  Ride  on,  man — don't  spare  the 
spur  !"  And  thus  we  galloped  on  over  six  miles  of  the 
most  hilly  road  I  ever  met  with.  Vokes  now  pulled 
up.    "  Harry,  my  boy,  I  think  we've  distanced  them  ; 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


37 


so  now  walk  your  horse  a  little,  for  we  have  a  long 
ride  before  U3.;' 

"  My  good  and  respected  relative,  are  you  gone  mad, 
or  what  does  all  this  mean  P 

"Simply  this.  I  clearly  heard  the  voices  in  the 
stables  of  which  you  spoke  this  morning. w 

■  Why,  you  denied  it." 

"  Yes ;  fearful  of  alarming  you.  The  fact  is,  they 
assembled  last  night  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  me. 
But  as  they  thought  it  might  prejudice  Kennedys 
trial,  they  put  it  off  till  to-night.  At  eleven  o'clock 
they  are  to  shoot  us  as  we  sit  at  supper.  The  Sergeant 
is  to  have  his  brains  knocked  out.  In  fact,  every 
arrangement  is  made.  Let  me  see,  I  find  by  my 
repeater  it  is  past  ten  ;  they  are  now  beginning  to 
assemble,  and  will  soon  miss  us ;  so  we  have  no  time 
to  spare." 

u  But  how  is  it  they  were  so  incautious  as  thus  to 
proclaim  their  plans  ¥* 

"  They  spoke  in  Irish,  a  language  I  happen  to  under- 
stand.   So  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  it." 

u  Had  we  not  better  hurry  on  V 

9  No,  no.  We  are  going  up  a  terrifically  bad  road, 
let  us  go  as  easy  as  we  can,  till  eleven,  and  then,  as 
they  will  have  discovered  our  flight,  we  must  ride  as 
fast  as  our  nags  can  carry  us." 

At  this  moment  the  moon  burst  forth,  and  we  saw  a 
ragged,  barefooted  urchin,  close  to  us ;  as  is  usual  in 
Ireland,  he  at  once  joined  the  party,  and  entered  into 
conversation.  Yokes  whispered  to  me  to  be  cautious. 
This  I  thought  a  ridiculous  hint,  but  still  I  attended 


38  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


to  it,  though  his  <*'  Cave  Caxem  "  appeared  uncalled 

for  in  the  present  instance. 

"What  is  the  name  of  the  town  yonder,  Pat  ?"  asked 
Yokes,  who  at  once  assumed  an  Irish  accent. 

"  Where,  yer  Honour  P 

"Ah,  now,  can't  you  answer  without  making  a  bos- 
thoon  of  yourself  ?  Sure  I'm  a  stranger,  and  want  to 
know." 

"I'm  thinking  it's  Newmarket !  Is  it  through  that 
town  yer'e  Honour's  about  passing  V — At  this  moment 
the  Sergeant's  sword  clanked.  The  Major  uttered  an 
exclamation  of  annoyance.  The  boy,  however,  did 
not  appear  to  notice  the  sound,  and  went  on  talking. 

We  now  came  to  a  wind  on  the  road  ;  round  this  we 
had  to  pass,  in  order  to  arrive  at  Newmarket,  which 
made  the  distance  considerably  above  a  mile,  though, 
by  cutting  across  the  valley,  the  village  might  be 
reached  in  three  hundred  yards. 

"  Where's  the  boy  P  suddenly  cried  the  magistrate. 
We  looked  round — he  was  gone ;  but  in  less  than  a 
minute  we  heard  three  distinct  notes  whistled  from 
the  centre  of  the  valley.  "  Hide,  ride  on,  uow's  your 
time  P  And  away  we  dashed  at  full  gallop.  As  wre 
came  in  sight  of  the  village,  we  saw  a  fine  fire  blazing 
in  the  smithy,  and  lights  in  almost  every  window ; 
but  as  we  approached,  the  smith's  shop  was  suddenly 
closed,  shutters  were  put  up  and  every  light  ex- 
tinguished. It  was  evident  we  were  betrayed.  "  Keep 
up — keep  up,  Harry — that's  ail  right  P  and  we  dashed 
at  racing  pace  through  the  town.  We  had  just  cleared 
it,  when  a  shot  was  fired.  The  ball  went  through  the 
Sergeant's  cloak,  but  did  not  iujure  any  of  us.  When 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


39 


we  Lad  proceeded  about  a  mile,  the  Major  pulled 
up. 

"  There,  that  will  do ;  we're  safe  now  \  there  is  no 
fear  of  their  following.  There  are  not  half-a-dozen 
men  in  the  village,  or  they'd  not  have  let  us  off  so  easy. 
Depend  upon  it  they  are  all  gone  to  Kilkenny,  to  hear 
their  comrade  tried." 

Yokes  was  singularly  gifted  with  perspicuity.  He 
calculated  every  chance,  and  drew  inferences  from  ap- 
parent trifles.  It  was  thus  he  sifted  evidence,  and 
seemed  almost  to  foresee  occurrences  which  to  any 
other  mind  appeared  unimportant  aud  improbable. 

We  had  not  gone  far,  when  Yokes  suddenly  turned 
down  a  lane ;  as  a  matter  of  course,  I  did  the  same  : 
the  Major,  to  my  surprise,  jumped  off  his  horse,  and 
beckoned  Magrath  to  do  the  like ;  then  leading  their 
horses  up  to  me,  he  asked  me  as  a  favour  to  hold  them 
for  a  few  minutes  ;  of  course  I  assented.-  In  another 
moment  the  magistrate  and  the  policeman  were  search- 
ing about  for  something  which  they  appeared  to  have 
dropped.  They  examined  about,  and  seemed  occa- 
sionally to  pick  up  something  out  of  the  mud.  At 
length  Yokes  suddenly  called  out  to  his  Sergeant, 
"I've  found  it — I've  got  it  here — this  will  complete 
the  evidence.  If  it  fits  his  hand,  it  will  at  once  con- 
vict him.  Oh,  I'm  so  glad  I've  discovered  it  P  At 
this  moment  the  moon  burst  through  the  clouds,  and 
I  glanced  with  horror  at  the  object  which  Yokes  held 
up  with  triumph.  It  was  a  human  finger,  or  rather 
half  of  one,  evidently  severed  from  the  hand  by  a 
sabre  cut.  "  What  have  you  got  P  demanded  the 
Major.    "I've  a  portion  of  skull  with  human  hair 


40  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


attached  to  it ;  I've  the  stock  of  a  broken  pistol,  and  a 
knife  rusted  with  human  blood,"  said  the  Sergeant. 

"  Providence  preserve  us  P  ejaculated  I.  "  Where 
are  we  V* 

"In  the  Borheen  of  Carrickshock.  Don't  you  see 
the  bank  all  broken  where  the  struggle  took  place  J 
This  dyke  ran  with  human  blood  only  a  few  days 
ago."  " 

"  Do  let  us  go  on  ;  I  don't  like  this  place — it  makes 
me  shudder,"  said  T. 

"Well,  as  you  like  ;  I've  got  all  I  want.  Here,  Mick, 
take  this  finger ;  we'll  fit  it  on  Teddy  Malony  when 
we  return  ;  you  may  throw  away  the  skull ;  but  bring 
the  knife  along  with  you.  Come,  we'll  warm  ourselves 
with  a  sharp  trot.  We  are  only  about  eight  miles 
from  Kilkenny,  where  we  shall  sleep.  Allans!"  and 
away  we  rode. 

We  were  within  four  miles  of  the  city,  when  we 
heard  loud  shouts,  mingled  with  occasional  shots ;  an 
extraordinary  glare  of  light  was  apparent  in  the  dis- 
tance, and  wre  drew  our  reins,  and  reduced  our  pace  to 
a  walk,  wondering  what  it  could  be.  Even  the  Major 
was  puzzled  for  afew  minutes;  at  length  he  divined 
the  cause.  "  I'll  stake  my  head,  Kennedy  has  been 
acquitted,  and  they  are  escorting  him  home  in  triumph." 
Another  ten  minutes  brought  us  in  full  view  of  the 
party,  and,  at  the  first  glance,  we  read  the  correctness 
of  Vokes's  supposition.  Shouting,  singing,  firing,  and 
brandishing  lighted  torches,  we  beheld  a  body  of  at 
least  five  hundred  men  approaching.  Drunk  and  in- 
flamed by  passion,  they  were  screaming  forth  alter- 
nately blessings  on  Kennedy,  and  curses  on  every  con- 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


41 


stituted  authority.  In  the  middle  sat  the  released 
murderer,  who  (many  believed)  had  escaped  his  just 
doom,  in  consequence  of  the  fears  of  the  jurymen.  He 
was  seated  on  a  small  mountain  pony,  and  was  sup- 
ported on  either  side  by  female  friends,  being  wholly 
unequal  to  sit  upright,  in  consequence  of  the  libations 
he  had  indulged  in;  yet  his  fair  partners  still  kept 
plying  him  with  liquor.  An  Irish  bagpiper  and  a 
wretched  fiddler  acted  as  a  band,  and  thus  the  pro- 
cession was  made  up. 

On  they  came,  roaring  and  capering  about  in  mad- 
dened ecstatics.  By  the  glare  of  their  torches,  they 
looked  like  demons ;  and  my  heart  sank  within  me, 
when  I  considered  how  small  was  our  chance  of  escape. 
If  they  caught  us,  we  should  instantly  be  sacrificed.  If 
we  turned  back,  our  fate  was  no  less  certain.  What 
could  we  do  ?  In  my  distress,  I  naturally  turned  to 
Yokes,  and,  to  my  horror,  saw  him  smile  at  some 
incident  which  had  occurred  amidst  the  approaching 
crowd. 

"  We  are  lost  ! "  groaned  I. 

u Giggy-ma-gow,"  replied  the  Major;  "  be  alive,  and 
there's  no  danger." 
"What  shall  we  do?" 

"Follow  me!"  and,  in  one  moment  more,  he  had 
cleared  a  low  hedge  beside  the  road.  We  did  the 
same,  and,  in  another,  we  were  all  well  concealed  by  a 
stack*  of  wheat,  which  served  us  providentially  as  a 
shield. 

On  came  the  fearful  multitude ;  they  were  now  close 
upon  us — they  were  not  twenty  yards  from  us — the 
slightest  indiscretion,  and  we  were  dead  men.    It  was 


42  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


a  perilous  moment.  I  do  believe  I  trembled.  The 
infuriated  wretches  were,  however,  far  too  excited  to 
think  of  turning  their  eyes  away  from  their  hero  ;  and 
I  can  now,  in  cool  moments,  believe  that  even  had  we 
not  been  thus  luckily  concealed,  they  would  not  have 
perceived  us. 

They  were  fully  five  minutes  filing  past  us.  They 
halted  a  couple  of  minutes,  to  raise  a  drunken  man  who 
had  fallen,  and  seemed  in  no  hurry  to  proceed.  How 
I  outlived  that  period,  I  cannot  divine ;  my  every 
pulse  seemed  to  stop,  and  I  certainly  did  not  breathe 
— at  least,  such  is  my  impression. 

Without  a  word,  the  Major  stealthily  stole  out,  and, 
about  a  hundred  yards  in  their  rear,  jumped  back  into 
the  road.  He  and  I  succeeded  in  doing  so  without 
attracting  any  attention  ;  but,  unfortunately,  the  Ser- 
geant's sword  was  loose  in  its  scabbard,  and,  as  his 
horse  sprang  over,  it  gave  a  loud  "  clank." 

The  crowd  at  once  recognised  the  well-known 
sound;  for  an  instant,  they  shduted,  the  "Army;" 
in  the  next,  they  cried  out,  the  "  Peelers."  They 
turned  round,  and  saw  us  by  the  bright  moonlight. 
Half-a-dozen  shots  were  fired  by  them  in  as  many 
seconds ;  but  they  were  far  too  intoxicated  to  take 
good  aim,  so  none  of  the  balls  or  shot  touched  us.  A 
party  instantly  quitted  the  main  body,  and  started  in 
pursuit  of  us — a  fact  by  no  means  pleasant,  as  these 
men,  when  sober,  can  run  for  a  short  distance  almost 
as  quick  as  a  horse  can  gallop.  u  On  !  on  ! "  roared 
the  Major  ;  and  again  we  started  at  our  utmost  speed, 
and  soon  left  our  pursuers  behind  us. 

In  half-an-hour  more,  I  sat  at  supper,  in  Kilkenny, 


CARRICKSHOCK. 


43 


with  my  daring  relative,  who  laughed  at  my  agitation, 
and  endeavoured  to  assure  me  that  it  was  "  nothing  at 
all!" 

"  It  may  be,"  said  I,  as  I  drank  his  health  in  a 
glass  of  old  sherry ;  "  it  may  be  !  But  if  ever  you 
catch  me  on  such  an  excursion  again — if  ever  I  accom- 
pany you  on  such  a  perilous  trip — may  St.  Patrick 
withdraw  his  protection  from  Erin  !  " 


BOSTON  COLLEGE  LJLBKaKY 
CHESTNUT  HILL,  MASS. 


44 


A  QUEEE  JOCKEY. 


"1  AM  glad  you  have  returned  to  dinner,"  said  Yokes, 
as  I  entered  his  mansion,  having  spent  the  previous 
evening  at  the  house  of  a  friend  in  the  county  of  Chire. 
"  I  am  glad  you  have  come  back,  for  I  wish  to  intro- 
duce you  to  Mr.  K  ,  chief  constable  in  the  police, 

one  of  the  most  intelligent  and  one  of  the  bravest  fellows 
in  that  force.  So  run  up-stairs  and  wash  your  hands 
quickly,  and  join  us  at  table,  for  dinner  has  been, 
already  announced."  This  I  did,  and  wras  in  my  accus- 
tomed seat  before  the  fish  and  soup  had  been  removed. 

"  Allow  me  to  introduce  you,  my  dear  Harry,  to 
one  of  my  best  friends,  and  decidedly  the  best  officer 

serving  under  me  ;  Mr.  K  ,  1  the  Jockey  !'  "added 

Vokes,  with  a  laugh. 

I  rose  and  bowed,  and  expressed  my  gratification  at 
making  the  gentleman's  acquaintance,  though  sadly 
puzzled  to  make  out  the  meaning  of  the  soubriquet 
which  my  father-in-law  had  added  to  his  name. 

Mr.  K  ,  I  should  say,  rather  stood  down  from  his 

chair  than  otherwise,  for  his  height  was  barelyfive  feet ; 
his  extremely  rounded  shoulders  still  further  deprived 
him  of  his  proper  proportions,  and  almost  gave  him  a 
look  of  deformity.  His  large  and  sinewy  hands  gave  the 


A  QUEEtt  JOCKEY. 


45 


surest  indication  of  considerable  strength.  His  clear 
blue  eye,  however,  plainly  bespoke  an  intelligence  of  no 
common  order — a  talented  brow — a  rich  and  humorous 
smile,  won  friendship  at  once,  in  spite  of  a  certain  glance 
which  occasionally  crossed  his  countenance,  plainly  indi- 
cating a  strong  and  determined  will.  When  seated,  I 
never  saw  a  man  whose  intimacy  I  would  rather  have 
cultivated  ;  when  upright,  I  would  have  chosen  him  as 
my  defender  against  any  odds.  Like  the  tiger-cat, 
though  small,  he  was  made  to  be  dreaded,  and,  like  the 
creature  in  question,  capable  of  overcoming  animals 
superior  to  itself  in  size.  Such  was  Mr.  K  ,  a  gen- 
tleman still  well  remembered  in  the  counties  of  Lime- 
rick, Cork,  and  Tipperary. 

Dinner  over — our  usual  quantity  of  wine  discussed — 
the  ladies  left  us,  and  then,  as  was  the  habit  in  those 
days,  and,  indeed,  to  tell  the  truth,  is  still  so,  whisky- 
punch  was  introduced — not  Jamesons  or  Kinahan's 
authorized  drinks,  but  real,  good,  well-smoked potlieen : 
the  milk  which  then  freely  flowed  in  Cratloe  woods. 
The  steaming  kettle  filled  with  hot  water  —  boiling 
hot — which  was  reckoned  absolutely  necessary  for  this 
beverage,  was  placed  on  the  table.  The  lemon,  the 
sugar,  and  the  etceteras  were  all  there,  and  our  hearts 
soon  became  warmed  with  the  steaming  liquor. 

"  Hand  me  the  jug,  my  Jockey  !"  said  Yokes,  with- 
out smiling. 

Mr.  K  did  so. 

My  curiosity  overcame  my  good  manners,  and  I 
Could  not  resist  asking  our  entertainer  "why  he  thus 
styled  his  guest." 

"  Don't  you  know     Oh,  it's  a  famous  story ;  but 


46  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


as  we  are  only  three  of  us  together,  sure  K   had 

better  tell  it  himself.    Sure  you'll  tell  it,  won't  you  V 

"  Ah,  then,  Major,  I'd  rather  not." 

"  Just  because  you're  the  subject  of  it ;  but  never 
mind.  If  you  won't  I  will,  and  then,  you  know,  your 
modest  nature  will  be  more  shocked  with  my  praise 
than  any  self-commendation  you  can  bestow  on  your- 
self. So  if  it's  only  modesty  which  ties  your  tongue, 
unloose  it,  and  tell  it  to  our  friend — just  as  it  hap- 
pened." 

"  Well,  then,  as  I  must,  I  must ;  for  it's  better  to 
narrate  the  simple  truth  than  allow  a  partial  friend 
like  the  chief  magistrate  to  colour  up  the  sketch  till  he 
makes  me  out  a  hero,  a  character  I  never  intended  to 
play,  nor  one,  which,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  do  I  ever 
believe  nature  designed  me  to  enact." 

"Well,  go  on."    He  did  so. 

fl  It  is  perhaps  necessary  to  tell  you,  as  a  stranger  to 
the  South  of  Ireland,  that  a  very  few  years  ago  this 
county,  and  indeed  all  Munster,  was  not  only  cele- 
brated for  its  insurrections  arising  from  political  and 
agrarian  causes,  but  it  had  also  won  an  unhappy  cele- 
brity from  the  cruelty  shown  in  many  of  its  personal 
attacks  on  unoffending  individuals.  These  fearful  acts 
were  of  daily  recurrence.  Not  a  night  passed  without 
some  dreadful  occurrence  of  the  kind.  Here  the 
military  force  was  of  no  use ;  the  local  magistrates 
dreaded  to  act.  He  who  sought  to  arrest  a  murderer, 
or  to  convict  an  offender,  was  marked  out  for  instant 
immolation.  Assassination  stalked  along  our  roads 
and  across  our  fields.  Some  of  the  largest  and  best 
defended  houses  were  attacked ;  no  wonder,  then,  that 


A  QUEER  JOCKEY. 


47 


the  local  executive  shrank  from  a  duty  which,  earnestly 
carried  out,  would  lead  to  the  wife  and  children  of  the 
active  magistrate  becoming  a  widow  and  orphans  on 
the  morrow.  Our  friend  Yokes,  here,  braved  every 
danger,  and  to  a  certain  extent  awed  the  '  bad  boys' 
of  this  county ;  bub,  as  I  have  explained  to  you,  he 
almost  stood  alone.  Country  gentlemen,  unaccus- 
tomed to  danger,  unpaid  justices,  naturally  avoided 
the  dangerous  services  now  required  of  them.  The 
Irish  bench  is  filled,  and  ever  has  been  filled,  by  a  body 
of  brave  and  intelligent  men — this  all  the  world  admits 
to  be  the  case — but  daily  to  risk  being  murdered,  your 
family  attacked,  your  property  injured,  was  beyond 
the  fortitude  of  even  an  Irish  J.P. 

"It  was  at  this  time  that  the  dreadful  murders  of 
the  O'Sheas  occurred,  one  of  the  most  horrible  occur- 
rences that  ever  took  place  in  Munster.  On  this  occa- 
sion the  house  of  a  well-to-do  farmer  was  attacked  by 
a  numerous  band  of  ruffians,  the  doors  broken  in,  and 
the  house  set  on  fire,  whilst,  as  each  member  of  the 
family — even  to  a  young  child  some  five  years  of  age 
only — endeavoured  to  make  their  escape,  they  were 
savagely  butchered  and  thrown  back  into  the  flames, 
in  which  they  were  reduced  to  cinders,  amidst  the 
cheers  and  shouts  of  the  savage  crowd  of  assassins.  I 
merely  quote  this  one  instance  of  the  boldness  of  these 
lawless  bands  who  paraded  through  the  county,  to 
show  how  fearlessly  they  made  their  attacks,  and  at 
the  same  time  I  mention  it  as  it  was  the  outrage  im- 
mediately preceding  the  one  I  am  about  to  quote — 
the  one  which  made  our  friend  the  Major  give  me  the 
soubriquet  of  1  The  Jockey.' " 


48  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


Here  we  again  replenished  our  tumblers,  and  after 
one  or  two  observations  our  little  friend  recommenced 
his  narrative. 

"One  day  I  was  sent  for  in  haste  by  Mr.   ,  the 

nearest  magistrate,  and  instantly  attended  the  sum- 
mons. Here  I  found  several  of  the  first  gentlemen  of 
the  county  assembled,  debating  with  closed  doors — for 
there  was  little  doubt  that  many  of  the  servants  and 
retainers  in  gentlemen's  families  were  in  league  with 
the  ruffians — how  best  to  proceed  in  a  case  which  had 

just  come  to  the  knowledge  of  Mr.  .    The  case 

was  thus  explained  to  me  on  my  arrival.    Mr.   , 

it  appeared,  had  received  that  morning  an  anonymous 
communication  by  the  post,  stating  that  the  farm-house 
of  his  most  respectable  tenant  was  that  night  to  be 
attacked  by  a  band  of  marauders,  and  "  sawed  (so  ^aid 
the  letter)  just  as  the  0  Shays  was  sarved"  in  the  neigh- 
bouring county.  A  threat  of  this  kind  might  have 
been  treated  with  derision  and  levity  in  more  settled 
times.  But  in  those  I  speak  of,  it  was  looked  upon 
with  just  alarm,  and  the  magistrates  had  now  met  to 
arrange  some  mode  of  defence. 

"  After  a  lengthened  discussion  it  was  agreed  that 
myself  and  another  chief  constable  should  order  our 
men,  one  by  one,  to  stroll  into  the  farm-house  named, 
that  they  should  go  fully  armed  and  provided  with 
thirty  rounds  of  ammunition  each,  and  that  myself 
and  my  brother  officer  should  follow  them  in  plain 
clothes,  and  when  assembled  with  our  men  (who  would 
make  up  a  party  of  some  twenty  well-tried  hands) 
concoct  the  best  mode  of  defence  in  case  of  the  inform- 


A  QUEER  JOCKEY. 


49 


ation  turning  out  to  be  correct.  The  council  broke 
up,  and  we  each  returned  to  our  station. 

"  It  was  about  seven  o'clock  when,  in  accordance  with 
my  directions,  I  entered  the  farm-house  in  question, 
where  I  found  that  all  the  men,  as  well  as  my  brother 
officer,  had  already  arrived,  but  no  steps  had  been  taken, 
as  the  arrangements  were  left  to  me,  who  happened  to 
be  the  senior  in  rank. 

"  We  instantly  set  about  barring  up  the  windows  and 
fastening  the  doors.  But  after  awhile  we  slightly 
opened  the  shutters  in  order  to  enable  us  to  fire  at  any 
person  approaching.  We  then  placed  the  females  of 
the  family  in  comparative  safety,  and  assigned  a  post 
to  the  father  and  to  each  of  his  sons,  locking  up  in  a 
sort  of  a  cellar  ail  the  servants  and  labourers — being 
well  convinced  that  one  or  more  of  them  were  in  league 
with  the  marauders. 

"  Eight,  nine,  and  even  ten  o'clock  sounded,  yet 
nothing  occurred  to  alarm  us,  and  many  of  the  party 
began  to  smile  at  our  apparently  useless  precautions, 
when  my  sergeant,  whom  I  had  placed  at  the  top 
window,  came  down  and  told  me  that  an  individual 
had  just  crossed  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house,  and 
entered  an  ornamental  shrubbery,  situated  about  one 
hundred  yards  distant.  My  next  in  command  derided 
the  information.  But  I  too  well  knew  the  intelligence 
of  my  sergeant  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of  his  statement, 
so  I  returned  with  him  up  stairs  and  looked  out.  The 
window  was  beneath  a  sloping  roof,  so  we  could  not 
be  seen  by  any  one  outside. 

i(  It  was  a  calm  moonlight  night— not  a  breeze  ruffled 
4 


50  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


the  leaves — all  was  still,  and  I  had  already  began  to 
chide  my  subordinate  for  allowing  himself  to  be  de- 
ceived by  the  dark  shadows  of  the  trees,  when  I 
heard  a  slight  rustle  in  the  bushes,  and  presently  the 
form  of  a  human  being  presented"  itself.  I  rushed 
down  quickly,  but  noiselessly,  and  ordering  all  lights 
to  bo  extinguished,  I  ran  to  the  hall  there  to  await 
events. 

"  Presently  a  loud  knock  was  given,  and  on  nry  de- 
ma-nding  what  was  wanted,  a  gentle  and  subdued  voice 

replied — *  Ah,  then,  Mr.  '  (naming  the  proprietor 

of  the  farm)  1  my  wife  is  suddenly  stricken  ill,  and 
will  surely  die  unless  I  can  get  some  spirit  to  give  her 
— only  a  noggin,  and  may  the  blessing  of  Heaven 
reward  you.'  This  wa3  said  in  such  a  piteous  tone 
that  had  I  not  been  well  on  my  guard  I  should  have 
been  deceived. 

"  1  I  never  open  the  cloor  after  dark,"  replied  I,  in  a 
feigned  voice.  1  My  master  has  gone  to  bed,  and  I 
don't  dare  to  disobey  his  orders.' 

u  6  Ah,  then,  only  for  a  moment — sure  you  wouldn't 
let  a  poor  creature  die  for  the  want  of  a  single  drop  ! 
Faith  you  might  trust  me — ain't  I  yer  auld  friend 
Paddy  Hogan,  and  no  other  ? 1 

"  Now  it  so  happened  I  knew  this  Paddy  Hogan  well, 
so  I  altered  my  tactics,  and  fastening  the  door  with 
the  chain,  I  opened  it  slightly  and  peered  forth.  The 
robber  appeared  delighted,  and  made  a  rush  to  enter. 

"  i  Not  so  fast/  cried  I,  f  you're  not  Paddy  Hogan, 
or  any  other  honest  man/  and  I  slammed  the  door  to. 

"  *  Bad  scram  to  ye,  but  ye  shall  suffer  for  this  ! 1 
gaid  the  rujgan;  and  lie  instantly  discharged  his  bluu- 


A  QUEER  JOCKEt, 


01 


derbuss  tli rough  the  panel  of  the  door,  and  then  called 
out  loudly  (in  Irish)  to  his  companions  to  come  on. 
Only  one  bullet  had  passed  through  the  entrance.  So, 
unhurt,  I  ran  up  to  the  first  floor  and  prepared  to 
receive  the  '  boys.' 

"  Through  the  opening  of  the  shutters  I  could  now 
see  a  large  body  of  men — some  disguised,  some  dressed 
in  white  frocks,  some  with  black  crape  over  their  faces, 
some  in  their  ordinary  clothes,  bub  all  armed  with 
weapons  of  one  kind  or  another.  The  fellow  who  had 
fired  through  the  door  was  in  front  of  them,  reloading 
his  gun.  He  was  about  six  feet  six  in  height,  and  very 
powerful.    He  was  evidently  the  leader  of  the  band. 

"  Confident  of  success — eager  to  see  the  blood  of  their 
victims  flow — the  wretches  now  set  up  a  shout  of 
triumph,  and,  at  the  signal  of  their  ringleader,  advanced 
to  attack  the  premises. 

"I  instantly  gave  the  word,  and  half  the  policemen 
(as  I  had  previously  arranged)  discharged  their  carbines 
into  the  approaching  crowd.  A.  yell  of  fear-stricken 
cowardice,  of  anger  and  revenge,  a  cry  of  astonishment, 
instantly  arose,  and  the  robbers  at  once  retreated  into 
the  bushes,  dragging  with  them  some  five  or  six  men 
whom  our  volley  had  brought  down. 

"  This  was  looked  upon  as  a  victory  by  my  brother 
officer,  and  several  of  our  men  advised  an  instant  sortie. 
Shis,  howrever,  I  felt  would  be  most  iir, prudent,  so  I 
at  once  negatived  the  proposition,  and  ordered  those 
who  had  fired  to  reload.  Scarcely  had  they  done  so 
when  again  the  a  ((aching  paity  emerged— increased  in 
numbers,  and  bt lengthened  by  a  hope  of  vengeance, 

Thsir  numerical  ^rce  greatly  eveet'ded  our** 

4-a  -%;J.:,: 


52  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  They  commenced  operations  by  a  well-aimed  volley 
directed  at  our  windows.  Thebroken  glass,  and  the  holes 
made  by  several  of  their  balls,  bore  testimony  to  their 
accuracy  in  shooting.  One  constable  was  slightly 
wounded ;  the  party  who  had  not  yet  fired  returned 
their  salute — showing  them  that  the  house  was  well 
defended. 

"  The  robbers  clearly  perceived  that  they  had  but  one 
of  two  courses  to  pursue  :  at  once  to  retreat,  or  by  a 
mighty  effort  to  force  their  way  into  the  house  and  try 
a  hand-to-hand  combat,  in  which  their  pikes,  swords, 
and  bludgeons  might  serve  to  oppose  the  fire-arms 
which  they  now  perceived  we  possessed. 

"  The  latter  plan  was  adopted,  and,  with  the  loss  of 
three  lives,  they  succeeded  in  forcing  the  front  door, 
which  they  burst  in  under  cover  of  a  portico,  whirl), 
unfortunately,  was  built  over  it.  In  they  rushed,  and 
now  the  combat  became  terrific.  Our  carbines,  compara- 
tively speaking,  were  of  little  use.  In  the  dark  we 
did  not  dare  to  discharge  them,  fearing  to  destroy  our 
friends,  whom  we  could  not  distinguish  from  our  foes. 
At  this  moment  our  proprietor  fortunately  appeared 
with  a  lantern,  and  the  sergeant  threw  open  the 
shutters,  allowing  the  bright  moonlight  to  pour  in. 

"  We  could  now  plainly  see  before  us,  and  hurrying 
to  form  a  compact  body,  we  discharged  into  them, 
another  effective  volley.  Seriously  injured  by  the  volley 
alarmed  at  seeing  the  regular  police  before  them,  the 
peasants  beat  a  hasty  and  disorderly  retreat ;  they  fled, 
shrieking  out,  as  our  people  fired  after  them.  We 
pursued  them  only  through  the  portico,  where,  having 
got  fairly  rid  of  them,  my  brother  officer  very  properly 


A  QUEER  JOCKEY. 


53 


rushed  forward  and  shut  the  frout  door,  which  he  now 
thoroughly  secured. 

"But,  oh  !  who  shall  paint  my  feeelings  when  1  found 
I  was  locked  out.  If  I  was  perceived  by  those  within 
I  should  probably  be  shot  as  a  robber ;  if  seen  by  the 
marauders  my  death  was  certain.  What  was  I  to  do  1 
All  this  flashed  across  my  mind  in  a  single  moment ; 
yet  what  could  I  do  ?  At  this  moment  the  gigantic 
leader  of  the  wretches  passed  me;  he  probably  would 
stumble  on  me,  and  as  I  was  wholly  unarmed  would 
murder  me.  Such  was  my  idea.  Besides,  I  felt  that 
if  I  let  him  escape  I  might  be  hereafter  blamed. 
After  an  instant's  hesitation,  the  fellow  turned  round, 
having  evidently  determined  on  joining  his  comrades, 
who  were  now  in  full  flight.  He  had  only  made  two 
paces  towards  them,  when  I  sprang  upon  his  shoulders, 
and  firmly  clung  round  his  neck. 

"  Surprised  and  terrified  by  this  novel  mode  of  attack, 
screaming  out  in  Irish  that  he  had  the  devil  on  his 
back,  he  hurried  on  his  pace  ;  he  evidently  ran  towards 
the  trees  for  the  purpose  of  crushing  me  against  them, 
the  only  mode,  and  decidedly  the  surest  mode,  of  dis- 
lodging me.  If  he  did  so,  I  felt  that  I  was  lost.  Yet 
what  could  I  do  ?  I  was  too  small  to  combat  with  him 
or  bear  him  down ;  I  was  too  weak  to  throttle  him. 
What  then  could  I  do  %  I  glanced  over  every  chance 
of  escape  ;  the  whole  train  did  not  occupy  ten  seconds. 
I  at  once  determined  on  my  course  of  action.  I  gently 
withdrew  my  right  hand,  and  dipping  it  into  my  pocket 
I  drew  forth  a  penknife,  which  I  opened  with  my 
teeth.  Thus  armed,  I  began  to  feel  secure.  In  the 
meantime,  the  great  savage  had  endeavoured  to  shake 


54:  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

me  off ;  but  all  in  vain.  My  life  depended  on  my 
tenacity ;  I  kept  my  seat,  and  defied  the  efforts  of  the 
monster  to  get  rid  of  me. 

"  We  now  approached  a  grove  of  trees  ;  my  captor 
already  felt  that  he  had  me — he  already  calculated  on 
the  certainty  of  my  doom.  But  in  this  he  was  grossly 
deceived.  I  threw  my  right  arm  round  his  throat ; 
in  it  I  grasped  my  penknife.  In  less  time  than  I  now 
tell  it  I  had  cut  his  throat  from  ear  to  ear.  The  man 
attempted  to  cry  out ;  I  stabbed  him  in  the  throat  and 
the  face,  again  and  again,  and  as  we  reached  the  trees 
(where  he  had  hoped  to  immolate  me)  he  fell  a  coq>se, 
bathed  in  a  pool  of  blood.  I  now  dismounted,  and 
glanced  at  the  giant  to  see  if  he  really  was  without 
life.  His  staring  eye,  his  fallen  jaws,  convinced  me  of 
the  fact ;  and  now  I  would  gladly  have  returned  to 
my  comrades,  but  I  did  not  dare  to  stir  or  make  the 
slightest  noise.  The  band,  though  dispersed,  had  pro- 
bably left  some  member  of  their  gang  in  the  vicinity. 
If  I  attempted  to  cross  the  lawn  I  should  probably  be 
seen  and  murdered  ;  if  I  endeavoured  to  call  to  my  men 
I  should  be  overheard  and  destroyed.  So  I  had  only 
to  await  quietly  till  daylight  in  my  present  position. 

"  To  own  the  truth,  I  here  passed  four  hours  of  the 
greatest  dread  (if  I  may  so  call  it)  that  I  ever  endured. 
Those  only  who  have  passed  a  night  alone  with  the  body 
of  him  whom  they  have  killed,  can  imagine  it.  Look 
towards  the  corpse  I  dared  not ;  his  eyes  seemed  fixed 
fiercely  on  me.  His  gaping  throat  seemed  to  reproach 
me  as  a  murderer.  In  a  word,  I  felt  terrified  and 
panic-struck  beyond  description. 

"  Oh,  how  I  blessed  the  daylight,  which  seemed  tardy 


A  QUEER  JOCKEY. 


55 


in  its  arrival.  Xo  sooner  had  the  first  ray  of  light 
illumined  the  heavens  than  the  door  of  the  farm-house 
opened,  and  a  body  of  policemen  appeared,  with  anxious 
faces.  They  left  the  place  in  search  of  their  chief 
constable,  whom  they  believed  to  have  fallen  a  victim 
to  the  marauders.  On  my  shouting  out  to  them  they 
suddenly  turned  round,  and  recognising  me,  gave  a  cheer 
of  delight,  to  which  my  heart  warmly  responded.  Their 
joy  could  not  exceed  mine.  In  a  few  moments  others 
came  out,  when  we  rushed  together  to  the  shrubbery 
where  the  ruffian  I  had  destroyed  lay  bathed  in 
his  blood.  He  was  at  once  identified  as  the  chief 
rebel  of  the  province.  By  accident  I  had  killed  the 
terror  of  the  neighbourhood.  Government  sent  me  a 
letter  of  thanks  for  my  conduct  on  the  occasion,  and  a 
handsome  present  in  money.  Indeed,  I  was  well  repaid 
for  my  lucky  exertions  on  this  memorable  occasion." 

"Don't  call  it  luck ;  it  was  pluck,  my  fine  Jockey, 
that  carried  you  through,"  said  Yokes. 

"  And  conferred  on  me,  as  you  see,"  said  he,  address- 
ing me,  "  the  title  of  '  The  Jockey.'" 

We  drank  his  health,  and  soon  after  the  party  broke 
up  and  retired  to  rest. 


•5G 


THE  TWO  LOAVES. 


As  you  approach  the  court-house,  where  the  assizes 
are  being  held,  and  long  before  you  pass  the  threshold 
of  that  important  fane,  you  behold,  with  astonishment, 
the  different  mode  in  which  law  is  carried  out  in  Ire- 
land, as  compared  to  the  sister  country.  The  English- 
man, who  has  been  accustomed  to  see  the  hall  of  justice 
only  marked  out  by  a  dozen  well-dressed  persons,  and 
a  constable  or  two  being  about  the  entrance,  naturally 
starts  with  dismay  when  he  sees,  as  is  always  the  case 
in  Ireland,  the  court-house  surrounded  by  thousands 
of  anxious  and  brawling  countrymen,  shouting  gene- 
rally, and  all  pressing  for  admission — a  mob  who  would, 
indeed,  be  dangerous,  were  it  not  that  every  avenue 
leading  to  the  interior  is  strictly  guarded  by  a  well- 
armed  body  of  military  police.  Hundreds  of  them 
surround  the  building,  while  the  interior  would  cease 
to  be  a  hall  jof  justice  if  one  half  the  area,  at  least, 
were  not  bristling  with  bayonets.  The  National  Con- 
vention never  displayed  a  more  strange  picture  than  the 
interior  of  an  Hibernian  assize  court.  That  the  Irish 
bar  and  the  Irish  bench  have  displayed  before  the  world 
some  of  the  very  finest  orators  and  sound  lawyers  that 
ever  graced  the  robe  of  justice,  all  must  allow.  But 
in  their  proceedings  there  is  wanting  that  calm  dignity, 


THE  TWO  LOAVES. 


57 


that  almost  chilling  pomposity,  that  distinguishes  a 
court  of  assize  in  England.  Petty  struggles  are  car- 
rying-on in  every  corner ;  brawlers  are  continually 
being  forced  out  of  the  hall.  The  lynx-eyed  policeman 
has  just  struck,  with  the  butt-end  of  his  carbine,  a 
fellow  endeavouring  to  smuggle  whisky  into  the  dock. 
The  jury  don't  look  happy;  they  evidently  wish  to 
make  a  party  affair  of  it.  The  barrister  pleads  hur- 
riedly, and  apparently  in  a  state  of  irritation.  He  is 
fairly  tortured  by  the  assumed  ignorance  of  a  principal 
evidence.  He  loses  his  temper  and  his  dignity  together. 
The  sheriff  looks  in ;  he  happens  to  be  popular,  and 
in  the  middle  of  a  trial  for  life  and  death  a  cheer  is 
raised  for  that  functionary,  which  explodes  through 
the  building  before  the  police  have  time  to  suppress  it. 
In  fact,  there  is  that  want  of  silent  dignity  which  awes 
the  Englishman  as  he  enters  a  British  tribunal.  To 
the  high  and  everlasting  honour  of  England  be  it 
spoken,  that  no  charge  has  ever  been  made,  for  a 
century  past,  of  political  or  religious  bias  ;  on  the  other 
side  of  the  channel  such  things  have  been  hinted  at, 
even  during  the  present  century.  Who  is  that  seated 
on  the  bench — that  little  man  whose  sharp,  intelligent 
look  seems  to  pierce  through  the  very  soul  of  a  doubt- 
ful witness]  See  how  he  grasps  the  subject ;  how  he 
draws  inferences  from  every  trivial  circumstance,  and 
how  wTith  a  cutting  joke  he  at  once  sets  down  a  flip- 
pant counsellor,  or  causes  a  laugh  through  the  court- 
house by  a  bon-mot  uttered  at  the  expense  of  the 
prisoner,  who  is  fain  to  join  in  the  general  hilarity, 
though  he  well  knows  the  same  lips  will,  within  the 
hour,  charge  the  jury  for  a  conviction  which  entails 


58  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


death.  Yes,  that  judge  lias  ilie  most  perfect  mastery 
over  every  jury.  How  far  he  always  wields  his  power 
properly  may  be  a  question  of  doubt.  At  this  moment 
he  is  trying  a  case  of  sheep-stealing';  but  before  the 
trial  lias  proceeded  far  he  has  called  up  the  clerk  of 
the  Crown  from  his  seat,  and  asked  him  in  a  whisper 
whose  tenant  the  prisoner  is.     t;  He  belongs  to  the 

lands  of  ,  my  lord,"  replies  the  other,  and  down 

he  sits.  Now,  the  tenantry  of  are  those  most  vio- 
lently and  politically  opposed  to  the  family  of  his  lord- 
ship :  so  he  at  once  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  prosecutor 
as  well  as  a  judge.  The  trial  proceeds,  and  the  case  is 
strong  against  the  poor  boy  in  the  dock.  That  he  had 
stolen  the  sheep  was  clear,  and  the  crime  was  in  those 
days  never  overlooked.  The  punishment  was  death, 
and  all  foresaw  that  the  wretched  prisoner  had  but  a 
few  hours  to  survive.  Relentlessly  did  the  judge 
charge  the  jury.  He  minutely  pointed  out  the  strength 
of  evidence  against  the  prisoner.  He  was  showing 
how  fearful,  in  an  Agricultural  country,  was  the  crime 
of  sheep-stealing,  when  the  clerk  of  the  crown  handed 
him  a  very  small  strip  of  paper.  The  judge  read  it, 
and  whispered  to  this  functionary  (who  sits  immediately 

beneath  him),  "  Are  you  quite  sure,  Mr.  B  F   H  I 

am,  my  lord,"  replied  the  other;  and  the  judge  conti- 
nued his  charge.  He  went  on  in  the  same  strain  for  a 
few  minutes.  Then,  turning  round,  he  said,  "  Yes,  gen- 
tlemen of  the  jury,  such  is  the  crime  of  sheep-stealing, 
and  he  who  is  guilty  of  it  deserves  his  fate.  If  the 
lad  who  stands  yonder  is  a  slieep-stealer,  he  deserves 
to  die.  The  evidence  is  strong  and  conclusive  against 
him.    But,  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  pause  ere  you  con- 


THE  TWO  LOAVES. 


59 


denin  one  so  young  on  such  bad  evidence.  Let  us 
examine  the  characters  of  the  witnesses  ;  let  us  examine 
their  motives ;  let  us  clearly  refer  to  their  different 
statements,  and  we  shall  find  them  conflicting  and  un- 
satisfactory. There  is  evidently  much  bad  feeling  in 
the  matter,  and  I  caunot  but  look  upon  the  charge  as 
a  conspiracy,  hatched  by  a  body  of  enemies  to  destroy 
a  very  young  man's  life.  Gentlemen,  I  must  tell  you 
I  don  t  believe  one  word  of  the  evidence  for  the  prose- 
cution, and  I  consider  that  you  will  do  well  to  acquit 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar."  The  jury  instantly  acquitted 
the  prisoner,  who  seemed  utterly  confounded  when  he 
found  himself  thus  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  ac- 
quitted. I  afterwards  read  the  slip,  which  had  been 
torn  in  two.  It  merely  ran,  "/  was  mistaken;  the 
prisoner  is  a  tenant  of  your  nephevfs  ;  his  family  ha  ve 
all  votes."    The  picture  may  perhaps  be  recognised. 

After  a  short  time,  and  before  the  cheers  of  the 
friends  of  the  acquitted  had  ceased  to  rend  the  air,  Sir 
M.  Barrington  and  Major  Yokes  entered  the  court- 
house, and  took  their  places  amongst  the  counsel. 

It  was  now  clear  that  a  serious  case  was  coming  on, 
and  the  pressure  in  the  hall  was  great.  Every  place  was 
rilled  up  ;  some  ladies  occupied  the  sheriff's  box.  Silence 
was  at  length  proclaimed,  and  the  prisoner  to  be  tried 
appeared  at  the  bar.  Xever  did  I  see  a  poor  wretch 
afflicted  with  a  worse  countenance.  He  was  duly 
arraigned,  and  finally  pleaded  u  not  guilty.5'  Sergeant 

Gr  now  stated  the  case,  and  a  more  fearful  one  I 

think  I  never  heard.  The  man  was  accused  of  having 
murdered  an  old  woman,  who  had  long  supported  him, 
and  her  two  infant  grandchildren. 


60  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

The  evidence  appeared  stroug  and  conclusive  ;  but 
the  prisoner  retained  that  stolid,  stupid  look,  which 
the  most  intelligent  Irish  peasant  can  assume  when 
determined  to  baffle  the  investigations  of  his  superiors  ; 
and  so  the  case  went  on,  occasionally  eliciting  a  sigh 
of  horror  from  those  unaccustomed  to  such  fearful  de- 
tails. The  prosecution  closed  ;  a  momentary  pause 
took  place.  The  counsel  turned  to  converse  together, 
and  a  few  persons  left  the  court.  At  this  moment 
some  provisions  were  brought  to  the  unhappy  prisoner, 
and  after  due  inspection  (as  is  the  custom)  were  handed 
to  him  over  the  thin  spikes  which  are  fixed  around  the 
dock.  This  was  going  on,  when  suddenly  the  voice  of 
Major  Yokes  rang  clearly  through  the  hall.  "  Sergeant 
Reedy,  stop  those  loaves.  Man  alive  !  What  does  he 
want  with  two  loaves  ?  Wouldn't  one  be  enough  for 
him  ?"  The  bread  that  the  prisoners  wife  was  handing 
to  him  was  instantly  pounced  upon  by  the  police  ser- 
geant. It  consisted  of  two  ordinary  loaves  stuck  to- 
gether, as  we  often  see  in  bakers'  shops,  and  therefore, 
beyond  the  fact  of  the  meal  being  expensive,  there  was 
nothing  to  remark  upon.  The  prisoner,  however, 
started  and  turned  pale.    The  woman  disappeared. 

"  Sergeant  Reedy,  bring  those  loaves  here."'  He 
did  so.  "  As  long  as  you  live,  Sergeant,  never  allow 
such  a  folly  as  this.  Surely  one  would  be  enough  for 
three  of  them  j*  and  while  thus  speaking,  the  Major 
broke  the  loaves  in  two.  "  Oh,  what  is  that — some- 
thing binds  them  together  1"  He  tears  them  apart, 
and  out  drops  a  pistol.  Every  one  starts  in  terror 
and  amazement,  except  the  magistrate  himself,  who 
coolly  examines  the  weapon.    Then  turning  to  the 


THE  TWO  LOAVES. 


61 


astonished  judge,  he  coolly  remarks,  "Loaded  up  to 
the  muzzle,  my  lord  and  hands  him  the  pistol.  In  a 
moment  the  high  functionary  is  struck  dumb  with  sur- 
prise, then  recovering  himself,  he  turns  to  the  prisoner, 
and  sternly  asks  for  an  explanation.  In  a  moment  the 
wretch  throws  himself  upon  his  knees  :  "  Oh,  Yarry  ! 
Yarry  !  The  Lord  be  good  to  us.  He  has  a  charmed 
life,  and  it's  no  use  fighting  agin  him.  Oh  then,  Major, 
it  must  have  been  the  divil  himself  who  tould  you 
about  the  arms  ;  for  barring  Biddy,  by  the  cross  of 
Athlone,  there's  not  a  living  soul  knows  a  word  about 
it.  Ah,  then,  it's  Heaven  or  the  divil  takes  care  of 
Tom  Vokes.  Holy  Mary  be  good  to  us — he  knows 
all."  And  the  man's  face  expressed  the  greatest  agony 
of  fear — if  not  remorse. 

The  judge  pressed  for  a  further  explanation. 

"  Well,  then,  your  honour's  glory,  it's  no  use  to  lie. 
Bedad,  he's  too  much  for  us  boys.  I'm  guilty,  and 
don't  deny  it ;  and  it's  to  Major  Yokes  I  owe  my 
being  found  out.  The  corpse  of  the  old  woman  being 
discovered  and  all  that — sure  I  knew  from  the  first 
I'd  be  condemned.  So  I  says  to  Biddy  —  Biddy, 
agrah, — get  Tim  Haglan's  big  pistol,  and  put  it  in 
the  middle  of  two  loaves,  and  when  I  want  food  hand 
them  to  me,  and  by  the  holy  Michael — great  glory  to 
him — at  the  moment  they  condemn  me,  I'll  blow  Tom 
Yokes's  brains  out,  for  he's  the  terror  of  all  the  county. 
But  oh,  my  lord,  it's  no  use,  he  has  a  charmed  life,  and 
it's  not  steel,  or  powder  and  ball,  will  kill  him !  and 
sure  that's  enougli ;  I'll  say  no  more,"  and  the  prisoner 
relapsed  into  silence. 


G2  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


The  case  went  on ;  the  man  was  committed,  con- 
demned, and  within  a  few  hours  executed. 

As  I  walked  home  with  Major  Voices,  I  asked 
him  most  earnestly  if  he  had  had  any  information  to 
induce  him  to  suspect  that  anything  was  concealed  in 
the  bread  % 

«  Nothing  at  all." 

"  And  how  came  you  to  do  so  V 

"  Upon  my  life,  I  can't  say.  I  thought  it  odd  to  see 
two  loaves  handed  in  for  a  single  meal — the  prisoners 
hands  trembled  as  he  held  them  out  to  receive  them." 

"  And  you  had  no  previous  suspicion  V 

"None  whatever.  But  remember  Dibdin's  song 
about  the  '  cherub  that  sits  up  aloft.'  It  is  not  the 
first  time  that  the  observation  of  the  most  minute 
trifle  has  saved  my  life.  But  come,  Henry,  don't  be 
so  inquisitive.  Walk  quickly,  it's  dinner-time,  and  I'm 
as  hungry  as  a  hunter/' 

So  on  I  hurried  with  my  strange  relative,  he 
whistling  as  carelessly,  and  apparently  as  unmoved,  as 
if  no  miracle  (for  as  such  I  shall  ever  look  upon  it)  had 
just  occurred,  to  save  his  life. 


G3 


DANIEL  O'CONNELL'S  ELECTION. 


In  1828  Daniel  O'Connell  publicly  proclaimed  his 
intention  of  coming  forward  as  a  candidate  to  repre- 
sent the  borough  of  Ennis  (County  Clare)  in  the  House 
of  Commons.  The  first  announcement  of  this  strange 
intention  was  received  with  derisive  smiles  and  a 
general  expression  of  doubt.  But  when  the  great 
Agitator's  measures  were  seriously  commenced  for  the 
purpose  of  carrying  out  this  object,  the  then  Govern- 
ment got  naturally  alarmed.  Aware  of  the  extraordi- 
nary influence  which  this  celebrated  patriot  possessed, 
well  read  in  the  violent  and  exciting  oratory  in 
which  the  popular  hero  indulged,  nothing  less  than  a 
rebellion  throughout  the  south  of  Ireland  could  be 
expected  to  arise  for  an  occasion  like  the  present, 
when  thousands  and  thousands  of  the  peasantry  would 
be  drawn  together  and  addressed  in  fiery  language  on 
those  religious  topics,  those  unjust  distinctions  which 
then  existed  between  the  members  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  and  the  Protestants  of  Ireland — a 
subject  which  had  for  centuries  caused  blood  to  flow 
and  discord  to  lift  her  head  throughout  the  sister 
kingdom. 

I  was  not.  surprised,  then,  when  I  found  that  w# 


64     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

(who  were  quartered  in  Limerick)  were  ordered  over  to 
keep  the  peace  in  the  county  of  Clare.  Right  and 
left,  orders  to  the  same  effect  flew  about ;  and  long 
before  the  day  of  nomination  a  force  of  some  G00O 
men  were  collected  in  and  around  the  town  of  Ennis. 
The  officers  of  the  regiment  to  which  I  belonged  were 
quartered  in  Clare  Castle,  our  men  and  horses  in  the 
adjoining  village — being  thus  situated  within  two 
miles  of  the  polling-booths.  As  regarded  our  personal 
comforts,  I  cannot  say  much  for  them,  being  forced 
(as  were  all  others)  to  share  my  bedroom  with  eight 
or  ten  brother  officers.  But  as  the  duty  wrould  pro- 
bably be  over  in  a  few  days,  wTe  laughed  at  these  and 
other  little  inconveniences,  and  enjoyed  ourselves  as 
well  as  we  could.  Not  so  was  it  with  our  worthy 
Colonel,  who,  with  the  head-quarters  of  the  regiment, 
was  also  present.  He  had  been  to  Sir  C.  D.,  who 
commanded  the  whole  force  on  this  occasion,  and 
remonstrated  with  him. 

"  We  are  wretchedly  quartered,  General.  Could 
you  not  manage  to  improve  our  position  V} 

"  Indeed  !"  replied  the  other.  "  I  thought  vour  men 
were  remarkably  well  put  up." 

"  So  they  are,  Sir  Charles  ;  but  our  horses  " 

"  Oh,  never  mind  them,"  replied  the  chief,  who  had 
always  been  an  infantry  officer.  "  If  the  men  are  well 
off,  hang  the  horses." 

"  Hang  my  horses,  General  screamed  the  old 
colonel,  who  had  watched  them  with  a  father's  eye 
during  two-thirds  of  his  life.  "  Hang  my  horses  !  No, 
you  can't  mean  that  !  Hang  my  horses  !"  and  suddenly 
turning  round,  the  old  cavalry  officer  bolted  out  of  the 


DANIEL  o'cONNELL's  ELECTION.  65 

room,  still  reiterating  the  obnoxious  fate  to  which  his 
troopers  had  been  consigned.  Some  vowed  that  he 
did  so  in  tears,  while  others  declared  that  he  gave  his 
men  an  extra  foot  parade  that  evening,  to  show  how 
he  undervalued  them  as  compared  with  his  horses.  Be 
the  case  however  as  it  may,  the  General  had  unwit- 
tingly wounded  the  Colonel  in  his  most  sensitive  part. 
He  ate  little  that  day  at  mess,  and  the  adjutant,  who 
sat  next  to  him,  assured  me  he  heard  him  utter,  more 
than  once,  "  Hang  my  horses,  indeed !  Hang  my 
horses  f '  in  tones  of  impassioned  indignation. 

The  mess-man  of  the  infantry  regiment  legitimately 
quartered  in  the  Castle  (I  think  it  was  the  Fifteenth), 
with  great  ingenuity  made  up  a  mess  for  us  all,  and 
really  spread  a  very  fair  dinner  before  us,  to  which  we 
did  ample  justice. 

On  the  clay  of  my  arrival,  just  as  we  were  sitting 
down,  who  should  come  in  but  0' Gorman  Mahon,  the 
right  arm — at  least,  so  I  believe  he  styled  himself — 
of  Daniel  O'Connell.  He  sat  down  with  us  and 
delighted  us  with  his  brilliant  jokes  and  truly  amus- 
ing conversation.  He  was  the  very  antithesis  to  the 
agitators  left  arm — Tom  Steel,  who  was  certainly, 
though  very  clever  and  well-read,  one  of  the  dullest 
and  most  melancholy  companions  I  ever  met  at  a  dinner 
table.  The  great  Dan,  like  Garrick,  represented  in  his 
celebrated  portrait,  must  have  struggled  thus  between 
tragedy  and  comedy  :  for  more  different  but  more  sin- 
cere supporters,  I  believe  no  man  ever  had. 

The  cloth  was  however  scarcely  cleared  away,  when 
the  0' Gorman  started  up,  and  assured  us  he  must  be 
off  to  look  after  political  matters.  In  ten  minutes 
5 


66     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


more  we  heard  him  galloping  out  of  the  yard.  We 
were  all  pleased  with  his  society,  but  from  that  day  to 
this  I  have  never  learnt  who  invited  him. 

The  next  day  I  was  occupied  looking  up  quarters 
for  freshly  arrived  troops.  In  a  few  instances  this 
was  a  disagreeable  duty,  inasmuch  as  many  persons 
objected  to  receive  soldiers  into  their  houses,  and  in 
these  cases  we  were  compelled  to  quarter  them  on  the 
unwilling  recipients  nolens  volens. 

I  particularly  well  remember  riding  at  the  head  of 
a  party  of  artillery,  to  seek  shelter  for  these  men,  into 
the  park  of  Barntick — the  estate  of  the,  then,  Sir 
Nathaniel  Peacock.  Sir  Nathaniel  was  abroad — he 
had  been  so  several  years,  and  probably  would  never 
return ;  so  the  house  was  closed  up  and  left  in  charge 
of  a  man  and  his  wife.  These  two  faithful  guardians 
eyed  our  approach  with  jealous  fear,  and  on  our  knock- 
ing for  admittance,  appeared  at  an  upstairs  window, 
from  which  they  demanded  to  know  our  business  at 
Barntick. 

"  I  have  an  order,"  replied  I,  "  to  quarter  these  men 
and  guns  on  you." 

"  Divil  a  man  comes  in  here,  without  the  order  of 
the  agent,"  growled  the  man. 

"  It's  no  use  we  sha'n't  let  you  in,"  screamed  the 
woman. 

"  Come  down  and  open  the  door  directly.  I've  an 
order  here  signed  by  the  proper  authority,  and  at  your 
peril  refuse  to  admit  us." 

"To  blazes  with  your  authority,  and  yourselves  too. 
You  shan't  pass  the  door-sill  till  you've  tasted  of  my 
blunderbuss — not  if  you  were  the  Lord-Lieutenant ; 


DANIEL  O'CONNELL'S  ELECTION". 


67 


so  the  sooner  you're  off  the  sooner  yell  get  back  to 
dinner, "  and  with  this  joke,  which  he  appeared 
mentally  to  enjoy,  the  fellow  slammed  the  window  to, 
and  walked  off. 

Had  I  been  in  charge  of  cavalry  or  infantry,  I 
scarcely  know  how  I  should  have  acted.  But  here  the 
course  was  abundantly  clear.  I  ordered  a  pole  to  be 
affixed  to  a  tumbril  and  backed  upon  the  door,  which 
in  an  instant  was  shivered  to  pieces,  while  the  worthy 
old  couple  inside  fled  in  alarm,  uttering  cries  of  terror, 
firmly  believing  that  we  had  thus  entered  by  force  with 
an  intention  of  murdering  them.  We  had  consider- 
able difficulty  in  coaxing  them  back  ;  but  at  length  we 
did  so,  when  the}r  proved  most  useful  in  cooking  and 
supplying  us  with  vegetables.  They  were  paid  for  the 
latter.  Where  those  vegetables  were  obtained  was  a 
question  which  rested  entirely  between  Sir  Nathaniel 
and  his  care-taker.  All  I  know  is  that  we  paid  for 
them. 

On  the  following  day  I  was  sent  off  with  despatches 
to  Sir  Edward  O'Brien,  of  Dromoland,  and  here  I  was 
received  with  the  greatest  courtesy  by  that  gentleman, 
and  thus  formed  an  acquaintance  which  afterwards 
proved  to  me  most  valuable  ;  since  I  have  subse- 
quently largely  partaken  of  the  liberal  hospitality  of 
that  excellent  man — now  no  more — and  enjoyed  with 
his  sons  many  a  pleasant  day's  fishing  in  the  lake 
which  is  situated  close  to  this  beautiful  castle.  It  was 
here  that  I  saw  for  the  first  time  William  Smith 
O'Brien,  who,  in  after  years,  played  so  conspicuous  a 
part  in  the  historical  drama  of  Erin. 

On  the  day  of  the  nomination,  I  was  desired  to 

5—2 


68     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


carry  a  communication  into  Ennis.  When  I  arrived, 
I  was  told  that  the  gentleman  I  sought  was  near  the 
hustings.  Thither  then  I  turned  my  steps,  and  as  long 
as  I  live  I  shall  never  forget  the  sight  that  met  my 
view.  I  have  since  seen  many,  many  elections.  I  have 
even  stood  before  them  as  the  principal  performer  on 
the  occasion,  but  never  have  I  seen  so  extraordinary 
a  sight  as  that  which  now  met  my  view.  At  least 
20,000  (I  speak  most  moderately  in  Faying  this,) 
were  closely  packed  before  me.  The  great  agitator 
wa3  addressing  them  in  that  exciting  manner  so  pecu- 
liarly his  own.  His  voice  was  loud — his  theme 
denunciatory  ;  but  still  a  bright  smile  lit  up  his  beam- 
ing countenance.  His  neckcloth  had  been  taken  of£ 
and  tied  loosely  over  his  breast.  His  head  was  bare, 
and  his  waistcoat  thrown  open.  Before  him  was  placed 
a  glass  of  water,  from  which  he  not  unfrequently 
sipped.  His  principal  supporters  stood  around  him  in 
silent  admiration.  The  hustings  pourtrayed  a  group 
of  men — men  of  first-rate  talent — awed  into  silent 
adoration  by  the  eloquence  of  the  orator. 

But  if  such  was  the  scene  pourtrayed  by  the  booth 
before  me,  what  shall  I  say  of  the  crowd  who  listened 
in  mute  attention  ]  Crammed  into  a  small  space — 
jammed  en  masse — squeezed  painfully  together — not  a 
complaint  was  heard.  Every  eye  was  fixed  on  the  popu- 
lar speaker.  The  very  ears  of  his  followers  seemed  to 
distend  themselves  to  catch  the  accents  which  fell  from 
their  loved  leader.  A  low  sigh  might  have  been  heard 
throughout  this  large  assemblage.  Guided  by  his  wishes 
— even  when  the  topic  became  inflammatory  to  this  im- 
pulsive people — still  not  a  murmur — a  murmur  even  of 


BANIEL  o'cONNELL's  ELECTION'. 


69 


of  admiration — could  be  elicited.  Quietly,  silently,  and 
seriously,  they  drank  in  the  words  that  were  uttered. 
Not  a  movement  of  impatience  could  be  traced  ;  no 
breath  impregnated  by  liquor  disgraced  by  its  redolence 
this  living  mass.  The  priest  who  had  led  in  his  share 
of  voters,  had  no  occasion  to  watch  his  flock.  He  was 
not  more  steady  or  attentive  himself,  than  was  his 
usually  wildest  parishioner.  Never  did  I  see  before, 
mind  dominate  feeling  so  effectually. 

O'Connell  saw  a  mounted  military  officer  in  the  dis- 
tance. He  stopped  for  a  moment,  pointed  towards 
me,  and  waving  his  hand,  addressed  three  or  four  words 
to  the  multitude.  In  the  next  instant  a  clear  passage 
was  left  for  me  right  through  the  centre  of  the  crowd. 
Ten  thousand  men  on  either  hand  squeezed  themselves 
into  a  still  more  dense  body,  to  afford  me  a  passage  to 
the  hustings,  and  effected  this  in  orderly  silence,  and 
without  a  murmur,  at  the  single  wave  of  the  hand  of 
him  who  afterwards  so  powerfully  and  successfully 
won  their  cause. 

I  freely  confess  I  never  felt  myself  in  a  more  awk- 
ward situation  ;  as  an  officer  on  duty,  I  had  no  right 
to  indulge  in  personal  feelings,  but  having  raised  my 
forage  cap  in  acknowledgment  of  their  courtesy,  I 
rode  forward,  delivered  my  mission,  and  gladly  (with 
a  feeling  of  conscious  shame  at  my  utter  insignificance 
on  the  occasion)  rode  back  as  hard  as  I  could  to  Clare 
Castle,  where  I  drank  a  great  deal  more  than  my  wont, 
to  keep  up  my  stamina  and  toast  my  polite  friends  in 
Clare,  while  I  related  to  my  brother  officers,  again  and 
again,  my  adventures  of  the  morning. 

The  result  of  this  election,  which  on  being  confirmed 


70     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


in  the  following  year,  put  Daniel  O'Connell  into  Par- 
liament, had  been  announced,  and  as  the  delight  of  the 
Irish  people  knew  no  bounds,  many  foretold  serious 
riots.  The  breaking  up  of  all  concerned — of  all  those 
assembled  in  Ennis,  amounting  to  at  least  20,000 
persons,  could  scarcely  be  carried  out  without  some 
excesses.  The  declaration  of  the  result  was  to  be 
announced  at  eleven  in  the  morning,  and  O'Connell 
had  stated  that,  this  over,  his  electors  might  follow  him 
in  procession  as  far  as  Cahirnarry  (I  believe  it  is  thus 
spelt),  the  residence  of  Mr.  James  Black,  where  he  was 
to  lunch  and  after  that  address  them.  Such  a  move- 
ment many  persons  thought  savoured  of  menace,  nor, 
indeed,  could  anyone  believe  that  such  a  large  demon- 
stration could  proceed  and  finally  break  up,  without 
serious  rioting ;  no  one  doubted  this. 

It  was  about  nine  o'clock  on  the  day  in  question 
that  I  found  myself  waiting  for  orders  in  the  quar- 
ters of  the  General,  who  had  certainly  on  this  occa- 
sion acted  most  wisely,  not  only  in  the  disposition  of 
the  troops  under  his  command,  but  also  in  the  strin- 
gent way  in  which  he  carried  out  those  measures, 
which  effectually  prevented  any  admixture  of  the  civil 
and  military  bodies,  between  whom,  thanks  to  his  pre- 
cautions, not  the  most  distant  shadow  of  a  conflict  was 
reported.  The  peasantry  during  the  whole  election 
remained  sober.  Not  a  soldier  was  accused  of  being 
drunk  ;  the  wildest,  the  most  incorrigible,  acted  alike 
with  sense  and  discretion  on  this  important  occasion. 

A  few  minutes  before  ten  Captain  H.  D.,  the 
son  of  the  General  and  also  his  aide-de-camp,  an- 
nounced the  arrival  of  O' Gorman  Mahon.    Sir  C.  D. 


DANIEL  o'cONNELL's  ELECTION. 


71 


seemed  puzzled  by  the  visit — the  motive  for. which 
he  declared  he  could  not  devise — and  seemed  irreso- 
lute about  admitting  him.  But  before  he  had  time 
to  exclude  him,  in  came  the  dashing  Irishman,  full 
of  importance. 

"  General,  I  called  to  announce  to  you  the  triumph 
of  our  great  leader  —  Daniel  O'Connell  has  been 
unanimously  elected." 

"  I  know  it,  sir,"  coldly  replied  the  other.  "  I  pre- 
sume you  did  not  put  yourself  to  the  trouble  of  calling 
on  me  to  announce  a  fact  of  which  I  could  not  possibly 
be  ignorant  V1 

"No,  Sir  Charles.  No;  I  came  for  a  more  im- 
portant purpose.  I  came  to  ask  you  where,  and  how, 
the  force  under  your  command  are  distributed,  in 
order  that  we  may  take  such  steps  as  may  be  necessary 
to  prevent  a  collision  between  your  people  and  ours." 
This  was  said  with  all  the  effrontery  of  a  rival  general. 

Sir  C.  D.  paused  a  moment,  and  I  trembled  lest 
he  might  commit  himself  in  his  reply ;  but  I  confess 
these  feelings  were  changed  into  admiration  when  he 
thus  answered  : — 

"  Mr.  Mahon,  you  have  come  to  ask  me  a  question 
to  which  I  feel,  as  the  commander  of  a  large  military 
force,  I  should  on  ordinary  occasions  be  wrong  to 
reply.  You  come  to  make  a  demand  which  I  feel 
to  be  unauthorized,  and  which,  consequently,  I  should 
be  fully  justified  in  treating  with  silent  disapproval; 
but  in  the  present  instance  I  will  fully  and  truly  point 
out  the  exact  position  of  my  forces." 

Captain  D.  and  I  exchanged  looks  of  surprise.  The 
General  went  on  : — 


.     72     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  Mr.  Mahon,  so  long  as  the  peasantry — whom  you 
call  your  people — are  quiet  and  well-behaved — so  long 
as  they  maintain  the  calm  demeanour  they  have  exhi- 
bited hitherto  during  this  election,  you  will  never 
know  where  my  troops  are  ;  but  should  they  infringe 
the  law — should  they  break  out  in  disorder  or  riot — 
you  will  find  them  exactly  at  your  elbow,  Mr.  Mahon, 
ivherever  you  are.  Charles,  perhaps  you  will  have  the 
goodness  to  see  this  gentleman  out." 

The  great  O' Gorman  for  once  appeared  abashed. 
The  General  resumed  his  writing  ;  half  an  hour  after- 
wards every  arrangement  had  been  made. 

We  were  drawn  up  in  a  boreen,  or  lane,  running 
parallel  with  the  main  road,  but  hidden  by  somewhat 
high  enclosures ;  the  end  of  the  lane  was  barred  across 
by  a  stone  wall  between  five  and  six  feet  high  ;  here 
we  remained,  and  saw  the  procession  of  the  Great 
Agitator  file  past  us  within  three  hundred  yards. 
Never  did  I  see  a  more  grand,  a  more  imposing  spec- 
tacle, nor  do  I  believe  it  has  ever  before  or  since  been 
equalled.  Where  so  many  well-dressed  peasants — pea- 
sants so  orderly,  so  firm,  so  quietly  determined — could 
have  been  found  in  Ireland,  was,  and  is,  a  problem  far 
beyond  my  powers  to  solve.  To  describe  it  would  be 
to  do  it  injustice  ;  I  therefore  shall  not  attempt  it. 

Suddenly,  while  we  were  gazing  on  this  imposing 
spectacle,  we  heard  the  clatter  of  horses'  hoofs,  and  our 
men,  who  were  temporarily  dismounted,  stood  to  their 
troopers,  expecting  an  order  to  resume  the  saddle, 
when,  lo  !  who  should  gallop  in  but  the  O'Gorman 
Mahon — his  shirt-collar  open,  a  wide  green  ribbon 
round  his  neck ;   his  cap  was  bedecked  with  that 


DANIEL  O'CONNELL'S  ELECTION. 


73 


colour,  and  streamers  of  the  same  fluttered  around 
him,  as  he  galloped  in  front  of  us,  mounted  on  a  chesnut 
horse,  apparently  an  Arabian.  Taking  off  his  cap,  he 
cheered  as  he  careered  along.  But  as  this  was  no 
breach  of  the  peace  we  had  no  right  to  interfere  with 
him.  Whether  he  came  personally  to  show  himself  to 
us,  or  entered  the  boreen  by  accident,  we  knew  not, 
but  were  equally  aware  that  he  had  as  much  right  to 
canter  down  it  as  we  had,  so  long  as  he  committed  no 
overt  act. 

Just  as  he  got  to  the  extremity  of  our  line  he 
reined  up  and  addressed  a  party  of  our  men ;  whether 
he  was  asking  his  way  or  addressing  them  politically 
I  know  not,  but  our  chief  instantly  called  out, 
"  Stop  that  man,  and  bring  him  here."  Away  we 
dashed  at  him,  not  doubting  that  we  must  take  him, 
as  his  progress  was  barred  by  the  wall  I  spoke  of. 
The  0' Gorman,  however,  had  no  wish  to  be  seized  ;  so, 
putting  spurs  to  his  nag,  which  was  not  above  fifteen 
hands  high,  he  boldly  charged  the  wall,  and  cleared  it 
in  the  most  gallant  manner.  We  none  felt  inclined  to 
follow  him — in  uniform  it  would  have  been  impossible 
— but  we  could  not  refrain  from  giving  him  the  en- 
couraging cheer  of  old  sportsmen  when  we  thus  saw 
him  take  a  daring  and  dangerous  leap  with  a  smiling 
adieu  imprinted  on  his  fine  countenance. 

O'Connell  addressed  his  new  constituents.  By  his 
desire  they  gave  three  cheers  for  "  the  army,"  (as  all 
military  bodies  are  designated  in  Ireland).  He  be- 
sought them  and  commanded  them  to  break  up  and 
return  to  their  homes  without  riot  or  drinking.  He 
foretold  to  them  that  by  such  a  line  of  conduct  their 


74     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

future  freedom  would  be  secured.  He  thanked  them, 
and  blessed  them;  then,  jumping  into  a  carriage  and 
four,  he  hastened  on  to  Dublin  and  London,  to  carry 
out  the  first  act  of  that  mighty  two-act  play  which 
ended  in  the  removal  of  Catholic  Disabilities. 

The  election  over,  we  again  returned  to  our  proper 
quarters.  I  therefore  once  more  entered  Limerick, 
and  returned  to  my  snug  quarters  in  Vokes's  house. 


75 


INSPECTION  OF  CONSTABULARY. 


"Harry,  my  boy,  Sir  C.  D.  is  to  inspect  my  men  to- 
day ;  will  you  come  and  see  the  inspection  ?"  said 
Vokes,  as  we  sat  together  finishing  our  morning  meal. 
"  I  don't  think  you've  seen  my  men  paraded." 

I  readily  assented,  but  at  the  same  time  expressed 
my  surprise  that  a  general  officer  should  thus  be  ap- 
pointed to  inspect  a  civil  force. 

"  Well,  it  is  strange  ;  but  as  the  order  from  Govern- 
ment has  come  down,  I've  only  to  obey.  It  strikes  me 
very  forcibly,  that  since  the  appointment  of  the  last 
two  inspectors-general,  who  are  both  military  men  of 
high  standing,  that  the  Executive  are  trying  to  turn 
our  constables  into  soldiers." 

"  Surely  this  would  be  unwise." 

"Unwise  is  a  mild  expression  ;  it  would  be 
the  height  of  folly.  We  have  plenty  of  soldiers  in 
Ireland  to  do  soldiers'  duty — trained  men,  who  can,  not 
only  put  down  any  rebellion,  but  also  add  a  charm  by 
their  martial  and  smart  appearance  on  any  occasion 
when  they  may  be  required." 

"  Are  Government,  then,  determined  to  make  yours 
a  military  force  V9 

"  Faith,  most  luckily,  they  can't  do  so.    I  hold  my 


76  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

situation  under  Peel's  original  Act,  and  hence  the  men 
under  me,  appointed  by  the  same  Bill,  are  truly  called 
Peelers.  I  have  one  hundred  of  them  under  my  im- 
mediate command,  bound  especially  to  obey  me,  and 
with  them  I  do  all  my  work.  I  must  confess  I  wholly 
rely  on  them.  The  new  constabulary  are  too  much  of 
the  soldier  and  not  enough  of  the  Peeler  for  me.  But 
come  along ;  they  are  assembled  by  this  time and 
away  we  went. 

Paraded  on  the  strand,  we  found  some  sixty  police- 
men on  foot  and  about  thirty  on  horseback ;  some 
rode  with  long  stirrups,  some  with  short.  Several  of 
the  carbines,  or  muskets,  which  the  infantry  men 
carried  had  evidently  not  been  cleaned  that  morning. 
Some  of  their  coats  seemed  dusty,  and  their  general 
appearance  (taking  them  as  soldiers)  was  decidedly 
slovenly  and  ill  set  up.  As  an  adjutant  of  cavalry 
myself,  I  felt  strongly  inclined  to  take  them  in  hand  ; 
but  I  said  nothing,  and  waited  patiently  for  about  ten 
minutes,  when  General  Sir  C.  D.  rode  up,  and  having 
shaken  hands  with  Vokes,  proceeded  to  inspect  the 
men. 

Sir  C.  D.  was  one  of  the  best-tempered  men  in  the 
British  service  ;  but  his  looks,  I  must  confess,  bespoke 
no  satisfaction  as  he  rode  down  the  line,  followed  by 
a  brilliant  staff  of  officers  and  orderlies,  who  contrasted 
strangely  with  Vokes's  policemen.  Having  taken  a 
hasty  glance  at  these  men,  he  withdrew  to  a  short 
distance,  and  beckoned  us  to  speak  to  him. 

"My  dear  Major,"  said  the  General,  "your  men  are 
far  from  looking  well — they  are  positively  un soldier- 
like !" 


INSPECTION  OP  CONSTABULARY. 


77 


"  My  dear  General,  it  is  just  as  they  should  be  ;  mine 
is  a  civil,  not  a  military  force." 

"  But  as  you  knew  I  was  about  to  inspect  them  you 
might  have  made  them  brush  themselves  up  a  little. 
Look  at  their  arms,  their  belts,  their  boots  !" 

"By  no  means.  I  was  ordered  to  parade  them 
before  you,  and  I  do  so  with  great  pleasure.  But  allow 
me  to  tell  you,  my  dear  Sir  Charles,  that  the  appear- 
ance of  some  of  the  very  men  you  blame  is  delightful 
in  my  sight.  Those  men  with  soiled  muskets  were 
engaged  in  a  severe  affair  all  night,  and  brought  in  two 
important  prisoners  :  those  two  men  without  belts 
have  used  them  to  pinion  a  celebrated  housebreaker, 
who  awaits  my  examination  at  the  police-office  :  those 
men  with  dirty  boots  crossed  three  miles  of  dangerous 
bog  this  morning  in  pursuit  of  a  notorious  offender. 
In  truth,  general,  I  may  tell  you,  that  a  policeman 
who  really  does  his  duty  has  but  little  time  for  dressing 
himself  up.  The  'rough  and  ready  boys'  are  the  boys 
I  like,  though  I  fear  the  time  will  come  when  military 
appearance  will  supersede  acute  intelligence,  and  a  well- 
dressed  constable  be  preferred  to  a  sharp  thieftaker.* 

*  It  may  be  as  well  here  to  notice  the  fact  that  Vokes's  prognos- 
tications have  been  fully  realized.  Sauntering  across  a  field  in 
the  county  of  Limerick,  some  two  months  ago,  I  met  a  small  party 
of  policemen,  headed  by  an  old  sergeant  whom  I  had  known  in  the 
good  old  times.  With  a  respect  by  no  means  general  in  Ireland 
now,  he  stopped  his  men  and  saluted  me,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
began  to  converse  with  me.  This  was  what  I  desired,  as  I  was 
anxious  to  hear  some  account  of  the  present  force  from  one  of  them- 
selves.   11  How  is  it  you  have  not  caugfylfWalsh  V  asked  I. 

"  Faith,  then,  I've  done  my  besirj'but  he's  too  much  forme." 

<  'And  why  ?" 


78  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


I  foresee  it  all ;  I  regret  it.  But  I  have  no  right  to 
complain,  since  I  have  the  undivided  obedience  of  one 
hundred  men  of  my  own  appointment,  and  so  long  as 
I  have,  the  peace  of  Limerick  shall  be  maintained, 
and  those  who  disturb  it  be  instantly  arrested  and 
punished." 


w  Sure,  how  can  I  get  hold  of  him,  cut  off  as  we  are  from  the 
people  ?" 

u  Cut  off  ?    What  do  you  mean  ?" 

M  Aint  we  placed  in  barracks  away  from  all  information  ?  Aint 
we  dressed  up  in  soldiers'  clothes,  and  taught  the  manual  and 
platoon,  instead  of  looking  after  criminals,  as  we  did  in  the  Major's 
time  ?  Aint  we  ordered  in  the  printed  regulations  to  mingle  and 
become  intimate  with  the  farmers  and  the  peasantry,  and  sure  how 
can  we  do  that,  when  we  are  always  forced  to  go  about  in  full 
uniform,  armed  to  the  teeth  ?  It's  well  we'd  be  looking,  mixing 
with  the  people  at  a  fair  or  a  pattern.  The  Lord  be  good  to  me  ! 
our  very  presence  would  spoil  the  fun,  and  no  one  would  spake 
except  in  whispers  before  us.  It  would  be  grand  sport  to  see  us 
dancing  with  one  of  the  colyeens." 

1  1  Well,  I'm  sorry  to  hear  this.  But  how  do  you  employ  your 
time  ?" 

"  Oh,  then,  we've  enough  to  do.  We  go  about  patrolling  in 
parties,  and  walking  about  the  streets  with  a  constable's  staff  in 
our  hands.  We  carry  out  the  census  and  emigration  reports  ;  we 
are  writing  three  or  four  hours  a  day  ;  and  now  it  is  said  we  are  to 
inspect  the  weights  and  measures.  Such  are  the  duties  we  now 
perform,  and  thus  occupy  the  time  we  formerly  devoted  to  the  de- 
tection of  crime." 

"  But  I  suppose,  Sergeant,  you  could  still  catch  a  runaway  ?  I 
remember  how  famed  you  were,  many  years  ago,  for  your  running." 

"  Faith,  I  couldn't  overtake  a  lame  donkey  now." 

u  Are  your  limbs,  then,  worn  out  ?" 

u  Far  from  it  ;  I  never  was  better  or  more  active.    But  a  racer 
could  not  run  with  a  ton  weight  on  his  back." 
"  What  do  you  mean  ?" 

'  'Simply  this  :  feel  the  weight  of  the  new  rifles  we  are  forced  to 


INSPECTION  OF  CONSTABULARY. 


79 


u  Upon  my  word,  Vokes,  I  believe  you  are  right ; 
but  as  I'm  sent  to  inspect  your  men,  what  am  I  to  do  ?" 
"Whatever  you  like." 
"  What  shall  I  report  ¥' 

"Anything  you  think  will  seem  good  on  paper. 
You  are  at  full  liberty  to  state  your  views  candidly, 
and  I  hope  you  will  do  so.  But  deuce  an  inch  I'll  stir 
from  the  path  I've  made  up  my  mind  to  follow." 

"  Upon  my  honour,  I  scarcely,  as  I  said  before,  know 
what  to  do  1" 

"  Then  I'll  tell  you.  Come  along  and  lunch  with 
me,  and  before  we  part  I  think  I'll  make  you  a  convert 
to  my  opinions  respecting  the  efficiency  of  the  police- 
force  you  have  just  looked  over." 


carry  about  now.  Sure,  they  are  only  good  for  show  :  they  are  so 
heavy  and  so  long,  we  can  take  no  aim,  unless  we  find  a  rest ;  and 
they  are  so  difficult  to  load  that  a  thief  or  murderer  might  easily 
get  away  while  a  man  was  reloading  his  piece.  I  must  confess  that 
we  all  like  the  old  Brown  Bess  better." 

"Then  I  suppose  you'd  prefer  running  after  a  man  ?" 

"Sure,  how  could  I?  I  would  be  blamed  if  I  threw  my  rifle 
away.  But  its  weight  would  entirely  spoil  my  pace.  Besides, 
ain't  I  buckled  up,  with  a  military  shako  on  ray  head,  and  a 
weight  of  ball' cartridge  dangling  before  me  ?  Sure,  how  could  I 
jump  with  a  long  sword-bayonet  dangling  behind  my  leg  ?  Faith, 
you  know,  I  believe  we  look  well ;  but  I  shouldn't  say  we  are  of 
much  use." 

I  confess  the  picture  staggered  me ;  the  truth  was  practically 
illustrated  by  the  party  before  me.  Add  to  this  a  review  of  the 
whole  system,  which  has  changed  men  who  ought  to  be  efficient 
policemen  and  detectives  into  grim,  stiff  soldiers,  and  the  officers 
commanding  them  into  officers  of  the  army  ;  the  resident  magis- 
trates selected  rather  from  Government  influence  than  for  deeds 
of  daring  and  intelligence,  and,  alas  !  we  find  the  prophecy  of  Major 
Vokes  painfully  fulfilled. 


80  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

The  General  consented.  The  Major  dismissed  his 
men,  and  we  all  returned  to  our  house  in  George-street, 
where  I've  every  reason  to  believe  the  worthy  and 
excellent  General  was  easily  and  properly  ^Yon  to  adopt 
the  views  of  the  chief  magistrate. 


SI 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


An  old  couple  had  been  murdered  in  their  beds,  and 
the  cottage  in  which  they  resided  had  been  burnt  to 
the  ground  by  the  murderers.  The  whole  country 
heard  with  horror  and  dismay  of  the  commission  of 
this  most  flagrant  crime  ;  aware  that  it  could  alone 
have  been  effected  by  a  numerous  band,  organized,  and 
acting  systematically.  Some  two  or  three  crimes  of  a 
similar  nature  had  previously  been  committed  ;  this 
being  the  case,  it  was  deemed  wise  to  strike  at  the  root 
of  the  evil.  The  Government,  by  the  advice  of  the 
local  magistrates,  proclaimed  a  reward  of  300Z.  for  any 
information  which  might  lead  to  the  detection  of  the 
parties  concerned,  at  the  same  time  offering  a  full 
pardon  to  any  one  (not  being  the  actual  assassin)  who 
would  turn  king's  evidence,  or,  as  it  is  styled  in  Ireland, 
become  an  approver.  But  for  several  days  these 
salutary  measures  were  of  no  avail.  Though  great 
exertions  were  now  made  by  every  member  of  the 
magisterial  bench,  who  began  to  feel  no  small  alarm, 
since  none  of  whom  could  say,  whether  one  of  their 
own  body  might  not  be  the  next  victim. 

My  friend  Yokes  on  this  occasion  (as  usual)  said  little, 
and  seemed  to  take  the  affair  extremely  coolly.    But  as 
6 


82  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


I  knew  that  he  was  hourly  in  communication  with  the 
Government,  and  continually  sending  his  force  about 
the  country,  I  had  little  doubt  that  he  was  deeply 
anxious  about  the  case. 

He  had  gone  for  a  single  day  to  visit  some  relatives, 
and  only  returned  on  the  following  afternoon  to  a  late 
dinner,  which  we  will  suppose  T  was  sharing  as  this 
sketch  opens. 

"  Any  news,  Harry,  since  I  have  been  absent  1  * 
"None  whatever,  except  one  or  two  visits  from 
county  magistrate?,  relative  to   this  murder,  and  a 
heap  of  letters  which  have  arrived  for  you." 

"  I've  seen  the  letters,  and  read  them.  As  to  the 
case  you  speak  of,  I  really  think  the  less  fuss  made 
about  it  the  better." 

"  Do  you  think  you've  got  any  clue  to  it  1 " 
"  It  is  impossible  to  say  ;  but  let  us  change  the  sub- 
ject," and  away  he  went  into  family  gossip  and  public 
news — leaving  me   no  opportunity  to  cross-question 
him  further. 

The  dinner  was  over,  and  our  first  glass  of  punch 
just  discussed, — by  the  bye,  Vokes  had  a  strange  way 
of  always  mixing  the  best  sherry  with  his  grog — when 
the  servant  entered  and  announced  that  the  "Majors" 
car  was  at  the  door.  Now,  as  that  worthy  had  only 
just  arrived,  I  confess  I  thought  the  announcement 
strange.  Yokes  saw  I  was  puzzled,  and  at  once  ex- 
plained. 

"The  fact  is  I  have  important  business  to  transact  at 
Eathbane"  (his  cottage,  only  one  mile  from  the  city). 
"  Will  you  accompany  me  1 " 

"  Not  I.    You  are  going  to  run  into  some  perilous 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


83 


affair,  the  clanger  of  which  I  don't  feel  inclined  to 
share.  I  hope  I  may  not  shrink  when  called  upon 
legitimately  to  risk  my  life ;  but,  truly,  T  see  no  fun 
in  these  reckless  exposures." 

"  Bah !  my  dear  fellow,  there  is  nothing  to  alarm  you 
here.  I  only  want  to  examine  some  witnesses,  and  if 
you'll  come,  I'll  promise  you  a  bottle  of  the  old  claret 
you  profess  to  like  so  well." 

"  That  alters  the  case ;  but  you  must  promise  not  to 
walk  off,  and  talk  to  your  people,  while  I'm  left  to 
drink  my  wine  without  company." 

"  Oh,  as  to  that,  if  you  don't  object,  I'll  not  leave 
the  table.  But  I  have  yet  to  finish  my  second  glass 
of  punch ;  I  always  take  one  extra  when  I  come  in 
from  travelling." 

"  How  far  have  you  been  ? " 

"  Nabochlish  avich  ]  Will  you  come  1 " 

"  I  will." 

"  Let's  be  off,  for  I  shall  return  here  to  sleep.  The 
family  will  return  from  Kilkee  within  an  hour,  so  let 
us  make  haste." 

I  arose,  jumped  on  the  car,  and  in  less  than  half- 
an-hour  I  was  seated  between  a  bright  fire  and  a  well 
covered  table — as  far  as  wine  and  dessert  went.  For 
some  minutes  my  relative  did  not  allude  to  the  busi- 
ness which  had  thus  brought  him  out  of  town.  At 
length  he  rang  the  bell  twice,  and  Sergeant  Reedy, 
one  of  his  most  favoured  policemen,  entered,  saluted 
him  in  military  style,  and  then  respectfully  awaited  to 
be  questioned  or  directed. 

"  You  came  in  from  Cahirconlish  in  charge  of  one 
individual  1 " 

6~~2 


84    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  I  did,  Major." 

"  At  what  hour  did  you  arrive  ? " 

"  At  a  quarter  before  three,  Sir,  this  morning.  I 
was  anxious  to  get  in  before  daylight." 

"  And  where  did  you  find  the  individual  ? " 

"  At  the  house  of  Captain  F  ,  who  said  he  had 

written  to  you." 

"  He  has.    Has  the  man  told  anything  ¥9 

"According  to  your  usual  orders,  Major,  I  forbad 
him  to  speak  till  he  saw  your  honour  yourself." 

"  How  were  you  dressed  V 

"  As  a  labourer,  sir." 

"  That's  right.  I  trust  you  were  kind  and  friendly 
with  this  man,  and  gave  him  all  he  asked  for  ?" 

Yes,  Major  ;  except  spirits,  which  you  always 
forbid." 

"  Bring  him  in." 

"  Yes,  sir     and  away  went  the  Sergeant. 

"  These  will  explain  to  you  my  present  business," 
said  the  Major,  throwing  me  over  two  letters.  I 

opened  and  read  them.    The  first  was  dated  Hall, 

near  Cahirconlish.    It  ran  thus  : — 

"My  Dear  Sir, — The  bearer,  Paddy  Macauliffe, 
appeared  before  me  this  morning,  and  gave  me  such 
important  information  relative  to  the  late  daring 
murder,  that  I  have  little  doubt  that  his  evidence  will 
lead  to  the  capture  of  the  whole  gang.  I  know 
Macauliffe  well,  and  I  am  sure  he  may  be  relied  on. 
He  was  present  during  the  whole  affair,  but  did  not 
take  an  active  part.  I  therefore  hope,  that  on  the 
conviction  of  these  wretches,    Government  will  let 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


85 


him  have  the  reward.  I  will  be  with  you  on 
Wednesday. 

u  Yours  truly, 

"  William  F  ." 

"  P.S.  I  send  him  in  under  the  care  of  Sergeant 
Reedy." 

The  second  was  thus  worded  : — 

"  Col.  L  sends  in  a  most  important  and  respect- 
able man,  a  tenant  of  his  own,  who  it  appears  beheld 
the  whole  of  the  late  savage  butchery  from  a  cupboard 
in  which  he  was  hidden.  Being  a  voluntary  witness, 
and  a  man  of  some  little  station,  he  trusts  that  Major 
Yokes  will  take  his  information,  which  may  be  relied 
on,  as  quietly  as  he  can,  as  the  bearer,  Michael  Tobin, 
is  easily  scared,  and  already  feels  alarmed  at  being  sent 
up  by  a  policeman  (William  Kennedy)  whom  Colonel 
L  has  directed  to  accompany  witness  to  Limerick. 

"  Green  Hough,  Co.  Limerick," 

"  Well,"  exclaimed  I,  as  I  concluded  these  epistles, 
"  I  suppose  you  are  delighted  at  thus  receiving  the  in- 
formation you  so  much  desired." 

"  Faith,  you'll  see  that  in  a  minute."  He  again  rang 
twice,  and  Sergeant  Beedy  appeared,  ushering  in  a 
very  well-looking  countryman,  dressed  in  the  usual 
frieze  coat,  corduroy  breeches,  and  black  stockings,  so 
generally  worn  throughout  the  county  of  Limerick ; 
taking  off  his  hat,  and  bowing  slightly  to  Yokes,  he 
stood  with  a  smiling  face,  and  a  preposessing  coun- 
tenance, awaiting  his  examination. 

"  You  were  at  the  affair  near  Kathkeale  V 

"  I  was,  Major." 


86  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  What  took  you  there  f 

"  Sure  I  was  drinking  with  my  cousin,  Mat  Cannody, 
and,  by  the  same  token,  I  owed  him  for  a  small  garden 
of  potatoes ;   and  says  he  to  me,  '  Paddy  Doody,' 

says  he  " 

"  I  thought  your  name  was  Macauliffe  ?"  interrupted 
the  magistrate,  with  a  significant  smile. 

"And  so  it  is,  your  honour,"  replied  the  other, 
without  wincing ;  "but  I  was  just  then  thinking  of 
this  same  Pat  Doody,  who  was  amongst  the  company, 
who  guv  me  a  puck  on  the  ear  because  I  called  him  a 
bad  boy.    Sure,  my  name's  well  known.    Faith,  thin, 

it's  odd,  that  his  honour,  Mr.  F  ,  did  not  mintion 

it  in  his  letter." 

"  Perhaps  he  did.    But  go  on." 

"Well,  yer  honour,  after  drinking  for  some  time, 
who  should  come  in  but  Corney  Macphail,  and  there- 
upon there  was  a  great  whispering,  and  several  of  them 
looked  savagely  at  me  ;  and  thin  they  drew  aside,  and 
talked,  and  seemed  to  differ.  Presently  Carmody 
comes  up  to  me,  and,  says  he,  '  Aren't  you  a  cousin  of 
mine?'  'I  am,'  says  I.  "Thin,  sure,  you  wouldn't 
betray  us — faith  we'll  make  it  worth  your  while?' 
and  thin  they  swore  me  on  the  cross,  and  tould  me 
they  were  going  to  attack  the  ould  couple  anent  Rath- 
keale,  and  that  if  I'd  join  'em  they'd  give  me  five  silver 
shillings,  and  excuse  me  the  bit  of  potatoes  I  owed 
him ;  so  I  consinted,  and  away  we  went — there  were 
nine  of  us — but  I  only  remarked  five  besides  myself, 
and  thim  same  were  Mat  Carmody,  Michael  the  Fox, 
Martin  Shea  and  his  lame  brother  Bill,  Pat  Hogan, 
and  myself.    That's  all  I  recognised." 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


87 


*  I  thought  you  said  Paddy  Doody  was  there,"  in- 
tervened Yokes. 

"  Ah,  thin,  I  forgot  it ;  sure  yer  honour's  right.  But 
he  went  off  to  Americky  next  day,  so  I  did  not  heed 
mentioning  him." 

"Go  on." 

"Well,  when  we  comes  near  the  house,  Mat  Car- 
mody  crept  in,  and  made  sure  they  were  asleep;  and 
thin  returning,  says  he,  1  Come  boy's,  let's  do  the  work 
at  once.  Sure,  they're  nothing  better  than  heretics — they 
haven't  been  in  chapel  these  six  months — so  we  need'nt 
fear  any  harm  will  come  of  it and  with  that  we 
all  rushed  on,  and  with  a  great,  big  bludgeon  Dan 
Hogan  broke  in  the  door." 

"  I  thought  you  said  it  was  Pat  Hogan  ?" 

"Ah,  then,  sure  I'm  confused — I  meant  Dan  Hogan." 

"  Was  Michael  Tobin  there  ?  You  know  him,  I 
believe  ? " 

"  Ah,  then,  ain't  he  half  brother  to  my  wife's  first 
cousin  %  I  know  him  well — he  was  not  there,  I  re- 
member well.  He  went  that  evening  into  Limerick  to 
bring  out  a  coffin  for  Tim  Sullivan's  baby  that  died  of 
the  small-pock,  or  the  likes." 

"  Well,  go  on  ;  you  say  you  attacked  the  cottage  ? " 

"  Faith  we  did,  but  I  had  no  hand  or  part  in  it, 
barring  the  being  there.  Mat  Carmody  rushed  to  the 
bed-side  of  the  old  man,  and  when  he  wouldn't  tell 
where  his  money  was  hid,  Mat  knocked  his  brains  out 
with  a  hurley-stick,  and  took  his  keys  from  under  the 
pillow.  It  was  Martin  Shea  and  his  brother  I  think 
finished  the  old  woman  ;  but  I  can't  swear  to  it 
entirely,  as  there  was  no  light  in  the  room  ;  but  I  cer- 


88  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


tainly  heard  their  voices  while  she  was  being  throttled  : 
and  then  we  came  down,  and  some  of  the  boys  got  tho 
watch  and  the  money." 

"  And  then  they  burned  the  cottage  ]  " 

"  They  did  your  honour." 

"  Did  you  see  them  do  so  ?  " 

'•'Sure  I  handed  them  the  light,  and  seed  'em  do  it." 
"  They  set  fire  to  the  thatch  first — did  they  not  1  " 
"  That's  what  they  did,  Major,  and  sure  the  straw 
was  so  ould  and  so  dry,  and  it  tuk  fire  directly." 
"  You  will  swear  to  this  ?  " 

"  I  will.  But  sure  they'll  give  me  the  reward  they 
promised,  for  my  life  wont  be  safe  after  the  trial,  and 
all  my  own  people  will  be  against  me,  because  I  shall 
have  hanged  my  cousin  Mat.  Oh,  then,  Major,  you'll 
see  to  this." 

"I'll  see  justice  done — don't  fear.  Take  this  honest 
man  out,  Sergeant,  and  let  him  have  some  supper.  I'll 
see  him  again  presently.  Take  him  out,  and  send  in 
William  Kennedy." 

"Yes,  Major,"  replied  Reedy,  and  away  went  the 
policeman  and  the  approver. 

Yokes  laughed  heartily,  but  would  not  communi- 
cate to  me  the  subject  of  his  mirth.  Presently  Ken- 
nedy entered. 

"  Bring  in  Michael  Tobin." 

In  a  few  minutes  more,  he  stood  before  the  redoubt- 
able chief  magistrate  of  police. 

"  You  are  Michael  Tobin — a  tenant  of  Col.  L  , 

I  believe.    Do  you  reside  near  Green  Plough  1  " 

"  I  live  on  the  demesne,  your  honour,"  replied  the 
new  comer,  who  was  dressed  in  a  most  respectable  suit 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


89 


of  clothes,  and  whose  manner  bespoke  a  far  higher 
station  than  that  of  the  last  witness. 

"You  beheld  the  crime  committed,  abont  which 

Gol.  L  writes]"  The  man  appeared  puzzled,  and  in 

his  agitation  nearly  crushed  his  hat  between  his  hands. 

"You  may  speak  out.  Kennedy  you  know,  and 
this  gentleman  is  my  near  relative,  so  you  may  speak 
out.    Tell  me,  then,  how  came  you  over  to  the  spot." 

H  Faith,  Sir,  I'm  ashamed  to  tell  the  truth.  But  the 
fact  is — ah,  now,  sir,  don't  press  me." 

"  Out  with  it,  Tobin." 

"Well,  then,  if  I  must  tell  it,  I  will,  though  I 
wouldn't  like  it  known.  Sure  I  went  over  to  coort  the 
servant  girl.  But  when  I  got  over  I  found  she  had 
gone  to  Dublin,  and  so  I  was  about  returning  to  Hough 
Green,  when  I  heard  a  noise,  and,  on  looking  out,  I 
saw  two  men  forcing  the  door,  and  as  I  had  no  arms 
I  hid  in  the  cupboard  in  the  servant's  room." 

"  That  was  in  the  room  upstairs  I" 

"  It  was  so." 

"  Was  it  on  the  first  or  the  second  floor  ? " 
"  On  the  first,  your  honour," 
"  You  are  positive  ? " 
"  I  am,  Major." 
"Well,  then,  go  on." 

"  Presently  the  old  man  went  down,  and  there  was 
a  great  scuffle,  and  he  managed  to  wound  one  of  the 
men  with  a  carving  knife  ;  but  the  other  fellow  came 
behind  him  and  shot  him  right  through  the  head,  and 
then  the  missus  rushed  down,  and  they  shot  her  too." 
"  And  what  were  the  names  of  the  men  1  " 
"  Bryan  Quill  and  Pat  Martin,  of  Pallaskcnry." 


90  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  Could  you  swear  to  them  ?  " 

"  I'faith  I  could.  Sure  wasn't  there  a  light  on  the 
table,  besides  a  great  big  lump  of  a  blaziDg  tire.  I've 
known  the  two  men  these  five  years." 

u  You  are  sure  there  were  only  two  ?  * 

"  Quite  sure." 

«  Was  not  Paddy  Doody  of  the  party  ? " 
"  Not  he  :  sure  he  was  out  of  the  way — about  the 
the  horse  stealing  affair  in  Tipperary." 
"  Was  the  house  slated  or  thatched  ?" 
u  Slated,  your  honour." 
"  That  will  do.    You  may  go  now." 
"  But  the  300/.,  your  honour  ?" 
w  Oh,  we  can't  talk  of  that  till  after  the  assizes." 
"  Faix,  that's  hard,  too." 

"  Is  it  V  Then  suddenly  turning  round,  in  an  angry 
voice  Yokes  demanded — 

"  Do  you  remember  the  pattern,  in  May  last,  at 
Patrick's  Well  f 

The  man,  with  a  pale  face  and  quivering  lip,  ad- 
mitted that  he  had  been  there. 

"  Do  you  remember  knocking  down  James  Murphy 
as  you  walked  home  with  him,  and  taking  his  watch 
from  him  1  You  called  yourself  William  Dawson 
then." 

"  Sure,  Major,"  stammered  the  man,  "it's  not  me 
you're  speaking  of?" 

"  Bedad,  my  good  man,  it  is  ;  and  as  you  choose  to 
deny  the  fact,  I'll  send  out  for  James  Murphy." 

"  Ah,  thin,  you  wouldn't  do  that.  Sure,  even  if  I 
did  the  same,  my  present  important  testimony  will 
overbalance  that.    You  wouldn't  be  shaking,  by  such 


SIFTING  EVIDENCE. 


91 


an  accusation,  the  truth  of  a  witness  who  is  about  to 
convict  for  you  the  two  greatest  rogues  in  the  county  ? 

It  was  the  master  (Colonel  L  )  himself  who  tould 

me  my  past  faults  (if  I  had  any)  would  all  be  wiped 
out  by  this  good  act." 

"  And  so  they  would  be  if  your  tale  were  true ;  but 
it's  a  tissue  of  falsehood." 

"  Oh,  then,  give  me  the  Book  and  I'll  kiss  it." 

"  Not  I.  I'll  not  hear  you  take  a  false  oath.  Have 
you  not  sworn  that  you  were  concealed  in  a  cupboard 
upstairs  f* 

"  And  so  I  was." 

"You  are  a  perjured  villain.  The  cottage  of  the 
poor  old  couple  was  all  built  on  the  ground-floor.  So 
much  for  your  truth.  Kennedy,  take  him  away,  and 
let  him  be  strictly  guarded  till  my  secretary  has  had 
time  to  draw  up  a  committal  for  me  to  sign.  No 
speaking — off  with  him ;"  and  away  went  the  false 
witness. 

Major  Vokes  now  rang  his  bell  twice,  and  Sergeant 
Reedy  entered.   "  Bring  Macauliffe  back."   He  did  so. 

"  And  now,  Mr.  Doody,  are  you  not  a  precious  scoun- 
drel to  try  and  hang  five  innocent  men,  merely  to  get 
this  300Z.  r 

"  Oh,  Major,  I  swear  " 

"  Silence,  sir !  You  have  already  told  us  enough 
lies.  You  begin  by  calling  yourself  Macauliffe,  when 
I  happen  to  know  that  your  name  is  Doody." 

"  Ah,  thin,  you  see,  I  thought  on  account  of  that 
little  affair  at  Tipperary  you  might  not  have  believed 
me,  if  I  did  not  call  myself  by  another  name — that 
was  my  rasin.    Divil  another  had  I." 


02  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  You  said  the  house  was  thatched  I" 
"  Didn't  they  set  fire  to  it  ]    Didn't  I  see  them  T 
"  You  did  not,  for  you  were  hiding  about  at  the 
time.    And  there's  another  little  fact  you  are  mistaken 
in.    The  cottage  is  slated,  and  not  thatched,  and  so  you 
have  committed  perjury.    Take  him  to  the  county  gaol 

at  once,  and  as  you  return  call  on  Mr.  D  ,  he's  a 

magistrate  of  Tipperary,  and  ask  him  to  send  an  order 
to  the  governor  of  the  prison  at  once,  to  send  him 
over  to  Clonmel.  The  assizes  open  there  to-morrow. 
There — there — no  talking.  Prove  that  I'm  wrong, 
and  I'll  compensate  you.  Tell  John  to  bring  round 
the  car  j"  and  the  door  closed  on  this  forsworn 
wretch. 

u  How  horrible  !"  ejaculated  I. 

"  It  is,  indeed ;  but  I'm  sorry  to  say  these  cases  are 
not  unfrequent." 

"  But  do  tell  me  ;  how  did  you  know  that  the  cottage 
was  slated  and  built  on  one  floor." 

"Oh,  then,  don't  be  bothering  yourself.  I'll  tell 
you.  When  I  said  I  was  going  to  see  my  relatives, 
I  at  once  started  for  the  spot,  and  examined  the  ruins 
of  the  cottage  in  question.  I  then  went  on  about  four 
miles,  and  discovered,  I  believe,  the  actual  murderer 
of  the  old  people.  He  will  be  in  our  gaol,  if  my 
fellows  are  sharp,  within  an  hour.  I  have  taken 
measures." 

At  this  moment  Sergeant  Macgrath,  the  best  man 
of  the  police,  after  knocking,  put  in  his  head,  and 
merely  said,  "  Dillon  is  lodged  safely,  sir,"  and  imme- 
diately drew  it  back,  and  shut  the  door. 


Sifting  evidence. 


93 


"  I  told  you  so,"  said  Yokes.  "  But  the  ear  is  ready  ; 
come  along     and  away  we  went. 

The  last  prisoner  was  hanged  on  clear  evidence,  and 
he  confessed  his  guilt.  The  other  two  were  trans- 
ported. 


04 


THE  TEliRY  ALTS. 


In  the  year  1830  an  agrarian  system  of  aggression  arose, 
bearing  the  name  of  "  Terry  Alt."  Whence  this  strange 
appellation  was  taken  it  is  impossible  to  say,  though  it 
was  generally  asserted  at  the  time  that  the  guilty 
parties  borrowed  the  name  of  the  most  harmless  and 
well-disposed  farmer  in  the  county  of  Clare  to  confer 
it  on  a  very  extensive  and  well- organized  band  of 
marauders,  who,  under  the  plea  that  sufficient  land 
was  not  apportioned  to  the  growth  of  potatoes  and 
grain,  amused  themselves  by  digging  up  and  thus 
destroying  thousands  of  acres  of  land.  By  every  post 
Government  received  notices  of  fresh  outrages  of  this 
description.  Bodies  consisting  of  several  hundred 
armed  men  nightly  passed  through  portions  of  the 
South  of  Ireland — more  particularly  through  the 
county  of  Clare — and  marked  their  footsteps  by  fresh 
outrages.  Yokes  was,  of  course,  as  usual,  very  active 
in  suppressing  these  aggressions,  and,  indeed,  the  par- 
ticular district  over  which  he  presided  he  kept  com- 
paratively free  from  stain.  But  daily  and  hourly 
alarmed  authorities  rushed  into  Limerick  to  report 
fresh  agrarian  attacks.  By  his  advice,  the  troop  (in 
which  I  was  then  a  cornet)  was  ordered  over  to  New- 


THE  TEERY  ALTS. 


95 


market-on-Fergus,  and  there  took  up  its  quarters.  The 
presence  of  the  military  had  the  desired  effect,  and  for 
several  days  no  Terry  Alts  ventured  into  our  imme- 
diate neighbourhood.  In  the  meantime  the  magistrates 
assembled,  and  after  a  solemn  discussion  agreed  to 
declare  to  the  Government  their  utter  inability  to  put 
down  the  dangerous  body  who  now  threatened  their 
property — concluding  their  report  by  an  earnest  appeal 
to  the  higher  powers  to  send  them  further  protection. 

The  reply  to  this  was,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  ex- 
traordinary on  record.  It  simply  stated  that  the 
Marquis  of  Anglesey,  then  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland, 
would  at  once  visit  the  disturbed  districts  himself,  and 
that  after  personally  making  the  requisite  observations, 
His  Excellency  would  take  the  best  steps  at  once  to 
put  an  end  to  the  disgraceful  state  into  which  the  local 
magistrates  had  allowed  the  county  of  Clare  to  fall. 
In  a  letter  written  by  himself,  he  informed  Sir  Augus- 
tine Fitzgerald,  an  old  general  officer  of  high  standing  in 
Clare,  that  he  would  pay  him  a  personal  visit  at  his 
hospitable  mansion  (Cahirgoran*)  in  the  course  of 
three  days,  and  further  than  that,  after  addressing  the 
Bench,  and  enjoying  the  hospitality  of  the  worthy 
baronet  for  one  night,  he  would  proceed  to  Cork  the 
following  evening. 

All  was  now  confusion.  In  consequence  of  the 
turbulent  state  of  the  county,  every  gentleman  had, 
more  or  less,  sent  away  his  silver  plate,  and  other 
valuables,  to  his  bankers  for  safe  keeping ;  and  now 
began  a  general  application  for  loans  of  such  articles  as 

*  I  am  aware  that  this  mode  of  spelling  may  be  incorrect,  but 
it  conveys  the  word  in  sound. 


90     RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


might  be  deemed  necessary  to  place  on  table  before  the 
impetuous  Lord  Lieutenant,  who,  if  not  received  in 
first-rate  style,  might  naturally  (after  his  differences 
with  the  magistrates)  look  upon  it  as  a  slight  Sir 
Augustine's  plate  was  in  Dublin ;  he  would  scarcely 
have  time  to  obtain  it,  besides  the  risk  and  trouble  of 
having  it  down  for  one  day.  So  messengers  on  horse- 
back were  sent  to  every  neighbour  and  relative  from 
Dromoland  to  Hermitage,  to  swell  out  this  metallic 
pic-nic.  The  parties  called  upon  responded  most  hand- 
somely, and  when  the  noble  Marquis  dashed  into 
Cahirgoran  Park,  in  a  post-chaise  and  four,  we  were 
ready  to  receive  him  with  military  honours,  and  the 
hospitable  General  equally  prepared  to  do  justice  to  his 
exalted  guest  by  a  show  of  first-rate  entertaiument. 

But,  alas  !  the  deeply-irritated  Viceroy  was  not  thus 
easily  to  be  calmed,  his  "soul  was  in  arms,"  and, 
spurning  the  proffered  luncheon  placed  before  him,  he 
impatiently  waited  the  coming  of  the  magistrates. 
They  soon  arrived,  and  after  presenting  a  compli- 
mentary address  to  his  Excellency,  made  their  report, 
which  was  little  more  than  an  echo  of  their  former  com- 
munication. The  Marquis  could  scarcely  hear  them 
patiently  to  the  end ;  when,  bursting  out,  he  addressed 
them  in  a  strain  of  unusual  censure.  He  positively 
averred  that  "he  had  marked  each  outrage  as  it 
occurred,  and  clearly  perceived  that  had  the  landlords 
been  more  conciliatory,  and  at  the  same  time  more 
firm,  those  outrages  would  have  at  once  been  put  a 
stop  to.  He  had  been  received  at  every  station  where 
he  had  been  delayed  with  an  enthusiasm,  a  demonstra- 
tion of  joy,  which  Irishmen  alone  could  display.  Yes, 


THE  TERRY  ALTS. 


97 


if  he  could  only  instil  his  own  ideas  into  the  minds  of 
his  hearers,  the  South  of  Ireland  would  be  as  tranquil 
as  the  most  peaceable  district  in  the  habitable  globe. 
Such  were  his  ideas,  and  therefore  he  could  not  but 
regret  that  his  counsel  and  advice  had  not  been  more 
generally  asked  and  followed;  and  he  most  reluctantly 
confessed  that  he  attributed  much  blame  to  the  justices 
of  the  peace  in  the  county  of  Clare." 

To  this  tirade  no  one  felt  inclined  to  reply,  though 
at  least  one-half  of  those  present  determined  to  retire 
from  the  Bench  ;  parties  holding  the  Commission  of 
the  Peace  in  Ireland  being  not,  as  we  have  them  in 
England,  selected  from  .the  church,  the  army,  or  the 
ranks  of  placemen  in  general,  but,  bond  fide,  the  most 
wealthy  and  extensive  landholders,  the  most  noble  and 
independent  men  in  the  country,  and  consequently 
unused  to  be  snubbed. 

His  Excellency  now  went  out  on  the  front  balcony, 
and  addressed  the  peasantry.  He  first  slightly  chided 
them  for  their  misdeeds ;  but  soon  breaking  out  in  a 
strain  of  exalted  praise,  he  glorified  the  county ;  he 
magnified  the  people ;  he  showed  that  the  peasantry 
were  the  sole  support  of  the  land ;  he  talked  of  Irish 
bravery  and  gallantry,  of  stalwart  heroes  and  lovely 
women — in  a  word,  he  threw  his  whole  affections 
amongst  them,  without  reserving  one  grain  for  the  in- 
dignant gentry  who  stood  around  him.  Need  I  add, 
that  each  fresh  compliment  was  applauded  to  the  sky, 
that  cheer  after  cheer  succeeded  each  other  till  they 
positively  became  deafening  :  the  blessings  called  down 
on  the  "  Hero  of  Waterloo "  were  so  numerous  that 
the  "recording  angel"  could  scarcely  have  found 
7 


98     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

room  to  inscribe  them ;  and  while  "  Brave  Angle- 
sey's" name  was  still  wafted  to  heaven  on  the  breaths 
of  hundreds  of  the  Irish  peasantry,  that  most  excellent 
but  impulsive  chief  retired,  once  more  restored  to 
thorough  good-humour  by  the  Cade  mille  falthah  of 
the  people  he  had  addressed. 

The  offended  magistrates  by  no  means  shared  the 
joyous  or  confident  feelings  of  the  high  functionary  ; 
but  as  they  had  promised  to  partake  of  the  dinner 
provided  for  him,  they  sat  down  to  it,  and  almost 
in  gloomy  silence  discussed  the  elegant  banquet  placed 
before  them. 

The  cloth  removed,  the  loyal  host  arose,  and 
after  toasting  "  the  sovereign/1  drank  as  usual,  that 
of  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  dwelling  on  those  bright  and 
brilliant  points  of  his  Excellency's  character  which 
will  live  through  future  ages  of  history.  To  his 
present  opinions,  he  wisely  and  hospitably  refrained 
from  alluding. 

As  might  be  expected,  his  Excellency  rose  to  reply. 
His  ill-humour  had  passed  away,  and  he  now  endea- 
voured slightly  to  make  up  for  his  severe  animad- 
versions of  the  morning.  But  as  he  warmed  on  the 
subject,  he  became  almost  enthusiastic ;  and  after 
pointing  out  to  them  the  devotion  of  the  peasantry  to 
himself,  the  love  they  entertained  for  him,  he  earnestly 
besought  them  to  copy  his  mode  of  treating  them,  and 
thus  secure  their  warm  affections.  "  Yes,"  added  his 
Lordship,  in  conclusion,  "act  as  I  do,  and  you  will 
equally  gain  the  same  attachment.  You  see  how  they 
welcome  me.    They  will  then  equally  welcome  you.  I 


THE  TERRY  ALTS. 


99 


have  but  to  hold  up  mj  finger,  and  they  at  once  obey 
me.  I  will  stake  my  life  that  I  could  walk  alone 
through  the  country  unmolested.  My  presence  would 
bring  peace  amongst  them.  I  only  wish  I  could  stay 
amongst  them  a  longer  period  to  soothe  their  irritated 
feelings.  Yes,  gentlemen,  you  may  retire  quietly  to 
your  houses  to-night,  for  Til  pledge  myself,  from  my 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  country,  that  no  one  will 
harm  you.  No  agrarian  outrage  will  be  committed 
while  I  remain  in  the  south  of  Ireland." 

Content  with  this  comparatively  gentle  address,  the 
Viceroy  sat  down.  He  soon  after  rose,  which  was  a 
signal  for  breaking  up.  It  having  been  predetermined 
that  his  Excellency  would  hold  a  general  levee  on  the 
following  day,  those  who  were  not  staying  in  the 
house  at  once  took  their  departure.  Few  felt  pleased 
at  the  manner  in  which  they  had  been  spoken  to.  A 
very  few  almost  believed  Lord  Anglesey  was  right ; 
but  as  they  rode  and  drove  through  the  splendid  park 
at  Cahirgoran,  now  lit  up  by  a  bright  moon,  they 
one  and  all  agreed  to  attend  the  meeting  on  the 
morrow. 

Tired  by  the  fatigues  of  the  day,  I  gladly  sought 
my  couch  at  midnight,  and  determined  to  take  a  com- 
pensation sleep,  as  I  had  ridden  into  Limerick  and 
back  early  on  the  preceding  day,  previous  to  my  official 
duties.  Need  I  then  say  I  was  soon  sound  asleep,  and 
enjoying  that  delightful  slumber  so  peculiar  to  early 
manhood,  when  suddenly  a  trumpet  loudly  sounded 
under  my  window,  disturbing  my  then  delightful  dream. 
Could  I  be  mistaken  1    No,  there  it  goes  again.    "  By 

7-2 


100    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  TOLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

George  !  It's  (  boots  and  saddle  !'  "  exclaimed  I,  now 
thoroughly  awake,  and  quickly  jumping  out  of  bed — ■ 
for  be  it  known  to  my  non-military  readers,  that  this 
said  "  boots  and  saddle  "  is  an  instant  summons  "  to 
turn  out  and  mount." 

What  this  could  mean  I  was  fairly  puzzled  to  guess. 
Could  any  accident  have  occurred  to  our  illustrious 
visitor  ?  Almost  impossible.  Could  any  sudden  rising 
require  our  presence  to  put  it  down  ?  Not  likely. 
Could  any  of  the  magistrates  have  been  murdered  on 
their  way  home  ]  No  ;  they  would  not  have  called  us 
out  on  such  an  occasion.    What  then  could  it  be  % 

Eager  to  know,  I  rushed  down  to  parade,  and 

there  met  my  commanding  officer  (Captain  D  ), 

who,  far  from  affording  me  any  information,  seemed 
still  more  puzzled  than  myself.  The  only  clue  he 
could  afford  was  a  written  order  from  Sir  Augus- 
tine, ordering  us  at  once  to  proceed  to  Cahirgoran 
House. 

"  It  must  then  concern  the  Lord  Lieutenant.  But 
in  this  case  why  so  early.  I  clearly  understood  he  was 
only  to  be  called  at  eight.     It  is  now  scarcely  six 

o'clock  r 

"We'll  soon  see,"  said  D  .     So  ordering  the 

trumpeter  to  sound  the  trot,  we  went  off  at  the  rate  of 
some  nine  miles  an  hour,  and  soon  entered  the  gates 
of  Augustine's  residence. 

At  a  single  glance  we  read  the  cause  of  our  being 
thus  hastily  summoned.  The  whole  of  the  noble,  the 
beautiful  park — more  particularly  around  the  house- 
was  dug  up  :  the  grass  that  had  for  centuries  been  the 
ornament  of  the  estate,  the  pride  of  the  owner,  was 


THE  TERRY  ALTS. 


101 


now  turned  most  skilfully  and  effectually  into  a  potatoe 
bed.  Not  a  sod  of  green  pasture  remained.  Four 
hundred  acres  of  brown  mould  now  disfigured  the 
approaches  to  the  mansion.  Between  midnight  and 
five  in  the  morning  this  leviathan  atrocity  had  been 
committed  under  the  very  nose  of  their  popular  ruler. 
Before  or  since  I  have  never  heard  of  such  a  demon- 
stration.   I  confess  I  never  felt  so  taken  aback. 

Truly,  Yokes  had  foreshadowed  this.  He  had  not 
foreseen,  or  perhaps  expected,  such  a  wholesale  effort  on 
the  part  of  the  peasantry  ;  but  he  had  clearly  and 
invariably  pointed  out  the  danger  of  attempting  to 
humbug  the  people  by  blarney,  or  relying  too  much  on 
what  is  called  enthusiastic  popularity. 

A  carriage  and  four  stood  before  the  house  as  we 
approached.  His  Excellency,  accompanied  by  a  single 
aid-de-camp,  stepped  in.  I  can  never  forget  his  mingled 
look  of  anger,  disappointment,  and  disgust.  He  drew 
down  the  blinds,  and,  ordering  the  postilions  to  drive 
quickly,  started  off  towards  Cork  without  even  be- 
stowing the  usual  salutation  at  parting.  We  escorted 
him  about  half  a  mile,  when  his  aid-de-camp  dis- 
missed us. 

Thus,  then,  did  he  who  flattered  himself  (as  many 
others  have  foolishly  done)  that  he  thoroughly  knew 
Ireland,  go  away — leaving  behind  him  not  only  a 
practical  admission  that  the  local  magistrates  were  in 
the  right,  but  in  his  first  moment  of  anger,  when 
called  up  and  shown  the  devastation  which  had  been 
committed,  he  had  fully  admitted  the  error  he  had 
been  guilty  of  in  thus  blaming  those  who  were  correct 
after  all. 


102    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  F;OLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

The  levee  was,  of  course,  adjourned  sine  die,  while 
the  Clare  authorities,  having  thus  triumphed,  doubled 
their  exertions,  and,  by  good  management  and  a  proper 
degree  of  severity,  mingled  with  strict  justice,  soon 
after  succeeded  in  putting  down  the  "  Terry  Alts  " 
without  the  assistance  of  a  Waterloo  hero  ! 


103 


DABBY  DEAE. 


One  of  the  most  frightful  murders  which  had  appalled 
the  county  of  Limerick  for  some  time  had  just  occurred, 
and  as  the  victim  was  a  female  celebrated  for  her 
beauty  and  her  kindness  of  heart,  the  case  enlisted 
even  more  than  the  usual  sympathy  elicited  on  similar 
occasions. 

The  murdered  woman  was  the  wife  of  a  most  respec- 
table baker  in  Bruff,  whose  surname  at  this  moment 
escapes  my  memory,  but  will  probably  be  better  recol- 
lected by  those  connected  with  Limerick  in  1828,  or 
thereabouts.  In  Bruff  the  whole  tale  is  well  remem- 
bered, and  persons  of  my  own  age  will  not  be  found 
wanting  to  confirm  the  details  I  now  give.  The  Chris- 
tian name  of  the  baker  was  Darby — a  common  name 
in  the  south  of  Ireland.  His  surname  we  will  assume 
to  be  Hogan,  and  having  thus  premised,  go  on  with 
our  sketch. 

After  discussing  the  news  of  the  day  with  Major 
Yokes,  with  whom  I  had  been  breakfasting — after 
partaking  of  a  somewhat  large  portion  of  fried  salmon 
and  eggs — for  young  dragoons  are,  or  at  least  were, 
celebrated  for  their  powers  of  mastication — I  rose,  and 
was  about  to  leave  the  room,  when  my  father-in-law 


104    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  iff  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


called  across  to  me,  and  in  a  careless  manner  asked  me 
what  I  was  going  to  do. 
"  Nothing  very  particular." 

"  Come  along,  then,  with  me  on  the  outside  car.  I 
am  going  to  take  a  drive  in  the  country — the  fresh  air 
will  renew  your  appetite.  Run  upstairs  and  take  off 
your  uniform,  put  on  plain  clothes,  and  by  that  time 
the  car  will  be  round." 

I  assented,  and  speedily  changed  my  appearance  to 
that  of  a  civilian. 

"  Where's  the  car  V  asked  I. 

u  It's  in  the  back  lane — come  along,"  said  the  Major, 
putting  on  his  hat  and  taking  up  the  horsewhip  he 
generally  carried.  "  Come  along ;  we  shall  be  back 
to  dinner." 

Now  the  last  observation,  coupled  with  the  fact  of 
the  carriage  having  been  brought  to  a  quiet  spot  be- 
hind our  stable,  instead  of  the  front  door,  somewhat 
startled  me  ;  and  when,  on  going  out,  I  found  Sergeant 
Macgrath  mounted  in  full  uniform  in  attendance,  I 
began  to  think  over  the  many  scrapes  and  dangers  I 
had  gone  through  in  Yokes's  company,  and  felt  more 
than  half  inclined  to  draw  back.  He  saw  this,  and 
with  loud  laughter  assured  me  that  there  was  no 
danger  whatsoever — that  he  was  only  going  to  see 
Tom  Doolan  (his  senior  chief  constable,  and  a  great 
friend  of  his),  quartered  in  Bruff. 

As  Yokes  seldom  deviated  from  the  truth,  I  felt 
quite  satisfied,  and  jumped  on  the  car,  and  away  we 
went. 

In  less  than  two  hours  we  arrived  at  Doolau's  quar- 
ters, and  here  we  found  the  worthy  C,  C. 


DARBY  DEAR. 


105 


I  now  discovered  that  my  father-in-law's  object  was 
to  inquire  into  the  details  of  the  late  murder. 

Mr.  Doolan  first  supplied  him  with  the  most  ample 
accounts  of  it,  and  added  that  he  had  been  out  two 
days  and  a  night,  accompanied  by  the  wretched  hus- 
band. But  all  in  vain.  The  police  had  taken  up 
several  persons  on  suspicion,  more  particularly  a  pedlar 
from  the  county  of  Cork  ;  but  after  strict  examina- 
tion, the  magistrates  had  felt  it  their  duty  to  discharge 
them. 

"  What  further  course  to  take,  I  scarcely  know.  Tell 
me  what  shall  I  do  V '  said  Doolan. 

"  Well,  then,  faith,  do  nothing  at  all.  Go  and  fish 
in  Loch  Ghurr,  orshoot  snipes  in  the  bog — or  make  love 
to  the  ladies,  as  you're  a  handsome  fellow.  Do  what 
you  like  ;  but  leave  this  affair  alone,  till  you  see  mo 
again." 

Our  friend,  who  was  an  active  and  intelligent 
officer,  scarcely  liked  being  thus  thrust  aside ;  but  as 
he  well  knew  his  superior,  he  only  laughed,  and  left 
us,  directing  the  Major  to  the  house  of  the  bereaved 
man. 

When  we  entered,  the  poor  fellow  was  in  tears. 
When  called  on  to  relate  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
his  grief  was  painful  to  witness  ;  and  no  wonder  either 
— for  his  wife,  quite  a  young  woman,  had  been  a  good 
wife  to  him,  and  a  more  attached  couple  had  never 
existed. 

The  circumstances  were  easily  detailed.  On  the 
Saturday  evening  previous,  Hogan  and  his  wife  had 
taken  a  long  stroll  into  the  country,  determined  to 
enjoy  the  fine  weather.    But  as  they  were  in  their 


106    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

every-day  clothes,  they  rather  avoided  the  frequented 
road,  and  strolled  through  the  fields.  At  about  three 
miles  from  BrufF,  in  a  solitary  spot,  about  two  hundred 
yards  from  the  road,  they  were  suddenly  pounced  upon 
by  a  gang  of  three  robbers,  with  their  faces  blackened. 
They  instantly  seized  the  lovely  girl,  whose  screams 
were  loud  and  long,  and  she  struggled  so  hard  that  it 
required  the  strength  of  two  men  to  hold  her.  The 
third  had  seized  Hogan,  and  held  a  pistol  to  his  head. 
Hogan,  however — a  man  noted  for  his  courage — 
watched  his  opportunity,  and  knocked  his  captor 
down,  and  instantly  fled  along  the  road,  crying  for 
help.  Presently  he  met  some  people  coming  back 
from  Limerick  market,  and  when  he  told  his  tale  they 
instantly  returned  with  him  to  the  spot  But  they 
were  too  late.  The  unhappy  victim  lay  dead  on  the 
ground,  her  skull  battered  to  pieces  by  the  blows  of  a 
heavy  bludgeon.  At  this  sight  Hogan  cried  out 
loudly,  and  throwing  himself  on  the  body,  fainted 
away.  The  peasants,  terrified  and  shocked,  raised  the 
two  in  their  arms,  and  conveyed  them  both  back  to 
BrufF.  Poor  Hogan  was  confined  to  his  bed,  [occa- 
sionally raving  during  the  two  days  following.  A 
coroner  s  inquest  sat  on  the  body,  and  brought  in  a 
verdict  of  "  Wilful  Murder."  The  poor  woman  had 
only  been  buried  the  night  before  we  arrived.  The 
husband  seemed  eager  for  vengeance,  and  suggested 
many  schemes  to  Yokes  by  which  the  savage  assassins 
might  be  discovered. 

After  a  moment's  pause,  the  magistrate  turned 
round,  and  looking  straight  at  the  poor  man,  said, 
?  Hogan,  you  had  better  accompany  me  into  Limerick." 


DARBY  DEAR. 


107 


"  Faith,  Major,  I'd  rather  not — for  I'm  still  weak, 
and  in  grief." 

u  Yes,  I  know  that ;  but  perhaps  your  deposition 
may  be  necessary  to  bring  these  murderers  to  justice." 

"  Do  you  then  think  you'll  catch  them  ?  Oh,  then, 
I  pray  to  Heaven  you  could." 

"  And  yet  you  hesitate  to  come  !    It  looks  ill." 

"Not  I,  Major  ;  sure  I'm  ready." 

H  Yes,  yes,  my  good  fellow ;  but  not  in  that  dress. 
You  must  put  on  your  Sunday  suit,  as  we  shall  have 
to  appear  before  the  Bench  :  it  would  appear  dis- 
respectful to  be  seen  thus." 

"True  for  ye,"  rejoined  the  baker ;  and  he  quitted 
the  room  to  change  his  clothes. 

I  saw  by  Yokes's  eye,  that  he  was  pleased  with  some 
result ;  what  that  result  could  be  I  could  not  imagine, 
but  I  equally  knew  it  would  be  no  use  to  question 
him;  so  I  maintained  a  strict  silence,  whilst  the  magis- 
trate went  to  the  window,  and  beckoned  his  sergeant 
up,  to  whom  he  gave  some  directions  (apparently  im- 
portant ones)  in  Irish,  and  then  dismissed  him. 

Hogan  now  came  out,  dressed  in  his  best.  His 
appearance  was  that  of  a  quiet,  industrious  shopkeeper, 
rather  above  than  beneath  the  rank  of  his  fellow 
tradesmen . 

To  my  surprise,  however,  Yokes  was  evidently  in 
no  hurry  to  drive  away  ;  for  although  the  car  stood 
ready  at  the  door,  he  asked  Hogan  to  give  him  a  crust 
of  bread -and-cheese  and  a  glass  of  beer.  Now,  as  I 
knew  that  my  relative  eschewed  luncheon,  and  posi- 
tively disliked  the  food  he  had  just  asked  for,  I  clearly 
perceived  his  object  was  delay.    The  refreshments  were, 


108    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AS  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


however,  brought,  and  slowly  partaken  of.  Whilst  wo 
were  thus  employed,  I  heard  a  horse  gallop  away.  In 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  more,  we  were  all  again  on  the 
car,  driving  towards  Limerick. 

When  we  had  travelled  about  two  miles,  we  met 
Sergeant  Macgrath,  walking  his  horse  in  the  direction 
of  Bruff.  This  fairly  puzzled  me ;  however,  I  said 
nothing,  while  Vokes,  stopping  the  car,  jumped  off  and 
held  a  few  moments'  conversation  with  the  mounted 
man.  Then  jumping  up  again,  on  we  drove,  Sergeant 
Macgrath,  to  whose  saddle  I  now  perceived  a  bundle 
was  strapped,  following  us. 

At  length  we  came  to  the  spot  near  which  the 
murder  had  taken  place,  when  Vokes  suddenly  ordered 
the  carriage  to  stop ;  then  turning  round,  he  looked 
straight  at  Hogan,  and  in  piteous  accents  cried — 
1  Darby,  Darby  dear,  what  are  you  doing  F 

The  affrighted  man  turned  as  pale  as  a  sheet,  and 
leaped  from  his  seat.  Yokes  now  faced  to  him,  con- 
tinuing to  cry  out  in  a  voice  bespeaking  agony,  even 
in  the  high  tones  of  a  female— r"  Oh  Darby,  Darby  t 
surely  you  woidd  not  murder  me!  Did  I  ever  wrong 
you,  ?  Oh,  Darby,  have  mercy  on  me  /" 

I  really  thought  the  Major  had  gone  mad ;  but 
imagine  my  astonishment  when  Hogan,  throwing  him- 
self on  his  knees,  screamed  out,  "  /  confess — /  confess 
it  /  But  how  did  I  know  you  overlieard  her — Oh,  the 
Lord  be  good  to  me  t — them  is  the  very  words  f* 

"  Handcuff  him,  Tinsbury  !  handcuff  him  !  and  bind 
him  to  the  car."  In  an  instant  our  coachman  jumped 
down,  and  throwing  open  his  top-coat,  displayed  under- 
neath the  green  uniform  of  a  policeman  ;  in  an  instant 


DARBY  DEAR. 


109 


more  his  orders  were  complied  with,  and  the  wretch 
was  safely  secured. 

Sergeant  Macgrath  handed  his  brother  constable  his 
loaded  carbine,  and  fastening  his  horse  to  a  gate, 
jumped  off,  and  accompanied  the  major  and  myself  to 
the  spot  where  the  outrage  had  been  committed, 
carrying  in  his  hand  the  mysterious  bundle. 

We  soon  arrived  at  the  fatal  spot,  when  the  sergeant 
opened  his  packet  and  produced  a  pair  of  shoes.  These 
were  those  that  Hogan  had  just  changed  for  his  boots, 
and  the  several  other  articles  of  dress  he  had  taken 
off  in  order  to  don  his  Sunday  suit,  by  the  desire  of 
Major  Vokes. 

Macgrath  knelt  down,  and  having  minutely  exa- 
mined the  footprints,  which  still  were  visible  in  the 
soil  where  the  struggle  had  taken  place,  carefully  fitted 
them  to  the  shoes  he  brought — they  tallied  exactly. 
Vokes  then  verified  them  himself.  The  coat-sleeve 
was  turned  inside  out,  and  a  large  patch  of  blood- stain 
found  near  the  wrist ;  the  trousers  had  been  torn  in 
the  struggle,  and  sewed  up  again.  Vokes  now  began 
searching  amongst  the  bushes,  but  without  success. 
On  looking  into  a  dirty  dyke  which  ran  by,  he  per- 
ceived a  piece  of  stick  lying  in  it ;  he  desired  his 
sergeant  to  take  it  out  :  he  did  so.  It  was  a  short 
bludgeon,  probably  the  one  with  w^hich  the  murder  had 
been  committed.  The  police  magistrate  now  found 
himself  possessed  of  enough  evidence  to  commit  the 
prisoner  upon,  and  returned  to  the  carriage. 

Here  sat  the  wretched  man — pale  as  death,  and 
sobbing  like  a  child.  "  Do  you  know  this  stick?"  asked 
Vokes,  displaying  the  bludgeon  he  had  found. 


110    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"Take  it  away ! — take  it  away !  Sure  if  I  hadn't  had 
it  in  my  hands,  I'd  never  have  done  it and  he  covered 
his  face  with  his  hands,  and  cried  aloud. 

We  drove  straight  to  Limerick  county  gaol,  and 
there  lodged  the  prisoner. 

After  dinner  that  day  I  asked  Yokes,  most  earnestly, 
whether  he  had  acted  on  any  information,  or  merely 
on  his  own  judgment. 

"  Well,  then,  I  declare  to  Heaven,  my  dear  fellow,  I 
acted  entirely  on  my  personal  observation.  There  was 
something  in  the  look  of  this  man  ;  there  was  some- 
thing in  his  overwhelming  grief  that  at  once  made  me 
think  he  was  the  murderer.  Did  you  see  how  he 
winced  when  I  proposed  taking  him  into  Limerick  ? 
But  he  fell  at  once  into  the  trap,  when  I  recommended 
him  to  change  bis  clothes." 

"  And  why  did  you  do  so  ?  "  interrupted  I. 

"Faith,  I  knew  that  if  he  had  committed  the  crime, 
he  had  done  so  in  the  dress  he  had  on,  for  he  said  he 
had  walked  out  in  his  every-day  attire  :  did  you  not 
remark  him  saying  so  ]  " 

"Not  I." 

"  Well,  then,  Harry,  my  boy,  you'll  never  make  a 
good  thief-taker,  for  it  is  by  these  trifles  we  come  at  the 
greater  truths.  Did  not  you  see  me  call  in  Sergeant 
Macgrath  1  Well,  it  was  to  tell  him  to  go  into  Hogan's 
room,  and  as  he  left  it  to  seize  the  clothes  he  took  off, 
and  gallop  on  to  see  if  the  shoes  fitted  the  marks.  Had 
they  not  done  so,  he  was  quietly  to  put  the  whole  back 
again.  He  met  us,  however,  and  told  us  they  did.  So 
I  thought  myself  justified  in  trying  the  ruse  I  did, 
and  through  which  the  prisoner  was  brought  to  confess. 


DARBY  DEAR. 


Ill 


"  But  how  did  you  happen  to  know  the  exact 
words  ? " 

"I  chanced  it.  I  knew  his  Christian  name  was  Darby, 
and  calculated  pretty  accurately  what  the  poor  girl 
would  have  called  out  on  his  assaulting  her.  Even  now 
I  cannot  be  sure  they  were  the  exact  words  she  used, 
nor  probably  is  Hogan  ;  but  they  were  so  like  them 
— so  like  the  appeal  she  probably  made — that  he 
believed  that  some  passer-by  had  overheard  them,  and 
thus  in  an  agony  of  terror  admitted  his  guilt.  But 
you'll  see  more  strange  scenes  than  this  before  you 
leave  the  county." 

"And  what  will  the  other  magistrates  say?" 

"  Say !  Nabocklish,  my  boy ;  haven't  they  been  at  me 
already  ?  Two  of  my  neighbours  have  already  been  at 
me,  to  blame  me  for  thus  taking  up  a  highly  respec- 
table man, — while  the  principal  magistrate,  who  lives 
near  BrufF,  has  galloped  in  and  offered  to  bail  this  excel- 
lent young  man,  whom  he  has  known  from  his  birth, 
to  any  amount.  I,  of  course,  refused — murder  is  not  a 
bailable  offence.  So  my  friend  has  gone  down  to  the 
club-house,  and  is  now  probably  engaged  in  writing  a 
memorial  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant,  requesting  his  Excel- 
lency to  remove  me  from  my  situation." 

Yokes  wound  up  with  a  hearty  laugh. 

"  And  have  you  no  fear  that  you  may  have  erred  ? 
Suppose  this  man  is  acquitted  V1 

"Suppose  the  skies  were  to  fall !  Here's  your  health !" 
and  Yokes  changed  the  subject. 

At  the  following  assizes,  Darby  Hogan  was  tried 
for  the  murder  of  his  wife,  and  convicted  on  the  clearest 


112    RECOI/LFXJTIOXS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


evidence  (though  wholly  circumstantial)  which  could 
possibly  be  adduced. 

The  night  before  he  suffered,  he  fully  confessed  the 
justice  of  his  sentence  ;  but  to  the  last  declared  his 
firm  belief  that  Yokes  was  gifted  with  supernatural 
powers. 


113 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENT. 


I  happened  to  be  dining  with  an  English  friend  at 
Moriarty's  Hotel,  who/in  company  with  another  tourist, 
was  en  route  to  behold  the  glories  of  Killarney,  when, 
after  the  wine  had  circulated  more  than  once,  I  pro- 
posed an  adjournment  to  Major  Yokes's. 

"  Yokes  !"  cried  the  stranger — "  Yokes  !  Surely 
you  do  not  mean  the  chief  magistrate  of  police  T 

"  Indeed  I  do." 

"  Then  I  shall  certainly  not  accompany  you.  I 
detest  his  very  name.  He  has  been  the  cause  of  all 
my  misfortunes." 

*  How  so  T  asked  my  friend. 

"I  don't  say  that  he  purposely  injured  me — I  don't 
say  that  he  acted  improperly ;  but  he  was  undoubtedly 
the  cause  of  my  leaving  the  army,  and,  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent, causing  my  character  to  be  defamed." 

"  How  is  that  V 

"Ah,  do  tell  us." 

"As  I  have  said  so  much,  I  will.  Call  for  some 
claret ;  for  not  one  inch  will  I  stir  towards  Yokes's — 
not  I.  And  I  think,  when  you've  heard  my  story, 
you  will  say  I  am  right." 

He  then  commenced  thus  : — 

"  I  had  only  joined  the  regiment  about  six  months, 


114  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

when  I  applied  for,  and  obtained  leave  for  a  fortnight 
on  '  private  urgent  affairs and  having  done  so,  left 
the  barrack-yard  in  high  glee.  I  was  dressed  in  a  new 
suit  of  mufti,  and  my  heart  was  as  light  as  youth, 
health,  and  hope  could  make  it.  My  friend  Thompson 
shouted  out  a  wish  that  I  might  succeed,  as  I  drove 
from  the  barrack-gate  in  one  of  those  old  tumble-down 
vehicles  which  formed  the  most  respectable  mode  of 
transit  some  few  years  ago — yclept  a  post-chaise — or, 
as  the  driver  denominated  it,  "a  poshay  of  the  right 
sort" — a  term  applied  to  every  article  to  be  admired, 
from  a  pretty  girl  to  a  poldoody  oyster. 

"  But  I  forgot  to  explain,  that  at  the  time  I  speak 
of  I  was  quartered  in  this  very  city  and  that  I  was  now 
starting  for  Bruff,  where  I  had  been  invited  by  Sir 
Phelim  O'Dowd — or  the  O'Dowd,  as  some  of  the 
people  called  him — to  pass  three  da}rs  with  him.  Sir 
Phelim,  I  must  observe,  had  extended  his  hospitality 
to  me  in  the  hunting-field,  where  I  had  won  his  heart 
by  leaping  a  high  ditch  (a  ditch  being  nothing  less  than 
a  mud-bank  in  Ireland),  and  landing  safely  over  the 
heads  of  a  man  and  horse  that  lay  sprawling  on  the 
other  side  in  gallant  style  !  Sir  Phelim  was  wholly 
ignorant  that  I  had  met  his  lovely  daughter  at  a  race- 
ball  in  Limerick,  and  fallen  over  head  and  ears  in  love 
with  her.  Need  I  say  I  accepted  his  invitation,  and 
now  hastened  to  profit  by  it. 

u  Arrived  at  Castle  O'Dowd — a  modern  square  build- 
ing, covered  with  white  plaster  and  embowered  in 
dilapidated  verandahs, — I  jumped  out  of  my  rickety 
vehicle,  and  at  once  sought  the  drawing-room,  where 
the  domestic  forces  were  drawn  up,  evidently  expecting 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENT. 


115 


ay  arrival.  Sir  Phelim,  after  a  cordial  welcome,  intro- 
iuced  me  to  his  lovely  daughter  (little  suspecting  that 
re  were  already  acquainted)  and  his  maiden  sister,  a 
;audily- dressed  old  maid  of  some  forty-five  years  of 
,ge ;  then  turning  to  his  butler  (for  footmen  are 
Iways  called  butlers  in  Ireland),  ordered  in  the  '  red: 
ound,'  invariably  offered  to  mid-day  visitors. 

"My  Louisa  looked  more  lovely  than  ever  ;  the  slight 
leception  she  was  playing  off,  in  thus  concealing,  for 
mrposes  of  her  own,  our  former  intimacy,  caused  a 
nost  becoming  blush  to  mantle  on  her  cheek  ;  and  I'd 
lave  given  half  the  estates  of  the  Earl  of  Kingston — 
ihat  is,  if  I  had  possessed  them — to  have  sent  papa  and 
lunt  out  of  the  room,  only  for  five  minutes. 

"  Need  I  say  how  happily,  yet  how  swiftly  the  hours 
passed  !  A  stroll  through  the  woods  ;  a  noble  banquet 
w^ith  tables  groaning  beneath  enormous  joints  (as  is 
always  the  case  in  Ireland)  ;  a  cooper  of  excellent 
claret ;  and  some  really  good  music  from  my  Louisa — 
I  call  her  my  Louisa,  to  distinguish  her  from  her  old 
maiden  aunt,  who  bore  the  same  Christian  name — 
seemed  all  to  pass  in  a  few  minutes ;  and  I  could 
scarcely  credit  it,  when  Sir  Phelim's  butler  announced 
midnight,  and  told  us  that  our  candles  awaited  us  in 
the  hall.    Such  were  the  ways  of  the  house. 

"  Elated  by  wine  to  a  certain  extent,  and  filled  with 
the  most  romantic  ideas  of  love,  I  was  endeavouring 
to  discover  my  room,  which  I  had  proudly  insisted  on 
finding  without  escort — indeed,  I  believe  I  had  rudely 
told  the  old  butler  to  mind  his  own  business,  sensi- 
tively believing  his  polite  pilotage  was  proffered  under 
an  idea  that  I  was  not  quite  steady — I  was,  as  I  said 
8—2 


116     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

before,  vainly  trying  to  find  the  door  of  the  room  that 
the  worthy  domestic  had  indicated,  when  a  very  smart 
female  servant  crossed  my  path,  and  bobbed  an  Irish 
curtsey. 

"'Come  here,  my  colyeen,'  said  I,  'and  tell  me 
which  is  my  room  V 

"  'Faith,  it's  straight  before  your  honour  !' 

'•' '  You  are  Miss  Louisa's  maid  ]' 

"  '  That  same  !'  says  the  pretty  chambermaid. 

"  Now,  wine  may  kill,  it  may  enervate,  it  may  con- 
fuse— but  still,  in  its  early  progress  through  the  mind, 
it  affords  inspiration.  At  least,  so  I  found  it.  The 
reply  of  the  pretty  Abigail  at  once  filled  me  with  a 
train  of  new  ideas. 

"  1  Come  here,  ma  cushla'  (for  I  found  a  little  native 
Irish  would  win  her  heart) ;  '  sure  you'd  give  a  note 
from  me  to  Miss  Louisa  V 

"  '  Is  it  me  would  do  it  V 

'"  Faith,  then,  you  will.  Look  here,  darlint !  I 
don't  understand  much  Irish,  but,  in  plain  English, 
here's  your  reward,  if  you  will;'  and  I  held  up  a 
sovereign. 

" '  Will  a  duck  swim?'  inelegantly  replied  the  smiling 
Abigail. 

'"Wait,  then,  a  moment,  and  I'll  do  the  thing 
respectably.'  (This  was  a  sentence  I  had  picked  up  in 
Clare.)  '  Wait,  and  I'll  bring  you  the  letter :'  and 
I  rushed  into  my  room. 

"  I  tore  out  a  leaf  from  my  pocket-book — took  out 
my  very  best  pencil-case  (a  gold  one)  and  wrote  : — 

" '  Dearest  Louisa, — Meet  me  near  the  front  gate, 
at  eleven  to-morrow  night — a  post-chaise  will  be  in 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENr. 


117 


readiness — to  bless  the  affection  of  one  who  means 
honourably,  but  who,  enchanted  on  a  short  acquaint- 
ance, sets  ordinary  rules  at  defiance,  the  warm  beating 
of  his  heart  having  long  banished  the  cold  dictates  of 
his  head. 

6  Your  adorer,  

"The  note  done,  I  sealed  it  with  a  love-seal,  and 
delivered  it  prepaid,  to  the  maid,  who,  for  another 
sovereign,  promised  to  bring  me  a  reply  within  half- 
an-hour. 

"  My  friends,  did  you  ever  await  the  reply  to  a  love- 
letter]  No.  Then  you  can  know  nothing  of  my 
throbbing  heart,  my  beating  pulse,  my  feverish  temples, 
<fec.  (fee.  <fec,  so  well  described  by  the  poet.  Suffice  it 
to  say,  the  maid  returned;  and,  having  pocketed 
another  sovereign  and  accepted  a  kiss,  gave  me  a  note 
redolent  of  musk  and  closely  sealed,  and  ran  away  laugh- 
ing.   I  entered  my  room  to  read  the  precious  missive. 

"  With  trembling  hands  I  opened  it — 

"'My  Dear  Sir, — I  really  feel  that  I  am  acting 
most  imprudently.  But  love  is  a  maddening  passion, 
which  carries  us  off,  even  beyond  the  bounds  of  pru- 
dence. Fie  ! — I  almost  blush  while  I  write  the  words, 
and  comply  after  an  acquaintance  so  short ;  but  that 
short  acquaintance  convinces  me  you  are  a  man  of 
honour.    I  will  be  there. 

'  Yours, 

c  Alas  !  too  much  yours, 

'Louisa  O'Dowd.' 

"  Oh  !  how  rapturously  I  kissed  the  dear  note.  I 
almost  devoured  it  in  my  ardour,    And  yet,  again, 


118    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

there  was  a  nasty,  selfish,  intruding  thought  which  said, 
1  Is  this  conduct  not  too  hasty  1  Should  she  thus  have 
succumbed  on  the  very  first  attack  V  But  no !  It  i 
was  the  effect  of  love  !  omnipotent  love  !  and  I  hushed 
every  murmur — every  scruple,  as  I  fell  asleep  blessing 
my  own,  my  adored  Louisa. 

"  Shall  I  say  how  the  next  day  passed  ?  Shall  I  say 
how  my  heart  kept  jumping  up  in  my  throat,  and  how  j 
I  longed  for  the  coming  night  ?  My  Louisa  kept  her 
room.  She  said  she  had  a  cold.  This  was  evidently 
feigned  to  conceal  her  agitation  ;  and  I  amused  myself 
by  watching  the  vain  attempts  of  a  Captain  O'Hag- 
garty,  who  sought  to  win  the  love  of  the  Baronets 
sister.  The  old  lady  repulsed  him  with  scorn.  She 
evidently  saw  he  was  a  fortune-hunter,  and  as  such 
treated  him.  She  even  appealed  to  me.  But  as  I 
was  busy  with  my  own  happy  thoughts,  and  as  I  was 
by  no  means  desirous  of  embroiling  myself  with  the 
best  shot  in  Tipperary,  I  declined,  to  the  evident 
annoyance  of  the  old  maid,  interfering  on  her  behalf. 

"  After  dinner,  Sir  Phelim,  who  had  been  more  than 
usually  cordial  throughout  the  day,  stretched  out  his 
hand  and  pressed  mine  ;  then,  with  a  wink  and  a  know- 
ing look,  he  drank — '  Success  to  you,  my  boy ;  may 
you  succeed  in  love  and  war.  I  suspect  you  take 
ladies  like  fortresses — by  assault,  eh,  Harry,  my  boy  V 
then  burst  out  laughing,  and  proposed  to  retire  to  the 
drawing-room. 

"  There  was  a  bantering  tone  about  my  host  that 
puzzled  me.  He  seemed  what  is  called  i  up'  to  some- 
thing;  but  what  that  something  was  I  could  not 
divine.    Louisa  could,  surely,  not  have  betrayed  me  / 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENT. 


119 


The  maid-servant  might  have  been  indiscreet,  it  is 
true ;  but  then  my  abduction  of  his  only  daughter, 
would  surely  not  have  been  a  subject  of  merriment  to 
her  father.  Even  old  Miss  O'Dowd  kept  smiling  ; 
and  the  only  one  out  of  humour — for  Louisa  still  kept 
her  room — was  the  Hibernian  captain. 

"  At  eleven  precisely  we  all  gladly  retired  ;  and  I 
listened  at  my  door  to  hear  that  the  house  was  quiet. 
In  ten  minutes  all  was  silent ;  and  as  my  watch  told 
the  half-hour,  my  bribed  Abigail  appeared,  and  with 
caution  led  me  to  the  garden-gate,  where  a  post-chaise 
stood  waiting.  She  insisted  on  my  entering  it.  I  did 
so  ;  and  away  went  the  maid  to  fetch  her  dear  mistress. 
Oh,  how  impatient — how  anxious  I  felt  !  Presently, 
a  light  footstep  was  heard,  and  in  another  moment 
Louisa  was  clasped  in  my  arms.  Her  blushes  were 
concealed  by  a  thick  veil ;  but,  as  I  pressed  her  to  my 
bosom,  I  felt  her  beating  heart. 

"  With  a  wild  hurrah  !  which  I  vainly  endeavoured 
to  silence,  away  dashed  the  postboys — for  I  had  four 
horses  on  this  occasion, — and  away  dashed  the  rickety 
old  chaise.  My  Louisa  sank  into  my  arms,  and,  for 
the  first  time,  I  imprinted  a  kiss  on  her  sweet  lips  ; 
that  is  to  say,  making  allowance  for  the  envious  veil 
which  intervened.  She  sighed ;  she  murmured ;  I 
could  just  catch  my  name  breathed  forth,  when  a 
seeming  earthquake  roused  me  from  my  dream  of  hap- 
piness. In  the  next  moment  I  lay  sprawling  in  the 
high  road.  The  post-boys  had  turned  the  comer  too 
sharply,  a  high  stone  had  caught  the  wheel,  and  the 
post-chaise,  being  fairly  turned  over,  at  once  came  to 


120    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

pieces,  while  the  released  nags  galloped  on  for  several 
yards,  the  post-boys  having  been  hurled  from  their 
saddles.  I  jumped  up  unhurt.  I  rushed  across  and 
raised  my  adored  Louisa,  who  had  become  insensible. 
In  vain  I  strove  to  arouse  her  ;  all  was  dark.  I  raised 
her  veil,  but  was  unable  to  see  her  dear  face  ;  I  could 
not  really  discover  whether  she  was  severely  injured  or 
not.  Fortunately,  at  this  moment,  I  heard  a  horse  ap- 
proaching. I  shouted  with  all  my  might  ;  and  to  my 
great  joy  Captain  O'Haggarty  came  up,  and  jumping 
from  his  saddle,  instantly  lent  his  aid.  My  cries  had 
been  heard,  and  a  farm- servant  approached.  I  ex- 
plained in  a  few  words  my  situation  to  the  Captain 
and  he  vowed  to  assist  me.  The  rustic  carried  a  lan- 
tern ;  we  opened  it,  and  cast  the  light  on  the  face  of 
my  Louisa.  Ob,  Heavens  !  I  can  never  forget  the 
moment ;  I  actually  screamed  with  annoyance,  while 
the  Captain  rapped  out  his  most  powerful  oath.  In 
my  arms  lay  extended  Louisa  O'Dowd — yes,  Louisa 
O'Dowd — but  not  my  Louisa  O'Dowd,  but  old  Louisa 
O'Dowd,  her  antiquated  and  crabbed  aunt.  In  my 
vexation,  I  let  her  fall  into  the  mud,  from  which  she 
instantly  arose,  seeming  to  have  suddenly  recovered  in 
the  most  miraculous  manner,  and  began  to  pour  out  a 
thousand  maledictions  on  my  now  too  apparent  disgust. 

"  On  the  other  hand,  Captain  O'Haggarty  made  use 
of  the  most  insulting  terms,  the  mildest  being  traitor  ! 
seducer  !  and  abductor  !  I  could  not  explain  without 
compromising  my  Louisa,  so  I  attempted  no  defence  ; 
but  hurling  defiance  at  him  and  his  old  love,  I  agreed 
to  meet  him  at  daylight,  at  the  eighth  mile-stone  on  the 
Limerick  road,  there  to  settle  our  dispute  with  pistols. 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENT. 


121 


"  A  few  words,  and  we  separated.  He  carried  off  his 
venerable  charge  in  triumph.  Disgusted,  irritated, 
and  somewhat  ashamed,  I  sought  the  cottage  of  Tim 
Sullivan,  the  master  of  the  hounds,  who,  though  it  was 
now  midnight,  I  felt  assured  I  should  find  still  up, 
imbibing  his  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  glass  of  toddy. 

"  The  worthy  squire — or  the  Master,  as  he  is  styled 
in  Munster — welcomed  me  with  a  loud  shout,  and 
instantly  ordered  in  a  reinforcement  of  glasses  and 
bottles.  Then,  turning  round,  he  introduced  me  to 
Major  Vokes,  a  handsome-looking  man,  with  a  cheer- 
ful smile  on  his  face,  who  sat  on  the  other  side  of  the 
table  sharing  his  liquor,-£-seemingly  nothing  loth  to 
do  so. 

"  I  was  delighted  ;  for,  truth  to  tell,  I  felt  a  conscien- 
tious scruple  at  asking  Tim  to  be  my  second  in  the 
fast  approaching  affair.  Yet,  what  could  I  do  ?  It  was 
hard  thus  to  call  on  a  man  with  a  wife  and  half-a-score 
of  children  to  embroil  himself ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
if  I  did  not  get  a  second  before  daylight,  O'Haggarty 
would  probably  post  me  as  a  coward.  I  had  no  alter- 
native— at  least,  so  I  had  supposed — as  I  sought  Tim 
Sullivan's  residence.  But  now  a  very  proper  person 
sat  before  me.  He  bore  a  military  prefix  to  his  name  ; 
he  was  doubtless  a  military  man  ;  the  Fates  had  sent 
him  to  my  aid. 

"  For  half-an-hour  I  sat,  quietly  enjoying  my  toddy, 
— studying  all  the  time  how  I  should  attack  the  Major. 
It  was  a  bold  measure  ;  but  I  had  no  alternative.  It 
is  true  he  was  a  stranger  ;  but  among  soldiers  there  is 
always  a  degree  of  masonic  brotherhood.  So  I  now 
only  waited  a  good  opportunity.  Here,  again,  Fortune 


122    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISU  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


favoured  me  :  Tim  was  called  away  by  the  sudden 
illness  of  a  favourite  hunter. 

"  I  lost  not  an  instant, — I  at  once  addressed  my  pro- 
posed aid. 

" '  Major,  as  a  stranger, — I  really  want  words  to 
apologize, — but  the  urgency  of  the  case  must  plead  for 
me.    Will  you  second  me?' 

"  *  I  really  do  not  understand  you  ! ' 

"  '  Simply,  then,  'tis  this — I  am  abrupt,  that  I  may 
make  my  communication  before  Sullivan  returns — I 
have  agreed  to  fight  a  duel  at  day-break.' 

"  1  And  you  wish  to  tell  me  this  ? ' 

" 1  Yes,  Major,  in  the  hope  of  inducing  you  to 
become  my  second.' 

u  1  Your  second  ! — ha  !  ha  !  ha  ! — a  capital  joke.  I 
understand  ! ' 

"  Now,  for  the  very  life  of  me,  I  could  not  see  why 
the  Major  should  be  so  very  merry.  I  am  sure  I  did 
not  feel  so.  He  surely  could  not  have  misunderstood 
me.    So  I  chimed  in — 

"  1  You  understand  me  ? ' 

"  '  Oh,  perfectly  !    I'll  be  off  now  ;  but  I  shall  be  sure 
to  be  there, — at  daybreak,  I  think  you  said  i 9 
"<I  did.' 

"  1  But  I  forgot  the  place  and  the  name  of  your  an- 
tagonist. You  must  tell  me  both,  as  I  must  be  in 
time.' 

"  '  My  antagonist  is  Captain  O'Haggarty.' 

"  '  Oh  !  No  wonder  you  are  frightened  ;  he's  the  best 
shot  in  Ireland.' 

"  '  I'm  not  frightened,  Major  ;  but  under  the  peculiar 
circumstances  ' 


AN  IRISH  ELOPEMENT. 


123 


"  1 1  understand !'  replied  Yokes ;  and  again  lie  burst 
out  laughing.    c  Where  is  the  rendezvous  1 9 

" '  The  eighth  mile-stone  on  the  Limerick  road.' 

"  6  That's  right.'  He  then  took  out  a  small  pocket- 
book  and  noted  down  all  the  particulars.  Again  he 
smiled,  and  rose,  saying,  '  We  shall  be  sure  to  be 
there,'  and  left  the  room. 

"  That  Yokes  took  notes  did  not  surprise  me.  Many- 
men  with  bad  memories  invariably  do  so.  That 
his  coming  responsibility  should  induce  him  to  leave 
his  grog,  I  could  understand,  though  it  vexed  me. 
But  that  he  should  not  seek  to  know  the  cause  of 
quarrel,  or  any  particulars  of  the  affair,  I  confess 
astonished  me ;  while  the  words  *  We  will  be  there ' 
puzzled  me.  But,  perhaps,  as  an  old  hand,  he  intended 
to  bring  a  surgeon,  or — as  is  often  the  case  in  Ireland 
— a  friend,  to  see  the  fun. 

"  I  passed  three  long  hours  with  Tim.  I  borrowed 
his  pistols,  but  gave  him  no  hint  of  my  projected 
rencontre.  I  drank  little ;  but  chatted  away  till  four 
o'clock,  when  Sullivan  proposed  to  retire.  We  did  so. 
In  half-an-hour  more  I  had  slipped  out,  and  was 
already  on  my  way  to  the  Limerick  road. 

"  Although  daylight  had  scarcely  fully  lighted  up  the 
heavens,  yet  O'Haggarty  and  a  fierce-looking  friend 
awaited  my  coming  with  bloodthirsty  impatience.  I 
confess  I  felt  somewhat  small  in  thus  approaching 
him,  unaccompanied  by  a  second. 

" '  Where  is  your  friend,  sir  ?  I  thought  you  under- 
stood the  rules  of  these  affairs.' 

"  ( And  so  I  do  ;  he'll  be  here  directly.' 


124    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


" 1  May  I  ask  who  acts  on  your  side  T  demanded  the 
fierce  looking  man. 

u  1  Major  Yokes,'  said  I. 

" '  What !  is  that  your  game  V  shouted  he. 

" '  Coward  ! — poltroon  !'  roared  the  captain. 

u  At*  that  moment  Vokes  galloped  up,  accompanied 
by  four  mounted  policemen,  and  away  bolted  the  man 
with  the  red  whiskers. 

"  1 1  arrest  you  both  !  Take  their  arms  from  them, 
Sergeant  Hennessy/  said  the  Major.  '  Gentlemen, 
you  must  accompany  me.' 

u  1  Infamous  traitor  P  roared  O'Haggarty,  frowning 
at  me  and  shaking  his  fist.  1  Dirty  coward  ! — whew  !' 
and  he  gave  a  contemptuous  whistle. 

"  'Come  along,  gentlemen ;  you  must  instantly  accom- 
pany me  to  Sir  Phelim  O'Dowd,  who,  as  the  nearest 
magistrate,  will,  on  my  information,  bind  you  both 
over  to  keep  the  peace/ 

"  Shall  I  go  on  with  my  tale  1  No ;  it  is  too  painful ! 
I  soon  discovered  that  Major  Vokes  was  at  the 
head  of  the  police  ;  and,  consequently,  my  application 
to  him  was  quoted  as  an  unmanly  mode  of  avoiding 
this  duel  O'Haggarty  first  posted  me  as  a  coward  ; 
then  ran  away  with  the  old  spinster.  Miss  Louisa 
O'Dowd  the  younger  with  truth  declared  that  she  knew 
nothing  at  all  of  the  affair ;  but  cruelly  added — 1  the 
detestable  coward  !'  My  brother  officers  sent  me  to 
Coventry ;  and,  in  a  fit  of  despair,  I  sold  out  of  the 
army  and  became  a  settler  in  Canada ;  where  I  after- 
wards shot  my  best  friend,  because  he  foolishly,  when 
elated  by  wine,  jeered  me  about  old  maids  and  police 
inspectors." 


THE  FAERIEE'S  SHOP. 


Did  you  ever  ride  on  an  Irish  Outside  J aunting  Car  1 
If  you  have,  you  may  well  feel  for  me — coming  in  from 
Croom  to  Limerick  on  a  vehicle  of  the  kind ;  not  that 
the  great  jeopardy  of  this  conveyance  is  not  greatly 
avoided  in  the  country  ;  for  although  I  admit  there  is 
occasionally  a  fear  of  being  shaken  off  over  rough 
macadam,  or  thrown  into  a  deep  ditch,  yet  your  limbs 
are  not  in  momentary  fear  of  being  crushed  by  a  pass- 
ing Jehu.  On  the  roads  of  Ireland,  there  is  no  crowd 
of  equipages.  Centralization  has  done  its  best,  and 
all  the  respectability  of  the  country  flock  to  Dublin. 

This  is  a  long  exordium  ;  but  never  mind, — better 
late  than  never.    So,  revenons  ct  nos  moutons. 

I  was,  as  I  said  before,  travelling  from  Croom  to 
Limerick  on  an  outside  car  with  my  friend  Major 
Vokes,  the  celebrated  chief  magistrate  of  this  county — 
a  functionary  about  whom  as  many  tales  are  told  in 
Munster  as  are  related  of  Robin  Hood  in  Nottingham- 
shire. We  were  jogging  along,  truth  to  tell,  half  asleep, 
when  Corporal  Mul reedy — a  policeman  in  livery,  who 
was  driving  the  carriage — turned  round  and  gave  us 
the  pleasing  information  that  Master  Bob  (the  Major  s 
favourite  horse)  had  cast  a  shoe,  and  that  consequently 
it  would  be  impossible  to  reach  the  city  in  time  for  the 


126    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

Sessions  then  going  on.  After  a  short  colloquy  in  Irish, 
our  driver  informed  his  master  that  there  was  a  smitliee 
some  half-a-mile  down  a  borheen,  and,  by  his  chiefs 
orders,  to  that  smitliee  we  now  proceeded. 

As  we  neared  the  forge  we  perceived  to  our  astonish- 
ment, or  I  should  rather  say  mine  (for  the  police- 
major  seemed  as  little  subject  to  surprise  as  a  Red 
Indian),  that  several  groups  were  collected  around  the 
shed  we  sought — why  or  wherefore,  of  course  we 
could  not  imagine ;  nor,  indeed,  did  Vokes  seem  to 
notice  the  circumstance  in  any  marked  manner. 

Our  limping  animal,  and  the  shoe  in  the  driver's 
hand,  told  our  tale  and  expressed  our  want.  The 
crowd  made  way  for  us  ;  and  we  were  soon  ensconced 
in  the  farriers  shop,  indulging  in  a  pleasant  chat. 

'•  You've  a  large  assemblage  to-day.  Is  it  a  fair  or 
pattern  JM  asked  Yokes. 

"  By  no  means,"  replied  the  shoer. 

"  Are  you  a  friend  of  Tom  Yokes  !"  suddenly  de- 
manded the  farrier,  after  a  pause. 

"  Me  ?  by  no  means.  I  give  you  my  honour  I  never 
saw  him  in  my  life  ;  and  I've  every  reason  to  believe 
I  am  his  worst  enemy." 

I  was  about  to  interfere — a  look  from  Yokes  silenced 
me. 

"  God  bless  you,  for  that  same  !"  said  the  farrier. 
"  It's  all  right  then,  and  I'll  tell  you  the  truth.  This 
scoundrel,  this  blackguard  of  the  world — may  the  curse 
of  Cromwell  be  on  him  ! — caused  my  uncle  to  be  hanged 
for  being  concerned  in  the  'rection  when  the  Blenner- 
hassets  were  killed.  Well,  there's  myself  and  Carmody, 
yonder,  and  Tom  Grady,  of  Carrickonlish  —  whose 


THE  FARRIER^  SHOP. 


127 


brother  he  killed  because  they  burned  the  gauger  when 
he  carae  to  take  Carmody's  cattle, — and  two  or  three 
other  boys,  and  we've  all  sworn — by  this  and  by  that, 
on  the  Holy — that  we'll  kill  Tom  Yokes,  and  it's 
many  a  day  we've  looked  out  for  him.  But  to-day 
we'll  have  him — glory  to  Ireland  ! — we'll  give  him  a 
puck  that'll  send  him  to  the  grave  of  Going.  Sure 
he's  coming  in  at  two  o'clock  to-day,  and  we'll  tache 
him  a  lisson  in  manners." 

I  stood  and  trembled, — I  confess  I  did  not  like  it. 
Not  so  Yokes,  who  seemed  to  enjoy  the  joke,  and 
replied,  with  a  smile — 

"  Do  you  know  his  person  f* 

"  Divil  a  bit ;  I  nivir  wish  to  see  him  till  I  take  my 
shot." 

"  Well,  he's  about  my  size.  But,  as  to  your  ven- 
geance, you  must  delay  it  for  two  or  three  hours  ;  for 
just  before  I  left  the  main  road,  I  saw  Major  Yokes 
going  into  Limerick  well  guarded." 

"  Sure  that's  provoking  !  What  will  we  do  f 

"  Well,"  chimed  in  the  fearless  functionary,  "  I'll  tell 
you  how  you  can  manage  it  :  let  Carmody,  Grady, 
and  yourself,  be  in  waiting  for  him  as  he  comes  out. 
There's  the  i  Brian  Borholm  ;'  be  there  at  five  o'clock, 
and  I'll  stake  my  life"  he'll  come  out  unattended. 
See  that  your  guns  are  well  charged,  and  mind  no 
one  but  the  ringleaders  are  there.  I'll  not  be  far  off'. 
But  now  the  horse  is  shod  I'll  hasten  on  ;  and  recollect 
what  I've  told  you.  Good-bye,  boys,"  roared  Yokes  ; 
and  away  we  drove. 

I  would  have  spoken  to  him — I  would  have  expos- 
tulated— I  would  have  asked  an  explanation — but  he 


128    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  FOLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

was  equally  deaf  to  all.  He  laughed,  told  anecdotes, 
sang,  talked  in  Irish  with  the  corporal ;  but  not  a 
word  on  the  subject  of  our  late  encounter  would  he 
deign  to  bestow  on  me. 

At  three  o'clock  the  Sessions  closed ;  and,  after 
partaking  of  a  hurried  luncheon,  the  car  came  round 
to  the  door,  and  the  Major  requested  me  to  mount.  It 
was  now  past  four. 

I  rather  demurred  to  the  proposition,  and  tried  to 
show  the  folly  of  driving  unarmed  and  unattended  into 
a  nest  of  murderers. 

"  Gighy-ma  gow,"  said  Vokes  ;  and  as  I  well  knew 
this  meant  an  expression  of  unalterable  determination, 
I  foresaw  the  folly  of  reasoning  with  him.  To  attempt 
to  dissuade  him  from  this  perilous  journey,  I  felt  was 
a  task  beyond  my  powers — to  allow  him  to  dare  the 
dangers  alone  would  be  the  act  of  a  coward ;  so  I 
jumped  up,  and  off  we  went. 

Major  Vokes  was  in  prime  humour  ;  I  cannot  say 
that  I  shared  his  hilarity. 

At  length  we  came  in  sight  of  the  public-house 
styled  the  "  Brian  Borholm  "  and  in  front  of  it  I  saw 
a  large  party  of  persons  advancing  to  meet  our 
carriage. 

"  Fly  for  your  life  !"  cried  I. 

u  Don't  be  making  yourself  a  bosthoon,"  calmly  re- 
plied the  Major. 

The  stoical  coachman  drove  steadily  on.  I  could 
have  seized  the  reins  and  throttled  him  with  pleasure 
— but,  as  a  military  officer,  I  felt  it  might  seem  a 
want  of  courage ;  so  I  silently  prepared  for  my  doom. 

In  ten  minutes  more  we  were  abreast  of  the  assas- 


THE  FARRIER'S  SHOP.  129 

sins.  But  how  great  was  my  astonishment !  There 
stood  the  stalwart  farrier  and  Carmody  :  yes,  there 
they  stood,  with  three  or  four  other  desperate-looking 
ruffians,  all  handcuffed.  Around  them  were  some 
twenty  policemen  armed  to  the  teeth. 

When  Yokes  arrived,  the  prisoners  uttered  a  cry 
between  a  groan  and  a  yell  of  execration. 

"  I  promised  that  you  should  see  me,"  said  the  police 
chief,  "and  here  I  am.  Two  of  you  are  old  offenders 
and  have  hitherto  eluded  me.  Faith  !  you  were  soft 
to  be  taken  in  this  trap.  Sergeant  Macmahon,  take 
them  into  Limerick.  Good-bye,  boys  !  You've  seen 
as  you  wished,  Tom  Vokes." 

"Bedad,  we  have,"  replied  the  farrier:  "but  it's 
no  use  fighting  wid  fate.  Sure  we  all  know  you've  a 
charmed  life.  But  if  ever  I  get  out,  you'll  not  live 
long— if  I  have  to  buy  a  silver  bullet !" 

"You'd  better  buy  something  else,"  said  Yokes: 
"  for  it's  you  that  murdered  the  Widow  Casey  I" 

"Who  told  you  that  f 

"Faith  !  we  wont  talk  now,"  said  Yokes.  "Drive 
on     and  away  we  went. 

The  farrier  was  tried  at  the  following  Assizes,  con- 
victed on  clear  evidence,  admitted  his  guilt,  and  was 
hanged. 


9 


130 


THE  THUNDERSTORM. 


One  of  the  most  sociable,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of 
the  most  respectable  institutions  that  ever  existed,  was 
the  Limerick  Club  some  thirty  years  ago.  Here  the 
first  men  of  this  and  the  neighbouring  counties  were 
wont  to  assemble.  Here  the  wittiest  and  best  con- 
vivial ists  of  tho  province  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting 
and  displaying  their  powers.  Here  the  billiard  room 
(which  I  have  subsequently  often  seen  graced  by  the 
appearance  of  H.  E.  H.  the  Duke  of  Cambridge,  and 
his  popular  aide-de-camp,  Colonel  Macdonald)  enlivened 
the  tedious  monotony  of  many  a  wet  day.  Here,  the 
cook  was  celebrated  for  his  artistic  powers  ;  while,  to 
crown  all,  here  that  claret  which  was  once  reckoned 
amidst  the  charms  of  Ireland,  still  existed — that 
claret,  which  was  about  as  superior  to  the  wrorthy 
grocers  vin  ordinaire  of  the  present  day  as  pure 
ITalernian  to  the  washing  of  port  wine  bottles  :  for 
until  about  1830,  splendid  claret  still  existed  in  Ire- 
land. It  is  now  all  gone  ;  and  more's  the  pity. 
To  resume,  however. 

I  was  sitting  at  table,  in  the  snug  dining-room  ox 
the  Limerick  Club,  joined  in  my  meal  by  J.  V.,  a 
relative  of  my  own,  a  gentleman  more  than  whom 


THE  THUNDERSTORM. 


131 


none  were  respected  in  this  old  city,  of  which  he  had 
been  twice  the  mayor,  and  in  which  he  held  still 
several  high  situations.  We  had  finished  our  dinner, 
and  washed  it  down  with  a  couple  of  bottles  of  old 
sherry.  J.  V.  had  ordered  a  cooper  (six  bottles) 
of  claret,  for  the  two  of  ns.  The  fire  was  stirred  up  by 
the  busy  waiter,  the  red  curtains  were  drawn  closer, 
our  napkins  were  thrown  across  our  knees.  J.  V. 
seemed  inclined  for  a  comfortable  sitting  (which,  by 
the  bye,  was  no  joke,  as  the  worthy  ex-mayor  always 
assured  his  friends  that  in  company  with  a  good  fellow 
he  was  ready  to  wear  out  a  lignum  vitce  chair).  All 
but  a  single  pair  of  wax  candles  were  removed,  and 
everything  bespoke  a  coming  jollification,  when  Vokes 
suddenly  entered  the  room.  • 

"  I  have  come  to  say,  I  can't  go  over  to  Ennis  to- 
morrow ;  so  my  dear  Harry  you  must  frame  your 
plans  accordingly.  I  must  go  over  to  Tipperary — a 
riot  is  expected  there.  I  wish  you  could  come  with 
me,  Major,"  added  he,  turning  to  J.  Y.  (who,  by 
the  bye  was  a  major  in  the  militia  regiment  com- 
manded by  his  brother),  "  I  wish  we  had  you  over  there, 
for  I  know  that  you  are  in  the  commission  of  that 
county,  and  I  have  so  often  experienced  the  benefit  of 
your  services  as  a  magistrate,  that  I  should  like  to 
have  your  aid  on  this  occasion." 

"  I  should  be  happy  to  go  with  you ;  but  the  truth 
is  I've  a  few  friends  coming  to  dine  with  me  to- 
morrow." 

"  Oh,  then,  if  you  stay  away  for  that,  we  shall  never 
get  you  ;  for  your  hospitality  is  so  notorious  that  we 
all  know  you  never  sit  down  alone." 

9—2 


132    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  Atf  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  Well,  to  tell  truth,  I  do  like  to  see  my  friends 
around  me.  But  sit  down,  man  ;  don  t  you  hear  the 
rain  coming  down  ?  the  barometer  has  betokened  a 
coming  storm  all  day.  Here,  fill  your  glass  ;  there's 
plenty  more  claret  in  the  house." 

Vokes  sat  down,  filled  his  glass,  and  listened  eagerly 
to  the  rain,  which  now  beat  violently  against  the 
windows. 

"So,  I  hear,"  continued  J.  V. ,  "  that  you  rode  out 
to  Adare  with  a  single  policeman,  yesterday,  and  seized 
Mick  Rooney.  Now,  wasn't  this  foolhardy  ?  Faith, 
they'll  kill  you  some  day  or  other,  and  then  both 
the  county  and  your  family  will  mourn  over  your 
temerity." 

"Pooh,  pooh!"  rejoined  the  police-magistrate; 
"they'll  not  injure  me.  Depend  upon  it,  a  bold  front 
awes  these  fellows." 

"  By  George  !  I'm  not  sure  of  that.  No  one,  I 
think,  doubts  my  courage  ;  but  I  would  not  run  the 
risk  you  run  daily,  to  be  made  lord-lieutenant  of 
Ireland." 

Yokes  laughed.  But  at  this  moment  a  loud  clap  of 
thunder  was  heard,  and  a  flash  of  lightning  pierced 
through  the  interior  of  the  shutters.  Yokes  turned 
deadly  pale,  and  uttered  an  exclamation — an  exclama- 
tion of  terror. 

"  Why,  then,  it's  nothing  at  all ;  it's  only  a  thunder 
clap  and  a  flash  of  lightning.  It  must  not  interrupt 
our  evening." 

Yokes  turned  deadly  pale,  and  covered  his  face  with 
his  hands.    I  tried  in  vain  to  rally  him.    He  was  evi- 


THE  THUNDERSTORM. 


133 


dently  terror-stricken,  and  at  the  next  roll  of  heaven's 
artillery,  rose  and  bolted  out  of  the  room. 

We  were  fairly  puzzled  to  know  what  had  become 
of  him  ;  but  for  a  few  moments  we  continued  to  keep 
up  our  conversation,  expressing  our  deep  wonder  at 
the  bold  magistrate's  conduct.  J.  Y.  thought  that  he 
had  recklessly  rushed  out  through  the  storm  to  rejoin 
his  family,  some  of  the  females  of  whom  might  feel 
alarmed.  I  rather  thought  he  had  been  taken  ill ; 
but  evidently  did  not  wish  to  be  followed.  So  I 
waited  quietly  some  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  and  then, 
as  he  did  not  reappear,  I  slipped  out  and  asked  the 
waiter  about  the  Major. 

The  man  could  not  resist  smiling  as  he  replied — 

"  He  is  below,  sir." 

"Where  T 

"  I'll  show  you,  sir." 

This  I  thought  strange,  and,  somewhat  surprised,  I 
followed  the  servant  down  the  kitchen  steps.  To  my 
astonishment  he  walked  towards  a  back  cellar,  and 
throwing  open  the  door,  and  handing  me  the  candle, 
for  it  was  pitch  dark,  he  exclaimed,  "  He's  in  there, 
sir."  I  started  at  the  idea,  and  dreaded  some  misfor- 
tune had  happened.  I  waved  the  candle  aloft,  and 
beheld  T.  P.  Y.,  cowering  in  the  corner,  with  his  silk 
handkerchief  spread  over  his  head.  "  Good  heavens  !" 
thought  I,  "  he's  dead !"  But  the  next  moment 
my  fears  were  relieved ;  he  raised  the  kerchief,  and 
asked  iu  timid  tones — 

"  Is  it  over  P 

"  What?" 


134    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


u  The  thunder  and  lightning  T 

(C  Oh,  yes  !  But  what  is  the  matter  with  you,  my 
dear  sir]    Are  you  ill,  or  hurt  ?" 

"  Neither,  my  dear  fellow.  But  I've  the  greatest 
horror  of  the  war  of  the  elements." 

11  Surely,  you  are  not  alarmed  at  such  trifles  t  * 

"  By  the  soul  of  my  graudsire,  I  am.  I'd  rather 
meet  fifty  croppies  any  day  than  encounter  a  thunder- 
storm. Franklin  told  me  last  week  that  silk  was  a 
non-conductor,  so  I've  thrown  my  handkerchief  over 
my  head.  Egad  !  the  flash  was  so  vivid  it  almost 
curdled  my  blood  with  fear.  But  now  I'm  all  right 
again,  and  if  the  rain  ceases  I  think  I'll  ride  over  to 
Derk  to-night,  and  sleep  there,  and  have  a  chat  with 
the  hospitable  owner  of  that  mansion  before  I  go  into 
Tipperary  in  the  morning." 

"  But  you  forget  the  state  of  the  county  ;  recollect 
the  danger  you  run  if  you  are  recognised." 

"  Bah  !  they'll  not  dare  touch  me,  and  if  they  did,  I 
know  how  to  defend  myself.  Besides,  to  tell  you  the 
truth,  I  feel  that  this  fright  has  so  chilled  my  blood  I 
require  some  exercise  to  restore  my  circulation.  Yes, 
I'll  ride  over  to  Derk  at  once ;"  and,  in  spite  of  all  my 
entreaties,  my  arguments  respecting  the  danger,  and  a 
thousand  other  reasons  which  I  equally  urged,  away 
went  this  dare-devil  (for  really  I  can  call  him  by  no 
other  name),  to  gallop  across  a  disaffected  country  at 
ten  o'clock  at  night.  I  returned  to  my  friend,  and  re- 
lated to  him  all  the  facts  of  the  case. 

He  was,  like  myself,  puzzled  and  surprised.  Nor 
could  he  then,  nor  can  I  to  this  present  hour,  account 


THE  THUNDERSTORM. 


135 


for  this  strange  inconsistency  in  human  nature — the 
boldest  and  bravest  man,  a  stranger  to  every  ordinary 
fear,  flying  and  shouting  in  terror  at  the  sound  of  a 
roll  of  thunder  and  a  flash  of  lightning  ! 

Yet  such  was  the  case.  I  personally  bear  testi- 
mony to  the  fact — leaving  philosophers  better  versed 
than  myself  in  such  matters,  to  account  for  this  physi- 
ological anomaly. 


J  36 


THE  IDIOT  BOY. 


"  Petek,  my  boy,"  said  Vokes  one  evening,  as  we  were 
sitting  round  the  fire,  at  the  same  time  addressing  a 
near  relation, — "  Peter,  my  boy,  why  do  you  never 
hunt  ?  I  can  mount  you  right  well,  if  you  wish  to  go 
out  with  the  hounds  to-morrow. " 
"  I  never  hunt  now." 

"Not  hunt!  Why,  you  used  to  be  a  perfect 
Kim  rod  !" 

"  It  is  true ;  but  a  circumstance  which  occurred  to 
me  about  two  years  ago,  when  I  was  out  hunting  in 
a  distant  part  of  this  country,  has  so  thoroughly  dis- 
gusted me  with  the  sport,  that,  truth  to  tell,  I  don't 
think  I  shall  ever  go  out  again.'' 

"It  must  have  been  a  serious  cause.  Wan  it  an 
accident  to  yourself  ?" 

"Not  at  all.  I'll  relate  it  to  you;  though  really, 
even  now,  I  feel  horrified  as  I  narrate  it.  As  an  old 
English  sportsman,  I  came  over  here,  anxious  to  try 
hunting  in  the  sister  country. 

"  The  fact  is,  the  Leicestershire  man  who  has  never 
visited  the  sister  isle  has  little  idea  of  Irish  sport.  A 
hunter  worth  3001.  at  Melton  would  be  dear  in  Ireland  at 
501.  ;  that  is,  as  far  as  his  field  qualities  in  that  country 
go.    Instead  of  hedges,  ditches,  and  fences,  we  have 


THE  IDIOT  BOY. 


137 


earth-banks,  small  rivers,  and  stone  walls  to  encounter 
and  overcome ;  and  as  the  first  of  them  (which,  by  the 
bye,  are  miscalled  ditches)  are  often  some  eight  or  ten 
feet  high,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  nag  which 
bears  you  should  be  trained  to  jump  on  the  top  and  off 
again,  or  slide  down  on  the  other  side — by  no  means  an 
uncommon  occurrence — as  the  exigency  of  the  moment 
may  require.  Mounted  on  a  thoroughly  well-trained 
horse,  and  possessing  some  knowledge  of  the  country, 
I  cannot  help  awarding  the  sporting  prize  to  Ireland. 
There  is  a  joviality  and  sociality  at  cover-side  unknown 
on  this  side  of  the  water.  There  is  a  cheering  shout 
and  a  reckless  pursuit,  when  the  game  is  running,  un- 
equalled in  our  hunting  fields.  It  is  true  that  every 
now  and  then  you  are  joined  and  accompanied  by  a 
ragged,  barefooted  Paddy,  who  yells  as  he  runs  along 
beside  your  horse,  keeping  full  pace  with  you,  and  only 
pausing  while  he  stands  still  to  see  you  take  your 
*  lapeS  In  no  place  does  Irish  hospitality  shine  more 
brilliantly  than  in  the  hunting  field.  Should  a  check 
occur,  should  a  pause  arise  during  the  meridian  hours 
of  the  day,  the  sportsmen  gather  together,  and  at  once 
ride  up  uninvited  to  the  best  mansion  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, where  with  joy  they  are  received  and  wel- 
comed. An  impromptu  luncheon  is  instantly  served, 
and  a  plentiful  supply  of 'red  round,' washed  down 
by  every  imaginable  drinkable,  is  offered  to  the 
hungry  hunters.  The  highly-spiced  meat,  the  no  less 
exciting  liquor,  comes  pleasantly  before  the  sports- 
man ;  and  in  half  an  hour  he  again  starts — like  Antaeus, 
refreshed  from  sleep — stronger  and  more  energetic  than 
ever. 


138    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  Some  years  ago,  I  remember,  that  we  had  chopped 
one  fox  in  cover — a  second  we  had  lost,  after  a  run 
of  twenty  minutes,  and  vainly  endeavoured  to  find  a 
third ;  our  hounds  were  scattering  about,  a  blight  had 
come  over  the  scent,  we  drew  in  blank  our  best  cover ; 
all  without  success.  It  was  now  past  one  o'clock,  and 
there  seemed  no  chance  of  immediate  sport.  80  we 
at  once  drew  off  the  hounds,  and  rode  on  to  Bally - 

murphy,  the  seat  of  Mr.  T  ,  where,  as  we  expected, 

we  found  a  right  good  luncheon  laid  out — to  attack 
which  we  did  not  fail.  We  drew  the  corks,  and  the 
claret  quickly  broke  cover. 

"  T  was  one  of  those  fine  old  Irish  gentlemen 

who  appear  to  have  dwindled  away  ever  since  the  visit 
of  Father  Mathew  and  the  Encumbered  Estates  Bill 
— two  visitations  that  have  destroyed  the  wit  of  the 
lower  orders,  and  much  retrenched  the  substantial 
hospitality  of  the  upper  classes.  It  is  not  more  unna- 
tural to  put  a  pig  in  a  warm  bath  night  and  morning, 
than  to  call  upon  a  real  Irishman  to  drink  little  and 
to  owe  less. 

"  T  kept  open  house  ;  like  the  ancient  tourna- 
ments, it  was  1  free  to  all  comers.'  There  were  always 
a  hogshead  of  claret  and  a  puncheon  of  whisky  on  the 

run ;  beef,  mutton,  and  bread  (as  T  expressed  it) 

were  grown  on  the  estate.  There  were  about  a  dozen 
servants,  who  not  only  divided,  but  occasionally  alter- 
nated, the  household  duties  amongst  them ;  besides 
these,  there  was  the  old  nurse,  the  blind  piper,  and  the 
idiot  boy — three  characters  ever  attached  to  the  old 
Irish  mansions.    It  is  hinted  that  there  were  also  a 


THE  IDIOT  BOY. 


139 


fortune-teller  and  a  banshee  on  the  establish  men  t ;  but 
this  was  only  whispered. 

"  I  had  given  my  horse  to  the  idiot  boy,  to  lead 
round  to  the  stables  ;  for  the  lad,  though  soft  and 
silly,  perfectly  understood  what  he  was  about.  He 
could  run  messages,  convey  letters  ;  and,  by  doing  odd 
jobs  now  and  then,  assisted  to  support  a  poor  mother 
who  perfectly  adored  him.  To  this  boy,  then,  I  gave 
my  nag,  and  cheerfully  sat  down  to  enjoy  my  luncheon. 

"  As  is  usual  on  such  occasions,  much  chaffing,  much 
boasting  took  place ;  and,  in  some  way  or  other,  the 
young  lady  of  the  house  was  induced  to  enter  into  a 
sporting  discussion,  in  which  she  of  course  got  the 
worst ;  but,  determined  to  be  quits,  she,  on  the  first 
opportunity,  slily  left  the  room,  and  carried  out  her 
project.  The  argument  had  been  relative  to  the  great 
acumen  of  her  sporting  adversary,  who  declared  that 
he  was  beyond  the  power  of  being  deceived. 

"MissT  proceeded  to  the  entrance  of  the  kitchen, 

and  called  Micky,  the  idiot  boy,  out,  who  joyfully 
obeyed  her  summons.  She  now  hurriedly  directed 
him  to  take  a  soldier  (a  red  herring),  and  having 
fastened  it  to  a  string,  to  drag  it  on  after  him  at  full 
trail — over  ditch,  dyke,  and  wall — for  two  miles,  in  the 
direction  of  Itoby  McArthur's  farm.  Arrived,  how- 
ever, at  that  house,  he  was  carefully  to  hide  away ; 
for,  if  found  by  the  infuriated  hunter — thus  misled  by 
a  drag — he  would  surely  receive  severe  castigation. 
Micky  assured  his  young  mistress  that  he  had  done  the 
same  once  before,  and  would  do  it  right  well,  if 
they  only  gave  him  twenty  minutes'  start.  These 


140    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRTSH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


matters  were  arranged.  The  young  lady,  whose  absence 
had  not  been  noticed,  rejoined  her  father's  guests. 
Her  health  is  drunk  in  a  bumper. 

"  Luncheon  concluded,  our  horses  are  brought  round  ; 
we  mount,  and,  with  a  warm  farewell,  again  we  ride 
towards  the  cover.  We  are  lightly  talking  over  our 
our  late  hospitable  reception,  when,  suddenly,  the 
whimper  of  a  favourite  hound  is  heard — the  sound 
increases — a  general  cry,  and  we  dash  forward.  The 
scent  lies  strong,  and  away  we  go.  Now  Tom  Murphy' 
celebrated  horse  strikes  a  stone  wall ;  Tom  is  thrown ; 
every  one  is  sorry  for  him  5  but,  dead  or  alive,  we  have 
no  time  to  stop  and  assist  him.  Now  a  high  ditch 
rises  before  us  ;  only  half  the  hounds  climb  over  it ;  I 
clear  the  summit,  and  dash  off  on  the  other  side.  In 
doing  so,  I  jump  over  a  man  and  horse  lying  sprawl- 
ing at  the  foot ;  the  man  is  Jem  Trollope,  who  is 
trying  an  English  hunter  in  the  county  of  Limerick. 
But  never  mind — we  dash  onward ;  w^e  arrive  at  a 
farm-house  ;  the  hounds  jump  over  the  wall  with 
eager  yell,  and  rush  into  a  pigstye,  where  Reynard  has 
doubtless  sought  refuge.  But,  stay — what  piercing 
cry  is  that  1  Another,  and  another  !  Surely  those 
screams  are  human  !  '  Whip  off  the  hounds  !  Body 
and  soul  !  whip  'em  off!  Don't  you  hear  it  is  a 
human  scream  1 '  cries  the  master  of  the  hounds. 

"  In  a  moment  we  are  all  out  of  our  saddles,  when  an 
agonizing  shout  is  heard  in  the  opposite  direction,  and 
a  woman,  in  apparent  frenzy,  dashes  through  us,  and 
leaps  into  the  stye.  'Allanah!  Allanah!  It's  Micky 
— my  boy  Micky  !'  The  hounds  draw  forth  an  object. 
But  no  ! — it  is  too  horrible  to  dwell  upon — it  is  too 


THE  IDIOT  BOY. 


141 


horrible  to  describe.  Suffice  it  to  say,  the  wretched 
parent's  fears  were  too  fearfully  verified.  The  poor 
idiot  boy,  having  completed  his  task,  had  crept  into 
the  stye,  dragging  in  with  him  the  red  herring,  on 
which  he  had  begun  to  feast,  as  the  pack,  led  by  the 
strong  scent,  dashed  in  on  their  prey.  The  mangled 
remains,  still  palpitating,  were  those  of  poor  Mick}r. 
In  his  anger,  the  Squire  killed  one  of  his  very  best 
hounds,  whose  jaws  still  reeked  with  human  blood. 
Insensibility  sheltered  the  poor  mother  for  a  moment, 
who  never  lifted  up  her  head  again — was  never  known 
to  smile.  The  hounds  were  sent  off  to  Galway ;  and 
for  a  long  time  no  attempt  was  made  to  hunt  the 
county. 

"  The  circumstances  are  so  indelibly  engraved  on  my 
memory,  that  I  verily  believe,  if  I  found  any  one 
'  running  a  drag,'  I'd  then  and  there  sacrifice  him  to 
the  manes  of  the  poor  Idiot  Boy." 


142 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


The  powerful  novel  entitled  "The  Collegians" — the 
work  of  Gerald  Griffin — not  only  made  a  great  impres- 
sion at  the  time  when  it  was  written,  hut  has  since 
been  revived  by  its  having  been  dramatized  In- 
more  than  one  author,  and  in  its  every  shape  become 
a  popular  play — the  most  successful  edition  or  adap- 
tation being  that  of  Dion  Boucicault,  who,  with  Mr. 
Webster,  produced  it  and  played  in  it,  at  the  New 
Adelphi  Theatre,  above  300  nights  consecutively,  and 
thus  made  the  unhappy  story,  under  the  title  of  the 
"  Colleen  Bawn"  a  household  word  in  the  mouth  of 
every  Londoner.  This  unequalled  popularity  naturally 
introduced  it  throughout  the  provinces,  and  so  general 
was  its  production,  that  I  feel  certain  there  are  but 
few — very  few — who  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  this 
most  charming  and  successful  drama.  The  plot  of  the 
stage  version  is,  however,  very,  very  far  from  a  correct 
one,  as  regards  fact?.  The  poor  girl  whom  Boucicault 
styles  the  Colleen  Bawn  was  too  surely  destroyed,  and 
happily  the  hero  of  the  melodrama,  as  well  as  his 
servant,  were  brought  to  condign  punishment.  Nor 
can  the  correct  tale  be  even  gathered  from  the  original 
tale  by  Griffin.  The  work  in  question,  written  by  him, 
was  brought  out  within  ten  or  fifteen  years  after  the 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


143 


murder,  and  consequently  the  author  was  compelled 
ingeniously  to  alter  the  true  facts,  the  less  to  wound 
the  feelings  of  the  culprit's  family,  who  were  then  alive, 
bearing  a  high  position  in  the  city  and  county  of 
Limerick. 

Lest  some  who  still  bear  the  name  may  yet  survive, 
and  feel  annoyed  at  a  fresh  reiteration  of  facts — naturally 
distressing  to  their  feelings — I  will  pass  over  the  early 
facts  of  the  case,  and  maintain  a  strict  silence  touching 
those  motives  which  led  to  the  act  of  horror.  A  true 
revelation  of  them  might  involve  the  names  of  two 
noble  families,  who,  though  of  course  in  no  way  impli- 
cated in  the  crime,  or  cognizant  of  the  unhappy  circum- 
stances which  led  to  the  immolation  of  a  good  and 
most  innocent  girl,  might  yet  feel  wounded  in  seeing 
their  names  once  more  appear  connected  with  the  fear- 
ful story.  As,  however,  I  look  upon  the  capture  and 
punishment  of  the  criminals  as  one  of  Vokes's  most 
talented  acts,  I  quote  the  story — omitting  the  names 
(as  I  said  before)  of  those  who  might  feel  annoyed  at 
being  thus  once  more  dragged  forward,  and  only  com- 
mence the  sketch  where  the  general  editions  of  this 
tale  end,  namely,  some  six  weeks  after  the  murder  had 
been  committed. 

We  will  therefore  open  the  present  narrative  at  this 
period,  laying  the  scene  in  the  beautiful  and  picturesque 
village  of  Glynn,  where  the  unhappy  girl  had  resided 

ever  since  her  elopement  with  Mr.  S  ,  who  had 

now,  however,  almost  quite  forsaken  that  place — being 
deeply  engaged  (as  it  was  said)  in  endeavouring  to 
obtain  the  hand  of  one  of  the  noblest  and  most  virtuous 
maidens  that  graced  the  British  peerage.  Eily  O'Con- 
BOSTON  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 
CHESTNUT  HILL,  MASS. 


]  44  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

nor  had  quietly  quitted  S— ,  who  however  still  re- 
tained, I  believe,  his  cottage  at  Glynn,  and  left  his  confi- 
dential servant,  a  certain  Sullivan,  in  charge  of  it,  who, 
however,  only  remained  there  a  few  hours  and  abruptly 
left.  The  proprietor  of  the  finest  estate  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  the  master  of  all  the  soil  around,  was  the 
then  Mr.  Fitzgerald,  who  boasted  the  honour  of  bearing 
the  style  of  "  Knight  of  Glynn," — one  of  the  two  oldest 
titles  in  Ireland.  The  knight  was,  of  course,  a  magis- 
trate for  the  county,  much  respected  and  liked.  But  to 
return  to  my  sketch. 

The  servant  man,  in  that  sort  of  confidence  which  is 
ever  affected  to  spread  a  tale,  informed  the  gossips 

that  Eily  had  never  really  been  the  wife  of  Mr.  S  , 

but  that  lie  had  been  deeply  attached  to  her,  and  lest 
he  might  legally  marry  her,  his  family  had  insisted  on 
his  sending  her  off  to  America  ;  and  that  she  had  gone 
there  some  ten  days  before  with  one  hundred  pounds 
in  her  pocket.  The  man  graphically  described  the 
parting,  and  as  the  possibility  of  such  an  emigration 
had  before  been  hinted  at,  the  statement  was  readily 
received  and  believed. 

Some  six  weeks  later  the  inhabitants  of  a  few  cottages 
near  Glynn  were  horrified  by  seeing  a  female  body 
washed  on  shore  by  the  rough  waves  of  the  Shannon — 
which  is  here  above  a  mile  in  width.  To  recognise  it 
was  impossible,  and  its  identity  appeared  lost,  since  it 
was  a  mere  torso,  or  trunk  :  the  head  had  fallen  off 
and  all  the  limbs  were  gone — the  outer  dress  had  dis- 
appeared, and  the  present  remnant  of  humanity  was 
only  preserved  and  held  together  by  a  pair  of  strong 
though  old  brown  jean  stays.    The  trunk  was  at  once 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


US 


conveyed  to  the  dead-house  of  the  village,  in  order  that 
every  one  might  see  it — but  not  with  the  slightest  hope 
of  its  being  recognised.  Of  course  all  the  females  and 
the  male  idlers  in  Glynn  went  to  see  it.  All  looked 
at  it,  shook  their  heads,  and  turned  away  from  it  in 
horror.  Though,  truth  to  tell,  no  one  suspected  foul 
play,  the  general  belief  was  that  some  unfortunate 
female  had  fallen  overboard,  and  that  the  length  of 
time  she  had  lain  in  the  water  had  thus  destroyed  her 
form. 

Amongst  others  who  visited  the  dead-house  was  an 
old  crone  who  only  occasionally  visited  Glynn.  The 
instant  she  beheld  the  remains  she  exclaimed  "  God 
be  good  to  us  !    By  the  Virgin,  that  is  the  body  of 

Eily  !"    The  persons  around  her  jeered  at  her, 

and  reminded  her  tauntingly  that  the  young  girl  she 
mentioned  had  gone  to  America.  But  no  power  could 
shake  the  opinion  she  had  formed,  and  she  went 
straight  before  the  nearest  magistrate  (the  late  knight 
of  Glynn),  one  of  the  most  upright  men  that  ever 
lived,  and  reiterated  her  tale. 

"  Upon  what  grounds  do  you  base  your  assertion  ?" 

"  Sure  it's  no  assertion,  but  positive  truth." 

"  Why  do  you  say  so  ?  The  trunk  of  one  individual 
closely  resembles  that  of  another;  then  why  say  that 
this  is  the  body  of  Eily  T 

"I'll  tell  yer  honour.  About  two  months  ago  I 
got  a  piece  of  printed  chintz,  and  I'm  ready  to  swear 
that  the  likes  of  it  did  not  exist  in  Ireland.  It  was 
not  only  peculiar  in  its  pattern  but  in  its  colours." 

"  But  what  has  all  this  to  do  with  the  matter  J" 

"  Faix,  then,  I'm  coming  to  that.    May  the  saints 
10 


146  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

never  look  down  on  me,  but  the  stays  in  the  dead- 
house  are  patched  with  that  same  chintz  which  I  sold 
to  poor  Eily.  Your  honor,  I'll  take  my  oath  to  its 
being  the  truth." 

Now  this  was  a  trivial  circumstance ;  but  the 
knight  thought  it  worth  while  instantly  to  ride  into 
Limerick,  and  into  that  city  he  caused  the  old  woman 
to  be  marched  between  two  policemen,  then  and  there 
to  be  examined  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  police, 
Thomas  Phillips  Yokes,  who  cross-examined  the  wo- 
man in  every  way ;  but  she  was  firm  to  her  evidence. 
Lest,  however,  she  might  be  tampered  with,  the 
worthy  magistrate  caused  her  to  be  detained  and 
carefully  watched. 

Yokes,  as  I  said  before,  once  on  a  track,  sifted 
everything.  The  vessel  in  which  poor  Eily  had  been 
said  to  have  sailed,  had  now  returned.  No  such  indi- 
vidual had  gone  out  in  her. 

About  seven  weeks  before, and  about  the  last  time  she 
had  been  noticed,  she  had  been  seen  going  out  in  a  row- 
boat  with  Mr.  S  and  his  servant  Sullivan  ;  further 

inquiries  elicited  the  fact  that  cries  for  help  had  been 
heard  in  the  direction  of  a  neighbouring  island  ;  while 
one  party  distinctly  swore  that  he  saw  the  boat  return 
with  the  two  men  but  no  woman,  and  had  even  asked 
about  the  circumstance  from  Sullivan,  who  told  him 
in  reply,  that  he  and  his  master  had  taken  the  girl  on 
board  one  of  Spaight's  ships,  and  left  her.  Nothing 
could  be  more  plausible,  more  probable,  and  until  the 
discovery  had  been  made  that  she  had  never  been  on 
board  that  vessel,  the  fact  did  not  appear  suspicious. 

Under  these  circumstances,  warrants  against  Mr. 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


147 


S  and  his  servant  Sullivan  were  issued.    But  the 

first  was  not  to  be  found,  and  the  second  had  gone  to 
America.    Of  this  there  was  no  doubt. 

The  chief  magistrate  of  police  and  the  knight  tried 
every  means  to  apprehend  the  accused  gentleman,  but 
without  effect.  It  is  true  he  was  known  to  be  lurking 
in  the  county;  but  secreted  and  protected  by  his 
powerful  relations,  the  task  of  seizing  him  seemed  to 
be  impossible.  Several  well-planned  attempts  at  cap- 
ture signally  failed,  and  months  rolled  on  before  any- 
thing could  be  done. 

It  was  a  dark  evening  when  Fitzgerald,  the  knight, 
walked  into  the  residence  of  Major  Yokes,  and  in  pri- 
vate made  him  a  communication  on  the  subject ;  the 
latter  at  once  called  out  a  troop  of  dragoons,  and  took 
with  him  a  dozen  mounted  policemen.  At  their  head 
rode  the  two  magistrates. 

They  proceeded  at  a  brisk  trot  towards  the  residence 

of  Mr.  M  of  S — — ,  one  of  the  most  independent 

and  influential  men  in  the  county  of  Limerick.  As 
Major  Yokes  rode  through  the  park  he  spread  the 
dragoons  round  the  house,  and  communicated  his  di- 
rections to  the  officers. 

He  then  gave  a  loud  knock,  the  door  was  opened, 
and  the  functionaries  instantly  ran  into  the  dining- 
room.  There  some  ten  or  twelve  gentlemen  were  as- 
sembled, and  on  the  left  of  the  host  sat  Mr.  S  « 

In  a  moment  they  rose  and  would  have  fallen  on  their 

intruders.    S          already  prepared  for  flight,  when, 

drawing  out  a  double-barrelled  pistol,  the  chief  magis- 
trate pointed  it  at  the  head  of  the  accused.  Fitzgerald 
did  the  same.    "  There  is  no  use  in  violence,  gentle- 

10—2 


148  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE.  ^ 

men,"  said  the  former,  "  opposition  is  out  of  the  ques- 
tion.   I  arrest  Mr.  S  on  a  charge  of  murder,  and 

whoever  resists  the  capture  does  so  at  his  peril.  It  is 
no  use  looking  towards  the  door  or  the  window ;  the 
hall  is  filled  with  police,  the  whole  house  is  surrounded 
by  dragoons.  I  arrest  the  prisoner,  and  shall  instantly 
take  him  off  to  Limerick." 

"  And  do  you  think  this  conduct  gentlemanlike  I 
— to  enter  a  person's  house  and  drag  off  his  guest  V? 

"  When  that  house  becomes  the  refuge  of  a  mur- 
derer, courtesies  cease ;  there  is  no  use  in  bandying 
words.  Were  he  in  the  Pope's  dormitory  or  the 
sanctuary  of  Westminster,  I  would  equally  drag  him 
forth.  Come,  sir.  Sergeant  Reedy  put  on  the  hand- 
cuffs. In  these  cases  there  is  no  respect  to  persons. 
Captain,  have  the  goodness  to  let  your  troop  mount  at 
once ;  we  must  not  lose  a  moment  in  reaching  Limerick. 
Be  good  enough  to  order  your  men  to  load  their 
pistols  and  keep  close  to  the  policemen.  Gentlemen," 
said  he,  turning  to  the  murmuring  party  around  him, 
"  you  see  there  is  no  hope  of  a  rescue.  Let  the  law, 
I  beseech  you,  for  once  be  executed  without  the  shed- 
ding of  blood." 

By  this  time  all  was  ready,  and  in  two  hours  more  Mr. 

S  was  a  prisoner  in  the  old  gaol.    Many  of  his 

friends  had  followed  him  at  a  distance  ;  but  the  force 
which  Yokes's  foresight  had  caused  him  to  take  with 
him  was  too  imposing  to  be  lightly  attacked. 

A.  few  days  later  Mr.  S  was  brought  to  trial ; 

an  overwhelming  mass  of  evidence  brought  forward 
clearly  proved  him  to  have  been  the  actual  perpetra- 
tor, or  immediate  participator,  in  this  brutal  murder. 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN.  149 

As  we  shall  have  again  to  recur  to  these  details,  it 
is  unnecessary  to  give  them  here ;  suffice  it  to  say  that 
the  jury  unhesitatingly  pronounced  him  guilty. 

At  the  same  moment  a  post-chaise  and  four  galloped 
from  behind  the  court-house,  in  which  was  seated  a 
county  magistrate.  The  carriage  took  the  road  to 
Dublin  ;  simultaneously  another  similar  equipage 
started  from  Moriarty's  Hotel,  also  bound  for  the 
capital.  They  reached  it  in  the  morning.  The  one 
traveller  sought  out  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  the  other 
the  Lord  Chancellor.  Each  of  these  functionaries 
was  earnestly  appealed  to — u  the  honour  of  a  noble 
family,"  "  the  improbability  of  the  case,"  "  only  sup- 
ported by  circumstantial  evidence,"  and  a  thousand 
other  reasons  were  urged  for  extending  mercy  to  the 
prisoner.  But  the  prayer  of  each  was  firmly  refused, 
and  the  disappointed  petitioners  returned  to  their 
hotel,  where  they  wrote  for  further  influence.  Twenty- 
four  hours  later  the  carriage  of  a  most  popular  noble- 
man— bearing  an  Earl's  coronet — sought  the  high 
authorities  ;  but  no  audience  could  be  granted.  "  The 
law  must  take  its  course." 

In  the  meantime  the  prisoner  went  on  laughing  and 
joking,  apparently  amused  at  the  preposterous  idea 
of  his  having  committed  such  a  crime.  He  seemed 
wholly  unconscious  of  his  dreadful  situation,  and  in 
this  line  of  conduct  he  was,  in  all  probability,  sup- 
ported by  his  proud  relations,  as  well  as  by  a  thorough 
belief  that  he  would  receive  a  reprieve. 

On  the  morning  of  the  day  appointed  for  his  execu- 
tion, the  sub-Sheriff  and  the  Chaplain  visited  him,  and 
showed  him  there  was  "  no  hope."    He  must  die ! 


150  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  HUSH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

S  appeared  somewhat  terror-stricken,  and  begged 

to  be  left  for  a  few  moments  to  pray  alone.  This  was 
accorded  him.  But  on  the  return  of  the  functionaries 
they  found  his  eyes  starting  out  of  his  head,  and  his 
cheeks  flushed.  He  had  swallowed  laudanum  \  but  in 
such  a  large  quantity  as  to  stupify,  not  kill  him.  The 
usual  modes  were  exercised  to  empty  his  stomach,  and 
in  a  short  time  he  was  out  of  danger.  Who  gave  him 
this  poison  he  never  divulged. 

In  consideration  of  his  connexions,  he  was  allowed 
to  proceed  to  the  gallows  (about  a  mile  and  a-half  off) 
in  a  post-chaise  drawn  by  two  black  horses,  the 
property  of  Mr.  Denmeade,  an  undertaker.  These 
horses  were  usually  accustomed  to  draw  a  hearse ;  they 
were  extremely  quiet  and  gentle  creatures. 

The  crowd  was  immense,  and  as  S  stepped  into 

the  chaise  a  shout  of  execration  rent  the  air  ;  but 
Major  Vokes  had  so  guarded  the  vehicle  with  police 
and  troops,  that  there  was  no  fear  of  a  Lynch  law 
attack  on  the  part  of  the  people,  or  a  rescue  on  the 
part  of  his  friends. 

The  horses  walked  on  steadily  till  they  came  to  the 
foot  of  Baals  Bridge,  which  spans  a  fast- running 
branch  of  the  Shannon.  Here  they  came  to  a  dead 
halt,  and  neither  whip,  spur,  nor  stick  could  induce 
them  to  move  farther.  That  u  no  horse  will  draw  a 
murderer  across  a  running  stream"  is  a  strong  belief 
among  the  Irish  peasantry,  so  here  they  believed  that 
they  had  a  proof  vouchsafed  by  Providence,  winch 

none  could  doubt,  of  Mr.  S  \s  guilt  j  so  now  they 

would  have  torn  him  to  pieces  if  they  could  have  got 
at  him.    In  the  meanwhile  every  means  (not  omitting 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


151 


the  burning  brand,  often  used  to  start  horses  in  Ire- 
land) were  employed.  One  horse,  however,  kicked 
himself  out  of  his  traces,  while  the  other  deliberately 
lay  down  and  refused  to  move. 

Mr.  S          was  requested  to  descend  from  the 

carriage,  and  with  a  pale  face  and  faltering  step  he 
did  so.  But  on  the  whole  it  must  be  admitted  he 
walked  with  tolerable  calmness  to  the  place  of  exe- 
cution. 

Here  no  news  of  a  reprieve  met  him,  and  as  he 
ascended  the  fatal  ladder  he  seemed  to  have  resigned 
himself  to  his  fate.  He  looked  earnestly  into  the 
crowd  and  there  saw  many  of  his  family.  Their  pre- 
sence appeared  to  strengthen  his  resolution. 

The  chaplain  then  came  up,  and  besought  him  on  the 

eve  of  eternity  to  confess  the  truth.    S  ,  however, 

again  declared  his  innocence.  All  but  the  sub-sheriff 
(John  Cuthbert)  and  the  executioner  had  withdrawn, 
and  the  cap  was  drawn  over  his  face  ;  the  former 
stepped  forward,  and,  seizing  his  arm,  said,  "In 
another  minute  you  will  be  before  the  Judge  who  reads 
all  hearts.  Are  you  guilty  ?"  "  No  !"  replied  the 
other,  firmly,  "  I  die  innocent jV  and  with  this  false- 
hood on  his  lips  he  was  launched  into  eternity.  The 
world  will  probably  never  again  see  such  an  example 
of  family  pride  I 

For  several  months  after  the  execution  the  most 
fearful  denunciations  were  fulminated  against  those 
who  had  thus  (a3  they  said)  sacrificed  an  innocent  man. 
Major  Yokes  and  the  Knight  of  Glynn  were  tabooed 
by  half  the  respectable  society  in  Limerick.  But  the 
former  was  not  a  man  to  let  anything  drop,  and  while 


152  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


all  supposed  he  had  forgotten  the  case,  he  had  sent  out 
a  confidential  agent  to  New  York,  and  found  that 
Sullivan  (the  servant)  had  returned  from  thence  to 
England.  This  was  enough  for  him.  He  despatched 
four  of  his  sharpest  policemen  to  London,  and  in  a  few 
weeks  Sullivan  was  safely  lodged  in  Limerick  gaol. 
He  was  tried  on  the  same  evidence  as  his  master,  was 
found  guilty,  and  condemned  to  die. 

Now  Sullivan  was  a  Roman  Catholic,  and  very  pro- 
perly believed  that  his  best  chance  of  heavenly  for- 
giveness wa3  to  make  an  ample  earthly  confession  ; 
besides  which  he  had  no  pride  of  family ;  so  he  sent  for 
his  priest  and  the  sub-sheriff,  and  in  their  presence 
made  the  following  statement,  which  may  be  wrong  in 
some  minor  particulars,  as  I  have  not  heard  of,  or 
read  of,  this  terrible  murder  for  the  last  twenty  years. 
But  I  give  the  details  as  well  as  I  recollect  : — 

"  My  master  and  I,"  began  the  servant,  "  had  agreed 
for  several  days  to  put  Eily  out  of  the  way,  and  we 
only  waited  an  opportunity.  I  was  then  and  there  to 
get  100?.  and  a  free  passage  to  America.  Such  wa3 
our  bargain.  Well,  yer  revirence,  it  was  a  lovely 
evening  when  my  master  proposed  to  take  poor  Eily 
(for  he  never  called  her  his  wife)  out  on  the  river  for 
a  row.  Not  a  ripple  was  on  the  surface,  so  we  three 
started  together.  I  had  a  gun,  as  I  said,  to  kill  fowl, 
at  the  bottom  of  the  boat.  My  master  brought  his 
flute,  which  he  played  merrily  as  we  skimmed  along. 
There  is  a  little  island  about  four  miles  beyond  Glynn, 
and  here  the  master  landed,  desiring  me  to  take  Eily 
a  further  row.  To  this  we  assented,  and  away  we 
went.    When  we  were  about  200  yards  from  the 


THE  COLLEEN  BAWN. 


153 


island,  I  took  up  the  gun  and  began  talking  about 
death.  Oh,  yer  riverence,  if  ye'd  heard  her  speak  of  it — 
had  ye  heard  her  call  down  blessings  on  the  master  !  I 
raised  the  gun.  '  What's  that  you're  at ;  sure  you'd 
not  hurt  poor  Eily,  who  prays  for  you  every  night  f 
and  she  gave  me  the  look  of  an  angel.  The  fallen  one 
himself  could  not  have  harmed  her.  So  I  threw  down 
the  gun  and  rowed  back  to  the  master,  and  told  him  T 
couldn't,  I  wouldn't  do  it. 

ft  Upon  this  the  master  cursed  me,  and  called  me  a 
coward,  and  threatened  me  if  I  didn't  do  it ;  and  said 
he'd  do  it  himself,  only  he  could  not  go  to  Ameriky  as 
I  could,  and  he  offered  me  more  money  down,  and 
swore  he'd  purtect  me,  and  all  that.  Well,  at  last  I 
jumped  into  the  boat  again,  and  as  soon  as  I  got  a  few 
yards  out  I  up  with  the  gun,  and,  without  looking  at 
her,  gave  her  a  blow  on  the  head  with  the  gun-stock 
which  stunned  her ;  she  screamed,  and  the  master,  who 
was  watching  us  on  shore,  began  playing  the  flute  to 
drown  her  cries.  I  struck  her  two  or  three  times,  till 
I  thought  she  was  dead,  and  then  I  lifted  her  and 
threw  her  into  the  water.  I  then  took  up  the  oars 
again,  and  was  about  to  row  for  the  shore,  when  she 
arose  to  the  surface  and  grasped  the  edge  of  the  boat. 
By  this  time  I  felt  more  like  a  tiger  than  a  man,  and 
I  smashed  her  hands  all  to  pieces  with  the  oar.  She 
lefc  go  her  hold,  and  slowly  sank.  But  as  she  died  she 
gave  me  one  look — oh  !  such  a  look — it  haunts  me  at 
night — it  pursues  me  in  my  pleasures.  Even  when  I 
drink  to  drown  remembrance,  I  see  that  last  glance  of 
poor  Eily's.  The  master  sent  me  away  soon  after. 
But  I  could  not  travel  away  from  her  last  look — I 


154  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


even  fancy  I  see  it  now.  I  do  believe  it  smiles,  since 
I've  told  the  truth — the  whole  truth  \n  and  here  the 
wretch  made  a  most  solemn  asseveration  of  the  truth 
of  his  statement.  He  was  examined  and  re-examined. 
He  never  wavered  in  a  single  particular.  On  the  way 
to  the  gallows,  he  turned  to  the  officer  who  guarded 
him,  and  declared  that  since  he  had  confessed  Eily 
had  appeared  to  him  no  more,  and  on  this  fact  he  built 
his  hope  of  being  forgiven. 

On  the  scaffold  he  acknowledged  his  guilt,  and  con- 
firmed all  he  had  previously  stated.  At  the  last 
moment  the  priest  said  to  him — "  You  are  about  to 

enter  into  eternity.    Are  you  guilty  ]    Did  Mr.  S  

plan  and  assist  you  in  the  crime  1" 

"As  I  hope  to  be  saved,  he  did  F  and  the  next 
moment  the  culprit  had  ceased  to  lire. 

I  have  here  endeavoured  to  sketch  as  correctly  as  I 
could  the  facts  of  a  case  which  will  ever  be  remembered 
by  the  inhabitants  of  Munster.  Many  versions  have 
been  put  forth,  but  I  feel  confident  that  mine  is  an 
exact  and  unbiassed  statement. 

All  the  parties  interested  and  engaged  in  this  fearful 
affair  have,  I  believe,  passed  away.  "  May  they  rest  in 
peace  T 


155 


RECEIVING-  RENTS. 


Vokes  and  myself  were  dining  at  the  hotel  in  Tippe- 

rary,  when  we  were  joined  by  Mr.  H  ,  one  of  the 

most  intelligent  members  of  the  legal  profession  in 
Ireland,  who,  besides  his  other  duties,  performed  those 
of  several  first-rate  agencies  in  Kildare,  Queen's 
County,  and  Tipperary.  The  addition  of  this  pleasant 
companion  to  our  company  gave  great  satisfaction  to 
my  relative ;  and,  indeed,  I  shared  the  feeling,  when, 
warmed  by  a  glass  or  two  of  punch,  our  friend  poured 
forth  a  string  of  most  amusing  anecdotes.  After  an 
hour  thus  agreeably  employed,  the  magistrate  turned 
round,  and  abruptly  asked  him — 

u  And  what  brings  you  here  ?" 

"  I  am  come  to  collect  the  rents  on  the  Kilbarry 
estate,  for  which  I  am  the  agent." 

"  Are  you  going  to  try  the  experiment  when  the 
country  is  in  such  a  disturbed  state  ?  Sure,  your  life 
is  not  worth  a  day's  purchase  if  you  do." 

"  Oh,  this  is  the  third  time  I've  done  so,  and  here 
I  am,  safe  and  sound.  On  the  first  occasion,  it  is  true; 
I  ran  a  considerable  risk  ;  but  I've  now  no  fear." 

"  How  is  that  f 

"  Oh,  it's  a  long  story,  though   a  curious  one, 


156    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN*  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


strangely  illustrative  of  the  Tipperary  peasantry ; 
but— " 

"  Oh,  let's  have  it  T 

"Pray  do,"  I  chimed  in. 

"Well,  I'll  tell  it  you,  for  I  think  I  can  recollect  all 
the  circumstances. 

"  I  was  barely  three-and-twenty  years  of  age,  and 
wholly  unacquainted  with  this  county,  when  I  was 
nominated  agent  to  the  Kilbarry  estate,  a  small  but 
snug  property,  worth  about  1000/.  or  1200£  a  year. 
When  the  first  rent  became  due,  I  came  down  to 
Clonmel,  accompanied  by  an  assistant,  and  at  once 
demanded  the  sums  in  arrear.  I  was  coolly  but 
determinedly  met  by  a  general  refusal  from  every  one 
of  the  tenants.  It  appears  the  lands  had  been  lately 
sold ;  the  farmers  assured  me  that  they  looked  upon 
the  sale  as  illegal,  and  one  and  all  declared  their  con- 
sequent determination  not  to  pay  one  farthing.  They 
also  added  this  comforting  assurance,  namely,  that 
though  they  did  not  wish  to  be  uncivil,  the  sooner 
I  returned  to  Dublin  the  sooner  I  should  be  in  safety. 
My  assistant,  on  this  hint,  at  once  tied,  and  on  my 
appealing  to  a  friend  in  the  locality,  he  strongly 
advised  me  to  do  the  same.  Nothing  could  be  done 
on  the  spot,  that  was  clear.  The  man  I  had  taken 
with  me  would  alarm  others  ;  indeed,  I  could  better 
serve  my  cause  in  Dublin  than  in  Tipperary  ;  by  these 
and  other  arguments,  I  was  persuaded  to  return  to  the 
Irish  metropolis.  Thence,  a  short  correspondence 
ensued  with,  the  defaulters,  but  not  one  wavered. 
They  again  positively  refused  to  pay,  and  dared  me  to 
enforce  my  claim.    In  the  meantime,  I  found  myself 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


157 


(what  is  called)  fixed  for  the  whole  amount,  and  as  I 
could  ill  afford  the  loss,  I  determined,  whether  it 
cost  me  my  life  or  not,  to  make  one  more  personal 
effort.  Having  thus  made  up  my  mind,  I  sought 
out  Charles  Macklin,  a  barrister,  and  a  schoolfellow  of 
mine.  I  knew  he  would  do  anything  to  serve  me. 
After  stating  my  case  to  him  he  for  a  few  moments 
remained  in  silent  doubt,  and  seemed  mentally  to 
canvass  some  idea.  At  length  he  turned  round  and 
abruptly  explained,  *  Yes,  you  shall  have  it ;  it  is  the 
only  way.' 

"  I  looked  puzzled. 

"  '  Yes,  I'll  give  you  a  letter  to  the  only  man  in  the 
whole  county  who  can  assist  you.  But  if  I  give  you 
this  introduction,  you  had  better  be  entirely  guided  by 
his  advice.' 

"  '  I  will,'  said  I;  'but  is  your  friend  a  magis- 
trate V 

" '  By  no  means,'  said  Macklin,  smiling.  1 1  am 
about  to  present  you  to  Bill  Quiglan.' 

"  f  What ! '  cried  I,  starting  up  with  astonishment, 
( Bill  Quiglan,  the  supposed  murderer,  the  most 
desperate  man  in  the  county  1 ' 

" '  The  same,'  replied  he,  coolly  sitting  down  and 
writing  a  short  note,  which  he  carefully  sealed.  *  The 
same  ;  if  he  cannot  assist  you,  none  can.  Keep,  how- 
ever, your  own  counsel,  and  see  him,  if  possible,  before 
it  is  known  that  you  are  in  the  county.  Good  luck  to 
you — good  bye.'  He  handed  me  the  letter,  and  I  took 
my  leave. 

"  I  went  down  by  the  then  night  mail,  and,  keeping 
close,  ,made  myself  acquainted  with  the  locality  where 


158    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


my  redoubted  friend  resided.    I  ordered  a  covered  car 

and  as  the  evening  shades  closed  in,  I  started. 

"  In  the  middle  of  a  wild  bog  stood  the  cottage  I 
sought — a  more  exposed,  a  more  desolate  spot  I  never 
beheld.  But  I  boldly  knocked  at  the  door,  and,  lifting 
the  latch,  I  entered.  The  whole  dwelling  consisted 
of  one  room.  Over  the  fireplace  a  well-kept  long  duck- 
gun  was  suspended,  and  a  brace  of  pistols  served  as  a 
further  ornament  between  the  bed  and  the  chimney 
corner  ;  a  pitchfork  was  thrown  carelessly  against  the 
wall,  and  everything  denoted  warlike  defence  in  case 
of  attack.  At  the  same  time,  although  the  habitation 
consisted  of  a  single  chamber,  there  was  an  air  of  neat- 
ness and  comfort  about  it,  far  beyond  the  average  of 
luxury  displayed  by  Irish  cabins  in  general. 

"  Bill,  who  was  a  tall  powerful  man,  decently  dressed, 
and  possessed  of  a  line  countenance,  rose  on  my  entrance* 
put  down  his  dudeen,  and  perceiving  me  to  be  a  gen- 
tleman, bowed  to  me  respectfully.  He  showed  little  or 
no  symptoms  of  surprise — though  evidently  ill  pleased 
with  the  visit. 

"  1  Good  evening  Mr.  Quiglan.' 

"  1  Sure  I'm  generally  called  Bill  Quiglan — at  your 
service.    Can  I  be  of  any  use  to  you,  sir  1 ' 

" 1  This  will  explain,'  said  I,  handing  him  my  letter 
of  introduction.  1  It  is  from  Mr.  Charles  Macklin,  now 
in  Dublin.' 

" '  Then,  sir,'  said  he,  hastily  banishing  the  frown 
from  his  brow,  1  then  sir,  you  are  welcome  a  thousand 
times.    I  trust  his  honor  is  well  1 ' 

"  ■  Quite  well — quite  well.  But  you  had  better  read 
his  communication.' 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


159 


"Til  do  that  same.'  He  opened  the  letter  and 
perused  it  with  great  attention,  then  suddenly  turning 
round,  he  exclaimed  :  "  And  now,  sir,  what  can  I  do 
for  you  ? 1 

"  ' 1  am  come  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  pay- 
ment of  the  rents  on  the  Kilbarry  estate.  Mr.  Macklin 
thought  you  could  assist  me  ?' 

"  1  And  so  I  can.' 

"  '  Well,  what  had  I  best  do  ?' 

"  'Arrest  Tim  Macarthy,  the  chief  tenant ! ' 

"  'Macarthy  ?  He  has  several  labourers  ;  he  is  well 
lodged,  and  I  fear  I  can  find  no  bailiff  to  undertake  the 
job.    Why  he  is  the  most  lawless  fellow  of  the  lot.' 

" ' That's  true  for  you  :  not  a  soul  would  dare  to  try 
it.    That's  the  man — he  should  be  seized.' 

"  \  Then  what  am  I  to  do  !' 

"  '  Charles  Macklin  is  your  friend  :  it  is  sufficient — 
I'll  seize  him  myself.' 

"  1  What  assistance  will  you  require  V 

" 1  None :  they'd  be  bold  men,  and  bad  ones  too,  who'd 
offer  resistance  to  Bill  Quiglan,  of  Ballybeg.  Sure 
you  have  heard  of  me  before — have  you  not — or  else 
why  do  you  thus  come  to  meV 

" 1  Well,  Bill,  it  is  true  I  have  heard,'  and  here  I 
began  to  speak  in  a  somewhat  nervous  manner,  1 1 
have  heard  that  some  years  ago  you  had  the  misfortune 
to — that  is — ' 

"  *  Out  with  it — don't  stammer  or  mince  the  matter. 
You've  heard  I  murdered  Tim  Dooler — sure  it's  no 
secret — all  the  county  rang  with  it — and  I  must  admit 
that  the  jury  brought  in  a  fair  verdict  when  they  pro- 
nounced me  guilty.    It's  well  for  them  I  considered  it 


1G0    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE  . 


so,  or  some  of  them  would  not  be  riding  about  their 
farms  at  this  moment.  I  had  no  right,  yen  see,  to 
punish  them  for  a  just  verdict.' 

* 1  But  if  you  were  convicted  how  did  you  get  off  1 1 

"  c  Ah,  then,  you  might  have  guessed  it  from  the  way 
in  which  I  treat  Counsellor  Macklin's  note.  Didn't 
he  find  a  flaw  in  the  indictment,  or  some  such  thing, 
and  by  his  exertions  didn't  he  get  me  off  clear  and 
clean — so  there  was  an  end  of  that  affair.' 

"  My  looks  plainly  expressed  my  horror  and  astonish- 
ment.   This  he  at  once  perceived. 

" 1  You  now  know  why  I'd  lay  down  my  life  for 
Charley  Macklin — may  Providence  bless  him  !  Faith, 
I'll  be  true  to  him  as  steel.  And  as  you  are  his  friend, 
I'll  go  through  fire  and  water  to  serve  him  ;  so  you 
needn't  fear  me.  Though,  faith,  I  believe  you  are 
about  the  only  man  in  the  county  that  does  not.  Sure, 
I'll  seize  him,  and  lodge  him  in  Cashel  gaol.' 

" 1  I'm  much  obliged  to  you  ;  but  even  that  won't  do. 
He  must  appear  in  Dublin,  and  I  fear  it  will  be  im- 
possible to  convey  him  there.' 

" 1  That's  true  for  you  ;  they'd  never  allow  it.  Be- 
dad  !  the  boys  are  true  to  the  cause.  It's  not  a  stranger 
they'd  allow  to  carry  off  one  of  themselves.  Your  only 
way  will  be  to  apply  for  a  large  detachment  of  soldiers 
and  police,  and  march  him  off.  Faith,  they'll  have  a 
rough  walk  of  it ;  and  it's  not  so  sure  they'll  get  him 
to  Dublin  after  all.' 

"'Bight,  Quiglan  ;  but  cannot  you  suggest  any 
other  mode  I1 

"  1  Hould  your  tongue  for  a  minute,  and  let  me 
tliiuk.' 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


161 


<;He  pondered  while  taking  three  or  four  whiffs 
of  his  pipe,  then  suddenly  turning  round,  he  asked 
me — 

" '  Do  you  know  the  contents  of  the  note  you  brought 
me!' 

"'Not  V 

"  '  Then  I'll  tell  it  to  you.  He  merely  says '  H  >  the 

bearer  of  this  letter,  is  my  best  friend ;  treat  him  as 
you  would  treat  myself,  and  serve  him  if  you  can.' 

" c  Upon  my  honour,  I'm  much  obliged  to  him.' 

"'And  you  know,'  continued  '  Big  Bill,'  'that 
the  counsellor  saved  my  life,  and  therefore  you  must 
be  aware  I'd  risk  that  life  ten  thousand  times  over 
to  please  him.  He  tells  me  to  serve  you  as  if  you 
were  himsel£  Faith,  then,  111  not  shrink  from  it, 
though  the  task  is  difficult.  I'll  seize  him,  and  convey 
him  to  Dublin  to-morrow  night.' 

"  'A  thousand  thanks.' 

"  f  That  will  do.  You  will,  of  course,  pay  all  expenses, 
and  give  me  101.  for  my  trouble  V 
"'Willingly.' 

" '  Well,  then,  give  me  the  writ/ 
u  I  produced  several. 

"'This  one  will  do,'  said  Bill,  selecting  the  writ 
against  Macarthy ;  '  and  now  be  oil*  and  if  any  one 
stops  you,  tell  him  you  are  a  friend  of  Bill  Quiglan. 
Don't  be  late  in  Cashel  ;  I'll  be  there  before  five. 
Good  night ;'  and  he  closed  his  door  as  I  drove  off  to 
Tipperary,  wondering  whether  my  new  friend  could 
really  carry  out  his  promises. 

"  I  arrived  on  the  next  evening,  about  live  o'clock,  at 
the  inn  in  Cashel,  and  learnt  that  a  person  had  called 
11 


162    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  A>r  IRISH  TOLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


and  ordered  a  car  for  himself  and  a  friend  to  proceed 

to  Clonmel  at  seven  o'clock. 

"  1  Do  you  know  who  the  person  was  V 
"After  a  moment's  hesitation,  he  replied,  'It  was 
Bill  Quiglan,  sir ;  he  has  brought  a  prisoner,  whom  he 
wishes  to  convey  to  Clonmel,  where  the  assizes  are 
going  forward.' 

"I  felt  surprised,  and  almost  feared  treachery  on 
hearing  that  he  had  thus  publicly  proclaimed  our  in- 
tended departure ;  but  as  it  was  now  too  late  to  retrace 
my  steps,  I  made  the  best  of  it,  and  Bat  down  to  a 
hurried  dinner.  This  was  scarcely  over  when  my  bold 
companion  was  announced.  He  was  now  dressed  most 
respectably,  and  assumed  an  air  of  gentility  and  confi- 
dence whioh  I  had  not  perceived  on  the  previous 
evening. 

" [  Well,  sir,  when  you  are  done,  we  will,  if  you  please, 
at  once  start.  I  wish  to  get  into  Clonmel  as  early  as 
possible,'  and  he  gave  me  a  knowing  wink  unper- 
ceived  by  the  waiter. 

"  I  was  going  to  say,  1  Quiglan  

" 1  Nabocklish.  Run,  Pat,  and  hurry  the  car.  Sure 
we're  to  go  round  by  the  gaol  to  take  Macarthy  up.' 

a  1  Well,'  thought  1, 1  this  man  is  the  most  imprudent 
fellow  I  ever  met  with,'  and  I  loudly  expressed  the 
idea  as  the  waiter  closed  the  door. 

"  1  Whist  1  these  walls  have  ears.' 

■ 1  Yes ;  but  you  don't  understand.    It's  not  £ 

" 1  Hisht !  faith,  do  you  take  me  for  an  omadawn. 
All's  right ;  you'll  see  presently ;'  and  without  allow- 
ing me  again  to  speak,  he  descended  with  me,  and 
jumped  on  the  car.    Within  a  quarter  of  an  hour  we 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


163 


were  clear  of  the  town,  with  Macarthy  seated  beside 
me  well  secured. 

"  In  silent  astonishment  we  drove  along  the  road, 
with  which  I  was  thoroughly  acquainted,  and  could 
not  help  fancying  that  I  was  betrayed ;  indeed,  I  had 
begun  mentally  to  reproach  my  folly  in  having  thus 
trusted  myself  in  the  power  of  such  a  villain,  when 
suddenly  Bill  turned  round  and  peremptorily  ordered 
the  car-driver  to  turn  up  a  bye  road. 

" 1  Sure  that's  not  the  way  to  Clonmel  t 

"  e  I  know  that  J  but  turn  up  

"  (  Faith,  thin,  I'll  do  no  such  thing.  I  was  hired  to 
go  to  Clonmel,  and  to  Clonmel  I'll  go.' 

"  '  You  know  me,  Thady  Ryan ;  you  well  know  that 
I  value  a  man's  life  just  as  much  as  I  do  a  dog's.  Do 
you  see  this — and  here  he  produced  a  large  horse-pistol, 
which  he  presented  at  the  man's  head.  By  the  heavens 
above  me  .' 

" '  Ah,  then,  Bill,  sure  you  wouldn't  murder  me  1 
You  know  I'm  sworn  to  go  to  Clonmel.' 

" '  Do  so,  then.  Jump  down  ;  I'll  drive.  You  may 
now  walk  on  and  tell  the  boys ;  but,  as  I  said  before, 
may  the  curse  of  Cromwell  light  on  me  but  I'll  blow 
your  brains  out  if  you  mount  a  horse,  or  hasten  beyond 
a  walk,  to  inform  your  friends  that  we've  changed  our 
destination.' 

"The  man  sprang  down,  and  scanned  Bill  from  head 
to  foot  with  a  savage  glance,  evidently  weighing  the 
chances  of  an  encounter.  But  Quiglan's  looks  were  now 
most  strangely  altered ;  he  no  longer  wore  a  bland  smile. 
His  brow  was  contracted,  his  teeth  fixed  firmly,  and  as 
he  followed  the  movements  of  the  other  ruffian,  con- 

11—2 


lGi    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IR1SII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


tinuing  to  keep  the  muzzle  of  the  pistol  pointed  at  him, 
I  never  beheld  so  fierce  an  object  in  the  course  of  my 
life.  The  hesitation  lasted  less  than  a  minute ;  in  that 
period  the  driver  had  slunk  off,  conscious  of  his  danger. 
Bill  had  seized  the  reins,  and  was  making  the  horse 
gallop  in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  in  which  we 
had  originally  started. 

"  We  hastened  on,  in  this  way,  for  several  miles ; 
no  person  was  visible.  The  cross  road  we  were  follow- 
ing was  evidently  unfrequented.  At  length  I  per- 
ceived a  horseman  in  the  distance,  and  mentioned  the 
circumstance  to  Bill,  who  instantlj7  handing  me  his 
pistol,  desired  me  to  point  it  at  the  head  of  the 
prisoner,  and  instantly  to  blow  out  his  brains  if  he 
endeavoured  to  escape.  I  complied  with  the  first  part 
of  his  request ;  I  much  doubt,  even  in  case  of  need, 
whether  I  should  have  followed  the  second  portion  of 
his  directions. 

"Presently  the  rider  came  up  with  us,  his  horse 
evidently  much  distressed  by  the  pace  he  had  been 
compelled  to  keep  up.  The  man  held  a  bundle  in  his 
hands,  and  as  he  approached  us,  roared  out  to  us  to 
stop. 

"  6  Not  a  bit  of  it,'  "  growled  Bill. 

"  Sure  haven't  I  brought  some  clothes  for  Mr. 
Macarthy,  and  I  only  want  you  to  stop  while  I  deliver 
them.' 

"  'Not  a  taste  of  it,  Tim  Grady  ;  and  what's  more, 
if  you  look  at  my  friend  on  the  car,  you'll  see  he  has 
the  very  pistol  in  his  hand  which  sent  your  friend 
and  namesake  Tim  Doolan  into  another  world,  and 
I've  its  own  foster  brother  inside  my  waistcoat ;  and 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


165 


what's  more,  if  you  attempt  to  spake  to  the  prisoner, 
I'll  make  short  work  of  it.  You  know  Bill  Quiglan 
well,  and  you  know  he  never  lies ;  so  be  off  wid  you, 
or,  by  my  soul,  I  may  be  tempted  to  try  the  little 
argument  I  have  ready  cocked  in  my  breast.  Be  off 
wid  ye  ;  do  ye  hear  V 

"  The  man  looked  at  him,  then  muttering  something 
in  Irish,  turned  back. 

"'By  dad,  Tim,  it's  little  I  care  for  your  threats. 
I'll  come  back,  and  you  won't  even  dare  to  repeat  the 
words  you  now  utter,  much  more  attack  me.  And 
now,  sir,  we  must  drive  for  our  lives/ 

"  ?  Couldn't  you  stop  and  ease  my  wrists  a  little  ; 
they  hurt  me  very  much,'  chimed  in  the  prisoner. 

" 1  Then  by  the  vestments  I  wont,  so  you  need  try 
no  tricks  on  me.  Sure,  don't  you  well  know  there  are 
ten  or  twelve  of  the  boys  coming  after  us,  and  Tim 
only  outstripped  them  by  virtue  of  his  horse's  speed. 
Faith,  I  fancy  I  can  almost  hear  them  now.'  We 
went  on  at  full  speed,  and  a  mile  further  on,  turned 
into  an  open  and  broad  road. 

u  '  We're  better  off  now,'  said  Bill ;  1  but  we're  not 
safe  yet.'  Presently  the  noise  of  wheels  was  heard, 
and  our  bold  driver  shouted,  '  It's  all  right  now,'  and 
stopped  the  car,  and  having  taken  back  the  pistol  from 
me,  began  to  help  the  prisoner  down.  At  this  moment 
the  Kilkenny  mail,  en  route  for  Dublin,  came  up,  to 
intercept  which,  had  evidently  been  Bill's  object. 

"  \  Stop  !  stop  !'  cried  he,  and  having  spoken  to  the 
guard,  Macarthy  and  myself  were  soon  comfortably 
placed  inside,  while  Bill  followed  in  the  car  about  two 
miles  further  on  the  road,  when,  the  coach  delaying  for  a 


166    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IBISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

few  minutes  at  a  rustic  tavern,  he  commended  hi* 
vehicle  to  the  care  of  the  innkeeper,  promising  to 
return  for  it  in  a  few  days,  and  jumped  into  the  mail 
with  us,  which  fortunately  had  only  our  three  selves 
inside  it. 

"  Bill  was  rather  an  amusing  companion,  and  chatted 
away  in  high  spirits,  and  even  Macarthy,  seeing  there 
was  no  use  in  being  sulky,  joined  in  our  conversation, 
and  more  than  once  shared  a  glas3,  in  perfect  good 
humour  with  his  captor.  This  in  England  would 
appear  strange,  but  such  conduct  in  Ireland  is  by  no 
means  uncommon. 

"  Early  in  the  morning  we  arrived  in  Dublin,  and  my 
friend  was  duly  lodged  in  prison.  After  a  few  days, 
seeing  there  was  no  hope,  he  offered  the  amount  of  his 
overdue  rent  But  by  Bills  advice,  I  refused  it,  and 
insisted  on  his  appearing  in  Court  unless  all  the  others 
paid  likewise.  After  a  short  hesitation  he  assented  to 
this,  and  handed  me  the  full  amount  of  every  claim,  and 
succeeded  in  getting  his  discharge.  I  joyfully  handed 
Bill  double  the  sum  I  had  promised  him,  and  from 
that  moment  to  this,  though  I  have  frequently  visited 
the  estate,  and  collected  the  rents  of  Kilbarry,  I  have 
never  been  annoyed  by  incivility  or  default.  While 
as  to  Bill,  I  rather  thin  his  reckless  boldness  on 
this  occasion  has  made  him  more  popular  in  the  county 
than  ever.  Of  course  I've  changed  some  of  the  names ; 
but  to  the  truth  of  the  circumstances  I  have  narrated, 
I  pledge  myself.' 

"  *  By  George,  you  are  a  plucky  fellow/  exclaimed 
Vokes,  delighted  with  the  anecdote.  i  I  only  wish 
you  were  a  magistrate  in  our  county.' 


RECEIVING  RENTS. 


167 


" 6  What,  to  be  shot  at  every  night  1 ' 
" '  Ah,  now  you  are  exaggerating.    It's  not  so  bad 
as  that.' 

" 6  Do  you  mean  to  say  you  were  never  fired  at  V 

" i  Oh,  as  to  that,  it  does  sometimes  happen  :  I  was 
shot  at  last  night  within  a  mile  of  my  own  house. 
By  the  bye,  that  reminds  me  I  must  buy  a  new  hat/ 
and  he  displayed  his  old  one  with  a  bullet-hole  through 
it.  I  stared  with  astonishment,  for  my  friend  had 
actually  supped  with  me  immediately  after  the  event, 
and  never  alluded  to  it. 

"As  I  had  had  no  startling  hint  respecting  the 
danger  I  had  myself  personally  run,  I  proposed  to  take 
a  stroll,  and  then  to  return  to  Limerick.    We  did  so. 

Mr.  H  slept  at  Tipperary,  and  the  next  day  visited 

Bill,  and  Tim,  and  Macarthy,  and  the  rest  of  his  now 
friendly  tenants. 

"  Certainly  Ireland  is  a  strange  country." 


ICS 


THE  CHARMED  BULLETS. 


As  I  came  up  in  the  steamboat  from  Kilkee  with  my 
daring  friend  Vokes,  I  could  not  help  blaming  him,  in 
no  measured  terms,  for  the  reckless  manner  in  which 
he  was  in  the  habit  of  running  into  every  danger,  and 
took  this  opportunity  of  remonstrating  with  him,  as  I 
had  only  just  heard  that  two  days  before  he  had  rode 
unarmed,  and  unsupported,  save  by  a  single  orderly,  into 
the  middle  of  a  faction  fight,  and  seized  a  notorious  cha- 
racter, although  he  full  well  knew  that  there  were  hun- 
dreds of  persons  engaged  in  that  struggle  who  had  pri- 
vately and  solemnly  sworn  to  take  his  life  whenever  an 
opportunity  offered.  And  where  indeed  could  such  an 
occasion  so  appositely  present  itself  as  in  the  midst  of 
a  violent  tumult,  where  no  one  could  in  particular  be 
identified  as  committing  a  murder,  since  all  around 
was  noise,  riot,  and  bloodshed  ?  How  foolhardy,  then, 
must  be  the  man  who  thus,  as  it  were,  purposely  and 
knowingly  braved  a  fearful  doom. 

"  Giggy  mi  goto  /" — (a  favourite  term  of  derision  used 
by  my  friend) — "  Giggy  mi  gow  !  Sure  aint  I  here  safe 
and  unhurt,  and  why  are  you  thus  mourning  and 
croning  over  me  as  if  I  was  a  corpse  at  your  feet  1 
Faith,  your  dull  look  and  your  lachrymose  tone  are 
both  too  melancholy  even  for  a  well-conducted  wake." 


THE  CHARMED  BULLETS. 


169 


"  But  if  you  care  so  little  about  your  own  life,  recol- 
lect you  have  a  wife  and  children." 

u  Bother,  Master  Hal.  Don't  I  tell  you  they  wont 
hurt  me." 

"  But  why  i    What  prevents  them  P 

"Well,  then,  I  don't  know.  But  perhaps  it  may 
be,  because  they  think  I  have  a  charmed  life." 

"  A  charmed  life  ?    What  do  you  mean  ?" 

"  Oh,  it's  very  simple;  I'll  tell  you.  You  must 
know  that  soon  after  I  was  appointed  a  magistrate 
I  went  without  any  fixed  intent  to  a  great  cattle 
fair  near  Adare  ;  here  I  found  some  thousands  of 
farmers  and  others  assembled,  and  here  I  heard  all  the 
usual  coping  and  squabbling,  the  sure  concomitants  of 
such  a  festival.  Several  people  had  been  taken  up  for 
picking  pockets,aud  some  for  horse-stealing;  one  man  had 
houghed  two  cows  out  of  spite,  while  another  had  ridden 
off  clear  with  a  horse  he  had  been  allowed  to  mount, 
and  had  not  yet  been  overtaken.  The  usual  number  of 
broken  heads  had  been  patched  up  and  bathed  in  whisky, 
while  one  or  two  who  had  had  their  arms  and  legs 
broken  had  been  carried  off  to  hospital — in  a  word  it 
was  a  regular  Irish  fair,  and  I  felt,  as  a  magistrate, 
that  before  long  my  duties  would  become  onerous. 
I  must  tell  you,  however,  that  a  short  time  before  this 
I  had  been  shot  at,  whilst  sitting  at  table,  and  though 
the  ball  had  passed  between  my  body  and  my  arm  I 
was  not  touched,  and  that  on  another  occasion  I  had 
an  equally  narrow  escape.  So  the  superstitious  peasantry 
began  to  talk  about  my  having  '  a  charmed  life/  and 
all  that  sort  of  nonsense. 

"  I  might,  however,  have  been  about  two  hours  in  the 


170    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

fair  when  a  young  respectably  dressed  farmer  came  up 
to  me  and  challenged  me  to  sell  the  mare  I  was  riding. 
Now  it  so  happened  that  it  was  the  very  thing  I  wished 
to  do.  So,  after  some  apparent  objections,  I,  with 
seeming  reluctance,  assented.  The  farmer  required  a 
short  trial.  This  was  but  fair;  so  I  got  down,  and  he 
was  soon  in  my  saddle.  '  Walk,  trot,  or  gallop  him/ 
said  I,  'but  do  so  along  the  road,  and  do  not  go  beyond 
the  stone  which  stands  about  150  yards  off.'  'Agreed  [' 
replied  the  proposed  purchaser,  and  away  he  went. 
He  first  proceeded  gently,  then  broke  into  a  trot.  At 
this  moment  a  policeman  whispered  in  my  ear — '  Sure 
your  worship,  that's  Jerry,  the  most  clever  horse  robber 
in  Ireland.'  I  was  startled,  and  at  once  saw  through 
the  trick,  so  I  roared  to  the  rascal  to  come  back,  but 
such  was  clearly  not  his  intention,  for  without  turning 
his  head  he  set  off  at  full  speed.  I  called  louder  and 
louder,  and  the  crowd,  who  always  favour  a  clever 
thief,  cheered  him  for  his  activity.  I  seized  a  long 
horse-pistol  from  the  policeman's  holster,  and  roared  out 
that  I'd  shoot  him  if  he  did  not  stop.  '  You'll  shoot 
your  horse,  Major,'  cried  a  bystander,  grinning.  'He's 
too  far  off  by  half,'  added  another.  s  Could  you  shoot 
the  moon  V  screamed  a  would-be  wit,  and  they  all  began 
laughing. 

" ( Boys,'  said  I,  '  I'll  bring  that  fellow  down.  It's 
true  he's  far  beyond  the  usual  shot,  but  I'll  hit  him. 
I  wont  kill  him,  but  I'll  hit  him  in  the  heel,'  and 
instantly  levelling  the  pistol  I  fired.  In  another 
moment,  to  the  astonishment — I  may  fairly  say  the 
dismay — of  the  crowd,  the  fellow  was  heard  to  scream 
out,  and,  with  a  fearful  bound  from  the  saddle,  he  fell 


THE  CHARMED  BULLETS. 


171 


wounded  on  the  road,  while  my  horse  galloped  on 
without  a  rider. 

"To  depict  the  surprise  of  the  people  assembled  would 
be  impossible.  The  shot  was  at  a  range  of  300  or  400 
yards,  made  with  an  old  police  pistol  and  carelessly 
aimed.  They  could  scarcely  believe  the  evidence  of 
their  eyes.  But  when  some  of  those  who  had  run  off 
to  the  spot,  screamed  out  that  '  Jerry  was  shot  in  the 
heel  !'  and  when,  on  his  being  brought  back,  it  was 
discovered  that  the  ball  had  acctually  divided  the 
tendon  Achilles,  their  astonishment  vented  itself  in  loud 
exclamations — all  declaring  that  it  was  a  charmed 
shot — '  that  I  was  in  league  with  certain  nameless 
powers' — 'that,  faith,  that  same  Major  was  something 
more  than  a  man.'  In  fear  they  shrank  from  me,  and 
during  the  whole  day  not  a  soul  would  approach  me ; 
and  thus  it  was  my  claims  to  the  possession  of  super- 
natural protection  first  arose.  Poor  Jerry  had  three 
months'  imprisonment,  but  he  never  murmured.  He 
only  blamed  his  luck  in  having  these  bad  dealings 
with  the  devil.  Another  act,  somewhat  similar,  soon 
after  confirmed  my  demoniac  character,  and  after  all 
it  has  so  aided  me,  although  I  have  loudly  disclaimed 
it  and  much  dislike  it,  that  I  laugh  at  any  threat  they 
make." 

Arriving  early  at  the  cottage,  and  having  nothing 
else  to  do,  we  together  took  a  stroll  in  the  country — 
followed  in  the  distance  by  a  couple  of  policemen,  a 
most  necessary  precaution,  which  had  I  been  consulted 
I  should  certainly  have  doubled. 

After  an  hour's  walk  I  felt  thirsty,  so  we  turned 
into  the  house  of  a  small  farmer,  who  professed  to  be  a 


172    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


great  friend  of  Vokes.  Here  I  asked  for  a  cup  of 
milk,  or  buttermilk.  But  the  worthy  tiller  of  the 
land  was  far  too  hospitable  to  hear  of  this  ;  he  insisted 
on  my  taking  a  piece  of  bread  and  cheese  (for  he  was 
what  is  called  a  comfortable  farmer)  and  a  glass  of  cold 
whisky- and- water.  After  some  objection  I  consented, 
and  he  went  to  the  cupboard  to  take  them  out. 
Scarcely  had  he  opened  it,  when  Yokes  suddenly  called 
in  the  policemen,  and  desired  them  to  seize  the  man. 
"  Halpin,  put  handcuffs  on  that  fellow,  and  take 
him  across  to  "Rathbane,  while  you,  Reedy,  search 
the  closet,  and  bring  all  the  contents  with  the  pri- 
soner." 

I  stared  with  undisguised  astonishment.  The  poor 
agriculturist  turned  pale,  but  held  out  his  hands  to  be 
manacled  without  uttering  a  word. 

Sergeant  Reedy  now  announced  the  contents  of 
the  cupboard — a  piece  of  cheese  and  a  loaf,  half  a  bottle 
of  whisky,  a  pack  of  cards,  a  prayer-book,  and  three 
pistol  balls.    Nothing  more. 

"  That  will  do,"  replied  Vokes.  "  Bring  him  along, 
and  don't  let  him  touch  any  of  the  things."  I  was 
dumbfoundered.  Why  a  civil  and  obliging  peasant, 
on  whom  we  had  called  by  the  merest  accident,  should 
be  thus  cruelly  and  savagely  treated  I  could  not  for 
the  life  of  me  understand.  I  had  often  seen  the  Major 
do  strange  things,  but  this  beat  all.  Thus  to  disgrace 
a  kind  and  hospitable  fellow,  without  any  apparent 
cause,  seemed  the  very  height  of  tyranny,  and  I  felt 
inclined,  as  I  had  been  partly  the  cause  of  the  man's 
seizure  by  visiting  his  cottage,  to  remonstrate  with 
Vokes.  But  then,  again,  I  knew  that  he  was  a  just  man, 


THE  CHARMED  BULLETS. 


173 


and  that  he  never  acted  harshly  unnecessarily.  And 
I  also  well  knew  he  disliked  cross-questioning,  so  I 
determined  not  to  say  a  word  till  we  were  once  more 
alone.  In  the  meantime,  I  vainly  puzzled  my  brain  to 
pick  out — either  from  the  conduct  of  the  man,  his 
appearance,  or  the  articles  found  in  his  safe — what 
possible  circumstance  could  thus  have  placed  him  in 
arrest. 

We  soon  arrived,  and  Yokes  instantly  proceeded  to 
interrogate  the  prisoner ;  but  not  until  he  had  sum- 
moned his  secretary  to  be  present — a  somewhat  unusual 
formality.  But  this  he  so  far  explained,  as  to  state 
that  as  the  affair  was  one  in  which  he  himself  was  per- 
sonally interested,  lie  wished  everything  to  be  con- 
ducted as  publicly  as  possible.  So  while  the  magistrate, 
his  secretary,  and  myself  sat  at  the  table,  the  prisoner 
stood,  apparently  in  some  agitation,  at  a  short  distance, 
surrounded  by  policemen. 

Yokes  at  once  began. 

"  Your  name  is  Hayes — Tim  Hayes,  I  believe  I" 
"  It  is,  your  worship." 

"  You  are  a  tenant  on  the  lands  of  Kilballycrow  ?" 
"I  am." 

"And  now,  my  good  friend,  you  need  only  answer 
such  questions  as  you  think  proper,  for  I  tell  you 
fairly,  if  you  say  anything  to  criminate  yourself  it  will 
be  noted  down.    Do  you  understand  ?" 

"  I  do,  your  honour.  Sure  my  foster-brother's  an 
attorney." 

"  How  long  have  you  lived  in  your  present  farm  ?" 
"  Five  years." 

"  I  believe  you  have  no  arms  ?" 


1?4   RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE, 

"None,  Major.  I'll  swear  I  have  not  a  weapon  of 
any  kind." 

"  I  know  that/'  replied  the  functionary,  quickly ; 
"  but  your  cousin  Carniody  has  a  fine  long  pistol  V9 

The  prisoner  turned  pale,  and  rather  stammered  out, 
"  I  b'lieve  he  has — that  is,  I  don't  know." 

"  Yes,  you  do,  Tim — yes,  you  do  ;  for  you've  cast 
bullets  for  it." 

"  The  saints  be  good  to  us.  Is  it  that,  you  mane  ?" 
cried  the  now  trembling  captive.  "  I  never  cast 
any." 

"  Didn't  you  cast  the  three  we  found  in  the  cup- 
board?" 

"  Not  I,  then.  Sure  I  don't  know  how  it  was  done  ; 
them  was  brought  me  by  my  cousin,  and  left  there  by 
accident." 

"  Search  the  prisoner  !"  ordered  Vekes.  His  pockets 
were  rifled,  and  a  bullet-mould  produced.  The  man 
actually  groaned  with  terror. 

"  What  do  you  say  now  V 

"Faith,  I  forgot  it.  Carmody  must  have  put  it 
there.'* 

"  Of  what  are  those  bullets  made  P 
"  I  don't  know,"  groaned  the  poor  wretch. 
u  Yes,  you  do.  Reedy,  split  one  of  those  balls  and 
give  it  to  me."  This  was  done.  "  Exactly  as  I  thought. 
They  are  of  silver — silver,  Master  Hayes — pure  silver, 
and  consequently  meant  for  me.  I  have  long  known 
that  Carmody  has  sworn  to  shoot  me ;  and  I  also 
know  that  he  declared  he'd  get  silver  bullets  to 
shoot  me,  as  I  possess  a  charmed  life,  and  nothing  else 
could  destroy  it.    All  this  I  knew  j  but  I  was  not 


THE  CHARMED  BULLETS. 


115 


aware  as  I  am  now  that  you  were  selected  to  cast 
them." 

The  unhappy  prisoner  threw  himself  on  his  knees,  and 
earnestly  offered  to  confess  all.  "  Sure  he  knew  from 
the  beginning  that  it  wo\ild  have  a  bad  end  ;  he  felt 
everything  was  known  to  the  magistrate ;  he'd  betray 
his  companions ;  he'd  do  anything ;  but  he  hoped  he 
would  not  be  punished,  as  he  only  did  it  because  the 
bad  lot  fe]l  on  him  at  a  game  of  cards." 

"  Take  him  down  to  my  office  in  William-street,  and 
I'll  see  about  it ;  all  will  depend  upon  how  much  you 
have  to  reveal,  and  how  far  your  truth  may  be 
relied  on." 

"Oh,  as  to  that  

"Away  with  him,"  and  the  man  still  calling  out  for 
mercy,  was  hurried  off. 

"  Didn't  I  tell  you,  Harry,  I  bore  a  charmed  life  ? 
What  do  you  say  now  ?  Believe  me,  the  superstitious 
fear  of  his  enemy  is  a  better  buckler  for  a  soldier  to 
rely  upon,  than  the  best  arm  he  himself  carries.  Come, 
my  boy,  the  ladies  are  waiting  for  us,  and  we  must 
really  be  punctual,  or,  after  all,  I  may  perhaps  lose  '  my 
charm!'" 


176 


THE  VASES. 


I  have  seen  and  recorded  so  many  scenes  displaying 
the  presence  of  mind  possessed  by  Mr.  Yokes,  that  few 
who  have  known  him,  or  read  these  pages,  can  doubt 
his  perfect  coolness  in  the  hour  of  danger.  I  have 
touched,  however,  but  very  slightly  on  the  extra- 
ordinary way  in  which  he  carried  these  qualties  into 
private  life.  I  will  therefore  now  devote  a  few  lines  in 
illustration  of  this  strange,  and  much  to  be  envied  faculty 
of  mind.  I  will  premise  this  short  sketch  by  stating,  that 
the  police  functionary  was  one  of  the  best  fathers  that 
ever  existed,  and  that  even  in  the  moments  of  his 
greatest  excitement,  even  when  rebellion  and  danger 
threatened  around,  and  he  was  called  on  and  worried  by 
conflicting  parties,  he  never  uttered  an  unkind  word 
to  his  family,  either  of  the  first,  or  second,  generation. 
His  love  for  his  children  could  only  be  exceeded  by 
that  which  he  bore  for  his  grandchildren  ;  with  them 
the  stern  magistrate  would  play  as  a  child,  and  woe 
betide  the  member  of  his  circle  who  dared  to  affront 
one  of  those  little  ones  :  "  the  darlings  were  youug ; 
contradiction  would  injure  their  health  ;  sure  they'll 
know  sorrow  soon  enough  ;  they  must  not  be  vexed 
now."    Such  were  the  principles  laid  down  by  our 


THE  VASES.  ]77 

friend  Yokes.  Of  his  love,  more  particularly  for  one 
of  these  children,  I  am  about  to  give  a  sketch 

Our  worthy  C.M.P.  had  been  engaged  all  day  in  the 
county  court-house;  some  most  important  trials,  in 
which Vokes  was  officially  concerned,  here  takin»  place  • 
he  was  unable  to  leave  the  case  even  for  a  moment' 
and  was  detained  some  eight  or  ten  hours.  At  length 
the  verd.ct  was  pronounced,  and  the  tired  and  worn- 
out  magistrate  returned  to  his  home. 

In  the  drawing-room  he  found  his' family  assembled 
awaiting  his  arrival,  and  none  more  so  than  his  little 
grandson  George,  who,  to  tell  the  honest  truth  was  I 
beheve.  thegrandsire's  pet,  and  who  warmly  recipro- 
cated  his  attachment.  " 

After  a  few  moments'  conversation  on  other  matters 
and  after  having  been  supplied  with  some  necessary 
refreshments,  two  porcelain  vases  were  pointed  out  to 
Vokes-two  most  exquisite  specimens  of  Sevres  china 
-which  had  been  sent  to  him  as  a  great  present  from 
Dresden  In  the  pride  of  her  heart,  his  wife  had  placed 
these  highly-prized  objects  of  vertu  on  the  mantelpiece 
and  now  pointed  out  their  beauteous  effect 

Every  one  admired  them,  and  a  friend  who  had  ac- 
companied the  magistrate  home,  a  man  of  some  travel 
and  taste,  declared  their  value  to  be  at  least  501 

The  child,  seeing  the  attention  of  every  one  directed  to 

these  tempting  looking  toys,  desirous  of  possessing  them 
or  jealous  of  the  admiration  they  excited,  had  quietly  and 
unseen  climbed  np,  and  in  the  next  instant,  in  his 
endeavours  to  grasp  the  glittering  china,  dragged  it 
down  With  a  loud  crash  it  fell  upon  the  Wh, 
and  dashed  into  a  thousand  pieces. 

12 


178    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


All  around  uttered  an  involuntary  cry,  while  tin- 
wretched  little  culprit  stood  in  silent  agony,  gazing  on 
the  wreck  which  he  had  caused  ;  pale,  trembling,  his 
mouth  wide  open,  his  eyes  transfixed,  too  frightened  to 
cry ;  he  stood  the  very  image  of  mute  despair. 

In  an  instant,  quick  as  lightning  could  flash,  Vokes 
had  sprung  forward,  and  seizing  the  fellow  vase,  dashed 
it  on  the  fender  beside  its  broken  companion,  crying 
out,  "  Gcorgy,  darling,  you  see  I  can  do  that  as  well  as 
you  !"  and  then  burst  out  laughing. 

In  a  moment  the  child  recovered  its  serenity,  and 
ran  up  smiling  to  its  grandpapa — "  Darling  Big  Tom"' 
(so  he  loved  to  be  called,)  "  can  do  everything  better 
than  Georgy." 

The  little  fellow  by  this  act  was  probably  saved 
from  convulsions,  and  his  kind  relative  considered  that 
such  an  escape  was  cheaply  purchased,  even  at  the  price 
of  his  beautiful  ornaments.  He  again  smiled,  and 
assured  that  the  boy  was  all  right,  played  with  him  for  a 
few  minutes  and  then  had  him  conveyed  to  bed ;  while 
he  went  down  to  consult  over  certain  documents  with 
Sir  Matthew  Barrington,  the  clerk  of  the  crown  (his 
most  intimate  friend) — documents  which  properly  or 
improperly  treated  might  save  or  destroy  the  lives  of 
several  accused  persons. 

Like  the  elephant,  who  when  enraged,  frequently 
runs  a  sort  of  muck,  destroying  every  man  or  brute 
he  meets  upon  the  way,  yet  carefully  places  aside  and 
in  safety  the  new-born  baby  lie  finds  in  his  path,  so 
Yokes,  even  in  his  moments  of  the  greatest  anger  or 
agitation,  might  be  at  once  calmed  by  the  sight  of  one 
of  his  loved  children. 


179 


A  SLIGHT  MISTAKE. 


George  L — -  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Vokes  The 
latter  had  laid  him  under  some  slight  obligation,  and 
George  possessed  a  grateful  heart.    He  used,  therefore 
vociferously  to  declare,  he'd  go  through  fire  and  water 
for  the  Major.    On  the  other  hand,  my  relative  had  a 
real  friendship  for  the  young  man,  who  was  decidedly 
not  only  one  of  the  best  riders  and  the  best  shots,  but 
one  of  the  jolliesi  fellows  in  the  county  of  Limerick. 
Not  a  race-not  a  wake-not  a  pattern  could  take 
place  but  George  was  there;  indeed,  no  orgie  was 
complete  without  his  presence,  who  could  drink  punch 
or  troll  a  hunting  song  with  any  man  between  the 
Sun  and  Shannon.    I  need  not  say  that  on  some  of 
these  occasions  our  friend  was  the  life  and  soul  of  the 
circle  by  whom  he  was  surrounded.    He  was  univer- 
sally popular,  and  consequently  sought  out;  he  there, 
fore^ometimes  might  be  found  in  company  unworthy 

It  was  on  an  occasion  of  this  kind  that  the  following 
afiair  occurred.  ° 

George  was  spending  his  evening  at  a  country  town, 
near  Bird  s  Hill,  after  a  day's  fishing  at  KiUaloe.  He 
was  half  asleep,  dozing  over  his  often-renewed  pipe, 

12  2 


180    RFX'OLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


when  he  heard  the  sound  of  several  loud  voices  in  the 
adjoining  tap.  Ever,  and  equally,  ready  for  a  "fray 
or  a  feast,"  George  did  not  hesitate,  but  at  once  walked 
into  the  room  where  the  apparent  disputants  were 
assembled  ;  but  who  at  a  glance  might  be  discovered 
to  be  warm  friends  talking  loudly  and  together,  but 

by  no  means  differing  in  opinion.    As  L  walked 

in,  the  conversation  ceased.  The  new  comer  prayed 
them  to  renew  it.  A  few  questions  were  put  to  liini  by 
one  who  seemed  to  take  a  lead  in  the  conversation, 
and,  on  his  pronouncing  "  all's  right,"  the  broken 
thread  was  renewed,  and  the  subject,  interrupted  for  a 
moment,  again  continued  in  half  whispers;  George, 
who  was  evidently  taken  for  an  English  tourist,  and 
therefore  wholly  unacquainted  with  the  Irish  language, 
seemed  little  noticed,  while,  as  I  said  before,  the  ani- 
mated discourse  was  again  renewed  in  pure  Irish. 

George,  however,  well  knew  his  native  tongue,  and 
attentively  listened,  while  a  deliberate  and  extensive 
cruel  outrage  was  planned.  But  what  struck  him  with 
more  horror  than  the  rest,  was  the  proposal  made  by  a 
little  miserable  cripple  with  a  shock -red  head,  that  if  it 
was  determined  that  "  Major  Vokes  M — that  "  curse  of 
the  world" — was  to  be  destroyed,  the  job  should  be  left; 
to  him  to  accomplish.  All  the  party  assented  to  this. 
For,  to  tell  the  truth,  few  envied  the  little  wretch 
the  risk  he  would  thus  incur.  He  was  therefore  fully 
nominated  as  the  murderer  of  that  devil's  child,  Tom 
Yokes;  and,  the  better  to  inaugurate  the  appointment, 
a  fresh  tumbler  of  punch  was  given  to  this  wicked 
lump  of  deformity.  Far  from  being  frightened  at  the 
danger,  the  savage  dwarf  seemed  rather  to  exult  in  the 
task. 


A  SLIGHT  MISTAKE.  181 

George  could  scarcely  contain  himself;  and  while 
they  then  proceeded  to  plan  and  arrange  an  extensive 
and  cruel  murder,  which  it  appears  they  had  long 
settled  on,  ho  carefully  concealed  his  emotion,  and 
sat  plotting  how  he  could  thwart  their  designs.    It  is 
true,  he  had  intended  to  pass  the  night  at  Bird's  Hill, 
but  now  he  was  all  anxiety  to  meet  Vokes  and  tell 
him  what  he  had  heard.    He  therefore  opuetly  left  the 
room,  and  obtained  an  outside  car  to  convey  him  into 
Limerick  ;  before,  however,  he  started,  he  once  more 
looked  into  the  tap-room,  but  it  was  too  late,  the  party 
had  all  broken  up  and  left.    George  almost  blamed 
himself  for  not  having  prevented  it ;  but  then  how 
could  a  single  man,  and  that  man  unarmed,  effect 
this  1 

He  now  jumped  on  the  car,  and  desired  the  driver 
to  gallop  into  Limerick.  He  promised  the  fellow  half- 
a-crown  if  he  got  there  in  an  hour.  Need  I  say,  the 
old  horse  was  whipped  into  his  best  pace  1 

G-  L  llad  scarcely  proceeded  a  mile,  when  he  over- 
took a  solitary  individual.  To  his  great  joy  he  per- 
ceived it  was  the  stunted  ruffian  who  had  agreed  to 
murder  his  friend.  He  did  not  hesitate  a  moment,  but 
stopping  the  vehicle,  he  jumped  off  and  seized  the 
fellow,  who,  without  any  resistance  (for,  indeed, 
against  such  a  comparative  Hercules  such  an  attempt 
would  have  been  madness)  allowed  himself  quietly  to 
be  placed  on  the  car  and  driven  into  Limerick. 

As  they  approached  Vokes's  house,  George  watched 
him  closely,  expecting  every  instant  that  he  would 
endeavour  to  make  his  escape.  But  the  wretch,  though 
apparently  conscious  of  his  danger,  made  no  effort  to 


182    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


get  away.  The  chief  magistrate  was  at  his  cottage,  a 
circumstance  which  pleased  our  friend,  as  his  rustic 
residence  was  used  frequently  by  the  Major  as  a  semi- 
police-office.  So  to  Rathbane  he  drove,  in  full  triumph, 
with  his  captive. 

We  were  sitting  at  supper  when  L  arrived,  who 

insisted,  even  before  he  would  taste  food  or  imbibe  a 
single  drop  of  the  creature,  on  telling  his  tale  of  horror, 
which  I  confess  filled  me  with  terror  indescribable. 
Not  so  Vokes.  I  suppose  habit  had  indurated  his 
feelings.  He  had  become  professionally  calm.  Let  it 
be  as  it  might,  there  he  sat,  without  displaying  the 
slightest  emotion.  George  seemed  rather  nettled  at 
the  coldness  with  which  his  news  had  been  received, 
and  then,  fancying  that  his  tale  might  possibly  be  dis- 
believed, he  vowed  solemnly  to  the  truth  of  what  he 
had  asserted. 

"And  where  is  the  ruffian   that   is  to  murder 

me?" 

"  I  left  him  in  charge  of  two  of  your  men,  with 
directions  to  shoot  him  if  he  attempted  to  escape." 

Yokes  rang  the  bell,  and  ordered  him  in. 

George  L-  's  description  was  perfectly  graphic. 

The  circumscribed  monster  that  stood  before  me  fully 
realized  the  frightful  description  he  had  drawn  of 
him. 

"  Is  this  the  man  Vy  asked  Vokes. 
"It  is,"  replied  li is  friend 

11 1  thought  as  much,"  said  the  magistrate.  "  Take 
him  away  ;  lock  him  in  the  loft  above  the  back  kitchen, 
and  give  the  fellow  something  to  eat.  We  may  hang 
him  ;  but  we  must  not  starve  him.    I  ll  come  out  and 


A  SLIGHT  MISTAKE. 


183 


examine  him  myself  presently,"  and  with  that  the 
assassin  was  led  away. 

Guess,  however,  George's  horror,  as  he  plainly  per- 
ceived his  friend  the  magistrate,  unseen  by  any  one 
else,  give  a  knowing-wink  and  a  half-smile  at  the 
bloodthirsty  prisoner. 

What  this  could  mean  was  more  than  puzzling. 
L  felt  indignant,  and  determined  on  closely  cross- 
questioning  his  friend  the  functionary.  But  the  latter 
gave  him  no  opportunity ;  he  evaded  his  questions, 
parried  his  queries,  and  by  dint  of  sheer  hospitality 
and  kindness  compelled  his  guest  to  sit  down  and 
share  his  supper  previous  to  giving  those  explanations, 
which  he  promised  to  afford  most  amply  to  him  when 
the  meal  should  be  over. 

The  captor  was  of  course  compelled  to  Submit  to 
these  conditions,  and  we  again  sat  down  to  our  long- 
interrupted  evening  repast.  "Why  or  wherefore  I  knew 
not,  but  my  relative  seemed  fidgety  and  anxious,  and 
evidently  lingered  over  his  supper.  Of  course  all  this 
was  a  mystery  to  me. 

Just  as  we  had  concluded,  a  knock  was  heard  at  the 
door,  and  the  chief  magistrate  loudly  called  to  the 
person  outside  to  enter.  A  horse-policeman  (I  think 
it  was  Sergeant  Macgrath)  came  in  covered  with  mud 
and  dirt,  as  if  he  had  ridden  in  at  full  speed,  and  going 
up  to  the  Major  he  whispered  a  word  in  his  ear. 

In  an  instant  all  care  was  banished  from  our  enter- 
tainer's brow.  11  Go  and  meet  them,  and  bring  them 
in  here,  as  quick  as  you  can." 

4-  Yes,  sir,"  said  the  sergeant,  as  he  saluted,  and 
then  closed  the  door  after  him. 


184    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  TOLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


44  And  now  for  a  tumbler  of  grog." 

"Not  so/'  remonstrated  George;  "you  have  pro- 
mised to  give  me  some  explanations.  I  think  I 
deserve  them." 

"  Well,  that's  true  for  you.  But  I  have  my  reasons. 
I  faithfully  promise  you  that  in  ten  minutes  all  shall  be 
el  cared  up, 

That  period  had  scarcely  elapsed,  when  another  knock 
was  heard,  and  on  the  door  opening,  again  marched  in 
the  weather-beaten  sergeant,  followed  by  no  less  than 
four  prisoners,  strongly  handcuffed,  and  escorted  by 
a  half-dozen  of  policemen,  armed  with  carbines. 

Vokes  took  the  whole  affair  as  a  matter  of  course, 
and  coolly  turning  to  George,  asked, 

"  Do  you  recognise  these  men  ?" 

"  By  Heaven,  I  do.  They  are  the  four  scoundrels  I 
left  two  hours  ago  at  Bird's  Hill,  plotting  a  murder," 
cried  he,  his  eyes  wide  open  from  astonishment. 

"  Can  you  identify  them?" 

"  That  I  most  certainly  can.  But  how  they  came 
here  it  is  impossible  to  say.  I  only  know  I  had  no 
hand  in  it.    1  only  arrested  the  other  ruffian,  the — " 

"Hush!"  quickly  interrupted  Yokes.  "Not  a  word 
of  that.  It  is  enough.  March  them  down,  sergeant, 
to  the  county  jail ;  let  them  be  lodged  separately.  Off 
with  them     and  away  the  wretches  were  marched. 

George,  now  in  real  anger,  turned  upon  him  whom  he 
had  hitherto  so  highly  respected.  "  MajorYokes,  I  would 
have  gone  to  the  death  for  you  ;  but  you  have  now 
offended  me.  You  have  treated  my  efforts  with  con- 
tempt.' 

"  By  no  means." 


A  SLIGHT  MISTAKE. 


185 


"  How  ]  Have  you  not  received  all  my  revelations 
with  coolness  and  carelessness'?  Have  you  not  smiled 
on  the  base  villain  who  would  have  murdered  you.  It 
is  true  that  you  have  captured  the  gang  without  my 
aid,  and  thus  my  services  are  of  no  use — " 

"  Georgy,  my  boy,  don't  talk  like  an  angry  child, 
and  I'll  tell  you  all.  But  you  must  keep  my  present 
explanations  a  strict  secret.  You  have  conferred  a 
most  lasting  favour  on  me.  You  can  now  identify 
these  ruffians  whom  I  have  long  endeavoured  to  entrap, 
and  thus  save  me  from  bringing  forward  my  most  valu- 
able approver,  whose  loss  would  indeed  be  most  fatal 
to  the  ends  of  justice  ;  yet  who,  if  once  publicly  known, 
must  quit  this  country  for  ever  within  an  hour  after 
he  gives  evidence  in  court,  or  he  would  be  too  surely 
destroyed.  You,  however,  as  a  free  country  gentleman, 
run  no  such  risk,  and  thus  through  your  means  I 
preserve  my  most  valuable  agent." 
"  And  who  is  this  valued  gem  V 
"  The  well-looking  young  gentleman  you  were  good 
enough  to  bring  up  to  me;  the  little  gentleman  who 
wormed  himself  into  the  confidence  of  these  ruffians  by 
promising  to  destroy  me.  He  has  had  his  supper ;  he  has 
doubtlessly  drunk  your  health,  and  is  now  comfortably 
snoring  within  ten  yards  of  us.  I'd  not  have  a  hair  of 
his  clever  head  injured  for  his  weight  in  gold." 

"  But  how  then  came  the  police  to  take  charge  of 
him  when  I  ordered  them  V 

"  Then  upon  my  honour  they  don't  know  who  he  is, 
more  than  you  then  did.  Now  mind  and  keep  my 
secret,  for  you  already  know  more  of  my  tactics  than 


18G    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  TOLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


any  man  in  the  county.  We'll  transport  those  would- 
be  murderers  at  the  next  assizes ;  you  shall  have  all 
the  glory  of  it." 

"And  so  I  ought,"  growled  George,  "after  making 
such  a  confounded  fool  of  myself." 


187 


THE  THREATENING-  LETTEK. 


I  came  down  late  to  breakfast,  arid  found  my  worthy 
relative  reading  his  letters  ;  one  of  these  more  particu- 
larly seemed  to  engage  his  attention.  For  several 
minutes  he  sat  pondering  over  it,  and  turned  it  over 
and  over  again,  closely  examined  the  superscription 
and  the  post-mark,  and  peered  curiously  at  the  writing. 
Presently  he  rose,  and  after  glancing  at  the  edges  of 
the  half-3heefc,  on  which  the  communication  was 
written,  went  to  the  window  and  held  up  the  paper 
against  the  pane  of  glass,  at  the  same  time  taking  out 
a  magnify  in  g-glass.  He  most  minutely  examined  the 
document,  doubtlessly  wishing  to  discover  a  water-mark 
or  other  indication  by  which  he  might  ascertain  the 
identity  of  the  writer.  His  efforts  seemed  fruitless, 
for  with  a  slight  "  hem  !"  indicative  of  disappoint- 
ment, he  again  folded  up  the  epistle  and  put  it  in  his 
pocket,  then  joined  with  a  smiling  countenance  and  an 
honest  appetite  the  excellent  meal  his  hospitality  had 
placed  before  us. 

Breakfast  over,  he  suddenly  turned  round  to  me. 

"  Harry,  my  boy,  you  seemed  curious  to  know  the 
contents  of  the  letter  I  examined  so  carefully  just 
now  ?" 


188    Ili:COLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"It  is  perfectly  true." 

"  Well,  then,  I'll  satisfy  your  curiosity.  Head  it  : 
it  is  a  perfect  gem  of  its  kind." 

He  threw  me  over  the  note,  which,  from  the  address, 
I  perceived  came  from  some  person  belonging  to  an 
inferior  class,  for  the  writing  was  of  the  worst  descrip- 
tion, whilst  the  missive  itself  was  dirtied  and  crum- 
pled— two  favours  evidently  bestowed  upon  it  previous 
to  its  having  been  dropped  into  the  post.  From  the 
outside,  then,  I  expected  some  u  peasant  literature " 
to  be  found  within,  and  tearing  it  open,  I  was  already 
moulding  my  mouth  to  a  hearty  laugh,  when  to  my 
horror  and  surprise  I  found  the  communication  headed 
by  a  rude  sketch  of  a  coffin.  I  now  perused  it  seriously  ; 
it  ran  thus — 

"  Let  the  fate  of  young  Martin  be  a  warning.  His  father,  like 
yourself,  was  a  cruel  magistrate,  and  didn't  we  kill  bis  son  ?  Didn't 
we  kill  him  as  we  left  chapel,  within  ten  yards  of  the  door,  and 
though  the  poor  boy  went  down  on  his  knees  and  begged  for  his 
life,  and  though  he  tried  to  cling  for  mercy  to  several  who  knew 
him  well,  and  though  we  knew  the  priest  would  set  his  face  against 
us  for  it — yet  we  then  and  there  destroyed  him  ;  and  he  only  a  poor 
innocent  boy  ?  how  much  more,  then,  shall  we  delight  in  killing 
you — you  murderous  villain  of  the  world.    By  the  light  that  shines 

— by  the  cross  we  love— by          if  you  don't  release  Pat  Toomey, 

and  leave  off  worrying  and  murdering  the  boys,  you  shall  be  a  dead 
man  in  three  days.  So  order  your  coffin.  By  night,  by  day,  by 
twilight,  we  are  on  your  track.  Thirty  boys,  who  never  flinched, 
have  sworn  your  death.  So  Tom  Vokes  prepare  for  your  certain  and 
cruel  end.    I  have  sworn  it. 

"  PADDY  MOONLIGHT."* 


*  I  have  turned  the  words,  into  good  English,  as  few  of  my  readers, 
I  fear,  could  understand  the  strange  terms  used  iu  the  original.  I 
have  also  suppressed  the  real  name  of  the  victim,  though  every 
Limerick  man  of  a  certain  age  will  recognise  it. 


THE  THREATENING  LETTER. 


189 


"What  do  you  think  of  that  ?" 
"  By  Heaven !  it  horrifies  me.    What  do  you  mean 
to  do  r 

"  Discover  the  foolish  writer,  if  I  can." 
And  is  that  all?    Do  you  call  a  threat  like  this 
foolish  ?    Why,  it  is  horrible — barbarous — savage  P 

"  Griggy  mi  gow  !  Sure  it's  only  foolish — nothing 
more  !  Don't  I  know  all  that  it  contains  ?  Hav'n't  I 
caught  and  convicted  the  murderers  of  that  poor  boy, 
one  of  the  nicest  lad's  that  ever  lived  ?  Don't  I  know 
that  there  are  plenty  of  persons  who  have  vowed  to  de- 
stroy me?  There's  not  much  news  in  that  ;  and  the  only 
wonder  is  that  they  don't  effect  their  purpose.  But 
not  by  letters  like  this.  It  is  useful  as  a  warning,  it 
may  be  useful  as  evidence,  and,  above  all,  it  may  lead, 
and  I've  no  doubt  it  will,  to  the  detection  of  the  gang. 
So  you  see  I'm  quite  justified  in  saying  that  the  fellow 
was  a  fool  for  writing  it.  But  don't  let's  talk  any  more 
about  it — don't  mention  it  to  a  soul,  but  go  off  to  bar- 
racks with  a  light  heart,  while  I  go  down  to  the  police- 
office." 

"  Under  the  present  circumstances  you  surely  would 
not  walk  T 

"  Bah  !  Go  and  attend  your  parade  ;  don't  mind 
me.  I'll  die  in  my  bed  yet ;"  and  away  went  Yokes  in 
high  good-humour. 

Two  days  elapsed,  but  the  busy  magistrate  never 
referred  to  the  subject ;  the  family  were  fortunately 
ignorant  of  it,  and  my  own  business  had  driven  the 
recollection  of  the  anonymous  letter  out  of  my  head  ; 
and  if  I  ever  did  think  of  it,  it  was  rather  to  do  so 
with  derision,  for  I  now  fully  began  to  agree  with  my 


190    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


friend  that  it  was  a  mere  idle  threat,  when  the  follow- 
ing incident  recalled  it  to  my  memory. 

It  was  on  the  third  evening  following — say,  about 
seven  o'clock — the  stars  were  shining  clearly,  and  the 
frozen  damp  cracked  under  each  footstep,  that  Yokes 
was  walking  home  to  the  cottage  to  partake  of  a  late 
dinner.  As  the  moon  had  nob  yet  risen,  the  surround- 
ing scenery  was  still  partly  buried  in  darkness  ;  but  the 
starlight  did  its  part,  and  objects  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  might  easily  be  discerned. 

He  had  arrived  at  the  top  of  Upper  William-street, 
where  the  roads  fork  into  two  wide  branches.  His  route 
was  to  the  right,  but  just  as  he  was  about  to  diverge,  a 
young  girl,  apparently  of  about  sixteen  years  of  age, 
and,  from  the  slight  glimpse  which  could  be  caught 
tli rough  the  opening  of  her  cloak,  (for  she  wore  it  in  the 
Irish  manner,  thrown  over  her  head  and  over  her  face 
like  a  cowl)  rather  well-looking,  stepped  forward,  and 
in  the  most  piteous  and  whining  terms  besought  u  the 
gentleman  to  come  and  see  her  poor  grandmother,  who 
was  dying and  though  Vokes  showed  her  the  total 
inutility  of  doing  so,  she  still  urged  him  in  the  most 
pathetic  manner  to  accompany  her.  Now,  if  the  truth 
must  really  be  admitted,  it  is  as  well  to  confess  that  a 
pretty  lace  was  a  wonderful  argument  with  the  worthy 
magistrate,  who,  after  vainly  endeavouring  to  shake  off 
the  girl,  at  length — for  reasons  I  shall  not  attempt  to 
fathom — consented  to  follow  her  to  her  cottage.  So, 
wrapping  his  cloak  more  closely  around  him,  and  his 
pace  unimpeded  by  any  luggage,  save  by  a  roll  of  new 
music  he  was  carrying  home,  he  trotted  off  after  his 
pretty  young  guide,  who,  at  a  speed  which  not  a  little 


THE  THREATENING  LETTER. 


191 


astonished  the  gallant  Major,  set  off  towards  the  left- 
hand  road. 

My  Limerick  readers  will  remember  a  large  tract 
of  waste  land  which  formerly  existed,  and  indeed  which 
still  exists  in  a  great  measure,  situated  between  the 
road  to  Tipperary  and  that  by  which  the  mail-coach 
used  to  travel  to  Dublin.  It  consisted  of  a  large  num- 
ber of  fields,  on  which  only  a  cabin  or  two  had  then  been 
built ;  near  the  Dublin  side  there  was  an  old  church- 
yard, long  since  fallen  into  disuse.  Across  this  plain 
now  hurried  the  girl,  closely  followed  by  the  CM. P. 

They  had  crossed  a  couple  of  fields,  when  they  came 
to  a  somewhat  wide  dyke.  To  Yokes' s  surprise,  the 
active  damsel  jumped  across  it  with  ease,  although  my 
relative  found  some  difficulty  in  following.  They  soon 
came  to  a  second,  across  which  the  girl  again  sprang  ; 
but  on  this  occasion — his  suspicions  aroused — the  acute 
magistrate  watched  her  movements  more  narrowly,  and 
saw  that,  instead  of  being  barefooted,  as  is  usual  with 
Irish  females  of  the  lower  class,  she  wore  a  pair  of 
strong  brogues.  Conviction  at  once  entered  the  mind 
of  Yokes,  and  he  hastily  jumped  after  her.  They  had 
not,  however,  proceeded  ten  paces,  when  he  suddenly 
seized  the  fair  damsel,  and  throwing  off  his  cloak,  pre- 
sented the  roll  of  music  (the  only  weapon  he  had)  at 
her  head,  and  dashing  off  the  covering  which  en- 
veloped her,  beheld,  through  the  very  imperfect 
light,  a  boy  standing  before  him,  who,  on  his  part, 
fancying  the  music  roll  was  nothing  less  than  a  horse- 
pistol,  began  shouting  for  mercy. 

"  Silence,  wretch  !  or  this  instant  is  your  last.  Utter 


192    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

but  one  cry — refuse  to  answer  me  a  single  question  — 
and  I  blow  your  brains  out." 

"  Oh,  mercy,  mercy,  Major  V 

"  Who  sent  you  out  V 

"  The  two  Wegeralds." 

"  And  where  are  they  ?" 

"Just  beyond,  in  the  berring-ground.  The  Lofd 
be  good  to  us  I" 

"You'll  walk  into  Limerick  before  me." 

"  Oh,  Gradi  !  Gradi !  sure  you  wouldn't  hang  a  poor 

i»d  r 

"  That  depends  upon  yourself.  If  you  go  quietly  on 
in  front  of  me,  and  don't  look  back  :  if  you  tell  me 
all  the  strict  truth,  I'll  uot  hurt  a  hair  of  your  head. 
But  if  you  attempt  to  give  the  alarm,  or  endeavour 
to  deceive  me,  you're  just  as  dead  as  Julius  Ca?sar,"  and 
again  Vokes  flourished  his  arm,  holding  the  music  roll. 

The  affrighted  boy — too  glad  thus  lightly  to  escape, 
returned  with  the  chief  magistrate,  who,  on  his 
arrival,  immediately  sent  out  a  party  to  arrest  the 
would-be  murderers ;  while  he  despatched  the  boy 
again  (disguised  as  a  female)  to  watch  at  the  corner 
of  the  street,  whom  the  prisoners  would  be  sure  to  see 
as  they  passed;  thu§  shielding  him  from  the  danger 
he  would  incur  were  it  known  he  had  betrayed 
his  friends,  and  thus  deeply  concealing  the  source 
whence  Vokes  derived  his  criminal  information. 

All  turned  out  as  he  had  foreseen.  The  prisoners, 
disarmed  and  crest-fallen,  stood  before  him.  This  I 
knew,  for  alarmed  at  his  long  absence  I  came  down  to 
William-street  oflice  to  meet  him. 

"Search  these  men  !"  cried  he,  turning  to  a  police- 


THE  THREATENING  LETTEK. 


193 


man.  The  functionary  did  so.  Some  powder  and  balls 
were  found  in  the  pockets  of  one.  In  the  other  only 
a  pocket-handkerchief  and  a  scrap  of  writing-paper. 

"  Hand  me  that  piece  of  paper  !  "  The  policeman 
did  so,  when  Yokes,  to  my  surprise,  closely  examined 
it — taking  the  greatest  apparent  interest  in  the  inves- 
tigation. Presently  he  pulled  out  of  his  pocket  the 
threatening  letter  he  had  received  three  clays  before, 
and  holding  them  both  up  to  the  candle,  called  my 
attention  to  the  fact  that  they  were  identical,  and 
showed  some  very  peculiar  water-marks. 

"That  will  do,"  continued  he,  replacing  the  letter  in 
his  pocket.  "That  will  do.  Here,  Sergeant,  keep 
this  scrap  of  evidence  till  the  trial.  I  now  commit 
them  for  having  sent  a  threatening  letter — one  of  the 
very  heaviest  crimes  they  could  commit." 

"  These  men  will  be  transported — the  example  in 
this  instance  is  worth  the  execution  of  a  dozen  mur- 
derers," said  Yokes,  as  we  walked  up  to  the  cottage 
afterwards.  "  These  fearful  missives  are  more  dan- 
gerous, and  more  thoroughly  alarm  and  demoralize  the 
country,  than  even  an  assassination.  If  they  are  trans- 
ported— which  I  am  sure  they  will  be — we  shall  have 
no  more  of  these  menacing  epistles  for  some  time." 

During  the  following  assizes,  the  worthy  magis- 
trate's prediction  was  amply  fulfilled. 


104 


THE  PIG  MARKET. 


I  entered  the  Police-office  in  Limerick  for  the  pur- 
pose of  asking  my  relative  and  friend,  Major  Vokes,  to 
join  our  pic-nic  to  Castle  Connel,  and  as  I  had  already 
secured  the  attendance  of  his  family,  I  little  doubted 
that  the  worthy  functionary,  who  was  ever  ready  to 
make  one  of  a  jovial  party,  would  assent.  I  found 
him  in  the  very  midst  of  business.  He  was  sitting  in 
a  back  parlour  surrounded  by  policemen,  while  a 
couple  of  wretched  prisoners  stood  before  him,  accused 
of  some  petty  crime.  As  they  were  all  talking  in 
Irish,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  discover  the  subject 
of  the  present  investigation ;  but  as  I  saw  them  led 
away  to  undergo  seven  days'  imprisonment,  their  crime 
could  not  have  been  one  of  magnitude,  and  they  left  the 
presence  of  the  magistrate  thanking  him  (as  well  as  I 
could  understand  them)  for  his  leniency.  How  he  could 
manage  to  carry  out  the  inquiry  I  was  puzzled  to 
imagine,  for  the  front  room  was  crowded  with  bare- 
footed females  and  well-clad  men  (such  is  the  dress  of 
the  lower  orders  of  the  Irish  peasantry,  and  in  which, 
by- the- bye,  they  show  little  gallantry  ;  for  while  the 
woman  is  bareheaded  and  barefooted,  the  man  is  com- 
fortably clad  in  a  pair  of  fustian  breeches,  good  worsted 


THE  PIG  MARKET. 


195 


stockings,  and  a  pair  of  strong  shoes,  and  he  always 
wears  a  hat,  such  as  it  is),  who  continued  to  shout  and 
roar  out  their  comments  and  opinions  in  spite  of  the 
policemen,  who  kept  driving  them  out  of  the  office. 
Babel  must  have  boasted  less  confusion  of  tongues. 
As  the  prisoners  I  had  seen  tried  were  let  out,  a 
fashionably  dressed  gentleman  (evidently  a  person  of 
respectability)  was  ushered  in.  The  magistrate  looked 
up,  but  took  no  further  notice.  He  offered  him  no 
chair.  He  addressed  him  in  the  same  tone  and  in  the 
same  serious  manner  as  that  which  he  had  made  use  of 
towards  the  peasants.  There  was  none  of  the  flun- 
keyism  which  we  often  see  in  the  metropolitan  courts 
of  England.  Major  Vokes  evidently  looked  upon  an 
offender  against  the  law  as  one  to  be  adjudged,  and, 
if  guilty,  punished.  He  knew  no  distinctions  of 
rank. 

The  gentleman  before  him  had  committed  some 
gross  breach  of  the  fishing  laws,  and  he  adjudged  him 
to  pay  a  heavy  penalty,  or  the  alternative  of  incarcera- 
tion. The  fine  was  paid,  though  the  captain  protested 
strongly  against  the  manner  in  which,  as  a  gentleman, 
he  had  been  treated. 

I  now  spoke  to  my  friend,  and  asked  him  to  join  us ; 
to  this  he  assented,  and  there  being  no  more  business 
to  be  done,  he  walked  out  of  the  office  with  me,  his 
hat  stuck  jauntily  on  one  side,  and  a  heavy  riding- whip 
under  his  arm. 

"  Come  this  way,  Harry,"  said  he,  taking  my  arm; 
"  I  want  to  meet  some  one  in  the  Pig  Market." 

"  Your  expectant  friend  must  be  a  bore,"  I  re- 
plied. 

13—2 


196    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


Vokes  laughed  heartily  at  my  poor  attempt  at  wit, 
and  we  lounged  up  to  the  top  of  William-street,  where 
the  unsavory  market  was  then  held. 

To  describe  the  scene  is  quite  impossible.  It  would 
baffle  the  admitted  powers  of  a  Lever  or  a  Carter  Hall 
to  do  so.  Suffice  it  to  say,  the  place  was  redolent  with 
the  fumes  of  the  very  worst  tobacco,  smoked  in  the 
dudeens  of  women  as  well  as  men,  commingled  with 
the  strong  and  certainly  not  pleasing  perfume  arising 
from  our  porcine  friends,  together  with  the  piercing 
cries  of  the  pigs,  which  were  almost  drowned  by 
shouts  in  a  language  wholly  unintelligible  to  me. 

Major  Yokes  was  in  unusually  high  spirits.  He 
asked  the  price  of  some  of  the  animals  before  him.  He 
chatted  with  one  or  two  young  men  about  some  pota- 
toes he  had  purchased.  He  had  a  joke  for  more  than 
one  pretty  colyeen,  and  sent  away  the  only  policeman 
present  on  some  trivial  errand. 

All  this  was  very  fine ;  but  why  he  should  walk  up 
and  down  in  such  a  place  I  could  not  make  out,  and, 
though  I  asked  him  the  reason,  he  refused  to  satisfy 
me. 

Presently  he  stopped,  and  called  to  a  tall,  fine-look- 
ing young  man,  who  appeared  to  have  nothing  to  do, 
since  he  had  scarcely  moved  from  the  spot  where  I  first 
saw  him  standing  as  we  entered  the  market. 

"Pat  Conolly,"  said  the  Major,  "why  don't  you 
kill  me.r 

"Is  it  me,  yer  honour  1"  demanded  the  other,  turn- 
ing rather  pale.  "Is  it  me  would  injure  yer  honour  ! 
Faix,  theu,  I  don't  understand  ye." 

"  Don't  you  1    Did  you  not  swear  at  the  shebeen 


THE  PIG  MARKET. 


197 


house,  near  Patrick's  Well,  last  Tuesday  night, 
to  shoot  me  to-day  as  I  passed  through  the  Pig 
Market?  Now,  my  fine  fellow,  why  don't  you 
doit?" 

"  Oh,  then,  sure  yer  honour's  glory  they've  been 
telling  you  a  lie.  Is  it  me  would  do  it  ?  Wasn't  it 
last  winter  you  gave  the  wife  a  sack  of  potatoes  ?" 

"  You  had,  perhaps,  forgotten  that  circumstance 
when  you  came  here  this  morning  to  destroy  me  J" 

"  Oh,  thin  !  yer  honour  is  joking." 

"Am  I!" 

"  Sure,  thin,  I'll  swear  by  the  holy — "  and  he  raised 
his  hand  to  his  breast. 

Major  Yokes,  to  my  surprise,  give  him  a  sharp  cut 
across  the  arm,  which  at  once  brought  it  down  in 
agony,  and  stepping  up  to  him,  he  thrust  his  hand 
into  the  man's  waistcoat,  and  drew  forth  an  old  pistol 
loaded  up  to  the  muzzle.  The  man  fell  on  his  knees, 
and  began  whining. 

.  "  Get  out  of  that,  you  cowardly  hound  !  I  know 
you,  and  shall  have  my  eye  upon  you  ;  and  when  you 
return  to-night  to  Cahirconlish,  you  may  tell  Tim 
Ryan  if  he  attempts  to  fire  into  my  windows,  he 
shall  be  hanged,  as  sure  as  I'm  Tom  Yokes.  Be  off!" 
and  he  spurned  him  with  his  foot.  The  fellow  rose, 
and  ran  away  like  a  frightened  hare. 

"  But  do  you  not  mean  to  punish  him  T  asked  I. 

"  Oh,  no.  That  would  do  little  good.  The  effect  of 
his  tale,  told  to-night  amongst  a  lawless  society,  will 
strike  the  whole  party  with  more  terror  than  if  the 
fellow  were  hanged." 

H  Yery  likely  !  very  likely  !    But  will  you  do  me  a 


198    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


favour  !  Never  ask  me  again  to  parade  up  and  down 
in  front  of  a  fellow  with  a  loaded  pistol,  ready  and 
anxious  to  commit  murder." 

"  Pooh !  pooh  !  there's  no  danger.  Now  we'll  go 
and  see  about  this  pic-nic." 


199 


TRIED  AFFECTION. 


"  I  have  asked  you,  my  dear  Vokes,  to  call  on  me,  in 
order  to  consult  you  on  an  affair  of  some  importance — 
at  least,  as  far  as  my  family  circle  goes,"  said  L.  D. — to 
the  chief  magistrate,  as  that  functionary  entered  his 
counting-house. 

"  Indeed  !  If  I  can  be  of  any  service  pray  command 
me." 

"  You  remember  Mary  Toovey,  whom  you  recom- 
mended me  as  a  trustworthy  girl  to  assist  in  looking 
after  my  children  some  six  years  ago  1" 

"  I  remember  her  well.  Her  father  was  an  honest 
fellow  in  Adare.  His  daughter  was  brought  up  at  P.'s 
Sunday-school." 

"  Most  true  ;  and  until  within  a  very  few  days  I 
always  looked  upon  her  as  one  of  the  best  behaved 
young  women  I  have  ever  met  with." 

"  And  you  have  had  reason  to  change  your  opinion 
of  her  1 " 

"  Unfortunately  I  have.  You  must  know" — and  here 

L.  D  dropped  his  voice.    "  Unfortunately,  I  say, 

I  discovered  that  I  had  been  systematically  robbed  of 
a  series  of  small  sums,  and,  watching  closely  afterwards, 


200    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


I  still  perceived  that  these  pilferings  unhappily  con- 
tinued. It  could  only  be  some  one  under  my  roof 
that  thus  abstracted  small  sums ;  and  as  I  have  a 
stable-boy  of  somewhat  loose  habits,  I  at  once  suspected 
him,  and  accordingly  I  marked  some  pieces  of  silver 
and  placed  them  with  two  or  three  one  pound  note3  in 
my  drawer,  leaving  my  keys,  as  if  by  accident,  on  the 
the  table. 

"  Having  thus  laid  my  plans  to  entrap  the  thief,  I 
went  out  to  dinner  and  returned  too  late  to  make  any 
search  that  night. 

"  On  the  following  moruing  T  went  to  the  place  where 
I  had  deposited  the  cash,  and  here,  to  my  great  horror, 
I  found  that  a  bank  note  and  three  half-crowns  were 
missing. 

"  Without  telling  them  why  I  summoned  them,  I 
called  up  my  servants,  and  having  locked  the  door, 
stated  to  them  what  had  occurred,  and  called  on  the 
pilferer  to  confess  the  crime,  and  thus  earn  pardon. 

"  None,  however,  admitted  the  alleged  guilt,  and  I 
now,  with  their  cheerful  permission,  proceeded  to 
search  them. 

M  Imagine,  my  dear  Yokes,  my  horror,  when,  after 
vainly  searching  the  servant  man  and  some  of  the 
females,  I  turned  to  your  2>rotege,  and  having  ordered 
her  to  display  the  contents  of  her  pockets,  I  discovered 
two  of  the  half-crowns  which  I  had  marked,  and 
could  now  distinctly  swear  to.  I  called  upon  Mary 
to  explain  this  strange  circumstance.  I  eagerly  de- 
manded to  know  how  she  had  become  possessed  of 
them.  But,  alas  !  all  in  vain.  She  was  dreadfully 
agitated,  and  was  only  relieved  from  a  fit  of  fainting 


TRIED  AFFECTION. 


201 


by  a  copious  flood  of  tears  which  came  to  her  relief. 
She  is  now  downstairs  in  charge  of  a  policeman.  I 
wished  if  possible  to  avoid  the  pain  of  sending  her, 
whom  I  have  known  for  so  many  years,  to  prison,  ani 
therefore  I  wrote  to  ask  you  to  call  on  me,  and  if 
possible,  assist  me  in  discovering  the  particulars  of  this 
distressing  affair." 

"  Has  she  had  any  followers — male  or  female  ! " 

"None." 

"  Has  she  ever  absented  herself  from  the  house  1 91 
»  Never." 

"  Do  your  "family  know  what  has  passed." 

"  No ;  they  are  all  at  Kilrush,  with  the  exception 
of  my  eldest  son,  who  assists  me  in  business,  and  he 
went  last  evening  to  Waterford,  and  will  not  return 
before  four  o'clock.  So,  strange  to  say,  not  a  soul  is 
aware  of  the  discovery  I  have  made." 

"  Call  in  the  girl — let  us  examine  her  together." 

The  poor  culprit  came  in,  more  dead  than  alive. 
When  she  saw  Yokes  she  covered  her  face  with  her 
hands  and  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears.  For  several 
moments  she  was  so  convulsed  that  even  the  stern 
magistrate  hesitated  to  address  her.  At  length,  after 
causing  her  to  be  placed  on  a  chair,  and  having  swal- 
lowed a  glass  of  water,  she  became  calm,  when  he  thus 
spoke  : — 

"  Mary  Toovey,  I  am  summoned  here  to  interrogate 
you  relative  to  a  robbery  which  has  taken  place  in  this 
house ;  and  as  part  of  the  money,  marked  for  the  pur- 
pose of  detection,  was  found  upon  you,  I  have  every 
reason  to  believe  that  you  are  guilty.5' 

"  I  am  !  indeed  I  am.    I  am  a  wretched  girl,  sir," 


202    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


cried  the  prisoner,  throwing  herself  on  her  knees 
before  him. 

"  And  yet,  religiously  and  well  brought  up,  I  can 
scarcely  believe  that  you  could  have  acted  so  base,  so 
ungrateful  a  part,  as  thus  to  rob  your  employers.  I 
would  rather  have  suspected  any  one  in  the  house 
than  you." 

"  Oh,  sir,  indeed,  sir,  it  was  L  I  am  a  wicked,  bad 
girl,  and  I  confess  the  crime." 

"  Are  you  sure  that  no  one  instigated  you — no  one 
advised  you  to  commit  this  robbery  P 

"  No,  sir — no  one.    It  was  all  my  own  doing." 

"  And  still  I  think  it  is  my  duty  to  inquire  further. 
I  will,  if  possible,  discover  your  accomplices." 

"  I  have  none — I  have  none.   I  alone  am  to  blame." 

The  worthy  merchant  now  chimed  in  ;  "  Mary,  I 
am  told,  by  Michael  the  groom,  that  he  saw  you  two 
nights  ago  talking  with  a  strange  man  in  the  garden." 

"  Its  false— it's  false." 

"  Have  you  mentioned  this  to  any  one  P  asked  Yokes 

of  L.  D  

"  To  no  one." 

Yokes  again  turned  to  the  girl.  u  Are  you  still 
determined  to  admit  your  guilt  P 

She  had  now  recovered  her  calmness,  and  answered 
firmly,  "  I  am  !" 

"  "  Do  you  know  the  consequences  ]  Do  you  know  that 
if  found  guilty  you  will  receive  a  fearful  punishment  rf" 

«  I  do?' 

u  And  still  to  save  youself  you  will  not  betray  your 
accomplices  1" 

"  I  have  none.    I  alone  am  guilty — I  confess  ir/5 


TRIED  AFFECTION. 


203 


"  Take  her  away,  sergeant.  I  must  inquire  further 
into  this  affair and  trembling  far  less,  seemingly 
relieved  at  having  thus  unburthened  her  conscience, 
the  "wretched  girl  was  led  away. 

When  she  wras  gone,  the  Major  turned  round  and 
addressed  his  friend. 

"  If  you  do  not  insist  on  it,  I  will  not  commit  this 
girl  till  to-morrow.  In  the  meantime  we  may  dis- 
cover her  accomplices.  It's  very  strange — very  !  But, 
by  George,  I  can't  believe  Mary  to  be  guilty." 

"  But  her  own  admission — the  money  found  on 
her?" 

"All  true;  such  proofs  should  be  convincing ;  but 
still  I  am  not  satisfied.  Do  me  a  favour.  Come 
you,-  and  your  son,  to  dine  with  me  to-day,  at  six 
o'clock,  and  we'll  talk  it  over  ;  but  mind,  don't  men- 
tion the  circumstance  to  a  single  soul  on  earth — not 
even  to  your  own  son.  Don't  write  it  to  your  family  ; 
and  if  any  one  asks  you  for  Mary,  say  she's  gone  to 
Adare  to  see  her  friends.  Pray  do  this,  and  you  will 
oblige  me." 

"  Certainly  you  make  a  strange  request ;  but  I'll 
strictly  attend  to  your  directions,  and  be  at  your  house, 
with  my  son  George,  at  six.  Perhaps  it  will  be  better ; 
for  my  wife  and  daughter,  and  even  George,  who  is 
generally  very  distant  and  haughty,  is  very  partial  to 
this  girl.  I  can  assure  you,  Major,  we  have  treated 
her  rather  as  our  child  than  our  servant,  which  makes 
her  conduct  the  more  detestable." 

"  True  for  you ;  but  now,  adieu.  Remember — six, 
and  silence.  And  off  went  the  police  functionary  to- 
wards his  office. 


204    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


On  arriving  there,  he  called  for  Macdonald,  a  young 
policeman  whom  he  often  entrusted  as  a  messenger. 

"  You  took  a  note  for  me  to  young  Mr.  D  ,  some 

evenings  ago,  relative  to  lending  him  a  hunter?" 

"  Is  it  Mr.  George  you  mean  ?" 

«  I  do." 

u  Well,  sir,  I  delivered  it  to  him,  and  he  said  there 
was  no  answer." 

"  I  am  aware  of  that.    Where  did  you  find  Mr. 

George  ?" 

"  In  the  billiard-room  beyont — in  George-street." 
"And  what  was  he  about V 

"  Well,  your  worship,  I  cant  rightly  say ;  I  didn't 
much  observe.  Bub  I  saw  him  drinking  and  smoking/' 

"Was  he  betting?" 

"  Ah,  then,  Major,  I  can't  say  surely  ;  but  I  think  he 
was,  for  one  of  the  young  officers  from  the  barracks 
called  out  and  said,  *  You've  lost,  George and  so  I 
suppose  he  was,  your  worship." 

"  That  will  do,"  said  Vokes,  and  then  proceeded  to 
try  one  or  two  cases  of  drunkenness  and  riot  which 
were  brought  before  him  for  judgment.  Presently  he 
got  up,  and  putting  on  his  hat,  he  strolled  leisurely  up 
George-street. 

On  arriving  in  front  of  Mr.  S.'s  shop — at  once  a 
place  for  refreshment,  the  supply  of  tobacco  and 
punch,  with  a  billiard-room  attached — he  turned  in, 
and  after  partaking  of  a  sandwich,  he  carelessly  asked 
the  female  who  was  at  that  instant  serving  behind  the 
counter,  whether  Mr.  G.  D  had  been  in  lately. 

"  Not  since  yesterday  morning." 

"  WJiat  did  he  call  for  then  %n 


TRIED  AFFECTION, 


205 


"  He  came  to  get  some  cigars,  as  he  was  about  to  go 
out  of  town ;  and  he  left  a  pound-note  with  me  to 
hand  to  Captain  D  ,  that  he  had  lost  on  the  races." 

"  Have  you  got  that  pound-note  ?*' 

"  No,  sir,"  replied  the  girl,  who  seemed  startled  at 
the  inquiry. 

"  Did  he  pay  you  for  the  cigars  ?" 

«  He  did." 

H  How  did  he  pay  you  t< 

"  With  a  half-crown  piece." 

"  Have  you  got  that  half-crown  ¥' 

"I  believe  it's  still  in  the  tobacco  till.  I  hope, 
Major,  it's  not  a  bad  one;  it  may  bring  me  into 
trouble."  And  fearful  of  being  mixed  up  with  the 
transaction,  she  examined  the  till  with  anxious  care, 
and  at  length  triumphantly  pulled  out  the  piece  of 
money  in  question.  "  Here  it  is,  sir ;  sure  I  didn't 
know  it  was  bad,  and  I'm  sure  Mr.  George  didn't. 
Here  it  is." .  And  she  handed  it  to  Yokes,  who,  after 
peering  at  it  with  great  curiosity,  put  it  into  his  pocket, 
and  then  throwing  down  two  shillings  and  a  sixpence, 
carelessly  said — 

"  Don't  you  see,  I  suspect  there's  some  bad  money 
in  Limerick,  so  I'll  take  away  this  piece.  But  don't 
tell  a  living  soul  what  I've  done,  or  faith  I'll  have  you 
up  for  a  witness." 

This  threat  was  quite  sufficient  to  render  the  girl 
dumb.  So  Yokes,  without  further  conversation,  walked 
up  to  his  cottage,  where  he  was  carrying  out  some  im- 
provements. 

At  six  o'clock  precisely,  Mr.  L.  D  and  his  son 

arrived  in  George-street,  and  shortly  afterwards  partook 


206    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


of  a  most  excellent  dinner,  which  I  was  lucky  enough 
to  share.  No  other  guest  was  present,  and  all  ap- 
peared in  high  good-humour,  and  drank  their  fair  fill 
of  claret  before  the  punch  apparatus  was  placed  on 
the  table.  This  done,  Vokes  desired  the  servant  not 
again  to  disturb  him  till  he  rang  the  bell. 

Well  knowing  the  habits  of  the  chief  magistrate,  I 
saw  that  something  was  coming. 

"  Mr.  D  ,"  said  he,  addressing  his  senior  guest, 

"  you  have  now  my  permission — nay,  I  may  add,  my 
request — to  tell  your  son  and  my  son-in-law  here  of 
the  dreadful  occurrence  which  has  taken  place  in  your 
family." 

The  worthy  merchant  did  so,  in  the  fairest  manner. 

During  the  recital  George  D          appeared  more 

agitated  than  I  should  have  expected.  He  evidently 
was  dreadfully  shocked,  and  seemed  to  bear  a  true 
affection,  more  than  an  ordinary  affection,  for  the  poor 
girl,  and  as  his  father  concluded  he  violently  ex- 
claimed, 

t{  I  am  sure  she  is  not  guilty.  HI  stake  my  life  she 
is  not," 

"  Can  you  then  point  to  any  other  person  as  likely 
to  have  committed  these  robberies  ?"  asked  Vokes. 

"  Me ?  me?  certainly  not.  What  should  I  know 
about  it  ?" 

Oh,  nothing,  nothing ;  only  you  are  wrong  thus  to 
acquit  Mary  without  proof." 

"  But  I  have  proof.  Her  established  good  character, 
the  manner  in  which  she  has  always  proved  her  worth 
and  respectability — " 


TRIED  AFFECTION. 


207 


"  Are  strong,  I  allow ;  but  in  face  of  her  own  ad- 
mission, and  the  evidence  against  her,  will  avail  her 
but  little  ;  she  will  be  convicted." 

"  Oh,  don't  say  so." 

"  Unless,  indeed,  you  can  give  us  any  clue  to  the 
real  thief." 

Poor  George  seemed  dreadfully  agitated.  He  was 
evidently  fond  of  the  unhappy  girl.  He  suddenly 
asked — 

"  Is  there  no  way  of  getting  her  off;  can  you  not 
aid  her  to  escape  ;  my  father  shall  pay  all  expenses. 
But  to  convict  poor  Mary  would  for  ever  stain  the 
character  of  our  family." 

"  I  can't  see  that,  George,"  chimed  in  his  father. 

"Nor  I,"  said  Yokes;  "but  let  us  change  the 
subject.    I  hear  you  lost  at  the  late  races  V 

The  young  man,  seemingly  thinking  of  something 
else,  merely  uttered,  "  Did  I  V 

The  father  appeared  astounded,  for  he  had  ever  con- 
sidered George  to  be  far  too  rigid  in  his  moral  prin- 
ciples thus  to  have  gambled  on  the  turf. 

"  You  did,"  went  on  Yokes ;  "  Betsy,  at  Goggins, 
gave  the  pound  note  you  left  for  Captain  D  ." 

The  detected  sportsman  was  now  all  attention ;  his 
agitation  was  really  frightful. 

"Ah,  you  seem  surprised  at  my  knowledge.  I'll 
tell  you  more.  You  bought  some  cigars  at  the  same 
time,  and  paid  for  them  with  this  half-crown,  a  half- 
crown  strongly  marked,"  added  Yokes,  as  he  partly 
produced  it,  but  carefully  shrouded  it  with  his  hand. 

"  What's  that  you  say  V9  said  L.  D— — . 


208    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"Nothing,  nothing  at  all.  But  see,  your  son  is  not 
very  well.  He  has  probably  over-excited  hinjsel£  I'll 
take  him  into  my  dressing-room — administer  some  re- 
storative essence,  and  he'll  soon  be  well.  Nay,  you  must 
not  come,  you  will  only  do  harm  ;  see,  he  waves  yon  off. 
Come,  George,  you'll  be  better  presently  ;  come  along," 
and  he  led  the  poor  sufferer  off. 

I  need  scarcely  tell  you  that  during  the  absence  of 

his  son  and  his  friend  L.  D  spoke  but  little.  He 

adored  his  son,  and  thus  to  see  him  strangely  attacked 
completely  paralysed  the  old  man.  Five  minutes 
elapsed — ten  minutes  elapsed — and  the  anxious  parent 
would  fain  have  sought  his  child  ;  but  I  gently  detained 
him. 

In  about  twenty  minutes  Voke3  again  appeared, 
followed  by  George  ;  who,  though  still  pale,  seemed 
to  have  recovered  his  strength,  and  in  reply  to  his 
near  relative's  inquiries,  assured  him  that  "  it  was 
nothing.    It  had  now  quite  passed  away." 

For  about  five  minutes  a  gloom — a  painful  silence 
— hung  over  us  all.  This  was  abruptly  broken  by 
Vokes. 

"  George  and  I  have  discovered  the  pilferer,  Mr. 

D  ,  and  I  will  be  guarantee  that  you  are  never  so 

robbed  again." 

"  Was  it  Mary  Toovey  V 

"Decidedly  not!" 

"  Who  was  it,  then  T 

"  That  you  will  never  know.    It  is  sufficient  to  say 
he  has  been  punished  and  you  are  safe  for  the  future." 
"But  why,  then,  did  the  girl  admit  it  ?" 
"  She  best  knows." 


TRIED  AFFECTION. 


209 


"I  shall  closely  cross-question  her  when  I  go  home." 

"Then,  indeed,  you  will  not,  for  she  is  now  seveial 
mile3  on  her  way  to  Dublin,  where,  well  knowing  her 
innocence,  I  have  sent  her  to  live  with  a  sister  of  mine. 
You  will  see  her  no  more  F 

"  This  is  very  mysterious  f* 

"  And  so  let  it  remain ;  make  any  fuss  about  it, 
and  the  punishment  of  your  garrulity  will  fall  heavily 
on  you.  Let  me  beseech  you  never  again  to  allude  to 
it ;  make  what  excuse  you  like  for  Mary's  absence,  but 
never  hint  at  your  first  unjust  suspicions." 

"  Unjust  !" 

"  By  heaven,  they  were  !  Harry,  pass  the  hot  water  ; 
we'll  never  allude  to  this  subject  again.'7 

If  L.  D.  did  not  read  the  case  aright,  he  was  indeed 
a  happy  man. 

L.  D.  has  been  gathered  to  his  fathers.  His  son 
George,  who  has  settled  in  Dublin,  married  twelve 
months  after  his  death  a  certain  Mary  Toovey — a  girl 
who,  I  believe,  would  willingly  have  given  her  life  for 
him. 


210 


THE 

MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE. 


Vokes  was  seated  in  his  office  in  Limerick,  surrounded 
by  policemen  and  clamorous  applicants  for  justice, 
giving  his  orders  and  receiving  reports,  when  a  most 
respectable  female  drove  up  on  an  outside  car,  and 
requested  to  speak  privately  to  the  "  Major."  In  a 
few  minutes  the  room  was  cleared,  and  the  lady  shown 
in.  After  a  short  hesitation,  in  some  trepidation,  she 
thus  began — 

"  My  name  is  " 

*  I  know  it — Mary  Malone,  of  the  small  farm  near 
Patrick's  WcJL" 

"  The  same.  I  was  not  aware  that  you  knew  me ; 
but  oh,  Major,  I've  brought  you  in  bad  news  that  you 
don't  know.  Sure  my  husband,  Thady  Malone — he's 
gone  off  and  deserted  me.    He  went  last  night." 

"  Not  so ;  he  went  on  Monday  last  Never  tell  me 
a  lie." 

"Ah,  thin,  Major,"  cried  the  wretched  woman — 
"  ah,  thin,  it's  myself  that  am  so  upset  that  I  scarcely 
recollect  the  day." 

"  That's  odd ;  for  you  wrote  a  note  on  Tuesday  to 


,    THE  SIYST£BIOL"S  DISAPPEAEAXC'i'.  211 

£pu«  J°hnst0n'  the  wheelwright,  announcin-  the 
fact,  and  sent  it  by  Paddy  Elm." 

"The  Lord  be  good  to  us!"  almost  screamed  the 
-happy  female.  «YouWeverjthing 

b^wt       n°te  y°U  £aid  you  did  uot  exP^t  Km 

Dae*.    Why  did  you  think  so?" 

makG.  U?  °f  "  C°mm0n  EnSIish  term,  poor 
M«y  was  struck  all  of  a  heap,  and  she  vainly  t  ied  to 
look  calm;  but  being  a  strong-minded  woman  and 
somewhat  annoyed  at  the  system  of  espionage  ese  ' 
c-d  on  her  movements,  she  now  recovered  he!  spirl 

"Well,  now,  Ml  tell  you-of  course  it's  between 
ouseiveS-]fc  cuts  me  up  to  confess  it,  but  as  you  insS 
on  it  faith  FlI  tell  the  truth.    I  suspect  he'has 
off  with  a  hussey  of  a  soldier's  wife,  whose  husband  is 
quartered  m  the  Castle  Barracks  " 

"Indeed!    What  is  her  name?    We'll  have  her 
arrested."  ner 

y^J^'f*  UOt  ^at  exactly  knows  it- 

thoUgh  I  think  he  called  her  'Ann.'  As  to  following 
her,  sn-  that's  out  of  the  question,  for  they  went  off  in 
a  ship  the  very  next  day  to  America  " 

,3-l"  lTy/°°\ft'ienc5'  y°U  mLstake-  No*  a  vessel  U 
sailed  from  this  port  to  the  United  States  for  ten 

kI  °h;,t,liu  I  ■  be  SUre-am''  *  1  h"Pe  I  *ay  be  - 
oW  "ol       >  f1^'  1  l0Ved  Thady  »  * 

me  01  take  charge  of  the  farm." 

14—2 


212    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  3IAG JSTRATE. 


"  Wouldn't  William  Johnston  do  as  much  for  you  T 

Mary  Malone  turned  scarlet,  but  ere  she  had  time  to 
reply,  Vokes  again  spoke. 

"  Was  not  your  husband  a  great  drunkard  T 

"  He  was,  your  honour." 

"  He  sometimes  got  insensibly  drunk  J" 

"  He  did  that  same ;  but  I  loved  him  for  all  that." 

"  Did  you  ever  quarrel  ?" 

"  Oh,  thin,  why  would  we  quarrel  ?" 

"  Well,  I  only  asked  you  because  I  had  hoped  he 
might  have  left  you  in  a  fit  of  passion. 

"Ah,  thin,  perhaps  it  was  so.  We  did  sometimes 
have  bits  of  difference." 

"He  accused  you  of  preferring  some  one  else?" 

"  Faith  he  did  ;  but  a  bigger  lump  of  a  lie,  by  

Then  suddenly  lowering  her  tone,  "  It  was  all  a  mis- 
take, for  I  loved  Thady  dearly." 

"  I  thought  he  sometimes  beat  you  ?" 

"  Well,  he  might ;  perhaps  I  deserved  it.  But  I'll 
forgive  him  all  if  he'd  only  come  back  to  me." 

"  You  asked  to  see  me ;  you  now  say  you  do  not 
wish  me  to  pursue  him.    What,  then,  do  you  want  r 

"  Oh,  thin,  Major,  sure  I  wanted  you  to  come  out 
and  just  look  in  on  me,  and  show  the  neighbours  by 
kindness  that  I  bear  a  good  character.  For,  sure, 
there  are  some  of  them  husseys  who  go  tlie  lengths  to 
say  that  I'm  glad  that  Thady's  dead." 

"Dead?" 

"  No,  I  mean  gone  way.    By  dad,  I'd  pitch  the 
and  the  Johnstons  and  all  the  world  over  Trow  Hil 
to  see  my  Thady  return.    Ah,  now  thin,  Major,  wii 
ve  come  V 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE. 


213 


u  I  will.  Remain  you  at  home  to-morrow,  and  I'll  be 
with  you  iu  the  course  of  the  day,  Mrs.  Mai  one. 
We'll  settle  their  gossip." 

il  Oh,  thin,  may  heaven  be  gracious  to  ye  ;  ye  are 
always  kind.  Sure,  I  brought  in  a  small  keg  of  butter 
of  my  own  churning." 

"  I  never  take  presents  of  any  kind.  So,  now,  away  ; 
I'll  be  with  you  to-morrow  and  away  went  the  grass 
widow,  apparently  much  pleased  with  the  result  of  her 
visit. 

No  sooner  was  the  distressed  lady  gone,  than  Michy, 
one  of  Yokes's  best  aids — if  a  rascally  informer  who 
had  hung  his  own  brother  on  his  fraternal  evidence,  and 
betrayed  a  gang  of  some  twenty  ruffians,  could  be  so 
designated — was  called  in  to  counsel.  My  little  friend, 
who  was  Protsean  in  the  forms  he  assumed,  was  dressed 
as  a  simple  country  boy;  he  had  already  been  some  time 
with  Yokes  before  I  entered,  and  had  evidently  given 
him  important  information. 

Now  there  are  stern  moralists  who  may  condemn  this 
mode  of  obtaining  evidence — this  horrible  way  of  arriving 
at  facts  through  the  means  of  a  wretch,  often  unworthy 
of  belief.  Perhaps  so  to  assist  the  efforts  of  any  other  man 
than  my  relative  would  have  been  dangerous,  but  the 
deep  search  he  ever  carried  out  to  arrive  at  the  real 
truth,  the  acuteness  of  his  cross-examination,  the  stem 
certainty  that  if  deceived  he  would  at  once  withdraw 
his  protection  from  the  deluding  party,  which  in  effect 
would  be  little  less  than  delivering  him  up  to  be 
punished  by  the  friends  of  those  whom  he  had  betrayed, 
kept  these  otherwise  dangerous  emissaries  in  the  most 
wholesome  check.    While  detained  by  Yokes  for  pur- 


214    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

poses  of  justice  they  were  protected,  clothe!,  and  fed, 
and  if  after  a  time  they  could  be  spared,  they  were 
sent  off  to  America  with  a  good  round  sum  in  their 
pockets.  If  they  misbehaved,  or  indulged  in  false- 
hood, lynch-law  would  soon  be  executed  on  them. 
No  wonder,  then,  that  their  evidence,  under  wholesome 
examination,  might  prove  useful. 

Of  all  those  who  had  given  evidence  for  the  Crown, 
Mickey  was  the  only  one  retained  as  a  necessary  spy, 
or,  as  we  should  more  politely  call  it  in  the  present 
day,  a  detective.  He  was  far  too  well  trained  and 
taught  to  attempt  any  deception.  Whatever  he  said 
might  be  relied  upon. 

"  And  so,  Mickey,  you  can  recollect  the  words  that 
were  posted  up  on  the  smithy  beyond  Eathbeale,  last 
Saturday  night  F* 

"  I  can,"  replied  the  other,  looking  at  me  most  sus- 
piciously. 

"  It's  only  my  relative — go  on." 

"  Well,  sir,  I  gave  a  shilling  to  Paddy  Rooney  to 
drive  his  car  for  him,  and  by  the  same  token  he  was 
so  drunk  he  couldn't  drive  it  himself ;  so  I  bought 
two  noggins  of  whisky,  and  I  guv  him  one,  yere 
honour ;  and  then  I  laid  him  down,  and  having  put 
on  his  top  coat — for  it  was  raining  awfully — and  having 
put  on  his  Jersey  hat,  I  lays  him  in  the  car,  and  made 
a  pillow  of  sods  of  turf  for  his  head — for,  faix  !  he 
seemed  uncommon  inclined  to  choke — and  away  I 
druv.  On  the  way,  who  should  I  overtake  but  Bill 
Brophy,  of  Ballymondus." 

" '  God  save  ye  !'  says  he.  '  Sure  you'll  give  me  a 
lift,  Paddy  Booney,  like  an  honest  boy  ]' 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE.  215 


u  6 1  will,'  says  I,  stopping  the  car. 

"  '  Fait  f  says  lie,  'you  ain't  Paddy  Rooney.'  And 
he  was  a  going  to  turn  away. 

" 1  Stay,  Bill/  says  I.  '  Ain't  I  all  the  same  ?  Sure 
there's  Pat  Rooney  drunk  in  the  car,  and  ain't  I 
driving  him  home  ?  So  jump  up.'  And  with  that 
up  he  jumps. 

"  '  Bill  Brophy,'  says  I,  '  what  makes  you  away  so 
far  from  your  county — and  where  are  you  going  V 

" '  Faith,  then,'  says  he,  '  the  climate's  become  ra- 
ther warm  down  there,  ever  since  somebody  houghed 
the  Englishman's  cattle.  So  I  came  down  here,  and 
I'm  going  to  meet  some  of  the  lads  at  the  smithy  be- 
yant,  if  your  blood  pony — bad  luck  to  him — will  only 
draw  us  there.' 

" (  Oh  then,  there's  no  fear  of  that.' 

I  now  interrupted  Yokes,  and  as  I  had  come  pur- 
posely to  fetch  him,  urged  him  to  hasten  his  prolix 
informant. 

"  It  wouldn't  do,"  whispered  he,  "  if  I  didn't  let 
him  tell  his  tale  his  own  way.  I'd  never  get  at  the 
truth ;"  and  then,  turning  to  the  informer,  he  merely 
said,  "  Go  on." 

"  Well,  your  honour,  I  soon  pumped  out  of  Bill — 
whose  lips  are  like  sieves,  through  which  everything 
runs — that  a  party  were  about  to  meet  to  form  some 
plans  ;  but  what  they  were  he  was  not  quite  sure. 

" '  Nabocklish !'  says  he,  '  you  are  a  true  boy,  I  be- 
lieve, since  you  know  me  and  my  father,  though  I 
don't  recollect  you ;  and  if  there's  a  loose  share  in  the 
fun,  you  shall  have  it.' 

" '  Thank  ye,'  says  I. 


216    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  "Well,  we  came  to  the  smithy,  and  there  there  was 
a  large  party,  with  lots  of  potheen.  But  as  I  see'd 
Ryan  among  them,  who  might  recognise  me,  I  wouldn't 
go  in,  but  sat  outside. 

"  Presently  I  heard  them  singing  and  talking,  and 
the  smoke  of  tobaccy  came  out  like  the  smelling  of  a 
rose ;  but  then  when  I  sniffed  this,  and  the  scent  of 
the  raal  potheen,  it  was  as  much  as  I  could  do  to 
resist.  But  I  had  promised  to  wait  for  Brophy,  so  I 
thought  it  safest  to  remain  quiet.  In  the  song  they 
sung  they  mentioned  all  the  affairs  they  had  been  in  ; 
and  John  Leary  boasted  'twas  he  as  settled  Fitzroy. 
But  they  all  bragged  of  so  many  deeds  of  the  kind,  I 
didn't  believe  them." 

"  But  the  song — was  it  funny  ?" 

u  Yery  ;  it  was  all  about  murdering  the  gentry,  and 
getting  the  land  to  themselves  ;  and  they  always  wound 
up  with  some  chorus,  saying  how  they'd  serve  your 
honour." 

"  Do  you  recollect  ?  You  said  just  now  you  did." 
« I  do." 

"  Repeat  it,  then." 

"Well,  Major,  I'm  not  a  good  singer;  but  the  end 
of  each  verse  ran  thus  : — 

There's  Hoskins  is  going,  and  Going  is  gone, 

George  Lake  and  Tom  Yokes  are  the  next  to  come  on. 

What  do  you  think  of  that,  Major?" 

"  Oh,  if  that's  all  you  learnt,  it  was  scarcely  worth 
the  trip.  Lines — almost  the  same — were  posted  on  the 
inn  door  where  I  slept  at  Kilmellock,  and  even  on  the 
Chapel  door,  a  month  ago." 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE, 


217 


6£  Ah,  but  I  didn't  tell  you  how  I  wormed  out  about 
Mrs.  Malone  from  Bill  Brophy." 

"  And  you  are  sure  J ohnston  knows  nothing  of  it  P 

"  Quite ;  he's  a  real  respectable  man,  and  don't  caro 
a  trawneen  for  the  woman." 

W  Well,  be  off;  I'll  see  to  all  this." 

M  But  Brophy,  your  honour  P 

c<  I'll  have  him  taken  within  an  hour,  as  you  happen 
to  fear  him ;  but  believe  me,  he'll  never  suspect  you 
of  giving  evidence.  So  now,  go  out  the  back  way ; 
I'm  going  with  my  friend  for  an  evening's  fishing  on 
the  falls  of  Doonas."    And  away  we  went. 

The  next  day  Yokes,  attended  by  an  uncouth  ser- 
vant in  livery,  drove  down  to  Mrs.  Malone's.  She  re- 
ceived him  with  kindness,  and  warmly  expressed  her 
gratitude.  She  placed  before  him  a  plenteous  luncheon, 
of  which  the  good  magistrate  largely  partook.  His 
horse  had  been  put  up,  and  the  servant  now  amused 
himself  by  strolling  through  the  farm-yard,  which 
closely  adjoined  the  house.  He  seemed  to  saunter 
about  carelessly  ;  but  any  one  who  had  closely  watched 
his  eyes  would  have  seen  them  wander  around  with 
piercing  intelligence. 

Yokes,  on  his  part,  was  no  less  busy.  What  these 
close,  though  unperceived  investigations  meant,  we 
shall  see  hereafter.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  civility 
of  the  functionary  towards  his  entertainer,  and  he  took 
down  copious  notes  from  her  statement  relative  to  the 
sudden  disappearance  of  her  husband.  He  shortly, 
however,  took  leave  of  Mrs.  Malone,  who  promised  to 
be  in  Limerick  on  the  following  day,  to  have  her  state- 
ment made  out  in  writing  and  placed  before  the  bench 


218    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

of  magistrates,  for  the  purpose  of  recovering,  if  possible, 
her  errant  partner. 

Yokes  and  his  servant,  who  was  no  less  a  personage 
than  Mickey,  drove  back  to  Limerick,  but  few  words 
passed  between  them. 

"  I  think,  Mickey,  you  are  right.  But  if  so,  where 
is  the  corpse  1  " 

"  I  can't  say,  but  I  think  I  know.  The  dunghill  has 
been  opened  and  closed,  but  not  enough  to  let  in  a 
body ;  it's  that  puzzles  me.  There's  something  too,  I 
think,  down  the  half-dry  well.  I'm  sure  there's  some- 
thing quite  white  at  the  bottom  of  it.  But  I'll  go 
out  again  if  you  wish  it,  Major  1 " 

"  No — it  is  enough.  Did  you  observe,  as  I  did,  that 
the  copper  has  been  lit  and  the  inside  scoured  since  V- 

"I  did;  but  " 

"  Never  mind — that's  enough.  Did  you  pick  up 
anything  1 " 

"  I  did ;  this  knife.  It  was  hid  behind  the  pig- 
stye." 

"Ah,  it  has  been  recently  sharpened  and  used.  You 
say  that  Bill  saw  a  great  smoke,  and  that  there  was  a 
bad  smell  came  from  the  malt-house." 

"  That's  the  truth." 

"  Well,  then,  be  ready  to  march  with  Serjeant 
Reedy  at  daybreak,  and  get  beyond  Malone's  cottage 
without  being  seen,  and  mind  the  instant  the  woman 
leaves  get  into  the  premises,  and  search  every  part. 
I'll  give  directions  to  the  Serjeant.  So  now  jump  off. 
Don't  be  seen  with  me  going  into  town.  I  think  we 
are  on  the  right  scent." 

Some  hours  afterwards  I  went  with  Yokes  to  the 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE. 


219 


theatre,  where,  to  my  great  amusement,  Yokes  WHS 
received  with  three  groans  by  the  people  in  the  gallery, 
while  I  was  loudly  cheered.  I  looked  at  my  friend, 
who  laughed  heartily  and  Lowed  to  them,  and  when  I 
timidly  asked — 1  wonder  why  they  cheer  me.  Sure 
it's  because  you  are  a  stranger  and  in  uniform.  They'd 
cheer  a  certain  old  gentleman  himself  if  he  wore  gold 
epaulettes.  A  voice,  however,  at  this  instant  called  on 
"Dirty  Betty  Carmody"  (a  most  respectable  Serjeant  in 
the  militia,  and  the  leader  in  the  orchestra)  to  play 
up  !  and  having  compelled  him  by  vociferation  to 
sound  Garry o wen,  they  began  screeching,  hallooing, 
and  beating  time,  till  the  wretched  old  theatre  nearly 
tumbled  about  our  ears.  An  Irish  theatre  some  thirty 
years  ago  was,  indeed,  a  strange  arena,  over  which 
the  "  gods  "  themselves  most  arbitrarily  presided. 
A  revenir. 

Next  day,  soon  after  noon,  the  interesting  Dido,  so 
cruelly  deserted,  drove  up  to  the  police-office,  and  for 
a  few  moments  Yokes  treated  her  in  a  most  courteous 
manner. 

Presently  a  message  was  brought  in,  and  his  whole 
manner  changed. 

"  Send  in  Smith  and  Macgrath."  The  altered  tone 
in  which  the  magistrate  spoke,  appeared  to  surprise 
Mrs.  Malone. 

They  entered.    u  Arrest  that  woman  !" 

"  Me  ?  me,  Major  i    What  do  you  mean  {" 

"  I  arrest  you  as  the  murderess  of  Thady  Malone, 
your  late  husband." 

"  What !"  screamed  the  astonished  female  ;  "  you 
cannot  mean  it.     It  is  impossible.    I  loved  him 


220    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AS  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

dearly,  and  I  am  as  innocent  as  you  are ;  I  swear 
by—" 

u  Don't  perjure  yourself.    I've  proofs." 

"  That's  out  of  the  question,"  cried  the  prisoner, 
brightening  up,  for  she  had  been  deadly  pale  and 
awfully  agitated,  on  the  first  accusation  being  made. 
This,  however,  was  no  proof  against  her.  Any  other 
woman  would  have  been  equally  taken  aback  at  such  a 
dreadful — such  an  unlooked-for — accusation.  "  Sure 
he's  gone,  and  far  away  by  this  time." 

"  You  murdered  him,  Mary  Malone." 

"  Where  is  your  proof]" 

u  Bring  in  your  parcel,  Sergeant  Reedy,"  who  im- 
mediately opened  it,  and  out  rolled,  to  the  horror  of 
all  around,  a  human  head.  It  was  bleached,  and 
looked  more  like  the  head  of  a  calf  than  of  a  human 
being. 

The  woman  could  not  repress  a  scream. 

"  Is  that  your  late  husband's  head  ?" 

u  I  don't  know — no — no.    Tm  sure  it  is  not." 

"  Sergeant,  you  knew  Thady  Malone ;  is  that  him  P 

"  It  is,  sir  ;  I  will  swear  to  it." 

"  Where  did  you  find  it  P 

"  In  the  dunghill,  in  his  farm-yard,  close  to  the 
house.    I  had  two  witnesses  with  me." 

The  wretched  culprit  sank  in  a  chair  ;  then  starting 
up,  she  exclaimed,  "  But  why  say  I  had  art  or  part  in 
it  ?  may  not  some  one  else  have  put  it  there  ?"  and 
she  looked  round  triumphantly. 

"  Send  the  next  constable  in  ;"  he  bore  a  basket. 

u  Sure  it's  an  arm  and  a  leg  I  found  in  the  old  well, 
though  how  it  came  so  white  I  can't  telh" 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  DISAPPEARANCE. 


221 


"  Do  you  recollect  Bill  Brophy  bringing  your  hus- 
band home  on  Monday  afternoon  very  drunk,  and 
that  you  plied  him  with  liquor  ]" 

The  murderess — for  by  this  time  it  was  tolerably 
apparent  to  all  that  she  was  so — shuddered. 

"  Faith,  then,"  said  Yokes,  "  I'm  about  to  commit 
you  to  gaol  for  the  murder  of  your  husband,  and  to 
show  you  that  I  don't  wish  to  entrap  you,  although  it's 
unusual,  I'll  tell  you  all  I  know.  I  shall  probably 
have  more  before  your  trial,  but  in  the  meantime  I  tell 
you  so  much,  in  order  that  you  may  make  a  good 
defence  if  you  can,  and  I  only  hope,  Mrs.  Malone,  that 
as  I've  knowu  you  long,  you  may  escape  the  dreadful 
doom,  which,  if  guilty,  you  will  not  only  deserve  but 
suffer." 

"I  have  reason  to  believe  that,  being  in  love  with 
another  man,  although  that  man  rejected  your  advances 
you  determined  on  getting  rid  of  your  husband." 

"  Ah  !  then,  that's  not  true." 

"  Silence  and  listen,  or  I'll  say  no  more.  On  Monday 
evening  last  Bill  Brophy  of  Ballymeadows  brought 
Malone  home  to  the  cottage  in  a  state  of  intoxication ; 
you  plied  him,  as  I  have  already  told  you,  with  liquor 
till  he  was  senseless  ;  Brophy  then  left  the  house,  but 
not  the  neighbourhood.  He  watched  through  a  crevice 
in  the  door." 

The  prisoner  sighed  deeply. 

"Ko  sooner  did  you  think  yourself  \mseen,  than, 
taking  out  a  knife  you  had  previously  sharpened,  and 
which  1  have  here,  you  cut  poor  Thady's  throat,  taking 
care  to  catch  the  blood  as  far  as  possible  in  a  flat  dining 
dish.    This  done — the  man  destroyed— you  went  into 


222    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


the  washing-linney,*  and  here  you  lighted  the  copper 
fire — the  boiler  had  evidently  been  prepared,  for  it  wa* 
filled  with  water  and  the  fuel  ready.  You  then  returned 
to  the  kitchen,  and  with  the  hatchet — which  you  after- 
wards buried,  and  the  knife  I  have  got— cut  up  the  poor 
fellow,  and  theu  boiled  him  piecemeal ;  look  at  the 
head  and  those  limbs,  and  you  will  see  that  I  am  right." 

A  groan  of  horror  went  round  ;  all  appeared  shocked 
except  the  prisoner,  who  maintained  her  calm  de- 
meanour. 

*  At  this  dreadful  work  you  remained  till  long  past 
daylight,  when  Brophy  went  away." 

"  Brophy's  a  perjured  villain  P  cried  Mrs.  Malone. 

"  I  remarked  myself  the  newly  cleaned  copper ;  there 
are  some  four  drops  of  blood  near  the  fireplace,  and  I 
pocketed  two  buttons,  torn  from  the  poor  man's  coat, 
while  you  left  the  room.  In  the  mean  time  an  active 
agent  looked  over  the  premises  and  remarked  that  the 
dunghill  had  lately  been  disturbed.  He  also  found  the 
knife  and  other  trifles  he  will  produce  at  the  trial  Ih  a 
word,  Mrs.  Malone,  you  murdered  your  husband  whose 
head  now  lies  before  you,  and  boiled  his  mutilated 
remains.  Don't  deny  it,  or  you'll  offend  heaven  ;  don't 
admit  it,  or  it  will  serve  to  convict  you  at  the  assizes. 
So  take  her  away,  serjeant,  and  may  heaven  have  more 
mercy  on  her  than  she  had  on  my  ouce  honest  tenant 
Thady  Malone." 

Proved  and  convicted  on  the  very  clearest  evidence, 
Mrs.  Malone  was  hanged  shortly  after  the  following 
assizes. 

*  Linney  is  generally  applied  in  Ireland  to  any  shed  attached  i& 
the  dwelling-house. 


223 


THE  DEAD  CAPTURE. 


But  what  shall  I  say  to  them  r  asked  his  footman 
83  S  the  hall-"  what  shall  I  say  i» 

bay  I  m  not  visible.?  ' 
"But  why  shall  I  say  you  are  not  visible  J» 
Votes,  who  was  bothered  by  thus  being  cross-ques 
baaed  and  annoyed  by  the  pertinacity  of  !he  s  riot 

!,«  J   i  ^  j  springing  into  his  saddle 

be  dashed  down  George- street,  and  was  far  on  his 
journey  before  the  rest  of  the  family  were  stirring 

the  bTvH  /  !rTer'  10  ^  •  We  fiom 

^  breakfast  table,  the  family  sat  down  to  that  meal 

without  making  any  inquiry,  and  the  business  of  the 
day  went  on  as  usual. 

At  about  noon,  a  pea3ant,  who  it  afterwards  appeared 


224    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


came  from  the  county  of  Clare,  called,  and  asked  to  see 
u  the  master." 

"  It  is  impossible." 

"  Why  ?  Sure  I  want  to  have  spache  of  his  ho- 
nour r 

"  Well,  then,  I  tell  you  you  can't." 
"  And  why  not  I  persisted  the  other. 
"  He's  OT 

*  Oh,  then,  never  mind  that  Faith,  I'm  sure  if  he's 
alive  he'd  see  me.  Haven  t  I  come  all  the  way  from 
Cratloe  Wood — a  good  ten  miles — and  faith,  I'm  not 
to  be  sent  back  without  setting  eyes  upon  him." 

u  I  tell  you  you  can't  see  him." 

"  Sure  I'm  Thady  Watson  ;  he  knows  me  well." 

"  If  you  were  his  Holiness  the  Pope,  you  couldn't 
see  him." 

"  Sure  I  must.  Now  let  me  only  have  spache  of 
him  for  a  bit.  In  holy  truth,  then,  I  wont  go  away 
till  I  have  " 

"  Once  for  all,  be  off,  for  I  tell  you  the  thing's  im- 
possible !" 

"  Impossible  !   And  why  1" 

The  servant  was  a  bit  of  a  wag.  He  was  angiy  and 
annoyed  with  the  continuous  pleading  of  the  fellow. 
Besides  which,  if  the  truth  must  be  told,  he  wanted  to 
get  back  to  the  kitchen,  where  his  warm,  comfortable 
dinner  stood  cooling,  and  so  determined  at  once  to 
come  to  a  conclusion.    He  quietly  replied — 

"  The  reason  is  very  clear — he's  dead  l"  And  slam- 
ming the  door  to  in  the  astonished  peasant's  face,  he 
burst  out  laughing,  and  ran  downstairs. 

The  surprised  countryman  stood  silent  on  the  steps 


THE  DEAD  CAPTURE.  225 

Of  the  entrance,  and  with  the  usual  cunning  of  a  low 
Irishman,  began  to  canvass  in  his  own  mind  the  pro- 
bability of  the  news  he  had  just  heard  being  true  or 
otherwise;  and  then,  with  a  complacent  grunt— uttered 
as  if  a  good  thought  had  struck  him-he  ran  across  the 
street,  and  hence  took  a  full  survey  of  the  house.  Here 
he  saw  every  blind  down  (the  morning  sun  resting  on 
the  windows),  and  this  bore  out  the  correctness  of  the 
footman's  statement-a  statement  which  was  still  more 
fully  confirmed  when  he  saw  two  policemen  turned 
away  from  the  door;  and,  last  of  all,  Mr.  Denmead, 
the  undertaker  (who  happened  to  have  been  sent  for 
by  Mrs.  Vokes-he  being  a  carpenter-to  make  some 
trifling  repairs)  enter  the  house. 

With  a  look  of  mystic  importance  and  delight,  the 
Clare-man  went  off  and  fetched  his  horse  and  car,  and 
without  waiting  to  transact  the  business  he  had  come 
about,  set  off  in  haste  to  announce  the  joyful  ncwa 
throughout  a  county  which  had  long  dreaded  the  power 
of  the  terrible  Major. 

When  the  footman,  some  half  an  hour  later,  related 
to  his  fellow-servants  the  witty  answer  he  had  given 
he  was  astonished  to  find  they  did  not  share  the  joke  • 
far  from  it,  they  loudly  blamed  him,  and  foretold  the 
serious  scrape  he  had  got  himself  into.  John  be^an 
to  feel  uncomfortable;  but  as  it  was  now  too  late* to 
undo  his  folly,  he  wisely  made  the  best  of  it,  and  went 
on  cleaning  his  master's  plate. 

Vokes  in  the  meantime  carried  out  the  measures 
he  came  over  to  propose,  and  then  dined  at  the  house 
of  a  friend.  It  was  dark  when  he  started  to  return- 
but  to  this  he  did  not  object,  as  he  was  by  no  means 
15 


226    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

anxious  to  be  recognised  ;  for  the  same  reason  he 
declined  to  be  attended.  The  only  precaution  lie  took 
was  slightly  to  vary  the  route  he  had  followed  in  the 
morning. 

As  he  got  a  few  miles  out  of  Ennis,  he  beheld  several 
large  bonfires  lighted  on  the  hills,  and  he  almost  began 
to  regret  that  he  had  left  Limerick,  as  these  illumina- 
tions were  always  used  as  signals  for  outbreak,  or  to 
telegraph  some  important  new3. 

Not  far  from  the  wood  of  Cratloe  one  of  these  fires 
blazed,  and  although  it  was  somewhat  hazardous  to  do 
so,  our  bold  magistrate  determined  on  visiting  the 
spot  and  learning  the  origin  of  it.  So  he  jumped  off 
his  horse,  and  concealing  the  pistol  which  he  carried 
in  the  holster  that  he  now  cast  from  him,  he  covered 
his  chin  with  his  muffler,  put  the  hat  straight  on  his 
head,  which  he  usually  wore  jauntily  on  one  side,  and 
changing  his  appearance  and  accent  as  far  as  possible, 
rode  slowly  up  the  ascent,  whistling  the  "  British 
Grenadiers." 

On  his  arrival  he  found  an  enormous  fire,  around 
which  fifty  or  sixty  people  were  assembled,  smoking, 
'    drinking,  and  chatting. 

"  Good  evening  to  you,  my  friends,"  cried  the  Major, 
assuming  to  his  own  satisfaction  the  pronunciation  and 
manner  of  an  Englishman.  "How  do  you  do,  my 
friends  I" 

The  surprised  peasantry  started  up,  but  seeing  a 
single  horseman,  they  again  resumed  their  places,  the 
neighbouring  blacksmith  calling  out,  "  Eaith,  what  are 
ye  after  1    What  do  you  want !" 

"  Oh,  nothing— nothing  at  all !    I  only  rode  here  to 


THE  DEAD  CAPTUKE. 


227 


say  I  had  lost  my  way  in  this  confounded  country,  and 
wished  to  ask  you  which  way  I  should  go  ?" 
"  And  where  are  you  going  ?" 

"To  the  city  of  Limerick.  I  think  you  call  it 
Garryowen  in  Irish." 

The  people  burst  out  laughing  at  this  specimen  of  a 
Cockney,  and  the  word  omadthawn  (idiot)  might  be 
heard  issuing  out  of  more  than  one  mouth,  as  they  ex- 
changed observations  in  Irish. 

"  Thin  it's  yer  way  ye're  asking  1" 

"  Well,  that's  all,  I  believe.  I  really  should  like  to 
find  it.  I'd  give  a  shilling  to  any  fine  fellow  who 
would  tell  me  the  way  I  should  go  ?" 

This  new  Cockney  ism  (as  the  Irish  people  call  it) 
produced  a  fresh  laugh,  and  seeing  that  the  man  was 
perfectly  innocent,  and  a  stranger,  they  asked  the  fool 
to  partake  of  some  of  their  cheer.  He  did  so,  and 
seemingly  allowed  the  liquor  to  open  his  mouth,  for 
now  on  his  side  he  began  to  ask  questions. 

"  Tell  me,  my  very  excellent  friends,  why  have  you 
lit  up  this  very  nice  fire  on  the  top  of  this  bleak 
mountain  V 

u  It's  to  convey  the  news." 

"  What  news  ?" 

"  Don't  you  know  it  i  Faith,  thin,  ye're  the  only 
man  in  Clare  that  don't.  Sure,  Tom  Yokes  the  pro- 
secutor's dead." 

Vokes  could  not  conceal  a  start. 

"  You  may  well  be  surprised,  and  so  were  we  when 
we  heard  it,  for  he  was  alive  and  well  yesterday. 
Here's  his  health." 

The  magistrate  mentally  joined  in  the  toast. 

15—2 


228    KEC0LLECTI0XS  OF  AN"  IMSII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"And  a  speedy  passage  to  the  bottomless  pit," 
bellowed  the  farrier,  with  a  savage  burst  of  delight. 
Vokes  did  not  join  in  this. 

u  Sure,  he  hanged  my  brother  for  shooting  an  ex- 
ciseman." 

*  And  didn't  he  transport  my  cousin  Pat  for  a  simple 
burglary  V 

"  Oh,  he  was  a  savage,  a  raal  right  down  savage. 
Bad  luck  to  him  ¥*  chimed  in  a  third. 

"And  haven't  I  been  out  these  nine  months  on 
account  of  the  burning  of  ould  Macnaulty  and  his 
daughter.  Haven't  I  been  hunted  up  and  down  the 
county  like  a  wild  beast,  and  after  all  I  was  not  the 
principal — I  only  strangled  the  ould  fellow  to  prevent 
his  telling.  Ye  all  know  it  was  Fred  Dwyer  as  stabbed 
the  girl,  and  robbed  her,  and  fired  the  house  ;  and  there 
now  for  ye,  he's  down  comfortable  like,  at  his  uncle's, 
beyant  Ennistown,  and  aren't  I  here  in  terror  of  my 
life  ?  Bedad,  I'd  like  to  stick  a  knife  in  his  heart,  the 
blackguard,  before  they  bury  him." 

"Ah,  there,  Teddy  Lynch,  hould  your  tongue;  you 
talk  too  much,"  said  a  female  of  the  party. 

"You're  right,  Biddy  agrath.  He'll  talk  himself 
into  a  hempen  collar,  some  day,  if  he  don't  look 
sharp." 

Vokes  had  now  learnt  all.  The  man  of  all  others 
he  wished  to  seize,  stood  within  three  paces  of  him  ; 
the  fellow  who  had  so  long  eluded  his  pursuit  was  now 
within  his  grasp. 

Not  liking  the  turn  the  conversation  had  taken,  the 
C.  M.  P.  gave  notice  of  his  approaching  departure,  not 
in  a  hurried  manner,  but  in  a  cool,  slow  way,  drawling 


THE  DEAD  CAPTURE. 


229 


out  his  words  to  the  great  amusement  of  his  hearers, 
who  looked  upon  the  Londoner's  accent  as  a  subject  of' 
fair  game,  without  even  for  an  instant  suspecting  that 
their  conversation,  which  had  been  carried  on  in  pure 
Irish,  could  even  have  been  guessed  at  by  the  Cockney 
before  them. 

Several  persons  now  offered  their  directions  relative 
to  the  best  road  for  the  stranger  to  follow,  while  Teddy 
Lynch,  more  eager  than  any  other,  doubtlessly  desiring 
to  earn  the  promised  shilling,  pressed  forward  and 
proffered  his  advice,  declaring  he  knew  every  yard  of 
the  country. 

Yokes  at  once  addressed  him.  "  My  good  fellow, 
you  are  pleased  to  say  you  know  this  wild  country 
well.  Now  I'm  all  alone  and  unarmed,  and  I  never 
was  here  before,  and  I  don't  much  like  travelling  in 
strange  parts,  you  see,  after  dark;  so  what  will  you  take 
to  come  and  guide  me  ?" 

"  Me— is  it  me  f 

"  Go  with  him,"  shouted  two  or  three,  "  for  the  fun 
of  it." 

"  If  you'll  come,  I'll  give  you  a  pound-note." 

"  Tare  a  nouns,  it's  a  good  offer ;  but  you'll  let  me  off 
as  soon  as  we  get  to  Banrathy  Bridge,  for  I  have  reasons 
for  not  wishing  to  enter  any  town  just  now." 

"  It's  a  bargain,  my  good  friend,"  replied  the  magis- 
trate, and  away  they  went,  the  peasant  walking 
beside  the  Major's  horse.  In  this  manner  they  pro- 
ceeded, little  conversation  being  exchanged,  till  they 
arrived  at  Banrathy  Bridge,  when  Lynch  turning 
round,  declared  that  he  had  fulfilled  his  task,  and 
demanded  the  reward. 


230    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"And  you  shall  have  it,"  roared  Vokes  as  he  jumped 
off  his  horse — "you  shall  have  it,"  cried  he,  seizing 
the  surprised  peasant  by  the  collar.  "  Attempt  to 
escape,  and  your  brains  shall  be  scattered  over  this 
bridge,"  added  he,  drawing  out  his  pistol  and  presenting 
it  at  the  fellow's  head.  "Hey,  police!  police!  Come 
here  quickly.  Nay,  it's  no  use  struggling,  Tim  Lynch, 
for  I  am  Tom  Vokes." 

The  murderer  looked  at  him,  and  seemed  at  a  glance 
to  read  the  truth  of  his  assertion.  His  altered  manner 
and  a  few  words  of  Irish  he  had  mingled  in  his  address 
too  surely  told  the  assassin  that  he  was  in  the  hands  of 
his  most  dreaded  enemy.  He  no  longer  struggled.  He 
submitted  to  his  fate.  The  dead  had,  as- he  believed, 
come  to  life  in  order  to  seize  him — how  then  could 
he  struggle  !  Terror-struck  and  paralysed,  he  allowed 
his  captor  to  drag  him  over  the  bridge,  at  the  foot  of 
which  stood  a  small  police  barrack.  Here  the  force, 
aroused  by  the  calls  of  their  superior,  were  just  hur- 
rying from  their  beds,  when  Vokes  entered,  dragging 
in  his  formidable  prisoner.  He  only  remained  to  see 
the  fellow  handcuffed  and  confined.  He  wrote  a  short 
note  to  the  nearest  magistrate,  who  lived  within  a  few 
yards.  Then  mounting  his  horse,  he  galloped  cheer- 
fully off,  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  report  which  had 
seemingly  removed  him  from  this  wTorld. 

After  some  trouble  he  came  at  the  real  truth,  and 
in  consideration  of  the  important  capture  to  which  it 
had  unwittingly  led,  the  footman  was  forgiven. 

Tim  Lynch  was  hanged  at  the  next  assizes  held  at 
Ennis,  to  the  great  joy  and  comparative  security  of  the 
whole  county  of  Clare. 


231 


A  SPORTING-  ADVENTURE. 


Mr,  L  was  one  of  the  most  active  and  zealous 
magistrates  in  the  county  of  Limerick.  He  came  for- 
ward on  every  occasion,  and  did  his  utmost  to  quell 
the  disturbances  which  in  1821  convulsed  the  district, 
and  were  ;the  precursors  of  those  outrages  which  for 
many  years  subsequently  disgraced  the  South  of  Ire- 
land. Ever  ready  to  afford  his  services,  and  equally 
prepared  when  called  upon  to  risk  his  life,  the  worthy 
magistrate  led  far  from  a  comfortable  or  a  peaceable 
existence.  On  one  occasion,  about  the  time  I  speak 
o£  he  was  solicited  to  attend  with  some  yeomanry 
and  a  large  body  of  regulars  the  fair  at  Bathkeale. 
Here  the  ordinary  festivities  took  place — that  is  to 
say,  after  the  usual  horse -coping  and  bargaining,  the 
usual  dancing  took  place,  and  when  this  was  done,  the 
usual  drinking  was  indulged  in,  crowned,  as  it  always 
was,  by  the  most  fearful  riots  between  opposing  factions, 
in  the  course  of  which  several  persons  were  killed,  in 
spite  of  all  the  exertions  made  to  keep  those  savage 
antagonists  (who  had  probably  met  here  by  mutual 
agreement  "  to  fight  it  out")  quiet  and  orderly.  The 
unhappy  result  of  the  conflict,  and  the  interference  of 
the  troops,  was  that  the  soldiery  in  turn  (compelled  to 


232    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  JRISU  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

do  so  in  their  own  defence)  fired  on  the  people,  and  so 
ended  the  affair.  The  latter  quickly  quitted  the  field, 
leaving  the  place  in  quiet  possession  of  the  powers  of 
the  law. 

Three  or  four  dead  bodies  lay  upon  the  ground ; 
gome  of  the  military  were  wounded.  The  people 
uttered  wild  threats  in  tones  which  reached  the  ears  of 
the  exasperated  troops. 

The  magistrate  desired  (at  least  so  I  have  ever  heard 
it  asserted)  a  grave  to  be  dug  on  the  spot,  and  into 
this  he  threw  the  bodies  of  those  men  who  had  fallen 
in  fighting  with  the  Kings  troops.  He  then  ordered 
some  quicklime  to  be  thrown  over  them,  and  the  hole 
filled  up.  This  was  done,  and  shortly  afterwards  the 
forces  left  Rathkeale  and  returned  to  their  quarters. 

Upon  what  grounds  they  based  their  belief,  I  know 
not ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  ever  afterwards  the  peasantry 
boldly  asserted  that  the  men  who  had  been  shot  were 
buried  alive  !  that  they  had  turned  round  in  their  last 
resting-place,  and  that  they  might  have  been  recovered 
had  it  not  been  for  the  operation  of  the  quicklime  ! 

Such  a  wicked  and  false  report  having  been  indus- 
triously spread,  it  can  scarcely  be  wondered  at  that 

Mr.  L  was  held  up  as  an  object  of  horror,  and  his 

life  placed  in  hourly  jeopardy. 

The  old  man,  however,  passed  away,  and  left  a  son 
to  represent  him,  one  of  the  pleasantest  and  best 
young  men  in  the  county,  celebrated  for  his  convivial 
powers,  his  reckless  daring,  and  his  great  superiority 
in  every  athletic  exercise  :  he  was  at  once  the  best 
rider,  the  best  shot,  the  best  runner,  and  the  best 
thrower  of  a  sledge-hammer  in  the  county  of  Limerick. 


A  SPORTING  ADVENTURE, 


233 


G.  L  was  more  than  once  fired  at,  but  never 
wounded.  By  his  fleetness  on  some  occasions,  and  his 
great  bodily  strength  on  others,  he  had  frequently 
escaped  from  the  hands  of  ruffians  who  sought  to 
injure  -him.  As  we  have  stated  before,  George  had 
even  been  denounced  in  the  songs  of  the  people — his 
death  was  foretold.  But  our  stalwart  friend  laughed 
alike  at  personal  attacks  and  anonymous  threats,  and 
continued  his  jovial  and  sporting  career  in  spite  of 
the  "bad  boys"  who,  though  disliking  him,  feared 
to  approach  him. 

One  afternoon  I  was  seated  with  Vokes,  when  our 
friend  rushed  in.  From  his  dress  he  had  evidently 
been  out  shooting ;  and  such  proved  to  be  the  fact. 
He  had  tried  snipe -shooting  in  Cappagh  Bog,  and  for 
some  time  enjoyed  good  sport ;  unfortunately,  how- 
ever, he  had  been  induced,  by  thirst,  to  enter  a  cottage 
and  ask  for  a  drink  of  water.  This  was  cheerfully 
accorded  to  him,  and  the  potatoes  just  boiled  for 
their  family  meal  freely  offered  by  the  two  women, 
who  were  alone  in  the  cabin,  to  George  with  a  friendly 
invitation  to  partake  of  them.  Fancying  that  he 
would  please  them  by  accepting  their  proffered  hos- 
pitality, and  well  knowing  that  a  refusal  to  eat  under 
an  Irish  roof  is  considered  a  decided  slight  in  that 
country,  the  sportsman  freely  swallowed  one  or  two, 
and  in  return  gave  them  the  birds  he  had  just  shot, 
and  a  glass  of  whisky,  which  he  drew  from  his  leathern 
pouch. 

He  now  rose  to  quit ;  but  to  his  surprise  he  found 
the  door  closely  barred  on  the  outside,  and  on  turning 
round,  after  several  ineffectual^  efforts  to  break  open 


234    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

the  entrance,  he  discovered  that  during  that  time,  at 
least  half  a  dozen  peasants  had  entered  at  the  back 
way,  and  one  of  them  was  in  the  act  of  bearing  off  his 
gun,  which  he  had  laid  aside  while  eating.  He  sprang 
at  the  man  who  had  thus  robbed  him,  and  seized  him 
by  the  throat ;  but  the  fellow  at  once  passed  the 
weapon  to  a  comrade,  who  made  off  with  it.  He 
vainly  endeavoured  to  struggle  with  the  party,  who, 
having  thus  possessed  themselves  of  the  arm  they 
coveted,  took  to  flight,  and  left  him  again  alone  with 
the  two  women,  who  had  not  ceased  to  cry  and  lament 
during  the  whole  scene,  which  had  not,  however,  occu- 
pied five  minutes. 

"  Och,  thin,  the  Lord  be  merciful  to  us,  Master 
George — it's  well  it's  no  worse  !" 

"  You  know  me  then  1 " 

"  Troth,  I  do.  My  father  was  herd  to  your  father 
— God  rest  the  old  gentleman,  though  they  tell  wicked 
stories  of  him ;  and  faix,  I'm  a  thinking  it  was  on  that 
account  they  spared  your  life.  But  take  my  advice, 
yer  honour ;  don't  come  to  the  Bog  again.  They  are  now 
pleased  at  getting  your  gun,  and  don't  care  to  harm 
ye.  Sure,  they  mayn't  always  be  so  agreeable,  and 
you  might  get  an  ugly  puck — not  to  say  a  death-stroke 
— so  don't  come,  Master  George ;  and,  faith,  if  ye're 
wise,  ye  won't  say  much  about  it." 

Long  ere  the  well-meaning  women  had  done  speaking 
the  young  man  had  left  the  cottage,  and  now  sought 
Vokes  for  advice. 

"  Well,  what  do  you  wish  me  to  do  T  asked  the  C.  M.  P. 

"  I  want  you  to  try  and  recover  my  gun." 


A  SPORTING  ADVENTURE. 


235 


"  Do  you  know  that  if  I  took  any  steps  to  find  out 
and  arrest  these  men,  it  might  lead  to  bad  results." 

"  Is  the  county  then  in  such  a  dreadful  state  1 " 

"In  truth  it  is,"  replied  Yokes,  who  now  quitted 
the  room,  and  was  absent  for  about  ten  minutes. 

"  Your  father-in-law  is  in  a  queer  humour,"  chimed 
in  L  . 

"He  is  so,"  I  replied,  *  but  he  is  so  strange  in  his  ways 
that  I  never  question  him.  You  have  now  told  him  your 
tale.  You  had  better  say  no  more.  He'll  not  forget  it ; 
and  notwithstanding  all  he  says,  depend  upon  it  he'll 
try  and  recover  your  gun  if  an  opportunity  offers  itself." 

"  I  have  no  doubt  you  are  right.  I'll  say  no  more 
about  it." 

Presently  Yokes  came  in,  and  having  succeeded  in 
persuading  our  victimized  friend  to  stay  to  dinner,  he 
branched  off  into  all  the  light  talk  of  the  day,  carefully 
avoiding  any  allusion  to  George's  loss. 

About  eight  o'clock  Sir  R.  F  came  in,  a  relative 

of  Yokes,  and  his  medical  adviser.    F  challenged 

the  magistrate  to  play  at  piquet,  and  they  sat  down 

to  that  scientific  game,  while  L          and  I  amused 

ourselves  by  chatting  over  our  respective  feats  in  the 
hunting-field. 

It  was  about  ten  o'clock  when  Yokes  was  called  out 
of  the  room.  He  seemed  to  expect  the  summons,  which 
could  be  nothiug  very  extraordinary,  as  he  remained 
to  finish  the  game  ere  he  arose  to  attend  to  the  call. 

He  shortly  returned,  and  walked  straight  up  to 
George. 

"  You  would  know  your  gun  again  V 


236    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AX  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

"  Decidedly." 

"  You  could  swear  to  it  V9 
i    "  I  could." 

Vokes  went  to  the  door  and  opened  it  Sergeant 
Toomy  entered ;  he  carried  a  fowling-piece  in  his 
hand.    L  's  eyes  actually  danced  with  delight. 

" Is  that  it?" 

"  It  is.    But  how  did  you  get  it  P 

"  That  is  my  business.  Give  back  the  piece  to  the 
police-sergeant.  It  will  be  returned  to  you  after  the 
trial." 

"What  trial  P 

"  The  trial  of  the  four  men,  aud  their  accomplices 
the  two  women,  in  Cappagh  Bog." 

"  Indeed  ;  but  can  you  catch  them  P 

The  door  opened,  and  four  fine-looking  peasants 
entered  and  two  women,  in  custody  of  a  small  party  of 
police. 

"Are  these  the  men  who  assaulted  you,  and  took 
your  gun  P 
*  They  are." 

"  And  these  the  women,  who  (unseen  by  you)  sent 
off  a  boy  to  fetch  them  P 

"  They  are  the  women ;  but  I  don't  believe  " 

"  Silence  !  the  crime  of  seizing  arms,  more  especially 
with  force,  from  the  person,  is  an  offence  of  the  most 
serious  nature.  Desire  Mr.  Woodbourne  to  make  out 
a  committal,  and  march  them  up  to  the  county  jaih 

And  now,  F  ,  let  us  finish  the  rubber  of  piquet 

these  fellows  interrupted."  • 

The  wonderfully  quiet  manner  in  which  Vokes  first 
gleaned  information,  and  then  made  use  of  it  j  the 


A  SPORTING  ADVENTURE. 


237 


calm  and  dispassionate  mode  in  which  he  treated  those 
brought  before  him,  the  strange  way  in  which  he 
seemed  to  possess  a  certain  knowledge  of  everything 
that  was  passing;  had  a  powerful  effect  on  all  around 
him. 

On  the  evening  in  question,  though  highly  gratified 
in  having  recovered  his  lost  treasure,  I  am  certain  that 
our  friend  left  the  doorstep  in  George-street,  convinced 
that  the  peasantry  were  right  when  they  said  f<  Tom 
Yokes  had  dealings  with  " 


238 


THE  HANGMAN. 


Although  1  had  given  a  brother  subaltern  two  days1 
duty  in  order  to  shirk  the  disagreeable  sight  of  a 
criminal  being  hanged,  for  to  ray  great  annoyance — 
though  not  to  my  surprise,  it  being  an  event  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  Ireland — I  found  myself  detailed  for  the 
"  execution  party,"  or,  to  express  it  in  less  technical 
terms,  I  was  ordered  out  in  charge  of  some  twenty-five 
dragoons,  to  be  present  at  the  execution  of  a  culprit — 
a  degrading  service  to  which  the  cavalry  are  continually 
liable  in  the  sister  country,  and  as  I  said  before,  a 
duty  to  which  I  so  strenuously  objected,  that  my 
military  chief  allowed  me  to  transfer  it  to  a  brother 
officer — he  bargaining  that  I  should  take  his  orderlies 
for  two  days,  and  thus  release  him  to  the  joys  of  the 
hunting  field. 

But  though  I  thus  eschewed  the  horrors  of  seeing 
a  poor  wretch  put  to  death,  I  must  admit  that  I  had 
a  morbid  desire  to  behold  the  victim  ere  he  suffered, 
and  to  examine  the  fearful  apparatus  which  was  to 
put  an  end  to  his  existence. 

I  therefore  asked  Vokes  to  take  me  into  the  new 
gaol  to  see  the  condemned  felon,  to  which,  after  a 


THE  HANGMAN. 


239 


slight  sneer  at  my  inconsistency,  he  assented,  and  we 
walked  up  together. 

On  our  arrival  we  were  shown  into  the  cell  where 
the  unhappy  wretch  sat  awaiting  the  summons  which 
was  to  call  him  forth  to  expiate  the  crime  he  had 
committed. 

A  couple  of  turnkeys  were  in  attendance  on  the 
man,  who  sat  in  seeming  calmness  on  a  stool,  freely 
conversing  with  the  persons  around  him.  He  had  con- 
fessed his  crime,  and  had  probably  been  absolved  by 
his  clergy,  for  he  seemed  in  tolerably  good  spirits  and 
fully  prepared  to  meet  his  fate.  He  spoke  coolly  about 
the  murder  he  had  committed,  and  appeared  more 
anxious  for  his  poor  children  than  himself.  He  had 
taken  leave  of  his  wife  and  family  :  he  had,  as  he 
considered,  made  his  peace  with  Heaven,  and  he  now 
resignedly  awaited  the  last  struggle  which  was  to 
wrench  him  from  life  to  eternity.  He  was  a  tall 
athletic  young  man,  some  five-and-twenty  years  of 
age,  dressed  from  head  to  foot  in  white  flannel,  and 
perfectly  ready  to  converse  about  himself,  but  equally 
determined  not  to  betray  the  companions  of  his 
crime,  nor  the  fearful  links  which  probably  bound  him 
to  carry  out  the  organized  will  of  others.  Even  now, 
were  he  to  afford  a  clue  by  which  one  of  those  secret 
societies,  those  brotherhoods  of  blood,  might  be  dis- 
covered— even  now,  at  the  last  moment,  he  might  hope 
for  a  respite,  for  the  judge  was  still  near.  But  no  !  The 
wretch  who  had  steeped  his  hands  in  the  lifeblood  of  his 
fellow-creature,  who  had  rendered  a  once  happy  hearth 
desolate,  and  sent  forth  the  widow  and  orphan  unpro- 
tected— even  this  wretch,  I  say,  felt  a  false  sense  of 


240    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AS  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

honour — an  obligation  to  shield  his  accomplices  ;  and 
while  he  recklessly  committed  a  crime  of  the  deepest 
dye  before  the  eye  of  his  offended  Maker,  he  still 
refused  to  break  an  oath  which  he  had  sworn  at  the 
bidding  of  his  terrible  copartners  in  guilt. 

Well  assured  of  this,  I  felt  less,  sympathy  for  the 
man  before  me  than  I  should  otherwise  have  done,-and 
hurried  out  of  the  cell — feeling  that  the  presence  of 
such  a  being  was  highly  distasteful,  and  far  from  being 
that  object  of  commiseration  I  had  fully  expected  to 
find  in  him. 

As  we  re-entered  the  yard,  Vokes  asked  the  head 
gaoler  whether  the  prisoner's  clothes  had  been  destroyed. 
The  official  bowed  assent,  and  we  passed  on.  I  could 
not  resist  my  desire  of  asking  the  chief  magistrate  why 
this  was  done. 

"  I'll  tell  you,"  said  he.  "  It  has  proved  most  effica- 
cious in  repressing  crime." 

"  Burning  a  man's  apparel  a  measure  calculated  to 
check  crime  !    Pshaw  !  you  are  joking." 

"  Not  so.  Did  you  not  see  that  the  prisoner  was 
dressed  in  white  flannel — his  own  habiliments  having 
been  made  away  with,  probably  burnt.  It  was  to 
ascertain  this  fact  that  I  walked  up  here  with  you." 

"  Upon  my  honour,  your  ways  are  most  strange.  Pray 
explain  yourself.  I  really  should  like  to  know  the  con- 
nexion between  the  destruction  of  a  coat  and  breeches 
and  the  suppression  of  murder." 

"  I  will  gratify  you.  You  must  know,  then,  that 
when  this  county  first  earned  its  fatal  celebrity,  every 
means  were  adopted  to  put  down  the  lawless  bands 
which  then  paraded  through  our  fields  in  open  day- 


THE  HANG1LLS.  241 

light.  Special  commissions  had  no  effect.  Prompt 
executions  were  of  no  avail.  Guilt  still  enjoyed  her 
supremacy.  And  when  an  execution  took  place,  it 
was  rather  a  scene  of  triumph  for  the  condemned  man 
than  the  severe  and  wholesome  lesson  it  was  intended 
to  impart.  Cheers  greeted  the  monster  as  he  ascended 
the  scaffold,  and  when  he  was  cut  down  his  body  was 
carried  away  to  be  interred  with  drunken  pomp.  The 
latter  portion  of  this  was,  however,  easily  put  a  stop 
to.  The  bodies  were  ordered  to  be  buried  within  the 
precincts  of  the  gaol :  and,  indeed,  on  some  occasions, 
they  were  given  over  to  the  surgeons  for  dissection,  to 
the  great  horror  of  their  relatives.  This  gave  a  tem- 
porary check  to  crime ;  but  after  awhile,  it  was  clear 
that  they  became  callous  on  this  head,  and  even  these 
salutary  measures  ceased  to  alarm  them. 

"  About  this  time  I  became  an  officer  of  Govern- 
ment, and  I  mentally  vowed  to  find  out  what  consola- 
tion they  had  introduced  to  meet  the  terrible  stroke 
aimed  at  them,  in  thus  depriving  them  of  the  dead 
bodies  of  those  they  loved. 

"After  considerable  trouble  —  for  they  jealously 
guarded  their  secret — I  found  out  that  immediately  on 
each  execution  taking  place,  the  friends  of  the  culprit 
came  to  the  prison-gate  and  claimed  his  clothes,  which, 
as  the  governor  of  the  gaol  thought  they  had  an 
undoubted  right  to  them,  were  duly  delivered ;  and 
loaded  with  these,  they  set  off  to  some  neighbour's 
cabin — generally  speaking,  in  some  distant  and  se- 
cluded spot — and  here,  having  arranged  the  gar- 
ments in  a  proper  form,  they  went  through  the  whole 
mockery  of  waktxg  tkf.it  !  Here  the  whisky  flowed, 
16 


242    RECOLLECTION'S  OP  AN  IBISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

and  the  tobacco-smoke  formed  a  canopy  of  cloud ;  here 
they  danced  round  the  apparel  of  the  deceased  ;  here 
they  poured  forth  blessings  on  the  soul  of  the  man  who 
had  been  hanged,  and  called  down  curses,  mingled 
with  oaths  of  vengeance,  on  his  murderers — thus 
designating  all  who  had  in  any  way  assisted  in  bringing 
the  assassin  to  justice.  Drunk,  furious,  and  ungo- 
vernable, these  creatures,  consisting  of  men,  women, 
and  children,  screamed  round  the  supposed  corpse,  and 
long  ere  they  were  sober,  attended  the  clothes  in  mock 
burial  to  some  hole  which  had  been  dug  in  the  garden 
to  receive  them." 

u  Well,  how  could  you  stop  them  V 
"  In  the  most  simple  manner.  On  the  morning  of 
his  execution,  each  condemned  felon,  male  or  female, 
was  stripped  of  his  or  her  usual  habiliments,  and  plain 
costumes,  made  of  white  flannel,  placed  on  them.  Thus 
clad,  they  appeared  before  the  crowd,  to  their  great 
horror  and  astonishment,  which  was  not  a  little  in- 
creased when,  on  application  at  the  gate,  they  were 

told  that  the  clothes  of  ,  the  person  just  hanged, 

had  been  burnt  that  morning  by  order  of  the  justices. 
Ridiculous  as  this  remedy  may  appear  to  you,  it 
alarmed  all  the  superstitious  fears  of  the  peasantry, 
and  afforded  a  more  effectual  check  to  crime  than  any 
other  measure  I  have  hitherto  been  lucky  enough 
to  originate," 

This  explanation,  I  must  confess,  surprised  me  much 
at  the  time  it  was  given ;  but  I  subsequently  found 
that  it  was  perfectly  correct,  for  I  personally  observed, 
when  more  closely  investigating  the  character  of  the 
Irish  peasantry,  that  the  sorrow  for  death  melts  away 


THE  HANGMAN. 


243 


before  the  triumph  of  a  "grand  wake" — a  long  re- 
membered glory,  quoted  ever  afterwards  in  the  family 
of  a  poor  man,  with  the  same  pride  which  bestows  a 
magnificent  funeral  on  a  member  of  a  superior  class — - 
a  tribute  of  vain  respect  paid  by  the  living  to  the  dead 
in  the  sister  country — a  tribute  which  can  do  little  good 
to  the  latter,  while  it  has  often  proved  ruinous  to  the 
unhappy  survivors. 

We  now  entered  the  small  square  room  immediately 
beneath  the  drop,  where  a  band  of  officials  were  seated, 
awaiting  their  turn  of  duty  in  the  approaching  melan- 
choly ceremony. 

From  the  corner  of  this  apartment  a  winding  stair- 
case leads  to  the  platform  above,  where  the  gallows  is 
erected.  To  this  staircase  I  was  hurrying,  when  I  felt 
myself  suddenly  lassoed  (if  the  term  may  be  allowed). 
I  was  caught  tightly  round  th  e  throat  by  a  rope  which 
had  a  slip-knot,  now  drawn  tightly  close,  while  I  be- 
held at  the  other  end  of  it  the  most  fearful-looking 
little  monster  that  I  ever  met  with.  There  he  stood 
grinning  at  me,  the  living  picture  of  Hans  of  Iceland. 
Not  above  four  feet  high,  blear-eyed,  strongly  wrinkled 
from  age — active  as  a  cat — there  he  stood  tugging  away 
at  me,  or  rather  firmly  holding  me — for,  truth  to  con- 
fess, the  tightning  of  the  cord  partly  arose  from  my  own 
plunges  to  escape — while  the  men  around  us  joined  in 
the  horrid  laughter  which  exposed  to  my  view  the 
wide  mouth  and  the  thirty-two  pearl-white  fangs  of 
this  fearful  nondescript.  Overcome  by  a  feeling  of 
danger,  I  drew  my  sword,  and  I  verily  do  believe  that 
the  next  instant  would  have  seen  me  pass  it  through 
the  diminutive  ruffian's  body,  had  not  Yokes,  checking 

16-2 


2ii    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

his  mirth,  roared  out,  "  For  shame,  man  !  put  up  your 
sword ;  its  ouly  little  Micky,  the  hangman." 

"  Gradi,  gradi  !'*  cried  the  facetious  monster,  holding 
out  his  hand  in  the  most  unmistakeable  manner. 
u  Gradi,  yer  honour  f 

Had  I  had  gold  in  my  pocket,  instead  of  small  silver, 
I  think  I  should  have  bestowed  it  all  with  alacrity  on 
the  disgusting  fellow,  so  anxious  was  I  to  get  out  of 
his  clutches ;  as  it  was,  I  threw  him  a  few  shillings, 
and  asked  a  turnkey  standing  near  to  take  off  my 
"  hempen  collar,"  for  I  shrank  from  the  touch  of  little 
llicky ;  and  half  ashamed  of  my  unseemly  violence,  I 
clambered  up  the  steps,  which  in  another  half  hour 
would  feel  the  last  tread  of  the  condemned  felon. 

The  apparatus  that  I  came  to  see  was  of  the  simplest 
kind.  The  portico  on  which  it  was  reared  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  high  wall,  so  only  those  could  be  seen 
who  mounted  the  actual  platform,  some  five  feet  above 
lis ;  so  I  had  time  to  look  at  the  terrible  engine,  with- 
out being  perceived  by  the  populace,  who  had  already 
collected  in  large  numbers. 

The  small  spot  on  which  we  now  stood  closely  re- 
sembled a  battery,  and  I  believe  this  idea  was  not 
absent  from  the  mind  of  him  who  selected  it  as  a  place 
of  execution,  since  any  attack  on  the  authorities,  or 
attempt  to  rescue  the  prisoner,  the  slightest  suspicion 
of  such  an  event  occurring,  and  the  whole  party  could 
shelter  themselves  behind  the  breastwork,  and  retire 
down  the  staircase  or  not,  as  they  might  deem  best. 

Yokes  told  me  a  strange  superstition — namely,  the 
conviction  in  the  popular  mind,  that  when  a  man  and 
*  Charity. 


THE  HA^GMAK. 


245 


Toman  are  executed  together — which  in  these  times 
was  not  a  very  rare  occurrence — if  thej  happened  in 
swinging  about  to  turn  their  backs  to  each  other,  it 
betokened  their  guilt :  a  token  from  Providence  winch, 
none  could  dare  to  doubt. 

As  the  time  for  the  awful  ceremony  approached,  we 
got  away;  and  I  confess  I  was  glad  to  again  find 
rnvsc]:  at  borne. 

But  here  my  annoyances  did  not  end.  About  two 
hours  later,  I  received  an  order  to  escort  the  Landman 
back  to  Ennis,  which  was  anything  but  pleasant,  as  it 
was  quite  sure  we  should  be  pelted  with  stones  the 
whole  way ;  but  as  I  had  already  shirked  the  public 
performance  of  Mr.  Micky,  I  did  not  see  how  I  could 
get  out  of  the  scrape.  I  stated  my  case  to  Yokes,  and 
added  the  sore  grievance  of  my  being  forced  to  give  up 
a  most  pleasant  dinner-party  in  order  to  shield,  during 
some  eight  or  ten  hours,  a  being  whom  I  disliked  and 
loathed. 

Yokes  laughed  at  my  chagrin,  but  promised  to  re- 
lieve me  from  my  unpleasant  predicament.  He  put 
<m  his  hat  and  went  across  [to  the  general  (Sir  C.  D.) ; 
in  a  few  moments  he  returned,  and  with  a  smile  handed 
me  a  scrap  of  paper — a  copy  of  an  order  sent  to  the 
barracks :  *  Thirty  men  of  the  32nd,  in  charge  of  a 
.subaltern  officer,  will  proceed  to  Ennis  this  evening,  at 
five  o'clock  p.m.,  on  escort  duty.  The  men  to  be  sup- 
plied with  the  usual  rounds  of  baH-cartridge."  I  at 
once  saw  that  I  was  free,  and  after  thanking  my  rela- 
tive, asked  him  how  he  managed  it. 
buf  Well,  then,  can't  you  see  I  Sure  the  horses  might 
get  injured  by  the  stones  which  are  sure  to  be  thrown 


246    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


at  them  by  the  angry  crowd ;  and  as  the  cart  in  which 
Micky  travels  only  goes  foot-pace,  he  requires  infantry, 
not  cavalry,  to  protect  him  properly." 

I  quite  agreed  with  the  magistrate,  and  silently 
drank  his  health,  as  I  sat  at  M  's  pleasant  dinner- 
table. 

Though  trifling,  the  incident  showed  that  Vokes  was 
ever  ready  to  meet  and  overcome  circumstances. 

The  escort  party  were  much  annoyed ;  some  of  the 
men  were  hurt ;  all  were  irritated  by  the  manner  in 
which  they  were  treated  and  abused.  The  officer,  who 
had  great  difficulty  in  preventing  his  men  from  firing, 
assured  me  he  would  not  pass  such  another  night— one 
so  unprofitable,  so  tiresome,  and  at  the  same  time  so 
degrading — to  obtain  a  step  in  rank. 


247 


PEASANT  PEIDE. 


"  There  are  decidedly  many  traits  of  our  Spanish 
origin  still  existent  amongst  the  Irish  peasantry,"  urged 
Vokes.  "  In  the  superior  ranks  these  strongly  marked 
characteristics,  however,  are,  it  is  true,  lost.  But  I 
account  for  this  difference  of  feeling  in  a  very  simple 
way.  The  landowners  and  gentry  of  Ireland  have 
ever  sought  alliances  with  English  families.  Add  to 
which,  the  many  grants  conferred  on  your  countrymen, 
my  dear  Harry,  by  Cromwell,  King  William,  and 
others,  and  you  will  at  once  trace  the  dilution  of  these 
attributes.  Nay,  do  not  look  annoyed ;  I  do  not  mean 
by  the  word  in  question  any  weakening  of  their 
strength,  but  the  natural  change  which  such  a  com- 
mingling must  bring." 

"  It  is  not  of  the  upper  orders  I  would  speak.  I  was 
trying  to  come  at  the  distinctive  points  of  a  thorough- 
bred son  of  the  soil." 

"  Well,  then,  as  I  said  before,  I  look  upon  their  origin 
to  have  been  Spanish.  Does  not  the  very  designation 
Hibernian  convey  it.  Is  the  expression  itself  more 
than  a  mere  corruption  of  the  old  Latin  name  of 
Iberia  ?    Are  the  prominent  points  of  their  disposition 


248    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


not  decidedly  Iberian?  Are  they  not  revengeful, 
lazy,  and  proud  1  Will  they  not  assassinate  in  cold 
blood  for  hire  P 

"  This  is  indeed  a  dark  picture." 

"  Every  picture  may  be  viewed  in  different  lights. 
Are  they  not  equally  warm-hearted,  generous,  hos- 
pitable, and  brave,  attached  to  their  ancestors,  and 
wedded  to  the  spot  on  which  they  were  born  ?  Are 
they  not  naturally  witty,  handsome,  and  affectionate  P 

"  Your  sketch  is  somewhat  conflicting." 

"  Not  more  so  than  the  character  of  those  I  would 
portray.  A  Protestant  clergyman  was  cruelly  mur- 
dered on  the  public  road  some  months  ago,  while 
travelling  with  his  family  in  an  open  car,  on  one  of  the 
most  well-frequented  roads  in  the  county  of  Tipperary. 
The  men  were  taken  up,  and  proved  to  be  strangers  to 
the  locality.  For  fifteen  shillings  each  they  had 
travelled  from  their  own  home,  situated  some  thirty 
miles  distant,  and  without  any  motive,  beyond  that  of 
securing  the  bribe,  shot  the  unhappy  victim.  On 
tracing  their  movements  and  acts  subsequent  to  the 
assassination,  I  found  that  one  of  them  only  had 
waited  the  "  price  of  blood  "  on  drink ;  a  second  bore 
it  home,  and  handed  it  over  untouched  to  his  bedridden 
parent;  a  third  gave  ten  shillings  of  it  to  his  sweet- 
heart ;  while  the  fourth  (for  that  was  their  numerical 
force),  probably  shocked  at  what  he  had  done,  paid 
nearly  the  whole  sum  for  masses  in  favour  of  his  fathers 
soul.  Here  surely  we  recognise  the  fearful  careless- 
ness with  which  these  people  treat  human  life.  The 
Irishman  substitutes  the  more  manly  weapons,  the  gun 
and  the  pistol,  for  the  poisoned  bowl  and  the  dagger, 


PEASANT  PRIDE. 


249 


but  they  are  no  less  ready  than  the  Spaniard  to  destroy 
a  fellow-being,  if  paid  for  so  doing." 

"  I  hope  this  is  an  isolated  case  ?  " 

"  By  no  means ;  it  is  rather,  as  the  American  legend 
was,  "  unus  e  2?luribns."  But  let  us  pass  that  over, 
and  see  whether  the  native  of  Erin  is  not  as  proud  as 
the  most  bigoted  child  of  Spain.  Why,  if  you  will 
scrutinize  them  closely,  you  will  find  that  there  is 
not  a  tenant  holding  a  quarter  of  an  acre  of  land  on  any 
gentleman's  property  in  Munster  that  does  not  speak 
of  his  wretched  holding — his  mud  cabin — as  an  heredi- 
tary estate,  and  will  fiercely  put  that  man  to  death  who 
dares  to  attempt  to  evict  him  from  it,  or  as  he  more 
pompously  observes — "the  man  that  would  cruelly  drive 
him  from  beneath  the  roof  of  his  ancestors."  It  is  from 
this  simple  cause  that  all  our  most  sanguinary  struggles 
have  arisen.  In  England,  your  small  cottages  often 
change  their  inhabitants.  If  a  large  proprietor  finds 
that  a  small  dwelling  interferes  with  the  view  from  his 
mansion,  he  orders  it  to  be  pulled  down.  If  a  tenant 
refuses  to  pay  rent,  he  is  at  once  turned  out.  Heaven 
help  you,  my  dear  fellow,  if  you  tried  such  an  experi- 
ment in  this  county.  Your  life  would  not  be  worth  a 
day's  purchase.  While  as  to  pride,  every  cottager 
believes  himself  to  be  the  descendant  of  some  great 
chief,  and  his  eyes  lighten  up  with  triumph  when  he 
by  chance  hears  of  the  deeds  of  a  Desmond  or  a  Brian 
Borholun.  They  are  as  proud  as  any  hidalgo  in  his 
Most  Catholic  Majesty's  dominions." 

"  But  you  said  they  were  lazy  ? " 

"  To  see  them  working  on  their  own  little  gardens, 
or  to  see  them  cutting  turf  in  the  bog  for  their  winter's 


250    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

supply,  would  almost  persuade  you  that  they  are  the 
most  laborious  people  upon  earth.  But  as  to  working 
for  wages,  they  will  always  shirk  it  when  they  can.  I 
will  recount  to  you  an  anecdote  illustrative  of  this  fact. 

"  Some  years  ago,  an  officer  in  the  4th  Dragoon 
Guards,  who  was  quartered  in  Ireland,  felt  so  much 
for  the  labouring  classes  in  this  county,  compelled  to 
work  all  day  long  for  sevenpence  per  diem,  that  he 
mentally  resolved  to  assist  the  over-worked  peasantry, 
if  ever  he  had  the  power  to  do  so.  This  opportunity 
shortly  afterwards  presented  itself  A  relative  unex- 
pectedly died,  and  left  him  10,000L     Full  of  his 

favourite  project,  our  friend  E  instantly  sold  out 

of  the  army  and  came  over  to  Ireland  then  and  there 
to  do  good  to  himself,  and  to  raise  the  degraded  condi- 
tion of  the  labourer  and  mechanic  in  that  country. 
Filled  with  this  noble,  and,  at  the  same  time,  profitable 
idea,  he  at  once  embarked  for  Cork. 

"  In  this  fine  county  he  soon  found  an  establishment 
where  he  could  employ  fifty  or  sixty  hands,  and  which, 
even  supposing  he  gave  the  workers  in  it  double  wages, 
would  still  afford  him  a  broad  margin  of  profit. 

He  then  hired  a  very  pretty  little  farm,  and  here  Iris 
calculation  was  even  still  more  flattering ;  so  he  at 
once  took  into  his  employ  some  two  hundred  persons, 
engaging  to  pay  them  one  hundred  per  cent,  more  than 
they  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving.  This  was  a  glorious 

windfall  for  the  Corkians,  and  as  E  hoped,  a  no 

less  fortunate  idea  for  himself. 

"  During  the  first  month  matters  went  on  most  pros- 
perously ;  the  mill  yielded  its  full  quantum,  and  the 
ledger  showed,  notwithstanding  the  high  wages  paid,  a 


PEASANT  PRIDE. 


251 


most  profitable  return.  Paddy  worked  hard  for  his 
increased  pay,  and  my  friend's  agriculture  was  quoted 
as  unequalled. 

"  After  about  three  months  the  attendance  of  the 
persons  engaged  wa3  not  quite  so  regular.  Many  of 
the  hands  in  the  mill  were  compelled  by  sickness  to 
absent  themselves,  while  the  ploughers,  and  sowers,  and 
tillers  had  so  many  engagements  elsewhere,  and  met 
with  so  many  accidents,  that  not  one  half  of  them  ever 
answered  at  roll-call. 

"This  was  disheartening,  especially  as  spring  was 

coining  on.    But  E  had  a  sanguine  hope  that 

matters  would  soon  mend.  But,  alas  !  they  grew  worse 
and  worse.  The  philanthropic  speculator's  affairs  got 
into  confusion.  His  half-worked  mill,  his  half- farmed 
acres,  plunged  him  into  trouble,  and  in  little  less  than 

a  year  the  name  of  E  appeared  in  the  Bankrupts7 

Gazette.  Poor  fellow!  He  left  this  country  disappointed 
in  vanity  and  feeling,  ruined  in  prospects  and  in  purse, 
and  still  worse,  carrying  with  him  the  assurance  of  his 
faithful  Irish  superintendent,,  that  'faith,  his  honour 
could  expect  nothing  better  in  a  free  country.' 

"  6  Why  so  V  echoed  the  ex-dragoon. 

" 1  Ah,  then,  did  you  think  we  were  all  fools  ?  Did 
you  think  that  when  a  man  could  live  on  sevenpence 
a  day  he'd  work  more  than  three  days  in  the  week  ? 
or  imagine  a  fellow  would  toil  six  in  a  mill  when  he 
could  make  enough  in  three  to  keep  him  ?  Xo.  no  \ 
we're  not  such  omadthawns  as  that  f 

"E          returned  to  England,  where  he  made  a 

second  fortune,  a  better  and  a  wiser  man." 

I  laughed  heartily  at  the  anecdote,  which  indeed  I 


252    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

have  since  heard  confirmed  from  the  lips  of  E  

himself,  who  is  now  a  celebrated  physician  in  London. 

At  this  moment,  the  police  magistrate  was  called 
away,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  subject.  Nor 
indeed  did  it  ever  occur  to  me  again,  till  I  met  my 
relative  several  years  afterwards  in  London,  when  he 
handed  to  me  a  copy  of  an  Irish  newspaper,  and  with  a 
glance  of  triumph  exclaimed,  "  Read  that  trial  of  a 
man  in  our  county,  and  I  think  you  will  allow  that  I 
was  right  in  my  description  given  of  the  peasantry. 
Ryan  Pack,  for  many  years  the  scourge  of  the  county 
of  Limerick,  has  been  taken  up,  and  his  trial  shows 
how  a  man  may  be  hired  to  shed  blood  in  the  south 
of  Ireland,  as  well  as  the  pride  which  lurks  in  the 
breast  of  even  a  convicted  assassin." 

I  took  the  journal  and  read  it.  The  case  had  been 
tried  before  an  especial  assize.  I  do  not  recollect  the 
minute  details,  nor  would  it  be  necessary,  even  if  I 
did,  to  record  them  in  cxlenso. 

The  leading  features  which  affected  the  statements 
of  Vokes,  I  think  ran  thus  : — 

A  certain  Kyan  Pack,  against  whom  several 
charges  of  murder  had  been  sworn,  had  long  eluded 
the  vigilance  of  the  Limerick  and  Tipperarv  police. 
-In  vain  they  looked  after  him.  He  seemed  Proteus- 
like to  change  his  form  whenever  they  approached  him, 
and  when  they  set  off,  in  full  conviction  of  catching 
him  on  one  side  of  the  county,  his  actual  presence  on 
the  other  was  fatally  announced  by  some  terrific 
murder  in  that  direction.  On  one  occasion,  it  is  said, 
two  policemen  slept  in  the  same  cabin  with  him,  un- 
aware of  his  proximity,  and  on  another,  a  policeman 


PEASANT  PRIDE. 


253 


drove  into  a  village  riding  on  the  shafts  of  a  turf-cart, 
in  the  centre  of  which  Mr.  Pack  was  carefully  packed. 
The  ruffian  was  here,  there,  and  everywhere.  He 
laughed  at  the  rewards  offered  for  his  apprehension, 
and  surrounded  by  crowds,  tore  down  the  printed  bills 
describing  his  person.  Bold,  reckless,  and  Cruel,  he 
was  at  once  the  idol  and  the  terror  of  the  multitude. 
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  through  the  un- 
tiring exertions  and  intelligence  of  Mr.  John  Stephen 
Dwyer,  a  magistrate  for  the  two  counties,  that  By  an 
Pack  was  at  length  captured  and  placed  in  durance 
vile.  And  now  began  the  many  difficulties  which  arose 
in  bringing  the  wretch  to  justice  in  a  country  where  no 
one  would  willingly  come  forward  to  bear  testimony 
against  him. 

Among  other  proofs  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
lawyers,  was  a  scrap  of  paper — evidently  a  page  torn 
out  of  a  sort  of  diary  which  the  prisoner  (he  being  a 
scholar)  appeared  to  have  kept  with  great  regularity. 
In  addition  to  the  one  I  here  quote,  others  were 
found  which  proved  that  Pack  was  most  particular 
and  strict  in  his  religious  duties  and  attendances ;  and 
indeed  his  conduct  in  prison  proved  the  sincerity  of 
this  feeling — for  no  man  was  ever  more  attentive  to  the 
good  advice  of  his  clergy,  or  more  ready  to  satisfy  the 
inquiries  of  justice  when  desired  to  do  so  by  his  priest. 
To  return,  however,  to  the  memorandum  in  question. 
It  ran  thus  : — 

¥  1838— April.  To  a  cursitshute  ....  1 
1840— Feb.  To  a  cursitshute  ....  1 
1842 — May.  To  a  cursitshute  .  .  .  .  ] 
1846 — Jan,    To  a  cursitshute  .    .    .    .  1." 


254    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


And  other  similar  entries — altogether  sixteen  in 
number. 

The  meaning  of  these  items  baffled  even  the  acute 
penetration  of  the  Crown  lawyers,  and  was  only  solved 
at  last  by  the  magistrate  I  have  mentioned,  who  thus 
made  them  into  English  : — 

«  1846— Jan.  to  a  cursed  shot  .  .  .  £\.n 
i.e.,  Ryan  Pack  had  received  one  pound  for  shooting  a 
fellow-being,  though  he  well  knew  at  the  time  that 
the  deed  was  accursed.  Mr.  Dwyer  is  said  to  have 
arrived  at  this  solution  by  observing  that  the  dates  of 
each  entry  exactly  tallied  with  a  corresponding  date 
on  which  a  cruel  murder  had  been  committed.  The 
correctness  of  the  deduction  was  confirmed  afterwards 
by  the  murderer  himself.* 

"  There  now,"  said  Vokes,  "  can  any  system  of  as- 
sassination, save  that  which  disgraces  Spain,  bear 
comparison  with  that  which  seems  indigenous  to 
Ireland  T 

"  Well,  I  must  admit  your  premises  so  far;  but  there 
does  not  appear  to  be  much  pride  shown  in  becoming 
a  hired  spiller  of  blood." 

"  Wait  awhile ;  go  on;  read  through  the  case,  and 

*  The  late  trial  of  Walsh  in  Limerick  proves  that  the  same  mode 
of  getting  rid  of  an  enemy  still  exists,  and  that  assassins  are  always 
to  be  fonnd  who  for  a  trifle  will  kill  the  most  virtuous  individual. 
It  has  been  very  broadly  asserted  that  Beckham  and  Walsh — ad- 
mitted, I  believe,  by  the  latter — received  only  fifteen  shillings 
between  them  for  destroying  Mr.  Fitzgerald,  one  of  the  most  amiable 
and  inoffensive  men  in  Ireland.  But  as  the  whole  case  will  be  laid 
before  the  public  in  a  few  weeks,  when  the  now  supposed  blood- 
thirsty employers  are  to  be  tried,  it  would  be  unfair  in  me  to  say 
more. 


PEASANT  PRIDE. 


255 


then  you  will  see  that  my  estimate  of  an  Irish  peasant's 
ideas  are  not  far  wrong." 

In  reading  through  the  details  of  the  trial,  in  the 
course  of  which  the  counsel  for  the  Crown  closely  ex- 
amined the  prisoner,  in  order  to  exhibit  the  state  of 
feeling  throughout  the  district,  I  found  him  asking 
several  witnesses  whether  they  would  shoot  a  man  for 
a  bribe,  and  in  two  instances  out  of  three,  to  the 
horror  of  the  Court,  they  admitted  they  would,  and 
seemed  to  glory  in  their  recklessness. 

At  length  the  jury  pronounced  a  verdict  of  Guilty, 
and  .Ryan  Pack  heard  without  emotion  the  sentence 
of  death  passed  on  him. 

In  the  following  number  of  the  newspaper,  with 
that  morbid  punctuality  so  welcome  to  journal  readers, 
the  sayings  and  doings  of  the  wretched  criminal  were 
described  in  the  most  minute  manner,  from  the  hour 
of  his  conviction  to  that  of  his  death.  A  party  of 
county  gentlemen  had  visited  the  culprit,  and  had,  out 
of  a  strange  curiosity,  asked  him — 

"  Would  you  have  shot  any  one  of  us  for  a  pound- 
note  r 

"I  would." 

"  What !  even  if  we  had  never  offended  you  1" 

u  Faith,  that  was  not  my  business." 

"Would  you  have  shot  Mr.  W  P — (naming  a 

popular  magistrate).  "  Would  you  have  shot  him  for 
one  pound  ?" 

"  Decidedly !" 

"Why,  he  is  a  Catholic." 

"  The  more  sure  of  going  to  heaven." 

"  Would  you  have  shot  this  gentleman  2"  asked 


256    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


one,  pointing  towards  Mr.  Dwyer,  who  just  then 
entered.  "  You  would  have  shot  him  with  pleasure, 
I'm  thinking." 

"  Not  so,"  said  Ryan  Pack,  quickly.  "  I  never 
should  have  thought  of  trying  it — not  I  :  for  though 
he's  sharp  and  rather  severe,  he's  just  and  fair  to  those 
whom  he  fancies  wronged,  and  right  good  to  the  poor. 
I  wouldn't  have  shot  him — indeed,  I  could  if  I  had  liked 
it ;  but,  as  I  told  you,  I  wouldn't.  And  now  I'd  like 
to  be  left  alone." 

"  I  only  came,"  put  in  Mr.  Dwyer,  "  because  you 
sent  for  me." 

"  Faith,  it's  true  for  ye.  I  knew  that  you  would  not 
come  out  of  mere  curiosity  to  look  at  a  dying  man  like 
a  wild  beast.  I  don't  mean  to  offend  you,  gentlemen  ; 
but  as  you  are  here,  you  may  as  well  hear  what  I 
have  to  say.  I  sent  for  you,  sir,"  said  he,  addressing 
Dwyer,  "to  tell  you  that  I  forgive  you  for  causing 
my  apprehension,  and  also  that  I  consider  that  you 
conducted  the  whole  affair  in  a  just  and  upright  way, 
and  to  acknowledge  that  my  sentence  is  just" 

"  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  say  so,  Ryan.  If  you  have 
anything  on  your  mind  at  once  unburthen  it,  and 
I'll  do  all  I  can  to  console  you." 

"  Oh,  as  far  as  that  goes,  I  have  confessed  to  my 
clergy,  and  made  my  peace  with  Heaven.  But  one 
thing  docs  afflict  me  and  grieve  me  in  the  moment 
of  death." 

11  And  what  is  it  ?    Can  I  alleviate  your  sorrow  ?" 
"  Impossible  !    Besides,  his  reverence  says  my  feel- 
ing is  wicked." 
"  What  is  it  P 


PEASANT  PPvIDE. 


257 


"Well,  then,  I'll  tell  ye.  It  is  that  I,  who  have 
always  held  my  head  high,  and  lived  as  a  respectable 
hoy,  should  now  be  hung  for  shooting  a  low  feather- 
merchant,  when  I  had  opportunities  every  day  of 
killing  a  magistrate,  or  a  grand  juror,  or  the  first  land- 
holders in  the  county,  and  so  dying  decently  for  a 
genteel  crime,  instead  of  thus  sneaking  out  of  the 
world  for  destroying  a  low  feather-seller.  Mr.  Dwyer, 
this  it  is  that  grieves  me." 

In  the  next  newspaper  the  execution  of  Ryan  Puck 
was  described.  He  died  calmly,  and  without  fear  or 
apparent  remorse. 

"Well,  Henry,  was  that  not  pride?"  asked  Vokes. 

"  I  admit  that  it  was,  and  therefore  for  the  future 
will  ever  believe  in  the  Spanish  qualities  of  an  Irish 
peasant" 


ir 


258 


THE  ABDUCTION. 


Some  forty  years  ago,  there  existed  in  Ireland  a  race 
of  young  men  called  Bucheeru,  or  Squireens,  the  idle 
sons  of  gentlemen,  of  estate,  who,  possessing  little  or  no 
means  whatsoever,  sought  by  impudenco  and  wit  to 
earn  their  daily  meal,  at  least  until  such  time  as  a 
stroke  of  fortuue  might  happily  enable  them  to  find  a 
five-pound  note  in  their  pocket — an  event  which  sel- 
dom occurred,  unless  through  the  medium  of  a  com- 
mission in  the  army  or  a  fortunate  marriage.  The 
young  men  of  the  present  day  born  and  bred  in  the 
sister  isle,  are  glad  to  become  clerks  in  public  or  private 
offices,  or  to  accept  any  post  which  may  give  them  an 
independence.  But  this  was  not  the  case  in  the  first 
quarter  of  the  present  century.  A  gentleman's  son 
despised  commerce  of  every  sort.  He  shunned  the  first 
merchant's  office  with  the  same  proud  disdain  with 
which  he  treated  the  lowest  shopkeepers.  Money- 
grubbing  was  beneath  his  dignity  ;  the  drudgery  of  an 
office  he  contemned.  He  preferred  lounging  about  the 
streets  in  half-starved  idleness  ;  riding  occasionally  a 
borrowed  horse,  or  shooting,  at  the  risk  of  being  taken 
up  as  a  poacher,  with  a  gun  and  a  licence  belonging  to 


THE  ABDUCTION. 


259 


a  neighbour.  He  swaggered  in  pride,  and  boasted  in 
ignorance.  He  looked  down  on  painstaking  respecta- 
bility, and  impatiently  awaited  the  day  when  his  father 
should  thrust  him  forth  in  a  pair  of  leather  breeches, 
bestriding  a  broken-down  hunter,  and  armed  with  a 
purse  containing  some  four  or  five  sovereigns.  Like 
a  modern  Gil  Bias  in  search  of  adventures,  the 
world  before  him,  he  carelessly  *  took  the  first  path 
that  presented  itself,  and  with  a  light  heart  and  a  brave 
spirit  the  "  young  master"  set  out  to  make  his  fortune, 
trusting  that  the  proud  aO"  or  the  ancient  "Mac" 
which  introduced  his  family  name  to  the  world,  would 
gain  for  him  a  useful  friendship  or  a  profitable  love. 

Need  I  say  that  we  had  our  full  share  of  these  pre- 
cocious youths  in  the  county  and  city  of  Limerick  ? 
Ever  ready  to  win  the  hand  of  a  dowered  maiden, 
ever  ready,  if  necessary,  to  fight  for  it,  the  Bucheens 
who  lounged  up  and  down  George-street  were  a  most 
formidable  body.  They  had  all  to  gain,  nothing  to 
lose ;  who,  then,  would  enter  into  strife  with  them  ? 
Their  sons  little  know,  in  1862,  what  wild  lads  their 
fathers  were  before  them. 

These  young  gentlemen  generally  contented  them- 
selves by  strutting  about,  and  occasionally  playing  off 
practical  jokes ;  but  the  following  anecdote  shows 
that  they  did  not  always  confine  themselves  to  inno- 
cent freaks. 

One  of  the  prettiest  girls  in  the  neighbourhood  was 
the  daughter  of  a  gentleman  farmer,  alike  celebrated 
for  his  large  fortune  and  the  jealous  care  with  which  he 
watched  his  adored  child,  she  had  only  just  completed 
her  fifteenth  birthday,  and  on  that  auspicious  occasion 

17—2 


2 CO    RFCOLLFXTIOXS  OP  AS  IRISH  POLTCE  MAGISTRATE. 


the  doating  father  had  so  far  relaxed  his  usual  strict- 
ness that  he  had  given  a  ball,  and  invited  to  it 
many  of  the  young  gentlemen,  sons  of  the  magistrates 
and  grand  jurors,  who  lived  around  him.  These  plea- 
sure-seeking lads  gladly  accepted  the  proffered  civility, 
anxious  at  the  same  time  to  dance  with  the  lovely 
heiress  (for  she  was  an  only  child),  and  make  up  for 
the  stern  exclusiveness  of  their  parents,  who  refused 
to  visit  one  whom  they  styled  a  mere  yeoman, 

Young  saw  the  sweet  and  interesting  creature, 

the  heroine  of  the  fete,  and  danced  with  her.    To  see 

her  was  to  love  her,  and  poor    at  once  became 

desperately  enamoured  with  her ;  love  at  first  sight 
never  wounded  so  deeply.  The  stricken  youngster 
came  home  an  altered  man.  He  could  neither  eat, 
drink,  nor  sleep.  He  no  longer  followed  the  hounds, 
as  he  had  hitherto  done,  sometimes  on  horseback,  some- 
times on  foot ;  the  oyster-cellars  were  forsaken ;  the 
racket-court  abandoned  ;  the  wretched  victim  could  do 
nothing  but  talk  of  his  enchantress  during  the  day  and 
dream  of  her  at  night.  It  is  true  that  he  had  at- 
tempted to  broach  the  subject  to  his  parents,  who  at 
once  united  in  a  dire  threat  to  turn  him  out  of  the  castle, 
if  he  dared  again  to  speak  of  the  u low  creature."  His 
mother,  who  was  the  niece  of  a  nobleman,  fainted  away 
when  she  heard  her  son  speak  highly  of  a  "yeoman's 
daughter."    Thus  stood  matters  in  his  own  house. 

Young  was  no  less  unfortunate  in  his  attempts 

to  win  the  hand  of  the  lovely  girl  with  the  consent  of 
her  father.  Far  from  considering  the  proposal  as  an 
honour,  the  irritated  sire  desired  the  Buchecn  to  leave 
his  house,  and  threatened  him  with  personal  castiga- 


THE  ABDUCTION. 


261 


tion  if  ever  he  caught  him  again  within  his  ring 
fence. 

The  young  lady  gave  no  encouragement  to  the  deeply- 
enamoured  Squireen,  whose  passion  seemed  only  to  in- 
crease with  obstacles,  and  at  length  became  a  settled 
madness. 

Determined  to  possess  the  object  of  his  hopes  at 
any  price,  and  seeing  that  all  ordinary  means  failed,  the 
reckless  youth  determined  on  carrying  her  off — a  mode 
of  gaining  a  wife,  ban  gre,  malgre,  bub  too  often  adopted 
in  the  South  of  Ireland.  For  this  purpose  he  secured 
the  assistance  of  some  of  his  friends  and  some  unprin- 
cipled retainers,  and  one  day,  when  Miss  «  was 

riding  home,  attended  by  a  single  servant,  who  it  is 
believed  was  in  league  with  the  abductors,  they  pounced 
on  her  and  carried  her  off. 

Within  a  few  hours  it  was  ascertained,  though  not 

without  considerable  trouble,  that  young    had 

carried  off  his  prize  to  a  solitary  farmhouse,  standing 
in  the  midst  of  an  extensive  bog,  some  twenty  miles 
from  her  father's  residence. 

The  bereaved  parent  was  naturally  angered  at  the 
outrage,  and  in  his  first  fit  of  passion  vowed  to  destroy 
the  cruel  abductor ;  but  on  calm  reflection,  on  consulta- 
tion with  his  best  friends,  he  became  convinced  of  the 
futility  of  any  personal  exertion  on  his  part — any  single 
attempt  to  recover  his  lost  treasure.  He  therefore  rode 
into  Limerick,  and  swore  informations  before  the  bench 
of  magistrates  then  sitting.  These  gentlemen  at  once 
ordered  out  a  considerable  force,  consisting  of  military 
and  police,  with  strict  injunctions  to  proceed  to  the  farm- 
house in  the  bog,  and  bring  back  the  imprisoned  girl. 


262    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IBISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


The  anxious  father  saw  all  the  preparations  made, 
and  was  about  to  ride  home  and  obtain  some  farther 
information  as  to  the  exact  locality,  when  a  note  was 
thrust  into  his  hand  by  a  little  ragged  urchin,  who  no 
sooner  saw  it  in  the  yeoman's  possession,  than  he  fle  I 
quickly,  and  was  soon  beyond  the  reach  of  pursuit. 
Mr.  opened  the  note  ;  it  ran  thus  : — 

"Sir, — It  is  true  that  I  have  carried  off  your 
daughter,  and  brought  her  here.  It  is  true  that  I 
adore  her,  and  intend  to  marry  her.  If  she  is  wise  she 
will  consent ;  fur  I  will  prove  myself  a  good  and 
affectionate  husband  If  you  are  not  silly,  you  #111 
advise  her  to  do  so,  and  thus  ally  yourself  with  one  of 
the  oldest  blood-stocks  in  Munster.  I  say  this  in  a 
friendly  manner — desiring  peace.  If  she  refuses,  by 
all  I  hold  sacred,  I  will  many  her  by  force.  I  am  no 
boy — and  she  will  repent  it.  So  now  take  your  choice. 
If  you  send  an  answer  by  a  little  boy  (and  I  can  see 
all  who  approach  within  a  mile)  I  will  show  it  to  her. 
So  I  advise  you  give  her  good  counsel  in  it.    If,  on  tho 

contrary,  you  attempt  to  recover  her  by  force,  by  , 

you  shall  repent  it.  If  you  bring  any  of  the  soldiery 
or  the  Peelers  near  me  you  will  for  ever  rue  it.  I  am 
determined — I  am  sworn.  And  the  very  first  man 
that  approaches  this  house  I  will  destroy,  and  then,  as 
I  know  that  the  struggle  is  useless,  I  will  instantly 
shoot  your  daughter,  and  then  blow  out  my  own  brains  ; 
for  as  I  hope  for  Eternity,  I  cannot,  will  not,  live  with- 
out her.  If  you  try  force,  you,  not  I,  will  be  the  mur- 
derer of  your  daughter  in  the  sight  of  heaven  ! 

"Hugh   


THE  ABDUCTION. 


263 


The  wretched  man  staggered  as  if  he  had  been  shot. 
He  well  knew  the  desperate  character  of  his  daughter's 
abductor  ;  he  fully  believed  that  he  would  carry  out, 
to  its  full  extent,  the  threat  contained  in  the  young 
man's  letter.  What  could  he  do  ?  His  love  for  his 
child  overcame  his  desire  for  vengeance,  and  he  went 
back  and  earnestly  begged  of  the  magistrates  to  post- 
pone their  attack.  This,  with  great  reluctance,  they 
consented  to  do,  but  only  extended  their  forbearance 
for  four-and-twenty  hours. 

The  next  step  which  naturally  suggested  itself  to 
the  affrighted  parent  was  to  call  on  Yokes,  who  at 
once  took  up  the  case,  on  the  strict  condition  that  he 
should  not  be  interfered  with.  This  was  agreed  to, 
and  he  at  once  began  his  measures. 

"  Write,"  said  Vokes,  "  write  a  reply." 

"What  shall  I  say !" 

The  Major  dictated  an  answer  ;  it  ran  thus  : — 

"  Until  to-morrow,  I  pledge  myself  not  to  molest 
you  j  this  will  give  me  time  for  reflection.  It  will 
give  you  the  same  advantage.  If  a  spark  of  honour 
still  lurks  in  your  breast,  you  will  not  injure  my 
child. 

"John  *" 

"But  how  shall  I  transmit  it  I" 

"Give  it  me ;  I'll  have  it  placed  in  the  fellow's 
hands.  I'll  send  it  by  my  milking-maid ;  they  will 
allow  her  to  approach.    So  be  easy  on  this  subject." 

"  You  think,  then,  he'll  deliver  my  daughter  up  f ' 

"  Decidedly  not." 

"What,  then,  do  you  think?    As  you  value  nvy 


264    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IK1BII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

peace  of  mind,  tell  me  candidly.  I  beseech  you  to 
open  your  breast  to  me  P 

"Well,  then,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  think  that 
when  he  finds  you  are  determined  on  recapturing  her, 
he  will  marry  her." 

"Marry  her? — marry  her?  Oh,  do  not  say  so; 
pray  do  not  P 

"  It  is  my  opinion.  To-night  he  will  send  for  a  priest, 
real  or  mock,  and  go  through  the  ceremony  of  espousing 
her.  To-morrow  he  will  throw  open  the  doors  and 
offer  her  back,  if  you  will  take  her." 

"  Oh,  this  is  too  horrible.  Can  nothing  be  done  ?  Til 
give  any  money,  Til  risk  any  danger,  but  let  me  have 
my  darling  back  again.  Ob,  Major  Vokes,  I  know 
your  wonderful  powers — do  exert  them  on  my  behalf!" 

"  Well,  I  really  feel  for  your  situation,  and  will  do 
all  that  I  can." 

The  bereaved  yeoman  after  a  few  more  words  left 
the  chief  magistrate,  and  by  the  desire  of  that  func- 
tionary returned  to  his  now  desolate  home. 

Soon  after  this,  Vokes  quietly  strolled  down  to  his 
office,  and  ordered  two  of  lis  men  to  steal  separately  and 
unseen  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  farm-house  in  the 
bog,  in  plain  clothes,  and  then  to  hide  themselves  in 
some  of  the  outbuildings  till  a  signal  should  be  given 
them,  when  they  were  instantly,  if  possible,  to  make  a 
forcible  entry  ;  but  on  no  account  to  allow  themselves 
to  be  detected  before  that  period.  They  need  not 
start  on  the  expedition  till  after  dark,  and  were  to  take 
notice  of  anything  that  occurred,  and  let  him  know. 
He  would  be  in  a  small  cabin  about  two  miles  from 
the  spot,  and  would  there  await  intelligence  from  them. 


THE  ABDUCTION. 


265 


All  went  on  well.  No  suspicions  were  aroused,  and 
Vokes  and  his  men  took  up  their  respective  stations, 
hidden  from  sight  by  the  darkness  of  a  winters  night. 

At  about  eight  o'clock,  a  low  tap  at  the  cottage 
door,  where  Yokes  was  seated  alone,  aroused  him  from 
a  short  nap  he  was  taking,  and  having  opened  it  him- 
self, for  he  had  no  follower  with  him,  having  sent 
out  the  proprietor  of  the  hut  in  order  to  avoid  obser- 
vation, he  ushered  in  a  man  in  a  large  horseman's 
cloak,  escorted  by  a  policeman,  who  withdrew  to  a  far 
corner,  and  allowed  the  magistrate  to  examine  the 
stranger. 

"  Why  am  I  brought  here '?  " 

"  I'll  tell  you  that,''  replied  the  Major,  "after  having 
learnt  how  you  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  policeman 
yonder." 

"  I  came  from  the  farm  in  the  bog.  I  was  sent  on  a 
message  by  the  young  master,  and  I'd  like  to  know  by 
what  right  I  have  been  seized  and  dragged  here,  and 
who  are  you,  who  dare  to  sanction  such  an  outrage  on 
one  who  has  never  offended." 

"There  you  mistake,  James  *  Mackinespie.  You 
killed  Lame  Murphy  at  the  fair  of  Cashel."  The  man 
started,  and  evidently  looked  round  with  an  idea  of 
escaping. 

"  And  as  to  myself,  I  am  Tom  Yokes." 

"The  Lord  be  good  to  me,"  cried  the  now  trembling 
wretch.  "  The  Lord  be  good  to  me ;  I'm  a  lost 
man." 

"  Not  so.     Be  true  to  me,  and  you  shall  be  free 
before  daylight.    I'm  not  looking  for  you  just  now." 
"  May  Providence  preserve  you,  Major  dear.  Sure 


2G6    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


I'd  give  my  life  for  you.     Oh,  then,  spare  me,  yer 

honour  ;  you'll  find  me  true  to  ye." 

"  On  what  message  were  you  sent,  and  to  whom  lw 

*  To  the  clergyman,  sure." 
"And  what  for]" 

"KThe  divii  a  one  of  me  knows,  then." 

*  How  could  you,  then,  tell  him  what  was  wanted  t" 
"  Ah,  then,  sir,  if  you  must  know  " 

"  I  will  know,"  roared  Vokes,  "  or  I  send  you  off 
to  Linierick  at  once." 

"  Well,  then,  yer  honour,  don't  do  that.  Sure  the 
master  gave  me  this  bit  of  a  note." 

The  magistrate  snatched  it  from  him,  and  tore  it 
open. 

"  Revd.  Sir, — Will  you  come  here  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible, and  bring  your  canonicals  and  your  book  of 
prayer  with  you  ?  The  bearer  (whom  you  may  trust 
in  every  way)  will  guide  you.    Pray  make  haste. 

*  Yours, 

"  Hugh  ? 

"  Umph ;  the  fellow  wishes  to  make  my  reverend 
friend  believe  that  it  is  to  shrive  some  dying  penitent. 
Faith,  he's  a  cute  lad,  but  I'll  balk  his  plans." 

"  Well,  sir,  may  I  go  now  1 " 

"  Yes  ;  to  his  reverence.  I'll  accompany  you.  So 
come  along.  Constable,  you  may  return  to  your  poet,"  j 
And  away  trotted  the  C.  M.  P.  and  the  messenger  to 
the  clergyman's. 

Arrived  here,  none  knew  what  passed,  but  the] 
upshot  was,  that  Yokes  and  the  sacred  minister  shortly] 


THE  ABDUCTION. 


267 


after  left  the  house,  and  directed  their  steps  towards 
the  farm  in  the  bog.  The  worthy  functionary  was 
closely  muffled  up  in  Mackinespie's  ample  cloak. 

"  Don't  look  round,"  said  Yokes,  as  they  approached 
the  building,  w  when  I  follow  you  in;  they'll  take  me 
for  the  messenger  they  despatched." 

"  True  ;  but  I  hardly  like  the  part  I  have  to  ptay. 
It  is  scarcely  in  keeping  with  my  holy  calling.  I 
should  not  lend  myself  to  a  deceit." 

"  Not  even  to  rescue  an  innocent  girl  from  the  clutches 
of  a  scoundrel,  who  must  eternally  ruin  her  unless  we 
can  now  manage  to  circumvent  him  1 " 

"  And  the  danger  !  " 

"  Oh,  there  is  none  to  you,  and  as  to  me,  I  laugh  at  it. 
Believe  me,  sir,  in  thus  acting,  you  do  a  good  and  noble 
deed." 

H  I  hope  so,"  whispered  the  other,  as  he  knocked  at 
the  door. 

"  Don't  forget  to  make  some  scruples  at  first,  and 
then  consent." 
*  I  hate  deceit !" 

"  Who's  there  P  roared  a  voice,  and  a  head  appeared 
through  the  window.  w  Ah,  I  perceive  it  is  your  Re- 
verence and  James  ;  I  could  scarcely  see  you,  it  was 
so  dark.    I'll  come  down  and  let  you  in." 

"Now,  then,  I  succeed  or  die,"  slowly  muttered  Yokes. 

The  next  moment  they  entered.    The  clergyman 

went  upstairs  with  young  .    The  supposed  servant 

remained  behind  to  fasten  the  door ;  how  far  he  did 
so,  the  sequel  will  prove. 

After  a  very  short  parley,  it  appeared  that  the  priest 
consented  to  perform  the  ceremony.    Two  large  tapers 


2G8    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


were  accordingly  lighted,  and  his  Reverence  put  on 
his  canonicals,  and  pulled  out  his  book,  while  the 
Bucheen  sought  the  room  in  which  he  had  imprisoned 
his  wretched  captive,  and  dragged  her  out  to  be  married. 

In  vain  she  besought  him  to  desist ;  in  vain  she 
knelt  before  him.  He  pulled  her  hastily  and  vio- 
lently along,  and  seizing  her  in  his  powerful  grasp,  he 
placed  her  before  the  table  on  which  the  volume  lay 
open  ;  the  clergyman  stood  behind  it,  and  an  old  bel- 
dame rocked  herself  in  a  chair,  waiting  to  hear  that 
ceremony  performed,  to  which  she  was  to  act  as  a 
witness. 

"  Go  on  I"  roared  the  excited  youth.   "  Go  on  P 

"  We  must  have  a  second  person  to  attest  the  mar- 
riage," quietly  replied  the  priest. 

"  Right,  right ;  I  forgot  that.  Here,  Mackinespie, 
come  here — quick — I  want  you.  Don  t  wait  for  any- 
thing ;  come  up  P  and  hearing  his  supposed  follower's 
step  approaching,  he  turned  to  the  table. 

Another  instant,  and  the  almost  fainting  girl  gave  a 
loud  scream,  and  attempted  to  dart  away.  Young 

  turned  round.    A  pistol  was  presented  at  his 

head,  and  a  firm  hand  held  him  by  the  collar ;  a  loud 
whistle,  and  two  men  (policemen  in  plain  clothes), 
armed  with  carbine  and  cutlass,  rushed  in.  In  his 
terror  and  surprise  the  lady  escaped  from  his  grasp, 
and  fled  for  succour  to  the  priest,  who  now  boldly 
joined  the  intruders,  and  loudly  denounced  the  wretched 
abductor. 

The  sketch  requires  little  more  addition.  Long  be- 
fore daylight  the  honest  yeoman  s  car  conveyed  the 
now  happy  girl  back  to  her  overjoyed  parent.  The 


THE  ABDUCTION, 


269 


young  man,  by  the  consent  of  all  parties,  was  sent  off 
to  Dublin.  The  affair  was  hushed  up,  and  the  feelings 
of  all  parties  thus  spared. 

Miss    (after  her  father's  death)  went  out  to 

India,  and  married  an  officer  of  rank.  But  she  never 
returned  to  the  county  of  Limerick,  where  she  had  no 
family  ties. 

The  young  Squireen,  it  is  said,  entered  the  Com- 
pany's military  service,  and  received  promotion  for 
some  exceedingly  gallant  actions. 

Who  can  say  whether  the  abductor  and  abducted 
may  not  be  the  gay  and  happy  couple  who,  surrounded 
by  several  beautiful  children,  disembarked  at  South- 
ampton last  year,  having  left  Calcutta  six  weeks 
before  i 

Vokes  is  gone,  and  so  are  the  parents  of  the  young 
man.    None  now  can  solve  the  mystery. 


270 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


Limerick,  formerly  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and 
salubrious  cities  in  Ireland,  once  the  throne  of  gaiety 
and  delight,  can,  alas !  be  no  longer  quoted  as  such. 
Her  glories,  her  charms,  exist  no  longer.    Her  once 
brilliant  garrison  appear  to  have  carried  away  with 
them  all  the  proud  members  of  the  u  right  old  stock" 
who  made  this  desirable  spot  their  residence  ;  while, 
worse  than  all,  her  "  lovely  lasses,"  the  pride  of  Erin,  > 
the  envy  of  the  world,  have  equally  disappeared,  and 
their  once  fairy  path  in  George-street  is*  now  usurped  I 
and  troden  by  modern  upstarts,  commercial  boors,  and 
dowdy  females,  while  the  silvery  tones,  the  bewitching 
smiles,  and  perfect  forms  of  her  lovely  daughters  are  I 
now  replaced  by  the  hooded  huxter,  and  the  peripatetic  J 
dealer  in  second-rate  lace.    The  names  of  those  who  I 
once  honoured  the  Club-house  by  being  members  of  I 
it,  are  now  superseded  by  those  who  could  never  have  I 
anticipated  the  honour  of  entering  it.    In  two  lines  I 
we  may  describe  it  by  thus  paraphrasing  a  passage  in  1 
the  prologue  to  Cato — 

* 1  A  city  struggling  with  the  storms  of  fate, 
And  gently  fallen  with  a  fallen  state," 

Yes,  such  is  Limerick  in  1862.    She  is  now  perhaps  ] 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


271 


the  quietest  and  dullest  place  throughout  the  whole  of 
the  sister  isle.  That  she  may  still  rank  as  a  well- 
situated  port,  that  profitable  exportation  and  importa- 
tion may  still  be  carried  on  here,  I  do  not  for  a 
moment  doubt,  and  that  many  respectable  individuals 
make  fortunes  within  her  boundaries  I  am  free  to 
admit ;  but  he  who  has  known  her  in  her  halcyon 
days  will  mourn  over  the  seeming  blight  which  has 
come  over  her,  and  breathe  a  sigh  as  he  vainly  tries  to 
discover  a  trace  of  those  who  once  kept  up  her  glorious 
hospitalities. 

I  am  not,  however,  about  to  plunge  into  a  lament 
over  her  sad  change,  nor  am  I  capable  or  desirous 
of  tracing  the  cause  of  her  decadence  ;  suffice  it 
to  say,  that  she  is  so  changed  that  I  cannot  help 
thinking  that  the  stirring  incidents  of  a  day  passed  in 
this  gay  city  some  thirty- three  years  ago,  cannot  be 
wholly  uninteresting  to  those  who  now  inhabit  or  feel 
an  interest  in  her. 

In  the  year  1829  I  was  seated  at  breakfast  in  the 
large  coffee-room  of  Moriarty's  (now  Cruise's)  Hotel ; 
Vokes  had  just  dropped  in,  and  was  chatting  with  me 
and  discussing  the  news  of  the  day,  when  we  were 
joined  by  Tom  Steele*"* — honest  Tom  Steele,  as  his 

*  The  unfortunate  end  of  Steele  has  been  too  widely  chronicled 
to  require  repetition.  Should  there  be  any  one  unacquainted  with 
his  melancholy  fate,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  after  struggling 
with  neglect  and  poverty  for  many  years,  he  was  unfortunately  in- 
duced to  attempt  suicide  ;  and,  with  this  intention,  threw  himself 
off  Waterloo  Bridge.  He  was,  however,  rescued  from  a  watery 
grave,  and  conveyed  to  Peele's  Coffee-house,  where  he  only  lingered 
a  few  days.  Death  thus  closed  the  career  of  this  once  celebrated 
character.    He  died  amidst  comparative  strangers.    But  the  unre- 


272  RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AS  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


countrymen  called  him,  or  as  he  styled  himself,  the 
Grand  Pacificator  of  Ireland — a  title,  poor  fellow,  he 
endeavoured  to  earn  by  using  on  all  occasions,  when 
addressing  the  lower  orders,  the  most  violent  lan- 
guage— language  the  most  naturally  suited  to  arouse 
this  inflammatory  people.  Tom  Steele  stood  con- 
siderably above  six  feet  high ;  he  stooped,  however, 
more  than  any  man  I  ever  saw.  His  sloaching  gait 
and  swinging  arms  were  most  ungainly,  while  his 
coarse,  sunburnt  hands,  his  shabby  habiliments,  and 
his  scorbutic  face,  which  might  falsely  have  been 
supposed  to  have  proceeded  from  drinking,  together 
with  a  large  bunch  of  soiled  green  ribbons  attached  to 
the  breast  of  his  coat,  and  a  pseudo-regimental  cap 
stuck  on  his  head,  might  well  prejudice  a  stranger 
against  him  ;  but  when  once  he  opened  his  mouth,  his 
voice  was  so  extraordinarily  mellifluous,  his  smile  was 
so  sweet,  his  manner  was  so  soft  and  winning,  that 
these  feelings  of  predislike  melted  before  his  superior 

mitting  care  and  attention  of  those  who  surrounded  his  last  couch, 
was  gratefully  proclaimed  by  poor  Tom  in  his  last  moments.  Alas  t 
however  ;  the  painful  picture  does  not  end  here.  For  though  his 
remains  were  borne  over  to  Ireland,  and  laid  (by  his  own  desire)  in 
the  cemetery  of  Qlasnevin,  within  a  few  yards  of  those  of  his  adored 
chief,  they  have  not  been  allowed  to  rest  there.  If  we  may  credit 
the  accounts  of  a  late  number  of  the  Irish  Times,  and  indeed  the 
facts  have  been  officially  admitted,  his  corpse  has  been  removed 
from  the  vault  in  which  he  was  originally  laid,  and  taken  to  an- 
other. The  guardians  of  the  burial-ground  declare  this  to  have 
been  done  because  the  tomb  had  become  44  damp  and  fallen  into 
decay."  The  correspondent  of  the  newspaper  asserts,  that  this  act 
of  cruel  sacrilege  was  committed  because  the  vault  had  been  recently 
sold  to  the  present  Lord  Mayor  of  Dublin.  If  the  latter  statement 
be  correct,  it  reflects  great  discredit  upon  all  parties  concerned  in  it. 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


273 


address — while  his  extraordinary  intelligence,  his  great 
knowledge,  and,  above  all,  his  sincere  honesty  of  pur- 
pose, for  which,  indeed,  he  had  sacrificed  his  happiness, 
fortune,  station,  and  we  might  almost  add  his  religion,  so 
commanded  the  admiration  of  all,  that  Tom,  in  poverty 
and  trouble,  was  still  respected  and  liked  by  his  equals, 
and  adored  by  the  peasantry,  over  whom  he  had  an 
influence  little  short  of  that  of  the  Great  Agitator  (or 
as  Steele  termed  him,  the  Great  Liberator,)  himself. 

Our  patriot  friend  approached  us,  and  handed  to  me 
the  manuscript  of  a  very  clever,  though  wild  article,  he 
had  written  for  me  to  be  inserted  in  a  periodical  {The 
Limerick  Chronicle)  which  I  had  started  in  that  city, 
and  which,  by-the-bye,  was  edited  by  that  very  clever 
member  of  the  Church  who  lost  his. high  position 

in  consequence  of  running  away  with  Mrs.  P  

C  . 

Tom  took  a  cup  of  coffee  with  us,  and  amused  us  by 
relating  some  anecdotes,  which  he  did  in  a  most  racy 
style,  though  he  modulated  his  voice  (as  was  often  the 
case)  to  so  low  a  tone  that  /  lost  much  of  the  wit 
mingled  in  their  recital. 

Presently,  the  great  Dan  himself  entered,  He  was 
to  leave  some  directions  with  his  lieutenant,  and  at  the 
same  time  receive  the  hearty  thanks  of  his  follower 
for  having  got  him  out  of  some  pecuniary  difficulties 
on  the  previous  evening.  These  thanks  the  great  man 
put  off  with  an  affectionate  smile,  and  only  expressed 
a  hope  that  Tom  would  not  get  into  any  more  scrapes 
— a  wish,  alas  !  most  difficult  of  accomplishment,  since 
the  Pacificator  cared  for  no  life  but  that  of  struggle — - 
no  food,  but  that  of  excitement. 


274     RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  1RISII  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


O'Cormell  now  came  across  toVokes,  and  shook  him 
heartily  by  the  hand,  and  exhibited  by  his  manner  and 
words  not  only  his  sincere  friendship  for  the  magistrate 
as  an  individual,  but  his  high  appreciation  of  his 
talents  and  his  services  as  a  public  officer.  I  believe 
most  firmly — I  have,  indeed,  strong  proofs — that  he 
held  my  father-in-law  in  the  very  highest  rank  of  his 
estimation;  and  none  could  better  judge,  since  in 
public  matters  they  were  generally  opposed. 

Ottley  now  came  in,  and  announced  that  the  car- 
riage was  at  the  door  in  which  he  was  to  travel  with 
his  political  chief  to  Dublin.  Tom  Steele  handed 
O'Conuell  into  his  carriage,  and  then  went  off  to  attend 
a  Mass  at  the  Chapell,  to  be  performed  for  the  soul  of 
the  late  Eoman  Catholic  Bishop  of  Killaloe,  an  old 
friend  and  ally  of  his. 

When  he  had  left  us,  I  went  across  with  Vokes  to 
his  office,  where  he  presented  two  of  his  constables 
with  51.  each,  as  a  reward  for  their  activity  in  captur- 
ing the  murderers  of  Major  Hare.  I  inquired  the 
circumstances.  It  appeared  that  the  gallant  officer, 
who  had  served  for  several  years  in  the  Light  Dragoons 
in  India,  had  lately  returned  to  Europe  and  taken  a 
very  nice  estate  in  the  county  of  Limerick,  named 
"  Fort  Henry."  Here,  from  his  justice  and  kindness, 
he  would  doubtlessly  have  become  popular ;  but  un- 
fortunately it  became  known  that  he  had  a  large  col- 
lection of  swords  and  fire-arms  within  his  mansion. 
This  was  a  booty,  of  all  others,  the  most  coveted  by 
the  Whiteboys,  and  so  they  determined  on  seizing 
them.  One  night,  when  the  Major  had  retired  to  his 
bed — little  suspecting  an  approaching  danger — he  was 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


275 


aroused  by  a  loud  and  violent  demand  made  on  him 
by  the  leader  of  a  band  of  insurgents,  who  vociferously 
demanded  that  all  the  weapons  in  the  house  should  be 
delivered  up  to  him.  The  Major,  a  man  of  decided 
courage,  at  once  refused  their  request,  and  most 
peremptorily  desired  the  fellows — who  were  dressed  in 
the  well-known  costume  of  Whiteboys — instantly  to 
retire.  To  this,  a  shot  fired  at  him,  and  from  which 
he  narrowly  escaped,  was  the  reply  he  received.  So, 
arming  his  servants,  he  at  once  proceeded  to  barricade 
the  windows  and  doors  of  the  house.  But,  unhappily, 
it  was  too  late.  The  ruffians  had  burst  open  the  prin- 
cipal entrance,  and  were  now  rushing  towards  the 
apartment  in  which  poor  Hare  and  his  wife  slept. 

He  in  vain  endeavoured  to  oppose  them.  He  was 
at  once  massacred  in  the  most  savage  manner.  His 
wife  escaped  by  a  mere  miracle,  and  the  murderers 
having  rifled  the  house,  retired  from  the  scene  of  their 
bloodthirsty  exploits,  carrying  with  them  all  the  arms 
they  could  find. 

After  the  most  strenuous  efforts,  and  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  active  magistrate,  the  two  policemen  before 
us  had  managed  to  get  a  clue  whereby  they  were  enabled 
to  trace  the  culprits ;  this  once  gained,  they  pursued 
them  with  unremitting  vigilance,  and  at  last  managed 
to  seize  the  ringleader.  This  effected,  many  of  the 
others  were  easily  detected,  and  the  most  prominent 
actors  in  the  bloody  scene  having  been  captured  and 
legally  convicted,  were  taken  out  under  a  strong  escort, 
and  executed  close  to  the  spot  where  the  outrage  had 
been  committed.  This  unusual  measure  had  been  re- 
sorted to  in  the  hc^pe  of  deterring  others  •  but  it  had 

18—2 


276    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


not  the  desired  effect.  The  Whiteboys  still  traversed 
the  county  in  search  of  arms.  Yokes,  however,  by  his 
untiring  exertions,  at  last  succeeded  in  putting  them 
down  ;  and  by  his  recommendation  the  present  reward 
was  bestowed  on  his  two  Peelers. 

The  next  person  to  be  brought  in  was  one  of  the 
most  respectable  small  farmers  in  the  county.  He  was 
accused  of  committing  a  robbery.  His  friends  had 
besought  Yokes  to  hear  the  case  in  private,  as  the 
publicity  would  be  most  disgraceful.  The  Major,  how- 
ever, turned  a  deaf  ear  to  their  entreaties.  His  prin- 
ciple was,  that  there  was  but  one  law  alike  for  rich 
and  poor,  nobles  and  peasants ;  and  in  accordance  with 
this  fair  maxim  he  ordered  the  offender  to  be  brought 
down  into  the  public  office.  But  when,  a  few  moments 
later,  a  beautiful  young  woman  fell  on  her  knees  be- 
fore him,  and  assured  him  in  agonizing  terms  that  she 
was  the  wife  of  the  culprit,  and  that  three  young  babes 
would  be  ruined  and  disgraced  by  the  exposure ;  that 
even  if  the  case  were  proved,  it  would  be  found  that 
he  had  been  wickedly  led  into  it  in  a  moment  of  in- 
ebriation ;  but,  above  all,  that  he  supported  by  his  own 
personal  exertions  his  aged  parents — the  heart  of  the 
chief  magistrate,  ever  awake  to  a  tale  of  woe,  was 
touched,  and  the  young  man  was  privately  examined. 
What  passed  I  know  not ;  but  within  half  an  hour  the 
supposed  culprit  was  discharged,  and  his  accusation 
blotted  from  the  charge-book.  He  had  become  so  im- 
plicated that  a  less  lenient  judge  than  my  relative 
might  have  committed  him  to  prison,  and  perhaps  have 
destroyed  for  ever  his  prospects.  But  as  he  had  been 
rather  morally  than  actually  guilty,  Yokes  had  let 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


277 


Lira  off  with  a  wholesome  admonition.  The  reclaimed 
young  man  subsequently  became  a  poor-law  officer, 
and  never  forgot  the  lesson  of  mercy,  which  from  him- 
self he  now  extended  to  others  around  him. 

As  Yokes  had  business  in  the  country,  I  mounted 
my  hack  and  cantered  off  to  the  Newcastle  racecourse, 
hard  by,  where  a  match  for  a  large  sum  was  to  be 
contended  for.  A  racer  belonging  to  an  officer  of  the 
garrison  was  backed  to  beat  a  celebrated  hunter,  the 
winner  of  several  similar  feats.  The  military  nag  was 
to  be  ridden  by  Capt.  H.  M.,  the  best  sporting  rider  in 
the  county,  a  gentleman  highly  and  generally  esteemed, 
but  a  Protestant;  tlie  other  belonged  to  Mr.^S.,  a 
dashing  young  fellow,  careless  whether  he  broke  his 
neck  or  no,  and  a  decided  favourite  with  all  the  Catholic 
party.  At  this  time  religious  feud  ran  high,  and  just 
as  the  gallant  captain  was  mounting,  he  was  warned 
that  an  effort  would  be  made  to  throw  his  horse  down 
on  his  attempting  to  leap  the  third  wall,  which  had 
been  agreed  to  be  four  feet  high,  built  of  loose  stones. 
The  gallant  captain  (or  Widow,  as  I  believe  he  was  usually 
called),  with  the  true  spirit  of  his  countrymen,  spurned 
the  notice,  and  jumping  up,  away  they  went.  Over 
the  first  fence  they  passed  well — nothing  impeded  their 
progress  ;  but  as  the  captain  gained  a  little  on  his 
opponent  the  crowd  rushed  forward,  and  as  Mr.  S. 
came  up  to  the  wall,  actually  pulled  it  down  to  let  him 
go  over  without  jumping.  And  now  all  eyes  were 
fixed  on  the  result  of  the  last  leap  ;  it  was  too  late  to  in- 
terfere, and  the  spectators  looked  on  in  anxious  dismay. 
As  they  approached  it,  a  shout  was  heard  on  the 
other  side — the  wicked  wretches  were  already  there — 


278    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

a  cheer — a  struggle  was  heard,  as  they  rode  up  neck 
and  neck — a  groan  burst  involuntarily  from  many  a 
lip  as  they  together  sprang  over  the  bulwark  which 
shut  them  out  from  view.  For  a  moment  the  most 
fearful  doubts  were  entertained,  and  we  followed  them 
at  full  speed.  But  here,  all  our  cares  and  fears  were 
at  once  dissipated ;  there  stood  both  gentlemen  besides 
their  animals  ;  Major  Yokes  was  conversing  with 
them,  while  at  about  one  hundred  yards  distance 
stood  a  body  of  police,  and  in  their  hands  a  dozen 
of  stout  peasants.  The  whole  scene  was  at  once  ex- 
plained. The  magistrate,  who  was  aware  of  all  pass- 
ing, had  received  information  of  the  intended  outrage  ; 
without  noise  or  fuss,  he  had  marched  a  proper  force 
to  the  spot  and  arrested  the  villains  who  were  already 
awaiting  to  destroy  their  victim.  Fortunately,  how- 
ever, no  harm  was  done,  no  overt  act  was  committed,  so 
having  shown  them  they  could  not  break  the  laws 
with  impunity,  the  Major  at  once  discharged  them, 
having  already  established  in  their  hearts  a  wholsome 
dread  of  his  prescience  and  his  power. 

On  my  return  to  the  city  I  found  a  military  band 
playing  in  the  Crescent,  while  over  the  adjacent  pave- 
ment I  saw  a  galaxy  of  beauty  promenading — a  bright 
bouquet  of  loveliness,  never  since  surpassed.  The 

beautiful  Miss  F  s,  daughter  of  a  noble  house  ;  the 

Miss  B.s,  of  Clare  (nieces  of  a  gentleman  afterwards 
savagely  murdered),  lovely  beyond  description  ;  the 
dashing  and  admired  Miss  S.  D.,  the  daughter  of  our 
general ;  the  pretty  Miss  S. ;  pert  little  Betsy,  and 
fascinating  Julia,  together  with  a  dozen  other  girls 
who  could  elsewhere  have  passed  for  first-rate  beauties, 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK. 


279 


and  a  select  knot  of  some  heavenly  looking  young  mar- 
ried women,  made  up  the  female  characters  of  the  de- 
lightful and  striking  picture  ;  while  a  host  of  dashing 
young  officers  and  sporting  young  men  from  the 
country  paid  them  well-deserved  attentions. 

Presently  I  heard  that  there  was  a  disturbance 
taking  place  at  the  other  end  of  George- street,  so  I 
hastened  thither  to  see  what  was  the  matter.  The 
whole  town  appeared  to  have  assembled  here,  and 
loudly  screamed  forth  their  anger  and  annoyance ; 
while  magistrates  and  policemen  hurried  backwards 
and  forwards,  and  every  one  seemed  excited,  though 
few  really  knew  what  it  was  about. 

I  soon  learnt  the  particulars.  It  appeared  that  a 
society  or  band  of  gentlemen,  styling  themselves 
"  Brunswickers,"  had  assembled  to  discuss  their  ex- 
treme political  views  at  Swinburn's  Hotel — now  no 
longer  in  existence — and  that  during  the  time  they 
were  thus  debating,  some  ill-judged  member  had  fool- 
ishly indulged  in  bitter  invectives  against  the  liberal 
party,  and  spoken  harshly  of  O'Connell.  This  had 
been  carried  out  to  the  party  in  question,  and  Tom 
Steele,  as  their  self-elected  leader,  had  mounted  on  an 
empty  cart,  and  was  in  the  act  of  pouring  out  the 
most  inflammatory  address  in  terms  somewhat  treason- 
able to  the  Government  and  the  King,  mingled  with 
words  of  the  most  dire  abuse  against  the  whole  body 
of  Irish  Orangemen,  when  Capt.  J.  (the  then  mayor), 
followed  by  only  four  of  his  attendants,  rushed  up  and 
seized  the  orator,  and  bore  him  off.  To  force  him 
through  the  crowd  to  the  court-house  would  have  been 
impossible,  so  the  plucky  ex-captain  of  dragoons  con- 


2S0    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


tented  himself  with  lodging  him  safely  at  Moriarty's 
Ilotel  till  the  arrival  of  Vokes  and  his  police,  or  if 
necessary  a  military  force — for  that  functionary  was  in 
command  of  the  city  forces  as  well  as  those*  of  the 
county.  This  was  most  fortunate,  for  I  do  sincerely 
believe  that  the  rash  act  of  the  daring  civic  func- 
tionary might  have  ended  seriously  had  not  my  relative 
arrived  on  the  spot,  and  for  the  second  time  since  the 
morning  poured  oil  on  the  raging  waters.  How  the 
thing  was  managed  I  know  not,  but  within  an  hour 
afterwards  Tom  was  again  haranguing  the  delighted 
crowd,  in  a  for  less  excited  tone  than  he  had  hitherto 
nsed,  while  throughout  his  whole  speech  he  never  once 
alluded  to  his  capture.  The  people  had  got  their 
pet  back  again,  they  cheered  loudly,  and  asked  no 
questions. 

At  five  we  had  a  most  excellent  dinner,  that  early 
hour  being  fixed  upon  as  one  of  our  garrison  theatrical 
representations  were  to  take  place  at  the* theatre.  Our 
corps  was  most  numerous,  consisting  of  some  thirty  or 
forty  officers,  quartered  in  and  about  Limerick.  Indeed, 
some  came  (Lord  A.  Hill  amongst  the  number)  all  the 
way  from  Cork  to  share  our  festivities.  Captain  Scan- 
Ion  was  my  brother  manager.  Our  actresses  were 
professional  ladies«froni  Dublin. 

During  our  meal  we  were  disturbed  by  the  entrance 

of  Mr.  L  .     He  came  in  in  great  trepidation. 

Yokes  had  informed  him,  in  a  confidential  letter,  that 
a  conspiracy  had  been  formed  to  assassinate  him.  But 
as  he  had  a  clue  to  the  whole  affair,  the  threatened 
gentleman  need  not  be  alarmed  ;  he  was  well  cared 
for.  My  friend  the  Major  was  annoyed  at  the  com- 
munication being  made  public,  as  he  declared  that  such 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK,  281 

exposures  led  to  fresh  crimes,  and  often  defeated  the 
ends  of  justice.""" 

My  timid  friend  got  rid  of,  I  at  once  started  for  the 
theatre,  and  certainly  1  never  sate  a  more  brilliant 
sight.  Not  having  to  play  in  the  first  piece,  I  amused 
myself  by  looking  over  the  theatre  and  doing  the 
honours  to  the  company  as  they  arrived.  I  must  con- 
fess I  felt  proud  of  my  position.  I  was  certainly  at 
the  head  of  one  of  the  most  elegant  specimens  of  thea- 
trical entertainment  I  had  ever  witnessed. 

The  pit  and  boxes,  beautifully  painted  and  deco- 
rated by  an  officer  of  the  Springers  (62nd  Foot) ;  the 
*  This  does  not  appear  to  be  the  case  at  the  present  time,  as 
every  threatening  letter  is  published  in  the  newspapers.    A  few 
days  before  th3  publication  of  this  work  at  least  a  dozen  appeared 
in  the  journals,  particularly  one  stated  to  have  been  communicated 
by  the  Government  to  Mr.  Coates,  a  gentleman,  a  land-agent,  highly 
respected  in  Ireland  ;  while  it  was  added  in  the  same  paragraph 
that  the  authorities  had  given  directions  that  Mr.  Coates  should  be 
accompanied  and  looked  after  by  police,  wherever  he  went,  when- 
ever  he  stirred  out.    Tbis  was  followed  by  the  following  paragraph 
given  m  the  Irish  Times,  of  the  26th  August,  1862.    We  give  it  to 
show  the  great  change  in  the  system  which  has  taken  place  within 
the  last  twenty  years. 

X  "  rTH z  tLLEGED  WAHNIKG  to  Coates.-As  already  stated  in 
the  Irish  Times,  a  rumour  has  been  current  that  Mr.  Abraham 
Coates,  of  Ballycarbry,  agent  over  the  Cliften  estates,  a  few  days 
since  received  intimation  from  the  Government  that  his  life  was  in 
danger,  a  plot  having  been  formed  to  take  his  life.  It  is  further 
asserted  by  a  local  print  that  the  room  in  Gowran  Castle  in  which 
Mr.  Coates  was  to  sleep  on  the  night  of  the  apprehended  attack  was 
marked,  arrangements  having  been  made  for  opening  the  sash 
outside!  It  is  also  said  the  attempt  was  happily  frustrated  by 
the  activity  of  Mr.  W.  Rowney,  S.L,  who  supplied  the  information 
in  time  to  the  authorities,  which  was  the  means  of  saving  Mr.  Coates's 
life.  It  is  certainly  a  strange  phase  of  the  affair,  with  such  a  clue 
that  the  guilty  parties  were  not  at  once  arrested  and  made  ame- 
nable to  the  law." 


282    RECOLLECTIONS  OP  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


benches  covered  with  crimson  cloth  throughout ;  the 

drop-scene  produced  by  Captain  M  ;  a  full  military 

band  in  the  orchestra ;  a  blaze  of  wax-lights  illumi- 
nating the  lovely  girls  as  they  sprang  to  their  places, 
assisted  by  well-dressed  officers  (for  uniforms  in  those 
days  were  really  becoming),  while  their  mature  and 
aristocratic  chaperons  followed  them,  led  in  by  men 
such  as  Heff  and  Giles,  and  others,  whose  type  are, 
alas  !  fast  passing  away.  Such  a  sight  was  decidedly 
cheering,  and  at  once  called  forth  the  encomiums  of 
the  elderly  ladies,  and  the  bright  smiles  which  ex- 
posed the  lovely  teeth  of  the  younger  portion  of  the 
audience. 

To  describe  the  performance  itself  would  be  a  work 
of  supererogation;  suffice  to  say,  that  it  went  off  most 
pleasantly,  and  we  all  retired  well  pleased  with  the 
result  of  our  exertions,  and  with  smiles  started  off  for 

the  house  of  one  of  our  best  actors,  Ralph  J  ,  one 

of  the  most  strange  characters  in  all  Ireland,  where  we 
had  been  invited  to  supper. 

Here  we  were  shown  into  a  small  room  with  an  un- 
carpeted  floor.  Oaken  chairs  were  placed  around  a 
deal  table — whether  meant  as  more  expressive  of  a 
hospitable  board  than  any  other,  I  am  wholly  unable 
to  say. 

At  one  end  a  large  tub  of  live  oysters  was  placed ; 
at  the  other,  the  same  fish  stewed ;  on  one  side  was  a 
dish  of  toasted  cheese,  on  the  other  a  plate  of  red  her- 
rings. In  the  centre  stood,  supported  by  trestles,  a 
small  cask  of  whisky  ;  while  on  dumb-waiters  were  to 
be  found  hot  and  cold  water,  lemons,  sugar,  enormous 
tumblers,  punch-ladles,  and  several  coopers  of  delicious 


A  DAY  IN  LIMERICK.  283 

claret.    A  blind  piper  sat  in  the  corner;  one  of  the 

-nd  o  T  Wait6d  °n  "S  iQ  iis  --let  dress 

aUd  0n  eveiT  conclusion  of  an  air  by  th»  piper  J 
us  with  a  view  halloa  !  7      P  P  '  fd'°Ured 

Kalph  was  the  best  singer)  dedded 

most  amusmg  companions  that  ever  was  known  in 

ST!  W  Th ^d  1  1  b6W'  " 
nor  fill  7     ,  f       TOS  n0  SitUati0Q  in  life  ««t  ^  had 

when  thea  T  ^  **  ^  M  «-  «"5f 
when  the  sporting  amusements  closed,  in  order  to 

erve  through  every  phase  in  life.    In  eve  y  ^  ^ 
learnt  something,  he  had  gleaned  -o»ehoiy,tS 
brough  home  to  his  hive  of  anecdote,  and  above" 
he  had  earnt  how  to  collect  around  him  the  brlhtes 
and  best  sprits  of  the  neighbourhood.    Need  I  tb  en 
add  how  tru,y  I  enjoyed  myself,  and  how  SLctan 2 
I  was  forced  to  admit  that  I  saw  th,  *  llctantl7 


284 


DANGEROUS  AFFINITY. 


Oxe  of  the  most  exciting  spots,  not  only  to  the  eye, 
but  to  every  thrilling  sense  of  a  piscatorial  sportsman 
in  Ireland,  is  the  (i  Salmon  Leap"  at  Castle  Connell, 
some  eight  miles  from  the  City  of  Limerick.  Here 
the  noble  Shannon,  bordered  on  either  side  by  orna- 
mental parks,  rapidly  dashes  through  its  rocky  bed,  at 
the  rate  of  eight  or  ten  miles  an  hour,  throwing  up  its 
silver  spray  amidst  the  sunbeams  overhead,  which  tint 
them  with  the  sparkling  beauties  of  the  most  brilliant 
gems.  Fine  old  trees  dip  their  leaves  in  the  bounding 
stream,  and  shed  their  umbrage  over  the  salmon  which 
here  abound.  Here,  seated  at  one  end  of  a  shallow 
canoe,  fishing-rod  in  hand,  the  anxious  angler  stands 
at  one  end  of  his  long  punt,  intent  alone  on  the  pursuit 
of  his  game  ;  while  the  professional  boatman,  armed 
with  a  pole  and  paddle,  continually  uses  his  every 
skill  and  exertion,  to  guide  and  steady  the  frail  vessel, 
which  only  for  a  moment  left  to  its  own  course,  would 
be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks,  or  drawn  beneath  the 
foaming  waters.  Thus,  then,  there  is  that  fair  share 
of  danger  in  the  amusement  which  alone  gives  zest 
to  sport,  which  demands  that  constant  care  and  acti- 


DANGEROUS  AFFINITY. 


285 


vity  that  may  fairly  be  styled  the  salt  of  sporting 
life* 

It  was  to  Castle  Connell,  then,  that  I  now  turned  my 
footsteps,  or  rather  those  of  my  horse,  who  trotted  cheer- 
fully along,  enjoying  the  occasional  sharp  nip  inflicted  by 
the  cool  breeze  of  an  early  day  in  spring.  My  tackle  had 
been  sent  on,  also  a  basket  of  provisions,  as  I  had  pro- 
mised to  visit  the  old  ruins  of  the  castle,  battered  down 
by  Ireton  (I  believe)  during  the  Irish  invasion,  the 
outward  walls  of  which  still,  however,  tower  in  solemn 
grandeur,  laughing  alike  at  the  blasts  of  winter  and 
the  summer  storm,  forming  one  of  the  most  picturesque 
objects  which  embellish  this  truly  beautiful  spot.  Yes, 
amid  these  stately  ruins,  if  permitted  by  the  baronet's 
steward  to  do  so,  I  was  to  share  my  pigeon  pie  with 

Lord  G  ,  the  most  polished  and  fascinating  man  of 

his  day,  and  the  no  less  admired  Kate  F  ,  the 

adored  of  all  adorers — the  most  perfect  specimen  of 
a  lovely  Irishwoman  even  that  highly  favoured  nation 
could  boast  of  having  produced.  I  also  made  arrange- 
ments to  dine  at  a  friend's  in  the  neighbourhood  and 
sleep  in  Castle  Connell,  as  I  had  made  up  my  mind  to 
attend  a  horse  fair  to  be  held  at  Bird's  Hill  next  day. 

All  these  plans  I  carried  out  to  my  own  entire  satis- 
faction. I  had  pic -nicked  with  my  noble  friend  and  his 
charming  companion.  I  had  dug  up  an  old  ring  in 
the  ruins,  which  I  then  believed  to  have  once  been 
the  property  of  an  Irish  chief,  but  which  subsequently 

*  It  was  on  this  spot  that  the  Honourable  Mrs.  Massey,  a  few 
years  ago,  was  drowned,  with  her  servant  and  boatman,  while 
crossing  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  dining  with  her  relative,  Sir 
Ilugh  D.  Massey,  of  Poonas. 


286    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


I  discovered  to  be  the  fraction  of  an  old  worn  out  cart 

harness.  I  had  sat,  or  rather  stood  up,  in  my  canoe 
for  nearly  three  hours,  and  with  great  difficulty  (and 
I  must  add,  with  the  assistance  of  my  boatman  also) 
hooked,  gaffed,  and  landed,  two  fine  salmon.  I  had 
taken  a  late  dinner  with  my  country  friend,  and  now- 
had  returned  to  my  little  modest  hostel.  I  had 
grasped  my  night  candle  with  the  intention  of  retiring 
to  bed,  when  I  was  startled  by  the  sound  of  the  ap- 
proaching steps  of  a  horse.  These  ceased  at  the  door 
of  my  hotel,  and  presently  I  heard  some  one  enter. 

The  next  moment,  in  marched  my  worthy  father-in- 
law. 

"  Good  gracious !"  cried  I ;  "  what  could  have  in- 
duced you  to  ride  down  here  alone  at  such  an  hour  1" 
"  I  wanted  to  see  you." 

"  Indeed  !  But  why  come  down  unaccompanied  1" 
"  I  was  safer  alone.  There's  a  nasty,  long  lane,  with* 
a  dead  wall  fencing,  in  Lord  Clare's  park.  If  they 
knew  I  was  coming,  even  with  an  escort,  our  numbers 
couldn't  save  us.  They  could  easily  destroy  us  ;  and 
so  I  sent  a  patrol  out,  on  the  Clare  road,  to  mislead 
them,  and  then  rode  down  here  by  myself  to  see 

you." 

"  But  why  r 

"I'll  tell  you.  You  must  not  go  to  Bird's  Hill 
fair  to-morrow." 

"  Indeed  !    May  I  ask  the  reason  f 

u  Because,  if  you  do,  you'll  probably  be  shot." 

«  And  why  f 

"  Ah,  now,  why  are  you  so  opaque  F 

"I  never  injured  any  one.    I  never  interfere  iu  rc- 


DANGEROUS  AFFINITY. 


287 


ligion,  or  politics.  Why,  then,  should  they  shoot 
mef 

"  Simply  because  you  are  my  son-in-law." 

"  Bless  me  !  that's  very  disagreeable ;  I  never 
thought  of  that." 

u  And  now,  my  dear  Henry,  let  me  give  you  another 
little  bit  of  advice.  You  are  really  very  foolish.  I 
saw  you  through  this  open  window  all  the  way  as  I 
came  through  the  village.  You  really  should  shut  the 
shutters." 

u  Again,  may  I  ask  why  V 

"  Simply  on  account  of  the  danger  of  being  shot  as 
you  sit  in  your  chair." 

"  You  must  be  joking.  Why  should  the  quiet  inha- 
bitants of  this  peaceable  hamlet  wish  to  destroy  me  P 

"  Merely  for  the  simple  reason  that  I  afforded  you 
just  now." 

"  Upon  my  life  P  muttered  I ;  "  I  never  before  had 
any  idea  of  the  pleasing  privileges  attached  to  the 
honour  of  being  wedded  to  the  daughter  of  a  police 
magistrate," 

"  What  do  you  mean  P 

"  Not  that  I  regret ;  on  the  contrary,  I  glory  in  being 
the  happy  husband  of  your  lovely  and  excellent  daugh- 
ter. But,  upon  my  honour,  I  have  not  the  slightest 
wish  to  claim  a  pistol-ball  as  her  dower  f 

" NahocMish  a  vfch  !  Every  bullet  has  its  billet, 
and  we  shall  yet  die  snugly  in  our  beds.  But  I  must 
be  off  again." 

"What,  alone P 

"  Decidedly." 


288    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


" Decidedly  not"  said  I.  " I  accompany  you  back, 
or  you  don't  stir." 

The  magistrate  remonstrated,  but  in  vain ;  and 
away  we  went  together — the  bargain  being  duly  made 
between  U3.  The  terms  were  these  :  on  condition  that  I 
gave  up  the  fair  at  Bird's  Hill,  Vokes  was  good  enough 
to  allow  me  to  escort  him  home.  Perhaps  for  the 
benefit  of  both  parties,  the  agreement  was  carried 
out. 


289 


THE  SHERIFF'S  SEIZURE. 


Vokes  and  I  were  travelling  between  Nenagh  and 
Maryborough,  when  who  should  step  into  the  night 

mail  but  Mr.  ,  the  sub-sheriff  of  Queen  s  County, 

a  gentleman  for  whom  the  Major  had  a  very  high 
respect,  one  who,  though  young,  had  on  more  than  one 
occasion  caused  the  law  to  be  respected  during  the 
short  period  he  had  been  in  office.  The  usual  greetings 
over,  my  relative  asked  him,  as  a  matter  of  conversa- 
tion, what  he  was  doing  in  that  part  of  the  country. 

"  I've  just  escaped  from  a  somewhat  perilous 
position." 

"  Indeed  ;  were  you  attacked  V 

"  Far  from  it ;  it  was  a  danger  of  my  own  seeking 
— a  danger  I  incurred  through  ignorance  on  my  part, 
and  ill-timed  zeal  on  the  part  of  my  assistant,  who 
has  just  been  carried  off  to  hospital." 

"  Oh,  pray  tell  us  all  about  it,"  said  I ;  "do  tell  us. 
It  will  wile  away  the  night  hours."  Yokes  backed 
up  my  request,  and  our  official  friend  at  once  assented, 
and  thus  began  : — 

"  You  may  have  heard  of  Captain  H  ,  usually 

styled  '  the  Reel  use  of  the  Mountain.'    If  you  have 

ever  read  the  celebrated  memoirs  of  Sir  J.  Bt  ,  you 

19 


290    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN"  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


will  be  able  to  judge  of  this  strange  being  from  an 
anecdote  which  that  well-known  writer  relates  of 
him." 

We  pleaded  ignorance  of  the  allusion,  and  asked  the 
present  narrator  to  supply  it.    He  thus  gave  it  : — 

"Captain  H  ,  disgusted  with  society,  or  for 

other  reasons,  chose,  some  years  ago,  to  retire  from  the 
busy  world  and  take  up  his  residence  on  the  summit 
of  a  very  high  mountain  which  divides  the  Queen's 
County  from  that  of  Tipperary.  Here  he  had  a  snug, 
but  isolated,  residence  built.    And  here, 

"  The  world  forgetting,  by  the  world  forgot," 

he  amused  himself  with  agriculture  and  the  sports 
of  the  field,  seldom  or  never  straying  beyond  the  limits 
of  his  mountain  throne. 

"  A  near  relative  of  the  popular  Irish  author,  it  ap- 
pears, had  a  strange  desire  to  shoot  grouse  on  the  aerial 
estate  of  the  recluse,  and  with  this  object  wrote  to  him, 
requesting  permission  to  do  so  As  might  reasonably 
have  been  expected,  no  reply  was  vouchsafed  to  his 
missive ;  so  one  fine  morning,  without  further  cere- 
mony, the  proposed  sportsman  ascended  the  almost 
inaccessible  height,  and  began  to  pepper  away  amongst 
the  birds.  The  report  of  his  fowling-piece  aroused  the 
"  man  of  the  mountain,"  who,  in  dire  anger,  jumped 
out  of  bed,  and  in  a  few  minutes  confronted  the 
intruder. 

"The  greater  number  of  our  sex  would  have  felt 
alarmed  by  the  appearance  of  the  misanthrope.  He 
was  above  six  feet  two  in  height,  and  very  powerful  in 
proportion.     His  eyes  glared  wildly,  and  his  right  fiat 


THE  SHERIFF'S  SEIZURE. 


291 


was  clasped  in  passion — his  left  hand  carried  a  gun 
— his  whole  appearance  denoted  violent  anger. 

"  '  What  are  you  doing  here,  sir  V  roared  he  in  sten- 
torian tones.    1  What  are  you  doing  here  ? ' 

"  'I  came  to  enjoy  a  day's  sport.' 

"  '  And  who  the  deuce  gave  you  leave  to  do  so  ? ' 

" 1 I  came  without.' 

"  1  How  dare  you  poach  on  my  property  ?  I'll  teach 
you  better  manners.  Ah  !  there  is  your  dog  making 
a  point.  By  Heaven  !  if  you  don't  instantly  call  him 
off,  I'll  shoot  him  ! ' 

"  6  If  you  do  so,  I'll  shoot  you  ! 1 

"  1  Will  you,  indeed  1  Then  here  goes  ! '  and  he 
instantly  pointed  his  gun,  and  the  next  moment  the 
poor  animal  (a  valuable  one)  rolled  over  severely 
wounded. 

" '  I  never  break  my  word,'  calmly  retorted  the 
sportsman,  and  in  another  moment  he  had  lodged  a 
full  charge  of  shot  in  the  left  arm  and  in  the  side  of 
Capt.  H  . 

"Wounded  and  in  pain,  the  now  infuriated  recluse 
sprang  upon  his  antagonist,  and  a  hand-to-hand  con- 
flict took  place,  during  which  the  proprietor  of  the  dog- 
got  a  most  severe  mauling;  indeed,  I  cannot  now 
remember  whether  they  did  not  both  use  their  second 
barrels,  and  I  believe  with  painful  effect  on  the  cap- 
tain. But  be  that  as  it  may,  the  lord  of  the  rocky 
soil,  maimed  as  he  was,  seized  the  plucky  poacher  in 
his  arms  and  bore  him  down  to  Durrow,  a  v 
three  miles  off,  and  there  left  Mr.  B.  in  charge  of  the 
local  magistrate.  Such  is  the  sketch  given  by  Sir 
J.  B  ,  if  my  memory  does  not  fail  me. 

19—2 


292    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


"  And  was  no  notice  taken  of  it  ?"  asked  I. 

"  None.  In  that  part  of  the  country  it  was  looked 
upon  as  a  fair  (though  strange)  duel,  and  the  unlucky 
grouse-shooter,  instead  of  being  pitied,  was  only  con- 
gratulated on*  his  miraculous  escape  from  the  most 
dreaded  character  in  the  whole  county." 

"  He  must,  indeed,  have  been  fear-inspiring.' ' 

"  Aye,  and  if  I  am  rightly  informed,  he  has  proved 
his  prowess  even  since  the  event  I  have  spoken 
of,  by  beating  off,  single-handed,  ten  or  a  dozen  White- 
boys  who  came  to  seek  for  arms,  and  after  killing  one, 
and  wounding  several  of  them,  he,  alone  and  unaided, 
dragged  into  the  nearest  town  the  chief  of  the  band, 
a  man  celebrated  for  his  athletic  powers,  and  lodged 
the  fellow  in  the  county  gaol,  although  nothing  would 
afterwards  induce  hira  to  take  the  trouble  of  appear- 
ing against  him." 

"  I  have  heard  of  the  occurrence,"  chimed  in  Yokes  ; 
"  but  what  has  this  to  do  with  your  present  visit  ?" 

"  Everything  !  It  unfortunately  happened  that  the 
very  first  execution  put  into  my  hands  was  one  against 
the  '  Recluse  of  the  Mountain.'  As  is  usual  in  treating 
with  a  gentleman,  I  wrote  to  him  in  the  first  instance, 
and  informed  him  of  the  unpleasant  duty  that  had  been 
thrust  on  me.  He  took  no  notice  of  my  letter.  I 
then  made  application  for  payment  in  a  more  peremp- 
tory tone.  He  now  answered,  and  set  me  at  defiance  : 
1  He  had  not  got  the  money  ;  and  if  he  had  he  would 
not  pay  it — he  equally  laughed  at  the  law  herself  and 
her  base  myrmidons.'  One  only  course  remained  open 
to  me ;  I  at  once  determined  on  personally  serving 
him  with  the  document,  and,  if  possible,  seizing  his 


THE  SHERIFF'S  SEIZURE. 


293 


goods,  for,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  had  no  anxiety 
whatever  to  meddle  with  his  person. 

"  On  a  former  occasion,  when  danger  had  threatened 
us,  my  Irish  assistant  had  run  away  and  left  me  ;  so 
on  the  present  I  picked  out  a  sturdy  old  English  pen- 
sioner named  Hoskins,  whose  bull-dog  courage  nothing 
could  overcome. 

"Accompanied  by  my  aid,  I  quietly,  and  without 
mentioning  my  intention  to  anyone,  came  down  to  this 
neighbourhood,  and  having  slept  at  the  house  of  a 
friend,  I  left  at  daybreak  under  some  fanciful  excuse, 
and  with  Hoskins  trudged  up  the  mountain. 

"  Although  we  arrived  early  at  our  destination,  the 
bird  had  already  flown.  The  house  was  perfectly 
empty ;  but  we  were  amply  consoled  for  this  circum- 
stance by  seeing  some  twenty  or  thirty  fine  cows 
grazing  on  the  land  around  the  cottage  ;  these  would 
indeed  repay  us  for  our  trouble,  and  satisfy  the  claim 
we  came  to  enforce.  Our  only  chagrin  was  that  we 
had  not  brought  proper  drivers  with  us  in  order  at 
once  to  remove  them,  and  we  were  actually  debat- 
ing whether  we  should  not  return  and  obtain  this 
necessary  assistance  previous  to  making  our  seizure, 
when  several  countrymen  approached  us.  These 
men  we  thought  might  easily  be  tempted  to  turn 
drovers  for  the  nonce — a  proceeding  which  would 
not  only  save  time,  but  money;  so  we  at  once  ad- 
dressed ourselves  to  them.  To  our  consternation 
we  discovered  that  these  mountaineers  did  not  speak 
a  word  of  English,  and,  alas  !  we  were  equally  ignorant 
of  Irish  ;  so  we  tried  as  well  as  we  could  to  make 
them  understand  our  wishes  by  signs.     They  also 


294    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

plunged  into  personal  hieroglyphics,  but  neither  side 
could  convey  their  meaning  to  the  other,  while  both 
seemed  irritated  at  the  supposed  stupidity  of  the  oppo- 
site party.  An  old  woman  was  dragged  forward,  but 
her  attempt  at  our  language  was  decidedly  Gaelic ;  an 
old  man  present,  I  believe,  from  the  few  words  he 
uttered,  could  speak  English  tolerably  well,  but  he  was 
stone  deaf ;  and  though  he  could  occasionally  cop- 
vey  to  us  his  meaning,  in  spite  of  a  fearful  stammer, 
he  could  not  hear  a  single  word  we  said.  So  we 
somewhat  cavalierly  dismissed  him  to  the  shades  below. 

"  Matters  now  began  to  grow  serious  ;  we  had  tasted 
no  food,  and  like  all  hungry  men,  felt  cross.  The 
peasants  roared  and  bawled  at  us,  making  signs  first  at 
the  cows  and  then  at  themselves,  which  we  interpreted 
to  mean  that  they  desired  to  take  charge  of  the  ani- 
mals for  us,  and  to  this  proposition  we  nodded  an 
assent.  Eut  still  they  did  not  appear  content, 
and  as  their  number  was  now  considerable,  I  thought 
it  better  to  proceed  to  business  at  once,  and  so  told 
Hoskins.  He  quite  agreed  with  me,  and  stepped  across 
to  make  the  first  seizure.  In  conformity  with  the 
rule,  he  first  produced  his  authority,  and  then  pro- 
ceeded to  lay  hold  of  one  of  the  cows.  No  sooner  had 
he  done  this,  than  he  was  levelled  by  a  blow  from  a 
stout  bludgeon,  while  a  general  cheer  of  approbation, 
and  a  contraction  of  the  circle  which  surrounded 
me,  showed  me  that  I  must  now  be  prepared  for  the 
worst.  I  felt  in  my  pocket  for  a  small  pistol  I  always 
carried  about  me,  and  had  just  made  up  my  mind  to 
sell  my  life  dearly,  when  I  heard  a  loud  shouting  in 
h    distance,  and  saw  a  towering  figure  on  horse- 


THE  SHERIFF'S  SEIZURE. 


295 


back  galloping  at  full  speed  towards  ine,  roaring  to 
the  peasants  in  Irish,  at  least  so  I  supposed,  to  desist. 
There  was  a  lull  for  a  moment,  and  he  dashed  in 
amongst  us,  and  jumped  from  his  horse. 

" 6  Who  the  devil  are  you,  sir  V  was  his  courteous 
way  of  questioning  me. 

"  '  I  am  the  sub-sheriff  of  this  county.' 

"  6  What  did  you  come  here  to  do  V 

execute  the  law  !    Here  is  my  authority/ 

"  No  sooner  did  the  excited  bystanders  see  the  docu- 
ment, than  they  again  pressed  forward ;  the  captain,  for 
now  I  felt  certain  it  was  he,  waved  them  back  with 
some  difficulty. 

"  ( And  what  did  you  hope  to  do  V 

"  'I  have  already  seized  all  the  cattle  around,  and 
only  await  proper  drivers  to  convey  them  away.  In 
the  execution  of  his  duty,  my  assistant  has  been  struck 
and  injured  by  these  uncouth  savages.  But  they  shall 
pay  dearly  for  it.' 

"  6  Fool  that  you  are  !  It  is  lucky  they  don't  under- 
stand you.  It  is  you  that  are  acting  illegally.  Know 
to  your  cost  that  not  one  of  those  animals  belongs  to 
me.  Though  they  graze  here,  they  are  bond  fide  the 
property  of  these  men.  You  must  instantly  give  them 

up; 

" ?  I  shall  not  do  so  willingly,  even  though  it  cost  me 
my  life,  till  you  give  me  security  for  your  debt.' 

"  '  Well,' returned  the  recluse,  'you  are  brave  even 
to  rashness,  almost  to  fool-hardihood.  But  I  admire 
courage  ;  it's  the  only  thing  I  worship.  A  man  of 
your  spirit  must  not  be  wantonly  sacrificed.  Come,' 
said  he,  dragging  me  in ;  i  come  in,  and  I'll  try  and 


296    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


satisfy  you/  He  then  turned  to  the  excited  by- 
standers, and  apparently  begged  of  them  to  be  patient 
for  a  few  minutes. 

"  In  the  meantime  he  led  me  into  what  he  styled  his 
parlour,  I  should  have  described  it  as  his  armoury, 
where  weapons  of  every  kind  were  neatly  displayed, 
intermingled  with  every  sort  of  fishing-rod,  saddle, 
bridle,  and  cudgel,  that  I  believe  ever  had  been  in- 
vented. 

"  *  And  now,  sir,  what  do  you  want  V 
" 1  Money/ 

* 1 1  have  none.  But  as  I  never  broke  my  word  in 
my  life,  will  you  take  my  promissory  notes  for 
the  amount  payable  in  four,  eight,  and  twelve 
months  V 

"  1 1  will/  unhesitatingly  replied  I.  1  I  thus  make 
myself  personally  responsible  for  the  debt  ;  but  from 
what  I've  seen  of  you,  I  have  no  fear  of  your  mislead- 
ing me.' 

"  'I  never  deceived  the  man  that  trusted  me  in  my 
life.  As  an  official,  you  may  perhaps  happen  to  have 
some  stamps  about  you  V 

"<I  have.' 

'  "  Give  them  to  me  !'  He  filled  them  up,  and  re- 
turned them.    1  Will  they  do  V 

" 1  Perfectly.    Good-bye     and  I  rose  to  depart. 

"'Xot  so,'  cried  the  captain,  laughing  ;  \  only  leave 
this  room  without  me,  show  yourself  alone,  and  you 
are  a  dead  man.' 

"I  started  at  the  announcement. 

" 1  I'll  soon  settle  this,'  added  he,  and  he  went  out 
with  me  and  addressed  the  people,  while  I  endeavoured 


THE  SHERIFF'S  SEIZURE. 


297 


to  express  to  them  that  I  had  no  claims  on  their  cattle. 
The  men  seemed  somewhat  disappointed  at  losing  their 
chance  of  skinning  me,  and  turned  sullenly  away.  I 
pointed  out  to  my  now  good  friend  (for  indeed  £e  had 
proved  himself  such)  the  prostrate  form  of  my  assistant. 
He  instantly  ordered  two  of  the  fellows  to  lift  him  up, 
and  carry  him  down  the  mountain ;  all,  however,refused. 
In  an  instant,  the  captain's  eyes  flashed  fire,  and  the 
man  he  addressed  fell  stunned  beneath  the  weight 
of  his  heavy  hand.  The  other  instantly  sprang  to- 
wards the  injured  Englishman,  and,  with  the  help 
of  a  comrade,  lifted  him  up,  and,  in  company  with 
the  captain  and  myself,  bore  him  down  to  the 
village. 

"  I  would  fain  have  spared  H  the  trouble  of  ac- 
companying me,  but  he  assured  me  it  was  absolutely 
necessary. 

"When  he  parted  from  me  he  extended  his  hand,  and 
taking  my  comparatively  diminutive  member  in  his 
powerful  grasp,  he  thus  addressed  me  : — '  Good-bye, 
sheriff ;  you  are  a  plucky  little  fellow — your  courage 
saved  you ;  but  never  try  such  an  experiment  again. 
If  tired  of  life  at  any  time,  and  you  desire  to  avoid 
self-destruction,  return  to  this  mountain  and  make 
yourself  known.  You  will  cease  to  exist  in  five 
minutes.  I  have  saved  you  once.  I  have  not  influ- 
ence to  save  you  a  second  time,  so  pray  to  the 
Lord  never  again  to  see,  '  the  Recluse  of  the  Moun- 
tain.' 

"  He  then  left  me,  and  I  remained  at  the  inn  (having 
seen  poor  Hoskins  well  stowed  away  in  the  hospital)  till 
this  carriage,  in  which  I  propose  to  travel  to  Dublin, 


298    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 

passed.  I  have  fortunately  found  pleasant  companions, 
and  thank  you  for  listening  to  my  long  tale."  . 

We  soon  arrived,  and  got  out.  But  afterwards, 
when  Quartered  in  the  Irish  capital,  I  met  the  worthy 
sub-sheriff,  who  assured  me  that  the  bills  he  had  taken 
from  the  "Hermit  Captain "  had  each  been  duly 
honoured  and  paid  to  the  moment. 


299 


FINAL  WOED  ON  IEELANB. 


Of  all  the  revolutions  which  have  taken  place  within 
the  memory  of  man,  none  can  exceed  the  bloodless 
revolution  which  within  the  last  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury has  changed  the  social  condition  of  Ireland 
— the  habits  of  her  people.  The  same  fertile  soil,  the 
same  splendid  scenery,  the  same  natural  advantages 
of  lake,  river,  and  forest,  still,  and  must  ever  exist,  but 
her  people  are  no  longer  the  people  of  whose  reckless 
bravery,  and  improvident  hospitality  we  read  in  works 
written  some  thirty  years  ago.  They  are  no  longer 
the  impulsive,  witty,  hard-drinking,  rollicking  boys  of 
Charles  Lever's  pages.  By  slow,  but  sure  degrees,  they 
have  undergone  a  change  like  that  of  the  chrysalis  grub, 
as  it  shakes  off  its  ignoble  form  and  soars  a  brilliant  but- 
terfly. By  this  comparison,  however,  I  do  not  intend  to 
convey  the  idea  of  the  vast  superiority  in  every  respect 
which  the  modern  Irishman  may  now  boast  over  his 
progenitor ;  for  although  in  many  instances  his  cha- 
racter has  much  improved,  there  are  certain  points 
which  in  thus  rendering  him  more  prudent,  more  sober, 
and  more  frugal,  have  altogether  cooled  that  warmth  of 


300  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


heart  which  once  formed  the  amiable  weakness  of 
Erin's  children. 

Our  sketches  may  perhaps  seem  designed  as  an  exagge- 
rated illustration  of  the  bloodthirsty  propensities  which 
once  led  the  Irish  peasantry  into  crime,  and  disgraced 
by  its  atrocity  this  lovely  island,  and,  indeed,  they  rather 
ponrtray  these  than  affect  to  be  a  personal  memoir.  But 
we  beg  to  assure  our  readers  that  we  have  in  many 
instances,  particularly  in  those  of  Major  Going,  Blood, 
Hoskins,  and  a  host  of  others,  avoided  bringing  into  pro- 
minence many  of  the  most  savage  murders  which  took 
place  at  the  period  when  this  little  work  is  supposed 
to  chronicle  the  stirring  incidents  which  occurred  in 
the  South  of  Ireland. 

A  check  was  decidedly  put  on  these  fear-inspiring 
acts,  the  organization  of  crime  was  almost  entirely  de- 
stroyed, the  links  of  horror  were  broken,  in  no  small 
degree  by  T.  P.  Yokes,  aided  by  the  intelligent  co-ope- 
ration of  his  brother  magistrates,  acting  unanimously 
on  a  system  laid  down  and  carried  out  during  a  series  of 
years  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  police.  I  have  there- 
fore thought  it  but  fair,  now,  when  crime  again  raises 
her  head,  and  assassination  immolates  her  victims  in 
broad  daylight,  to  recount  some  of  those  means  which 
at  a  former  period  threw  a  protecting  shield  over  the 
landowner,  and  carried  terror  to  the  bosom  of  the 
murder-seeking  tenant. 

The  fearful  deeds  which  were  then  enacted  most 
generally  arose  from  differences  in  religious  creed  or 
political  action.  The  Catholic,  still  under  penalties 
which  bound  him  down  by  unfair  fetters,  and  deprived 
him  of  all  right  to  worship  his  Creator  in  his  own  way, 


FINAL  WORD  ON  IRELAND. 


301 


was  an  ever  ready  subject  of  discontent ;  while  the  mani- 
fest difference  between  the  laws  introduced  to  propitiate 
the  English,  and  to  grind  down  the  Irish  (at  least  so 
they  were  t  aught  by  interested  demagogues),  still  further 
irritated  the  then  impetuous  peasantry  of  Ireland. 

In  the  days  I  speak  of,  the  kind-hearted  landed 
gentry  of  the  sister  country  knew  no  bounds  to  their 
hospitality  and  expenditure.  It  is  true  that  they 
seldom  received  any  rent,  but  they  seldom  asked  for 
it.  Meat  was  reared  on  their  lands.  Every  article  of 
life  was  prepared  on  their  estate.  "Whisky  was  dis- 
tilled in  their  mountain  fastnesses,  and  woe  betide 
the  lawyer  or  the  bailiff,  even  when  supported  by 
the  posse  of  the  sheriff,  or  a  troop  of  dragoons,  who 
dared  to  attack  the  lord  of  the  soil.  The  castle  doors 
were  closed.  Every  tenant  mounted  guard,  and  the 
besiegers  were  fain  to  return  as  they  came ;  though 
the  commanders — both  military  and  civil — often  re- 
turned to  dine  with  the  "jolly  defaulter,"  who  loved 
them  as  guests  beneath  his  roof — who  laughed  them 
to  scorn  as  besiegers  before  his  walls.  Yes,  such  were 
the  manners  of  the  olden  time — the  halcyon  days  of 
Ireland.  The  county  member  could  always  give  you 
twenty  good  horses,  and  a  dozen  postboys,  to  draw  you 
from  his  seat,  to  the  seat  of  Government.  But  he 
could  seldom  lend  you  51.  to  pay  for  your  place  inside 
the  mail  coach.  A  cask  of  claret,  or  of  whisky,  has 
often  been  tapped  on  the  dinner  table,  when  the  neigh- 
bouring grocer  refused  to  give  tick  for  a  bottle  of 
ginger  wine.    Troja  fait — Ireland  was! 

But  how  different  now  is  the  state  of  the  sister  isle. 
Qauses  and  effects  have  completely  changed  her.  Her 


302  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE.  . 

peasantry  and  her  landholders  have  equally  shared  in 
this  wonderful  transformation — a  transformation  so 
general  that  I  will  defy  any  one  now  to  find  a  single 
member  of  the  old  stock  left.  Father  Mathew 
compelled,  by  his  eloquent  reasoning,  the  lower  classes 
to  become  sober.  The  Encumbered  Estate  Act  com- 
pelled by  its  enactments  the  gentry  to  be  prudent. 
And  in  both  cases,  as  in  every  newly-inducted  fashion, 
the  disciples  have  decidedly  gone  far  beyond  the  most 
sanguine  anticipations  of  the  original  intention. 

Wit  and  jollity  were  banished  from  amidst  the  lower 
classes  by  the  moral  preacher.  Hospitality  and 
generosity  have  fled  before  the  Act  of  Parliament. 

The  consequences  of  this  strange  and  sudden  revolu- 
tion should,  and  will,  decidedly  bring  prosperity  to  the 
Green  Island.  The  higher  orders,  who  have  not  had 
their  estates  sold  in  spite  of  their  wish,  reside,  gener- 
ally speaking,  on  their  lands,  and  do  much  good  by 
their  presence.  The  commercial  community  are  de- 
cidedly extending  their  adventures  ;  and  many,  many 
men  may  be  now  seen  moving  in  Dublin  society,  or 
ruling  the  monetary  transactions  of  the  Irish  capital 
by  their  great  wealth,  who  entered  that  city  some  five- 
and-twenty  years  previously  little  better  than  paupers. 
Building  houses,  and  purchasing  lands,  forming  banks, 
and  carrying  out  stockbroking  operations,  railway  con- 
tracts, and  cattle  dealing — have  all,  and  every  one, 
created  capital,  and  transformed  many  very  poor  men 
into  merchant  princes — humble  shopkeepers  into  fre- 
quenters of  the  Viceregal  Court.  m 

Nor  has  the  change  been  less  marked  amidst  the 
labouring  population  of  the  country.    A  difference  of 


FINAL  WORD  ON  IRELAND. 


303 


religious  creed  is  no  longer  a  bar  to  friendship.  The 
Catholic  and  the  Protestant  now  boast  equal  laws  and 
privileges.  The  priesthood  of  the  former  church,  now 
highly  educated  in  colleges,  feel  that  they  have  a  stake 
in  the  country,  and  an  interest,  human  and  divine,  in 
preserving  peace  amongst  all  Christians.  The  conse- 
quence is  obvious.  Religious  assassination,  once  so 
prevalent,  is  now  unheard  of,  while  daily  assimilating 
laws  (assimilating  with  those  of  Great  Britain)  and 
relief  from  heavy  taxation,  have  drawn  out  that  bitter 
sting  which  parties  opposed  in  politics,  once  loved  to 
inflict  on  each  other. 

The  dirty  mud  cabin  is  quietly  giving  way  to  the 
small  whitewashed  farm.  The  dunghill  has  been  re- 
moved from  the  front  door,  to  the  rear.  The  smoke 
goes  up  a  well-formed  chimney,  and  the  pigs  and 
poultry  are  gradually  being  banished  from  the  inside 
of  the  house.  The  daily  meal  amongst  the  labouring 
classes  is  still  potatoes — nothing  but  potatoes — but  they 
are  eaten  with  calm  content,  and  crowned  by  the 
luxury  of  a  pipe.  The  tiller  of  the  soil  is  allowed  a 
proper  period  thus  to  partake  with  his  family  of  his 
homely  food,  and  at  night  he  now  returns  to  his  more 
comfortable  cottage,  rather  than  create  a  riot  in  the 
neighbouring  shabeen,  or  plot  murders,  and  indulge  in 
irritating  argument  beside  the  smithy's  brilliant  fire  as 
in  former  years. 

The  money  of  the  small  farmer,  once  spent  on 
whisky,  or  shared  amongst  convivial  comrades,  is  now 
hoarded  up,  and  it  would  indeed  be  a  useless  task  in 
the  present  day  to  attempt  to  coax  a  well-to-do  agricul- 
turist out  of  his  cash.    He  lives  frugally — he  drinks 


304    RECOLLECTIONS  OF  AN  IRISH  POLICE  MAGISTRATE. 


water — he  works  hard,  and  he  now  places  in  a  bank 
(an  establishment  he  formerly  abhorred)  the  hard 
earnings  which  have  rewarded  his  toil. 

Such  is  Ireland  in  1862.  A  happy  state,  that  she  is 
likely  yearly  to  improve,  unless  she  once  more  gives 
way  to  crime.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  most 
cruel  and  wanton  murders  have  lately  stained  her  soil. 
Unmanly  threats  have  been  used,  and  the  firm  basis 
of  social  comfort  between  landlord  and  tenant  shaken 
by  agrarian  outrage. 

Experienced  and  well-trained  magistrates  were  never 
more  earnestly  required  than  they  are  at  this  instant. 
The  efficiency  (or  otherwise)  of  the  present  police 
system  should  be  inquired  into.  Nearly  13,000  in 
number,  largely  officered,  presided  over  by  some  200 
or  300  stipendiary  magistrates,  with  salaries  varying 
from  3001.  to  500L  a-year,  with  a  staff  of  clerks  in 
Dublin  Castle,  and  a  large  barrack,  with  an  adjutant, 
officers,  and  a  military  chief,  in  the  Phoenix  Park — 
surely  this  force  should  be  sufficient  to  put  down 
murder  and  outrage.  Ireland,  thus  filled  with  an 
especial  body,  in  addition  to  her  vast  army,  should  bo 
kept  in  such  a  peaceful  state,  that  crime,  affrighted 
by  the  fears  of  detection  and  punishment,  would  fly 
from  Ireland  for  ever.  I  have  therefore  published  the 
foregoing  sketches  of  one,  the  recollection  of  whose 
untiring  and  efficient  zeal  may  yet  stir  up  the  emu- 
lation of  the  present  police  force,  and  in  that  hope  I 
have  thrown  them  loosely  off,  without  regard  to  literary 
fame.  One  or  two  of  them  have  already  appeared  in  a 
popular  periodical ;  but  with  these  exceptions,  they  arc 
before  the  public  for  the  first  time,  and  touch  rather 


FINAL  WORD  ON  IRELAND. 


305 


upon  the  less-canvassed  incidents  which  occurred  in  the 
South  of  Ireland,  than  the  more  glaring  ones  made 
public  by  every  newspaper  in  the  United  Kingdom — 
a  roll  of  bloody  deeds  more  fitting  for  the  pages  of  a  new 
edition  of  the  "  Newgate  Calendar,"  than  those  of  a 
mere  railway  volume. 


THE  END. 

