CARR OF CARRLYON. 



PAET L 

CASA LAMBEBTI. 



CHAPTER I. 

One raioj evening In November^ 1847, a post 
cal^h^, drawn by three steaming horses, drew 
up at the gate of Bologna, on the road from 
Modena. The leather curtains, which, on account 
of the rain, had been fastened close, were drawn 
aside, and in answer to the official demand for a 
passaparto, the head of a fair young man, in a 
trayelling-oap, was thrust forward. This was 
followed by the keen eyes and black beard of 
another who had been asleep in the opposite 
TOL. I. 1 



t * . 



2 



CARR OF CARRLYON. 



comer, and who now, starting up suddenly, un- 
fastened a leather bag, which was slung round 
his neck, and produced, from it a pocket-book, 
which he handed to the officer. He followed 
this proceeding by jumping out himself; and 
while the Italian soldier held up his lantern, and 
slowly spelt the gilt superscription on the passport 
cover, ** The Honourable Laurence Carr," the 
courier . for such he was . surged him with volu- 
bility, and a yet more persuasive silver argument, 
to be expeditious. The document was transferred 
.possibly with another sUver argument. to the 
hands of a superior officer in the guard-house, 
while the courier and his friend held a colloquy 
under the archway. How had they made the 
joutney fix)m Modena? Was there any thing fresh 
concerning the banditti, since the diligenza was 
stopped and robbed two nights ago ? Sicuro . . . 
a poor devil, im certo faitore^ riding home from 
market last night, was killed; at least, so they 
told us in Modena, where we stopped a couple 
of hours. Per Baceo, if the patrol cateh them . ." 
But the patrol is not likely to catch them, thinks 



CASA LAKBERTL 3 

the courier, apparentlj, by his incredixloiifl smile, 
and his " ch6, chi, chfe." 

The authorities being now satisfied that the 
trayeller was not a conspirator, or a spy, or any 
oiher dangerous character, but simply '^ un signore 
In^ese, yiaggiando per il suo piacere," the pass- 
port was returned, one tattoo the more on its 
battered fiice ; and the postilion, urging his weary 
horses on, with a cric-crac, they rattled under 
the city gateway, and up the dim arcaded streets, 
to the Hotel San Marco. 

There was a fair in Bologna ; and, in addition 
to this, some great festa, I forget what, had 
crowded the inns with Italians, mostly from the 
Bomagna. come in, probably, to combine a little 
biennial business and pleasure. At none of the 
principal hotels was there a bed to bo had ; and 
the cal&che went groaning uneasily up one street 
and down another, the postilion's jovial cric-crac 
sounding at last the most melancholy satire on 
that weary convoy. The horses slid and stumbled 
on over the stones, and the postilion shouted and 
invoked all his most familiar saints but it was 

1.2 



4 CARR OP CARRLYON, 

not until they liad been repulsed at so many 
doors, that Laurence began to contemplate the 
frightful probability of passing the night inside the 
cal^he, that they stopped before a dirty-looking 
Locanda where a vacant room was to be had. 

When I state that Laurence Carr had been 
somewhat luxuriously brought up; that he was 
considerably self-indulged, and that he had made 
up his mind to spend some days, at least, in 
Bologna, it will not be thought surprising that 
he should take a jaundiced view of travelling in 
general, and of Bologna in particular, as he 
followed the padrone moodily upstairs, looking 
with disgust into every unsavoury comer, which 
the flaring candle in the padrone's hand revealed. 
It was in vain that his valuable Giuseppe pointed 
out, very reasonably, that they were lucky to get 
in anywhere. His master declined this or other 
comforts of a like description ; and exercised his 
privflege as an Englishman of grumbling at 
everything. At another moment he might have 
smiled at the novel aspect of affairs, and seen 
their picturesque side, for he had that valuable 



CASA LAMBERTL 5 

capacity; but not now. He only felt tlred^ cold^ 
and disgusted. 

He had to reach his room by a wooden gallery 
which ran round the courtyard upon tlie second 
floor^ and then the padrone, drawing forth a key, 
unlocked a door, and hoped, with pride, that the 
signore was contento. A room . ^hear it not, spirits 
that dwell among the quilted' curtains of Laurence's 
bedroom at Carrlypn . a room deroid of curtain, 
carpet, blind! Walls, once whitewashed, now 
stained and much written over (for the custom 
is not peculiarly English) ; a diminutive deal table, 
on which stood a diminutive slop-basin and bottle 
of water, y(iih. an absurd napkin, supposed to 
serve as a towel, in consistency like a piece of 
blotting-paper ; this, with one rush-bottomed 
chair, formed the entire furniture, besides the 
bed. The latter article was constructed, with 
primitive simplicity, of a bundle of Indian com, 
in white, tossed on the top of another bundle 
in blue. 

Carr looked ruefully round him. There was 
fortunately a grate ; and on his expressing a wish 



6 CASB or CABRLYON. 

for some fire^ the donna di fe/oenda came and 
plucked a handful of Indian com out of the bed^ 
to light one. Feeling exceedingly hungry^ he 
then descended into the aala, in search of food^ 
^hile Giuseppe was looking afber the luggage, and 
paying the postilion. A plate of something that 
looked like lamp-oil, in which floated sundry little 
stars, adroitly cut out of tallow candle, to judge 
by the taste, was first brought to him. This was 
followed by a dish of aalame, more familiar to 
our ears as Bologna sausage, and a frittura, none 
of which Carr was yet sufficiently Italianized 
to eat with satis&ction to himself. A lucema, or 
three-wicked lamp, was the only light: it stood 
in the centre of the table, upon which libations 
of wine and oil had been liberally poured, together 
with parings of bread and cheese, the remains 
of the .afternoon meal. A couple of farmers at 
one end were discussing their day's bargains in 
pigs and cattle, over a dish of polenta and a flask 
of red wine. A commercial traveller, at the 
other, with his glazed leather pack resting on 
the wall beside him, sat smoking over the 



^ 



CA6A LAMBKBTL 



Mcnitare ToBcano, . a grimy cop j the flaccid folds 
of whidi could not be induced^ by any pei> 
suasioD, to stand upright These were the only* 
occupants of the sala; but ihe padrona, wafting 
in with her a strong flavpur of garlic> kept coming 
and going, locking and unlocking a cupboard^ 
which seemed to Garr to be a very Noah's Ark 
of domestic economy, only that there was but 
little order in the arrangement of ihe miscel- 
laneous articles, and that they certainly were not 
in pairs. The padrona was slip-^hod, and attired 
in a sort of bedgown, ded round ihe waist by 
an apron, and a bunch of keys. She had a great 
basket of splendid black hair, yery ill-kept, with 
a silver bodkin run through it ; and the glimpses 
of linen, promiscuously afforded about her person, 
were none of the whitest 

Having satisfied the first cravings of hunger, 
and after making these obsenrations, the young 
travdler arrived at the conclusion that even his 
own cell, with a fire and a pair of candles, was 
better than the sak, and he retired accordii^y. 
Here, in the luxury of dressin^gown and slippers. 



8 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

with his despatch-box open on the rickeiy table 
before him, he sat down to begin a letter to his 
mother j and felt idmost comfortable in the pleasure 
of detailing his discomforts to. that sympathizing 
correspondent. 

We will take this opportnnitj, instead of letting 
the reader work on in the dark through several 
chapters, to introduce in a n)ore formal manner 
an individual who plays a prominent part in the 
following pages. We all know what a comfort it 
is if pur friend, when he asks us to take a perfect 
stranger in to dinner, ^ves us the merest sketch 
or hint of that stranger's family or antecedents. 
It not only saves ns from mmmg on a shoid 
of dangerous subjects : it often serves as a key 
to the whole tone of thought and feeling, and 
elucidates many a casual iremark, which .would 
otherwise pass unheeded. This last argument is 
so applicable to the case of the strangers whom 
we never see, whose looks and intonations of 
voice our imagination has to supply, and only the 
fiuntest transcript of whose words, jotted down, 
or remembered long afterwards, can be repro- 



CASA LAMBEBTL 9 

duced for us on paper> that any digression which 
brings such a stranger more tcily before us^ needs 
no apology. 

Laurence Carr^ though five-and-twenty^ was 
not yet entirely his own master ; but he was heir 
to broad lands and an ancient barony, and he 
was an only child. As such, the best had in- 
variably been done to spoil him, and in many 
ways, it must be confessed, the. system had suc- 
ceeded. From his earliest childhood he had been 
indulged in every whim, and nothing but the 
wholesome antidote of Eton and Oxford prevented 
his being insupportably self-sufficient But . ^let 
the nice distinction be appreciated . this did not 
prevent his having a considerable amount of vanity, 
which, indeed, was an inheritance. Perhaps, in 
reality, he seldom thought well of himself; but, 
certainly, he had an inordinate desire to be 
thought well of. Endowed with more than 
average abilities, and, above all, with artistic and 
poetical feeling, yet lacking the creative power to 
produce what he so keenly enjoyed, he had passed 
from boyhood into manhood, hearing it repeated 



10 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 

that he was a genius who was to bnrst upon the 
world some dsj, though in what shape was not 
yet quite decided. His father was anxious that 
it should be in oratory; and looked upon the 
'^ House" and a hunt-dinner as the legitimate 
fields for display in the son of an old Tory lord 
Unfortnnatelyj Laur^iee's first attempt at public 
speaking . it was at a large coonty meeting . 
&iled signally, and bis yanity was too much 
wounded upon that occasion to permit him to 
repeat the experiment He resisted his father's 
desire that he would stand for the county, at the 
last election, which took place about a year after 
Laurence left Oxford, urging that he had no 
taste for politics and no gift of doquence. Lady 
Carrlyon, on the other hand, was anxious her son 
should adopt a diplomatic career, bat Laurence's 
education had been that of most other coUege-bred 
British youths, and at one-aod-twenty he was 
by no means at ease in a protracted Frendi con-> 
yersaticm. He was quite sensible of his own 
deficiencies, and had the good sense to feel that 
without considerable study he was unfit for the 






CASA LAMBEBTL 11 

career bis mother urged on him. Thus a jear 
or two rolled by, and tbe period at wbicb we 
introduce Lauroice to the reader's notice had 
arrived, and he was still, in common phraseology, 
''doing nothing/' His mother, who, npon the 
strengtb of having known Lord Byron and 
Sir Walter Scott in the days of her youth, 
imagined that she had literary tastes, thought it 
wonld not be amiss if her son devoted some 
of his spare time . ^when not better employed . to 
writing. Certain juvenile efiusions of Laurence's 
were kept in a cabinet in her ladyship's boudoir, 
and had been freely circulated in a distinguished 
circle during the young gentleman's boyhood. 
Now, whenever they were adverted to, her lady- 
ship observed, with a sigh, ** Ah I if he chose, 
he could write such beautiful things!" Why 
he did not choose, no one perhaps clearly uader- 
Btood; but among her ladyship's friends, at all 
events, a belief in the capacity generally existed. 

Thus Laurence Carr may be said to have en* 
joyed a prospective sort of reputation. How long 
he would be able to exist upon this capital was 



12 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

doubtful ; but with a handsome^ intelligent fiice 
and extremelj agreeable manners^ it was hard if 
it could not carry him on for a few years. He 
was impetuous and impatient of control ; but, 
then^ yery little control had been exercised over 
him. His father was a weak, good-natured, fox- 
hunting old gentleman, double his mother's age, 
whom both mother and son, on most points, 
twisted round their fingers with careless facility. 
Lady Carrlyon, as may be imagined, was not so 
easily dealt with ; but from having, in his boy- 
hood, made an idol of her son, she began to find 
in him, as he reached man's estate, some of that 
inexorable quality, associated in our minds with 
the objects of 'heathen-worship. It was not that, 
like some other young men, he called on his 
mother to supply the deficiencies of an extrava- 
gant purse. Laurence never was extravagant, 
and his father gave him a liberal allowance. His 
tastes were not vicious. They were luxurious, 
indolent, and refined. He had very few secrets 
from his mother; but he understood her 
thoroughly, and exercised an unlimited sway 



CASA LAMBEBTL 13 

over her. This being so^ it was bis misforti2ne 
and not his fault, tbat be could not feel much 
filial respect for tbat foolish and worldly-minded 
woman, always intriguing for sometbing (latterly 
it was that her son should make a great marriage), 
and so cruel-tongued as regarded her own sex. 
Laurence bad tbe good taste to feel annoyed 
whenever these characteristics of his lady-motber 
came prominently forward. Whatever bis &ults 
were . and, besides tbose I have hinted at, there 
were otbers many and serious . ^be was entirely 
free from this vulgarity of mind. He had a good 
deal of family pride, it is true, but fliis only made 
him profoundly indifferent to the- social position of 
others. His kindly nature, and that weak desire 
to please everyone I have already named, ren- 
dered him the most popular man of his college. 
Then, as to money, be was ignorant of everything 
concerning it, and clearly would never make a 
man of business. He bad an allowance sufScient 
for all bis wants, and some day or other be would 
inherit a large landed property and a tolerable 
fortune. In the meantime nothing could be more 



14 CABB OF GABBLYON. 

repugnant to Imn than the bare idea of marrjing 
for monejj or for anything eke but love. One 
after another of those noble or wealthy maidens 
who were decoyed into the country by liiat am- 
bitious lady-mother had been bowed, away by the 
indignant heir-apparent^ as soon as he perceived 
the scheme. It was no usa Her ladyship might, 
have spared hersdf the trouble. And in the 
matter of guests at Carrlyon, Master Laurence 
grew more domineering every year. Last 
Christmas he actually insisted upon the little 
apothecJEury's wife and her plain daughter being 
invited. Why, such a thing never had heea 
heard of! . as Lady Carrlyon remarked. Still 
more galling to that noblewoman's feelings, how- 
ever, was it when her son positivdy threatened to 
go tq> to London and spend his Christmas tliere, if 
a certain Lady Arabella King and her husband, 
very &r off neighbours, were not bidden to die 
house. Touching this lady, a very painful story, 
daidng many years back, was told, and hcui been 
told with great amplificatuMi during all tiiese 
years by Lady Carrlyon. Her son chose to dis- 



CASA LAMBEBTL 15 

beUeve the story ; and then being worsted by her 
ladyship's eloqnence^ took up the absurd and 
untenable ground^ that as Lady Arabella had 
been pardoned by her husband, and had subse- 
quently conducted hersolf Uke a good and faithful 
wife, the case against her should be considered as 
'' not proven," and that she should not be hunted 
away from all respectable society. As the lady 
had never before been invited to Garrlyon, it 
increased the difficulties of the case; but the Idol 
was inexorable, and his victim had to yield, with 
the best grace she could. 

Laurence, on his introduction to London society, 
met with what the French call great success. He 
was made love to, and made love at ; and Lady 
Garrlyon had her natural solicitudes that he would 
be caught by some manoeuvring mamma. But, 
though submitting willingly enough to be made 
a great deal of by a numb^ of pretty women, 
Laurence seemed to preserve himself tolerably 
heart-whole, and, at the id of three or four 
seasons, had not had one very serious flirtation. 
What was serious was the unavoidable result of 



16 CABB OF CABRLYOK. * 

this life of constant excitement upon his character 
and habits. He had started with some yagae 
idea of fitting himself by application for the 
diplomatic career his mother wished him to follow. 
In the ceaseless round of society from town to 
country houses^ yachting, shooting, and what not 
besides, he soon fonnd anything like study im- 
possible. He was passionately fond of painting; 
but, somehow or other, he ''never found time*' 
to do anything but caricatures of his friends 
smoking round the billiard-table, or picnicing 
upon {he moors. He had aspirations after better 
things; and this might almost be said to be his 
misfortune. Had he been entirely commonplace, 
he would have been more humble and more con- 
tented with the extremely luxurious round hole 
Society had provided for him. As it was, there 
were edges which made him feel that he might 
have been a square peg, if he was not actually 
one; and he had just sufficient energy to feel 
dissatisfied with the aimless existence he led, and 
not enough to abandon it for a more brave and 
manly one. 



CASA IiAMBEBTI. 17 

Three or four years elapsed : and though his 
firiends still *' believed " in him^ and the best 
circles were unanimous in declaring him to be 
''so very talented^" the shrewd few discerned that 
Laurence Carr would never really do much ; and 
among those few the very first to make this dis- 
covery was himself. He was for a short time 
secretary to a man high in office ; but the party 
only remained in a few months, and Lady Carr- 
lyon's brilliant anticipations for her son all fell to 
the ground. He had not, indeed, much aptitude 
for business, but he could write a very good 
letter. Unfortunately, however, his extreme 
sensitiveness to forms and shades of expression 
rendered, his, anything but the pen of a ready 
writer; and it is possible that his chief would 
have been better satisfied with a less refined and 
a more rapid and industrious scribe. 

As yet, singular to say, Laurence Carr had 
been very littie on the Continent A smnmer in 
Switzerland, a few weeks at Baden and Paris, 
and a yachting cruise to the Mediterranean, was 
the extent of his foreign travel. But he was now 

VOL. L 2 



18 CASB OF CABSLTON. 

enterixig his twentj-fifiih year ; and with a fiseling 
of weariness and disgust, at the end of a long 
London season, he resolved to throw up all his 
conntiy engagements for the next six months, and 
betake himself to Italy and Greece. The moors, 
and Scotch hospitality, with a blooming maiden at 
every door to greet him . England's patriarchal 
covers, with that long ronnd of coontry houses, 
fall of these London &ces, of which he was, oh I 
so sick . Carrlyon, with his mother's rampart of 
eligible yonng ladies ronnd him . ^he wonld forego 
them all. Tes ! and he should probably remain 
away a year, or perhaps much longer, in a sort 
of Childe Harold's pilgrimage ; and he would 
really study painting, and see something of 
foreign life and sociely, and give up English 
people for a time. 

So he said. But Lady Carrlyon did not believe 
a word of it She considered his going abroad a 
great waste of time, when he might be ^ improving 
his connection" at home; but she was sure he 
must soon tire of wandering about in that uncom- 
fortable sort of way, and Christmas at all events 



CASA LAHBSBTL 19 

would find liiin back agaiiu Bat any oppoaiticxD^ 
she knew, would act detrimentallj to her wishes ; 
so she busied herself in getting him letters to 
" the best people '' in the places where Laurence 
talked of staying anj time* Among these letters 
was one which it gave her some trouble to obtain* 
Partly on account of its renowned school of paint- 
ing and the riches of its galleiy ; partly because 
he heard it was essentially Italian, and that there 
were no English residents there . ^Laurence had 
fixed on Bologna as a halting-place where he 
might possiUy remain some weeks. The difficult 
of &xdiig any one who had ever seen any one, 
who had ever known any one in that musty old 
town (which her ladyship remembered passing a 
night in upon her wedding tour, and thought 
insupportaUy gloomy) . this difficulty, I say, 
nearly baffled her. But, at last, from the Neapo* 
^iitan Minister she obtained a letter for her son 
Id the Marchesa Onofrio, a very great Bolognese 
.,tdy: and this letter was now lying upon the 
lesk before him. 
There he sat in a dressing-coat of dark blue 

2.2 



f 



20 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

flannel, lined with scarlet, with Turkish trousers 
to match, twisting his yellow moustache into a 
point, and biting the end of his pen, in search of 
an epithet he could not find. 

Descriptions of personal appearance are gene- 
rally failures. The impression a man makes, not 
as he passes one in the street, but after being an 
hour in his society, is the only important point 
Whether Laurence's eyes were blue or brown, 
whether he had a long nose or a short one, signi- 
fies very little. I know he was reckoned an 
uncommonly good-looking fellow, and that his 
manners made people feel much pleased with 
themsdyes, which is, I suppose, the test of good 
breeding. His talk was very pleasant; not so 
brilliant that it burnt you up, or so powerftil that 
it knocked you down, but characterized by a 
gentlemanly enthusiasm upon a variety of sub- 
jects, which you felt yourself encouraged to discuss 
with him. 

How the man would act in any of the great 
emergencies of life ; what were the stronger 
passions, if he had them, or more deeply hidden 



CASA LAMBEBTL 21 

Tv^eaknesses^ underlying the surface I have endea- 
voured to depict,. wUl be seen hereafker. At 
present it will be enough to show him to the 
reader as the world saw him, with just so much 
knowledge as the world had of those circum- 
stances wliich had tended to mould his character. 



22 CABB OF CABBLTON. 



CHAPTER n. 

The following morning rose bright and stimiy 
after the night's rain. Laurence woke late^ having 
slept better on his rustling bed of maize than 
he had often done on more luxurious couches. 
Springing out of bed, he threw open the window 
and looked on the street below. He could hardlj 
belieye it to be the melancholy cut-throat looking 
place he had fancied it the night before. The sun 
smote the opposite houses in its morning glorj^ 
bringing out the details of their past magnificence 
into strong relie The arms of some ancient 
family, probably long since impoverished, were yet 
remaining, rudely cut in stone, upon the ikfade 
of one of these palaces. A window was open, 
through which, in that clear atmosphere, Laurence's 
eyes could discern the painted ceiling and the rieh 



CASA LAHBEBTL 23 

monldings of a large apartment . magnificence 
stzangelj in contrast with its present occupatioB 
i^qparentlj. The cracked jar on the window-siD^ 
from which a yonng vine sprang^ clustering np a 
pde^ with leayes ahready yellow and tawny, indi- 
cated probably the finrtanes of its possessors. A 
string of onions hnng np beside it; a cofifee-pot 
and some cooking ntensil stood on a taUe near 
the window; and a bambino, like a bale of yellow 
linen with two black jewels of eyes stock in it, lay 
helpless on die floor. 

Laurence noted these particulars with the curio- 
sify of an observant man. He glanced down into 
the street below. A priest, shuffling along under 
the arcade, with a three-cornered beaver shading 
his pinched features, and a breviary under his arm. 
A peasant or two; then another priest, and then 
some soldiers. A housewife bearing her fowls and 
butter from market; and then more priests, and 
more soldiers ; and more soldiers, and more priests. 
As the procession became somewhat mono* 
tonous^ Laurence roused himself to the fact that 
his toilette was still in the most elementary stag^ 



24 GARB OF CABRLTON. 

and left his station at the window. Soon after^ 
Giuseppe entered^ with a pyramid of clothes and 
milk-jug full of hot water. A glance at the 
blooming face gradually protruding itself out of 
a Jersey, was enough to show the acute little 
Italian that his signore was in much better humour 
than the.night before. Now^ like other function- 
aries, Oiuseppe aimed at ruling his chief. He 
had endeavoured to reconcile him to that humble 
locanda, as a necessary evil, for the night, but 
he had no intention of remaining there, or any- 
where else in Bologna, beyond a day or two. It 
was a dull town, and the sooner they got on to 
Florence the better. His line of conduct was 
chalked out beforehand. 

''Well?" cried Carr, st^ struggling into his 
Jersey, '' any chance of rooms, Giuseppe ? Have 
you been to the San Marco, and the other 
places ? " 

Giuseppe shook his finger negatively backwards 
and forwards within an inch of his nose. 

''No room for one dog, sare. We not stay 
in this beast-hole. This not place for one noble 



CASA LAHBEBTL 25 

gentleman* We go to Firenze^ where all de Eng- 
lish familj go. Dere more pleasm*e nor here^ and 
better picshur^ sare; . ^var fine picshnr inFirenze.** 
Carr's avidity in pictnre-himting was looked on 
by his servant as a weakness for which he had 
a profound contempt^ but out of which he occa- 
sionally made capitaL When he wished to linger 
a day longer at Milan and Genoa^ sundry palaces 
and churches ignored by Murray were declared 
by Giuseppe to contain Leonardos and Vandykes, 
with all the recorded treasures of those cities ; 
and the young traveller was more than once in- 
duced to halt for an hour in his day's journey 
(while Giuseppe refreshed his inward man) by 
the rapturous account of '' una eerta Madonna " 
in some convent on the hill* The courier had 
grown strong in the belief that he could lead his 
master, not by the nose, but the eyes. Perhaps 
those eyes were at last becoming open : a succes- 
sion of delusions had made them clearer-sighted. 
. At all events, in any matter upon which Oarr was 
resolutely bent, Giuseppe found that his eloquence 
was spent in vain. 



26 CABB GB CABBLTON. 

^ The bed was dean. I shall remain here tOI 
I can get in elsewhere." 

^'WenogetinatSanMaroo^sare. De Marquis 
from Normanby haye take apartment to-monow. 
De Albergo Swizzero so full . so full . ^hold not 
one flea more, sare. Better we get on to Firenze, 
sare . belUssima Firenze! When you get there, 
so beauUM picshurs, you no look back at this 
beasirhole I ** 

^ In this beast-hole I shall stay for the present, 
Giuseppe, so say no more dbout it Take my 
passport to the post^ffice, and inquire whether 
there are any letters for me. And stay . ^take 
this letter with my card to the Palazzo Qnofrio. 
No. upon second thoughts, I'll leave it myself; 
and I shall probably call at the San Marco, and 
find whether I haye any chimce of rooms.** 

The little Italian's cheek flushed angrily, and 
Laurence smiled. I am not sure that he was 
wrong. I think it extremely probable that had 
that letter found its way into Giuseppe's pocket, it 
would neyer haye found its way into the Marchesa's 
hand, and this yeradous history might neyer haye 



CAfiA LAMBEBTL 27 

been woUeia I Certain it is tha^ thanks alone to 
that last detennined hint, Laurence found jbimself 
oomfbrtably settled in an apartment at the San 
Marco the fcdlowing daj. 

To follow tliB course of thjs same mornings how<* 
mwer, Laurence set forth immediately i^fter break- 
&sty armed with a Murray (disguised in Russia 
leather), an opera-glass;, a sketch-book^ and a 
slender stock of Italian. LaquaxB de place he 
allured. Up one dim arcaded street, and down 
another ; past the fine old Foro de' Mercanti, and 
those famous uncomfortable towers, toppling side 
by side or the last seven hundred years ; into the 
giant Piazza^ over which Neptune and his Tritons 
preside, thronged at this moment with merchandise 
and market folk, and a-Uaze with coloured cotton 
handkercfaie& ; up the steps of San' Petronio, and 
half-Ordozen other churdbes ; sauntering, verifying 
Murr^, sketching a priest or peasant^ and ques- 
ticBiing the sacristan in bald Italian ;. so sped the 
morning hours with Carr. 

It was two o'clock before he had found his way 
to the Onofrio Palace. He was directed to a large 






28 GARB OF CABKLTON. 

dilapidated building, of no great architectaral pre^ 
tensions^ situated in a street wliich seemed to be 
little used as a thoroughfare. Round the pillars 
supporting the colonnade the grass and nettles 
sprang up luxuriantly; and owing to the great 
height of the houses on either side, the sun at this 
season only penetrated the centre of the street for 
an hour or two in the middle of the day. The 
gateway leading into the courtyard of the palace 
stood open. In the centre of that courtyard was 
a marble basin, surmounted by some rheumatic 
dolphins, whose playful antics were now reduced 
to a paltry trickle oozing down their moss-grown 
tails, and splashing ever and anon into the water 
below. Facing the gateway were two doors. Over 
one of these stood a board, on which was written 
'* Galleria Ono&io; " and upon the bell beside it 
the word ''Oustode.** Apparently the outlay on 
repairs had not been extensive in the palazzo for 
many a long year. Running his eye over that 
long range of windows, Laurence detected more 
than one broken pane, whose deficiency had been 
supplied by a firagment of shutter. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 29 

He pulled the costode's rusty bell^ and npon the 
production of his letter for the Marchesa was 
directed to the other door. Seeing that he was a 
stranger and a foreigner^ however^ Cerbems 
thought it as well to improve the occasion by re- 
commending Laurence not to omit inspecting the 
famous galleiy of which this functionary kept the 
key. But Laurence . ^with Milan and Oenoa delu- 
sions still fresh in his mind . thought this visit might 
safely be deferred. He was more curious to see 
the interior of the palace and its owner than works 
of art, in which he may be excused for beginning 
to feel somewhat sceptical. 

A man] in his shirt-sleeves, smelling of the 
stables, but with one arm struggling into a yellow- 
braided livery, scuffled to the door, unlocked and 
opened it ajar. 

'* The Marchesa does not receive." 

Laurence explained, as well as he was able, that 
he only wished his card and a letter to be trans- 
mitted to her. The man turned the card all round, 
and eyedpLiaurence, and looked at the seal of the 
letter as if he had thoughts of breaking it Finally, 



30 CASH OF CABBLTON. 

he muttered^ with a puzzled air^ ^ Bene^ bene," and 
withdrew^ barring the door cautiously after him. 

*^ A qneer people this/' said the Englishman as 
he sauntered away. ''Fancy any of oar swdla 
living in this wretched manner. As to its being a 
palace, it's more like a deserted cotton factory at 
Manchester (only there isn't such a thing), and fer 
all the benefit one gets of an Italian stm and sky^ 
in this gloomy street^ one might as well live at the 
bottom of the old well at home. I wonder what 
sort of woman this Marchesa is. Will she adc me 
to dinner? Perhaps they don't dine in these 
parts. Has she a jealous husband, by-the-byj 
who keeps her under lock and key, and the sur- 
veillance of that unsavoury servant? Perhaps 
my letter jnay never reach her. Well, I. can 
pass some days very pleasantly here, at 
all events ; but I must confess to myself (I 
wouldn't fer the world to any one else), that I 
shouldn't be sorry for a little society. Solitude 'a 
all very well for awhile, but Fm a gregarious 
animal, and want some one to be able to say ' how 
delightful solitude is' fo,. which isn't original. 



GASA LAHBERTL 31 

b J the ^ray ; bat I forget who made the remack. 
Now then for the pictures " . and he inqoiied of 
the first passer-by the way to the Accademia. 

Here it would be easy and appropriate to lannch 
forth into the raptures evinced by Laurence on his 
first visit to the gallery of Bologna^ interspersed 
with a few second-hand Buskimsms as to the fiilse 
teaching of its eclectic school^ and the beauty and 
moral worth of its Francias^ Lorenzo Costas^ and 
the earlia: men. It would be easy^ I say, to 
imagine that Carr thought and felt a great deal 
which he wrote afterwards in journals andsosthetic 

 

letters to artistic fri^ids. But to say the truth, 
it was nothing of the kind. After his half-dozen 
churches, he felt painfully conscious that it is only 
given to a man to i^preciate a certain number of 
good thmgs at a time; and as he threw himself 
languidly on a bench and looked round him, the re- 
flection that what he there saw had to be described in 
fitting terms weighed like a miU-stone on his mind^ 
He was honestly very fond of pictures, and might 
have dispensed with art-cant ; but the sense of his 
^position" as a connoisseur, visiting Italy for the 



32 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

first time; was too strong for him. He was disgusted 
to find that he was not '' stmck," and *^ excited^" 
and ^' elevated;" as much as he ought to have been ; 
but he did the wisest thing under the circuinstances 
. he went out straightway and took a long re- 
freshing draught of Nature after this surfeit of 
Art 

Standing on the Monte della Guardia, with the 
grand old city lying at his feetj and the tawny 
plain stretching beyond^ broken with its patches 
of vine and olive garden, the *' sentinel cypresses " 
beside the white flat-roofed villas, and the 
convent-crest of some wooded slope ; gazing, far 
as the eye could reach in that dear Italian air, 
to the purple ridges of the Apennines on the one 
hand, and the funtly articulated shore of the 
Adriatic on the other, Laurence felt that this was 
a gaUery which could never weary, or irritate, or 
lose its intrinsic value with the taste of a passing 
generation. Eclectics might be in or out of fitshiouj 
but this was everlasting ; . above all criticism, and 
beyond appeal. The soothing influence of such a 
scene, under the glowing light of an autumn after- 



CASA LAMBERTL 33 

noon^ was never more stronglj felt than by 
Laurence Garr that day. 

The sunset was rapidly melting into dusk, as he 
descended the hill and threaded the streets towards 
his locanda. In doing so, he passed the steps of a 
church as two ladies, closely veiled, entered* The 
heavy leather door in swinging back disclosed for 
a moment the dimly-lit interior; and the distant 
strain of an organ, blended with voices chanting, 
fell on Laurence's ear. He turned and entered^ 
The church was almost dark, save where the light 
burning before an altar served to define indistinctly 
the image of its patron saint, and haply some sup- 
pliant motionless in prayer before it. From the 
small side chapel, however, where vespers were 
being performed, a pod of light streamed down 
upon the pavement, against which the kneeliug 
figures told out like spots of black ; and here and 
there an earnest, uplifted face was strongly illumi- 
nated. A picture this to be seen eveiy evening, 
V but none the less striking : and as the plaintive 
words of the hymn, 

*' Hadre del Mondo, ora pro nobU," 
VOL. L 3 



34 CASB OF CABSJJ[W. 

t 

died nmvy m sobhixig cadence^ Lanreooe was not 
Protestant enough not to feel BoAened and 
subdued* 

He leant against a column, while his eye rested 
on the Taried groups around him; and he stroTe to 
read the withered oonntenance of the crone mut- 
tering OTor her beads, the black-browed peasant, 
fresh from the Apennines for the fair, staring up 
supersdtiously at the tinselled Madonna, and the 
ruby light burning before her; . ^the half-clad 
children turning restlessly at ihe sight of a stranger, 
and ready to hold out tiieir hands for a bajocco 
while they continued jabbit'fng their Patei>-nostec 

Suddenly his attention was arrested by the two 
figui:es whose entrance into the church had origi- 
nally attracted him. He had lost sight of them in 
the dusk, but he now observed that they had taken 
up their position not far from where he stood, and 
were seated somewhat apart from the worshippers 
in the chi^eL Indeed, they took no active part 
ia the service, and appeared to have come there, 
like himself, as listeners and spectators. They had 
both drawn aside their heavy veik . secure, as they 



CASA liAKBEBTL 35 

thought, no doabt, from observation: and the 
small black bonnets left no portion of their faces 
concealed. It was easy to see at a glance that they 
were mother and daughter. Very unlike Italians 
. ^if Italians they were ; . ^with that ineffable some- 
thing of gesture and manner that belongs almost 
exclusively to our own countrywomen. 

Laurence's first glance was one of curiosity; 
the second, of interest. After that, he had no 
eyes for anything else, as long as he Jstood 
there. 

Let me try and give you some idea of them. 

It might have, been difficult to tell the age of 
the elder lady. She was tall and slight, and her 
fidr hair was streaked with silver. Her cheek was 
pale and worn, and she had a deep-set look of 
sorrow in her eyes which it was difficult to get 
rid of when you had once looked at them. Other 
&ce8 that you had kaown for years and years 
would be forgotten sooner than this one. She 
must in youth have been eminently beautiful, the 
outline of the features was so still; and though 
the likeness between them was strong, that[gentle, 

3.2 



36 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

delicate-looking girl beside lier had not tlie pre 
tensions to classical regularity of form the mother 
still possessed. Her sweet, fawn*like eyes, and 
the charming expression of her month, were 
perhaps the girl's chief beauty. She was very 
pale, with an abundance of wavy brown hair 
drawn back behind her ears, and . as Laurence 
observed when she took off her glove . one 
of the most beautiful hands it was possible to 
see. She was very simply attired in some kind 
of gray worsted dress, which, with its narrow 
white collar and cuffs and black silk mantle, was 
unlike the raiment of many colours so much loved 
by Italian ladies. 

The expression of the elder lady's &ce, as she 
listened to the music, underwent little change ; it 
was one of deep, tranquil melancholy. She leant 
back in her chair, folding her hands upon her 
knee, with her eyes fixed upon a picture by 
Francia, which was indistinctly illuminated in the 
chapeL The young girl's mobility of counte- 
nance, on the other hand, expressed a thousand 
varying emotions ; but it was evident that she was 



CASA LAMBERTL 37 

whollj absorbed in the mnsic^ and the thoughts 
it naturally awakened. Unconscious of herselfj 
as it were; having no past teeming with sad 
memories to rise up, and stand between her and 
the sweet and holy influences of the hour, her 
fair face seemed to indicate that she was listening 
to messages from another world. 

The service was over. The ladies rose, 
lowered their veils, and glided out of the church. 
Laurence followed them. At just sufiScient dis- 
tance to enable him to distinguish the two figures 
in the deepening twilight, he tracked them as 

they threaded the silent streets and plazze of this 

 

tranquil quarter of the city. They were approach* 
ing one of the gates ; and now they turned down 
a vicolo, overshadowed on one side by the fig- 
trees that hung over a garden-wall. As he was 
proceeding to follow, rather precipitately, down this 
narrow lane, Laurence became suddenly conscious 
that he was not only observed, but that another 
person was apparently similarly employed to him- 
8el The figure of a man, in one of those large 
cloaks which are universal throughout Italy, had 



38 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

for some time past walked on the other side of the 
way without attractiiig his attentioik NoWj how- 
ever^ at the comer of this vicolOf the man turned 
round and eyed Laurence deliberately. The 
English gentleman felt rather angry and rather 
ashamed of himself; but, of coarse, resolved all 
the more not to have his curiosity balkecL It 
was impossible to distinguish the features of the 
stranger^ though Laurence brushed close to him. 
The small English travelling-cap, however, lent 
no such friendly shadow as the Italian's beaver, 
and the latter was probably able to see Laurence's 
&ce sufficiently to recognize him at any fiitnre 
time* 

Laurence passed him, and walked on. A few 
yards down the weoloy the ladies turned under 
the archway c^ a house . the one to which that 
garden apparently belonged . and a small wicket 
closed after them. Laurence, of course, felt him- 
self bound to continue his walk to the end of the 
vieolo, and find his way out as best he might. 
Curiosity, however, prevailed so fiir over discre- 
tion as to induce him to turn his head when 



CABJl LAMBEBTL 39 

about half-way* The man in the doak was just 
entering that honae* 

Who were they? and what was he? Hnsband, 
brother, lover? Laurence felt that he fihonld 
never rest till he had learnt the history of the 
inmates of that house. 

At the bottom of the vicolo flowed the river 
Savena. The Italian must have smiled^ Laurence 
thought, at that thin artifice of his continuing his 
walk to the end of what was, virtually, a blind 
alley I He retraced his steps; noting the house 
well . a large and handsome one . ^as he passed it, 
but feeling that he should be somewhat puzzled 
to find his way back there again* An hatir's 
random walking, after several contradictory direc- 
tions from the passers-by, brought him safe, 
hungry, and in an agreeable frame of mind to 
his inn. There was something worth living . in 
Bologna . for, after all. Here was a mystery . 
for he chose to consider it a mystery . and "a 
ice to go mad for," as Byron once wrote, and 
Lady Carrlyon often most inappropriately quoted* 
It was astonishing how infinitely better the greasy 



/ 



40 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

Italian dinner tasted to him that evening, and he 
began to think the inn was really not such a bad 
place, after all. 

So ended Laurence Carr's first day in Bologna. 



CAS A LAMBEBTL 41 



CHAPTER III. 

The following morning lie removed to the San 
Marco^ as I have said, But^ before this, a note 
came, directed to him in characters resembling a 
child's design for lightning. The tenor of the 
note, which was in French, and not very legible, 
was to beg Vhonorahle Carr (of course, the 
Christian name was lost sight of) to visit Ae 
Marchesa Onofiio in her opera-box that even- 
ing : to which I'honorable Carr retomed an 
affirmative answer. 

Oar Englishman passed the morning of that 
day again in the gallery, fancying that every 
Madonna, in tarn, bore some resemblance to the 
sweet fuce that haonted him ; bat more especially 
the little Bed Bidinghood of a Magdalen, by 
Timoteo delle Vite ; with an order to copy which 



42 CABB OF GABBLTON. 

picture he instantfy gladdened the heart of a poor 
artist whom he found at work. The afternoon 
he spent in trying to l*etrace his steps of the 
previous evening; and^ though he did not exactly 
suoceed in] doing this, he found his way, at last, 
by a more circuitous route to the mcolo, and, in 
astronomical language, '^ took observations " of 
the house and its general aspect Not a voice, 
not a footrfall, not the flutter of a drapery; the 
shutters hermetically closed against the afternoon 
Bun, on the garden side ; and looking through the 
griUe into a small paved court, across which the 
shadow of the wall streamed slantwise, a mutilated 
bust was to be seen, holding divided empire with 
four orange-trees in green boxes ; and a clothes'- 
line, with linen hanging out to dry, between 
them I 

The only positive piece of informatioii Laurence 
gained was the name of the house. Above the 
archway was written, in attenuated white letters, 
CamiLaimhefiL 

The opera-house of Bologna, though not lazge^ 
is one of the prettiest in Europa The eflfect 



GASA LAHBEBTL 43 

produced by each box Laving a* balconj^ which 
prefects ix^ a circular form, is gay and graceftiL 
These balconies, like Ihe rest of the house, are 
decorated in white and gold, the interior of the 
boxes being scarlet ; and when brilliantly filled, 
as they were on the night of Lanrence's first yisit, 
the eotq> d'oBil is very striking and pictnresque. 

The box-keeper opened the marchesa's door, 
and l2ie yonng man entered. The box was nn- 
tenanted; and, after a glance of surprise and 
admiration round the honse, Laurence was about 
to retire and stroll into the pit, firom which he 
could watch for the marchesa's arrival, when 
the door was thrown back by a servant in rich 
livery (whom Laurence recognized as his firiend 
of the riiirt-sleeves), bearing an opera-^lass, cloak, 
footstool, Ac He was followed by a tall, hand- 
some woman, with a lively, pleasant expression, 
about forty years of age, in a lace dress, which 
was no doubt very valuable, but would have been 
better for Ihe wash-tub. She had a great quan* 
tibf of jewels, and ribands, and artificial flowers 
about her ; in spite of which there was that un- 



44 CABB OF CAKRLYON. 

xnistakable air of Dobilitj which we term in 
England a ** thorough-bred " look. Her mannerj 
indeed, had not the repose to which Laurence 
was accustomed, in the best London circles ; bat, 
inasmuch as it was genial and natural, with 
nothing sham, affected, or pretentious about it, 
was closely allied to the very best manners of all 

She greeted her visitor witli great cordiality, 
and poured forth her questions in French with 
a volubility which fairly bewildered him. How 
long was he going to stay? Was he travelling 
alone? That must be trisie indeed! Was this 
his first visit to Italy? She herself had never 
been to England. No, that firightful sea . oh I 
she could never cross it She had known one 
charming English lady who had pressed her to 
come and visit her in England : Madame . 
Madame Wite. Did he know Madame Wite? 
She had a fine house in Rdgent Street, and was 
no doubt in the best society. '^ For you English,'^ 
she added, ^'have different societies, I am told. 
We have only two, the nobUi and the mezzo eeto, 



CASA LAMBEBTL 45 

and ihej never mix. If you remain herej,, I will 
introduce you to all we have : bnt I suppose you 
will be going on to Florence and Rome^ where 
your countrymen assemble in crowds? Here we 
have no foreigners, you know." 

''That is partly my reason for staying at 
Bologna. I wish to see something of Italian life 
in ^ purely Italian town. Half Rome is divided 
between French and English, I am told. Besides 
this, I come to study the Fine Arts, and desire 
to become well acquainted with all tiie treasures 
your city possesses. I have already paid two 
visits to the Gallery, with, much interest" (Oh, 
Laurence !) 

''Ah I And do you care for music as well? 
you English are cold . ^not enthusiasts as we are." 
The marchesa laughed. "Tou never draw the 
carriage of a prima donna home, as we do here-^ 
do you ? Have you heard the Frezzolini ? Listen 
then . ^she is beginning her cavatina." 

Instead of listening herself, the lady turned to 
greet a short stout man who entered the box, and 
who raised her fingers to his lips with a half-mock 



4< CAB OF CABLTON. 

oeremonj, as he pressed his hand to his hearty 
Lmghing and gesticulatrng, and talking Italian 
so fiist that Laurence could only catch a word 
here and thera There was something about a 
bet^ and the word '^ U lupo " (the wolf) constantly 
recurred* Laurence kept his head towards the 
stage, and affected to be absorbed in FrezzalinTB 
exquisite singing of ^' Emani, Emani, involamV 
I am afraid, in reality, curiosity rendered him but 
an indifferent listener. What the deace were 
they both laVighing so heartily at ? 

The marchesa turned to Laurence at the 
conclusion of Frezzolini's cavatina, and bagged 
to present him to her cousin, the Prince 
Ortolani. 

^You wonder at our laughing and talking 
while our prima donna is singing? I see it by 
your face. Signer Laurence . and I generally do 
listen to her, and to my tenor . ah I you have not 
heard my tenor yet? he does not sing to-^iight 
But you see, we have had this opera and Nabucco 
on alternate nights for two months; and as I 
spend eyery evening in this box, I cannot hold my 



CASA LAMBEBTL 47 

tongue always . Eeco U lupo!*' and touching the 
prince's arm, she pointed, langhing, to a box 

* 

nearlj opposite, where an old gentleman wiib a 

hard grizzled hce had just seated himself beside 

a middle-aged woman, and was taking a survey of 

the house through his glass. It stopped at the 

marchesa'a box, and a little sign of recognition 

passed with the tips of the gloved fingers; but 

still the glass remained stationary, and then some 

other sign was made which Laurence did not 

understand. He ventured to inquire who the old 

gentleman was, when the prince had left the box. 

''That one opposite?" said the marchesa, laughing. 

''Oh, that is only my husband. He wants to 

know who you ar& He will probably be in 

here presently . an honour he has not paid me 

for a week . on purpose to find out your name.** 

The tinge of sarcasm in her tone was so slight 

as to be scarcely perceptible ; but she continued, 

after a pause, with something akin to sadness 

in her manner : " You do not imderstand living 

like tliat in England, they tell me. We are 

accustomed to it here, Signor Laurence. The 



48 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

marcHese aiad I have separate establishmeuts^ and 
are very good friends . when we meet 1** 

She would probably have continued the subject 
which she had opened upon without the smallest 
hesitation, and it is difficult to saj when her frank 
revelations might have stopped, had not two 
young men entered the box at that moment Her 
manner instantly changed, and she greeted them 
with the same gaiety as before : introducing them 
to Laurence as Count Bazzi and Count GKulio 
Blangini. They were both rather handsome: 
both noisy and good-humoured : Blangini of the 
full-blown greasy, and Razzi of the lean aquiline 
type. They talked French with a strong accent, 
but great fluency : had been to Paris, and spoke 
of Chantilly races with enthusiasm. Then th^ 
questioned Laurence as to sport in England . 
seemed surprised to hear there were no wild boars 
or* wolves . and Razzi offered to take him to a 
hunt in the Apeimines, if Laurence prolonged his 
stay in Bologna. In short, the young men frater- 
nized, as no three Englishmen ever do, at first 
sight. 



CASA LAJ^CBEBTL 49 

" I put my EngKsh friend under your charge,'* 
said the marchesa. ''You. are both of you to 
make Bologna as pleasant as you can to him while 

he stays here . ^provided you don*t prevent his 

 

coming to my box every evening. Is there any 
fair lady in the house^ signore, whom you 
would like an introduction to? One of these 
gentlemen shall effect it, if there is . ^provided," 
she added, laughing, ''it be not the contessa 
opposite.'' 

Ever since his arrival, Lanrence's eyes had 

.wandered round the house from time to time, in 

the hopes of discovering his incognita; but in 

vain. With the policy 'of a man of the world, 

however, he protested that any exchange for the 

society in which he had the privilege of finding 

himself, must be one for the worse. 
The marchesa was probably too much accus-* 

tomed to this sort of language to believe in it ; 

but she seemed gratified, and strove to make 

herself additionally agreeable. 

The act was over, and the door again opened, 

admitting that grizzly old man with the lanthom 
VOL. L 4 



50 CABB OF CARBLTON. 

jaws^ and cold cruel eyes, who was not inappro- 
priately designated *' il lupo." 

The marchesa extended her hand, the fingers 
of which he just tonched, bowing with great 
ceremony to the two Italian gentlemen, and 
saying to his wife, in the most agreeable, friendly 
manner, and by no means an unmusical voice, 
'^ Who is your friend, card mia t Introdnoe 
me.** 

The introduction effected, and the marchese 
having ascertained who and what Laurence was, 
after a few civil speeches, walked out of the 
box. 

''He is now gone to his friends, iihe Neri, to 
communicate the fact of our having an En^ish- 
man and a heretic among us^** 

The Neri, as I suppose everyone in England 
knows by this time, are the Church party, as 
opposed to the Bianehi, or liberals. 

''Ugh I quei pretil^ said Bazzi, with an 
expression of disgust, but in so low a tone that 
Laurence could hardly catdi the words. " I wish 
ihey were all- 



CASA LAMBEBTL 51 

^ Hush ! coTo mioP cried the maFcbesa. *' We 
all go to confession, remember, and are bonnd 
to confess each other^s sins, as well as oar own. 
Ha! ha I Here is our Englnh friend wants to 
leani Italian. Can't yon recommend him some 
reveroKd padre, who will make him a oonrert 
to the holj faith while he teaches him the 
gnanmor ? By-ihe-bj, there k Gtiido in the 
pit I have not seen him for an age. He is 
the very man for yon to know, ngnore . the 
only yonng man among ns from whom yon will 
gain anythiDg voorik knowing, Vm afraid* He 
is not like these ignoranii^ she added, laughing, 
as she pointed with her fan to Che two yonng 
ceonts, who grinned good-hnmoaredly. ''He 
will be able to tell yon what is worth seeing in 
his native town, and knows every pictore of 
merit Then he has taken ihe highest honours 
at omr vnzversity, and is a mvant in all historical 
matters ; while I wager that neither of these have 
ever been inside the gallery is their lives, and 
don't k^ow whe&er Annifaaie Caraoci was a 
general or a poet ! " 

4.2 



52 CABB OF CABELYON. 

'* A general^ of course^" said Blangini, iddig- 
nantlj. '^It was he who crossed the Alps." 

"No; a poet," cried Razzi. "Was it not he 
who wrote La Secchia RapUa ?" 

"I told you so," said the marchesa, clapping 
her hands with delight " Cart Jigli mid . ^go to 
school, both of yon, and talk of your horses and 
your dogs and Mademoiselle Cerito's pretty feet; 
but never of art and literature, and what you 
don't understand! I wish I could make Gnido 
look up," and the marchesa kept making signals 
with her fan, which the young man below either 
did not or would not observe. His eyes were 
resolutely fixed on the stage. 

"I will go round," said Count Bazzi, "and 
send him up to yoiu" 

" I will accompany you, if you will^ allow me," 
Biud Laurence. " I shall get a 'coup (Tosil of this 
aide of the house," and the two young men left 
the box together. 

" The marchesa is a charming woman. Signer 
Carr>" said the count, as soon as they were in 
the iobby; ^'rather curious . original . ^but she 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 53 

amuses us more than Stentorello. and then^ what 
a good creator^ ! Poor thing ! everyone likes her 
. everyone pities her I ** 

'' I suppose you mean on account of her 
husband ? He looks like an old brute." 
. " So he is . a canting, stingy, old Codino. But 
she can never have cared for him; and when 
he neglected and ill-used her, why, naturally^ 
she found consolation elsewhere. Pavera donna ! 
Her first lover died, and then her second ^ 

'' Oh I she has had a succession, then ? " 

'^ Che vuole f A woman must have some one 
to care for. II Lupo gives her up one floor of 
the palace, but hardly allows her enough to keep 
three servants, while he gives half his fortune to 
the Contessa Feppi, and the other half to the 
priests for the good of his soul. The contessa 
is very pious, and they go to mass together," 
added the young Italian, with a sneer. 

To an Englishman, even with some knowledge 
of the world, the announcement of these recog- 
nized positions as a matter of course, was rather 
astounding. The count was evidently too simple 



54 CARB OF CAIUEILTOK. 

and too lit^al to be inventiiig fijr Lsoreooe's 
amasement; and certainlj what tiie latter saw 
tended to corroborate the statement 

They w^ie at the entrance of the pit. A tall, 
dark young man, with melancholy eyes and a 
remarkable breadth of brow, stood leaning with 
folded arms against the door. His eyes were 
fixed on the orchestra, bat it might be oonfi- 
deiltly asserted that his thoughts were Tery fsr 
away. 

'^Guido,'' said Count Razzi, touching him on 
the shoulder, ^ I am sent by the Marchesa Onofrio 
to bring you to her box, and to introduce you to 
this English gentleman, her friend. You are to 
give him all sorts of information about things we 
know nothing of, earo tntb. so come along.*^ 

The young man, when first addressed, turned 
quickly round, and a slight flush overspread his 
face. It even then, however, retained its habitual 
expression, which was one of thoughtful, almost 
imnatural calm. He bowed gravely ; but either 
Count Razzi forgot to say, or Laurence fiuled to 
catch, his new acquaintance's name. 



CASA LAMBERTL 55 

*' I will follow jou ; and if I can be of any 
service to die Marchesa OnoMo> I shall be 

It occurred to Laurence that this was not re- 
markably courteous in form; or perhaps it only 
appeared so, in contrast to the exaggerated expres- 
sion3 of sorrow, and devotion, and ecstasy, which 
he had heard so frequently used that evening. 
But it was eTident at a glance that here wm a 
man of another stamp, whom such manners would 
ill become, and who, on most occaaions, would 
say, probably, considerably less than he felt . 
never more. Laurence, in spite of this tacitur- 
nity, found himself iiresistibly attracted. It was 
that involuntary attraction which a man occa- 
sionally feels for something immeasurably nobler, 
loftier, and stronger than himsel It has nodiing 
to do with personal liking. A man may be weak 
enpngh to like something which he knows jto be 
perfectly worthless. On the other hand, it is less 
the individual than the moral force he represents 
to our minds, which exercises a sovereign influence 
over us, and bids us bow down and do homage. 



56 CABB OF CAEBLYON. 



(( 



It is a century since we have seen you^ 
Guido ! " said the marchesa, holding out her hand* 
*' You lead the life of a recluse, and never come 
to the opera.*' 

'' I leave it for those who have a better right to 
enjoy it, marchesa,'' said the young man, smiling 
gravely (so to speak). '^ I cannot aford, you 
know, either time or money, which must be my 
excuse for not oftener paying you my respects 
here." 

'' Dio mio I caro^ cried the marchesa, impa- 
tiently. ''Your good old mother is not making 

. 

you a Nero, is she ? I suppose we have none of 
us either time or money to waste . so my confessor 
always tells me; and I certainly know I have 
little enough of the latter. But look you, my dear 
Guido, what should we do without our music? 
It is the only thing poor Italy has left her I " 

A darker shade passed over the young man's 
face ; and the lady continued : 

'* If I gave up my opera box, I should only 
add one more miserable person to the world for 
three or four hours every evening. But, caro 



GASA LAMBEBTL 57 

mio^ . (and here she dropped her voice, while the 
two Italians at the back of the box talked and 
langhed so loud that Laurence could only catch 
her words now and then) . <*! know how you 
employ much of your time . ^not all in hard law 
studies.'' He caught the name of Pio Nono 
several times, and the words '' liberal reform," 
'^ constitution," <^ no faith in priests," &c. &c ; and 
she ended by saying . *^ I have no money to give 
. nothing but my sympathy and my help in any 
way . ^in every way . ^when the good time comes." 
There was a short pause ; and then the marchesa, 
turning abruptly to Laurence, said : 

'* Razzi has made you two acquainted. Now, 
Guido, in the first place you must recommend a 
good Italian professor to this English gentleman ; 
only don't let it be a priest. Then you are to 
give him information as to everything that ia 
worth seeing, and not worth seeing, in our city. 
That last is very important, as the laquais'de^lace 
will try and drag him to upwards of a hundred 
churches and thirty palaces ! " 
'^ As to a professor," answered the young man 



58 CASB OF CABBLYON. 

she called Gaido, '* mj old fiaend Garofisdo has a 
Bdr knowledge of Eiiglisliy and* what is still rarer 
in these dajs^ a ihoroiigh knowledge of onr own 
language He is an accomplished classic^ and the 
best guide to the text of Dante that a foreigner 
can haye. If 70a wish it, sir, I will ask him to 
call on joo." 

^' Prajr do not give yourself that tronbl^ If 
70a will let me have his address ^ 

^We live in the same house, and I am con- 
stantly with him, so that it is no trouble. I cannot 
offer to be of much assistance to yon here, aa my 
time is very mnch occupied, but if there is any 
thing in wludi I can, I shall be yery hi^y to 
help you." 

'' Thanks. Ferhapa you will allow me to do 
myself the pleasure of calling on you/* said Carr ^ 
in his most urbane manner. ''May I aak where 
you reside ? ** 

'' I am seldcHU disengaged but in the evening," 
replied the Italian, '''when you. will no doubt have 
plenty of other engagements. I live in . the Gasa 
LambertL" 



CASA LAMBEBTL 59 

Laurence started^ wad felt himself coloor. The 
Italian's eyes were fixed yery calmly upon him^ 
and he continued slowly: 

^ So that, perhaps^ upon the whole^ if you wish 
to see me^ it would be as weU that I should call 
upon you. Signer Carr." 

^ Yes, caro," said the marchesa. " Go and call 
on him to-morrow ; but don*t prevent his coming 
here in the evening. I propose taking him to my 
cousin% Ae Princess Ortolani, who has a recep- 
tion to-morrow night" 

" And you have promised. Signer Oarr, to 
come and see my stables at two o'clock," said 
Count Razzi. 

^And I am to introduce him to the club at 
twelve," said Blangini. 

'' I will take my chance with my friend Oarofido 
of finding you ree from these numerous engage- 
ments. Signer Carr, towards dusk. Do not hurry 
back to your hotel on that account, however ; if 
you remain in Bologna, I have no doubt we shall 
meet again." And bowing to the marchesa, he 
left the box. 



60 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

Laurence immediatelj inqtured his name. 

" Count Otiido Lambertij of a very noble old 
family, bat sadly impoverislied. His mother is 
obliged to let the greater part of their palace^ 
and lives in a miserable comer with her son. 
He is devoting himself to the study of law . 
nnlike the young men of our nobility in general, 
who consider that or any other profession but a 
soldier's a degradoHon ! " 

" So . ^then . ^the house. the palace . ^I mean the 
. Casa Lamberti . ^is tenanted by other families 
than Count Guide's ? " 

''This old professor, Garofalo, and one other 
family . country-people of yours, by-the-by. who 
have been here some few months, I believe, but 
brought no letters to anyone, and seem to avoid 
society." 

'' Ah ! What does the family consist of ? " 

'' Father and mother, one daughter, and some 
niece or friend, I believe. The name is Courteney, 
Do you know them? " 

'' N. no. I think I've met them. The daughter 
is pretty, isn't she ? " 



CASA LAMBEBTL 61 

V 

** RavisaanU, I am told, bat very unapproach- 
able: kept like a princess in a fairj tale I All 
our giinyentii have been intriguing to get an intro- 
duction in yain. Is it not true, Blangini ? Well I 
be consoled, caro mio, your elders have failed 
equally ! Fancy II Lupo being guilty of an 
infidelity to the coptessa t Ha I ha ! ha I Orto- 
lani has been telling me such a good story of his 
catching him in the act of dogging this little 
English girl about the town in the dusk, like a 
veritable lupo I The best of it is, I can't help 
fancying Ortolani must have been similarly em- 
ployed himself! " 

The two counts rolled on their chairs with 
laughter ; but the Englishman didn't seem amus^. 

'* Si dice, she has a larger fortune," said Blangini, 
when he had at last recovered his composure. 
^'All English ladies, I believe, are blonde and 
have large fortunes. For my part, I adore 
blondesl" 

'^ And large fortunes," laughed the marchesa. 

^ She is not to be compared to the other, the 
dark one, whoever she is," said RazzL " Fortune 



63 CABB 07 GABBLYOK. 

or notj she is the one for met Ah I e&. cara 
creatwra I " and he blew an imaginarjr Idas nith 
the tips of his gloved fingers^ indicative of pas- 
sionate admiration. ** What eyes I What a fignxel 
What an ankle I {Can rispetto parlctndo), I am 
resolved to know her, monchesa. What will joa 
bet me I don't succeed 2 " 

'^ I am too poor to bet, caro mio, as jon know ; 
besides, I wish yon all success. But the opera 
is 0?er. Oome, let ns be going. Bwma aeroy 
figli miei Sign<nr Carr will see me to my 
choir.* 

The marchesa rose; and as the two ItaKaiis, 
after raising her fingers to their Hps, to<^ the 
hint and retired, she contnawed : '^ Ton see what 
I aUn I If you ore not bored. Signer Carr, come 
back and have a little supper. I have aii:ed one 
or two pleasant people and my pet tenor, Tasca 
^."^na eocieta acelta, as we say here." 

The marchesa's servant appeared at the door at 
the same moment, and Laurence, folding the white 
cloak around his fair companion, conducted her 
through the densely-crowded lobby downstairs. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 63 

As he handed her mto^her old-&sl}ioned sedan 
chair (a relic of past times not yet utterly abandoned 
by great Italian ladies in places like Bologna) and 
followed it along the arcade towards the Palazzo 
Onofiioy more than one jeering voice in the crowd 
might have been beard to exclaim : 

'^Ho I hoi The ntuation of eiciabeo has been 
vacant scmie time. Has she offered it to that 
good-lookiDg EagKsbman ? " 



64 CARB OB CABSLTOK. 



CHAPTER IV. 

LEAymcfr Laurence Carr to the enjojinent of the 
pleasant little supper-party assembled in the 
marchesa's apartments in the Palazzo Onofirio^ and 
to the study of a society entirely new to him, we 
will take leave to follow Ouido Lamberti as he 
strides along the dimly-lit streets towards his 
home. The melancholy lamp here and there 
swung across from arcade to arcade, or burning 
before an image of the Yiigin at the comer of the 
street, reveals the powerful figure of the young 
man, his beaver thrown forward on his brow, his 
doak swung under one arm and over the other 
shoulder, his foot planted on the ground with the 
firm and vigorous tread of one who knows his goal^ 
and walks straight to it 
He knocks at the little wicket of the Casa 



CASA LAMBEim. Q| 

Lamberti^ wUch is locked at this lyor^ and on 
being admitted by the porter, turns off to a small 
door at the right hand of the court, instead of 
entering by the principal one in front 

Nanna, the old woman who has nursed him in 
his cradle, is at the top of the windmg stair. Her 
yellow brown face peers forth in strong relief under 
its white coif, as she holds out a lucerna to light 
her young master up. 

'' Dorme ? " (Is she asleep ?) asks the young man. 

" Che, che^ replies the Nanna, pettishly. 
** Would you have her sleep while you are gadding 
about like this at night, getting into evil courses, 
and turning a deaf ear to all the good padre's 
exhortations; never going to mass, and giving 
up confession, and associating with bad, irreligious 
people? Sleep I indeed. She has enough to do 
to pray for you without thinking of sleep. Six- 
and-thirty prayers she has offered up this day on 
your account. As to her own salvation, blessed 
saint I that was assured long since." 

Out of tenderness to the old woman, submitting 
patiently to this attack, from which his conscience 

VOL. L 5 



66 CAfiB 01* CARBLTOK. 

held him dwr, and to which, it must be confessed, 
use had somewhat hardened him, the young man 
sought his mother's room without reply. 

A large, bare chamber, without carpet or 
curtain, producing an involuntary shiv^ as one 
entered it, even from the outer air. A tattered 
piece of tapestry, representing some sacred subject 
. so Guide had always been told, as a child, 
though, from the latitude of treatment, it was 
difficult to say what . ^hung along the wall ; and 
against it stood a hard battered-looking bed. A 
shred of the curtain hung over the head of the bed, 
but none at the foot. A board was stuffed against 
the grate, to keep out the winds which came 
whistling down the chimn^; for fire there was 
none this cold November night. But seeing that 
the circulation of the poor devotee who occupied 
the room was slow . ^more from fasts and want of 
exercise than age . a acaldino, oi' jar of embers, had 
been placed near her. It had long since died out, 
but she still stretched her withered hands over it 
from time to time, striving to recall a little warmth 
to them. 



CASA LAMBEBXL 67 

She moat have been a handsome woman in her 
jouth: thin, yellow-skinned^ and shriveled as she 
now wasj her brown eyes were still intensely 
bright ; her black hair still intensely bkck ; but 
no other vestige of youth was left. The fignre 
was bent. dwindled into decrepitude, and so 
wasted that the black serge dress she wore hung 
like a sack upon her. She had also a black net or 
enqpe cap, and a black collar; and the withered 
yellow-fiu^e in this framework presented as lugu- 
brious a picture as could well be seen* A crucifix 
waa on the table beside her, and a pamphlet, upon 
the comer of which was represented a bleeding 
heart, with an invocation to the Madonna dei 
seUedolorL 

The mother's eyes looked eagerly towards the 
door as her son entered, but her lips continued 
moving rapidly and noiselessly, and she]made a sign 
to him not to disturb the prayer she was saying. 
In another moment she dropped the rosary into 
her lap, and stretching out her hands, drew her 
son towards her, and pressed her poor trembling 
lips to his forehead* 

6.2 



,! 



68 CARR OF GARRLTON. 

" Where have you been, my Guido ? Thanks 
be to our blessed lady who has sent you back 
safe I It is rare that yon are out so late at night, 
and I became uneasy, fearing I know not what ! " 

" I am sorry for that, mother," said the young 
man, tenderly stroking her hand. " It is, as you 
say, rare that I am out so late as this ; but I was 
induced to look in at the opera for half an hour." 

''You used not to go to the opera?" pursued 
the countess, looking inquisitively into his face. 
" What took you there?" Then seeing that her 
son hesitated between his natural truthfiilness and 
the desire to avoid her question, she sighed deeply 
and continued, in an altered voice : '' Alas I my 
Guido, I fear that the good padre is right, and 
that you have taken to evil companions . enemies 
of our holy religion, agitators, and such like. Oh, 
my son, would you but open your heart to receive 
the consolations the Church has to offer, you would 
find joy and peace, and not be vexed by these 
vain questions! Under whatever ills we suffer 
here the Church teaches us resignation." 

"Resignation? That is a cowardly virtue for 



CASA LAMBERTL 69 

men with hearts that feel wrongs and don't believe 
them to be inevitable." Then, as if ashamed of 
having been betrayed into saying even this much, 
he quickly added . ^^ But we will not discuss these 
questions, dear mother, for you know we shall 
never agree on certain points. You see them 
through the eyes of Padre Stefano. So be it I 
would not for worlds disturb your opinions on 
many matters, wherein I happen to difer from 
the Jesuit College. Let us avoid speaking of 
them.** 

^' Nay, Guide,'' said his mother, with a naiveti 
her spiritual counsellor certainly would have re- 
prehended, ^'the good padre has desired me, on 
the contrary, to try and bring you to speak on 
these matters, and open your heart as much as 
possible." 

'^ I have no doubt he did," responded her son, 
with a slight curl of the lip. 

'' He fears that you are too intimate with these 
English people. Guide. I have no fault to find 
with them myself. They pay their rent very 
regularly; and Nanna says they are clean, and 



70 CAKB OF CABBLTOK 

have done no damage to ihe ftLmitare. But tik, 
my son 1 remember . ^they are heretics 1 *' 

'' Yes ! the J are heretics. Perhaps some piovis 
Catholics might not be as liberal in all their 
dealings^ if applied to b j a Protestant priest as 
Padre Stefano applied to them in aid of his 
schools." 

^^The devil often misleads as^ my son, hj an 
assumption of liberality," responded his mother, 
shaking her head. ''Not that I would insinuate 
aught against your friends. -only they do not 
acknowledge our blessed Lady ; and what is all 
yirtue without that but a vanity and a snare? If 
you would use your influence now to." 

"Mother," said the son, abruptly, ** there are 
subjects on which it is dangerous to speak. Our 
Church is one. I believe the edifice to be rotten^ 
and that it cannot hold together as it is, even with 
a good man like this new Pope at its head. Signer 
Courteney sees this as clearly as I do. He and 
his family are my greatest friends, but we do not 
discuss religion. . 7here would be little profit on 
either side. You may give this comforting 



CASA LAMBEBTL 71 

assurance to the padre, that if I am an unworthy 
son to the Churchy my Protestant friends are at 
least inBocent of any endeavour to seduce me over 
to theirs.'* 

The countess sighed, and again shodc hea: 
head. Then, after some little hesitation, she 
said aoftlyi 

" My son, liow many scudi are there in the 
purse? The Propaganda are greatly in need of 
funds, and I have promised the good padre to 
give all I can* These are not times to think of 
personal comfort, and I can do very well without 
the for muff you wished to huy me*" 

^'listen, moiher. The ^mall sum now in the 
purse is the sole produce I have yet gained for 
many weeks' hard labour. It is Ihe money 
Yolpino, ibe bookseller, paid me for Ihose transla- 
tions I made for him. It is barely enough to 
enable me to purchase a few articles necessary for 
you, and I will not consent to dedicate it to the use 
of the Propaganda. Nearly the whole of the rent 
joa reoeived last month was seized upon by 
Padre Stefiuio.* 



72 CAKR OF CABRLYON. 



.. 



Do not speak of the good padre in that 
manner, my son," 

" Well, well ; he kindly consented to accept it 
for the use of his order. Up to what point, think 
you, mother, he intends you should impoverish 

yourself ? " 

 

" We brought nothing into this world, my son, 
neither may we carry anjrthiug out" 

" No I " exclaimed the young man, moved by 
his momentary irritation to a somewhat unseemly 
jest. ''Padre Stefano would take good care of 
that I Forgive me, mother ; I would not wound 
you for the world. When the rent of the palazzo 
is paid in a few days, do what you like ; but this 
money mu(t not be touched by the Jesuits* I 
have sworn it" 

A look of anguish came over the old lady's face, 
and when her son stooped down to kiss her fore- 
head, her hand trembled as it passed over the 
wave of his long brown hair. 
Good-night, mother." 

Good-night, my son. May the holy Mother 
keep, and lead you back into the right way." 






CASA LA&IBEBTL 73 

He passed through the ante-room, where Nanna, 
with a clasp-knife in her hand, and a erust of 
bread and an onion on her lap, was engaged upon 
her evening meal. She paid no attention to her 
young master, but continued eating; and he, ' 
desiring the faithful old servant to go to his 
mother, and urge her retiring to rest, left the 
room. 

But not yet to seek his own ; though the hun* 
dred church clocks of Bologna, from their lofiy 
campaniles, have already called out the hour of 
eleven to each other. Not yet will he throw him- 
self on his hard pallet, and toss in troubled dreams, 
it may be, until morning. At the top of the 
winding stair which I have named are three 
doors : one leading to his mother's rooms, one to 
bis own, and one (which is locked and never 
opened) to the main body of the palace, now 
tenanted by the Courteney family. The wing 
occupied by the Lambertis, you understand, is 
quite distinct; having a separate entrance and 
staircase, and only connected with the central 
building by this unused door. It was this door 



74 CABB OP CABBLTOK. 

the young man approached^ listening attentively 
for several minutes for some sound of life. Bat 
there was none: all seemed bnried in profound 
silence upon the other side, and Gnido turned and 
descended the stair* Here he knocked at a 
door upon which was nailed a card labelled *^ Ugo 
Garofido, Professore di Lingua," and at the in- 
vitation of a deep rich voice, he turned the 
handle and entered. 

A man of fifty, with a luminous foil eye, a 
massive jaw, and a brow whose bumps and mr 
equalities told out strongly under the lamp by 
which he read, was seated at a table in the emtre 
of the room. He was enveloped in a blue dotii 
cloak, the collar of which came above his ears ; he 
wore a small velvet cap, and carried an antique 
tntaglios the sisse of a moderate saucer, upon his 
fore-finger. That he was addicted to snuS, d&e 
appearance of things amply indicated* And by 
^ things," I do not mean tiie nasal organs alone . 
no, nor the dose-shorn Hp and chin, bat the shirt 
and the sleeve, and the hands, and the writing- 
desk, with its litter of books and papers, and the 



CASA LAKBEBXL 75 

two silk podceirhandkerchiefe beside him, and, 
above all, tbat nnsustakable bom box, held 
betwixt finger and thumb. 

The room, which was small, was lined, piled, 
strewed, with books. Not alone on shelyes, tables, 
drawers, and mantel-piece . ^the fioor was covered 
with them ; the very bed groaned under a weight 
of quartos ; naj, I am afiraid the basin itself had 
heesx pressed into the service. Among these 
books one was to be found repeated in all forms, 
and types, and editions. That book was the 
Dwma Commedia, There is a story of a German 
malefactor, who committed any number of cnmes 
in order to procure rare editioi of the Bible. 
There is bo knowing what iniquity ihis estimable 
gentleman might not have been tempted to per- 
petrate for ihe sake of an unknown edition of 
Daate. 

He greeted Guido with a nod of the head and a 
hearty smile, without riung firom his chair. 

^^ Be seated, my friend. Well, where do you 
come from, and what news do you bring ? " 

''One thing at a time. I come from the opera. 



76 CAEB OF CAERLTOK 

where I went for the sole purpose of seeing. you 
know whom, Garofalo. TeU me first, if you can, 
why were they not there ? " 

'^The signore was unwell, and the xnadame 
could not leave him. I saw Mademoiselle Sara 
in the garden, who seemed properly out of sorts at 
being disappointed. She said the signore made a 
point of being ill whenever they were going any- 
where. It is lucky, my friend, you are not in 
love with her. That young lady has something of 
a temper J* 

The young man leant his head upon his hand, 
and sat silent for a while. 

'' I have no admiration for Mademoiselle Sara,** 
he said, at last ; '^ but she is in a dependent poei- 
tion; at least, the distance between us were not 
so hopeless, Garofalo." When I first knew the 
Courteney family I was a boy. It seemed then a 
bright dream which might some day be realized . 
that the golden-haired little girl should become 
my wife. Now that dream seems more and more 
distant every day ! " 

Count Gtuido Lamberti," said the professor. 



.S 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 77 

with an ironical smile, ^'yonr modesty is exces- 
sive. One would hardly say that the representa- 
tive of an ancient Bolognese family was not a 
fitting alliance for the daughter of an English 
private gentleman." 

'^ Garofalo, you know well what any honest 
man must feel in my position. An ancient name 
doesn't pay dehts.- doesn't render a man inde- 
pendent It is rather a hindrance to any active 
employment in this poor land of ours, at the 
present time. What have the academical honours 
of this university done for me ? Nothing. I work 
hard at the study of law, but an aristocratic advo- 
cate is an anomaly to which few will be able to 
reconcile themselves. I might, perhaps, get some 
small post under government, if I felt inclined 
to pay assiduous qpurt to the cardinal-legate, 
and to becon^e a mere machine in the hands 
of priests. But' my father's blood flows in my 
veins, and you know what effect education has 
had! I am not fallen so low as to seek . or, 
indeed, accept . ^favours at the hands of those 
whom I despise. In aU this, tell me, Garofalo, 



78 CASE OF GABBLYON. 

what hope is there finr the fhtare ? What hope 
for me^ as an honourable many of ever being able 
to disclose mj deep^ devoted lore to die daughter 
of a rich Ekiglishman . an heiresB f " 

'^Ehi !^ ejaculated the professor, raising his eye- 
brows, as he took a copioos pinch of snuff. ^ Ci 
WioU pazienzal Rome was not built in a day^ 
said the Latins, and you are only laying the feon- 
dations of your city as yet You are young- 
have life all before you: if the signorina is of 
your way of thinking, you may both wait ten 
years. At your age that is nothing; at mine, it 
is an eternity f Ah! if I were three-^md-twenlj 
again, young man, what great ihings I would do I 
I would bring out an edition of this book " . and 
he laid his hand on the Divina Commedia . '^soch 
as no conmientator has ever dreamed of 1 But 
life is too short now, and I am too poor; so I go 
on teaching blockheads at a couple of pauls the 
hour, and my copious notes will enrich some 
future editor of the divine poet I " 

'^ Speaking of your teaching reminds one of 
what I should have told you sooner, Garo&low 



CASA LAMBEBTL 79 

I hare found you a new scholar. That is mj 
news." 

"Good. Who is he?'' 

" An Ei^lishman who is just arrived in Bo- 
logna, where he proposes spending some little 
tme." 

^ Good again. He mnst be a man of taste. 
Most of his countrymen devote twenty-four hours 
to our city, at most What is his name? Do 
yon know anything of him ? " 

''His name is Carr . ^young, good-looking, and, 
I suppose, rich. Most Engliidmien are. I confess 
to having felt a prejudice against him, when I 
waa introduced this evening, but I am bound to 
say that his ^ 

''Well; but why this prejudice, my friend? 
Explain." 

"A cause scarcely worth mentioningi You 
know since I found that rascally old Marchese 
Onofrio and several other younger men following 
Mrs. Gonrteney and her daughter in their walks, 
persecuting them with letters, and trying in other 
ways to scrape an acquaintance, I have strongly 



80 CARB OF CABRLTON. 

urged their not being out at dask ; and, whenever 
an opportonity allowed me, I have . I confess to 
you . followed them at a distance to protect them, 
in case of any difficulty. I would not have them 
discover this for the world. It is a secret happi- 
ness to me to walk after her, though I do not 

even hear the sound of her voice But 

days often elapse without my being able to accom- 
plish this. Last evening I learnt that they were 
out at an hour when they ought long since to have 
been home. I went in the direction I found they 
had taken, and met them. They passed me un- 
noticed in the shadow of a doorway ; and I then 
perceived that their steps were dogged by a man 
. evidently an Englishman. Of course I followed, 
and, at the comer of the street, turned and faced 
the pursuer. It was this Mr. Carr. What his 
object was . ^whether one of mere curiosity to 
discover who his countrywomen were, I cannot 
tell. On seeing he was watched, of course he 
gave up the game. Tou can understand that I 
was not very agreeably surprised to recognise him 
this evening." 



CASA LAMBEBTL 81 

'' How comes it^ then^ that youj who keep aloof 
from these gay young l^ertini in general^ made 
his acquaintance ? " 

**That poor woman^ the Onofrio, sent for me 
to her box for the express purpose, and asked me 
to be of any use to him I could. One substailtial 
service I rendered him on the spot, which was 
to recommend you." 

" Ehil Guide Lamberti, if we can succeed in 
making this foreigner understand something of 
the glories of our literature . if we can make him 
feel that the land which produced this great man " 
(hand on book again) '^ and others has still within 
it the elements of greatness, which only require 
freedom and opportunity to be developed . we 
shall have done something! If, on the other 
hand, he is contented with conjugating the verb 
* amare ' and following signorinas in the street, I 
shall only have to thank you, my friend, for 
putting so many pauls into my pocket" 

*' Who can wonder," said the young man, pur- 
suing a train of thought into which the pro- 
fessor's words had led him . ^^'who can wonder 

TOL. L 6 



82 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 



at Englishmen fonniog the estimate of ni Aey 
generallj do, wfaem they leam die condition of 
education and morab in our upper chunea? In 
such sodeiy as I found this Garr to-nigkk . and 
it was nether better nor worse than two-thirds 
of ^ that distinguished assemblage . he probably 
came to the condnsion that we w&e all good- 
naturedj unprincipled^ ignorant idlers. Is be 
yery fiir wrong? And yet these Kazzis and 
Blanginis, and the rest of ihem, might become 
honest and useM citizens of the State onder 
other circumstances. As it is^ what chance hare 
we, any of us ? Without example, without edn- 
cation, without occupation of any kind . ^bigots 
or sceptics . our minds become narrower, and 
our faith leas every day I * 

**^Hanno perduia U ben deW iatdUUo,*^ mut- 
tered the professor. ''Our poet tells us that 
those who live 'sema infamia e aenza lodo* are 
to be found in the vestibule of hell I " 

^ And yet," continued the young man energeti- 
cally, ''who shall say what these men might not 
become but for this cursed tjrranny of priests. 



CA8A LAHBEBTL 83 

stopping np every avenue of light and know- 
ledge, and grinding us down beneath . an iron 
heel?" 

^^Ah, mj son I" said Oarofalo, with a sigh, 
^ yonr ciy is an old one. It has been heard for 
BIX hundred years and more. Mind you, again, 
what the immortal JFlorentine says^-^ 

' Ahi genie, ehe dorresti esser dirota, 
 lasciar seder Cesar neUa sella, 
8e bene intend! dd che Bio ti nota I ' 

Bat they will go on sitting upon Caesar's saddle, 
and demanding a good deal more than the tribute 
due unto Caasar, until they are rudely dragged 
down* And that dsy will come, my son, though 
I may not live to see i;t . never fear. As to this 
Fio Nono, I have no faith in all his liberal 
measures]" 

^'Nor I, if he lets the Jesuits once get round 
him* They say his confessor is an enlightened 
Hum, and the Pope is at present guided by him. 
The Jesuits will make away with him^ however, 
if they find he stands in their way." 

6. a 



84 CABB OF CAKRLYOX. 

 

** Not 80 loud, my friend I Though this is your 
own honse^ remember that walls have ears ! " 

''Alas I in this house least of all should I 
utter anything I would not have overheard. 
Why, in this holy cause, every cupboard in my 
mother's room might harbour a priest! Does 
not the end justify any means? She and old 
Nanna might easily be persuaded it was for my 
salvation. . . . . But I am no hatcher of 
Mazzinian plots, as you know, Garofalo. I and 
my small knot of friends here keep our eyes 
open, and meet to discuss the progress of events 
two or three nights a week. We are ready to 
sacrifice all for Italy, when the time is ripe : but 
we will not endanger the cause of fi'eedom by 
joining any rash conspiracy. I have nothing, 
therefore, to dread from Padre Stefano's sharp 
ears. I openly avow my opinions . ^but so does 
every Italian now who is not a Jesuit, or in the 
pay of Aufitria." 

'' Ah I those Austrians I " said the old Italian, 
with a groan, and he shoveled up a pinch of 
snuff at the same time, with great virulence. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 85 

''Those maledeiti Tedeschi! It never will be 

well with us^ till we get rid of them out of the 

land, . 

' Le tern d'ltalia tutte piene 

Son di tiranni.' 

All our efforts, my son, must be directed first 
towards ridding the country of- these white- 
coated barbarians, before we think of anything 
else. All reforms in our government must come 
afterwards." 

Their conversation continued on politics for the 
next half hour. I do not think it would be either 
profitable or amusing for us to listen to them. As 
the clock struck twelve. Guide rose. 

"Good-night, Garofalol I will go with you 
to this Englishman's to-morrow. He proposed 
coming liere, but I was anxious he should not do 
so, . ^for reasons you may guess.*' 

** Bene!^ said the professor; and the door had 
hardly closed before he was back again in the 
company of his beloved Dante. 



86 CABB OF CARBLTON. 



CHAPTER V. 

The house of Lamberti was a very ancient 
Bolognese one^ which, from a variety of causes, 
had dwindled by degrees into poverty and 
obscurity. The last Count, at his death, had 
Idft his son very little else than that dilapidated 
palace, with its garden and vineyard, and other 
dependencies ; the revenue produced from which, 
as has been seen, formed the sole income of the 
young man and his mother. 

The late count had been recklessly extrava- 
gant in his youth, but he was not to be classed 
with the herd of favniant Italian nobles. He 
felt keenly for the hapless condition of his 

4 

country; he burned to rouse her from the 
lethargy in which she was plunged. He had 
fought witli distinction against the French in 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 87 

1814; but since then had been embroiled more 
than once with his own government^ for he was 
profody rash, and impetuoiis ; and his hatred of 
the priesthood increased as he grew older. At 
kst this gaUant gentleman. who, with aU his 
&Qlts, was popular with everyone except the 
priests . died, and left his only son, at the age 
c^ fevarteen, sole representative of Ms house. 

Gnida's most direct inheritance from his father 
was his prida In other respects there was little 
resemblance between them; and this one quality 
showed itself difierently in two such opposite 
characters. The hot-tempered man of scanty 
education and little self-control was proud of 
his ancient family ; could be arrogant in his 
manner, 'especially when in contact with the 
scarlet stockings, and was a little vain, too, per* 
haps, of his personal prowess in a generation 
when heroism of any kind was usfertunately 
rare among Italians. Hia son's |ide, though 
morbidly sensitive, as we shall see by-and-by, 
was silent and undemonstrative. His extreme 
tenderness, too, under a somewhat cold exteriorj 



88 CARB OF CABBLYON. 

and his consideration for the feelings of others, 
were entirely alien to his father's character* 
They came from the loving wife and mother, 
though most weak-minded woman^ whose efforts 
had all miserably failed in making the husband 
happy whom she adored. He respected her, 
and was never otherwise than kind when they 
met, but there could be little sympathy between 
them. Her very virtues were stumbling-blodcs 
in the way; and when that pious soul became, 
in the course of yeors^ entirely subject to the 
domination of priests^ the separation between the 
count and his wife was complete. ' His animo- 
sity against the disciples of Ignatius Loyola was 
louder and more bitter than ever. Still in all 
but spiritual matters she obeyed him implicitly, 
and would have testified to the world her grief 
at his death by entering a convent, had it not 
been for her boy. To him she had transferred 
all her carnal affections, poor lady! and, in spite 
of every mortification of the flesh, she found 
they stiU clung tenderly to this one earthly 
object. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 89 

I 
In more manly shape this capacity for strong 

and deep attachment manifested itself in Goido. 
His &ther had been little tolerant of his wife's 
weakness : the son, while he had an equal horror 
of priestly influence, and strove to counteract it 
in every possible way, never abated in his patient 
devotion to his mother. His life was so unlike 
that of most young men, that, as we have seen, 
the poor devotee and her old serving-maid had 
grown somewhat unreasonable in their expec- 
tations. Not that he ever spent the evening in 
his mother's room ; the constant recurrence of the 
one subject uppermost in her thoughts rendering 
any protracted conversation impossible to Guide, 
even had not the hourly prayer and meditation 
enjoined by Padre Stefano precluded the poor 
lady from any lengthened enjoyment in her son's 
society. Guide's room adjoined his mother's, and 
indeed opened into it by a sliding panel: but 
this he rarely used, preferring to go round by 
the ante-room, and face his spiritual enemies 
boldly at the door. She liked to know that he 
was in his room, with his books, within call, and 



90 CAKB 07 GABBLTON. 

out of ''barm's way.'' She could. then call the 
padre'9 attention with some pardonaUe pride to 
her son's stndiomi and ezemplaiyliie. Bntlattexlj 
there had been a fallii^ off. "Harm's way" 
was the way of all republicans and firee-ihinkera 
in Chnrch matters : and into this the padre said 
with great sererily that Gnido was fidling deeper 
every day. It was rare^ indeed, that he spent 
the entire erening from homCy as on this occasion^ 
when he had been tempted inside the walls of 
the opera; but some pcMiicm of eadi was generally 
passed either at his small dreolor or with the 
Courteneys. This was unpardonaUe. Had he 
broken loose in a course of the wildest profligacy, 
more hopes might have been entertained of him ; 
but now his ultimate perdition was shown to 
be a mathematical certainty. Gmido fought the 
priest with the unerring blade of truth: only 
as to his friends and their opinions he maintdned 
an impenetrable reserve. The most vigilant 
espionage had fiuled hitherto in detecting anything 
of a treasondble nature in the intercourse of these 
young men. Lamberti's presence was their great 



CJlSA UIMBEBTL 91 

support He was known to disapprove of con- 
spiracies; and he always openly declared that 
if Italy was to be regeneratedj it most be by the 
soksm^ energetic wiU of the people, not by the 
plots and intrigues of a few individuals. Thus, 
ahhongh he was regarded as a ^' dangerous cha- 
racter," the boldness and u{rightness of the young 
aristocrat not only turned aside his enemies' 
deadliest thruslsy but served, in a manner, to 
shidd his associates. 

But ihere was one subject upon which, excepting 
with his o]d and valued firiend GaroEdo, he never 
spoke . this English, fiunily, whose acquaintance 
he had made at Turin some years previously, 
when sent there to spend a year widi his axmt, 
and to whom he rendered some slight service . I 
forget what . which entailed an acquaintance. 
This jBunily of Courteneys had now been some 
moi^hs in the Casa LambertL The intimacy 
of boyhood had been renewed; the circum* 
stance of both being under one roof tending 
vy naturally to this result. Guido had long 
ago broken through tite ice of* reserve which 



92 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

Mr. Courteney maintained with the world in 
general . at least npon all public topics connected 
with Italj^ and on classical and general literature, 
that gentleman discussed points with the young 
Italian^ and evidently had some respect for his 
character and abilities. As regarded himself^ and 
everything that related to England, Mr. Ck)urteney 
was as studiously silent with Guido as with the 
rest of the world. And in this respect only 
his wife resembled him. She had always had an 
affection for the handsome, intelligent Italian boy: 
now that he was grown to man's estate, she 
found all her hopes fulfilled. He, and the old 
professor^ whose society Mr. Courteney seemed 
to like, had a general invitation to spend their 
evenings with the English family. Guido often 
looked in for an hour or two : but during the day 
they never met. There was nothing, therefore, 
to proclaim the fact of this increasing intimacy 
to the world in general . but it grew apace. 
Leading the stem life of self-denial the Italian 
had hitherto done . knowing little of woman's 
society save that of the two aged ones in his own 



CASA LAMBEBTL 93 

wing of the palace . ^it was natural that the fair^ 
gentle English girl should impress the young 
man's heart and imagination in a way none of 
the Italian ladies of his acquaintance were able 
to do. Many of them were no doubt handsomer^ 
but they had neither her grace nor refinement. 
The simple^ untutored expression of her natural 
sentimentSj so different from the demure convent 
manners of the few unmarried women he knew, 
was in itself an inexpressible charm to the young 
man. Like all strong natures that have been 
much shut up within themselves, his seemed to 
expand under the infiuence of its first passion. 
Not that he ever said much . ^he preferred to 
watch and listen to her. But what had lain 
dormant in him before-. the sap of his inward 
being, so to speak . ^rose and fiUed every member 
with new life. To his devotion as a son, to 
his high aspirations as an Italian, was now added 
the passionate love of a man hitherto ignorant 
of the deep-hidden fire which had been kindled 
gradually within him. 

Alas! almost simultaneously with this passion 



94 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

grew the conviction that it was all bnt hopeless 
the object of it should ever be his. 

This was the one secret' which^ like s miser 
over his hidden treasure, be dreaded should be 
dragged to light In all else^ candour and fear* 
lessnesss ; bat not in ihis. He dreaded the 
priests : and he dreaded his own heart even more. 
He imposed on himself additional restraints: 
diminished his evening visits, under some pre- 
tence or other, to one or two a wedc, and fisd 
on her image more and more in bis heart the 
less he saw her. 

His precautions had succeeded in KliiM^mg 
Padre Stefiuio hitherto: so mudi was gained. 
Madame Lamberti's spiritual adviser might in* 
veigh against her son's heretic friend; but in 
his knowledge of impulsive Italian nature, it 
never entered into the priest^s calculations that a 
young man should exercise sufficient command 
over himself not to render his love apparent if 
it existed* 

Guido's sole confidant, as I have said, was the 
professor. His upc^ht character and Arewd 



CASA LAMBEBTL 95 

intellectj not less than their ide&tity of feeling <m 
many important subjects^ had drawn the TOimg 
znan towards him aoon after the former had 
emerged firom boyhood* They had read and 
discussed together as master and pupil : the 
youth's ill-digested ideas on many subjects had 
hardened into definite prindi]^ under the pro- 
fessor's training ; and now, as firiend with friend, 
they conversed openly on all subjects. Garofido's 
intimacy with the CSourteney family, in which he 
gave daily lessons, and with whom he constantly 
spent an evening in expounding Dante, had given 
hipi opportunities of observing Gkudo when in 
Miss Conrteney's society; and it is possible that 
the shrewd man of letters, while i^parently ab- 
sorbed in his book, suspected die state of Guido's 
heart, ere the count was aware of it himself 
However this may be, such a state of things 
could not go on long without a tacit understanding 
ari^ng between them, which gradually widened 
into confession, sympathy, and advice. That the 
professor thought his friend's case sufficiently 
hopeleflSj may be injured from his cheerfully 



96 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

recommending liim to wait for ten years. Ten 
years I to a young fellow in love ! But with his 
knowledge of life, its shifting impressions, and 
the power of time to soften all, the commentator 
upon Dante offered, perhaps, the kindest and 
wisest advice in his power. 

Having now endeavoured in some d^ree to 
elucidate the actual and relative positions of four 
of the dwellers in the Casa Lambert!, we will 
proceed with the narrative of events which fol- 
lowed the conversations detailed in the last 
chapter. 

To return to Laurence Carr. The morning 
after the opera he was ready to declare the society 
of Bologna to be uncommonly pleasant, and the 
Marchesa Onofrio one of the most delightful 
people he had ever met That little supper-party 
of five, when they all smoked cigarettes, and Tasca 
sang so deliciously from the Trovaiorey and Ortolani 
told those amusing (though rather equivocal) 
anecdotes . ^why, he felt in ten minutes as if he 
had lived among them all his life! This was 
something like society. This was rather a different 






CASA LAMBEBTT. 97 

matter to the pompous, silver-toreen festivities at 
Carrljon : yea, and the nine o'clock banquets 
of Belgraye Square. There was some fun' in 
this. People could be natural here; and make 
themselves pleasant to you, without inquiring 
your rent-roll. As to that marchesa, she certainly 
was an uncommonly attractive woman. Such 
frank, unaflTected manners, such a genial sense of 
humour and pathos, and such a warm heart! 
Decidedly the society of Bologna was agreeable 
for a bachelor, at all events. 

As Laurence rolled lazily from side to side in 
bed, the ten o'clock sun streaming in upon the 
yellow eider-down quilt, and Giuseppe announcing 
for the third time that his hot water for shaving . 
was ready, . as our English hero, I say, lay in this 
position, he felt in tolerably good humour with 
himself and the rest of the world. His reflections 
hung together somewhat in the shape I have noted 
down above, and he found no diSculty in making 
up his mind to remain at Bologna . until he should 
become tired of it. Besides the attraction of that 
pleasant, sans-fafon society into which he had been 

VOL.L 7 



98 CASK OF CASai^XOS. 

introduced, tbere was a yet atronger indacement 
to fttay where he waa . a phantom which thrust 
itself forward so pertinadooalj across other 
wholly disconnected thoughts, that he smiled 
in spite of himself at the fascination tbis idea 
eierdsed over him. When Giuseppe saw that 
smile, he gave up the game. No Florence 
for three months at least I That, as far as 
his experience went, was the limit allotted to 
human love. 

In the afternoon, Carr made a point of bdng 
at his hotel when Guido and the professor called 
Of this visit I need say nothing, but that the 
preUminaries for Carr's taking a lesson eretj 
morning in the professor's room at the Casa 
Lamberti were arranged. The professor, indeed, 
at first objected that his room was small, and he 
hesitated about receiving Cazr ; but . the latter 
so absolutely insisted on this point, and brought 
forward such a number of recondite reasons why 
kssons given in hotels never could be profitable, 
that the professor was obliged to yield; while 
he looked at Guido, and shrugged Ins eye- 



CASA LAMBEBTL 99 

brows and shoulders simultaneously. The latter 
was more sUent than he often was in his 
iriend's society, as the two Italianb trod the 
arcade together on their way back to the Casa 
Lamberti. 



7.2 



73276B 



100 CARR OF CARRLYON. 



CHAPTER VI. 

In that small ground-floor apartment^ with its one 
window open to the garden^ sat the professor and 
his new pupil. 

The vine-leavesj which had formed so thick a 
curtain round the window a month before^ were 
now few and yellow^ and the branches/ stripped of 
their purple burdens^ trailed dry and broken 
along the wall, or flapped against the dim, 
greenish window-pane in the November wind. In 
front, there was an open space, where the pozzo, 
or well, stood, and where some earthenware jars 
and pitchers indicated that here the household 
came to draw water. There were two aloes in 
stone pots, and a green lizard lying out in the 
only sunny bit of terrace which the shadow of the 
blouse did not yet cross : and then beyond, came 



CASA LAMBERT!. 101 

the pergola, or trellised walls of vine^ no longer 
an impervions green shelter from the still powerful 
mid-day snn. The farther end of this walk was 
terminated by a low wall, which looked over the 
river Into the olive-gardens, and vineyards, and 
villages of the far-stretching valley. Against this 
wall grew a pomegranate ; and npon the top of 
the wall stood a few pots of geraniums, in virtue of 
which I suppose it obtained its title of garden, for 
other flowers there were none. Fragments of 
balustrade, however, and four grand old cypress- 
trees in either corner of the enclosure, showed 
what a stately, well-cared-for place this pleasant 
wilderness once was. 

Over the low garden-wall I have mentioned 
leant two yomig girls. The tall fair one we have 
seen before ; but who is the other ? . a very grace- 
ful fig;are of middle height, with a profusion of 
black waving hair, and a small sallow face, lit up 
with the most wonderful eyes and teeth. Ex- 
citement, too, as we shall see by-and-by, can lend 
to this singular countenance a brilliancy of colour- 
ing and an intensity of expression which might 



102 CABR GF CARSLTON. 

make any pointers at leasts call it beautifnL Bat 
beantiftd in a qoiesoent Btate> and to an ordinary 
observer^ it is not . ^least of all in its espresaion 
at sndi times. And if physiognomy be any 
indication of character^ it mnst be when in repose. 
Those inYolontary troth-telling lines into which 
nature falls, letting drop the mask of conven- 
^nality for a while, carry more knowledge with 
them than is to be gained even in m<xnents of 
strong emotion. In this instance, the lines are 
decidedly bad. The passionate dilation of the 
nostril, the sensnality of the lower lip, and the 
nervous contraction of the brow, do not impress 
one favourably. Whatever &scination die young 
lady possesses must be exercised by the substi- 
tution of a very different expression when the 
mask is on, and by the charm of a singularly rich 
musical voice, and by the use of considerable 
devemess combined with a powerful will. 

With their conversation we have nothing to do 
at this moment Whether either of them spoke as 
they lent over the garden-wall, plucking a dead 
geranium-leaf now and then, and letting it drop 



n 



CA3A LAMBEBTI. lOS 

into the xiver below, is tmimportaiit They formed 
a pictaresque contrast defined agamstthe blue skj, 
and the jCMing gentleman who was watching them 
thought BO. He had been watching them, so 'far 
as Messieurs Virgil and Dante would permit him, 
for the last quarter of an hour. The descent of 
those .worthies to the lower regions offered some 
obstructions to this stadj; but what whh the 
obscure words and obsolete forms of writing, he 
found in every line opportunities of looking out 
of window in quest of a translation. Then there 
were religious and historical allusions to be ex- 
plained by the professor; during which time his 
pupil gaxed with a perplexed air straight at the 
pergola, as though he were wholly absorbed in 
disentangling the poet's web. 

At last his patience was exhausted . he could 
restrain himself no longer ; and after casting about 
in Tain for some way of leading naturally to the 
point he had in view, he abruptiy broke into . 

** I beg your pardon. Signer Garofalo, but who 
axe those young ladies?'' 

" Do you not know? " said the professor, wili 



104 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

a shrewd twinkle of the eye. " They are country- 
women of yonrs . the taller one at all events. 
She is Mr. Courteney's daughter. ^ Quel giamo 
piii non vi leggemmo avandy " he muttered as he 
closed the book ; but the quotation and its appli- 
cation wwe equally lost on the Englishman. 

'' And the other^ . the dark one . ^who is she ? ** 

^ Hi I " replied Garofalo^ crossing his legs^ and 
resigning himself to the catechism which he saw 
now had driven Dante ignominiously from the 
field for that morning. Chi h sa, signore ? . ^who 
knows? A companion and friend of Miss 
Courteney's. Her name is Gisbome ; but whether 
she is English or not^ it is hard to say. She speaks 
Italian like a native, and German equally well, I 
understand." 

'* And Miss Courteney ; . ^you know her family, 
no doubt, well . as you live in tlie same house? ** 
I give the signorina lessons." 
No brother, or other sisters, I think, you 
said?" 

The professor did not recollect having stated 
ihe fact, but he corroborated the assumption. 






CASA LAMBEBTL 105 

'' Do you know what part of England they come 
from? There are CoTirtenep in my county. I 
wonder whether they are any relations." 

The professor shrugged his shoulders, for all 
reply. 

"They have not been here many months, I 
believe. Do you know if they have been long 
abroad ? " ' 

"Apparently for many years. They seem to 
have travelled in all parts of Europe. They left 
Rome, Signor Courteney told me, on account 
of the numbers of English. They were there a 
very short time.** 

"Do you mean that he positively objects to 
meet any of his own countrymen ? ** inquired 
Lamrence, indignantly, as though he personally 
were affironted. 

"I donH know tha^: but he is a peculiar man, 
and shuns general society. Among his own 
nation, this is, of course, more difficult than it 
is among foreigners. One of Bologna's chief 
attractions, I believe, to Signor G>urteney, was 
there being no English here." 



106 CASK OF CAHRLTON. 

<' That I can understand as a rede ; siiB^ there 
are exceptions to be made. I suppose he has, 
then, absolutely no acquaintance among Ttelians 
here?" 

" None but his landlord. Count Lamberti^ and 
myself; though some of our best families, contrary 
to their custom wih strangers, have shown them- 
selves disposed to make their acquaintance." 

^'Is Count Lamberti intimate in tbe family?" 
pursued the indefatigable questioner. 

(varofalo was puzzled how to reply. He took 
refiige in a copious pinch of snuff 

''He knew them long ago, when he was a 
boy, but it is difficult for any one to be intimate 
with Signer Courteney," he said, adroitly evading 
the question. ''He. is a taciturn man, though 
not without learning, and much knowledge of 
the world acquired at some^time or other of his 
life." 

This was not exactly what Carr wished to 
discover, but he hardly thought it safe to push 
hifl inquiries in that line, for fear of betraying 
his real motives. At the same moment the two 



CA8A LAMBEBTL 107 

girls left tbeir station at the wall, and came slowlj 
back under the pergcda in the direction of the 
house. Charming as Lanrence had thought that 
fair yonng head in its black bomiet and veil, it 
was doubly so now, witib the wind lifting the 
light brown hair, unsheltered bj aught save the 
small parasol i^e held. The movement of her 

simple tight-^fitting dress she wore, seemed cha- 
racteristic of health, and gaiety, and innocence. 
So Carr thought. Her step was firm and free, 
her cheek flushed with the morning wind. She 
caroled a snatch of some popular air everj now 
and then; and every now and then she raised 
her arm to the trellis above to reach a vine- 
leaf which had remained green longer than its 
companions. Joyous and careless as a bird she 
came along, utterly unmindfid of the fact that 
every movement could be observed from the 
windows of the west wing of the palace. It is 
probable that 6<Hne such considerati<Na did occor 
to her companion. Her face underwent a com- 
plete and rapd transformation: the lai^e eyes 



108 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 

were lowered, and an air of voluptuous pensive- 
ness, so to speak, pervaded her figure as she 
advanced languidly. Once, and once onh', she 
looked up, and her Qje ran rapidly along the 
windows. A momenU after the girls turned an 
angle of the garden and were out of sight 

" Signor Garofalo," said Carr, abruptly, '* will 
you convey a message to Mr. Courteney, with 
my compliments? I receive Tlie Ttin^ newspaper 
here as regularly as the post-office authorities will 
allow me. He may like to hear a little more 
English news than he can get from the MonUcre, 
and, if so, I shall' be very happy to send him 
my paper every day.** 

The professor gravely inclined his head. 

'' I will convey your message, signore." 

That was a happy thought of Carr's ! . ^a trans- 
parent design, perhaps, but one which could 

. 

hardly fail to produce the desired result This 
old Courteney could not be so absurd as to refuse 
the polite ofer of a newspaper ; and an acquaint* 
ance, in the natural course of things, must gradu- 
ally ensue. He who wrote so much in his letters 



CASA LAMBkRTI. 109 

home about the charm of getting rid of all 
English society,^ now, with an inconsistency by no 
means rare, declared it was not to be tolerated 
that the only two Englishmen living in a foreign 
town should be strangers te each other. He was 
much' occupied with the thought all that day, 
and kept laying down little trains of hypothetical 
circumstances to be fired after the reception of 
the first Times paper. The image of that fair 
face haunted him, with its wiud-blown hair and 
clear, truthful eyes. He beheld it, like Owen 
Meredith's young lady, '^ in a dim box over the 
stage," that same evening, as he sat making him- 
self agreeable to the Onofrio. He was not given 
to dreaming, but he saw it distinctly in his sleep 
that night, passing and repassing before him ; 
and in the postscript of a letter to his mother 
the following morning, he could not resist saying, 
" There is a family of the name of Courteney 
here . a father, mother, and daughter. Tell me 
whether you know anything of them." 

When he, an hour or two afterwards, entered 
the professor's room with The Times in his hand. 



110 CABB OF CARRLTON. 

the latter smiled, and, after shaking hands with 
hifi papilj said, . 

''S%Dor Courteney retams you his compli- 
mentsy and declines joor polite offer. He says 
he cares nothing for the politics of Ida ooantry, 
and never wishes to see an English newspaper 
again." 

It was very ridicalons, I admit, but LanreDce 
Carr was irritated; and I fear he betrayed it 
to the sharp eyes of the Italian teacher. There 
was no other way of accounting fer the petty 
impatience and the remarkable stupidity of tlmt 
intelligent young Englishman during the whole 
lesson* He pcMsitively couldn't construe a line. 
The unhappy ^[itfausiast about the Divine Comedy 
subsequ^itly declared to Gruido that he had never 
passed such a hopeless morning over a canto in 
his life I 

That he, so popular, so sought after in the best 
London society, not only for certain worldly 
advantages which he possessed, but, as he ndight 
reasonably flatter himself, for certain personal 
ones, . ^that he diould take the trouble of coming 



1 



CASA ULMBXBTX. Ill 

aU the waj to Bologna to be snubbed by a 
trumpery travelling Englishman^ . ^it was really 
too much! Had it been an Italiaawfao so met 
his advances, he could have stood it better^ 
FcMreigaers were not bonnd to know that the 
Carrs of Carrlyon were one of the oldest families 
in the North. 

''But after all," whispered that inward voice 
which will make itself heard, ^the man has a 
right to choose his own acquaintance, I suppose; 
and if he won't know me, why I don't see how 
I can force him." '' Yes, I can, and I will," said 
Obstinacy* ''I never was conquered yet in 
anjrtfaing I chose to undertake; and I have set 
my mind upon knowing that girL I am resolved 
to acconqdish it It may be ridiculous. Of 
course, I know there are hei^ of better-lo(ddng 
women in EIngland ; and many a man in my place 
would say I was a fool not to devote myself to 
the iir marchess here, instead of wasting my 
time in running after a shadow. I don't care. 
I can only prove that it if a shadow. the idea 
I have conceived of that girl's charm . ^by making 



112 CABB or CABRLYOK. 

her acquaintance. Til do it, cost what it 
may.** 

ScTeral days passed, without any oppoitnnity 
for the furtherance of Carr's wishes, but also with- 
out any diminution in the fixedness of his deter- 
mination. He did not even see Miss Courteney, 
and he found an evident disinclination on the part 
of the professor to enter again upon the subject 
of the family. But he was not discouraged. He 
' continued going nightly into Italian society, and 
very pleasant it was; but the days were almost 
entirely given up to wanderings round the ndgh- 
bourhood of the Lamberti palace, in twilight visits 
to the church where he first beheld the sweet face 
which had haunted him ever since. 

His efforts to improve his acquaintance with 
Guido Lamberti were not more successful, and 
his cuposity respecting the Italian, and the exact 
footing he was on in the Courteney. family was 
still imsatisfied. Lamberti had, indeed, been as 
good as his word in giving Carr every informa- 
tion in his power touching pictopes, historical 
monuments and records, not seen by strangers 



CAS A LAMBERTI. 113 

in general The only thing he would not give 
was his society. He excused himself when Carr 
asked him to dinner; and as it w;as clear that 
capacity was less concerned in the refusal than 
inclination, the would-be Amphitryon had pride 
enough not to renew the invitation. 

Under these unpromising circumstances, his 
only ally and auxiliary was the fat little porter 
of Casa LambertL This functionary, in considera- 
tion of certain scudi judiciously bestowed, informed 
Carr . with more or less accuracy . what the 
^'famiglia Inglese" had done or proposed doing 
daily. The gentleman was lame, and they drove 
nearly every afternoon. Then Carr learnt one 
day that Guide and the professor had spent the 
previous evening with the family; and upon 
another occasion, to his disgust, that they had 
been at the opera the night before, while he 
had sat above them, talking nonsense in the 
Onofrio's box, unconscious of their presence! 
Decidedly the porter was a valuable acquaint- 
ance ; but he did not always tend to promote our 
friend's good humour. 

VOL. I. 8 



114 CABB OF GABBLYON. 

Carr grew deepeiate. Great evils xeqnire strong 
remedies; but tbongh the odmpassioiiate reader 
I liope will feel the cruelly of Carr's position, I 
have my doubts wheth^ the remedy in this case 
will appear altogether justifiable; unless he, the 
reader, happens to be a sanguine young man .i 
five-and^-twenty, with the oigan of conscientions- 
ness singularly undeveloped. 

A communication was made to Carr ooemonung 
as he entered the gate of the Gasa Lamberti, 
the result of which must be detailed in another 
chapter. 



CASA LAMBBBXL 115 



CHAPTER VII. 

Lauhekce Cabb returned at once to his Intel, 
leading a message for Profeaear Garofalo, to the 
effiact that he -was unavoidably prerented taking 
his lesaon that morning. 

. Giuseppe looked up rather aatonisbed at his 
master's unexpected return to his room* The 
little man was at the dressing^ble in the act of 
transfisrriBg some eau-de^Porttifffd to his own 
person : but he bore the shock without visible 
eonfusion; nature, in anticipation of such little 
peccadillos, probably having pcovided him with 
a complexion that could not blufih. His master 
took no notice, bemg fiill of the scheme on hand, 
and of the idea that he was about, for the first 
time in his life, to make an accQmplice of his man- 
servant. He felt like one of the heroes in Mrs. 
CentUvre's old-fiishion^ comedies; only with a 

8.2 



116 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

slight awkwardness as to commencing the dia- 
logue which none of those worthies ever expe- 
rienced. 

**Look here, Giuseppe . make no remark- 
mind you I but do just what I tell you : do yon 
hear? First of all, order the best and largest 
carriage you can find, with the strongest horses, 
to be here in an hour's time to take me to the 
Villa del Monte. Then you will go to this 
address " (here he handed him a paper) ; '' much 
now . much depends on your executing this 
commission cleverly. You will then find out 
the driver of a carriage which is ordered this 
afternoon for an English family living at the 
Casa Lamberti. Tou will make him understand 
that he is to conduct this party in safety to the 
spot they order him, and that, when tJiere^ it is 
necessary his carriage should break down. The 
springs may break, or the wheel come off, or any- 
thing else he likes, but he must render it im- 
possible for the carriage to be mended on the spot 
Offer him what you choose, but don't leave him 
till he consents ; do you understand ? eh? " 



CASA LAHBEBTI. 117 

*^ Sicuro, sigjiore,^^ replied Giuseppe, with the 
air of a man who has been accustomed to arrange 
accidents all his life; then added, in his bad, 
bnt voluble French, '^ and I suppose I may bar- 
gain separately for silence? beforehand, that is, 
for afterwards his lips will be sealed &st enough, 
in fear of his master finding him out." . 

^'I give you carte blanche to make what 
bargain you like ; only let the matter be cleverly 
managed, and not a syllable of it breathed. Til 
pay, of course, every expense that is incurred, 
and protect the fellow if he gets into any trouble. 
I leave the affair in your hands, Giuseppe ; now 
go, and make haste." 

Carr spent the intervening hour in preparing 
his portfolio and sketching materials, and 
whistling in his excitement like a shrill mackaw, 
as he strode about the room waiting for Giuseppe's 
return. 

He came, and all was satisfactorily settled. 
The driver was declared to be manageable and 
intelligent : there was no difficulty or risk. Half 
an hour afterwards Carr was rolling along, the 



118 CABB OF CAB&LTON. 

sole occupant of a spacious, opa bcitaka, oai the 
Toad to Piaoetora. 

It was a long diiye, lying along the fertile undn- 
lating JEmiHan pikin, till the road reached the foot 
of the Apenmnesy where it began to ascend. The 
Tilla was sitnafed some distance off the main road 
upon the side of the bare brown hill^ up whick 
wagons and oxen had worn a deep-rutted track. 
During the vilieffffiatwra, this was a fsiToarite drive 
of the Bolognese, on account of its fine yiew and 
tiie cool inyigoxuting breeze that comes swirling 
rotmd those billowy crests of mountain, intensely 
purple in the distance, tawny in the foregroondj 
nowhere rising into positive grandeur, but having 
in their horizcHilal formation a distinctive charac- 
ter from all other mountain scenery. The eye 
requires as much apprenticeship to the olive as the 
palate does* Its cold gray-green fcilage produces 
a disagreeable effect to English eyes habituated to 
forests of oak and beecb and elm ; and here, as 
CSarr kdced round, the only vegetation consisted of 
a few of these stunted trees crawling up the hill- 
side, which was scattered with loose gray stones. 



GASA LAMBEBTL 119 

As he approached the Yilla^ indeed^ the remains of 
an ayenne of venerahle (^presseB. stood up in solid 
pillars of green to refresh the eye, and with their 
dark bine shadows flung across the path, served as 
a haven of rest to the sight in that mountain sea. 
"Few of these relics of a faroff day survived to 
recall the time when the villa . now tenanted bj 
olive-dressers only . ^was the feudal residence of 
some great noble, who probably often rode down 
that avenue with his stately cayalcade. Traces of 
a tenuced gardoi belonging to tbe same date yet 
remained in the broken balustrade and fish-pond, 
long since dried up and overgrown with reeds and 
briarsL Here vrfiere some fair Bolognese lady may 
have sat and fed the carp on summer evenings, 
listening to one of the novels which Messire Boc- 
caccio had lately given forth from that rival city 
over the blue mountains yonder, and where the 
golden sunsets no doubt fell upon many a joyous 
group seated, in the velvet splendours of that day, 
with fruit and mandolin and music . ^here, where 
the Inst of the eyes and the pride of life reigned 
absolntely once^ Nature had again asserted her 



*120 CAKR OF CARRLYON. . 

sway. The garden^ save such small portions as 
were reclaimed for the uses of the fiinner's family 
who occupied the villa, was a desert Some 
tattered, sun-burnt children were playing on a 
great heap of Indian com near the door, and stared 
in wide-eyed wonder as Laurence approached. 
These, and some lean, conceited-looking poultry, 
who seemed by their bearing to consider any pre- 
sence but their own on the place an intrusion, 
were the only living objects Carr beheld. Probably 
all the larger and more industrious portion of the 
establishment, master and man, women and oxen, 
were out at work in the fields. 

Laurence wandered round in search of a pic- 
turesque spot, and finally fixed on one which 
commanded a view of the entire plain : Bologna, 
with its many campaniles and two leaning towers, 
in the middle ground ; Modena, Ferrara, and even 
Milan, distinguishable as cloud-specks in the 
distance. From this pomt, the road Carr had 
just traversed was necessarily seen for a long 
distance, till the undulations of the plain, with its 
vine and olive gardens, hid it Carr set himself 



CAS A LA31BEBTL 121 

indnstrionsly to draw the extensive panorama 
before liiin^ though no subject could be less in his 
line, artistically speaking. He had the satisfaction, 
however, of seeing one or two of the principal 
points already sketched in, before the dark spot 
which he knew to be a carriage, became visible on 
the dusty road. 

The next half-hour was one of nervous im- 
patience. Carr endeavoured to fix his attention 
upon the group of belfries with the line of purple 
mountain behind them, but his eye constantly 
wandered back to that ever-increasing speck upon 
the road, until it assumed the aspect of a crazy- 
looking vehicle dragged by two jaded horses up 
the stony hill-side. A minute more, and it had 
arrived; the. three ladies it contained having 
walked up the hill, while an elderly gentieman 
alone retained his seat. Carr heard the familiar 
buzz of English voices behind him: they had 
entered the garden. He would not Ipok up, but 
drew away more vigorously than ever. 

^' It is a great shame," said the gentieman, '^ to 
have given us such a wretched carriage and such 



122 CABB OP CABBLTON. 

bad horses, to^j, of all oilier days^ when we 
were going this long drive. I slumld haTe tamed 
back bat for yon^ Gilda. Tou aeemed to have set 
joar heart on coming.^ 

Here was a lucky escape Scorn the fiulore of aU 
his schemes ! and here too a happy augury : het 
*^ heart was set on coming I " The next speedi or 
two Carr lost, but the party drew near the terraced 
walk where he sat The elder lady exdaimed, 

*^ What a glorious view I lliis repays one for 
anything, Conrteney; and the drive back will be 
much easier for those poor hcn^es." 

''Look, mamma: there is a man sketdbiag; 
only think of onr finding any one up here I And 
how very like an Englishman his back looks 
I see they all wear those rongh brown Jackets. 
Shouldn't yon like to see what he is doing? I 
should, so mnch. Perhaps he is a poor artist, 
papa, and yon m%ht buy something, as you did 
at " 

'' Hush ! don't talk so loud," said the gentleman, 
speaking himself in a remarkably dear voice. 
'' You forget how easily every word is heard. It 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 123 

might reallj be an KnglishTnan. Miss Gisbome, 
c^Iige me hj telling the dnver to bring the pkdds 
and cushions oat here; the sun is warm enough to 
sit awhile and rest, after that horrible sluddng;" 

*' Here comes the driver> sir," said a deep 
woman's voice. 

'' Bat what i& the matter with him ? Look, 
how he throws his eyes about, and clasps his 
hands I One would saj the man had gone mad I " 

From this point the dialogue was carried on 
in rapid Italian ; and had Carr not been pr^ored 
for the substance of it, the greater portion, 
probably, would have been lost on him. First, 
of course, every saint in the calendar was 
invoked by the vociferous driver to witness that 
it was not his fault ; bi;it would the English 
nobleman, whose humble servant he was, beUeve 

 

it? The most extraordinary accident had 
happened. In taking out his horses to feed, 
the carriage had been turned too short, and 
iqset, and one of the sprmgs was broken. 

^ Broken I ^ almost shonted Mc Courteney. 
''What do you mean? This is some trick of 



124 CARR OF CARRLTON. 

yours, birbone that you are, to get money oat 
of me. I know you all, a set of rascals I The 
thing is impossible. Upset in the yard? I 
don't believe it I * 

^'The Holy Virgin punish me, signore, if I 
am not saying the truth! Come and see. The 
spring is broken ; if the signore can mend it, 
so much the better." 

** Why, good heavens I how are we to get 
back?" said Mrs. Comrteney. "Do you mean 
that we can't use the carriage to get back to 
Bologna?" 

"Eh I die vuolef Vostri signori can't go with 
a broken spring: and there is no one here can 
mend it" 

" I repeat," said the gentleman angrily, this 
is some rascally trick of yours to keep us 
here. Tou are in league with the people of 
this place ; but, mark my words now, if I 
don't ^" 

" Signore, excellent signore 1 " whimpered the 
Italian so effectively, that Carr nearly laughed 
outright " Do not be hard upon a poor, honest 



CASA LAMBERTL 125 

fellow. What trick wonld you have, me play 
you? There is another stranger np here^ appeal 
to him, signore. Perhaps he is returning to 
Bologna, and wonld send you out another carriage 
before night-fall ? " 

" Night-fall I " cried the lady.  Why, Cour- 
teney, it will kill you to be out so late ! What 
is to be done?" 

There was a murmured consultation which 
Laurence could not catch, and was interrupted in 
a humble manner by the driver. 

'' Scusi, signore, but this stranger is alone, and 
his carriage is large, much larger than mine. 
He might "" 

"Hold your tongue, sir. You want to stay 
here, that's the fact ' of the matter," said the 
gentleman once more.' " It's impossible, quite 
impossible, to ask a stranger to take a whole 
family in his carriage in that way." 

'* Well, but papa 1 " rang tlie sweet, clear voice 
of his daughter in English, *' there would be 
nothing in asking him to take ^ou. Women are 
different, you know; but he couldn't object to 



126 CASB OF CASSLTON. 

do any act of Christian cbcarify for another 
and in your state of health ; and we eald reonin 
up here yery contentedly till yoa aeni out 
anotlier carriage for m. 

This was the moment for Can* to step forward 
The last suggestion threatened to upset all his 
plans. He was seated about fifty yards rom 
where the party stood, and on a lower rai^ 
of terrace. He jumped np, and came towards tiie 
group, raising his hat as he approadied* 

** Pardon me, I am an Englishman . m visiter 
like yourself here. I have just overheard the 
dileomia yon are in, and I beg to assure you there 
are four places in my carriage very much at your 
service. I could not think of allowing you to 
separate your party, and my carriage is a very 
large one . much too lai^ for a solitary 



man.** 



The gentleman he addressed leant heavily on a 
stick, and was evidently lame. He was a mtn of 
fifty-five or sixty, perh^ ; slight and pale, with 
grey hair, and must have been handsome in his 
youth, but sickness had wasted the face beyond its 



CASA LAHBERXL 127 

years, and rendered it gaunt and hollow* He 
coloured as Laurence spoke^ and bowed stiffly; 
and wldle lie hesitated in his reply the elder lady 
said quickly, 

^'We cannot afford to refuse this gentleman's 
very kind offer, Courteney ; indeed, I don't know 
how we should g^ back without it, firom this very 
retired spot. 

Then Mr. Courteney said slowly, 

^ I find it difficult, sur, to express die extreme 
rductance I feel in putting a stranger to such 
ittoonviipHence." 

*^ Oh, not at alL Don't mention it," exclaimed 
the other, in an off-hand manner. ^^ I assure you 
it will be quite a pleasure. Charming place this, 
ain'tit?" 

<< First, before taking advantage of your pdite- 
ness," continued Mr. Courteney, without noticing 
this appeal, *' Miss Gisbome^ and Gilda, will you 
go and look at the actual state of our carriage, and 
see if the fellow is telling the truth. It may 
be only a matter for a piece of cord, after all. 

^ Allow me to inspectit," said Carr. " I under- 



128 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

stand something more of springs and axles perhaps 
than these young ladies do." 

Mr* Conrteney begged that he irould not 
troable himself, but the two ladies had already 
turned towards the gate, and Carr lost no time in 
following them. 

*' I am afraid we must pronounce the verdict of 
* an unsound body,' " he observed, as they stood 
before the prostrate carriage, and stooping down he 
examined the spring, which was most effectually 
broken. ** The constitution of the vehicle, however, 
must have been in a very impaired state> and its 
breaking now probably saved you from an accident 
on the road home." (Oh, Carr I) 

" It seems to me a very unaccountable occur- 
rence," said Miss Gisbome. " I never can believe 
the carriage slipped down into that hole by aeci- 
dent'' 

The young lady's piercing eyes looked full at 
him, and Carr felt the colour rise to his cheek. 
Miss Courieney*s words were a relief. 

"Well, Pietro will be disappointed if he ex- 
pected to keep us here. We ought to be exceed- 



CA8A LAMBERTL 129 

ingly grateful to yon^" she added^ taming frankly 
to Lanrence ; " for my father's health is such 
that exposure to the damp of the plain when the 
sun is down might be fatal to him. But I am 
afiraid we shall crowd you.? 

It was worth going through a good deal to hear 
that sweetj guileless voice say she was '' grateAil " 
to himj Can; thought, though he knew how little 
he deserved it. He replied, however, with perfect 
presence of mind . 

'' Oh ! if that was all, I could easily walk back. 
The distance is nothing, and the road straight; 
one couldn't mistake it. I can assure you I 
should infinitely prefer walking the distance any 
number of times to leaving you here " . (Miss Gis- 
bome kept running those black eyes through and 
through him) . ** you and this other young lady, 
with the chance of meeting with some disagreeable 
adventure." 

** I should not be the least afiraid of being left 
here, or of walking home alone: I have the most 
perfect confidence in all ItaHans." 

''Far be it from me to shake it," returned 

VOL. I. 9 



130 CABB OF CABELYON. 

Laurence, smiling ; '' bat iliia is an old*fiuliioBed 
Qtmntrj, and practices which have become obsolete 
elsewhere are still in vogue. It is a mere matter 
of habit, I dare saj^-highway robberj and abdiw- 
tion; still it does not conduce to a feeling of 
security in the English breast, and you know we 
have heard of such things quite lately. It was 
only last week that.-" 

'^ Oh I if you judge of a whole nation from a 
newspaper story or two. probably all concocted . 
I have nothing to say," returned the young lady, 
somewhat warmly; adding, with true feminine 
inconsistency, '^ though is it to be wondered at, 
when they are ground down by tiie priests, and 
see their families starving, that they should do 
anjrthing to get mon^ ? An ignorant, pennfless 
man can only take to the road." 

^' Or (lie Church, in more senses ihan one. My 
pocket was picked at Milan cathedral by the most 
devout individual, who never stopped saying his 
prayers." 

" How shocking I " said Miss Courteney ; ^ but 
we are very Italian; we have lived here so long: 



CASA LAMHEBTL 131 

joa must not abuse the people to ns, please^ we 
are so fond of them.'' 

There was not much in her words ; it was the 
child-like readiness with which she ^'made friends" 
at oncet a simplieily as &r removed from the 
forwardness of a &st young lady as from the 
mauvaiae honte of a school-girL It was a manner 
to which Laurence was not much accustomed, 
and while satii^ying his fitstidious taste by its 
unaffected grace, it had die charm of novelty 
and surprise. Not so the manners of her com- 
panion: in spite of her rich musical voice and 
her brilliant eyes, there was that about her which 
was disagreeable to Carr. Besides, she was evi- 
dently too sharp . ^he was more than half afraid 
that she suspected him. 

^'I will go and see that the horses are put 
into my carriage ; the afternoon is far advanced, 

and I am afraid Mr. Courteney ^ (he stopped 

for an instant, confused by that blade diamond 
glance) . "for I bdieve it ia Mr. Courteney's 
daughter whom I have the honour of addressing?'' 
** Yes. How did yon know papa's name ? " 

9.2 



132 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

*^ By visiting the Casa Lamberti daily, where I 
take lessons of your friend. Professor Garo&la" 

'^ Oh, then you are the gentleman he spoke to 
ns about? Sir Carr he called you. We are so 
fond of him* You know one good specimen of 
an Italian, at all events: such a fine, generous- 
hearted old man, and so clever." 

^^ He is ; and I like him much, in spite of his 
always quoting Dante at me, which I don't half 
understand. But you mustn't suppose I don't like 
Italians. Those I know seem good fellows, and 
are pleasant enough for half-an*hour ; but, really, 
only half educated. Their ignorance, indeed, is 
absolutely refreshing, in an age when every one 
knows everything so dreadfully well." 

^' You would find some exceptions to that role," 
replied Miss Courteney, quietly ; but there was a 
shade of annoyance across her brow. 

'* I suppose that this, like their standard of right 
and wrong, and everything else, is to be attributed 
to the priests," pursued Carr, as they turned back 
towards the terrace. *^ Everything, I find, is laid 
upon the Neri . ^those black sheep; their backs 



CASA LAMBERTL 133 

must be very broad to bear the burdens cast 
upon them.'' 

" I understand nothing of politics or religion,'* 
said the girl, simply, '^ I only know I love Italy 
and Italians, and I don't like to hear them 
abused." 

It was but a passing cloud, followed by un- 
interrupted sunshine during the remainder of that 
afternoon. Carr was more cautious in the expres- 
sion of his decided opinions upon Italy ; and while 
he conversed pleasantly on topics of general in- 
terest, he forbore to make any allusions which 
might have been distasteful. They had rejoined 
Mr. and Mrs. Courteney ; and all the party (with 
the exception of the elder gentleman) wandered 
down to the lower terrace and examined Carr's 
sketch, and looked at all the distant points of the 
landscape through his strong racing-glasses ; and 
then, at last, Carr's coachman appeared, to say 
the carriage was ready. While Mrs. Courteney 
and Her daughter returned to assist ihe invalid 
man, Carr went forward to deposit his sketching- 
stool and umbrella on the coach-box. As he 



134 CASB OF CAKHLTON. 

passed under the archway, a man with a faroad 
grin on his countenance came up, . 

" Spero ehe rostra signoria i contento dime?^ 

Carr frowned and made a sign to the man, mnt^ 
tering the only Italian oath in his vocalnilary. He 
h^ard a rustle, and turned. Sara Gisbome's dark 
eyes gleamed under the archway on him. 

- He walked swilUy on widiont saying a word. 
It was provoking. However, he had gained his 
point . his first step, and must now push forward 
his advantages, so as to prevent this girl's sus- 
picions or prejudices, if they existed, from taking 
effect against him. 

When Mr. Courteney limped up, leaning on a 
stick and his daughter's arm, it was evident that, 
in the interval^ she had told him Carr's name ; 
for he at once said, with that peculiarly rigid 
politeness which characterized him . 

'^ I find, sir, that I am already iJidebted to yon 
for an act of courtesy not usual among our coun- 
trymen when strangers to each other. I am 
myself," he added, with an acid smile, '^beyond 
the average type of British sauvagene. I make 



CASA LAMBESTL 135 

no new acqaaintances, and confess that I do not 
willingly lay myself under an obligation to a 
stranger. After saying so mach^ Mr. Carrj I 
must add that I feel greatly indebted for the 
service you are now rendering ns, and beg yon 
to accept the gratitude of a churlish En^tahr 
man.'' 

There was something so singalar in the gentle- 
man's manner that Carr felt rather disconcerted, 
as he handed the ladies into the carriage. 

*' Oh I Mr. Carr," said Mrs. Courteney, seeing 
that he was about to jump on the coach-box, '>^we 
cannot think of allowing you to be there. Come, 
Gilda^ ait between us. Why, the carriage is a 
perfect ark ; it would hold several more, I believe ; 
and I should be miserable all the way home at 
the idea of turning you out of your own carriage. 
By-the-by, I wonder how poor Fietro is to get 
back with the broken vehide." 

''Poor Pietroy" remarked Miss Sara, with all 
qipanent innocence, ^ wiU find his own way back. 
He seems to think it a good joke. I see him 
watching us behind that door, and laughing." 



136 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

''The impudent scoimdrell m take care he 
has no buona mcmo^ said Mr. CoUrteney. 

That long, delicioils drive I who shall describe 
it? Sitting opposite the sweetest face he had ever 
looked upon . ^listening to her fresh^ unsophisti- 
cated remarks on all sorts of subjects . ^making 
the clear young laugh ring with anecdotes of that 
world he knew so well, and she knew so little . 
watching the fleeting expressions of her face, 
which, like a sensitive plant, expanded and shrank 
up before the genial or grave impressions which 
his conversation produced . ^he would not have 
exchanged his position just then for a' throne! 
Everything was propitious : Mr* Courteney lis- 
tened, and watched, and seldom spoke ; Mrs. 
Courteney conversed fi^y, when the subject was 
not England, which she evidently avoided men- 
tioning; and through the indefinable melancholy 
which never left her eyes, and certain tones of her 
voice, there penetrated a genial nature that pro- 
bably was once as buoyant as her daughter's. 
Her remarks were not particularly clever, but her 
perception seemed acute, and the balance of her 



CASA LAMBEBTL 137 

judgment weighed very heavily on the side of 
gentleness and charity. The other occupant of 
the carriage took no part in the conversation, and 
Carr would almost have forgotten her existence, 
had it not been for those eyes which mesmerised 
him every now and then, in spite of himself. 
He then became uncomfortably conscious that a 
sallow girl was sitting next him, drinking in every 
word^ every look he gave forth, and drawing her 
own deductions there&om. But the charm of 
that society was too great to suffer much from so 
slight a drawback. It was with a feeling of un- 
mingled sorrow that he saw the carriage drive 
under the great gateway of Bologna, and that the 
black arcaded streets took the place of glowing 
plain and garden on either side. 

How could they remain strangers after that 
drive ? The thing was impossible. Mr. Courteney, 
with some thaw of his ordinary freezing dignity, 
thanked Carr again as he alighted, and added, . 

'^ I make it a rule to call on no one, and my 
family enters into no society; but you have laid us 
under an obligation, sur; and if you like to come 



138 CABB OF CABBI.TON. 

and see 11S5 you will be welcomed faj these ladies, 
and you must take the consequences which form- 
ing any new acquaintance, entails, if you find na 
insupportably dull^ or a grade bdow die society 
you are accustomed to** (the sick gentleman 
smiled in a grim^ disagreeable way)> '' remember 
I have given you no encouragement The con- 
sequences be on your own head I * 



CA8A XAMBERTI. 139 



CHAPTER VIIL 

An English tea-taUe is, peiliaps^ never 6o much 
appreciated by a man as in a foreign ootmtrj. It 
is an institution so essentially national . ^taken in 
its int^rity^ with hissing nm or kettle, and tea 
that has really seen China . that the *^ cop which 
cheers but not inebriates " brings a glow of honest 
enthusiasm to the British travelkr, who meets it 
after a long abstinence from all such bererage. 

An evening or two after his memorable ruse 
(which we mnst all regret to find had answered 
so well), Laurence was seated at such a table, over 
which Mrs. Courteney presided. The appointments 
of the table were thoronghly English, and there 
was such a pervading air of comfort, without ex- 
travagance, in all {he arrangements of the room, 
that Carr felt it harmonised wdl with its inmates. 



140 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

no less than with his own contentment, as he sat 
there. He compared that room, in his own mind, 
with the threadbare stateliness and discomfort of 
the marchesa's mhrn^ and the miserable napkin, 
with its coffee-pot and cup, he had seen one morn- 
ing, wh^i admitted to her at an earlier hour than 
usual. Perhaps English respectability had never 
worn 80 captivating an aspect to him before. 

In an arm-chair near the wood fire, which 
burnt cheerfully on great brass dogs upon the 
hearthstone, sat Mr. Courteney, engaged in grave 
^ discussion with the professor. He was evidently 
a man of no mean literary attainments ; spoke 
little, but occasionally brought his learning well 
to bear upon the questions under consideration; 
and though he carried no snuff-box himself, never 
refused a pinch from the professor's. The latter 
regarded him, in consequence, as the most en- 
lightened Englishman he had met With him he 
could argue, and quote, and contradict himself . 
as all lovers of argument do. night after night, to 
his heart's content, and at perfect ease, over that 
comfortable fire. The two men suited each other. 



CAS A LAMBEBTL 141 

The Italian's expansive temperament fitted into the 
dry receptive character of the Englishman ; and 
Mrs. Courteney, wbo so seldom saw her husband 
take an interest in conversation^ encouraged Graro- 
falo's evening visits, assuring him that they were 
an act of charity to the sick man. Thus they had 
come at last to be almost a matter of course. 

Upon this occasion his younger companion, 
Guide Lamberti, had accompanied the professor. 
His appearance there, as I have abeady said, 
was now much less frequent than it bad been; 
and unless he talked upon other occasions more 
than he did this evening, he could hardly be 
considered to add much to the hilarity of the 
party. A finer, but gloomier figure, as he stands 
there in the shadow of the far end of the room, 
near the piano, his arms folded, his eyes fixed 
intently on that shining tea-table, it would be 
difficult to see. At the piano is seated Sara 
Gisbome, her fingers wandering vaguely over 
the keys, with fragments of some well-known air 
now and then, like the confused images in a 
dream. She is not actually playing or singing 



142 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

cither^ though oecasionallj a few low oontralto 
notes maj be heard: I rather think she is wait- 
ing to be a^ed. Bat if she is waiting for Connt 
Lambert!^ Ae may sit there for ever, like another 
Saint Gecilial Wood and stone are- not less con- 
scious than he of the dark-veiled lids and. faint- 
flushed cheeky the quivering lip, and heaving 
bosom, so close beside him. And jet she looks 
positivelj handsome by candle-light in her white 
dress, nor wholly unlike one of those figures of 
sensual Creole grace which Yidal loves to paint. 

Mrs* Conrteney's delicately beautiful profile, 
with a black lace handkerchief tied loosely under 
her chin, is bent over her tea-tabla She is listen- 
ing to Carr as he sits opposite, discoursing about 
art, while her daughter occu^es a low stool at her 
feet The rays of the lamp fall on Geraldine 
Gourteney's fair head, as her fingers ply rapidly at 
the long brown straws she is plaiting. Occa- 
sionally she looks up with a laugh or a radiant 
look of intdligence, but her observations and 
replies do not generally interrupt the task she has 
in hand. Weave away; young girl, with bright 






CASA LAMBEBTL 143 

and hopeful spirit, while thoa canst! That other 
weaver Fate has honrs in store for thee not far 
distant, wh^i thoa shalt look back wist&Uy to this 
tranquil past I 

Are you in any profession^ Mr. Carr ? " 
Unfortunately nof 

Why are yon not an artist, as you seem so 
fond of painting?'' 

^ Between the amateur and the artist there is a 
great gulf fixed, which should never be crossed 
rashly. Perhaps I haven't saScient talent, and 
certainly not sufiBcient energy, to give myself up 
to hard study; and wi&out it no man can really 
be an arti$t . ^though, like the first cousin to Lady 
Jones, it may be inscribed on his tomb, that he 
'painted in water-colours and of such are the 
Kingdom of Heaven.'" 

Miss Cburteney laughed, and then said quickly : 
'' Well, if I were yon, I would sooner {dead the 
want of talent than the want of energy. The one 
yoa can't help, and the other you can, Mr. Carr." 

^ Tme," relied Cair (not without some slight 
prickings of conscience). '' True ; but there is such 



144 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 

a thlog as misdirected energy, ending where it 
began, in self-delnsions ! There is nothing more 
melancholy than a man in porsnit of something 
which he can never attain." 

" Yes. Do you know I think there is ic. a man 
in pursuit of nothing. I should so like to do 
wmedivng if I were a man. I beg your pardon: 
I hope Fm not rude; but I daresay I talk a 
great deal of nonsense ; only you said * unfortu- 
nately ' you were in no profession." 

'^ And I repeat it. Miss C!ourteney ; but, some- 
how or other, circumstances have been adverse to 
it One day, however, I shall have plenty to 
do as an English country gentleman, and till 
then ^" 

<' An English country gentleman ! Do describe 
the life to me I Hunting the fox, and shooting 
bii^is, dressed in leather gaiters, and ^ 

'^ Birds dressed in leather gaiters?" laughed 
Carr. 

''Oh! you know what I mean . ^the men in 
leather gaiters, as you see in old engravings. And 
you always live in a fog, don't you ? " 



CASA LAMBEBTL 145 

Again Carr laughed* " From whom are your 
ideas of England imbibed? From Mrs. Cour- 
teney?** 

*^ No^" glancing np at her mother. '' Mamma 
never will talk about England to me ; so all my 
ideas are taken from Corinne, and other books I 
have read ; and I am so much obliged to any one 

who will tell me about the dear old country which 

 

I have a strong affection for^ though I have never 
seen. How I ahouli like to go there ! " 

A shade passed over her mother's face. 

" Are you not contented where you are, Gilda?" 

** Why, darling mother, of course! You know 
how fond I am of Italy, and that no other country 
can be the same as this to me, who have grown 
up under its clear blue sky! But that doesn't 
prevent my having a great curiosity and desire 
to visit our own land, of which I have read so 
much*" 

*' Have you ever travelled in any other coun- 
tries? Do you know Germany?" asked Carr, 
curious to know as much as possible of her past 
life. 

VOL. I. 10 



146 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

" Yes. I am afraid I don^t appreciate Gennany 
as I ought To begin ynHiy of poone I'm too 
Italian to like Aostrians. The very sight of a 
white coat makes me cross. And^ besides^ all 
Germans seem to me bo cold and phlegmatic" 

*'I see yon are as prejadieed .as Mary Asfa-> 
bnrton in Hi/perion; and I feel inclined, like 
Hemming, to say that it is becanse yon do not 
know them . ^the Germans I mean." 

'^ If anything conld make rae like ibem, it 
would be Stfpericm, which throws audi a veil of 
poetry over Germany and eyerything belonging 
to it What a charming book that is! I like it 
better even than Longfellow'B poetry. Bnt will 
yon tell me, Mr. Garr, if yon can, what I never 
yet have been able to get anyone to explain to me 
. ^19% it iscalled jBypmoR?" 

''WdU let me sea Something to do with 
heaven and earth. I have a sort of confused idea, 
which is difficult to put into wcffds. But* on the 
whole, I am inclined to think Longfellow was 
influenced in his choice of a name by Ihe example 
of Richter, with whose writings he was evidently 



CA8A XAHBEBTL 147 

imbued at the time^ and whose Tikm bears as 
madi relation to its name as Hyperion does.** 

"That doesn't quite satisfy me," said Gilda, 
shaking her head. 

" It is the best reason I hare to give. Bnt you 
know it is a ishion in the present day for the 
titles of books to afford yon little or no due to the 
contents. The honest old Travels in Hie East, or 
Traveb in Spairiy have given place to Edihens and 
GaspadioSf and heaven kndws what other out- 
landish names^ which convey no idea whatever 
to an unlettered Englidunan in search of infor- 
mation. Then^ as to the ^ Pendllings/ and 
'Pen-and-Iidc-ings/ and the 'Hambles' and 
'Scrambles' " 

"Let me stop you in time^ Mr. Carr,** cried 
Gilda. "YotL don't know that papa wrote a 
book called Cities of SieUyf In case you should 
be going to abuse ihat sort of title^ it is as well 
to let you know. But the book is not misnamed : 
it does describe these cities^ and nothing else. 

^ I never met with it Was it published with 
Mr. Courteney's name ? " 

10.2 



148 CABB OF CABELTOK. 

"No. oh I no,** intermpted Mrs. Conrt^iey, 
hurriedly. *'It was written many years ago . 
when you must have been a boy . ^and it ap- 
peared . ^anonymously." Apparently some painful 
recollections were associated with the subject, for 
with the manner of one who would abruptly 
alter or cut short the channel of conversation, 
she turned towards the piano, and said, ''My 
dear Sara, be kind enough to play us some> 
thing.** 

*' What shall it be, ma*am ? ** 

The young woman looked up from the roll of 
music she was, to all appearance, listlessly turning 
oyer, . ^though not a word at the farther end of 
the room had escaped her . and fixed her large 
eyes on Mrs. Courteney. 

" Anything. That sweet, plaintive air I am so 
fond of. I forget the name of it** 

''It is called 'Remorse,*** replied Sara> in her 
peculiarly low, distinct voice. 

As Mrs. Courteney bent forwards to fill the 
tearcnps before her, Carr was surprised to observe 
how her hand trembled. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 149 

The mnsic was well named It was one of 
those subtle compositions in which the mournful 
theme which pervaded it gained power and in- 
tensity as it stole along, from a felicitous pro- 
gression of harmonies . the bone and muscle, as 
it were, whereon the melod j was built : and the 
ear probed and dissected it, and returned again 
untired, with fresh wonder and delight, though, 
it maj be, not unmixed with sadness to sensitive 
natures. 

"Confess, now," said Carr, turning to Gilda, 
"that could only be a German composition . so 
admirably thought out . so full and satisfactory. 
Tour Italians never write like thai How capi- 
tally Miss Gisbome plays I" 

" She does ; but the piece makes me sad. It 
is like the cry of a soul . despairing and almost 
without hope . ^that minor ending." 

^^ Repentance would end in a major . ^that is 
the distinction, I suppose," said Garr. 

But further discussion was stopped, for the fair 
musician had already finished an improvised pre- 
lude to one of Gordigiani's most spirited songs. 



loO CABB O^ CAB&LYON. 

and now burst forth, in a rich contrdio, with the 
isapaBabned wordfl, . 



*' IT i ttato detto cbe ta moi partire; 
Per qiiaato pOHO, tn non devi andare. 



f 



It was dl5calt to belieye that the singer was not 
aa Italian, so pure was the enunciation, so sponta- 
neous the rapid utterance of that melodious 
Tuscan. The energy with which the girl sang 
it showed that she was either a consummate 
artist, capable of throwing herself into anj part, 
or that the general sentiment of these words 
found an echo in the secret chambers of her 
own heart Fierce and tender by turns; hoarse 
with tremulous passion in the words. 

** Bammi la xxiano, oppnr prendi on oolteUo;" 

the flood-gates of her voice burst forth with 
thrilling edect when she added . 

*' .... manoam'abbandonare!" 

The singer's countenance was lit up with that 
strong flame of ezcitcanent, or ^^ inspiration,^ as 
it has become a fashion to call it, which commu- 



CAS A LAMBERTi. 151 

nicates itself^ In greater or leas degree^ to every 
listener. At the dose of the sang, there was 
general applame from the small audience^ led 
hy the professor and Ghiido, in right of their 
nationality, 

''Biara, signorinal" said the latter. ''Snch 
singing as yours is enough to roose the hearts 
of a people to do great diingB. Yon would lead 
an araoy to batde with on * Lmo di Guerra ' better 
than some generals I conld name." 

Sara's cheek glowed fidntly^ and a smile 
hovered over her lips, as she ran her fingers 
lightly down the keys. 

''No German coold have written that song, 
Mr. Garr," said Miss Conrteney, smiling. ** Con- 
fessy now," she added, imitating his own phrase, 
*' that could only be an Italian composition I " 

Lsnrence shrugged his shoulders. '' It is the 
' rendering,' as newspapers call it, which makes the 
song. That young l^dy is uncommonly clever." 
Then leaning over towards Mrs. Courteney, 
he oxitinaed, in a lower tone, while Sara Gis- 
ly>me kept up an under^^urrent of accompaniment 



152 CARR OF CARRLTON. 

at the piano^ " Is she purely English? Has she 
no Italian blood in her veins ? " 

" None, I believe," 

.'What is her history? Where has she been 
educated ? " 

Carr was not accustomed to exercise much 
restraint upon his curiosity, and sometimes asked 
rather inconvenient questions^ out of the fulness of 
his heart Mrs. Courteney paused ere she replied, 
and then did so with some hesitation. 

''As to her education, I really do not know 

much. Her mother was a French Creole, I 

believe, and Sara was bom in the West Indies. 

So much I have learnt from her. We met her 

first in Florence, last year, when she was in a 
 
very desolate' position, poor girL An English 

lady with whom she had been living, and who, 

it was thought, had adopted her, died, leaving 

Sara perfectly destitute ; and the lady's relations 

would do nothing for her. She was going out 

as a governess, or lady's maid, when Courteney 

heard of her case through our doctor, and thought 

she might be a useful companion to Gilda, who 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 153 

has seldom had any of her own age. I found 
her very clever: she taught my daughter a great 
deal she never knew before, and was contented to 
accept our secluded life for the sake of a home 
and protection ; so she has remdned with us ever 
since. I mention all this, Mr. Carr, because she 
is rather a peculiar young person, and her manners 
are, perhaps; not exactly such as you are accus- 
tomed to ; but you must be lenient to them. She 
has never had a mother's care, and has been 
thrown about the world, and had a troublous 
life of it until she came to us. We all form 
hasty judgments in this world, and without know- 
ing something of her p^st life, poor Sara must be 
misunderstood, I know." 

" You have given me an interest in Miss Gis- 
bome I confess I did not feel before. She is too 
clever . apparently too well able to take care of 
herself, for " 

" No, no. not that," said Mrs. Courteney, 
shaking her head. '' She is impulsive and pas- 
sionate, and these qualities are not good for self- 
defence, though they may tend to make a singer 



134 CABB OF CABHLYON. 

Poor child!" she added^ in a yet lower voice; 
^I fear she has plenty of trouble in store, but 
as long as she likes it, she shall remain witkns ; 
I will never turn her adrifL*' 
^ She has qualities which eminently fit her or 

. 

the stage, I should think." 

''Heaven forbid that die should become an 
actress I To one of Sara's character it would be 
a dangerous career." 

Miss Gisbome had risen from the piano and 
approached the teartable. 

'' Sara, do sing one of Pergolesrs beautiful old 
airs," said Miss Courtoiey, ''just as a contrast to 
that Tuscan canzone, and to show what music 
Italians can make in another line." 

The young lady thus addressed turned with- 
out reply, and as she passed where Count 
Guido stood, said, with rather a sarcastic 
smile . 

"You have no taste for church music, I be- 
lieve?" 

"Pardon me," he replied. "For real church 
music I have the greatest admiration ; for the 



GASA LAMBESTL 135 

opera pot-^uris th^ plaj in our clmrches, the 
profoundest disgust and contempt" 

'' Thej do not always play that sort of moaic/' 
said Miss Conrteney^ quietly. '^At the resper 
seryice at San Martino there is sometimes rery 
touching and beautiful music. One eveanag, the 
eSkct it produGed on me I shall neyer forget" 

" Nor I," said Carr, but in so low a Toice that 
no one but Miss Courteney oould have heard him; 
and she looked up simply into his face^ as not 
understanding his words. Guido continued : 

" You are more fortunate than I am, signorina. 
The last time I took my mother to high mass, 
we were invited to pray to a chorus in Robert 
U DuMe, and we came away to die galop in 
Guitave. They treat us like children; our ears 
must be tickled ; and the fine services of Pales- 
trina, Simonelli, and other of the old masters, 
are thrown aside as cumbersome and dull, in order 
to pander to the vulgar taste of our priests." 

^' Ut populuB dc sacerdos/* mnttered Mr. Cour- 
teney. 

''Ton have few pr^udices in thdr fitvour, I 



156 CABB OF CAHRLYOK. 

know," sneered Sara. " Do you ever confess, 
signor conte?" 

Gnido looked at her with some surprise. 

" Never.** 

''It must be a comfortable thing," she said, 
dropping her voice, '' to get rid of one's sins in 
a lump. Thej tell me it answers perfectly, and 
I am half tempted to try." 

The young Italian remained grave and silent, 
as though he heard not; leaning with folded arms 
against the wall, while Sara seated herself once 
more at the instrument 

The music of Pergolesi showed the resources 
of her fine voice more than the little Tuscan air 
had done : she sang the melody of the grand old 
master with severe simplicity, and yet . it would 
have been difficult to say why . her singing now 
produced no effect upon her audience. Whether 
she was indeed incapable of raising herself to the 
level of such elevated music as this, or that fix>m 
some accidental circumstance her head was dis- 
turbed by other thoughts which jarred with the 
tender solemnity of the words she had to utter. 



CASA LAMBEETL 157 

certain it is that the performance seemed cold and 

lifeless. The professor, it is true, murmured an 

appropriate quotation at the .fire-place about 

the 

** F!(i dolce canxone e piii profimda,*' 

but no electric fluid of sympathy ran round the 
small audience. As Sara was not pressed to sing 
again, she rose and went to the farther end of the 
room, where she sat sflent over some embroidery 
for the renuunder of the evening. Guide was 
gone; and with him her restlessness and irrita- 
tion seemed also to have departed. The sharp 
ear and vigilant eye lost nothing at the tea-table, 
but all outwardly was subdued and tranquil. 

Laurence Carr returned home that evening . 
the first spent in the &miliar intercourse of home 
life in this family . ^with deeply-heightened interest 
and admiration. He had enough of the romantic 
temperament to feel the charm of such a strange 
unconventional existence as Geraldine Courteney's 
appeared to be, and to contrast it favourably 
with the turmoils of a fashionable life. There 
was a peculiarity in h^r position which fascinated 



158 CABB OF GABBLTON. 

his imagination. She had seen nothing of ihe 
worlds . ^accq^ting the term fo mean socie^jr* . 
though the greater part of her short life had been 
spent in moving firom one foreign land to another; 
and the bond of love uniting father and mother 
and daughter had grown^no doubts all the stronger 
by reason ^of this isolation from society. The 
picture of that bright young girl seated at her 
mother's feet, and looking up, ever and anon, 
wistfully into the tender, melancholy eyea bent 
oyer her, was continually present to the yom^ 
man's mind as he walked home. 

His fastidious taste was not disappointed. Na 
For the first time in his life an HhBion seemed 
in a fair way of realization. All he saw her 
do, all he heard her say . end he watched with 
keen and critical attention . satisfied him. It was 
a pure crystal nature, through whidi he saw 
bright and many-coloured gems below. Would 
they turn out mere comm<m pebbles? Ay] 
there was the question. From which ihe reader 
will rightly infer that Carr waa by no means over 
head and ears in love as yet 



CASA LAMBERTL 159 

Nerertbeless, it was With feellogs of consider- 
able annoyance that he read a passage . in his 
mother's letter^ which he found Ijing on his 
table when he retomed home that night Ladj 
Carrlyon^ at the end of four pages of fiishionable 
goaup, in which she detailed all the guests who 
Jiad been staying at Carrlyon, with the on-^its 
abont Lady So-andHSK> and of Lord So-and-so's 
in&mons will, interlarded with some account of 
her own schools and of her quarrel with the 
ocEbns Low-cbnrch rectcv about that piece of 
land, . ^at the end of all this, I say, after some 
comments on Carr's enthusiastic descriptions of 
Bologna, her ladyship wrote thus: . ^^'You ask 
me whether I know anything of pome people of 
llie name of Conrteney. Certainly not. They 
can't be any relation of Lord D.'s . ^name not 
spdt the right way. Probably some vulgar 
people who have managed to get into sociefy 
abroad, and whom nobody knows in England. 
Let me beg you, my dear boy, whatever you do, 
not to get mixed up with any of our own country 
people, if you can help it. chance acquaintances. 



160 CARR OF CABBLYON. 

I meaiij of course. Foreigners, it doesn't signify, 
you know . ^need not know them afterwards. Bat 
with English, it is so very awkward having to 
cut them when you meet again. I remember 

N 

once about a fever I had, and a woman in the 
same hotel who came and nursed me. oh I stich 
a woman, with the most awful brogue . ^it was at, 
Cologne . and it was so unpleasant afterwards . 
of course I could not know her in Paris. So, 
to return to these Courteneys, you will oblige me, 
whatever low company you go into among the 
Italians, not to mix with any of these vulgar sort 
of English people." 

However involved her ladyship's parts of speech 
might be, there could be no doubt as to her 
meaning and its worldly wisdom. Her dutiftil 
son crushed the letter in his hand, with some 
polite expression which it was just as well that 
Lady Carrlyon did not overhear. 



n 



CAS A LAMBEKTI. 161 



CHAPTER IX. 
A FORTNI0HT elapsed, and Laurence was with his 

4 

new friends daily. Out of gratitude for her 
kindly reception of him, he went once or twice 
to the marchesa's bol ; but he declared to himself 
that he was bored by the ceaseless clatter of 
Italian voices there, and contrasted the evenings 
spent thus most unfavourably with those passed 
at the Casa LambertL He had not actually a. 
general invitation to the latter, but under some 
pretext or other contrived to call there every 
afternoon, and was often asked to stay and join 
the family tea-table. He lent Miss Courteney 
drawings, and brought her books of all kinds. 
He gave her lessons of an evening, moreover, on 
the sketches or copies that had been made during 
the day. The young girl entered enthusiastically 
VOL. I. 11 



162 CABB OF CARBLYON. 

into this new pursuit^ and enjoyed these evening 
lessons apparently as much he did. She always 
greeted his arrival with a 'bright smQe. He was 
the first young Englishman she had known^ and she 
found him so pleasant and amusing I He brought 
a fund of new life from the outer world into that 
little circle. Carr watched her and Guido very 
narrowly, but there was nothing to lead him to 
suppose that the Italian was more than a very 
intimate amico di eaaa, to use the phrase he heard 
so frequently. The girl had evidently a great 
deference for his opinion : broke off in the middle 
of what she was saying to listen to him if he 
spoke, and never attempted to contradict him as 
she did Carr. But Guido was generally silent: 
sometimes even abstracted, and this seemed to 
be growing on him; while, on the other hand, 
Carr was always agreeable, and with him Miss 
Courteney laughed and talked unrestrainedly. 
Carr was very anxious that his rank and fortmie 
should not transpire. He had seen too much of 
the world, not to be aware that all his agreeability 
and accomplishment were as a feather to a ton 



CASA LAMBEBTL 163 

when weighed with those sabstantial advantages 
in society's scale. Though he did not think the 
Coorteneys woold be much inflaenced thos^ he 
was determined to posh his way on to their 
intimacy as an unknown man . mnch as the 
3ddjar> haying fought his own way to the breach, 
deprecates the friendly hand that would help him 
over. His instructions to Giuseppe were rigorous 
. ^not to mention his master's fiunily and position 
to any of the servants at the Casa Lamberti. 
Gnido and Gtux>faIo only knew him as '^ Signer 
Carr." I strongly suspect^ however, that Miss 
Gisbome, at a very early period, found ways and 
means to ascertain the young Englishman's rank 
and prospects. 

And what of Mr* Courteney? How did he 
regard Laurence? It was difficult to say. That 
he sanctioned his constant visits there could be 
no doubt: but whether from policy, inclination, 
or indifference, the closest observer . that same 
mythical character I have already cited . could 
not have told. A man of few words, self- 
contained in his sorrows or his aversions, ap* 

11.2 



164 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

parently never expansive with either v?ife or 
child; wrapping the untold secrets of his heart 
in a frigid case of polite studies^ classical research, 
Etruscan antiquarianism, and so fordi, he crawled 
from the fireside to the garden, with his volume 
of Plinj or Tacitas, and seemed to. set his books 
and his infirmities as a fence round him rom 
too close contact with the outer world. He 

4 

seldom joined in general conversation: a word 
or two aptly dropped sometimes illuminated a 
whole field of discussion, and a dry, thin smile 
flitted across those bloodless features now and 
then. If Carr applied to him for any informa- 
tion, he gave it with lucidity and precision; 
and, once or twice, the young man had more 
lengthened arguments with him on abstract sub- 
jects; but, generally spectking, the only person 
he could be said to converse with was the 
professor. 

M.\3s Gisbome's strangely capricious humours 
puzzled Carr a good deal Towards himself her 
manner had latterly undergone a marked change. 
Tlie cat-like suspicion with which she had at 



n 



C ASA . LAMBERTL 165 

first regarded him had departed. She even 
allowed him to discover, when chance threw 
them immediatelj together, that she conid talk 
on most subjects with point and facility. But 
she still habitually remained silent, unless when 
Guide Lambert! was present She then, more 
than once, startled Carr by the vehemence with 
which she threw herself into some discussion 
that was going forward, terminating in glimpses 
of almost ungovernable ill-humour. At. first 
sight, it appeared as if she purposely displayed 
her worst side whenever she was in the Italian's 
company ; but one versed in human nature 
might have otherwise interpreted the nervous 
irritability, the impetuous utterance, the restless 
glances, fierce, or bold, or tearfol, which the 
girl directed towards Lamberti. 

But a change had been coming over him, tooy 
these last few days: a slight one, perhaps, but 
still very perceptible to the person most con- 
cerned. Each evening that he had passed latterly 
with the Courteneys he had seated himself by 
Sara, turning his face resolutely away from the 



166 CAHR OF CARRLYON. 

group at the drawing-table.' He could not bear 
to look at them, and he had not the courage to 
remain awaj altogether. Yet what right had he 
to dispute that place beside her? None. But 
though he hdd himself aloof, though he scarcelj 
addressed her in the course of the evening, he 
could listen to her merry laugh, and hear her 
naive remarks, even while appearing to talk to 
the girl beside him. The god who is said to be 
blind may have deceived for awhile even so keen* 
sighted a victim as Sara GKsbome . who knows? 
Carr, who was too much engrossed with his own 
affairs to watch the barometer of the Creole's 
temper very attentively, observed with surprise 

her softened voice and subdued manner one 

* 
evening. 

'^That girl is the queerest compound I ever 
met ! " he mentally ejaculated. 

There was a certain villa of Prince Ortolani's 
*liear Bologna, to which the public was not 
admitted, and of which, in consequence, rumour 
gave the most fabulous account Babykm and 
Armida did their usual good service, of course. 



GASA LAMBfSTL 167 

in the deacriptions of its wonders. Carr had not 
mock curiosity himself on the subject, bat it 
was an object for a pleasant drive with the 
Courteneys^ and he obtained a card of admission 
without difficulty^ through the mardiesa. It 
happened that Razsd was present; when Madame 
Onofirio gave him the ticket of admission^ which 
was good for one day only in the week. 

" Can you not introduce me to these country- 
peo{de of yours. Signer Caxr?" asked the Italian, 
drawing him aside, 

*^ Impossible, my dear count. I've had all the 
trouble in the world to know them myself. The 
old geBtlem,an is a monomaniac on the subject of 
society.'* 

'^Bot the dark signorina, eh? You English 
allow your young ladies a freedom we don't un- 
derstand here. Can't you introduce me to A^r ? " 

Carr laughed, and assured him it was as much 
as his place was worth to present a stranger to any 
member of the Courteney household : and there 
the matter dropped* 

The day specified on the card was cold, hvi 



168 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

fine^ and soon after one Carr drove up to the Casa 
Lamberti. He was disappointed beyond measure 
to find that Miss Courteney was not going. She 
had a slight cold^ her mother sdd^ caught while 
sitting out to sketch the day before ; '' and as she 
is not very strong," added Mrs. Courteney, " we 
are obliged to be careful. Walking about on 
marble floors, and standing in damp gardens, at 
this time of year, is not very prudent for any one, 
I believe ; but Courteney seems inclined to go, so 
we will not put it off on Gilda's account" 

There was nothing to be said. He could not 
put off the expedition if they chose to go ; but he 
was annoyed, and the prospect of a long afternoon 
without his one attraction looked dismaL 

Miss Gisbome sat beside him in the carriage, 
and opposite was Mr. Courteney. Carr had never 
talked so much with that gentleman before, and 
though he did not feel that he knew him any 
better, or liked him any more at the end of that 
long drive, he could not but own that it was rare 
to find a man whose conversation betrayed a 
deeper knowledge of men, and who managed to 



CASA LAMBJBRXL 169 

say so much in so few words. It was curious, 
however, to observe how he glanced aside rom 
any subject which should lead him to speak of 
England. The East and West Indies, the prairies 
of North and South America, the most remote 
parts of Europe, he seemed' familiar with them all; 
bat one might almost imagine that he had never 
seen the white cliffs of his native land. On the 
other hand, he drew a great deal from Laurence, 
who, except on the subject of his family and 
social prospects, spoke unreservedly enough : and 
without any '^ pumping" Mr. Courteney found the 
expression of the young man's principles and 
opinions flow pretty freely. This was probably 
what he wanted ; and he exerted himself to talk . 
knowing that in no part of the human frame is 
there more sympathy than in the tongue, 

The^ villa, when they readied it, proved to be 
very much what Mr. Courteney had predicted . a 
monument of costly bad taste. It was built in 
the disastrous style of the last century: broken 
pediments, garlanded with flowers, and niches 
filled by pupils of Bernini with statues in a 



170 CABB OF CABKLTON. 

whirlwind of stxHie drapery. The gardens had 
'exhausted the ingemdtj of tuccessiye princes U> 
devise new manstrosities : Chinese pagodas and 
Swiss ch&lets; artificial cascades over painted 
rocks (^ a spot worthy of Salvator Rosa," as the 
guide said), and inutatioii trees squirting water 
oyer the .unsuspecting visitor; gigantic piles of 
shell and concrete, with a stnflfed tiger conduuDt 
in the midst These and similar delights weore 
characteristic of tho depraved taste now so 
common, alas I among a people once conspicaons 
for their refinement 

Mr. Courteney and his wife remained in the 
orcmgerief while Sara and Laorence set out 
to walk round the extensive gardens. Mr. 
Gourteney took a volume out of his poeket and 
began reading. Presently he laid it down, and, 
turning to his wife, said . 

^' Lamherti comes to us much less than he did." 

*' Yes," replied Mrs. Gourteney. " I can't help 
thinking his mother objects to hb being so much 
with us." 

** The counter-attraction is not as strong, then. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 171 

as you 0Qce thotight it night be?" said the 
invalid, with a somewhat sarcastic smile. 

^No: I suppose not; and perhaps, Henry, 
it is better so. One gets to see these things 
diffarenflj." 

*^ Your opinions have undergone a marvellously 
rapid change. It is not so very long 3ince you 
tdid me you would not desire a better husband for 
Qilda.^ 

^Kor could L I have a real love and respect 
for him, and think his is a rare character; but 
unless the child cared very deeply for him, I doubt 
whether she would be happy. It would be a most 
unquiet existence. She would be persecuted by 
the old lady to become a Catiholic, and Guide's 
strong political feelings are sure to lead him into 
troubled waters. I had rather our darling's future 
were a peaceful one, if possible.'' 

''Peace cometh not from without,'' muttered 
the sick man. .... '' But all this you knew 
months ago. I repeat, your opinions have 
changed very rapidly." 

** GKlda has seen nothing of the world," said 



172 CAfiB OF CABRLTON. 

Mrs. Courteney, evasively. "Latterly I hare 
thought that perhaps she would be happier 
married to an Englishman^ and leading a quiet 
EngUsh life.** 

There was a twinkle in Mr. Conrteney's eye as 
he said . 

" I thoyght 80. Ton have looked, then, at the 
probable consequence of letting this man into the 
house? He isn't likely to &11 very desperately in 
love. It is a yearly epidemic with that kind of 
man : but supposing she bums her fingers ? " 

" I don't think there's much danger at present. 
He is very agreeable, and unlike the few people 
she has ever had an opportunity of meeting ; and 
I candidly confess that I shall be very glad if she 
does like him, and he likes her; but she is so 
simple and child-like still, that I really think no 
idea of love has yet crossed her mind." 

Mr. Courteney raised his eyebrows for all 
reply. 

He took the Tacitus from his pockety and read 
on for the next hour without another word. 

" On this spot," said the custode to Carr, as they 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 173 

reached a dark comer near a fish-pond^ " the late 
prince's brother committed suicide. He was in 
love, and rejected by the lady's family^ so he blew 
out his brains. Povero Principe I " 

''It seems to be regarded as an interesting 
feature in the place^" said Carr. '' Look at this 
tablet with an inflated tribute to the virtues of the 
deceased. ' AI egregio ed eccellente Principe I ' 
Well ! we may find sermons in stones here^ if not 
good in eyerything. To laud a man who has been 
guilty of that final act of moral cowardice " 

" Poor wretch I " murmured Sara^ with a 
shudder. ''He must have suffered much; he 
must have been hopeless ; but he was not a man^ 
or he would have overcome every obstacle. Will 
is fate ; don't you believe that, Mr. Carr?" 

" Have you found it so ? " he asked quietly, in 
reply. 

" I am a woman. We come under stronger in- 
fluences than our own, which paralyze us at times." 

"Do you mean seriously to say you think that 
a man endowed with powerftd will can do what 
he pleases ? " 



174 CABR OF CABBLXON. 

" It depends on what it is he pleases, and the 

strong will maj always gain; We, too, in nine 
cases out of ten. It will draw towards itself, wilb 
mesmeric power, even hearts that have snocnmbed 
already to some foolish passion. Yes, yes 1 " she 
added rapidly, ^' all this a strong will can accom- 
plishl" 

A tarn in the shmbbery brought them across a 
gentleman, who smiled and took off his hat to 
Carr, and stared fixedly at his companion. 

 Who is that ?" asked Sara, abruptly. 

" Count Giolio BazzL Why do you ask ? ** 

'^Because I see him constantly when we are 
out Is he a Bolognese ? " 

" I believe so . a very old family, but poor, like 
most of them*'* 

"Ah!" 

" None of the young men here seem to do any- 
thing to try and gain an honest livelihood : they, 
at least, have no strong will ! and how they marry 
and support families I can't imagine, while their 
coffers remain empty..'* ' 



CASiL LAMBEBTL 175 



. 



As empty as their heads.. But they look to 
their wives to snpply the former ; the latter even 
a dowry cannot do. So this county then, has 
nothing bat his ancient title to recommend him I 
What is ihe marketable value of that, do you 
think?^ 

*'I cannot say," answered Carr, in the same 
tone of sarcasm, but the hidden meaning of his 
words was not lost upon his listener. *^ The 
object of the purchaser, the amount of ' alarming 
sacrifice ' she was willing to make, would probably 
determine the real value of the possession to her. 
But I should recommend no ooe to effect the 
purchase, without duly considering how the 
article is likdy to wear." 

Sara seemed hardly to hear him ; she was lost 
in a train of thought not the most agreeable, to 
judge by her &ce; and soon after broke into 
another subject in her usual abrupt way. 

An hour afterwards they were standing in one 
of the polished marble salocms of the villa, which 
they had left until the last, and Mr. and Mrs* 
Courteney were now with them. The walls were 



176 CARR OF CABRLTON. 

lined with statuary ; mostly rubbishy but amongst 
which Mr. Gmrteney's critical eye detected a 
remarkably beautiful female bust, under which 
was written '* Mes'salina." 

** Probably so christened," said Mr. Courteney, 
" on account of the strong animal character of the 
whole head, admirably modelled as it is. Evi- 
dently a bust from life, whoever the original was. 
Look at the phrenological development! It is 
curious how the ancients, while ignorant of the 
science, illustrated it perfectly, not only in their 
carefal reproduction of living types in marble, but 
in their conceptions of their deities, each the per- 
sonification of some onenrice or virtue.'' 

" But phrenologists seem to me mistaken very 
oflen," said Carr ; ''just because nobody living is 
the personification of any one thing, but a jumble 
of contradictory ones. As to this Roman empress, 
I never can help pitying her. She lived too long 
ago to have her character 'rehabilitated,' as is 
the fashion in the present day, with estimable 
characters like Richard the Third ; or she might 
have been proved to be a model of domestic 



CASA LAMBEBTL 177 

Tirtae, instead of remaining a peg to hang infamy 
upon through all time I " 

''All vice may be said to be disease, and' such 
a course as this woman's was so, no doubt ; and 
in that case more deserving philosophic compari- 
son than reprehension,'' said Mr. Courtenej, sen- 
tentiouslj. 

"No, no," murmured his wife, in a low voice ; 
'' we maj all say our sins are diseases we inherit 
We must not attempt to cast, away the responsi- 
bQity of them thus. No I " she added, with a deep 
sigh, " we were born with our eyes open, knowing 
the evil and the good I " 

''And prone to follow the former, I believe, 
ma'am," said Sara, smiling. " I daresay, after all, 
Messalina wasn't worse than half the women who 
pass for paragons of virtue. As to the men, I sup- 
pose there's a separate code of morals for them in 
the kingdom of Heaven, as there is here.. For 
women, all the law and the ptophets is contained 
in one commandment . ' Thou shalt not be found 
out''' 

Mrs. Courteoey looked pained, as she naturally 

VOL. I. 12 



178 CABB OF CABHLTON. 

mighty at hearing libe girl's strange speech; bat 
Mr. Courteney flushed in a maimer very tmnsaal 
with him, and his voice had an angry, tremuloas 
sharpness when he spoke, nnlike its nsually cold, 
measpored cadence. 

'^ Let me recommend yon, yonng lady, as yon 
value your advancement in life, to be careful not to 
make too free a display of yonr copious informa- 
tion, and to be circumspect in the choice of sub- 
jects on which to exercise your wit" 

A look shot from the girl's eyes which Oarr 
did not easily forget, but she smiled and tumed 
away; and the sick man, as though ashamed to 
have been surprised out of his ordinary icy self, 
never uttered again till they reached home. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 179 



CHAPTER X. 



..^^ 



About a week later, Mr. Courtenej had ^ome 
conversation with his wife, which we need not 
detail here, as the results of it will be tolerably 
apparent presently. Suffice it to say that he had 
been ill for some days. 

With what eyes the different inmates of the 
Casa Lamberti beheld the growing Intimacy with 
the young Englishman with the Courteney family, 
we shall also soon see. 

" Guide scarcely ever comes near us now," said 
Mrs. Courteney to her daughter, as they sat at 
work together in the mother's room. 

'^ Do you know, mother, I fancy somehow that 
he . ^he doesn't like Mr. Carr. It's very odd, for 
I think Mr. Carr so pleasant, and he's so very 
kind to me. We shall be dreadfully sorry when 

12. a 



180 CABB OF CARRI.YON. 

he goes awaj, sha'n't we ? But, if you observe^ 
Guido scarcely speaks to hiou It makes me quite 
uncomfortable to see them together I " 

*^ Tes, and I have also observed how amiably 
Mr. Carr has once or twice tried to draw Guide 
into conversation, but in vain.^ 

The mother watched her daughter's face atten- 
tively all this time. 

" We shall probably see him again at Florence 
or Pisa. He will, I dare say, follow us.** 

** Follow us ? What do you mean ? We are 
not gomg to leave Bologna, mother ? " 

'^ Tour father seems to think this place too cold. 
He is not sure either that it agrees with you. 
He talks of moving somewhere." 

The girl had dropped her work, and sat gazing 
with sad eyes before her. 

" And Guido ? " 

 Well, my daughter, what of him ? " 

There was a long pause. 

 Will he not follow us, too ? " 

" Nay, how can you expect it ? He is working 
hard here ; and though we are living in the same 



CASA LAMBERTI. 181 

hocise^ he can scarcely find time even to pay us a 
Tisit now once or twice a weeL" 

Gilda sighed. . 

"Why do you sigh, dear? Shall you be so 
very sorry to leave this ? '* 

" I shall never like any place so well. Dear 
old house I I shall never know how happy I have 
been here until it is all past I " 

Her mother looked puzzled; and it was now 
her turn to sigh. 

" My darling mustn't get sentimental. We 
women must learn to know our own hearts early 
. ^what it is we do most value. It comes too 
late^ by-and-by I Too late^ my darling ; and 
r^rets then are vain I " 

Her lips trembled as she kissed her daughter's 
forehead^ and rising, passed into the adjpining 
room, where her husband lay. 

An hour afterwards, Carr called. He found 
the two girls in the drawing-room, and soon 
perceived that there was a shadow over the brow 
of both. Gilda had just communicated to Sara 
the probability of their leaving Bologna. Unless 



182 CABR 07 CABBLYON. 

some dedsive measiires were taken^ tins would be 
destructive to all that joang lady's views. She 
said nothings but sat coiled up on the sofa, with 
eyes fixed on the pages of Nuxoh <fe' Lapi beire 
her^ though she read not a word therein^ and 
never altered h&t position when Carr entered. 
Gilda's depression showed itself^ of coarse, in a 
very different form. She smiled as she held out 
her hand, and talked very much as usual. Carr 
could do no more than silently observe the change 
in her usually buoyant spirits, and wonder at the 
cause; 

I should have described before the distribution 
of the Courteneys' apartments, and it is necessary 
I should do so here, to make what followed on 
this and subsequent occasions clear to the reader. 
The saloUo in which the family generally sat, and 
where Carr now found the two gbrls, communi- 
eated with Mrs. Courteney's room, by a door 
which generally stood open ; and looking through 
this door, you saw another opposite to it, which 
was always shut This led to Mr| Courteney's 
room, whieh was a cvHrde-sae. The ante-room 



CABA IiAHBBBTL 163 

on the other side of the scUottp conducted to the 
sola d% pranzOf to the large bed-room conjointly 
occupied by the two girls, and to the servants' 
apartments. From this ante-room also led the 
door which I hare elsewhere mentioned as con- 
necting the portion of the palace let to the 
Courteneys with the wing in which Guide and 
his mother lived. 

" I have brought you a tolerable copy I have 
had done^ by a poor artist here, of my favourite 
little Magdalene in the gallery, by Timoteo delle 
Yite. You said you did not rem^tnber it ? " 

'^No; and I am afraid my education is not 
sufficiently advanced yet to care for those hard 
early pictures as I ought You always tell me 
I like the wrong things,'' she added, with a smile. 

^ When are we to go to the gallery, that your 
education may be ccmtinued ? I have not had the 
pleasure of taking you there yet" 

^It must be some day soon." She felt re* 
hietant to talk about their departure : and it was 
as mnch to change the sul^ject as anything, that 
abe added." I don't think you have ever seen 



184 CARR OF CABRLYOK. 

a picture in my mother's room ? We call it her 
Madomia. |ify father picked it up many years 
ago^ and no one has ever decided who it is by. 
I think it more lovely than any Raphael I ever 
saw ; but very likely old associations have some- 
thing to do with it Whenever my mother is 
nervous, or out of spirits, I have seen the conso- 
lation this picture has been to her. She often 
sits for hours at a time looking at it^ 

She led the way into the adjoining room as 
she spoke, and drew the curtain of a small 
picture which stood in the comer, over a writing- 
table. The subject was that commonest of all 
with the old Italians . a Virgin and Child. It 
would seem hardly possible that this oft-repeated 
group can be otherwise than conventional. Yet 
the tmknown painter had thrown an expression 
into those two heads which stamped the picture 
as original The solemn love of the mother, 
impressed with the awful privilege of that 
maternity, yet watching with tender human gaze 
the divine child upon her knee, and clasping 
with her woman's hand that holy charge which 



GA8A ULMBEBTI. 185 

angels guarded . ^the far-seeiDg eyes of the infant, 
looking through yon, and beyond you, with 
pitying intensify, whereby the Divinity was mani- 
fested more nobly than by the glory roimd his 
head . these things indicated no ordinary painter, 
but one deeply imbued with the spirit of what 
he painted, and to whom his work had been a 
labour of pious love. Whatever its school, what- 
ever its technical defects, it was a picture which 
could not but affect the beholder who was capable 
of feeling its pure devotional spirit Beneath 
it was written, on a slip of paper, *' I came not 
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance," 

''It is a very remarkable picture," exclaimed 
Carr, after a pause ; '' and those words are a just 
commentary on the wonderful expression of the 
child-Chrisf s &ce. All the sermons in the world 
may be condensed in that one text" 

'' You. can understand what this picture is to 
my mother, then . ^this thought so full of love 
and compassion before her eyes, whenever she is 
suffering." 

**The painter, whoever he was, was hardly a 



186 CABB 07 CAflELTON. 

BomaiUBt in one sense* The majesty is all m 
the child : the mother is onlj a pure and tender 
woman . snch bbuos picture Mary of Galilee . ^not 
an object of worship^ as Rome makes her." 

He stood before it some minutes more, and 
then, as he was turning away, his eye fell on an 
old-fashioned brass-bound desk which stood on 
the table beneath. There was one noticeable 
thing abont this object^ which arrested Laurence 
Carr's attention. Upon the lid wa3 an ^igraved 
crest; and below it, pains had eyidently been 
taken to obliterate some name or motto which had 
once stood there. .Whaterer it was, it had been 
scratched finely over, and was now illegible. 
The crest represented a man with a key in his 
hand and a rope round his neck. Though 
apparently some effort had been made Id erase 
this also, the engraving was too deep, and the 
design was still deariy definable. 

^Is this strange device the Gourteney crest?" 
asked Carr. 

*' We have no crest My father will not cany 
armorial bearings. I don't know whose tliis is. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 187 

or whom the hox originallj belonged to. My 
mother..*' 

The door leading to Mr* Conrtenej'B room 
opened* 

** What are you doing there, my child?** 

It was Mrs. Coorteney's voice, and she crossed 
ihe room with a hasty step. She looked dis- 
ccMnpoaed. 

^ I brought Mr. Carr to look at your Madonna, 
mother ; and he was asking me the meaning 
of the crest on this box, and whom it belonged 
to." 

The trouble in the elder lady's &oe was her 
only reply. She moved away into the talctto, 
and sat down at the krther end. The shades 
of twilight were fast gathering ; and Garr could 
scarcely define more than her figure, as she sat 
with hands dasped upon her knees and her head 
bent over them* Gilda was so accustomed to 
see her mother lock anxious and harassed when 
she I^ Mr. Coorteney's room, that she paid but 
fittle attention to these facts. Her mother's life 
was one of constant watching, patience, and dis 



188 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

appointment. Mrs. Courteney's discomposure, 
however, was new to Carr, and struck hl^ ; but 
his cariosity was piqued, and he could not help 
retmning to the subject which had originally 
roused it. 

^^I am curiops in crests," he said, carelessly. 
^^ It seems to me that I have seen this, but cannot 
remember whether it is English or foreign. Do 
you happen to know the name of the family that 
bears it?" 

There was a pause. And then her voice came 
low and interrupted, like wind rustling through 
thin autumn leaves. '^ The family is called 
Caliston." 

*' Ah I I know all about it now . if my memory 
serves me right, at least. An ancestor was one 
of the condemned citizens of Calais, whose lives 
Philippa's intercession saved, when they came 
with ropes round their necks, bearing the keys 
of their city to Edward. This ancestor, I fancy, 
came over to England, and got called Cahxstovm . 
a nick-name, at first . which was corrupted into 
Caliaton, and seriously adopted in lieu of his 



CASA LAKBEBTI. 189 

French name^ which English lips couldn't pro- 
nounce. If I remember right, there was a tide . 
Grandon, I think, in the family . ^bnt if so, it 
is extinct Titles die oat so in England I "J 

Mrs. Conrtenej neither spoke nor moved. Her 
daughter said, musingly, '* That is a curious 
story: I wonder I never heard it before. The 
origin of crests and names would make an in- 
teresting book, I should think. What do you 
suppose the origin of Courteney was?" 

<f Taking the nick-name theory," laughed Carr ; 
''we may suppose that some ancestor of yours 
was conspicuous for the shortness of his nose; 
and those ill-mannered Normans, who were always 
so personal in their pleasantry, dubbed him 

m 

'' Well, we have got over the insult in the lapse 
of time," replied GUda, smiling ; '' and our noses 
have regained a moderate length. I am glad the 
insult was not perpetuated in a crest" 

'' The motto of that Caliston crest. In figmind 
aahia, is a monument to Queen Philippa, and a 
noble compliment to your sex, take it which way 



190 CASB OF CASELYON. 

 

yoa wSL * Safely in a ioomanJ Ladies of the 
house of CaUston may well be proud of that 
Are yon connected in any way?" 

Mrs. Coorteney rose, hnt her voice shook so 
much that the wards she uttered were scarcely 
distinguishable. '* She knows nothing of the 
&inily you speak o They and we are strangers.** 

^^ Ahl I thought so," said Oarr, <{iiietly ; ^firom 
the fact of the name being erased firom the box . 
probably at the time it was bought at some 
sale . but " 

<^ Mother I Dear mother! you are ill," and 
Gilda ran towards Mrs. Courteney, who was 
pressing one hand convnlsiyely to her heart, while 
she leant on the sofit with the other. '^ This is 
one of your old attacks from oyer-excitement 
and fatigue. Come and lie down, and don't talk 
any more." She drew her away, supporting her 
with her twining arms, and the bedroom door 
closed behind them. 

Carr felt, and he well migh^ xather uncom- 
fortable. He reproadied himself. as is always 
the case, when too late.for his ''cursed curiosity." 



n 



CASA LAMBEBTL 191 

is qne&tkois had awakened in some way a chain 

of painfol memories in the poor lady's mind ; there 

could be no doubt about it. A mystery connected 

with that name . ^possibly an early^ an unrequited 

love, buried and out of sight long ago; bundles 

of hia letters^ written in the hawthorn days of 

her girlhood* before she knew the hard* cold man 

whose bride she afterwards became, the ink now 

faded, in the secret drawers of that desk-^Carr's 

mind suggested some such possible romance; and 

j&bm it he was roused by a heavy sigh in the 

the &rther comer of the room. He started, 

having entirely forgotten Miss Gisborne's presence. 

The room was almost dark, but the light of the 

fire caught the girl's glittering eyes, sending out 

lurid flashes now and then from the shadow where 

she still lay coiled up upon the so&. 

^^ Mrs. Courteney is very nervous," said the low 
contralto voice. 
** Is she subject to these attacks ? " 
^' You have observed that she is a devoted wife. 
Whenever Mr. Courteney is worse than usual, 
the least thing upsets her." 



192 CAfiB OF CABBLYOK. 



(( 



He must be a bad patient, I should think . 
enongh to make an j one ill to be with him. Is 
he really worse ? " 

<' So much so that he contemplates leaving 
Bologna, as he thinks the climate does not agree 
with him." 

^'Leaving Bdognal And where will they go?" 

^' Chi lo saf They may travel, perhaps, firom 
place to place." 

Carr's heart sank. It would be impossible, 
without assuming a more decided atdtude than 
he was prepared to do, for him to follow the 
Courteney wanderings day by day. Had the 
young lady calculated on the effect her words 
would produce? She knew, at all events, that 
nothing was less probable than the probabilify 
she suggested. Mr. Courteney's health could ill 
stand the fatigue of constant travelling. 

'^ How long have they been here ? " said C!arr, 
abruptly. 

'^ Seven months. Geraldine and I shall be glad 
enough to get away : we are tired of this duU, 
old house." 



CASA LAMBEBTL 193 

*' You had better only answer for yourselfi" 

'* Perhaps she may have changed lately. She 
used to agree with me in thinking Bologna gloomy 
. ^this house especially^ after Rome and Naples. 
Not that she saw any more society there than here, 
for her life has always been a melancholy one. I 
shouldn't stand it as well as she does^ if I were 
in her place . the only child of a rich man ; but 
dependanU must take what they can get^ and be 
thankfiiL It is hard for Geraldine, -at her age, 
to be shut out from all Intercourse with the world, 
where she would be so much admired; but she 
bears it like an angel I'' 

There was an ugly smile on the girl's face, 
which the darkness happily covered. 

*' Miss Courteney seems to me to be perfectly 
happy," sud Carr ; '' and she is so fond of Italy 
and Italians that, at least, she has no regrets, 
I conceive, for the English society from which 
Mr. Courteney's strange prejudices more especially 
banish her." 

''Notwithstanding her foreign education," replied 
Sara, quickly, ** she is essentially English, as you 

VOL. I. 13 



194 CABB OF CAKBLYON. 

must see yourself; and would oidy be happy as 
die wife of an EngUshman, I belteye." 

'' It is getting late," said Carr^ in Us sadden 
way. '^ I am afraid Mrs. Courteney is too unwell 
to leare her room again, so I will wish you good 
evening.'' 

* He abjured the mardiesa's box that eyening* 
Sitting moodily over the fire in his dressing-gown, 
and puffing away at a regalia, he looked upon 
himself as one of the most ill-issed and aoSering 
of men. It is a hazardous thing to attempt to 
^ve a tangible form to the current of any man's 
unspoken thought, but it ran pn>l>ably somewhat 
in this wise . 

*'If they go away, what am I to do? I am 
fast &lling desperately in love with that girl . 
they ought to see that. I shall never meet any 
one again I admire half as much. She realizes 
my heau iddat of what a girl ought to be. Never 
but once before have I seen anything to be com- 
pared with her . that poor curate's daughter at 
Carrlyon. Ah ! that was five years ago. I sup- 
pose Fve grown more worldly-wise since then; 



CA3A LAMBERTI. 195 

but I hare the same confonnded ill-Itick. My 
lady would torn up her nose at these people us 
much jaa she did at poor Bessy Hobbs. Well^ 
what then? Fm no longer a child in leading- 
strings^ and I won't marry a London girl . ^IVe 
always said so Bnt T shonid Kke to see more 
of these peqpl^ before I W e haTs only known 
eack other three wedte I Why the deuce do thef 
go away jnat now? If 9 very stnpid of them. 
The father I don't mnch like, but then one doesn't 
marry the &therr The mother . w^, I wish my 
own mother were like her; only that these nerrons 
attacks are a bore. Not that I beJteve a word of 
the nerronsness. When that horse ran away the 
other day, she wasn't a bit frightened. Ko ! It 
is sometlung more than that . something which 
neither her child Hor, perhaps, any one else knows. 
No matter: there is no mystery abont GKlda. 
my Gildal Hallo I Laurence Carr, yon're going 
ahead. She'd only be happy as the vnfe of an 
Englishman. Well ! At first I thought there was 
something between her and this fellow Lamberti . 
that Werther-like air was] likely to take a young 

13.2 



196 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

^1 . ^bat I am reassured. I believe he's In love, 
but he sees it*s hopeless. That accounts for his 
following them about at dusk, like a cat, as I 
first saw him doing. The idea of that rare jewel 
being thrown away on a penniless Italian . ^mewed 
up in this gloomy old palace. persecuted by the 
priests and that righteous old woman who lives 
shut up in a room there ! But if she really loved 
him ? Hum ! . ^I suppose she'd be contented with 
anything. Do I intend my wife to lead a dissi- 
pated London life ? No. We shall live at Carr- 
lyon, and receive our friends there, and go up 
to town sometimes, and sometimes travel and lead 
a pastoral life in the mountains ; and I shall paint 
at last th<U picture which is to make my reputa- 
tion; and Gilda . ^By Jove I my imagination is 
running away with me. Weill if they only 

remain here a fortnight longer ^ 

With this incomplete resolve Carr flung the 
end of his third cigar into the fire, and went to 
bed. 



CAS A LAMBEBTL 197 



CHAPTER XL 

101 

QiTlDO Lakbsbti was pacing die terrace at the 
end of his garden early one morning. At this 
hour he was secure from intermpiion^ and could 
escape from the narrow confines of his own room 
to enjoy the liberty of this walk without danger of 
encountering any of the Courteney family. XTp 
and down^ with his law-books under his arm^ hiS' 
brow bent^ his eyes fixed moodily on the ground^ 
the young man walked ; stopping every now and 
then to lean upon the terrace wall and look' out 
on the kndscape below. The early sunlight 
flashed on white convent walls and sculptured 
towers; the keen tramontana wind lifted ix\U} 
tremulous silver the gray-tufted olives, and cut 
out the blue profile of the Apennines vividly 
against the sky. Perhaps those well-known 



198 CABB 01 CARKLYON. 

objects had never looked more beautiful^ and the 
Italian's senses were never shut to natore ; but his 
thoughts were otherwise engaged. 

^'Is it wise to maintain this struggle anv 
longer? May not pven my resolution be too 
severely tried ? Were it not better to break this 
chain at once . to go away for a time^ seeing that 
li I am wearing my life oat m Ihis miserable 
fight? I cannot study. I cannot ewea devote 
my thoaghts to the grave questions which are 
arising for Italy. I am growing more hopdessly 
wesk, more absorbed by this one fatal idea, every 
day I She will marry this Englishman. It is but 
natoral, I SQ^pose, that she ahoidd. There is no 
doubt she likes him : oagfat that not to be enough 
for me ? / can never be anything to her. Years^ 
at least, must elapse before I could hope to ofl^ 
her anything but an empty name ; and never, while 
penniless, will I woo a rich wife. Long be&re 
thi^t she will be mairied. Yes I if I ever indulged 
in <he foolish dream at times that I might awaken 
in l>er heart some answer to the growing passion 
within me, it has been dispelled. She takes a 



CASA LAMBESTI. 199 

delight in thk Englishxnaii's society abe never 
could do in mine. I am dull and tadtunL I 
cannot compete inth tins brilliant man of the 
world ; and yet I know I have a(Maoething witihin 
me that he has not. *a strength and depth of 
attachment of which I helieve he is incapaUe. 'If 
be were made of odwr stuffy I think I conld better 
bear to see her become his ; . bat I mistrnst him . 
^s &J9 accomplished gentleman. He is vain 
and friTdona . ^a spoilt child of fortune . ^withont 
the solidity of character whereon to build a 
woman's happiness. Am I jealous and pre- 
judiced ? Perhaps sa This daily torture I 
cannot stand much longer. It is better that I 
should put an end to it at once ! ^ 

He had reached one of the old cypresses at 
Ihe end of the terrace^ where anoiher walk 
crossed it at right-angles. And here he sud* 
denly came &oe to face with Miss Courteney. 
She started; and the cdour flattered in her 
cheek. 

^' Good day, Gnido. I did not expect to find 
any one out here at this hour*" 



200 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

** I am jost going in. I will jjot distarb your 
meditations.'' 

''I wanted to breathe the fresh air. I felt 
stifled in my room/' she said, without replying to 
his words ; ^^ and I wanted also to see the early 
sunlight on those hills, which I must soon wish 
good-by to ! " There was a pause. 

''Are you really going to leave Bobgna? 
The signora said something of this the other 
day ; but your father paid his rent for three 
months in advance only a few weeks back." 

The young count said this simply, without any 
false shame in alluding to his position as a 
landlord ; though his pride in other ways, as we 
have seen, was so sensitive. 

'' My father has been certainly worse since the 
extreme cold began, and he thinks that at Pisa, or 
Leghorn, or even on the Lung' Amo at Florence, 
he should be warmer. I am so tired of these 
moves every six or nine months! and I am so 
sorry to leave Bologna and this dear old house. 
I shall never like any place as well, Guida I 
have been so happy here." 



CASA LAMBEBTL 201 

 

''I am glad of it^" he replied, rather coldlv. 
<'I hope the memories associated "with my old 
house may not lose their charln for you in after 
years." 

'' They never can," she said, eagerly. 

''I hope you may continue as happy as you 
now are. In that case, your impressions will not 
change." 

''Why should you think they could?" she 
persisted. " Even if I am not . ^happy ? " 

He could not give the obvious answer, and so 
force a confession or denial from her ; he felt the 
danger, and replied vaguely. 

''Your ideas of happiness may change. Tou 
will probably go forth into the world, and a more 
animated existence may alone seem yforthy of that 
name. It is possible that if you revisit this dull 
old house years hence you will wonder that you 
ever thought It endurable." 

She was silent : the tears had gathered in her 

eyes. 

" Do you think," she said, at last, with some 
touch of resentment in her tone, '' that I am so 



a02 CASB OF CABXLYOIS. 

firivolous as to be carried away eompletely by this 
* world ' of which yxm i^>eak, and which it is most 
improbable I shidl erer see? " . 

*' No ; and I repeat that if yoar lot is happy, 
jfxi will look back with pleasure to these traaqail 
days, even though yon would not willing^ reinni 
to the monotony of such a life. The umversal 
law of change governs all around. Are we either 
of us what we were sis years ago, when I first 
knew you ? K I meet you x years hence, will 
you XK>t be very different to what you are now? 
New firiends, new ties, new interests . ^these effisct 
great changes." 

*' Do you think that new fiiends can make me 
forget old ones? ** she said, m a tremulous voice, 
and with averted face. '' Guide, you are un- 
kind, you are unjust" 

'' I think not,* he replied, with a strong effort 
at self-command. ^* I did not say you would 
forget, but things belonging to the past must as 
surely drop out of your future life as the stars 
fade out of heavesi at morning's approach. Yon 
are going out into the broad sunlight Oar paths 



CASA liAHBERTL 203 

henceforward divei^ge widely^ asunder. Such 
lives as Garo&lo's and mtne," he added^ hastily . 
'' grim ^Tes of drodgery and routine . can bare 
no longer anything to do in your future sphere. 
Those lires have crossed yours for an instant; 
their coarse will now lead them farther from yon 
eachday.'* 

She stood for a long time silmty looking over 
the terrace walL Her eyes seemed to watch the 
dond-shadows flitting over the distant crests of 
purple Apennines ; bnt she had a choking at her 
throaty poor child^ which prevented her uttering 
award. 

Her thonghte^ too, refused to shape them- 
selves into any language. Something of what he 
said was tme^ indeed. For a great and, as it 
seemed to her, a sudden change had come over 
her within the last day or twa She was not the 
same expansive, sunny-hearted girl she had been 
a week ago. The last shred of childhood had 
dropped from her; she had awaked to all the 
tender consciousness of woman. Her heart dared 
not give & account to itsdf of all the contending 



204 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

emotions that arose tbere. She knew that she 
was miserable; and now within these last few 
minutes doubly so. That was enough^ poor 
child I 

*' Must you always remain here ? " she faltered 
at last " itave you no ambition that points 
beyond Bologna^ and the life you are leading? 
What of your own future ? ** 

'^ I have hard work for many years before me 
here^ unless .ihe crisis we are expecting arrives. 
When my country requires me I shall be ready: 
until then, to take care of my old mother, and to 
work for our daily brei4 . ^these are my duties^ 
and my only prospects. As to the wild ambition, 
the extravagant hopes of youth, signorina," he 
added, bitterly, ''I have grown wiser of late. 
The fiilfilment of such dreams is not for me." 

'* K. they are worth keeping, don't cast them 

aside at once ^ but the girl's voice was 

scarcely audible* 

Oh, that he had dared M at her feet, and, pour- 
ing forth all the passionate love at his heart, 
acknowledge what those hopes, what that ambi- 



CASA LAMBERTL 205 

tion^ had once been! Bat he crashed back the 
rebel thought^ as his hand did the yellow vine- 
leaves above his head; and his words, when he 
epoke at length, were calm and self^ntained. 

*' The Italians have enough to do to live in the 
hard, actaal present Hopes which a man's own 
brain or right arm can never realize . the things 
which lie beyond his power to accomplish . he 
does well to pat away, sternly, decisively, at 
once." 

'' Yoa say that circumstances change," persisted 
Gilda gently, *' and that we all change with them. 
May not a time arrive when these hopes of your 
youth, whatever they be, can be realized ? Or is 
it the change in yourself?" she added, in a still 
lower voice . ^*a, change which has already begun, 
and which you feel will increase ? " 

** Yes, yes," he said^ quickly, ** I am changed, 
and I shall no doubt change still more. If we 
suffered in middle life as we do in youth, there 
would be no old age. But we grow harder. 
Thank God for that I " 

She turned round, and raised her eyes wistfiilly 



206 CABR OF CABRLTON. 

into his face. There was something that struck 
her as muiataral in his tone of voice. She s^hed 
hearilj. 

*' I mast go in; there ia the conventrbell strik* 
ing eighty and I have not jet heard how mj 
fiidier is this morning*'' 

As she stq^ped from nnder the afadow of the 
cypress into the full sonshine of the terrace, one 
of the small Swedish gloves she carried drof^wd 
from her hand. Had she seen the instantaneous 
movement with which Gktida stooped and thmst 
it into his breast, how diflEecent the whole after- 
current oS those twa lives might have been I 

But another pair of ejes beheld ihst small, 
rapid action; and a white face grew yet one 
shade whiter among the oleander-trees yonder. 
The teeth were set, and a small hand clenched as 
they approached ; and then a shadow stole noise- 
lessly away, crept around a axmer of the palao^ 
and disappeared. 

They spd^ no more to one anoth^. Silently, 
side by side, they walked until they reached the 
courtyard, when the young count gravdy rased 



CASA LAMBERT!. 207 

liis broad beaver hat, and passed under the narrow 
doorway that led to his own whig of the palace. 
The girl, on her side, turned slowly, thoughtfully 
lip the marble steps towards the apartment her 
family occupied. 



208 CABB OF CAKBLTOX. 



CHAPTER Xn. 



-.O*- 



GuiBO, his head buried in his hands^ the door 
barred against Nanna's importunities that he wiH 
break his fast with a mortad^Ua . Guido^ I saj, 
in that fastness of his, may let his thoughts travel 
at will from the folios and pencil notes that lie 
before him. The morning will slip by, as morn- 
ings have done with him before, alas I in a tumult 
of conflicting thought, from which his energy will 
rise victor, but which leaves traces of that struggle 
in the trampled and wasted gardens of the heart 
At three-and-twenty, his youth is gone. Let it 
go I The stem, self-contained man may be wrong 
in his views of life, wrong in the main principle 
which rules him now, but he has obtained some- 
thing which middle age . ay, and old age, too 
(according to the most credited accounts) . do 



CASA LAHBERTI. 209 

not always possess. He had obtained the mastery 
oyer his own passions. 

Bnt while he sits alone there with his eyes 
fixed dreamily on the page before him^ Gilda^ 
with an aching heart under her faintly smiling 
&ce, passes the morning in the gallery with her 
mother aild Laurence Carr. Little opportunity 
has she to commune with her own thoughts while 
Carr is expatiating on the elevated beauty of 
Francia's " Saint Sebastian^" or scornfully pointing 
oat the frigid formalism of the Eclectics. Gilda, 
it is true, finds herself every now and then 
answering somewhat at random, and is conscious 
of a vacuum between the observation she has just 
caught and the last she can remember* How 
is this ? Carr's conversation is always agreeable, 
and he is making unusual efforts to rouse her 
flagging spirits this morning. She looks pale and 
tired . has been anxious about her father, no 
doubt. Anything is more natural than that she 
should not be paying attention to what he is 
saying! 
Laurence Carr had been introduced into the 
vol. L 14 



210 CAKR OF CAfiBLTON. 

world imder circamstBiieeB which made it haid 
for him not to be a little vain. As is often th^ 
case, this was combined with a really low opinion 
of himself This sonnds paradoxical, bat with a 

* 

man of quick parts and keen susceptibility it is the 
natural conseqoenoe of finding an nndae valna- 
tion set npon his attractions. Jealous of pmise 
and with considerable self-ASseitiQiiy he had little 
self-belief Thence his anxiety that his statioa 
and prospects should remain concealed firom the 
Conrteneys as long as possUile, so as to test his 
own personal merits without the aid of adren- 
titioBS advantages. Lamberii, on the other hand, 
was an entirely self-reliant man, who never doubted 
of his own judgment, his own powers, his own 
acts . ^yet with perfect indiflference to the woiidVi 
ymce, and without a tinge of vanity. 

Carr repeated to hxBBself constantly that theie 
was no doubt the girl liked him. The questim 
was, how much f And was he jnstified, he now 
began to ask himsdtf, in poiaoing this investi- 
gation, unless he had fully made up his mind 
how to act? He was uneasy on this score; and 



CASA LAMBESTI. 211 

bat for this sudden change in the yoang lady's 
manner, I am not snre that he might not hav^ 
thought it expedient to pack his portmanteau and 
depart' forthwith^ before he had committed himself. 
Miss Conrteney's absence of mind and depression^ 
so different from the blithe, buoyant spirits to 
which he was accustomed, acted unconscioosly on 
Carr as a counter-irritant He forgot all about 
going away, and thought only of winning back 
the smiles to that sweet face. 

He learnt that their departure from Bologna 
was actually decided on, though no day was yet 
fixed. If any other reason were wanting, besides 
her fiither's illness, to aocbunt for her depression, 
surely it was to be found in this. Could their 
intercourse be renewed elsewhere as it had been 
here ? Hardly, witiiout explanation oa his part 
And what explanation was he prepared to gi^^? 
The question forced itself in this very distinct and 
practical form upon his mind, as he stood before 
(juido Renins ^ Massacre of the Innocents." Not 
that there was any apparent connection between 
the. two subjects, unless it was a sudden com- 

14.2 



212 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

punction of conscience that he was enacting the 
part of one of Herod's centurions upon the heart 
of the fair innocent heside him. Bat his words 
showed no symptom of what was passing within. 

'^ If GKiido Reni had always painted like this," 
he observed^ after a short pause before the picture, 
** I shouldn't feel the contempt for him I generally 
do. . There is no unmanly, maudlin affectation 
here. One hears that mother's agonized cry! . 
and the action, though violent, is not exaggerated. 
Perhaps choosing such a subject at all is an 
evidence of the unhealthiness of mind which 
afterwards showed itself in the sentimentality of 
upturned eyes and dishevelled locks ; but there 
is no want of strength here. The story is only 
too well told . don't you agree with me ? " 

'' Yes. It is exceedingly painful. It gives me no 
pleasure to look at Let us turn to something else. 
Ah I it is a pleasure to look at '^ Saint Cecilia " 
after that What a sweet singing face it is ! Do 
you believe the story of Francia's having died of 
mortification after seeing it ? " 

'< Certainly not. V asari is a horrid old gossip. 



CAS A LAMBEBTL - 213 

Francia was mach too fine a fellow to do anjthing 
of the sort The picture^ no doubt, prodaced a 
powerful effect on its arrival hei^e, and probably 
owing to it so many of Francia's scholars . Inno- 
cenza da Tinola, and others . became followers of 
Raphael ; but in all their best works they retain 
traces of Francia's great and earnest manner. 
As to '' Saint Cecilia," I believe devoutly that she 
has been touched up and cleaned almost beyond 
recognition. That sky is like so many yards of 
dyed merino hung behind her. As to the '^ Mag* 
dalene" in the corner (how different to our '^ Little 
Red Riding Hood" of Timoteol), Fm afraid 
Raphael must be held responsible for her. Pos- 
sibly Christian mythology, in which I am not 
well versed, may show some warrant for her being 
a giantess . ^bnt that ogling affectation! Let us 
hope it is a portrait taken before she reformed, 
otherwise it is likely to be prejudicial to the 
interests of virtue." 

Gilda did not smile : her thoughts had wandered 
far, as her eye rested on the fine figure of Guide's 
'* Samson " in another room. 



214 CASK OF CARKLYON. 

'' Yon like that picture ? " said Carr, abruptl j, 
piqued to find his remarks had been thrown away. 
'' Very academic* The landscape ia the best part 
of it** 

^* Perhaps so^'' said Gilda^ rousing herself to 
reply. ^^ I am no judge you know. The figure 
strikes me aa Tery vigorous and fine. Samson 
seems there a moral conqueror, and the dead 
Philistme aroundlcoald fiuicy lepresenting Oie 
passi<ms he has OTerconie." 

''Then," said Carr, laughing^ ^it b Samson 
before he knew Dalilah, evidently. Tour imagina- 
tion clothes the picture with a poetry it hardly 
possesses in itself. Miss Courteney. Samson kK>ks 
to me only like an Academy model. Stop I Now 
I look at the head more attentively it reminds me 
of your silent landlord, LambertL Do you see 
the likeness ? " 

Gilda coloured, but answered, without hesita- 
tion, " It reminds me also of Count Lamberti." 

^Perhaps the resemblance, then, suggested 
those fine attributes with which you invest the 
Jewish Hercules ? " 



CA8A LAMBEBTL 215 

^Perhaps so,'* said the yoong hdy, calmly. 
'' There is one point of dimmilarity,^ observed 
Carr, sarcastically, ''that Lamberti makea so 
very little nse of that implement of destruction . 
the jawbone of an ass." 

He repented of the paltry witticism as soon' as 
it was uttered. A look of speechless astonishment 
and indignation shot from Gilda's eyes, and she 
turned quickly away. Truly, her silence was 
more eloquent than any amount of remonstrance; 
and Carr felt it to be so. He did the only right 
thing under the circumstances, which, considering 
that his jealousy had been roused, was not so easy 
as it may appear. 

''I sacrificed truth to a bon-mot when I said 
that. Miss Conrteney . proving, I'm a&aid, that 
mine is the ass's jaw I Though Count Lamberti 
does not honour me with his conversation . in 
q[te of every advance of mine . I have reason to 
believe that he is a clever fellow, of a very 
difieront stamp from the generality of these young 
Italians. I may not admire his manners . that is 
a matter of individual ojMnion . ^but I shookl be 



216 CABB OF CAPBLYOK. 

sorry thi^t jon thought I treated any friend of 
yours contemptuously.'* 

*' Guido Lamberti is a great friend of ours," 
replied Gilda^ fearlessly and warmly, " and if you 
knew him better, Mr. Carr; and all his noble 
qualities . ^his devotion to his old mother, his 
struggles through poverty, ^ and even worse 
troubles . ^his high-mindedness, and his chivalrous 
sacrifices to others, you . you would refrain from 
speaking slightingly of him, fwt because he is our 
friend, but because you would respect him too 
much . at least, I think so." 

** It is worth his while to haie been abused, to 
meet with so warm a defender in you. Miss 
Courteney." 

The sarcasm of Carr's tone brought the blood 
again to Gilda's cheek ; and then she was annoyed 
to feel herself colouring, which made her con- 
siderably worse. She began to wonder that she 
should ever have liked this Mr. Carr so muck 
To-day he seemed positively disagreeable to her; 
and she was quite glad when her mother, who had 
been sitting down to rest, joined them, suggesting 



CASA LAMBEBTL 217 

that it was time to return' home for their mid-day 
dinner. 

As they were leaving the Academy, the 
Marchesa Onofrio^ attended by a tall, military- 
looking man with blonde moustaches, entered, and 
Carr had to pass so close t^ her that he could 
scarcely avoid stopping to say a few words. The 
marchesa playfully reproached him with never 
coming to see her now, but added, with a glance 
towards the English ladies, who had walked on, 
that no doubt he was better engaged. She intro- 
duced her companion as a cousin . a Piedmontese 
officer . ^to whom she was actually showing the 
lions of Bologna. She had not been inside the 
Accademia before, she did not know the time 
when! 

Promising to pay a visit to her box that evening 
if possible (which meant, if he were not specially 
invited to the Casa Lamberti), he bowed, and 
hastened to rejoin his companions. 

** Who is that lady ? ** asked Mrs. Courteney. 

<' The Marchesa Onofrio. She has more than 
once expressed to me her regret that you do not 



218 CAKR OF CAKKLYON. 

enter into sociefy here. Bst I believe^ nnless yon 
bring letters, none of these great ladies erer call 
on strangers*" 

" Oh, I have no desire, I assure job. Weshoold 
only refuse their invitations.'' 

'^I quite understand. Tou have no donbt 
heard that the marchesa is very charming, but 
hardly the person yon would wish Miss Coorteney 
to be intimate with ; and I suppose she ts an 
average sample of Italian society." 

** Indeed, I meant to express nothing of the 
kind,'* said Mrs. Courteney, colouring, ''but the 
simple truth. We enter into no society, here or 
elsewhere. God forbid that I should throw stones 
at any woman ! " 

" And is it yet decided, Mrs. Courteney, where 
you go when you leave Bologna?" he said 
presently. 

''Mr. Courteney has not made up his mind." 

'< Then your departure, I hope, is indefinite? ^ 

''No. We shall leave this certainlj in the 
coarse ol a few days. Mr. Courteney seldom 
makes up his mind till the night before we start 



CASA LAMBERT!. 219 

where we are to go^ and then very often changes 
it en rcuUJ* 

^'Then how is one to know where jon are 
gone? " asked Carr^ with unusual directness for a 
young gentleman of the world, 

**OhI'' replied Mrs, Courteney^ evidently not 
choosing to understand the question as it was 
intended, '' ewe correspondence . which is a very 
small one. comes through our bankers We 
write to them when we have a place, and again 
when we are settleci." 

Carr began to grow alarmed. Was there a 
likelihood of his losing sight of her altogether ? 
At all events, the pleasant prospect of an indefinite 
l^ocrastination, which should bind him to nothing, 
diminished very rapidly. It was clear that no 
sort of encouragement would be held out to him 
to follow their wanderings. The question protruded 
itself more and more forcibly upon bis mind as he 
retraced his solitaiy steps, aftar escortii^ the mother 

* 

and daughter back to the Casd LambertL Ko 
hope had been expressed that lie would return 
that evening. He was uneasy . dissatisfied. 



\ 



220 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

In crossing the Piazza Maggiore he nearlj ran 
against Count Razzi, whom he had occasionally 
met since he made his acquaintance in the 
Onofiio's box and rather liked the good-natared> 
impulsive Italian. After shaking hands^ Carr 
drew him aside from the throng of the market- 
place towards the steps of San Petronia 

'' I want to ask you a question or two touching 
this Guide LambertL You know him well, I 
think ? 

'* I have known him all my life^ but I scarcely 
ever see him. He is too grave and steady for 
me^ I am sorry to say^ though he is a year or 
two younger.** 

In the first place, can you tell me whether he 
has ever had any affaire du cceur . any Uauoni 
Is he the cavaJiere servente of any married lady 
here? or is he pining for some obdurate fair 
one? I know he doesn't go into society, but that 
is rather a reason for supposing him to be more 
agreeably employed." 

'' It is possible," replied the Italian, raising his 
eyebrows and shoulders simultaneously, and dis- 



CAS A LABIBEBTL 221 

tending his hands . a traditional action expressive 

of ignorance. '' It is possible ; but I cannot 

affirm that it is so. Sicuro, no young fellow 

like Gnido can live without the tender passion ; 

and some months ago it was thought he was 

in love with la bella Ingleae . the fair one^ 

not the dark (who is worth fiftj of the other, 

in my opinion, as you know). They were often 

seen together then, but never now ; so, I suppose, 

the old father put a stop to it. He is poor as 

a hundred devils . ^is Guide. But the girl is 

rich . ^why doesn't he carry her off, I say, if he 

is in love with her?" 

'^Ahl to be sure, why doesn't he? And so 
they were very intimalte some' time ago? And 
she is rich, too ? It would be a famous marriage, 
then, for the indigent count" 

" Per appunto ! Just what I told him I Of 
course it would . ^but then Guide is proud, that 
may have something to do with it I do believe 
he is capable of not mariying this Inglese, just 
because she is rich, and he hasn't a bajocco. 
Stupid, Signer Carr, ain't it? If La Sara 



222 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

with the black ejes had only this money] Che 
diaioolo! I should have no scniples. Bat I am 
told she is not even a relation . some one they 
have taken into their house out of charitj : is 
it so?" 

<< Something like it, I bdieve. Anyhow, yoa 
would find the bargain a dear one, azzL Do 
you know the young lady?" 

^' Not yet Pazienza^ and the Italian laid his 
forefinger on his nose. a movement full of esoteric 
meaning among his countrymen . ^^I shall make 
her acquaintance." 

'^ Then you have not much time to lose,** said 
Carr, laughing, as he shook hands once more 
with the count; ^^for she leaves Bologna in a 
few days." 

Another meeting, apparently as accidental as 
the one just recorded^ took place some hours later 
in the same day, at the comer of the vicolo in 
which the Casa Lamberti stood. 

As Padre Stefano, with that deprecating shuffle 
which is the peculiar attribute of the Roman 
priesthood, was hastening on to his evening 



CA8A LAICBEBTL 223 

office of consoling the Countess Lamberti by the 
fresh imposition of prayer and penance^ a figure 
closely Teiled approached with a reverent incli- 
nation of the head^ as though asking for the good 
father's blessing. He extended his hand^ and 
mmnbled some inarticulate benison; but even as 
he did so the figure uttered a word or two which 
seemed to arrest his attention. 

*' Whatever you may have to communicate to 
me, daughter^ had better be said in the con- 
feaaioiiaL You will find me at San Domenico 
in an hour's time . in the third confesuonal on the 
ri^it-hand side." 

With this the figure glided silently by, like 
a shadow, and Padxe SteGuio' shuffled on to the 
CasaLambertL 



224 CABB OF GABRLTON. 



CHAPTER XIIL 



..O*- 



As Goido entered Iiis mother's ante-room that 
evening Nanna came up with an imperatiye 
gesture^ desiring him on no account to disturb 
the devotional exercises of that saint, who was 
engaged with Padre Ste&na 

" Why, I saw him going out of the house two 
hours ago ! What sins has my poor mother com- 
mitted between that time and this? Are we 
never to be free from these fellows at any hour?" 

The old woman lifted up her hands in pious 
horror. 

'^ To think that he should speak so I Instead 
of looking on it as a privilege to receive the good 
padre as often as he condescends to enter our 
doors I Come, sit ^ you down, child, and 111 
prepare you a friUura for your supper. Yon 



CASA LAMBEKTL 225 

have got into a foolish habit of &sting lately, and 
look as miserable as a parched pea." 

**Why, Nanna, I thought you approved of 
fasting?" said Guido, relaxing into a smile, as the 
old nurse bustled to and fro. 

^^Ahl I doubt its doing much good to your 
souL It's not the proper sort of fasting, and 
comes of the devil, I believe.'' 

"Well," said the young man, more gravely, 

but .with the same indulgence he always showed 

^ to Nanna's peculiar opinions, " supposing I were 

to tell you that it was necessary to enable me to 

work? I cannot study when I am stuffed full 

 

of your fritturaa and salames . and you know, 
my good Nanna, that \must work." 

*' Che^ cheP cried the old woman, impatiently. 

'' The proverb says, ^ E meglio un somaro vtro, cfie 

un doUof^ morto ; ' * and if you starve yourself, 

where is the use of all your fine learning ? No, 

no; the good padre is right The devil tempts 

* people to learn too much. It is a snare to pride, 

he says. As long as you were a child, you fed 

"^ A liviogass is better than a dead doctor. 

VOL. L 15 



226 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

finely, and tbeii yon did not talk blft^benqr 
against the Chnrch as you do now." 

'' Only against Padre Stefiino and his fantiiren, 
Nanna." 

'' It all comes of your learning ! '^ continued the 
old woman without listening. '' Why as the padre 
sajrs, look at our Blessed Lady and the saints, 
they never learnt anything, and yet theyVe got 
the finest thrones in Paradise . aU gold and 
precious stones . so what is the use of learning 
things? It only spoils yonr digestion, and fiUa you 
with evil thoughts.'' 

But the door at that moment opened, and Pldve 
St^EUio stepping out, in aU the odour of sanctitjr, 
interrupted the conversation. He glanced with a 
mild severity at the young man, who rose, as in 
courtesy bound, but did not attempt to solicit the 
reverend fiidier's benediction, while Nanna pvesaed 
her withered lips fervently upon the snuffy, farown 
hand he extended. As she opened the opposite 
door to let the padre out, Guide tamed at ono^ 
and entered his mother's room. 

She was kneeling befiu the Uack crucifix in 



GA8A LAHBEBTL 227 

the coniear, and did not torn round at the soond of 
the opening door. To judge from the movement 
of her lipsy and the agitation of those clasped, 
attenuated hands, she was praying with even mora 
than nsdal fenrencj. Her son heaved a deep. 
sigh. Was his mother's mind to be thus more and 
more lacerated during the brief remainder of her 
days ? The traces of fast and vigil were visible 
in increased emaciation and pallor. Was that a 
sight for men or angels to rejoice at ? Her past 
blameless life gave those harpies of the Church 
too little hold to fasten on, but he knew how his 
own short-comings in orthodoxy were made use of 
to work npon her religious excitability. This 
thought always roused his ire more than anything 
else was capable of doing, and produced in him a 
frame of mind least of all fsivourable to the views 
of Father Stefimo and Co. 

The Countess Lamberti rose from her knees, 
and her son approaching, took her trembling hand 
in his, and led her to a seat 

** Ouido, my son, I have much to say to you : 
sit you down here, when I can look into your face, 

15.2 



228 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

as I used to when you were a little boy. Ah I 
Guidoccio,'' she added, shaking her head^ as she 
tenderly stroked his face. " I wish you were that 
little boy again ! All my troubles about you have 
arisen since you grew to be a tall, learned man^ 
and I have remained the same ignorant woman, so 
that you won't listen to my voice now, Guide, as 
you did then. Oh I my son I my son I that you 
would listen to me I ** 

<< Have I ever refused to do so, mother ? Since 
I have ceased to be a child, all the things that 

. 

seem good to you do not seem so to me. But in 
you, mother, my belief and respect have never 
altered. We have differences of opinion. That is 
all. Why need that worry you, mother? Why 
should you let any one come between you and 
me ? You Jiave always done your duty conscien- 
tiously by me: do not be disquieted on my 
account now.** 

^^I am disquieted,'' said Madame Lamberti,hastily 
wiping away the tears that came into her eyes, as 
though she were ashamed of evincing such weak- 
ness before her son, '' much disquieted since ^ 



CASA LAMBERTL 229 

** Padre Stefano was here, of course. That 
is the special object of his yisit" 

'^ Yes,'' continued his mother, not understanding 

the sarcasm implied in her son's words. '^ It was, 

I believe, the only object of the benevolent padre's 

second visit And, oh I mj Guide, I have been 

praying to the blessed Saint Catherine . ^this is the 

eve of that holy virgin's day . ^and I have offered 

her twelve candles for strength to help me to talk 

to you, my son ; and that you may be enlightened 

to see the truth. Do not . oh I do not, my beloved 

(ruido, turn a deaf ear to my words I " 

The son sat quiet, looking gravely up into his 
mother's face. 

''They tell me, my son, that a woman has 
enslaved your heart: one who is not of our 
country or . religionJ* 

Sh0 paused. A flush overspread the young 
man's &ce, and he withdrew his hand from his 
mother's knee, where it rested : but he made no 
reply, waiting apparently for his mother to 
advance her accusation more distinctly before 
he did so. 



230 CAKB OF GABSLTON. 

<' Ah I myson, tell me that this is not true ! It 
cannot be I Ton will not bring my gray bain in 
sorrow to the grave, by marrying a beretie . one 
who denies our holy comnranionBl Why did I 
eyer receive these English under our roof? I had 
a foreboding it could only bring tribulation on our 
house I Gruido, my son, listen lo me. I will go 
down on my knees to you not to do this thing." 

The poor lady was so excited that she literally 
attempted to rise and put her words into execu- 
tion. Her son's firm, calm hand held her down. 

'^ Stay, mother : before I say anything, let me 
know all that your informer has thought fit to tell 
you concerning the matter you speak oJ^ 

The force of the son's character acted, as it 
always did, in calming Madame LambertTs 
agitation. 

*' He says, Ghiido, thai; you have been for a long 
time in love with this English girl, and that you 
have made her in love with you, and that her 
parents are angered, and are leaving Bdogna 
on this account! To think," added the poor 
mother, with a momentary touch of pride for 



CA8A A3iBKBTL 231 

which ahe subseqnentlj, no.doabt^ fined herself 
heavily in Pater-nosteni*. '' to think that any 
foreigner shoold be able to treat a Lamberti thus I 
That mj son should be held in contempt bj these 
Knglish heretics I What witchery is there in 
this girl^ my son ? Might yon not choose among 
the pious Catholics of our city a fairer bride? 
We are poor; but ours is an ancient house^ and 
there is many a partiio our good padre might 
ofier you, Guida And this English girl, whom 
yon meet clandestinely in the garden, she will 
make you an infidel, and you will ner^ have 
peaoe in this world or the next I Oh I Guide, 
my son, let not the snares of the flesh overcome 
you . ^break through them . ^break through them 
while you can I There is yet time . ^and the girl 
will many tha other Englishman, and go her 
way in peace." 

Madame Lamberti's mind was in too perturbed 
a state to allow of her putting the information 
she had received in a more succinct and clear 
ferm: it oosed oul^ so to speak, between her 
warnings and entreaties. Guide gathered from it. 



232 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

however^ to what extent truth and fiction had 
heen cunningly interwoven before the tale was 
poured into his mother's ear. He replied reso- 
lutely,. 

^'Mother, you know I have never deceived 
you. You will believe me when I say that part 
of what you have heard is a malicious lie.** 

Madame Lamberti clasped her tremulous hands. 
" Tell me . ^tell me . it is not true that ** 

^^It is true that the only woman I have ever 
loved, or ever shall love on earth, is Signorina 
Courteney." He spoke almost in a whisper, but 
so clearly . so decisively . ^there was no mistaking 
his words. 

The mother fell back in her chair, with a groan. 

^' It is true that I love," he continued, in the 
same low, ringing voice ; ^ but she whom I love 
does not guess it, mother, and never will. Her 
heart will soon belong to this Englishman . ^if it 
is not his already. I met her by accident this 
morning : so much, ag^, is true . ^but no breath, 
no kind of love, passed, my lips. I have careMy 
guarded the knowledge of it since I felt that, 



GA8A LAMBEBTL 233 

as a man of honour^ I ought not, I could not, seek 

to make her my wife. Latterly, I confess it, 

mother (I never thonght to do sol), my passion 

has grown deeper and stronger . ^and I have fled 

the temptation more and morel I have gone there 

as little as was consistent with our old intimacy 

and Uxe signore's great kindness to me. The 

signora reproaches me constantly with not visiting 

them oftener. Judge, Uxen, whether it is likely 

that 2 am the cause of their departure from 

Bologna I It is a wicked fabrication. You have 

forced a confession firom me, who do not frequent 

confessionals. I believed the secret safe; and 

safe between us, mother, it must remain . do you 

understand? Since that prying Jesuit has dis 

covered it . ^how, I care not to inquire . and has 

added his own ^ 

^'Nay, Qwdo mio, do not speak disrespectfrdly 
of the padre." 

'^ Well, weU, mother, I will not if I can help 
it But this matter concerns me, and me only. 
Will you do as I wish in the business, or shall 
I speak to Padre Stefimo myself?** 



234 CABBL OF CiLBKLTON. 

** No, no," cried the poor la^, akrmed at tiie 
idea ; ^ tell me what you would have me do.^ 

<' Be aaent" 

''Btit not firom the padre, mj son? How 
canIP'' 

^ Yon win timply tell him that I have aatisfied 
your mind on this questioDy without entering into 
any explanation.'' 

<Bnt. bat,** hesitated the countess, as she 
looked anxiously into her son's face; ^ after aD, 
Guido, you ore in lore with the English girl . 
you do not deny it . and though at my entieaties 
you gire her up now.." 

^ Stay, mother : undecerre yourBel Your 
entreaties hare nothing to say to this. I have 
fought and striven with my pasuon, and hare 
hidden it jealously firom mortal eyes for mondiB 
peat It is no question of giving up now: my 
whole life latterly has been one long saciiflce." 

^'WiU you, then," pumted his mother, with 
a pertinacity that never lost sight o its object. 
^will yon, Aon, promise me solemnly, my sod, 
never, imder any circumstances, to many this 



nAiiA LAMBEBTL 235 

gid? I hsLYB not long to live, Goido, and I 
ahonld leaye ihit wodd of tronUe with a mind 
more at eaae about yoa, if I had iSie aasnrance 
com your ovm Hpa that joa would never do this 
thing. Will you promise me ? " 

The yonng man started up, and took a hasty 
torn through the apartment Then he stopped 
before his mother with folded anns* 

^ Yoa do not know what you are asking of me. 
I cannot make such a pionuse, mother. Though 
I tell youf and I tell mysc^ fi% times a day, 
that I have not the most distant hope of ever 
making her mine, yet . yet . O my God I never 
is a hard word I All my passionate love rises 
in rebellion agunst making such a promise. I 
cannot do it. Don't ask me, mother. Be content 
with what I have told you. My soul would not 
take such an oalli, ihon^ my lips did I** 

'^You do not love your poor old mother, or 
you would not refuse what, is perhaps her last 
ve^est,'' sobbed the old lady. 

^ Tour request is unreasanable," said the young 
man, almost sternly. 



236 CABR OF GABBLYON. 

'^ Nay, but what can I say to the good padre ? 
Can I tell hun that you have satbfied me ? Alas! 
I shall not die at peace with this dread upon me. 
that mj son will many a heretic when I am 
gone I ** 

He choked the sigh that rose^ and replied, 
indirectly^ . 

** If yon will live better^ mother* we shall keep 
house here together^ yon and I^ for many a year 
yet ; and if yon wonld only send these meddling 
priests about their bnsmess^ you might be happy, 
and " 

Madame Lamberti shook her head sadly^ and 
raised her hand. 

<< I must fast and pray for you, without inter- 
mission, during the short time I have to stay 
with you. Guide; and the Blessed Virgin may, 
perhaps, be pleased to open your eyes from their 
spiritual blindness." 

'< It is your priests who make me blind. IJny 
stand between me and fiuthl" he said, almost 
fiercely; then added, in a calmer tone, ''but forgive 
me, mother. You know I never willingly open a 



CASA LAMBEBTL 237 

diflcnsalon on these matters. I cannot but wound 
your susceptibilities : and now> least of all, when 
I am suffering, and seeing ycu suffer fix)m the 
meddlesome interference of your confessor. Do 
yeu consider yourself boimd to tell him all that 
has passed between us ? " 
Madame Lambert! hesitated. 
" If he presses the point . ^yes." 
'' Then you may add that if he makes any use 
whateTor of the knowledge so gained firom you, 
under the sacred seal of confession ; and that it 
transpires, as it assuredly will, he shall feel that 
the effects of an Italian's just  indignation and 
wrath may be as terrible as that vulgar passion 
called revenge. I will brand him as a perjurer 
before the whole Catholic world ; his own Church 
shall spurn him: the opinion of all honourable 
men would not have mttch effect." 

The coimtess rose, not without a touch of 
dignity in her manner, though her thin hand 
trembled on the table for support. 

'^ If you can only use this language touching 
one whom I so greatly revere, you had best be 



238 CABB OF OABBLYOK. 



Indeed> I feel I hsve had need of medita* 
tion and prayer. Qood-night, Goido." 

And, for the first time in the rememhranoe of 
either, mother and son parted for the night 
without benediction or embraoew Hia heart re- 
proached him with having spoken too vehemenilj. 
The words came, he knew, with double force 
&om him, who was so self-contained in generaL 
Ere he had closed the door be lingered for a 
moment, and would have tuned back. Bat 
abready a tremulous voice in the comer of the 
room was rising in its fervent supplicadonr^ 

^' O y irgine santissima I O Madre di miseri- 
cordia, e Bifiigio di nm, miseri peccatori, vi 
prego . . . . 

He heard no more, but closed the door abruptly. 
The channels of the son's tenderness, alas I were 
likely now to be turned aside by whatever re- 
minded him of a religion against which he felt 
more and more rebellious and reaentfuL 



CASA lAMBBBTL 239 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Mr readers . the gentle ones especial! j . will 
lutve discovered by this time that Goido Lamberti 
was b J no means a perfect character. Thej will 
complain of his unbending pride . ^his hardness . ^ 
his '^ want of religion." They will feel but little 
sympathy with the motives which prompted him 
to stmggle with the passion at his heart ; he will 
be called ^'coUl*" For whereas human naturci 
in the aggregate, r^ards with a loving pity the 
spectacle of strong temptation yielded toj strong 
temptation resisted is a species of heroism to 
which, secretly, the world is not partial, however 
it may sermonize* It accords its frigid tribute of 
reqpect; but its sympathies are kept for those 
who have yielded, and suffered, and repented. 

All this I feel strongly ^as I write. I, who 
knew the.man-^who came into personal contact 



240 CARB OF CABBLYON, 

with those manjHsided fragments of individuality 
which^ joined cmminglj together by the Gbneat 
Artist, go to make np the mosaic of character . 
who knew all he had had to contend with, and 
how the circomstances of that early life moulded 
the whole after-career . I feel the difficulty of the 
task I have set myself. To bring that portrait 
before my readers' eyes in such colours, and 
painted with such careful and delicate touches as 
shall incline him to take some small portion of 
the interest I have felt in passages of this man's 
life, requires, I fear, an abler hand than mine. 

The effects of a despotism of any kind on a 
proud and sensitive nature are always disastrous ; 
how much more so when that despotism is a reli- 
gious one I As a boy, the young Lamberti had 
writhed under the tutelage of priests : his fether's 
muttered curses against the bondage in which 
they dwelt found a ready soil, took deep root, 
and bore vigorous fruit in the young Guido's 
mind. During the year he spent at Florence, 
where his education was carried on in a more 
enlightened spirit, and under the influence of 



GAS A IiAMBEBTI. 241 

more liberal opinions than dared then be mani- 
fested in Bologna^ the youth's views on social and 
political matters had first taken something like 
a distinct shape and consistency. The subsequent 
years^ in which he studied at the university of his 
native city^ brought him into contact with several 
young men who shared and discussed these views 
among themselves. They were mostly from the 
middle classes . the mezzo ceto, as it is termed; 
and in a land where the distinctions of rank are 
still so jealously preserved, but for his becoming 
a student, the young Count Lamberti would pro* 
bably never have met them. Some few were 
noble, like himself; but their number was small, 
and their intellectual development, generally 
speaking, languid*. brave, imprudent fellows, pro- 
fuse of words, but not to be counted on as any 
great acquisition of strength to the Liberal party. 
Their views on all other points were not Guide's, 
They discussed their successes in love . ^their pro- 
spects of marrymg so many thousand scudif with a 
woman attached thereto . the opera, the ballet, 
and the cacdcu Among his fellow-students of less 
VOL. I* 16 



242 CABB OF CABfiLYON. 

exalted birth, Grnido oftener found the higher 
mental qualities npcni which he felt that hopes 
could alone be built of Italy's regeneration. Hence 
it was Willi diese latterly that he almost entirely 
consorted. Hence that he regarded with in- 
difference akin to contempt the claims of andoit 
birih. But pride of another sort he had, as we 
have seen. His poverlj, and the manner of his 
life, shunning general society, and living with a 
small knot of men of energetic minds and extreme 
opinions, confirmed and strengthened points in his 
character, which, under different circumstances, 
might have long lain dormant 

Six years had passed since he first beheld Gilda 
CSourteney. He was then seventeen. During this 
time her childish image had ever reigned para- 
mount in his heart, and had preserved it from 
the sullying influence of more transient passions; 
until now, withiu the last few months, the mirage 

of his boyish imagination had taken a substantial 

 

form, exercising a subtle and dangerous power 
over all his senses. He fled^ alarmed at the extent 
of the inflnence to which he felt he was submit- 



CASA LAMBEBTL 243 

ting* The struggles that followed have been here 
fiuntly indicated ; it is with their results that we 
are now more immediatelj concerned. 

Havings Asmodeu4ikej lifted the roof of the 
Caaa Lamberti on this particular evening, and 
having taken a glimpse into that melancholy 
apartment where the countess and her son have 
joBt parted^ we shall take the opportuuitj of 
glancing into another in the same house (apolo- 
gizing to the ladies as we enter . but entering 
all the same). 

Gilda and Sara occupied one room. Not for 
lack of accommodation . ^rather the reverse. It 
is nervous work being the' sole occupant of half 
an acre of bed-room ; particularly when the wind 
has a habit of whistling through the chinks of the 
great oak door (which has no lock, only a bolt 
drawn across), and the ill-fitting windows imitate 
the rattling of bones and the chattering of teeth 
m the dead of night Gilda was no heroine, and 
requested, the very first moment she was inducted 
to this vast tapestried apartment, that Sara might 
share it with her. 

16.9 



244 CABB OF CAHBLTON. 

It may be asked what was the nature of the 
tie subsisting between the two girls. On Sarahs 
side the course of events will soon show : on 
Gilda's it was the genuine^ warm-hearted pity 
of a young, enthusiajstic nature for Sara's firiaid- 
less position ; a genuine admiration for her great 
and various abilities ; but an utter absence of all 
sympathy with her companion's opinions and mode 
of viewing life. 

Sara wajs, in the most extensive sense of the 
word, very clever. Every action of her life into 
which passion did not enter . and her passions 
being strong carried her away too often . was a 
matter of calculation. These calculations were 
not only complete to the eztremest fraction ; 
they were conceived generally on a broad, bold 
scale. Thus the coarse arts of flattery and hypo- 
crisy (I allude now to her general demeanour) 
were but rarely employed, and then only in such 
subtle infusions as were safe from detection. If 
it cannot be said that she appeared what she 
really was, at least she allowed so much of her 
own wayward self to appear as rendered it diffi- 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 245 

cult fi>r those who knew her best . even in after 

jearsj when they had a clearer insight into her 

character . ^to pronounce how, and in what pro* 

portions, art and nature were welded into one 

another. She had too much of the wisdom of 

the serpent not to know that the meekness of the 

dove would ill become her. She was too astute 

not to see that the acting of a character entirely 

foreign to her own, day after day, and month* 

after month, must be detected sooner or later. 

The moment must come when the mask would 

drop, and then her game would be up. Better 

than this . ^because in the long run safer . was it 

to show from the very first such portions of her 

strange, ill-regulated mind as she dared dbplay, 

and thus accustom her kind protectors, the Cour- 

teneys, into " making allowances ** for almost 

everything she did. It was a somewhat danger-^ 

ous experiment, for it might naturally be supposed 

that Mr. Courteney would feel averse to allowing 

his daughter to associate with Sara on terms of 

such extreme iiltimacy. But her cleverness, as 

we have seen, carried her through this. The 



246 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

exceeding leniency^ pnshed almost to weakness, 
of Mrs. Oonrtenej's jadgments was borne oat in 
this case by the remarkable toleration Mr. Coor- 
teney showed towards the Creole girl's strange 
whims and manners. That a man so fastidious 
and so irritable should not long since have dis- 
missed firom his household a girl whose tznscm* 
pulous tongue caused him to wince occasionally 
under that marble exterior^ was one of those 
inconsistencies we pronounce at once as incom- 
prehensible. 

She was now seated befiire a dressing-table in 
the centre of the room^ unfastening Uie long cofl 
of black hair' which ^ in a rippling wave upon 
her shoulders. If she glanced up with a piercing 
look of inquiry every now and then at the qK)tted 
green mirror before her^ it assuredly was not from 
motives of Vanity, for the image there presented 
to her was distorted, as if by paralysis, and oould 
hardly be a gratifying object of study to tlie 
person reflected. But as she raised those roond 
and polished arms, and the white fingers were 
leisurely employed in freeing the masses of her 



CASA LAMBBRXL 247 

ebony hair from the confines of comb and bodkin^ 
her gaze travelled through the dim twilight which 
two guttering wax candles afforded in the room^ 
and fastened upon the figure of GUlda seated, 
partially undressed, at the foot of her bed. She 
had been there for the last twenty minutesi silent 
and motionless, her eyes fixed upon the pine-wood 
embers smouldering on the heartL She had un- 
fiutened her dress, but beyond that seemed in 
no hurry to proceed. The contrast between the 
slight, almost infimtine figure of the one girl, 
with her pink gown hanging loosely round her, 
her listless attitude and &ce of dreamy thought- 
fulness, and the finely developed proportions of 
the other, revealed in every movement of her 
arms, under the white dressing-gown, with those 
strange coal-black eyes gleaming out from under 
them . ^this contrast would have struck any artist 
as suggestive of a picture, though there are but 
few who could have painted it 

Afler a long pause, unbroken by a word, Sara 
said, abruptly, . 
" Qilda, why don't you undress ? " 



248 CABB OF CARHLYON. 



.C 



I don't feel tirecL I shan't be able to sleep 
if I go to bed." 

** You are out of spirits. Well I what is it? " 

 Nothing." 

< You are low at the prospect of leaying 
Bologna^ and your Mends here^ eh ? " 

Gilda was silent 

*^ Never mind^ dear. There's one of them who 
will^ follow you all round the world. Take my 
word for it." 

Gilda turned her head suddenly towards the 
speaker^ with a look of animated inquiry. 

** Mr. Laurence Carr " (Gilda sank again into 
listlessness) *' will certainly follow us to Florence. 
He told me as much himself." 

OhI" 

** Cava mia ! under all that apparent simplicity, 
you are a profound little hypocrite. As if you 
didn't see that this young gentleman is desperately 
in love with you, and as if you were not per- 
fectly well aware that he is an excellent partu 

* 

He is only keeping his real station a secret in 
order that you may fall in love with himself 






CA8A LAMBEBTL 249 

ahme. Then he'll throw aside his disguise^ like 
the prince in a fiurj tale^ and come out covered 
with gold and jewels. But all this you knew 
as well as I did long ago." 
Are you jesting^ Sara? " 
Never was more serious in my life." 

^'I haven't an idea what you mean." 

''Oh I I should think not I Of course^ with 
your air of simplicity^ you didn't know he was 
Lord Carrlyon's only son?" 

'' No ; and I don't see how the discovery is to 
afect me in any way." 

'' Oh, you provoke me^ Gilda ! Pray be natural 
with mef if you can. Don't pretend not to see 
what it's impossible any one can be blind to." 

**If you really mean what you say," said 
Gilda> colouring, '' I believe you are quite mis- 
taken. Mr. Carr is very kind to me, and very 
pleasant, and I like him iMty much . when. 
when he's not sarcastic and disagreeable; but 
Tm sure he doesn't think of anything else, and 
I should be very sorry if he did." 

" If you don't care for him, you have been 



250 CASS OF GARBLTOK. 

behaving very badly to bun, that's all I have 
to sayl You have always shown a marked 
partiality for bis society." 

*^ Oh^ Sara ! . ^you don't mean^-yoa sorely don't 

think that I ^it's impossible. I do like Mr. Cair 

very* much. I like to talk and listen to him: and 
he's been very kind to me. but-*but ^ 

'^ These are usually supposed to be symptoms 
of preference/' said the other^ sarcastically. 

''Not of the same sort^" said Gilda, hesitating 
and colouring again. '' There are peq[>I&. with 
whom one never exchanges a word fimn one 
week's end to the other-^^-and yet on& feels nearer 
to them than . ^than . to. -to tiiose whom one has 
constant intercourse with." 

^ I really don't understand yon. When a man 
devotes some hours daily to a woman^ and that 
she submits with mare than complacency to this 
devotion^ it is usually supposed in the world that 
such 'constant intercourse' portends somedung 
nearer. In shorty such conduct on the woman's 
part is called giving enwuragement . and this jou 
have most decidedly done." 



CASJL LAMBKRTL 251 

Gilda looked greadj diafarafised, bat said nothing 
tar a miniite or tiro. 

'^Nol" she exclaimed at last, nhaking her 
head. ^Mr. Carr isn't in eaxnest, and I don't 
believe he misconstmes anything I have ever 
aaid or done. He's fond of society^ and he likes 
ns; and, perhaps, my ignorance amnses him, and 
he is kind enough to teach me-*-bat, oh^ no I he 
isn't in love." 

** You are conversant^ then, with all the symp* 
toms of the 'disease ? ^ 

Her sharp, white teeth flashed like some savage 
animal'Sf in the glass, as she spoke. 

^ I know, at least, when it is not,^ replied 
Gilda, with a half'-sigh: and the words were a 
mournful echo of her own secret thought But 
Sara would not abandon her prey so easily. 

'^Yon are aware, I suppose, of the extrar 
ordinary rute by which he obtained admittance 
into Ihis house. Most peoj^ would say that such 
a proceeding indicated ^ love at first sight' " 

** You deal in riddles to-night, Sara. I don't 
know what you allude to, the least." 



252  CAHB OF CABBLYON. 

''To his having bribed our driver to break 
our carriage on the top of the Apennines^ in 
ordenthat Mr. Carr might bring us home in his 
own. If you doubt the story, ask Marietta. 
She wormed it out of his courier, at last . ^when^ 
I suppose, he thought there was no longer any 
necessity for conceabnent. But / was sure of it 
from the very first'' 

Gilda stared and looked almost frightened* 
Her companion burst out laughing . ^that hard 
little laugh peculiar to herself 

'' I don't like stories that come through servants, 
Sara, and I shan't believe anything on that kind 
of authority," said 6ilda with some warmth. 
''Not that it signifies to me whether this is tme 
or not" 

"Except inasmuch as it shows how resdved 
Mr. Carr was to know you. 'If these things 
were done in the green tree, what shall be done 
in the dry?' If this ardent young gentleman 
went through so much in order to know you, 
what is he not prepared to undei^ in order to 
win you ? " 



CASA LAKBEBH. 253 

 Very little^ I hope,** replied Gilda, quietly. 
*' But forewarned is forearmed. I shall remember 
what you say, and take care to avoid misleading 
liim any more daring the short time we remain 
here.** 

*'Then you will be acting like a little fool." 
The angry flash of the eye that accompanied this 
was as instantly veiled, and Sara proceeded in a 
quietj^ compressed voice . 

^ If you were as careful not to be the cause of 
uneasiness and dissension in other quarters it 
would be as well." 

Grilda looked at the speaker with wide-open 
eyes, but her hands unconsciously clasped each 
other tighter. 

*' Are you mad to-night, Sara ? What does all 
this mean ? What cause of uneasiness can I be to 

anyone?" 

'* You are one to the Countess Lamberti." 

The young girl turned pale as death, and 
murmured . , 

^' How so?" 

^'Because you are a heretic; and that she 



S54 CAlQft OF GABBLTON. 

wonld sooner see her son dead, I believe, than 
nuurried to one. Yet she knows thst joa hare 
eacerted all your arts to fascinate hinij though joa 
do not care for him a rash! and he has the good 
sense to avoid you as much as possible. Any 
man's head may be tamed by flattery . ^ihai silent 
flatteiy which consists in looks as much  any- 
thing; but Count Lamberti knows that such a 
marriage would be prodnctiTe of nothing bat 
misery. You have already sown dissension between 
him and his mother. If you have any finendahip 
for him, you should imitate his line of conduct" 

Flesh and blood could not stand this. Even 
Gilda's gentle nature rebelled against the coarse- 
ness of Sara's diatribes. The tears gathered in 
her eyes, but she spoke distinctly enough, while 
her cheek flushed with indignation. 

''You have no right to speak thus. It is most 
fieJse and cruel, Sara. Guide Lamberti and I are old 
friends, but I never have done anything to warrant 
your ungenerous taunts ; and I don't believe a bit 
more what you say about Madame I^uonberti dian 
I do your story about Mr. Cacr I " 



CA8A LAMBERTL 255 

^ Oo and pay her a Yisit See how she receives 
yon." 

" She has always discouraged our visits, and 
sbnniied ns on account of oar religion. Th^e- 
fore that is not to the point I daresay tXii has 
objected to Onido's being so mnch with us, and he 
has come mnch less often lately . perhaps in 
consequence. I see nothing in that to justify 
your statements.'* 

"Very well, my dear, as you like,** replied 
the other, and a smile came over the dark fiice 
which appeared most baneful in the crooked 
reflection of the mirror. "I only spoke for your 
good* You will act, of course, as yon think best ; 
but you may rely on the faeU Madame Lamberti 
is only counting the hours until you are out of 
the house; and as you don^ care for the poor 
^ow, really the kindest thing to do would be. to 
leave him in peace^Miot to try and awaken his 
pity by appearing broken-hearted at leaving 
Bologna. Men are so weak, there is no knowing 
what they may not do from vanity and pity 
combined." 



256 CABB OF CABRLYOK. 



tt 



Yoa may be quite easy about Ghiido 
Lamberti," smd Gllda^ in a steady Toice^ bat Mrith 
quivering lip. 

Sara had not miscalculated the efect of her 
words. She foresaw that, however indignantly 
Gilda might repudiate the imputation, the wound 
would rankloi and the poison impregnate her 
whole being. 

She careftdly adjusted the silk net into which 
her hair was gathered for the night, and having 
satisfied herself that it was securely fastened, she 
turned round, saying, with a laugh . 

''And now, cara mia, to turn to more im- 
portant subjects, how do you intend to have that 
blue dress of yours made ? ^ 

But no reply came. Gilda was on her knees 
at the foot of the bed, saying her evening prayer. 
The poor child was praying fervently for his 
welfare and happiness . she. did not think of her 



I 

own. 



And the two girls spoke to each other no more 
that m'ghi 



CASA LAMBERTI. 257 



CHAPTER XV. 

This same night wad a sleepless one to the young 
Englishman, tossing to and fro in a state of fever- 
ish excitement under his eider-down quilt at the 
San Marco. He had spent the evening in the 
marchesa's box, not having received an invitation, 
as he hoped, from the Casa Lamberti. He was 
absent, and the marchesa for the first time found 
the handsome young Englishman very dull com- 
pany. She shrewdly guessed the cause, however, 
and was too good-natured to take pfience; for he 
made the most laughable efforts to appear lively. 
But, in the terse language of the schools, it was 
''no ga" The marchesa rallied him with some 
pointed, but playful allusions to the fair Inglese 
she had seen him with that morning. The heavy 
Piedmontese officer, >vith whom she seemed on the 
VOL. L 17 



256 CABB OF CARRLTOK. 

most easy terms of intimacy, was in the box, and 
one or two others came in. There was a good 
deal of noisy rattle, but, alas I instead of finding 
it entertaining, as he had done the first night or 
two, Carr thought it insupportably tedioos, and 
finally made his escipe before the opera was over. 
He smoked his cigar fer half an hour in the 
Bkeet, and saw the marebesa's sedan pHB> with 
its escort of Piedmontese cimdry; then Bfangim' 
and Kazad came by, the laitter singing with great 
energy. 

'' La donna ^ mobile;** 

in which sentiment Carr fdt di^oaed to agree; 
and threw away the end of his cigar, wilk mism- 
thr^ic feelings towaida the whole sex* 

Bat this was only one phase . a passing one^ 
' of the malady nnder which he laboured* It was 
quickly aocceeded by the qnestioiL wfaedier Ufe 
could be endurable without one particular JhmuL 
And he began to be alarmed at the answer his 
heart gare, or that he thought it gtrte, wUdb 
came to tlie same thing. He had scarcely yet 
oontonplated seriously the proqiect of making 



CASA LAHHEBTL 259 

GMa Covatesney his wife. No^ it was tlirast 
befeiB his eyes so that he eonld not refose 
vary longer to see that the onljr altenmtrre to 
this -was breaking off all intercourse with the 
family at once^ and striving to Ibrget her as best 
he might The first obvious reflectioB was that 
his parents would be strenuonslj opposed to the 
marriage. His modier wonld sooner cut off her 
rig^t hand than that her only son should many 
a '^ nobody." To this objectioo oq the part of 
Prudence, Yotith replied recklessly, that he had 
always told his mother he should marry to please 
htmaelf, and not for rank or fiishion, or any other 
worldly consideration. He was dependent on his 
father, it was true; hot Lord Carrlyon would 
surely not carry his resentment (or, rather, hat 
ladyship's) so far as not to allw his son and 
hehr a suitable allowance when he was once 
married, and the thing was beyond recall ? This 
line of argaent cfe^l^r pointed to a marriage 
witltout the knowledge of his parents, if he could 

r 

pearsuade the Courteneys to consent to thisi But 
had fte any certain assurance that Gildia cared for 

17.2 



260 CARR OP CAKRLYON. 

him ? Might he not have been playing with edge- 
tools, and find himself wounded, while he had left 
no impression in return? He repeated this ques- 
tion over and over again anxiously to himself* 
Her manner to-day had puzzled him- Had he 
been too backward in declaring his intentions 
clearly (if they could even now be called clear)? 
Perhaps so. Her sensitive nature would shrink 
fix)m betraying her feelings for one who had never 
openly avowed his own. Why should he not 
avow them ? Why should be fly from her ? 
Would it not have a touch of romance and 
chivalry, this marrying against all the world's 
prejudices ? 

And wasn't she far too good for him? He 
might dazzle all the rest of the world, but he 
didn't blind himself. He acknowledged that he 
wasn't worthy of that rare prize. He knew what 
her training had been by that most charming 
mother . wasn't that mother herself sufficient 
guarantee? His two aunts and his six cousins 
were all ready to pick holes in whomsoever he 
should marry on his own responsibility. Well, 



CASA LAMBBTI. 261 

they would find it diflScolt to invent any fault 
in Gilda. The simple distinction of her manners 
was borne out in her mind: he did not dread 
the criticism of any number of London salons for 
the one^ or of carping old maids for the other. 

Then it was an inestimable blessing of which 
he did not fail to remind himself when enume- 
rating the favourable points of the question^ as 
he tossed to and fro in his bed^ that Gilda had 
neither brother nor sister . ^nothing that could be 
h charge in aft^r life; only that very charming- 
mother^ who would be an ornament to any society^ 
and Mr. Courteney, whoj although he was not 
connected with the D family^ was undoubt- 
edly a gentleman-like, well-educated man, quiet,, 
and retiring, who would not be wanting to thrust 
himself upon the Carrlyon connections. In short, 
it was clearly impossible his mother could call any 
of ihem vulgar. She would hate them, of course, 
and it was probable that Gilda would not be very 
happy just at first whenever Lady Carrlyon and 
she were together. What should he do if he saw 
her wretched ? He knew his mother's prejudice and 



H 



262 CABB or CABBXiTON. 

 

temper, and to see any om wk> was dear to Um 
fioffiexiflg uder AeBe woidd b^ iasiipportaUe. 

HeiB adverse winds began to drift hk haxqve 
upon the shoak af doubt and deq>OBdeoi^* Wliat 
if Mc Courteoef refused bis daogbter'a iiand 
until Lord Carrlyon'a oonsent was obtained? 
And if tbe s,fBur were definitiviely broken 'oS, or 
that be ordered post-boiseB to-inqcrow^ and fled 
from the da^er would not life bave lost balf its 
sayour to bim? Could be look forward to a 
purposeless wandering from city to cilj, and then 
a return to ibe treadjnill of Laodaa society^ with- 
out loathing? But then if his sitber really did 
cut 4>S his suppliei^ and that he were rednoed 
to supportii^ binnelf by painting? Aa to the 
rumour that Mr. Courteney was a man of great 
wealth, and that Gilda was an beiressiy Gazr had 
seen and heard enough of an Italian belief in the 
unbounded riches of every Englishman to giye it 
no credence. It was not likely Mr. Couiteoe^ 
would live in tbe irety retired way be was doing 
if he were a man of substance. CaiTj to do him 
justice, would bave been diaappomted to find tbst 



GASA ULMBERXL 263 

.rilda had a lai^ fortitDe. It would hav robbed 
liis deYotioa of hall its grand seU-fiacrifice. But, 
for the first tuoe, he cursed his inaptxtode for defi- 
nite hard work which had preFented his MIowliig 
any pro&aekm, whereby he might have been in- 
depemdent. Siippositi< and contingency followed 
so clote on each other in his heated imagination^ 
that he found nothing like a distinct answer to 
any of these perplexii^ doubts. 

One image floated darkly acrctas his mind now 
and then, without his being able to account 
exac^y for its exercising such a disagreeable 
influence over him. Tliat image was of a tall, 
xeserred young man, with whom he had held but 
little interconise, and of whom, in reality, he 
knew nothing. Certainly he had little ground 
for his vague jealousy of Guide Lamberti beyond 
 the fow careless words of Razzi. These referred 
to a Bolc^nese rumour which bad already, accord- 
ii^ to Jiis informer, died away. Nothing that 
Cacr had seen would arouse or coi^m such a 
suq)idiaa ; although he 'proved that such a sus- 
picion esusted from having, in the first instance. 



264 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

questioned Razzi on the subject. In vain Carr 
reminded himself that, on lihe rare occasions when 
Guido joined the party in Mrs. Conrteney's 
drawing-room, he scarcely ever addressed himself 
particularly to Gilda. Nor had Carr ever detected 
any symptoms of secret preference for the Italian 
in Miss Courteney herself; and yet, in spite of 
every reasonable assumption to the contrary, he 
felt a vague apprehension that from this quarter 
some obstacle ih his future happiness might arise. 
Like all people of good digestion, who sleep 
well, Laurence regarded a bad night as a calamity 
of the most portentous nature. He must be very 
ill. This mental anxiety was telling on his con- 
stitution. It visibly affected his temper (or 
" his nerves," he would probably have termed it), 
and it rendered his organ of combat! veness very 
conspicuous. His college friends used to say 
(and who should know one so well as one's 
college friends?) that the only way Laurence 
would ever get to Heaven was by being dragged 
violently . ^in the opposite direction. This cha- 
racteristic was, of course, doubly apparent when 



CASA LAMBEBTL 265 

his mind was in a state of extreme tension and 
excitement. Bj a judicious amount of contra- 
diction^ he might have been led to adopt any 
extravagant measure at such times. On this 
occasion it came in the most appropriate form . 
a conjoint letter from his father and mother. 

Giuseppe drew back the thin muslin curtains 
and presented the letter to his master^ as he lay in 
bed, observing^ with a thrift with which his habits 
of vicarious expenditure were hardly consistent, 
that he had had to pay double postage for it. 

Carr propped up the flimsy bolster, and by dint 
of sundry thumps induced it to perform the part 
of a support to his back, as he raised himself in 
that disordered couch and tore open the cover. 
His mother's were the first sheets that fell out 
To these was added a single one in his honoured 
father's hand. It was so seldom Lord Carrlyon ever 
wrote to his son, that curiosity, I fear, as much as 
anything else induced Carr to read this first : . 

** My deak Boy, . ^I am sorry to say the N. and 
D. Railway Company, of which I am one of die 



266 CABB OF GABSLTON. 

directors and original shareboldeiBy luui fiukd^ 
and I have to pay down a large sunL, at cmou 
Tiere is nothing ft>r it but selling tlie Clapton 
&rm as I can't lay ny hand on any ready monej, 
and I 'won't borrow if I can help it Of ooane, 
you will give me yonr signature to the deed of 
sale, as it can't be done widioat I have told 
Scroggins to send yon the necessary papers; and 
I hope that the twelve thousand pounds which the 
farm will fetdb may cover my liabilities. Your 
grand&ther bought it. It is not part of the 
.original Caxrlyon estate. I have veij heavy 
ejqpenses; and the mines, I am acaid are not 
going on as well as they did. I would not ask 
yon to part with the land, if I could help iU 
my dear Lanrenca I hope you wiU come home 

SOOOi 

" Yonr affectionate lather, 

<f CAJtBLTOK." 

The son threw down this bald, disjomted episde 
with a flushed cheek, and took up his mother's. 
After many lamentations on the necessity for 



CASJl XJLMBfiBTI. -267 

alienating nay partioB of the estate wludi she 
^ mdenliood " ivsis neceaBarjr, Iter Itdysh^ went 
an to remark^ . 

"Of -course I ila not cajre about the lamd; but 
it bas. such a bad affect in tbe coujutjr, selling 
property, tbat I am very mncb Annoyed. How- 
e^^er, your &tfaer tells me it imist be done; thou^ 
I casBotsee, wilb bis fine property, wby it oouU 
not be. raised in some other wAy. only twelve 
thousand pounds I He proposed my ^ving up 
London nest season, and redndia^ the establisb- 
ment bere; bnt q course, that was not to be 
heard Qf--tfae way to make people talk more than 
ever I What is madi more reasonable is that 
lie should give up his kimting, which, at his tiiae 
of life, there is a aMLturol excuse fixr doing . pec^le 
can't think it odd. You can't think how all this 
has worried me, my dear boy, particttlarly as we 
Jbad a fa)use full of people (Oortly, the historian, 
among tithecs . so interesting t), and I was obl^ed 
to Attend to them, and your fiither was shut 
up widi lawyers and horrid men <^ bnsiness all 



268 CABB OF QABBLYOK. 

the time^ and could not go out shooting with ant 
of the party. I wish your father had nerer 
had anything to do with raUroads I He frightens 
me by saying that his responsibilities do not 
end even here^ and that he may be called on fer 
double that amount ; but that I never can believe. 
You are my comfort in all this, dear boy; 
for I know^ in the first place, that you wiU not 
hesitate to sign whatever he asks you, though 
it may be very painful to you to do so ; and next, 
I have such confidence in your making a match 
which will relieve your father and me firom all 
our present anxieties I You will, I hope, duly 
feel the responsibility which rests on you now, 
and how doubly necessary it is that you should 
marry welL If you do not come home at once 
(we shall be having a very recherche party here 
for the new year, and I think of giving a ball), 
I hope your good feeling will lead you to go 
on to Rome, or to return to Paris, and not tpask 
your time in a stupid place like Bologna, where yon 
can meet with no opportunities such as you ought 
to be looking out for. What amusements you find 



 



CASA LAMBERTI. 269 

tliere I can't tbink . ^the more so^ as you seem^ 

from your last letter, to have given up the only 

society worth knowing . that of the Onofnos and 

Ortolanis. As to those English people you write 

about, I wonder you have the bad taste to prefer 

those sort of second-rate 'settlers to the native 

society of the place. Poor dear Lord Byron once 

said to me,' "I hate my own country people!" 

When I am abroad I often think how right he 

was I Talking of Lord B., I hope you have been 

teriiing something. I showed Cortly those sweet 

things, and he said you had germs. If you 

remain abroad, a poem . something in the ChUde 

Harold style, with just a dash of the Don Juan 

to make it go down with a certain set . ^would 

keep your name before the world, and prevent 

your being forgotten. But, my dearest Laury, 

though I say this, I do trust you mil return 

before long. They say there is a chance of the 

borough being vacant next year, and you pught 

 to be doing popularity here before that. Lord 

Alverton's daughter comes out nest season, too. r 

and you know how anxious I have always been in 



270 CARR OF CiJtBLTOK. 

thta quarter. Snch a nice girl I so well broaghiup! 
such principleSj besides her two hondxed thooaand 
pounds I Yes I mj dearest hoy, jou nmst posi- 
tivdy not wrte a^ "ore preeioos time Ja tint 
9tii|nd, dirty town^ bat come haxk: aad coiMde 
me in all my troubles and flBxietie8-*As ever, 

^ Tour j&ndly attached nwiherj'* 

&C. Ac 

It was with BO very pleasant saisation^ as 
may be imagined^ that Carr read diese two letters. 
It was clear his father^s affairs, were not in tie 
condition he had been brooght np to^ bdie?e 
they were. Lord Caarlyon mnst haive been Sring 
at the extremity of his income for yean past 
not to be able to lay his hand on this com- 
paratively small snm of money. Bat it was not 
this that affected Carr nearly so mncfa as mi^t 
have been imagined He had constandy affirmed 
that he was indifferent about money: and tlioa^ 
when he used to say this, he fcrgot to add that he 
was not indifferent to those refinement of K& 
which money alone can procure, it was yery true 



CASA LAMHEBTL 271 

tbafr he had never been extravagant^ and the 
piobabiltttes were that he would reeoncile htmsdf 
to a reduced fortune better thm most mexL He 
cared more aboat parting with a sragle aere of 
the family property. If that could have been 
prevented^ he would have been content to be a 
poorer man for the Test of hit life. It wounded 
his AchiHes' heel . that small vulnerable point of 
pride in the old fiimilj residaooe and unbrokoi 
succession of so manj miles of fair En^ish land 
which^ together with a spotless naonej he expected 
would have been transmitted to- him intact 

But now; even this consideration faded into 
inffigmficance before the increased difiSculties to 

. 

his marriage which must inevitably arise. And, 
wUIe he read his mother's letter, hia irritation 
became greater . his antagonism more and more 
roused. Why should he sacrifice his happiness 
because his lather chose to speculate in railways, 
and hia mother to be recklessly extravagant? 
What right had any one to dictate whom or 
how much he was to marry? Did they expect 
him to sign a marriage contract as readily as 



272 CARB OF CABBLYON. 

this deed of sale of a farm? Thej would find 
themselves mistaken* He had had enough of 
all this worldliness; he was sick to death of 
hearing of women with two hnndied thousand 
pounds. Such a thing onght not to be allowed. 
It was tempting poor devils to sell themselves. 

At all events he was resolved 

What to do? Why, to write to his father at 
once^ and tell him^ without hesitation, that he 
was going to be married, and that he would be 
happy to sign away any number of farms, if he 
obtained his &ther's consent. But stay! Was 
not this somewhat premature . ^plunging himself 
into hot, nay, boiling water with his father and 

 

mother before he had ascertained distinctly the 
state of Gilda's heart, and had spoken to Mr. 
Courteney? 

This was clearly the first thing to be done, 
and he would not write to England until his 
mind was satisfied on this point Having come 
to which resolution, he leapt out of bed, and 
began dressing with an energy and expedition 
which perfectly amazed Giuseppe. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 273 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Mb. Coubtenet had been very Dl all night The 
Italian doctor had been sent for earl j that mom- 
ing^ and^ while he pronounced him in no imme- 
diate danger^ told Mrs. Courteney it wonld be 
most precarioos for her husband to travel for 
some time to come. The cold Tramontana wind^ 
which at this season is so prevalent^ might be 
fatal to him. He must be carefully watched, and 
kept as quiet as possible. 

Yet here he was, at twelve o'clock in the day, 
lying on the sofa, looking more bloodless than 
ever, but in discussion with his wife, despite 
her earnest entreaties that he would not exert 

himsel 

*'I have not been a great talker for the last 
five-and-twenty years . and I have not very long 

VOL. h * 18 



274 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

left to say what I want," he replied, with a grim 

smile. ** It is folly to shut one's eyes to the 

fact that I may die any moment If I could 

only see the child respectably married, with no 

more than the average risk of being wretched for 
life " 

" Oh, Henry, do not talk in that bitter way ! " 

*' I repeat, that if I conld see her married to 
any hcmest mui, who was likely to l)e kind to 
her, I should be only too much obliged to any one 
who woald pot me out of my misery* I suffer 
horriHy . it cant go on long." 

"What can I do to give ytm any comfort?'' 
said his distressed wife. 

^ Get this matter setfled one way or the odier, 
if we are to remain here an indefinite time. Hits 
fellow Carr is probaUy only amusing Idmself ; 
but what is sport to him may be death to ker. 
Haye you any idea whether she cares for him? ** 

"^I am pusded: sometiiues I think she does; 
but I have always carefully avoided speaking 
to her en the subject, for fear of putting tlie 
idea into her head." 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 275 

'< Wellj as it is evident that your ideas about 
Guido Lamberti were delusions . ^though I should 
infinitely prefer him, with all his disadvantageSy 
to this ^armlouB young gentleman . I have no 
objaction to Mr* Carr as a son-in-law^ provided 
the girl likes him. He is a gentleman. That is 
something. I have watched bim pretty narrowly^ 
and though he's not made of very strong stufi^ 
there's nothing radically bad. If he were a hard- 
working man> like Lambert!^ I ^ould be better 
pleased. For tweniy years I have known what 
it IB to be idle. without an object . without a 
career. It doesn't improve a man's amiability. 
Ambition and energy stagnant . ^the mind preying 
on itself," he added^ bitterly. '^ But as it is^ 
what I have seen of the man is rather in his 
favour, . and you know how important it is that 
the child should be married^ 

*^ But you would not hurry on ber choice, with 
the risk of her repenting it later ? " 

''Certainly not: but I would also gnard her 
from the risk of falling a prey to any sharper 
after 1 am dead. Bemember what your position 

18.2 



276 CARR OF CABBLYON. 

is, and will be. Never forget that we are ouieasU 
Jrom society. The onlj line of condact yoa can 
carry on with dignity and safety is that I have 
always adopted . ^to stand firmly on your own 
ground, resisting every attempt to draw yoa firom 
it By doing thus, you will spare yourself much 
future misery. But the girl. don't yon see 
that her position will be doubly perilous? In 
God's name, if she and this Englishman like each 
other, let them be married. If not, it is better he 
went his way." 

'' It is strange," said Mrs. Courteney, ^ that 
the last two or tl^ee days she seems to avoid 
him." 

''Then she likes him. But she inherits your 
temperament, and is likely to be guided by her 
impulses. They are dangerous guides. Talk to 
her. See what she says." 

Oh, Henry I " said his wife, through her sobs ; 

don't say she is like me. Tou scarcdy know 
her. Tou don't, indeed. She has fiir more 
strcngtii and decision of character than you give 
her credit for. I know what you think-. that I 



if 



GASA LAMBERTI. 277 

am not fit to gaide her^ not fit to take care of her 
when . when you're gone : but " 

^' Tour task will be a difficult one^ and it would 
relieve you of a weight of anxiety if it were settled 
before I go. Perhaps^ I have not much faith in 
woman's strength of character under such cir- 
cumstances. At all events^ I believe it would be 
both for the girl's happiness and yours^ if she 
were established respectably now, and left you to 
end your days in peace." 

While he was speaking Marietta entered. The 
** Signor Inglese " was at the door, craving to see 
cither Mr. or Mrs. Courteney. 

It was the third time he had called, with the 
same success . simple denial. He learnt from 
Marietta that Mr. Courteney was no worse . in 
no immediate danger ; and, as there appeared to 
be little prospect of Carr's seeing the ladies of 
the family (Gilda, pleading her father's illness, 
scarcely left her room), the next morning he 
could restrain himself no longer ; and, resolving 
to end this miserable state of uncertainty one way 



278 CABR OF CARRLTON. 

or another, he despatched the followmg note to 
Mr. Courteney : . 

^ My deab Sib, . I am sorry to learn that your 
serions iUness is the canse of my being denkd 
the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Courteney and your 
daughter, when I called both yesterday and die 
day before. As I fear it may be some time before 
your hospitable doors are again open to ine {for 
I understand that Mrs. and Miss CSoorteney are 
in close attendance on you), I write to ask 
whether you are well enough to grant me the 
favour of a short interview on a subject of Tital 
importance to me and my future happiness^ You 
may possibly divine what that subject ia. Should 
you be unequal to the exertion of reoeivisg me, 
perhaps I might be allowed to see Mrs* Courteney. 
Otherwise, I would endeavour to express myself 
as fully as I can on paper. 

*' Believe me, my dear sir, 

*' Ever most sincerely yoors. 



CASA LAMBERTL 279 

V To this note Carr received the following laconic 
reply, half an hoar afterwards : . 

" Dear Sib, . I shall be happy to hear what 
you have to say at four o'clock. 

*' Faithfully yours, 

" Henry Couhtenet." 



280 CABR OF CABRLTOK. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

It was not without a certain dignity and sim- 
plicity that Carr avowed the state of his feelings 
to Mr. Courtenej that afternoon. With the tact 
to perceive that the least possible circamlocntion 
wonld best suit the taste of his auditor, he came 
straight to his point at once ; merely prefacing it 
with the irank confession that he had intended 

I 

speaking first to Miss Courteney, had an oppor- 
tunity been allowed him for so doing. Mr. 
Courteney listened gravely, without visible emo- 
tion of any kind, even when he learnt the future 
position and fortune of the man who sought his 
daughter's hand. He was silent while Garr 
'* hoped that he was not mistaken in believing 
that Miss Courteney would be inclined to listen 
favourably to his suit ; that he should, of course. 



CASA LAHBEBTI. 281 

wish her decision to be free and unbiassed^ if 
Mr. Courteney gave his consent^ and that he 
should beg to learn ihat decision from her own 
lips." Carr went on to say that he should write 
to his father, as soon as Miss Courteney had 
consented to become his. 

** I will not conceal from you," he added, *' that 
my father is likely to object to my marriage at 
first; but that, will make no difference in my 
feelings or conduct I am five-and-twenty, and 
am not likely to be OTerruled in such a matter ; 
and if you are averse to our marriage actually 
taking place under these circumstances, a very 
few months will induce my father to yield, I am 
confident." 

And here at last Mr. Courteney broke silence. 

" Before you go any further, sir, let me remind 
yon* of one thing . and I beg you never to forget 
it . bear witness to it hereafter-^that neither I 
nor my family sought your .acquaintance, but, on 
the contrary, avoided it, and that it was thrust 
upon us by a stratagem, of which I have only 
become aware within the last few da}^." 



282 CASK OF CABRLTOK. 

^'I do not forget it, nor sliall I ever do so, 
Mr. Conrteney," said Carr^ colouring to tiie roots 
of his hair. 

''Nor can yoa plead at any fiitiire time &at you 
were entrapped or inveigled into a marriage with 
Miss Courteney. You will allow- that very little 
inducement has been held out to you to follow 
up the acquaintance." 

" I am surprised and hurt^ Mr. Courteney, tint 
you should conceive it possible for me to hold 
such an opinion of your family^ or even permit 
such language respecting it ever to be used in 
my presence.** 

" If Miss Courteney should accept your ofEsr, 
theu; as you candidly own that your ftinily is 
likely to bejopposed to such a marriage, you must 
make me one promise : and I require but one. Ton 
shall never forget the circumstances under wlach 
you made our acquaintance ; you shall never be 
induced to say that you were deceived, tihat you 
were not dealt faarly with . that this mania^ 
was made up for you. If you cannot make such 
a promise, young man, say so at once.** 



CASA LAMBERTL 283 

'* I make it readilj^ and I swear to keep it/' 
said Carr, eagerlj. 

^In that case^ having made this preUminarj 
stipulation^'' pursued Mr. CoQrtenejr^ with the 
same imperturbable manner, ''let me saj that I 
am better pleased at yonr frankly acknowledging 
the view jonr fath^ is ' likelj to take in this 
matter at once, than had you endeavoured to 
soften cr conceal it." 

** But I beg to assTure you ^ began Garr. 

''Stay! young gmtleman. Hear me to an 
end. I wish you distinctly to understand that, 
even should I find Miss Courteney shares the 
sentiments you have expressed, I entirely object, 
to a long engagemoit'' 

** But, sir "" 

Mr. Courteney raised his thin hand. 

" I entirely object to a long engagement. But 
having said this, I must add {hat, if yon have 
well considered the subject . ^if you have no doabt 
or reluctance in your own saind in entering 
into such a compact against the wishes of your 

n 



284 GARB OF CABBLTON. 

" None whatever. I have made up my mini" 

'' In that case, I shall not regard the objection 
as insuperable. I shall only stipulate that Lord 
Carrlyon shall be informed of your intention. 
After that, if Miss Courteney is of your mind, 
the sooner you are married the better." 

Carr was surprised. This was hardly the tone 
for which he had been prepared; but he was, 
of course, well pleased to find what he had 
looked on as the chief difficulty in his way re- 
moved. After he had expressed his thanks and 
his satisfaction, Mr. Courteney said . 

'^ I am led to form this opinion and resolution 
firom two- considerations. Firstly, that a man is 
only solemnly responsible to God and his own con- 
science for the marriage he makes. No one else 
can judge of the real motives and, it may be, 
the conflicting stru^les that have terminated in 
the final resolve." (Carr felt keenly how true 
this was in his own case.) ''Secondly, and of 
fiir minor importance, is the consideration that 
Miss Courteney is not unprovided for. She will 
not be dependent on your family, and I shall 



CASA LAMBEBXI. 286 

exact no settleinent upon her bejohd her own 
fortane. During her mother's lifetime . ^mine, of 
course^ is only an affair of months^ more- or less . 
she Yfill have a part of mj fortane. She will 
receive npon the day she marries fifteen thousand 
pounds^ and at Mrs. Courteney's death an addi- 
tional ten thonsand.** 

There was no denyibg that in the present state 
of the Carrlyon money-market, this was not un- 
welcome intelligence. I have said that Carr did 
not believe, )Emd would have been really annoyed 
to discover, that Gilda was an heiress; but that 
she had a competency was a feature. in the case 
which would ce||ainly &cilitate his negotiations 
with his fether. He hastened, however, to declare 
that he had believed Miss Courteney to have 
no fortune; and he requested that the manage- 
ment of it might be left entirely in her hands. 
Mr. Ciourteney did mt appear to think that this 
declaration called for any reply; but after a 
moment's pause, he observed . 

*' The sand of my life is nearly run out, Mr. 
Carr. I confess it would make me easier to see 



286 CABB OF GABBLYOK. 

tlus girl married to an honest man wbun she loTes 
. ^whoever lie may be . ^befinre I die. I am in- 
different to all worldlj advantages for her . ihat 
is the result, I aoppose, of haying lived so many 
years out of ' the world ' . so that your being heir 
to a.title^ and so on, is no attraction in mj eyes. 
Indeed, from circumstances into whidi I see no 
reason to enter, I consider it almost a drawback. ^ 
(Could Lady Carrlyan only hear him ! Even her 
son is rather staggered.) ^^I mention this to 
prove to you that I shall not endeavour to 
influence Miss Courteney either for or against yoo. 
It rests entirdy with her to decide. I carry out 
the principle I upheld just now with regard to 
marriage : it most be a free choice, for which she 
is responsible at a higher bar than ndne, or the 
world's.** 

There was something of solemnity in the way 
Mr. Courteney uttered these words which deeply 
impressed Carr. But the sick man was a{^flr- 
ently beginning to feel exhausted, and anxious to 
bring the interview to a dose ; for he added, after 
a few moments. 



CABA LAMBEHTL 287 



(t 



To-modTTOw momiogy Mr. Can, if jon call, 
you shall see her: urge the suit joursel^ and 
receive her answer from her own lips. Mean- 
while, she shall be prepared for your coming and 
its ol^ect You would not wish that she should 
be surprised into returning a hasty answer; and 
a little cahn deliberation befordiand is worth a 
long repeutance afterwards. Excuse my asking 
yoQ to remain any loiter now. I am tired." 

He looked so ; and Carr was not sorry to take 
his extended hand and hurry out of the room. He 
had fdt less at his ease throughout that interview 
tluia he ever remembered to have done in all his 
previous life. 

It wae Yiot alone the recogoition of a powerful 
by an inferior mind. It was not the hardness 
with which the truths Mr. Ckmrt^iey uttered were 
d^Bed Bor the cddnete of his manner, repelling 
all expansion ctf heart from the young man. What 
haunted and pauiJEully impressed him was the 
conviction that some great sorrow . some livelong 
remorse had embittered all the fountains of human 
knowledgej and had frozen up, on heights inac* 



288 CARB 09 CASIULTON. 

cessible to warmth and sympathy, the wisdom of a 
disappointed man. 

Can* felt that the phrases of society to which he 
was accastomed were much wasted breath to sodi 
a man: the arguments he would have brought 
forward to an ordinary '' papa" would be thrown 
away here ; and, moreover, he had a disagreeable 
impression that Mr. Courteney only half believed 
in the unalterable strength and depth of his 
passion. All this weighed upon him, in spite 
of the remarkable success of his interview. In 
fact, he felt that he had played a very secondary 
part in it, and considering the startling '' point " 
. the coup de Hiedtre . ^that part contained in the 
announcement of his rank and fortune, this was 
rather hard. On the other hand, perhaps he 
produced a more favourable impression on the 
stem, cynical invalid, than had he shone forth 
brilliantly in eloquence and profession. 



v. ' 



CAS A LAMBERTI. 289 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

AnD what of Geraldine all this time ? Eyer since 

the conversation three nights ago, in which Sara 

had contrived, with devilish cunning, to poison 

the very purest fountain of pleasure which the 

young girl possessed, she had shrunk with shame- 

from dipping even so much as the tips of her 

fingers into that now troubled water. She did 

not dare to see Guide. She felt the blood rush 

to her cheek at the very possibilily of meeting 

him. A great deal of what had been said might 

be fidse, but there was a residue which was true. 

He avoided her : he was cold and guarded when 

they met that morning : he was a changed man 

lately. Her own secret, indeed . that secret which 

she had not guessed herself till lately, and now 

tried to disavow . had not been dragged to light ; 

VOL. L 19 



290 CABB OF CAEKLYOK. 

but she was accused of trying to attract. of acting 
as a heartless coquette towards him ! Oh I if it 
were possible that he thought so! H it were 
possible even that his mother should think and 
say so! and this she could not but confess was 
more than possible. She hid her face in her 
hands; and the burning tears forced their way 
through them. Yes I Sara's seed had taken root! 

She spent lihe greater part of those days alone 
Of Sara, who asserted her independence by going 
out at all honrs^ she saw little. Her mother was 
principally occupied in attending npon Mr. Cour- 
teney. And even Jto that dear mother whom she 
loved and trusted so implicitly^ it was difficult to 
speak upon the subject that weighed so heavily at 
her heart. What, indeed, could she say ? How 
disentangle that woof of mingled feelings, when 
she scarce saw the threads of them herself? 

It was true, as Mrs. Courteney had said to her 
husband, that she had never noticed to her daughter 
Laurence's attentions. With rare delicacy she had 
forborne rom questioning her as to her feelings 
either towards the young Englishman or the Italian* 



CASA LAMBEBTL 291 

If there was a confidence to be made, it would 
come unsought, and she would not trouble the 
fireshness and guilelessness of that young nature 
by suggesting thoughts which might not yet have 
fotind their way there. The change in Guide 
heui been only slightly adverted to, as we have 
seen* At times there may have been a shade 
across Gilda's brow, but it was scarcely mare 
than a passing one. Until the idea of leaving 
Bologna had roused the young girl's dormant 
feelings, there had been little outwardly to indi- 
cate their nature. Mrs. Courteney was at a loss 
to understand why her daughter seemed now to 
avoid every chance of meeting Laurence Garr, 
with whom but a few days since she had been 
on sach intimate terms. Her mother could not 
Edl to remark that when Gilda heard the sound 
of his voice in the outer suhtto she fled into her 
own room. It seemed difficult to believe that 
Gruido was the cause of this change. There was 
no symptom of such being the case. Yet the 
depression of the girl's spirits struck ^ her mother 
painfully. She felt that it was not to be accounted 

19.2 



292 GARB OF CABRLTON. 

for by the fact of Mr. Courteney's illness; that 
there was something which lay much deeper below 
the surface^ though she was fairly perplexed. ^lot 
haying the key to Sara's artifices . ^to know what 
that was. 

And now the moment had arrived when some 
explanation must follow. In the twilight of 
Mrs. Courteney's bedroom^ on the day of Garr's 
interview with her hosband, as the evening was 
closing rapidly in, mother and daughter sat to- 
gether, the girl's head buried in her- mother's 
lap, the mother's hand fondly caressing the soft, 
golden hair. They had remained thus for a long 
time, silent, almost motionless, after Mrs. Cour- 
teney had announced Laurence Carr's proposal 
She begged her daughter to weigh her feelings 
well ; not to return a hasty answer, or let any out- 
ward influence affect her. 

''It appears," she said, at length, ''that this 
young man is rich, and heir to an ancient title. 
That would not influence your choice, I know, 
and your father and I regard it almost as a dis- 
advantage. But we like him; and since your 



CASA LAMBEBTL 293 

father has spoken to him about you, I think he 
is especially' pleased with his candour and good 
feeling. If, therefore, dear child, you like him, 
as we think you do ^ 

^' I don't love him, mother." 

There was a pause. ^ . 

" The question is whether you have ever seen 
any one you like better.'* 

The girl turned pale. Even now she shrank 
from putting into words what was at her heart. 

" Yes," she murmured ; " but it is of no use 
talking of that. If Mr. Carr cares for me, he 
is the only person who does so^in this way. 
Do you think, mother . tell me truly . do you 
think I have given him reason to believe I . I . 
liked him?" 

"Certainly, my child, I do think so, or he 
would not have ventured to propose. But you 
must not let this influence your decision. If you 
have unwittingly deceived him, better acknow- 
ledge it now than repent later. Anything . 
anything better than that, my darling 1 " 

" I like Mr. Carr very much ; he's been very 



294 CARR OF CARRLTON. 

kind to me^ and I feel very grateful to him fer 
caring about me. No one else does, but joa 
and papa. But^ oh! mother, oughtn't a woman 
to love the man she marries mnch more than 
this ?. before everything else on earth. as you 
loved papa when you married ? ^ 

Mrs. Courteney shuddered. 

" A passionate love is not always conducive to 
ultimate happiness. A love founded on esteem, 
and growing by degrees, oflfers surer ground, my 
child.** 

*' Mother, I will tell you something," whispered 
Grilda, hiding her burning face m her mother's 
bosom. '^ Had it not been for a foolish, ground- 
less idea that some one else loved me, I might 
have loved Mr. Carr, perhaps. It was a child's 
fancy which had grown with my growth, and 
which I scarcely knew myself till quite . quite 
lately; and now it is all vanished . all gone I* 
she sobbed. 

The mother stroked her daughter's head lovingly, 
as it lay on her breast, and said, soothingly . 

" If it was but a chimera, my darling, let it 



CASA LAMBEBTL 295 

vanish. DoQ*t let it come between yoa and a 
possible substantial happiness. If this dream is 
not to be realized^ it mustn't swallow up your 
young life." 

'^I know it is not to be realized, mother. I 
have awaked . and see now that it was only a 
dream. But is it possible ever quite to forget 
such dreams, do you think ? " 

** We change-^" began her mother, with a 
sigh. 

*^ Ah I that is what he says,** murmured Gilda. 

*' Yes, we change, and look back to the land- 
scape of our youth with rery different eyes: the 
things that seemed fair in the morning seem yeiy 
different in the cold mists of erening, my child. 
Though you do not fombt, other and more en- 
during hopes may ris^ and take the place of those 
that are buried." 

It was too dark for Gilda to see her mother's 
face, but the roice told of her strong emotion. The 
girl pressed her lips silently on the tremulous 
hand diat enclosed hers. 

^ My mother will not urgg me to this," was her 



296 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

silent reflection; '^bnt she and mj poor fiulier 
evidently both wish it : she confesses that ansietj 
on my account is adding to his irritability and 
suffering; and I see how agitated she is even 
in talking of it : I dread seeing papa. What 
am rto say? What am I to do ? Is it right that 
I should marry Mr. Carr ? Papa will say I have 
been acting heartlessly towards him dlso, as Sara 
accused me of doing towards Gruido ! I am veiy 
miserable. I wish I knew what was right." 

She was but a child in years, after all! 
Scarcely eighteen, and with absolutely no ex- 
perience of life. Decision of character is almost 
always the growth of circumstance. The tenderly- 
nurtured child had never yet thought or acted for 
herself. But the time was come when she must 
do so ; and this first trial was a severe one. 
' Another long silence followed. Mrs. Courteney 
was no more in perplexity as to the state of 
her daughter's feelings; and she dreaded to in- 
fluence her decision by a word. Were the 
premises on which that decision would be founded 
false or true? Was Guido really indifferent 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 297 

to her ? Had she undoubted ground for belle\rmg 
this ? The girl's face was turned towards the 
window, where the last rajs of the winter sunset 
yet lingered in level bars of yellow behind the 
campanile of a distant church. Thus she sat on a 
low stool at her mother's feet, and watched the 
stripes of twilight cloud broaden across the sky, 
silent, abstracted, sad: feeling no comfort but 
in the tender stroke of that tremulous hand laid 
upon her head ever and anon. 

Mr. Courteney's hand-bell rang from the adjoin- 
ingroom. The moiher started up and hurried in. 
She was absent a few minutes, and on her return 

she said . 

 

^ Your father wished to speak to you hunself. 
I thought you would prefer doing so to-morrow 
morning. Go now into your room, dear child, 
and lie down until tea-time. You look pale and 
tired ; and I shall be busy for an hour." 

Then it was, so soon as her daughter had left 
the room, that Mrs. Courteney acted upon one of 
these suddenly-formed resolutions (her husband 
would have called them impulses) which were now 



298 CAEB OF CARBLTON. 

rare with her, though once so essentiatty 
characteristic of her tender and enthosiastic 
nature. Her child's happiness was at stake. It 
was no moment for the cautions hesitations which 
she had learnt, alas! in her sdbool of troubk 
ought to be the necessary preliminaries to every 
course of action. She hastQj wrote a few words 
in pencil, and ringing the bell, desired that 
they might be taken at once to Count Lamberti 
A few minutes later Mrs. Conrteney's ear cau^ 
the well-known sound of that firm step in the ante- 
room. The door opened, and Guido entered 
The servant placed a lamp upon the taUe and 
retired. 

*^ Sit down, Gui^' if yoa have a few minutes 
to spare to me. I have mudi to say to you, 
to consult you upon." 

He shook hands with Mrs. Coortenev and sat 
down. 

** We have known you now a long tioa^'^ she 
continued; '^and though we see less of you than 
we did, my husband's regard and mine is the 
same for you as ever. We feel to you, indeed, 



CASA LAMBBBTL 299 

more like a son^ and are confident that in any 
matter vital to the happiness of all of U8 yon 
would assist ns with your hest counsel as a son 
and a brother, GuidOk" 

He bowed, and she went on . 
'* The subject I would speak to you abont is 
this Englishman, Mr. Laurence Carr. Tou 
know him. Tell me candidly yonr opinion of 
him* As a young nan, yoa have opportuxuties 
of judging which an invalid and an M woman 
camiot have.'' 

^^My intercourse with Signor Carr has been 
but slight," replied Goido, constrainedly. 
'* Owing to yourfedf?" 
*^ Owing to myself, perhaps." 
^^ There is, then, I infer, but little sympathy 
between you?" 

^ I think not But do not misuiderstand me, 
signora. Let this be no di^aragement to Signor 
Canv I know nothing against him." 

'* Tou have positively no reason for this 
aversion ? " 

*' It is difficult, perhaps, always to account for 



300 CABB OF CASRLYON. 

one's likings, or the reverse,'' he rehuned, 
coldly. 

'' Then, jou have no reasonable gronnd for the 
prejudice existing in your mind ? ** " 

" If you insist on calling it by so hard a name 
. ^none." 

*' Have you any idea why I ask you these 
questions. Guide ? " 

He waited for a moment, and then replied . 

" I guess the reason/' 

**I shall probably not live very long, Guido. 
In the space of five-and-forty years I have lived 
a long, long life-time I and you know the state 
of Mr. Courteney's health* He is anxious to see 
our child married to some upright, honourable 
man who loves her, feeling how precarious both 
our lives are. There was a moment . I may say 
this now, Guido . when he thought this man 
might have been yourself." 

She paused so as to allow him to speak, if he 
felt so minded. He was silent His back being 
turned towards the lamp on the table, it was 
impossible to distinguish his features. 



CASA LAMBERTL 301 

*' But the idea," she continued^ *^ soon passed 
a^ray^ and he saw that your feeling towards oar 
dear child was only that of a brother ; while 
we felt that year mother would probably offer 
many objections to your marrying a heretic. Is 

it 80?" 

^' Let it suBcei signora^" he replid, at last, in a 
low, hoarse voice, **that I can never marry in 
my present condition. I have sworn it . ^never to 
drag down my wife to penury, nor to be depen^ 
dent on her. Let this suffice. I entreat you, 
make no further reference to myself; my feelings 
or my mother's are beside the question. Tell 
me only in what way I can serve you and yours 
. ^my life, signora^ would be. willingly laid down 
in such service." 

''Bear with me a few moments," said Mrs. 
Courteney, quietly. '' After my own child's hap- 
piness. Guide, there is none I desire more 
fervently than yours. You know that, though 
not rich^ she will have a competency. If, as I 
think I perceive in your words, there is a deeper 
feeling in. your heart than you permit yourself 



^302 CABB OF CAlOtLYON. 

to express openl j^ do not . oh I do not, Gnido, 
let the happiness of perhaps two pec^le be 
sacrificed to a false pride! What is money and 
every other worldly advantage compared to thb? 
Do yon really prize them so highly as to think 
they weigh down the balance against a tme 
love? Alas ! yon have not seen .as much of life 
as I have> or you would judge differently I Tell 
me. Guide, that I am mistaken as to your fedmgs; 
or revoke that vow, which can never have be^ 
registered in Heaven I " 

Guido seized her hand and raised it to his lips. 
She felt that he trembled, and it seemed to her 
that a scalding tear fdl on her hand as he bent 
over it There was, indeed, all the agony of a iifSc* 
time concentrated for him in those few minutes! 
But though his voice shook when lie spoke, there 
was no faltering of resolution in the words. 

*^ I entreat you, signora, say no more. Bdieve 
me that vow is registered beyond recall I will 
confess to you that, had not my pride . the pride 
of a Lamberti . prompted it, my mother and the 
priests would probably have driven me to it, for I 



CASA LAMBERTL 303 

could not sabject mj wife to their persecution. It 
is my destiny, signora ; it can never be otherwise* 
Bat be consoled ; I am the only sufferer I Never 
has a word passed my lips to cloud the future 
happiness of your child. Need I ask you, signora, 
never to allow a word to cross yours of the secret 
yon have guesaed? It will go down with me to 
the grave unspoken." 

Birs. Courteney sighed heavily. 
** If that is your last and unalterable determi- 
nation, I have nothing further to say. I know 
you will understand my real motives for saying 
so Hiuch. Had you been willing to forget your 
poverty, Mr. Courteney would not have been 
the one to remind you of it ; but neither to him 
nor to any one else, I promise you, shall a word 
on tins subject be breathed by me. We will 
try and forget that it was broached, while my 
regard for you, Qnido, remains tmaltered. As 
to Mr. Carry" she conttnued, after a pause, 
^'I must rest satisfied, I suppose, with your 
assurance that you know nothing against him . 
nothing that should make us hesitate to receive 



304* CARR OV CARRLYON. 

him as a son-in-law^ shonid oar child consent to 
marry him?** 

^'Nothing, if, she consents/ he added^ witli 
emphasis. 

Mrs. Conrteney's countenance showed signs of 
some strong internal agitation before she next 
spoke : and it was then in more slow and 
measured phrase. 

^'I have now^ then^ one last request to make 
of jou. You tell me that no word has ever 
passed your lips to cloud the happiness of our 
child* You must not do so even by your presence 
when she is married. This sounds hard, but it 
is wise for both of you. Whatever her lot is . 
whether she accepts Mr. Oarr or another . so socm 
as that lot is irrevocably fixed, it is better that 
you should not meet Married life is not always 
thornless; and the less sympathy a woman has 
the better I The fancies of a child may revive 
with dangerous force when a woman is unhappy." 
She sighed heavily, and added, ''Promise me 
this.'* 

''Ida" 



CASA LAMBEBTL 305 

She held out her hand, and Goido raised it 
once more to his lips. . 

So their interview ended : . she back to solitary 
reflection, and doubt, and prayer, in her own 
room : he striding down the stairs, and out into 
the black night, which had now closed over 
the city, pacing the arcaded streets hour after 
hoiir^ and feeling in his heart like the ship- 
wrecked when the last cable has parted . the last 
hope of life is drifted out of reach. 



VOL. I. 20 



SOS CARB OV CASBLTOK. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

BxroBB daybreak next moniing tlie wife was in 
hear husband's room. He wa9 alretdj up and 
writing letters. * 

*'This is to Monsieur Tourville, my lawyer 
and the girl's trustee. Let it be despatched by 
this morning's post to Paris . if she consents. 
There is no time to be lost I feel stronger just 
now, but this strength is fictitious, and, with the 
necessity for exertion, will pass away. I want 
to have the matter off my mind. Have you seen 
the child?" 

*' No ; it is not yet seven o'clock.** 

** Send her to me when she is up." 

" There is one thing, Henry," said the wife, in 
a low voice, after a pause . " there is one thing 
you are no doubt prepared to do." 



CASA LAMBKBTI. S07 

^Whatistkat?" 

^' If Gilda consents to marry Mr. Carr, jott 
have made up joar mind to tell him every- 
thing?'' 

^ By BO means* I see no good to be gained 
by trach a oonrse to either of them. They will 
both be happier without such knowledge^ which 
need never reach them.*^ 

^^ But, ohj Henry I if it does reach him here- 
after^ and through another channel I Think of 
the reproaches to which you subject yourself! 
Think of his family-. o f . . ^ 

^ I have thought of all you suggest/' said the 
invalid^ drily, *' and I seQ no cause to alter my 
resolution formed long ago. Whoever marries 
my child marries the daughter of an obscure 
En^ishman living abroad, who shuns society. 
who has repelled, rather than met, the advances 
of any suitor for his child. In short, that man 
will marry her for herself alone, and on his own 
responsibility. I do not conceive myself the least 
obliged to render up to him an accovnt of n^y 
past life; and as I believe Aat such knowledge 

20.2 



308 CARR OF CARRLYON- 

would be injurious to her (from my experience 
of the way in which this righteous worid visits 
the sins of the fathers ou the children), I shall 
take the liberty of acting according to my own 
judgment iu the matter. Against the conse- 
quences of any accidental discovery hereafter I 
have guarded, by fully impressing on tliis young 
man the fact just alluded to . that he has sought 
U8 out, and received no encouragement in so doing. 
But such accidental discovery is most improbable. 
The half of my fortune will be paid* over to 
Gilda's husband on her marriage day, and the 
remaining half . ^with the exception of a legacy . 
at your death, all being now in the French funds 
in my present name. During the short time I 
remain here he will not be troubled by hearing 
much of me; and I have already pointed out to 
you the necessity of following the same line of 
conduct when I am gone." 

** Henry I you don't mean the child and I must 
be entirely separated ?" 

'' Virtually so. This has no doubt entered into 
a prudent man's calculations. He sees we are not 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 309 

fi>rward, pushing people." The thin^ sarcastic 
smile died away. " Seriously, you are not foolish 
enough to contemplate the possibility of returning 
to England. of venturing to Carrlyon, even wheu 
your daughter is installed there as mistress ? You 
have not lived this life for twenty years to expose 
yourself to insult and obloquy at the close of it> 
have you?" 

The patient woman howed her head; but the 
tears gathered in her eyes. 

** You are right . I feel you are right Who- 
ever she marries, we must be divided, alas I 
But, oh! Courteney, even thus, is it not better 
to let Mr. Carr know all? Don't let him be 
able to reproach you hereafter with having 
kept the Secret from him . with having deceived 
hunl" 

^^The secret is ours. No one has a right to 
demand us to unbury our past. There is no 
deception, for there is nothing in the chilcCa past 
to conceal, and that is all that aifects her husband, 
or that he has a right to know. My mind is made 
up. Say no more about it." 



310 CAfiB OF CASBLYOS. 

The iather's interview with hia daughter 
* 
short enough, and characteristic 

** Yoa know 'that I eanH lire loog, and thai 
yonr mother's health is precarions. It is natoral^ 
therefore, that we should be anxious to see yon 
married. God forbid that I should ttrge yoa to 
marry any one, bat here is a man yon seem to 
like, and who . as far as one can judge of any* 
body in Ihis work! of shams . appears hone^ and 
honourable ; likely to make you a kind husband, 
in short Don't be romantic-*4on't be disap- 
pointed if you're not passionately in love; Fve 
lived long enough to know that that sort of thing 
don^ last But some less fine-sounding thmgs 
do. Use your judgment as to what yon have 
seen of this Laurence Carr . ^and you've had a 
fair opportunity in this last month . ^to decide for 
yourself whether yon can be contented to pass 
your life with him." 

^ My mind is made up, father," said the soft, 
young voioa 

Mr. Gknirteney waited a minute. " Well ? " 

" I will give my answer, if you please ; 



CAS A LAMBEBTI. 311 

to Mr. Carr himselC He dball decide for 



It was a hopelessly wet daj^ as one actor in 
tbat small drama will probaUj remember all his 
lijfe. The ndn spouted in two continuous courses 
firom the gurgoyles on the roof into the cortile 
below* A gutter of liquid black mud poured 
vdemently down the centre of the street, where> 
except a priest, or a soldier, or some miserable 
figure of dire necessity making his way across the 
desert piazze against the driving rain, no one 
Tentured beyond the limits of his own length of 
arcade. The tall Englishman, in his dripping 
macintosh, striding along to the Casa Lamberti, 
was therefore additi(ially conspicuou& Padre 

_  

Stefano, as he lifted the leathern curtain of San 
Peironio, and hurried in to morning mass, noted 
that figure across the piazza, and smiled. He 
probably knew as much as we do of the errand 
on which Garr was bound. The marchesa, en 
papilloies and robe de chamhre, beheld him fi'om 
an upper window as she stirred her chocolate, and 
guessed whither he was going. The knot of idle 



312 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

young nohUi over their billiards and donunoes at 
the club laughed and shrugged their shoulders, 
ejaculating, " E propria innamorato, quello ! " . 
for gossip in Italian towns is even more swift 
and searching than elsewhere. The professor 
looked up from the Purgatorio and sighed as 
Carr passed his window with a cheerful nod* He, 
too, guessed the young man's errand that dismal- 
morning, and muttered to himself . ** Well, well, 
it is better, perhaps. So will my Gmdo's 
thoughts now be devoted entirely to a mistress 
who cannot be robbed from him . ^Italy 1 Povero 
giovane I His heart will consume its fire 
inwardly for awhile, till, like Enceladus, it 
burst forth with redoubled strength, in a new 
direction.'' 

The old Italian took a grave pinch of snuffy and 
for a few moments forgot the text before him in 
a patriotic dream of the future. 

Last of all, Saraj with her iace pressed against 
the window, watched for Carr's coming from the 
salcUo, and slipped out into the ante-room as soon 
.as she saw him enter the courtyard. 



CAS A LAMBEBTL 313 

** One word of counsel from a friend," she 
whispered, hurriedly, as he unfastened his drip- 
ping overcoat. " Be bold and persevere. Show 
yourself as earnest and ardent, and, above all, 
as thoroughly convinced, undoubting, of her love. 
Attach no importance to anything she may con- 
fide to you of her scruples or her hesitation. It is 
part of her romantic disposition . dear child I . to 
dwell morbidly on such things. Do not let them 
affect you, Mr. Carr," she laughed ; and, looking 
round, whispered still lower, ** It is far from her 
intention that they should do so." 

She glided away, leaving Carr somewhat be- 
wildered and perplexed as to the precise sense he 
was to attach to her words. But there was no 
time to ponder them more deliberately. His hand 
was on the drawing-room door. He opened it, 
and found himself alone with Gilda. 

She was standing in the centre of the room, 
against the back of her chair, her hands tightly 
pressed together. Her face was very pale ; 
otherwise there was no indication of all she had 
suffered, and of the struggle she was still under- 



314 CABB OF CABBLYON; 

going. Cair took the hand she held oat to him 
between both his. 

^* Dearest Gilda I Maj I be allowed to call joa 
so? Is the answer I am here to receiye &om 
y oa a fiiTourable one to my hopes ? Say bat that 
one word> dearest, and put me out of my painfid 
suf^nse.* 

'' Mr. Carr, I have something to explain . some- 
thing to say first, if you will listen to it I am 
young, and have no experience of the world. 
Forgive me, if I sdy anything I ought not Are 
you sure you are not mistaken in mcying that 
you loye me ? It never entered my thoughts 
that you were in earnest You amused yourseli^ 
and I did the same. Anything so deep and 
solemn as love for life, perhaps^ I did yon the 
injustice to believe you could not feeL If my 
manner has led you to think otherwise, Mr. 
Garr, I entreat your forgiveness^ If your love is, 
indeed, real, and not a mere passing fancy> I am 
very grateful, but most unworthy of if* 

Garr dropped the litde hand, and a shade 
crossed his brow. His tone was sharp and cold. 



GASA LAMBEBTL 315 

^^ Have you been trifling with me all this time, 
then^ Miss Ck>Hrt6ne7 ? I tliink I bave deserved 
better at your hands than to be told you didn't 
believe me capable of a strong attachment" 

^^You misunderstand me, Mr. Carr. I like 
you; and nothing was ever further firom my 
thoughts than to trifle with your feelings. True^ 
I did not think you were in earnest : I thought it 
was the way among men of the world, leading the 
life you have been accustomed to, to say more 
than they mean. Still, I rrAght have attached 
more importance to all your kindness towards me: 
might have loved you but for another reascm . 
something . something," she went on, hurriedly, 
^' which it is so painful to me to mention, that 
I only do so because I consider you have a right 
to know it I have allowed myself fbolishly. un- 
consciously. *to regard another in the light of . in 
short, as you wish me to regard yow. It ^as 
a child's dream that grew up unknown to myself 
. ^unshared . ^unguessed by that other. I have 
awaked &om it But you understand now why I 
can't meet your love as it deserves." 



316 CARB OF CARBLYOK. 

Carr bit his lip. His pride was stung; and 
he wonld probably have accepted the refusal con- 
tained in her reply at once; butSara's word's 
flashed across him. He paused for a minute^ and 
said^ with a smile . 

** You regard this fancy of your childhood from 
too romantic a point of view. Your dream^ you 
say, is fled. A reality is before you . a reality, I 
believe, of substantial happiness, if you will accept 

. 

it I am undaunted by what you tell me. Do 
not disappoint the hopes yon have led me to 
cherish. I love you, Gilda. My love has over- 
stepped every obstacle. You have encouraged this 
love . cruelly encouraged, if aU you now do is 
to throw on it the ice of your contempt 1 " 

^'lifot contempt, oh I not contempt, Mr. Carr. 
I could fee] regard and friendship for you : but, 
ah I this is a poor return for the love you 
offer me.*' 

'* I am content to accept it. It will grow into 
the love you dream of day by day, Gilda." 

She sank down into the chair beside her, and 
leant her head upon the table. Poor child I She 



CASA LAMBEBTL 317 

knew not how to resist any more: she felt 
be^v^ildered : what was she to say? She had 
hoped . die had believed that by a simple state- 
ment of the truth Garr's feelings would have 
prompted him to withdraw. And now, if it was 
true that she had led him to conceive that she 
encouraged his passion . ^as every one thought, and 
as Carr averred . if^ he was satisfied with that 
cold feeling, which was all she had to give, what 
opposition could she continue to make ? 

** Remember it is your doing," she murmured. 
" I have told you all . do not reproach me after- 
wards. I will try and be a faithful wife to you, if 
yon wish it I cannot promise more." 

He was upon his knees before her. She allowed 
him to draw her towards him. She felt his bum- 
ing lips pressed upon her cheek. She knew that 
he spoke, but tlie words she could not understand. 
Her brain was reeling round and round. A dead- 
ness seemed creeping over her limbs. She made 
an effort to rise . to shake it off. and fell forwards 
senseless in his arms. 



318 CABB OF 



jix* 



CHAPTER XX. 

Thb moon, unobscured bj blind or shutter, shone 
inll into the room the two girls occnpied. It was 
long past midnight: the tapers were extingoished; 
the fire on the hearth had died out ; the ghostly 
moon alone filled the room with its light, tondiing 
the faded forms npon die arras, and defining the 
cumbrous furniture in masses of solid shade upon 
the rough floor. 

One occupant of that chamber had been asleep 
for the last hour. The over-worn young heart 
was locked in oblivion for awhile, and, after 
several sleepless nights, had dropped into a heavy 
slumber. Upon the bed opposite, a ray of moon- 
light fell on a slight figure sitting erect, its arms 
folded, its face shrouded by the masses of black 
hair which, escaping from the net, had fallen 



CA8A ULAfBERTL 319 

about the shoulders. 'assiiredlj not fksleep, jH 
motioideBS as stone* 

What k in the woman's heart, ^as she sits 
upright there in ti^ Uue moonlight? What 
dark and tangled web of thought is her busy 
brain wearing in the dead of night? The 
secrets of a yonng heart ahready depraved are a 
foul subject to hj bare for contemplation* The 
unworthy hopes and fears, the vindictiye hales, 
the nnscmpalons stratagems that stop short at 
no means to compass their end, must be dia- 
sected without shrinking, though it may be that 
in BO doing the surgeon's knife miss the more 
delicate fibres that overspread in a net-work the 
human heart That strong nature for good or 
evil, like some rich land in which the weeds 
grow rankest and poisonous reptiles abound, 
had springs of passionate love and tenderness, 
capacities of bearing abundant blossom of am- 
stancj and endurance, which, for want of control 
and cultivation, so to speak, ran riot through 
the land, and left it a noxious swamp. From 
her Creole mother, whom she had lost as a child. 



320 CARR OF CABBLYON. 

and whose memory she still cherished in a wild, 
vindictive way^ swearing sooner or later to avenge 
the wrongs that mother had suffered . ^firom her, 
the dark hot blood and sensual development ; the 
sinuous grace^ and with it the nature of the 
serpent From her English father^ probably, ihe 
secretiveness, the hard, indomitable tenacity of 
purpose, the mental grasp, and ability to cope 
with adverse circumstances instead of succumb- 
ing to them. No ordinary woman this, into 
which two natures were so dangerously welded. 
She will spare none : she will yield to none. Her 
paths are torhious : if one be blocked up she will 
try another ; but you may be sure no worm will 
stop her: she will tread it relentlessly under 
foot, and pass on. 

Two subjects hold divided empire in her mind 
tonight, as they have long done. To these 
ruling thoughts has every word, every action 
of her life for some time past been subservient. 
They may be said to belong to the two sides of 
her nature : the one warm and human, springing 
from the passionate heart, and sending its fire 



CASA LAMBEBTl. 321 

througli the senses: the other^ cold and calcu* 
lating^ though no less intense^ bom of the head 
and nourished bj the circumstances surrounding 
her. The one is a love^ unrequited^ yet hoping^ 
darings and scheming, in spite of all discourage- 
ment The other, that resolute determination to 
rise fin>m her dependent position and to acquire 
power . no matter by what means . ^which, firom 
her childhood upwards, has been ever present 
to. her mind. When neglected and starving, 
when flattered and fondled, when finding herself 
suddenly thrown aside as a broken plaything, 
or treated with the care and tenderness of a 
daughter by her present protectors, that one idea 
has been ever predominant . ^never turned aside 
nor softened by any outward change. Power! 
Now, the idea was more or less connected with 
hmu How to acquire an ascendancy over, and 
render herself necessary to him; how to raise 
herself into such a position as to make him 
recognise her abilities, and feel that such a 
woman was the true helpmate for him in those 
political struggles which wer? looming for him 

TOL. I. 21 



322 CABB OF GABBLTQK. 

in the future. So fisur her schemes had prospered. 
She had effectually swept her riyal from the 
path. In other directions, as will he seen bjr- 
and-bj, she had played her part with consummate 
skilL But by &r the most diBcalt portion of 
her task was yet to be done. so difficult that 
to most women it would have seemed bopdea^ 
The idea now predominant in her mind was that 
by knowledge only . knowledge of all the secrets 
underlying the lives with whom her life was 
now connected, could she obtain influence, im- 
portance. potMr. 

A suggestion wbich her unscrupukmsness, her 
tnuning in dark and crooked ways, had constantly 
prompted lately, returned to-night witb redonbled 
force. That desk, for which Mrs. CourisDey 
evinced such jealous concern, must contain the 
due to some secret of vital impartanoe to hersd^ 
her hnsbandf or her child. The poaaesskm of 
this secret might prove of immense valae to the 
furtherance of Sara's plans. It might foniiah 
her with the hold she felt she would require^ 
sooner or later, upon Mr. or Mrs. Courteoej; 



CASA LAMBEBTL 323 

and no stone was to be left unturned which 

might help to make her mistress of her position. 

But the turning of this particular stone was no 

easy thing. It was fraught^ as she knew^ with 

difficulty and danger. She hesitated: from no 

compunctions of conscience, but because the risk 

was great, and she balanced the probability of 

the secret being worth to her the chances of 

detection. The burning curiosity, the restless 

excitement of the woman's nature, leading her 

to prefer any peril to inaction, prevailed in the 

end, as might be foreseen. 

She glided out of bed, and threw her white 
wrapper around her. It was characteristic of 
the woman, that as she passed the mirror, she 
stood *for a moment or two with folded arms, 
and looked at her own image reflected there in 
the cold blue moonlight Then, stealing to the 
bedside where Gilda slept, she drew back the 
curtain, and gazed at her innocent rival with an 
amount of concentrated hatred in her glance 
which almost seemed to make itself felt by the 
sleeper. She moaned and turned uneasily towards 

21.2 



324 CABR OF CABBLTOK. 

the wall, and Sara, starting back, dropped llie 
curtain and held her breath until the sleepers 
respiration, rising and falling once more "at regular 
intervals upon the silence of the night, told her 
that there was nothing to fear in that quarter. 
She crept, with her unshod feet, along the roug^ 
boards till she reached the door, drew back the 
bolt with a cautious hand, stopped, listened, and 
then pulled the door swifllj open. It had an 
ugly habit of creaking; and, in spite of her 
dexterity, it now gave out one short, sharp sound, 
like a cry, which she believed must inevitably 
wake Gilda* She was prepared for the emer- 
gency, but her presence of mind was not called 
for. The young girl had apparently fallen into 
a yet deeper sleep, impervious to all ordinaiy 
sounds. Sara glided out 

Across the ante-chamber, past the servants' 
rooms, that dim white figure crept noiselessly 
along. In the sala, where the heavy curtains 
were drawn, excluding the moonlight which had 
lighted her hitherto, the real danger and difficulty 
conmienced. Mrs. Gourteney's door was a-jar, as 



. CASA LAMBKBTL 325 

iwas indicated by the shaft of famt light from the 
lamp she always burnt by the bedside* A false 
step here^ a stumble against one of the heavy 
chairs or tables, would' betray Sara inevitably. 
She stretched out her soft, velvet hands, and felt 
her way along to that narrow stream of light at 
the door. 

Having reached this in safety, she crouched 
down and listened. Not a sound. She knew 
this door did not creak; she ventured to push 
it open a few more inches. But she also* knew 
that Mrs. Courteney was a very light sleeper. 
Even now she might be awake. The utmost 
caution must be used: and the girl stopped 
again and held her breath and listened, but in 
vain. 

The chief difficulty was to get possession of 
the key of the desk. Sara had ascertained that 
Mrs. Courteney was accustomed to lay it with 
her watch and rings on the table by her bed. 
Sara could almost see it glimmering under the 
lamp from where she stood-r- but to reach it 
without betraying herself, seemed impossible. 



326 CAEE 07 CABBLTON. 

At the ead of five mimites she had BatisJied 
herself that the inmate of that room must 
actnallj he asleep. The deep shadow^ cast hy the 
half-drawn curtain over the bed prevented her 
distingnishing the sleeper^s figure; but no one 
who was awake, Sara felt sure, could remain ao 
perfectly motionless. 

The Creole girl then suddenly bethought herself 
of a practice not unconunon in the land of her 
birth wherebj at least one danger might be 
obviated* The shallow, dim-burning lamp was 
so placed as to light only the upper portion of 
the walls, and leave Ae floor in shade. 

Slipping off the white wrapper, so as to obviata 
the rustle of unnecessary drapery, she lay down 
almost at full length and crawled snake^wise^ 
inch by inch, along the floor, and up to the bed ; 
pausing, if so much as one of her nails scraped 
the board, and lying still ; then creq>ing on, witii 
an oily suppleness of limb unknown to EurcqpeaDS^ 
until she reached the table, and touched the 
valance of tiie bed. 

She stopped again ot a moment,^ raised herself 



GA8A LAMBEBTL 327 

on her elbows^ and looked behind the cortun. 
The bed was empt^; 

Sara was ahnost more startled than relieved 
for ft few seconds. Then springing to her feet, 
she stepped sofUj to the door of Mr. Oonrteney*s 
Toom and listened* 

She heard. the sick gentleman restlessly taming 
in bed: and then came a low sob which she 
recognized as Mrs. Gonrteney's. 

'^ This thing is preying on your mind^ Heniy^'* 
said the wife's broken voice* '' For God's sake^ 
teE him all> and ease yoor conscience of this 
terrible weight Thinkof theawMreqponsibility I 
ven if he break off this marriage^ the child's 
feelings are not so deeply engaged tha t " 

^' Enough . hold yonr peace, Mary. The child 
has deddedj and / have decided. The blood is 
on cur heads . ^yomn and mine; I will never yield 
assent to tiiat hideous creed that it is to be trans- 
mitted to oar child, though the world decree it so." 
Sheidd she hear any more? The wife was 
aboiit to reply, but time was predocBk There 
stood the box, and there lay the key. Enow- 



328 CAHR OF CABRLTON. 

ledge more certain^ more complete than by eares- 
dropping, coald thus be obtamed. There was tbe 
risk of discovery, but that risk must be run. She 
took the key, swept up the desk in her arms, and 
in another moment had glided out ; then reaching 
her own room in safety, flung her precious bunien 
on the bed. 

She struck a light Gilda still slept soundly 
as a child, and Sara began her work of examina- 
tion untroubled by a fear. 

Yet scarcely had she opened the desk when the 
superscription on a letter met her eye, and a 
sharp, irrepressible cry of surprise escaped her. 
With trembling hands she tore open the letter; 
she brushed the hair back from her distended 
eyes and drank in the contents, and not fill 
then drew a long, deep breath, as after an in- 
vigorating draught She sprang to her feet with 
a smile of devilish exultation, and raising her 
arms to their full extent above her head, twisted 
her fingers sportively together ; but the next 
moment these feverish fingers were busy at work 
again tearing open packet after packet And hers 



CASA LAMBEBTL 329 

a dried geranium Ieaf and here a curl of hair 
fell under that desecrating touch, and were scofi*- 
inglj thrust back into fhe covers whence thej 
came. Some copies of verses in very faded ink ; 
a register of birth and marriage ; and last of all, 
at the bottom of the desk, a thick cover, whereon 
-was written, " To be burned, with all these papers, 
afler my death." She tore it open. A lock of 
a man's light brown hair, thickly clotted with 
blood, fell out, and under it the miniature of 
him, no doubt, to whom that hair once belonged. 
A young and handsome man, joyous and full of 
life, but with a weak, almost eSemini^te expres- 
sion of mouth which the flattering brush of the 
limner could not conceal. She held it up to 
the candle, and fastened her tigerish gaze upon 
the features; then thrust it hurriedly back into 
the cover, locked the desk, and glided back as 
she came^ The search had not occupied more 
than twenty minutes ; and Mrs. Courteney's room 
was still empty. Sara placed both desk and key 
carefully in their places, and crept again to her 
room undiscovered. 



330 CAHB OF CABBLTON. 

Bat not to aleep that night : . to hj her firan- 
dations in the fatore anew; to oonBoIidate the 
old jealonsies with new hate ; to undermine with 
fresh vigour from fresh stores of power, and to 
reconstract with redoubled energy and skilL 



I 
t 



EHD OV YOL. L 



' N 



London : Frihted bj Sxrb, Elobb & Go., 16|, Old BtOtj, K.a 



OARROF CARRLYON 






IK THBBE TOLUKES. 



BT 



HAMILTON AId, 

. UTHOB OF "BITA" "GONriDBlTGBS," BTO. 



^ VUttng tli inlqoity of Uie iktben upon the chndren.". Ezodos zz. r . 5. 



VOL. IL 



LONDON: 
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., 65| COBNHILL 



M.DCGC.LXn. 



[77*e right of Tran$lati&n is ra:rvid.^ 



OAKR OF CARRLYON 



PABT I,.eontittued. 
CAS A L AMBEBTI. 



o- 



CHAPTER XXL 

The unhappy old devotee sat with the scaldino 
upon her knees, and the Jesuit before her. The 
expression on her countenance was made up of 
terror, perplexity, and above all, the most abject 
abasement* In the oily tongue of her cx)nfessor 
was all the law and the prophets. She could 
no more struggle successfully against it, than the 
doomed bird under the fascination o^ a serpent. 
*' Si d faJUa Cristiana f " she inquired ; the 

VOL.IL 1 



2 CABB OF CAKRLYON. 

conversion to Romanism being onlj more laconi- 
cally expressed, by the ^' making lieisdf a 
Christian '' to narrow-minded bigotry, even in the 
countess's station. 

" Davero^ replied the priest " But this has 
not been accomplished without some diBcnItj, 
and the promise of procuring her a good partiJUi. 
Your son she inclines to most of all; and as I 
think she will exercise an advantageous influence 
over him, you must exert yourself, contessa, to 
bring about this result" 

''But he loves the other one, padre; and you 
know how obstinate he is, poor boy I " 

'' The other has thrown him over for the 
Englishman, and the count may be brought to 
marry this girl, through pique. She is dever 
and may work us much good ; and I tell yon that 
it is essential to separate your son at once from 
his dangerous companions, and attach him to 
some sharp-witted woman, who will obtain a 
righteous ascendancy over him." 

''But . ^but," stammered the poor lady, ashamed 
of naming so sordid a consideration to the 






4. 



CASA IAHBBTL 3 

spiritaalljr-minded father, *' is she not yerj poor ? 
a dependant on this Courteney fiunilj?*' 

'' She engages . ^how and whence I know not . 
to procnre some fifty or sixty thousand scndi for 
her marriage portion.'' 

It is very strange, is it not? " 
We have nothing to say to the straageness 
of it," remarked the priest, somewhat sharply. 
^ She undertakes that it shall be forthcoming 
before the n^otiations are oonclnded. And you , 
know that it would be difficult to obtain as much 
with any partito here, in the pxesent state of the 
count's fortunes . ^unless, indeed, you sought for 
an alliance among the mezzo eieto." 

'^ Noi" replied the countess with a sigh. " His 
father was a proud man, and so is Guide. The 
Lambertis were counts in the Marches in the 
fourteenth century. They have never degraded 
themselves to a mere mercenary marriage. But 
what do you know of this girl's birth, padre? 
She may belong to the fMzzo ceto herself? " 

This momentary glimmer of reason was quickly 
put cmt by a severe look from Padre Ste&no.* 

1. J 



4 CARR OP CABRLTON. 

*'Do you imagine I have not inqnired, my 
daughter ? , Confine your excellent observation 
to matters you can understand. I have seen the 
register of this young lady's birth^ and letters 
written by her illustrious papa, whose family is 
one of the oldest in England. You may rest 
satisfied on this head.** 

*' Indeed, padre," said the poor lady, submis- 
sively, after a moment's pause, ^' I fear I shall not 
succeed in persuading my son to listen to reason ; 
but of course I will obey you. Anything to 
serve the interests of our holy Church, and to 
promote the spiritual welfare of my Guido.** 

^' You must work upon his feelings ; and as I 
have already ssud, pique may do somewhat But 
you have no time to lose. I learn this evening 
there is a change in the plans of the Courteney 
family again. They depart in a few days." 

**The blessed Virgin be praised for that!" 
ejaculated Madame Lamberti, fervently. '^ I have 
had no rest since they have been here, and shall 
have none sua long as they remain. They have 
paid their rent up for the next three months, 



CASA LAMBEBTL 5 

so I bare no disquietude on that score^ but oh ! 
I feel as if my Guido were never safe as long as 
tbat otber girl was bere I Sbe bas exercised some 
unbolj spell over bim* He neitber eats nor 
sleeps. I bear bim walking up and down the 
room half the night, father." 

<' Marriage will cure all that," replied the 
priest, smiling. 

*^ Maj he not return to be as he was before they 
came, . ^when they depart? " said the poor mother. 

" I repeat, it is necessary that we obtain a hold 
over him now or never, and it rests chiefly with 
you to accomplish this." 

The above is but a firagment of a long conver- 
sation which passed between the priest and his 
victim about a week after Carr's proposal, and 
two days after Sara's nocturnal wanderings. 
Her interviews with Padre Ste&no, which had 
been pretty frequent before then, had even been 
longer and more frequent since. And while the 
old woman was as a puppet in the hands of the 
priest, he, astute man as he was, was but a 
puppet in the bands of the girL 



6 GABB OF GABBLYON. 

The maniage could not take place at Bidogna. 
Florence waa the nearest place where there was 
a clergyman; and a fiivonrable change in the 
weather produced so corresponding a one in 
Mr. Conrteney's health, that he declared him- 
self equal to undertake the journey. He seemed 
to have rallied^ indeed, ever since the marriage 
was decided on : and though the physician looked 
grave and shodc his head, he could not positively 
interdkt the journey by short stages. It was 
agreed that Carr, who was as impatient of delays 
as Mr. CovxteneiY seemed, should go on to 
arrange certain necessary preliminaries, and that 
the Courteneys should follow three days later. 
Mrs. Courteney alone opposed all haste, and 
would have temporized if she could: spoke of 
the impossibility of her daughter's wedding gar- 
ments being made in this haste; and suggested 
that there should be at least a month's interval 
before the marriage. But Carr's characteristic 
impetuosity was seconded in this instance by 
Mr. Courteney's evident anxiety that the matter 
should be concluded* 



CASA LAMBERTI. 7 

*' In my state any nnnecessary delay is dan*, 
gerotts. I am well enough to move jnst now. 
I may not be so a fortnight hence; and in a 
month's time I may he gone on a longer journey^ 
who knows ?^ .The settlement is so simple a 
matter, that we may expect it from Paris in a 
few days. What then is there to detain us?" 

Gilda made no objection. She was quiet, pale, 
and passive. Far from avoiding Carr now, she 
met him with her gentle snule, and Ibtened to 
all his rapturous nonsense, and seemed to feel 
that in plighting her word she had relinquished 
all further right to act for herself, and must, 
perforce, lean upon and cling to the support she 
had chosen. His tact was never more graceftilly 
and adroitly employed than in speaking to h^ 
of the happy future they would lead at Carrlyon. 
Almost the first time they had met, she had 
expressed an eager desire to become acquainted 
with English country life. She would see it now, 
he told her, under auspices which be hoped would 
make her love it, and prev^it her casting a 
regret back to Italy  . . and he described the old 



8 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

house, with its, pictare-gallerj, and banqueting- 
hall, and sunnj terraces, and herds of &31ow 
deer swimming across the lake to be fed on 
sommer mornings, and the rides down forest 
glades, and the village, with its schools and its 
ivied church, and the Christmas boontj . ^which 
should be called ^^ Geraldine's bountj,** when she 
was Lady of the Manor, . and the loving tenantry, 
and the children's feasts, and . and . in short, like 
portraits of Queen Bess, his brilliant pictore of 
the golden time that was to succeed their marriage, 
had no shadows. Yet shadows there were, only 
he ignored them. His father^s sturdy figure 
pointing to his diminished rent-roll ; his mother's 
implacable face of spite, and wraih, and disap- 
pointment; he saw them both, but he resolved 
they should not interfere with the happiness of 
that prospect. Had not his life been passed in 
twisting them both round his fingers? When 
the thing was done . accomplished beyond recall 
. they would submit to make the best of it: 
though he well knew what obstacles would be 
thrown in his way to prevent it, if possible. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. . 9 

Therefore^ he was anxious that the marriage should 
take place before any letters or messenger, in reply 
to his announcement^ could reach Italy. In that 
aimouncement of his engagement, he said nothing 
of its immediate fulfilment ; with reference to the 
sale of the farm, he contented himself, on second 
thoughts, by expressing the assurance that he 
should always be happy to consent to anything 
tending to make his father comfortable ; and he 
felt certain that Lord Carrlyon, on his part, would 
never refuse his consent to a step upon which 
the happiness of his son depended. To his 
mother I am afraid he assumed a sharper and 
more decided tone, as better calculated in his 
estimation to produce the desired efect He 
reminded her that he had neyer given her the 
smallest reason to believe he should marry to 
please any one but himself. He Iiad pleased him- 
self. He was prepared for all she could say, 
and he begged beforehand to assure her it would 
not have the least weight with him. His mind 
Was fully made up, and his word pledged. The 
wife he had chosen was ,one whom Lady Carrlyon 



10 CABB OF GABBLYON. 

ought to be proud to receive as a daughter-in-law. 
She was rich in every mental and personal graoe^ 
which he had lived long enough to consider 
superior to all other riches. In conduaion^ he 
had the effironteiy to hope that his mother would 
send his bride-elect some small trinket, firom the 
great family jewel-case^ as an earnest of her 
ladyship's affectionate regard. 

He was more in love than ever: foxgot him- 
self, his little vanities and small social triumphs, 
the selfishness of the spoilt child, the arrogance 
of the admired and successful man ; forgot every- 
thing but her: and the love which began as a 
pastime^ now influenced every thought and action. 
Perhaps the combativeness of his nature, which 
I have already shown was so prominent a feature, 
added to the ardour of his passion for the time. 
He swore that the earnestness of his devotion 
should gradually melt her coldness. He would 
overcome and drive out that old memory; he 
never doubted it And, in truth, this energy of 
purpose, tiie ennobling influence of one healthy 
feeling, strong and true, in a petty life of 



GAS A LAMBEBTL 11 

dilettanteiant made itself fislt; the outlines of the 
man seemed hroader and bolder than thej had 
hitherto. Gilda was not insensible to this ; what 
woman coold be so? She said she had done him 
injustice: she tried to repair it by everj means 
in her power. The week that had elapsed was 
one of probation to her : it was an effort always 
to appear cheerful, to drive back the thought 
that would rise unbidden at times^ and to enter . 
or seem to enter . ^into all Carr's plans with 
interest When she failed, she reproached her- 
self: for was he not more tender and more 
forbearing than she had believed possible ? 

One trial was spared her* Guide she never 
saw. Since that interview with Mrs. Courtenej 
he had not been inside the apartment. She did 
not hear his name mentioned. By tacit consent, 
neither her mother nor herself had alluded to him 
since that day : Gilda, indeed, was ignorant that 
her mother had seen him. No good was to be 
gained by repeating to her the substance of that 
interview. The best, the only thing, that her 
mother could hope, was that the memory of this 



12 CABB OF CABSLYON. 

early love^ which the girl at least had no idea was 
retumedj might die out and be forgotten in these 
two young lives. Mrs. Courteney's partiality for 
Carr made her, perhaps^ more sanguine that the 
redemption of her child's happiness lay in his 
devotion. 

Such was the state of feeling, and the position 
of affairs, in the family on the day when it had 
been finally resolved tbict Carr should proceed by 
diligence the following morning to Florence, 
engage an apartment for the Courteneys, and 
make the necessary arrangements for the marriage 
forthwith. He had already written to the Secre- 
tary of Legation, who was a friend of his, begging 
him to facilitate matters ; and it was agreed 
between Mr. Courteney and himself that the 
ceremony should take place, if possible, four or 
five days after their arrival in Florence. 

That evening, as they sat round the tea-table, 
Garofalo, who had not been to see his friends for 
some days, unexpectedly made his appearance at 
the door. The worthy professor looked rather 
pale and anxious, as though some matter of 



CA8A LAMBERTI. 13 

more than common grayitj weighed ttpon his 
mind. 

Mr. Conrteney, who was stretched in his chaise 
hngue near the fire, with his pocket-yolume of 
Horace between his finger and thnmb^ greeted his 
old friend with unusnal warmth. 

''How fares it with our learned professor? I 
have been here, on this sofa, for the last two days, 
expecting you to come and see me." 

''Hi I signorcj" responded the Italian, grasping 
the invalid gentleman's thin hand, '^I have had 
business of importance occupying me. CKk vuole f 
I am glad to see you better. Ton, too, caro 
signore, have been occupied, I believe ? Is it too 
late to offer my felicitations? " 

'* Very nearly ; for in less than a week we shall 
be gone." 

'*I regret it much, signore. This house will 
indeed seem deserted without you : but who can 
tell how long any of us will remain here ? Guido 
himself is off to-morrow." 

''Guido!" exclaimed Mrs. Courteney, aloud. 
The attention of every one of the party was fixed 



.7 



\ 14 CASK OT CABRLTOK. 

upon die professor^ otherwise the extraordinaij 
conynlsioh of Sara's face could hardlj hare 
escaped notice. The cup of tea she was carrying 
to her lips shook so that she was obliged to set it 
down. 

<^ By-the-bj^ that rembds me,'' said Mr. 
Courtenej, '' that we have not seen Coont 
Lamberti, either, for some days. What is the 
cause of this sudden departure ? " 

The professor "laid his ibrofinger on the side of 
his nose. 

*' FrioaJU affcdrs, which call him to the north of 
Italy for a short time, signore." 

Carr inyoluntarily fixed his eyes upon Gilda 
while the above was passing. She turned a shade 
paler, and a low sigh . so low indeed that it 
scarcely reached him . escaped her after the pro- 
fessor's last speech. An awkward silence followed. 
Each member of that small party felt it, and 
knew the reason ; that is to say, his own reason: 
and for some minutes there was nothing heard 
but the noise of the professor^s copious pinch 
. of snuff, the taking of which was always at- 



CASA LAHBEBTL 15 

tended hj a sound like that of a terrier worrying 
a rat 

'^Ton must come and visit ns at Florence^ 
Garofalo^" said Mr. Courteney at last, ^^ the cittct 
superba of your favourite poet must have some 
attraction for you." 

'* Ah I it is as ungrateful to me as it was to the 
divine Dante^" replied the professor, shaking his 
head. '^ A Florentine, I am exiled from her walls, 
signore ; and if we meet again, it must be else- 
where . for the present But," he added in a 
livelier tone, though with equal earnestness, " con- 
gratulate me, signore I What think you ? I have 
made the acquaintance of two mtch men since I 
had last the honour of seeing yon ! Italians . true 
genllemen, true scholars, and both of them full of 
the most interesting details for meJ' 

** Who are these uncommonly rare birds ? " 
asked Mr. Courteney, sarcastically. 

" One is called Jacoppo Bossi, a Venetian ; the 
other, Giovanni Tibaldi. His countiy I cannot 
find out; such an entertaining companion! and 
full of instructian." 






16 CARB OF CAKRLYON. 

'' Where did you make the acquaintance of 
these gentlemen^ Garofalo? I never heard yon 
speak before in such terms of any of your towns- 
folk." 

*' Ah ! caro signore. These were forwarded 
to me from Venice, by a friend. They are not 
to be found here." 

" Forwarded? not to be found? What do you 
mean ? Where are they living ? " 

" Living ! They have been dead, caro signore, 
betwe^ three and four hundred years. These 
are their MS. letters, despatches, and journals, 
full of illustrations to the history of the time, 
with many quotations from the divine poet; a 
volume of priceless value to me, copied by my 
friend from the archives of Venice ... I know 
these men, I know them as well as if I had seen 
them in the flesh ! Ha ! rare fellows I rare fellows, 
signore." 

The good faith with which the enthusiast spoke, 
and was evidently so carried away by his admira- 
tion of these defunct worthies, to forget for the 
moment every other subject, called a smile into 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 17 

tHe face of his auditors^ and effectually diverted 
the channel of conversation from LambertL 

Nevertheless, later in the evening, when an 
opportunitj offered itself of addressing Mrs. 
Courtenej in a low voice, and without attract- 
ing marked attention, Garofido said, . 

''Our fnend charged me to deUver a message 
to you, signore, and one to your daughter, . 
through you . . . you will comprehend his motives 
for not bidding you farewell in person. He bade 
me deliver those farewells, with his heart-felt 
prayers for your welfare, and that of the signorina. 
He was not aware that your own departure was so 
near at hand." 

''When is he going? and will he leave his 
mother for any length of time? ** 

" He has had a message from a good friend of 
ours . a friend of Italy's," . ^the professor frowned 
mysteriously ; " and he was glad to lejive Bologna 
just at this moment Important events may arise. 
I am not at liberty to say more. He may return 
soon, but it will depend on certain contingencies, 
and other wills than his own.'* 

VOL. n. 2 



r 



18 CABB Oer CABMLTOS. 

As lie ottered the last words in that pecnfiaily 
hoarse yrbisiptat, which is often beard BMsre dis- 
tinctly than an ocdinaij conTersational tone, Sara 
Gisbome passed close bj* The ribbon of her 
skeve canght in the back of the professor^s chair ; 
or at least it afqpeared to do sot The mofement 
was adroitl J mans^ed, and it would hare been 
difiknlt to tell from the ezpressioa of her face 
that she had heard a word that was said. 

A few miniites ktor she sauntered out of the 
room. Ho one erer took any notice of her goings 
and ooaui^a^ and she knew she was safe from 
observation. 

In the ante-room she flung herself down into 
a chaiTj and sobbed. Unhatural as this may 
appear in one so hard, cmel, and relentless, con- 
sistency is, in reali^, the only thing which is 
nnnatnxal in hnman nature. The passionate heart 
of the gid was lashed into a perfect stcm at the 
idea of seeing Gnido no more, just now when 
her plans seemed ripe for execotiQD. A few days 
.only a few days more ; but how nroch might 
have 'been efected in those few daya Forgei- 



CA8A IiAMBEBTT* 19 

fill of prudence^ forgetful of eyerything but the 
frustration of her heart's wild dream^ for which 
she had toiled and plotted so loDg, Sara deter- 
mined that he should not depart without her 
making one last and desperate effort. She would 
compromise herself . ^no matter . she would risk 
that fair fame which was almost her only worldly 
capital; but what mere worldly considerations, 
withoot any stronger support, could restrain her 
at such a moment? 

Whaterer was to be done must be done quickly. 
She rose, and mnning to the door which I 
have already mentioned as connecting the Cour- 
teney's iq)artinents with those occupied by Guido 
and his mother, she drew back the heavy bolts, 
and opened it Upon closing it again, she &und 
herself on the chrk staircase. A draught of cold 
air came up &om the open passage below. She 
stood stilt and shivered, brushed away the tears 
that still lay upon her cheek, and tremblingly 
appnMu^ed the door she knew to be his, and 
baaieaith which a light was shinmg. 

2. a 



20 CABR OF CABBLYON. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

The young adrocate was in his room alone, sur- 
rounded by the few preparations .he was making 
for his sudden departure. A pile of letters and 
papers . ^most of them in ciphei^. entrusted to 
his care by some of the liberals of Bologna, for 
their friends in Milan; a small valise; an engi- 
neer's map ; and a case of pistols were near him. 
He had announced his departure to his mother 
an hour previously, imder the pretext of law 
business, which would detain him at Milan ibr 
a few days. The countess received the intelli- 
gence in a way that surprised her son. Two 
days had elapsed since her conversation with 
the Jesuit father, and she had not yet sununoned 
courage to broach the subject of it to Gnida 
She now said verv little; but in this reticence 



CASA LAMBERTL 21 

she seemed to be exercising a great restraint 
oyer herself. 

'^ Ton will come back and spend an hour with 
me Ister, Jiglio mio, will you not ? " 

It appeared as though she were almost anxious 
to get rid of him for the moment. 

Guide had eagerly hastened to obey a summons 
which might be of importance to his country, 
and released him for a time at least from a. 
life which had become almost insupportable. H;s 
incapacity for application^to any of his old studies 
had increased. Over and oyer again he sat down, 
and attacked the subject before him: in a few 
minutes his thoughts had wandered far away. 

He was miserable. He felt that so long as he 

 

remained imder that roof with the Courteneys 
it was hopeless. The secret missiye, with its 
prospect of very different employment ere long, 
came like a wholesome tonic, arousing him frx)m 
despondency, and bracing his relaxed energies. 
His country wanted him ; the deep wound in his 
life which he knew his own nature too well to 
believe could ever be healed, must not be suffered 



eS CAKB OF CABfiUrON. 

to eat ftway all the man's vital force. He bad 
talked of change^ but the verj strengtk f par- 
pofle (whether the principle that guided it were 
right or wrong)^ which had made him resirt the 
noblest, as it is the snbtlesi^ .tempfcaiion to which 
man is here exposed^ denoted  chacactor < iron 
mouldy less sa8cq)iible tkim most things te the 
inflnence of time. This love woald remain as 
a shrine whereon to <$ffer up his purert thamghts; 
a sanctnary wherein to r^ire &om the tormoil 
and strife of the world. But Gnido -was a man. 
e action: a man whose sympaEthies led him to 
regard it as the first duty of every citinen of 
the state to be up and stirring in anch lanes; 
and as the dep&L a moral dt^gtadation to be 

9 

sunk in indolence and self-indulgence. It was 
not less a principle, therefore, than a necessity 
of his natuve to work ; and work requiring energy, 
skill, and forelhonght, was iSbe best medicine now 
to *' minister to a mind diseased." 

His preparations were nearly (completed. He 
stood there with folded arms, kwkiag t a little 
glove that lay on the table before him; and 



CASA XAMBEBTL 23 

-wiiile he yidded to this xoomeniucy weakness, 
hu thou^is wandered far, &r awaj from the 
bnnness of the present hour, and hard practical 
considerations for the fiitnre. . . . iEliewas starUed 
by a low knock at the door, and thrust the glov 
hurriedly into his breast Upon his inyitatio& 
to enter, the door slowly opened, and the figure 
of Sara Gisbome met his astonished gase. 

^ Yon arc going away early to-oaomyw, Ghudo 
Lamberti, amd I have come . ie widh yen good- 
ly-" 

She spoke in a low tieaudons ,'voioe, Tery 

* 

unlike her nBal self; and xapidly, as tfaongh 
not trusting hecsdf to weigh and consider wha4; 
words die had come diere to say. 

^Ydh shun any leaye-takang with the Cdur- 
teneys," she went on. ^ The strengdi of a man's 
will is such, that yon haye vootad np already 
the boyish passion f(Hr a child who was inseaatble 
to yonr bve, and wfll soon be another's. Is it 
not so? Well, Gnido Lambeiti, tiie step I take 
is withont precedent, tmwomanly . call it by what 
name yon will ; but I aai ccmie to tell you these 



24 CABB or CABBLTOK. 

is one who is willing to devote her whole life, 

nsLj, to lay it down in yonr service, Gxnio 

Lambertil A woman, whom yoa do not love 

 
at present, indeed, but whose devotion yonr heart 

would recognize in time ; a woman whom it is 

in yonr power to mould for good or ill; who 

would toil and plot for yoa; whose energies. 

they are greater than most women's . should be 

concentrated on the cause you have at heart 

She asks for nothing but tolerance at first She 

knows you must recover from the wound under 

which you still suflfer, before she can hope for 

anything more; and . and she would not now. 

Guide Lamberti, run the risk of exciting your 

contempt by taking this extraordinary step, but 

that time presses, and that if they are not now 

united, &te may divide those two lives for ever I " 

'' Signorina,'? said Guide, gravely, taking her 

hand, '^ there is not so much love in the world 

that one can afford to be ungrateful for it ! But 

I will not deceive you. I have no love, nor 

shall I ever have any, to give in return. How 

a grave, taciturn man can have won, unwittingly. 



CASA LAMBSBTL 25 

the affection of so brilliant a woman as yourself^ 
I know not; but your imagination has endowed 
him^ signorina^ with qualities he does not possessj 
I fear Time and absence will teach you that you 
were mistaken^ and " 

"No, no, Guido!*' cried the girl, passionately ; 
, " don't talk of time and absence ! I cannot con- 
tinue to live as I am dping. I cannot remain 
with thes^ people. I have always hated them. 
I hate them worse than ever now. If I am forced 
back to that life, I shall become desperate . 
reckless : my bosom seething over with bitterness 
and disappointment. God knows what I may not 
do ! I hold even now a secret in my possession 
which might break off this marriage. But I 
will not do that/* she added, while her eyes 
flashed again. "No! I have a revenge for past 
wrongs more sure than that." 

Guido looked at her in stem surprise. 

" Are they not your benefactors of whom you 
thus speak ? " 

"No!" she exclaimed fiercely, and her voice 
had now risen from the murmur in which she 



26 CABR OF CABfiLYON. 

liegan to a pitch far aboye its ordinaiy one. 
** My ccj is like that of Esau of old ! Thej 
hare robbed me of mj Iiirthrigfat, awl now Aej 
have robbed me of mj blessrag . the blenig 
of your love^ Lamberti ! I have good caiue to 
hate them I'' 

^' Ton q>eak in riddles, signorina, and it is not 
for me to xmravel them. Forgive me if I reaund 
you that a false constniotion might be placed on 
your presence here. We live surroonded by 
spies in this house. Bennit me to condvct yoa 
back to your own wing f the pdaoe." 

'^ What do I care?" she cried, with a pasBnenate 
burst of tears ; ^' what do I care fia* l3w constmc- 
tion that is put <m my presenoe here? it is tfa^ 
truth. I would have sacrificed all, oS for yon! 
Whatever I become in after life, whatever depth 
of degradation and self-abammeat I vuiy reach, 
it is owing to you, who might have redeemed me, 
and who abandon me now to all the wont pas- 
sions in my nature.** 

While she was yet speaking, the noise of a key 
m the lock, and of a door turned sharply on its 



CASA LAMBEB7I. 27 

hinge^ made Guido start and look towards the 
panel wluch communicated with his mother's 
room. It flew bac^, and the countess^ pale and 
feeble^ followed by the Jesuit father^ stepped into 
the room. 

*^ The sound of your voices^ my son^" began the 
old lady, in quivering accents, '^ atiiracted the good 
padre and me^ and we are coma here to con- 
firm the hopes we have lately entertained, that 
you have transferred your affections from the 
heretic English lady to her whose eyes have been 
graciously opened by our blessed Vir^n to the 
troth of our holy fidtk" 

It was a lesson she had learned by heart ; and 
ahe weoat on, after a frightened^ hurried glance at 
her son's stern Eu:e . 

^^ We know jour upright heart, so sensitive 
to the call of honour, my son; and that you 
would not compromise the fair fiune of this lady 
by remainix^ closeted with her at this hour, were 
you not prepared to vindicate ber character, as 
your wife, before the world." 

^' It is a choice which will iunise your friends 



28 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

no disquietude in this world, nor imperil your 
salTation in the next^" chimed in Padre Stefana 

The yoang man's brow was knit ; but a scomfol 
smile played round his mouth. He saw the 
Jesuit's plot; and turned his piercing ejes upon 
the girl^ to read there how far she was implicated 
in it before he trusted himself to speak. 

She was white, and her fingers twitched 
nervously, but she returned him gaze fi^r gaze. 

'^ I am innocent of any share in this, Guido 
Lamberti, so help me God I Reverend father, 
I appeal to you whether ^ 

'^ The appeal is needless, signorina," said Guido, 
with grave courtesy. "I am quite ready to 
acquit you of any share in so puerile a plot. My 
poor mother, had you not submitted to be a tool 
in this, it would be hardly worth my notice. 
Out of respect for you, 1 do not reply to this 
' reverend father ' as he deserves, by kicking him 
down-stairs, as I should any other scoundrel whom 
I caught eavesdropping. But, remember this, if 
any scandal should arise from this lady's being 
known to have been here, the scandal is of your 



CASA LAMBERTL 29 

making, sir ; and your clotb, for which I have 
uncommonlj little respect, as >70u know, will not 
protect you. What has passed between this young 
lady and me is a matter which concerns us ctlone; 
and I submit to no man's interference in such 
things. Signorina, will you permit me to con- 
duct you back to your own apartments ?" 

Though in the form of a request, there was 
really more of command in the words, as he said 
them, and took the girl's trembling hand in his. 
What use was there in resistance, even if she 
coiild have resisted that strong will ? But shame 
and mortification held her dumb. Without even 
raising her eyes towards her two advocates, she 
suffered him to lead her from . the room, and 
across the passage, to the unbarred door through 
which she had found her way there. As they 
now reached it, she seemed to make an effort to 
speak, but her voice, or the words in which she 
would have clothed her meaning, failed her. She 
shrank away from the firm, manly pressure of 
the hand he once more extended, in bidding her 
farewell, and with her white face cowering under 



30 CASB OF CABRLTON. 

s iam^e af nniHTeled hair^ she fled dcywn the 
dinalj-lit pasBige, witlieift eren lookmg at Mm 

again* 

He found ki room racated oh his retorir^ and 
after a few moHieiiDs' consideration descended to 

 

\m friend, the professor. He was at his desk 
as usual, but &i6 time he was writing letters. 

^ Strange things have been taking place in 
this^ house to*night, arnica mioy but even to jon 
I m8t not diselose them. .1 thidt it better to 
antedate mj departure, howerer, bj a few houis, 
as tibat rascally priest maj be plotting to txj 
and detain me. Heayen knows what ecclesiastical 
hiws tkej maj not bring to bear oir a poor 
fdlow who . well ! no matter . ^but I think I 
am as well abscsat from Bologna for a short 
time. The ict is,* he added, with a sorty 
attempt at a laugh, ^^thej are bent on marrying 
me to some woman who eiiher is, or affects to 
be, a pious CathdSc, and whom the Jesuits think 
they can have under their thumb. 1 ought to 
be honofored at tibeir bestowing so much notice 
OB me.* 



GASA LAMBBBTL 31 

" He ! ceuro mio, your great alIities and your 
strong character^ witlumt the weight of your 
name, make you a fi>nnidable adversary^ and 
would make yoa  valuable a fnend. . . . 
But, let me aak^ haw are yoa to get away 
at this hour ? There is no diligenza till six 
o'clock." 

^^A carriUa will take me to Modena, where 
I shall arrive heftre the eariy diligenza starts.. 
I will send the porter's boy for one." 

While he crossed the court, the professor rose 

 

and drew tnm, a leathern bag stuffed into a 
chink in the wallj five and twenty gold pieces* 
H&tk of these after some hesitation he rejdaced. 
He would gladly have given the entire sum, 
but he dared not part with the whole of those 
small savings, laid up against a day when he 
might no kmger be able to earn a bajocco. On 
the count's return, the dd man placed the money 
kthis hanid* 

^ Take it withoot hesitation and without shame," 
he said, ^yonr funds will be nearly exhausted 
by this journey; and this is given not to you. 



32 CAHB OF CABBLTOK. 

but to the cause we both have at heart I have 
enough left for any pressing emergency, take 
it then, figlio mio, in God's name, and may He 
prosper your journey I If the moment be indeed 
arrived for Italy, if you remain away altogether, 
who knows but I may pack up my Dante and 
follow you ? " 

Guide pressed his old friend's hand in silence^ 
He would not wound him by declining the offer ; 
his pride was of another sort; and he valued 
that fiiendship beyond much gold. 

" So be it, old friend. We understand each 
other. The young man's arm may one day 
support the failing one. Yon will hear from 
me from time to time, and learn how affairs in 
Lombardy are progressing. If the proq>ects of 
our friends there seem visionary, and their hopes 
in Charles Albert not likely to be realized ; if, in 
short, this movement we are led to expect be one 
I cannot think myself justified in joining, you will 
probably see me back here before long. Watch 
over my poor mother while I am away. Those 
sharks will leave her no peace. God help her I " 



CASA LAMBRETL 33 

He wrang his friend's hand^ and then the 
two embraced, as Italians are wont to do. Five 
minutes afterwards he entered his mother's room. 
He had prepared himself for a violent scene. 
But as he opened the door his mother's prostrate 
figure on the bed, and the priest beside her, sent 
a shock through the son's heart He rapidly 
approached her. 

^'Mother," he began, as he took her passive 
hand. There was no response, but a low moan, 
and the closed eyes feebly opened, and rested on 
the young man. 

'' Your mother, count, is sick unto death, I 
fear me, . and alas! my son, you are the cause 
of this!" 

Thus murmured the smooth-tongued Jesuit. 
But Guide, who had seen the countess more 
than once before in this condition, recovered 
liis presence of mind, and drawing from his 
pocket a travelling-flask, he applied it to her 
lips. 

^* It is only exhaustion, produced by long 
j&sting, and mortification of the flesh," he said, 

VOL. n. 3 



34 CABB OF CASSLTOK. 

tnmii^ ta the priest ^This and tiie leoent 
agitation yon cansed het, hare brov^it on tins 
attack* There is a long Bcore betweoi us, padre, 
beware I'' 

^'Yoa speak a language^ my son, I do not 
nsderstaindy'' returned the priest, with auwk 
hmniHty. " How can a poor man like me 
have offended yon? As a tme flenraMt of our 
holy Ghnrch^and in tibe etamal inteiosts cf this 
exceUent Iady I haTe .ii|okied ^erteia religioas 
exerdseBy which ^ 

" Spare yonr breath, and keep your defence sr 
those who beliere it," intanrapted the count's 
stem voice. ^' Yon have stanred her, and others 
like her^ that your Order might be enriched,^ 
yon would bleed her of her last htgocco, in the 
name of religion, forsooth 1 Tour lies, yoar 
firands^ your slander, are they not known to 
me? And yon eaqpect me to become a pioos 
son of the drarch, to belkve in blinking pictures, 
and bleeding images ! Go to I Mother, are yon 
b^ter? CSan 3ron listen to me ? ** 

A fidnt colour on her %s and chedL showed 



CAfiA LAMBEBTL. 35 

tkafc tke reBtorative liad not been wi&oixt offset 



She fiufldj fiigiiified 

<^I am called away . as I told jioa some hours 
ago, mother: it may be for maotha . it may be 
only for a few days. You must bear p^ while 
I an absent; you mast not be despondent about 
me^ or suffer others to fill your mind with &oliah 
or eyil fancies about me^ I go but to do my 
intj^ as I beliere my&ther wmild have dane; 
and I will try not to piove myself anwortfay of 
hisname. Give me your Uessiag beCirel depart, 
willyoanpt?" 

The poor woman writhed upon her bed^ and 
cast a piteous glance towards the priest. 

"How can you expect to win a blessing,** 
murmured the latter, **when you desert your 
mother in what may be her last hour, and dis- 
obey her voice, my son ?" 

It was but a very thin artifice to detain him. 
Even now Madame Lamberti raised herself with 
an effort, and cast her arms round her son's neck. 
The mother's love was too strong for the priest. 

'^ You will go : I know it," sjie sobbed, " and 

3. a 



36 CABS OF CABBLTON. 

may the Holy Yirgin watch over and lead you 
back to me I I will not cease to pray for yon, 
i9y Guido; and, oh I if we do not meet again 
this side the grave, let us not be separated for 
ever hereafter I** 

"We shall not," replied the yonng man, 
solemnly. 

She lay locked in his arms ; and memories of 
past years, before a doad had risen up between 
them, crowded on those two hearts, pressed to- 
gether for the last time. And then^ not daring 
to trust himself to speak again, he rushed firom 
the apartment. 



t 

* 



GASA LAMBEBTL 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Cabb bad. only been in Florence a few hours, 
when a frantic, incoherent telegram from his 
mother reached him, imploring him to return to 
England instandj. This was followed in the due 
course of post by three letters; one from his 
father . a weak combination of command and 
entreaty to his son to break off his marriage, 
evidently-dictated by Lady Carrlyon; one from 
that lady herself, as foolish and vulgar a com- 
position as was ever committed to paper by an 
angry mother ; and one from the family lawyer, 
informing the heir of all the Carrlyons of the con- 
fused state of his father's affairs, of the necessity 
of selling or mortgaging a much larger portion of 
the estate than had been originally contemplated, 
and lastly of Lord Carrlyon's incapacity to in- 



38 CABB OS* CABXLTON. 

crease his son's allowance in the event of his 
marriage. 

Carr's impatience to place the question of his 
marriage beyond the pale of fiirther discossion 
was only stimulated by this means. Ten days 
of solitary refibction, without expositions or the 
necessity for active eieploymenty might perhaps 
have leid to the postponement of hia marriage for 
a time. But ten days hamty occupied in aor- 
mouBting the mmor obstades of detail tiiat oftn 
present themselves on such oceasiooSy and in 
hurrying on the preparadoas for the c er emo i iy, 
with now a fresh ineentrre to exertion in tfaew 
hritating despatches from Enghmd . wfay^ no Ibr^ 
toitoua concnrrenee of circumstaaces oould be so 
fiiTourable to the speedy aceomplifibmeiit of tUs 
marriage with a man like Carr I 

As his takii^ h bride io Engiand was of 
oonrae out of the question at first, when his recep- 
tion at Carrlyoa was sure to be humiliating and 
painfiil in the extreme, Carr made up his mind to 
remain in Itaty for the next six months at least 
The political horizon was growing more and ommib 



0, CASA LAMBESn, 39 

orercast eTBrjr daj^bnt Cair had not lired in inti- 
macy with the Conrteneys without imbibing their 
liberal opinio&s on the subject of Italy. He 
regarded the sqpproadhing storm with interest^ and 
had no heaitatian in deciding to remain in a 
country which would probably be the scene of 
a reTolutbn before many months were over. It 
wanted but a few days to Christmas. Immediately 
after the marriage he and Gilda were to proceed 
to Romey and remain there during the Carnival^ 
retomingto Florence in Lent. The summer he 
prc^xssed spending on the Lake of Como; and 
before that season was past^ the dignified attitude 
he was to assume would, of course, bring his 
father and mother to reason. Then, with a lofly 
amiability, he would yield to their pressing solici- 
tations, and take his fair wife home to be intro- 
duced to them. Whether he shoiUd consent to 
remain or no^ depended ^itirely on the good 
behayionr of his parents. As he ccmsidered the 
matter over, he derived more and more comfort 
from the reflection that his wife's moderate income 
would be sufiScient to render him independent of 



40 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

any additional assistance from liis &ther. He 
felt that this was what lawyers call the " strong 
point ^ in his case. And thereupon he wrote a 
temperate, But firm and manly, reply to his father, 
in which he regretted that there was any point 
upon which they should have a difference of 
opinion, but announced his confidence that Loid 
Carrlyon's calmer judgment would recognize the 
impossibility of his son^s breaking his engagement, 
even if he felt so disposed. He moreover laid 
down the principle . somewhat sententiously, con- 
sidering the circumstances . of firee will unshadded 
by opinion or prejudice in such cases ; and then, 
with considerable self-satisfaction, he laid down 
the pen. 

A few days later the Courteneys arrived. It 
was a sharp, glittering day, with the keen Tramon- 
tana sweeping down all the streets that were open 
to the north, and a brilliant sun pouring ahnost 
intolerably upon such as lay towards the south, 
and were sheltered from the mountain wind. In 
the one, a few pedestrians, like a charge of bulb, 
drove blindly and furiously along, with heads 



CASA LAMBERT!. 41 

bent before the wind^ and heavy cloaks swathed' 
around their faces. In the other> f.lostks were 
swung back, heads raised, and the pedestrians 
might not infrequently be seen to sink lazily 
back against a wall, and bask, like lizards, in the 
sunshine. The flower-girls, so notably character- 
istic of Florence, flaunted here, like butterflies, 
under the shadow of their large Leghorn hat8, 
flinging their bouquets of choicest exotics into 
some of the carriages (the carriages, mark, in 
which there are anli/ ladies, go by unnoticed), 
and bestowing a smile or a sprig of jasmine, out 
of very exuberance of heart apparently, on every 
passer-by. Were I disposed to moralize, here 
would be a' fine opportunity for inquiring how 
many broken hearts have gathered, and tied up, 
and then given away with a gay and graceful 
smile, these tube-roses and camelias. There was 
a sad tragedy when I was in Florence connected 
with one of these Jiariaje . ^but enough of that 

At an hotel upon the Lung' Amo, Laiirence 
Carr took up his quarters; and you may be sure 
that the handsome, aristocratic-looking young 



42 GARB OF CABELTON. 



Engliftluiutii met with an tinasiial amoimt of at- 
tention a| t^e iumds of the flowec^^iih. He faai 
aecured a large apartr; eat for a few weeks in the 
afd^oinii^ honse, as being tiie wannest atnatian 
in the topwn, for Mr. Coortenej, who waa to go 
on to Fiaa for tiie remainder of the winter^ as 
soon as his daughter was married. 

As the heavj vsUttrimo carriage drove JSf to 
die door^ and Carr5 who waa waiting there to 
receive them handed oct the three ladies, a gnmp 
of flower-girls pressed roimd, ihmsting their 
choicest bonqnets on him, ^per la bella si^ 
nofina." It takes even less to gather a knot of 
idlers iog^her in Italj than dsewhere. Tbe 
arrival or departure of a travelling carriage nera 
fails to accomplish iliis. In the crowd congregated 
abont the door as Carr tamed casnalfy ronnd, he 
recognized a foce nnder a liroad-leafed hat, which 
he had last seen in Bologna. His mind, however, 
was ei^rosBedwiA too interestmg a subject to gire 
this one more attention, and he was certainlj 
far from associatiiig with that muffled stranger 
the gay Ginlio Bazzi. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 43 

Mr. Conrtenej retired at anoe to his room, and 
as Sara' Gisbome sent word thiit she bad a head- 
ache^ and wished to be left nndninrbed, Carr spent ' 
Ae evening alone with ihe mother and daughter. 
There was a restlessness, an agitaiiov, abont 
Mrs* Certeney*s maimer, which did not t^pe 
Laurence. Habitnallj mdancholy as was the 
expression ofher face, there was now an inerettfed 
depiessioB, ahemating with a look of alann, which 
prompted the yonng man to incpiire, with his nsoal 
atraightfiorwanlness, if anjthing was the matter ? 

''Mj mother's strmgth has been over-taxed 
of late,** said Gilda, sadlj* ''She is far fiom 
strong: and all this watching with my &ther, 
the excitement of a hnrried jotnney, and of my 
approaching marriage, have been too mnch for 
her. Ton witnessed, I dunk," she added, lower- 
ing her yoice, ** one of her nervons attacks? they 
have been more freqnent of late. I lodk forward, 
Laurence, so much to having her with us in the 
svmmer at Coma Pi^ says he is going to 
remata at Leghorn, but you^ll make her come, 
at all events, won't you? " 



44 CABR or CARRLYON. 

There was someiliing of her old playfulness 
in the tone. She was striving with all her 
strength \o forget everything else but him ; and had^ 
indeed^ at times^ regained to outward appearance 
her sweet cheerftilness of manner. This last 
snggqstionj which in the innocence of her heart 
she thought most give Carr pleasure^ was certainly 
not calculated to do so as much as she imagined. 
If it was to have been made at all> it should have 
come from himself. However^ he really liked 
Mrs. Courteney ; and though with no uncommon 
selfishness in man he would have wished that 
Gilda's attention should be devoted solely to 
himself for a long time to come^ he consoled 
himself with the reflection that it was a veiy 
different thing from having the father (with whom 
he never could feel at his ease) as a visitor for an 
indefinite period, and he managed to reply, with- 
out wincing. 

'^ Certainly, darling, she shall be with us aD 
the summer : only mamma must not engross aU 
my Gilda's thoughts, eh ? Is there anything, by- 
the-by, you think your mother would like from 



CASA LAMHEBTL 45 

England ? I am expectiiig some things to be sent 
over. What shall I give her, Gilda, as a poor 
return for the treasure I am robbing her of? " 

" Give her, Laurence, what will be worth more 
to her than anything . ^a son's affection. Poor 
mamma I when you know how good, and patient, 
and unselfish she is, you will love her almost as 
much as I do. Tell me," she added, looking up 
into his face with an expression of earnest inquiry, 
**have you heard from your own mother and 

 

father . since . since we were engaged ? " 

" I have, dearest What then ? " 

" Only that . ^that I have not heard you speak 
of them. Will your mother be kind to me, 
Laurence?" 

** I hope so, Gilda ; and if not, you may depend 
on it you shall see very little of her." 

That night, whe;i he was gone, and all the 
bouse was still, Gilda sat at her open window, 
looking out mto the quiet starlight Sara and 
she no longer occupied the same room. Indeed, 
ever since that evening, now some weeks past, 
when Sara had so cruelly probed Gilda's heart. 



46 CABS 01* GABBIJrON. 

a wall 'of sepaiatioDj so to speak^ liad. beeo 
growing up between the two gids. It may be 
tbat an iBstinct of the heart poiated to the tme 
motives whidi hiy at the bottoai of the asvage 
attack that had left GiUa Ueedii^ and diame- 
stricken ; it may hare been only the nalnral 
repaLuGoa of a pnxe^ goikless naioie to. a tarmfi 
one, when the depths of passion being stmed, 
the two souk came closer to one another 
than^ in their daily intereooEBey they had yet 
done. But Sara was outwardly changed kfaly. 
She had always been eapricioos; die was reso- 
lutely snUen and dbsttacted now^ whenefer she 
joined the &inily cirdLe Daring the last we^ 
of their stay in Bologna, the Courteneys had in 
reaUty seen little or nothing of her. Her change 
of faith . ^now openly avowed . ^was made the 
plea for long daily absences rom hom& No one 
opposed this, and no one thoo^t of qnestioning 
her as to where she really went Mrs. Ckiartenej 
had never felt that she had any anthority over 
the nnroly Creole girl; it was too kte to begin 
now endeaFOoring to assert it Moreover, the 



CASA LAMBEBTL 47 

poor lady's mind was otherwise and painfully 
engrossed. She had anxiety enongih of vanoas 
kinds, or this might have rendered lier more 
uneasy than it did. As it was, she was ^jwl that 
her chQd would soon be separated fiom Sara. 
She did not underrate that young lady's abilities, 
and she feU that it was not iiiq>rQbable the young 
conyert, by-aad-by, might have endeavoured 
to influence Gilda. Thou^ not bogoied in her 
religious opinions, Mrs. Courteney had clung 
steadily to the faith of her youths through many 
years of waadersBg in Roman Oathdlic countries; 
and she would have regarded it as a heavy 
calamity had Gilda changed her religion. The 
mingled fisding of pity, mistrust and admiration, 
therefore, with which she had always looked an 
Sara, now gave place to an iU-d^oed dread. 
Having invariably treated her with a motiier's 
kindness, it was still impossifale she should feel 
ibr her anything of a mother's love. Sara, even in 
ker most attcactive days, had repelled sympathy. 
And now that she wis harder and more impene- 
trable than she had ever before shown herself. 



48 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

even in her darkest moments, Mrs. Coorteney's 
kind heart could onlj heave a sigh when she 
thought what early wrong and wretchedness must 
have poisoned the fountain-springs of that yomig 
heart, and turned all its waters to bitterness! 
Confidence there was none, she knew, between 
them, and any attempt to bias opinions so 
resolutely taken, she was well aware would be 
fruitier But she made up her mind that, bj- 
and-by, when left alone with Sara, she would 
set herself patiently to work a change in that 
obdurate spirit: and in the meantime she was 
quite as well pleased that the girPs strange fit 
just now kept her aloof from Gilda, and left 
mother and daughter generally without the 
restraint of a third presence. 

Gilda Courteney was alone, then, in her room 
that night She looked out of the open window, 
and down upon the rushing Amo, where the 
lamps of the bridge flashed and quivered, and 
the black arches beneath were repeated in blocks 
of liquid shadow. Upon the opposite bank were 
the dim shapes of church and palace, huge piles 



CASA LAMBEBTL 49 

of tower and other building darkly defined against 
the starry night That bank was unknown groond 
to her. Her feet had not yet wandered among 
its intricate streets and piazze. And as her eye 
rested with a vague curiosity upon these outlines 
of the unexplored city^ she felt as thoiigh she 
were looking at her own future^ The bridge 
she was soon to traverse^ and which never could 
be recrossed^ lay before her. The hard^ solid 
bank on whidh she now stood would soon be 
left behind. Already the pleasant landscapes of 
the past had faded far away. Those blue moun- 
tain ranges . a sunny spot upon a lichen-covered 
wall . ^a trail of vine against a sunset sky; the 
pictures^ often trivial enough^ that are photo- 
graphed in the memory from some accidental 
association^ they belonged to a time that already 
seemed far distant. She had reached the bridge. 
What lay beyond it ? 

With no such misgiving should a young girl 
regard her future^ when that future is of her 
own choice and making. Gilda would not have 
allowed that she felt any misgiving. Tet she 

TOL. zi. 4 



50 CABB CS GABBIXON. 

questaooed what this f atare had in store lor her 
irith an anxious scmfcinj. It was no wani of 
confidence in Carr, hat in faersel She had 
accepted him, because it seemed to be nurep- 
sally felt that she ought to do so, and because 
she had no good reason to giye^ since he hsd 
rejected the only one she offered* Thai diiUidi 
passion she firmly betieved to be extinct; and, 
on the other hand, the more she saw of Ganr, 
the more she found to like. If it was possiUe 
fiMT her to live as hundreds of other happy wamen 
did, entertaimi^ a pladd affection for their has* 
bands; why tiben she tMwU be haj^y. It was 
her own heart she feared; it was the doabt whether 
she would be oontent to exist cm a lower range of 
feeling, havii^ had a glinqiae of something higgler, 
and deepar and stronger. 

Oh, inevitable faturel future that we boihi up 
for ourselves blindly in the dark, whose faint sky- 
outline the keeuHiighfed only may discern, pre- 
dicting how the rugged walls will shi^ them- 
selves as we grow near. We are as ehildi^i that 
cannot bear the light I We grope on ever to 



CASA. LAMBEBTTL 51 

the end; and mercifullj ordained is it of the 
All Wise that onr poor human knowledge reaches 
no ardier than the present npon which we 
stand* To foresee, without the power to avert; 
who could carry the intolerable burden of such 
knowledge to the end of a long life ? 

The girl gazed wistiidlj at those phantom- 
outlines opposite^ and her thoughts took the 
direction I have indicated; while she dre^ her 
shawl closer round her^ and crouched down by 
the window. To the occasional passers-by in Ihe 
street below . and they were few at this hour, 
their footsteps echoing along the pavement in 
the desr night air, till they died away in 
the distance, . to such she was invisible. She 
had put out her candle ; the window was a Uack 
square. And there she remained, how long she 
scarcely knew, until her attention was awakened 
to the sound of footsteps stopping beneath the 
whidow. 

It was not, however, until the sound of a voice 
distinctly reached her ear that Gilda started, 
and leaning forward, endeavoxured to discern the 

4.  



52 CARB OF CASBLYOK. 

spei&er. Impossible to see more than two dark 
figures^ apparently a man and a woman, in the 
door-way below. But that voice? snrely she 
could not be mistaken, low as was the tone in 
which it spoke. 

** Will you be in readiness when I call upon 
you ? and willing to do my bidding, whateyer it 
is ? Remember I have warned yon, I am some- 
thing of a tyrant" 

" It is a tyranny which is sweet to me, leU 
angiol mio ! But will you in return hold out no 
prospect of a speedy release from my suspense? 

" None ; I require to see, to know, more of yon 
than I can in these stealthy interviews. Our 
acquaintance is of too short standing. Signer 
Conte, for me to bind myself to anything. But 
I will not deprive you of all hope: if you can 
stand the strange whims and caprices of a 
woman ?^ 

" What is there I would not stand from you, 
divina f " 

" If this war breaks out, are you ready to join 
the army? To gird on your sword, and help 



CASA LAMBERTI. 53 

to drive out the Austrian? I am aware that 
you have not been bred to such rude sporty and the 
scion of a noble house may ^ 



<. 



Corpo di Bacco 1 you are laughing at me^ my 
angel I Our education may have been neglected ; 
but there are few of us, I hope, who will not 
be ready to gird on their swords when the good 
time comes. ..But if I am to wait till then . . \I ^ 

** You are poor. How do you intend to support 
a wife ? I am extravagant." 

"The padre told me what your marriage- 
portion would be," replied the gentleman, with 
the utmost naiveti. " On that, with what I have, 
we can live like gods ! " 

" Some of the gods lived uncomfortably enough," 
laughed the lady; a low mocking laugh. The 
next moment she exclaimed, "Hush! some one 
comes down the street Don't stand there. Buona 
noite.'' 

She pulled the porter's bell, and disappeared 
through the door. The man walked leisurely 
away. Gilda listened with a beating heart for 
several minutes. Was she mistaken? Did that 



54 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 

woman belong to some upper floor apartment? 
The most acute eair could not hare cau^t the 
sound of a footstep on the stairs. Bat at length 
her strained hearing detected the unt creaking of 
a door cautiously opened in the adjoining room. 
And then she doubted no more. 



CA6A LAMBEBTL 55 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The exertion of travelliag pioduoed such an nn- 
fayoorahle change in Mc Conrteney^ that it was 
feared the marriage woiud have to be posl^ned. 
It had been fixed to take pkce a week after 
the date of iiheir amval in Florence. The morn- 
ing following their arrival he was so eshansted 
that Mrs. Conrteney became serioosly alarmed. 
The physician when he saw him, told her plainly || 
that any strong excitemoit in his present condition 
mi^ be &taL Quiet, perfect qniet^ and a milder 
climate than Florence, were all he could suggest 
to hM. the feeble links of life together. 

But on the subject of the marriage, Mr. Conr- 
teney was as impatient as Garr conld possibly 
be. He smiled almost contemptuously at the 
idea of being excited by it^ and declared that 



56 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

whether he were able to appear at the ceremonT 
or not, it was to take place on the appointed day. 

Gilda had something at her heart which she 
felt must be told her mother; but that poor worn 
face seemed pleading so earnestly to have no 
additional burden cast upon her, every time that 
Gilda sought to approach the painful subject, that 
day after day elapsed without her doing so. The 
swift hours, nevertheless, moved on with steadj 
pace towards the moment that was to separate 
her from that tender mother, whose loving 
embrace she never remembered to have missed 
9 single day since she was bom. And as the 
time drew near, Mrs. Courteney's ^trouble and 
agitation of mind became more and more pain* 
fully apparent The effort to appear calm before 
her husband rendered the strange excitement 
under which she laboured only more unconizol- 
lable at other moments. Carr remarked upon it 
to Gilda more than once after that first evening 
of their arrival, and the poor child heaved a 
heavy sigh each time. 

In spite of the want of sympathy between them, 



CASA LAMBEBTL 57 

Gilda had found comfort in the recollection that 
Sara would be left with Mrs. Courtenej. That 
poor mother would at least have the girl whom 
her kindness had tended like a daughter^ as a 
companion in the dreary days that^ Gilda knew 
well^ would follow her own departure. And now^ 
to a youDg and generous hearty almost the worst 
feature in Sara's extraordinary conduct was its 
hard^ calculating selfishness. It was evident she 
cared nothing for the man^ whoever he might 
be ; and whether or not she married him^ would 
only make use of him for her own ends. It was 
the night before her marriage that Gilda nerved 
herself to repeat to her mother what she had 
overheard. But Mrs. Courteney's mind was so 
absorbed in one subject, that none other com- 
paratively could produce much effect upon hen 
She and her child wept unrestrainedly in each 
other's' arms that night, as though they felt it 
might be the last time they would ever be able 

to do so ! 

 .  . . 

The marriage was over. They were gone. 



58 CARB OF CABKLTON. 

There were only six persons ffreseot in Uie chapel 
Garr and his two friends^ GUlda with her mother, 
and Sara. Mr. Coarteney was too weak to lea?e 
the house. He was wheeled into the room to 
receiTe the small party on their return, sid to 
place a magnificent Indian shawl upon the hnde's 
shoulders when she ran up and threw Iier arms 
round his neck. That was a sad break&st ihat 
followed ! and everyone felt it a relief when tlie 
travelling britska which Carr had hired for the 
journey drove up to the door. And now llie 
last sobbing farewell was given^ and they were 
actually gone. Gone I And in the window, 
watching them as they drove off, with a very 
peculiar smile upon her &ce, stood the figure of 
a young womaHj balancing a letter in her hand. 
Should she send it, or wait ? 

Mrs. Courteney's room commumeated, as it 
had done at Bologna, wiUi her husband's. It 
was necessary to pass through it to reach the 
latter. 

<' I desire to speak with Mr. Courteney^" said 
Sara standing at the door of the first room. The 



CASA LAMBEBTL 69 

one beyond it' was ajsr^ so that har irords^ slowly 
and disdncUy uttered, could easily reach the 
person for whom they were intended. 

Mrs. Conrteney was in her own room, sittmg 
with her hands clasped before the picture of 
that Mother of many sorrows, whose sweet, piiying 
face seemed to say in aU moments of profonnd 
depression, ''Be of good courage. I too have 

sofiered*" 

She started to her feet at the sound of Sara's 

Toice, and came hurriedly towards her. 

''What is it you want?'' she demanded in 
trouUed accents. 

'' To speak with Mr. Conrteney," repeated the 
girl, more distinctly than before, as die iblded 
her arms and looked the other defiantly in the 



"He is ill. -exhausted ; yon cannot see him 
now. What is it, Sara ? " 

Gilda's words, which subsequent agitation had 
driven from Mrs. Conrteney's mind, now flashed 
across it She returned Sua's ]ock with one of 
sorrowfnl, questioning' wonder. 



60 CABB OF CARBLYON. 

"My business is with Mr. Courteney," said 
iihe girl in the same hard dear voice as before. 
" If he knows that I desire to speak tnA him on 
a matter of importance ^ 

The hand-bell rang sharply from the adjoining 
room. Sara followed Mrs. Courteney without 
further invitation to the door. 

" Why do you prevent her coming in ? ** said 
the voice of the sick man, irritably. ''Admit 
her at once." 

Mrs. Courteney stood back to let Sara pass, 
and the eyes of the twp women met once more, 
as the wife glided out and closed the door bdiind 
her. Why did she shudder under that look^ as 
though stung by a serpent? And why did some 
irresistible presentiment fasten her to the spot of 
floor where she stood close to the door, until, 
trembling, she crouched down there with Ler 
head in her hands ? 

Mr. Courteney was in his chair, propped by 
pillows. A desk, with sev^al legal-looking docu- 
ments, was before him. His face was of an ashy 
whiteness, but the clear pale flame of his eye 



CAS A LAMBEBTL 61 

burnt as intensely as ever, through the gray 
shadows that had gathered round it 

He looked up at the young woman as she stood 
there^ a few paces from his chair, in her white 
dress, which she had not yet laid aside after the 
wedding. He looked up at her, in silence ; but 
with a strange indefinable expression which few, 
perhaps, had ever seen upon his face. She 
returned his look without flinching, her arms still 
resolutely folded. 

''Mr. Courteney, I am going to be married. 
As a dependant on yaur bounty y I came to announce 
the fact to yoij." 

There was a bitterness and insolence in the tone 
that did not escape his observation. He bowed 
his head slightly, and she continued, " Have you 
no curiosity on the subject ? ^ 

" None. You are your own mistress, to do as 
you please. Miss Gisbome. 

'' But I am penniless, and I want money. That 
is why I com^ to you. Shall I further tell you by 
what right I ask it? " 

He remained silent The hand in which he 



62 CABR 07 CABBLYOK. 

held a paper trembled* He laid it cm the table. 
'^ Proceed^" he said, after a pooae. 

'^ It is a right jou will not denY when I inToke 
the name of Sara Momy." 

He raised his wasted hand, and wiped the damp 
from his brow* This^ and a aervons contortiOD of 
the month, ifexe the only evidences of any estn- 
ordinary anotion. 

^ It is a right I do deny; " his voice was low 
but steady. '^ That name should have no inflnence 



on me." 



** It is the name of one you foully wronged/* 
said the girl, with flashing eyes. ^ The curse that 
fell upon you and yours bom her dying lips yet 
rings in my ears. I swore never to rest till I had 
found you . and I have done sa The curse has 
already taken effect! Yea! Henry Dunstanly, 
under your assumed name, through all the dianges 
of time and circumstance, diance has helped me to 
discover the secr^ hid finom ihe whole world . ay! 
Jrtnnyourowmmfaf I now know what prompted 
you to take me into your house as something better 
than a servant, when you found me starving in 



CASA LAMBEBTL - 63 

GrcDoa, a year ago ! It was no generous pitj ; it 
was the stinging voice of ranoise I Tou knew me 
. ^700 recognized jour child, abandoned twenly- 
fonr years ago, by the likeness to her mother. 
Yon thought I should never discover you. It was 
a cheap way of being quit with conscience ! But 
did it never occur to you that the blood of Sara 
Momy flowed in the. veins of this girl? That 
vengeance was her inlieritance? That sooner or 
later it would track you out ? It was a dangerous 
experiment making the offcast child an inmate of 
your house. Walls have ears, and my care&l 
edacalion has not led me to be above eaves- 
dropping, fiither ! ** 

She laughed scornfully 

** What is it you mean ? and what is it you 
want ? " gasped Mr. Conrtenej. 

'* I mean," she replied slowly, ^^ that the other 
ecret of your J^ is equally known to me, and I am 
here to make use of both. Toa are in mypower, 
Mr. Dunstaaly." 

He had leant forward in his eagerness, and now 
fell back, while a ghastly shade passed over 



64 CABB OF CABULYON. 

He tried to speak, but could not* The girl lifted 
the strong stimulant which was on the table to his 
lips. It was horrible to see the act of apparent 
mercy performed with that ruthless expression on 
her face I 

'^ Why do you come to me at the eleventh honr 
when the sand of my life is just run out?" he 
gasped faintly. " Why have you waited to say all 
this until now?" 

A devilish smile crossed her lips. 

'' I have bided my time. I waited till Gilda was 
married, the thing accomplished beyond recall! 
Tour intellect is still acute enough to seize all the 
importance of that fact for me? By a word ilus 
marriage might have been broken off; and neither 
of the parties much the worse. How different is 
the case now ! the honour of a noble house is con- 
cerned : you apprehend my meaning ? " 

The dying man set his teeth hard. 

'^ What object do you propose to attain by this 
course ? " he murmured in a hoarse voice. " Your 
fancied vengeance will not reach me by any dis- 
closure now. I shall be beyond it. If it is only 



^ CASA LAMBERTL 65 

monej you want, spare your threats, girl. There 
is a suitable provision made for you in these in- 
structions which I leave my wife. This provision 
will place you beyond want" He took a paper 
from the table. '^ I leave no will : for the name I 
die bearing, and which my wife will bear after me, 
has no legal value, as you have discovered; I have 
therefore sold all my property out of the funds, and 
divided it into two equal shares. Out of my wife's 
portion, while she lives, will be paid you an annuity 
of two hundred pounds, and five thousand pounds 
at her death." 

" Your oilier child receives something like fifteen 
thousand pounds now and as much more when her 
mother dies, I suppose ? Adversity, you see, has 
made me practical, and I have learnt by starvation 
the value of money; I do not mean to starve 
again. Mrs. Laurence Carr has made a great 
marriage, rank and future wealth: she has less 
need of your money, and far less right to it than I 
have. I demand that you divide her fortune 
equally with me." 

When he answered it was with great difficulty, 
TOL. n. 5 



66 CABS OF CASBLTOK. 

bat clearly^ resolutely; stopping every now and 
then to gather breathy bat never from any indeci- 
sion of purpose. 

" What you ask is impossible. My daughter's 
fortone is ahready paid to her husband ; I have 
told you, I do not recognize your right to demand 
anything of me. I was young when I loved your 
mother with all the fierceness of a first passioD. 
She was many years older^ and her nature was 
corrupt She very nearly rained me, for I wonld 
have given her all I possessed on earth. But that 
was litile compared with the other injury. I 
trusted her, and she deceived me. The discoverr 
of her treachery froze my whole nature, and it has 
never thawed: when I loved again, it was a better 
woman, and I suffered and sinned too, for A^ sake; 
but I was then a hardened man of the world. I 
was no longer capable of the devotion I had wasted 
on your mother: I had loat my fitiih in woman, 
and I looked on muceea in love as the legidmate 
prize of the persevering and adroit You have 
seen me cold, cynical . I have grown more and 
more so every year ; but this it was your mother 



CASA LAMBERTL ^ 67 

first made me. What I do for you is in expiation 
of my sins^ and in pitj for yonr position. But 
claim on me^ yon have none." 

The ihmider cloud that had been gathering on 
Sara's brow during the above speech^ burst out in 
uncontrollable fury. 

** You do wisely to insult my mother's memory 
at this moment I Coward! She died in abject 
misery^ leaving me, a child, to the care of strangers, 
with no other inheritance than her revenge ; while 
you . ^you, with a fresh crime upon your head, were 

revelling in wealth, and ^ 

*'I swear," interrupted the dying man, "that 
she never communicated with me, after I dis- 
covered her falseness and broke with her. Had 

she ever let me know she was in want ^ 

'* Fine words I " scoffed Sara. *f Fine words 
now that she is dead and gone ! But they will 
not make me turn back from my purpose. Hal 
you have shrunk from publicity these eighteen 
years past ; your name shall be publicly branded 
now. Ton shall live long enough to see those 
you love best suffer through you: that virtuous 

5.2 



68 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

wife and daughter . ^I liave another account to 

 

settle with the latter . they shall be brought to 
shame and dishonour^ and thus " 

The dying man bounded up in his chair. He 
seemed possessed by some agent, independent of 
his own feeble strength, and beyond his control 
His bony fingers grasped the ^rl by the throat 
so suddenly, that the veins started out on her 
forehead before she had time to step back and 
seize his wrists. For a second they stood thus 
. father and child . if, indeed, they were so, locked 
in a death-struggle, face to face. 

It was a sight for fiends to witness, and rejoice 
over. 

But death was already relaxing the fingers that 
had closed round the girl's throat. That momen- 
tary strength was spent, the flame that leapt in 
the socket had already died down, and he rolled 
back heavily upon the bed. 

The door at the same instant was burst open, 
and the unhappy wife, rushing in, threw herself 
on her knees beside her husband, and buried her 
head in her hands. 



CASA LAMBERTL 69 

*' Henry ! Courteney I I have * heard all. No 
matter, dear, what becomes of me, I cannot long 
survive you; let her have what she wants, my 
money, everything, only, for God's sake I spare my 
child ! Spare her this misery, this disgrace noic. 
Tou would not hearken to me before, Courteney, 
when there was time to avert this misery. Oh, 
husband I as a last request, I implore you, leave 
us not to this creature's mercy ! speak to me, 
promise me . make her swear ^ ' 

Suddenly a horrible suspicion flashed through 
her mind, and starting up, she brushed back 
the damp gray hair from his brow, with her 
quivering hand, exclaiming wildly, as she pressed 
her face close to his, . 

'' Look up I Look up I Speak to me once 
more! only once . ^Henryl Oh, my God I he is 
dead, and without a word ! " 

She gave a low, helpless cry, like a wounded 

bird, and fell forwards insensible upon the body. 

. . . . . 

The Creole girl stood there, immovable and piti- 
less as a Greek Fate over her victims. 



70 CABB OF CAJRBLYON. 

^'Foiled by deathP" she mattered to heiseU; 
^' No ! ^ Her eye rested at that moment on. the 
papers that lay scattered over the table befi]ce 
her. She swept them up into a heiq>, and cazxied 
them leisurely to her own room^ before calling 
Marietta to Mrs; Gourtenoy's assistance. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 71 



.CHAPTER XXV. 



^^m. 



<<I HAYS the painful task of announcing 
to you the death of Mr. Conrtenej^ which took 
place a few hours after jour departure yesterday ; 
and, in pursuance of the customs of this country, 
he was. buried to-day. 

<< Mrs. Courteney has remained in a sort of stupor 
ever since her husband's death, unconscious of 
what passes aroand her; so that I haye taken 
u^n myself the necessary arrangements, and shall 
remain here until Mrs. Courteney is able to disf 
cuss a amali matter of business between us. Were 
it not for this untoward event, I should no longer 
be an inmate of this house, as I had communicated 
to Mc Courteney before he died the fact of 
my immediate removal &om his protection. It 



72 CARE OF CARRLYON. 

is probable, therefore, that on your return 
here, where your generous sympathy will doubt* 
less lead you at once, I shall no longer be in 
Florence. 

'' It may be as well to mention, which I do with 
regret, that I have reason to fear Mr. Couitenej 
has left his widow but poorly off . trusting, no 
doubt, to your kind and liberal sympathy ibr 
her support Until you take measures for the 
same, the English apothecary (whose letter corro- 
borating these statements I enclose) will generously 
attend on, and provide for your respected mother- 
in-law; and should you not see fit to make the 
necessary provision, which, after all, cannot be 
expected of you, the hospitals of Florence, I believe, 
are good. 

" May I request the favour of your communi- 
cating this sad intelligence to Mrs. Carr? and, 
with the expression of my regard and esteem for 
yourself, believe me, 

"Truly yours, 

" Saba Gisborks. 

** To the Hon. Laurence Carr J* 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 73 

4 

The following was enclosed : . 
*' Sib, 

^' I WAS called in yesterday evening to see 
the body of Mr. Courteney. I found life had been 
extinct upwards of half-an-hour. Of his death 
from natural causes there can be no doubt, as 
his appearance confirmed all I knew before bf 
his state of health. I regret to add that Mrs. 
Courteney's frame sustained so severe a shock 
in this sudden bereavement, that she has not yet 
recovered her consciousness, and is in a condition 
requiring the utmost care and attention: that 
with these she will recover . slowly but surely . 
I have no doubt Unfortunately, the very admir- 
able nurse she now has . a young lady whose 
exertions and fortitude throughout these trying 
scenes have been beyond praise . informs me that 
she will be under the painful necessity of leaving 
Florence in the course of a few days. Under 
these circumstances, sir, while I beg to assure 
you that Mrs. Courteney shall want for no atten- 
tion at my hands, you will no doubt see the 
importance of her having some relative or friend 



74 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

near hen Awaiting yonr wiahes, I haTe the 
honour to be^ sir^ 

<<^ Yonrs iaidifiillj^ 

'<THoa Sascdeht.' 

" P.S. . I open this to say that the dergjman 
and I together have locked up, an4 set our seals 
upon all documents we have found belonging to 
the deceased." 

Carr sat at breakfiist in the H6tel de PEurope 
the morning after his arrival in Rome, wben the 
above letters were' handed tof him by Giiiaqip& 
Opposite him was his. wife,, fair and gentle crea- 
ture, unsuspicious, of all the sorrow that cofver 
contained fer hen The morning son streamed 
in through, the window at her back, kindling tht 
outline of her soft brown hair into a natural 
glory of gold : it tipped witii snow tiie edges of 
the white lace collar, and silvered the folds of 
her gray silk dress, that stood up shsiplj 
against the light Carr looked at her, as her eye 
ran listlessly down the columns of GaUgnam, 
and a pang shot through, his heart at the thought 



CASA UiMB'Bmi. 75 

of disturbing timt pictsre a fiur' serenity witli 
the cruel newshe bad to break. 

Men are greater cowards tiian women at such 
moments. Carr would have given a great deal 
to be able to defer l^e evil hour ; but he diu?ed 
not. He knew it was necessary to prepare her, 
since it was clear at a glance that diey must 
return at once to Florence. The death of Gilda's 
father could not be said to affect him otherwise 
than, with' an unacknowledged sense of reUiefi 
The account of Mrs. Gourteneyj however, filled 
bim with honest sorrow; and he felt, very 
properly, that Gilda'a place was by her mother's 
bednside.. 

It waa-a^ great bore,, of course,^ leaving Rome 
the day afier one's, arrival there, and the fourth 
of one's honeymoouy without having seen any- 
thing of the Eternal City ! But, to his honour 
be it saidv if this, selfish regret flashed not un** 
naturally through Carr's mind as- he sat there, 
it was quickly driven out by tiie image of tibat 
desolate and widowed ladj, tendied by strangers 
in ber bed of sickness and^ yearning for her* child. 



76 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

He never hesitated an instant as to the obligatioa 
of retoming to her as fast as four horses conld 
cany them:' his only hesitation arose from his 
desire to spare Gilda as much anxiety as possible. 
He read Sara's letter twice . ^three times before 
he could make up his mind to speak. The strange 
form of that communication . ^the almost studied 
heartlessness, with its thin crust of cold polite- 
ness, coming from one who was under sndi 
obligations to Mrs* Courteney, could not fail to 
strike Carr with surprise and disgust It also 
rendered his breaking the news to Gilda more 
difficult, since it was impossible to give her the 
letter itself to read. Even Mr. Sargent's might 
alarm her unnecessarily as to her mother^s stata 
He must make some excuse for keeping both 
from her, and soften the blow as much as might 
be, omitting all details. As to the supposition 
of Mrs. Courteney's being left destitute, he did 
not entertain it for a moment The deceased 
man had scrupulously ftilfilled his promises to 
Carr. The interest of the fifteen thousand setded 
on his wife had been placed to Garros credit at 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 77 

his banker's the day before his marriage. It was 
not to be believed, therefore, that the widow's 
portion had not been secured with the same rigid 
exactitude. It struck Carr . not indeed at the 
moment, but later . as singular, that anj one 
should pretend to be acquainted with Mrs. 
Courteney's pecuniary position, since she had her- 
self remained unconscious after her husband's 
death, and his papers were under lock and seal. 
As he revolved at his leisure the strange tenor 
of that letter, and asked himself what it might 
mean, he was also forcibly struck and puzzled by 
the cordial expressions . one would almost say of 
commiseration . towards himself, . a comparative 
stranger to the writer, . ^with which it closed, 
without so much as a word of sympathy to his 
wife ! 

But this critical examination of Miss Gisbome's 
composition, as I have said, came later, and when 
he was alone. The disagreeable impression it 
left generally on his mind was all he now knew. 
Htf folded it up carefully with the doctor's letter, 
and put it in his pocket. 



78 CABB OOF CABSI.TON. 

fihe bore the news better than he expected 
Her father's health had been such that she was 
familiarized with the idea of his probable death, 
and his increased weakness of late had addition- 
allj prepared her. She felt the natural grief of 
a young heart, when the first vacancj occurs in 
its narrow circle : him to whom she had hitherto 
looked for guidance, and knowledge, and advice 
she should behold no more. It cannot be said 
that he had endeared himself veiy jstronglj by 
any inward sympathy or outward demonstration 
to his daughter ; but he was the law that governed 
and bound up that small household : his learning 
was held to be inexhaustible; his opinions and 
decrees knew no change. The infinence of a 
powerful will and large, clear intellect had been 
felt thus by Gilda firom a very early age. The 
loss to her was one which she knew could not be 
replaced. And to her poor mother . she dreaded 
to think of her! 

Four hours later they were on the road back 
again to Florence. Throughout that melancholy 
journey, which they performed as rapidly as four 



CASA LAMBEKTI. 79 

horses coald cany them^ with an occasional halt 
of an hour onlj^ her husband's tenderness for her 

 

sorrow, his patient efiforts to soothe and comfort 
her, touched Gilda profoundly; and the gentle 
pressure of her hand, as it lay within his, repaid 
Oarr for alL It was a spontaneous movement 
which told that the young wife's heart was not 
insensible to the sacrifices he was making. Now 
Carr was one of those heroes capable of making 
sacrifices for a continuance, only when they are 
acknowledged. 

They arrived at Florence very late in the 
following day. On driving up to Mrs. Courte- 
ney's, Carr was almost as much relieved as Gilda 
to hear that her mother was conscious, and out of 
danger. He was beginning to be afraid that he 
had not sufficiently prepared her for the state in 
v^hich he expected to find Mrs. Courteney. She 
was sitting up, and received them with a calm 
which seemed almost unnatural. She looked wan 
and weak, though fragments of letters and papers 
around her gave evidence that .she had already 
roused herself to one of the most painful tasks 



80 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

consequent on death* To Carr it appeared as 
though^ after tlie long tension of her nervous 
system^ a reaction had taken place ; that she had 
gone through too much to feel any longer acutely. 

After the severe shocks her mind was dulled to 

 

sufferingj he believed ; and was stunned^ much as 
her frame was shattered^ by the blow. Perhaps he 
was right That a great change had come over 
her was certain. Was it the calm of resignation ? 
Let us gltlnce back at her a few hours previously 
and see. 

When the Carrs arrived^ it was seven o^clod^ 

.% 

They learnt that at five Sara Gisbome had taken 
her departure. She had made her calculations 
with exactitudcj and managed to hav^ arranged 
her '^ matters of business ^ with Mrs. Courteney^ 
just before it was possible for the Carrs to reach 
Florence. 

'* You are now sufficiently^ recovered, madam," 
said the exemplary young person of whom Mr. 
Sargent spoke in such warm praise, as she entered 
Mrs. Courteney's room with some papers in her 
hand. ''You are now sufficiently recovered to 



1 



CAS A lAMBEBTL 81 

discass business with me. Before we do so, and 
that I take my leave, may I beg that you will not 
forget to tell Mr. Laurence Carr that I nursed 
you carefully for five days and nights." 

"Thank you, Sara," said Mrs. Courteney, 
gently. 

" Perhaps your memory does not serve you accu- 
rately as to the events immediately preceding Mr. 
Courteney's . ^we will still caU him Courteney . ^'s 
death ? You then, with a just appreciation of my 
position, wished to make any sacrifice in order that 
my demands might be complied with. Are you 
still of the same mind, madam ? " 

 I am," she murmured. 

" Here are certain coupons, bonds, and railway 
shares, amounting in all to nine thousand, eight 
hundred and fifty pounds, which it needs but 
a scratch of your pen to transfer firom your name 
to mine. This will be a simpler method of 
carrying out Mr. Courteney's wishes, than your 
paying me the annuity of four hundred pounds, 
he proposed, and is slightly to your advantage, 
moreover." 

TOL.IL 6 



82 CAB& OB GABBIXON. 



t. 



I nDderstood," faltered Mn. Coartenqr^ ^'tlni 
. ihat it was twa hnndred pomida? " 

<< Your memory^ as I expeeted, is at fault I No 
wonder! These lixtes, in Mr. Courteney's own 
hond^ wiU serve to r^esh it Praj show the 
paper to Mr. Laurence Garr if he should make 
inqoiries on the subject^. thai be may see you 
are onlj carrying out your late InBhaiifs 
wishes." 

The paper she handed was indeed in the deceased 
gentleman's handwriting. It was a dight me- 
morandum, intended for his wife, and penned a 
few hours before his death. After some ndnor 
injunctions and recommendations, it directed that 
the interest of ten thousand pounds should be paid 
annually to the ^'young person calling hersdf at 
present Sara Gisbome," and that sum deriaed to 
her upon Mrs. Courteney's dealh. It was alto- 
gether an informal document, hastUy written^ and 
intended only for his wife; when Sara's haad 
swept it, with the rest of the papers, from the 
table. One expert at discovering such frauds 
might have detected that a figure 1 had 



CASA. LAMBBTL 83 

that time been inserted, and a 5 adroitly con- 
verted into an 0: but to the uninitiated, this was 
imperceptible, even on the closest inspection* 

Mrs. Courtenojr was no fool. She had a oon* 
viction that her husband never intended what 
purported there to be his wriikton intention. She 
knew him too well: even if her ears and her 
memory* could have deceived her in the memor- 
able interview she had overheard. Tet she took 
the paper passively, without questioning its authen- 
ticity. It was undoubtedly in his handwriting, 
and that was enough for her. Sick and weak, 
her brain troubled by one harassing doubt 
and anxiety, she felt herself relieved thus of a 
heavy responsibility. The gift of two thirds of 
her fortune would reduce her to penury, but if 
she purchased tranquillity for her child at this 
price, was not the bargain a cheap one? For 
herself, no one so indifferent to poverty . ^more 
so than ever at that moment, when all her worn 
and weary heart asked for was rest 

She took the pen in her trembling fillers, 
but ere signing the first deed which Sara placed 

6.2 



84 CABR OF CARSLYON. 

before Iier^ she paused and looked up^ her ejes 
filled with tears. 

'^Sara^ I have never done you any harm; or, 
if I have, it was iinintentionaL I would have 
loved you, if you had allowed me, but you would 
not Your animosity for real or fancied wrcxigs 
has been bitter. Say that it is wiped out, before 
I sign this; that you will not visit it upon the 
innocent and unoffending." 

'^ To you individually, madam," said Sam, 
carelessly, '^ I have never had any particular 
animosity. And, at all events, your just resti- 
tution of a portion of that fortune which should 
have been my mother's, will clear off the score 
between us." 

And my child, Gilda? Ton understand me." 
If Mrs. Laurence Carr does not cross my 
path, I shall leave her at peace. If my plans 
are not thwarted, you and she are safe, madam, 
and will never hear of me again, which is, no 
doubt, what you devoutly hope. This I will 
swear to you, if you wish it" 

''It is enough," said Mrs. Courteney, as she 






CASA LAMBERTI. 85 

signed her name. "If your mind were not so 
jaundiced, mj poor girl, you would know that 
we neither of us have ever thwarted, or could 
desire to thwart, your views ; and that, far from 
not wishing to hear of you, we should like to 
know that your married life was better, and 
calmer, and happier, than your girlhood has been. 
God help us all, Sara I This is a difficult world. 
I am the last woman that should be hard on 
another; God forgive us both I " 

A momentary softness stole into the hard black 
eyes of the Creole girl, as she listened to those 
tender and womanly words. But she crushed it 
out and stamped on it at once. No relaxation 
of resolve for her I What had $he to do now 
with human sympathy? Passion and ambition; 
all else had died and been buried in her mother's 
grave. 

She gathered up the papers without reply; and 
while Mrs. Courteney sank back on the pillow, 
exhausted with the exertion of talking and writing, 
Sara left the room. 

Half an hour later, she returned to wish her 



86 CABB OS CABfiLYON. 

good^bj; It was nn ordinary act of courtesy, 
performed m the most ordinary way. She de- 
clined to give hec address; to state where slie 
was going, or by what name sbe was heooe- 
fiarwidrd to be known. She left a polite message 
for Mr. Laurence Carr, wxtii a short note. 

And thus the two women parted, sever to meet 
again in this world. 



CASA LAMBEKTI. 87 



CHAPTER XXVL 



..o*- 



Two days elapsed* Mrs. Goaitenej gained strength 
rapidly. On the third morning she was able to 
leave her room^ and take her plfu^e on the sofa 
in the aalcu Carr happened to be alone there, 
and was glad of the opportunity of speaking to 
his mother-in-law without the presence of his 
wife. To soy tibe trath, he was not altogether 
in the most equable state of mind. GKlda had 
confided to him with tears in her eye that meming 
ihttt htT BOtiher was geieg to send awi^ all her 
servants: her reduced means would not admit 
of her keeping diem. Carr hknself had not been 
<;aUed mpon to invesiagate the state jof Mr.- Oomv 
tenej's affidrs; the seais had been broken, and 
every paper examined by tine widow herself iOe 
now felt an tmcomfortaUe vnqncion that 



88 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

Gisbome's information was correct. Her last 
note consisted of these words, . 

'' I LEAYE Mrs. Courteney, dear sir, with no 
anxiety as to her health. As to her future com- 
fort and well-being, were you not at hand to see 
that they suffer no reduction from her change 
of fortunes, I should be indeed unhappy. But 
howev^ tried and deceived, your generosity will 
succour her, I am persuaded. 

.* Faithftdly yours, 

Carr knew no more what to make of this letter 
than the first He had questioned Mrs. Cour- 
teney, and then Gilda, more particularly as to the 
writer. From the latter the account he reoeiTed 
was unsatisfactory enough, and she spoke of Saia 
with a severity very nnlike Gilda in general. 
Mrs. Courteney was more vague and more lenient 
in her manner. She mentioned Sara's unremit- 
ting attention during her own iUness; but the 
subject was evidently painful to her, and she 
avoided it as much as possible. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 89 

Carr was annoyed and pnzzled by the tone of 
these notes^ The half-pity they seemed to express 
for him was especially irritating; and since this 
intelligence of his wife's^ he resolved to broach 
the sabject boldly to Mrs, Conrteney, and learn 
the actual truth. 

'' I fear^ from what Gilda tells me," he began, 
'' that your husband's affairs have been left in 
some disorder. Will you let me assist you in 
looking over and arranging his papers?" 

Thank yon, Laurence," she answered gently. 
They are in perfect order. You are aware 
that Mr. Courteney left no wilL He told you 
so, I believe, when he divided his fortune ? His 
only instructions are contained on a slip of paper, 
addressed to me." 

*' But. but, since you have, by this division, 
between five and six hundred a year, why, let 
me ask, should it be necessary for you to reduce, 
80 suddenly, your establishment ? " 

** It is necessary . ^no matter why . ^but you 
need not pity me. My plans are already 
arranged. There is an Italian lady living at 






90 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

Forli^ whom I know welL I faall go to ber. 
Those quiet towns where strangers sekiom pan, 
and Berer reside are ^erj cheap^ and to iiie one 
pbne is the same as another.'' 

** Mrs. Conrteney,'' said Oarr^ rather heatedlj, 
^^do you not place enough confidenoe in me to 
eay candidly what this drain apon your income 
IS; that rednces you from comparatiye affluence to 
poverty?** 

'^ It is from no want of oonfidenoe in you that 
I shrink from the snhject, Laorenoe ; but, because 
it is a painfel as weQ as a useless one to discuss. 
In a. word; more than half the fortune you aappoee 
me to possess, is already m the hands of another 
person. Tins person had a strong daim on 
Mr. Courteney ; there is the paper he left . ^read 
it Ask me no more que8tionB-*4he thing is 
done beyond recall ; aend if you would oblige me, 
never allude again to the subject" 

He took tbe paper and read it wifii amaaa* 
ment, strongly mingled, it must be confessed, 
with indi^iation. It was hardly credUe iiiat 
Mr. Courteney should have left bis wife thus 



CASA LAMBERTL 91 

burdened and impovenshed I And whtt was 
the tie strong enoogh to indnoe lum to act 
thas ? Ay, what I The more he thoiaght of 
it, the more mjsterioos and dif&cnlt to believe 
it seemed. Tet there was the document in his 
own handwriting ; and there was his widow 
adcnowledging and acting npon the same. It 
was outrageous I 

Then he began to diink how he was personally 
affected by this discovery, and made out for 
himself a strong case of grievance. He con- 
sidered himself done. Of course it was impossible 
he could leave his wife's mother in abject poverty 
. ^the dead man bad calculated on tiiat It is 
true llie promised dowry had been punctually 
paid ; but instead of complete independence, here 
he found himself saddled with a very heavy 
charge I He forgot, as men often do under 
like circumstances, how often and how strongly 
he had deprecated the idea of being influenced 
by his wife's money, and how he had requested 
that it might be settled entirely on herself, and 
placed beyond his control. 



92 CAER OF CABBLYON. 

Had this been recalled to Ids mind^ and the 
manifest inconsistency of his present complaint 
pointed out, it is not improbable that Garr would 
have intrenched himself behind a whole barrier 
of specious arguments to prove that he was not 
called upon in anj way to spend his wife's 
money upon his wife's motiier. Fortunately, aU 
his better feelings were allowed to have full play. 
There was no one to advise him to do the right 
thing. His irritation had time to cool down. 



*f 



"  nn' anna spesso il non averne, 



says an Italian poet. There sat the widow, pale 
and helpless in her weeds, opposite, asking 
nothing of him, but, on the contrary, accepting 
her poverty with a simple dignity and self* 
respect that could not fail to touch Carr at last 
He recognized in her very reserve which had 
angered him, that instinct of ddicacy which 
shrank from making her position known to her 
8on-4n-law. 

After the lapse of a few minutes, he went up, 
and held out both hands. 



CASA LAHBEBTL 93 

'^ Your home must be with us for the present^ 
Mnt Courteney. When we leave Italy . Gflda 
and I . ^we will talk more about your future 
residence. Until then you must make up your 
mind to live in our tent^ wherever it may be 
pitched. I will hear nothing. I will take no 
excuse I Gilda's happiness would be destroyed, 
if she knew you were living in solitude and 
misery at a wretched little place like Forli. 
I could not allow it. I am clothed in a little 
brief authority, you see, as your daughter's 
husband, and I choose to exercise it As to this 
memorandum,'' he added, in a graver tone, ''I 
accept it for what you say it is . ^the expression 
of Mr. Courteney's last wishes. I forbear to 
make any comment, or to ask any question on 
the subject I shall endeavour to forget it irom 
this moment, and only wish the provisions of it 
were such as to enable ycm to do so." 

Carr could say and do things too, you perceive, 
in the true and chivalrous spirit of a gentleman. 
Pity that the many small defects that had gathered 
on his character, like an accumulation of fine dust 



94 CABS OF CABHLTON. 

on machinerj, so often inpeded Ab actnn of its 
wheels^ 

Mrs. Goiirtenej's eyes filled with tears, and she 
pressed Cart's hand warmljr Int she remained 
firm fixr a long time to her original intention. 
It needed all Gilda's ^itreaties, and Carr's per* 
soasive arguments. reiterated with additional fbree 
for several days . to indnoe her to abandon it 
Bat the more she resisted, the more resolved Gaix 
was to carry through his magnanimous inientionsL 
She had to yield finally against her tnsluicte, rather 
than her ja^ment; for after all, was it not a 
natural and obvious coarse ? Her dan^iter's 
husband was disposed to treat her as a mother; 
why should she estrange herself rom them ? She 
knew how Gilda loved her, and she determined, 
with the rare wisdom of experience, to inflnence 
her child as little as possible; to live as much 
within herself as might be, and never to stand 
between husband and wife. If, after this, she 
detected the smallest sliade of discord arise, which 
might be traced to her presence, she was resolved 
that nothing should induce her to remain. Tet 



CASA LAMBEETL 95 

even when these rules of action were laid down 
her dead hnaband's advice recurred to her over 
and over again^ with painful, cruel distinctness* 
Were it not wiser to make the wrench at once 
and for ever, that must sooner or later separate 
her from her child? 

It may he supposed that Can* was anxious to 
know what tone his fath^ and mother would 
now adopt towards him; and, in truth, he was 
all the more so, that he did not write, and said 
nothing on the subject to any one. After his 
marriage he had written one brief letter announc- 
ing the fact, and then followed a long silence 
on either side. Circumstances, in the meantime, 
were favouring him ; the complication of Lord 
Carrljon's affairs was serious, and without more 
energy and resolution than the old man possessed, 
it was difficult to right them. Carr's imfortunate 
marriage at this juncture (instead of allying him- 
self with ''money," as of course he ought to have 
done) was to be bitterly deplored; but in any 
sort of rupture with his ^ son, or open expression 
of his displeasure when Carr's signature was so 



96 CAfiB OF CABBLYOK. 

necessary to him^ Lord Carrljon could not have 
indulged^ even had he felt so inclined* Poor 
hampered, harassed old man I what with his 
kwyers, and creditors, and oyerbearing wife, he 
had a hard time of it just then* Lady Carrljon 
it was who prevented his writing at once to their 
delinquent son. She had a violent bilious attack, 
brought on by her rage at the frustration of all 
her most cherished schemes, and in her impotent 
wrath, forbade Lord Carrlyon from answering 
the prodigal's letter. But as the bilious attack 
passed away, and a mens sana in corpore sano 
returned to the worldly-wise woman, a convic- 
tion of the utter futility of this line of conduct 
grew on her. If anything could redeem her 
Laurence. could retrieve ihe past . ^it must be 
done by other means, and not just at present. 
Wait till the first fever of passion is past . till 
reason has resumed her sway: then who knows 
but some flaw, some informality, may be found 
in this disgraceful marriage, contracted with such 
suspicious haste? So whispered prudence; and the 
proud woman gnawed her heart-strings, and wrote 



CASA LAMBSRTL 97 

to her son* Unlike her more unpremeditated 
effiisionsy it wfui an astute composition^ in which 
rnUd sorrowful surprise yielded to the lovmg 
mother's hope that, as the step was taken^ it 
might conduce to her son's happiness* This letter 
was accompanied by one from his &ther, saying 
very little about the marriage, and a great deal 
about the Carrlyon estate. 

The packet reached Garr at Florence soon after 
the interview I have recorded with Mrs. Courteney, 
and about a month after his marriage. It made 
him very happy, and Gilda' observed that the 
doud which had hung over his brow more than 
once of late, was completely dispelled this morning. 

''Shall we spend next winter at Carrlyon^ 
Gilda?" he asked, as he stooped over her chdr 
and kissed her forehead. 

A number of contending feeUngs made tumult 
in the young wife's breast, but she replied with 
her sweet smile, while the colour rose to her 
cheeks,-^ 

'<0h, yes; if they wish it> Laurence, by all 
means let us go." 

voL.n. 7 



98 CASK OF GABBLTON. 

In tmdi, ahe had grown not unnatnraDj to 
think of Carr'fi home and his paiBDis widi aone- 
thing like dread. The few words that had 
drof^ttd bom her husband now and then had 
not been reaasoring: ihe absence of all com* 
mnnication with his family seemed strangely 
cold to the warm-hearted girl^ and when speaking 
of it to her mother^ the hitter prepared her to 
expect anything bat a cordial welcome from the 
house of Carrlyon. 

^^Bot," added Mrs. Gonrteney, '<a husband 
and "wife must be all in all to each other; and 
if Laurence is sincerely attached to yon^ as I 
believe him to be, and you continue as hiqppy 
together as you are now, dearest child, no matter 
what happens. All the world besides is of no 
moment compared with t&at" 

Yes, he was sincerely attached to her; there 
was no doubt of it This was not a mere passing 
fimcy, which wore away widL possession. Bat, re- 
membering the circumstances under whidi he was 
accepted, it may be asked, was he contented with 
the amount of affection it was in his wife's power 



\ 



CASA LAMBEBTL 99 

to bestow on him in return ? He was naturally 
of a jealous temperament : the proverbial staring 
of Italians incensed him beyond measure; and 
he was near horse^whipping a young artist, who, 
attracted by the fair hair and sweet young English 
face, ventured to request that she would sit to 
him, as Gilda stood watching him copy in the 
gallery one day. 

The recollection of Guido Lamberti was put 
away from him as for as possible. They never 
spoke, and never heard of the young Bolognese. 
His name by tacit consent was avoided in the 
small family circle, for it was but natural to 
imagine that it was not a very agreeable one to 
Laurence Carr. He could not bear to think that 
Gilda had ever loved the Italian. In fact, when- 
ever he thought on the subject, he declared it 
was not the case: it was but a gfarlish fancy 
whidi sentimentality had exaggerated into a 
passion. Yet, with a very common inconsistency, 
he was jealously on the look-out for any symptom 
that should indicate the existence of such passion 

stm. 

7.2 



100 CABR OF CABBLTOK. 

For the present it is necessaiy to say bat little 

of the state of GHlda's own heart These were 

early days. She was very grateful for her 

husband's deyofionj and his tenderness to her 

mother ; very anxious to please him^ and for the 

rest tranquil and passive. The seeds were sown, 

no doubt, of that affection whose growth^ like 

moss, is unperceiyed* Alas! like moss^ too> it 

never would do more than cover the furfact of 

her being. The passion-flowers within had been 

torn up ere thq^ had come to maturity, and 

trampled ' under feot When she thought of 

Lambert], it was as of something long since passed 

away, belonging to another period of existence. 

The idle dreams of that time had fled for ever. 

Feelings of an unlike character were growing 

up daily stronger in her now; and she strove 

with all her heart to shut out idle retrospection. 

That handsome young couple in deep mourning 
attracted, indeed, universal attention. They were 
daily to be seen sauntering through the Uffixi or 
Fitti Falace, and on sunny afternoons driving to 
one or other of the princely viUas that surround 



CASA LAMBERTL 101 

Florence. Sometiines Mrs. Gourteney accom- 
panied them ; bat she was always ready with an 
excuse to leave them together, and anxioas that 
they shoald be dependent on each other's society 
alone. 

Except two or three of the young men belong* 
ing to the embassy, they knew no one, and Carr, 
in his present frame of mind, was not anxious to 
encourage the visits of these acquaintances. His 
wife's dedp mourning was sufficient plea for the 
reclusive life they led, and Carr at once declined 
any intercourse with the few English whoi undis- 
mayed by the signs of coming tempest, lingered 
in Florence. 

The carnival was over. The customary bois- 
terous merriment of maskidrs had struggled under 
an ominous gloom, and the low thunder in the 
distance had made itself heard through the sound 
of tabret and dulcimer. And now, on the other 
hand, the sackcloth and ashes of Lent scarcely 
suited the fiercely excited temper of the Tuscan 
capitaL Fair Florentine dames, whose morality 
sat lightly on them during ten months in the year. 



102 CASR OF CARBLYON. 

and who^ in the ordinaiy course of t])iiigs letind 
to conyentSj and were busy making tlieir aalTi- 
tion at this season^ were now in a fever of 
patriotic excitement On the 17 th of Febnurj 
the Toscah constitution was promulgated^ and 
the anomaly of an Austrian liberal grand-di&e 
was presented to the world. This was onlj a 
link in the chain of reaction which was being 
rapidly passed firom cify to city thranghont the 
poiinsnla* Terror-stricken Bowba . after die 
Sicilian revolution, where his merciless cid- 
nonadings earned him the name by which he 
will be handed down to posterity, . ^King Bombs 
in his abject terror, promising anything and 
everything to his revolted Neapolitans, was a spec- 
tacle at which all Italy rejoiced. Every day 
news arrived of some firesh demonstration of 
popular feeling in the cities writhing nnder 
Austrian rule. Fr(n Milan it was an address 
circu]|ited among the youths of all classes, in- 
viting the population to follow the example of 
the Americans, who abolished the use of tea in 
order to avoid paying the tax to England. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 103 

^^Give up tobacco, and all Toluntary taxation," 
was the exhortation of the Milanese patriots. 
From Veoice it was the deliver|uice of Daniel 
Manin and Tommasso firom prison bj the hands 
of the people, and the cry of ^ Morte ai Tedeschi I " 
The overthrow of the Orleans djnasfy in France, . 
insurrection at Yienna,-^a Roman constitoiion 
granted by Fio Nono, . ^intelligence of these and 
other moves rapidlyfoUowing each other on the great 
political chess-board, kept Florence in a fermei^t 

If Garr had ever been a lake-warm liberal, he 
at all events now heartily adopted his wife's 
politics, and was sanguine for the emancipation 
of Italy. They lingered on in Florence until 
the spring should have fully burst, and they 
should be driven northwards to seek shelter from 
the heat Every evening during this , time he 
sauntered into the Ca6 Doni, and mingled with 
one of the knots of free-spoken republicans, who 

 

were discussing the news of the day. The latest 
rumours current were thus brought back to the 
tea-table, where mother and daughter anxiously 
awaited his return. 



104 CARB OF CABRLTOK. 

At last die long-gailieriiig thunder bunt On 
the 18th of March die great revolt of Milan 
broke oat, and fiye days hter Radetzki and the 
Austrian garrison were compelled to retire. 

And here it is necessary that we should torn 
aside for a space, to consider what had become, 
meantime, of the other actors in this story. 



PART II. 



o*i 



YILLA POSSOMBEONI. 



lo; 



PAETIL 



VILLA EOSSOMBBONL 



CHAPTER L 
Thx circumstances which agitated Italy at this 
tiine are fresh in every one's recollection. It is 
imBecesBary to do more than allnde to them, when 
they .intersect die lives of the peofde I am writing 
aboati I hold the teller of stories generally 
mistaken when he ascends into the region of 
history ; and the careless reproduction of opinions, 
artistically suited to the ccmduct of the tale, tends, 
in too many cases, to perpetuate error. Thus my ' 
own Italian tendencies, and ihe political uih of 
both my heroes, shall not induce me to repeat the 
ill-authenticated stories of Radetzki's cruelty, nor 



108 CABB OF CASBLTON. 

indulge in any Mazzinign diatribes against the 
laddess Charles Albert As for Pio Nono and 
King Bomba^ are not their tergiversations written 
in the memories of men ? Let them rest in peace. 
Grnido Lamberti had not miscalculated time and 
place. He was at Milan some weeks before tlie 
match was laid to the train which speedily fired 
the whole peninsula, and joined that band of 
young men by whom the irritation of public feding 
against ihe Austrians was so greatly fomentei 
On ihe 18th March the revolt broke out; and 
during the bloody days that followed, the Bolognese 
gentleman was to be seen fighting beside his 
Lombard companions of all ranks, and recklessly 
exposing his life, as it seemed, at the barricades. 
Hb rifle . one of the three hundred fire-arms 
which were all the patriots of Mflan could 
muster . did good service, while the Austrian 
bullets fell harmless around him. On the 21st, 
as we all know, Radetzki was compelled to retreat; 
and Como, Brescia, Bergamo, and the Italian Alps, 
answering the sunmions of the revolted dty, sent 
forth volunteers to join the Milanese in expelling 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 109 

the detested Austrians. The first step was gained^ 
bat It was onlj the first The Milanese were 
mistaken in fancying the victory already won* 

Companies of volunteers were speedily formed^ 
and in one of these Gnido Lamberti enrolled him* 
self. In the petty engagements that followed 
during the next few weeks Italian superstition was 
not slow to pronounce that Count Lamberti bore a 
charmed life^ though it was one to which he seemed 
to attach but little value. However that might 
be^ he did not purposely expose it Life had 
indeed lost all charm^ all colour for him ; he could 
look forward to nothing with any vivid sense of 
possible pleasure ; but the great aim of his exist- 
ence yet remained imaccomplishedj and to thai he 
now applied himself with undivided soul and 
strength. The state of his mind was such as finds 
relief firom over-stress of thought in vigorous action 
alone. The tension of every nerve and muscle in 
his body^ the necessary rapidity of eye^ and 
promptitude of hand were vents to a strong 
inward excitement Above all^ the desire to 
stimulate by his own daring the crowd of youths 



110 CABB OF CASRLT02S. 

aroimd him carried Gnido awaj* ^The jonng 
Lamberti has every qualification to make a good 
captain but one," remarked a yetenm^ shaking hiB 
head^ ^he has no sdfKsonimand.'' Yet ihis was 
the same Gnido so fatally controlled by his mis- 
taken pride hitherto! But in such inconsistency 
is natore justified of her children* 

Whenever he had time to recnr to himself and 
his own lot, he was wretched. Natore wH make 
herself heard sooner or later, drown her voice as 
yon win by the sophistry of any principle that is 
not founded on truiL There were times . ^Dafosdy 
in the long sQent hours of the night . when ilie 
young man's heart gave way, and he almost re- 
nounced the stubborn prejudices in which he bad 
been eariy trained. Were not a man's heart and 
conscience the only tribunals he should reeogmae? 
Was it not a moral cowardice to r^ard what migld 
be said or thought of him ? And was this lofiy 
pride of independence worth the sacrifice of a life's 
(nay, might it not be two lives') happiness ? He 
could hardly doubt, after that last interview wi& 
Mrs. Courteney, that Gilda had not been whoUj 



VILLA F086QMBB0KL 111 

indifferent to him ; and her sweet pale face^ as he 
had beheld it for the last time, seemed to look 
down on him reproachfully as he laj there on the 
floor, wrapped in his heayy doak, and sorronnded 
in the dim fireli^t by his sleeping companions. 

Then the old pride would again assert its 
sway, not nnmingled with bitterness at a &te 
against whidi there was now no hope. t-no appeal I 

From this conflict of feeling the necessity of 
ronfiii^ himself to action was a boon and a relief. 
Among the questions daily discussed there were 
the momentons ones: what government was to 
succeed to the existent state of things in Italy? 
and whether -republicans ought to fight nnder the 
Piedmontese standard, with no other prospect than 
the old patch- work of petty soTereignties through* 
out the peninsula, swept of Anstrians and ahirri, 
and garnished with a constitution i^iece. Mazzini 
(and Mazwni was revered at that time, be it re- 
zuembered, by all liberals) had ceded to the idea 
of a ^nnited kingdom of Italy," but did not encour- 
age his followers to uphold the thrones of such po- 
tentates as Leopold and Bomba. Charles Albert, on 



112 CABB OP CABBLTOK. 

the other hand^ could hardlj enter into anyocMnpact 
^tffinst his patriot allies as they then were, still lesB 
so against the watchword of their partyPio Nana 
It is true the Pope's allocation very soon afterwards 
shook public confidence in his professions ; and in 
Ferdinand of Naples there never can be said to 
have been any. Still the Roman and Neapolitan 
armies were on the march to assist in the great 
national war. Charles Albert conld not ignore 
this, and while the liberal party placed no &ith in 
oaths forced firom the reluctant lips of the Italian 
princes, it was impossible for the king to decline 
their aid, or to assent to the stipulations which tbe 
Mazzinians wbhed to force on him. 

Guide Lamberti, as we know, was a republican. 
A citizen of the Roman States, he was no lover 
of the Papacy, and found it hard to believe that 
any good thing could come out of the duur of 
St Peter. But he felt that all diflSsrencea d 
political faith or judgment were merged in tbe 
first, great, and pressing duty towards his country- 
To rid the soil of the Austrian, that was the 
first thing . ^for men of all shades of opinion to 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 113 

CD-operate in this^ and leave the vexed questions 
of internal government to be settled hereafter. 
Had more been of bis mind^ the great movement 
of '48 bad not failed^ as it assuredly did, for lack 
of unity and concentrated vigour. 

From Bologna . ^bis beloved Bologna . ^Lambert! 
had almost daily intelligence through the professor. 
The countess, wrote that worthy man, was as well 
as continued fast and mortification would allow; 
she sighed whenever she spoke of her son: but 
she found comfort in the reflection that he had 
an image of the Virgin round his neck, which 
she had hung there herself when he was a boy. 
His preservation was no doubt owing to this. 
The patriotic enthusiasm of the city, Garofalo said, 
knew no bounds. Sympathy with their brethren 
in the north was expressed in addresses, subscrip- 
tions, the raising of volunteer corps> and the 
departure of many of the leading young men to 
join the standard of Charles Albert Among the 
latter, Garofalo mentioned Count Razzi. The 
Marchesa Onofrio, too, was departed towards the 
seat of war, with the view of nursing the prospec- 

VOL. n. 8 



114 CABB OF CASBLTOK. 

tire wouikIs of the Fiednumtese cousin, it wib 
supposed. 

One portion of this intdUgence Gruido had 
abeady forestalled some time before^ In the 
first fighting days of MiLm, he and Raaan came 
across each other, and exchanged a warm gnsp 
of the hand in the midst of that excited aoene; 
He met him afterwards in cafiM and other poUk 
pkces, and the two Bolognese gentlemen were 
sobseqnentlj attached to the same divkion of 

* 

the army. During the early peciods of this inter- 
conrse^ Gnido was stmck by a certain degree of 
mystery, which, being so at Tarianoe with his 
firank gay character, seemed to oppress Baai 
when alluding to himself, his position, and pro- 
qtects. Gruido did not appear to remark it, and 
avoided thenceforward any indirect sqpproach to 
a subject which evidently embarrassed his fiiend 
Had he^ indeed, felt any great curiosity on the 
subject, or been moved by other motires, it is 
more than probable that ^^ other's awkward 
reticence would have yidded tn the smallest 
amount of pressure. As it was, a cirenmatanoe 



VILLA K)660MBB0NL 115 

ere long aflbrded to Gaido the due he was far 
from seeking. 

More than once daring the five days' fighting 
at the barricades, Gnido's attention had been 
momentarily drawn to the figare of a slight, 
dark youth, dressed in a gray jacket, his short 
wavy hair surmoimted by a cap of the same 
colour. He carried a revolver in his bdt, and 
a light carbine slung across his shoulder. It 
i?as his dexterity in the employment of this 
latter weapon which attracted Guido's notice. 
The youth certainly could not be said to ex- 
pose .himself unnecessarily to the enemy's fire. 
He generally established his position behind a 
heap of paving-stones, or under cover of a wall; 
whence, with the utmost Mong^froid, he took 
deliberate aim, picked off his man, and reloaded* 
The gallantry might be small; the skill and the 
success were eminent In the glimpses which 
Guido caught of the boy's profile there was 
something not altogether unfamiEar^ he fancied; 
but he had not time to give the subject a second 
thought With the shades of evening, the youth 

8. a 



116 * CABB OF CABRLTOK. 

< 
always disappeared, and was to be seen nd&er 

in the streets nor cafis. In the mad rejmcings 

consequent on the expulsion of the Austrians 

from Milan, Gnido remembered afterwards never 

to have come.across him. But one evening wbile 

passing through one of the piazzCi he was arrested 

by th^ sound of a rich, harmonious voice, pooling 

forth with all the impassioned eloquence of Italy 

the then popular hymn of " Pio Nono.** A crowd 

had gathered under the open window, and their 

enthusiasm was noisily expressed in the choras 

they made at the end of each couplet Their 

vivas and plaudits at the termination of the whole 

drew the singer somewhat reluctantly, as it seemed, 

to the window.- 1 Though it was not possible to 

see his face, Lamberti recognized, or fancied be 

recognized, the outline of the figure against the 

light as that of the youth in gray. The voice, 

too, strange to say, haunted him as one he bad 

heard before. Whether the singer had, on bis 

side, recognized a friend among the uptomed 

faces in the dimly-lit piazza below, or whether 

gratified vanity alone prompted the display, there 



VILLA 70SS0MBB0NI. 117 

was no telling; but he.bronght his guitar to the 
window^ and with redoubled fire and pathos he 
sang one patriotic song after another, until the 
excitement of the increasing crowd below became 
tumultuous and almost alarming. Then the singer, 
bowing his head, closed the window and with* 
drew. 

The corps to which Guide and Razad both 
belonged was soon afterwards attached to the 
Sardinian army. Thej left Milan, and took part 
in most of the sharp skirmishes and petty engage* 
ments which followed. In one of these . ^Monzam- 
bano, or *some other, . Guide was, for the -first 
time, strangely and unexpectedly brought face to 
face with that mysterious youth in gray. 

It was a hand-to-hand fight across a bridge, I 
have heard him say. The Austrians were re* 
treating, but dbputed every inch of the ground. 
Just as he had disarmed a young officer, and 
was making him his prisoner. Guide found him- 
self seized in the grasp of a giant double his 
own weight, who, attracted by the conspicuous 
gallantry of the young count, had borne down 



118 CABB OF GABBLTOK. 

eveiythiog before him^ leeolved to piedpitate 

hk enemy overj the bridge. The danger iru 

imminent Guide's hands being otherwise em- 

plojed at the moment, he was, sfnte of fab grot 

strength, almost powerless in die grapple of those 

mighty arms diat dosed like a Tice round Imn- 

There was a sharp, violent straggle, for a 6w 

seconds only : Gnido yainly straining every 

muscle to free himself while he was hesred up 

towards the parapet At that instant, even while 

tottering on the brink, a pistol was discharged 

full in the broad, heavy, fair-bearded fiioe, thrust 

so close to his own, and the Austrian's bnins 

were scattered over him. Guide staggered back} 

and his eyes met those of his deliverer, as the 

youth in gray, with a strange smile of triumph, 

returned the pistol to his belt, and slipped back 

into the crowd. 

And Gruido recognized him I 



lis 



CHAPTER II. 



^O^ 



The Laurence Caxrs had at last left Florence, 
and were bending their steps northwards. Un- 
dismayed by the fact of its being the theatre of 
war^ they were to pass the snmmer in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Lago di Oarda. An Italian' 
acquaintance of Carr's> who was far too much 
alarmed to think of occupying his villa there 
under the present aspect of the country^ offered it 
to Carr for a very small ** con-sideration." The 
state of the Laurence Carr finances was such as 
to render any expensive residence for the summer 
undesirable. The fine apartment on the Lung' 
Amo, the carriage and horses, the pictures and 
pietre dure which Carr had found irresistible: 
these in four months had eaten akeady a large 
hole in the year's income. I have said that he 



120 CAKR OF CABRLTON. 

had never been recklessly extravagant^ and never 
addicted to expensive vices ; but the heir of the 
Carrlyons had the vaguest ideas of squaring 
income and expenditure, and towards the end of 
his sojourn in Florence was dismayed at the 
aspect of his cheque-book. He would sooner 
starve than make any application to his fa&er; 
from his mother-in-law he was naturally still 
more anxious to conceal the tightened state of 
the money ^arkei He kept his own counsel, 
but he made up his mind they must go, and 
really '^economize" somewhere: there was no 
help for it 'And at tliis juncture, it so happened, 
that the villa for a ^^con-sideration" was ofiered 
to him. It was described as spacious, and 
beautifully situated . surrounded by its own 
vineyards, and overlooking 'the Lake of Grarda. 
The' picture, in short, was painted in glowing oil 
colours ; and if one was disposed to overlook the 
ugly crack across it (namely, that the contending 
armies would probably be encamped in its im- 
mediate vicinity), no doubt it was a tempting 
proposal. Carr vfas disposed to overlook it; 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 121 

neither his wife nor mother-in-law had any fears, 
bnt on the contrary rejoiced to be nearer to the 
theatre of all their hopes and sympathies. The 
bargain was strack, and towards the middle of 
May they left Florence. 

The Villa Fossombroni lay abont a day's march 
beyond ' Peschiera. Their journey so far, a 
tedious vetturino affair, performed not without 
difficulties, and by many a circuitous route in 
avoidance of yet greater ones, was at last 
accomplished. They had meant to keep aloof 
from this, one of the four great fortresses of 
Venetian Lombardy, which was then besieged by 
the Italian army; but news of its fall, simul- 
taneously with Charles Albert's victory at Goito, 
reached them on the way. Ambulance-carts with 
the wounded and the dying, . ^files of prisoners in 
the white, blood-stained uniform of Austria, . 
couriers, orderlies, vehicles of every description 
moving in dim clouds of dust along the stony 
road . ^proclaimed the triumphant news. Peschiera 
had fallen I ' All Italy rang with the cry. 

"Why should we turn aside from Peschiera 



122 GASB OF GASBLTOK. 

now ? " said GflcUy her ejes lighted vp witk 
cnthiniaflm. '^ It is in the hands of oar fioendi^ 
snd oh I LanrenGBy pethaps we might he of 
ue to some of the poor ironnded people! 
Mamma and I have made a whole tronkfid 
of lint Look at that nnfortonate boj carried 
along, both arms shot off! ^ she added, shndderingy 
''and the old man beside him! how thej* axe 
jolted along! It is horrible^ Can't we do anj- 
thlDg for them ? Let ns stop ; doj Lanrencel It 
is inhnman to let them soffisr so ! " 

" Mj dear child, tibej wouldn't stop &r ns. 
They're taking them to the hospital at Golbo. 
shot in some of the distant ontposts, I suppose . 
or else they are too fiill at Peschiera to take 
them in. Perhaps^ by-the-by^ there may not be 
room for ua in the place*" 

''Let ns try; we can but go on, if it is so. 
Don't refuse me." She looked into his fiuse, 
pleadingly. " It seems so nnnatoral to be sitting 
here at our ease, cautiously avoiding all this 
misery, that we might do something to alleviate. 
Do tell him so, mamma." 



TILL A VOSSOMBBOITL 123 

But Mhl Conrteney was BQent, and Carr 
leplied smilingy 

*^ You're not made for a hospiialj Gilda. Why, 
yon tamed qnite white just now at ihe sight 
of a little blood. Yoa'd be more in their way 
titan of any service, I suspect A horrid con 
fusion, depend cm if 

'' If Laurence objects to your going, and I 
think he \& right, my chUd," said her mother, 
hastily, *^ I will get into a carateUa, and go 
on by myself to Peschiera. I can easily rejoin 
you in a few days at Fossomfaroni; and there 
is no danger for my nerves now you Imow," she 
added, smiling. 

''No," repeated her daughter, more earnestly 
than before, *'I cannot agree to that, mother. 
Laurence will not refuse me, I know. I am not 
so weak and foolish as he thinks ; and I want to 
prove to-^him that I con be of some use. Dear 
Laurence, I shall be miserable if you won't 
consent to our all going on to Peschiera t ^ and 
she looked up, with her sweet, excited fece so 
pleadin^y, that the young fool did consent. 



124 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

 

Ah! had he known that his more characteiktic 
obstinacy would have been fiur better for all 
their fntore happiness at that moment I 

The state of the newly-liberated fortress justified 
Carres anticipations. The wretched little place 
was crammed to overflowing. The Dnke of 
Genoa's staff, and the chief officers of the diyisioD, 
occupied the few dirty houses of entertainment, or 
were billeted on the principal citizens. Tricolor 
flags, ribands, and garlands interwoven with 
mottoes, fluttered from every window, which 
were occupied by women, young and old, in 
flaming gala dresses. The narrow streets below 
were filled almost wholly by men, and of these 
the larger proportion of course were soldiers. 

*^ Well I this looks promising," said Carr, 
resignedly, as the vetturino heaved and struggled 
up the street between the mob of soldior, 
attracting some small notice by reason of its 
peaceful-looking convoy. 

''This looks promising I It reminds me of 
the night I arrived in Bologna, only this is 
considerably worse. We shall have to pass the 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 125 

night in the street, I foresee. By Jove I Here 
we are at a full stop. What are we to do? 
Giuseppe! Giuseppe! what the deuce is the 
fellow up to ? He has run off into the crowd 
like a mad dog. Well I my dear Gilda, I con- 
gratulate you on the' success of your idea ! We 
shall all be driven to the hospital to earn a 
shelter, evidently." 

''Here comes Giuseppe, with a radiant face," 
said Grilda, putting her head out of window, '' but 
who is the lady with him ? Do you see ? with 
a white boumous? Surely, I know her face." 

<< The Onofrio ! by all that's wonderful I " cried 
Carr, bursting out laughing, as he leapt &om the 
carriage. '' Well, this is lucky. I give Giuseppe 
credit for that move. Marchesa, overjoyed to 
see you. Who would have thought of meeting 
here? > If you can find us a place to lay our heads, 
we are your slaves for life." 

''I have found you one already," said the 
kindly Italian, laughing, as she shook him warmly 
by the hand. '' But come, introduce me, en rigle, 
to your wife and her mother, and then you wil . 



126 CAB& OF CABBLTOlSr. 



all come with me. I only arrived here a few 
hours ago myself,'' she continuedt after the cere- 
mony had been decoiroiisly gone through, ^from 
Crolto, and I am with my old aimt, Madame Santiy 
who has a honse here. She has not above four 
oSScers billeted on herj and shall find rooms fer 
you, I engage." 

They descended from the carriage, leaving it to 
follow as best it might, while they threaded the 
crowd until they reached Madame Santi's house: 

On their way thither the marchesa oould not 
resist saying, 

'^You English are a strange people. nerer 
happy unless you are in the midst of everything. 
What brings you here, caro tnio f " 

'' Well," replied Carr, laughing, <^ the &ct is, I 
am henpeeked . a state of .things you don't belieTe 
in here, eh? My wife was bent on visiting ^ 
hospital, and seeing if she could do anything fo 
the poor fellows . so I yielded with the best grace 
I could." 

^* Brava! signoral" the marchesa tamed round 
with an ^icouraging little nod, *'braval we sadly 



VILUL 70SB0HBB0NI. 127 

want help in all departments. Our poor volim*- 
teers ! scarcely fed, and many of iiiem not lodged 
at all I Quel maledeUi Tedudd have lavaged the 
whole conntry, so that there is little left for them ; 
and as to the commissariat," she added, dropping 
her voice, '^ howevar, the less said on that subject 
the better I Your conntrywomen are all good nnrses, 
are they not ? well ! so shall we Italians be in the 
course of time. We wanted a good war to rouse 
our energies. You've heard about that dear 
BelgiojoBO, haven't you ? Dio mio ! che gene^ 
roia, nobile ereatura ! She has levied five hundred 
Neapolitans herself, and brought them with her 

Ah I if we had more such women I " 

They had by this time reached the Casa Santi, 
one of the few tolerable houses in the place, and 
were conducted by the marchesa into a sala, where 
two officers ware composedly smoking their cigars 
over the remains of the mid-day meaL The room 
was still hermetically sealed against a possible ray 
from the afternoon sim, and the atmosphere was 
consequently suffocating with tobacco-smoke and 
the savour of depart^ viands. Flies of every 



128 CARB OF CASBIiTOK. 



iptioii blackened the walls and ceiling and 
swarmed over the table-dodi, where ihej fon^t 
oyer fragments of sugar, and the membra dufeeta 
of a fowL 

Madame Santi was a sharp little old ladj, reiy 
nnlike an Italian in appearance, having a Ii^t 
brown front, . ^which might be presumed to afford 
some distant clue to the colonr of her own locks, 
when she had any . and verj shrewd gray eyes. 
She was foil of animation, and wore a trioolonred 
bow in her cap. The influx of unexpected Tisitors 
seemed in no way to disconcert her . as it pro- 
bably would have done most English ladies. She 
received them very cordially, showed them a 
couple of bare chambers, with painted ceilings, and 
said the servants must manage as best they conld 
in the kitchen. She suggested no d^culties, and 
made no apologies, which was the surest way of 
setting the strangers at their ease. 

As to remaining beyond the night at Peschien, 
under such circumstances, beholden to this lady 
for hospitality, it was, of course, not to be thought 
of. Carr took an opportunity of saying this to his 



VILUL FOSSOMBBONI. 129 

wife^ and added, that as it was then past six 
o'clock, she and her mother had better not^^^delay 
their visit to the hospital, if they were bent 
on it 

''I'll take you there; but you won't ask me 
to go in? r^e no vocation for dressing wounds, 
I will smoke my cigar round the fortifications, 
and call for you later." 

''We are not afraid of walking by ourselves 
in Italy," said Gilda, quietly, . "If you don't 
like to come in, mamma and I can find our way 
back perfectly, Laurence." 

Carr was not in the best of humours, and this 
answer of his wife's did not please him. 

"Oh I as you like. I am quite aware that 
you used to walk about Bologna by yourselves : 
but you will find that Englishwomen in society 
don't generally think it advisable to do so after 
dusk, especially in a place crammed with sol- 
diers. But if you don't want me, say so, by all 
means." 

" My dear Laurence, you misunderstood me," 
said Gilda, distressed. '^I only meant that you 

voii. n. 9 



130 GASB OF GABRLYOK. 

should not wony younelf about xts, i you d 
not like to..* 

^ Ckune I ^ said ihe marchesa^ entering quicklj* 
** Come, cUldren ! let ns take our eafd fwir and 
be o I shall leave yon, signora, at ilie hospital, 
toff I am more at home among the fleshpots of 
gyptwh]chIamcaRyingto oar poor Yolunfteeis, 
than with poultices and bandages. I don't nnler- 
stand much about medicine, you see; I take a 
dose once a month, and am l)led occasionaDy to 
purify the system; but as to anything elasy 1 
have always had the best health, I am glad to 
say, and I don't understand sick people. They 
pretend that I neariy killed a poor feUow the 
odier day, because I poured half a bottle of ekuaiti 
down his throat; I thought he wanted streo^gth, 
but it appears he was in a fever, so since thai I 
am very cautious, and devote myself priacipallT 
to those whom my system can't kilL" 

Notwithstanding which disclaimer, the warm- 
hearted woman had been indefatigable on every 
battlefield in alleviating, as ftr as she could, 
the sufferings of the wounded, until they were 



YILLk POSSOMBBOISIL 131 

transmitted into other hands. She now . as the 
caretta below^ laden with meat^ breads and wine, 
testified . ^was devoting her substance to some of 
those whoj though nnwonnded, had borne the 
harden and heat of the day. 



9.2 



133 CABB OF CABBLYON. 



CHAPTER m. 

Thet stopped at the door of a long^ low boHding, 
and here the marchesa and Carr left mother and 
daughter, Carr proposing to call for them in a 
couple of hours. 

Within, the greatest confusion appeared to 
reign. There were not near hands enough for 
the necessary work, and surgeons, assistants, and 
nurses, were running to and &o with all the 
noisy gesticulation of Italians, which, added to 
the piercing shrieks of some of the unfortunate 
sufferers, rendered it a perfect BabeL The two 
ladies, each laden with a heavy parcel, tried in 
vain for some time to obtain any information as 
to the part of the building to which they were 
to direct their steps. Avoiding the wards where 
any serious operations were being performed, and 



VILLA EOSSOMBBONI. 133 

to which, of course, the snrgeons' and nurses' 
care would be principally given, Gilda and her 
mother entered one to which a young surgeon at * 
last directed them, adding that there were some 
bad cases in it to which he had not time to 
attend. 

It was densely, hideously crammed : the state 
of the atmosphere was such that Gilda stopped 
and gasped. Only by a strong effort, and deter- 
mination not to give way, was she able, after a 
minute's pause, to enter. 

There was no distinction of persons or of 

w 

country. officers and men, Italians and Austrians, 
all crowded together. A few nurses, and a couple 
of sisters of mercy, huiprying to and fro . ^prayers, 
groans, and imprecations, all around. 

** Madre di Dio I non abbandonarmi I " roared 
a stalwart son of Naples, who bore his slight gun- 
shot wound less patiently than many did the 
loss of limbs. Gilda dressed and bound up his . 
arm as well as she was able, not without a 
shudder: and his vociferous blessings almost 
alarmed her. The poor boy in the next bed. 



134 * CABB 07 CAEBLTOK. 

"who had sustmned a mortal injury^ and wbom 
the surgeoDS had abeady examiiied^ praKmiiaDg 
his ease hopeless, said fidntly, as Mxbl CooiteDey 
moistened his lips with aii orangey*^ 

''Kind signora* do not waste your time on 
me. I . am dying. They have told me aa 
There are others who may be saved. Go to 

them," 

^Are yoa happy, niy poor boy? Is tiiere 
anght you wish ? Have yon seen a priest?" 

He shook his head. 

^' I don't want one. We don't care for piiests 
at homep I've done my duty, and I die far 
Italy Oh my poor mother ! I shonld be quite 
happy if only she kne w .. . . " 

''Give me her address; She shall learn hov 
bravely you died." 

And with this solace, she tamed to the old 
Austrian beside him, whose arm had been shot 
away. 

'*A nice hospital yon have here," groaned 
Radetski*8 follower, with an oath: ^a kennel of 
cursed Italian dogs, where one gets nothing 



. VILLA POSSOHBBQKL 135 

to eat or drink . ^and as to cUacipUne, I flhould like 
the old marshal to see it I " 

She bound up his woimd, and went fiMTward 
on her misaion of mercy. 

Gilda fomid her dexterity mcrease with her 
confidence and courage. She infused^ moreover, 
some portion of her hopeful spirit into the heart 
of each sufferer she tended. The hour sped. 
Daylight was fast waning. The flickering rays 
of sunset no longer played upon the white- 
washed wall> and over the pillows of sufiering 
men* The rapid twilight of the south was 
already enveloping the distant comers of the 
room^ and there yet remained a row of beds at 
the upper end of it, which the ladies had not 
yet visited. 

The ccxifiisioit of nurses and aasistasits hurry- 
ing to and firoy and the fast^fading light rcn* 
dered it difiBcuU to distinguish the occupants of 
these until one was dose to them. Gtlda ap- 
proached the first, and asked gently where his 
injury was. No answer. She toeched the hand 
thaf lay passive on the cofralid. It was cold. 



136 CARR OF CASBLTOK. 

She started back. It was the first time die 
had come into actual contact with death; and 
she coold not help shuddering. She snatched 
the , lucema a servant had just set down, and 
guided by its feeble light passed on to the next 
bed. 

But this sufferer and the next one had been 
cared for. She passed on, leaving her mother 
some distance behind. 

She had now reached the last bed on that 
side of the ward. As she came near, she raised 
her light, as she had done to the others . end 
was turning away, for lo! her help here, too, 
had been forestalled. A youth clad in gray 
leant over the pillow, busied in renewing a 
bandage on the brow of him who lay there. 

Yes. She was turning away . but she stopped, 
rooted to the spot, her eyes fastened on the 
bed, a cold, sick horror creeping through her 
veins. She would have called out; she would 
have spoken his name: her tongue dave to the 
roof of her mouth. She would have drawn 
nearer: her limbs seemed turned to stone. 



VILLA rOSSOMBBONI. 137 

The sufferer was muttering in the unconscious 
delirium of fever ; and impatiently snatched at 
the hand of his nurse each time it touched 
him. Gilda heard hut one word moaned forth 
in all the agony of intense longing. It was her 
own name. The light fell from her hand and 
was extinguished on the floor. 

The youth sprang up, and with the savage 
bound of a tiger, seized her arm, and thrust her 
back. 

** What have you to do here? Who told you 
to come? You have followed him, have you? 
You will not give up the ground to me, then, 
even now you are married, heartless littie jade ? 
Have you forgotten the compact between us ; or 
did your mother not tell you? Take care . if 
you cross my path l" 

The youth crushed her wrist ip his thin iron 
fingers, till a low cry broke from the terrified 
girl. 

'< Silence, fool!" said tiie other between his 
teeth, as he relaxed his grasp. 

''But, Sara, Sara! in pity tell me. Is he 



138 CABB OF CABBLYOV. 

very ill ? I knew notiung of his being here. 
I didn't indeed." 

The diaguiaed' woman folded her anns and 
stood sttitinel-wise before the bed. Even in the 
dim light, the tcinrnphant glitter of her dark eyes 
was visible. < 

'^ He has a brain fever. Don't be deoeiTed bv 
hia wild ravings afiar yon. You Hke to hear 
them, ehp Mrs. Laurence Caxr? . yon come 
here to drink them in? and your husband would 
like to hear ihem too I But I wwn you once 
again--4ake care I or it will be worse for yon. 
Ton cannot have your fine English faosband 
and your poor Italian lover tool You have 
made yonr choice, and I have taken the post 
that might have been yours. Trouble him and 
me no more, or I swear to QoA you shall 
repent it I " 

'< Grod forgive you, Sara I I only beseech 700 
to tell me " 

The voice struck the ear of the delirops man. 
He started up in bed. 

^' Begone I " repeated Sara, beside horself 



VILLA F06SO1IBB0NL 139 

passion, '^ You will kill him ; and his blood 
be on your head if he dies I " 

The wretched Gilda turned^ and walked feeblj 
to the centre of the room, where her modier was 
oceupitd. Scarcely knowing what she was about, 
she touched her on the arm, murmuring,. 

<< Let us go. I am ill. I can stay no longer." 

The growing darkness and confusion of noise 
had effectually prevented Mrs. Courteney'a seeing 
or hearing anything of the soene so rapidly 
enacted at the farther end of the ward. 

As soon as they were in the op^i air, Gilda 
laid her hand upon her mother's arm. 

'^ Mother, I have seen him ! " 

It was all she 8aid> and Mrs. Conrteney needed 
no more. She had felt a dim dread of this all 
along^ aa a possibility which it behoved her to 
avert, if she could. It was not to be averted ; 
and what she dreaded had come to pass. 

<'Is he very ill, my child?" she asked^ 
at last ''If so, I will go back to him so 
soon as .. . " 

"No I mothier. . Sara." 



140 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

As she gasped out that name^ Mrs. Courtaiey 
clasped her hands^ and murmured^ . 

''Good God I what horrible fatality is this? 

That woman ^here! my poor child, yon 

know not what you have done! that woman's 
enmity ." 

''Has opened my eyes to the tmth at last, 
mother,** said Gilda in a very low voice. "I 
see it all now. Bnt oh I is there nothing to 
be done? . ^abont him, I mean. Mnst we leave 
him, then, to her care? Knowing him, loving 
him as we have done, mother . ^it seems so hkrd 
to abandon him ; so cmel and imnataral.*' 

" It must be so, Gilda," said Mrs. Courtenej, 
hastily ; " we know he is well tended and cared 
for; and even I dare not return and. face that 
woman now. The consequences to you, my child, 
might be very miserable. Pray God to avert 
them, and soften that wretched girl's heart! 
K, as I suppose, from their being here together, 
he loves her " 

"^e does noU^ Gilda's breathing came short 
and thick, and she hurried her pace, but the 



.VILLA F08S0MBB0NL 141 

wordfl would out '^ She tried to deceive me. I 
was not to be deceived. I heard him^ I aaiw him. 
Of course it is all one to me now, mother; but 
I huAo he doesn't love her." 

Mrs. Courtenej said no more ; she was wisely 
afiraid of pressing ihe point The work of months 
had been destroyed in a moment, and that secret 
divulged which she had hoped, for her child's 
happiness, Gilda might never know. Yet she 
trusted her firmly . implicitly. The very truth 
and daring with which she had spoken those 
words, testified to the young wife's pure crystal 
nature. 

The two ladies, in their agitation and excite- 
ment, had reached Casa Santi before they re- 
membered that Carr was to have called for them. 
It was too late, and they were too tired to think 
of retracing their steps. The marchesa was with 
him: he would easily learn that they had left 
the hospital 



142 CABB OS* CAEBLTOK. 



CHAPTER IV. 

TsE two ladies were sammonied to supper lialf a& 
hour later. The marchesa had returned. Bendes 
Madame Santi and the other two officers^ tbere 
was also the PledmtyDtese cavalry raytaiHj who 
was introduced as Madame Santi's wpiew. Gtir's 
place was vacant 

Gilda felt wretched : she wiidied her husband 
would appear. Her pale fiuse and swollen eyes 
could not fail to attract attention. 

Is this your English beauty?" multeied 
Piedmoni^ under its long tawny mooatache^ to 
the dark^eyed Italian lady beside him. "^ Well 
there is no accounting for tastes I Elk 9$po$e <s 
martyr, I see; and her virtnesi I daresay^ are 
great; but ^ 

''Hold your tongue^ eugino mio. You will 



TILUL 70SS01IBB0NI. 143 

discnaa this pasty of ortolaiis better than you can 
a woman's virtues. You know nothing abont 
them."' \ 

" I know jours^ cam.'' 

<^The list is small enough," replied the lady, 
laughing ; ^^ and as to tins little IngUse, she is too 
good for such as yon. Signora," she cried, 
elevating her voice, ''what have you done with 
your handsome husband ? He left me some time 
ago to retom to you. Did younot wait for him?'' 

He iqppeared at that same moment ; and with 
a polite salutation to the lady of the house, seated 
himself at the opposite side of the table to his 
wife, without looking towards her. Her counte- 
nance brightttied as he entered, and she tried 
to catch his eye ; but he seemed resohred not 
to look that way. To any one unacquainted 
with the variations of his countenance, he was 
much as usual . ^polished, agreeable, w^-bred. 
But Gilda and her mother had learnt to watch 
every shade of that most impressionable character 
as it rose to the surface. They knew at once 
that he was not quite pleased 



144 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

" I was just asking where yon ware^" said tlie 
marchesa* ''Here is your poor little wife^ wbo 
has been looking most disconsolate." 

''Ladies manage to look so at a very short 
notice^ I believe/' said Carr, with what was meant 
far the perfection of quiet sarcasm. 

"Did I not tell yon/' whispered Piedmont, 
" that she was enacting the martyr?" 

" I have been pacing the street in firont of the 
hospital for flie last hour/' continued the iiynred 
Carr^ still carefully avoiding his wife's eye. 

"Gilda was not well, and obliged to come 
home^" said her mother. 

> 

He turned quickly rounds his countenance 
undergoing the most instantaneous change. There 
was no lack of love imderlying that morbid, 
sensitive folly. He gazed at her now with the 
most intense inquiring anxiety. She returned 
the look, with a litde nod and smile of reassur- 
ance ; and amid vociferous Italian jokes, boastfiil 
wagers as to when the maUdetti Teduchi should 
be driven across the Alps, and such like, the 
supper slowly progressed. 



VILLA FOSSOBiBRONI. 145 

How those Italians did eat I As to Piedmont^ 
Lis catholic interior seemed capable of embracing 
all things in its astounding fervonr. Nor could 
a family resemblance in this respect . if in no 
otherr. be said to be wanting between the two 
Italian ladies and their military relative. It was 
plain Madame Santi thought but poorly of her 
English guests from the meagre repast they made. 
She whispered to her neighbour^ *^ Ho inteao 
che gli Inglese nan mangiono altro clie il came crudo 
coir acqua-vita/* a proposition the truth of which 
the officer next her was not prepared to dis- 
pute. * 

But the supper was not to conclude without 
further agitation to Gilda. The marchesa^ in 
tiie amiable endeavour to bring her English ' 
friends into the fold of general conversation^ began 
questioning Mrs. Courteney relative to the hos- 
pital. Suddenly, clapping her hand to her brow, 
she cried, . 

" Ma, JDio mio I What waS' I thinking of not 
to tell you that an old friend of yours, poor 
Guide Lambert!, was lying there, ill of brain- 

VOL. n. ' 10 



146 CAllR OF CABRLYON. 

fever? I only heard it an hoar ago-^t is tme^ 
and thejtold me tlie danger was over, and lie 
was well cared for . vety well eared ^/?>7*. other- 
wise I should have gone to look after hun mjwiL 
Did yon see him P^ 

^^I did nof Mrs. Conrtonej spoke plainly 
and deliberately; she knew the peril of anything 
short of the direet tmth^ boldly spok^i in such 
cases. ^ I did not ; bnt my daughter did. He 
was well cared for^ and our services were not 
required." 

The marchesa smiled^ and said no more. Gilda 
was annoyed to feel the blood rush up into her 
face, and then as suddenly desert it She had 
been taught by her mother to hate all coneeal- 
ments. Painful as it must be to allude to the 
sulgect^ she fully meant to tell her huaband of 
that meeting; and was only waiting till ihey 
were alone to do so; not of the insults she 
had received at Sara's hand . ^it could do no good 
to repeat tAo#; and Gilda shrank from alluding 
to the equivocal position the Creole had appeared 
to accept, if not to court But of Guide him- 



VILLA F0S80MBR0NL 147 

I 

self, Gilda woald speak openly; she felt it to 
be onfortaiiate, however, koowing her husband's 
peculiar temperament, that the fiict should trans- 
pire thus in public She looked at her husband^ 
and found, as she half anticipated, that his coun- 
tenance had fallen many degrees below zero. He 
helped himself largely to salad, though he had 
announced a moment before that he had no 
appetite, and deyoured it with a voracity which 
rivalled the Italians. He did not look up from 
his plate; no,. his attention was apparently eon- 
centrated upon the beei-root and garlic dripping 
with oil ; but there was a spot on his brow which 
could not deceive the young wife. By the time 
supper was over he had half satisfied himsdf that 
she was cognizant of Guido Lamberti's being in 
the hospital^ and that this was the secret cause 
which had, brought her to Peschiera. 

The repast terminated with a dish of marrons 
glacda^ transfixed on tooth-picks; after which the 
m&k with a slight bow towards Madame Santi, 
lit their cigars, and the marchesa joined them 
with a cigaretto. The English ladies soon after- 

10.9 



148 CAEB OF CABRLYOK. 

wards rose, and, pleading fatigne, withdrew to 
their own rooms. Mrs. Courtenej, however^ in 
wishing the marchesa good-night, asked for the 
favour of a few moments' conversation with her. 

As soon as she found herself alone with the 
Italian lady, she said, . 

''I will tell you as briefly as I can what I 
have to say. It is about Count Lamberti. I 
am troubled, uneasy about him; I liave known 
him since he was a boy, and have the wannest, 
tenderest regard for him. I would gladly go 
and nurse him . were it not that another woman 
is there already. . Nor is this all. There 
are circumstances which render it imperative 
that this woman and I should not meet : there- 
fore .* 

''You know her, then?'' exclaimed the other 
in astonishment ''She has been exciting the 
curiosity of the whole camp ; she has taken part 
in nearly every battle, and preserved her dis- 
guise so well that her sex was not discovered 
for a long time. It was poor Razzi's rage and 
jealousy that betrayed her at last. It seems 



YILTJi FOSSOMBBONL 149 

that she had been leading hun on with hopeSf 
which she never meant to fulfil, and his un- 
governable indignation burst openly forth, when 
he found that it was Guide Lamberti all the 
time with whom she was in love. While poor 
Sazzi remains at Goito, she followed Guide here, 
and since he fell ill, she has thrown off all con- 
cealment, and nursed him so devotedly^ thatr-r 
that . in short there is no doubt whatever of 
the position in which they stand towards each 
other." 

" Pardon me. I have very grave doubts 
whether it be more than the insane passion of 
an unprincipled girl for a man who is utterly 
indifferent to her. So long as he is imconscious 
of her presence, she will devote herself to him 
day and night; but if she should find that this 
devotion is imavailing, it will of course cease, 
even if no worse happen. I know you feel 
an interest in Guido LambertL Promise me that 
you will not leave him entirely at the mercy of 
this woman. You will keep a watchful eye over 
him, will you not ? " 



150 CABB OF CABBLYOX. 

*^ Depend on it I wiU^" and the mardwsa p9spA 
her new acquaintance warmly bj the hand. ^We 
cannot spare onr Gaido; we have too ftw like 
him^ alas I But I hope he will be a Ktde grate- 
ful to her^ eh ? Pomerina I It is hard upon us 
women^ signora^ when we sacrifice everTtUng, 
and get nothing in return." 

With this the ladies separated. Meantime a 
scene of a diiferenlr nature was being enacted in 
the adjoining room. 

'^ My dear Gilda^ I make no complaint. I think 
it Terj natural that you should wish to go and 
see your old friend^ when' you knew he was ill 
in hospital^ but.." 

^ But I did noe know it^ Laurence, I rq>eat It 
was by the purest accident I found him.** 

** Appearances, you will admit, were strangehr 
in favour of such a supposition ; your eagerness 
to get to Peschiera, your declining my escort to 
the hospital, and your returning here withont 
me. However, I am perfectly ready to beKete 
it V)Q an accident, only I beg you not to think 
that I am a jealous fool, and that had it been 



VILLA FOSSOMUHOKL 151 

Otherwise. bad you, in shorty learnt that Lamberti 
was ill, I would willingly have aliowed you to 
go and aee him. My confidence in yon is too 
great *. 

'^That is rightj dearest Laurence. Whatever 
I may do, however foolish I may be^and women, 
you know, dear, are not always wise . be sure that 
I am true, that I would not deceive you for the 
world. I gave you, Laurence Carr," . here she 
looked down and her voice faltered, . "the best 
proof of this when you asked me to marry you. 
I showed you my whole heart . down to the very 
bottom." 

She looked up now, and fixing her clear gray 
eyes upon his &cq, added, after a pause, "You 
must never doubt me after that." 

And he took her to his heart, and kissed her 
in rapturous fondness, and swore that he never 
would. 

After all, he toaa a jealous fool, and she was an 
angel, . ^but it was out of the excess of his love 
that he had sinned. 

So the ground was weeded of that noxious plant. 



152 CABB OF CARBLTON. 

and the son shone in npon pleasant garden-places. 
And yet it may be doubted whether a grain of the 
baneful seed had not fallen^ unperceived and far 
out of sights into the womb of that productive 
soiL 



153 



CHAPTER V. 

. 01 

Thk strong man^ whose life had seemed so spe- 
cially guarded through the perils of battle, had 
been struck down at last, by the unerring hand of 
Nature. Long-continued excitement telling alike 
on mind and body . both had suddenly given way, 
and a brain fever of the most alarming complexion 
was the restdt 

The violence of the disorder was now abated : 
the fierceness of delirious raving had been fol- 
lowed by a state of exhaustion, with fitful lapses 
into feverish unconsciousness* To one of these 
Gilda Can* had been witness. The constant 
repetition of her name, the broken and confused 
images of things associated with her, still gave 
evidence at such moments that the darkened mind 
had not yet resumed its empire, though it was 



154 CARR OF GARRLTON. 

struggling towards the light. Like Samson, 
however, there was strength even in its blindness. 
The crushing sarcasms, the bitter reproaches^ 
aimed now at himself, now at others, wliich ran 
throughout his wildest ravings, made the Dalilah 
beside him wince and grow pale. But hers was 
a torment the false Philistine never knew. The 
imagination of the most refined cruelty never 
invented a torture so maddening to a turbulent, 
passionate nature as this: sitting day by day 
beside the oiu object of every tjiought, every hope, 
present "and fixture, and listening to As vehement 
adjurations, the tender pleadings, the unoonfidoos 
cries, of the agonized heart, all . all ibr anofther ! 

She sat there, witii her elbows on her knees, 
hour after hour, gnashing her teeth as tJie hated 
name rose to hb lips, and pressing tjie small, hard 
white knuckles on which her chin rested, till the 
sharp nails entered the flesh. She rose to wipe 
the damp of fever from his brow, to adnnnister die 
draught, or squeeze the pomegranate on lua lips, 
and then she resumed her seat Hour after hour ; 
night succeeding to day ; snatching brief intervak 



VILLA It>SSOMBRONL 165 

of rest, without ondressmg, and then, vi^laut as 
ever, at her post agabk > Her fiuse was somewhat 
white and worn; the short-cot black hair hong 
dank aroimd it: those wondrous midnight eyes 
were surrounded by the ashy lines that mark an 
inward consuming fire. Tet the woman was, 
perhaps, even more striking thus than she had 
ever a^)eared before. Her singularly graceful 
figure, and beautifiilly modelled feet and ancles, 
were seen to advantage in the boy's loose gray 
dress. HJer slender throat risixig firom the folded 
ahirt-collar, and small shell*like ear, showed j:o- 
minently under the short loose locks. Add to this, 
the mystery that surrounded hex, the somewhat 
scornful dignity of her manners, the coolness, at\d 
courage, and dexterity she had displayed, and it 
will be readily xmderstood that not a few hot- 
blooded young Italians would have risked a brain- 
fever to be regarded and tended as Guide now 
was. 

3he was playing a desperate game. Would she 
win or lose ? With regard to her relations with 
Razzi I shall say nothing. It is not my bu^iiess 



156 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

to inquire how far the reproaches of that fiettnitoiis 
youth were justified^ or what measure of fisuth she 
had broken towards him. So much seems certain: 
she had used him as a shield^ or blind^ and now 
she had cast him aside. With regard to Ihat 
oilier, the question was narrowed to this: Would 
gratitude for her unwearying devotion, would 
admiration for her heroic efforts in the great 
national cause, triumph finally ovei^ that puerile 
passion which had wrought such havoc in his life? 
She had heard of men xising from the brink of the 
grave, where, in truth, he had lain for some days, 
in whose thoughts, sympathies, and affections an 
entire revolution had been wrought. Her whole 
life . ^the life of the heart, that is . was bound up 
in this venture. Against the testimony of her 
ears, through all those ravings, she dared to beUeve 
that Guide would rise an altered man. 

He had lain for many hours after that convul- 
sive effort by which he started erect in bed, 
beholding the spectre of his disordered brain 
palpably before him, in a deep, dreamless sleep. 
The doctor had been his round, and pronounced 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 157 

favourably on him: the first and second watch 
were passed. No rest for Sara to-night! her 
neryes were strong to that fine pitch, when all 
idea of sleep is utterly discarded. The tempest 
which had raged in her soul at confronting her 
hated rivsd was hardly yet assuaged ; the sugges- 
tions of a malign)uit vengeance were only stifled 
down, to bide their own bad time. For she 
awaited his waking; she knew he would awake 
to consciousness . to the consciousness of her pre- 
sence ; and in the feverish balance of hopes and 
fears she sat there watching. 

As the golden gray of the smnmer dawn broke, 
he heaved a deep sigh and opened his eyes. They 
opened upon Sara . a strange, wondering look . 
and then >wandered along the crowded pallets of 
the whitewashed ward. Though unconscious and 
perplexed as to where he lay, it was evident the 
fever had left him. The mind was clear, and 
able to admit, and reason upon, ^ every outward 
impression. He lifted his hand to his head as 
though recalling and arranging a long-scattered 
train of thought ; then, after a few minutes' in- 



it 



158 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

tervalj he raked himself a little on Yub elbow and 
regarded Sara steadily and in silence. 

''How long have I been here?" he aaid^ia a 
low but perfectlj- clear voice. 
This is the eighth day." 
I hUvjB been very ill, then? " 

.* Yea have." 

^ And is it you . you who have watched by 
me all this time? I thought . I dreamt . 
that " 

''That an angel of light was beside you; and 
you find an angel of darkness ?" Her lip quivered, 
and she continued, grimly . ^"Yes, Guido Lam- 
berti, it is I who have watched beside yon all 
this tima You camiot deprive me of the satis- 
facti<Hi of having twice saved your life." 

He sank back upon the pillow^ and tsmed 
away his head with a weary sigh. 

'^ It is a very worthless one : of fittle value to 
anybody now." 

" You know that what you say is fiilse I " she 
replied in a tremulous, vdiement veicck ^ Your 
life 18 of value . of inestimable value to one. 



YIIiLA I'OSSOMBRONX. 159 

Lambert] ; else she had not dragged you out of 
the very jaws of death, at her own peril." 

''I am not ungrateful; believe me, I am not 
ungrateful, Sanu I am only sorry that you have 
devoted your dayt and nights to rescuing such 
a life as mine. There are others better worth 
the care, that must have perished for want of it 
meantime.** 

''How many days and nights I have devoted 
to you," said Sara, bitterly; ''plotted, struggled, 
wept for you,' Lamberti, you will never know. 
But you do know that I ask for nothing else tha!h 
to devote all the days and nights of my whole 
life to you,* she continued, impetuously. " I am 
no weak, puling girl : I am a woman ; strong in 
passion . stronger in energy and resolution. Has 
my life lately proved this to you ? Has it proved 
that I am not wholly unworthy of you, and the 
cause for which you fight ? I have cast my lot 
in with the patriots of Italy. My voice has 
roused, my arm . woman as I am . has helped; 
my care has nursed them in sickness. And 
why ? Is it for the sake of Italy ? I care no more 



160 CARB OF GARRLTOK. 

for Italy, except through yon, than I do for 
Austria." 

She was down on her knees by his bed now ; 
and close to the pale emaciated hand that lay 
outside the coverlid her burning lips poured forth 
the long-pent stream of passion. 

'^ I have been ambitious, Gkddo. All my am- 
bition I sacrifice to you; to belong to a poor man; 
to fight and struggle, and work for him. I have 
never known what good was : all my life has 
been disfigured with the early knowledge of sin ; 
you awake in me the consciousness of better things, 
and make me believe in the possibility of an 
altered . a redeemed life. You fill a void in my 
being, which nothing else can filL And thus 
altered . thus purified, I know that my life would 
fill a void in yours ; that I could in reality be 
a help meet for you, Ghiido, which . ^which that 
weak girl ^ 

*^Sara! let me implore you not to continue 
thus! God knows I am sensible of all I owe 
you I You have laid me under a heavy debt of 
gratitude, and it is impossible I can repay your 



VILLA F08S0MBB0NL 161 

self-sacrifices in any other way than in bare 
words. The heart, Sara, is not there. In its 
place is a stone ; no more capable of beating for 
another human being, as it once did, than if it 
were already lying at rest for ever under the 
sod. Better it were sol Italy can spare me; 
her independence is won. My poor mother would 
soon haye joined me; and she is the only creature 
left me to care for on earth.'' 

^^ It is false I " exclaimed Sara, violently, starting 
to her feet " You care for her still . ^for another 
man's wife; for the miserable creature whose name 
has been on your lips all through your delirium I " 

He trembled violently; the weak state he was 
in rendering his agitation quite uncontrollable. 

"What did I say?" he murmured at last. 
** Did any one hear me? Was any one by?" 

In the instant which intervened before she 
replied, she balanced the probable advantages of 
truth and falsehood, and decided promptly in 
favour of the latter. 

"No: the world is still ignorant of the fatal 
secret of your heart. Count LambertL It has 

VOL. IL 11 



102 CAXB OF CAx&crcau 

not conceived it possflile that 70a ranam coU, 
niionehed hj the devotBHi f  woina i wha in 
lisked lier Bfe and sacnafioed ber xcpntatkni ht 
joxL TkB tme motiine f nj' preaoMe boa is 
no fieetet No cue h iBnooent eami^^ flhe ean- 
tisaed, with aameeii^^to aaagine it is {ram pave 
pliikaithn>p7^ or Platanic fidendship, that I knFe 
saccifioed that ^vhioh ia cf saoat Taioe ta m wtmm 
in this world. I have liiniBt jnyacJf -volvatHJljr 
oat .if the pale of societjr* im^ T imoe wuf rt- 
vmrdr 

The rare cambiBBtioa of a inolent xataxt with 
I3ie moat conanmmate art, made it difficdtt at tiaBea 
to aay how far fiara was carried mkaj hy i9ie 
impetiB of her realty atrcmg fealingt, or hawitr 
she merely simidated ia be sa In ibe py a a i ait in- 
stance the procid sensitiYe Yoioe^ with ifts loaicb of 
reproachfol aoom, anight be a ananageagent of 
natural resonrceB . a leeeping of Ibe feeiEnga neB 
tfi hand, so to qpeak, wbkb vcaa cakailjAad wilh 
the most artistic knowledge of effiscL But aaadj 
flieie was aomsthing also real and deep. 

An ezpreisian of sharp pain crosaad the jomag 



VILLA WtOBBOim^aXL 163 

man's farow^ and he flushed up to 4he Tary ienxples 
ere he areplied slowly . 

*^ Pardon me : if your name has been conpM 
wifh anyone's^ it is rather with Gii^o Bazsi's. I 
know he loves you. I believed^ as I fiiippQ6e>etheiB 
did, that.it was for .his sake you " 

" His sake ! " she broke into a scomfiil laugh. 
** That idiotJKazzTs? Am I awximan likely io he 
captivated by a pair of sleek momtaches ? Lmade 
use of him, as I would hkve done txf Any other 
fool ; and he deluded himself in the belief JI should 
one day marry him. In my moot abject moments 
I never contemplated the possibility of it, though a 
friendless nnroman . an oifaenttirMs. ris often driven 
to such a deed for the shelter of a lespeotable 
name. God knows to whacfc I may itwt he drii^eii,'' 
she added with a bmfst of natural feeling, '^ .when 
the only honest passion Qn^twhioh I anchored Js cut 
awjr!* 

^ Yon have deceived an honest man, which :no 
honest passion 'should induce a woman to .dpb".he 
replied coldly. ^ I fear you are ambitions.; that 
you will seek higher game than poor Razzi, and 

11. a 



164 CABR OF CABRLTOK. 

fling it away when snared like him, if it is to serve 
jour own ends. Listen to me. As yea hope for 
peace here and hereafter, neither seek nor accept 
the love yon cannot return. You haye great ^fts 
to attract men, great powers to influ^ice them for 
good or eviL Beware how you exercise these.** 
He paused for a moment; then went on with 
remarkable distinctness, though his voice had 
waxed very weak: '^As for myself, I will not 
let you deceive yourself, even though you think 
me cruel or ungratefoL My heart cannot warm 
to you or any other woman again. Its fire is 
burnt out . dead. Do not think to rekindle it 
Our natures are very widely different, Sara. Our 
union could never be blest. You will wake up 
firom this infiituation : but let me be your JriauL 
Think of me as such, and I will try and prove so 
in reality. You fancy I can exercise a beneficial 
influence on you? Let me do so in that character^ 
if I can. You are steering in dangerous courses. 
Let me prove that I am not unmindful of your 
generous devotion by endeavouring to guide and 
save you 1 ** 



VILLA FOSSOICBRONI. 165 

A torrent. of passionate tears burst from the 
unhappy woman, and she sank down by the bed 
again, hiding her face in her quiyering hands. 
Then, starting up, she dashed away the scalding 
drops, and in a tremulous voice that seethed out 
from the raging fire within, she said, . 

'' I will foUovo you, Guido Lamberti, till I die! 
Though I may seem\o forget the one object of my 
life . ^mark me . ^I never shall 1 never forget nor 
turn away from it, I may fisJl lower and lower . 
the little good left in me may die out quite, but in 
this I tell you there will be no change. Tour offer 
of a cold friendship I reject; your counsel I 
deride ; but you do not know me yet No I You 
shall find there was sterner stuff here than you 
thought for, before we both die. There is no 
* waking up ' for me to any other knowledge of my 
own heart than as it now is. I see myself with 
hideous distinctness . all the deformity ungraced 
by anything save love : and that love you cast back 
upon me . ^to correde and 'eat out my very vitals. 
Would to God it would turn to hatred! but 
towards you it never will I Twice I have saved 



166 CABSL OF CABBI.XOISr. 

yonr life^-itiB a hitter saiu&edim. anil may yet 
livB to do Ba ifgnm. I dudl; watdL joa at a du- 
tanoBi oD atr lont nBeen r Isnt I* shall ncra lose 
8ighio jFoa; and-iaany tajjPiDgjimciDieoC joar 
life^. ivtt' aiiaUi again meet. This ahafl be fte 
Tengeance e the woman joa dewpmAr ^^ 
Lambectr^V " 

He was toa weak to> utter; and* wilhoat asodier 
word flhe tnnied aside andhtirrisd finomlliewaii 

'' Qh/ she mottered to herself, as Ab naked 
into the slveet,.and' tearing open her collar^ btfcd 
hw stifling bosom to the pore morning aIl^. ^oh! 
but* there is another vengeance, leas mild but do 
less swe^ I He worships her still I and she woold 
eome and nnsse him, and drink in die hUffCJ of 
his ravings, wonid she ? The compact between us 
is. broken ! ^ 



n 



167 



I 



CHAPTER VI. 



..... 



The Villa. Fesfloniibroni stood an. a hill oiir 
agaioBt. the pleasant Lake of Gtazdo. It m^it 
be a. mile to the water's edge- . moxe or leanf. 
ihvoogh. flie interreBing vineyards^ the groves of 
maibeny and lemon; but an acrow^ shot finim 
the tarraee, vmdd probably readi the same 
point in half the distance. Upon the- otifeer side 
the stQny,^ doatj road crawled np the back of 
the hiU, describliig nany a tortoous: bend whtdi, 
bj a cnrious fiumkyv while ihey donbled tbe 
length of t&e ascen^ seemed in nowise to 
diminiidi its Bteq>ise9s. Tins nad^ which was 
litde better than a. waterconrse in winter, only 
led to ihe icHIa and i\ foMma. It was never 
mendedu OccagbnaBy a great stone waa bron^t 
to fiU some lidi^ which tfareateaed to n^et &e 



168 GARB OF CAKBLTOX. 

Tine-dresser's cart: bot the noble owner of the 
villa was too poor or too careless about it, to 
think of mending his own road. The few weeks 
of the Yilleggiatora spent here was all he saw 
of his property during the year; and probably 
even then he never traversed this road firom the 
day his rickety veUurino toOed np ike weaiy 
ascenf to the day when he stepped into that 
same conveyance again on his way back to Mllaa. 
He sat, no doubt, with hermetically sealed 
windows during the greater part of the ^aiiog 
summer day, playing at dominoes with a friend 
and smoking his cigar, very much as he might 
have done in his cafi at Milan; and, in the 
evening, instead of the Se(da or the Cireolo, there 
was the sail upon the lake, or a languid stroll 
through the vineyard. Gould the state of the 
road be of material importance to him ? 

Nor were the villa and its dependencies muck 
better cared for thaia the road. Nothing could 
be less like the generally oonceived idea of an 

Italian villa. A square pink building, pierced at 

.. 

irregular ij&tervals with eyelet-holes of windows, 



^T 



r 



VILLA rOSSOMBRONL 169 

and having a loggia or covered terrace ranning 
round two ^ides of it Shade there was none; 
garden there was none. The dusty vines came 
up quite close to the hotise on three sides: on 
the fourth there was a small plot of sunburnt 
grass^ with a few oleanders and oranges in square 
green boxes, and one very old olive. This tree, . 
the only one of any size for half a mile round, . 
was probably the last remaining of a grove 
that had beeiL cut down to make room for the 
vines and dwarfed mulberries. It grew so close 
to the house that the shadow of its fantastically 
twisted limbs, laden with silvery-green fringes, 
chequered in tremulous blue mosaic the white 
pavement of the loggia. As a companion to this 
solitary and venerable reUc of a past day, one 
desolate peacock, with an habitual air of moulting 
about his rusty plumage, kept sentinel on the 
terrace, as the walk on this side of the house 
was called. He was of a speculative turn of 
mind, this grim old* retainer of the Fossombroni. 
Standing on one leg, his head inclined on the 
same side, with a curious, puzzled look, he stood 



170 GitBE OF CAXBLYOSf. 

a tihe wimbw- aifti and peered at llie oeenqpaHis 
of ibe iDomrwiiihiiiy inaimderiB^ no doubt, after 
die manner af' old* decayed aBTYante^ an tiia 
dumg^He lud ^eiL in Ms time 

Bayoad tiiia tervac^ the ^viueyHvub, and lemon-* 
gandanai, and. fielda a nnriae or bnak-wlMaty 
bordesed with lowa af tfaick-feav^d paHavd wboL- 
becries, stietdied awaj over nndalatmg dopes 
down to the wator's edge. The kke^ cfcr 
var7ing.eTer heantifal, at dawn or eve^in ^tona 
or ahine, whedker taking tke folded hilb like a 
mothtf to ita bosom^ or thmuting them) bade io 
the hot fi^it of noon with its^ argoit shield^ tn- 
dimmed by dint or tAadow . &e lake, backed by 
a distant amphitheatre of Alpa^ was the one object 
af attraction to the Villa FosBomfaronL Ls 
foBBtoria . Ae' moat miporiant building on aodi a 
property aa this in Italy . was & separate and 
anbstantial honaej m far better order hi aU 
xespeata Aas Ac TiUa it8el lilot only was the 
wine^ made haoe, the flax dried, the lemona and 
lanrodi^enrira gathered in, bnt one, the laigest and 
airiest Boomy waa entirely devoted to the: 



VILLA TOSSOUBBOBL 171 

of aQlD-woniiB^ tiie ecdture of which: is navit Ae 
most ^ lucrative branchi of HombHrd indintrj; 
SurronndSag the faUtma was a small fannjaBcL 
The community of pijga and fiiwls^ fliongh' a poor 
one, dwelt tbgether in a lively conteatment, which 
contrasted strongly with the dignified but de- 
pressed deportment of that solitary peacock who 
formed ilie entire Bve stock of the villa. Nor 
was' the difference of the two interiors less 
strongly marked . ^the active, industrial life of 
the ftictor's dVvellihg, with the silence and stagna- 
tion of that more pretentious one^ where no life 
was. The rooms were Targe and lofty, and there 
were plenty of Ihem. This was all that could 
Be said. They were utterly bare of ftimiture' . 
as we understand that term . curtaihless, carpet>- 
less, comfortless throughout There* was a few 
rickety chairs and tables, bedis and commod'es^ 
with one very hard settee in the saloon . so hard^ 
eold, and slippery, indeed, that it was like getting 
upon a frozen sea. On the other hand some 
fine Majolica plates, a small bronze fountain by 
John of Bologna, and a folding screen covered 



172 CARB OF CABBLYON. 

with extraordinarily coarse caricatures bdonging 
to a day which is happily past, were the in- 
congraous adornment of the aforesaid saloon. I 
must not forget a wiry old piano^ and a bagatelle 
board . ^this last novelty^ being the sole addition 
made by the present proprietor to his country 
residence. 

It was late on a rainy afternoon when Carr 
Wi^ed up the hill I have described, alongside 
' the-vetturino in which the two ladies were seated. 
Heavy clouds drowned the distant landscape, 
as they do even in Italy at times, particularly in 
mountainous districts. There could hardly have 
been a less favourable moment for the '^ first 
impression " of Carres summer residence. Robbed 
of its one attraction, the glorious panorama before 
it, nothing, certainly, could well look more 
cheerless and uninviting than the villa did. The 
Englishman's philosophy, which had been oozing 
out of him for the last half-hour, was wholly 
I exhausted when he crossed the threshold, and 

entering the saloon, gazed ruefully round him. 
''Impossible to remain here I We should die 



VILLA TOSSOMBBONL 173 

of it in a week. Confound the fellow's lying 
impudence I . ^talking of this barrack as ' un vera 
paradiao.^ Did you ever see such an abomination 
of desolation?" 

'* Oh, dear, yes, Laurence," said his wife, cheer- 
fully. ** I have seen many much worse, which, 
with a little arrangement, and by dint of living 
in, have grown to look very different I don't 
think when the sun' shines this will really be at 
all ugly . large cool I'ooms : and see there ! under 
that loggia, I am sure one has a charming view." 

''Oh, charming I vines diversified by mul- 
berries ; that was all I saw on the road up." 

'' Well, dear, it's a paradise in one thing, at all 
events," said his wife cheerfully again ; '' there's 
no forbidden fruit" 

But he wouldn't laugh. 

''I wonder what people in England would 
think of my sanity in coming to this wretched^ 
hole to pass the summer ? As to my mother " 

He seldom or never made an allusion to her ; 
and the fact that he did so now indicated that 
he was unusually out of sorts. He turned 



174 CABR OF ^AHBLXOar. 

abrnptlj away without oondudiiig his sentoDce, 
and walked drearify throngh the TBmaining Mfmair 
ments, wiih his hands throst deep iiitD his paletot 
pockets* 

Gilda and her mother^ meantime^ busied diem- 
selves^ as women onljr do under sach circnm- 
stanoes^ in unpacking and assisttng in tlie jiixa^ge- 
ment of their bedrooms^ and instmctiiig die t?Fo 
women whom the fattore had engaged to do ihe 
honsework in the mysteries ^of making a bed 
in the English fashion. !Fnrdiennore-^Giiiaqipe 
being occupied in the primary duty of impaddng 
his master's shirts, and endeavouring te ixam 
them into drawers which manifestly never ttonid 
contain them. Oilda was shortly afterwards to 
be seen in the kitchen, teaching ifae ttwo ^ood* 
humoured, laughing peasant-woman how to pre- 
pare the tea-service. * One of them had <carefiilly 
poured all the boiling vrater into the elop-baain, 
into which she had apparently some vagoe inten- 
tion of inAniDg the leafves. An 'ewer iufl t -vSk 
had undergone as wdSi the unneeessary pn^Moa- 
fion of boSing ; :biit this was easily lanediedfrom 



ynXA POSSOMBBCXSO. 175 

&e \&am hard by. Tizomphingy in shorty over 
all her difficnltiefi, Gilda at laat ea^ (her tear 

table properly laid out and served; and when 

 

Carr entered the room a few minittBB later^ the 
snowy doth and hissing kettle under tiie laimp- 
lighty with chairs drawn Tonnd it, had an air of 
comfort which surprised him. His goed hnmonr, 
which waa never ruffled for very long, was now 
completely restored ; and though not much more 
disposed to look hopefully at the aspect of ihings, 
he was more disposed to lau^ at it 

^ There is no ohanoe of one's being over- 
whelmed with society here, certainly, unless it 
be ihfi Austrians down yonder; but they appar 
rently have already paid this yiUa a ^it. *and 
sacked it They'JQ hardly find it ivorth their 
while io come again, so we shall not 'Cven have 
that little excitement What a profoundly dismal 
abode] though yon have managed to make this 
room look ahmti comfortable, Gilda. I suppose 
with one's boidcB and paintings one will puU 
through, somehow or other '; bat really when you 
and I have been here fifty days, I thiak we shall 



176 CARE OF CARRLYON. 

deserve the flitch of bacon, much more tban by 
liTing fifty years among the pomps and yamties 
of a wicked world.** 

'' Yon forget that the wicked world is coming 
to us before many of the fifty days have dapsed. 
The marchesa is coming to her annt's, whose 
villa she says you see upon the lake from this.** 

'^ I don't envy her the view she has in retom, 
then." He laughed; then added more gravely, 
^' I do not know that the marchesa's is the society 
I should wish you to see too much of, Gilda. 
She is a pleasant, amusing, generous-hearted 
creature; but a woman who, from whatever 
circumstances, has lost all self-respect, is never 
a very desirable companion, . don't you agree 
with me, Mrs. Courteney ? Good heav^is ! you 
look very pale. Are you ill ? The journey has 
been to much for you." 

*'No; it is nothing; it is past I know too 

little of Madame Onofrio to judge her. I suppose 

* 

you are right But you would make a distinction, 
Laurence, would you not, between a presoit and 
a past life ? If . if she were repentant yon would 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 177 

not think her past contamiuating for ever and 
erer, would you?'' 

''Wellj no; not exactly: Fm not so strait* 
laced as all that Still I think one's wife may 
be just as well without too intimate association 
with those sort of ladies. If one's not yery 
particular," he continued, didactically, '^ there is 
no knowing when one wiU stop. Not that this 
has anything to do with the marchesa, who is no 
Magdalene, but a woman with strong feelings, 
who has been driven by an unhappy marriage 
into a groove where old age will suddenly over* 
take her; and then she will be reconciled with 
the Church, and take to making her salvation." 

" You have no faith, then, in the repentance of 
middle age?" said Mrs. Courteney, sorrow- 
fully. 

*' God forbid that I should judge any one I But 
those who only repent when the capacity or oppor- 
tunity of sinning fails them haven't much merit, 
I should think." 

''I didn't think it was a question of merit 
either way," said Gilda, quietly; ''but none of 

VOL. IL 12 



178 CASK OX* GABBLTOST. 

Oia labonregB wene egdodyiy Lausence^ evtn at 
the eleventh hour^ remember." 

*' I alwaya considered those who had bonie the 
hnsden and heat of the daj very unfiurly trotod, 
nevertheless. If there ia to be no distinatieii 
between^ a pure life and a taidy repentance ^ 



wife had risen, and come round tO' where 
he was sitting. Aa^ she leant aTr and kissed bis 
fiadrdieadr she whispered;?. 

''Don't say aivfthing more. I think it dis- 
teesBes. mamma->^rhaps: on. anntmn^ of pepa^-I 
diaa'b knew.." 

And so Garr aixmptly changed the convenaiioii} 
and die maiohesa's name wav not mentioned agsffi 
tfaa(fe. evening; 



17 



I 



CHAPTER yiL 

101 

'' WsllI By Jeire! that is a stmming ykm, I 
rniMt coafos I Come han, Gilda, and look out 
Look at that'Cnrtaia. of clouds sbwljr driftixig off 
those distant momitaiiiw. And how wonderfaUy 
freah and briUiant eyerything is after yesterday's 
rain I The lights and shadows oa the waters^ 
dear* and erisj^ as if they'd beei^ dashed in by 
Hasdiagl" 
*^ What a compliment to natora ! " lauj^ed 

Gilda.. 

*' I long to> tcy my hand at it The white sails 
of that fdoeca yonder^ lika wings^ ripj^g tbe 
water: and tlie early bine mista Ijing ia the 
hoHoiwa oat thev^ where' tha son has not yet 
readied. How eapitsdly it wonld paint I Even 
that Sxegmaad, whidk I thought so monotonoiia 

12. s 



180 CABR OF CABRLYON. 

last nighty has a great deal of character. The 
tangled lemon-grove, and pergola of vines, with 
the wild Indian com and fig-tree straggling up 
here and there : something might be made of it 
I shall paint jon, Oilda, sitting upon that low 
wall^ and the peacock beside you, just for a bit 
of colonr,** 

''Thank jou; I am too much flattered. And 
now, perhaps, you will allow me to finish dresang." 

She ran away ; while he still leant oat in his 
dressing-gowTi, painting imaginary pictores, and 
thinking that after all the Villa Fossomhrani was 
not half snch a bad place as he had fancied. 
After breakfast Gilda exercised her ingenuity in 
trying to render the saloon a little more conifii- 

able. She routed out two large pieces of &ded 
tapestry &om a lumber-room, where they were 
rolled up, and spread them in the centre of the 
floor. She disturbed the synunetrical arrange- 
ment of chair and table, and disposed them 
according to her own ideas. She plucked a few 
tendrils of vine to furnish the large Miyolica jars; 
she improvised some muslin blinds for the windows; 



VnXA FOSSOMBRONL 181 

and finally, by a judicious disorder of books and 
work^ Bhe showed herself a mistress in the womanly 
art of making a cheerless room assume something 
of a home-aspect 

Carr's pleased surprise when he entered the 
room more than repaid his wife. 

^' Well/ he said; ^'I shall not in future refuse 
to believe the stories of Indian magicians making 
pineapples and fruit-trees grow up out of the 
bare boards. How on earth have you managed 
to turn the barrack I saw last night into a habit- 
able room ? ** 

'' Living in Italy teaches one all sorts of shifts 
and contrivances in this way," she said, smiling. 
'* It also teaches one to make the best of whatever 
one has, and not to be discouraged by first im- 
pressions . which some people I know are apt 
to be.'' 

''I was not discouraged by the first impression 
I received some eight months ago, during a certain 
vesper service at San Petronio, Mrs. Impertinence ; 
and I rather think I do make the best of what 
I have got" 



182 CAB& 01* GAXKLXOfiT. 

^' Am jou sore of iihat? * 

ISme plajfhllj skkmiahiog, as ht fg epMed Us 
paktte aad easeU vbile Jus wife flitted to nd 
firo upon household cares intent. Our Amid die 
iBOimiDg glide rapidlj by. His meEcnrial ifirit 
rose with the sunshine, as mpidl j as It lad baoi 
depiressed wjlih the pettjr annojattces of ihe pre- 
Tions mghL Neither eare nor .mpiciaH jwac at 
hand to east their haneM shadows tm hia jpaiL 
His income and ezpeDditniie woold soon wiui w ei 
their pcoper balance in a &w maotha qmadj 
spent here. Meantime he would reaBj- wack 
hard at his paintings which, from ane -eanae or 
another, he had wft jet done ainee he came to 

Shall it be held fair and haaeuiaUe to tcy 
and penetrate he yonng wife's fedlings thai aane 
morning, which was destined to be the boundarj 
between two epodia of her manied iife ? Tbere 
can Bcarceljbe a doubt that any illusion whidi had 
surrounded Garr was by this tiaK diapoBed. Ss 
weaknesses were not those of a vigorms or laqga 
mind ; his very brilliancy was of that 



VILLA I*0680MBB0in. 1^3 

water whidi becomes somewhat dim in the eYerj^ 
day 'fire-*Iight of home. Biis love soflRszed no 
diminntioD^ bat it was likely to Obe of a jealous, 
perhaps even tyrannicalj natore. And jet^ para- 
doxical as it may seem, her feeUng for her husband 
was &r truer and stronger than it had 'been when 
she married. That step onoe taken, she shut her 
eyes resolntely to the pa^; and tamed her 
thoughts ^edly npon the foture she had accepted. 
She instinctively felt the <danger of neglecting 
such a coarse ; and under Ibat ^et demeanour 
was a strength of purpose which, perhaps, even 
her own mother did not fully Teoognize. A 
strength, differing from Sara Griabome' in this, 
that it was neither passionale nor spasmodic, ' 
capable of no heroic colour, and only apparent, 
indeed, on xdose inspection, and ui certain 'times ; 
so that not even those who lived with her . 'least 
of all her liusband . were aware cf tins hiddea 
fioroe. If she had not succeeded in rooting up, 
she had at least cut down to the very roots, the 
strong broad-leafidd passion of her gidhood. Beside 
it . not in its place. had grown ttp a 'sknder 



184 ^CABB OF CABBLTON. 



sapling, whose brandies as yet, indeed^ afforded 
little shade, bat round which she clung and twined 
herself, resolved to find there both shadow and 
support This feeling was, no doubts fostered by 
the nature of Carres love for her. Exacting as 
was the form in which this was sometimes shown, 
she found herself to be of hourly importance to 
his happiness; and this, in any woman's eyes, 
covers a multitude of sins. He was no hero: 
but he had some generous qualities, and many 
foibles. She saw how early education had choked 
the former, and developed the latter. She ML 
with a woman's instinct the necessity of studying 
to counterbalance this pernicious influence. As 
Lady Carrlyon, without undue exaggeratioo, 
might have passed for the evil spirit of his youth, 
so here was his good angel, struggling to regain 
possession of the man. And in this struggle the 
gentle, tender-hearted girl grew day by day into 
the true wife, consecrating all her thoughts unto 
her husband. He did not come between her and 
that impossible dream of the past, which was pat 
out of sight . ^and for ever ; for that belonged to 



VILLA rOSSOMBRONL 185 

an ideal worlds and this was the world cf fact 
in whicb she was living. She had grown into 
a tacit acceptance of the belief that such dreams 
are never realized ; that thej only gild the morning 
of girlhood, and melt away into the sober realities 
of the afternoon. 

She had attained to this frame of mind, after 
six months of married life, when she fonnd Gxddo 
Lamberti in the hospital at Peschiera. The night 
that followed that meeting was a miserable one. 
Ever present to her mind was Ae image of the 
fevered man, calUng upon her again and again 
in his ravings. In the knowledge thus gained 
she had at first (alas! for the strength of all 
mere hnman effort) felt an irrepressible joy. He 
loved her, then I he had always loved her I Bi;t 
the natural reaction came ; she started back horror- 
stricken to find that&e past was not as completely 
effaced from her heart as she had believed. Carr's 
jealous suspicions aggravated her misery; yet they 
were, perhaps, fortunately timed in rousing her 
to the very present work her hands had to do. 
She passed a miserable night, but she rose calmer 



186 GAKK GF CABBLTOK. 

and stronger from ilie oonfiict.' She looked verj 
pale and tired doruig the joumej, ndUch cficHad 
from Carr the remark that lioqikil tipork wmdi 
eiridently never agree 'with lier. He ^wam not 
otherwise than kind in his manner; (but his^wiTcfc 
appearance seemed to annoy, and inrhaps even 
more han the weather contxibnled to d^Rss 
him* In proportion as his spirits Sall^ homever, 
she exerted hecseilf to rotee and cheer her Im- 
band : we have seen to wdiat effect If it be xsked, 
after this^ wheflier she was happy, I .ae& vuij 
beg ithe reader to decide tiie question &r himadf 
ont of bk own conscionaness, and aceordiiig io his 
belief in the tamount of contentment &at attends 
such efforts as itars. 

The post came in Ae afternoon* Theif were 
taking their coffse in the loggia, when -dbn bag 
was brought to Carr, and he itore open ifae aingle 
letter it contained. 

^ Confound it I '^ he exclaimed. -^ Mj mether's 
coming here I ^ 

*' Ladj Carrlyan ? " said both ladies in a bxeafth. 

^ Yes I ^ replied the son, with an eg p ceasion f 



VILIiA FOSSOMHRONL 167 

conntenaace not flattesiqg to hev ladjalhip. '' She'ji 
at Baden with my father^ who hag been ordeved 
theire^ and so ahe thinks it hsl pify not Ao 'take 
advantage of being so near me to cooas tibe Alpa, 
she says. Heaven knows what she is to do heorel 
shell be' bored to deatL I would tG{> her 
if I could^ bat it's too ilale* she is cm ber load. 
Dated ihe second^ I see^ .and this is ithe .dighth. 
These 'CoofiDrand^ posts have been 'delajedo I 
suppose, fimm ihe fitate of ttungs ihesre." 

^ Wlien do jou tibink she can .axrivn? " ad;ed 
Mrs. Oourteney. 

Carr referred to his letter. 

^ She expects to be at Como JtoHBUMrrow^ and wiU 
write to me from there; but says ihere is no 
use ia my gomg to meet her, as E(he is unoertain 
about her route, which wiU depeud on the state 
of the country^ She is immensely plndky, yon 
know, and not tamed aside by a trifle; so hayiqg 
made np her mind to .oome . come -she wilL 
Keverihfiless, she hasn't :much idea of rongUng 
it; shell mover stand the life hnre: and ^heii 
the worst of it is, she is such a trem^idow 



188 CABR OF CAKBliTON. 

Austrian I I shall have no peace on account of 
mj Italian sympathies^ whicli you have infected 
me with, Gilda. The best, the cnh/ good thing 
about her coming is" (he looked with a satisfied 
smile towards his wife) ''that it shows, I think, 
she wants to know jon, to greet my wife, meffUo 
tardi che mat, as a danghter." 

Gilda did not appear as mnch exhilarated bjr 
this Tiew of the case as might have been desired. 
She had always regarded the idea of her mother- 
in-law with profound awe ; she could hardly tell 
why, unless from Carr's cautious silence hiflieito 
on the subject The intimation of Lady Canv 
lyon's soon becoming an inmate of the villa fell 
on her like a dead-wdght; it was more than 
the prospect of present discomfort or annoyance; 
it was a presentiment of future evils, vague 
and undefined. As to Mrs. Courteney, it was 
easy to see that some acute trouble weighed 
upon her, of which jshe struggled to unburden 
herself in word^. At length, after a pause of 
some minutes, she found strength and voice enough 
to say : . 



VILLA f OSSOMBfiONL 189 

" This most make a change^ my dear Laurence^ 
in our plans." 

" A change ? What do you mean ? " 

'' As Lady Carrlyon is coming, it is better on 
all accounts I should leave you." 

'^ Nonsense ! Do you suppose I should allow her 
to turn you out? If my mother comes, she must 
take us as we are; I have no idea of any change." 

<< Believe me, Laurence, it is better so. I 
know your kind nature and all it suggests; but 
in Gilda's interest, even more than your own, I 
must beg you to consent to this. Tou see your 
mother has a prejudice . ^not imnatural, I dare 
say . against the yoxmg wife she has never seen, 
and only heard of through your report. She is , 
coming here, I hope, to conquer this; but we 
shall double the difficulties she encounters by my 
remaining. I have seen more of the world than 
you have, Laurence^ long, very long ago, that 
is to say. I know that a wife may often over- 
come prejudice when her family are not tolerated. 
Lady Carrlyon will say you have saddled yourself 
with ao imreasonable burden in having your 



IM CiiUt OF GJUIBLTOR 

wilb'a matheir to* liv widt jov; and I ann afraid 
her heart may be hardened still more ^gnmt mj 
child^ in conseqfuence;'* 

'^ My* dear Mra Conrteney;" said Gorr, laktng 
her hand, ^' oblige me hj sayiag no moTe mr this 
aubjeetu 1 VKfcld not fi>r the world aHow my 
modieir ix> sn^iposo 70a had left ns oa h&r aecoant 
AJln w ine tD< tnidentand hrarcfaaxacteFbettttir Am 
70a possibly can^ One anut be fern,. ^/Emi^irith 
her; tHatiBthe thiagr I hora* taibsn my poshiiiB 
widL HgEdtjr, I flatter mjBd^ in the aEur of my 
marriage, and I aminoft gdag to yield an mek, I 
didn't inidte my mntiier hers; If she. Gomes, as 
I hope andbditeve, kindly du^ased towards GiUa, 
she will not^ she mighi nolv to find it diAcolfe ts 
acc^ your pmenee;: and I diall let her aas at 
once'tha; positiaip it is my iwtontion lAatyoashoiili 
always, hold among xaJ^ 

Tha; tears had been silently atceammg donm Us 
wife's fiM; She bmshed iiheBi hurriedly away, 
aodkiflMd him with treaUs^ltps*. Qne^agam, 
and fiir tba Inat tima, Mrsi. Gaocteaey raised ker 
.oiee ia mo^ailiiig ramonstransep-^ 



VOB^QMBBjmL 191 

'^FoB Qfidlsi sake, dan-t kt me bft the cause of 
aB7 BBBimderstfliidbig between youiself and your 
mother! Better, a diomsand times^. that we d^uld 
not meetf again, than, that this, should be the caae; 
My child and I can\ never havj any diflbrence of 
ftding,. tlkiiugh we should be sepajmited for . a long^ 
lory tima Her finit duty now is towards you 
and youv fiunily^ I mustn't come in> the way r I 
mustn't^ indfittdy Lamence. Let me go* Coorteney, 
almost with hi8> dying bireaifch told me^ . ^warned 
me*" 

Thar poor lady stopped short, and praased her 
hand te Iier heart ;* while the same ^lastly pallor, 
which always accompanied any violent exaitement, 
ovenqpread her fiice, and her respiration seemed 
snapoidedi. In. a moment .lild was at her 
motbev's side. Erom a knowledge of the* nature 
of thesw attadra, which, had at one time been 
more frefaeat. tfaanolate, she had learnt how to 
treat them; and in a few minntes Mrs. Courteney, 
thoa^ stitt pale aad eshaiasted, was breatfaing 
tranquilly im hr danghterV amiB. Carr, with all 
a man/ s hopelessnesff on- such occasions^ stood by^ 



192 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

and held a bottle of camphor. Of coune no more 
was said then npon the subject, the diwcnmon of 
which had agitated Mrs. Courtenej so greaflj; 
but Carr was fiirther than ever firom yielding his 
point To do him strict jastice^ there was some- 
thing of a chivalrous feeling in this^ added to the 
inherent obstinacy of his character; he had a 
kindly hearty and the notion of turning lln. 
Courteney adrifti because his mother was an 
impertinent woman of ftshion^ was utterly abhor- 
rent to him. As to whether the opposite coune 
was to tend to the happiness of any one conceined, 
or^ with respect to the wisdom of conciliating Lady 
Carrlyon by degrees^ Carr would not so much 
as entertain these considerations for a moment 
Whether rightly or wrongly^ he chose to consider 
that ^'a pi^inciple** was at stake; and^ perhaps, 
because his capital in this stock was slender, he 
made a great deal of it^ and would have died 
rather than give it up. 

To his wifoj Carr's inflesdble resolve was the 
only consolation^ at a moment when her heart felt 
very heavy. She realized^ for the first time^ her 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 193 

position in ber basband*s family. He bad been so 
careful in keeping tbis disagreeable subject out of 
sigbt as mucb as possible^ that she only knew the 
fact of bis relations with bis family^ after a short 
interruption^ having been resumed: which had 
given ber^ I believe^ greater pleasure than himself. 
He never spoke of the letters he received from 
home ; read no extracts ; transmitted no meaning- 
less conventional messages to his young wife; 
observed^ in shorty an almost absolute silence on 
the subject It occurred to ber sometimes as a 
strange and formal state of things; a tie^ bounds 
apparently^ by little love or thought or interest 
on either side. Of Lady Carrlyon^ as I have said^ 
she had formed an idea on very slender premises. 
She could not think that the mother cared much 
for her son ; and the father regarded him and his 
marriage with an equally superb indifference^ 
probably. She was sorry ; but then Carr did not 
seem to care; and it never occurred to her as 
something which vitally concerned herself. Now 
it didj however : now it dawned on her^ with ever- 
increasing distinctness^ that her marriage was the 
VOL. n. 13 



194 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

great barrier which had ris^i np betweoi Gair 
and his parents. Her mother's feara, and Can's 
rejoinders, opened her eyes to the tmtL Heaven 
help her if she were to find antagonism and enmitj 
in the new home! She dang to the gentle 
mother who had presided over the old one more 
closely than ever. 

So Mrs. Conrteney was to remain. Her 
daughter told her next morning how griered 
Carr would be if she broached the subject 
again ; and when, contrary to her better judg- 
ment, the poor lady yielded, her only cranfort 
was in the look of radiant thankfulness that 
beamed in Gilda's eyes. 

That same morning the news of the fidl of 
Yicenza arrived. It was the first serious reverse 
the patriots had met with: and it changed thdr 
note of triumph into one of consternation* Flying 
rumours of all kinds reached the villa during 
the day; and our English fiiends, in spite of 
family anxieties, chafed and lamented over the 
dimmed prospects of the Italian National Cause. 



195 



CHAPTER VIII. 

LoBD Cabbltok's gout was the ostensible reason 
that the shatters in Belgrave Square were closed^ 
and the world of routs and revels deprived of 
the light of her ladyship's countenance. I don't 
know whether any one actually weat the length 
of believing that she was a devoted wife. I 
rather think it was pretty generally looked 
upon that a tightness in the money market was 
the secret motive-power in this edifying spectacle 
of conjugal unity. 

However this might be^ there was probably 
another and still more powerful argument^ which 
induced Lady Carrlyon to expatriate hersdf for a 
timej under the pleasing subterfuge of attendance 
on bei^ lord. What this was we may by-and-by 
see ; if, indeed, it were reaUy capable of making 

13.2 



196 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

her undertake a tedious and most uncomfortable 
jonmej into Italy at this hot season (not free 
from all risk of personal danger^ moreoyer)^ after 
depositing her gouty peer in the hot waters of 
Wiesbaden. She could not fail to meet with 
obstructions and annoyances on her road; 
but among her ladyship's failings she was not 
justly to be charged with weak nerves. She 
had an almost unbounded belief ui her '* position" 
carrying her through everything. In this she 
was so far justified on the present occasion, that 
every facility had been afforded her by all sorts 
of ministers and men of influence to prosecute 
her journey. Her writingK^ase was stuffed with 
letters to ambassadors and generals, reconunend- 
ing the distinguished lady to their special care. 
Her sympathies being wholly Austrian, she had 
felt some reluctance in carrying any credentials 
to the rebel camp, as she considered Charles 
Albert's. But prudential motives prevailed. It 
was pointed out that without some such counter- 
poise, the Austrian <K)rrespondence . innocuous as 
it was . ^which she carried, might bring her into 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 197 

serious difficulty. She might be seized by the 
Italians as a spy. So she was armed with 
letters of safe conduct from both parties; and 
though stopped twenty times each day^ and 
suffering unavoidable delays, these letters stood 
her in good stead. When politely requested to 
descend from her carriage at the Sardinian 
outposts, she showed at the window a letter to 
the Duke of Genoa, and desired with a lofty 
urbanity to speak with the officer in command. 
Her arguments proved so conclusive to that 
individual,, that it was no longer a question of 
searching her carriage, or obstructing her progress, 
but of affording her every facility and attention. 

In traversing the Austrian lines, it *was the 
same game, only played with more cordiality; 
and here she generally indulged in an animated 
political chat with the white-coated blond- 
moustached heroes, who came clanking their 
swords up to the carriage*door, and raising two 
wooden fingers to their forage-caps. At Verona, 
she was lucky enough to come across an aide-de- 
camp of Radetzki's, to whom she entrusted her 



198 CAKR OF CARULYOX. 

letter to the old marshal with a liyelj prayer 
for his success. These and the leaser obstacles 
of occasionally finding every post-horse employed 
for the siege-trains^ and every room in liie 
inn occupied by a dozen soldiers . all these, 
I say, being with patient endurance and mmg- 
froid overcome. Lady Carrlyon was at last 
approaching her journey's end. 

Her real feelings and motives she possibly did 
not very ac<nirately define to herself: they mig^ 
be modified or strengthened by circumstances. But 
she at least knew what they were not Anxiety 
for her dear son's happiness, . a magnanimous 
sacrifice of prejudice, . an eager desire to greet 
.* the young person " as a daughter-in-law, these 
lofty sentiments were the stalking-horses her 
ladyship rode to death ; and though they might 
serve the common purposes of social delusion, 
there were some who shrewdly suspected that 
these beasts of burden were unduly freighted. 

The admixture of a certain kind of cleveme. 
worldly sharpness, call it what you will . ^with 
a large proportion of folly, is very common ; and 



VILLA F0S8OHBBONL 199 

just so much Lady Carrlyon possessed. Eyerj 

one wIlo has lead an extract from her letters 

will be ready to pronoupce her a very s3Iy 

woman. Yet it is donbtfol whether those who 

met her night after night at London parties 

thought so. They saw in her a snccessfcd 

woman . a woman who had worked her way 

up, perseveringly, to achiere the work she had 

appelated herself, and had never swerved nor 

Altered. Bom to poverty, and of a family 

with no noble or influential connections, she had 

not only married rank and wealth; she had 

advanced her position after marriage from being 

the wife of a respectable fox-hunting old Tory 

lord, to being one of the most impertinent women 

in London, an exclusive leader of fashion, in 

whose train ladies of much higher pretensions 

ill all ways followed tamely. It is all very well to 

look down with a bird's-eye view upon her follies 

now, and laugh at them ; but when we knew her in 

her palmy days, we confess to having been dazzled. 

^^ Sich is life," as a great authority has observed* 

She is leaning back in her carriage, revolving 



200 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

in her mind future schemes, fatore hopes and 
possibilities, with an eye riveted on one particular 
button of the cushion opposite. One would say 
that all her future success depended on her not 
losing sight of that button for a single moment 
Herein you have an index to the woman's cha- 
racter; a pertinacity, with all her frivolity, in 
holding fast by any idea which her narrow mind 
has once conceived. If Carr is obstinate, so 
doubly is his mother, though she has been giving 
up to him all his life. For she has not the power 
of carrying things with a strong hand as he has. 
But then, en revanche, she is not as kindly-natured. 
She is cunning, and in a low, worldly way, fitf- 
sighted ; she will appear to yield, and yet spare 
no pains to compass her end ; and, though baBed, 
will return again and again to the charge, from 
an unexpected quarter. 

Lady Carrlyon is still a beautiful woman, over 
whom the waves of time hitherto have rolled 
with much the same effect as those other waves 
upon the hard smooth sea-sand . a wrinkle here 
and there: no more. The steel-blue eyes flash 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKI. 201 

keenly as in youth; the brilliant teeth are still 
faultless; the hair untouched with silver. Her 
dress betokens an absence of that important sense 
of the fitness of things, which is unfortunately 
too common among our countrywomen. Instead 
of some simple, cool material this hot weather, 
she is *' wearing out " one of last season's gowns ; 
a mauve silk, flounced to the waist, in every fold 
of which the Italian dust will lodge. She has 
several bracelets, with lockets like little skulls 
hanging about her in all directions, and which 
like ilie trophies of a barbarian chief, might be 
supposed to typify her victories. But the truth 
is, she has had few. Seldom has so handsome a 
woman inspired so little genuine admiration ; 
though a certain number of hangers-on she is 
sure of in London. 

m 

Beside her, from a round basket, peeped the 
most repulsive little canine face that human in- 
genuity ever disfigured. Helplessly fat, with a 
nose broken flat, and a tongue that lolled per- 
petually out of its mouth, this engaging animal 
was the object of Lady Carrlyon*s tenderest care 



202 CARB OF CABKLTON. 

and solicitude. The servants might starve, so 
that B6pine had her bread and milk. It is not 
to be supposed, however, that those functionaiies 
showed any symptoms of starving. As they sat 
in the rumble there, Carl, the large oily courier, 
and Mrs. Timson, a genteel waiting-maid, deTour- 
ing a chicken together under the carriage umbrella, 
they seemed perfectly well able to take care ot 
themselves. 

The day had been intensely hot, and it was 
late in the afternoon as the dusty carriage wound 
wearily up the hill*side, sinking deep at every 
step into the hard, dry ruts, and grinding to 
powder the stones that lay beneath its wheeb. 
The sun was low enough in the horizon to bathe 
the landscape in that mellow tint which is only 
seen at the close of an Italian day. The great 
folds of mountain rolled back one after another, 
each more intensely purple than the last, and 
spread themselves out as the carriage ascended 
higher and higher; until, at last, the edges of 
the lake below gleamed upon the sight. And 
then the sheet of golden sky was repeated in 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 203 

liquid glorj^ citMsed, at intervals, by soft tremu- 
Ions shadows of violet cloud and mountain. The 
Tuddj shaft of a pine-tree, its thick-tufted branches 
all a-glow with flaming sunlight, reared itself 
against the gleaming water, in one place where 
a little rocky promontory was thrust out into the 
lake. A silver ripple here and there, like a broken 
thread of pearls, marked where the lazy stroke 
of an oar had faUen from under the striped awning 
of a boat ; its freight of laughter-loving Italians, 
even in these troublous times, singing snatches 
of Verdi as they took their evening row. 

Not so the peasants. 

A few vine or olive dressers, returning from 
their day's work, met the carriage on its ascent 
Some of them were leading broad, dun-coloured 
oxen, with creamy horns and onyx-coloured eyes, 
yoked to long carts that were laden with the 
rich fruits of the earth. There was but one 
expression on those bronzed faces : a sullen endur- 
ance. What boots it that the land be flowing 
with milk and honey? that the ''just earth '^ 
make such bountiful return for their toil, so long 



204 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

as their neck be under the Anstrian's hed? And 
the hopes of Italy have been fast melting away 
these last few days ! 

But neither the fair face of natore nor the 
moral aspect of the people attracted mnch atten- 
tion from the occnpant of the traTelling-<niage. 
She only wondered, with a shudder, as the yilla 
at last came in sight, how any one could think 
of living in a house like a dikpidated factory, 
and how it would be possible for her to pass a 
certain number of weeks there. The poor steam- 
ing horses drew up under the white-washed wall, 
over which a row of lemon-trees showed refireah- 
ingly green; and the heavy courier descended 
.and pulled the bell of an iron wicket Ere it 
had ceased its discordant jingle, the figure of 
Carr, in a white jacket and trousers, his fair skin 
burnt to a rich bronze under the thin straw hat, 
met his mother's gaze, as he leapt down the steps 
of the terrace, and threw open the gate. 

*^ Welcome to an Italian house, mother I Up 
to the last moment I hardly expected you." 

He handed her out, and embraced her. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 205 

" My dearest boy ! My poor Laury I How 
glad I am to see yon, dear I But, good heavens ! 
how brown you are I I should hardly know 
you, and you had such a nice complexion ! ^ 

" The life we lead here, you see, mother, don't 
exactly conduce to keeping it, as you will soon 
discover." 

" Ah I yes, naturally " (with a sigh). " I 
understand the whole tone of mind, associates, 
and so on, very coarse. You needn't be afraid, 
dear, I am prepared . quite prepared. So you 
lead a peasant's life here, I suppose . dig, and that 
sort of thing?" 

''Just now we have something else to think 
of," replied her son, laughihg. "I have been 
constantly on the hills for the last few days, 
gleaning intelligence about the movements of both 
armies. You have come to us at an exciting 
moment I am glad you have got through all 
the difficulties of your journey so well, mother ; 
and we will make you as comfortable as we can 
here, but you must not expect the luxuries of 
Carrlyon." 



206 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 

**0f course not, dear. Ab Sir Walter med 
to say, in onr hours of ease I might be hard to 
please, but not when anguish wrings the brow ; and 
I am sure you have a great deal to pat up with." 

" I have a hard bed, and no carpet, to pt up 
with ; and the only thing that ' wrings my brow ' 
is the confounded heat," said Carr, with rather 
a forced laugh and a heightened colour. ''That 
is all : and I am glad to say I support these trials 
with wonderful equanimity, as do also my wife 
and her mother." 

" Her moiA^r ? " 
Yes ; Mrs. Courteney." 
Do you mean that she is with you ? ^ 

''Certamly. Didn't you know that? Gilda, 
poor child," he went on hurriedly, '' is so ansioiis 
that you should be {^ased with everything, . ^her- 
self most of all. I hope you will try and be so. 
I hope you come here without any . any . fading 
of prejudice, mother." 

" Oh, certainly, my dear boy ! ^se why thmdi 
I come? only I didn't understand that you had 
saddled yourself with the whole family.." 



.( 



.( 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOia. 207 

** The whole &inily consists of Mrs. Courteney." 
" But," conturaed Lady Carrlyon, without heed- 

c 

ing the interruption, '^ having made the first great 
sacrifice, having overcome any natural objections 
to receive your wife, my dear. Laury, of course 
I am prepared to see her with your eyes, and to 
try and overlook her family and everything else." 

They had walked slowly up the terraced 
garden. Lady Carrlyon hanging on her son's arm, 
and pausing from time to time as this conversa- 
tion passed. As they approached the loggia she 
who was the subject of their discourse appeared 
in sight She was leaning, in her simple white 
dress, against the balustrade, looking rather pale. 
In her nervousness she had plucked a twig of 
the hoary olive-tree beside her, which she held 
in her hand ; and as she stood there, looking down 
on the approaching figures, she might not unfitly 
have represented Peace with her appropriate 
emblem. Perhaps some such fsmcy connected 
with those few silvery green leaves did cross 
GUda's mind, for as she watched the advancing 
group, her trembling hand almost involuntarily 



208 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

extended the olive-branchy as though pleadmg 
against animositj and discord. She waited until 
thej were qnite close and looked np, before she 
descended the steps to meet her mother-in-law. 
Ladj Carrljon eyed her rapidly all over: then 
extended both arms and drew Gilda towazds her, 
coldly touching the pale young cheek with h^ 
lips. It was a conventional salutation for which 
Gilda was probably unprepared ; in her agitation 
she let drop the twig of olive, and it fell under 
Lady Carrlyon's feet The startled look on the 
young wife's face the next moment, when she 
beheld the leaves, to which she had attached 
almost a superstitious importance, crushed be- 
neath her ladyship's boot, made the latter ex- 
claim, . 

" Don't be frightened, my dear, you look quite 
scared. I have been telling my son that we are 
to be excellent friends, I hope; so you mustn't 
look shy and alarmed; nothing is so underbred. 
You must treat me as your own mother, and then 
we shall get on very welL lupine I B^pine! 
don't be barking at that peacock! Come here. 



VILLA rOSSOMBKOKL 209 

ma'am t She is djing of hunger^ poor little 
thiogl Get her some bread and milk^ Laurj; 
and if you have the ^ leg of a chicken^ I daresaj 
she could eat it" 

Carr knew all his mother's little ways perfectly 
well : her airs of gracious condescension^ seasoned 
with impertinence ; and the rapid transfer of her 
attention to a yelping spaniel as the subject of 
paramount' importance. He knew what it all 
meant He was mortified that Gilda appeared 
to so little advantage, as he thought; 'he was 
annoyed that his mother evidently admired her 
so little : and he was, above all, angry with him- 
self for feeling irritated. Was it possible that 
his wife's indescribable charm, which consisted 
in no dazzling beauty, could be appreciated by 
Lady Carrlyon? Was it possible, on the other 
hand, that Lady Carrlyon's nature should change 
all of a sudden, and her heart be softened towards 
her daughter-in-law otherwise than by degrees? 

They entered the sala, which Gilda's hand 
had decked with pomegranates and oleanders, 
Qj^i which, in its primitive way, looked really 

VOL. n. 14 



210 CAKR OF CARRLYOH. 

Terj cheerilil and pretty. Lady Carrlyon stood 
stupefied in the doorway for a second or tiro, 
then shmgging her shonlders, tamed to her 
son: . 

**Well! I give you some credit fiir makiiig 
yourself happy in such a place as this^ Laniy! 
With your refined tastes, and brought np as 
you have been : not a carpet, not a mirror^ none 
of the common necessaries of life! How haTe 
you managed to exist? Don't think that / mind 
it. I am en voyageur^ you know ; and I suppose 
your wife has been accustomed to this sort of 
thing all her life; but really you surprise me. 
It is astonishing how people's standard lowers by 
degrees . fortunately, I suppose.'' 

But her ladyship sighed, as though it were a 
moral and not an upholstering standard of which 
she spoke. 

''People accommodate themselves to the life 
they lead and the society they keep," she added. 
''Poor dear Byron told me he was quite happy 
at Ravenna. Fancy being happy at Ravenna! 
By-the-by, have you been writing anydiiog? No 



VILLA fOSSOMBBOlTL 211 

very intellectaal influences here, I si^pose. I left 
that amusing Cortly at Baden, and " 

'^ Tou have not yet told me how you left the 
governor," interrupted her son 

" Oh ! pretty well ; bored at having to drink 
the waters, you know, and a good deal worried 
on more subjects than one, as you can under- 
stand. He has sold all his horses, I'm glad to 
say, and has let the shooting of the chase; so 
we shan't go home till quite the winter. If 

 

that is B^pine's milk and water, I hope it has 
the chill off? I can't bear her drinking cold water 
in this dreadful climate. And now will you 
show me my room? I should like to have my 
maid next me, if you please; and pray, Carr, 
tell them to make haste with the imperials, I 
am dying to get off this gown." 

^* Remember, it is rather hot work unloading 
the carriage, and dragging up your heavy 
boxes in this weather, so you must be patient; 
and pray don't make a great toilette, when you 
do change your dress. 11 Gilda can be of any 



use ^ 



14.2 



212 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

*'Yes; if I can be of any use," repeated the 
latter^ in a helpless kind of way. 

" Oh ! dear, no, thank you. I have fortunately 
brought my own sheets ; I don't think I could sleep 
in such sackcloth as that. I should have no 
skin left on my bones in the morning. But Tm 
not at all particular, you know; and really with 
a few curtains the room might be made very 
tolerable. By-the-by, Tve had my room at 
Carrlyon so charmingly done up with pale blue 
and white lace since you were there. Your 
father was so absurd about it, couldn't see that 
the room wanted fresh furniture, and was quite 
indignant against my poor portih^es and devitnts 
de cheminds. He always asks, ' What's the use of 
putting velvet petticoats on the chimney-pieces 
and doors!' ha! ha!" 

''He has a fellow feeling for those dumb suf- 
ferers under petticoat government," laughed her 
son, glancing at his wife, '* which I begin to under- 
stand now." 

"Don't talk nonsense," said his mother, very 
sharply. ''Any man who subihits to. to. what 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 213 

you call petticoat government is a fool. Oh I 
there you are at last Timson'; what a time you 
have been ! Now you must go away, Laury, and 
you, my dear, I always forget your name? " 

^'Gilda, for shortness. Geraldine is my real 
name." 

*^ I shall call you Geraldine, by all means ; 
much more ladylike. Gilda sounds like a peasant 
or a pet donkey. No one ever heard of Lady 
Gilda. That is the test. Au revoir, my love, and 
try and not blush in that way, to oblige me." 

The door closed behind Carr and his wife; 
and each, cautiously avoiding the other's eye, 
they turned down the passage towards their own 
rooms without a word. Carr felt that the com- 
mencement of a struggle was at hand; he was 
irritated and depressed, all the more so from 
the necessity of concealing his real feelings in 
his mother's presence. As to poor Gilda, uneasy 
as the prospect of Lady Carrlyon's visit had made 
her, the reality promised to be far worse. She 
knew at once that it was impossible there could 
ever be any sympathy between her mother-in- 



214 CASB OF CABBLTQN. 

law and herself. Worse than that, she was om- 
sdous, through the very pares of her skin^ tiat 
Lady Carrlyon had eanceiTed a deadly enmity 
towards her^ which nothing would chai^ or 
even mitigate. She was sad and sick at heart: 
it seemed as though all things conspired against 
her; bnt this at least was no fanlt of hers, and 
she woold try and not let it overshadow or take 
an. nndae prominence in her young Efe. She 
must go forward on her course without fear or 
wavering ; if Lady Carrlyon could never love, she 
should at least respect her. Thus she stm^ed 
with the tears that forced themselves into her 
eyes, as she sat down for half-an-hour alone in 
her bedroom before dinner. She was anxious 
to avoid her mother: that dear mother whose 
solicitude for her child never uled to detect the 
least shadow on Gtilda's brow, and from whom, 
if possible, she must now conceal how her toider 
and sensitive nature had been wounded. 

She need not have been afraid. Mrs. Courteney 
would not have ventured to probe her daughter's 
heart at that moment. She had kept out of the 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 215 

way until now: and now^ as the hour of her 
own trial approached^ she entered the sala alone, 
a thought paler than usual, and without any 
change in the uniformity of her widow's dress. 
She had been sitting there for some minutes by 
the window, when the door was thrown open, 
and Lady Carrlyon sailed in, in a cloud of white 
embroid^ and floating coloured ribbons. A 
greater contrast than the appearance of the two 
matrons presented, as they stood there, could 
scarcely be found. Mrs. Courteney rose, her 
thin delicate hand leaning on the back of the 
chair for support, while a sudden flush over- 
spread her cheek. Lady Caxrlyon stared at her 
from head to foot, as though somewhat puzzled 
or surprised ; then, with a freezing inclination of 
the head, took up a book from the table, and 
seated herself without a word. 

The next two or three minutes that elapsed 

^ seemed ages to Mrs. Courteney ; then Carr came 

in, which was a relief. He glanced rapidly from 

one to the other, went up to his mother, and 

laying his hand upon her shoulder^ said, . 



216 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

"I conclude yon and Mrs. Courteney, my 
second mother, have dispensed with the ceremoDy 
of introdaction, or shall I go through it, in due 
form ? " 

Lady Carrlyon once more inclined her head, 
this time with a vapoury smile, though secretly 
indignant at hearing the low person in whose 
presence she found herself thus styled. She 
began glibly, nevertheless, after her manner, 
talking on other subjects, until Gilda slid into 
the room, and dmner was announced. Then, as 
her son offered her his arm, and they walked into 
the next room, she whispered, 

"Do in pity tell me, Carr, where it is I have 
seen that woman? Her face seems familiar to 
me, years ago ; but where, I can't think." 

"Nor I," he replied, indifferently. 

Her conversation all that evening was addressed 
exclusively to her son. This might be supposed 
to be natural after their long separation ; but it 
was certainly not well-bred. Indeed, she pur- 
posely talked of things and people concerning 
whom mother and daughter could know nothing 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 217 

nor feel any interest The young wife sat by, 
bending over her work> and listening to the May- 
fair gossip, friyoloas at best, when not ill-natured 
or scandalous. It was a new insight into life, 
and not an agreeable one. There was not a word 
of friendship or love in this world of Lady Carr- 
lyon's. It was a hard phantasmagoria of people 
dancing and feasting, struggling for money-bags 
and coronets, bespattering each other with mud, 
and grinning like apes, at each other's folly and 
wickedness. Carr had been Uving now so many 
months out of this world, that he derived a certain 
amusement in hearing of people whom he had 
known there more or less well. Gilda was sur- 
prised to hear him laugh at some of his mother's 
stories, and gradually fall into a tone of con- 
versation which his wife believed to be foreign 
to all his real tastes. 

And so it was the first evening after Lady 
Carrlyon's arrival was passed at the villa. 



218 CABB OF CARBLTOK. 



CHAPTER IX. 

.Ci 

^' As to this horrid mess my poor dear Lanrence 
has got himself into^ it mnst have been a positire 
in&tuation tiiat made him marry that girL I 
expected to have found her at least very hand- 
some, in which case she might have bad some 
success in London, to carry off the dreadful 
mfsaJUance; but she is positively hardly good- 
looking I with no style, no conversation . nothing ! 
She does the peliU inginue . ^blushes to the eyes 
when one speaks to her, and has all those affecta- 
tions of simplicity which I detest. If she were 
even very clet>er, I could forgive her, for she might 
advance his interests, perhaps ; but I can't make 
out that she knows anything! In short, I am 
in despair, for I foresee she will be a clog to my 
darling through life I And then there's a mother I 



YIXXA FOSSOMBBONL 219 

a woman, my dear, who looks as if she had been 
brought up in the Castle of Otranto, and had 
never recovered the frights of her childhood* 
I am sure I have seen her before in some melo- 
drama* of the kind, for her face is so dreadfully 
familiar to me. She never speaks, so you may 
imagine she is a lively addition to the party* 
She seems to have fastened upon poor Laury 
for life; but I must really try some vigorous 
measure to dislodge her. Do pity me I The case 
is so much worse than even I anticipated, and 
at present I see no opening. But you know I 
am not easily discouraged; and, having come 
here, I intend to sacrifice myself for a few weeks 
to my poor boy's interests. Such a talented 
creature as he is, and with such prospects, to 
see him so thrown awayl It makes me quite 
wretched; and it will require a great deal of 
management to do anything with him, I foresee. 
Tell me how the dear duchess gets through her 
confinement,'' &c. Sec 

It was thus Lady Carrlyon wrote to one of 
her intimate friends (of whom she had related 



220 CARB OF CAERLrOX. 

some piquant anecdotes to her son the evening 
before^) the day after her arrivaL 

Carr had ridden off at daybreak into the moun- 
tainsj with a couple of peasants, to reconnoitre, 
and pick up what news he could of the Italian 
army. It was thought there would be a battle 
near Rivoli, where a large force of the enemy was 
encamped, while they possessed tlie whole chain 
of Monte Baldo. There appeared to be great 
indecision and uncertainty as to the King's more- 
ments; but it was evident that he must soon 
strike some blow to retrieve the losses to the 
national cause which had now followed each 
other in such rapid succession. Carr was excited 
on the subject, as any other young Englishman 
would have been. He rode out, as he had done 
constantly of late, with the stalking-glasses slung 
upon his back, the pistols in his belt, the well- 
filled sandwich-box in his pocket . all the appK- 
ances, in short, of a dilettante campaigner. He 
was well pleased, he said to himself, at the oppor- 
tunity of leaving his wife and mother to "become 
better acquainted, without the intervention of his 



VnXA FOSSOKBRONL 221 

presence,'* He was sanguine enough to hope they 
might even become intimate bj the time he 
returned! He had been extremely despondent 
the evening before; but that sunshiny morning 
he took a brighter view of things. Not so, Gilda. 
Her heart sank within her at the prospect of 
passing the whole or greater part of the day alone 
with Lady Carrlyon; for Mrs. Courteney had 
taken her daughter's hand early that morning, and 
said gravely, . 

**It is your duty, my child, to try and con- 
ciUate Lady Carrlyon ; and, as she knows you 
better, I hope you and Laurence's mother may 
be drawn nearer to each other. You will be 
constantly thrown together now, and I tun glad 
it should be so. Tou will get accustomed to any 
little peculiarities, . what nlay seem cold or formal 
will wear off, and you will gradually make allow- 
ances for what may hurt or repel you in her 
manner at first She is undergoing a severe trial 
for her son's sake. AU this, dear child, makes 
it incumbent on you to be as much with her as 
she will allow ; and to try and win her affection 



222 CABR OF CABSLXOS. 

if 70U possibly can. With me, of coarse^ it is 
quite a different matter. Lanrence, in his kind- 
ness, was mistaken in wishing me to remain here ; 
and I ought not to have yielded, for I am in a 
false position. Laidy Garrlyon very naturally 
regards me with animosity. It will be ea^, my 
darling, to forgive you ; but there is no reason 
why she should soften her heart towards me. 
The only course I can adopt with dignity, there- 
fore, is to relieve her of my presence as much as 
possible. My health is sufficient plea for remain- 
ing in my room the greater part of the day; 
and you must not think about me, darling, or 
come near me. All your time and attention now 
must be devoted to Lady Garrlyon.'' 

But either a fine lady's caprice or some subtle 
motive had wrought a marvellous change in her 
ladyship's manner when, towards the middle of 
the day, she appeared in the sala. She could 
not help being impertinent, it is true: she was 
one of the women who never can, except to 
some one of whom they stand in awe : but it was 
the impertinence of familiarity, not that of cutting 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 223 

disdain. She asked all sorts of questions, withont 
the least regard to the manifest pain it caused 
Gilda to answer many of them. There were 
certain things she was hent on discovering, and 
the easiest means of doing so was from her 
daughter-in-law direct. Carr had exercised a 
sound discretion in speaking as in writing about 
his wife's family ; but now everything, or almost 
everything, there was to be known of Gilda's 
early life was probed and sifted out by his 
mother. The Courteneys' wanderings, the utter 
seclusion in which they lived, the first acquaint* 
ance with Laurence, all this by degrees Lady 
Carrlyon induced Gilda to tell her about The 
young wife felt as if she had no right to refuse 
to answer any of these questions ; she only shrank 
from speaking of her father ; and here even Lady 
Carrlyon's unflagging perseverance &iled to elicit 
much information. She turned abmptiy into 
another path. 

** How old are you, my dear ?" 

''Just nineteen." 

*'Ohl However, I suppose you had many 



224 GARB OP CABRLYOX. 

admirers before you finally condescended to many 
LaurencQj eh?" 

Gilda shook her head. 

*^ Come^ nonsense ! yon don't mean to tell me 
that, living in Italy . this land of song and pas- 
sion, as poor Byron would have called it . that 
you never had a flirtation before you knew 
Laurence, my dear Geraldine?" 

** Indeed not No, I never had a flirtation." 

"Well, but tell me now how many yonng 
men have you ever known intimately in your 
life?" 

 

"Laurence was the first, the only young 
Ens^lishman I ever knew." 

She spoke hurriedly, and Lady Carrlyon glanced 
sharply at her face the while. 
But plenty of Italians?" 
Very few." 

Her ladyship mused for a few moments. 

" How very romantic I A first love I and though 
it isn't exactly that with Carr, . ^for, of course, 
you know that it was his quarrel with Lady Hand 
Brabazon that drove him abroad ? . (and a most 



.. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 225 I 



adyantage<5u3 match that would have been for 
hun . ministerial connection^ and so on) . yet 
it is certainly very romantic and high-minded of 
him, giving np the world for your sake, as he is 
doing, my dear, and abandoning all his fine 
prospects.* 

'*I don't know what you refer to," replied 
Gilda, with some touch of pique in her voice. 
'' I am not aware of Laurence's having made any 
particular sacrifice. It is his own choice, not 
from any request of mine, that we are still in Italy. 
I am ready to "follow him where and when he 
likes, and should be the last to interfere with any 
prospects of his. I wish heartily, on the contrary, 
that he had some profession: I think if he were 
a working man he would be happier." 

^'I spoke of his matrimonial prospects, my 
dear. Tou will excuse me, I know. As to his 
being what you call ' a working man ' (which is 
a horridly vulgar term, my dear Geraldine), dear 
Laurence has too much genius to be a plodding 
man in an office, or anything of that sort With 
strong ministerial connection, I think he might 

VOL. n. ] 5 



226 GASB OP CAHELTON. 

have been Secretary of State, Sat most of the irj 
work, I believe, is 1^ to die Undar Sectetary, cr 
the Under Secretary's secietarj. But all tlmt, yon 
Bee, requires interestl Poor dear Lord Gaxr^on 
sever had any, except in the himtiiig-fieid ; and 
now Lanry has been and thrown away his cfaaooes; 
which, as I say, my dear, is oertainly vezy 

. Qilda's blood, poor dttid, was roused to rq>ly, and 
thongh her lips trembled die said, very diatinctiy, 
^ You do your son an injustice. Lady Oanyka. 
He would scorn to be indebted <to his wife for 
podtion or interest I thought that mil who bore 
the name of Caniyon would be too pmiid to 
harbour any such thought ; as I hnow that is . 
my husband . would. But I mippose that pamts 
think differently on these sobjacts.* 

''As you mi^t have learnt fiom your own, my 
dear. However, let tiiat pass. I am only sozioiiB 
now that you should realize your faaabaiidli 
positiony and the neoessity of sacrificing younelf 
for his good, if you ne called is. As lo his 
continuing to live buried away fium the wodd. 



VHIA FOSSOliBBOn. 227 

it is^ of coone^ perfisctlj abBurd, and yoa must 
use all your influeooe to makd lum ecnne to 
England, and see what we can do Sor him there, 
in the waj of getting him aomething." 

'^ Certainly, Lady Oarrlyon; I have already 
said ^ 

'' Tes, yes, my dear, I know all yon mean, but 
it isn't enongh that yon ahonldn't ni^ge him to^toy, 
yoa must urge lum to go, ewen if it is witiboot 
yon, for a time. Women are very often in the 
way . partieolarly when they axe not women of 
business* ** 

^I shall accompany him, whererer it be, trnkss 
he forbids it,* said Gilda, quietly. 

Much more of the same sort of conrecsation 
passed ; Lady Carrly on pntlang out a namber of 
feders in different directions, and making herself 
acquainted with her daugfater-in-law*s s^itiments 
on a variefy of important points. If ba9ed in 
Bome particulars, she was successful in most 
How far {he knowledge, thus gained, was satis- 
fiictory to lier ladyship, may be better judged of 
hereafter. 

15.2 



228 CASB OF CABBLTON. 

In the afternoon, a peasant-lad came up through 
the mulberry plantations from a salmon-colonred 
villa upon ilie borders of the lake, the gazebo of 
which was distinctly visible from the FossombronL 
This villa, it now appeared, was the property of 
Madame Santi, who, with her niece, the marchesa, 
had arrived there the previous evening. The 
marchesa wrote, with characteristic effusion, in her 
long spidery characters, to the effect that she 
would come up in her portantina to pay the 
Laurence Garrs a visit in the cool of the evening, 
if they were at home. Gilda, who really liked the 
marchesa, hailed the prospect with thankfulness, 
as a relief from the undivided burden of Lady 
Carrlyon's company. The latter, who, it wiU be 
remembered, had origmaUy procured the intro- 
duction for her son, was no less .pleased to find 
ihere was ^' some one, one has heard of before," in 
these parts. She regretted, indeed, to learn that 
the marchesa was an enthusiastic patriot: such 
radical principles being only fit for the low-bom ; 
but her claims, as a woman of family, went fiir to 
balance this drawback. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 229 

Carr retamed earlier than his wife expected. 
He brought no news. He liad come upon a 
small detachment of volunteers marching across 
the mountains to join the King's Brmj, by some 
intricate paths only known to the peasants who 
guided them; but these raw troops could give 
him no information. The towns^ they said> were 
beginning to niurmur at the King's inaction. 
It was hoped that he would strike a bold blow 
to recover Verona^ as the old marshal^ it was 
thought, began likewise to show symptoms of 
languor. 

The family party sat drinking their coffee 
in the loggia, after dinner, when two brawny 
boatmen were seen toiling up the plantation, 
bearing an arm-chair upon poles between them. 
The goodly form of the marchesa was no light 
freight, to judge from the condition of Uer 
porters; and with the amusing familiarity of 
Italians, they remarked jocosely on her increase 
of weight, since they had last the honour of 
carrying the Ecceltnza. She had a black veil 
on her head, and in her hand a fan and a large 



230 GABB OS CABRLTOZr. 

panMoL She diacomsed fredy iriHk her two 
bearers, and laughed, and addresBed thaoi in- 
differently aa ^' caro mio/' m a way that ezdted 
the unbounded artoiriflbnipnt of Lady CairiyoD, 
who through her doaUe eye-^ass watched the 
approach of the iNroceasion. 

Carr greeted her very oordially and jHreaented 
her to his mother. The yery imaimple mamiefs 
of the English lady . they could hardly be 
called affected^ they were so much a pari of 
herself . evidently afforded the Italian some 
amusement There was a quiet twinkle in her 
eye every now and then, which betrayed her. 
Bui Lady Carrlyon was not allowed much oppop- 
tunity for display. There were so many questicos 
to be asked, and the marchesa had so much to 
say, that the talk was soon entirely hen. The 
movements of the Sardinian army, . ^the proq^ects 
of the National Gaaae, . ^the political d dkih 
with which we have now nothing to do she 
descanted on. them aH There waa one pcnnt on 
which both Gilda and her mother burned to 
question the marchesa ; but they wisely refirained. 



VnXA F0S80MBB0SL 231 



and were iewarded after a time, for 
patience. 

'^ I can't think/ observed Lady Caxrljaa, with 
her usual tact and good taatOj ^' how it is yon don't 
like those dUtinguds Austrians, in their white ooats, 
m J dear Lanry. So thoiongfa-bred, ao patrician I 
But I'm a Tory, and can't tolerate;" 

^' Do tell me what a Tori is, milady ? " cnt in 
the marchesa, with a good-hiQnonred smile. 

'^ Oh ! everything that's eonatUutiondl . yon 
don't understand the meaning of that i&em either, 
I dare say." 

^ They are for giving ns constitutions now at 
last," laughed the marchesa. ''Shall we all be 
turned into Torts, Sign<Mr Garr ? Not if it is to 
make us love the white coats." 

''Poor Sir Walter I" sighed Lady Carrlyon, 
sentimentall}''. " Talking about Toryism and 
white ooats pula me in mind of meeting him, 
just aa he came com Borne. The last time I 
saw him, poor man, I asked him if he'd found 
much to interest him: 'Not so much as a pair 
of Aw . irowmn ' (he used a stronger expression 



232 CABB OF CABHLYOX. 

than trowsers^) alluding to Charles Edward, who 
was always in his thoughts I Beautifiilj wasn't 
it ? Such a Jacobite, Sir Walter I " 

''Was he not a great lover of the people?" 
asked Gilda. 

''Oh I he liked them in their proper place, 
not when they want to overthrow goTenmients, 
and all that sort of thing* Fm reallj sick to 
death of the name mysel Everything now b 
done for the people." 

"Not here^ said Gilda, venturing to raise her 
voice again. " Indeed, Lady Carrlyon, you have 
only to hear the horrible state in which they 

found the prisons . ^the injustice ^ 

My dear," interrupted her ladyship sharply, 

you don't suppose that, accustomed to mix m 
political circles as I am, I don't know all the staff 
that's talked ? There isn't a word of truth in it 
Lord Finsbury, who was minister for such a 
long time at Florence, assured me it was impos- 
sible for anything to be more luxurious than the 
prisons, both at Rome and at Naples." 

"My brother," remarked the marchesa, "was 






VILLA FOSSOMBB027L 233 

confined in one of the former for thirteen years, 
in consequence of a pasquinade he wrote when 
a boy of sixteen. I do not think he found it 
luxurious^ milady. But we never could tell: 
for he was at last liberated by death I " 

" Horrible 1 ^ said Carr. " Italians would not 
have been men^ if they had not risen to free them- 
selves from such a state of things. But tell me, 
marchesa^ how comes it that you have left the 
camp at this moment? " 

'^I had the fever" (Italians use this generic 
term for every variety of disorder), **and was 
obliged to be quiet My cousin, too, has been 
wounded, and is coming here . where he will be 
better off than in the hospital . so soon as he 
can be moved; but the aunt, you understand, 
could not nurse him alone. Talking of hospitals, 
by-the-by, poor dear Guide Lamberti, Madame 
Courteney, is well again at last, and has returned 
to his duty. I hope he will not try his strength 
too soon, for he gave us fine work, after you 
left! It seems that iliat very night he had a 
most exciting conversation with, . you know whom. 



234 GARB. OF GABBLTOIT. 

madame^ . and I suppose jour suspicions were 
correct ; for those in the ward who were nearest 
to where Guido lay, report to having heard 
them in violent discussion! At all evente, it 
produced a return of fever^ and he was t&j ill 
for two or three days. 

** WhatbecameofAerf "asked Mrs. Courteneyt 
in a low roice. 

''Disappeared, and no one knew where I Some 
say she has been seen in the vicinity of the esanap: 
but no one can positively say what has become 
of her. I could not exactly supply her place, 
you understand, but I was with him as much 
as I could be, and one of the good nuns nursed 
him when I was not there. At all events, we 
indulged him with no exciting conversations, and 
so his youth and a fine constitudon carried him 
through*'' 

Gilda, who had been drinking in every ward 
with her eyes and ears, heaved unconscioualy a 
l(mg-drawn sigh. 'Her husband, without appear- 
ing to watch her, had not lost one variation of 
her countenance. He knew not to whom the 



VILLA FOSSOMBUOSL 235 

marchesa's remarks referred ; but it was extremelj 
gratifying to learn that there was some fair lady 
on terms of such extreme intimacy with his former 
rival ; and that Gilda should know it His thoughts 
never for an instant turned in the direction of 
Sara Gisbome; and he was indeed profoundly 
indifferent who Guide's devoted nurse might be. 
It was enough his wife should know there woe 
such a person. Lady Carrlyon, meantime, with 
all her perceptions quickened by the desire to 
convict her daughter-in-law of some backsliding, 
glanced from one to the other, and then at 
Mrs. Courteney, and thought, as she subsequentiy 
expressed it, '^ there was something.^ 

Finally, after further gossip connected with the 
camp, which in no way concerns us, and when 
the rapid twilight had been succeeded by a glorious 
moon rising over the lake, the marchesa stepped 
into her poriantinai and, escorted by Carr, whose 
glowing dgar-end shone like a fire-fly among 
the trees, retraced her steps to .the Villa Santi. 



236 GABB OF CABBLTON. 



CHAPTER X. 

A FEW mornings after. Ma mother took the oppor- 
tonitj of having what she called some ''quiet 
conversation'' with Carr. He seemed mtfaer 
absent at first, but her ladyship had a fine art 
for rousing any dormant flesh and blood, bj the 
goodly home-thrusts she dealt . ^no matter where ; 
if about the heart, so much the better. 

'' I'm afraid your Other's affairs are still in a 
sad mess," she said, after awhile ; " and I fear 
the property will come to you dreadfully em- 
barrassed, Laury." 

" I hope it won't come to me at all, for a long 
time," said he, hastily. "But how is this? I 
thought that my enabling him to sell the Clapton 
&rm and woods, would have eased his mind, at 
all events, of some portion of this burden. I have 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 237 

asked for no increase to mj very small allowance* 
How is it he is so heavily embarrassed? " 

'f Oh I it's entirely that ruinous hunting and 

horse-racing, and ^ 

" Why, my father never had racers." 
^'Ohl well; but he used to go to races, and 
it's all the same thing; for, of course, he betted. 
It's of no use pretending that he didn't. And 
it is quite absurd laying it upon my expenses. 
No woman of my rank ever went without so 
many things they really wanted. I had no ball 
last year. I wouldn't have Mario at my concert, 
but put up with some horrid new man, because 
he was cheaper I I'm sure I try and economize. 
-And then, as I tell him, he ought to be so 
obliged to me for not having had daughters ! . 
such an expense brin^g them out, and tlien 
portioning them I Where would he have been 
now, I should like to know ? Talking about that, 
dear, it's very noble of you, and like yourself, 
living on your small allowance; and the one 
satisfactory point . ^to be frank . about your mar- 
riage is, its rendering you independent; though. 



238 CASB 07 CAKBLTOS. 

of ooorsep you mi^t have had a nmch greiAer 
fortana By-the-by, yoa secret tdd hb exactly 
tBhat yon got wiA your irife." 

*^ My wife has a small fortune settled upon lier, 
and in the hands of trosteeiL I 6xm\ possess 
a fiulhing of it" 

Lady Cairlyvm dropped her crochet; and oovid 
hardly finune her fisice mto proper compueurey 
after nearly a minnte had di^sed, to -exdaim . 

^'I never heard of such a lUng! Tour oirn 
doing, I suppose? Vastly generooB and nxnanik, 
Fm snre, my dear boy. Then am I to tmder- 
stand that yen are living npon her boumUff* 

Garr cdonred to die nx>ts of his haix;. 

''I preferred doing so, to living fipon my 
fiither's, when he wonld not acknowledge my 
marriage. 

Lady Garrlyon conghed. 

** Is this to be ^ peiT^^eiwe^ my dear? * 

''That depends on my firfher, and partly on 
my own diance <x getting a Kvelfliood for n^ 
seli" 

ExBcUy. That's just it Nowdon^ymflM: 



t. 



yqXA FOSSOMBBONI. 239 

you'd belter come to England and see what can 
be done for you there ? The dueheas, yoa know, 
used to be very fond of yon, and, of course, the 
duke oonld give yon something good, if he choBf. 
Bat as long as you remain here, you know, why 
nothing is to be done I " 

''And how about Gilda? We are living very 
economically here, as yon perceiye. In fact, to 
be plain with yon, I shouldn't be able to live 
in England in a way I should like, upon what 
we have." 

'' Well ; let us see . ^perhaps you might leave 
her here. Just for a little time, you know, until 
you hear of something that would suit joa^^ 

'^ Leone her?. I rath^ think not If I waited 
as long as I have already done, I should be absent 
some years! Very few things, Fm afraid, do 
suit me: the fanit of my education, I suj^pose. 
No, no, mother; when my father can make me 
a snitaUe allowance, HI ocmie to England; until 
then. 111 paint pictures in Italy, and sell diam, 
if I can." 

" I hope notj my dear Laury, fcr your wife's 



240 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

sake, if for no other roasoD, I hope not! She 
seems an amiable yomig person, but yon mnst 
allow she has not that toumure which is so 
requisite to a woman of fashion* It isn't to be 
expected that she should^ of course, in her position ; 
and mixing in the best circles might do a great 
deal for her. Indeed, I've no doubt the duchess, 
out of kindness to you, would take her by the 
hand, which would be everything, I need hardly 
say!" 

"Still, if my wife remains in Italy, while I 
am dancing about town en garfon, I hardly see 
how she is to benefit by these advantages ? ^ 

" Of course I mean ultimately, when you are 
in office ; but as long as you remain here, you 
know, there is no chance of your getting any- 
thing. Out of sight, out of mind. By-the-by, 
do not think me indiscreet, dear, but I suppose 
the mother was a stipulation? a sort of neces- 
sary tax you pay on your wife's income, isn't 
she?" 

"Mrs. Courteney came to us by my invita- 
tion, subsequent to my marriage; and she now 



.. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 241 

remains here^ contrary to her own urgent solicita- 
tion^ at my express desire." 

'' Oh ! " said his mother. '^ Well^ I dare say she 
is a good woman. No manners, but that can't be 
expected &om a person who has never lived in 
good society, you know . has brought up her 
daughter strictly, I hope ? Strong religious prin- 
ciples ? You know I was always particular about 
"religious principles." 

Very particular," chimed in her son. 
And living abroad makes people so lax . so 
very lax ; as the Bishop of Tonbridge Wells was 
remarking to me the other day. 'If you once 
lower your standard/ he said. I hope, my dear, 
you won't lower your standard, eh ? " 

" The standard of liberty ? By no means." 

'^ Nonsense. Don't pun on serious topics. I 
always brought you up on high-church principles^ 
and I really was quite in hopes you would have 
written something theological in the style of Lord 
Grampion's Journey in a Mumble to Some; $o 
interesting! his interviews with the priests, . always 
had the best of the arguments ; and it would have 

vol.. IL 16 



242 CABB OF GABBLYOF. 

done yoa 80 nnick good with our party^ if yoa iMd 
done something like it. Bat to retnm to what I 
was going to say : I do seriously hope these 
Conrteneys are not going to make yoa a Catholic, 
my dear Laurence? " 

" What oa earth should make yoa suppose so ? 

They'aie as Protestant " he was going to add 

<< as you are^" but stopped short 

*^ Well, my love, they are evidently radicals ; 
and have made you so . at least, about these horrid 
Italians; and when priliciples are once und^mined 
one never knows where it will stop. That reminds 
me to ask you who this vecy intimate finend of 
theirs is, whom Madame Qnofrio was taUdng about 
yesterday ? I never saw such an agonized fiioe as 
your wife had all the time the marchesa was 
talking about his ilhiess* Of course he is a near 
relation?" 

Carr turned sharply to the window, and 
drummed the devil's tattoo with his fingers oxl 
the shutter. 

^He is an old firiend . ^nothing more. Hallo! 
my kdy, there's your precious spaniel in trouble 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 243 

B^ine I B^pine ! she's got into the faUort^s yard, 
and all the ducks and turkeys are making an on- 
slaught upon her I " ^ 

Lady Carrlyon flew out into the loggia, with the 
air of a Niobe, calling distractedly for her wretched 
little dog. B^pine, for her part, would fain have 
reached the haven of her mistress's arms, but hav- 
ing surreptitiously effected an aitrance into the 
farmyard through a gap in the wall, she found, as 
her betters have sometimes done in like circum- 
stances, that she had forgotten her way out I The 
maternal solicitudes of the ducks and turkeys 
being most unnecessarily roused by the presence of 
this formidable specimoi of the canine race, they 
one and all, with a chorus of quacks and shrieks 
and cackles, set upon the unfortunate B^pina In 
vain the obese, ajsthmatic little creature endeavoured 
to escape firom her pursuers: unaccustomed fi>r 
years to the l^itimate use of her legs in running, 
she made the most piteous effinrts to perform this 
feat, which, far firom excitiog the generous compas- 
sion of the feathered mob, only elicited what 
appeared to be shouts of derisive laughter. There 

16.2 



244 CABB OF CABBLTOX. 

was a foremost old turkey, who gobbled and in- 
flated her red throat, like an infnriated dowager, 
and nttered a paralytic i^ of exultation fivau 
time to time which was appalling to hear. She it 
was, apparently, who gave the time to the rest 
Flapping their wings, with outstretched throats, 
and wide open bills, the ferocious phalanx pressed 
hard on the poor little wretch, who with eyes 
starting out of her head, terrified and bewildered, 
finally plunged into the deep brown pond where 
the farm oxen stood, the water streaming fiom 
their black muzzles, as they raised their heads in 
stony wonder, their eyes dilated on the luckless 
B^ine. This settled her fate. Carr sprang oyer 
the low fatioria wall almost at the same instant, but 
it was too late. After a few inefiectual efforts to 
keep above water, the little black head and red 
helpless tongue sank like a stone, while the circle 
of blue and green ducks, with their orange bills 
glancing in the summer sun, dived and wagged 
their tuls and quacked with diabolical delight, and 
the oxen pawed and bellowed round them. The 
poor litUe animal was probably choked by the 



VILLA EOSSOMBBONL 245 

unsavoury mud thus raised^ if fright and exhaus- 
tion had not akeady done their work. Before 
Carr and the farm-servants were able to rescue her 
life was extinct 

No words can adequately describe the storm of 
Lady Carrlyon's passionate tears and wrathful 
execrations. It would have been touching had it 
not been comical to find the woman who prided 
herself on her aristocratic impassability giving 
way to this vehement, unbridled grief for the loss 
of her pet dog. She accused every one in turn of 
being the cause of this disaster. She declared to 
her son that she knew it was part of a plot to get 
rid of her. There was no measure to the foolish 
things she said and did, which her worldly cunning 
at another moment would have reproved. Pos- 
sibly other causes of irritation now found vent in 
this channel, and as Gilda and her mother pru- 
dently kept aloof from the irate lady, the vials of 
her vrraih were emptied on her son and her maid. 
Carr was glad it should be so : he was ashamed of 
his mother's splenetic folly. Such outbursts he 
knew were rare. very rare indeed; and she 



246 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

already cut a siiBciently unattractive figuxe, he 
was well aware^ in his wife's eye& Still, the task 
of throwing oil upon those troubled waters required 
all his patience; and that ease-loving man was not 
long-suffering in this respect 



yHXA BOSSOMBROKI. 247 



CHAPTER XI. 

1 HAYE said that other causes possibly occasioned 
the measore of Lad j OarrlTon's irritation to brim 
over. The fact is^ she was thoronghly out of 
humoor with tiie results of her visit so far. She 
oonld find no ground for hope in any fact con- 
nected with her son's marriage. She had been 
here nearly a week, yet neither polished imperti- 
nence, cajoleries, nor innuendoes had succeeded in 
shaking the domestic foundation; nor did the 
seeds of discord she scattered with so liberal a 
hand seem likely to be productive in separating 
husband and wife. Yet to what else could she 
look forward? It was of course clear that her 
son had been entrapped into a marriage by low, 
designing people. Even the idea that he derived 
any personal pecuniary advantage by the trans- 



248 CABB OF GABBLYON. 

action was now swept away. If thej were 
separated to-morrow, Carr would be no penny 
the richer throngb liis wife, while he wonld cany 
this wretched millstone about his neck, incapaci- 
tating him from contracting any '' advantageous" 
marriage. Was it not enough to wring the heart- 
strings of a miserable, world-corroded mother, 
whose ignoble ambitions were to receive their 
crown and sceptre, so to speak, in this only son? 
Truly the sorrows of the pure in heart are as 
nothing compared with the dis^pointments of 
those whose best affections even have the soil and 
taint of this world. 

The attitude of Mrs. Courteney was especially 
aggravating. Lady Carrlyon could have desired 
to have had frequent opportunities of showing 
that low person what she thought of her; but 
the latter undeviatingly held to her course of 
strict retirement With simple, unobtrusive dignity 
she withdrew from any direct intercourse with 
Csut's mother; never appearing in the sala, 
except when obliged to do so, and then taking 
no share in the conversation, but seated some- 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 249 

what apart, busilj plying her knittrng-needles. 
The shj but enthnsiastic temperament of her 
danghter-in-law offered Ladj Carrlyon more fre- 
quent opportunities of wounding and humiliating 
her; and when Carr was not present she exercised 
these with some ingenuity. 

It is surprising how far an utterly foolish and 
contemptible woman may succeed in tormenting a 
yery noble one ; as the horse writhes tmder the 
sting of an insect* Gilda felt that it was the 
sting of an insect, and yet she writhed. She 
began to have a full appreciation of her mother- 
in-law's pettiness and vulgarity of mind: she 
could, moreover, generally exercise a remarkable 
restraint over her own words, in conversation 
with Lady Carrlyon. But the wound often 
rankled, though she might despise the hand that 
dealt it. It was in vain to repeat to herself what 
she knew to be the truth. Had she loved her 
husband with a different sort of love, the poison 
might have been powerless : as it was, there was 
no absorbing passion strong enough to counteract 
its influence. The feeling which I have endea- 



250 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

Toured to indicate as growing up more and more 
in her, was just of that nature to be most acutdj 
sensitiye to these stabs from her husband's Bioiiier. 
When two hearts are aU in all to each other, it 
is oomparatiTely of little moment tiioo^ the 
whole world be against them. Anything shnl 
of this, on either side (and not many are eapsible 
of a love so self-complete), demands sympa&y 
and help, fiunily ties, the enoouragement of 
fiiendly voices, and the binding love of children. 
Whether or not it should please Heaven to send 
Oilda that last and best blessing, it seemed 
probable that the comCbrt of the odiers, at least, 
would be denied her on her future road. 

And in secret she often sighed and ialtered 
over this; though her whole object was to con- 
ceal firom Garr that she suffered under Uf 
mother's behaviour. He was scarcely less anxious 
to shut his eyes to the fiict He was sufficiendy 
uncomfortable as it was; his tranquilliiy of mind 
disturbed ; all sorts of unwelcome thoughts, 
doubts, and dilemmas, flitting like ugly donds 
athwart the serenity of his summer sky. Most 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 251 

of these were untangible as the clouds them- 
selves : to few of them, probably, woald he have 
confessed, even in the locked closet of his own 
heart And yet they obscured the sunshine. 
He didn't care what his mother said . much less 
what she thought . ^why should ^be? Had he 
ever cared much? Had he not acted in the 
matter of his marriage without the most remote 
reference to her feeling or opinion? Didn't he 
know beforehand all she would say on any given 
subject? and hadn't he, from his youth upwards, 
been protesting against all his mother's doctrines ? 
The wealmess and inconsistency of human 
nature is a stale theme. To take up one's parable 
and preach thereon must be a profitless task, 
when a man's own heart and the lives of all 
aroitad him bear such abundant witness to the 
same. The one of whom we write was] no excep- 
tion to the rule. If we have succeeded in giving 
the reader any idea of Laurence Carr, he will 
understand that contradiction and inconsistency 
were inherent in bim. It may sound paradoncal 
to say that his actions were perpetually at variance 



252 CABR OF CABKLTON. 

with his character ; but it is no less trae. Tet out 
of these very anomalies arose that unitj which 
might make a shrewd observer predict with some 
certainty when the active man would belie and 
oppose &e passive one. More than one such occa- 
sion we have already noticed. And now, in spte 
of his strong attachment to his wife, in spite of 
natural obstinacy and a just contempt for all his 
mother's opmions (somewhat too openly expressed), 
this same silent and unacknowledged resolution 
was working in Carr. He grew accustomed to 
the idea of himself as one who had made a noble 
' self-sacrifice. He didn't regret the &ct ; but he 
didn't mind the world's acknowledging it, for of 
course it was a fact, though it was one which now 
for the first time he saw in this light : his natural 
generosity and chivalry of sentiment haying 
blinded him hitherto. When Lady Carrlyon had 
once accustomed him to accept this position, she 
had accomplished a great deal more than she was 
aware of. He didn't tolerate her insinuations, he 
didn't listen to her remarks, a bit more ; but he 
was content to be regarded as an imheard-of 



VILLA F0S80MBR0NL 253 

paragon of devotioQ, in '' sacrificing all his pro- 
spects " . as the phrase ran . upon the altar of love. 
Of coarse every little privation for the present, 
every difficulty or possible annoyance for the 
future, was to be laid upon the same altar after 
thisj and contributed, it is to be feared, to the 
incense of self-laudation. 

But in some other respects it was yet more 
singular how Lady Carrlyon's presence wrought 
a change in her son. He had no sympathy with 
her love of fashionable society: he was never 
tired of declaring this, and often avowed that a 
London season afforded, to his mind, the least 
satisfactory intercourse with one's fellow-creatures 
of any condition of humanity. Yet he was now 
unaccountably seized with the desire that his 
wife should take her place and shine in this 
very circle which he despised ! Was it because 
Lady Garrlyon held her cheap? Could not Gilda 
afford this and any other amount of disparagement ? 
Lastly, was so poor a triumph worth the exchange 
to an existence of struggle, and heartburn, and 
unrest? 



254 CABR OF CABBLTON. 

There was yet anotiber point whereon Garr wis 
uncomfortable, and angrj with himsdf for fSediDg 
uncomfortable, since his mother came He was 
upright and straightforward, with all his faults; 
had a horror of crooked ways, a disdain of sospicioiL 
But we have seen thathecouU suspect, and that his 
jealousy could make him cruelly unjust On 
these tender places some of Lady Canlyoa's 
random shots took effect M<xe especially the 
one which assumed that Carr had been accepted 
for his worldly position rather than firom prefer- 
ence. ^ Of course," her ladyship would say, ''a 
girl of that sort. Hying in Italy too, had some 
love affidr before; but naturally she was daxaled 
by the idea of becoming your wife, my dear 
Laurenoe. the position, and all together, . so one 
mustn't be too hard upon her, if she does seem 
rather cold*" 

Now, though Carr knew this deduction was 
utterly &lse, the premiss was true He cursed 
his own stupidity fifty times a day for recurring 
to a suspicion so utterly unworthy of his pure- 
hearted wife ; but still the words 'rankled. And 



VILLA F0S80MBB0KL 255 

as they were repeated in some form or other 
whenever his mother and he had any conver* 
sation, there was no chance of their passing away 
and being forgotten* Whenever Gnido's name 
occnrred in conversation . as it generally did 
the evenings the marchesa spent at the villa . 
Carres eye furtively watched Gilda, while he 
framed a thousand theories as to her feelings: 
the next moment indignantly repudiating every 
unworthy suspicion of her^ and striding out into 
the gard^i with knit brow and flushed cheek. 
This restless, irritable state of mind was the 
growth of two short weeks. Gilda perceived 
and attributed it to its right cause. It did not 
endear Lady Garrlyon to her, or render that 
lady's visit more acceptable than it at first 
appeared. Since her dog's death she liad been 
more unbearably silly and impertinent than ever ; 
and now, a fbrtnigfat aft^ her arrival^ as the 
party sat at dinner, a greater contrast to the 
cheerfiil trio who met there . a few mornings 
before could hardly be found. There had been 
a ^' row ^ in the Italian household : Lady Carr- 



256 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

lyon's two servants giving themselyes sach 
insolent airs in imitation of their mistress, that 
the cook had been moved to brandish a coUdlo 
over Carl the courier's head, and the black-eyed 
dovma di facenda, it was asserted, had futened 
upon Mrs. Timson, and reft from her a handful 
of sandy locks. For these outrages the queen- 
mother had demanded summary justice to be 
inflicted, and great was her wraih when her son 
attempted to defend the delinquents, on the score 
of Italian temperament, and the difference of 
** manners," 

'< Manners ! do you call it manners to rush at 
people with kitchen-knives ? It's really hoirible, 
Laurence I You have got so demoralized, living 
among these people, I really believe you don't 
think there's any harm in it But I see what 
it is : of course, if they were not my servants, 
some notice toould be taken, . but your wife and 
her mother, I suppose, put them up to U, and 
it is another covert insult to me, like my poor 
Supine's death! Nothii^ shall induce me to 
believe that was accident.^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 257 

They were in the loggia alone, but her lady- 
ship's angry voice was considerably raided. 

"If you will talk in this way, mother, pray 
speak in a lower voice, for I should be sorry that 
Mrs. Conrteney or Gilda should hear you. As 
to their being your servants: if they were not 
your servants, let me tell you that I should have 
turned them out neck and crop long ago. These 
patrician ways don^t suit Italians, who are ac- 
customed to be spoken civilly to.'* 

"Ob, of course I I understand. As little, I 
suppose, as my patrician ways suit your wife? I 
take the hint, my dear, but we shall not remain 
here long^ to trouble them . only, as long as one 
is here, one would be glad to have one's servants 
treated decently. It would be a bore to have one's 
courier's throat cut, though manners are so 
different I have gone through a great deal," 
continued her ladyship, with a sudden change to 
the larmoyant in her tone, " I have gone through 
a great deal, Laurence, in coming to see you here, 
and I did not expect to be treated as I have been. 
I consented to receive the person you have 

VOL. n. 17 



258 CARB OF CAMtLYON. 

chosen to marry, which was of course a great 
sacrifice, and I wished to take her hj the hand 
and form her a little, if pos&ible, and I shoidd 
have introduced her into the best circles ; fant I 
have been met with such ingratitude, that all mj 
w^arm feelings are crushed . crushed! . and . end 
I see it*s of no use, and that you are so fond of 
this low kind of society, that it is impossible to 
raise you, or make you wish for anything better 
now. Your old friends will scarcely believe it! 
I dread to think of what the duchess will say! 
Of course, my poor boy," added she, with a 
change of tone, '^ it isn't your fault, you're under 
tills fatal influence, 'But it shall be thou shalt 
lower to her level day by day,' as Lord Bynm or 
somebody or other says ; so that now you can 
even see your mother insulted without resent^ 
ing it!" 

"You really talk in a way, mother, that is 
enough to provoke a more patient man than I 
am. Who dreams of insulting you ? not Gilda. 
She is constantly trying to devise some scheme 
for your amusement It was but last evening 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 259 

she suggested having a party of the peasants up 
here^ on the lawn, to dance the adUarella for you, 

and "" 

" A refined entertainment ! ^ 

. 

''And she is always urging me not to think 
of her, but to devote myself more to you. If 
your servants give themselves airs, my wife can't 
help that So long as you can put up with our 
ways here (they are rough, but you knew that 
when yon came), Gilda and I will try and make 
you happy; but I never expected you would be 
able to stand an Italian life for long. When we 
come to England. I suppose we shall some day. 
I think you will perceive that my wife's manners 
are not quite what you seem to fancy, and that 
without any forming she will not disgrace the 
station in which she is placed." 

Lady Carrlyon muttered something about his 

 

being satisfied, of course, and turned on her heel, 
more completely out of humour . ^more thoroughly 
discouraged, than she had yet been. She had 
played her highest cards, and was beaten. There 
was a very distinct hint in that closing speech 

17.2 



260 CARB OF CARIiLYON. 

of Carr's^ that unless her views underwent some 
modification, the duration of her visit might with 
propriety be curtailed. Must she really retam 
home, baffled at every point? Must she submit 
to be beaten out of the field by lihis mere child> 
and her mother? Must she give up the hope of 
leading her son back to the path of ambition, or 
at least of vanity, and social success ? of separating 
him from this *^ low connection " in any way if 
possible? or, last hope of all, of moulding her 
daughter-in-law to her own ways and wishes? 
It certainly appeared so* If she remained she 
must alter her tone ; she must stoop to dissemble, 
and really to these people in her present frame 
of mind I no, she couldn't do this. There cer- 
tainly never was an unhappy mother more to be 
pitied; and she found her only consolation in 
the sympathizing breast of Mrs. Timson* Not 
that she actually followed that time-honoured 
custom of heroines in old comedies by which 
the tiring-woman becomes at once a confidant 
and a confederate. Lady Carrlyon said very 
little herself; but her astute maid knew the 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 261 

signs of the times, and profited by tliem, and 
she was rewarded after her kind. She had made 
the most of that quarrel in the morning ; and 
now when her feelings were still irritable, in 
the afternoon, she diverged into another path, 
where she had often before led her too willing 
mistress. 

" It's uncountable to me, m' lady, how a party 
with any pretentions to gentility can demean their- 
sel ves so low as to make their own gownds. There's 
Mrs. Courtoncy makes every stitch she wears, 
as I'm informed. And to be sure the sleeves is 
ridiclously old fashioned . quite the year before 
last . ^let alone the tight body, which if you re- 
member right, m' lady, went out three seasons 
ago. As to Mrs. Carr, really, m' lady, I'd tell 
Mr. Carr, if I was you, that she do disfigure 
'erself hawful with them bands so tight to her 
'ead, instead of the 'air a little full. I suppose, 
m' lady, she's seen nothing different They mostly 
'ere seem to 'ave a disgusting lot of 'air, which, 
as I'm informed, they plaster with tallow-candles 
to their 'eads." 



262 CABB OF CABBLTOir. 



.. 



Disgusting I " ejaculaied her ladyship, wi& a 
shudder. 

'' I'm sure I'd hoffer willing, m' ladj, as your 
ladjabip's daughter-in-law, and I not aboTe mj 
sitivation, which is^onlj a senrint, Fm well aware, 
and no need to be] treated as I ^ave been by some 
people, to dress 'er 'air myself once; but Fm 
afraid, m' lady, the hoffer wouldn't be 'preciated." 

" Wouldn't be understood," responded her mis- 
tress, shaking her head. 

'^I don't complain for myself," continued Mrs. 
Timson, with an increase of spiteful humility, 
'* of not being spoke to, and gave a bed as you 
wouldn't put an 'orse to sleep upon, and the 
insults untold as I've 'ad 'eaped on me, which 
ham but a servint I'm well aware, though ladies- 
maids 'as then: rights ; leastways the dook always 
nodded 'is 'ead, or said, ^ I 'ope your 'ealth's well, 
Mrs. Timson,' when he met me in the passage ; 
which I've neyer 'ad a word from the ladies 'ere, 
and I've no call to expect it, I suppose, thomgh 
it is aggrayoking, m' lady, to see Mrs. Carr's 
familiarity with them low Italians. I 'eard 'er 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 263 

call that fellow Jewsippe, carro mio, which Mr. 
Finks said he wouldn't think of calling me, and 
that it meant my dear I I couldn't 'ardlj believe 
mj hears^ I was that shocked I I wasn't sure I 
didn't ought to have fainted* It might have woke 
her to a sense, m' lady." 

Her mistress again shook her head gloomily, 
and sighed. She said nothing ; but Mrs. Timson 
knew that her words had not been unacceptabley 
and that that blue mantle she coveted (Finks 
said that blue became her) would devolve on her 
shoulders all the sooner in consequence. 

A party of four persons, as I have said, never 
sat down to a meal more ill at ease than did 
the family at the villa that day to their early 
dinner. Lady Carrlyon, wrapped in dignified 
abstraction, played with the briloquta on her chain, 
not deigning to open her lips. She had decided 
on no course of action as yet, and in medio tatis^ 
nmua was her ladyship's motto when wavering 
between insolence and insincerity. 

GUlda was silent and sad. She was not super- 
stitious, but there was a weight at her heart 



264 CAUK OF CARRLYON. 

which might have been held to predict &ome 
vague calamity. Was it only that household- 
worry m the morning, and her increasing dreaJ 
of and aversion to her mother-in-law ? Carr, at 
least, was unusually tender and demonstrative to 
her since his conversation with his mother. It 
seemed as though he weve trying to comp^isate 
to his wife for all the discomfort and annoyance 
to which she was daily exposed. He was terribly 
worried, for his mother's visit was turning oat 
even worse tlian he feared. He wished she would 
go quietly away, without making any more rows. 
He hated rows, and he resolved he would not 
pay attention to anything she said. But even 
while his manner was so magnificent and tfuou- 
ciant with his mother, he was anything but at 
ease himself; and though he saw the whole 
absurdity and injustice of her accusations as 
clearly as any one could, his own line of conduct 
was by no means so plainly chalked out as his 
tone indicated. Could he really, if things came 
to their worst, turn his own mother out of his 
house ? Impossible. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 265 

Mrs. Courteney was the calmest of the party. 
She had brought her knitting to the table, and 
%Mi it bei^ide her; but the sitting there was little 
more than a matter of form: nearly every dish 
passed by her untasted. There were long oppres- 
sive silences, broken only by the soond of knife 
and fork. Carr made pne or two forced attempts 
to be witty, bat they were felt to be failures. 
At last they drew their chairs into the loggia, , 
and coffee was served. The post-bag at the 
same moment was brought in, and laid upon the 
table. It contained but one letter, and that was 
for Lady Carrlyon, 



END OF VOL. I 


CHAPTER XXI. 

I 

The unliappy old devotee sat with the scaldino 
upon her knees^ and the Jesuit before her. The 
expresslon on her couutenance was made up of 
terror^ perplexitj, and above all, the most abject 
abasement* In the oUj tongue of her confessor 
was all the law and the prophets. She could 
no more struggle successfullj against it, than the 
doomed bird under the fascination of a serpent. 
" Si i fatta Crtiana f " she inquired ; the 

VOL. IL 1 



2 CAER OF CARRLYON. 

conversion to Romanism being only more laconi- 
cally 'expressed, by the " making herself a 
Christian " to narrow-minded bigotry, even in the 
conntess's Station. 

^^ Davero^ replied the priest "But this has 
not been accomplished without soie difficulty, 
and the promise of procuring her a good partito. 
Your son she inclines to most of all; and as I 
think she will e^ercise an advantiageous influence 
over him, you must exert yourself, contessa, to 
bring about this result" 

" But he loves the other one, padre ; and you 
know how obstinate he is, poor boy ! " 

" The other has thrown him over for the 
Englishman, and the count may be bronght to 
xnarry this girl, through pique. She Is clever 
and may work us much good ; and I teil you that 
it is essenal to separate yoor son at once from 
his dangerous companions, and attach him to 
BOme sharp-witted woman^ who will obtain a 
righteons ascendancy over him." 

*'But . ^bt," fitammered the poor lady, ashamed 
of naming so sordid a consideration to the 



et 



CASA LAMBEBTL 3 

SfHritttally^mmded father^ '^ is dhe Aot yery poor ? 
a dependant on this Coarteney fiunily ? '* 

** She igageg . ^how and whence I know not. 
to procture some fifty or sixty thonsand scudi for 
her marriage portion." 

It is Yory straiige, is it not ? ^ 
We have nothing to say to ibe stra&geness 
of it^" remarked the priest^ somewhat sharply. 
She undertakes that it shaU be forthcommg 
before the negotiations are ccmcloded. Andyou 
know that it would be difficcdt to obtain as xnmch 
with any partito here^ in the present tate of the 
count's fortunes . unless^ indeed you sought for 
an alliance among the mezza ceto.^ 

** Np," replied the countess with a sigh '* His 
father was a proud man^ and so is Guido. The 
Lambertis were counts in the Marches in tbe 
fourteenih centnry. They have never degraded 
th^nselves to a mere mercenory maniage. Bat 
what do yoa know of this girFs birth^ padre? 
She may belong to the mezzo iSto herseif? " 

This momentary glimmer of reason was quickly 
put out by a severe look r<mi Padre Stefiuio. 

1.2 



4 CARB OP CARBLYON. 

"Do you imagine I have not inquired, my 
daughter ? Confine your excellent Observation 
to matters you can understand* I have seen ihe 
register of this young lady's birth, and letters 
written by her illustrious papa^ whose family is 
one of the oldest in England. You may rest 
satisfied on this head." 

"Indeed, padre," said the poor lady, submis- 
sively, after a moment^s pause^ '^I fear I shall not 
succeed in persuading my son to listen to reason ; 
but of course I will obey you. Anything to 
serve the interests of our holy Church, and to 
promote the spiritual welfare of my Guido." 

" You must work upon his feelings ; and as I 
have already said, pique may do somewhat. But 
you have no time to lose. I leam this evening 
there is a change in the plans of the Courteney 
family again. They depart in a few days." 

*' The blessed Virgin be praised for that 1 " 
ejaculated Madame Lamberti, fervently. " I have 
had no rest since they have been here, and shall 
have none as long as they remain. They have 
paid their rent up for the next'three months. 



\ 



. I 

CASA LAMBEBTL 5 



SO I haye no disquietade on that score, but oh I 
I feel as if my Guido were neyer safe as long as 
that other girl was here I She has exercised some 
unholj spell over him. He neither eats nor 
sleeps. I hear him walkmg up and down the 
room half the night, father." 

" Marriage will eure all that," replied the 
priest, smillng. 

'* May he not retum to be as he was before they 
came, . when they depart ? " said the poor mother. 

^^ I repeat, it is necessary that we obtain a hold 
over him now or never, and it rests chiefly with 
you to accomplish this." 

The above is but a fragment of a long conver- 
sation which passed between the priest and his 
victim about a week after Carr's proposal, and 
two days after Sara's noctumal wanderings. 
Her Interviews with Padre Stefano, which had 
been pretty frequent before then, had even been 
longer and more frequent since. And while the 
old woman was as a puppet in the hands of the 
priest, he, astute man as he was, was but a 
puppet in the hands of the girL 



6 CABR OF GARELTON. 

The iDiurriage oould not take place at Bologna. 
Floraace was ihe nearest place where there was 
a ckrgyman; and a fayouraUe change in tbe 
Weather prodnced so corresponding a one in 
Mr. Coorteney's health, that he declared him- 
self equal to undertake the journej. He eleemed 
to have rallied, indeed^ ever since the saarriage 
was decided bn : and though the phjsician looked 
graye and shook his head^ he coiild not positiyelj 
interdict the joom^ by short stages. It was 
agreed that Carr^ who was as impatient of delays 
as Mr. Courteney seemed, should go on to 
arrange certain necessarj preliminaxies, and that 
the Courtenejs should follow ihree days' later. 
Mrs. Courteney alone opposed all haste, and 
woold haye t^nporized if she could: spoke of 
ihe impossibility of her daughter's wedding gar- 
m/Kits being made in this haste; and snggested 
that there should be at least a month's interyal 
before the marriage. But Garr's characteristic 
impetuosity was seconded in this instance by 
Mr. Courteney's evident anziety that the matter 
should be concluded. 



CASA LAMBERTI. . 7 

^ In my -state any unneoessary delay is dan- 
gerous I am well enongh to more just now, 
I may not be so a fortnight henoe; and in a 
month's time I may be gone on a longer joorney 
who knows? The aettlement is so simple a 
matter^ tbat we may espect it firom Paris in a 
few daytL What then is there to detain us ? " 

Gilda made no objection. She was quiet, pale, 
and pasdve. Far &om avoiding Carr now, she 
niet him with her gentle smile, and listened to 
all his rapturoos nonsense, and seemed to feel 
that in plighting her word she had relinqnished 
all further right to act for herseif, and must, 
perforce, lean upon and ding to the support she 
had chosen. His tact was never more gracefuUy 
and adroitly employed than in speaking to her 
of the happy fiiture they wonld lead at Carrlyon. 
Almost the first time they had met, she had 
expressed an eager desire to become acquainted 
with En^ish country life. She would see it now, 
he told her, under auspioes which he hcMped wonld 
make her love it, and preyent her casting a 
regret back to Italy . . . and he described the old 



8 CAKR OF CARRLYON. 

I 

house, with its picture-gallery, and banqueting- 
hall, and sunny terraces, and herds of fallow 
deer swimming across the lake to be fed on 
sammer momings^ and the rides down forest 
glades^ and the village, with its schools and its 
ivied church, and the Christmas bounty-which 
should be called " Geraldine's bounty," when ahe 
was Lady of the Manor, . and the loving tenantry, 
and the children's feasts, and. and . in short^ like 
portraits of Queen Bess^ bis brilliant picture of 
ihe golden time that was to succeed their marriage^ 
had no shadows, Yet shadows there T^ere, only 
he ignored them. His father's sturdy figure 
pointing to his diminished rent-roll ; his mother's 
implacable face of spite, and wrath, and disap- 
pointment; he saw them both, but he resolved 
they should not interfere with the happiness of 
that prospect. Had not his.llfe been passed in 
twisting them both round his fingers? When 
the thing was done . accompHshed beyond recall 
. they would submit to make the best of it: 
though he well knew what obstacles would be 
thrown in his way to prevent it, if possible. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 9 

Therefore, he was anxious thatthe marriage should 
take place before any letters or messenger, in reply 
to bis announcement^ could reaeb Italy. In tbat 
announcement of bis engagement^ be said notbing 
of its immediate fiilfilment ; witb reference to tbe 
sale of tbe farm^ be contented bimself^ on second 
tbougbts^ by expressing tbe assnrance tbat be 
sbould'always be bappy to consent to anytbing 
tending to make bis fatber comfortable ; and be 
feit certain tbat Lord Carrlyon, on Im part, would 
never refuse bis consent to a step upon wbicb 
tbe bappiness of bis son depended. To bis 
motber I am afraid be assumed a sbarper and 
more decided tone, as better calculated in bis 
estimation to produce tbe desired effect He 
reminded. ber tbat be bad never given ber tbe 
smallest reason to believe be sbould marry to 
please any one but bimself. He had pleased bim- 
self. He was prepared for all sbe could sy, 
and be begged beforeband to assure ber it would 
not bave tbe least weigbt witb bim. His mind 
was fuUy made up, and bis word pledged. Tbe 
wife be bad cbosen was one wbom Lady Carrlyon 



10 CARR OP CABBLTON. 

onght to be proad to receive as a daughter-in*law. 

She was rieh in every mental and personal graee^ 

which he had lived long enongh to coneider 

snperior to all other riches. In conclusion^ he 

had the effirontery to hope that his mother would 

send his bride-elect some small trinket^ from the 

great family jewel-case, as an eamest of her ' 

ladyship's affectionate regard. 

He was more in love than ever : forgot him- 
self^ his little vanities and small social trinmphs^ 
the selfishness of the spoilt child^ the arrogance 
of the admired and successful man ; forgot every- 
thing bat her: and the love which began as a 
pastime^ now inflnenced every thonght and action. 
Perhaps the combativeness of his nature^ which 
I have already shown was so prominent a featnre^ 
added to the ardonr of his passion for the time. 
He swore that the earnestness of his devotioh 
should gradually melt her coldness. He would 
oTercome and drive out that old memory; he 
never doubted it. And, in truth, this energy of 
purpose, the ennobling influence of one healthy 
feeling, streng and true, in a petty life of 



GASA IiAMBEBTI. 11 

dettanteitfn, made itsdf feit ; tbe outlines of the 
man seemed broader and bolder ihan they had 
hitherto Gilda ymn not insensible to this ; what 
woman could be so? Sbe said sbe had done bim 
injustice: sbe tried to repair it by every means 
in her power. The week that had elapsed was 
one of probation to her : it was an effort alwajs 
to appear cheerful, to drive back the thought 
that wauld rise unbidden at tiin6S5 and to enter . 
or seem to enter . ^into all Carr's plana with 
interest Wben ahe failed^ she reproached her- 
self: for was he not more tender and more 
forbearing than she had believed possible ? 

One trial was spaied her* Guido she never 
saw. Since that interview with Mrs. Courteney 
he had not been inside tbe apartment She did 
not hear bis name mentioned. By tacit consent, 
neither her mother nor herseif had alluded to him 
since that day: Gilda, indeed, was ignorant that 
her mother had seen him. No good was to be 
gained by repeating ip her the substance of that 
interview. The best, the only iing, that her 
mother oonld bope, was that the memory of thi3 



12 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

early love, which iq girl at least had no idea was 
retumed, might die out and be forgotten in ihese 
two young lives. Mrs. Courteney's partiality for 
Carr made Her^ perhaps, more sanguine that the 
redemption of her ehild's happiness lay in his 
devotion. 

Such was the State of feeling, and the position 
of affairs^ in the family on the day when it had 
been finally resolved that Carr should proceed by 
diligence the following morning to Florence, 
engage an apartment for the Courteneys^ and 
make the necessary arrangements for the marriage 
forthwiL He had already written to the Secre- 
tary of Legation> who was a friend of his^ begging 
him to facilitate matters ; and it was agreed 
between Mr. Coorteney and himself that the 
ceremony should take place, if possible, four or 
five days after their arrival in Florence. 

That evening, as they sat round the tea-table, 
Garofalo, who had not been to see his friends for 
some days, unexpectedly made his appearance at 
the door. The worthy professor looked rather 
pale enxd anxious, as though some matter of 



CASA LAMBEBTL 13 

more than common gravitj weighed upon his 
mincL ' 

Mr. Coarteney^ who was stretched in bis chaise 
longue near the fire, with his pocket-yolame of 
Horace between his finger and thumb^ greeted his 
old friend with imusu)Ed warmth. 

**How fares it with our leamed professor? I 
have been here^ on this sofa, for the last two days, 
expecting you to come and see me." 

*^Hh\ signQre^" responded the Italian^ grasping 
the invalid gentleman's thin band, ^^I have had 
bnsiness of importance occupying me. Chi vuole f 
I am glad to see you betten Ton^ too^ caro 
signore, have been occupied^ I believe ? Is it too 
late to ofiFer my felicitations ? " 

" Very nearly ; for in less than a week we shall 
be gone." 

.^'I regret it mnch, signore. This house will 
indeed seem deserted without you: but who can 
tdll how long any of us will remain here? Guido 
himself is off to-morrow.'* 

*' Guido I" exclaimed Mrs. Courteney, aloud. 
The attention of every one of the party was fixed 



14 CAER OV CABRLTON. 

upon ihe professor, otherwise the extraotdinary 
convulsion of Sara's face could hardly have 
escaped notice. The cup of tea she was carrying 
to her lips shook so tfaat she was obliged to set it 
down. 

" By-the-by, that remmds me,** Said Mr. 
Courteney, " that we have not seen Connt 
Lamberti^ either, for some days. What h the 
cause of this sudden departure ? " 

The Professor laid his forefinger on the aide of 
his nose. 

^^ Private afairs, which call him to the north of 
Italy for a short time^ signore." 

Carr mTolontarily fixed his eyes upon Gilda 
while the above was passing. She turned a shade 
paler^ and a low sigh . so low indeed that it 
scarcely reached him . escaped her after the pro* 
fessor's last Speech. An awkward sQence followed. 
Each member of that small party feit it and 
knew the reason ; that is to say his own reason : 
and for some minutes there was nothing heard 
bnt the n<se of the professor's copious pinch 
of snuff^ the taking of which was always at- 



CASA LAMBERTL 1$ 

tended by a sound like that of a terrier worrying 
a rat* 

^^Tou must come and visit ns at Florence, 
Garofalo," said Mr. Courteney at last, ^^ the citt 
superba of your favourite poet xnost have some 
attraction for you." 

" Ah ! it is as ungratefal to me as it was to the 
divin Dante," ireplied the prafessor, shaking his 
head. " A Florentine, I am exiled from her walls, 
signore ; and if we meet again, it must be eise- 
where . for the present But," he added in a 
Urelier tone, though with eqoal earnestness, ^^ con- 
gratolate me, signore ! What think you ? I have 
made the acquaintance of two sitch men siilce I 
had last the honour of seeing you! Italians . true 
gendemen, true scholars, and both of them fuU of 
the most interesting details for me." 

" Who are these uncommonly rare birds ? " 
asked Mr. dourteney, sarcastically. 

*^ One ia called Jacoppo Bossi, a Yenetian ; the 
other, Giovanni Tibaldi. His country I cannot 
find out; such an entertainisg oompanion! and 
fall of Instruction.'' 



16 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

"Where did you make the acquaintance of 
these gentlemen, Garofalo? I never heard you 
speak before in such terms of any of your towns- 
folk." 

*' Ah I caro signore. These were fotwarded 
to me from Venice, by a friend. They are not 
to be found here." 

" Forwarded? not to be fouhd ? What do you 
mean? Where are they living ? ^ 

*^ Living ! They have been dead, caro signore, 
between three and four hundred years, These 
are their MS. letters, despatches, and Journals, 
fll of illustrations to the history of the time, 
with many quotations from the divine poet ; a 
Tolume of priceless value to me, copied by my 
friend from the archives of Venice .... I know 
these men, I know them as well as if I had seen 
them in the flesh I Ha ! rare fellows I rare fellows, 
signore." 

The good faith with which the enthusiast spoke, 
and was evidently so carried away by bis admira* 
tion of these defunct worthies, to forget for the 
moment every other subject, calied a smile into 



^ 



CASA LAMBEBTL 17 

the face of his- auditors, and effectaally diverted 
the Channel of conversation from Lamberti 

Neverthelessi later in the evening, when an 
opportunity offered itself of addressing Mrs. 
Courteney in a low voice, and without attrac1> 
ing marked attention^ Garo&lo said> . 

^^ Our friend charged me to deliver a message 
to you, signore and one to your daughter^ . 
through you . . . you will comprehendhis motiyes 
for not bidding you farewell in person. He bade 
me deliver those farewells^ with his heart-felt 
prayers for your welfare, and that of the sighorma. 
He was not aware that your own departure was so 
near at band." 

" When is he going ? and will he leave his 
mother for any length of time? " 

'' He has had a message from a good friend of 
ours . a friend of Italy's," . ^the professor frowned 
mysteriously ; ^' and he was glad to leave Bologna 
just at this moment Important events may arise 
I am not at liberty to say more. He may retnm 
iBoon> but it will depend on certain contingencies, 
and other wills than his own." 

VOL. n. 2 



y 



18 CAHB OF C ABSLYON. 

As he uttered tbe last words in tliat pecuKarlj 
hoarse wliisper, which is often heard more dis* 
tincy ifaan an ordinr j conversational tone^ Sara 
Gisbome passed dose by. The ribbon of her 
leeve canght in the back of the professor's chair ; 
or at least it appeared to do bo. The movement 
was adroitly managed,, and it wonid haye been 
difficult to teil &om the ezpression of her face 
that she had heard a word tht was said. 

A few minntes later she sauntered out of iJic 
noom. Ko one ever took any notice of her goings 
and Comings^ and she knew she wa safe from 
Observation. 

. In the ante-room she flung herseif down into 
a chanr^ and sobbed. Unnatural as this may 
appear in one so haxd cruel> and relentless> ison** 
abtoicy is, in reality, the only thing which is 
nnnatural in human nature. The passionate heart 
of ihe girl was lashed into a perfect storm at the 
idea of seeing Guido no more, just now when 
her plans seemed ripe for execuiion. A few day s 
.only a few days more ; but how much might 
have been efFected in those few d^ys. Forget- 



CASA LAMBERTI. 19 

ful of prudence, forgetfiil of everythmg but the 
frustration of her heart's wild dream^ for which 
she had toiled and plotted so long, Sara deter- 
mined that he should not depart without her 
making one Tast and desperate effort She would 
compromise herseif. no matter . she would risk 
that fair fame which was almost her only worldly 
capital; but what mere worldly considerations, 
without any stronger Support, could restrain her 
at such a moment? 

Whatev^r wa to be done must be done quickly . 
She rose, and runnmg to the door which I 
have already mentioned as connecting the Cour- 
teney's apartments with those occupied by Guido 
and his mother, she drew back the heavy bolts, 
and opened it Upon closing it agsun, she found 
herseif on the darfc staircase. A draught of cold 
air came up from the open passage below. She 
stood still and shivered, brushed away the tears 
that still lay upon her cheek, and tremblingly 
aj^roached the door she knew to be his, and 
beneath which a light was shining. 

2.2 



t 
20 CARR OF CARRLYON. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

The young advocate was in his room alime, sur- 
rounded bj the few preparations he was making 
for his sudden departnre. A pile of letters and 
papers . ^most of them in cipher . entrusted to 
his care by some of the liberals of Bologna, for 
their firiends in Milan ; a small valise ; an engi- 
neer*s map ; and a case of pistols were near him. 
He had announced his departure to his mother 
an hour previously, nnder the pretext of law 
business, which wonld detain him at Milan for 
a few days. The countess received the intelli- 
gence in a way that surprised her son. Two 
days had elapsed since her conversation with 
the Jesuit father, and she had not yet sammoned 
conrage to broach the subject of it to Guido. 
She now said very lite; but in this reticence 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 21 

she seemed to be exercising a great restraint 
over herseif. 

^' You will come back and spend an hour with 
me later,^Ztb wo, will you not ? " 

It appeared as though she were almost anxious 
to get rid of him for the moment. 

Guido had eagerly hastened to obej a summons 
which might be of importance to his country, 
and released him for a time at least from a 
life which had become almost insupportable. His 
incapacity for application to any of his old studies 
had increased. . Over and over again he sat down, 
and attacked the subject before him: in a few 
minutes his thoughts had wandered far away. 
He was miserable. He feit tbat so long as he 
remained under that roof with the Courteneys 
it was hopeless. The secret missive, with its 
prospect of very different employment ere long, 
came like a wholesome tonic, arousing him from 
despondency, and bracing his relaxed energies. 
His country wanted him ; the deep wound in his 
life which he knew his own nature too well to 
believe coald ever be healed, must not be suffered 



12 CABR OP CARRLYON. 

tp eat awaj all the man's vital &rce. He bad 
talked of change, but the very strengtb of pur- 
pose (wliether the principle that guided it were 
right or wrong), which had made him resist the 
neblest, as it is the subtlest, temptation to which 
man is here exposed, denoted a character of iron 
jnould, less susceptible than most things to the 
influence of time. This love would remaia as 
a shrine whereon to ofFer up bis pnrest thoughts ; 
a sanctuary whereiu to r^tire fix)in the tnrmoil 
and strife of the world. But Guido was a man 
of action: a man whose sjmpathies led bim to 
regard it as the first duty of every Citizen of 
the State to be up and stirring in sach times ; 
imd as the depth of moral degradation to be 
8unk in indolence and self-indulgence. It was 
not less a principle, iherefore, than a necessity 
of bis nature o work; and work requiring energy, 
skill, and forethought, was the best medicine now 
to ** minister to a mind diseased." 

His preparations were nearly completed. He 
stood there with folded arms, looking at a litde 
glove that lay on the table before him ; and 



GASA LAMBBRTL 23 

while lie yielded to thk momentary iveakness^ 
his thoughts wandered far, far away from tlie 
businesa of the preaent hour, and bard practical 
consideTations for the futnre. . . . Hewas stared 
by a low knock at the door^ and throst the glore 
^ horriedlj into his breast. lipon his iaritation 
to enter, the door slowly opened, and ihe figure 
of Sara Gisbome met his astoniahed gaze. 

** You are going away eariy to-morrow, Gnido 
Lamberti, and I hare come . ^to wish you good- 
by." 

She spoke in a low tremnloua yoiee, very 

 

nnlike her itsnal seif; and rapidly, as thongh 
not trusfing herself to weigh and consider what 
words ahe had come ihere to say. 

**You shun any leave-taking wh the Conr- 
teneys," she went on. ** The strengtit of a man's 
will is snch, that you have rooted up already 
the boyish passion for a diild who was insensible 
to yonr love, and will soon be another's* Is it 
not so ? Well, Guido Lambert!^ the step I take 
is without precedent, nnwomanly . call it by wht 
name you. will; bat I am come to tdl yoa there 



24 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

is one who is willing to devote her whole life, 
nay, to lay it down in your service. Guido 
Lambert! I A woman^ whom you do not love 
at present, indeed^ but whose devotion your heart 
would recognize in time;  woman whom it is 
in your power to mould for good or ili; who 
would toil and plot for you ; whose energies . 
they are greater than most women's . should be 
concentrated on the cause you have at heart. 
She asks for nothing but tolerance at first She 
knows you must recover from the wound under 
which you still suffer, before she can hope for 
anything more; and . and she would not now. 
Guido Lamberti, run the risk of exciting your 
contempt by taking this extraordinary step, but 
that time presses^ and that if they are not now 
united, fate may divido those two lives for ever ! " 
" Signorina," said Guido, gravely, taking her 
hand, *^there is not so much love in the world 
that one can afford to be ungrateful for it I But 
I will not deceive you. I have no love, nor 
shall I ever have any, to give in retum. How 
a grave, tacitum man can have won, unwittingly. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 25 

the affection of so brilliant a woman as yourself, 
I know not; bat jour imagination has endowed 
him^ signorina^ with qualities he does not possess> 
I fear. Time and absence will teach you that you 
were mistaken, and *' 

"No, no. Guido!" cried the girl^ passionately ; 
" don't talk of time and absence ! I cannot con- 
tinue to live as I am doing. I cannot remain 
with these people. I have always hated them. 
I hate them worse than ever now. If I am forced 
back to that life^ I shall become desperate . 
reckless : my bosom seething over with bitterness 
and disappointment. God knows what I may not 
do ! I hold even now a secret in my possession 
which n^ight break off this marriage. Bat I 
will not do that/* she added^ while her eyes 
flashed again. ^' No ! I have a revenge for past 
wrongs more sure than that." 

Guido looked at her in stem surprise. 

" Are they not your bene&ctors of whom you 
thus speak?" 

** No I " she exclaimed fiercely, and her voice 
had now risen from the mormur in which she 



26 CARR OF CARBLYON. 

began to a pitch far above its ordinary one. 
.^ Mj cry is Kke that of Esau of oW I They 
have robbed me of my birthright, and ncm- they 
have robbed me of my blessing . ^the blessing 
of your love, Lambert! ! I have good canse to 
hatetheml" 

^^ Tou speak in riddles^ signorina^ and it is net 
for me to unravel them. Forgive me if I remind 
you that a false construction might be placed on 
your presence here. We live surronnded by 
spies in this honse. Permi! me to condact yoa 
back to your own wing of the palace." 

" What do I care ?'* sbe cried, with a pasBionate 
burst of tears ; " what do I care for the construc- 
tion that is put on my presence here ? it is the 
truth. I wonid have sacrificed all^ all for yon! 
Whatever I become in after Hfe, whatever depth 
of degradation and self-abasement I may reach^ 
it is owing to you, who might have redeemed me, 
and who abandon me now to all the worst pas- 
sions in my nature." 

While she was yet speaking, the noise of a key 
in the lock, and of a door tamed sharply an its 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 27 

hinge, made Guido start and look towards the 
panel wliicli communicated with bis mother's 
room. It flew back^ and the countess^ pale and 
feeble^ foUowed by the Jesuit fiither^ stepped into 
the room. 

" The soulid of your voices, my son," began the 
old lady, in quivering accents, *^ attracted the good 
padre and me, and we are come here to con- 
firm the hopes we have lately entertained^ that 
you have transferred your affections from the 
heretic English lady to her whose eyes have been 
grafciously opened by our blessed Virgin to the 
truth of our holy faith." 

It.was a lesson she had learned by heart; and 
she went on^ after a &ightened, hurried glance at 
her son's stem face. - 

"We know your upright heart, so sensitive 
to the call of honour, my son; and that you 
would not compromise the fair &me of thi& lady 
by remaining closeted with her at this hour, were 
you not prepared to vindicate her characterj aa 
your wife, before the world." 

" It is a choice which will cause your friends 



28 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

no disquietude in this world, nor imperil your 
salvation in the next," chimed in Padre Stefano. 

The young man's brow was knit ; but a scornfiil 
smile played round bis mouth. He saw the 
Jesuit's'plot; and tnmed bis piercing eyes upon 
tbe girl^ to read tbere bow far sb was implicated 
in it before he trusted himself to speak. 

She was white, and her fingers twitched 
nervously, but she returned him gaze for gaze. 

**I am innocent of any share in this. Guido 
Lamberti, so befp me GodI Reverend fatber, 
I appeal to you whether " 

" The appeal is needless, signorina," said Guido, 
with grave courtesy. "I am quite ready to 
acquit you of any share in so puerile a plot. My 
pooir mother, had you not submitted to be a tool 
in this, it would be hardly worth my notice. 
Out of respect for you, 1 do not reply to this 
^ reverend father ' as he deserves, by kicking him 
down-stairs, as I shbuld any other scoundrel whom 
I caught eavesdropping. But, remember this, if 
any scandal should arise from this lady's being 
known to have been here, the scandal is of your 



CASA LAMBEKTL 29 

making, sir ; and your cloth, for which I have 
uncommonly Utile respect^ as you kaow, will not 
protect you. What has passed between this young 
lady and me is a matter which concems ns ahne; 
and I submit to no man's interference in such 
things. Signorina^ will you permit me to con- 
duct you back to your own apartments ?" 

Though in the form of a request, there was 
really more of command in the words^ as he said 
them^ and took the girl's trembling band in bis. 
What use was there in resistance^ even if she 
could have resisted that streng will ? But shame 
and mortification held her dumb. Without even 
raising her eyes towards her two advocates^ she 
suffered bim to lead her from the room, and 
across ihe passage^ to the unbarred door through 
which sh had found her way there, As they 
now reached it^ she seemed to make an effort to 
speak^ but her voice, or the words in which she 
would have clothed her meaning^ failed her, ,She 
shrank away from the firm, manly pressure of 
ihe band he once more exlended, in bidding her 
farewell, and with her white face cowering under 



30 CAEK OF CARRLYON. 

a tangle of unraveled hair, she fled down the 
dimly-lit passage, withont even looking at him 
again. 

He fonnd bis room racated on bis retum^ and 
after a few moments' consideration descended to 
his friend^ the professor. He was at bis desk 
as usual, but tbis time he was writing letters. 

*' Strange tbings bave been taking place m 
tbis house to-nigbt, amico mio, but even to you 
I must not disclose tbem. I tbink it better to 
antedate my departure, bowever, by a few bonrs, 
as ibat rascally priest may be plotting to try 
and detain me. Hearen knows wbat ecclesiastical 
laws they may not bring to bear on a poor 
fellow who . well I no matter . ^but I tbink I 
am as well absent from Bologna fbr a sfaort 
time. Tbe feet is," be added, witH a sorry 
attempt at a langb^ ^' tbey are bent on marrying 
me to ome'woman wbo eitber Is, or affects to 
be^ a pious Gatbo&c^ and wbon tbe Jesuits tbink 
tiiey can bave nnder tbeir thumb. I ougbt to 
be bononred at tbeir bestowing so much notice 



on me." 



CASA lAMBEBTL 31 

'^H^! cato m>^ your great ahilities and your 
st70Dg diaracter, without tbe weight of your 
name^ make you a formidaUe adversary^ and 
would make you as yaluable a friend. . . . 
Bot^ let ni6 ask, how are you to get away ' 
at this hour ? There is no diligenza tili slx 
o'clock." 

'^A carreUlA will take me to Modena^ wkere 
I Bhall arrive before the early diligenza Btarts. 
I will send the porter's boy for one." 

While be crossed the coiirt^ the professor rose 
and drew from a leathern bag stnffed into a 
chink in the wall^ five and twenty gold pieces. 
Ten of these affcer some hesitation he replaced. 
He would gladly have given die entire sum^ 
but he dared not part with the whole of those . 
small savings, laid up against a day whi he 
might jio longer be able to eam a bi^occo. On 
tbe count's retum, die old man placed the money 
in bis bAiid. 

** Take it without hesitation and without shame/' 
he said^ ^^your funds will be nearly ezhausted. 
by this joumey ; and this is giyen not to you. 



32 CAKR OP CARRLYON. 

but to the cause we both have at heart I bave 
enough ]et for any pressing emergency^ take 
it then^ glio mio, in God's name^ and may He 
prosper your jouraey 1 If the moment be indeed 
arrived for Italy, if you remain away altogether^ 
who knows but I may pack up my Dante and 
foUow you ? " 

Guido pressed his o.ld friend's band in sllence. 
He would not wound him by declining the oflfer ; 
his pride was of another sort; and he valued 
that friendship beyond much gold. '^ 

" So be it, old friend. We understand each 
other. The young man's arm may one day 
Support the failing one. You will hear from 
me from time to time, and lesun how affairs in 
Lombardy are progressing. If the prospects of 
our friends there seem visionary, and their hopes 
in Charles Albert not likely to be realized ; if, in 
short, this movement we are led to expect be one 
I cannot think myself justified in joining, you will 
probably see me back here before long. Watch 
over my poor mother while I am away. Those 
sharks will leave her no peace. God help her ! " 



CASA LAMBRETL 33 

He wrang his friend's band and then the 
two embraced, as Italians are wont to do. Five 
minutes afterwards he entered his mother's room. 
He had prepared himself for a yiolent scene. 
Bat as he opened the door his mother's prostrate 
figure on the bed^ and the priest beside her, sent 
a shock throagh the son's heart. He rapidlj 
approached her. 

''Mother," he began, as he took her passive 
band. There was no response, bat a low moan, 
and the closed eyes feebly opened, and rested on 
the yoang man. 

"Yoor mother, count, is sick anto death, I 
fear me, . ^and alas ! mj son, jou are the cause 
ofthis!'' 

Thus marmured the smooth-tongued Jesuit. 
Bat Gnidoy who had seen the coontess more 
than once before in this condition, recovered 
his presence of mind, and drawing from his 
pocket a travelling-flask, he applied it to her 
Ups. 

" It is only exhaustion, produced by long 
fasting, and mortification of the flesh," he said, 

VOL. IT. . 3 . 



34 CABB 07 CABSLTON. 

taming to the priest. **This and xe recent 
agitation yoa caused her Iiave brongbib on this 
attack There is a long score between iis^ padre, 
beware I " 

^'You speak a language, mj aon^ I do not 
tmderstandy'' retomed the priest^ with mock 
bumillty. ^^ How can a poor man Uke me 
have offended you? As a true servant of onr 
boly Chnrcb^ and in tbe Sensal interests of this 
excellent lady^ Z have enjoined certain religioas 
exerciseB^ which ^^ 

*^ Spare your breath, and keep yonr defenoe for 
tbose who belieye it," intermpted the connt's 
Stern yoice. '^ Yoa haye starved her, and others 
like her, that yonr Order might be enriched, . 
yon would bleed her of her last bajocco, in the 
name of religion, forsooth I Yonr lies, your 
frands, yonr slander, are fh^ not known ta 
me? And yon expeet me to become a pions 
son of the Chnrch, to belieye in blinking pictures, 
and bleeding images ! Go to I ^ Mother, are yon 
better ? Can yon listen to me ? " 

A iaint colour on her Ups and cheek ciiowed 



CABik LAMBE&TL 35 

that the ifistorative had not bew without effect 
She fidntly sigmfied assent 

^^ I am called away . as I told yoii aome honrs 
ag05 motJier : it may be for mootha . it may be 
only for a few days. You must bear upi, wbile 
I am absent; you most not be despondent abot 
me^ or suffer others to fill your mind witk H>lifib , 
or evil fanciea aboat me. I go bat to do xny 
daty^ as I believe. my iaJther iwahi bare done ; 
and I will try not to proye mysdf miworthy of 
bis nameu Giro me your blessdag befbre 1 deput 
will you not?" 

The poor woman writhed upon. her bed, and 
cast a piteous glance towards the priest 

**How can you expect to win a blessing," 
murmured the latter, *^when you desert your 
mother in what may be her last hour, and dis- 
obey her voice, my son ?" 

It waa but a very thin artifice to detain him. 
Even now Madame Lambert! raised herseif with 
an effort, and cast her arms round her son's neck. 
The mother's love was too strong for the priest. 

** You will go : I know it," she sobbed, ^^ and 

3.2 



36 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

may he Holy Virgin watch over and lead you 
back to mel I will not cease to pray for you, 
my Goido; and, oh! if we do not meet again 
this side the grave, let us not be separated for 
ever hereafterl" 

''We shall not," replied the young man, 
solemniy. 

She lay locked in bis arms ; and memories of 
past years, before a cloud ha4 risen np between 
them, crowded on ihose two hearts, pressed to- 
gether fot the last time. And then, not daring 
to tmst himself to speak again, he rushed from 
the apartment. 



GASA UaiSERTL 



CHAPTER XXHL 

Cabb had only been in Florence a few hours^ 
when a frantic^ incoherent telegram firom bis 
mother reached bim^ imploring bim to retam to 
England instany. Tbis was foUowed in tbe dne 
course of post by tbree letters; one from bis 
fatber. a weak combination of command and 
entreaty to bis son to break off bis niarriage^ 
evidently dictated by Lady Carrlyon ; one from 
tbat lady berself, as foolisb and yiilgar a com- 
position as was ever committed to paper by an 
angry motber ; and one from tbe family lawyer, 
infonmng tbe beir of all tbe Carrlyons of tbe con- 
fased State of bis fatber's affairs, of tbe necessity 
of selling or mortgaging a mucb larger portiou of 
tbe estte tban bad been originally contemplated> 
and.lastly of Lord Carrlyon's incapacity to in- 



38 CABR OS* CABBLTOJfi^. 

crease his son's allowance in the event of tis 
marriage. 

Carr's impatience to place the question of his 
marriage beyond the pale of further discussion 
was only stimulated by this means. Ten days 
of solitary reflection, withont Opposition^ or the 
necessity for active employment, might perhaps 
have led to the postponement of his marriage for 
a time. Btit ten days bcrsily occnpied in sor- 
monnting the minor obstacles of detail that often 
present themselves on such occasions, and in 
hnrryrng on the preparations for the ceremony, 
with now a fr^sh incentive to exertion in these 
irritating despatches from England . why^ no for- 
tuitous concarrenoe of circumstances cotild be so 
favonrable to the speedy accomplishment of this 
marriage with a man ke Oarr I 

As his taking his bride to England was of 
course out of die question at first, when his recep* 
tion at Carrlyon was sore to be humiliating and 
painfol in the extreme, Carr made np his mind to 
remain in Italy for the next six months at least. 
The political horlzon was'growing more and more 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 39 

overcast erery daj, but Caxr had not lired in inti- 
macj with ihe Oonrtene js without imbibing their 
liberal opinions on the sabject of Italy. He 
regarded the approaching storm with interest, and 
had no hesitotian in deciding to remain in a 
coantry which woold probably be the scene of 
a revohztion before many months were oyer. It 
wanted bnf a few days to Chrifitmas. Immediately 
afier the marriage he and Gilda were to proceed 
to ome, and remain there during the Garnival, 
retoming to Florence in Leni The smnmer he 
proposed q>^idlng on the Lake of Oomo; and 
before that season was past, the dignified attitnde 
he was to assume wonld, of coorse, bring his 
father and mother to reason. Then, with- a lofty 
amiability, he w^uld yield to their pressing solici- 
tationSj and take his fair wife home to be intro- 
duced to ihem. Whether he shonld consent to 
remain or no^ depended entirely on the good 
behavionr of his parents. As he considered the 
matter over^ he derived more and more comfort 
from the reflection that his wife's moderate income 
would be sofficient to render him independent of 



40 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

anj additional assistance from his father. He 
feit that this was what lawyers call the " strong 
point" in Iiis case. And ihereupon he wrote a 
temperate^ but firm and manly, replj to his father^ 
in which he regretted that there was any point 
uon which they should have a diflference of 
opinion^ bat announced his confidence that Lord 
Carrljon's calmer judgment would recognize the 
impossibility of his son's breaking his engagement, 
even if he feit so disposed. He nioreover laid 
down the principle . somewhat sententiously^ con- 
sidering the circumstances . of free will unshackied 
by opinion or prejudice in such cases ; and then, 
with considerable self-satisfaction^ he laid down 
the pen. 

A few days later the Courteneys arrived. It 
was a harp, glittering day, with the keen Tramon- 
tana sweeping down all the streets that were open 
to the north^ and a brilliant sun pouring almost 
intolerably upon such as lay towards the south, 
and were sheltered from the mountain wind. In 
the one, a few pedestrians, like a charge of bulls^ 
drove blindly and fiiriously along, with heads 



CASA LAMBERTI. 41 

bentbefore the wind, and heavy ploaks swathed 
around their faces. In ihe other, cloaks were 
swong back, heads raised, and the pedestrians 
might not infrequentlj be seen to sink lazilj 
back against a wall, and bask, like lizards, in tbe 
sunsbine. The flower*-girls, so notablj cliaracter- 
istic of Florence, flaunted here, like butterflies, 
under the shadow of their large Leghorn hats, 
fiinging their bouquets of choicest exotics into 
some of the carriages (the carriages, mark, in 
which there are only ladies, go by unnoticed), 
and bestowing a smile or a sprig of Jasmine, out 
of 7ery exuberance of heart apparently, on every 
passer-by. Were I disposed to moralize, here 
would be a fine opportunity for inqoiring how 
many broken hearts have gathered, and tied up, 
and then given away with a gay and graceful 
smile, these tube-roses and camelias. There was 
a sad tragedy when I ,was in Florence connected 
with one of these ^ono/c . but enough of that 

At an hotel upon the Lung' A^o> Laurence 
Carr took up bis quarters ; and you may be sure 
that the handsome, aristocratic-looking young 



42 GABB OF CABRLYOK. 

Englishman metivith an.uniisaal amount of at- 
tention at the hands of the flower-girls* He had 
secared a large apartment for a few weeks in. the 
adjoining liouse^ as being the wrmest sitaation 
in the town^ for Mr. Conrteney, who was to go 
on to Pisa for the remainder of the winter, as 
soon aS his daughter was married. 

As the heavy vetturino carriage drove np to 
the door^ and Carr, who was waiting there to 
receive them, hxnded ont the three ladies^ a gronp 
of flower-girls pressed round, ihrosting their 
choicest bonqnets on him, '^ per la bella sig- 
norina." It takes even less to gather a knot of 
idiers iogether in Italy than elsewhere. The 
arriyal or departure c^ a trayelling carriage never 
fails to accomplish this. In the crowdcongregated 
abnt the door as Carr tnmed casually round, he 
recognized a fiuse under a broad-leafed hat, whidi 
he had last seen in Bologna. His mind, however, 
was engrossedwith too interesting a subjecttogive 
this one more attention, and he was certainlj 
far from assodating with that muffled stranger 
the gaj Gdalio Razzi. 



CASA lAlfBERTL 43 

Mr. Covrtenej retired at once to bis room^ and 
as Sara Gisbome sent word that Bhe had a faead- 
ache^ and wished to be left undistarbed^ Carr speat 
. the evening alone with the mother and dangfater. 
Tbere was a resessness, an agitation, abont 
Mrs. Conrteney^B manner^ whicb did not escape 
Lanrence. Habitnallj melandioty as was the 
expression of her face, tbere was now an increased 
depression, altemating with a look of alann, wbich 
prompted the jonng manto inqnire, with bis usaal 
straigbtforwardness, if anything was the matter? 

^^My mother's strengi bas been over-taxed 
of late," Said Gilda, sadly. '^Sbe is far from 
strong: and all tbis wtching with my sither, 
the excitement of a burried joumey, and of my 
approaching marriage, baye been too mach for 
her. You witnessed, I think," she added, lower- 
ing her Toice, *f one of her nervons attacks? they 
have been more frequent of late. I look fcarward, 
Laurence^ so much to having her with ns ih the 
sammer at Como. Pa^ says he is going to 
remain at Leghorn, bat yoa'll make her come, 
at aQ eyents, won't yoa ? " 



44 CAKR Or CAERLYON. 

There was someihing of her old playAilness 
in the tone. She was striving with all her 
strength ixiforget everything eise but him ; and had^ 
indeed^ at times^ regained to outward appearance . 
her sweet cheerfolness of manner. This last 
Suggestion^ which in the innocence of her heart 
she thought must give Carr pleasore, was certainly 
not calculated to do so as much as she imagined. 
If it was \o have been made at all^ it should have 
come from himself. However, he really Hked 
Mrs. Courteney ; and though with no uncommon' 
selfishness in man he would have wished that 
Gilda's attention should be devoted solely to 
himself for a long time to come^ he consoled 
himself with the reflection that it was a very 
different thing from having the faiher (with whom 
' he never could feel at his ease) as a visitor for au 
indefinite period, and he managed to reply, with- 
out wincing . 

'* Certainly, darling, she shall be with us .all 
the Summer : only mamma must not engross all 
my Gilda*s thoughts, eh? Is' there anything, by- 
the-by, you think your mother would like from 



CASA LAMRERTL 45 

England? I am expecting some things to be sent* 
over. What sliall I give her^ Gilda, as a poor 
retum for the treasnre I am robbing her of ? " 

'* Give her, Laurence, what will be worth more 
to her than anything . a son's aSection. Poor 
mamia ! when you know how good, and patient, 
and miselfish she is, you will love her almost as 
mach as I do. Teil me,** she added, looking up 
into his face with an expression of eamest inquiry, 
**have you heard from your own mother and 
fiither . since . since we were engaged ? " 

" I have, dearest What then ? " 

** Only that . ^that I have not heard you speak 
of them. Will your mother be kind to me, 
Laurence?" 

*^ I hope so, Gilda ; and if not, you may depend 
on it you shall see very little of her." 

That night, when he was gone, and all the 
house was still, Gilda sat at her open windw, 
looking out into the quiet starlight Sara and 
she no longer occupied the same room. Indeed, 
. ever since that evening, now some weeks past, 
when Sara had so cruelly probed Gilda's heart. 



46 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

a wall of Beparationx so to speak, bad been 
grovmng up betweea the two girls. It may be 
tl^at an instinct of the heart pointed to the true 
motivea wbidbt lay 9t the bottom of the sayage 
atta^k that had left Gilda bleeding aod fikhame- 
atricken ; it maj have been only the natural 
repulsion of a pore^ guileless natnre to a compt 
one, when the depths of passion being stirred, 
the two souls came closer to one anoth^ 
thaa> in their daily intercourse^ ihey had yet 
done. But Sara waa outwardly changed lately. 
She had always been capricious ; she was reso- 
lutely sullen and abstracted now^ wheaever she 
joined the &mily circle. Dring tiie laat week 
of their stay in ologna, the Conrtegneya had in 
reality seen little or nothing of her. Her change 
of faith . now openly avowed . ^was made the 
plea for long daily absences &om home* No one 
opposed this^ and no one thought of questioning 
her as to where she really went Mrs. Coorteney 
had never &lt that ahe had any aujthority over 
the unruly Creole girl ; it was too late to begin 
now eileavQuring to assert it. Moreover^ the 



CASA LAIIBEETL 47 

poor lady's mind was otherwiBe and painfally 
engrossed. She had anxietjr enoogh of vanouB 
kinds, or this migfat have rendored her more 
tmeasj timn it did. As it was^ she was glad that 
her child woald soon be sepacated from Sara. 
She did not underrate tibat yoniig lady's abilities, 
and she feit that it was not improbable the young 
conyert, bj-and-by, might haye endearoured 
to inflaence Gilda. Though not bigoted in her 
religious opinions, Mrs. Courteney had chmg 
steadily to the faith of her yonth, throiigh many 
years of wandering in Romaii Catholic countries ; 
and she wonld have regarded it as a heavy. 
calamity had Gilda changed her religion. The 
mingled fbeling of pity^ mistrust and admiration, 
therefore^ with which ahe had always looked on 
Sara, now gave place to an ill-defined dread. 
Having inyariably treated her with a mother's 
kindness, it was still impoasifale she should feel 
for her anything of a mother's lova Sara, even in 
her most attractiTe days> had repelled sympathy. 
And now that she was harder and more impene- 
trable tfaan she had eyer before shown herseif. 



48 CABB OF CABELYON. 

even in her darkest moments, Mrs. Courteney's 

kind heart could onlj heave a sigh when she 

thought what early wrong and wretchedness must 

have poisoned the fountain-springs of that young 

heart, and tumed all its waters to bittemess! 

Confidence there was none, she knew, between 

them/ and any attempt to bias opinions so 

resolutely taken, she was weU aware would be 

fruitless. But she made up her nund that, by- 

and-by, when left alone with Sara, she would 

set herseif patiently to work a change in that 

obdurate spirit: and in the meantime she was 

<][uite as well pleased that the girl's strnge fit 

just now kept her aloof from Gda, and left 

mother and daughter generally without the 

restraint of a third presence. 

Gilda Courteney was alone, then, in her room 
that night. She looked out of the open window, 
and down upon the rushing Arno, where the 
lamps of the bridge flashed and quivered, and 
the black arches beneath were repeated in blocks 
of liquid shadow. Upon the opposite bank were 
the dim shapes of church and palce, huge piles 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 49 

of tower and other boilding darkly defined against 
the starry night That bank was nnknown groond 
to her. Her feet had not yet wandered among 
its intricate streets and piazze. And as her eye 
rested with a vague cnriosity npon these outlines 
of the nnexplored city^ she feit as though she 
were looking at her own futore. The bridge 
she was soon to trayerse^ and which never conld 
be recrossed, lay before her. The hard, solid 
bank on which she now stood would soon be 
left behind. Already the pleasant landscapes of 
the past had faded far away. Those blue moun- 
tain ranges . a sonny spot upon a lichen-coyered 
wall . a trail of vine against a sunset sky; the 
pictures^ often trivial enough^ that are photo- 
graphed in the memory &om some accidental 
association^ they belonged to a time that already 
seemed far distant She had reached the bridge. 
What lay beyond it ? 

With no such misgiving should a young girl 
regard her future^ when that future is of her 
own choice and making. Gilda would not have 
allowed that she feit any misgiying. Tet she 

YOL. n. 4 



50 CAKB OF CARRLTON. 

qaestioned i;^at this fotitre had in stre for her 
with an Dxk scnitmy. It was no waM of 
confidence in Carr, bot in hersel She had 
aocepted him becaoae it seemed to be univer- 
sally feit hat she ought to do so, and becanse 
ahe had no good reason to gii/^ since be had 
rejected the only one &^e offiE^ed. That chiMisk 
passion she fitmly beiieyed to be eztinct; -and, 
on the odier band, the more she saw of Oarr, 
the more she iound to like. If it was possible 
fbr h^ to live as huBdreds of oier haj^j women 
(Hd tertainiiig a plactd affiection for their hos* 
bands; why thon she tootdd be haj^y. It was 
her own heaxt she feared^ it w<as ihe doabt whetber 
she would he oonteiit to exist on a lower rnge of 
feeling having had a glimpae of something hi^ier 
and deeper, and stronger* 

Oh inevitaUe fi&turel fature that we build np 
for ourselves blindly in the dark, whose famt sky 
onine the bea^^ighted only may discern, pre- 
dicting how the roigged walls will sbape them- 
selves as we grow near. We are as children that 
cannot bear ihe lightl We grope <m ever to 



CASA LAMBEB33. 51 

the end; and merdfully ordained is it of the 
All Wise tliat cur poor human knowkdge reaches 
no &zihCT than the preaait upon which we 
stand. To foresee, without fhe power to a^ert; 
who could carry the intolerable brden of such 
knowledge to the end of a long life ? 

The ^d gazed wistfiilly at those phantom- 
ondines opposdte^ and her thonghtg took ihe 
direction I have indicated ; while she drew her 
shawl closer rmmd her, and cronched down bj 
the Window. To the occasional passerB-by in the 
Street below . ttnd they were few at this honr, 
their footBteps choing along the pavement in 
the clear mgiiA air, tili they died away in 
the distance, . ^to gmdi she was invisible. She 
had pizt ojot her eandle; the window was a black 
Square. And ^ere she remained, how long she 
scarcely knew, unt her attention was awakened 
to the sound of footsteps stopping beneath the 
Window. 

It was not, however, until the sound of a voice 
disnctly reached her ear that Grda started, 
and leaning finward, endearoured to discem the 

4. a 



52 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

' Speaker. Impossible to see more than two dark 
figures^ apparently a man and a woman^ in the 
door-way below. But that voice? surely she 
could not be mistaken, low as was the tone in 
wbich it spoke. 

"Will you be in readiness when I call upon 
you ? and willing to do my bidding^ whatever it 
is ? Remember I have warned you, I am some7 
thing of a tyrant" 

*'It is a tyranny which is sweet to me, heVS 
angiol mio ! But will you in retnm hold out no 
prospect of a speedy release from my suspense ? 

^* None ; I require to see, to know, more of you 
than I can in these stealthy Interviews. Our 
acquaintance is of too short Standing, Signor 
Conte, for me to bind myself to anything. But 
I will not deprive you of all hope: if you can 
stand the strnge whitns and caprices of a 
woman ? " 

" What is there I would not stand from you, 
divina ? " 

" If this war breaks out, are you ready to join 
the army? To gird on your sword, and help 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 53 

to drive out the Austrian? I am aware that 
you have not been bred to such rde sport, and the 
scion of a noble house may ^ 

" Corpo dt Bacco ! you are laugbing at me, my 
angell Our educatiqn may have been neglected; 
but ihere are few of us, I hope, who will not 
be ready to gird on their swords when the good 
time comes. But if I am to wait tili ihm 1 " 

" You are poor. How do you intend to support 
a wife ? I am extravagant." 

* * 

"The padre told me what your marriage- 
portion would be," replied the gentleman, with 
the utmost naiveti. " On that, with what I have, 
we can live like gods I " 

" Some of the godsliveduncomfortably enough," 
laughed the lady; a low mocking laugh. The 
next moment she exclaimed, "HushI some one 
comes down the street Don't stand there. Buona 
notteJ*^ 

She puUed the porter's bell, and disappeared 
through the door. The man walked leisurely 
away, Gilda listened with a beating heart for 
several minutes. Was she mistaken? Did that 



54 CABB OE CABfiLYON. 

woman belong to some npper floor i^artment? 
The most acute ear oould not have canght the 
soTind of a footstep on ihe staira. Bat at lengh 
her atrained hearing detected the uiit creaking of 
a door cautionsly opened in ihe adjoining room* 
And then she donbted no more. 



CASA LAMBESTI 55 



. . 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The exertion of travelling psoduced sock an uor 
favourable cliange in Mr. Goiurteiiey that it was 
feared the marriage waoid bare to be postponed 
It had been fixed to take place a week afier 
the date of tbeir arrival xa Florence. The morn"- 
ing followkig tbeir arrival he was so exhauated 
tbat Mrs^ Court&oay became seriously alarmed. 
The physician when be aaw him^, told her plaiiiljr 
that anj streng excitement in his presentcondiiion 
znight be fatal* Quiet perfect quiet, and a mildcar 
climate than Florence, were all he could suggest 
to hold the feeble links of life jxigether. 

Bot on the subject of the marriage^ Mr, Coar* 
teney was aa impatient as Carr conld posnbly 
be. He smiled almost conlbemptaously at the 
idea of being escited by it^ and declared liiat 



56 CAER OF CARRLYON. 

whether he were able to appear at he ceremony 
or not, it was to take place on the appointed day. 

^ Gilda had something at her heart which she 
feit must be told her mother; bat that poor wom 
face seemed pleading so eamestlv to have no 
additional brden cast upon her, every time that 
Gilda sought to approach the painful subject, that 
day after day elapsed without her doing so. The 
swift hoors, nevertheless, moved on with steady 
pace iowards the moment that was to separate 
her from that tender mother, whose loving 
embrace she never remei^ibered to have missed 
a Single day since she was bom. And as the 
time drew near, Mrs. Courteney's [trouble and 
agitation of mind became more and more pain- 
fuUy apparent. The eflFort to appear calm before 
her hnsband rendered the strnge excitement 
under which she laboured only more uncontrol- 
labie at other moments. Carr remarked upon it 
to Gilda more than once after that first eveniug 
of their arrival, and the poor child heaved a 
heavy sigh each time. 

In spite of the want of sympathy between them. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 57 

Gflda had fouud oomfort in the recoectioii that 
Sara would be left with Mrs. Courteney, That 
poor mother would at least have the girl whom 
her kindness had tended like a daughter^ as a 
companion in the dreary days that^ Gilda knew 
well^ would foUow her own departure. And now, 
to a young and generous heart, almost the worst 
feature in Sara's extraordinary conduct was its 
hard, calculating selfishness. It was evident she 
cared nothing for the man^ whoever he might 
be ; and whether or not she married him^ would 
only make use of him for her own ends. It was 
the night before her marriage that Gilda nerved 
herseif to repeat to her mother what she had 
overheard. But Mrs. Courteney's mind was so 
absorbed in one subject^ that none other com* 
paratirely could produce much eflFect upon her. 
She and her child wept unrestrainedly in each 
other's arms that night, as though they feit it 
might be the last time they would ever be able 

to do so ! 

***** 

The marriage was over. They were gone. 



58 CABR OF CARRLTON. 

There were only sdx persona present in the chapeL 
Carr and bis two fiiendsy Gilda wih her mother, 
and Sara. Mr. Courteney was too weak to leave 
the house. He was wheeled into the rooxn to 
receive the small partj on thir retnm^ and to 
place a magnificent Indian shawl upon the bride's 
Shoulders when she ran np and threw her arms 
round bis neck. That was a sad breakfast that 
fcdlowed ! and everjone feit it a relief when the 
travelling britaka wbich Carr had hired for the 
journej drove up t the door. And now the 
last aobbing farewell was given, and they were 
actuallj gone. Goine! And in the window^ 
watching thfiffl as tbej drove off, with a verj 
peculiar smile upon her &ce> stood the figure of 
a^ young woman, balancing a letter in. hex band. 
Should she scaid it, or wait ? 

Mrs Courteney's room communicated, as it 
had done at Bologna with her husband's It 
was necessary to pasa tbrough it to reach the 
latter. 

**I desire to speak with Mr. Courteney," said 
Sara Standing at the door of the first room The 



GASA UABEBTL 59 

one beyond it was ajar, so ihat her words^ slowly 
and distmcilj uttered^ could eaailj reach the 
person for whom they were intanded. 

Mrs. Courtenej was in her own room^ ttmg 
with her hands clasped before the pictare of 
thai Mother of many'sorrows, whose sweet, pitying 
face seemed to say in aU moments of proformd 
depression^ ^^Be of good conrage. I too have 
snffered." 

She started to her feet at the soundof Sara's 
voice, and came hurriedly towaids her. 

^^What ia it yu want?" she demanded in 
troabled accents* 

To speak with Mr. Conrteney;' repeted the 
girl^ more distinctly Ihan before^ as she Solded 
her arms and looked he other defiantly in the 
&ce. 

He is ill . exhaosted^ you cannot see him 
now. What is it, Sara? " 

Gilda's words, which subsequent agitation had 
driven firom Mrs. Court^iey's nind, now flashed 
across it She retumed Sara's look with one of 
Borrowfal, qnestioning wonder. 



60 CAKB OF CARRLYON. 



.C 



My business is T^ith Mr. Courteney," said 
the girl in the same hard clear voice as befbre. 
** If he knows that I desire to speak vrith htm on 
a matter of importance " 

The hand-bell rang sharply from the adjoining 
room. Sara followed Mrs. Courteney without 
further invitation to the door. 

" Why do you prevent her Coming in ? " said 
the volce of the sick man, irritably. "Admit 
her at once." 

Mrs. Courteney stood back to let Sara pass, 
and the eyes of the two women met once more, 
as the wife gUded out and closed the door behind 
her. Why did she shudder under that look, as 
though Btung by a serpent? And why did some 
irresistible presentiment &sten her to the spot of 
Soor where she stood dose to the door, until, 
trembling, she crouched down there with her 
head in her hands ? 

Mr. Courteney was in his chair, propped by 
pillows. A desk, with several legal-looking docu- 
ments, was before him. His face was of an ashy 
whiteness, but the clear pale flame of his eye 



CASA LAMBEHTL 61 

biirnt as intensely as ever^ through the gray 
shadows tbat had gathered round it. 

He looked up at the young woman as she stood 
there^ a few paces from bis chair, in her white 
dress^ which she had not yet laid aside after the 
wedding. He looked up at her^ in silence ; but 
with a strnge indefinable expression which few, 
perhaps, had ever seen upon bis face. She 
retumed bis look without flinching, her arms still 
resolutely folded. 

"Mr. Courteney, I am going to be married. 
As a dependant on your hounty^ I came to announce 
the fect to you." 

There was a bittemess and insolence in the tone 
tbat did not escape bis Observation. He bowed 
bis head slightly, and she continued, '^ Have you 
no curiosity on the subject ? " 

** None. You are your own mistress, to do as 
you please^ Miss Gisbome 

'* But I am penniless, and I want money. Tbat 
is why I come to you. Sball I further teil you by 
what right I ask it? " 

He remained silent. The band in which be 



62 CABB OF CASBLYON. 

held a pap^ trembled. He laid it on Ae table. 
'^ Proceed^" he said^ after a pause. 

** It is a right yoa will not deny, wlien I invoke 
ihe name of Sara Momj." 

He raised his wasted band^ and wiped ihe damp 
fram bis brow Tbis^ and a neirous contortion of 
tbe montb^ were the only eiidences of anj extra- 
ordinary emotion. 

" It is a rigfat I do deny ; " bis voice was low 
bat steady. " Tbat name sbonld bave no influence 



on me." 



^' It is the name of one you foully wronged," 
said the girl, with flashing eyes. ^ The curse tbat 
feil lipon yon and yonrs from her dying lips yet 
rings in my ears. I swore never to rest tiU I bad 
fonnd you . and I bave den so. Tbe cnrse has 
already taken effecti YesI Henry Dw^Canly, 
nnder your afianmed name, throngh aU tbe dianges 
of time and circumstance^ cbanee has helped me to 
discover tbe secret hid fian tbe wfaole world . ay I 
fr&m your own wife ! I now know wbat pix)mpted 
you to take me into your bouse as somdliing better 
mn a servant, irhen you found me stsrying in 



CASA LAMBERTL 63 

GrenoEi^ a jeaer ago ! It was no generous pitjr ; it 
wis tlie stuigiiig voice of remorse I You knew me 
. you recognized yonr child^ abandoned twentj" 
fonr years agOj bj the likeness to her mother. 
You thought I shoiild never discover you. It was 
a cfaeap way of being quit wiih consdence ! Bat 
did it never occur to yoa ihat the blood of Sara 
Momy flowed in the veins of this girl? That 
vengeance was her inheritance? That sooner or 
later it would track yoa out ? It was a dangerous 
experiment making the offcast child an inmate of 
yonr houae. Walls have ears^ and my carefiil 
edacstion has not led me to be above eavea- 
dropping, fatber I ^ 



She lau^ed scomfully 

*' Wbat is it you mean ? and wbat is it you 
want ? '' gasped Mr. Oourteney. 

^^ I mean^" she replied slowly, '^ that the other 
secret ofyour life is equally known to me^ and I am 
here to make use of botfa. You are in my power^ 
Mr. Dunstanly" 

He had leani forward in his eagemess^ and now 
feil back, ^^ile a ghastly shade paased over his fisiee. 



64 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

He tried to speak^ but could not The girl lifted 
the strong stimalant which was on ihe table to bis 
Ups. It was borrible to see the act of apparent 
mercy perfonned with that ruthless expression on 
her face I 

*^ Why do you come to me at the eleventh hour 
when the sand of my life ia just run out ? " he 
gasped faintly, " Why have you waited to say all 
this until now ?^ 

A devilish smile crossed her Ups. 

" I have bided my time. I waited tili Gilda was 
married^ the thing accomplished beyond recall! 
Your intellect is still acute enough to seize all the 
importance of that fact for me? By a word this 
marriage might have been broken off; and neither 
of the parties much the worse. How different is 
the case now ! the honour of a noble house is con- 
cerned : you apprehend my meaning ? " 

The dying man set his teeth hard. 

^* What object do you propose to attain by this 
course ? " he murmured in a hoarse voice. ** Your 
fancied vengeance will not reach me by any dis- 
closure now. I shall be beyond it. If it is only 



CASA LAMBEKTL 65 

money you want, spare your threats, girl. There 
, is a suitable provision made for you in these in- 
structions which I leave my wife. This provision 
will place yoii beyond want." He took a paper 
from the table. " I leave no will : for the name I 
die bearing, and which my wife will bear after me, 
has no legal value, as you have discovered; I have 
therefore sold all my property out of the funds, and 
divided it into two equal shares. Out of my wife's 
portion, while she lives, will be paid you an annuity 
of two bundred pounds, and five thousand pounds 
at her death." 

" Your oilier child recelves someiing like fifleen 
thousand pounds now and as much more when her 
mother dies, I suppose ? Adversity, you see, has 
made me practical, and I have leamt by starvation 
the value of money; I do not mean to starve 
again. Mrs. Laurence Carr has made a gi*eat 
marriage, rank and future wealth: she has less 
need of your money, and far less right'io it than I 
have. I demand thfit you divido her fortune 
equally with me." 

When he answered it was with great difficulty, 

VOL. II. 5 



66 CAKR OF CAERLYON. 

but clearly, resolutely; stopping every now and 
then to gather breath^ but never from any indeci- 
sion of purpose. 

'* What you ask is impossible. My danghter's 
fortune is ah:*eady paid to her husbaitd ; I have 
told you, I do not recognize your right to demand 
any thing of me. I was young when I loved your 
mother wiih all the fierceness of a first passion. 
She was many years older, and her nature was 
corrupt. She very nearly ruined me, for I would 
haye given her all I possessed on earth. But that 
was Utile compared with the oiher injury. I 
trusted her, and ^'^ deceived me, The discovery 
of her treachery froze my whole nature, and it has 
never thawed : when I loved again, it was a better 
woman, and I suffered and sumed too, for her sake ; 
but I was then a hardened man of the world. I 
was no longer capableof the devotlon! hadwasted 
on yonr mother: I had lost my faith in woman, 
and I looked on succeBs in love as the legitimate 
prize of the persevermg and adroit. Tou have 
seen me cold, cynical . I have grown more and 
more so every year ; bi^t this it was your mother 



CASA LAMBEBTL 67 

first made me. What I do for you is in expiation 
of my sins, and in pity for your position, But 
claim on me, you have none." 

The ihnnder cloud that had been gathering on 
Sara's brow during the above speech, burst out in 
uncontrollable f ory. 

*^ You do wisely to insult my mother's memory 
at this moment! Coward! She died in abject 
misery, leavlng me, a child, to tiie care of strangers, 
with no othOT inberitance than her revenge ; while 
you . ^you, with a fresh crime upon your head, were 
revelling in wealth, and " 

*^I swear,** interrupted the dying man, "that 
she never communicated with me, after I dis- 
covered her falseness and broke with her. Had 
she ever let me know she was in want " 

^*Fine wordsl" scoffed Sara. "Fine words 
now that she is dead and gonel But they will 
not make me turn back from my purpose. Hai 
you have shrunk firom publicity these eighteen 
years past ; your name shall be publicly branded 
now. You shall live long enough to see those 
you love best suffer through you: that virtmus 

5.2 



68 CAKR OF CAKKLYON. 

wlfe and daughter . I liave another account to 
sete "with the latter . they shall be brought to 
sliame and dishonour^ and ihus " 

The dying man bounded up in his chair. He 
seemed possessed by some agent, independent of 
his own feeble strength, and beyond his control, 
His bony fingers grasped the girl by the throat 
so suddenly, that the veins started out on her 
forehead before she had time to step back and 
seize his wrists. For a second they stood ihus 
. father and child . if, indeed^ they were so, locked 
in a death-struggle, face to face. 

It was a sight for fiends to witness, and rejoice 
over. 

But death was already relaxing the fingers that 
had closed round the girPs throat. That momen- 
tary strength was spent, the flame that leapt in 
the socket had already died down, and he roUed 
back heavily upon the bed. 

The door at the same instant was burst open, 
and the unhappy wife, rushing in, threw herseif 
on her knees beside her husband, and buried her 
head in her hands. 



CASA LAMBERTI. 69 

"Henry! Courteneyl I have heard aD. No 
matter, dear, what becomes of mey I cannot long 
survive you; let her have what she wants, my 
money, everyihing, only, for God's sake I spare my 
child I Spare her this misery, this disgrace noio, 
You would not hearken to ine before, Courteney, 
when there was time to avert this misery. Oh, 
husbandl as a last request, I implore you, leave 
US not to this creature's mercy! speak to me, 
promise me . make her swear ^" 

Suddenly a horrible suspicion flashed through 
her mind, and starting up, she brushed back 
the damp gray hair from his brow, with her 
quivering hand, exclaiming wildly, as she pressed 
her face close to his, . 

" Look up I Look up ! Speak to me once 
more I only once . Henry ! Oh, my God 1 he is 
dead, and without a word I ^ 

She gave a low, helpless cry, like a wounded 

bird, and feil forwards insensible upon the body. 

***** 

The Creole girl stood ihere, immovable and piti- 
less as a Greek Fate over her victims. 







CARR OF CARRLYON. 



*'Foiled by death?'* she muttered to herself, 
*^ No I " Her eye rested at that monieoA on the 
papers that lay scattered over the table before 
her. She swept them up into a heap, and carried 
them leisurely to her own room^ before cdlling 
Marietta to Mrs* Coorteney's assistance. 



CASA LAMBEBTL 71 



CHAPTER XXV. , 
 Deab Sib, 

. 

^'I -HAYE the painful task of aonouncing 
to you the death of Mr* Gourtenej^ which took 
place a few hours afier your departare yesterday ; 
and^ in pursuance of the customs of this country, 
he was boried to-day. 

^^ Mrs. Courteney has remained i a sort of Stupor 
eyer since her hnsband's death^ unconscioos of 
what passed around her; so that I hare taken 
upon myself be necessary arrangements^ and shall 
remain here antil Mrs. Courteney is able to dis- 
cuss-a small matter of business between us. Were 
it not for this untoward event^ I should no longer 
be an inmate of this house^ as I had communicated 
to Mr. Courteney before he died the fact of 
my immediate removal &om bis prd^tion. It 



72 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

is probable^ therefore, that on your retum 
liere, 'w:liere your generous sympathy will doubt - 
less lead you at once^ I sball no longer be in 
Florence, 

" It may be as well to mention, which I do with 
regret, that I have reason to fear Mr. Courteney 
has left bis widow but poorly off . trustingi no 
doubt^ to your kind and liberal sympathy for 
her Support Until you take measures for the 
same^ the English apothecary (whose letter corro- 
borating these Statements I enclose) will generously 
attend on, and provide for your respected mother- 
in-law; and should you not see fit to make the 
necessary provision, which, after all, cannot be 
expected of you, the hospitals of Florence, I believe, 
are good. 

'^ May I request the fayomr of your communi- 
cating this sad intelligence to Mrs. Carr? and, 
with the expression of my regard and esteem for 
yourself, believe me, 

*^ Truly yours, 

'^ Saba Gisbobxe. 

'* To the Hon. Laurence Carr.^ 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 73 

The following was enclosed : . 

'' SiB, 

" I WAS calied in yesterday eyening to see 
the body of Mr. Courteney. I found Hfe had been 
extinct upwards of half-an-hour. Of bis death 
from natural causes there can be no doubt^ as 
bis appearance confirmed all I knew before of 
bis State of bealth. I regret to add tbat Mrs. 
Courteney's frame sustained so severe a shock 
in tbis sudden bereavement, tbat sbe has not yet 
recovered ber consciousness^ and is in a condition 
reqairing tbe iitmost care and attention: tbat 
witb tbese sbe^will recover . slowly but surely . 
I bave no doubt. Unfortunately, tbe very admir- 
able nurse sbe now bas . a young lady wbose 
exertions and fortitude tbrougbout tbese trying 
scenes bave been beyond praise . ^informs me tbat 
sbe will be under tbe painfol necessity of leaviog 
Florence in tbe coorse of a few days. Under 
tbese circumstances^ sir^ wbile I beg to assure 
you tbat Mrs. Conrteney shall want for no atten- 
tion at my bands, yoix will no doubt see tbe 
importance of ber baving some relative or friend 



74 



CABB OF CABRLTON. 



near her. Awaitmg your wishes, I Jiave the 
honour to be, sir, 

'* Yonrs faitbfuUy, 

" P.S. . I open this to say that the clergyman 
and I together have locked up^ and set our seals 
upon all documents we have found belonging to 
the deceased." 



Carr sat at breakfast in the H6tel de TEurope 
the moming after bis arrival in Rome^ when the 
above letters were handed to him bj Giaseppe. 
Opposite him was his mh, fair and gentle crea- 
ture^ nnsQspicioas of all the sorrow that cov^ 
contained for her. The momiDg sun ^eamed 
in throTigh the window at her back, kindling the 
outline of her soft brown hiair into a natural 
glory of gold : it tipped with snow the edgcs of 
the white lace collar, and silyered the folds of 
her gray silk dress, ihat stood up sharply 
against the light Carr looked at her, as her eye 
ran li^lessly down the colunms of Galigrumiy 
and a pang shot throngh his heart at the thought 



CASA LAMBEBn. 75 

o distorbing tfiat pietore of fair seremty with 
the cmel news. he had to break. 

Men are greater oowards than women at such 
moments. Carr would have given a great deal 
to be able to defer the evil hour ; bat he dared 
not. He knew it was necessaoy to pr^are her, 
since it was clear at a glance that thej must 
retam at once to Florence. The death of Gilda's 
&ther could not be said to affect him otherwise 
than with an unacknowledged sense of relie 
The accoimt of Mrs. Conrtenej, however, filled 
him with honest sorrow; and he feit, v^j 
properly, that Gilda's place was by her mother's 
bednside. 

It was a greai bore, of coarse, leaving Rome 
the day after one's arriral there, and the fourth 
of one's honeymoon, without having seen any- 
thing of the Eternal City ! Bat, to his hononr 
be it Said, if this selfish regret flashed not un- 
natnrally through Caxr's mind as he sat there, 
it was qnickly driven out by the image of that 
desolate and widowed lady, tended by strangers 
in her bed of sickness and, yearning for her child. 



76 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

He never hesitated an instant as to ihe Obligation 
of retuming to her as fast as four horses could 
carry them: bis only hesitatlon arose from bis 
desire to spare Gilda as much anxiety as possible. 

He read Sara's letter twice . tbree times before 
be could make up bis mind to speak. Tbe strnge 
form of tbat communication . tbe almost studied 
beartlessness, witb its tliin crust of cold polite- 
ness, Coming from one wbo was under such 
obligations to Mrs. Courteney, could not fall to 
strike Carr with surprise and disgust. It also 
rendered bis breaking tbe news to Gilda more 
difficult, since it was impossible to give her ihe 
letter itself to read. Even Mr. Sargent's migbt 
alarm her unnecessarily as to her mother's State. 
He m^st make some excuse for keeping botb 
from ber^ and soften tbe blow as much as migbt 
be^ omitting all details. As to tbe supposition 
of Mrs. Courteney's being left destitute, be did 
not entertain it for a moment Tbe deceased 
man bad scrupulously fulfiUed bis promises to 
Carr. Tbe interest of tbe fifteen thousand settled 
on bis wife bad been placed to Carr's credit at 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 77 

Us banker's the day before his marriage. It was 
not to be believed, therefore, that the widow's 
portion had not been secured with the same rigid 
exactitude. It Struck Carr . not indeed at the 
moment^ but later . as singulare that any one 
shoold pretend to be acquainted with Mrs. 
Courteney's pecuniary position^ since she had her- 
seif remained unconscious after her husband's 
death^ and his papers were under lock and seal. 
As he revolved at his leisure the strnge tenor 
of that letter^ and asked himself what it might 
mean^ he was also forcibly Struck and puzzled by 
the cordial expressions . one would almost say of 
commiseration . towards himself, . a comparative 
stranger to the writer, . ^with which it closed, 
without so much as a word of sympathy to his 
wifel 

But this critical examination of Miss Gisbome's 
composition, as I have said^ came later, and when 
he was alone. The disagreeable Impression it 
left generally on his mind was all he now knew. 
He folded it up carefuUy with the doctor's letter, 
and put it in his pocket 



78 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

She bore the news better than he expected. 
Her father's health had been such that she was 
familiarized with the idea of his probable death^ 
and his increased weakness of late had addition- 
allj pr^ared her. She feit the natural grief of 
a joung heart, when the first vacancy occnrs in 
its narrow eirde : him to whom she had hitherto 
looked for guidance^ and knowledge^ and advice 
she should behold no more. It cannot be said 
that he had endeared himself very strongly by 
any inward sympathy or outward demonstration 
to his daughter ; but he was the law that govemed 
and bound up that small household : his leaming 
was held to be iaexhaustible ; his opinions and 
decrees knew bo change. The influence of a 
powerful will and large^ clear intellect had been 
feit thus by Gilda from a very early age. The 
loss to her was one which she knew could not be 
replaced. And to her poor mother . she dreaded 
to think of her I 

Four hours kter they were on the road back 
again to Florence. Throtighout ihat melancholy 
jomney, which they perfonned as rapidly as four 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 79 

horses coald carry them^ with an occasional halt 
of an honr only^ her hosband's tendemess for her 
sorrow^ his patient eEbrts to soothe and comfort 
her^ tonched Gilda profoondly ; and the gentle 
pressure of her hand^ as it lay within his^ repaid 
Carr for alL It was a spontaneous movement 
which told that the yoong wife's heart was not 
insensible to the sacrifices he was making. Now 
Oarr was one of tiiose heroes capable of making 
sacrifices for a continuance, only when they are 
acknowledged. 

They arrived at Florence very late in the 
foUowing day. On driving up to Mrs. Courte- 
ney's, Carr was almost as much relieved as Gilda 
to hear that her mother was conscious^ and out of 
danger. He was beginning to be afraid that he 
bad not sufSciently prepared her for the State in 
which he expected to find Mrs. Courteney. She 
was sitting up, and receired them with a calm 
which seemed almiost unnatiu*al. She looked wan 
and weak, though fragments of letters and papers 
around her gare evidence that she had already 
roused herseif to one of the most painful tasks 



80 CARR OF CAURLYON. 

consequent on death. To Carr it appeared as 
though^ after ie long tension of her nervous 
sjstein^ a reaction had taken place ; that she had 
gone through too mucli to feel any longer acutely. 
After the severe shock^ her mind was dulled to 
suffering^ he believed ; and was stunned^ much as 
her framewas shattered, by the blow. Perhaps he 
was right. That a great change had come over 
her was certain. Was it the calm of resignation ? 
Let US glance back at her a few hours previously 
and see. 

When the Carrs arrived, it was seven o'clock. 
They leamt that at five Sara Gisbome had taken 
her departure. She had made her calculations 
with exactitude^ and managed to have arranged 
her "matters of business" with Mrs. Courteney, 
just before it was possible for the Carrs to reach 
riorence. 

" You are now sufficiently recovered, madam," 
Said the exemplary young person of whom Mr. 
Sargent spoke in such warm praise^ as she entered 
Mrs. Courteney's room with some papers in her 
liand. "You are now sufficiently recovered to 



CASA LAMBESTL 81 

discuss business with me. Before we do so, and 
that I take my leave, may I bog that you will not 
forget to teil Mr. Laurence Carr that I nursed 
you careftdly for five days and nlghts.'' 

" Thank you, Sara," said Mrs. Courteney, 
gently. 

" Perhaps your memory does not serve you accu- 
rately as to the events immediately preceding Mr. 
Courteney's . ^we will still call him Courteney. 's 
death? You then, with a just appreciation of my 
Position, wished to make any sacrifice in order that 
my demands might be complied with. Are you 
still of the same mind, madam ? " 

'* I am," she murmured. 

'* Here are certain coupons, bonds, and railway 
shares, amounting in all to nine thousand, eight 
hundred and fifty pounds, which it needs but 
a Scratch of your pen to transfer from your name 
to mine. This will be a simpler method of 
carrylng out Mr. Courteney's wishes, than your 
paying me the annuity of four hundred pounds, 
he proposed, and is slightly to your advantage, 
moreover." 

TOL. IL 6 



I 



I 



82 CABB OE CABBLYON. 



tc 



I nnderstood," faltered Mrs. Conrteney, '^that 
. ^tihat it was ttvo hundred pounds? " 

'' Yonr memory, as I expected, is at fault I Ko 
wonderl These lines, in Mr. Courteney's own 
hand^ will serve to refresh it. Pray show the 
paper to Mr. Laurence Carr if he should make 
inqoiries on the subject . that he may see you 
are only carrying out your late husband's 
wishes,'* 

The paper she handed was indeed in the deoeased 
gentleman's handwriting. It was a slight me- 
morandom, intended for his wife^ and penned a 
few hoors before his death. After some minor 
injunctioDS and recommendations^ it directed that 
the interest of ten thousand pounds should be paid 
annually to the ^'young person calling herseif at 
present Sara Gisbome/' and that sum devised to 
her upon Mrs. Courteney's deatfa. It was alto- 
gether an informal document^ hastily written^ and 
intended only for his wife; when Sara's band 
swept it^ with the rest of the papers, from the 
table. One espert at discovering such frauds 
might have detected that a figure 1 had since 



CASA LAMBEBTL 83 

that time be^i inserted^ and a 5 adroij con- 
y erted into an : but to the iminitiated, this was 
imperceptible even on the dosest inspection 

Mrs* Conrteney was no fool. She had a con- 
yiction that her husband never intended what 
pnrported there to be his written Intention. She 
knew him too well: even if her ears and her 
memory could have deceived her in the memor^ 
able interview she had overfaeard. Yet she took 
die paper passively^ without questioning its authen- 
ticity. It oa ndonbtedly in his handwriting, 
and that was enougfa for her. Sick and weak^ 
her brain troubled by one harassing doubt 
and anxiety^ she feit herseif relieved thus of a 
heavy responsibility. The gift of two thirds of 
her fortune wonld reduce her to penory, bat if 
she pnrchased tranquillity for her child at this 
price^ was not tiie bargain a cheap one? For 
herseif, no one so indifferent to poverty . ^more 
so diaa ever at that moment, when all her wom 
and weary heart asked for was resU 

She took the pen in her trembUng fing^, 
bat ere signing the first deed which Sara placed 

6.2 



84 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

before her, she pa.used and looked up^ her eyes 
filled with tears. 

" Sara^ I have never done you any hrm ; or, 
if I have, it was unintentional. I would have 
loved you, if you had allowed me, but you would 
not Your animosity for real or fancied wrougs 
has been bitter. Say that it is wiped out, before 
I sign this; that you will not visit it upon the 
innocent and unoffending." 

*^ To you individually, madam," said Sara, 
carelessly, *^ I have never had any particular 
animosity. And, at all events, your just resti- 
tution of a portion of that fortune which should 
have been my mother's, will clear off the score 
between us." 

" And my child, Gilda ? You understand me." 

**If Mrs. Laurence Carr does not cross my 
path, I shall leave her at peace. If my plans 
are not thwarted, you and she are safe, madam, 
and will never hear of me again, which is, no 
doubt, what you devoutly hope. This I will 
swear to you, if you wish it." 

It is enough," said Mrs. Courteney, as she 



(( 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 85 

signed her name. *^If your mind were not so 
jaundiced; my poor girl, you would know that 
we neither of us have ever thwarted, or could 
desire to thwart, your views ; and that, far frora 
not wishing to hear of you, we should like to 
know that your married lifo was better, and 
calmer, and happier, than your girlhood has been. 
God help US all, Sara I This is a diScult world. 
I am the last woman that should be hard on 
another. God forgive us both 1 " 

A momentary softness stole into the hard black 
eyes of the Creole girl, as she listened to those 
tender and womanly words. But she crushed it 
out and stamped on it at once. No relaxation 
of resolve for her I What had she to do now 
with human sympathy? Passion and ambition; 
all eise had died and been buried in her mother's 
grave. 

She gathered up the papers without reply ; and 
while Mrs. Courteney sank back on the pillow, 
exhausted with the exertion of talking and writing, 
Sara left the room. 

Half an hour later, she retumed to wish her 



86 CABB OP GAHELTON. 

good-by. It was an ordinary act of courtesy, 
performed in the most ordinary way. She de- 
dined to give her address; to State where sfae 
was going, or bj what name she was hence^ 
forward to be known. She left a polite message 
for Mr. Lanrence Carr, with a short note. 

And thus the two women parted, never to meet 
again in this world. 



CASA LAMBESTI. 87 



CHAPTER XXVL 

Two days elapsed. Mrs. Courteney gained strength 
rapidly. On the third moming she was able to 
leave her room^ and take her place on the sofa 
in the sala, Carr happened to be alone there^ 
and was glad of the opportonity of speaking to 
his motheiMn-law without the presence of his 
wife. To say the truth^ he was not altogether 
in the most eqoable State of mind. Gilda had 
coafided to him with tears in her eye that moming 
that her xnother was going to send away all her 
senrants : her reduced means would not admit 
of her keeping tfaem* Garr himself had not been 
called upon to investigate the State of Mr. Cour* 
teney^s afiairs; the seaU had been broken, and 
erery paper examined by the widow hersel He 
now feit an nncomfortable suspicion that Miss 



88 CARR OP CARRLYOX. 

Gisbome's Information was correct. Her last 
note con'sisted of these words, . 

" I LEAYE Mrs. Courteney, dear sir, with no 
anxiety as to her health. As to her future com- 
fort and well-being, were you not at hand to see 
that they sufier no reduction from her change 
of fortunes, I should be indeed unhappy. But 
however tried and deceived, your generosity will 
succour her^ I am persuaded. 

*^ Faiihftilly yours, 

S- G." 

Carr knew no more what to make of this letter 
than the first He had questioned Mrs. Cour- 
teney, and then Gilda, more particalarly as to the 
writer. From the latter the account he received 
was unsatisfactory enough, and she spoke of Sara 
with a severity very unlike Gilda in general. 
Mrs. Courteney was moi^ vague and more lenient 
in her manner. She mentioned Sara's unremit- 
ting attention during her own illness; but the 
subject was evidently painfnl to her, and she 
avoided it as much as possible. 



CASA LAMBEBTI. 89 

Carr was annoyed and puzzled by the tone of 
these notes. The half-pify the j seemed to express 
for him was especially irritting; and since this 
intelligence of his wife's, he resolved to broach 
the subject boldly to Mrs Courteney^ and leam 
the actual truth. 

" I fear, from what Gilda teils me,** he began^ 
*^ that your husband's affairs have been left in 
some disorder. Will you let me assist you in 
looking over and arranging his papers?" 

" Thank you, Laurence," she answered geny, 
*' They are in perfect order. You are aware 
that Mr. Courteney leflt no will. He told you 
so, I believe, when he divided his fortune ? His 
only Instructions are contained on a slip of paper, 
addressed to me." 

**But . but, since you have, by this diyision, 
between five and six hundred a year, why, let 
me ask, should it be necessary for you to reduce, 
so suddenly, your establishment ? ^ 

" It  necessary . ^no matter why . but you 
need not pity me. My plans are already 
arranged. There is an Italian lady living at 



I 



90 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

Forli, whom I know well. I shall go to her. 
Those qtiiet towns where strangers seldom pass, 
and never reside, are very cheap, and to me one 
place is the same as another." 

Mrs. Courteney/' said Carr, raiher heatedly^ 
do you not place enough confidence in me to 
say candidly what this drain upon yoor income 
is, that reduces you from comparatiye aflSuence to 
poverty?" 

" It is from no want of confidaice in you that 
I shrink from the snbject, Lanrence ; bat, because 
it is a painful as well as a useless one to discuss. 
In a Word, more than half the fortnne you snppose 
me to possess, is already in the hands of another 
person. This person had a streng claim on 
Mr. Courteney ; there is the paper he left. read 
it. Ask me no more questions . ^the thing is 
done beyond recall; and if you would oblige me, 
nev^ allude again to the aubject" 

He took the paper and read it with amaze- 
ment, strongly mingled, it must be eonfessed, 
with indignation. It was hardly credible {hat 
Mr. Gonrteney should have left bis wife thus 



' 'li 



CASA LAMBEBTL 91 

burd^ied and impoverished I And what was 
the e Strang eoaoagh to indnce him to act 
thus ? Ay, what I The more he thonght of 
it, the more mysterions and difficult to believe 
it se^ned. Yet Atre was the document in his 
owB handwriting ; and there was his widow 
adbiowledging and acting npon the same. It 
was outrageons ! 

Then he began to think how he was personally 
affected bj this discovery, md made out for 
himself a strong case of grieyance. He con- 
sidered himself done, Of course it was impossible 
he conld leave his wife's mother in abject poverty 
. ^the dead man had calcnlated on that It is 
tnie the promised dowrj had been pnnctnallj 
paid ; but instead of complete independence, here 
he fonnd himself saddled with a very heavy 
Charge I He forgot, as men often do nnder 
like circnmstanceSj how often and how strongly 
he had deprecated the idea of being influeneed 
by his wife's money, and how he had reqnested 
that it might be settled entirely on herself^ and 
placed beyond his control. 



92 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

Had this been recalled to his mind^ and the 
manifest inconsistency of his present complaint 
pointed out, it is not improbable that Garr would 
have intrenched himself behind a whole barrier 
of specious argumenta to prove that he was not 
called upon in any way to spend his wife's 
money upon his wife's moiher. Fortunately, all 
his better feelings were allowed to have fll play, 
There was no one to advii^e him to do the right 
thing. His irritatipn had time to cool down, 

" E nn' anna spesso il non averne," 

says an Italian poet. There sat the widow, pale 
and helpless in her weeds^ opposite, asking 
nothing of him, but, on the contrary, accepting 
her poveriy with a simple dijgnity and self- 
respect that could not fail to touch Carr at last 
He recognized in her very reserve which had 
angered him, that instinct of delieacy which 
shrank from making her position known to her 
son-in-law. 

After the lapse of a few minutes, he went up, 
and held out both hands. 



CASA LAMBEBTI, 93 

'^ Tour home must be with us for the present, 
Mrs, Courteney. When we leave Italy . Gilda 
and I . ^we will talk more about your future 
residence. UntU then you must make up your 
mind to live in cur tent, wherever it may be 
pitched. I will hear nothing. I will take no 
excuse ! Gilda's happiness would be destroyed, 
if she knew you were living in solitude and 
misery at ' a wretched little place like ForlL 
I could not allow it. I am clothed in a little 
brief authority, you see, as your daughter's 
husband, and I choose to exercise* it As to this 
memorandum/' he added, in a graver tone, "I 
accept it for what you say it is . the expression 
of Mr. Courteney's last wishes. I forbear to 
make any comment, or to ask any question on 
the subject I shall endeavour io forget it from 
this moment, and only wish the provisions of it 
were such as to enable you to do so." 

Carr could say and do things too, you perceive, 
in the true and chivalrous spirit of a gentleman. 
Pity that the many small defects that had gathered 
on his character, like an accumulation of fine dust 



94 CABB COf GABBLrON. 

on macfainery^ so often impeded the action of its 
wheels. 

Mrs. Courteney's eyes filled with teaxs, and she 
pressed Carr's band warmlj: but she remained 
firm fbr a long time to her original Intention. 
It needed all Gilda's entreades, and Carr's per- 
suasive arguments . reiterated with additional force * 
for several days . to induce her to abandon it 
But the more she resisted, the more resolved Carr 
was to carry throngh bis magnanimoas intentions. 
She had to yield finally against her instinctSfraiher 
than her judgment; for after all, was it not a 
natural and obvious course ? Her daughter's 
husband was disposed to treat her as a mother ; 
why shonld she estrange herseif from them ? She 
knew how Gilda loved her, and she determined, 
with the rare wisdom of experieuce, to influence 
her child as little as possible; to live as much 
withiii herseif as might be, and never to stand 
between husband and wife. If, after this, she 
detected the smallest shade of discord arise, which 
might be traced to her presence, she was resolved 
that nothing should induce her to remain. Yet 



CASA I4AMBEBTL 95 

even when these rules of action were laid down 
her dead husband's advice recorred to her over 
and over again, with painful, cruel distiiictness. 
Were it not wiser to make the wrench at once 
and for ever, that must sooner or later separate 
her iicom her child? 

It may be supposed that Carr was anxious to 
know what tone his father and mother woidd 
now adopt towards hun; and^ in truth, he was 
all the more so, that he did not write, and said 
nothing on the subject to any one. After his 
marris^ he had written one brief letter announc- 
ing the fact and then foliowed a long silence 
on either side Circumstances, in the meantime 
were favouring him; the compllcation of Lord 
Carrlyon's aairs was serions, and without more 
energy and resolution than the old man possessed, 
it was difficolt to right ihenu Carr's unfortunate 
marriage at ds juncture (instead of allying him- 
seif with ^^money/' as of course he ought to have 
done) was to be bitterly deplored; but in any 
sort of rupture with his son, or open expression 
of his displeasure when Carr's Signatare was so 



96 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

necessaiy to him^ Lord Carrlyon could not have 
indulged, evieu had he feit so inclined. Poor 
hampered^ harassed old man! what with his 
lawyers, and creditors, and overbearing wife, he 
had a hard time of it just then. Lady C^rlyon 
it was who prevented his writing at once to their 
delinquent son. She had a violent bilious attack, 
brought on by her rage at the frustration of all 
her most cherished schemes, and in her impotent 
wrath, forbade Lord Carrlyon from answering 
the prodigal's letter. But as the bilious attack 
passed away and a mens sana in corpore sano 
retumed to the worldly-wise woman^ a convic- 
tion of the ntter fatility of this line of conduct 
grew on her* If anything could redeem her 
Laurence . could retrieve the past . it must be 
done by other means^ and not just at present. 
Wait tili the first fever of passion is past . ^till 
reason has resumed her sway: then who knows 
but some flaw, some informality, may be found 
in this disgracefiil marriage, contracted with such 
suspicious haste ? So whispered prudence; and the 
proud woman gnawed her heart-strings, and wrote 



CASA LAMBERTL 97 

to her son. Unlike her more unpremeditated 
effusions, it was an astute composition in which 
mild sorrowful snrprise yielded to the loving 
mother's hope ihat^ as the step was taken it 
might conduce to her son's happiness. This letter 
was accompanied by one from his father, xying 
very Uttle about the marriage, and a great deal 
about the Carrljon estate. 

The packet reached Carr at Florence soon after 
the interview I have recorded with Mrs. Courteney, 
and abont a month after his inarriage. It made 
him very happy, and Gilda observed that the 
dond which had hang over his brow more than 
once of latOj was oompletely dispelled this morning. 

'^Shall we spend next winter at Carrlyon^ 
GUda?" he asked^ as he stooped over her chair 
and kissed her forehead. 

A number of contending feelings made tumult 
in the yonng wife's breast^ bat she replied with 
her sweet smile^ while the colour rose to her 
cheeks,. 

'^Oh, yes; if they wish it, Laorence, by all 
means let as go." 

VOL. H. 7 



sa CABR o;r QAsmiSON. 

Ist iin&f Ae bod gsiomn not unnaturally to 
tbiiik of Cacx's bome aai his paxeots witb some. 
tdmrg Ilk dsead.. The tew wojrds that bad 
diropped &om her hnsband now and then bad 
oot bcen reassnriag^r the absenee of all com?* 
BBcomcatton witb bis familj seemed stvacgelj 
cdd to tho warrarheftrted prl, and wbdn speaking 
of it to ber motber^ the hiAer prepared ber Ix 
espect anythioBg bat a cecdial frekosBoe front die 
bouse- of Canrlyoiu 

^But," added Mus. Oodxtenej^. ^^a liod^and 
attd wife nutet b& aU in ali to eacb other; aad 
] Laurence is, Bmeeidj aitadbed to yon^ aa I 
belisTe bm toir be^ and yoa continnd as bappjr 
togaftber as joxt ace; now dearest cbild^ no matter 
wbat bappens;. AU tbe world bjeaidoa is of no 
moment compared witb ^at" 

Yes> be waa sineerely attaiebed to her; there 
was no doubt o it Tbia was not a nDore paanng 
ncy, wbidi woie awaj witii. possossion. BiaJt, x^ 
membering tbe circumstances under wbicb be was., 
aceepted^. ht: nw^ be askd^ waa be contented witb 
tbe amount of affection it was in bia WAfe's powe 



CASA LAMBBTL 99 

to Bestow on bim in retum ? He was natundly 
of a jealons tonperament : be proverbial staring 
of Itdtans incensed him beyond measare; and 
be was near borse^wbipping a young artist^ vrbo^ 
attracted by tbe fair bair and sweet yonng Engfish 
ikee^ Tentnied to request tbat sbe wonid sit to 
bim, as Gilda stood watcbing bim copy in tbe 
gallery one day. 

Tbe receOection at Guido Lamberld was put 
away from bn as &r a possible. Tbey never 
spoke^ and never heard of tbe yoang Bologneser 
His name by tacit consent was aroided in tbe 
small "femily cirde, for it was bnt natural to 
imagine tbat it was not a very agreeable one to 
Lanrenee Carr He could not bear to tbink tba^ 
Gilda bad.^er loved tbe Italian. In fact, wben* 
ever be tboagfat on tbe snbject, be dedared it 
was not tbe caae : it was bxrt a girlisfa faney 
wbicb sentimentality bad exaggerated into a 
passion Yet, witib a very common, inconsistency^ 
be was Jeaioiisly cm &e look-ont fc^ any Symptom 
tbat sbonld iodicate tbe existence of sncb passion 
stiD. 

7.2' 



100 CARR DP CARRLYON. 

For the present it is necessary to say bat Utile 

of the State of Gilda's own heart. These were 

early days. She was very grateful for her 

hnsband's devotion^ and his tendemess to her 

motiier ; very anxiom to please him, and for the 

rest tranqnil and passive. The seeds were sown, 

no doubt^ of that affection whose growth^ like 

moss^ is unperceived. Alas! like moss^ too^ it 

never would do more than cover. the surface of 

her being. The passion-flowers within had been 

tom up ere they had come to xnaturity^ and 

trampled under foot When she thonght of 

Lamberti^ it was as of something long since passed 

away, ^belonging to another period of existence. 

The idle dreams of that time had ed for ever. 

Feelings of an onlike character were growing 

np daily stronger in her now ; and she strove 

with all her heart to shut out idle retrospection. 

. That handsome young couple in deep mouming 
attracted^ indeed^ universal attention. They were 
daily to be seen sauntenng through the Uffizi or 
Pitti Palace, and on sunny aftemoons driving to 
one or other of the princely villas that Surround 



CASA LAMBERTI. 101 

Florence. Sometimes Mrs. Courteney accom- 
panied them ; bat she vras alwajs readj vrith an 
excnse to leave them together^ and anxions that 
thej should be dependent on each other's socIety 
alone. 

Except two or three of the young men belong- 
ing to the embassy, they knew no one, and Carr, 
in his present frame of mind^ was not anxious to 
encourage the visits of these acqiiaintances. His 
wife's deep mouming was sufiScient plea for the 
reclosive life they led, and Garr at once declined 
any intercourse with the few English who, undis- 
mayed by the signs of Coming tempest, lingered 
in Florence. 

The carnival was over. The cnstomary bois- 
terous merriment of maskers had stmggied under 
an ominous gloom^ and the low thunder in the 
distance had made itself heard throngh the sound 
of tabret and dulcimer. And now^ on the other 
hand^ the sackcloth and ashes of Lent scarcely 
suited the fiercely excited temper of the Tuscan 
capital. Fair Florentine dames^ whose morality 
sat lightly on them during ten months in the year^ 



102 CABE OF CAKRLYON. 

and who^ in the ardbaiy course of things^ retir^ 
to conventSy and vere hasj making nar Btlvt^ 
on at this seafion^ w^e m&w in a feycar of 
pateiotic excitemeai On be 17tb of F^ehniary 
the Tuscan Constitution was promulgated, aad 
the anomaly of an Austrian M)eraL graadnhike 
was presented to the w.*ld This was oxily a 
link in ibe chain of reaction which was being 
rapdlj passed from citj to citj throrngbout & 
peiun&ala. Tearor -stricken Bomba . afier the 
Sidlian revolution where bis meroiless can- 
nonadings eamed him the name by which he 
will be handed down to posterity, . ^King Boinba 
in Ws abject terror, promising anyung and 
everything ta bis rerolted Neapolitaas, was a spec- 
tade at which all Italy rejoiced. very day 
news arrived of aome firesh demonstcatian of 
p(^ralar feeling in the cities writhing under 
Attstrian rule. From Milan it was an address 
circulated among the youths of all classes, in- 
viting the population to foUow the example of 
the AmericajQB, wbo abolidbed the use of tea in 
Order to avdid payii]^ the tax to Eiland. 



CASA LAHBEOn. 108 

^'Give np tabacco, and all rciuttiMrj tucation^'' 
was ihe exliortatioii of the ICanese patriota. 
From yemce it was tke deKTeraaoe al DanM 
Manin and Tommaaso from priwMi hy th6 haads 
of the people^ nd ie crf of ^ Morte aa Tedeschi I " 
Tlie OTerihrow of the Orleans dynaaty in Franoe^-. 
insorrection at Yieima, . a Roman Gonstitiidoii 
granted by Pio Nono, . intelligence of these and 
other moves rapidly foUowing each other on thegreat 
political chess-board^ kept Florence in a ferment 

If Carr had ever been a luke-warm liberal^ he 
at all events now heartily adopted his wife's 
politics^ ^d was sangoine for the emancipation 
of Italy. They lingered on in Florence until 
the spring shonld have fully burst, and they 
should be driven northwards to seek shelter from 
the heat. Every evening during ihis time he 
sauntered into the Caf Doni^ and mingled with 
one of the knots of free-spoken republicans^ who 
were discussing the news of the day. The latest 
rumoars current were thus brought back to the 
tea-table^ where mother and daughter anxiously 
awaited his retum. 



104 CARR OP CAERLYON. 

At last the long^gathering thunder bursi On 
tbe 18th of March the great revolt of Milan 
broke out^ and five days later Radetzki and the 
Austrian garrison were compelled to retire. 
. And here it is necessary that we should turn 
aside for a space^ to consider what had become^ 
meantime^ of the other actors in this stoiy. 



I 

< 



PART II. 



>o^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBEONI. 



107 



PAET IL 



VIIiLA FOSSO MBEOWI. 



-^^ 



CHAPTER I. 
The drcamstances -wch. agitated Ztalj at this 
time are freah m eveacy one'fl recoUection. It is 
TOUiecesBarj to do more thaa allude io them, wben 
thej intersect ie lires of the people I am writing 
aboai I hold the teller of atones generally 
mistaken wlien he asc^ids into ie xegioa of 
Iiisiorj ; and the careless i^eproduction of opinions, 
artisticaDy saited to the aKliiot of tbe tale^ lesds, 
in too maay cases, to perpetnale rror. ThuB mj 
own Italian tendenciesj and the polieal iaii of 
both mj heax)eSf shall not induce lae to repeat the 
iU-aothenticated ^oaries of Radetzki's croeltjj nor 



108 CAER OF CARRLYON. 

indulge in any Mazzinian diatribes against the 
luckless Cliarles Albert. As for Fio Nono and 
King. Bomba^ are not their tergiversations written 
in the memories of men ? Let them rest in peace. 
Guido Lamberti had not miscaiculated time. and 
place. He was at Milan some weeks before the 
match was laid to the train which speedily fired 
the whole peninsula^ and joined that band of 
young men by whom the irritation of public feeling 
against the Austrians was so greatly fomented. 
On the 18th March the revolt broke out; and 
during the bloody days that foUowed, the Bolognese 
gentleman was to be seen fighting beside bis 
Lonabard companions of all ranks^ and recklessly 
exposing his life, as it seemed^ at the barricades. 
His rifle . one of the three hundred fire-arms 
which were all the patriots of Milan could 
muster . did good service, while the Austrian 
bullets feil harmless around him. On the 2 Ist, 
as we all know, Radetzki was compelled to retreat ; 
and Como, Brescia, Bergamo, and the Italian Alps, 
answering the sunmions of the revolted city, sent 
forth volunteers to join the Milanese in expelling 



VnXA FOSSOMBBONI. 109 

the detested Austrians. The first step was gained, 
but it was only the first The Milanese were 

mistaken in fancymg the victory alreadjr won. 

 

Companies of volunteers were speedily formed, 
and in one of ihese Gnido Lamberti enroUed him- 
self. In the petty cngagements that foUowed 
during the next few weeks Italian superstition was 
not slow to pronounce that Count Lamberti bore a 
charmed life^ though it was one to which he seemed 
to attach but lite value. However that might 
be^ he did not pnrposely expose it Life had 
indeed lost all charm^ all colour for him ; he could 
look forward to nothing with any vivid sense of 
possible pleasore ;_but the great aim of his exist- 
ence yet remained unaccomplished^ and to that he 
now applied Umseif with undivided soul and 
strength. The State of his mind was such as finds 
relief firom over-stress of thought in vigorous action 
alone. The tension of every nerve and muscle in 
his body, the necessary rapidity of eye, and 
promptitude of hand were vents to a streng 
inward excitement Above all, the desire to 
stimulate by his own daring the crowd of youths 



110 CABS OF GABBLTON* 

aroand bim carrie( Guido anraj.. ^'The joung 
Lamberti haa every qualification to make a good 
captam but oe/^ remaarked a reteran^ shaking }m 
head^ ^he has na self-command." Yet this was 
the same Guido so fatally centrolied hj bis mis- 
taken pride hitb^to^I But in sucb inconsistency 
is nature justified of ber cfaildren. 

Wbenever he bad' time to reeur to bimself and 
bis own lot^ he was wretcbed. Nature wili make 
berself heard sooner or later^ drown ber voice as 
you will by Ae sophistry of any principle tbat is 
not fonnded an truA Tbere were tunea . mostly 
in fte long silent bonrs of tbe nigbt . ^wben tbe 
young man^s beart gare way^ and be almast i&- 
nounced tbe stubbom prejndices in wbich he bad 
been early traibed Were not a man's beart and 
consciencer &e oafy tribunals be should recogoize? 
Was it- not a: morsd cowardice to regacd wbat might 
be said or thougbt of bim ? And was tbis lofty 
pride. of indq)endenoe wori tbe sacriifice of a lile's 
(nay^ might it not be* two livea') bappiness? He 
could bardly donbt^ afber tbat last interriew with 
MrB>..aiirteneyrtiiat Gilda bad not be^xwholly 



YILLA ^OSBQMBnOtSL 111 

iBdiffeiseni. to him ; aad hec aweet: p^e face,, as be 
had bc^eld it for the last time^ aeesoed to Look 
dawj QU bim reproacbf ully as h& lay tbere on the 
floor, wrapped in bis beavj cloa^ and sarrouncGed 
i ike dim firdlight b j bis eefixsg compamons. 

Then tbe old pride would again aasert ita 
swayv oot mmiingkd witb bittemess at a fate 
against wbicb xere was now no bope . ^no appeal ! 

From. tibia amict of feeling the neceasitj of 
roufiin^ bimself to action was a boon and a relief. 
AmoBg tbe qui^tians dallj discusaed tbere were 
tbe momentoiui enes: wbat goYornment was to 
succeed to the existent State of timigs in Italy^ 
and whetber repnMicans ought to fight under the 
PidmBtese Standard, with no other prospect than 
the old patch-work of pettj sovereignties throngb- 
out tfaa paninsula^ awpt of Aostrians^ and sMrriy 
and. ^^umi^ed wih a cmistitution apiece. Mazzini 
(and Mazzini was revered at tfaat time,^^ be it re- 
membered,. bj all liber&Is) had ceded to the idea 
of a ^ nniisedl kii^dom of Italy^ ' but did not encoor- 
age hift foUowers. to ophold die ibrones of such por 
tentates as Leopold and Bombaw. Cbailes Albert^ on 



112 CAER OP CABRLYON. 

the other hand^ could hardly enter into any compact 
against his patriot allies as they then were^ still less 
so against the watchword of their party, Pio Nono. 
It is true the Fope's allocution very soon afterwards 
shook public confidence in his professions ; and in 
Ferdinand of Naples there never can be said to 
have been any. Still the Roman and Neapolitan 
armies were on the march to assist in the great 
national war. Charles Albert could not ignore 
this^ and while the liberal party placed no faith in 
oaths forced &om the reluctant Ups of the Italian 
princes^ it was impossible for the king to dedine 

 

their aid^ or to assent to the stipulations which the 
Mazzinians wished to fbrce on him. 

Guido Lamberti as we know, was a republican. 
A Citizen of the Roman States, he was no lover 
of the Fapacy, and found it hard to beUeve that 
any good thing could come out of the chair of 
St Peter. But he feit that all differences of 
political faith or judgment were merged in the 
first, great, and pressing duty towards his country.. 
To rid the soil of the Austrian, that was the 
first thing . for men of all shades of opinion to 



VILLA POSSOMBRONL 113 

co-operate in this, and leave the vexed questions 
of internal govemment to be settied hereafter. 
Had more. been of bis mind, the great movement 
of '48 had not failed, as it assuredly did, for lack 
of xmity and concentrated vigour. 

From Bologna . ^his beloved Bologna . Lambert! 
had almost daily intelligence through the professor. 
The cotmtess, wrote that worthy man, was as well 
as continaed fast and mortification would allow; 
she sighed whenever she spoke of her son: but 
she found comfort in the reflection that he had 
an image of the Virgin round bis neck, which 
she had hung there herseif when he was a boy. 
His preservation was no doubt owing to this. 
The patrioticenthusiasm of the city, Garofalo said, 
knewno bounds. Sympathy with their brethren 
in the north was expressed in addresses, subscrip- 
tions^ the raising of volunteer corps, and the 
departure of many of the leading young men to 
join the Standard of Charles Albert Among the 
latter, Garofalo mentioned Count Razzi. The 
Marchesa Onofrio, too, was departed towards the 
seat of war, with the view of nursing the prospec- 

VOL. n. 8 



lU CABB OF CABRLYOK. 

tive woimds of ibe Fiedmontese .coosinj it was 
supposed. 

One portioa of tlus 'inidlig^nce Guido had 
alr^adj fore8i<:alled some ikae befora la the 
first fighting days of Milan^ be aiad Bazfi ciuaie 
across each qther^ and xchanged a irarm giasp 
of the band in tbe nudst of that ezcited Bcene 
He met Um afterwards in cae and other pnblk 
-phce, and th two Bol^gneae. gentlemen were 
Bubsequently attandbed to the Barne division of 
tbe arm j. Dring the eaorly periods of tbis inter- 
Qonrse^ Guido was Struck by a certain degree of 
mystay, wbicb^ being so at Tariance with bis 
frank gay cbaracter^ seemd to cppcess Bazzi 
wben alkiding to bimself bis position^ and pro- 
specta. Guido did not apper to remark it, ad 
ayoid! thenceforward any iarect approach to 
a subject whicb evidently embarrassed bis frieud. 
Had he, indeed^ feit any great coriosity on tbe 
6ubjeet> Qs: h&sm moved by otiier motires, it is 
moore tban probable that tbe other's awkward 
reticence wotttd bave yielded ix> the smaEest 
amoiint of pressure. As it was^ a cirennustance 



YJUJl B06S0MBB02^ 115 

ere long flforded to Guido ibe dne he was fiir 
from Beeking. 

More than once dnring the fire days' fighting 
at the barricadeS; Guido's attention faad been 
momentariiy drawn to the figuTB of a sfight, 
dark yottth^ dressed in a gray jacket> his short 
wavy hair tmnncnBited by n cap ef the same 
colonr. He carried a Teyoiyer ix las bdt^ and 
a light carbine sking across his shoiddar It 
Tnu9 his de^cterity in the employmeBt ^ Um 
latter weapon which attracted 6ido% Botice. 
The yottth certajnly could not be said to ex-* 
pose himself tinnecessarily to tite enemy's fire 
He generally estabUshed his poBitkm beiand a 
heap g paving-^toes, or tinder corer of a wall ; 
whence^ with the utmost iang^oid, he todt 
deliberate aim, picked off his man^ and rdioaded. 
The gallantry might be small; the skfll and die 
scECcess were eminent. In the glimpsea which 
Guido canght of the boy's profile there was 
something not altogether nnfamiEur^ he fencied ; 
bat he had not time to giye the snbjeet a seccmd 
Ihonght With the shadea of erening, the yonth 

8.2 



116 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

always disappeared, and was to be seen neiliher 
in the streets nor cafis. In the mad rejoicings 
consequent on the exptdsion of the Austrians 
from Milan, Guido remembered afterwards never 
to have come acrosis him. But one evening while 
passing through one of the piazze^ he was arrested 
by the sound of a rieh, harmonious voice, pouring 
forth with all the impassioned eloquence of Italy 
the then poptdar hymn of " Pio Nono." A crowd 
had gathered under the open window, and their 
enthusiasm was noisy expressed in the chorus 
they made at the end of each couplet. Their 
vivas and plaudits at the termination of the whole 
drew the singer somewhat reluctantly, as it seemed, 
to the window. Though it was not possible to 
see his face, Lamberti recognized, or fancied he 
recognized, the outline of the figure against the 
light as that of the youth in gray. The voice, 
too, Strange to say, haunted him as one he had 
heard before. Whether the singer had, on.his 
side, recognized a friend among the uptumed 
faces in the dimly-lit piazza below, or whether 
gratified vanity alone prompted the display, there 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 117 

was no ielling; but he bronght bis gultar to the 
'window^' and with redoubled fire and pathos he 
sang one patriotic song after another, nntil the 
excitement of the increasing crowd below became 
tmnultuous and almost alarming. Then the singer ^ 
bowing bis head^ dosed the window and with- 
drew 

The Corps to which Guido and Razzi both 
belonged was soon afterwards attached to the 
Sardinian army. They left Milan^ and took part 
in most of the sharp skirmishes and pettjr engage- 
ments whicH foUowed. In one of these . Monzam- 
bano^ or some other^ . Guido was, for the first 
time, strangely and unexpectedly brought face to 
face with that mysterious youth in gray. 

It was a hand-to-hand fight across a bridge, I 
have heard him say. The Austrians were re- 
treating, but disputed every inch of the ground. 
Just as he had disarmed a young officer, and 
was making him bis prisoner^ Guido found him- 
seif seized in the grasp of a giant double bis 
own weight, who, attracied by the conspicuous 
gallantry of the young count, had bome down 



118 CABS OiP CASKLYOTS. 

..rjthifig before Um, -Ycsol^ed te piecipitate 
liJiB enemj oveiy the bridjge The danger was 
immiBent. Guido's hsnds heilig ofherwis em- 
pkyed at 4th6 raement, he wm^ sfitQ of )ua great 
stvength^ almost poinnerkssin the grapple of tihose 
ndghtj rma tbii cloeed like a Tice i^oand faiBi. 
There was a Sharp, violent struggle, for a fiew 
seooiid amly : Onid raiiily straining ever j 
muscle to firee himo^ while he was heared up 
towards the prapet At that instant, even wfaile 
tottecing^ on the brink, a pistol waa disc^arged 
ftill ia the Inroad, heavy, fair4)earded face, umst 
so cloee to his own, and the Austrian's brains 
were scatteved over hiiru Guido staggered back, 
and his ejes iznet those of his deliverer, as the 
jonth in graj, with a strnge smile of triamph, 
retumed the pistol to his belt, and slipped back 
iatothe crowd. 
And Guido recognized him I 



119 



CHAPTER n. 

Ths Laurence Carrs had at la&t left Fbreoce^ 
and were bending their steps northwards. Un-' 
dJsmajed hj the fact of its being tbe theatre of 
war^ they were to pass the summer in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Lago di Gsffda. An Italiaa 
acquainiance of Carr's> who was far too mudb 
alarraed to think of occupying hia Tla therd^ 
under the present aspect of the country^ offered it 
to Carr for a very small ** con-sideration.'* The 
State of the Lanrence Carr finances was sack as 
to render any expensiye residence for ihe summer 
undesirable. The fine apartment on the Lnng^ 
Amo^ the carrkige and horses the pictores and 
pietre dwre whicb Canr had found irresistible: 
these in foor moniths had eaten abeady a hirge 
hole in the year's income. I have said that he 



120 CAKR OF CARRLYO^. 

had never been recklessly extravagant^ and never 
addicted to expensive vices ; but the heir of the 
Carrlyons had the vaguest ideas ,of squaring 
income and expenditure, and towards the end of 
his sojourn in Florence was dismayed at the 
aspect of his cheque-book. He would sooner 
starve than make anjr application to his faliher; 
from his mother-in-law he was naturally still 
more anxious to conceal the tightened State of 
the money market. He kept his own counsel^ 
but he made up his mind they must go^ and 
really "economize" somewhere: there was no 
help for it. And at this juneture, it so happened, 
that the villa for a " cn-sideration " was offered 
to him. It was described as spacious^ and 
beautifully situated . surrounded by its own 
vineyards, and overlooking 'the Lake of Garda. 
The picture, in short, was painted in glowing oil 
colours ; and if one was disposed to overlook the 
ngly crack across it (namely, that the contending 
armies would probably be encamped in its im- 
mediate vicinity), no doubt it was a tempting 
proposal. Carr was disposed to overlook it; 



VILLA FOSSOl^IBKONL 121 

neither his wife nor mother-in-law had any fears, 
but on the contrary rejoiced to be nearer to the 
theatre of all their hopes and sympathies. The 
bargain was Struck^ and towards the middle of 
May they lefl; Florence. 

The Villa Fossombroni lay about a day's march 
beyond Peschiera. Their joumey so far, a 
tedious vetturino aSair, performed not without 
difBculties, and by many a circuitous route in 
avoidance of yet greater ones, was at last 
accompHshed. They had meant to keep aloof 
from this, one of the four great fortresses of 
Venetian Lombardy, which was then besieged by 
the Italian army; but news of its fall, simul- 
taneously with Charles Albert's victory at Goi'to, 
reached them on the way, Ambulance-carts with 
the wounded and ihe dying, . files of prlsoners in 
the white, blood-stained uniform of Austria, . 
couriers, orderlies, vehicles of every description 
moving in dim clouds of dust along the stony 
road . proclaimed the triumphant news. Peschiera 
had fallen I All Italy rang with the cry. 

"Why should we tum aside irom Peschiera 



122 CABB Or CAJBRLYON. 

DOW ? " Said Gildai her ejes li^d^ed np with 
eiiihasiafiixL '^It is in the hsndfi of onr&kndss 
and oll I Lanrence, pechaps we might be of 
iiae 1o Bome of the poor woanded people I 
Mamma and I have made a whdi ininkftil 
of Unt Look at that mifortiiDate boj carried 
along both arms shot off! " she added, shiadderiDg, 
'^and the dd man beside huni how thej are 
jolted along I It ia horrible* Gan't we do any- 
thing for them ? Let ns stop ; do^ Laurence I It 

is inlniTnan to let them SuffcT SO I " 

^ My defiir chd^ ihey wouldn't stop for us. 
They're taking them to the hospital at Goito. 
shot in some of the distnt outposts, I sappo^e . 
or eise they are too fall at Peschiera to take 
them in* Pearhaps by-the-by^ there may not be 
room for h% in the- place." 

^' Let ns try ; we can but go on, if it is so 
Don't refnse lae." She looked into his &ce^ 
pleadingly. ^^ It seems so nnnatural to be sitting 
here at our easoj cautionsly avoiding all thia 
misery^ that we might do sometbing to aUeviate 
Do tdl him so msmma.'* 



YXLLJl YOSSOMBROITL 123 

Bat Mrs Coortanejr wa& ilait, and Carr 
replied smiHzi^^ 

'^ YouVe not maa fisr a bo^tal Gilda. Whj, 
jou tnrBed qnite white Just now at be sight 
of a little bloocL You' be more m their way 
tbaa of anj Service^ I sna^tect. A botrid coa- 
fnsioii depend obl it.^ 

'^ If Lanrsioe objects ta Tonr going and Z 
tfaink be is rigbt^ my child" said her mother^ 
bastily^ ^ Z will get into a caratella, and go 
oa by myself to Fescbiera. 1 can easily rejoiXL 
jon in a &w days at fosaombroni; and tb^re 
ia no danger for mjr nerves now you know'' sbe 
added^ smHii^. 

'^No," repeated her dangbt^ more eamesy 
tban be&re ^^ 1 canndi agree to that, motber. 
Iianrence will not refuse m, I know, 1 am not 
so weak and focdieh as he tbinka ; and I want to 
prove to him that 1 cati be of some use. Pear 
Laurence^ 1 shall be miserable if > you wcoi't 
consent to onr all going o& to Fescbiera I ** and 
sbe loekod ap^ with her sweet^ cscited &ce so 
pleadtngly tbat the youfig ibdi did consiBBt 



124: CARR OP CARRLYON. 

Ah! had he known that his more characteristic 
obstinacy would have been far better for all 
their fiiture happiness at that moment ! 

The State of the ilewly-liberated fortress justified 
Carr's anticipations. The wretched little place 
was crammed to overflowing. The Duke of 
Genoa's stafiP, and the chief officers of the divlsion^ 
occupied the few dirty houses of entertainment^ or 
were biUeted on the principal Citizens. Tricolor 
flags, ribands, and garlands interwoven with 
mottoes^ fluttered from every window, which 
were occupied by women, young and old, in 
flaming gala dresses. The narrow streets below 
were filled almost whoUy by men, and of these 
the larger proportion of course were soldiers. 

** Well 1 this looks promising," said Carr, 
resignedly^ as the yetturino heaved and struggled 
up the street between the mob of soldiery, 
attracting some small notice by reason of ' its 
peaceful-looking convoy. 

'^This looks promisingl It reminds me of 
the night I arrived in Bologna^ only this is 
considerably worse. We shall have to pass the 



' VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 125 

nigUt in the street, I foresee. By Jove I Here 
we are at a fll stop. What are we to do? 
Giuseppe I Giuseppe ! what the deuce is the 
fellow up to ? He has run off into the crowd 
like a mad dog. Well I mj dear Gilda, I con- 
gratulate you on the success of your idea ! We 
shall all be driven to the hospital to eam a 
shelter^ evidently." 

**Here comes Giuseppe^ with a radiant face," 
said Gilda, putting her head out of window, " but 
who is the lady with him ? Do you see ? with 
a white bournous ? Surely, I know her face." 

" The Onofrio I by all that's wonderful ! " cried 
Carr, bursting out laughing, as he leapt from the 
carriage. *^ Well, this is lucky. I give Giuseppe 
credit for that move. Marchesa, overjoyed to 
see you. Who would have thought of meeting 
here? If you can find us a place to lay our heads, 
we are your slaves for life." 

" I have found you one already," said the 
kindly Italian, laughing, as she shook him warmly 
by the band. */ But come, introduce me, en rhgle, 
to your wife and her mother, and then you wil. 



126 CABB OF CAfiBLTOlSL 

all come wh me. I only arrived bere a &w 
hours ago myself," slie contiaued, afher the c^- 
mony had been decoroasly gone througH ^rom 
Grolt(^ and I am with xacjr old aimt^ Madame Smo, 
who has a house here. Sbe has not o&oi; fbnr 
officers billeted on. her, axtd shall find rooms for 
you, I engage." 

They descended from the carriage, leaying it to 
foUow as best it might while they threaded the 
crowd until they reached Madame Santi'a faonse. 

On iheir way thither the marchesa could not 
resist saying, 

^'You English are a strnge peopleH-^nerer 
happy nnless y on aie in the midst of every thisg. 
What brings you here, earo mio f " 

'' Well," repUed Carr, laughmg, *the &ct is, I 
am henpecked . a State of thii^ you don't believe 
in here> eh ? My wif e was bent an visiting the 
hospital^ and seeing if die could do anythii^ for 
the poor fellows . so I yielded with the best grace 
I could." 

'' firaval signoral" tke mandiesa tnmed xound 
with an enooniaging Ettle nod, '^brara I we sadly 



VILLA 70SS0MBS0NL 127 

wit help in all departments Oor po(: Tolon- 
teers ! scarcely fed ^ axid mknj o Oieai not lodged 
at all I Quei mcdedetti Tedeaehi have rsiraged the 
whole country^ so that there is little left or iem ; 
and as to the oommissaria^/' she added, drt^ing 
her Yoice^ '' however the kss said oa tha;t subjeet 
the better I Tour conntrywomeBare all gooduxrses, 
are thej not ? well ! so shall we Italians he in the 
conxiBe of time. We wanted a good war to rouse 
our energies. YouVe heard about that dear 
Belgiojaso, har^t you ? Dio tnio ! cht guM^ 
ro9a, nobe ereatura 1 She has leried five biuidred 
Neapolitans horsel^ and brmigbt them with her 
Ah I if we had more such women I " 



They had by this time reached the Caaa 
one of the few tolerable houses m the plaee^ and 
were oondncted hy tihe mardiesa into a sala, where 
two officers wens composedly smoking their eigar 
over the remains of the midnlay meaL The room 
wa& still hecmetically sealed against a posalble ray 
firom the aftenioon sun, and the atmoapbere was 
conseqncaitly soffocang with tofaacco-smoke aod 
the saronr of dq^arted yiands. Flies < every 



128 CABE OF CAEBLYON. 

description blackened the walls ^nd ceiling and 
swarmed over the table-cloth, where they fought 
over fragments of sagar, and the membra djecta 
of a fowl. 

Madame SantI was a sharp little old lady, very 
unlike an Italian in appearance^ having a light 
brown fipont,^. which might be presumed to afford 
some distant clue to the colour of her own. locks, 
when she had any . and very shrewd gray eyes. 
She was fll of animation, and wore a tricoloured 
bow in her cap. The influx of unexpected visitors 
seemed in no way to . disconcert her . as it pro- 
bably would have done most English ladies; She 
received them very cordially, showed them a 
couple of bare Chambers, with painted ceillngs, and 
Said the servants must manage as best they could 
in the kitchen. She suggested no difficulties, and 
made no apologies, which was the sorest way of 
setting the strangers at their ease 

As to remaining beyond the night at Feschiera, 
under such circumstances^ beholden to this lady 
for hospitality, it was, of course, not to be thought 
of. Carr took an opportunity of saying this to his 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 129 

wife, and added, that as it was then past six 
o'clock^ she and her moiher had better not^delaj 
their visit to the hospital^ if they were bent 
on ii 

"Fll take you there; bi^t you won't ask me 
to go in? IVe no vocation for dressing wounds, 
.1 will smoke my cigar round the fortifications^ 
and call for you later."' 

^' We are not afraid of Walking by ourselves 
in Italy," said Gilda^ quietly. "If you don't 
like to come in^ mamma and I can find our way 
back perfectly, Laurence." 

Carr was not in .the best of humours^ and this 
answer of his wife's did not please him 

"OhI as you like. I am quite aware that 
you used to walk about Bologna by yourselves : 
but you will find that Englishwomen in society 
don't generali^ think it advisable to do so after 
dusk^ especially in a place crammed with sol- 
diers, But if you don't want me, say so, by all 
means'' 

"My dear Laurence, you misunderstood me," 
Said Gilda, distressed. "I only meant that you 

VOL. n. 9 



130 CAER QF CABRLTON. 

ahould not wony youraelf aboolr ua, if joa did 
mot lifcft to . . -'^ 

^Comcbl " aaid be narehesa^ entering quidd;^ 
** Gome, children 1 let us take our cafi noir and 
be 0&. I ahall leave 70u> aignora, at tbo: hoapttal^ 
fiur I asn nsore at HomQ among the floBh^oia of 
Egjpt, whidi I am ourrjii^ to onc poor voluirteers, 
than with poultices and bandages I don't imdier- 
stand mach ahottt medicine^ jou see ;. I take a 
doae Mice & month. and aar bled. occasionallj to 
pnrify the syatem; bat bs to anything dse^ I 
bave always had the best health^ I aat glad. to 
say^ and I don't imderstand skk pec^ife. Tl^ey 
pretend that I nearlj kiUed a poor feUow^ the 
otiter day^ becaiise I poured half a bottle of ehianti 
down bis throat; I thou^rt he. wanted stcength^ 
IdxA it appears he was. m a Ssvo^i so since: then I 
am very cautioua, and deyote niyself pzmcipally 
to those whom my System can't kilL'^ 

Notwithstandwag whicb dusclaimer^ the warm- 

hearted woman had been indefatigable on erery 
batflefidd in alleviafcing,. as fiur as she could^ 
the SD&nDga of tl^e woasded^ until they were 



YHXA T0SS0MB801SL 131 

transmitted into other hands She now . as the 
caretta below^ laden with meat^ bread^ and wine^ 
testified . ^was devoting her substance to some of 
those who^ though unwounded^ Lad borne the 
brden and heat of the day. 



9.2 



132 CABB OF CABBLTOK. 



CHAPTER IIL 
.(>. 

Thet stopped at the door of a long, low building, 

and here the marchesa and Carr left mother and 

daughter, Carr proposing to call for them in a 

couple of hours. 

Within, the greatest confusion appeared to 

reign. There were not near hands enough for 

the necessary work^ and surgeons, assistants, and 

nurses, were running to and fro with all the 

noisy gesticnlation of Italians, which, added to 

the Piercing shrieks of some of the tinfortanate 

sufierers, rendered it a perfect Babel. The two 

ladies, each laden with a heavy parcel, tried in 

vain for some time to obtain any Information as 

to the part of the building to which they were 

to direct their steps. Avoiding the wards where 

any serious Operations were being performed, and 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 133 

to which, of course, the surgeons' and nurses* 
care would be principaUy given, Gda knd her 
mother entered one to whicb a young surgeon at 
last directed them^ adding that there were some 
bad cases in it to which he had not time to 
attend. 

It was densely^ hideously crammed : the State 
of the atmosphere was such that Gilda stopped 
and gasped. Only by a strong eflfort, and deter- 
mination not to give way^ was she able^ after a 
minute's pause^ to enter. 

There was no distiuction of persons or of 
country. officers and meo^ Italians and Austrians^ 
all crowded together, A few nurses^ and a cople 
of sisters of mercy, hurrying to and fro. prayers, 
groans^ and imprecations^ all around. 

** Madre di JDio I non abbandonarmi I " roared 
a stalwart son of Naples^ who bore his slight gun 
shot wound less patiently than many did the 
loss of limbs. Gilda dressed and bound up his 
arm as well as she was able^ not without a 
shudder: and his vociferous blessings almost 

X 

alarmed hen The poor boy in the next bed. 



134 CABB OF CABBLYON 

wlio had Bustamed a mcxrtal injory^ and whom 
tbe snrgeons had. alreadj exammed, pponotincixig 
bis oase liopeless, said iaintly^ as Mr& Courteney 
xnoistened /bis lips 'wMi an 'orange, . 

^^jimd s^nora^ do not waste yontr time on 
me. I am dying. They have told me >so. 
There ate x>ierB who my be BSEVBd. Go to 
them." 

.*^Are yon happy, my poor boy? I there 
augbt you -mah ? Have yu seen 'a priest P " 

He sbook bis bead 

" I don't want one. We don't scare for priests 
at kme. IVe done my ditty, and I die for 
Italy. Ob, 3ny poor mother ! I sbtmld be qtute 
bapgyif only sbe knew " 

'^Give me lier address. She shall leam hxw 
bravely you died.^ 

And witb tM solace sbe tuimed tb ftbe old 
Anstrian beside bim, ^bose arm bad been dbot 
away. 

" A ance bospital you bave bere,** groaned 
!Radetzki'ii foU&wer, witb an oatb : ^ a kennel of 
tsursed Italkn dogs, wbere one get nottang 



VILLA JO8S0MBB0KL 135 

to eat or drink . ^and as to disciplmef I should like 
tke old marshal to see jt I " 

She botind up !his wocind, asid went fcrvvard 
an her mission of mercy 

Gilda found hec dexteiity i&crease ^Al hv 
confidence and courage She infosed, moreovety 
sofBe portion of lier hope&il spiiit into the heart 
of eaoh afferesr she ttiended. The hour 0ped. 
Daylighlb was fast waning. The flickedaig rajs 
of Bunaet no loager played upcm &e idiite- 
wifaed wall, and over the pillowB of sdlfering 
mm, The rapid twiBght of the sonth was 
alroadj enveloping the distant comersiof the 
room, and Ihere yet remained a row of beds at 
the Tipper end of it, which the kdies faad not 
yet visited. 

The tonfiiskm <f( B'orses wad usaistaaeEts horry- 
img to and &, and the fast^ading H^t t8&- 
dered it difficuk tb distiiqgoish the oooapants of 
hese until one was tdose to diem. 4GIda ap 
proaohed tfae first, and asbsd <gently whi^e his 
itgutj was. No waswec She teoched the haad 
that lay passire on die tTeclid. tt was cold* 



136 CARR OF CABRLYON, 

She started back. It was the first time she 
Lad come into actual contact with death; and 
she could not help shuddering. She snatched 
the lucema a servant had just set down, and 
golded by its feeble light passed on to the next 
bed 

But this sufferer and the next one had been 
cared for. She passed on, leaving her mother 
some distance behlnd. 

She had now reached the last bed on that 
side of the ward As she came near, she raised 
her light, as she had done to the others . and 
was tuming away, for lo! her help here, too, 
had been forestalled. A youth clad in gray 
leant over the pillow, busied in renewing a 
bandage on the brow of him who lay there. 

Yes. She was tnming away . ^but she stopped, 
rooted to the spot, her eyes fastened on the 
bed, a cold, sick horror creeping through her 
veins. She would have called out; she wonld 
have spoken his name: her tongue clave to the 
roof of her mouth She would have drawn 
nearer: her limbs seemed tumed to stone. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 137 

The sufferer was muttering in the unconscions 
delirium of fever ; and impatiently snatched at 
the hand of his nurse each time it touched 
him. Gilda heard but one word moaned forth 
in all the agony of intense longing. It was her 
own name. The light feil &om. her hand and 
was extingidshed on the floor. 

The youth sprang up^ and with the savage 
bound of a tiger, seized her arm^ and thrust her 
back. 

** What have you to do here ? Who told you 
to come? You have followed him, have you? 
You will not give up the ground to me, then, 
even now you are married^ heartless little jade ? 
Have you forgotten the compact between us ; or 
did your mother not teil you? Take care . if 
you cross my path ! " 

The youth crushed her wrist in bis thin iron 
fingers^ tili a low cry broke from the terrified 
girl. 

" Silence^ fool I " said the other between his 
teeth, as he relaxed his grasp. 

"But, Sara, Sarai in pity teil me. Is he 



138 CABR (Xe GABBLYOK. 

v:y 111? I knew mothing of his being here. 
I didn't iiideed.'' 

The diaguised woman folded her arms and 
stDod sentind-wise before ihe bed. Even in the 
dim light^ the trinmphaBt glitter of her dark eyes 
WAB visible. 

*^ He has a brain fever. Don't be deoeived by 
his irild savings after you. Tou like .to , hear 
thena, eh, Mrs. Lanrence OaxrP . you come 
here to drink them in? and your httsband would 
like to hear them tao I Bnt I warn you once 
again-^take cave I or it will be worse far yotu 
Yoa caasnot hsve yonr fine Eoglish hnsbazid 
and yonr poor Itaan k)ver too ! Y<m have 
made your choice, aad I have taken the post 
thftt might have been yours. Troubie him and 
me no more^ or I swear to God you shall 
repent it J " 

**<3od fbrgire you, Sara! I ddy beseech ycm 
to teil me **  

The voice si^nok the ear oF the denn man. 
He started up in bed. 

'^ Begone I " repeated Sara, biOBide hersetf with 



YILLA F0S6OMBBONL 139 

pafiskm. ^'You will HU hhn; and bis blood 
be on your head, if .he (dies ! " 

The wretdhed Gilda ftumed^ and walked feebly 

to the centre of the aroom, where her mother waB 

ocxmpied. Scarcely knowing what she was abaat^ 

she touched her on the arm, murmuring,. 

^ L.$t US ga I am ilL I can ^ay no longer." 

The growing darkness :and confusion of noise 

> 

had efiectnally preyented Mrs. Courteney' seeing 
or hearing anything of the scene ^o rapidly 
^naoled at the faither end of the 'ward. 

Jls soon aB libey were in the open adr, Oilda. 
laid her band npon her mother'i arm. 

^ Mother, I hav^e .een himl " 

2t "wjas bU fihe sai, and Mrs. Couvteney needed 
HO mome. She had feilt a dim dread of this all 
along, BS a possifaiUty which it behoved ^her to 
arwnt, if he cottld. It was not to be averted ; 
and what she dreaded had xiome to pass. 

"^ I9 he very ill, my child ? " he asked, 
at lasi "If so, I will go back to him so 
soon an . ^ 

^^fe! HKrther iSara." 



140 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

As she gasped out that name^ Mrs. Courtenej 
clasped her hands^ and murmured, . 

"Good GodI what horrible fatality is this? 

That woman herel. . my poor child^ you 

know not what you have donel that woman's 
enmity " 

^'Has opened my eyes to the truth at last^ 
mother," said Gilda in a very low voice. **I 
see it all now. But oh! is there nothing to 
be done? . about him, I mean. Must we leave 
him, then^ to her care? Enowing him, loving 
him as we have done, mother . ^it seems so hard 
to abandon him; so cruel and unnatural." 

" It must be so, Gilda," said Mrs. Courteney, 
hastily ; " we know he is well tended and cared 
for; and even I dare not retum and face that 
woman now. The consequences to you, my child, 
might be very miserable. Pray God to avert 
ihem, and soften that wretched girl's heart I 
If, as I suppose, from their being here together, 
he loves her " 

"-ET djoe9 not^ Gilda*s breathing came short 
and thick, and she hurried her pace, but the 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 141 

words would out. ^* She tried to deceive me, I 
was not to be deceived. I heard him, I aaw him. 
Of course it is all one to me now^ mother; but 
I know he doesn't love her.** 

Mrs. Courteney said no more ; she was wisely 
afraid of pressing tiie pomL The work of months 
had been destroyed in a moment^ and that secret 
divolged which she had hoped^ for her chfld's 
happiness^ Gilda might never know. Yet she 
trosted her firmly . implicitly. The very truth 
and daring with which she had spoken those 
words, testified to the young wife's pure crystal 
nature. 

The two ladies, in their agitation and ezcite- 
inent, had reached Gasa Santi before they re- 
membered that Carr was to have called for them. 
It was too late, and they were too tired to think 
of retracing their steps. The marchesa was with 
him: he would easlly leam that they had left 
the hospital. 



142 CABS; (Xr CABBLTON. 



CHAPTER IV. 



^O .  . " 



The two ladiea were summomed to sapper half an 
hour later. The macchesa hadretuamed. Besldes 
Madame Saxitl and the other two officers, tkefe 
was also tbe Fledmoiitese cavalrjr captaiii, who 
was introduced as. Madame Sajatii's mphaut^ Cair^s 
place was vacani 

Gdlda feit wretched ^ she- wiahdd her huaband 
would appea. Rec pale face asd awollen ejea 
cottld not fili ta attract attf^tiook 

^Is this yeux Esglish beadatjr?" mixtiiered 
Piedmont, imder its long tawny moustatcfae^. to^ 
the da]*k-ejed Italian lady beaide bissu ^ Well 
there is no accounting for tastes I - Ells m poae en 
martyr, I see; and her virtuos, I daresay, are 
great; but " 

" Hold your tongue, cugino mio. You will 



VILLA. JQSSQMBBOm. 143 

disctis& thift pasty of ortolans: better than jou can 
a womfla's YiTtmes You know nothing aboat 
them." 

" I know yonxsy cava." 

<' The Usfe is. tsaudl enongh" replSed tbe hj, 
laughing ; ^' and a& to d)i& lUtl i^&se^ A& ia loo 
good &r auck as yoiu Signora^" she cried^ 
elevating her Tcace>, "libati have you done witfa 
yoar handsome hiftsfaazid? He lefi me sonae tnne 
ago ta retom to you. Did yoxLisot wak for kica?''' 

He appeared afe that same nuomeiit.; andwilli 
a polite salutatioa io the lady of the house^ seated 
himself at the opposite side o the.- table ta bis 
wife^ wiUuwit lookiag tawaida her. Her counte- 
naoce bsighteoed a& b& ^iteced and abe td^d 
toi catch bis eye; hat he'aeemed resolTed not 
to look tbat way. To any one. imacqmaiated 
with the yariations. of bis comitenaoGe^ be was 
muck aa nsual . polisbed> agreeable^ well-bred. 
Bat Grilda and ber mo4ber had leaxnt. to watcb 
every sbade of that mos! impresaionibJe characteHr 
as it rose ta the sur&ce. They kitew at once 
that he was not quite pleaseiiL 



144 CABR OF CASBLYON. 

*' I was just asking where you were," said the 
marchesa. "Here is your poor little wife, who 
has been looking most disconsolate." 

'^ Ladies manage to look so at a very short 
noticej I believe," said Carr, with what was meant 
for the perfection of quiet sarcasm. 

"Did I not teil you," whispered Piedmont, 
"that she was enacting the martyr?" 

'^ I have been pacing the street in front of the 
hospital for the last hour/' continued the injured 
Carr, still carefuUy avoiding bis wife's eye. 

*' Gilda was not well, and obliged to come 
home," said her mother. 

He tumed quickly round, bis countenance 
undergoing the most instantaneous change. There 
was no lack, of love underlying that morbid, 
sensitive foUy. He gazed at her now with the 
most intense inquiring anxiefy. She returned 
the look, with a little nod and smile of reassur- 
ance ; and amid vociferous Italian jokes, boastful 
wagers as to when the maledetH Tedeschi should 
be driven across the Alps, and such like, the 
supper slowly progr^ssed. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 145 

How those Italians did eat I As to Piedmont^ 
his catholic interior seemed capable of embracing 
all things in its astounding fervour. Nor could 
a family resemblance in this respect . ^if in no 
other . ^be said to be wanting between the two 
Italian ladies and their militarj relative. It was 
plain Madame Santi thought bat poorly of her 
English guests from the meagre repast they made. 
She whispered to her neighbour^ "fib inteso 
che glilnglese non mangiono altro che il came crudo 
coW acqua-vita,^ a proposition the truth of which 
the ofBcer next her was not prepared to dis- 
pute. 

But^the supper was not to conclude without 
further agitation to Gilda. The marchesa, in 
the amiable endeavour to bring her English 
firiends into the fold of general conversation, began 
questioning Mrs. Courteney relative to the hos- 
pital. Suddenly, clapping her band to her brow, 
she cried,. 

" Ma, Dio mio I What was I thinking of not 
to teil you that an old friend of yours, poor 
Guido Lamberti> was lying there^ ill of brain- 

VOL. n. 10 



146 CARR OF CARRLYOK. 

fever? I only heard it an hotilr ago . ^it is true . . 
and they told me the danger vas over, and he 
was well cared for . very well cared for . otlier- 
wise I shonld hare gone to look after him my^elf. 
Didyouseehim?" 

"I did not." Mrs. Courteney spoke plainly 
and deliberately ; she knew the peril of anything 
short ci the direct trath^ boldly spoken in such 
cases. " I did not ; bnt my daughter did. He 
was well cared for, and onr -Services were not 
reqiiired." 

The matchesa smiled, and said no more. Gilda 
was annoyed to feel the blood rush up into her 
face, and ihen as suddenly desert it She had 
been tanght by her moiher to hate all conceal- 
ments. Painful &a it must be io allnde to the 
snbject, she fuUy meant to teil her husband of 
that meeting, and was only waiting tili they 
were alone to do so; not of the insults she 
had received at Sara's band . it could do no good 
to repeat t!ioee; and -Gilda shraii from alluding 
to the eqnivocal position the Greole had appeared 
to accept, if not to conrt. But of Guido him- 



VILLA POSSOMBRONL 147 

seif; Gilda would speak opeDly; she feit it to 
be unfortnnate^ however^ kuowing her hu^band's 
peculiar temperament^ that the fact should trans- 
pire thus in public. She looked at her husband, 
aiud found^ as she half anticipated^ that his coun- 
tenance had fallen many degrees below zero. He 
heiped himself largely to salad, tiiough he had 
annoTUKsed a jnoment before that he had no 
appetite aad deVoured it with a voracitj which 
xivalled the Italians. He did not lock up from 
his plate; no his attention was apparentlj con* 
centrated upon the beet-root and gorlic dripping 
with oll ; bat there was a spot on his brow which 
<H)ald not deceive the yonng wife. j the time 
supper was over he had half satisfied himself that 
she was cognizant of Guido Lamberti's being in 
the hospitaly and that this was the secret cause 
which had brought her to Peschiera. 

The repast terminated with a dish of Tnarrons 
glacda, transfixed on tooth-^pioks ; after which the 

I 

men with a slight bow towards Madame Santi, 
lit their cigar^^ and the marchesa joined them 
with a cigaretto. The English ladies soon after- 

10. a 



148 CAKR OP CARRLYON. 

wards rose, and, pleading fatigue, withdrew to 
their own rooms. Mrs. Courteney, however, in 
wishing the marchesa good-night, asked for the 
favour of a few moments' conversation with her. 

As soon as she found herself alone with the 
Italian lady, she said, . 

'^I will teil you as briefly as I can what I 
have to say. It is about Count Lamberti. I 
am troubled, uneasy about him; I have known 
him since he was a boy, and have the wrmest, 
tenderest regard for him. I would gladly go 
and nurse him . ^were it not that another woman 
is there already. Nor is this all. . There 
are circimistances which render it imperative 
that this woman and I should not meet: there- 

fore " 

"You knowher, then?" exclaimed the other 
in astonishment. "She has been exciting the 
curioity of th^ whole camp ; she has taken part 
in nearly every battle, and preserved her dis- 
guise so well that her sex was not discovered 
for a long time. It was poor Razzi's rage and 
jealousy that betrayed her at last. It seems 



VILIJV rOSSOMBONL U3 

that she had been leading him on with hopes, 
which she never meant to falfil^ and bis un- 
govemable Indignation burst openly fortb^ when 
be found that it was Guido Lamberti all the 
time with whom she was in love. While poor 
Razzi remains at Goito^ she followed Guido here^ 
* and since he feil ill^ she has ihrown off all con- 
cealment; and nursed him so devotedly, that . 
that . in short there is no doubt whatever of 
the Position in which thej stand towards each 
other.'* 

" Pardon . me. I have very grave doubts 
whether it be more than the insane passion of 
an unprincipled girl for a man who is utterly 
indifferent to her. So long as he is unconscious 
of her presence, she will devote herseif to him 
day and night; but if she should find that this 
devotion is unavailing^ it will of course cease> 
even if no worse happen. I know you feel 
an interest in Guido Lamberti. Promise me that 
you will not leave him entirely at the mercy of 
this woman. You will keep a watchful eye over 
him, will yott not?" 



150 CABE OP CABRLYON. 

^ Depend onit I wilV and the marchesa grasped 
her new acqaaintance warmly by tha haad. ^ We 
cannot spare oiir Guido; we have too fevr like 
him^ alas I Bat I hope he will be a little grate- 
fiil to her^ eh? JPoverina! It is hard npon irs 
womenv rignora, when we s.u;rifice everything, 
and get nothing in retum." 

With tfais the ladies separated. Meantime a 
scene o. a diffsreiit natiire was being enacted in 
the adjoining room. 

*^ My dear Gilda, I make no complaint I iJiink 
it yery nataral that you should wish to go and 
see your old riend, when yon knew he was ill 
in hospital, bot ^ 

^ Bat I did not know it, Laurence, I repeat It 
was by the pnrest accident I fbnnd him." 

** Appearaaces, you will admit, were strangely 
in favonr of snch a snpposition ; your* eag^mess 
to get to Pes.hiera, your declining my escort to 
the hospital, and yonr retuming here withont 
nie However, I am perfectly ready to believe 
it was an accident, only I heg you not to think 
that I am a jealous fool, and that had it been 



YILZA. FQaSOMjiiQNL 151 

otherwiae . hacL jou. in ahort^ leaimt ihat Lamberti 
was ill. I wouM williiigly have alkwed yoa to 
gQ and see. hixsu Mj confidfioice; ia joit ia too 
great ^ 

"That is right, dearest Laurence. Whatevw 
I may do, however foolish I may be . and women^ 
you know, dear, are not always wise . ^be sure that 
I am true, that I would not deceive you for the 
MTorld. I gave you, Laurence Carr/' . ^here she 
looked down and her voice faltered, . "the best 
proof of this when you asked me to marry you. 
I showed you my whole heart-. down to the very 
bottom." 

She looked up now, and fixing her clear gray 
eyes upon his face, added, after a pause, You 
must never doubt me after that." 

And he took her to his heart, and kissed her 
in rapturous fondness, and swore, that he never 
would. 

After all, he was a jealous fool, and she was an 
angel, . ^but it was out of the excess of his love 
that he had sinned. 

So the ground was weeded of that noxious plant. 



152 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

and the sun shone in upon pleasan^ garden-places. 
And yet it may be doubted whether a grain of the 
baneful seed had not fallen^ unperceiv^d and far 
out of sightj iuto the womb of that productive 
soll. 



J 



153 



CHAPTER V. 

The strong man, whose life haa seemed so spe- 
cially guarded through the perils of battle, had 
been Struck down at last, by the unerring band of 
Nature. Long-continued excitement telling alike 
on mind and body . ^bth had suddenly given way, 
and a brain fever of the most alarming complexion 
was the resnlt. 

The violence of the disorder was now abated : 
the fierceness of delirious raving had been fol- 
lowed by a state of exhanstion, with fitftd lapses 
into feverish unconsciousness. To one of these 
Gilda Carr had been witness. The constant 
repetition of her name, the broken and coniiised 
Images of things associated with her, still gave 
evidence at such moments that the darkened mind 
had not yet resumed its empire, though it was 



154 CAER OF ejARRLYON. 

struggling towards the light. Like Samson, 
however, there was strength even in its blindness. 
The crushing sarcasms, ie bitter reproaches, 
aimed now at himself, now at others, which ran 
throughout bis wildest ravings, made the Dalilah 
beside him wince and grow pale. But hers was 
a torment the false Philistine never knew. The 
imagination of the most refined cruelty never 
inrented a torture-so maddening tb a turbulent, 
passionate nture as thisr sitting day* by day 
beside the one object of erery tiiought, every hope, 
present and fiiture, and* listening to the vehement 
adjuratibns, the tender pleadings, tJie imcmiscious 
cries, of the agonized heart, all . all fbr anther! 

She sat there, with her elbows on her knees, 
hour after hour. gnashing her teeth as tlie hated 
name rose to his lips, and pressing the small, hard 
white knuckles on which her chi'n rested, tili the 
sharp nails entered the ffesh. She rose towipe 
the damp of fever from his brow, to adttiMster the 
draaght, or squeeze the pomegranate on hi& lips, 
and then she resumed her seat. Hour after hour ; 
night sueceeding to day ; snatchmg brief intervals 



YILLA lOSSOMBRQNL 155 

of rest, wkhout undvoaeui^ and. ien^ vi^kat aa 
eY&c, at her posi agaixu Her ace was soxaewbat 
^rhite and worn ; tfae short-Kiuii bladc haic hxmg 
dank around it : thoa wond^oos midnight eyes 
were surronnded by the 9hj liaes that mack an 
inwaid cenBuming re. Yet the womoa was,. 
perhaps>. even more stdking thus than sh bad 
ever appeated be&re. Her singdarly graceful 

 

figare>. and beautifully modelkd feet and anelesj 
weis Seen to advantage in tbe boy's k)ese gi^ay 
dress. Her s^nckr throat rising front the &lded 
shtrt-cdlar^ and small shell-Iike ear^ sbowed pro- 
minendj nnder the short Loose locks Add to this 
the: m jaory thal snarreunded ber^ the aomewhat 
scomfiil dlgnify of her manners, the. coolness^ and 
coarage, and dexteriiy she had displayed, and it 
will be ready nnderstood that not a few hot- 
. blooded young Italians: would hajve rit^ed a brain* 
fever to he regacdei and tended as: Guido now 
In as* 

She was playing a. desperate game. Wonld she 
win or lose? Witk regazd to her relations with 
Ri^ I shaU say nothing. It fe not my Husiaeas 



156. CARR OP CARRLYON. 

to inquire how far the reproaches of that fatuitous 
youth were jastified^ or what measure of faith she 
had broken towards him. So much seems certain : 
she had used him as a shield^ or blind^ and naw 
she had cast him aside. With regard to that 
other^ the question was narrowed to this : Would 
gratitude for her unwearying devotion, would 
admiration foi* her heroic efForts in the great 
national cause^ triumph finallj over that puerile 
passion ^hich had wrought such havoc in his life? 
She had heard of men rising from the brink of the 
grave^ where^ in truih^ he had lain for some days, 
in whose thoughts^ sympathies^ and affections an 
entire revolution had been wrought. Her whole 
life . ^the life of the heart^ that is . was bound up 
in this venture. Against the testimony of her 
ears^ through all those ravings^ she dared to believe 
that Guido would rise an altered man. 

He had lain for many hours after that convul* 
sive eflTort by which he started erect in bed, 
beholding the spectre of his disordered brain 
palpably before him^ in a deep^ dreamless sleep. 
The doctor had been his roimd^ and pronounced 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 157 

favourably on him: the first and second watch 
were passed. No rest for Sara to-night! her 
nerves were strung to that fine pitch, when all 
idea of sleep is utterly discarded. The tempest 
which had raged in her soul at confronting her 
hated rival was hardly yet assuaged ; the sugges- 
tions of a malignant vengeance were only stifled 
down, to bide their own bad time. For she 
awalted his waking; she knew he would awake 
'to consciousness . ^to the consciousness of her pre- 
sence ; and in the feverish balance of hopes and 
fears sH sat there watching. 

As the' golden gray of the summer dawn broke, 
he heaved a deep sigh and opened his eyes. They 
opened upon Sara . a strnge, wondering look . 
and then wandered along the crowded pallets of 
the whitewashed ward. Though unconscious and 
j)erplexed as to where he lay, it was evident the 
fever had left him. The mind was clear, and 
able to admit, and reason upon, every outward 
Impression. He lifted his band to his head as 
though recalling and arranging a long-scattered 
train of thought ; then, after a few minutes' in- 



158 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

terval^ he raised himself a little on his elbow and 
regarded Sara steadilj and in silence. 

"How long have I been here?" he said^in a 
Iqw but perfectiy clear voice. 

'* This IS the eighth day." 

.^' I have been very ill, then ? " 

**'Tou have.'* 

" And is it you . you yrho have watched by 
me all this time? I thought . I dreamt . 
that ^ 

^ That an angel of light was beside you ; and 
you find an angel of datkness?" iHer lip qivered, 
and ishe contintied, grimly . *' Yes, 'Guido Lam- 
berti, it is I who have watohed beside you all 
this time. Tou cannot deprive me of the satis- 
faclion of having Uoice saved yotrr life." 

He sank back upon the pillow, and tumed 
away his head with a weary sigh. 

** It is a very worthless one*: of little value to 
anybody now.^ 

'* You know that what you say is false ! * Bhe 
replied in a tremulous, Tehement voioe. **Your 
life w of value . of incstimable Talue to o&e. 



VIIXA FOSSOMBBNL 15 

Lambert!; eise Bhe had not dragged you out of 
the very jaws of death, at her own peril." 

" I am not ungrateful ; belieye me, I am not 
ungrateful, Sara. I am only sorry that you have 
devoted your days and nights to rescuing such 
a lifo as mine. There aro thers better worth 
the care, that mut have perished for want of it 
meantime." 

**Hw .many days and nights I have devoted 
to you,** Said Sara, bitterly; **plotted, struggled, 
wept for you, Lambert!, you will never know. 
Bat you o know that I ask for nothing eise than 
to devote all the days and nights of my whole 
life to you," she continued, impetuously. ^* I am 
no wek, puling girl : I am a woman ; strong in 
passion . stronger in energy and resolufion. Has 
ray life lately proved this to you? Has it proved 
that I am not whoUy unworfliy of you, and the 
cause for which you fight ? I have cast my lot 
in with the patriots of Italy. My voice has 
roused, my arm . ^woman as I am . has helped; 
my care has nursed them in sickness. And 
why ? Is it for the sake of Italy? I care no more 



160 



CARR OF CARRLYON. 



for Italy, except through you, ihan I do for 
Austria.'^ 

She was down on her knees by his bed now ; 
and close to the pale emaclated band that lay 
outside tbe coverlid her buming Ups poured fortb 
the long-pent stream of passion. 

'* I have been ambitions^ Guido. All my am- 
bition I sacrifice to you ; to belong to a poor man ; 
to fight and struggle, and work for him. I have 
never known what good. was : all my life has 
been disfigured with the eaxly knowledge of sin ; 
you awake in me the consciousness of better things^ 
and make me believe in the possibility of an 
altered . a redeemed life. You fill a void in my 
beingj which nothing eise can fill. And thus 
altered . ihus purified, I know that my life would 
fill a void in yours; that I could in reality be 
a help meet for you, Ghiido, which . which that 
weak girl ^ 

" Sara ! let me implore you not to continue 
thus! God knows I am sensible of all I owe 
you ! You have laid me under a heavy debt of 
gratitude, and it is impossible I can repay your 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 161 

self-sacrifices in any other way than in bare 
words. The heart. Sara, is not there. In its 
place is a stone ; no more capable of beating for 
another human - being^ as it once did^ than if it 
were already lying at rest for ever under the 
sod. Better it were so! Italy can spare me; 
her independence is won. My poor mother would 
soon haye joined me ; and she is the only creature 
left me to care for on earth." 

^' It 13 false I " exciaimed Sara^ violently, starting 
to her feet, " You care for her still . ^for another 
man's wife; for the miserable creature whose name 
has been on your Ups all through your delirium I " 

He trembied violeny ; the weak state he was 
in rendering his agitation quite uncontroUable. 

" What did I say ? " he murmured at last. 
** Did any one hear me ? Was any one by ? " 

In the instant which intervened before she 
replied^ she balanced the probable advantages of 
truth and falsehood^ and decided promptly in 
favour of the latter. 

"No: ihe world is still ignorant of the fatal 
secret of your heart^ Count Lamberti. It has 

VOL. n. 11 



162 CABB QF GAEBLYON. 

not conceiyed it possible that jou remain cold, 
nntonched bj the devotion of a woman wbo has 
lisked her life and sacrificed her reputation 'fer 
jon. The irue motire of xaj presenoe here is 
no Beeret. No one is innooeat enongfa,'' she con- 
tinued; with a sneeor '^ to imagine it is from pore 
philanthropj^ or Platonic friendship^ that I have 
sacrifioed that which is of most vahie toa ^woman 
in this World. I have thrust mjself Tolnntaiily 
out of the pale of Boctety^ ctnd I have my re-- 
wardr 

The rare combination of a vidlent natnre with 
the most conaummate art^ made it difficult at idmes 
to Bay how far Sara was carried away by the 
impetuB of her really ationg feeUngs^ or how far 
she merely simnlated to be so. In lihe present in- 
stance the proud aensitive Toice^ with its touch oF 
reproachful sconi might be a monagement of 
natural reaourcefr. *a keeping cf the feelingB wett 
in hcmdf 00 to epeak^ which waa calculaiad with 
the most artistic knowledge of effect Bot anrely 
ihere was something alao jpeal and deep. 

An fixpimion of ahp pain cro8d ihe yoong 



VILLA FOBSOfMHBOKL 168 

man' brow, and lie fltiflhed tip to "tfae yery templfis 
ere he replied slowly-^ 

^^ Pardon me : if your name kafi been conpled 
with uayoJie% it is rather with Qiaglio BasziVi. .1 
know he loves 70a. I beHeved, as I suppose dtheis 
did, iat it was for his sake jm " 

" Hia sake I " she broke into a seomfol ku^ 
*^ That idiot RazzVs ? Am I a woman likely to be 
captiyated by a pair of sleek moostaches ? I^nsade 
use of him, as I would have >done of any ether 
fool ; and he delnded himsdf in the belief I shonld 
one day marry him. In my xaost abject moments 
InevQr contemplated the.potaibility of it, thongh a 
firiendlesB woman. *an adnentureas . is often drlven 
to suoh a deed &r Ihe shelter of a i6pectaUe 
name. 6od knows to what I may not be djoiyan,*' 
she added with a burst of natural feeling, ^^when 
the only honest passion on which I anchoredJscnt 
way!" 

'^ Yoa have deceiyed an honest man. whioh nio 
honest passion hould indace a woman to do>" he 
replied cddly. ''^I fear yoa are ambitious; tat 
you will seek higher game than poor !azzi, and 

11.2 



164 CARB OF CABBLYON. 



fiing it away when snared like him^ if it is to serve 
your own ends, Listen to me. As you hope for 
peace here and Iiereafier, neither seek nor accept 
the love you cannot retum. You have great gifts 
to attract men, great powers to influence them for 
good or evil. Beware how you exercise these." 
He paused for a moment; then went on with 
remarkable distinctness^ though bis yoice had 
waxed very weak: '^As for myself^ I will not 
let you deceive yourself, even though you think 
me cruel or ungrateful My heart cannot warm 
to you or any other woman again. Its fire is 
bumt out . dead. Do not think to rekindle it. 
Our natures are very widely different, Sara. Our 
Union could neyer be blest. You will wake up 
firom this in&tuation : but let me be your friencL 
Think of me as such, and I will try and prove so 
in realiiy. You fancy I can exercise a beneficial 
influence on you ? Let me do so in that character, 
if I can. You are steering in dangerous courses. 
Let me prove that I am not unmindful of your 
generous devotion by endeavouring to guide and 
save you 1 " 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 165 

A torrent of passionate tears barst from the 
unhappy woman, and slie sank down by the bed 
again^ hiding her face in her qnivermg hands 
Then, starting np^ she dashed away the sealding 
dropSj and in a tremulous voiee that seethed out 
from the raging fire within, she said, . 

" I vsill foUow you, Guido Lamierti^ tili I die ! 
Though I may seem to forget the one object of my 
life . mark me . I never shalll never forget nor 
tum away from it. I may fall lower and lower. 
the little good left in me may die out quite, but in 
this I teil you there will be no change. Your. offer 
of a cold friendship I reject; your counsel I 
deride ; but you do not know me yet. No I You 
shall find there was stemer stuff here than you 
thought for, before we both die. There is no 
* waking up ' for me to any other knowledge of my 
own heart than as it now is. I see myself with 
hideous distinctness . all the deformity ungraced 
by anything save love : and that love you cast back 
upon me . ^to corrode and eat out my very vitals. 
Would to God it would tum to hatred I but 
towards you it never will I Twice I have saved 



M6 CABB; Oir. GABBIiXOK. 

yoar life^-it is a bitter aatafl&con . and I may. yet 
Kva tQ do. 80 < agaan I hall watch you at su dis* 
taneei.or ab leanb maaeeit; hnt I shalL ueyer Lose 
aigtit o you ^: and in aay ixjing juncturfi of . your 
Ufa we: ahall agaih meet. Tina shall ba the 
vengeance o Um woman you daspised. Guido 
Lambeb" 

He was/fcoa weak: to^ utter ;. and without anotiber 
Word she tumed aaide and: hurried fix>m tha.ward 

''Ob/' dne muttered to berself, as sbe rushed 
into the a^aety^and tearing open her collar^ baied 
hext stiflii^ bosom to the pure moming air. *^ohl 
bat. there is. another yengeance^ less mild but no 
lew sweat I He woridiipa her still I and ie would 
' come. and nurse him^ and drink in the flattery of 
hi raving0i>would she ? The compact between us 
i. blken !.'* 



w 



CEPPTER VI. 

The Yilla FosBombroni ' stood. on: a hill over 
ugsinBt the pleasant Lake of acda. It might 
be: a mil6 to- the water'a edge^-more or less. 
throngh the- intervening vineyards^ the groves of 
molberiy Qd lemoxi ; bot an arrow^ shoi fcom 
the tecracej would probably reach the same 
point in half the distance. Upon the other side 
the stony,, duflty read crawled up the back of 
die hill. describing many  tortoous bend which 
by a coriaus fitcttlty, while they doubled tiie 
lengih of the OBoent, seemed in nowise to 
diminiah ita steepness. This road, which was 
liide. botter- tiiaa a waterconrse in winter^ oidy 
led tD tue rilla and itB fattoricu It was never 
meoded;. Qccadonally a gceat stone was brought 
ia fiU some hole^ which. threatened to upset the 



1G8 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

vine-dresser's cart: but the noble owner of the 
Villa was too poor or too careless about it^ to 
think of mending bis own road. The few weeks 
of the Villeggiatura spent here was all he saw 
of bis property during the year; and probably 
even then he never trave^sed this road from the 
day bis rickety v.ttu9*ino toiled up the weary 
ascent to the day when he stepped into that 
same conveyance again on bis way back to Milan. 
He sat^ no ^ doubt^ with hermetically sealed 
wuidows during the greater part of the glaring 
summer day^ playing at dominoes with a friend 
and Smoking bis cigar, very much as he*inigbt 
have done in bis ca at Milan; and, in the 
evening, instead of the Scala or the Circoloy there 
was the sail upon the lake, or a languid stroll 
throngh the yineyard. Could the state of the 
road be of material importance to bim ? 

Nor were the villa and its dependencies mach 
better cared for than the road. Nothing could 
be less like the generally oonceived idea of an 
Italian villa. A Square pink building, pierced at 
irregulr intervals with eyelet-holes of Windows, 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 169 

and having a loggia or coyered terrace running 
round two sides of it. Shade there was none ; 
garden there was none. The dustjr vines came 
up quite close to the house on three sides: on 
the fourth there was a small plot of snnbumt 
grass^ with a few oleanders and oranges in Square 
greenboxes^ and one very old olive. This tree, . 
the only one of any size for half a mile round^ . 
was probably the last remainmg of a grove 
that had been cut down to make room for the 
vines and dwarfed mulberries. It grew so close 
to the hoase that the shadow of its fantastically 
twisted limbs, laden with silvery-green fiinges^ 
chequered in tremulous blue mosaic the white 
pavement of ihe loggia. As a companion to this 
solitary and venerable relic of a past day, one 
desolate peacock^ with an habitual air of moulting 
about his rusty plumage^ kept sentinel on the 
terrace^ as the walk on this side of the house 
was called. He was of a speculative tum of 
mind^ this grim old retainer of the Fossombroni. 
Standing on one leg, his head inclined on the 
same side, with a curious, puzzled look, he stood 



170 CABR OF CAHRLYON 

. 

on &e window^-sHIs and peered at l^e- occapaonts 
o ihfi rooms witiiin^ manndering no dottbt^ aifter 
die mumer oS old decayed servants^ on the 
ehangaa he had witnesaed in Ms tinie, 

Bejond ihis terrace, the yineyards^ and lemonr 
gardeni^ and fields ef maiise or bnek-wheat, 
bordered wilh lowa of thick4eaved pollard muL- 
berneSj steetched. awaj over nndnlating slopesi 
down to die water'a edge* The lake, ever 
yarying, ever beontifal^ ab dawn or eve^ m. storm 
or shine^ whether taking the folded hls like a 
mother to ita. boaom^. or thrusting them back in 
the hot fight of noon with ita aigent ahield^ nn- 
dimmed bj dint or ahadow . ^the. lake, backed by 
a diatant amphiiheatra of Alpa^ waa the one object 
of attraction to the Villa. Foaaombroni. Ita 
faorut-^iike moat. impertant building on snch a 
property as. this in Italy^^^was a aeparate and 
aobataniial honae^. in far bett^ order in all 
respeeta tbaa: ihs: ^illa iteeUl Not only was die 
wine: mada here, tiie flaz. dried> die lembna and 
lanrelhberries gaifired in^ but one> the laigeat and 
airieat room, wair entineljr devoted to Aa reacing 



VILLA TOSSOMBBONL ITI 

of ailk^worms^ se cultnre of whieh i now the 
most lcrativQ branch of Lombard indufltrj 
Surrounding the ittoria was a small fannyard; 
The Community of pigs- and fowk^ tfaough a poor 
one^ dwelt together in a lively contraitment^ which 
contraated strongly with the digjiified but de** 
pressed deportment of that soUtary peacock who 
formed the entire live stock of the villa. Nor 
was the difFerence of the two interiors less 
strongly marked . the active, industrial lifo of 
the factor's dwelling, with the silence and stagna* 
tion of that moi^ pretentious one, where no life 
was; The rooms were large and lofty, and there 
were plenty of them; This was all that could 
be said. They were ntterly bare of fumiture: . 
as we Tinderstand that term . curtainless, carpet^ 
less, comforess throughont There was a few 
rickety chairs and tables, beds and cmmodes, 
with one very hard settee in. the saloon . so hard, 
cold, and sHppery, indeed, that it was like getting 
tqpon a frozen sea, On the other band some 
fine Majolica plates, a small bronze fomitain by 
John of Bologna, and a folding screen covered 



172 CARR OF CARRLYON. -^ 

with extraordinarily coarse caricatures belonging 
to a day which is happily past, were the in- 
congruous adomment of the aforesaid saloon. I 
must not forget a wiry old piano^ and a bagatelle 
board . this last novelty. being the sole addition 
made by the present proprietor to his coiintry 
residence. 

It was late on a rainy aftemoon when Carr 
walked up the hill I have described^ alongside 
the vetturino in which the two ladies were seated. 
Heavy douds drowned the distant landscape^ 
as they do even in Italy at times, particularly in 
mountainons districts. There could hardly have 
been a less favourable moment for the '^first 
Impression " of Carr's summer residence. Robbed 
of its one attraction, the glorious panorama before 
it, nothing, certainly, could well look more 
cheerless and uninviting than the villa did. The 
Englishman's philosophy, which had been oozing 
out of him for the last half-hour, was whoUy 
exhansted when he crossed the threshold, and 
entering the saloon, gazed raefnlly round him. 

*'Impossible to remain herel We should die 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 173 

of it in a week. Confoimd the fellow's lying 
impudence I . talking of this barrack as ' un vero 
paradisoJ Did you ever see such an abomination 
of desolation?'* , 

*^ Oh, dear, yes, Laurnce,** said bis wife, cheer- 
fiiUy. " I have seen many mach worse, which, 
witb a little arrangement, and by dint of living 
in, have grown to look very different I don't 
think when the sun shines this will reaUy be at 
all ugly . ^large cool rooms : and see there ! under 
that loggiay I am sore one has a charming view." 

" Oh, charming I vines diversified by mul- 
berries ; that was all I saw on the road up." 

** Well, dear, it's a paradise in one thing, at all 
events," said bis wife cheerfuUy again ; *^ there's 
no forbidden finiit." 

Bat he wonldn't laogL 

"I wonder what people in England would 
think of my sanity in Coming to this wretched 
hole to pass the summer ? As to my mother " 

He seldom or never made an allusion to her; 
and the fact that he did so now indicated that 
he was unusually out of sorts. He tumed 



174 CAKR OF CAERLTOK. 

abrnpy away withoat concluding his aentesnce, 
and walked drearily through ihe remaining aport- 
ments, with bis hands thrust deep into bis paktot 
pockets. 

Gilda and ber motber/meantime, bused "tbem- 
elves, as women only do nnder sucb circum- 
stances, in unpacking and assiBting in Ihe acrange- 
ment of tbeir bedrooms^ and instruotizig tfae two 
women wbom tbe fattore bad engaged 'to de tbe 
bousework in tbe mysteries of making a bed 
in die Englisb fiibion. PuFtbennore . 'Ginseppe 
being occnpied in tbe primary dty of nnpacking 
bis master's isbirts, and endeavonring to cram 
ibem into drawers wbicb manifestlynever could 
contain tbem . ^Gilda was sbortly afterwards to 
be Seen in tbe kiteben, teacbing tbe two goodr 
bumoured, laugbing peasant^women bow i; pre- 
pare tbe tea-service. One of tbem bad carefully 
poured all tbe boilfaig water into Ibe lop-bain, 
into wbicb be bad apparently some vagtje inten- 
tion of infiiing tbe leB;v'eB. An ewer f dll of *milk 
bad undergone os well tbe tmneoeesazy ppepai- 
tion of boffing ; l)Ut tbis wa easily i^medied^rom 



VILLA F0S60MBB0NL 175 

ihe rm hard by./ Triumpfaiiig, in Bhit^ aver 
all her difficolties, Gilda at la^ law lier ieor 
table properlj laid out and served ; and when 
Carr entered the room a few mimiteB later^ the 
snowj cloth, and bissing kettle nnder the lamp- 
light^ with chairs drawn round it, had an air of 
comfort which flurprised him. His .good Immonr, 
which was never rnfiBed for very long, was now 
completely restored ; and thougfa not mnch more 
disposed to look hopefally at the aspect of things^ 
he was more disposed to laugh at it 

*^There is no cbaiyse of oe's being over- 
whelmed m, society here, certainly, unleB it 
be the Aostrians down y onder ; but they appa- 
rently have ahready paid this villa a vislt . and 
sacked it. They 11 hardly find it worth thcdr 
while to oome again, so we hall not eyen hscve 
that little excitement. What a proibnndly dismal 
abodel thongh you have managed to mhe this 
room lodk almost comfrtable, Gilda. I snppo&ie 
with onO'S books and paintings one will pnll 
throu^ somehow or other ; but i^ally when you 
and I have been here fty days^ I think we shall 



176 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

deserve the fiiitch of bacon^ mach more than bj 
living fifty years among the pomps and vanities 
of a wicked world.'* 

'*You forget that the wicked world is Coming 
to US before many of the fifty days have elapsed. 
The marchesa is coming to her aunt's^ whose 
villa she says you see upon the lake from this." 

" I don't envy her the view she has in retum, 
then." He langhed; then added more gravely, 
^' I do not know that the marchesa's is the society 
I should wish yoa to see too much of^ Gilda. 
She is a pleasant^ amusing^ generous-hearted 
Creatore; but a woman who, from whatever 
circmnstances; has lost all self-respect^ is never 
a very desirable companion,. -don't you agree 
with me, Mrs. Courteney ? Good heavens ! you 
look very pale. Are you ill ? The joumey has 
been to much for yoti.** 

'^No; it is nothing; it is past I know too 
little of Madame Onofrio to judge her. I suppose 
you are righi But you would make a distinction^ 
Laurence^ would you not^ between a present and 
a past life? If. if she were repentant you would 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 177 

not think her past contamiuating for ever and 
ever, wonld you?** 

"Well, no; not exactly: Pm not so strait- 
laced as all that StQl I think one's wife may 
be just as well without too intimate association 
with those sort of ladies. If oneV not very 
particular," he continaed, didactically, " there is 
no knowing when one will stop. Not that this 
has anything to do with the marchesa, who is no 
Magdalene, bat a woman with strong feelings, 
who has been driven by an unhappy marriage 
into a groove where old age will suddenly over- 
take her; and then she will be reconciled with 
the Chnrch, and take to xnaking her salvation." 

*^ Yoa have no faith, then, in the repentance of 
middle age?" said Mrs. Courteney, sorrow- 
fully. 

" God forbid that I should judge any one I Bat 
those who only repent when the capacity or oppor- 
tanity of sinning faUs them hven't mach merit, 
I shoald think." 

"I didn't think it was a qaestion of merit 
either way," said Gilda, qaietly; "bat none of 

VOL. n. 12 ' 



I7a OBB 0^ CABM)N. 

thfi. lahourera. were eoccluded^ Laurence> eyen at 
the eleventh hour, remember." 

^^ L alwaya Qonidered: thofle who had borne tfae 
bnrden and heat of. the day very unfairly treaied^ 
Bevertboless. If liiere ift to be no distinction 
bdtween.a pure Kfe and a tardy repentance ^" 

His. wife had.risen and came round to where 
be was sitting Ab: she leant over and. kisaed bi& 
foxekeodi he whlspered^^ . 

^^I}i>n't say. anydung. more. I think it disr 
tresses mamraa-r-^rbaps' on, aoeount of papa^; . I 
dasvtJsDow;? 

And.so Carr. abimptly cbanged ie comveraation 
and'the.marobei^'fi name: was not mentioned again 



179 



CHAPTER VII. 

*^ Well J By Jove ! that is a stunning viw, I 
muBtr Qaneas ! Coma hexe, Gilda, and. Inok out. 
Look at that curtain of clouds slowly drifting off 
those distant moontains* And. how wonderfully 
fresh and brilliant everything is afiexi 7esterda7's> 
raini The lights and shadows on the waters,. 
clear and ciisp aa i they'd been dashed in bj 
Hardini;! ** 

" What. a^ compliment to natura ! " lau^ed 
Gilda. 

^'Elong^tO'tiT^ my band at it The white soils 
of that' felticca yonder,. like wings rippling the, 
water: and. tlie early bla mists Ijing in the. 
hoUowa ont there^ whare the. sun has not yet. 
reaohed Hbw capitaily it would painti Even 
tiiat &xegniiind> which: I thought so. monotonous. 



180 CARR OP CARRLTON. 

last night, has a great deal of character. The 
tangied lemon-grove, and pergola of vines, with 
the wild Indian corn and fig-tree struggling up 
here and there : something might be made of it. 
I shall paint 70U5 Gilda, sitting upon that low 
wall, and the peacock beside yoa, just for a bit 
of colour." 

"Thank you; I am too much flattered. And 
now, perhaps, you will allow me to finish dressing." 

She ran away; while he still leant out in his 
dressing-gown, painting imaginary pictures, and 
thinking that after all the YiUa Fossombroni was 
not half such a bad place as he had fancied. 
After breakfast Gilda exercised her ingenuity in 
trying to render the saloon a little more comfort- 

able. She routed out two large pieces of faded 
tapestry from a lumber-room, where they were 
roUed up, and spread them in the centre of the 
floor. She disturbed the symmetrical arrange- 
meut of chair and table, and disposed them 
according to her own ideas. She plucked a few 
teiidrils of vine to furnish the large Majolica jars ; 
she improvised some muslin blinds for the Windows; 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 181 

and finally^ bj a judicious disorder of books and 
work, she showed herseif a mistress in the womanly 
art of making a cheerless room assume something 
of a home-aspect. 

Carr*s pleased surprise when he entered the 
room more ihan repaid his wife. 

" Well," he Said ; " I shall not in future refuse 
to believe the stories of Indian magicians making 
pineapples and fruit-trees grow up out of the 
bare boards. How on earth have you managed 
to turn the barrack I saw last night into a habit- 
able room ? " 

^' Living in Italy teaches one all sorts of shifts 
and contrivances in this way," she said, smiling. 
" It also teaches one to make the best of whatever 
one has, and not to be discouraged by first im- 
pressions . which aome people I know are apt 
to be." 

^* I was not discouraged by the first impression 
I received some eight months ago, during a certain 
Vesper service at San Petronio, Mrs. Impertinence ; 
and I rather think I do make the best of what 
I have got" 



182 CAER OF CABRLYON. 

^^ Are you sure of that ? " 

Thu playfiilly skirmishiDg, as he prepared hi 
palette and easel^ while hk wife flitted to and 
fro upon household cares intent, Garr foiind the 
moming glide rapidly by. His mercnrial spirit 
rose with the sunshine^ as rapidly 2 it had heen 
depressed with the petty annoyancefi of the pre- 
Yious night, Neither care nor uspicion were at 
Jiand to cast their haneful shadows on his ;patL 
His income and expenditure would soon yec&yer 
their proper balance in a few months qnietly 
spent here. Meantime he would really work 
hard at his painting which^ froni one cause or 
another^ he had not yet done since he ciime to 

Baly. 

Shall it be held fidr and honourable to try 
and penetrate the yoang wife's feelings that same 
moming, which was destined to be the boundary 
between two epochs of her married Jife? There 
can scarcely be a doubt that any illosion whioh had 
isorrounded Carr was by this time diapellad. Sis 
weaknesses were not those of a vigoraufi or lai^e 
mind ; his very brilliancy was of that sacoadarj 



VILLA FOBOHBRONL 183 

water which becomes somewhat dim in the verj^ 
daj fire-Iight of home. His love suffered no 

. diminntion, but it was likely to be of a jealous^ 
perhapB eyen tyrannical^ natim. And jet^ para- 
dozical as it may seem^ her feeling for her hnsband 
wa$ far tmer and strenger than it'had -been wfaefn 

, she married. That Step once taken, ahe hat her 
eyes resolately to the pat; and tomed her 
thonghts fixedly tipon the ftitore she hod eccepted. 
She instinctively feit the danger of neglecting 
such a course; and ander that qniet demeanour 
was u Btrength of purpose which, perhaps, even 
her own mother did not fnlly recognize. A 
strength, differing from Sara Gisbome^s in this, 
that it was neither pesssionte nor ^pasmodic^ 
capable of no heroic colonr, and only apparent^ 
indeed^ on close inspection, aad at certain times ; 
so that not even those who lived with her . least 
of all her hnsband . ^were aware f this hidden 
foQrce. , If she had not suceeeded in rooting up, 
Bhe had at least cat down to the yery roots^ the 
streng broad4eafed .passion of her girihood. (Beside 
it . ^not in its place*. had grown np a dender 



184 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

sapling, whose branches as yet^ indeed^ afforded 
little shade^ bat round which she clung and twined 
herselfj resolved to find there both sbadow and 
Support. This feeling was^ no doubt^ fostered by 
the nature of Carr's love for her. Exacting as 
was the form in which this was sometimes shown^ 
she found herseif to be of hourly importance to 
his happinessj and this^ in any woman's eyes^ 
Covers a multitude of sins. He was no hero: 
but he had some generous qualities, and many 
foibles. She saw how early education had choked 
the former and developed the latter. She feit 
with a w<oman's instinct the necessity of studying 
to counterbalance this pemicioi^s influence. As 
Lady Carrlyon, without undue exaggeration, 
might have passed for the evil spirit of his youth, 
so here was his good angel^ struggling to regain 
possession of the man. And in this stmggle the 
gentle, tender-hearted girl grew day by day into 
the true wife, consecrating all her thoughts unto 
her husband. He did not come between her and 
that impossible dream of the past which was put 
out of sight. and for eyer ; for that bdonged to 



l 



I 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 185 

an ideal world, and this was the world cf fact 
in which she was living. She had grown into 
a tacit acceptance of the belief that such dreams 
are never realized ; that they only gild the morning 
of girlhood^ and melt away into the sober realities 
of the aftemoon. 

She had attained to this frame of mind^ afiter 
six months of married life^ when she found Guido 
Lamberti in the hospital at Peschiera. The night 
that followed that meeting was a miserable one. 
Ever present to her mind was the image of the 
fevered man^ calling upon her agaih and again 
in his ravings. In the knowledge thus gained 
she had at first (alas! for the strength of all 
mere hnman effort) feit an irrepressible joj. He 
loved her^ then I he had always loved her I Bat 
the natural reaction came ; she started back horror- 
stricken to find that the past was not as completely 
effaced from her heart as she had believed. Carr's 
jealous suspicionsaggravated her misery ; yetthey 
were, perhaps^ fortunately timed in rousing her 
to the very present work her hands had to do. 
She passed a miserable, night^ but she rose calmer 



186 GAB OF CARBLYON. 

and stronger &om the confiici. She looked veiy 
pale and tired daring the joumey, which dicited 
irom Carr the remark that hospitol work would 
evidentljr never agree with her. He was not 
otherwise than kind in his mamier ; bat his wlfe's 
appearance seemed to annoy, and perfaaps even 
more than the weather eontributed to depress 
him. In Proportion 3& his spirits feil, koweyer, 
she exerted iierself to ronse and cheer her faa- 
band : vre have seen to what effecL If it be.asked, 
alter this, whether she was happy, I can onlj 
heg the reader to decide tibe quesiion for ^himseff 
out of his own consciousness, and aceording'to his 
belief in the amount of contentment ifaat attends 
such efforts as hers. 

The post came in the aftemoon. They yrere 
taking their coffee in the loggia, when rtfae bag 
Tras brought to Carr, and he tore open the singl 
letter it contained. 

" Confound it ! " .he exclaimed. .* My moesr's 
Coming her I ** 

" Lady Carrlyon ? J' said boi ladies in a fareth. 

^' Yes 1 " replied the son, with an expressbu of 



VILLA POSSOMBRONI. 1&7 

eouBtenance not flattering to her ladyhip. *^ She's 
Et Baden with mj father^ who haa been rdered 
there^ and so ehe thinks it a pity not to take 
advantage of being so near me to cvms the JJps^ 
sbe says. Heaven knows what sbe is to do bere ! 
she'Il be bored to deatb, I would stop ber 
if I could^ but it's too lat^, she is on ber road. 
Dated ihe second^ I see^ and tbk is ihe eigbtb. 
These confoiiniled posts bave been delayed^ I 
suppose^ from tbe atate of tbingB heve." 

'^ Wben do you think she can .amTe ? " asked 
Mra. Conrteney. 

Carr referred to his.letter. 

" Sbe expecU to be at Como to^mQrrov(r^.and wiU 
Tmte to me from tbere; bat ays tbere is no 
lue in my going to meet her, as she is uneertain 
about her xoute, iivhich will depend on the atate 
of the country. he is imm^isely phioky^ you 
know^ and not tumed aside by a trifle; so. Having 
made np her mind to come . cqme sibad ^wilL 
Keyertheless^ she haan't much idea of roughiog 
it.; she'U never stand ihe life here: and then 
the worst of it is^ she is such a tremendans 



188 GARR OF CARRLYON. 

Austrian ! I shall have no peace on account of 
my Itlian sympathies^ which you have infected 
me with^ Gilda. The best^ the only good thing 
about her coming is'' (he looked with a satisfied 
smile towards his wife) '^that it shows^ I think, 
she wants to know you, to greet my wife, megUo 
tardi che mai, as a daughter." 

Gilda did not appear as much exhilarated by 
this view of the case as might have been desired. 
She had always regarded the idea of her mother- 
in-law with profound awe; she could hardly teil 
why, nnless from Carr's cautious silence hitherto 
on the subject The intimation of Lady Carr- 
lyon's Boon becoming an inmate of the villa feil 
on her like a dead-weight; it was more >than 
the prospect of present discomfort or annoyance ; 
it was a presentiment of fature evils, vague 
and nndefined. As to Mrs.-Courteney, it was 
easy to see that some acute trouble weighed 
upon her, of which she struggled to unburden 
berself in words. At length, after a pause of 
someminutes, shefound strength andvoice enough 
to say : . 



VILLA POSSOMBBONL 189 

" This must make a change^ my dear Laurence^ 
in OUT plana." 

" A change ? What do you mean ? " 

^'As Lady Carrlyon is coming, it is better on 
all accounts I should leave you." 

<' Nonsense ! Do you snppose I should allow her 
to tum you out? If my mother comes) she must 
take US as we are; I have no idea of any change." 

^^Believe me^ Laurence, it is better so. I 
know your kind nature and all it suggests ; but 
in Gilda's interest^ even more ihan your own^ I 
must beg you to consent to this. You see your 
mother has a prejudice . ^not unnatural^ I dare 
say . against the young wife she has never seen, 
and only heard of through your report. She is 
Coming here^ I hope^ to conquer this ; but we 
shaU double the difficulties she encounters by my 
remaining. I haye seen more of the world than 
you haye^ Laurence^ long, very long ago, that 
is to say. I know that a wife may often over- 
come prejudice when her famlly are not tolerated. 
Lady Carrlyon will say you haye saddled yourself 
with an unreasonable brden in haying your 



VJO CABB OF CABJLTOlf. 

wife's mother to live widi you ; and I ^am afraid 
her heart may be hardened still more agidnst my 
child; in consequenee." 

^^Mydear Mr&'Courteney/' said Carr^'taking 
her hand^ " oblige me by saying no more on thia 
suljeeti I wonld not for the world allow my 
moierto fioppese you had leftus on her aocoont; 
Allow me to nnderstand her charaeter better than 
yoa possibly can. One mxisb be rrny-^firm with 
her; that is the thihg. I have taken my position 
with dignity, I flatter myself, in the affair of my 
marriage^ and I anLnot going to yield an incL I 
didn't invitorrny mother hera If she comea^ as 
I hope and.belieye^ kindly disposed towards Gilda, 
she will not) Ae ought not,, to find it difficult to 
accept your preaanee; and I ahalL let her aee at 
onee tUe poation it ifiimy intentin that yoa ahonld 
alwaya hold among u*" 

The tearsvhad been aently Streaming down his. 
wifa'ft iBL She broshed them horriedly away, 
andkiasad him with tcemUing Ups. OnoeagBin 
and. foF thft' last time, Mi. Conrteney raiaed her* 
voieo in unavailing remonstranee:*-^ 



VILLA. POSOHBBOISrL 191 

^' FoE Gcfid'a saike^ dci't let me he. the cause of 
any mssandeTataBding bet\reen yourself and yonr 
moiber! Better, a thousand times^ that we shonld 
not meei* agai&^.than that. this shonsld be the case. 
Mjr ohild.aiid I can never have any differenoe-of. 
feeng ihongh we should be sepamted for . a bng 
l&nff time. Her first duty now ift^ towarda yoii' 
and your &inily. I mustn't come in ie way : 1 
mustn!t^indfied^.Lai2renoeK Leime go. Conrteney, 
ahnoiL mrith bift) dying breatb told. mer. wamed 
me? 

Tba poor lady atopped abort^ and. pressed her 
band to.ber beart.;, wbile the same gbastly pallor, 
wbich always accompanied.any violent excitem^ent, 
overspread her face, and her respiration seemed 
snspendedi Ib a-. momeni Qilda was at her 
motbE?& side* Eim a knowledge of xe natoie 
of these: attack, whieb bad at one time* been 
more fzaqnent tban of late, she bad leamt bow b 
treat them; and in a few minutes Mrs. Conrteney^ 
tboc^ still, pide and eshansted, was breathing 
tranqniUy in her dat^htec'sracms.. Carr, with all 
a man'ft hopelessness on sadb oceasionsy.stood by. 



192 CABR OF CABKLYON. 

and beld a bottle of camphor Of course no more 
was Said then upon the subject^ the dlscnssion of 
which bad agitated Mrs. Courteney so greatly; 
but Carr was further tban ever from yielding bis 
point To do bim strict justice^ tbere was some- 
tbing of a cbivalrous feeling in tbis^ added to tbe 
inberent obstinacy of bis cbaracter; be bad a 
kindly beart^ and tbe notion of toming Mrs. 
Courteney adrift, becanse bis motber was an 
impertinent woman of fasbion^ was utterly abbor- 
rent to bim. As to wbetber tbe opposite course 
was to tend to tbe bappiness of any one concemed^ 
or^ witb respect to tbe wisdom of conciliating Lady 
Carrlyon by degrees^ Carr would not so mucb 
as entertain ibese considerations for a moment. 
Wbetber rigbtly or wrongly, be cbose to consider 
tbat ^'a principle'' was at stake; and^ perbaps, 
because bis capital in tbis stock was slender, be 
made a great deal of it^ and would baye died 
ratber tban give it up. 

To bis wife^ Carr's inflexible resolve was tbe 
only consolation, at a moment wben ber heart feit 
yery beavy. Sbe realized, for tbe first time^ ber 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 103 

Position in her husband's family. He had been so 
carefol in keeping this disagreeable subject out of 
sight as mach as possible^ that she only knew the 
fact of his relations with his family, aflber a short 
interruption, having been resumed: which had 
given her, I believe, greater pleasure than himself. 
He iiever spoke of the letters he received fropi 
home; read no extracts ; transmitted no meaning- 
less conventional messages to his young wife; 
observed, in short, an almost absolute silence on 
the subject. It occurred to her sometimes as a 
Strange and formal State of things ; a tie, bound, 
appai'ently, by little love or thought or interest 
on either side. Of Lady Carrlyon, as I have said, 
she had formed an idea on yery slender premises. 
She could not ihink that the mother cared much 
for her son ; and the father regarded him and his 
marriage with an equally sperb indifference, 
probably. She was sorry ; but then Carr did not 
seem to care; and it never occurred to her as 
something which vitally concemed herseif. Now 
it did, however : now it dawned on her, with ever- 
increasing distinctness, that her marriage was the 
TGL. n. 13 



194 CABB OF CABHLYON. 

great barrier which had risen up between Carr 
and bis parents. Her moiber's fears, and Carr's 
rejoinders^ opened her eyes to the tnilL Heaven 
help ber if sbe were to find antagonism and enmity 
in tbe new bomel Sbe clong to be gene 
mother wbo bad presided over tbe old one more 
doselj tban ever. 

So Mrs, Courteney was to remain. Her 
daugbter told ber next moming bow grieved 
Carr woid be if sbe broacbed the subject 
again; and when^ contrary to ber better judg- 
inent, tbe poor lady yielded^ ber only comfort 
was in tbe look of radiant tbankfulness that 
beamed in Gilda's eyes. 

Tbat same moming tbe news of tbe fall of 
Vicenza arrived. It was tbe first serious reverse 
tbe patriots bad met witb : and it cbanged ibeir 
note of triumpb into one of constemation. Flying 
rumoors of all kinds reacbed tbe villa during 
tbe day; and our Englisb friends, in spite of 
family anxieties, cbafed and lamented over tbe 
dimmed prospects of tbe Italien National CSanse. 



195 



CHAPTER VIII. 

LoKB Cakblton's gout was the ostensible reason 
that the shutters in Belgrave Square were closed, 
and the world of routs and revels deprived of 
the light of her ladjship's countenance. I don't 
know whether any one actually went the length 
of believing that she was a devoted wife. I 
rather think it was pretty generally looked 
npon that a tightness in the money market was 
the secret motive-power in this edifying spectacle 
of conjngal unity. 

However this might be, there was probably 
another and still more powerftil argmnent, which 
indaced Ldy Carrlyon to expatriate herseif for a 
time, nnder the pleasing subterfuge of attendance 
6n her lord. What this was we may by-and-by 
see; if, indeed, it were really capable of making 

13.2 



196 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

her undertake a tedius and most uncomfortable 
joumey into Italy at this hot season (not free 
from all risk of personal danger, moreover), aflter 
depositing her gouty peer in the hot waters of 
Wiesbaden, She could not fail to meet with 
obstructions and annoyances on her road ; 
but among her ladyship's failings she was not 
justly to be charged with weak nerves. She 
had an almost unbounded belief in her " position " 
carrying her through everything. In this she 
was so far justified on the present occasion, that 
every facility had been afforded her by all sorts 
of ministers and men of influencfe-to prosecute 
her journey. Her writing-case was stuflFed with 
letters to ambassadors and generals, recommend- 
ing the distinguished lady to their special care. 
Her sympathies being wholly Austrian, she had 
feit some reluctance in carrying any credentials 
to the rebel camp, as she considered Charles 
,Albert's, But prudential motives prevalled. It 
was pointed out that without some such counter- 
poise, the Austrian correspondence . ^innocuous as 
it was . which she carried, might bring her into 



VILLA POSSOMBBONL 197 

serious diflSculty. She might be seized by tbe 
Italians as a spy. So she was armed with 
letters of safe conduct from both parties; and 
though stopped twenty times each day, and 
suffering unavoidable delays, these letters stood 
her in good stead. When politely requested to 
descend from her carriage at the Sardinian 
outposts, she showed at the window a letter to 
the Duke of Genoa, and desired with a lofty 
urbanity to speak with the officer in command. 
Her arguments proved so conclusive to that 
individual, that it was no longer a question of 
searcMngher carriage, or obstructing her progress, 
but of aflFording her every facility and attention. 

In traversing the Austrian lines, it was the 
same game^ only played with more cordiality; 
and here she generally indulged in an animated 
political chat with ihe^ white -coated blond- 
monstached heroes, who came clanking their 
swords up to the carriage-door, and raising two 
wooden fingers to iheir forage-caps. At Verona, 
she was lucky enough to come across an aide-de- 
camp of Badetzki's, to whom she entrusted her 



198 CAKB OF CARRLYON. 

letter to tiie old maxshal with a lively prayer 
for his success. These and the lesser obstacles 
of occasionally finding every post-horse employed 
for the siege-trains, and every room in the 
inn ocenpied by a dozen soldiers . all these, 
I say^ being with patient endurance and Bang^ 
froid overcome, Lady Carrlyon was at last 
approaching her joumey's end. 

Her real feelings and motiyes she possibly did 
not very accurately define to herseif: they might 
be modified or strengthened by circumstances. But 
she at least knew what they were not Anxiety 
for her dear son's happiness^ . a magnanimons 
sacrifice of prejudice, . an eager desire to greet 
*' the young person " as a daughter^in-law, these 
lofly sentiments were the stalking-horses her 
ladyship rode to death ; and though they might 
serve the common purposes of social delnsionj 
there were some who shrewdly suspected that 
ihese beasts of brden were unduly freighted. 

The admixture of a certain kind of clevemess. 
worldly sharpness^ call it what you will . with 
a large proportion of foUy^ is very common ; and 



VILLA FOSSOHBHONL 199 

just SO much Lady Carrlyon possessed. Erery 
one who has read an extract rom her letters 
will be ready to pronounce her a very silly 
woman. Yet it is donbtfiil whether those who 
met her night after night at London parties 
thought sa They saw in her a successful 
woman . a woman who had worked her way 
up^ persereringly^ to achieve the work she had 
appointed herseif, and had never swerved nor 
fidtered* Born to poverty, and of a family 
with no noble or influential connections, she had 
not only married^ rank and wealth; she had 
advanced her position after marriage from being 
the wife of a respectable fox-hunting old Tory 
lord, to being one of the most impertinent women 
in London, an exclusive leader o fashion, in 
whose train ladies of mach higher pretensions 
in all ways followed tamely. It Is all very well to 
look down with a bird's-eye view npon her foUies 
nowg and laagh at them ; bnt when we knew her in 
her palmy days, we confess to having been dazzled. 
'^ Sich is life," as a great anthority has obserred. 
She is leaning back in her carriage, revolving 



200 CABR OF CARBLTON, 

in her mind future schemes, future hopes and 
possibillties, with an eye riveted on one particular 
button of the cushion opposite. One would say 
that all her future success depended on her not 
losing sight of that button for a single moment. 
Herein you have an index to the woman's cha- 
racter; a pertinacity, with all her frivolity, in 
holding fast by any idea which her narrow mind 
has once conceived. If Carr is obstinate, so 
doubly is his mother, though she has been giving 
up to him all his life. For she has not the power 
of carrying things with a strong band as he has, 
But then, en revanchey she is not as kindly-natured. 
She is eunning, and in a low, worldly way, far- 
sighted; she will ppear to yield, and yet spare 
no pains to compass her end ; and, though baffled, 
will retum again and again to the charge, from 
an unexpected quarter. 

Lady Carrlyon is still a beautiful woman, over 
whom the waves of time hitherto have roUed 
with much the same efifect as those other waves 
upon the hard smooth sea-sand . a wrinkle here 
and there: no more. The steel-blue eyes flash 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 201 

keenly as in yoath; the brilUant teeth are still 
faultless; the hair untouched with silver. Her 
dress betokens an absence of that important sense 
of the fitness of things, which is onfortanately 
too common among our countrywomen. Instead 
of some simple, cool material this hot weather, 
she is '* wearing out " one of last season's gowns ; 
a mauve silk, flounced to the waist, in every fold 
of which the Italian dust will lodge. She has 
several bracelets, with lockets like little skulIs 
hanging about her in all direcjiions, and which 
like ilie trpphies of a barbarian chief^ might be 
supposed to typify her victories. But the truth 
is, she has had few. Seidom has so handsome a 
woman inspired so little genuine admiration ; 
though a certain number of hangers-on she is 
sure of in London* 

Beside her, from a round basket, peeped the 
most repulsive little canine face that human in- 
genuity ever disfigured. Helplessly fat, with a 
nose broken flat, and a tongue that lolled per- 
petually out of its mouth, this engaguig animal 
was the object of Lady Carrlyon's tenderest care 



202 CABR OF CAEELTON 

and soHcitude. The servants miglit starve, so 
that Bpine had her bread and milk. It is not 
to be supposed; however^ that those fiinctionaries 
3howed any Symptoms of starving. As they sat 
in the rumble there, Carl, the large oily Courier, 
and Mrs. Timson, a genteel waiting-maid, devour- 
ing a chicken together under the carriage nmbi'ella, 
they seemed perfectly well able to take care ot 
themselves. 

The day had been intensely hot, and it was 
late in the aftemoon as the dasty carriage wound 
wearily up the hill-side, sinking deep at every 
Step into the hard, dry ruts, and grinding to 
powder the stones that lay beneath its wheels. 
The sun was low enough in the horizon to bathe 
the landscape in thafmellow tint which is only 
Seen at the close of an Italian day. The great 
folds of mountain rolled back one after another, 
each more intensely pnrple than the last, and 
spread themselves out as the carriage ascended 
higher and higher; nntil, at last, the edges of 
the lake below gleamed upon the sighi And 
then the sheet of golden sky was repeated in 



VILLA FOSSOMBKONL 203 

Cquid glory, crosaed, at interyals^ by soft tremn- 
loas sbadows of yiolet cloud and mountain. The 
ruddy shaft of a pine-tree, its thick-tufted brancheB 
all a-glo\r with flaming sunligbt^ reared itself 
against the gleaming water^ In one place where 
a Uttle rocky promontory was thrust out into the 
lake. A silver ripple here and there^ like a broken 
thread of pearls^ marked where the lazy stroke 
of an oar had fallen firom ander the striped awning 
of a boat ; its reight of laughtar-loTing Ital|ns> 
even in these troublons times^ singing anatches 
of y^di as they took their evening row. 

Not so the peasants. 

A few vine or olive dressers, retoming from 
their day's work> met the carriage on its aacent 
Some of them were leading broad, dun-coloured 
oxen> with creamy hdrhs and onyx-coloored eyes^ 
yoked to long carts that were laden with the 
rieh frnita of the earth. There was bat oase 
expression on those bronzed ficea : a snllen endnr^ 
ance. What boots it that the land be flowing 
with milk and honey? that the **just earth** 
make such bonntiful retam for their toiI> so long 



2Q4 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

 

as their neck be under the Aiistrian's heel? And 
the hopes of Italj have been fast melting awaj 
these last few days ! 

Bat neither the fair face of nature nor the 
moral aspect of the people attracted much atten- 
tion from the occupant of the travelling-carriage. 
She only wondered, with a shudder^ as the villa 
at last came in sight^ how anj one could think 
of living in a house like a dilapidated factorj, 
and how it would be possible for her to pass a 
certain number of weeks there. The poor steam- 
ing horses drew np nnder the white-washed wall, 
over which a row of lemon-trees showed refiresh- 
ingly green; and the heavy conrier descended 
and puUed the bell of an iron wicket. Ere it 
had ceased its discordant jingle, the figore of 
Carr, in a white jacket and trousers, his fair skin 
bumt to a rieh bronze nnder the thin straw hat, 
met his mother's gaze, as he leapt down the steps 
of the terrace, and threw open the gate. 

*^ Welcome to an Italian house, mother ! Up 
to the last moment I hardly ezpected yon." 

He handed her out, and embraced her. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 205 

** My dearest boy ! My poor Laury ! How 
glad I am to see yoii^ dear ! Bat, good heavens I 
how brown you are ! I should hardly know 
you, and you had such a nice complexion ! " 

" The Kfe we lead here, you see, motiier, don't 
exactly conduce to keeping it, as you will soon 
discover." 

" Ah ! yes, naturally ** (with a sigh). " I 
understand the whole tone of mind, associates, 
and so on, very coarse. You needn't be a&aid, 
dear, I am prepared . quite prepared. So you 
lead a peasant's life here, I suppose^ . dig, and that 
sort of thing ? " 

"Just now we have something eise to think 
of," replied her son, laughing. "I have been 
constantly on the hills for the last few days, 
gleaning intelligence about the movements of both 
armies. You have come to us at an exciting 
moment. I am glad you have got through all 
the difBculties of your joumey so well, mother ; 
and we will make you as comfortable as we can 
here, but you must not expect the luxuries of 
Carrlyon. 



206 CABB OF CABBLYOK. 

"Of conrse not, dear. As Sir Walter used 
to saj, in oor hoors of ease I mig^t be hard to 
please, bat not wben angnisb wrings the brow ; and 
I am snre you have a great deal to put np with." 

*^ I have a hard bed, and no carpet, to put up 
with ; and the only thing tbat ^ wrings my brow * 
is the confounded heat,".said Carr, with radier 
a forced laugh and a heightened colonr. ^* That 
is all : and I am glad to say I snpport tfaese trials 
with wonderfal eqnanimity, as do also my wife 
and her mother." 

Hermai^r?" 
Yes ; Mrs. Courteney." 
Do you mean that she is with you ? " 
Certainly. Didn't you know that? Gilda, 
poor child," he went on hurriedly, *^is so anxions 
that you should be pleased with everything, . her- 
seif most of all. I hope you will try and be so. 
I hope you come here wiihout any . any . leeling 
of prejudice, mother." 

" Oh, certainly, my dear boy ! eise why should 
I come? only I didn't understand that you had 
saddled yourself with the whole family ^ 



cc 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 207 

^ The whole simily oonsists of Mrs. Oourteney." 
" Bat,'' continaed Ladj Carrlyon, withoutheed- 
ing the interraption, ^' having made the first great 
sacrifice, Iiaving overcome any natural objections 
to receive your wife, my dear Laury, of coiirse 
I am prepared to see her with your eyes, and to 
try and overlook her family and everything eise." 

They liad walked slowly up the terraced 
garden^ Lady Carrlyon hanging on her son's arm^ 
and pansing rom time to time as this oonversa- 
tion passed. As they approached the loggia she 
who was the subjet of their discourse appeared 
in sight She was leaning^ in her simple white 
dress, against the balustrade, looking rather pale. 
In her nerronsness she had plncked a twig of 
the hoary olive-tree beside her, which she held 
in her band ; and as she stood there, looking down 
on the approaching fignres, she might not unfitly 
bare represented Peace with her appropriate 
emblenL Perhaps some such fancy connected 
with those few silrery green leaves did cross 
Gda's mind, for as she watched be adrancing 
group, her trembling hand almost inyolontarily 



208 CABB OF CABBLT05. 

eztended tbe olire-liEaiich^ as dioagli pleading 
against animosity and discoid. Slie waited tmtfl 
thejr were quite close and looked up, befoie she 
descended the steps to meet her mother-in-law. 
Ladj Carrljron ejed her rapidljr all over: then 
eztended both arms and drew Gilda towards her, 
coldljr tonching the pale young cheek with her 
Ups. It was a conventional salutation for which 
Grflda was probablj nnprepared ; in her agitation 
she let drop the twig of oUye, and it feil nnder 
Ladj Carrljon's feet The starded look on the 
jonng wife's &ce the next moment, when she 
beheld the leayes, to which she had attached 
almost a soperstitions importance, cmshed he- 
neath her ladjship's boot, made the latter ex- 
claim, . 

'^ Don't be firightened^ my dear^ you look quite 
scared. I haye been telling my son that we are 
to be excellent friends^ I hope; so yon nmstn't. 
look shy and alarmed; nothing is so nnderbred. 
You must treat me as yoar own mother, and then 
we shall get on very welL B^pine I B^pine ! 
don't be barking at that peacock! Come here^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 209 

ma'am ! She is dying of hunger, poor little 
thingl Get her some bread and milk^ Lauiy; 
and if jou have the leg of a chicken, I daresay 
she could eat ii" 

Carr knew all his mother's little ways perfectly 
well: her airs of graciotis condescension^ seasoned 
with impertinence ; and the rapid transfer of her 
attention to a yelping spaniel as the subject of 
paramount importance. He knew what it all 
meant He was mortified that Gilda appeared 
to so little advantage^ as he thought; he was 
annoyed that his mother evidently admired her 
so little: and he was, above all, angry with him- 
self for feeling irritated. Was it possible that 
his wife's indescribable charm, which consisted 
in no dazzling beauty, could be appreciated by 
Lady Carrlyon? Was it possible, on the other 
band, that Lady Carrlyon's nature should change 
all of a sudden, and her heart be soflened towards 
her daughter-in-law otherwise than by degrees? 

They entered the sala, which Gilda's band 
had decked with' pomegranates and oleanders, 
and which, in its primitive way, looked really 

TOL, n. 14 



212 CAKE OF CABRLYON. 

** Yes ; if I can be of any nse," repeated the 
latter^ in a helpless kind of way. 

" Oh ! dear^ no, thank you. I have fortunately 
brought my own sheets ; I don't think I could sleep 
in such sackcloth as that. I shonld have no 
skin left on my bones in the moming. But Tm 
not at all particular, you know; and really with 
a few curtains the room might be made vory 
tolerable. By-the-by, Tve had my room at 
Carrlyon so charmingly done up with pale blue 
and white lace since you were there. Your 
father was so absurd about it^ couldn't see that 
the room wanted fresh furniture, and was quite 
indignant against my poor portres and devants 
de cheminds. He always asks^ ^ What's the use of 
putting velvet petticoats on the chimney-pieces 
and doors ! ' ha ! ha I " 

"He has a fellow feeling for those dumb suf- 
ferers under petticoat govemment," laughed her 
son, glancing at his wife, " which I begin to under- 
stand now." 

"Don't talk nonsense," said liis mother, very 
sharply. " Any man who submits to . to . ^what 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 213 

you call petticoat govemment is a fool. Oh 1 
there you are at last, Timson*; what a time you 
have been ! Now you must go away, Laury, and 
you, my dear, I always forget your name? " 

"Gilda, for shortness. Geraldine is my real 
name." 

^* I shall call you Geraldine, by all means ; 
much more ladylike. Gilda'sounds like a peasant 
or a pet donkey. No one ever heard of Lady 
Gilda. That is the test. Au revoir, my love, and 
try and not blush in that way, to oblige me." ' 

The door closed behind Carr and his wife; 
and each, cautiously avoiding the other's eye, 
they turned down the passage towards their own 
rooms without a word. Carr feit that the com- 
mencement of a struggle was at hand; he was 
irritated and depressed, all the more so from 
the necessity of concealing his real feelings in 
his mother's presence. As to poor Gilda, uneasy 
as the prospect of Lady Carrlyon's visit had made 
her, the reality promised to be far worse. She 
knew at once that it was impossible there could 
ever be any sympathy between her mother-in- 



214 CABB OV CABBLYON. 

law and IiersdU. Worse ihan that, she was con- 
sciouSy throngh ihe veiy pores of her skin^ tiiat 
Lady Carrljon had oonoeived a deadlj enmitj 
towards her^ whicfa nothing would diange ar 
even mitigate. She was sad and sick at heart: 
it seemed as thongh all things conspired agamst 
her; bat th at least was no fault of hers^ and 
she wonld trj and not let it overshadow or take 
an nndue prominence in her yonng life. She 
nmst go forward on her oonrse withont fear or 
wavermg ; if Lady Carrlyon could never love, she 
should at least respect her. Thns she stroggled 
with the tears that forced tibemselves into her 
eyes^ as she sat down for half*an-honr alone in 
her bedrocHDi hefore dinner. She was anxions 
to avoid her mother: that dear mother whose 
solicitade for her child never fidled to detect the 
least shadow on Gilda's brow, and fixim whom^ 
if possible^ she mnst now conceal how her tender 
and sensitive natnre had been wounded. 

She need not have been afiraid* Mrs. Courteney 
wonld not have ventored to probe her danghter's 
heart at that moment. She had kept out of the 



VILLA POSSOMBKONL 215 

way until now: and now^ as the hour of her 
owu tiial approaclied, she ^itered tbe fiala alone^ 
a thouglit paler than usual, and without any 
change in the uniformity of her widow's dreas* 
She had been sitting there for some minutes hj 
the window, when the door was thrown open^ 
and Lady Carrlyon sailed in^ in a cloud of white 
embroid^y and float^ng coloured ribbons. A 
greater contrast than the appearonce of the two 
inatr(Mis presented, as they stood there^ could 
scaroely be found Mrs Courteney rose, her 
thin delicate hand leaning on the back of the 
chair for support, while a sudden flush over- 
spread her cheek. Lady Carrlyon stared at her 
rom head to foot> as thongh somewhat pnzzled 
or sarprised j then, with a freezing inclination of 
the head^ took up a book from the table, and 
seated hersdf witfaout a ward 

The next two or three minutes that elapsed 
seemed ages to Mrs. Courteney ; then Carr came 
in, which was a relie He glanced rapidly hom. 
one to the other, went up to bis mother, and 
lajring bis hand npon her Shoulder, said, . 



216 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

" I conclude you and Mrs, Courteney, my 
second mother, liave dispensed witii the ceremony 
of introduction, or shall I go through it, in due 
form?" 

' Lady Carrlyon once more inclined her liead, 
this time with a vapoury smile, though secretly 
indignant at Hearing the low person in whose 
presence she found herseif thus styled. She 
began glibly, nevertheless, after her manner, 
talking ori other subjects, until Gilda slid into 
the room, and dinner was announced, Then, as 
her son offered lier his arm, and they walked into 
the next room, she whispered, 

"Do in pity teil me, Carr, where it is I have 
Seen that woman? Her face seems familir to 
mei years ago ; but where, I can't think." 

"Nor I," he replied, indifferently. 

Her conversation all that evening was addressed 
exclusively to her son. This might be supposed 
to be natural after their long Separation; but it 
was certainly not well-bred. Indeed, she pur- 
posely talked of things and people conceming 
whom mother and daughter could know nothing 



j 



VILLA FOSSOMBEONL 217 

nor feel any interest. The young wife sat by, 
bending over her work, and listening to the May- 
fair gossip, frivolous at best, when not ill-natured 
or scandalous. It was a new insight into llfe, 
and not an agreeable one. There was not a word 
of friendship or love in this world of Lady Carr- 
lyon's. It was a hard phantasmagoria of people 
dancing and feasting, struggling for money-bags 
and coronets, bespattering each oiher with mud, 
and grinning like apes^ at each other's foUy and 
wickedness. Carr had been living now so many 
months ont of this^ world, that he derived a certain 
amusement in hearmg of people whom he had 
known there more or less well. Gilda was sur- 
prised to hear him laugh at some of his mother's 
stories, and gradually fall into a tone of con- 
versatlon which his wife believed to be foreign 
to all his real tastes. 

And so it was the first evening after Lady 
Carrlyon's arrival was passed at the villa. 



216 CABB OF CARRLTON. 



CHAPTER IX. 

** Ab to this horrid mess my poor dear Lanrence 
has got himself into, it must liave been a positive 
infktnation that made him many ifaat girl. I 
expected to have foand her at least very hand- 
8ome5 in which case slie might have faad some 
siiccess in London, to carry off the dreadfal 
mAalliance; but she is positively hardly good- 
looking I -mth. no style, no conversation . ^nothing 1 
She does the pete ingenue . ^bhxshes to the eyes 
when one speaks to her, and has all those affecta- 
tions of simpHcity which I detest. If she were 
eyen very cZeer, I conid forgive her, for she might 
advance hls interests, perlmps ; birt I can't make 
out that she knows anythingl In short, I am 
in despair, for I foresee she will be a clog to my 
darling through life ! And then there's a mother I 



VILLA ITOSSOMBONL 219 

a immMi, my dear, who looks as if she had been 
brought up in the Castle of Otranto, and had 
never reeovered the frights of h^ childhood. 
I am snre I have seon her before in some melo- 
drama of the kind, for her face is so dieadfully 
familir to me. She never speaks, o jon may 
imagine she is a lively additicm to the party. 
She seemfi to have fastened npon poor Laory 
for life; bnt I mnst really try some vigorons 
measnre to dislodge her. Do pity me I The case 
is so mnch worse than even I anticipated^ and 
at present I see no opming. Bnt yon know I 
am not easily disconraged; and, haying come 
here, I intend to sacrifiee myself for a few weeks 
to my poor boy's interests. Sack a talented 
creature as he is, and with snch prospects, to 
see him so thrown away! It makes me quite 
wretched; and it will require a great'deal of 
management to do anything with him, I ibresee. 
Teil me how the dear dnchess gets through her 
confinement/' &c. (Sbe. 

It was thns Lady Carrlyon wrote to one of 
her iatimate fidends (of whom she had related 



220 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

some piquant anecdotes to her son the evening 
before,) the day after her arrival. 

Carr had ridden off at daybreak into the moun- 
tains, with a cojiple of peasants, to reconnoitre, 
and pick up what news he could of the Italian 
army. It was thought there would be a battle 
near Rivoli, where a large force of the enemy was 
encamped, while they possessed the whole chain 
of Monte Baldo. There appeared to be great 
indecision and uncertainty as to the King's move- 
ments; but it was evident that he must soon 
strike some blow to retrieve the losses to the 
national cause which had now followed each 
other in such rapid succession. Carr was excited 
on the subject, as any other young Englishman 
would have been. He rode out, as. he had done 
constantly of late, with the stalking-glasses slung 
upon his back, the pistols in his belt, the well- 
filled sandwich-box in his pocket . all the appli- 
ances, in short, of a dettante campaigner. He 
was well pleased, he said to himself, at the oppor- 
tunity of leaving his wife and mother to "become 
better acquainted, without the intervention of his 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL- 221 

presence." He was sanguine enough to hope they 
might even become intimate by the time he 
retumedl He had been extremely despondent 
the evening before; but that sunshiny moming 
he took a brighter view of things. Not so Gilda. 
Her lieart sank within her at the prospect of 
passing the whole or greater part of the day alone 
with Lady Carrlyon; for Mrs. Courteney had 
taken her daughter's band early that moming, and 
Said gravely, . 

*'It is your duty, my child, to try and con- 
ciliate Lady Carrlyon; and, as she knows you 
better, I hope you and Laurence's mother may 
be drawn nearer to each other. You will be 
constantly thrown together now, and I am glad 
it should be so. You will get accustomed to any 
little peculiarities, . what may seem cold or formal 
will wear off, and you will gradually make allow- 
ances for what may hurt or repel you in her 
manner at first. She is undergoing a severe trial 
for her son's sake. All this, dear child,^ makes 
it incumbent on you to be as much with her as 
she will allow ; and to try and win her affection 



222 CABB OF CASKLYON. 

if jou possibly can. With me, dT course^ it is 
quite a different matter. Lanrence, in hk kmd- 
nesB, waa mistaken in wishing me to remain bere ; 
and I ought not to faave yidded, for I am in a 
false pofiition. Lady Carrljon verj natnirally 
regards me with animosiiy. It will be easy> my 
darling^ to forgive you ; bat tbere is no reasan 
wby she should soften her heart towards me. 
The only conrse I can adc^t with dignity^ tbere- 
fore^ is to relieve her of my presence as much aa 
possible. My health is sufficient plea for remain- 
ing in my room the greater part of the day; 
and yoa most not think abont me, darling or 
come near me. All yonr time and attention now 
mnst be devoted to Lady Carrlyon.'' 

Bat dther a fine lady's caprice or some sabtle 
motive had wronght a marvelloos change in her 
ladyship^a manner when, towards the middle of 
the day^ she appeared in the sala. She coold 
not hdp beii^ impertinent, it is tme: she was 
one of the women who never ean, except to 
some one of whom they stand in awe : bat it was 
the impertinence of auD[uliarity, not that of catting 



VILLA' l'OSOMBRONL 223 

disdain. She asked all sorta of qaesiions, wiliioiit 

the least regard to the manifest paih it canaed 

Gilda to answer many of theni. There were 

certain thinge she wa^ bent on discoyering^ and 

the eaaiest means of doing so was frozn her 

daaghter-jn-law direct. Caxr had ezercised a 

aound discretion in speaking as in writing about 

his wife's family ; but now everything^ or ahnost 

everything, there was to be known of Gilda's 

early life was probed and sifted out by his 

mother. The Curteneya' wanderings^ the utter 

seclusion in which they lived, the first acquaint- 

aoce with Lawrence, all tbis by degrees Lady 

Carrlyon induced Gilda to teil her about The 

young wife feit as if she had no right to refuse 

to answer any of these questions ; she only shrank 

from speaking of her father; and here even Lady 

Carrlyon's unflagging perseverance failed to eKcit 

much informaon She tomed abmptly into 

aztother paith. 

" How old are you, my dear ?^' 

** Just nineteen." 

"OhI Hawever, I suppose yoB had many 



224 CAEE OF CARRLTON. 

admirers before you finally condescended to marry 
Laurence, eh?" 

Gilda shook her head. 

*^ Come, nonsense ! you don't mean to teil me 
that, living in Italy . this land of song and pas- 
sion, as poor Byron would have called it . that 
you never had a flirtation before you knew 
Laurence, my dear Geraldine?" 

*^ Indeed not. No, I never had a flirtation." 

^^ Well, but teil me now how many young 
men have you ever known intimately in your 
life?" 

"Laurence was the rst, the only young 
Englishman I ever knew." 

She spoke hurriedly, and Lady.Carrlyonglanced 
sharply at her face the while. 
But plenty of Italians?" 
Very few." 

Her ladyship mused for a few moments. 

" How very romantic I A first love I and though 
it isn't exactly that with Carr, . ^for, of course, 
you know that it was his quarrel with Lady Maud 
Brabazon that drove him abroad? . (and a most 



i6 
CS 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 225 

advantageous match that would have been for 
Tiim . ministerial connection, and so on) . yet 
it is certainly very romantic and high-minded of 
him, giving up the world for your sake, as he is 
doing, my dear^ and abandoning all bis fine 
prospects.'' 

"I don't know wbat you refer to," replied 
Gilda, with some toucb of pique in her voice. 
'* I am not aware of Laurence's having made any 
particular sacrifice. It is bis own cboice, not 
from any request of mine, tbat we are still in Italy. 
I am ready to follow bim wbere and wben be 
likes, and sbonld be tbe last to interfere witb any 
prospects of bis. I wisb beartily, on tbe contrary, 
tbat be bad some profession : I tbink if be were 
a working man be would, be bappier." 

"I spoke of bis matrimonial prospects, my 
dear. You will excuse me, I know. As to bis 
being wbt you call * a working man ' (wbicb is 
a borridly vulgr term, my dear Geraldine), dear 
Laurence bas too mucb genius to be a plodding 
man in an office, or anytbing of tbat sort. With 
streng ministerial connection, I tbink be might 

VOL. n. 15 



226 CARB QF CABBLYON. 

have been Secretaty of State^ for most of the dry 
work, I belieYe, is left to the Undr Secretarjj or 
the XJnd^ Secretary'ssecretaiy* But au that> yon 
see, requires interesti Poor dear Lord Garrljoa 
never had any^ except in the hunting-field ; and 
now Laury has been and thrown away bis dbances; 
which, as I say^ my dear, is certainly yery 
TonuxntiCm 

Gilda's blood, poor cbild was ronaed to r^ly> and 
thongh her Ups trembled she said, yery distincy, 

^ Ton do yonr son an injostice, Lady Garrylon. 
He wonld scom to be indebted to hia wife for 
Position or interest I thooght hat all who bcxre 
ihe name of Cardyan wonld be too prond ta 
harbonr any such thon^t ; as I know that he--^ 
my hnsband . ^woidd. But I snppose ihat parents 
think differendy on ihese snbjocts.'* 

*' Ab yon might have kamt fix)m yonr own, my 
dear. However> let that pass. I am only anziona 
now that yoa shoold realize yonr hnaband'B 
positionjE and the neoessity of satrificing yonrsdf 
for his good, if you nre ealled on As to bis 
continning ta Uve bnried away from the worid. 



VILLA POSSOMBBONL 227 

it is, of couTse, perfecdy absurd, nd yod nuist 
Bse all your influexice to make Inm come to 
England aaid see what we can do fisx liizn tbere, 
in the way of gettmg him something." 

^'Certainlj, Lady Carrljon; I have alreadj 
Said " 

" Yes, je&y my dear, I know all you raiean^ bui 
it isn't enoagb that yoxt sfaotddn't urge faim to Hay, 
yon mnst urge bim to go, eren if it is witboat 
yon, for a time. Women are very ften in ie 
way . ^particularly wben tbey are not women of 
bnsiness.** 

^^I shall accompany bim, wherever it be, nnless 
be forbids it," said Grilda, qnietly. 

Mncb more of the same soi^t of conTerEKtioH 
passed; Lady Cairlyon pntthifg out a number of 
feelers in di^esit directions, and making berself 
acquainted witb her daugfater-in-law's sentimecits 
on a variefy of important points. If baffled in 
some particulars, sbe was suocessful in most 
How far the knowledge, ihus gained> was satis- 
fectory to her ladyship, may be better judged <rf 
hereaflter. 

15.2 



228 CAKK OF CARBLYON. 

In ihe afternoon, a peasant-lad came np through 
the mulberrj plantations from a salmon-coloured 
villa upon xe borders of the lake^ the gazebo of 
which was distinctly yisible from the FossombronL 
This villa, it now appeared, was the property of 
Madame Santi, who, with her niece, the marchesa, 
had arrived there the previous evening. The 
marchesa wrote, with characterlstic effusion, in her 
, long spidery characters, to the effect that she 
wonld come up in her portantina . to pay the 
Laurence Carrs a visit in the cool of the evening, 
if they were at home. Gilda, who really liked the 
marchesa, hailed the prpspect with thankfulness, 

I 

as a relief from the undivided brden of Lady 
Carrlyon's Company, The latter, who, it will be 
remembered, had origmally procured the intro- 
duction for her son, was no less pleased to find 
there was " some one, one has heard of before," in 
these parts. She regretted, indeed, to leam that 
the marchesa was an enthusiastic patriot: such 
radical principles being only fit for the low-bom ; 
but her claims^ as a woman of family, went far to 
balance this drawback. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI, 229 

Carr retumed earlier than his wife expected. 
He brought no news. He had come npon a 
small , detachment of yolanteers marching across 
the mountains to join the King's army, bj some 
intricate paths only known to the peasants who^ 
guided them; bat these raw troops coiild give 
him no Information. The towns^ they said, were 
beginning to mnrmur at the Eing's inaction. 
It was hoped that he would strike a bold blow 
to recover Verona, as the old marshal, it was 
thought, began likewise to show Symptoms of 
languor. 

The family party sat drinking their coffee 
in the loggia, after dinner, when two brawny 
beatmen were seen toiling np the plantation, 
bearing an arm-chair upon poles between them. 
The goodly form of the marchesa was no light 
freight, to judge from the condition of her 
porters; and with the amusing famQiarity of 
Italians, they remarked jocosely on her increase 
of weight, since they had last the honour of 
carrying the Eccelenza. She had a black veil 
on her head, and in her band a fan and a large 



i 
t 



230 CASB OP CABRLYON. 

parasoL Sho discoursed freelj wh her two 
beax'ersy aad laughed, and addressed them in* 
difierently as ''caro huq," in a way that excited 
the unbounded astaiishment of Lady Canlyons 

w 

yvho ihrough har double eye-glass watched the 
approach <^ the procession. 

Carr greeted her very cordially and presented 
her to bis mother. The very unsimple manners 
of the Ejiglish lady . they could hardly be 
called affected, they were so mach a part of 
herseif . evidenily afforded the Italian some 
amusement There was a quiet twinkle in her 
eye every^ now and then^ which betrayed her. 
Bat Lady Carrlycm was not allowed much oppor- 
tunity for display. There were so many questions 
to be asked^ and ihe marchesa had so mach to 
say^ that the talk was soon entirely hers. Th^ 
mQvements of the Saidinian anny, . the prospects 
of the National Cause^ . ^the political ai dice% 
with which we have now noihing to do> she 
descanted on them all. There was one point on 
which both Gilda and her molher boraed to 
quefiftion the mardiesa ; bat they wisely refirained^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBKONL 231 

and were rewarded^ after a time^ for their 
patience. 

" I can't think," observed Lady Oarrlyon, with 
her nsiial tact aad good taste^ '^howit is you don't 
like those diatinguia Austrians, in their. white coats^ 
my dear Lanry. So thorongh-hred, so patridan I 
Bot Tm a Tory, and can't tolerate." 

^^ Do teil me what a Tori is, milady ? " cut in 
the marchesa, with a good-homoared smile. 

** Oh ! everything that's canaiUuiional . you 
don't nnderstand ihe meaning of that term either, 
I dare say." 

'* They are for giving na constitutions now at 
last/' laughed tiie marchesa. ''Shall we all be 
tnmed into Toris, Signor Oarr ? Not if it is to 
make ns love  white coats." 

**Por Sir Waltar!" sighed Lady Carrlycm, 
sentimentally. ^ Talking aboot Toryism and 
white coats pnts me in mind of meeting him, 
jnst BS he came from Eome. The last time I 
isaw Inm, pooor man, I asked him if he'd found 
much to interrat him : ' Not so miich as a pair 
of hia . tro!m&9 ' (he nsed a stronger expression 



232 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

ttan trowsers,) alluding to Charles Edward^ who 
was always in his Ihoughts! Beautifiil, wasn't 
it ? Such a Jacobite, Sir Walter I " 

"Was he not a great lover of the people?*^ 
asked Gilda. 

" Oh 1 he liked them in their proper place, 
not when they want to overthrow govemments, 
and all that sort of thing. I'm reallj sick to 
death of the name mysel Everything now is 
done for the people." 

** Not here^ said Gilda, venturing to raise her 
voice again. '^ Indeed, Lady Carrlyon, you have 
only to hear the horrible State ift which they 
found the prisons . ihe injustice ^ 

^* My dear/' interrupted her ladyship sharply, 
" you don't suppose that, accustomed to mix in 
political circles as I am, I don't know all the stufF 
that's talked? There isn*t a word of truth in iL 
Lord Finsbury, who was minister for such a 
long time at ^Florence, assured me it was impos 
sible for any thing to be more luxurious than the 
prisons, both at Rome and at Naples," 

" My brother," remarked the marchesa, " was 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 233 

confined in one of the former for thirteen years 
in consequence of a pasquinade he wrote when 
a boy of sixteen,  I do not think he found it 
luxnrious, milady. But we never could teil; 
for he was at last liberated by death I " 

*' Horrible ! " said Carr. ** Italians would not 
have been men^ if they had not risen to free them- 
selves from such a state of things. But teil me^ 
marchesa, how comes it that you have left the 
camp at this moment? '* 

^^I had the fever " (Italians use this generic 
term for every variety of disorder), *'and was 
obliged to be quiet My cousin, too, has been 
woundedj and is Coming here . where he will be 
better off than in the hospital . so soon as he 
can be moved; but the aunt^ you understand, 
could not nm'se him alone. Talking of hospitals^ 
by-the-by, poor dear Guido Lamberti, Madame 
Courteney^ is well again at last, and has retumed 
to his duty. I hope he will not try his strength 
too soon, for he gare us fine work, after you 
left! It seems that tliat very night he had a 
most exciting conyersation with, . you know whomf 



234 CASB OF CABBLYOK. 

madame^ . and I saj^pose jonr sn^icions were 
correct ; for iose in ihe ward w ho were neaiest 
to where Guido lay, report to having heard 
them in violoit discnssion! At all ereniSy it 
produced a retom c^ feyer, and he was yerj ill 
for two or three days. 

** What became of her? " asked Mrs. Gojortenej^ 
in a low voice. 

*^ Disappeared, and no one knew where ! Some 
say she has been seen in the vicinit j of the camp : 
bnt no one can positively saj what has become 
of her. I conld not exacj supply her place^ 
yo<a understand, bat I was with him as mnch 
as I conid be, and ooe of the good nnns nursed 
faim when I was not there. At all evesats, we 
indolged faim With no exciting conversations^ and 
80 his youth and a fine consiitati(i carried him 
tfarough." 

Gilda, who had been drinking in evecy word 
with her eyes and ears^ heayed unconsciously a 
long-drvwn sigh. !Her husband, withont appear- 
ing to watdi her^ had not lost one yariation of 
her ooimtenanoe. He knew not to whom the 



VILLA FOSSOHBBOKL 235 

marchesa's remarks referred ; but it was extremely 
gratifyiug to learn that there was some fair lady 
on terms of such extreme intimacj with bis former 
rival ; and that Gilda should know it. His thoughts 

t 

hver for an instant tomed in the direction of 
Sara Gisborne ; and he was indeed profoundly 
indiJBferent who- Guido's devoted nurse might be. 
It was enough his wife should know there was 
such a person. Lady Carrlyon, meantime, with 
all her perceptions quickened by the desire to 
convict her daughter-in-law of some'backsliding, 
glanced from one to the other^ and then at 
Mrs. Courteney, and thought, as she subsequently 
expressed it, " there was aomething.^ 

Finally, after fiirther gossip connected with the 
camp, which in no way concems us, and when 
the rapid twilight hadbeen succeeded by a glorious 
moon rising over the lake, the marchesa stepped 
into her portantinaf and, escorted by Carr, whose 
glowing cigar-end shone like a fire-fly among 
the trees, retraced her steps to the Villa Santi. 



236 CABB OF CABBLTON. 



CHAPTER X. . 

Ol 

A PEW momings after, his mother took the oppor- 
tunity of having what she called some "quiet 
conversation " with Carr, He seemed raher 
absent at first, but her ladyship bad a fine art 
for rouslng any dormant flesh and blood, by the 
goodly home-thrusts she dealt-^no matter where ; 
if about the heart^ so much the better. 

"Tm afraid your father's affairs are still in a 
sad 'mess^" i^e sald^ after awhile ; ^^ and I fear 
the property will come to you dreadfiJly em- 
barrassed^ Laury." 

** I hope it won't come to me at all, for a long 
time," said he, hastily. "But how is this? I 
thonght that my enabling him to seil the Clapton 
farm and woods, wonld have eased his mind, at 
all events, of some portlon of this brden. I have 



VILLA FOSSOMBEONL 237 

asked for no iucrease to my verj small allowance. 
How is it he is so heavily embarrassed? ** 

'^ Oh ! it's entirely that ruinous hunting and 

horse-racing^ and " 

** Why, my father never had racers." 
'*Ohl well; but he nsed to go to races^ and 
it's all the same thing ; for of course^ he betted. 
It's of no use pretending that he didn't. And 
it is quite absurd laying it npon my expenses. 
No woman of my rank ever went without so 
many things they really wanted. I had no ball 
last year. I wouldn't have Mario at my concert, 
but put up with some horrid new man, because 
he was cheaperl I'i;n sure I try and economize. 
And ihen^ as I teil him, he ought to be so 
obliged to me for not having had daughters ! . 
such an expense bringing them out, and then 
portloning theml Where would he have been 
now, I should like to know ? Talking about that, 
dear, it's very noble of you, and Uke yourself, 
living on your small allowance; and the one 
satisfactory point . ^to be frank . ^about your mar- 
riage is^ its rendering you indej^endent ; though. 



238 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

of ooQxse^ 70a migbt have had a much gieater 
fortune. B j-the^by, joa never told us exactiy 
tohat jon got with your wife." 

^^ Mj wife has a small fortune settled upcm b^^ 
and in tbe bandfl of trostees. I dcm't possess 
a &rtbmg of it." 

Ladj Carrljon dropped her crocbet ; and could 
bardly frame her &ce into prqper composure, 
after nearlj a minute bad elapsed^ ix> asLclaim . 

^'I noTor beard of sucb a tbing! Tonr own 
doingy I suppose ? YastI j generons and romantic, 
I'm sure^ my dear boy. Tben am I to nnder- 
stand tbat you aie livii^ npon ber bounty?^ 

Carr colonxed to tbe roots of bis bair. 

^'I preferred doing so, to living npon my 
ftber's, wben be would not acknowledge my- 
marriage'' 

Lady Carrlyon conghed. 

^' Is tbis to be ^ perpiuM, my dear ? " 

**Tbat depends on my father, and partly on 
my own cbanoe of getting a velibood for my* 
seit' 

Exactly. Thrt^sjnstit Nowdon^tyoaftiBk 



VTTJ.A POSSOMBRONI. 239 

yon'd better come to England and see what can 
be done for you there ? The duchess, you know, 
used to be very fbnd of you, and, of co^rse, the 
dnke cordd give you something good, if he ehoMe. 
But BS long as you remain here, you know, why 
nothing is to be done I '* 

** And how about Gilda? We are liying very 
economically here, as you perceiye. In fact, to 
be piain with you, I shouldn't be able to live 
in England in a way I should like, upon what 
we have," 

'^Well; let us see . ^perhaps you might leaye 
her here. Just for a lite time, you know, until 
you hear of something that would suit you ? '* 

^^Leave her? I rather think not If I waited 
as long as I have already doiie, I should be absent 
some years I Very few tlnngs, Fm afraid, do 
suit me: the fault of my education I sujqpose. 

No, no, motber; when my &ther can make me 

 

a suitable allowance, I'U come to England ; until 
then, ni paint pictures in Italy, and seil them, 
ifican.'' 

I Aope not, my dear Laury^ for your wifis's 



.i 



240 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

sake^ if for no other reson^ I hope notl She 
seems an amiable young person^ but ypu must 
allow she has not that toumure which is so 
requisite to a- woman of fashion. It isn't to be 
expected that she should^ of course, in her position ; 
and mixing in the best circles might do a great 
deal for her. Indeed, I've no doubt the duchess, 
out of kindness to you, would take her by the 
hand^ which would be everything, I need hardly 
sayl" 

"Still, if my wife remains in Italy, while I 
am dancing about town en garfon, I hardly see 
how she is to benefit by these advantages ? " 

'* Of course I mean ultimately^ when you are 
in ofSce; but as long as you remain here, you 
know, there is no chance of your getting any- 
thing. Out of sight, out of mind. By-the-by, 
do not think me indiscreet, dear, but I suppose 
the mother was a stipulation? a sort of neces* 
sary tax you pay on your wife's income, isn't 
she?" 

"Mrs. Oourteney came to us by my invita- 
tion, subsequent to my marriage; and slie now 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 241 

remains here^ contrary to her own urgent solicita- 
tion, at my express desire,'* 

" Oh ! " said his mother. ** Well, I dare say she 
is a good woman. No mannersy but ihat can't be 
expected rom a person who has never lived in 
good Society, you know . ^has brooght up her 
daughter strictly, I hope ? Strong religious prin- 
ciples ? You know I'was always particular about 
religious principles.'* 

*' Very particular,'* chimed in her son. 

^'And living abroad makes people so lax . so 
very lax ; as the Bishop of Tonbridge Wells was 
remarking to me the other day. 'If you once 
lower your Standard,' he said. I hope, my dear, 
you won't lower your Standard, eh ? " 

'* The Standard of liberty ? By no means." 

'' Nonsense. Don't pun on serious topics. I 
always brought you up on high-church principles, 
and I really was quite in hopes you would bave 
written something theological in the style of Lord 
Grampion's Joumey in a Rumble to Home; io 
interestingl his Interviews withthe priests, . ^always 
had the best of the axguments ; and it would have 

VOL. u. 16 



242 ^ CAES OF GABBLTON. 

done you eo mach good with our party, if y<m had 
done something like it Bat to retam to what I 
was going tx) say : I do s^ionsly hope these 
Comeneys are not going ix> make yoa a Catholic^ 
my dear Lauience ? " 

^ What on eaci should make you suppose so ? 

They are as Protestant " he was going to add 

<^ as you are," but stopped short . 

** Well, my love, they are evideny radicals ; 
and have made yoa so. at least, abont these homd 
ItaUans ; and when [inciples are once undermined 
one nev^ knows wbere it will stop. That reminds 
me to ask yon who this very intimate riend of 
tbeirs is whom Madame Onofrio was talking abont 
yesterday ? I never saw soch an agonized ce as, 
your wife had au the time tbe marchesa was 
talking aboot his illness. Of coorse he is a near 
relation?" 

Qarr tomed sharply to the window, and 
dnuamed the devil'a tattoo with his ngets on 
theshtttter. 

^^ He is an old fiiend . ^nothing more. Hallo I 
9iy lady, there's yonr predoos spaniel in troable. 



VILLA I'OSSOMBBONI. 243 

B^pine ! B^pme ! Bhe's got into the foMore^s jbiA, 
and all the ducks and tnrkeys are making an on- 
slaught npon her I *' 

Lady Carrljon flew out into the loggia^ with tbe 
air of a Nk>be^ callmg distractedly for her wretdied 
lite dog. B^ine, for her part^ wonld fidn have 
reached tiie haven of her mistress's arms^ bat hav* 
ing sorreptitionalj effected an entranoe into the 
farmyard ttuxnigh a gap in ie wall^ she fonnd^ as 
her bester have sometimes done in like circum* 
stances, tfaat she had forgott^i her way ont t The 
matemal solicitades of the ducks and tnrkeys 
being most tameoessarilj roused by tbe presence d 
this formidabie speoimen of the canine race^ they 
one and all^ with a cboms of qnacks and shiidcs 
and cackies, set npon tiie nnfortanate B^pine. In 
y ain the obese, asimatic litde creatore endeav onred 
to escape firam Jber pnrsmers: tmaocustomed fixr 
yeara to ie l^timate use of her legs in mnning, 
die made ihe most piteons effiurts to perform diis 
feat, which, ar from exciting the gmerous compasr 
sion of the loathered mob, only elicited what 
appearod to be Bhonts of derisiv e langhter. There 

16.2 



244 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

was a foremost old turkey, wlio gobbled and iu- 
flated her red tbroat^ like an inforiated dowager, 
and uttered a paralytic cry of exultation from 
time to time which was appalling to liear. She it 
was, apparently, who gave the tune to the rest, 
Flapping their wings, with outstretched throats, 
and wide open bills, the ferocious phalanx pressed 
hard on the poor little wretch, who with eyes 
starting out of her head, terrified and bewildered, 
finally plunged into the deep brown pond where 
the farm oxen stood, the water Streaming from 
their black muzzles, as they raised their heads in 
stony wonder, their eyes dilated on the luckless 
B^pine. This seted her fate. Carr sprang over 
the low fattoria wall almost at the same instant, but 
it was too late After a few ineffectual efforts to 
keep above water, the little black head and red 
helpless tongue sank like a stone, while the circle 
of blue and green ducks, with their orange bills 
glancing in the summer sun, dived and wagged 
their tails and quacked with diabolical deh'ght, and 
the oxen pawed and bellowed round them. - The 
poor little animal was probably choked by the 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 245 

imsavoury mad thus raised^ if fright and exhaus- 
tion had not alreadj done tlieir work. Before 
Carr and the farm-servants were able to rescae her 
life was extinct. 

No words can adequatelj describe the storm of 
Lady Carrlyon's passionate iears and wrathful 
execrations. It would have been touching had it 
not been comical to find the woman who prided 
herseif on her aristocratic impassabilitj giving 
way to this vehement, unbridled grief for the loss 
of her pet dog. She accused every one in tum of 
being the caose of this disaster. She declared to 
her son that she knew it was part of a plot to get 
rid of her. There was no measare to the foolish 
things she said and did, which her worldly cunning 
at anoiher moment would have reproved. Pos- 
sibly other causes of irritation now found vent in 
this Channel, and as Gilda and her mother pru- 
dently kept aloof fix)m the irate lady, the vials of 
her wrath were emptied on her son and her maid. 
Carr was glad it should be so : he was ashamed of 
his mother's splenetic foUy. Such outbursts he 
knew were rare. very rare indeed; and she 



246 



CABR OF GABBLYOK. 



alreadj cut a suffickntlj xmattractive figure^ he 
was well aware^ in hls wife's eyes. Sll^ the task. 
of throwing oil npon ihose troubled wat^rs required 
all his patience; and that ease-loylug man was not 
long-suffedng in this respect. 



VnXA FOSSOMBRONI. 247 



CHAPTER XI. 

 

I HAYE Said that other canses possibly occasioned 
tibe measure of Lad j Carrlyon's Irritation to brim 
over. The fact is, she was thoroughlj out of 
Immoar widi the resnlts of her Visit so far. She 
coold find no ground for hope in anyfiict con- 
nected with her son's marriage. She had been 
here nearlj a week, yet neither polished imperti- 
nence^ cajoleries, nor innnendoes had sncceeded in 
shaking the dome&tic fonndation; nor did the 
seeds of discord she scattered wiih so liberal a 
band seem likely to be productiYe in separating 
hnsband and wife. Yet to what eise could she 
lodc forward? tt was of coorse clear that her 
a(n had been entrapped into a marriage by low^ 
designing people. Eyen the idea that he deriyed 
any perscHial pecnniary adyantage by the trans- 



248 CARB OF CABBLYON. 

action was now swept away. If they were 
separated to-morrow, Carr would be no penny 
the richer tbrough bis wife^ while he woald carry 
this wretched millstone about bis neck^ incapaci- 
tatiiig bim from contracting any " advantageons " 
marriage. Was it not enougb to wring tbe beart- 
strings of a miserable^ world-corroded motber^ 
wbose ignoble ambitions were to receive tbeir 
crown and sceptre^ so to speak, in this only son? 
Truly tbe sorrows of tbe pure in beart are as 
notbing compared witb tbe disappointments of 
those wbose best afiections even bave tbe soil and 
taint of this world. 

Tbe attitude of Mrs. Courteney was especially 
aggravating. Lady Carrlyon could bave desired 
to bave bad firequent opportunities of showing 
tbat low person wbat sbe thought of her; but 
Ibe latter nndeviatingly beld to her course of 
fitrictretiremeni Witb simple, unobtrusive dignity 
sbe withdrew fix)m any direct intercourse witb 
Carr's motber; never appearing in -tbe sala, 
except wben obliged to do so, and tben taking 
no share in tbe conversation, but seated some- 



VILLA rOSSOMBBONL 249 

what apart^ busilj plying her knitting-needles. 
The shy but enthnsiastic temperament of her 
danghter-in-law oflFered Lady Carrlyon more fre- 
qnent opportnnitiea of woundmg and humiliating 
her; and when Carr was not present she ezercised 
these with some ingennity* 

It is surprising how far an utterly foolish and 
contemptible woman may succeed in tormenting a 
Tery noble one ; as the horse writhes under the 
sting of an insect. Gilda feit that it was the 
sting of an insect^ and yet she writhed. She 
began to hiive a fll appreciation of her mother- 
in-law's pettiness and vulgarity of mind: she 
could^ moreoyer, generally exercise a remarkable 
restraint over her own words, in conversation 
with Lady Carrlyon. But the wonnd often 
rankled^ though she might despise the band that 
dealt it. It was in vain to repeat to herseif what 
she knew to be th truth. Had she loved her 
hnsband with a different sort of lore, the poison 
might have been powprless : as it was^ there was 
no absorbing passion strong enongh to connteract 
its influence. The feeling which I have endea- 



250 CARR OF CARBLYON. 

Toured to indkate as growiog np more and more 
in her^ was just of that natore to he most acutely 
Bensitive to these stabs from her husband's matiier. 
When two bearts are all in all to each otber^ it 
is comparativelj of little moment ion^ ihe 
whole World be against thein. Anytbing short 
of s, on either side (and not manj are capable 
of a love 80 self-complete)^ d^nanda aympathy 
and belp^ fenuly ties, the enconragement of 
friendij voices^ and tbe binding love of cbildren. 
Wbether or not it should please Heaven to send 
Gilda tbat last and best blessing^ it seemed 
probable that the cdmfort of the oflters^ at least, 
wonld be denied her on her fiitore read. 

And in secret she often sighed and fahered 
over this ; thongh her whole obf ect was to oon- 
ceal firom Carr that she snffered ander bis 
mother's behavionr. He was scarcdy less anxions 
to shut bis eyes to the &dL He was sidSBcienilj 
uncomfortable as it was ; bis tranqnfity of mind 
disturbed ; all sotrts of nnwelcome thongbis^ 
doobtSy^ and dilemmas^ fiitting like ngly donds 
aihwart the serenitjr of bis snmmer sky. Most 



VnXA FOSSOMBBOm. 251 

of these weie untaBgible as the doods them- 
selves: to few of them, probablj^ wonld he have 

 

cnfessed, even in the locked doset of his own 
heart Asd yet they obscured the snnshine. 
He didn't caie what his mother said . ^mneh less 
what she thonght . ^why should %e? Had he 
ever caxed mnch? Had he not acted in the 
mattar of his marriage withont the most remote 
reference to her feeling or qpinion? Didn^ fae 
know beforehand all she wonld say on any given 
snbject? and hadn't he^from his youth npwarda, 
been protesting against all his mother's doctrines ? 
The weakness and inoonsistency of haman 
natnre is a stale theme. To take np one's parable 
and preach thereon mnst be a profitless taak 
when a man's own heart and the Hves of all 
aronnd him bear such abnndant witness to the 
same The one of whom we write was^no excep- 
tion to the mle. If we have sncceeded in gxving 
the reader any idea of Lanrence Garr, he will 
nnderstand ihat contradiddon and inconsistency 
were inherent in hinu It may somtd paradoxical 
to say that his actions were perpetnally at varianee 



252 CABE OF CARRLYON. 

with bis character ; bat it is no less trae. Tet out 
of ihese verj anomalies arose that iinitj which 
might make a shrewd observer predict wiih some 
certaintj when tbe active man wonld belie and 
oppose tbe passive one. More tban one sucb occa- 
sion we bave already noticed. And iiow^ in spite 
of bis strong attacbment to bis wife^ in spite of 
natural obstinacj and a just contempt for all bis 
motber's opinions (somewbat too openly expressed)^ 
tbis same silent and unacknowledged resolution 
was working in Carr. He grew accustomed to 
tbe idea of bimself as one wbo bad made a noble 
self-sacrifice. He didn't regret tbe fact ; but be 
didn't mind tbe world's acknowledging it, for of 
coorse it was a fact, tbougb it was one wbicb now 
for tbe first time be saw in tbis ligbt : bis natural 
generositj and cbivalrj of sentiment baying 
blinded bim bitberto. Wben Lady Carrlyon bad 
once accustomed bim to accept tbis position, sbe 
bad accomplisbed a great deal more tban sbe was 
aware of. He didn't tolerate ber insinuations, be 
didn't listen to ber remarks, a bit more ; bat be 
was content to be regarded as an unbeard-of 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 253 

paragon of devotion in '^ sacrificing all bis pro- 
spects " . as the phrase ran . ^npon the altar of love. 
Of course every little privation for the present, 
every di5culty or possible annojance &r the 
fhture^ was to be laid upon the same altar after 
this^ and contributed^ it is to be feared^ to the 
incense of self-laudation. 

But in some other respects it was yet more 
Singular how Lady Carrlyon's presence wronght 
a change in her son. He had no sympathy with 
her love of fashionable society : he was, never 

I 

tired of declaring this^ and often avowed that a 
London season afforded, to bis mind, the least 
satisfactory intercourse with one's fellow-creatares 
of any condition of humanity. Yet he was now 
nnaccountably seized with the desire that bis 
wife sbould take her place and shine in this 
very circle which he despised I Was it becanse 
Lady Carrlyon held her cheap? Could not Gilda 
afford this and any other amount of disparagement ? 
Lastly^ was so poor a trimnph worth the exchange 
to an existence of struggle^ and heartbnm^ and 
unrest ? 



254 CAKB OF CASBLTOK. 

There was jet anoiher point wliereon Carr was 
uncomfartable, and sAgrj with faimself {or feeling 
muMnnfortable, since his mother canie. He was 
upri^ and straightforward, with aU Ms foults; 
had a hoxror of crooked ways^ a disdain of saspicioiL 
Bat we Iiaye se^i tbat he cauld suspect, and that Im 
jelousy could make him cruelly nnjasL Oa 
these tender pices fiame of Lady. Carrljon's 
random shots took effect More especiay the 
one wjuch assamed tfaat Carr had been aooepted 
for his worldly Position rather liban fix>m prefer* 
enoe. ** Of course,*' her lady ship would say, ^ a 
girl of ihat Bort, fiving in Italy too> had scnne 
loye affidr before; bat natorally she was daszled 
by the idei of becoming yoor wife, my dear 
Laurence . the position, and all together, . so one 
mostn't be too hard upon her^ if she doea seem 
rather cokL" 

Now> iboogh Carr knew this dedncticm was 
otteily fSae, fhe premiss was trae. He corsed 
his own stapidity fifty times a day for recnrring 
to a 8U5pidou so ntterly onworthy of his parer 
hearted wife ; but still the words [rankled. And 



VILLA rOSSOMBBONL 255 

as thej were repeated in some form or otber 
wheneyer bis mother and he had zaj <x>ny^- 
satkm, there waa no chance of their possing away 
and being forgotten. "^hene^er Ghiido's name ' 
occurred in convenation . as it generally did 
the evenings the marchesa spent at the villa. *- 
Oarr's eye furtiTdiy watched Gilda^ while he 
framed a thousand theories as to her feelings : 
the next moment indignantly repudiating every 
unworthy suspicion of her^ and siriding out into 
the garden Avith knit brow and flushed cheek. 
This restless^ irritable state of mind was the 
growth of two Short weeks. . GQda perceived 
and attributed it to its right cause. It did not 
endear Lady Carrlyon to h^^ or render that 
lady's Ti^it more acceptable than it at first 
appeared* Since h^ dog's death she had been 
more tmbearably silly and impertmexrt than ever ; 
and now^ a fortnight aller h&c arrival, as the 
party sait at dinner, a greater contrast to the 
cheerful trio who met there a few momings 
before ooold hsuxUy be fbund. There had been 
a " row " in the Italian household : Lady Carr- 



256 CABR OF CASBLYON. 

Ijon's two servants glving diemselves such 
insolent airs in imitation of their mistress, ihat 
the Cook had been mo^ed to brandish a eoeo 
over Carl ihe courier's liead, and the black-eyod 
donna dt facenda, it was asserted, had fastened 
lipon Mrs. Timson^ and reft firom her a handfal 
of Sandy locks For ihese outrages the queen- 
mother had demanded summary justice .to be 
inflicted^ and great was her wrath when hier 9pn 
attempted to defend the delinquents, on tiie score 
of Italian temperament^ and the difference of 
" manners." 

'^ Manners I do you call it znanners to rush at 
people with kitchen-kniyes ? It's really horrible> 
Laurence I You have got so demoralized, liyiog 
among these -peeple^ I really believe you don!t 
think there's any hrm in it But I see what 
it is : of course^ if they were not my servan^s^ 
some notice would be taken^ . ^but your wife and 
her mother^ I suppose^ put them up to , and 
it is another covert insult to me, like my poor 
B^pine's death! Nothing shall induce me to 
believe that was accidenU^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 257 

They were in the loggia alone^ bat her lady- 
ship's angry voice was considerably raised. 

*'If you will talk in this way, mother, pray 
speak in a lower voice, for I should be sorry that 
Mrs. Courteney or Gilda should hear you. As 
to their being your servants: if they were not 
your servants, let me teil yoit that I should have 
tumed them out neck and crop long ago. These 
patrician ways don't suit Italians, who are ac- 
customed to be spoken civilly to.'* 
. 5^ Ob, of course! I understand. As little, I 
suppose, as my patrician ways suit your wife ? I 
take the hint, my dear, but we shall not remain 
here hng, to trouble them . only, as long as one 
 here, one would be glad to have one's servants 
treated decently. It would be a bore to have one's 
courier's throat cut, though manners are so 
different. I have gone through a great deal," 
contlnued her ladyship, with a sudden change to 
the larmoyant in her tone, " I have gone through 
a great deal, Laurence, in Coming to see you here, 
and I did not expect to be treated as I have been. 
I consented to receive the person you have 

VOL. IL 17 



258 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

chosen to marry^ wl^ich was of course a great 
sacricey and I wished to take her hj the band 
and form ker a little, if posible^ and I should 
have introdnced her into the best circles; fant I 
have been met with such ingraiitude, that all mj 
warm feelii^ are cnished . crtuhed! . and . and 
I See it's of no nse^ and that you are so fond of 
this low kind of society^ that it is impossible to 
raiae you, or make you wish for anything better 
now. Your old friends will scarcely heUeoe itl 
I dread to think of what the dnchess will say! 
Of course, my poor boy," added she, wh a 
chatte of tone, " it isn't your fault, you're under 
this fatal influence, 'Bat it shall be thoushalt 
lower to her level day by day,* as Lord Byron or 
somebody or other says ; so that now you can 
even see your mother insulted without resent- 
ingitl" 

'^You really talk in a way, mother, that is 
enough to provoke a more patient man than I 
^m. Who dreams of insulting you ? not Gilda 
She is constany trying to devise Bome scheme 
for your amusement. It was but last evening 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 259 

she stiggested having a party of the peasants up 
here^ on the lawn^ to dance the saahlla for you^ 
and ** 

" A refined entertainment ! '* 

'And she is always urging me npt to think , 
of her^ bat to devote myself more to you. If 
your servants giye themselres airs, my wife can't 
help that. So long as you can put up with onr 
ways here (they are rough, but you knew that 
when you came)^ Gilda and I will try and make 
you happy; but I never expected you would be 
able to stand an Italian life for long. Whi we 
come to England . ^I suppose we shall some day . 
I think you will perceive that my wife's manners 
are not quite what you seem to fancy^ and that 
withot any forming she will not disgrace the 
Station in which she is placed." 

Lady Carrlyon muttered something about liis 
being satisfied^ of courae, and tumed on her heel^ 
more completely out of humour . ^more thoroughly 
discouraged^ than she had yet been. She had 
played her highest cards^ and was beaten. There 
was a yery distinct hint in that closing speech 

17.3 



260 CARR OF CARULYON. 

of Carr's^ that unless her views underwent some 
modification^ the duration of her visit might with 
propriety be curtailed. Must she really return 
home, baflBed at e.very point? Must she submit 
to be beaten out of the field by this mere child, 
and her mother? Must she give up the hope of 
leadiug her son back to the path of ambition^ or 
at least of vanity^ and social success ? of separating 
him from this "low connection" in any way if 
possible? or^ last hope of all, of moulding her 
daughter-in-law to her own ways and wishes? 
It certainly appeared so. If she remained she 

 

must alter her tone ; she must stoop to dissemble, 
and really to these people in her present frame 
of mindl no, she couldn*t do this. There cer- 
tainly never was an unhappy mother more to be 
pitied; and she found her only consolation in 
the sympathizing breast of Mrs. Timson. Not 
that she actually foUowed that time-honoured 
custom of heroines in old comedies by which 
the tiring-woman becomes at once a confidant 
and a confederate. Lady Carrlyon said very 
little herseif; but her astute maid knew the 



VILLA FOSSOMBKONL 261 

signs of the times, and profited by them, and 
slie was rewarded after her kind. She had made 
the most of that quarrel in the momlng; and 
now when her feelings were still irritable^ in 
the aftemoon^ she diverged into another path^ 
where she had often before led her too willing 
mistress. 

'* It's uncountable to me, m' lady, how a party 
with any pretentions to gentility can demean their- 
selves so low as to make their own gownds. There's 
Mrs. Courteney makes every stitch she wears, 
a^ I'm informed. And to be sure the sleeves is 
ridiclously old fashioned . quite the year bfefore 
last . ^let alone the tight body, which if you re- 
member rights m' lady, went out three seasons 
ago. As to Mrs. Carr, really, m' lady, I'd teil 
Mr. Carr, if I was you, that she do disfigure 
'erseif hawful with them bahds so tight to her 
'ead, instead of the 'air a little fll. I suppose, 
m' lady, she's seen nothing different. They mostly 
'ere seem to 'ave a disgusting lot of 'air, which, 
as Pm informed, they plaster with tallow-candles 
to their 'eads." 



262 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

" Disgusting 1 " ejaculated her ladyship, with a 
shudder. 

** I'm sure I'd hofier wiUing, m* lady, as your 
ladyship's daughter-in-law, and I not above my 
sitivation, which is][only a servint, I'm well aware^ 
and no need to be] treated as I ^ave been by some 
people, to dress 'er 'air myself once ; but Fm 
afiraid^ m' lady, the hofier wouldn't be 'preciated.'* 

^^ Wouldn't be understood," responded her mis- 
tress, shaking her head. 

"I don't complain for myself," continued Mrs 
Timson, with an increase of spiteful humility, 
" of not bemg spoke to, and gave a bed as you 
wouldn't put an 'orse to sleep upon, and the 
insults untold as I've 'ad 'eaped on me, which 
ham but a servint I'm well aware, though ladies- 
maids 'as their rights ; leastways the dook always 
nodded 'is 'ead, or said, ' I 'ope your 'ealth's well, 
Mrs. Timson,' when he met me in the passage ; 
which I've never 'ad a word from the ladies 'ere, 
and I've no call to expect it, I suppose, though 
it is aggravoking, m' lady, to see Mrs. Carr's 
familiarity with them low Italians. I 'eard 'er 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 263 

call that fellow , Jewsippe, carro mioj which Mr. 
Finks Said he wonldn't think of calling mef and 
that it meant my dear ! I cotildn't 'ardly believe 
my hears^ I was that shockedl I wasn't sure I 
didn't ought to have fainted. It might have woke 
her to a sense, m' lady." 

Her misiress again shook her head gloomilj^ 
and sighed. She said nothing ; but Mrs. Timson 
knew that her words had not been nnacceptable, 

* 

and that that blue mantle she coveted (Finks 
Said that blne became her) would devolve on her 
Shoulders all ihe sooner in conseqnence. 

A party of fonr persons^ as I have said^ never 
sat down to a meal znore ill at ease than did 
the fafmily at the villa that day to their early 
dinner. Lady Carrlyon, wrapped in dignified 
abstraction^ played wiih the brdloques onher chain^ 
not deigning to open her lips. She had decided 
on no conrse of action as yet^ and in media tutis- 
dmus was her ladyship's motte when wavering 
between insolence and insinoerity. 

Gilda was silent and sad. She was not saper- 
stitioas^ but there was a weight at her heart 



264 CAliB OF CARHLYON. 

wliich might have been held to predict some 
vague calamity. Was it nly that household 
worry in the moming, and her increaslng dread 
of and averslon to her mother-in-law ? Carr, at 
least; was unusually tender and demonstrative to 
h^r since bis conversation witb bis motber. It 
seemed as tbough be were trying to compensate 
to bis wife for all the discomfort and annoyance 
to which she was daily exposed. He was terribly 
worried, for bis mother's visit was turning out 
even worse than be feared. He wished she would 
go qiiietly away, without making any more rows. 
He hated rows, and be resolved be would not 
pay attention to anything she said. Bnt even 
wbile bis manner was so magnificent and insou- 
ciant with bis motber, he was anything but at 
ease himself; and tbough be saw the wbole 
absurdity and injustice of her accusations as 
dearly as any one could, bis own line of conduct 
was by no means so plainly cbalked out as bis 
tone indicated. Could he really, if tbings came 
to their worst, tum bis own motber out of bis 
bouse ? Impossible. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 265 

Mrs. Courteney was the calmest of the party. 
She had brought her knitting to the table^ and 
laid it beside her ; bat the sitting there was little 
more than a matter of form: nearly every dish 
passed by her mitasted. There were long oppres- 
sive silences^ broken only by the sound of knife 
and fork. Carr made one or two forced attempts 
to be witty, bat they were feit to be failures. 
At last they drew their chairs into the loggia^ 
and cofiee was served. The post-bag at the 
same moment was brought in^ and laid upon the 
table. It contained but one letter, and that was 
for Lady Carrlyon. 



END OF VOL. II. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Her ladyship eyed it with elevated brows. The 
Cover was a blotted mass of directions and era- 
sures; and the final address had been written 
on the reverse side, close to the seal. She tumed 
it over two or three times, as though it might 
possibly contain some detonating powder, or subtle 
Medicean poison. 

"Very oddl A band I don't know . ^foUowed 
xne half over the world, apparently. Carrlyon 

TOL. in. 1 



2 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

and London^ and Wiesbaden; and as to the 

Italian postmarks " 

The sentence remained unfinished. She had 
tom open the cover^ and unfolded the large thin 
sheet of paper it contained. As her eyes feil 
on the first lines, she turned the letter hastily 
round to look for the signature. But apparently 
there was small satisfaction to be gained from 
this. Her brow was knit^ and her cheek fiushed 
through its rouge. The Contents of that letter 
were exci)bing, it was clear ; though whether painful 
or the reverse, it was difficult to decide. 

At a sign from her mother^ Gilda rose and 
followed her down into ihe garden below. They 
walked in silence nntil ihey reached the lower 
terrace^ nnder the shadow of the mulberry-trees. 

^' Mother/' said Gilda^ and her arm stole round 
the mother^s waist^ '^you look pale. What is 
the matter? Is it because thatodious woman is 
so rade to us ? I know we shall never be happy 
as long as she is here." 

*. Don't say that, darling ; ehe is Carr's mother 
remember. No: whatever happens, dear . wkatr- 



i ^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBKONI. 3 

ever happenSf you must try and kecp frieds with 
her . do you hear, Gilda? You must consider 
her as your mother, now. Never mind me, dear^ 
I am nervouB and foolish; and the sight of a 
letter . ^you know how foolish I always was about 
letters. It is nothing. I am quite welL** 

"She is 80 disagreeable," sighed Gilda, '^Do 
you think Laurence really likes her to be here ? ** 

*'It would be very nnnaturai if he didn't 
Remember that he has been accustomed &om his 
infency to those . peculiarities, which may strike 
US as disagreeable^ and he does not ee them, 
happily." 

** Tes, he does," said Gilda, almost in a whisper ; 
'^ he sees her manner to you, and to me too, and 
it annoys him; and she has said ihings against 
US, too : I know it. And that has made him so 
odd these last few days, mother; so very kind 
sometimes, and then " 

'^Hushl Do you remember what I told you? 
I am never to hear anything against Laurence. 
That is tho conditiqn of my remaining with you, 
Gda." 

1.2 



4 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

" Ah ! mother, what should I do without you ? " 
Said the young wife, as her head nestled on her 
mother's breast. 

Lady Carrlyon had reached ihe bottom of the 
fourth page, while her son smoked his cigarette 
with the imperturbability proper to that relaxation. 
His eyes were riveted on the landscape before 
him : the slopes of vine and olive buming under 
the mid-day sun : the silver sheet of water that 
made the eyes ache if they rested there for a 
moment: the folds of mountam in a blue heat- 
haze beyond. He looked at this, or appeared to 
be looking, for, in reality, he lost none of his 
mother's movements. The letter she read evi- 
dently strangely affected her; though, when she 
had finished and laid it down, it would have been 
difficult to say whether the expression on those 
nsually vapid features was that of wrathfiil or 
pleasorable agitation. 

'* What is the matter ? No bad news, I hope ? " 

'* Oh I it's only what I expected all along ! ** 
xclaimed Lady Carrlyon, in an hysterical voice. 
'' I was sure of it ; I said I remembered her face ; 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 5 

I knew there was something dreadful about her, 
and now you'll believe me another time. It's 
shameful ! it's scandalous, that such women should 

be allowed to. to YouVe been regularly 

caught . ^yes . caught by a low, designing creature 
. ^you wretched, silly boy: and all because you 
wouldn't listen to your mother! However, I 
should hope it wouldn't be diflScult to get you 
a divorce, if " 

**Are you gone ravmg mad?" cried Carr, 
starting up, and bringing his fist down upon the 
table, wlth a force that made the coffee-cups 
clatter. " What on earth are you talking about ? " 

" I'm talking about this letter, and you'd better 
read it," retorted his mother, mdignantly; **and 
then you'll be able to judge whther I'm mad . 
Fm sure it's enough to make one so." 

He snatched the letter with a trembling band, 
and read as foUows : . 

" Madam, 

" The writer of these lines is unknown to 
you. In the communication he is about to make 



6 GABB OF CABRLYON. 

he is solely prompted by his interest and pity for 
your S0115 and, he may add> by a sincere desire to 
avert ihe heavy calamity he seea impending over 
a noble family That the circumstance of your 
son's maxriage cansed you much grief and surprise 
is no secret to the writer. How greatly would the 
anxiety of a mother's heart have been augmented 
had the real name and Position of the family to 
which your son had allied himself been known 
to yottl But that kniowledge was cautiously 
concealed, even from your son, whose high sense 
of honour would naturally have shrunk firom 
stalning the spotless purity of an anclent name 
by such an alliance* It now becomes a painful 
but necessary duty to open your eyes as to these 
facts. 

'^ The name of Henry Dunstanley is probably 
not wholly unknown to you, madam. Though 
more than twenty years have elapsed suice that 
brilliant and success&l man was the idol of those 
salons which you still adom, you will not have 
forgotten him complet^ly. His notorious successes 
with the fair sex rendered him, more than any- 



Villa fossombbonl 7 

thing eise, perhaps, the inost fashionable man f 
bid day. The circumstance wluch brouglit this 
career of triumph abruptly to a close will not 
haye escaped yoti, thongh many a page has been 
added to the chronicles of fashionable Y?ce since 
then. The elopement of Lady Mary Oaliston, 
and her yonng husband's deafh in the dnel he 
fought with Mr. Dundtanley, made much noise at 
the time. Caliston was bis wife's first coosin, and 
the same age as herseif . endowed with remarkable 
beauty, judging from a portrait which the writer 
of these lines has seen Yet these attractions did 
not preserve bis wife's affections (if, indeed, they 
ever were her husband^s, and not made the mask 
for a mercenary marriage), nor conld they secure 
her fideliiy against the seductions of a man many 
years older than herseif, corrapt in heart and mind, 
and who had only shory before deserted ihe 
woman who $hould hare been bis wife. 

** The execration which followed this murder-^ 
for it was nothing less, . ^the cool, accomplished 
duellist pitted against an inexperienced yonth, 
frenzied with the remembrance of bis wrongs. * 



8 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

the universal execration not less than the law 
obliged the wretched partners in crime to fly the 
country, and to change their name. Thence- 
forward, the ambitious career of Henry Dunstaley 
was at an end. The politician and man of letters 
was heard of no more : and his brilliant con- 
versation was qnoted as a thing of the pasi In 
obscure parts of France and Italy it was under- 
stood that a miserable man^ broken down in 
Constitution, was dwelling in the dosest seclusion, 
feeling that the brand of Cain was upon him, and 
shunning his countrymen, whenever any rare 
chance brought them in his way. A few months 
only after this man's marriage, a child was bom 
to him. The fruit of that adulterom connection is 
your 8071*8 ipife. 

** You will no doubt find in this fact a suflS- 
cient reason for the indecent haste with which the 
future Lady Carrlyon's marriage was concluded. 
Bnt there was another motive to which the writer 
of these lines would direct your particular atten- 
tion. The young lady was in love with another 
man, to whom it was impossible she should be 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 9 

united. As danger might have ensued &om the 
continuance of such an intimacjj it was doubly 
necessary to dispose of her at once. Now, madam^ 
in pointing out to you that the child of Lady 
Mary Dunstanley has married your son, without 
entertaining the smallest particle of afiection for 
him, but ^as urged thereto by her parents^ while 
her heart secretly was given to another^ you will 
perceive there is some ground for alarm ihat her 
future conduct may emulate her notorious mamma's 
somewhat too closely. Like her, she has married 
the most attractive of men from unworthy motives: 
like her, she is still under the influence of anoiher 
and fatal fasdnation. In support of this assertion 
it may be stated that. she lately induced her 
unsuspecting husband to go to Peschiera, in order 
that she might visit her lover in the hospital 
there I 

"Your son has been duped, madam, and the 
family name disgraced. You would not wish its 
honour to be yet farther tamished by any open 
scandal. To avert such a calamity you must 
persuade your son to withdraw his wife from the 



10 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

&tal associations by which she is surroimded. 
Take her to England . awaj from her misgaided 
mother . away^ too^ rom the dangerous prozimity 
of one who fihall be nameless. The bradng air 
there maj strengthen principles ahread j weakened 
by the soft seductive climate of Italy. 

" May your daughter-in-law be spared, madam^ 
to become the mother of a legimate heir to the 
House of Carrlyon, is the hope of 

'* Your ladyship's most obedient 

"NKNOWN FbIEJD.'* 

Carr was pale as a sheet. He said nothing 
for some moments^ bat crushed the letter in his 
band and flung it on the table. 

'' Tou don't suppose/' he said^ in a hoarse 
voice^ at last, " that I am so degraded as to 
listen to the accusations of an anonymous corre- 
spondent. Of all the mean, cowardly . ^^ 

** That's all very well," replied the lady, tary, 
*' bnt I have my own reasons for believing them ; 
and as the truth of the story is very easily 
proved by questioning this . ^this woman (what- 



VILLA lOSSOMBBONI. 11 

ever you please to call her), if you don't clioose 
to do it, I shall." 

"I insist^ mother, on your doing nothing of 
ihe Bort. Mrs. Courteney shall not be insulted 
whilst she is in my house.'' 

He stopped short^ and turned away What 
if it were true ? In that one moment numberless 
circuxnstances ca.e crowding on l mind, which 
miglit seem to corroborate this horrible story. 
The blood tingled through all bis veins at the 
bumiliating thought that bis mother's words n^ight 
in some sort be confirmed If there were any 
fonndation for this, then indeed had he been 
dealt with most nnworthily. 

He Said after a pause-. 

** I will speak to her myself. As yoti are so 
prejudiced, it is but fair that Mrs. Courteney 
should have an opportunity of Clearing away these 
suspicions . of replying to these slanders^ for such 
I believe them to be. You shall be amply 
satisfied^ moreover^ that what this anonymous 
letter informs you of my wife is false." His 
voice quivered, but he went on : "I say it 



12 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

IS faUe, and if I were not sure it was so, I 
would " 

" What would you do ? '' 

" No matter. We will leave the subject of my 
wife, if you please. That is a point that only 
concems herseif and me. Promise me not to 
breathe a word of this to her or to her mother 
before I speak to Mrs. Courteney." 

** Well, you always were romantie I If there 
is any truth in the story, I should have said 
it would bring your wife to a proper sense of 
her Position letting her know it, and prove a 
waming to her . ^but it's as you like. only I 
know what your interview with that woman will be. 
She'll get round you, and manage to make you 
believe her innocent, which you're quite inclined 
to do, if it was only to prove that Pm wrong." 

"You shall be present,'* said Carr, after a 
pause. "You shall hear her denial frpm her 
own lips, provided you will promise to take no 
part in the interview. And whatever be the 
result, remember, I will have Gilda remain in 
ignorance of this painful subject '^ 



VILLA rOSSOMBRONL 13 

Fortune favoured his design; for Mrs. Cour- 
tenej ascended the steps of the loggia at the 
same moment^ and alone. Gilda's white dress 
was discemible^ seated in the shadow pf the 
mulberry-trees. The moment was not to be lost, 
Carr took his mother-in-law's band, as she was 
turning silentlj, and without raising her eyes, 
towards her own room, and led her into the aalotto, 
to the right. 

Lady Carrlyon followed. 

"I have only a word to say . a question to 
ask, nothing more," and he laid the letter open 
on the table before her. 

Her face contracted with a sharp sudden spasm, 
and the thin band trembled violently on the 
chair where it leant for support ^ 

"Do you know this handwriting ? " he con- 
tinued, in a gentle voice, " and if so, have you 
any secret enemy ? " 

She pressed her band to her heart : her white 
lips moved, but no sound came ; she oscillated 
to and fro for a moment, and feil back upon the 
floor, insensible. 



14 CABB OF CARRLTON. 

Carr ran forwardj and took her up in his arms. 
He was horrified at what he had done. He 
thonght she was dead. 

*^CaIl one of the Italian women/' said his 
mother, quietly. " She has only fainted." 

Her ladjship did not attempt to ofFer any 
assistance herseif, but as Marietta ran in, she 
continued,. 

"Teil her to cut her mistress's laces. She 
must be dreadfully tight with that waist. Well, 
Laurence, this is a very convenient way of 
answering any awkward questions; but I trust 
you will not be weak enough ^ 

She stopped at an impatient sign from her 
son. The unhappy lady slowly opened her eyes 
under the efFect of the restoratives administered 
to her, and was half led, half carried by 
Carr to her own room. Before he left her, 
she had contrived faintly to whisper a message 
to her danghter, which ho delivered at 
once. Her mother was not quite well, but 
desired to be left alone and undisturbed for some 
hours. 



VILUL FOSSOMBRONL 15 

** Your eyes must be open, my poor boy," 
exclaimed Lady Carrylon, when she met her 
son retuming, with a gloomy air, to the house. 
'^Your eyes must be opened by that wretched 
woman's manner and of course I needn't teil 
you that the very first thing to be done is to 
separate her from your wife at once. Of course 
shell trump up some story now she's prepared 
for it 5 but you understand, Carr, that I shan't 
believe it; and if you let her renudn here, you 
must choose between her and your own mother^ 
as I couldn't possibly compromise mysdf by 
remaining in the house with her.** 

There was a bittemess in Carr's heart at 
finding himself deceived-at finding the woman 
he had implicidy trusted and regarded as a 
model of matronly virtue no better than the 
rest of her sex . ^which held him silent. He 
could find no words wherewith to answer bis 
mother. He had been deceiyed ; there could be 
00 doubt about it^ and bis wife-<-f^no5 he would 
not think of that. He would not admit the yery 
funtest suspicion of her, and yet^ like some 



16 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

hateM insect^ it bazzed round^ asking for 
admittance. 

He tumed his head away^ and leant against a 
column of the loggia. His mother, delighted at 
this sllent testimony to her triumphant argu- 
ments, proceeded, with a show of magnanimity . 

^*Bad as it is, however, my dear boy, and 
mach as I feel for you, we must remember it 
miglit have been worse. She's got blood. I 
remember all about her now. Lady Mary 
Caliston . daughter of Lord Grandon's . title 
didn't go out of the direct line, and became 
extinct on the death of her father, forty years 
ago . married her cousin, Mr. Caliston. IVe been 
trying to think where it was I saw her a few 
nights before she ran away. I never knew her, 
but she went everywhere, and the thing made 
a grcat noise at the time. Of course she's a 
shockingly immoral person, and I hope Tm too 
highly prlncipled to countenance her for a 
moment . quite out of tlie pale . still, you know, 
it's a grcat thing that she's got blood*" 

*' She has enoogh of it on her unhappy head. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 17 

if this be true," replied her son, with something 
between sigh and sarcasm. 

Two or three hours later a message came to 
Carr to say Mrs. Courteney wished to see him. 
He found her sitting before her open desk ; 
that desk which was the remote cause of so 
much misery 1 Opposite her hung the Madonna 
and Infant Christ, towards whom the wom, tearless 
eyes were tamed from time to time; but she 
was calm, and showed little traces of the emotion 
which had so lately overpowered her, save in her 
extreme paleness. 

The course of tonics and bitters which Carr 
had been undergoing from his mother in the 
Interim, had produced, as usual with hiiA, an 
entirely opposite effect. He was a weak man, 
if you will, but time generally altered his views, 
and after the first wrath had passed away his 
kind heart softened towards the unhappy lady; 
all the more from. his mother's heartless and 
vulgr diatribes. His Indignation was directed 
solely against the memory of the deceased man. 
As he entered his mother-in-Iaw's room^ Carr 

VOL. nL 2 



'/ 



18 CARB OF CARRLXON. 

went np at once and took her band with jnore 
than bis usual kindness of mamier. 

She did not look np, bnt sileny retomed its 
pressura 

"Will you let nie see tbe letter, Lanrence? 
You need not be afraid of my fainting now. 
Tbe wTst diat oould bappen to me is over, and 
I loiew, ab! yes, I knew tbat it must come 
sooner or later." 

He laid tbe letter -before ber, and tumed to 
tbe window. He watcbed one particular fly, a 
belpless creature struggling in a web wbicb a 
Spider bad cunningly suspended across tbe pane. 
"It is a futile leffort poor tbingl" be said to 
bimsdf ; ^^ tfaere is no extricating yourself^ on 
toming back, no redemption possible from tbat 
Yoracious :j^der's maw, unless I breid^ yonr 
web?" and as be passed bis band across be 
silver tbreads tbere was probably more in bis 
mind ian tbe libaintion of a fly. 

He beard bcsr sigb beavily, and tomed round. 
Slie bad tinisbed tbe letteTy and sat kaning ber 
head lipon her band. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKI. 19 



4( 



Who is your secret enem j ? " he asked. 

God forgive lierl an imliappj woman. She 
has iU-requited me^ bat let that pass. I do aott 
judge her . ^who am I that I should jndge any 
one? So fiir as wfaat conoemB me she has 
but told you what / would have told you long 
and long ago, if I mi^ht. Bot oh^ my poor 
child. my Gilda Ae has cruelly wroi^ed I Be- 
lieve me as if I w^:e on my death-bed, Laurenoe, 
all that this letter contains about your yf\k is 
fahe . ottedy fahe. She at least had bo con- 
cealments from you. Before she consented to 
marry yon she told you all. Let no 'one ev^ 
indace you to believe otherwise. She knows 
nothing . ^may she never know it, Lanrence. of 
the fearfol pasL She told yon her ^wn past, the 
dieam of her eariy girlhood^ and she told yon 
the tmth when she said it wob past sikI for erer. 
Gan any one who looks at her doubt her pnre and 
goiltleBs :Batare ? The day you do so^ Lanr^ice, 
ycm wi me it . ^yes I nie it all yoor life.'' 

She stopped to gather breath ; then continned^ 
after a pause, in a tone ofmefiable sadness: 

2.1 



20 CARR OF CARRLYO^r. 

 

" It is this bows me to the dust, that my 
poor innocent child should still be reaping the 
fruits of my sin ! God knows that sin is ever 
before me^ as David says. It has pnrsued me 
relentlessly these twenty years'; I might fly the 
World and change my name, but there it was, 
in my own home, gnawing at my vitqls . a living 
remorse in him, a growing disgrace in her, my 
child, until . until I have been tempted to think 
there was no forgiveness of sins, as he, alas I 
my husband, believed. I confounded the world's 
Code with God's in those days, but I know now,** 
she added, looking up at the picture of the 
infant Christ, " that however long'J and justly 
I may suffer here, there is One above who 
forgave a sinful woman like myself when He was 
upon earth, and who will not utterly banish 
me from His presence hereafter. It is oiily for 
my child . my poor child, God forgive me I 
that my heart rebels. It is the old Mosaic law, 
not the Christian, this visiting the father's sins 
upon the children 1 Courteney feit iti he knew 
the world's code too well, and therefore it was 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 21 

he acted on that fatal error that in order to secure 
our child's &tare it was essential to conceal 
the past I Alas I alas I Laurence^ how ofteu have 
I knelt down and besonght him to teil you all. 
No man, he said, would knowingly marry the 
daughter of Henry Dunstanley and Mary Caliston." 

" And do you believe that if he had told me 
all I shonld have retracted? The only thing I 
can't get over is the deception. It was giving 
my people a right to say I had been taken in. 
The Word is a hard one, Mrs. Courteney, but 
had I taken the step with my eyes open, as I 
most assuredly should have done, the world could 
never have dared lift a finger. Yoiir husband 
did a great wrong to me and to Gilda at the 
same time> when he deprived me of the power of 
proving ihat my love was strenger . ^far strenger 
than the world's prejudice^" 

^' I know it, Laurence ; and I have feit your re- 
proaches daily . hourly . all these months while 
they were yet uneoneeived by you, Do you 
remember a promise he extracted from you? I 
attached but lite value to the words myself. He 



22 CAB& OE CABBLTOK. 

maintained, however, that jou could not complain 
of having been deceived^ should you eTer leam 
the truth after making that pn^uae. 

" It is true ; I perfectly recall it," replied Carr, 
with more bittemess than he hid yet displayed; 
''and I cannot bnt admire the astuteness wbich 
dictated it at such a momenL It woold have 
been still more refined cunningy howeYer, to have 
made me a partner in the plot, so to speak* The 
dbcovery has come so snddenly^ that I conld not 
even pretend to be weU informed on the sabject 
beforehand. Pardon me, I do not bhime you, 
Mrs. Conrteney; there^are snbjects npcoi which 
it is hard for any woman to speaJk." 

''He made me twear I woold not Need I 
teil jon, Laorence, that he alwaya did with me 
as he liked? That fior years and years my saise 
of right too often gave way to him? His word 
was law ; he nerer changed I seldom y^itored 
to argue a point with him; yet on thia one I 
never ceased to do sa It was all to no effect. 
He Said our secret omcemed no one bot onr- 
aelves; we were not called iqpon to doad our 



*j^' 
i 



VILLA FOSSOMBRQNL 23 

child's fiitare. Alas ! I knew what such aurgu* 
ments were worth ; bnt he was ill . dymg', as he 
knew himself, and as I tried not to see. and oh, 
Laurence^ these discussions irrttated him against 
me, and aggravated his own suffering; and I bad 
not the . the coorage to speak> whea I thenght 
what the cxKDseqaences might be to hun.'' . 

*^I repeat, Mrs. Courteney, I do not blame 
yon. It was rery natural, and I am as anxious 
as you can be that Gilda shuld be kept in 
igoorance of all this. I have made my mother 
promise not to alinde to the sabject> and mj care 
shall be to keep it from her." 

A mom^xtanr shiver ran through Mrs, Conr- 
teney's frame. 

*'Thanka for that. It wonld indeed be cruel 
to do otherwise, for the blow wonld be a heavy 
one to her> who has lived hidierto believing her 
mother to be spotlessl Let her believe it still, 
dear Laurence, when I am gone. It is bitter to 
think of one's child despising one . and I shall 
depart almost happy if I know that she cherishes 
my memory nnaltered. 



?4 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

Carr feit sorely perplexed. She meant to leave 
them^ and his heart prompted bis urging her to 
stay. On the other hand^ could he tum his 
mother out of doors, for so it would virtually be 
doing? For her to remam, with the knowledge 
she p(X3sessed^ even if she consented to do so^ 
would be to expose bis "wife and her mother to in- 
tolerable insolence^ while she might, and no doubt 
would^ cause endless mischlef with his father if, 
she departed now in wratL 

*^ Why should you leave us ? " he said at last, 

bruptly. " / don't want you to go ; my mother 

will be retuming very soon to England, and " 

*^ Stop, dear Laurence, do not say anything 
more, I thank you sincerely, but my mind is 
quite made up; I ought not to have come here 
at all, still less should I have remained here 
with Lady Carrlyon, It was weak, foolish, sel- 
fish. I ought to have remembered his injunctions, 
so often repeated, never to darken my child's 
path after she was married. Her future in 
your family depends on our being separated. 
Your mother does not love Gilda now: in time 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 25 

she cannot help doing so, It is mach better for 
my child's ultimate welfare that Lady Carrlyon 
should be here; I would not have it otherwise: 
bat my place is distinctly not liere^ and I must 
go . ^go, at once while I have courage and strength 
to tear myself firoin my child.'' 

** But where are you going ? " said he, help- 
lessly, *' and what pretext do j-ou mean to give 
for your sudden departure ? " 

** I can teil Gilda some part of the truth," she 
replied, with a slight flush. ** Your ijaother's pre- 
sence here renders mine undesirable." 

Carr walked to the window and' looked out. 

"We shall miss you very much; your pre- 
sence has been often of great Service : never a 
nuisance and a bore. But I suppose you are 
right, and that for the present we must let you 
go, Gilda will lose a wise mother's advice, and 
my mother can't supply that, as you know. Gilda 
will tave a diflBcult part to play. My mother's 
prejudices are streng . they will be strenger now : 
there's no concealing it. I have had moments of 
jealousy, I shall have them again, Mrs. Courteney; 



26 CABB OF CARKLYON. 

bat I swear to ycm that I trnst yonr daughter; 
that I love her more than when I married, and 
that I will neyer allow a word t& he breathed 
against her rom . ^&oni what is past I think," 
he added naively^ ^ tiiat she loyes me better than 
when we inarried ? Don't yon ? " 

**She does; and it rests with you, Lanrence^ 
to raise and strengthen that bond, or to lower it 
into one of duty only. (jod act by you, as yon 
treat her! Remember that cold suspicion is f^r 
worse to a sensitive natnre than actnal unkind- 
ness; and withont confidence^ no trne love can 
exist." 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 27 



CHAPTER Xin. 

Heb arrangements were already made, A dili- 
genza which pasaed ai the foot of the hlll in xe 
early moming would take her to Peschiera . 
thence she wonld get to Yenice. One jdace was 
mupli like another to the forlom woman. The 
dlitj- of access, and the circomstance of the 
siesge, dedded her. She would find pleniy of 
wock ibr her hands there^ and little leisure to tat 
down and ihink. This pari of her taj^ was easily 
accompliahed : a harder portion of it yet remained 
behind. 

The swift Italian twilight was closing round 
when she sent for her daughter. It was far^ far 
into the night when thej parted. Frostrate on 
her knees hefoire her mother^ at one moment 
imjJoring her^ with passismate yehanence, not to 



28 CAER OF CAERLYON, 

abandon her; the next^ more calm and self-con- 
tained^ trying to arm the young haart to face its 
future bravely, Gilda passed hour after hour of 
the Summer night Unexpressed, the thought lay 
cold and heavy as a stone at the heart of both 
mbther and child^ that those golden moments^ so 
swiftly winged, might be the last they should 
ever spend on earth together. 

"Mother," whispered Gilda, after a pause, in 
a low fluttering voice, "if . ^if. I should have 
a child, will you not promise to come to me in my 
hour of trouble ? " 

The poor mother's heart was wrung with 
anguish, and it was only after a violent effort that 
she was able to reply : *' I cannot promise, darling, 
for God may will it otherwise, If He should 
permit me to retum to you, then I will do so, but 
circumstances may prevent it. This is no longer 
my place, as I have told you, dear child, and 
I must never dispute it; but you know that 
my spirit will be constantly with you, and this no 
oqe can prevent. You will write to me often and 
fully, about all that most closely concerns you, . 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 29 

except your hnsband. What passes between you 
and hiin shonld be close locked away : and, unless 
in some dire necessity, I implore you to make no 
confidences on this subject to any one^ All your 
other difficulties or sorrows . and there must be 
some in every human life . ^you shall pour out 
to me : but upon any connected with Laurence, 
say nothing, dear. The habit of repeating, still 
more of setting down on paper the feelings of the 
moment, often raises into importance circum- 
stances which would otherwise die out of the 
memory completely. Regard it as a matter of 
hnour to keep his short-comings hid firom every 
eye. It will make you a happier woman, and 
it will draw you closer to your husband every 
year, Let nothing come between you two, neither 
father, nor mother, nor friend. And as to me, 
my darling, I shall be happy in the reflection of 
your happiness, and if I should not be near you in 
the body, yet surely we shall in spirit be even 
closer to each other than if I were here, and that 
a shadow grew up between us: not from your 
loving me less, but because you would see your 



30 CABB OF GABBLYO^. 

husband by d^rees estranged bam bis own firaiy^ 
and " 

*' Yes ! " intarmpted Gilda, throngh her tears. 
^* It is all that horrid woman . I know it  is of 
.no use telDg xne, dear motber, to trj and love 
her, I canl I never shalL And as to her 
snpplying jcmi place, it's dreadftd, motber, to 
talk of snch a tbing. I dart believe tbat Lanrence 
himself wishes her to be bere. and I c2o^belieye 
tbat he bonours and reveres and loves you ^ 

**No, no," aid Mrs. Courteney, ^dtb a tremn- 
louB voice. " Not so, my cbild ; Lanrence is Tcry 
good to me, Tery good and kind and indnlgent, 
bnt be has no reason to tbink thus of me. He is 
not my own son, remember: and thongh be nrges 
me now to srtay, he ees the wisdom of my going, 
and he will feel it more and more when I am 
gooe." 

Thene was a long panse. Oilda slowly dried 
her eyes, and lay with her bead in her motber's 
hands, like a litde chd. 

^ I feel grown so old,^ she said at last, ^ so old, 
Jon can't teil, motber, witbin tbese few montbs 



VILLA rOSSOMBBOKL 31 

past It seems years and years ago since I was 

. # 

gay and light-Jiprted. I cannot teil why, bot 
I find DO longer the same keen pleasure I used in 
everything. It makes me so weary now to look 
forward to a long life . ^nnlcss I may have a child,'' 
she added, in a low voice, " Without you to talk 
to, to nestle my head in your bosom, I shall grow 
morose and crabbed, I believe. When I am with 
Lady Carrlyon, do yon know, moiher, I feel so 
inclined to contradict everything she says. It 
is very wrong, hat I can't hdp it; I know we 
shall never agree. Her yery langh irritates me." 

** You will never forget that die is your bus- 
band's mother, Gilda." 

^ Laurence is very kind . kind and indu^ent, 
moier," continued ie yonng wife, miisingly, 
'' bat ^ 

^ Remember the lesson I have just been reading, 
my darling," said Mrs. Courteney, gently, " wb^i 
your oW mother is jbo langer by to prose to you." 

^ I ball forget nothing you say, mother; and I 
shaQ try aad do my duiy faithfuUy. But . ^ she 
hesitated a moment, ^'I don't think Laurence 



32 CAER OF CAKRLYON. 

understands me, I doubt whether I am capable 
of ever making him very hapgy. I don't say 
this is bis fault* No doubt it is mine. But when 
you spoke just now of . of married life, I couldn't 
belp tbinking how difficult it was^ dear mother^ 
and bow diflPerent from. from.wbat. I 'once 

fancied it " 

" Stop I my darling. DiflBcult it is for all of us, 
tbis life ; but recurring to any dreams of tbe past is 
worse tban useless. For God's sake, don't fall into 
tbat dangerous babit, Don't expect tbis life to 
be a patb of roses : ratber tread cautiously^ as one 
wbo knows tbat tboms beset bim on every side. 
You bave married an uprigbt man wbo, I believe, 
is firmly attacbed to you. He bas bis faults . 
bis weaknesses . ^we all bave. Make it your 
study to subdue and soften tbem, if possible. 
Don't trust your Impulses . ^good and generous 
thougb tbey generally are . for tbere are some 
natures tbat resent impulse. In sbort, my 
darling," added tbe motber, with a sad little 
smile, as sbe tenderly kissed ber daugbter's fore- 
bead, ''all my advice may be summed up in 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 33 

bidding you grow old, as you say you feel your- 
self dolng. old, and sedate, and prudent, for 
you have still the lingerings of the child about 
you." 

The young vfife shook her head. There was 
something her mother did not or would not see, 
but she Said no more. Why embitter those last 
hours they were to pass together with fuier 
sorrow and anxiety ? 

The first streak of dawn was in the east, and 
the dark blue of the sky had grown many shades 
paler ere the mother could persuade her daughter 
to tear herseif from her arms, She was to be up 
in the morning to see her mother off of course, 
but this was the last time they would probably be 
alone and undisturbed. It was a sad hour^ though 
few words were spok^n, for the hearts of both 
women were fll; but as they wrenched them- 
selyes asunder from that last embrace^ it was 
almost with the quivering tendemess of the flesh 
when parted by the surgeon's knife. 

And it was the last: for Mrs. Courteney^ in 
Order to spare her daughter a repetition of that 

VOL. m. 3 



34 CABB OX CABBXYON. 

scene^ antedated her departure a couple of hoars ; 
and when Gilda retnmed to her mother's room 
at ihe appointed howc, there was nothing left but 
a few shreds of paper, and a black riband from 
hi^r mother's dress. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOm. S5 



CHAPTER XrV. 

.Ol 

I HA.VB Seen portions of Lady Carrlyon's corre- 
spondence written and received doring the next few 
days. It is unnecessary to reprodaceher letters here, 
hongh be tone of exnltation^ and the nndisgoised 
hope that she has succeeded in the first 8tep towards 
freeing her son^ are emineny characteristic of 
the woman. On the other hand the accoants of 
her lord's health alarmed her. Not that she bad 
apy sudden fit of tendemess or remorse on her 
hnsband's aeconni She did not hurry her 
departure or express the smallest uneasiness at 
being away firom bim. And yet she was uneasy. 
If he died at this ii>pportane jnnctore, it would 
disarrange a\l her plans. Carr would take 
poftseision of bis property^ and bis wife . ^Lady 
Carrlyon . ^would be at once received as sucb 

3.2 



36 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

Over and above the annoyance of becoming 
** dowager," was the aggravation of being deposed 
by such a successor. Her ladyship shed some 
honest tears on the subject ; which enabled 
Mrs. Timson to state that It was beautiful how 
m' lady took on, when she was alone, about 
m' lord's ilhiess. And as no one was in a posi- 
tion to contradict this, it went to swell the 
number of fahles out of which history is com- 
piled, 

There is a Latin proverb to the eflfect that 
our reputation is in the hands of our servants . 
omnisfama a domesticis emanat . which is not as 
incompatible as it may appear at first with the 
modern one . that no man is a hero to his valet-de- 
chambre. For though our valets-de-chambre 
know US to be no heroes, it is clearly their interest 
to make us appear such in the eyes of the world. 
They derive a borrowed lustre from our fame^. 
Thus Mrs, Timson, who knew her mistress far 
better than, I am thankful to say, we shall any 
of US ever do, was never weary of proclaiming 
that her ladyship was the greatest, the most 



VILLA FOSSOMBKONL 37 

generous^ the most amiable^ and laost ill-used of 
England' noblewomen. 

Lady Carrlyon's manner towards her daughter- 
in-law was singularly gracious during this period. 
She paraded her condescension somewhat osten- 
tatiously before Carr, it is true, but even in 
private she restrained the hauteur which had 
marked her intercourse with Gilda heretofore. 
It was, no doubt, the most narrow-minded 
prejudice which prevented this change being 
duly appreciated. Gilda feit a greater repug- 
nance than ever towards her, and in proportion 
as the eider lady advanced, the younger one 
shrank back into rigid and freezing couitesy. 

The Italian arms in the meantime had suffered 
several reverses, and the indecision which 
characterized Charles Albert's movements fiUed 
more energetic natures with apprehension for the 
future. The capitulation of Vicenza had been 
followed by that of Padua, Treviso, and oiher 
towns, nntil the whole of Venetia, with the 
exception of Venice itself and Osopo, was once 
again in the hands of the Austrians. The gloom 



88 CABB OF CABRLYON. 

thus cast over the Italian cause had^ indeed^ been 
dispelled for the moment bj certain brilliant 
passages of arms. At Corona^ near Rivoli^ 
Pignerol's brigade, with a Company of Turin 
students^ defeated thrice the number of Impe- 
rialists^ and drove them back at the point of the 
bayonet. The taking of Govemolo by General 
Bava was anoher achievement which raised the 
spirits of the patriots. But it was feit by the 
keener-sighted that a position must be desperate 
which caused trivial successes such as these to be 
considered important 

One division of the Piedmontese army held 
positions stretching from above Biyoli as far as 
Sommacampagna. A reserve occupied Peschiera^ 
Pozzolengo, and other small towns in the vicinity 
of the Lago di Garda The whole contry was 
alive with patrols, videttes, and parties of skir- 
mishers^ thickly sown among the vined^ and 
mulberries and olives. 

Carr was out a great part of each day now, 
riding to one or other of the nearer posts^ with 
occasionally a long excursion across the hiUs to 



TltXA iroSSOMBEOSTL 39 

yerify some flyrng romour of the Austrians' 
advance. A boj with a second horse et mtde 
laden with fowls^ ^ggs^ and butter^ generally 
accompanied him in bis vinte to the meagrely^ 
proviskmed camp; rendering them, no doubt^ 
doubly acceptable thereby* 

The fact is^ Oarr was in that frame of mind 
which demands energetic employment for boih 
xnind and body. Most men's natnres snffef 
deterioration withont the constant and irksome 
stimnlant of a profession ; and it will have been 
Seen that Carr's had done so. What might 
have been only specks had grown into nn- 
sightly. excrescences, deforming mach that was 
good. At this moment he was stung by secret 
doubts and disquietndes at which his better 
natore revolted^ bat which^ in spite of all he 
had Said to Mrs. Conrteney and to himself^ 
would not be crashed or driven away. It is 
the propeity of such minds as his^ with only a 
partial capacity for what is great and noble^ 
that their donbts feed themselves^ pelicanrwise^ 
from their own breast. A life of Inaction^ the 



40 CABB OP CABRLYON. 

absence of healthy and continnous exertion 
(healthj for ihe mind^ that is to say^ under 
nearly every condition), tends more than any- 
thing to the growth of such habits. The cur- 
rent of thought, instead of flowing vigorously in 
a broad straight channel^ is stopped by every 
creek and shallow in its sluggish coiirse. Are 
these truisms? It behoves us to recall them 
when we wish to measure justice to a man like 
Carr. 

And in measnring justice let us not forget 
that he fought manfully against his irritable 
and suspicious firame of mind. These hard and 
early rides across the buming plain and moun- 
tain, with just a spiee of danger to flavour the 
adventure^ were not unsuccessfiil. The days he 
remained at home he was almost invariably 
'gloomy anddepressed; while, on the other hand^ 
he seldom retumed from one of his long excur- 
sions but with heightened spirits. Even when 
things were going ill with the Italians there 
was always some anecdote of heroism to be en 
thusiastic aboutj or some good story against the 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 41 

Austrians to be laughed over, which the presence 
. of Lady Carrlyon, it is to be feared^ robbed of no 
particie of its zest. 

As a matter of course there was daily expos- 
tolatlon fipom Lady Carrlyon on the subject of 
her son's Visits to " the rebels," as she was pleased 
to term them. And as a matter of course^ Carr 
disregarded these expostulations^ and went all the 
more firom the fact of his mother's presence at 
the Villa. Gilda was the principal sufferer for 
obvious reasons; but then Gilda was an ardent 
Italian^ eager to leam the last news of the patriots^ 
and ever urgent on her husband to befriend them. 
She had no right to complain. Moreover^ the 
habits of the coontry permitted her^ at this sea- 
soM^ to pass the greater part of the day in her 
own room. Both ladies were supposed to take 
sieste of onlimited doration in darkened rooms 
wiih hermetically sealed Windows; and Gilda 
thus avoided every opportunity of a tete~~tete 
with her mqiher-in-law when she could. 

The marchesa was still at her aunt's villa^ and 

* 

of the former lady our friends saw a good deal. 



42 CASB OF CABBLTON. 

The reasons she assigned for lingering on varied 
every other day; which might have pu2zled any 
one sufBciently ignorant of, yet interested in, the 
fair Italian to feel puzzied about her But Carr 
knew, and his mother knew perfecy well, that 
the Piedmontese cousin's non-^appearance was the 
reason; and if Gilda was dull.of apprehension, 
why, perhaps it was to be attributed to the fact 
that she did not trouble her head about the 
matter. She accepted all the Italian chose to 
teil her in perfect good fidth, which not un- 
naturally roused the scom of her mother-in-law. 
*^ Those airs of petite inginue are so very absurd ! 
As if, living in Italy all her life, she could be 
so very innocent ! " But her husband, having 
introduced her, bad the good taste not to shock 
his young wife by ever alluding directly to the 
marchesa's position. Had she been English, he 
certainly never would have , introduced her ; but 
being Italian, it was quite another thbg. Their 
ideas of morality were so different to ours; it 
was not fair to judge by the same Standard, 
So he told his mother, and that matron, who 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 43 

coold become^ on occasion^ such a dragcm of 
virtnons principle (as we have seen), acquiescecL 
The fact is^ Carr liked the marchefia^ and she 
amnsed his mother; so he encouraged their 
regulr erening meetuigs. It would have been in- 
consistenty after this^ to heap stones npon the poor 
woman. Bejond a general caution^ therefore> 
not to become too intimate with their agreeable 
acquaintance^ Carr said nothing to his wife on 
the subject. 

Onr friends from the villa, nnder the striped 
awning of their boat^ and impelled bj the stroke 
of a couple of lazy oars rom time to time^ polled 
up nnder the wall of the widow Santi's house 
rather earlier than usnal one evening. Carr was 
of the party, which his long excursions often now 
prevented his being, thongh he generally met 
the ladies on their retom. Bat yesterday had 
been an nnnsnally hard day ; and this moming had 
passed with hun conseqnently in a dreamy State of 
mind. endeavouring vainly to constme a chapter 
of Gxdcciardini, and finding it wearisome and 
hopeless. There he lay now, with half-closed 



44 CABB OF CABBLTON. 

eyes, stretched upon the striped cushions, smoking 
his dgar, and watching the movement of his wife's 
fingers as she plied her knitting-needles. 

" YoTir hands are getting horridly bumt, 
Geraldine," said Lady Carrylon ; *^ and as to 
tlie end of yotir nose, it's covered with freckles, 
from your wearing that ridiculous hat, and no 
veil, as I do. I should never have kept my 
complexion if I liadn't taken care never to 
expose it." 

As to her keeping her complexion^ perhaps 
Gilda had her own ideas on the subject; but she 
replied . 

" I can't breathe in a veil in such weather, and 
it*s impossible to work in gloves, you know. 
Nothing will tan some people's skins," she added^ 
with what Carr interpreted as a malicious twinkle 
of the eye. ^^Look at the marchesa. Nothing 
but that black veil at the back of her head^ and 
a parasol, and she is neither bumt nor freckkd." 

" Naturally as brown as a berry 1 " said the 

eider lady, '^and as coarse as Oh! here 

she comes. And how red her eyes arel I 



I 
VILLA POSSOMBBONI. 45 

declare the woman's been crying 1 How im- 
prudent at her age ! Nothing  so destnictive ; 
and she'd very little but her eyes." 

So murmured Lady Garrylon as the marchesa^ 
in her black veil, nnder a deep-fringed green 
parasol^ appeared on the terrace walk above them^ 
and then slowly descended the Steps leaduig to 
the boat Very unlike her nsual seif, she did, 
indeed, look absent and depressed. 

Carr, with somethlng like a groan at the 
exertion, rose and sprang out of the boat 

"Too shocking, the heat, ain't it, my dear 
marchesa ? " screamed Lady Carrlyon fainy from 
her cushion. *' I'm nearly dead with it. I see 
you are suffering too, only of course not Uke 
US foreigners." 

" I am suffering, milady, from what cannot 

. affect you, I know,** retumed the other, with 

a sad shake of the head; then addressing Carr, 

she added, '* have you heard that Sora and 

Sonmiacampagna have fallen ? " 

'^Why, noi Yesterday I found them at all 
the posts I visited, in such spirits about that 



46 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

affiiir at Corona. They knew nothmg of it 
then." 

**It happened only yesterday, and you were 
in ihe opposite direction. It was a no less hard 
fightj I hear; but by a cowardly trick^ihe Tedetcht, 
. birboni that they are !. deceived cur noble 
troops^ and made tbem believe they were going 
to firatemize with ns." 

^^ How infamons I " said Gilda^ her face all 
a-glow. '* Such men to call themselves soldiers I 
Do you know the particulars ? ^ 

^'It appears that a column of these wretches 
were seen waving a white flag^ and shouting 
* Viva V Italty ^ Fratemilhy and so on. The 
general. Aviemoz . ^hesitated for a moment^ they 
teil me^ but seeing the Austrian Commander 
advance and embrace the officer of our leading 
regimentj he could no longer doubt^ but hastened 
to greet these new brothers, They soon changed 
their attitude . the perfidious cowards 1 . ^and fired 
upon our poor brave feUows, butchering them 
by dozenSj Ahl Dio mio, it makes my blood 
boil to think of it. Aviernoz was left at last 



ynXA FOSSOMBBONL 47 

with onlj thiitjr men against two hnndred I 
He foQght like a lion-i. thej all did . and onlj 
when he feil to the gronndy wounded in two 
places^ were they able to take Um prisoner, 
Poor AviemozI eren then he wonld not give 
ap his 8word> bot flnng it on the grotind^ 
exclaiming with indignaticm, ^ J wl never gioe 
up my stoord io iraiUors ! ' Thi3^ signora^ is how 
tibey teil xne it happened. I know no more than 
thi.'* 

" By Jove ! I'ni sorry I was not there. Just 
like my confoonded lack. I'm sure to miss 
any fon that is going on^ and as to finding 
out anythmg from the peasants, they are the 
stupidest set. ; . ** 

.* You fcrget that your Italian betrays you to 
be a fbreigner at onee," sald Gilda; ''you can*t 
ezpeet them to tmst you^ as a stranger.'' 

" It is not that," said th^ marchesa, gloomily, 
'^bnt the peasants about here are hardly true 
Italians. They have been corrupted by the 
Austrians, and do not enter heartily into the 
olgect [of this war. Many of them will actually 



48 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

own to you that tliey were contented as they were, 

and regard any change as dearly bonght by 

the destruction of their crops and cattie. Bestie!^ 

(and this^ I fear^ was applied not to the cattie^ 

but their owners, judging by the forcible and 

active expression of disgust . ^unknown to English 

ladies . ^which followed). 

*' At all events, it is impossible to get anything 

out of them," said Carr, *' and what reports they 

do bring me are sure to be wrong about the 
movements of either arrny.** 

"Almoist all the Austrian troops in Verona 
have marched out, I hear, some to garrison these 
places they have taken from us. The move- 
ments of the rest we don't know yet" 

*' You at least manage to get speedy infor- 
mation, marchesa. I have ' a mind to ride off 
to-morrow in that direction, and get a peep of 
the Austrians if I can.'* 

" If you come across that very genemanly 
young man, Count Blume, who was so civil 
about my passports when they stopped the 
carriage, Laurence," said Lady Carrlyon, '*you 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 49 

might ask him up to the villa. So very gentle- 
manly and pleasant ! " 

" * Oh, how shall I your true-love know ? ' ^ 
laughed Carr. "Not ^by his sandal shoon and 
cockle-sliell.' How do you suppose I am to 
recognize him from a hundred other white 
wooden heroes, without visible space for the 
accommodatlon of thelr dmners ? Shall I go up 
to the first of them who answers your glow- 
ing descriptlon and say, ^ Du bist wie eine 
Blume?''' 

*' You are very silly, Laurence," said his 
mother, upon whom the joke of the quotation 
was entirely lost ; " and, as Sir Walter once 
said to me, nothing is such bad taste as constantly 
making jokes." 

" It's a very small one, and it's my first 
to^day," replied Carr, with mock humility. His 

* spirits were decidedly rising. 

" Who is this Sare Voltaire of whom milady 
is constantly speaking ? " asked the marchesa 
of Gilda, in a low voice and in Italian. " Any 

* relation to tl^at ugly old Frenchman, like a 

VOL. III. 4 



50 CARE Or CARRLYON. 

monkejy who wrote such shocking things about 
love and religion, you know ? " 

When Gilda had explained ihe difiference, the 
Italian exclaimed . 

*^ Oh I then it was he wrote that pretty ramance 
abot the knight and the Jewess^ and the 
Talwnano too^ where the beautifdl qneen follows 
her eavaliere, Ricciardo, to the wars^ and.." 

" He was her husband," said CarTr 

** I remember it was Guido Lamberti who trans- 
lated that and some others for us at Bologna^" 
continued the march^sa, heedless of the interrup- 
tion, ** and that reminds me, Signora Carr . have 
you heard the news ? " 

Carr's jealous attention was roused in an instant. 

" What?" he asked. "Does it concem Lam- 
berti?" 

Gilda had tumed her head away towards the 
lake, and was leaning over the boat's side, which 
she grasped with both her hands* She waited 
in an agony of suspenso for the next words. 

"The poor old contessa, his mother, is dead! 
worried to death by the priests ; and Guido^ 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 51 

ihey say^ had no blessing from her when he left 
for the war." 

'^ That is not troe," said Gflda hurriedly^ bat 
so low that it was difficult to catch her words. 
^^The Professor told ine himself that Gui . that 
Coont Lambert! did have his mother's blessmg 
in spite of Padre Stefano." 

'^Tcm have dropped your knitting into the 
water, xny dear, in your extreme agitation/' 
said Lady Caxrlyon. 

**Poor Gkddol" sighed the marchesa. **He 
probably does not know his loss^ and will leam it 
casually &om strangers ; for they cannot teil with 
what division of the army he is now ar where he 
is to be found; so it may be Weeks beore the 
news reaches Imn." 

*' He will feel it deeply," said Gilda quietiiy, bat 
withstlayerted&ce: ^'hewassogood^aederoted 
toherl" 

^ For God'a sake don't lean over the side of the 
boat so mnch^" cried Carr^ with some aharpness. 
^'Toa'll be over in  momentj Gilda. And tfaongh 
yoor fidend has lost hii^ mother, it'B no reason you 

4.2 



62 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

should commit suicide." Then turning to the 
boatman^ he asked in indifferent Italian^ eked 
out with pantomime^ '^How deep is it here, 
eh?" 

^^ Profondo ,di tre tiomini^ replied the man. 

" A lugubrious measurement, . ^tnily suggestive 
of suicide," remarked Carr. "*The disagreeable 
idea oceurred to me, by-the-by, the other day 
when I was bathing, how many dead men were 
lying under me." 

*^ I remember poor Lord Byron's telling me that 
he once had the cramp when bathing. I never 
hear of a case now without a melancholy interest," 
added her ladyship sentimentally. 

Whereupon the marchesa spoke of the fair 
Guiccioli, whom she had known at Ravenna in days 
of yore, and the talk flowed on uninterruptedly 
through fields of gossip thenceforward. Gilda sat 
by taking no part in the conversation . deaf to it, 
indeed ; for her thoughts were far away in that 
desolate house, and thence they ranged to him, and 
pictured him, wherever he might be, when this 
heavy sorrow should overtake him. Alone, with- 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI. 53 

out a sjmpatliismg voice to soften the heavy blow . 
wounded or in sickness^ it might be^ as when she 
last saw him. Carr watched the abstracted look 
on bis wife's &ce. He was not satisfied 



04 CABB OF CARBLTOK. 



CHAPTER XV. 



.O- 



The next moming at daybreak there was a change 
in the weather, and when Carr rose everjrihmg 
betokened heavy rain. But he was not to be 
deterred by this. He had set bis heart on recon- 
noitring the Anstrian camp^ if it were possible; 
and it did seem probable, from all accounts,thathe 
would fall in with some portion of it at a few 
leagues' distance. Gilda was too much accustomed 
to these expeditions to feel any iineasiness, and 
Lady Carrlyon had expressed a mild approbation 
of this particular one. 

" Take your macintosh, Carr," said the young 
wife, as she kissed him in the loggia ; " and you 
niay as well strap this roll of lint to your saddle. 
We will gladly afford that to our enemies, though 
I See you are not going to enrich them with the fat 
of the land." 



VILLA FOSSOMBBOKL 65 

" I should tldnk not, indeed ! " cried Carr, as he 
jumped on bis liorse. '^ Fm afiraid we shall bare a 
wet day, bat yoy!re more to be pitied than I am, 
6hut np with mj motber, wbo won't be in the best 
bamour, I'm afraid. Don't rub ber prejudices up 
tbe wrong way, Gilda, if you can help it . and I 
say, don't wait dinner for me : I can bave some- 
fhing cold wben I retum, and my lady's patience 
oozes away, I know, very rapidly under fasting. 
Bye-bye." 

And he rode off, foUowed by the black-eyed 
nrchin who acted as bis guide, across tbe hills. 

Carr's predictions were fiilMed. The heavy 
clonds gathered thicker and thicker, and before 
long tbe rain began its gradual, steady downfall 
The face of the window streamed with tears, and 
beyond it seemed notbing bat a vile oepy of the 
lovely landscape blotted in indigo: lake and 
mountain, Tine and olive, one indiatinguisbable 
rnisi The early hours were by far the least 
wearisome, for then Lady Carrlyon was still a-bed, 
and Gilda bad her mother to write to, and a num- 
ber of small bousehold cares that eat away tbe 



5& CARR OF CARRLYON. * 

morning. But towards mid-day, when Lady Carr- 
lyon made her appearance elaborately dressed^ and 
there was less comfort than ever to be gathered 
from looking out of window, Gilda's spirits began 
to droop. The whole of that miserable wet after- 
noon those women spent together, and never were 
two human beings more heartily sick of each 
other's society. At first Lady Carrlyon plied 
the pump-handle vigorously, as she generally did 
when she found herseif alone with her daughter-in- 
law ; but Gilda had leamt discretion in^her replies. 
Her ladyship had been almost offensive of late in 
some of her questions, and the strnge way in 
which she alluded to Mrs. Courteney occasionally 
roused the dormant spark of pride in the gene 
daughter. Like some other gentle natures, there 
was an under-current of energy and resolution . 
nay, even a combativeness . which only appeared 
on very rare occasions. There was something in 
Lady Carrlyon which excited this organ^ phreno- 
logically to speak, just as an electro-biologist might 
do by laying his band on that particular bump. 
Carr was quite right in his caution. Not that 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 57 

Gilda ever forgot the distance of years between 
herseif and her husband's inother* She was never 
peri nor flippant. Lady Carrlyon might have 
liked her better^ perhaps^ if she had been so. She 
simulated an interest In the fashionable London 
gosslp ; bat it was a poor sham : she choked down 
many an indignant protest against the Carrlyon 
theories of life ; bat then when it came to some 
direct home question, Gilda had once or twice been 
known to reply in a way which startled and 
offended her ladyship deeply. When Lady Carr- 
lyon inquired whether Mrs. Courteney wore false 
teeth latterly^ I am inclined to think she regardied 
it as an act of condescension ; when she took np a 
prayer-book with Gilda's name in it^ and said she 
supposed Gilda's mother had never taken her 
inside a place of worship, she was surprised that 
the remark should be received with some resent- 
ment Poor Gilda bridled her tongue as far as 
possible. She was most anxious not to widen the 
breach between them : but this aflemoon it did 
seem more than ever difficolt to sit quietly by^ 
making lint in the window^ and hear such cold. 



58 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

faise, and heartless remarks as sbe was compelled 
to listen to* 

Five o'clock came. the dinner-hour . and then, 
at half-past, Gilda, remembering Carr's injonc- 
tionSj ordered it to be j^erved. It came ; and she 
made it last as long as she possiblj could, for the 
clatter of knives and forks was a relief, to say 
notbing of Giuseppe's presence, after that frigid 
Ute-h-tete. Moreover, sbe bad a lingering bope 
tbat Carr would appear before it was cleared 
awaj. Bat coffee was brougbt, and be did not 
conie ; and tben Lady Carrlyon nnder ibe sootb- 
ing influence of ber dinner, or, as sbe was pleased 
to say, *^from extreme prostration," feil asleep 
on tbe sofa, and silence reigned in ber stead. 

Seyen o'clck . eigbt o'clock. Gilda sat tbere 
in tbe window, ber work dropped npon bet lap, 
and ber bead pressed against tbe pane. Wbere 
was Carr? He bad never been out so late as 
tbis. For tbe first time a sense of naeasiness 
stole over ber. Tbe wind bad been rising for tbe 
last bonr, and with it tbe rain bad somewbat 
abated in yit^nce, tbon^ it drove in 9barp, 



VILLA 70S60MBB0KL 59 

sudden gnsts round the house, and forced itself 
throQgh the sockets of the ill-fitting Italian 
window& Nothihg bejond the terrace conld be 
Seen m the waning li^it where the pink oleander- 
Uossoms hnng drenched and broken among shiver- 
ing leaves, and the orangefk-^some of the trees 
overtomed and hroken in their pots*. lay scattered 
on the soaking gravel path. 

And then the lucema was brought in, and the 
un mnslin curtaiiiisi let down before the drearj 
Windows; and Ladj Ganrljon started up, ex 
clainung.  

^Whatl not come back yet? Good gradousl 
what can have happened ? " 

It  am nglj phrase which has blanched- many 
a eheek beakle Gilda's The echo of her own fear 
thns distinctly uttered was sickening to the yonng 
wife. But the sospense at least^ was not of long 
dixrati<L Giuseppe^ graye and impertorbable as 
ever cwne in a few zoinntes later with a letter on 
asalver. 

^ Giaeomo^ tihe boy, is without He has brought 



60 CARB OP CARKLYON. 

 

It was directed to Mrs. Laurence Carr, but 
Lady Carrlyon made a dash at it (she was not 
particular in such matters)^ and tore the letter 
open before Gilda could reach it. 

"My dearest," she had the grace to read it 
loud . '* Do not be alarmed^ but I am a prisoner, 
or^ ifthat Sounds too grand^ I am detained by the 
Austrians^ until I can prove who and what I am, 
o suspicion of being a spy. I was seized by 
a picket as I was reconnoitring the lines ; and it 
appears that some rascally peasant volunteered 
the information that I was a friend of the enemy, 
and took provisions to them daily They asked 
for my passport, and a variety of impertinent 
questions, which I didn't answer to their satisfac- 
tion, and I finally demanded to be taken before 
the general of the division. I cannot say he 
received my explanations very well, but I obtained 
leave to send off the boy for my passport and 
papers, and these will set matters right at once. 
Teil my mother to let me have her letters to the 
Archduke, and Kadetzki, and any other swells 
whose names are likely to iijispire a general of 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 61 

diyision with respect Don't be the least uneasy, 
for I am perfectly safe, and never was better in 

by-ie-by (the thick Sbeand^ in the left-hand 
drawer), with my dressing-case, by bearer. I am 
Smoking the pipe of peace at this moment with the 
two oflScers of the guard . very gentlemanlike 
fellows . in the hut which has been appropriated 
as a guard-house. I beg to assure you I have 
neither manades on my feet^ nor the conventional 
pallet and pitcher of stage prisoners. I am going 
to play piqnet with my stem gaoler as soon as 
I send this oS, and find the adventore so far 
really rather pleasant than otherwise. I am only 
a&aid (perhaps it would be truer to write hope ?) 
that you may be anxious about me. Do not 
expect me before to-morrow evening, as I am 
told it may be late in the day before they examine 
my credentials. 

 Ever, my dearest^ 

'* Your loving husband^ 

"Latjrekce Oakb. 
** Teil my mother, with my love, that I find her 



62 CJlRR OF CASRLYON. 

friends far better Company than I expected^ thoQgh 
I have not yet seen her Bliane.^ 

** Well I It's fortunafce it's no worse," cried her 
ladyship, throwing the letter down. *'I thought 
no good would ever come of these mad es^ditions 
It's bad enough for a man of bis family to be 
subject to such a degradation^ quite like a-^a 
common person; but it will teach him a lesson, 
I ho^e^ to have no more to say to these horrid 
revolutionists As to yon^ my dear^ I can't 
gratify him by saying youVe been very anxious 
about him; bat every one is not of the same 
sensitive temperament that I am fortunately for 
their happiness, I dare say I " 

^^ It is an awful night to send that boy back 
again across the hills/ said Gilda, looking out and 
without replying to her motiber-in-law* **There 
was still daylight while he came, but he wiU 
never find bis way back now. Had he not better 
wait tili daybreak? From what Laurence says, 
it can make no difference in the length of time he 
is kept there." 



VILLA POSSOMBBOKL 63 

^ Well ! I neyer did hear anything like that I 
AUow me ta saj, G^raldine, that if you have 
HO feelingj you might pretend to have a Utile, 
on an occasion like the present. The idea of 
cansidermg a wretdied boy like that: a horrid, 
dirty Italian peasant, rather than yonr own 
httBbandl Putting impediments in the way of 
poor Lanry's release, for the sake of . of. . '* 

'^ I am not patting impediments in the way of 
Bis release, and if you choose to misunderstand 
me, I can't help it, Lady Carrlyon. It is of much 
more importance that his passport and papers 
shonld reach Carr safely to*morrow, even at 
mid-day, than that they should run the risk of 
being lost to-night To keep to any track across 
the hls soch a night as this must be almost 
impossiUe, I should think ; however, we wiU hear 
what the boy says himsel" 

He was brought in, and a melancholy-looking 
object he certainly was, dripping at erery rag 
(and they were few) that hung on him : but with 
two bright intelligent eyes that redeemed the 
sallow little face. The questlon was soon settled. 



64 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

for the boy declared it was impossible to face the 
storm upon the hls. It was so dark that the 
latter part of his road he had been obliged to feel 
for the path with his hands. Moreover, . and 
this was evidently the chief cause of alarm in the 
boy's mind . there had been a fight down there, 
semewhere on the Mincio, and he . the boy . 
hidden carefully in a bnsh, had witnessed a skirmish 
between three of the fagitives and their pursuers. 
There were stragglers all about the hls, he 
declared, and he was afraid of being captured, 
perhaps mnrdered, by them. Under these circum- 
stances (whether exaggerated by terror or not, it 
was impossible to say), it was evident that 
nothing could be done that night Lady Carrlyon 
suggested scomftdly that some other messenger 
might be found, but Gilda knew that the fattoria 
.could produce no such. Finally, it was decided 
that at daybreak the boy should set off, accom- 
panied by Giuseppe, with the necessary credentials, 
though Lady Carrlyon, to the very last, persisted 
in it that there was no reason why they should 
not Start at oncc. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 65 

The wind meantime had risen very considerably 
and eddied round ihe villa^ sweeping away tiles 
and chinmey-pots &om ihe crazy roof^ whistling 
throngh every keyhole^ and threatening to shatter 
every pane in its increasing fury. The frightened 
Italian women-servants ran hither and thither^ 
thrasting paus up the straight^ wide-mouihed 
chimneySj down which the water was pouring, 
and invoking each her patron saint to avert a 
second deluge. They wept and gesticulated^ but 
ihey were not utterly useless^ which Mrs. Timson 
certainly was, whiie manifesting great disgust for 
'^ the noise of them women." Sal-volatile and an 
ill-executed faint she considered more genteel 
expressions of alarm^ and ihey kept the plethoric 
Carl constantly employed at her side. 

The relative position of the. two ladies was not 
improved by what had occurred. Lady Carrlyon, 
besides being mach incensed^ was in growing 
terror of ihe^ storm, which seemed threatening 
every instant to bring down ihe whole villa, and 
bory its inmates under ihe ruins. She sat 
cowering on the sofa, with an angry yet abject 

TOL. nL 5 



66 CABB OF CABELTON. 

expression of face, which nnder other circuni- 
stances miglit have brought a smile on Gilda's 
Ups. As it was, she was by no means easj her- 
seif, tbough she went about the hoase endeayonr- 
ing, by her calmness, to reassure the terrified 
servants 

Suddenlj . it might have been half-past nine 
OT later . there was a ring at the great rusty 
bell . ^rusty from utter disuse . ^that hnng outside 
ihe lo^a. 

Gilda was in the hall at the moment, when the 
women stood huddled together like stared hares 
Could it be Carr? ImpossiUe. Who oauldithe 
at this hoTir ? If anything could add to the 
nervonsness of the assemblage, it was this un- 
known, almost unearthly, sound. 

Giuseppe was instructed to go to the grille. 
He brought back word that three soldiers . 
volunteers of the Italian army . sought shelter 
&om 1^ storm. One of them was wounded. 
They had be^i pursued and had lost all knowledge 
of where they were in the darkness, but had at 
length bedn attra^^ted by the lights of the yllla. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 67 

^'It is not a night to keep onr enemies ont, 
mach less onr friends^" said Gilda. ^' Admit ihem 
at once** 

^'For Grod's sake^ Mrs. Lanrence Carr^i don% 
think of opening the doorl We ehall all be 
robbed and mnrdered^ besidea being crushed to 
deaih if ihe hottse cames dovm, I desire . ^I insist 
on it, ihat yon don't let these people in." 

It was Lady Carrlyon who spoke, in a shrill, 
Piercing voioe^ as she mshed in from the ad- 
joining sala, and stood there shaking in everj 
limh. 

'^ Oh I if I was only back in Hingland ! ^ sobbed 
Mr& Timson, coming to her chiefs snpport, like a 
good aide-de-camp as she was. '^ We shall be all 
ravaged and mnrdered! Don't let them in^ 
m' lady . ^them nasty^ horrid, Italian soldiers. It 
was predicted of me that my bones should bleach 
on a forrign shore; bnt^ oh! be firm^ please^ 
m' lady, and don't let ns be ravaged by the soldiers. 
Ifs had enongh to be crnshed^ as yonr ladyship 
says, but weVe got onr charactersy leastways, and 
111 stick by you, m' lady, as yonr ladyship's son 

5.2 



68 CARR OP CARBLYON. 

would wish and would do, in like according, if he 
was here, which, misfort'nately, he ain't." 

After which heroic efiTort she sobbed herseif 
away into silence^ and Gilda's very clear^ steady 
voice, was heard. 

" I am sorry to add, to any one's alarm, Lady 
Carrlyon, or to do what yon don't wish ; but I 
must act in this matter as I know Lanrence 
would if he were here. I could not meet bis 
reproaches were I to shut out brave and suFering 
men on such a night as this.'* 

" Pray, Mrs. Lanrence Carr, do you remember 
who I am, that you speak to me in this way?" 
Lady Carrlyon herseif was almost inarticulate 
wiih rage. ** Do you remember that I am 
Laurence's mother ? " 

** Yes, Lady Carrlyon ; and that I am bis 
mfeJ* 

She was white and cold as a stone, but her 
voice did not shake. The crisis was come in 
which she was called on to act for the first time 
in her life . with decision and boldness. Her 
courage rose with the emerg^ncy. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 69 

<< Mrs. Lanrence Carr/' quivered ihe exasperated 
ladj^ ^'I shall not condescend to bandj words 
witb jou, I shall inform my son of the waj in 
which you have treated my remonstrances, and . 
and if you persist in this outrageous piece of folly 
and obstinacy^ I shall retire to my own room. I 
yr'l not countenance such a thing, and . and I 
call every on here to witness that I wash my 
hands of the consequences." 

Wherenpon her ladyship swept out of the hall, 
followed by Timson in a limp, hysterical condi- 
tion. 

The great dpor was unlocked and opened ; and 
with the fierce gust of wind and rain that entered 
were drified in three drenched and exhausted men, 
the unwitting cause of these unjust alarms 



70 GARB OF CASBLYOK. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Gilda seized ihe single lucenia iat stood on the 
marble table^ and sheltered its flickering flame 
firom the wind with her hand as the men entered. 
The next moment she set it down again; and 
the pale^ trembling hand leant hevilj upon ihe 
marble table. 

Of ihe three men who stood there two were 
not genilemen it could be se^n at a ^ance. 
It was pne of ihese poor fellows who had been 
wounded in the arm : he was supported by the 
third of the party, who was in ihe background 
and indistinctlj seen. But though wrapped in 
the heavy folds of a horseman's cloak^ this porson 
was unmistakably a gentleman. Impossible^ too^ 
to mistake the outline of ihat head ; Gilda knew 
ihat Guido Lambert! stood before her. 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 71 

There was a momentary rush of the pasaionate 
tendemess of old through all the woman's senses 
He was there . ^he whose Image so often^ often 
inyoluntarily to herself^ was present with herl 
She beheld him once more . him whom she never 
thonght to see again. Her heart seemed to stop 
its beatings . the room swam ronnd with her: 
for a moment . a moment only . ^she fbrgot every- 
thing bat his presence. 

And then came the revulsion; the cutting of 
a thonght, cold as steel; the ebbing away of 
the blod as swiftly and suddenly as it rose. 
What had she to do with him now ? why came 
he here? was it a fatality which brought this 
man and her face to &ce again at such an hour 
as this ? They had nothing more to say to each 
oiher on this side of the grave. She thonght of 
that last meeting. How were they to meet 
now? 

Suddenly the recoUection of his bereavement, 
perhaps as yet unknown to him, flashed upon 
her. She must see him, and alone. It was the 
duty of an old friend . she was nothin^: more . 



74 GARE OP CABRLYON. 

previoudy. Even the servants were probably 
strack with this, for the plethoric Carl elevated 
his eje-browSj and made a significant gesture to 
Mrs. Tnson, in whom curiosiiy had so far pre- 
vailed over terror as to bring her to the door 
of her mistress's apartment, where a section of 
her &ce was to be seen moving backwards and 
forwards before the cautious slit^ so as to accom- 
modate either eye to the focus of Observation. 

It was remarked that the stranger whom Mrs. 
Lanrence addressed replied in a very few words, 
and even these were scarcely audible. Giuseppe^ 
acting as chamberlain^ then conducted all three 
men to unoccupied rooms^ where dry clothes 
were provided them^ and the wonnded man was 
attended to. 

Thongh ihe storm continued to rage with un- 
abated violence meantime^ the terrors of the 
female part of the Community had visibly abated^ 
Strange to say^ since the introduction of the three 
in-comers. Wheiher a new excitement supplied 
the place of ihe old^ or ihat a greater sense of 
protection and securiiy than the presence of Carl 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 75 

and Giuseppe could inspire was thus afforded^ is 
not for HS to say. Certamly there were fewer 
sobs and inyocations to the Yirgin^ with an 
increased alacrity, which was now directed to 
suppljing the wants of their unished soldier* 
guests. 

Half-an-hoor latter Giuseppe^ still acting as 
chamberlain^ opened the door of the salotto^ and 
aimounced Count Lambert!. The traces of illness 
yet remained on his face: helooked aged and 
pale and worn now that the light feil fiill on 
him. He advanced to the table where Gilda sat 
pretending to work. She held out her hand, 
and b^an rapidly^ . 

'^ Sit down : and^ first of all^ teil me how you 
are? You have been very, very ill, I know: 
are you quite well again ? quite streng enough to 
retum to this life of fatigue ? " 

** Yes ; I am well again^ I thank you." 

She went on . anything to stave off for awhile 
ihe subject she had at heart^ . 

** Are things going forward as we could wish? 
I fear not." 



76 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

He shook bis head, 

**There is no unity; and a house divided 
against itself cannot stand. Neither Rome nor 
Naples are to be trusted Already thej are 
beginning to play us false," 

" Will not France lend Italy a band ? " 

*' Cbarles Albert is jealous of calling in foreign 
aid.** 

** Alas, poor Italy 1 Is tbere ien no bope ?" 

She spoke nerroiisly: tbe tears stood in ber 
eyes. 

'' Our figbt is tbe figbt of a dying man. tbe 
struggle of despair, We sball not die in vain, 
bowever," be added gloomily. ** Over our dead 
bodies anotber generation will stride to victory 
and freedom. We sball bave at least done our 
country a service by sbowing tbe world tbat 
Italians were not tbe despicable race it beld 
tbem." 

** Guido " . tbe tears were raining down ber 
cbeeks now . " you speak despondingly and 
bitterly. Wbat do you look forward to. for 
yourself ? " 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONL 77 

'^Nothing. I am not a hopefal man. I've 
had to deal with hard truths all my lifo. We 
may continae this guerilla war for months ; but 
we shall be beaten. There  a hope, however, 
nay^ a certainty^ though I may not live to see 
it realizedj that Italy will rise up stronger^ 
and fight with a more nnited will some day^ 
from the knowledge of how her sons died for 
her in '48." 

It was nnlike a man in the very prime of 
life ; this shutting himself out from his comitry's 
fxitare 

How different &om the bnming^ eager ambitlon 
of the yonng patriot nine short months ago I 
It seemed doubly cmel to teil him that which 
she had upon her mind now^ and which it was 
evident he knew not After many hopeless 
efforts she found voiee enough to say : 

^^Have you heard from our mutoal friend^ 
the dear old professor^ lately? " 

^I saw him only two days since. He has 
joined the army at last^ with a new detachment 
of volunteers . meii of all ages . from the miirer- 



78 CARR OF CABRLYON. 

sitj; but we are not in the same division. I rode 
OTer to Goito to aee hinu^ 

** And . and . ^what news did he bring of yottr 
mother?" 

He stopped short in bis reply^ and fixed bis 
keen eyes upon her face. 

** Yoa have beard sometbing^ signora? ** 

** Tes ; I beard . ^from tbe Marcbesa Onofrio ^ 

**What?'' 

'* That . ^that yonr mofher was very ill." 

He Btarted np and walked to tbe &rtber end 
of the room. Tbe drops stood upon bis brow as 
he tumed and &oed the lampligbt again. 

^^For God's sake, teil me tbe truth. I have 
been expecting it for months. Is ehe dead f " 

She nttered no sonnd^ bnt tbe movement of 
her bead was enougb ; be sank down and bnried 
bis face in bis bands. Tbe heaving of tbe streng 
man's Shoulders showed bow violent was tbe 
internal struggle. Gilda sat there as motionless 
as bimself ; a long, long interval, as it seemed to 
her; ere he raised bis bead and said, 

**ThankGod! She is at rest." 



YILIA 70SS0HBB0NI. 79 

GQda, by a sudden Impulse^ laid her soft 
small band npon bis arin* He sbivered at tbe 
toucb^ and at tbe sound of bis name pronounced 
by that voice once more. 

**MyJieart bleeds foryou, dear Guido, indeed 
it does. But I wisbed to break this sad news 
to you myself, if you didn't know it. I tbought 
it wotdd be worse for you to bear it from 
strangers in tbe camp." 

'^I tbank you for ibat" be exclaimed in a 
broken voice. "Tbe priest's letter, if be ever 
wrote onc, bas not yet found me. I did not tbink 
tbe end was so near at band, but God knows 
it is better so I My poor motber, sbe is spared 
mudb fiitnre misery. I would not bave ber back 
bere for all tbe world can give. Yes I sbe is 
at peace now I Sbe never was so in ber lifetime. 
Sbe is a mariyr to tbe Cburcb, if tbere ever 
was one. Tbey killed ber, tbose cursed priests, 
by a daily deatb, year after year, and now sbe 
is free of tbem for ever I I bave no doubt about 
that I hiiow it Tbey called me an unbelieyer. 
Perbaps tbey were rigbt I am sometimes in- 



80 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

clined to doubt whether there be a future state. 
any reign of justice to foUow this long injustice ! 
No two lives can be more different, more 
entirelj separate in thought and principle^ than 
mine and hers. If there is a hereafler^ shall we 
be parted for ever? Do you believe it? I 
iiave suFered mucb; I have done lite eise but 
sxiflfer I a lonely life of sacrifice. Will it all go 
for nothing? because I have shrunk from the 
tyranny a^d hypocrisy of that monstrons lie, 
wherewith these men ground down her life like 
powder I " 

He spoke fiercely, and again the little band 
was laid upon bis arm 

'^Guidoj I have leamt mucb since since 

we used to see each other so often, I know 
now that it is appointed unto every living soul 
that has a warm beating heart^ to suffer in this 
World. It may be more or less. But, oh I 
Guido, though we may be separated . ^no matter 
iiow . from all we love best on earth, never 
believe it is for ever. I don't know much about 
religion, perhaps, but I feel there  a hereafter. 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 81 

I know that it is just because God does permit 
craelty> and injostice^ and misery here^ that it 
will be riglited by-and-by. If I didn't think 
so I should be very unhappy." 

^'Unhappy?'* he said, quickly, wiih an altered 
mannen ''Is it possible that . that any shadow 
has fallen on you already? I hoped that you 
at least "were perfecy happy." 

She colonred, for she feit her words had 
implied more ihan she intended^ and yet she 
cotdd only conscientionsly reply . 

''I am not unhappy, I said I should be if 
I did not believe firmly in a future. 'Perfect 
happiness' it is not meant any one should have 
here. You know my mother is no longer with 
me^. and I have a sad presentiment that our 
Separation will be a very long one. That is a 
dark shadow^ for nothing can ever supply her 
place* Can I help looking forward to a time 
when there shall be no more Separation^ and 
we shall be reunited to all those we have loved 
best on eartb?" 
"Pray for me!" he murmured, and by an 
VOL. in. 6 



82 CABB OP CAKRLYON. 

irresistible impulse, while he rose to take bis 
leavej. feeling that tHs interview had already 
been protracted too long for his powers of self- 
commandj he raised the small hand that still 
lay close beside him to his buming lips 

At the same moment the door was flung open, 
and Lady Carrlyon^ foUowed by Mrs. Timson^ 
appeared. It was owing to no smgukr coin- 
cidence" that their arrival was so opportunely 
timed^ bat to the plain fact (as Mrs, Timson after- 
wards owned) of their haviug been listenicg at the 
door for some minutes previously. Her lady- 
ship's face was more radiant than anything else^ 
though there was a great assumption of yirtuous 
horror in her demeanour when she spoke. 

" Mrs. Laurence Garr^ after the scene of which 
I have been an inyoluntary witness, I think the 
sooner you decamp the better, and rid my unfor- 
tunate son's house of yonr presence." 

She had translated this speech into execrable 
French. The foregoing conversation had been 
carried on in Italian, of which she did not 
understand a word, but, as she afterwaxds said. 



yiLLA K)SSOMBBONL 83 

'^iere was no mistakiog those disgustmg fiEimi- 
liarities,'' and tbe intention of Lady Garrljon's 
harangae was at least equally clear. Had a bomb 
exploded in the centre of the room it could 
hardly have produced greater eflTect 

An xinspeakable horror transfixed Gilda to 
the spot where she stood^ staring at Lady 
Carrlyon with almost yacant gaze> nntil slowly 
the eye kindled with indignation, and the deep- 
dyed flush of outraged innocence overspread her 
&ce. Bat before she fonnd words wherein to 
reply to this insnlt her mother-4n-la^ had ofiered 
her^ Ghiido exclaimed^ in a voice that sounded 
like distant thnnder . 

**WhoisthisIady?" 

" My mother-in-law.'* 

** What do ihese insults mean, madam ? If you 
have overheard what haa passed^ how dare you 
nse such language to this lady? Her conduct 
requires no defence. If your son demands any 
explanation from me, I will satisfy liim that my 
presence here was ** 

^ I shall teil him nothing of the sort> sir ; for 

6.2 



64 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

probably youVe a professed duellist ; and it wotdd 
only be a repetiiion of the dreadful business whicK 
made Mrs. Carr^a mother so ntorums years ago. 
I have too mucb regard for my son's life for 
that^ and I can only repeat that slie had better 
go away at once before bis retum, as it*s perfectly 
impossible she can remain with bim afler this, 
The case is really too outrageous . ^too palpable I 
before the whole household, tool Closeted for 
nearly an hoor at midnight! I am perfectly 
ashamed^ Mrs. Carr I perfectly ashamed ! I sus- 
pected how it was long ago, and my suspicions 
were still further ronsed to-night, when you 
persisted against my advice . against my supp- 
cations . in admitting ihese men. I am not qnite 
a fool, Mrs. Laurence Carr; I saw at once it 
was an assignation. Now, as I consider that my 
son has left me in bis absence to watch over bis 

wife*s honour ^" 

**Your son*s wife requires no one to watch 
ver her hononr," interrupted she, drawing her- 
seif up to her ftdl height, and looking really 
splendid in her new character. '^And since it 



VILLA FOSSOMBBONI, 85 

has come to piain speaking between us^ Lady 
Carrljon^ let me say that I have also suspected 
you since the first momeut I saw you of being 
a wicked^ unscrupulous woman. I decllne having 
anything further to saj to you. My explanations 
sball be made to my husband^ and he will judge 
between \x&J^ 

"Facts are facts," said Lady Carrlyon, ^*and 
two eye-witnesses, I believe, carry proof witb 
them^ all the world over."' 

**It depends," retorted her daughter-in-law, 
now ronsed to the utmost, **wheier they are 
worthy of credence. Their motives must be 
above snspicion A woman who can be guilty 
of listening at a door with her lady's maid . 
listening, as it happens^ without being able to 
nnderstand a word in this case. could be gnilty 
of swearing away any one's character who stood 
in her way. But your son hnows you, Lady 
Carrlyon, and that is my safeguard.'' 

I am not sure that she was justified in sending 
that last shaft To teil a mother that a son de- 
spises her is a streng measure. But Gilda had 



86 CAEB OP CARRtTON. 

great provocation, and in her excitement words 
dropped from her which she woidd certainly not 
haye used deliberatelj 

Lady Carrlyon was absolutely livid. She took 
the salts from Timson's band, and gasped ont, . 

^^Yonr insults have no effect on me; but as 
you are so utterly shameless, I sball not inter- 
fere with yon any more, but leave you to finish 
your UU-h'Ute Tnthout Interruption,'* and he 
tumed towards the door. 

*^ No I " Said Gilda, seizing her by the wrist, 
and fordbly holding her to the spot whwe she 
stood. (Those quiet women sometimes have a 
marveUous force and determination when they're 
thoroughly lashed up I ) ** No 1 since you are 
nere, you shall stay . ^you shall stay and hear 
me bid this gentleman ferewell." She held out 
her band to Guido, and her voice trembled a 
lite as she sdd . still in English for Lady 
Carrlyon's benefit: "If you would oblige me, 
you will depart with the early moming. Think 
no more of the scene you have just witnessed; 
and above all, do not let it injure my husband 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 87 

in your estimation, by raising a sospicion of his 
kindness and bis confidence in me. It is not 
necessary, but, if you wiU, you can write to 
him; only leave this house early to-morrow. You 
wl graut me this last favour, won't you ? " 

He murmured an assent, as he dropped her 
hand; and then, leaving Lady Carrlyon and her 
maid to follow, Gilda passed out of the room. 



88 CABB OF CABRLYON. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

>0t . . . 

The storm gradually cleared away about day- 
break, and an hour later a party of five persons 
left the villa: Giuseppe and ihe boy on iheir 
way to the Austrian cantonment ; Guido and bis 
companions to rejoin their division at Peschiera. 
The arm of ihe wounded man was dressed, and 
being refreshed with supper and sleep, he was 
ready to set forth again. Not so Guido. With 
a mind harassed by the most painful and con- 
flicting thoughts after a sieepless night, he turned 
bis back upon the house which held all he loved 
on earth. But the conduct of this story does not 
aUow US to foUow bis fortunes at present We 
must remain at the villa. 

She . Gilda Carr . suffered as women of quick 
and keen susceptibilities alone do suffer that 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI, 89 

night. She foiind relief in a passionate burst 
of tears when she reached her own room; bat 
there were things far beyond the sharp indignity 
she had suflfered, which festered at her heart, 
and which no tears conld heal or soften. There 
was the mysterious, horrible allasion which Lady 
Garrlyon had tanntingly made to Gilda's mother. 
The dreadful husiness which made her so notorious 
years ago. What did it mean? Was it only a 
baseless calumny like that which she had now 
trumped tip against Gilda herseif? The idea 
that her mother was othei:wise than innocent, I 
need hardly say, never for an instant crossed 
her mind; but the more she thought over it, 
the strenger grew the conviction that there was 
some dark and painful circumstance belonging 
t the past with which her mother was con- 
nected. It explained much that was otherwise 
inexplicable ; it confirmed a suspicion which had 
more than once crossed her mind ; it might even 
account for her sudden departure. This thought 
hannted her all night long. She could not get 
rid of it; it weighed upon her; it forced itself 



90 CABB OF CABRLTON. 

in eveiy conceivable shape on her imagmation. 
If there was a secret sorrow or reproach, why was 
she not allowed to share it? 

Uncoimected with this, yet for ever present 
before her^ was the sad^ stem face of the Italian. 
His words of hopelessness as to this world . of 
donbt as to another^ rang in her ears. Grod help 
him I She might at least prcy for hira. There 
was no law that forbade her doing that 

As to Garr, she never for an mstant doubted 
how he would treat his mother's accusations ; 
bnt then came the consequences. After what had 
passed it was utterly impossible she shoold Kve 
in the same house with Lady Carrlyon. She 
knew how anxious Lanrence was to avoid estrange- 
ment fix)m his parents, and if she now were the 
cause of it, this wonld be a heavy additional triaL 

Carr had been awaiting the retum of his mes- 
senger for some hours when the boy appeared. 
As ill-luck would have it, the general had sent 
at an unusually early hour to know what account 
the Englishman could render of himself, and Carr 
was very naturally annoyed at the non-arrival 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 91 

of his credentials. The storm, as is often the 
case in the neighbonrhood of mountains^ was 
partial: whfle it raged round the Villa Fossom- 
bnmi it was scarcely feit a few miles off. Thus 
Garr had no suspicion of the real cause of delay ; 
and there was certainlj a plausible excuse for 
the extreme ill-humour in which his faithful 
messengers found him between nine and ten 
o'dock that moming. 

After a pretty sharp cross-examination, the 
anthorities were satisfied of Garr's identity with 
the person named in the letters as ^'the son of 
a distmguished English ladj whom she was about 
to visit;" and with the Englishman specified in 
the passport^ as the possessor of capelli e haffi 
biandL The inevitable caution under such cir- 
cumstances to be more prudent in his future 
rambles, and, above all, to abstain from conveying 
provisions to the enemy's camp, was followed by 
an invitation to the general's breakfast table ; 
where, as Carr was a tolerable German scholar, 
he was able to appreciate a yariety of yery coarse 
jokes interspersed vdth yery big oaths. Though 



92 CARR OP CARRLYON. 

he had written of bis captors in the most amiable 
spirit the previous night, flie charm of novelty 
had wom off by this time, and he was heartily 
sick of ihem before he quitted their noisj table 
and jmnped upon bis horse towards noon. 

His mother, with a solicitude very unlike \er 
usual habits, was waiting for him on the lowest 
Step of the loggia. His eye glanced rapidly round, 
but there was no one eise ; and the shade deepened 
on his brow. In truth, Gilda, who but a moment 
before had run out to greet her husband, upon 
seeing Lady Carrlyon had retreated hastily, being 
anxious to avoid any personal encounter with her 
jnother-in-law, She feit sure, too, that Carr would 
come to her room at once, so there she retired 
and waited in momentary expectation of his 
appearance. But when more than half an hour 
elapsed, she could stand it no longer, but sent 
a message begging him to come to her. 

Lady Carrlyon, meantime, found the ground 
in a very favourable State. Her son was weary 
and dirly : conditions of mind and body which 
tend to make a man irritable. He had not re- 



VnXA 70SS0MBB0NL 93 

coYered bis displeasure at being detained an nnne- 
cessrj nomber of bours^ as be believed; and 
be feit considerable resentment at bis wife's want 
of alacritj in comibg fortb to meet bim after all 
bis perils. Witb wbat art and labour bis motber 
poured ber falsely coloured tale into bis ear, we 
will not stop to teil. Carr knew bis motber, it 
is true; be knew tbe nature of ber sentiments 
towards bis wife, tut tbere was strong circum- 
stantial evidence to bear out almost all sbe said, 
and tbe demon of jealousy rose fierce and strong 
witbin bis breast. How mucb or bow lite be 
beUeyed perbaps be did not exactlj know bim- 
seif, bat when bis wife's message reached him, 
be acted as a man of bis cbaracter always acts, 
-firom tbe bot Impulse of tbe moment. 

Sbe ran forward to embrace bim, but be drew 
back, and taking eacb band wbicb sbe extended, 
be led ber to a seat, wbile be remained standing. 

"You bave sent for me. Geraldine" (be bad 
never before called ber so), ^'and I am come to 
bear wbat you bave to say. After tbat, you 
will be good enougb to listen to me." 



94 GARR OP CARRLYON. 

^^ Laurence ! dear Laurence I what is the mean- 
ing of all this? Why did you not come to me 
at once npon your retum ? * 

'^ I was detained. My mother found it possible 
to come out and welcome me on my retum, but 
my wife ^" 

*' Dear Laurence 1 don't say that Your mother 
and I haye unfortunately had a difference." 

'' I know it" 

"And I could not meet her. I preferred, at 
least, seeing you alone first." 

** You thought, no doubt, you would get round 
me 1 " he exclaimed violeny, with a sudden change 
from his cold and cutting manner. ** But I have 
been made a fool long enough. I don't think 
your own mother, or any one eise, can accuse 
me of unjust jealousy in demanding an explanation 
of your conduct, and I insist upon having it" 

Gilda looked at him in sad surprise, and the 
tears gathered in her eyes. 

"I had not expected <is. and yet it is natural^ 
I suppose, for you have only heard your mother's 
Version of. of the events of last night I don't 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 95 

ask you what she said or insinuated. You know 
perfecy well your mother's cruel and unjost 
prejndices against me^ Laurence.'' 

" Oh! my mother's not to be believed, of course. 
I was prepared for that But she is careful of 
my honour . of ihe hononr of the family; and 
let me teil you it would be well if my wife were 
equally so." 

She had risen^ while a rapid change passed 
over her face, and there was something of dignity, 
nay, grandeor, in her whole demeanour, as she 
stood before him, which impressed Carr in spite 
of liimsel 

*^Stopl hear me before you say any more . 
belbre you speak words which you would r^ret 
one day having spoken. If I thought it possible 
that 8eri(msly, in your inward heart, you could 
doubt me, I should feel as if it were all over 
between us. I did last night what you or any 
oier Englishman would have done. I gare 
shelter to three men, one of ihem wounded^ and 
all of them drenched and exhausted. I was as 
much pained as astonished when I discovered 



96 CABR OP CARELYON. 

among these the last person of all others I would 
willingly have received here during your absence. 
And yet I sougtt an interview with him alone " 
(she looked Carr fearlessly in the face), ^*for, in 
memory of our old-^old friendship, I feit that 
I ought to break to him the sad news of his 
mother*s death. God knows, that interview was 
painful enough to me' as it was I It needed not 
your mother*s violent intrusion and gross insults 
to render it more so. And now you mnst judge 
between us. If you believe her, I am not fit to 
be your wife . let me go back to my mother, 
But if you believe mey you must do so fully 
and not by half-measures. Lady Carrlyon and 
I can no longer remain under the same roof. It is 
impossible." 

Carr's anger was cooling, and if he had for 
one, Single instant entertained a doubt of Gilda, 
her spirited self-justification had set that at resL 
But there was a good deal of jealousy . agood deal 
of wounded amour-propre yet unappeased : and he 
would not readily abandon the position of an 
injured man. Moreover, to be forced into a 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 97 

decision between two conrses of action was what 
lie especiallj disliked. 

**Yoiir condact was^ at least^ very imprudent, 
and certainlj open to animadversion." 

*^If I were in the same position to-morrow 
I should act in the same way.'* 

" Oh ! we have no doubt of that. Of course 
my wishes would have no weight compared with 
the attraction of such society I " 

Gilda's cheek flushed, but she replied, calmly 
enongh . 

" Did I ever disobey your wishes, Laurence ? 
I do not believe you will ever ask me to do 
what is wrong; and until then, I hope I shall 
always try to fulfil them. In any dispassionate 
moment, when you will listen to all that passed 
between Guido Lamberti and myself last night, 
you will not desire that I had acted otherwise, I 
think." ' 

*^ I shall always desire that my wife does not 

put herseif into a compromising position. My 

mother naturally has English ideas of propriety, 

which you have grossly outraged. Your refusing 

voL in. 7 



98 CAEB OF CARKLTON. 

to let the inessenger retum at once for me 

was enough to rouse her Buspicions^ i begin 
with." 

" Giuseppe will teil von, which yoirr mother, I 
sappose, has not done, that the boy was too terri- 
fied^ and positively refiised to set out during the 
storm." 

'* Then your admitting three strnge men, with 
uone but Giuseppe and thatt porpoise Carl in thfe 
house, was most incautious. most dangerous ! If 
my mother was indignant and used streng 
language ; if, in her anger, she coneeived unjust 
suspicions of you, it was certainly not without 
apparent fbundation. To be closeted fr half-an- 
hour in the dead of night with any youi^g man, 
particularly so old a friend^ is contrary to our 
conventional English notions of propriety, and is 
quite enough to destroy your reputation, were it 
known." 

"I have done nothing of which I need be 
ashamed," said Gilda, proudly ; " and I desire no 
<*oncealments." 

*^ But I do, if you please ; and as you expressed 



VILLA K)SSOMBBONL 99 

yourself jut now bo amenable to my wishes, 
you will be good enongh to remember this. 
My mothfir^ I trust^ for my sake, may be induced 
to forget^ or^ at least^ to be silent as to^ what 
passed last night Bat I cannot hope that any- 
thing like cordiality can be restored between 
you " 

" It never existed," observed Gilda. 

*^ And, therefore, I shall not oppose her going 
at once, '^as I have no doubt she will insist on 
doing. But, in order that thIs feud may not be 
kept up etemally, I wish you to offer her an 
apology for aU the annoyance and anxiety which 
your inconsiderate conduct . ^to use the mildest 
.term . ^has caused her." 

Oilda sank down again on the chair, and buried 
her face in her hands. Suddenly she looked up. 

" Do you know that Lady Carrlyon insulted, 
grossly insulted, my mother's name? If, after 
that, you desire me to ask her forgiveneas, I will 
do so ; but it will be painftd, and it will not be 
sincere. I can command my lips, but no more, 
Laurence." 

7.2 



100 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

" Insulted ? " he exclaimed ; then tuming away 
' he muttered to himself: "Fool! to beUeve her, 
on her oath, that she would keep the secret! 
Wliat did she say ? " 

** She talked about ' the dreadful business 
which had made her so notorious.' What did she 
mean ? If there is any truth, any shadow of truth 
to justify so cruel an insult, teil me, I beseech of 
you, teil me the truth. I am not a child, and I 
can bear anything rather than your mother, and 
such as your mother, should use tliis language, 
while I am Ignorant of what so nearly affects me, 
and imable to answer it." 

*^ She probably referred to some stupid old 
story which I will teil you another time. Think 
no more about it. She will not repeat that 
language, and you must make allowance for her 
being angry, Gilda. There is something to be 
forgiven on all sides, only be civil to her while 
she stays here. I ask no more." 

And he abrupy left the room. 

He was justly indignant now against his mother. 
Bat, perhaps in his heart of hearts, he was not 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL ll 

sorry ix) have a good^ genuine grievance against 
her at this moment 

He entered with knit brows. 

*^ Well 1 " cried her ladyship, eagerly. 

" So you tave broken your word . ^your solemn 
promise, mother^ not to allude to Mrs. Courteney's 
past history." 

**Welll and if I did, what does it signify? 
though I'm sure I never said anything . ^nothing 
more than perhaps a dtant allusion to her horrid 
mother^ and there was no great hrm in that, 
I suppose 1 " 

*^ You have deeply wounded Gilda, and very 
much annoyed me, by your unguarded language." 

*^ Deeply wounded, indeed 1 1 like that 1 What 
can it signify now, I repeat? On the contrary, 
the story should be spread far and wide. It was 
one of the worst things in that infamous plot against 
3'ou, that all this was concealed . that you didn't 
know, poor boy! that you were marrying the 
daughter of an infamous woman. Of course . that 
sort of thing's in the blood . ^what could you 
expect but this from any one with the Caliston 



102 CARE OP CARRLTOir. 

blood in their veins ? And that horrid creature 
knew it well enough.'' 

This was not agreeable language to Oarr, and 
chivalry spoke out 

" The lady you designate thns, I have already 
told you, I have a sincere pity and regard for. I 
believe her to be much better than half your fine 
ladies who have not the honesty to run away." 

** Including her daughter ? " sneered Lady 
Carrlyon ; ** though her worst enemy can't accnse 
her of being a ' fine lady ! ' However," she added, 
*^ of course it is all over nowy you will make yonr 
arrangements for obtaining a Separation at once. 
I am afraid at present the evidence is not direct 
enough . the case altogether is hardly enongb to 
obtain a divorce, but you wonld soon do so. In 
these sort of cases a woman never stops at the first 
tep, particularly if she is let to go her own way.'' 
"Why should I let her go her own way, 
then?" 

" Why ? Why ? I really don't know what to 
make of you, Carr. To get rid of her, of course ! 
I suppose you mean to do iJiat You're not going 



VILLA FOSSOMBEONL 103 

to be a disgrace to your femily, and a laughing- 
atock to the wliole world by going on living witii 
such a woman as your wife, are you ? " 

" Listen to me.. My wife has no knowledge of 
the Conventions of English society, and has acted 
very fooKshly, I admit . ^but I believe her to be 
innocent, perfectly innocent, and " 

" Grood heavens I And didn't you teil me just 
now that you knew . that you had hnovm all along 
ahe liked this horrid Italian fellow, and not you ? 
Is  possible the artful creature has bamboozled 
you completely in these few minutes 1 " 

Carr coloured scarlet. 

"I don't know what foUy I may have uttered in 
the heat of passion. I am cool now, and my eyes 
are open. J am not easily * bamboozled,' for I see 
perfectly what you have been driving at ever since 
you came, and that to separate me and my wife 
was indeed the sole object of your coming here. 
Now, I teil you plainly that I am not going to 
separate &om her, mother." 

Lady Carrlyon adopted that invaluable remedy, 
aahystericalfloodoftears. 



104 CARR OF CARRLYON. 



a 



You nngrateftil boy ! to speak so after all I 
have done for you. You'll bring my . my . ^" (she 
would have said gray hairs, but probably feit 
that form of speech inappropriate to their dyed 
condition) . ** y oull bring my sorrows to ihe grave I 
You'll break my heart, and then you'll be happy ! 
You who Lad such fine prospects, and all so thrown 
away ! You've no feeling^ no pride, no noihing ! 
To let yourself be blinded and deceived by this 
creature ! Don't talk to me I I won't listen to 
anything you have to say. I won't stay another 
day in the house with her. It's perfectly disgrace- 
ful ! shameful I Your father will be pleased to 
find in addition to the respectahle connection you 
have made, what a complaisant husband you are I 
Your friends at Brooks's will be entertained no 
doubt ; and as to what the dear duchess will say, 
I dread, I positively dread to think of it I " 

** Come, mother, you ought to know me by this 
time. I'm tolerably obstinate, I flatter myself. 
You never knew me care for what any fellow at 
the club chose to think or say. I may be pas- 
sionate, jealous, and a weak fool into the bargain 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONI. 105 

about my wife, tut that's my own look out, no one 
eise's. As to your dachess, I shoold recommend 
her not to offer me her advice . a woman who has 
only been respectable since she has grown too old 
to be otherwise. Pah 1 " 

"0hl pray insult the aristocracyl I can't 
expect anything eise after your treatment of me I 
It's of a piece with your revolutionary principles 
and all the rest of your dreadful irreligioua notions 
now. IVe nothiog more to say. I give it up. 
After all the time and trouble I have spent, to say 
nothing^ of money, and for it all to end in this I 
Such black ingratitude I " 

And her ladyship burst into another and louder 
torfent of tears. 

Carr bit his Hp and appeared to hesitate whether 
he should speak. Why? There was one last 
effort to be made to soften his mother's heart 
Should he make it ? It was a forlom hope scarcely 
worth venturing ; and he had kept it back until now 

"Mother," he said at last, in a low, almost 
tremulous voice, *^ before six months are over I 
shall be  father/' 



107 



etioDr ex^eened r- v^ 
wawKma. Her yxit, 

it die loigdi of ex- 
'ler daugfatenn-Inr, 



19 ife fidlowed 




1C6 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

Lady Carrlyon started up^ and then sank back 
again, with an impotent effort to scream, 

^ Yon wretched boy ! It only wanted this to 
complete your misery and disgracel I see now 
how that designing creature has got round you. 
But 111 never acknowledge her child, never . 
never I And Pll order post-horses to-morrow 
momingy and FIl never receive her . ^never I so 
it's no use brmging her to England, and . and . ^ 

The angry woman sobbed, and choked, and 
gulped for some tne longer. Her son did not 
attempt to alter her decision. The post-horses 
were ordered for the foUowing moming. 

But with the foUowing moming came the noti- 
fication of a great change to both Carr and his 
mother. Lord Carrlyon was deadi Prsonally, 
no one feit the loss very keenly. And if Carr 
chose to repudiate his father's debts he would 
find himself a richer man than the late lord had 
been for many a year. That was important. 

The dowager (alas 1 that she should be so 
styled,) set off alone a few hours later. She 
knew all that the change implied for her. A 



VILLA FOSSOMBRONL 107 

small jointure, and the gloomy dower-house ! Her 
face^ as Mrs. Timson poetically expressed it^ was 
** already in weeds ; " and no wonder. Her tone, 
too, was considerably lowered in the interview 
with her son; and she went the length of ex- 
tending a torpid hand to her daughter-mJaw, 
before she stepped into her carriage. 

Two days later, Carr and his wife foUowed 
her to England. 



PART III. 



..O- 



AU CINQIEME. 



111 



PAKT III. 



AU CINQUiiiME. 



CHAPTER I. 

I MUST now pass over a period of eighteen months> 
and take the reader to Paris in the begimung of 
the year 1850. How the several fortunes of those 
in whom I have tried to interest this same reader 
so far have been affected in the interval, he will 
learn by degrees. At present I will ask him to 
accompany me to the Italian Opera House on a 
certain night in January, where he will have 
an opportunity of seeing one or two faces already 
familjiar to him. 

A stranger in the Stalls that night, facing about 
o as to have a view of the entire semicircle 



112 CARB OF CAERLYON. 

of boxes, had he been a man of refined tastes 
and delicate perceptions, woald probably havc 
been attracted by the pale face of a young woman 
who sat alone a great part of the evening in 
front of one of the hgea couvertes, She was 
very simply dressed ; flowers and ornament were 
*^ conspicuous by theur absence," to use a stock 
paradox of orators. She was not brilliantly 
coloured by nature or art to catch the eye. 
But she had a sweet, sensitive face that listened 

to the music ; and the expression of it in repose 

 

hd an indescribable interest which was wanting 
in all the more showy beauty by which she was 
surrounded. 

Nearly opposite to her was a box occupied by 
three persons, to which I am about to introduce 
the reader. A lady sat in the front of this box 
also, but concealed behind the curtain, so that, 
except from the Stalls, her face was not visible. 
My suppositious stranger, however, as he Stands 
there, if he be a man of strong animal passions, 
an admirer of acute individuality (tt/pey as the 
French call it), of low black brows, and sinuoos 



AU CINQIEME. 113 

raven liair^ of a firm ihroat^ and bust, and arms, 
developed in all the maturlty of womanhood, 
would tum his opera-glass more frequently in 
this than in any other direction. A striking- 
looking woman certainly, not easily to be for- 
gotten when once seen. Whether to be called 
handsome, must be a question of individual 
taste; but those who saw her tliree years ago 
would not believe how time lias acted upon her 
as upon fruit, mellowing and ripening to an 
nnforeseen roundness of form and richness of 
colour. But perhaps this lady's most remarkable 
attribute are her eyes. The fire and languor of 
passion, the flash of wit, and the keen sword- 
glance of Observation belong alike to those deep 
' eyes, which in repose resemble the clear brown 
pebbles we see in the bed of a river. A few 
very large diamonds are strewn like stars through 
the loose Serpentine coil of her raven hair. The 
deep yellow of her dress is softened by a covering 
of Venetian point-lace, and a bouquet of rare 
flowers lies on the cushion before her. 

Seated opposite to her, so as to face the house, 

TOL. III. 8 



114 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

is a stout, middle-aged man, with a face smoothljr 
shom, save where it ha3 been permitted to break 
out into a short, stubby black moustache. There ' 
is an air of 'the Bourse written all over him. He 
wears spectacles ; bis hair is cut very short, and 
bis dress, which is scrupulously neat, has tbe 
peculiarity of all looking too tigbt for him. The 
pliant kerseymere foUows every contour of bis 
plump legs, like a mould of black wax. The 
salin waistcoat is in a ripple of little plaits between 
each button. The coat, particularly about the 
arms, looks as if it would require to be ripped 
up with a penknife to free the sufTerer under 
its peine forte et dure. It is only necessary to add 
that this individual's right band had a, tendency 
to bury itself periodically in bis trousers' pocket, 
where it derives apparently some unknown satis- 
faction from the contact of certain coins and 
keys. 

At the back of the box, and behind the lady's 
chair, is a fair, florid Englishman of thirty, from 
whose manner and demeanour the most casual 
observer must detect that he is a veiy warm 



AU CINQUIEME. 115 

admirerof the lady. She occasionallj addresses an 
Observation to him in English^ bat her conversation 
is generally carried on in French, for the benefit 
of her elderly companion. She haa scarcely 
Youchsafed a glance round the house imtil the 
entr^acte, when she raises the large opera-glass 
beside her, aad drawing back a comer of xe 
curtain sweeps the tier of boxes. 

"Who is it that is so fortunate as to attract 
your, attention, Duchesse? Your glass has'been 
fixed in one spot for fll two minutes." 

** Only a woman," replied the lady, as she lid 
down the glass, with a smile ; but the smile was 
anything but pleasant, as the Englishman felt^ 
though not gifted with remarkable acuteness of 
perception. 

*^Do you know anything about her?" added 
she fter a pause. ^^That pale, vapid-looking 
woman in white, opposite?" 

*^I should think so. Tbat's Lady Carrlyon: 
loainried to a cousin of mine. It's the fadiion to^ 
admire her, I believe ; but I can't bear ihai; styte 
of woman : looks as cold as a stone." 

8.2 



116 > CARR OF CAERLYON. 

** You are right I knew her once : she is as 
cold and passive as a stone^ or she wouldn't be 
sittiog there now. She doesn't care a straw 
for her husband ; but she will always be a model 
wife^ I suppose^ for she has no passion in her 
composition.'* 

, " And yet, if the old dowager is to be believed, 
there were some very queer stories even about 
her in Italv." 

*^ What do you mean ?** 

She tumed sharply round^ and pierced him 
with those keen eyes. 

*^OhI I don't know: some Italian or other 
whom she let in at night when Carrlyon was 
away, . so the old dow says. Very likely it's 
a lie ; but she swears there would have been a 
Separation, only Carrlyon was still spoony on 
his wife then, and preferred even playing Georges 
Dandin to getting rid of her.** 

The lady tumed away, so that the young man 
could not See her face, while she laughed a hard 
metallic laugh. 

*^You are very scandalous, Fitzhugh. And 



AU CINQUIEME. 117 

has miloTdy then, got tired of bis wife now ? You 
say he was ^ still spoony then.' " 

*^ Well, upon my life I don't know. Men have 
such different ways of evincing their love . for 
their wives. Carrlyon's awfuUy jealous ; but then 
he's a deuced good-looking fellow, you know, 
and made agreat deal of ; and, as she's not streng 
enough to go out every night, she's left a good 
deal alone." 

*^ And yet he would be furious at her finding 
some oue to cheer her solitude? That is very 
like you men : you expect a devotion when you've 
no longer any right to it But I'm surprised 
about my mild friend Carrlyon. I thought he 
was going to be a pattem husband . a model of 
devotion. 

'' That depends on what you expect I really 
believe he's very fond of bis wife ; as fond as . 



as " 



ic 



As any man ever is? Ha, hal I'm afraid, 
my dear Fitzhugh, that if possession is nine points 
of the law, the desire of possession is more than 
nine points of love with all you men." 



118 CARB OF C ARBLYON. 

*^ Now, I declare, Ducliesse, that's not fair. It 
all depends on a fellow's character. My idea of 
devotion is being constantly near the woman you 
really care for." 

*^But tben, mon amiy you see you are not 
married, or anything at all like it, to the woman 
you * really care fbr,' if indeed she exists," 

Tlien, apparently thinking that this English 
colloquy had lasted long enough, slie tumed to 
her other companion, and addressed a few obser- 
vations to him in French. 

A young man at the same moment entered 
the narrow passage which divides the covered 
from the uncovered boxes at this theatre; and 
looked round him. 

^^ Mon eher R^al," said the lady we have he^d 
addressed as duchesse, tapping her elderly friend 
on the arm, "will you go round to Madame 
de Czerny for me ? Ask her to come home and 
sup with US, after ^he opera. I expeet two or 
three more men," and as Monsieur R^al with 
an air of resignation left the box, she tumed 
round to Fitzhugh, and said rapidly. 



AU CINQUiiME. 119 

" See ! there is Lord Carrlvon close tinder- 
neath liere; go and teil bim from me that an 
old friend wants to renew her acqnaintance. 
There I be quick ! off with you, for he is actually 
looking round towards bis wife, as if he thougbt 
of retuming to her. Mind ! you're not to come 
back without bim." 

The young man did not look best pleased at 
the commission; he probably had ^nticipated a 
short tete-'tete ; but against the Duchesse's Orders 
there was never any appeal. 

He left her with a comical look of disgust, 
and Coming behind Carrlyon slapped bim on the 
Shoulder. 

^^I say, you lucky dog! tbere's the greatest 
lionne in Paris, the woman we're all mad after, 
wants to see you in her box ; . says she's an old 
adquaintance of yours." 

"My dear fellow, I am a respectable married 
man. I don't frequent the society of liounes now.'' 

"Welll but this is a duchess. We all know 
from London experience, that that makes all the 
difference." 



120 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

** Don't be cynical, Fitzy, it don't become you. 
Who's your duchess ? " 

'' De Valentino." 

'Tm none the wiser. Never heard of the 
title." 

** Oh ! it's not a sham. It exists, or rather did 
exist; for I believe the old duke, who died last 
Winter, left no heir. He was u Neapolitan, and 
an exile, a horrid old rip . and this is his 
widow.'' 

" Well, but who was she ? " 

'^Ah! you're getting too curious. No one 
knows; perhaps you can enlighten us. The 
duke picked her up in Italy, I believe, and she 
managed her a.ffairs so well (deuced clever 
woman), that he actually married her, and died 
here in Paris three or four months afterwards, 
leaving her nothing but debts and a title ! " 

"How does she live, then?" said Carrlyon, 
laughing. 

"Who shall say how any fascinating woman 
lives who has heaps of adorers ? Of course there 
are plenty of scandaks, but I don't believe any 



AU CINQUIEME. 121 

one knowa anything positive. Many a man liko 
that old R^ pays through the nose, I believe 
for the sake of being seen with her. of having 
the Ailat of a supposed liaon with a woman 
like herseif. As to me, I've only known her 
lately, and I'm too poor to do anjrthing but lay 
an opera-box or a bouquet upon the altar of this 
divinity ; but, by Jove ! she's a woman to go mad 
for, Carrlyon, . ^look out for yourself ! " 

*^My dear fellow, as I before observed, I'm 
married. You don't know all the delightfiil safety 
conveyed in that word. But where is she ? You 
make me curious to see this fair lady who claims 
my acquaintance." 

"You can't see her from here. She's behind 
that curtain. You must come round, if you want 
to see her.** 

*^ Well ! I suppose there's no hrm in." 

*' Come along, man.** 

And the two cousins entered the box together. 

**Am I so changed that you don't recognize 
me, Lord Carrlyon?'* said the Duchesse, in rieh 
musical voice, as she smiled and held out her 



122 CARB OF CARELTON. 

hand. She drew back the cortaiii at the same 
time^ and pointed to the chair opposite, wliich 
Monsieur R&d had just left. *^Have you for- 
gotten a certjwn drive when our carriage broke 
down, and you were good eoiough to bring us 
home in yours ? I have not seen you since 
your marriage-day." 

Carrlyon coloured. 

^^ Pardon me. I , haven't a Frenchman's art 
of paying compliments, er I should endeavour 
to express that, if I didn't recognize you at the 
first moment, it is that time has added so much 
to . ^instead of taking from, your personal attrac- 
tions, Madame la Duchesse . ^besides my not 
being in the least prepared to see you here.** 

He feit, to say the truth, rather uncomfortable. 
He remembered all the horror his wife had 
expressed on the rare occasions when her former 
companion's name had crossed her lips. He 
remembered her strnge notes to himself, the 
unexplained tie subsisting between her and the 
late Mr. Oourteney, the darkness and mystery 
which had always surrounded this woman. At 



AU cmQUii:ME. 123 

the some time it is as well to remind the reader 
tbat Lord Carrlyon had never known anything 
of Sara's campaign. Mrs. Courteney and her 
danghter had shrunk from speaking of the 
equivocal position in which she had been found 
at Peschiera; and when the marchesa alluded in 
conversation to Guido's devoted nurse, she did 
80 with no knowledge of her name. Carrlyon 
had heard enongh of the dachesse, however, from 
his Cousin, to add to his discomfort on recognizing 
in her the Sara Gisborne of whom he retained 
anything but a favonrable impression; and he 
began to revolve in his mind how he could 
gracefiilly execute a retreat from the position 
in which he found himself. The duchesse had 
drawn back the curtain, as I have said. His 

I 

wife's box was exactly opposite. 

** Very neatly said for an Englishman,** smiled 
the duchesse, " and how is Lady Carrlyon ? 
I suppose I mustn't call her Gilda. We had 
a little quarrel, you know, petite Jalousie defemmey 
when we were both silly girls." (Carrlyon 
winced). *^ But bygones should be bygones, nw 



124 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

that we are both married. She looks pale^ poor 
dear. I hope her spirits are not bad? They 
used to be so very high." 

" She is delicate. She inherlts her father's 
Constitution, Fmsorry to say." 

liiere was a slight contraction in the pupil 
of the lady's velvet eyes, and an involuntary 
movement of the mouth. It was not lost on 
Carrlyon. She went on in a mocking tone, 

^^ And Mrs. Courteney ? She is no longer 
with you, I believe ? Your generosity was 
amazing, in keeping her so long after you had 
been so deceived 1 Of course your family could 
not be expected to countenance such a person. 
Where is she now ? '' 

^^ In Italy. We shall see her in the spring." 

'^Poor Italy. Our friends there are most of 
them dead or in exile. Have you seen Count 
Lamberti since your marriage ? " 

'' I have not" 

*^ Then you do not know his fate ? " 

There was a sort of bitter triumph in the way 
fihe asked this. 



AU CINQUIEME. 125 

" No, nor am I deeply interested," he replied ; 
biit his cheek kindled. 

" Your wife, at least, will like to hear of her 
old friend. He is here . in Paris . teaching 
Italian. Utterly ruined . ^what Httle property 
he had having been confiscated after the fall 
of Korne. He fought there to ihe last, you 
know, he and the old Garofalo . ^you remember 
him? The old man was killed, and the young 
one is here, trying to earn a few francs." 

No donbt it cost that woman something to 
say those few words, apparently so carelessly 
nttered. But we know what a consummate 
actress she was. There was nothing to indicate 
that the subject touched her deeply. 

Carrlyon did not reply. He rose to take his 
leave. 

"How long have you been in Paris?" she 
Said, as she held his band. 

*^ We got here at Christmas." 

" And you remain the winter, I hope ? " 

*' Yes, if my wife doesn't feel the cold too 
much." 



126 CARB OF CABELYON. 

'* Won't you come and see me . Place 
Vendme ? I receive on Taesday evenings. 
To-morrow I have a box at . the Palais Royal, 
if yoa like to look in ; but,. perhaps, youVe too 
yirtuoos (such a model hufiband!) to enjoy 
naughty French plays ? " 

" Thank you. We dine ^t the English 
Embassy. The naughty French plays are many 
of them Very dull, I think,. in spite of ieir 
reputatlon. I have no other objection, to see- 
ing one." 

" Have you your horses in Paris ? " 
" I have no horses anywhere just now." 
"Because I have a charming hack> quite at 
your Service whenever you feel inclined to accom- 
pany me. I ride to the Bois every moming at 
twelve." 

Lord Carrlyon bowed, and murmured some- 
thing about Madame la Duchesse beisg too ,kind ; 
and the box-door opening at that moment admitted 
Monsieur R^al. 

"Madame de Czerny will join your supper- 
party, Duchesse, and begs to be allowed to bring 



AU CINQUiiME. 127 

an Italian fiiend of Iiers^ who knew yon^ he says, 
formerly . ^le Comte JlazzL** 

Had any one present known, which none did, 
the nature of her past relations with the man 
she was thus asked to receive^ the study of the 
dnchesse's face woold have been wholesome and 
instructive. It wore an expression snch as Rachel 
occasionally tumed to admirable acconnt in her 
finest parts. There was the slightest possible 
amount of annoyance and surprise, qnickly fading 
away into the most sublime contempt, which just 
curled the comers of her mouth. '^Does that 
miserable butterfly dare to disturb my repose ? 
Is he fluttering round me still ? Let him come. 
I will not break the wretched creature on the 
wheel. He can do me no hrm now." The 
changing expression of her face aaid all that to 
the initiated. 

As it was^ Carrlyon only smiied to remember 

how in&tuated the Bolognese geneman had been 

two years before on the subject of this same 

woman. 

*' Will you come back and have sapper with 



128 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

US, Lord Carrlyon, when you have seen your 
wife safe home, like the model husband you 
are?" 

" Not to-night, thank you." 

^' Ah I I See Gilda keeps too tight a band on 
you at present. A .man is like a borse. You 
sbould let bim bave bis bead a little." 

*' It is possible, bowever, for a man's bead, like 
a borse's, to turn towards bis own stall and bis 
manger, Ducbesse. Good-nigbt.'* 

He was pleased witb bimself for baving said 
ratber a good tbing, and made a better exit tban 
be expected. 

As to tbe ducbess, let ber be content. Sbe bas 
plunged a fresb dagger into tbe beart of tbe 
woman sbe bas never forgiven, and will never 
forgive. Sbe bas sbown to all tbe world tbat sbe 
is upon tbe best possible terms witb tbe young 
Englisbman. Sbe bas kept bim twenty minutes 
in ber box before tbe wbole bouse. Her jealousy 
and ber vanity bave both bad tbeir triumph 
to-nigbt. Let ber be content. 

Carrlyon, wbo was again detained for a few 



AU CmQUIEME. 129 

minutes by a friencl in the lobby, only just reacLed 
bis wife's box as the curtain feil, apd the stream 
began pouring out of the theatre. He placed the 
cloak on her Shoulders, and she fastened it She 
looked a shade paler perhaps than usual, but took 
her husband's arm without a word, and passed out 
into the crowd. 

One of the world's " good-natured people," I will 
call her Mrs. Smith . if she ever reads this, let her 
conscience smite her . came up with her husband 
while the Carrlyons were waitirig for their 
carriage. The husband spoke to Carrlyon, and the 
wife took an opportunity of whispering to Gilda : 

"I do feel for you, my dear! I should be so 
wretched if Charles frequented that horrid 
woman's Company. Such a dangerous creaturel 
No man can withstand her, they say." 

-** What are you talking about ? Who do you 
mean ? " faltered the young wife. 

" TVhy, the Duchesse de Valentine . the woman 
opposite you, of course. The poor dukel We 
knew him very well. He was such a charming 
man 1 " 

VOL. ni. 9 



130 CAEB CXF iGARRi;rON. 

** WaB he ? " repeated Gcilda, mechanically. 
JBut the next moment^ recovering from her painful 
bewilderment, she had the tact to say, " The lady 
I snppoBe you allude to is an did friend of mine. 
I did not know her nnder her present name, but 
Lord Carrlyon made her acqnaintance through 

Before the lady conld adeqnately express her 
astonishment^ Carrlyon had caught sight of the 
servant gesticulating that the carriage was ready, 
and he hurried his wife throngh the crowd. 

There was a face suddenly stretched forward, 
the wom, hoUow eyes of which followed the 
carriage with the moat intense interest, unt it 
disappeared round the comer. And then another 
carriage drew up, a small little brougham, with 
a Coronet, and the rnost dapper of English tigers, 
into which carriage was handed, by two gentle- 
men, a dark, handsome woman, flashing with 
diamonds, on whom the pallid face in the crowd 
looked with a very diSerent expression . a kind of 
disdainfiil pity, a shuddering sorrow, which made 
him qnickly tum away. The young man to whom 



AU CINQUIEME. 131 

tibis &ce belonged had fonnd himself wandering 
in th street that night, cold and famished. The 
light that streamed &om the great portico of the 
opera had attracted hinu There was a nearer 
approach to warmth in the crowd pouring out 
than was to be found in the black and &ozen streets. 
There is no fire, no fragment for supper, 
awaiting his return to that miserable garret au 
. einqumef to which he is slowly bending his weary 
Steps after that first glorious yision has past rom 
sight, as he walks along ; and a hard, hollow cough 
echoes with those steps down the street. He has 
tasted nothing since breakfast, and yet there are 
certain firancs in his pocket eamed by the sweat 
of his brow ; but they belong ahready to his 
landlord. They were paid him this evening 
at the end of a tedious lesson, and they will be 
paid away to-morrow ; for he is proud and 
scrupnlously honest, is this young man. But as 
he tums the corner of the last street, the gratefui 
odour of chestnuts roasted over a pan of charcoal 
reaches him. There are a few sous at the bottom 
cf his threadbare pocket. He takes out two, and 

9.2 



i 



132 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

hands them to the old crone^as he warms his 
nnmbed fingers over the, clear-burning coals. 
Then he walks away, bt stops presently, leaning 
against the wall, to gather strength for the 
remainder of his road. Thus, weak and suflfering, 
yet undaunted by pinching misery, with a few 
chestnuts for his supper, the heir of the Lambertis 
retums to his solitary garret. 

By way of contrast, let us glance for one 
moment at another interior that night. 

The Duchesse de Valentine has gone home to 
her gilded apartments, where the most profuse 
luxury reigns. The supper at which she enter- 
tains her select circle is sumptuous, though not 
too much so to offend good taste. If the wit be 
not very brilliant, the hilarity is apparently over- 
flowing ; and then -when the Champagne has ceased 
to run, the hostess is supplicated to raise her 
enchanting voice. And the syren does so, and 
it is pronounced far more enchanting than any- 
thing that has been heard that night. Song - 
follows song; she raises the excitement of her 
admirers to the utmost pitch, and she accepts 



AU' CINQIEME. 133 

the incense with a half cynical smile. At last, 
when they are all gone, she will fling herself 
on a sofa, and burying her head in the cushions 
shall sob her heart out, that fierce, passionate, 
ill-govemed woman, to think of her degradation, 
and of the price she has to pay for the power 
and Position . she has obtained. There is no 
shadow of repentance^ that sanctifying dew which 
falls on the thirsty heart; but there is contempt 
and dlsgust, a sense of satiety in f ulness, of failure 
in triumph, of disbelief in everything human and 
divine. 



.j 



134 ' CARR OP CARRLYON. 



CHAPTER IL 

Lord Carrlton's determination to wipe off all 
Lis father's debts involved a rigid economy for 
some years to come. Carrlyon was let, the 
house in Belgrave Square sold. A son had 
been bom to Lady Carrlyon during the past 
winter (which had been spent in London); but 
the joy consequent on this event had been 
short-lived. The child only survived its birth a 
few weeks, and the dowager was once more 
triumphant and hopeful. After this . it was the 
spring of '49 . the Carrlyons left England again. 
No wonder that the*six months' experience of 
London's fogs and glooms, associated as it was 
with a mother's first grief, left no pleasing im- 
pression of England on the mind of one bred 
under the sunny skies of Italy. She had scarcely 



AU. CINQUIEME.. 135 

made a firiend. Ladjr Carrlyon had taken indns- 
trions care that no member of the familj should 
Step forward and extend a cordial hand to the 
dendlesa stranger. Abandoning her hopes of 
eflSecting a rupture by a coup^-mcdn^ the dowager 
now trusted to time to wear out the heavy chain 
which her son had. riveted npon him. But her 

. petty spite was vindictive and vigilant as ever. 
It is remarkable that even sensible people will 
often accept facts advanced by some one for 
whom they entertain a thorough contempt, rather 
than trust their own discrimination in testlng the 
probabllity of such facts. So it was generally 

^ received as incontrovertible that Lord Carrlyon 
was a "martyr to circumstances," that he had 
been entrapped by a vei'y deeigning mother, 
who, as every one knew (for Lady Garrlyon's 
parentage was by tJiis time a matter of public 
notoriety), was a. most depraved character. As 
to her daughter, th^e is a scripturl proverb about 
figs and thistles^ which was made to do a great 
deal of duty; while in reference to the stories 
circulated about her by the dowager, was tiiere 



136 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

not a profane one touching fire and smoke 
which the most leniently-disposed must find 
concluive ? 

Gilda was unfeignedly glad, then, to exchange 
the chilling visits of ceremony, the eight o'clock 
dinners, and the powdered footmanhood of London, 
for the more unsophisticated life to which she had 
been accustomed. She and her husband were 
thrown more together again than had been pos- 
sible in England, where bnsmess of various kinds 
had called him much from home, and Gilda had 
spent many entire days by herseif. It would have 
seemed natural, perhaps, that her mother should 
have been sent for as the time of Lady Carrlyon's 
confinement drew near: but that was not to be. 
The idea, by constant repetition, had been firmly 
established in Lord Carrlyon's mind, that it was 
not wise or justifiable to have his mother-in-law 
an inmate in his house jtist at rst, on arrival 
in England. He knew the world was inclined 
to be very ill-natured ; the presence of the divorced 
lady would be a legitimate excuse with many for 
avoiding Lady Carrlyon. It would still further 



AU CINQUIEME. 137 

prejudice his friends against his wife, and he had 
no right to allow this. By which specious argu- 
ment he proved, of course, that he was as 
indifferent to the world's opinion as he always 
professed himself, and that he acted only from 
tlie most unselfish love and regard for his wife. 
Gilda herseif was careful never to glve utterance 
to the intense longing she feit to behold that dear 
mother again. The cloud had never been cleared 
up. Something there was . ivliaty she knew not . 
which rendered her mother's name painful to 
Laurence, and her presence unacceptable. He 
had avoided all her inquiries ; he had at last 
forbidden her to question him further on the 
subjeet : it was a sealed book between them. 
She looked forward doubly to going abroad with 
the hope of rejoining or at least meeting her 
mother; but Mrs. Courteney was still in Italy, 
and Laurence decided that their first summer 
was to be spent in the Pyrenees, and this winter 
in Paris. Hitherto, therefore, mother and daughter 
had not met. Laurence spoke of Switzerland now 
for the spring ; " and then your mother can join 



138 CARB OF CABRLYON. 

US," he added. Bis wife'a brimming eyes and 
beaming face were liis rewanL 

I have Said that she was thrown more with 
her husband when tibey left England; but on 
reaching Paris something of the English life was 
renewed. Gilda began to go into sodety for 
the first time since her marriage, and to fall 
into that daily routine which she soon foresaw 
would form a large portion of their existence 
henceforward. She knew little or nothing of 
the World, but she had ihe good sense to under- 
stand that if Lanrence showed any desire to go 
out, the wisest thing was not to discourage it, 
but to accompany him. He was very populr 
both with men and women ; and though we know 
that he affected to be superior to that sort of 
thing, the silent flattery of popularity was soothing 
and grateful to him after his long abstinence from 
this moral opium. Unfortunately the physicians 
were unanimous in declaring that Lady Carrlyon 
ought not to over-fatigue herseif; should avoid 
late hours, heated rooms, and excitement of all 
hinds. She was expecting her confinement in- 



AU CINQUIEME.. 139 

April, and it was urged on her, tiiat her child's 
health would, in all probability, depend on her 
own during the next three montha To this 
argument she reluctandy yielded at last; but it 
made her uiihappy to tfaink that Laurence should 
remain at home on her accoont. ^*It is of the 
greatest importance," wrote the dowager, **to 
Carrlyon's prospects in life that he should mix 
in all the diplomatic society, and be appreciated 
among them, as he cannot fail to be: fori am 
a& strennons as ever in my exertions to get him 
someiJiingy and an embassy would of course be 
the best thing. So I do trust you will not di^ 
courage his mixing, if you are in such poor healtji 
that you cannot go out." It will be seen there 
was a hoUow truce between ther mother and 
daughter-in-law, which was ratified from time to 
time by one of these hard didactic letters. This 
one was not without its efiect. The young wife 
feit it would be selfish to allow her husband's 
prospects to be injured by preventing his " mixing; '* 
and she urged him continually to leave her, when 
perhaps it would ha-ve been wiser not to have 



140 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

done so. There may be no diminution of affec- 
tion at first^ but a habit of life is acquired thus, 
which is often destructive of domestic happiness. 

Were they happy then? It was generally 
thought so. Lord Carrlyon was very proud and 
evidently still very jealous of bis wife, thougli the 
most lynx-eyed of bis friends could never detect in 
her any disposition to fliri Bat there was that 
inexorable voice for ever whispering in bis ear, 
*' Beware I you must be doubly careful of her, it is 
in the blood; it is an inberitance . that tendency to 
inconstancy." And it was no use bis shutting bis 
ears indignantly. The voice spoke just as clear 
next time. 

Many an evening now she spent alone ; and on 
the rare occasions that she did accompany bim into 
Society, it was to see bim surrounded by a world of 
which she knew nothing, in whom she feit no 
interest, and wbo talked a language she scarcely 
understood. They bad been married now two 
years. She bad bad opportunity enough to study 
her husband's character, its good and its weak 
points. Was she a bappier woman? As time 



AU CINQUIEME. 141 

removed her fartlier and farther from that early 
heart trial which had left its brand indelibly upon 
her soul, the sharp, painful outlines of the past 
were in a measure softened. I confess this at 
once, though I am aware it will destroy much 
sympathy for her. But like Mistress Robin Gray, 
she had been striving " a gude wife to be " every 
day of those two years : and her efiTorts, so far as 
in her lay, had been rewarded. It is even possible, 
had her husband's character been other than it was, 
that she niight now have been enjoying as mode- 
rate a share of happiness as falls to most women. 
Nothing could ever have replaced the one streng 
passion of her early life ; but do we not see 
around us every day women who, under like 
circumstances, are peaceful . contented T The 
misfortune was that there was an absence in 
Laurence of all that would have Consolidated her 
affection ; of all that her character most needed, 
that her heart most yeamed for. Brilliant social 
attractions, a poetical temperament, a refined and 
accomplished mind . nay, generosity, kindness, and 
a thousand other good qualities are but as the. 



142 CAE DP CAERLTON. 

scttlpttired leaves and flowers aronnd a colunm. 
If the plinth be of granite^ well : if of more friable 
material, its capital will not withstand the rde 
hand of time. 

Gilda'B nature essentiall j demanded strength of 
the man on whom she now endeavoured to lean 
The attitude of a woman who is perpetually 
obliged to watch every varying shade on her husr 
band's face i never imorally Jieahhy. It is pro- 
bable that a woman of more decided will> a more 
domineeringy more exacting^ . in short, what is 
called a cleverfr woman, would have been very 
much happier.in Gilda's place. She would have 
** managed " her husband. And he no doubt after 
a fitruggle or two would have succumbed, had she 
^nly Keen sufficiently adroit. But management 
was not in Gilda's line. Her sole thought was to 
pleasB her husband; and the occasions were rare 
wlien she ventured to act upon her own private 
judgment, if opposed to bis. Such occasions, how- 
ever, iad once or twice arisen : once, I remember, 
in reference to the treatment of her poor little baby 
whom she nnrsed herseif, contrary to Laurence's 



AU CINQUIEME. 143 

wih, Tintil he got the doctors to declare that she 
was injuring the child's health as well as her own. 
;She reluctantly yielded. The child did not die for 
some weeks afterwards, and from other causes; 
but the young mother could never get rid of the 
impres^ion that It might have been saved had fihe 
.continued to nurse it. 

The Carrlyons had now been m Paris three 
weeks, They had apartments in. the Stel de 
la Terrasse, fecing the Tuileries gardens. In 
these gardens Gilda walked daily with her hus- 
band in the morning, when the weather permitted. 
He had an objeetion to her going out without 
him, under any circumstances wha^ever. She 
had ventured, the moming after their arrival, 
with Marietta, as far as a shop in the !Rne de la 
Paix ; but Laurence was seriously annoyed, and 
she never thought of repeating the offence; so 
that she was virtoally ehut up, unless Laurence 
happened to be at home when the sun shone; 
and if the aftemoon was fine, and he was gone 
on a round of yisits, it was a grievous trial to the 
poor child of &eedom to look through her prison 




144 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

bars and see the gay carriages driving past into 
tlie Champs Elysdes. Of course, she occasionally 
went the round of Visits herseif,' but this was not 
a diversion which she much appreciated. She 
had few acquaintances : no friends. Laurence 
seemed always to discourage her makmg any; 
though he was jealously susceptible of the proper 
ceremonious respeet and attention being shown 
her. His own friends he never asked inside his 
house. ^e Said he couldn't aflFord to entertain; 
and they said, of course, that it was " all his wife." 
"A fellow's never worth anything after he's 
married, particularly when he's married out of 
his own sei." So Lady Carrlyon was voted cold 
and duU . altogether a mistake ; while only a few 
were enthusiastic in their admiration of the exqui- 
site charm and purity of her expression, and the 
great simplicity of her manners. 

. Among these, I remember, was poor Ary 
Scheffer, who expressed himself warmly about 
the young English lady. Indeed, I used to think 
at ihis time, that she gtrongly resembled one of 
his favourite heads ; too thin, perhaps, for critical 



AU CINQIEME. 



145 



beauty, but certainly most loveable and lovely. 
The change in the whole expression and character 
of her face must have Struck all wh had seen 
her two or three years previously. No child- 
Hke vivacity, no joyous sunbeams chasmg each 
other rapidly across the smooth, serene brow. 
The hope of youth had died out of that still 
young face : the tranquil, sober-coloured aifterhoon 
reigned there prematurelyi 



VOL. m. 



10 



146 CABB OB CABRLYON. 



CHAPTER ni 



...." 



Gilda was silent ihe whole waj home It was 
not in her natore to be aulkj : she woold franklj 
have expressed her annoyance, tut she scarcely 
knew whether it was right . or we^ at least . to 
do so with her husband. 

Laurence, on the other hand^ was waiting for 
this expression of annoyance, and angry that his 
wife chose to remain silent Perhaps, if tiie truth 
must be told, he would not have objected to her 
feeling just the least touch of jealousy. 

Now she either feit nothing of the sort, or she 
was immeasurably his superior in her power of 
self-restraint : so much was clear. At last his 
own impatience, when ihey reached home, burst 
out, . 

*'Your friend, Miss Gisbome, has had an 



AJl CINQIME. 147 

extraordinary rise in. th world. I auppose you 
saw her to-night? She is now a dnchefflu" 

" I cannot caQ^ hec a iGdend. I hsve a. bad 
opinion of her.!' ^ 

" Oh I there was some qoarrel . a jealousy 
between yon; she referred to it to-nighfc. I never 
could teil why it. was you W.re quite so hard 
lipon her always. BFot that I ever liked her; 
and you needn't be the least afraid that I am going 
to Ml a victim to her charms now*'' 

'^I am not; but I think she has regarded itaa 
a trinmph^ having you. in her box tfais? evening* 
I know it from the way in which she looked 
across at. me. And . and^ i you don'tr know it, 
Laorence^ I must teil you that she is not well 
spoken of* I don't want to^ b& unx^haritable^ 
but whether she be a duchess^. or whatever die 
is^ I can't. regard her aa fasving^ rison in the 
world since she wasr with n& She was. &lse and 
ungrateftil ta my mother ; and L heard. her witfa 
my own ears entering into a compact, with dia 
man she aftexwardft so' grossly decdved^ All 
this ia enough ta make me regard her with 

10.2 



148 CARB OF CABBLTON. 

arersioD^ without any otlier cause. I confess, 
dear Laurence, that I shonld be sorry if you 
frequented her soeiety mucli ; and as to myself^ 
you would not ask me, I am sure, to renew our 
acquaintance, would you ?" 

"Certainly not: at the same time I must 
correct one statement You remember how she 
nursed your mother five days and nights? As 
to ypur father's extraordinary legacy, or whatever 
you choose to call it, I know of nothing to make 
one believe that she got him to sign tliat paper 
by any unfair means. Of course it was a most 
mysterious bequest, but your mother always chose 
to maintain a rigid silence on the subject^ so I 
really know nothing to justify your accusation 
of her ingratitude to Mrs. Courteney. As to what 
she may be otherwise, I dare say her character 
won't bear] strict investigation, but neither will 
half the women in Paris : and, as I often teil you, 
Gilda, you carCt be too careful, particularly in 
such a scandalous place as this." 

" I dare say you're right, Laurence." 

" I can't cut this woman exactly," he went on, 



AU CINQUIEME. 149 

after a pause. " She was uncommonly civil, 
offered me her horse, and so on, and as I don't 
know anytliing positively against her, I can't cut 
her, you know, Gilda." 

His wife was silent. Perhaps she thought what 
she had just told him was sufficiently against the 
lady in question. If her husband didn't see it in 
that light she could say no more. Her silence 
was misinterpreted by Carrlyon, who retumed to 
his original charge. 

"But you needn't be the least alarmed, you 
needn't be the least jealous, Gilda : I should not 
think o^frequenting this lady' society." 

**I don't understand jealousy until one's con- 
fidence has been shaken. I should only be sorry 
for you to be seen often with her, because of the 
way in which ihis world of Paris talks. I have 
seen enough of it already to know that" 

" Oh, yes I of course, and all the men here seem 
mad after her. I assure you I was quite envied 
to-night," he added, laughing. " She wanted me to 
go back and have supper with a small party in 
her apartment." 



160 GARE OF CARRLYON. 

^'Did she?" Baid Gilda, but in no tone of 
inqtriry. 

And to join her party at the Palais Eoyal 
to-morrow . ^but I refused that also." 

" We dine at the Eiribassy/' observed bis wife, 
quietly. 

Her hnfiband tnmed away, rather piqued tbat 
he could not Tonse so much as a spark of jealons 
nneasiness in bis wife's breqfit. 

The following morning, at an early bour, 
Carrlyon was at Galignani's. He bad formed 
a magnanimons resolve before felling asleep tbe 
previous nigbt, and was bent on carrying it out. 
His efforts to leam tbe address of tbe person be 
fiougbt did not att rst seem likely to be suecessfiil. 
He looked down Ibe list of Italian teacbers, be 
questioned in vain tbe foggy man in spectacles 
wbo waited on bim. He was on every acconnt 
anxious not to bave recourse to tbe Ducbesse de 
Valentine: and yet it seemed as if be would be 
reduced to tbis measure. He was leaving tbe 
sbop, wben a yonnger man bebind tbe counter, 
wbo bad beard bis last ({uestion, stepped forward. 



AU CINQUiiME. 151 

He remembered a sick-looking gentleman who 
called some time ago^ and left a card ; but Paris 
was already so overstocked with professors of 
every language under the sun, that they, Galig- 
nani, were able to offer bim no encouragement 
They told bim that, witbout special interest, it 
was bopeless. He had since called once, but tbere 
was, of course, nothing for bim. Perbaps this 
was the person Milord was in searcb of. And 
after a bunt among dust-covered cards, so it 
proved. Signor Lamberti, Teacber of ItaUan, 
Rue du Bac, No, . . 

To fbis address Lord Carrlyon at once directed 
bis Steps. He had a generous disposition, and 
the romantic dement in bis character was touched 
at the deed whicb had suggested itself to bim. 
He had well conidered in wbat terms he sbould 
convey bis desire to assist the man who was 
once bis rival. But he had not contemplated 
wbat Steps he sbould take if the Italian were 
from bome, and this, it proved, was ibe 
case. 

** At wbat bour does he generally come in ? ** 



152 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

demanded Carrlyon of the grimy old woman in 
tlie porter's lodge. 

" Probably not tili night. Sometimes it is very 
kte.*' 

** Has he so many pupils then ? Is he giving 
lessons all that time ? ^ 

The crone shook her head^ witli a not unkindly 
smile. 

** Poor young man ! I should think not, 
indeed I He doesn't eam enough to buy himself 
a dinner every day, by the look of him. It is 

I 

only two days ago I said to him, * Look you, a 
shopman's trade is better than yours. There's 
my boy, now he is well-paid and well-fed, and 
looks rosy, he does.' " 

"Ah!" said Carrlyon, anxious to encourage 
the old woman's garrulity. " He is rosy, this 
son of yours ? a handsome fellow, no doubt And 
in what house is he ? " 

"In the Maison de Lille, m'sleur. He is 
handsome, though I should not say it, and a 
great favourite with the ladies, but such a good 
son to me, m'sieur! Never misses a Sunday 



AU CmQUIEME, 153 

Coming to see me, dressed in bis beautiful clothes, 
with a satin stock, and a flower in his button, 
when he migbt be, ta . ta, 1 know what I 
Icnow.^ 

" Monsieur Lamberti is not so fortunately 
endowed, perhaps," Carrlyon remarked, with a 
smile. ^^The Maison de Lille would not find 
it pay to have a sallow, melancholy-looking 
Italian, eh, madame ? " 

" Du touty du tout ! II aurait aussi des bonnes 
fortunes, celui-ly sHl itdit seulement bien 
nourri ! If he only woidd take to the counter ! 
but a man who generally goes without a dinner, 
what would you have ? It is a pity, a great pity, 
m'sieur." 

Carrlyon was, or fancied himself to be, a great 
physiognomist. The old woman was to be 
trusted: in this instance he was not deceived. 
He tore a leaf out of his note-book, and twisted 
it round a note of five hundred francs, writing 
in Italian outside that it was left by a friend. 
He placed this in the old woman's band, together 
with a five-franc piece; charging her to dehver 



154 CABB OS CABBLYON. 

the former withont answering any questions 
relative to himsel A sfaranger had leftit; she 
knew HO more^ and was straightway to forget 
what manner of man he was. 

Garrlyon wal^d away with very conaiderable 
satisfaction. He could not well afford that twenty 
pounds jiist then ; but he had spent it in 
a way which gratified various qualities; some 
which we have named, some we will not inquire 
more particalarly into ; Bince, even in the texture 
of many a good action, may be discerned the 
secret thread of human frailty, 

Another weary day of expectation, and of 
fruitless inquiry, for the Italian teacher. His 
engagements at present stood thus:- . A daily 
and gratuitous lesson to two poor young sisters, 
whom he had casually heard of, as preparing them- 
selves for govemesses. A lesson three evenings 
in the week to a young clerk, who was shortly 
to join a merchant's house in Leghorn. And a 
lesson . nominally twice a week, in reality not 
oftener than once a fortnigfat, by reason of the 
lady's caprice . :to the daughter of an English 



AU CINQUIEME. 155 

gentleman. This left a large margin of unoccupied 
time, and alas I as his cancierge had rightly 
diviiied, a purse whoy inadequate to the 
simplest wants of daily life, Of his private 
means he had absolutely nothing lefk. His 
landed properly, with what small poseessions he 
had lefb at Bologna^ had all been confiscated 
by the Chnrch ; and now, on a Constitution im- 
paired by the wounds and the fatigues of the 
last two years' campaigns, the privations and 
the Hearing anxiety of this daily struggle were 
telling visibly. That cough grew more hollow 
every day. Though the man's energy bore him 
up wonderfully, more and more frequent grew 
the occasions when he had to stop in his rapid 
walk through the streets, and lean against a 
wall. He waxed weaker and weaker. His pride 
and his tenacity of purpose were the same as 
of old; but in appearance he was scarcely re- 
cognizable. The fece fallen away, the lines 
about the mouth hardened and compressed, the 
eyes so far, far down m those deep brovsii 
hollows ; it was indeed surprising that the old 



166 CAB OF CARRLYON. 

woman sliould discover any charm in that wan, 
haggard face. That she did so was owing to 
that secret power in it^ which influences most 
women, young and old. 

He.had sought for work far and near that 
day, the work f a penny-a-liner, at the door 
of three editors; the work of a Grub Street 
hack in the shops of a dozen librarians. All 
without successl of no avail his great endow- 
ments^ his vast acquirements here^ it seems. The 
pride of the Bolognese University, the acCoi- 
plished Scholar, cannot eam his bread, while' the 
rosy son of the concierge revels among the flesh-pots 
of Egypt ! This is no overcharged picture ; it is 
a commonplace, as false as commonplaces usually 
are, that ability will always be recognized sooner 
or later. Ay 1 it is too often later ; when it has 
passed away irrevocably from among us. There 
is no nimbus round the head of genius by which 
we shall recognise its presence; and while pre- 
sumptuous ignorance is too often thrust to the 
fore, great intelligences may be passed over, unless 
some happy accident reveal tliem to the world. 



A CINQUIEME. 157 

There was a time when this man's heart had 
been fll of wratli and bittemess; it was so no 
longer. The two great hopes of bis Ufe were 
dead, and the adversities through which he had 
passed had not been without their uses; tiiough 
it may be that he had yet somewhat to leam. 
But he had more tolerance in present evil ; more 
trust in fiiture good. Without a sneer at the 
blockheads on whom he saw the loaves and 
fishes showered, he met his daily disappoint- 
ments, what some might have considered his 
daily humiliations. It was not in the power of 
such things now to touch him deeply; so long 
as he could retain his independence he was almost 
indifferent to the rest It might be from extreme 
bodily prostration that all ambition seemed dead 
within him ; there was no goal to win now, but 
sufficient unto each day was the evil thereof. 

He came home towards dusk, feeling the 
absolute necessity for rest. An acute pain in his 
ehest, from which he habitually suffered now, had 
increased greatly this aftemoon, owing, probably, 
to the scanty nourishment he had taken while 




158 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

tmdergoinggreatfatigae. Hecould scarcely drag 
bis weaxy limba alongi and the sight of the 
battered gates of liie okl porte^isochire wa an 
inestimable relief at last. 

The old woman seemed Struck witb tbe 
additinal pallor and attenuation of tiie yotmg 
man's &ce^ as sbe leaned orer ber door and 
banded to bim Carrlyon^s note^ for sbe sbook ber 
bead^ muttering to berself at tbe same time, . 

'^ JS*etait setdement dem la Maiion de Lille . . /" 

He took tbioF little twisted slIp of paper in bis 
band witbout interest or curiosity apparently^ but 
wbile tbe old woman was ligbting bis candie (and 
sbe was an unusual lengtb of time about it) bis 
fingers listlessly untwisted wbat tbey beld. He 
opened out tbe crisp folds of the billet de banque 
and held it to the ligbt. 

Then followed a silence whicb seemed to the 
old woman a very long one^ and he boked up 
witb knit brows and a stem questioning ftice. 

** Wbere does tbis come from? ** 

" How am I to know, m'sieur." 

*^Wbobroughtit?" 



AH ONQUliME. 159 

 A man." 
"InUvery?" 



 No." 

*' What did he say ? " 



He desired that miglit be given to you." 

"Nothing more? Think, now . try and re- 
member." 

** Nothing. I am quite sure." 

The old woman resolutely shook her head^ and 
Monsieur Lambert!^ taking np bis candle^ pro- 
ceeded without another word to climb dowly the 
four pair of stairs that led to bis little room 

It was a Strange way for a starving man to 
greet the band in the dark that held out life to 
him. 



160 CARR OF CARRLYON. 



CHAPTER IV. 

When he reached liis own room, lie sat down 
before the paper and attentively considered the 
haudwriting. It was unknown to him: but one 
thing was suflBciently clear, it was the writing of 
no Italian, He might have surmised long and 
vaguely, but for an accidental circumstance. 
Lord Carrlyon had not observed, in tearing the 
leaf from his note-book, that a few faint lines . a 
mere Scratch, indeed . had been drawn by him on 
the reverse side of the page, This sketch . if 
sketch it could be called . indicated the outline 
of Gilda's head, as she beut over her book one 
evening; and so happily had the character been 
caught, that it was not possible to mistake for 
whom it was meant, 

Ahl Carrlyon, those few pencil-strokes have 



AU CINQlijME. 161 

not only frustrated your generous design, they 
will be the cause of mucli present and future 
misery. A night of acute anguish^ of humiliation 
such as he never believed it possible for him to 
have feit, was the immediate result produced by 
that little scrap of paper on the individual it 
was meant to b<3nefit. 

In an instant all seemed piain before him. This 
act of charity originated in the angel from whom 
his pride had alone separated him ; she had asso- 
ciated her husband in these pitying alms bestowed 
npon the starving Italian* teacher. To almost 
any man there would have been a measure of 
bitterness in this cup, *very hard to accepi To 
Guido, witb his temperament, and under the 
peculiar circumstances in which he stood with 
regard to the Carrlyons, it was an aggravation 
of his sufferings; a degradation to which all he 
had undergone hitherto was as nothing. He 
thought of his last interview witib Gilda; of the 
letter he had subsequently written to Lord Carr- 
lyon, and of the short, cold answer he had received 
in retum. He remembered this, and writhed 

TOL. ra. 11 



162 CAEB Or CARRLYON. 

npon his sleepless pallet as he pictored to himself 
the wib's pleading ejeSy and gentle^ ^persuasive 
Yoice nrging on her hu^and the deed of mercj 
towards an abject^ miserable man I 

He was unwilling, very mwilling to come into 
personal contact with Carrlyon or Wa wife. Putting 
aside eveiy other consideration, he knew how the 
mere sight of her as die stepped into her carriage 
had power to trouble and con&se his ihoughts; 
how the stubbom heart he had been schooling 
80 long rose up in rebellion then; and how all 
that fostered her memory nnfitted him for his 
daily work. As to her hnsband^ ii was natural 
that he should feel extremely repugnant to seeking 
an interview with him. But there was no choice 
in the matter. After arriving at that conclusion^ 
the young Italian fell asleep towards early moming 
firom sheer exhaustion; but only passed &om a 
wxirld of painful reality to one of agitated dreams. 

It was unusually late when he wxDike^ The 
cravings of hungerj^ which he had staved off the 
previous evening, were so sharp that he feit the 
necessity of strengthening his exhausted powers 



A GENQliMEL 163 



for the trial that was h^(xce Hm, hy sometiag: 
moce dian the panng of a stide loaf nd hui 
Single cup of cofiee* The brlght ejesi of the old 
portress twinkled as she wafiched the young maa 
sallj forth and enter the caf c^posita 

^ Ha ! hon . ^that comea of my firiendj um 
Englishman The poor fellaw has not entered 
that door once Bince he came to lodge here. 
Thank God> mj Gaston haa hi bettle of Bor- 
deaux and a good breakfast everj moming ! " 

Guido found no difficulfy in leaming Lord. 
Carrlyon's address. Towards midday he reached 
the Hotel de la Terrasse. His lordship was not 
at homa Here was an unlooked-for difficnltjr^ 
He could ill spare ihe time to be ruzming huxkf- 
wards and forwards^ when he onght to be at 
worky or,^ at least^ trjing to find it Moreaver^ 
until this question was set at rest, and the snbjeet 
dismissed firom his nnnd, he feit it would be 
impossible to do anjthing. Het oonsidered  be 
stood there . at the porter's lodge. whedier it 
were possible to retom tibe'Xnofiey hy lettor. Mad 
he bj any chance been mistakea in hm surmise, 

11.2 



164 CABB OF CARRLTON. 

miglit not this course lead to considerable awkward- 
ness and misapprehenslon ? As he thus debated 
a yexf simitfemme de chambre passed him. In 
her promotlon to a Parisian bonnet and shawl, 
Guido would hafdly have recognized Marietta, 
had she not stopped short^ exclaunlng with Italian 
impetnosity^ as she clasped her hands, . 

" Dio mio ! Who would have thought of seeing 
Count Guido here ! How glad the signora^ 
my lady^ will be . ^how glad ! But you look ill, 
Signor Conte^ pale^ and thin in the face. Ah! 
xne, how it recals that dear country, seeing you 
againl" 

"I am afraid . ^ he stammered, *^ that I cannot 
see your mistress now, Marietta. I had business 
with your master, but he is not at home." 

*' Ah I Signor Conte, you will not refuse to 
Step up, and see my lady for a few minutes only? 
You will teil her of Italy. She never hears of 
the dear country now. She sees no old friends : 
it will do her good." 

Such an interview must be far more painftil 
ihan any with Lord Carrlyon could possibly be. 



AU CINQli:ME. 165 

But should he shrink from it on ihat account? 
Was it not the simplest^ the most straightforward 
way, to appeal directly to her who had instigated 
this act of charityf He would put all eise out 
of sight. He would forget himself ; his own 
wounded feelings. He came there to satisfy a 
just sense of honour and independence. Now^ at 
least^ he would allow no false prIde to mar the 
accomplishment of the task in hand. 

After a momentary hesitation^ he followed 
Marietta. His braln swam round; his tongue 
seemed cleaving to the roof of his mouth^ as ihe 
ante -Chamber door opened, and closed behind 
him^ and he found himself once again alone in 
the presence of Gilda. 

She had heard the name so joyously announeed 
by Marietta, and had started up from her chair ; 
her cheek a shade paler^ her breathing quick and 
irregulr, her fingers slowly relaxing their hold of 
the baby's white frock on which they had been 
employed until it slid down upon the floor at her 
feet, She was not otherwise agitated outwardly. 
Her manners was composed and her voice tolerably 



166 CABB CV X^ISKETON. 

fteady irhen ehe spoke. She made a movemeirt as 
if to hold out her hand : bot he elther did not, or 
woidd not percerre it 

^ When we last met and parted^ Ladj Carr* 
Ijm,^ he ;(^ke in a low hnsky ydce^ ''it 'was 
imder painful dbrcomstancefi Yon will Teadilj 
believe I wocdd! not seek to recal them by trou 
Ming you with my presence now ; but your 
husband is out^ whom I called to Bee, and you guess^ 
no doubt^ what it is that brings me here, ^at 
makes me aeek a &w moments' interview with 
you?" 

'^No, .kiido, I do not; I did not know you 
were in Paris. I grieve to see you looking 
so lU." 

^' You did not know I was in Paris ? " he repeated. 

*^No,Ididnot"' ^ ' 

^* Tou had not heard fliat my small property was 
eonfiscated? ihat I was penniless^ and an ezile? 
I beseedi of you to answer me candidly. Pray 
let no &lse Mndness prompt you to deceive me^ 
Lady Carrlyon.'* 

She looked at him in astonishmoit 



AU CINQUiiME. 167 

"My mother did indeed write to me that jonr 
property was confiscated ; but I knew no more. 
I longed to hear that you were . were domg wdl, 
Guido, bnt no word has erer reached me.* 

'^ And your hosband? Have you no xeason to 
think that Lord Carrlyon has heard of me lately? 
That his generosity has been roused by what 
he beEeves, however falsely, to be my great 
distress ? * 

Gilda cdoured up to the temples. 

" I think not. I believe I should have heard it. 
What has kd you to this conclusion ? " 

^ The fact tiiat ^" *he stopped short He was 

reluctant to speak of that little pencil-head. '^No 
matter^ it seems I was mistaken." 

He feit troubied . confiised. Every possible 
contingency passed in rapid review before his mind. 
The iraage of the dark face he had seen conung 
out of the opera rose up once more. Had she 
sought to humSiate him in the eyes of Gilda and 
her husband ? Was it purposely to mislead him, 
that that sketch had accompanied the anonymocs 
gift imder which be was writhing ? He passed Hs 



168 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

band over hls brow^ as these perplexing questions 
presented themselves. 

Gilda made a step forward^ and laid her 
trembling band upon bis arm. A sbock seemed 
to run tbrougb bis wbole body. He started 
violently. 

^' Yeu are ill, Guido. I see it Wbat is tbe 
matter ? Wbat does all tliis mean ? Is it possible 
tbat you are . tbat you bave been in want ? How 
dreadful tbis is 1 You are tbin and pale. Ob I 
Guido, I beseecb of you let no foolisb pride come 
between us now. Let my busband be your friend. 
If be does not know of your being in Paris . and I 
am confident be does not . teil bim all, trust in 
bim; let bim belp you. Guido. You will find bim 
generous and noble, tbougb I know you used not 
to like bim. For my sake. Guido . tbe sake of 
your old friend . try and do so now. Only go to 
bim yourself : let me bave notbing to say to tbis ; 
and I know be willdo all in bis power. Guido, to 
get you employment, or assist you in wbatever 
way you most desire." 

" I never sougbt tbe assistance of any buman 



A CINQUlbl. 169 

belg since I was born; and I am least of all 
likely to do so now God bas given me istrength 
to fight with my own rigbt arm, and if He wills 
tbat I shall fall now, so be it I will never live 
upon the bounty er the favours of my fellow- 
men," 

"Oh! Guido Lambertll" she exclaimed, in a 
sorrowful vdice, though with more force than it 
had yet displayed, "what must your pride appear 
in His sight, before whom we are as dust? 
How do you distort His divine decree that we 
should help to bear each other's burdens in this 
life ? If all men thought as you do, would there 
be any possibility for.ihe exercise of love and 
Christian fellowship in this world ? Independence 
is noble, Guiclp; but there is something, I^believe, 
higher and nobler still ; and the pride ihat refuses 
to accept a benefit . ah 1 " 

*'Men are variously constituted," interrupted 
Lamberti, with a slightly sarcastic inflection; 
"some find no difficulty in subsisting by tiie 
means of others, I had rather starve, . though 
I don't believe any man ever did starve who had 



170 CABR OF CABRLTOK. 

a tolerable head sblA a strong will^ howerer 
great may be be bardBhlps he goes throngh. 
Thifi monej," he took ie bank-note from his 
pockety ^ Befems to sicoich sie as I hold it I shall 
lieber use it ; and it mll weigh heavily on me^ 
Tintil I can retum it to the unknown giver^ and 
relieve mjself of such an Obligation. It is an 
Hisanify^ if jon will^ fdgnora ; bnt no moral arga- 
ments are of anj ayaiL I was born so; I cannot 
help it." 

She looked distressed. 

* What are yon doing here^ in Paris ?** 

^ I am a teacher of Italian." 

** At least you wl let ns help you in tiiat way. 
My hnsband has a large circle of friends here/' 
(there was a scarcely audible sigh), t^and he may 
be able to get you pupils for the present, though 
I hope you will find work more worthy of your 
talents before long ; and if my husband " 

** Say no more, I heg of you. We have known 
each other too long for the coM form of thanks. 
I know all tiiat your generous heart wouM 
prompt ; . , . . nay, my belief in ite influence 



AU OBQUlbdSl 171 

over Lord Caniyon has led me into an error. 

. . . . But I haye need of nothing I only 

b^ you to graxLtme one &yoiir.' 

Whatisit?" 

** I have received this money anonymoudy.. 
Since yom are mre that Lord Canlyon did 
not Bend it . does not know of my being 
in Paiis-roblige me by not mentioning my 
Barne to him. It wonld gready add io my 
annetaes and amioyanees^ if be^ m mistaken kind- 
ness, ^ere to endeavour to find me ont, or to 
try and aseist me in any way. I repeat I want 
nothing bat what my own brain can and toill 
procure for me m time^ I know. Will yon, 
therefore, in memory of. rof old times^ signora, 
grant this one request . simply to be silent . 
ntterly silent regarding this visit^ and regarding 
me? I shall take steps for diseovering my 
anonymous friend^ and shoold I have* reason to 
retum to my oriffinal sospicionj I shall make 
a point of seeing Lord Carriyon himself ; other- 
wise I flhonld wish him to remain in ignorance 
of ihe fact that I am in Paris^ and that I sought 



172 CAKR OF CAEELYON. 

him out. Lord Carrlyon is a ricli and generous 
Englishman ; I am a poor and proud Italian* 
There is nothing in common between us, you see ; 
and^ to oblige me^ signora^ let him remain in utter 
ignorance of all that concems me." 

The colour went and came upon the young 
wife's cheek. She could not refuse so slight a 
request^ put thus to her. She knew all that 
dictated ii She culd not tut own that under 
the circumstances it was natural that Lamberti 
should shrink from allowing his necessitous con^ 
dition to become known to her husband; but 
it was in every way painful to her to accede. 
She would have given . what would she not have 
given ? . to have told Carrlyon all, and to have 
set him to work among his diplomatic friends to 

 

obtain some post for that rarely-gifted man. 
What a pure vivifying joy in her somewhat 
stagnant life would it have been to feel that she 
was the indirect means of placing him in a posi- 
tion where his great intellectual power should 
have been feit and appreciated I It was not to be. 
He would accept nothing at her hands but silence. 



AU CINQUIEME. 173 

O Pride ! how much misery hast thou wrought l 
She could not bear to refuse him : yet the thought 
of keeping even this small thing from her hus- 
band . the very first unwhispered secret in her 
married life . shot like a poisoned arrow through 
her heart. 

And it was poisoned t poisoned with more misery 
than the heart of the young wife yet conceived. 



174 CABB OF GABBLTON. 



CHAPTER V. 

Nothing more passed between them. He left 
the room and walked down-stairs iiito the street 
with that quick, nervous tread which extreme 
physical exhaustion had of late somewhat slack- 
ened ; but wherein the fever of highly-wrought 
excitement now found vent. 

Out . into the Rue de RIvolI, and along the 
arcade, blindly, almost madly, forcing his way 
'along; regardless of the groups ihat sauntered 
idly there, sheltered from the wind, and in the 
fll blaze of the mid-day sun. Regardless of 
e;sfQTy one, yet not imnaturally attracting some 
attention himself. He had just emerged from the 
porte-cochfere of the hotel, when a gentleman, 
Crossing over from the wicket in the Tuileries 
gardens, perceived him. Any one observing that 



MXL CINQliMlL 175 

gentleman'a hands(Hn& akce would haye seen 
surprise and cnriosity^ witk a filigbt admixture o 
dl^Ieasure, verj clerl j depicted. 

'^How the dence haa h^ fbund me out? for he 
Aas fonnd me out, of course^ &oni bis bemg here 
Deviliah awkward; he'll be always Coming in, 
nomr . ^gratitude and so foru One won't be able 
to get rid of bim . and Gilda . mn I Wbat an ass 
I am I Foor devil I how ill be look . and wbat 
a' seedy coatl yet be looks more distingoisbed 
in bis ababbiness^ tbaa all tboae grinning apes 
romid bim^ wUb tbeir polisbed leatber boots^ and 
Jouvin's best lavender gloves ! Fab I Tbatfs a 
man,.after all, lo make a woman ^ 

He is stopped sbort in bis soliloquy by a Mend, 
jnst as be . is entering tbe hatd t and tbare be is 
kept for fuU two minates,. engaged in a frivokns 
cbatter aboot tbings be doesn't care a straw for, 
wbile tbe tbings tbat concem bislife and bappiness 
are in abeyance. At last be breaks tbe Ibread of 
ihe gossip, and runa np-staira;^ Marietta meets 
bim at tbe door of ber mistress' room, witb ber 
fingsr on. ber Bps. My lady is rery unv^' . ^baa 



176 CABB OF CABRLYOX. 

had a sort of faint . and is now on her bed. 
If my lord thinks well, she would send for the 
doctor. My lord does think well : but a cloud has 
gathered on bis brow. , He questions the girl how 
long her mistress has been ill . whether she can 
accotint for it . ^has any one been with her 
mistress ? Marietta replies without any hesitation. 
She found my lady on the Soor a few minutes ago : 
to the best of her belief y no one had been with her, 
but she cannot say positively. Marietta is not 
a bad girl: she means no hrm by this direct 
lie; on the contrary, she supposes it may be a 
kind and useful action, and among the peasants of 
Roman Catholic countries, a virtuous expediency 
supersedes all eise in the code of moral ethics. 
She had a suspicion years ago, as all waiting- 
maids have, of the State of her mistress' heart: she 
has the most unboimded faith in that mistress' 
goodness and purity, bat she sees how terribly 
this interview has overcome her. Perhaps my lord 
knowB nothing of the circamstances? If my lady 
choose she can teil him But why shall she, 
Marietta^ be the one to make mischief ? She 



I 

AU ciNQUiiaiE. 177 

nnhesitatlngly teils a lie And so the sharp little 
Italian^ in her anxiety to spare her mistress^ is 
partly the cause of the real michief that ensnes. 

Carrlyon walked into his wife's room. She 
was on her bed^ pale and motionless; but he 
took the band that lay near him^ and she gently 
retumed its pressure. Presently she opened 
her eyes, and smiled faintly. 

** It is nothing. I am much better now. Do 
not be uneasy about me^ Laurence. I shall be all 
right again in half-an-hour.'^ 

'* The doctor will be here presently. Tou 
feel no pain ? ^ 

" None. I was only faint, that was all." 

He sat there in silence by the bedside^ and in 
course of time the physician arrived^ Leaving 
him alone with his patient for a few minutes^ 
Carrlyon walked down to the porter's lodge. 

** Did any one call for me this moming ? " 

** One gentleman^ who, when he found milord 
was out, went up and saw milady," 

He retumed to his wife's room. 

*' It is nothing of any consequence,^ said 

TOL. m. 12 



178 CABB (W CAERLTON. 

Dr. . ^^Nothing to inter&re with . in short, 

j!Ou imdearstand^ nothing to make you iineasy. 
Quiei^ qizkft is the great thing^ with a little 
l^nlar exerciae. No excitement^ no fatigue^ 
pd I hope, in two montbs from iis time^ 
Bsjlord ^ 

^ Thaii you, ' doctor." My lord gave the 
physician a golden squeeze oF the band^ and he 
vanished* 

He waited in hia xoom a whole honr^ ezpecting 
his wife to send for Irim, She wonld teil him 
how it all happened, she would explain every- 
thing. He was a fool for being so cnrsedly 
suspicions. At length, his impalence conquer- 
ing every otber feeling, he retomed to his wife's 
rooBL She was up nofw, sitting near the fire^ 
aaid looking mach as xisuaL She began talking^ 
with \diat he eaaiy detected to be a nervoufi 
anxiety to $aj someikhigf an indifferent snbjects. 
Where liad he been? Wbat was thoaght of 
the president's speech ? &c. 

He walked abocii the room as he replied to 
her took np the botes on the toilette-table^ 



Ik 



AU IHQmiME. 179 

pnlled ihe brooches out of the pincasliioD, and 
dug i^em down again with a yiolent stah* 
Every moment lie was hoping she would break 
the subject upon which he was waiting tfe 
impatientlj to leam something: bat he waited 
in yaiEU His irritalion was increased by the 
necessity he feit of concealing firom his wi& 
the knowledge he had gained of her interview 
wi4 Lamber In her present condrtion, aay. 
thing Hke a scene must be avoided^ he knew 

and if ^he shaddered at the dreadfnl suspidoia 

that wonld farce tiiemselves npon Iiim^ and 
abruptly left the room again. 

If this Visit of Lamberti's wre wholly nnex- 
pected by Gilda . if it shonld prove that the 
ItaHan having traced the don(Mr of his anonjr- 
mons gift^ had simply c^alled to acknowledge 
it, . wherefiMre this mystery? On the contrary, 
would it not be natural iat he, Lord Carrlyon, 
shonld be in&rmed at once? Had he not the 
porter's testimony that ** iahen the gentleman found 
my lord was out, he went up to my lady ? ^ The 
alarming State of ezcitement into which this visit 

12.8 



180 CABN OF CAimLYN. 

had evidently thrown his wife . did it not clearly 
show that the man was still fax from being an 
object of indifference to her ? that the subject of 
iheir conversation during this interview was of 
deeper interest than the acknowledgment of a 
paltry sum of money ? Why, she had schooled 
even her maid into the utterauce of a glib false- 
hood I How could it be acconnted for ? - Was he 
dreaming ? He had been a jealous^ suspicious ass^ 
over and oyer again ; but had he ever really 
doubted Gilda's perfect truth before ? He swore 
to himself he never had. He was in a State of 
mind . a torment of doubt and self-reproach, of 
bitter jealousy and wrath- . which men constituted 
like himselfj of a mass of inconsistencies^ can alono 
realize He was for taking violent measures^ 
one moment; the next, for treating the whole 
idea as the delnsion of a diseased imagination. 
He would throw himself at her feet, and im- 
plore her to teil him all . he would promise to 
forgive her everything; poor childl Had she 
not told him the struggle she had gone throngh 
with that same fatal passion^ before her marriage ? 




AU CINQUIEME. 181 

Was she to blame if the sight of this man 
even still overwhelmed her? It might be no 
more than this; ay, but the duplicity, the con- 
cealment! Should he try and make her feel 
Bomething of the pangs of jealousy herseif? 
Should he plunge into the wildest dissipation, 
devote himself to the Dnchesse de Valentino, and 
neglect his wife ? The thought of her sweet, 
pale face^ and the sufierings she was soon to 
undergo in becoming a mother, smote him as 
the suggestions of his heated Imagination reached 
this point No I he was a brte to dream of such 
a pitiful revenge. When she had passed through 
the perils of childbirth, he would speak to his 
wife, dispassionately and kindly; he would point 
out to her the danger of cherishing anything like 
a sentimental feeling, which she might fancy to 
be purely platonic, for one who was not her 
husband. Above all^ he would impress on her 
the foUy of concealments. There were a great 
many obvious ihings which occurred to him, as 
being suitable to such a moment; and he trn- 
quillized his mind by arranging what he would 



182 CAER QE CASBLYON. 

WELj when the moment sfaoald arrive br ihat 
thrilliiig oratiosL 

Yet it mnst not be snpposed that bis mind was 
at rest long Thoee who best knew Carrfyon 
woold feel* snre that bis doubta might slumber 
awhile, bat would rise izp again like giants 
refresbed^ and more keen-ejeeE than ever. Was 
sfae not Mary Galbton's daugfater? Had sbe 
not the taint in her blood wlch socmer oc later 
was snre to "come out?" This thought had 
been repeated so oflen in one form or aoEKother 
hv his mother. that in certain &ames of mind it 
assnmed to Lanrenoe all the hideous distinct- 
xtess of reality Unfortimateljr,. the feeling that 
she was, howeyer innocenttj-j eonceali^ some- 
thipg from her hnsfaand, made poor Gilda ill at 
ease in his presence; and his suspicions. were 
thos strengthened that, whatever the nature of 
her interview with Grnido might have been, the 
old love in her heart was not extinct. The inter- 
view itself was possiblj accidental and innocent 
enongh ; but she conld not tmst heraelf to e^ak 
of it, and that was snfficient ! . After broodisg 



'% 



AU CSBQUbEB. 183 

over the sabject for a day and a night, he had 
reduced all his wild sospicions into some such 
form as this. 

And then he recelved a note, the form and 
tenor of wUch somewhat sorprised him. 



( 



184 CARR OE CARRLYOK 



CHAPTER VI. 

The Duchesse de Yalentino sat in her boudoir 
late in the afternoon of the same day on which 
Guido had paid his yisit to the Hotel de la 
Terrasse. She was denied to visitors in general ; 
but one visitor was now with her, to whon; she 
never was denied. A grave, middle-aged man, 
quiedy dressed, and conspicuously unremarkable 
(to use a daring antithesis) in every respect. He 
stood opposite to where the duchesse sat, and had 
a note-book in his band, to which he frequently 
referred. 

** Since I saw madame two days ago," said this 
individual, " Monsieur Lamberti has made twelve 
fresh applications for employment at publishers', 
newspaper-offices, schools, and Colleges, but with- 
out success. At one of the latter for young ladies. 



AU CINQUIEME. 185 

in the Chaussee d'Autin, to wliich he procured 
an introduction he was very nearly engaged (as 
I leamt from the servant)^ bat his good looks 
stood in his way. He did, however," continued 
the Speaker, correctmg himself by his note-book, 
*'receive two firancs for translating an article in 
the Monitore Toscano for a newspaper here, and 
it is possible he may occasionally get employment 
there again I followed him half over Paris 
.yesterday. He did not reach home until past 
seven o'clock, very much exhausted, for he had 
eaten scarcely anything all day. He had a 
conversatlon y^iiSk the portress before going up- 
stairs ; and firom where I stopd in the shadow of 
the archway, I could hear what passed. It 
appears that a geneman had called in his 
absehce, and had lefl; a piece of paper. Monsieur 
Lamberti made several inquiries conceming this 
gentleman, and appeared perplexed and annoyed." 
There was a pause, and the lady said sharply, . 
*' You must jBnd out who it was. YouVe ways 
of doing that, I suppose? ** 
*^This morning, rather later than usual," 



186 CABB OF CAHRLYON. 

continiied tBe man^ impertorbablj, '^ Moosieixr 
Lambert! left Ins hoxtae ; taiA, ooutraErj to all bis^ 
usnal babits^ break&sted at ibe caSi (q^>06it& He 

^ Nevar mind \f bafc he baiL Gro cm." 

'^He thea prooeeded to Measrs. Galignani's; 
wbere, I imagine, be procnred an addreas be 
wanted After tbat be went atiaigbt to tbe Hfitel 
de la Terrass&T 

Tbe ducbesse did not starte bot sbegrew gbastlj 
wbite^ aad set ber teetb bacd 

'^ Good. well ? and wbat ben ? " 

'^ Apparentl j tbe person be called to see was 
not at bome. I watcbed bim from tbe opposita 
side of tbe street. He stood tmder tbe ardiiwaj 
besitating for aome minutea iintil a yoimg wcnnan^ 
afemme de ehambre^ I sbocdd sappose, pasaed by 
Tbere was a zecognidon^ and after a few words 
Monsieur Lamberti foUowed tbe girl npstaba. 
He remained tbere nine minutea and a quarfer 
by mj watcb. He walked bomewarda at a pace 
wbicb rendered it difficolt fiff me ta keep bim 
in. sigibtj witbout attracting notice by mnning. 



A CmQIEME. 187 

But whea within a. &w doors of bis own boaa^ 
bis pace sudklezilj slaekened, I ofaserved lasat 
3tagger^ and thought sosie cne had piished SLgainsk 
him, hat the next moment he ean^t hdd .> tbe 
wall to -prevet himadf falHi^ He put his Iiand 
to hm mouili aod whea he remcved it, it was 
atained with blood* Two of &e paasera-bj 
stoj^ped^ . one of theoL was  medical stndent^ . 
and tben I came up> and togetber we finipported 
bim bome^ We k>ok bim npstairs and bud. bm 
oa bi bed. He was too weak now ig> offer airjF 
resistanc^ and tfae Uood prevented bi speakmg 
wbeoi be attempied it*^ 

^^You didn't leave bim in thal State?" gasped 
tbe ducbessej. ia a boaise Yoice. 

^'Tbe Student sacceeded after maae iSme m 
^pping tbe bemorrbage^ and tben we 1^ bim in 
tbe care of tbe old portsess, a motberij 8<rt of 
woman^ wbo promised to kok afier bim. Tbe 
stodent enjolaed bia taking ali tbe noonsbmemt 
posdbl^ at wbicb tbe old woman sbragged bec 
flbooldeirs and ahoek bar bead. Seeing how tbe 
case stood (wbicb^][ indeed^ Monsieur Lambertl'k 



188 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

appearance might haye told him before)^ the 
young man then suggested that if there were any 
retum of the blood-spitting, the stranger should 
be conveyed to one of the hospitals, where he 
would have the best food and constant attention. 
At the Word hospital a shudder seemed to run 
through Monsieor Lamberti's whole frame. One 
would have supposed there was some terrible 
recollection connected with it, but he said nothing. 
The Student remarked to me as we came away, 
that if the man we had just left contmued his life of 
toil and privation, it was evident that nothing 
could save him, * and it will be very rapid work, 
moreover,' he added." 

There was a silence of some minutes. What- 
ever the duchesse feit, she managed to maintain 
an outward semblance of calm, as she shaded 
her face with the band on which she leant. The 
man, having said apparently all that he had to 
say, stood patient and imperturbable opposite, 
like a clock that is run down, and waits to be 
wound up, before it again performs its intricate 
daily work. 



AU CINQUIEME. 189 

" You need not retum to your post before tho 
aftemoon of to-morrow. In bis present conditionj 
Monsieur Lambert! is clearly unable to leave the 
bouse If anjtbing of importance sboold oecor 
after tbat time, yo will let me know at onee." 

Sbe made a sligbt movement with ber bead^ 
and tben rang tbe band-bell beside ber. A foot- 
man appeared^ and tbe individual . belonging to 
a class wbicb is supposed only to exist in romance^ 
but which is common enougb in Paris . passed 
from ber presence witbout anotber word. 

As be left tbe room^ ber bead sank upon tbe 
table. 

" Tool tbat I was 1 I bave waited too long. 
Ob, my Godl If deatb sbould rob me of bim 
now . now, wben tbe moment seemed ripe for 
all my plans 1 WbeH I bave struggled fo^r wealtb 
and power to belp bim; to soften bis beart by 
gratitude towards me^ as men stmggle to win 
women I . and all to end in tbis. Deatb I deatb ! 
Ob, borrible ! . and sucb a deatb I Had it been 
tbere at Fescbiera, long ago, in tbe silent night- 
watcbes, wben bis b^ad lay nnconsciously on my 



190 CAJBB QF CASBLTON. 

bosam, and I narsed hkn as a mother does her 
ch3d; ob! I jconld bave bome his dying^ then; 
yes,^ for tiien I -expected it! But naw, when 
the onlj hope tbat Bustained me in this hideous, 
miseraUe mockery of Efe was the hope of him . 
tizat lie idiould be natdbed away ! It cannot be 
too late : it shall inot be ! I must t^e a decisive 
Step at once.  .  Bot this mterview with her, 
What does it znean? Z know bis pride too well 
to think he would ever have applied for assistance 
rom ilierrip in any sfaape ; and that conceited fool, 
Carrlyon, ^onld never haye asked him there. 
What does it mean? I must see to this. I 
thought that creatnre was-swept out of my path. 
Let her look how she erosses it again. This 
time she will be crushed t * 

The expression of vindictive hatred on her face 
as she raised her head^ contrasted strongly witii 
passianate 8<^fow depicted there^ as that face had 
fallen between her hands a few minutes since. 

She rose, and summoning her maid, exchanged 
h^ sumptuons dress for one of very homely 
material, A shabby bonnet and thick double 



A GXKQinEME. 191 

veil caaxsitd Jber features <H>m|detely The maid 
was accustomed''to these mtamorpboae^ and not 
tbe hsat surpriaed* She wms^ moreover^ a model 
of diacretiD, as ihe maid of anj Duchesse de 
Yslentino need be. Her mistress stepped down 
a laAck. stak into tSie camt^ and was soon lost 
in tlie ciowded six^ts. 

It waa qiiite dosk when she leached the Rne 
du Bac GoDiraay to her eigpectation^ she found 
the old portress aeated before her pn of embers^ 
torewksg a ivtane r her pa^ent upstairs. Without 
apology, the veiled lady opened the glass door, 
behiad which ehe canght sight of this pleasant 
pdmse^ ssad entermg^ closed the door again. 

^^ Pardon^ madame/ she began^ in Ihe gentlest 
of Yinces, withoirt taising her impenetrable yelL 
^^ Pardon^ madame ; 1)iit I am come to have some 
conversation with you relative to a lodger you 
have upstairs ; in whom I take a deep interest." 

** Tien^ said lie t>ld woman, eyeing her from 
her head to her foo<^ with shrewd scrutiny. " And 
who may that be, madame ?" 

The poor yoong litaEan teadier^ Monsieur 



.<f 



192 CABU OP CABRLYON. 

Lambert!, who is now ill, and whom you have 
been so kindly nursing.'' * 

" Cest drple^ pouriant/* replied the other, 
shnigging her Shoulders. **If he has friends, 
why do they not prevent his starving? You 
none of you trouble your heads until he is nearly 
dead, and now, within twenty-four hours, you are 
ihe second who come here inquiring about him ! " 

The lady was hardly able to control herseif 
suflSciently to say in a careless tone, . 

"The second? Ahl the first was his . his 
cousin, I suppose ? " 

^^ Soyez tranquille, ma bonne petite dame* It 
was a gentlemarif^ answered the portress, regard- 
ing her visitor with a knowing twinkle and a 
nod; "whatever his relationship was; ma que 
voulez-vous? his help came too late. The poor 
youngman "" 

" Ah I so he did help him? " 

" Who said so ? " said the old woman, angiy 
at having let slip the avowaL "How am I to 
know whether he helped him? I only know that 
he called, and left a paper^ and that the young 



AU CINQUIEME. 193 

man went out this moming^ and was brought 
home.very ill; so that the gentleman's ylsit don't 
seem to have done mnch goodj anyhow." 

^^ N05 madame^ and the reason Is piain enough. 
Your lodger prefers starving, strenge to say, to 

. 

living upon money given him in charity. I will 
manage better, with your *assistance. Get him 
the strengest houilhn you can, from the cc(fi 
opposite; and I shall trust to you, madame, to 
make him take it. If you can force some wine 
down his throat so much the better. Invent any 
lie you like to pacify him; but see that his 
strength is supported during the next few hours, 
and I will call again early to-morrow. It is better 
that I should not see him to-night." 

She threw a Napoleon on the table; thentumed, 
as she was leaving the room, to add, . 

*^ I see you are a woman of discretion. I need 
not impress on you the necessity of keeping my 
visit here a secreL You will have no reason to 
repent doing so, if you will follow my wishes. Is 
he less SuflFering this evening ? " 

** He is asleep at this moment, madame ; " then, 

YOL. m. 13 



194 CABB OE OIRBLYON. 

as her visitor passed out, and closed tke door 
behind her, ^ Ha I ha I ma banm pitite datm^ o 
you are in love with him, are you . a pair of fiae 
flashing black eyes, throngh yoor Teil J and a real 
lady, too, for all she is dressed like a sunpSe 
haurgeoise^ Did I not seethe Yalendezmes on that 
Corner of her handkerchief that peeped otit ? Je 
vfy eonna dans les dentellesy moi ! I ^(^msn't in 
Madame Bertin's shop,^as a girl, for nothing. And 
these great ladies, with their fancies for .some poor 
fellow, who is fax below them, don't J Jknow all 
about it? Was I not right? Said I Jiot so? 
Sil dtadt aeuUment bien nourri^ il aurait des bonnes 
fortunes^ celvirUb ! Pas de doute ! " 

The lady who was the object of this just surmise 
walked home, tolerably satisfied with ihe resnh of 
the interview. Guido was in good hands with the 
kindly old portress : as to his visitor^ it was easy 
to guess now who he was, and though she could 
not divine the motiye of his visit, her jealous un- 
easiness was thus allay^d. 

By what cunning wiles the old woman pecsuaded 
iier patient to swaJlow the nntriment 4die brought 



AU iSNQUIElIE. 195 

Tihn ircfm time io time, I scacrcdbjr know. Tbere 
was a fable tkat tiie surgeon (lie ira a ytimig 
medical Student in realitj) wbo liad so oppartcnieljr 
oome to httoberiTs assistazice, bdionged to the 
neighbouring bospital, whei out-door relief ^'was 
fnmished, and tiiat he sent iliese good tbings fer 
the sick man. Tbe ccmscions neeessity of regain- 
b^ strengi before he coidd doanything prevailed, 
perhaps, more han every argmnent in inducing 
Groido to swallow them. It may Beem inconsis- 
tent ihat he should so readily harve succumbed to 
accepng charity in this form, aifter his extreme 
sensitiveness on the point^ wken presented to him 
anonymously, and in another shape. Bnt in the 
first place, it may safely l3e advanoed that many a 
man feels less hmniliation in bdng ihe recipient of 
a great public charity, than in lying mtder a beavy 
Obligation to one private individnal. Add to lins 
that, in Guido's case, the cmly ^o perBons from 
ii^hom his imi^ination could suggest this bounty to 
proceed, were the yery last iwo tea ar& from 
whom he wonld ivilHn^ Smve :]BBceiyed ixe 
smaest fayour. It becoutes less Burprising, tben, 

18.2 



196 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

that while that bank-note lay untouched upon his 
table^ he refused neither Burgundj nor Bouillon 
at the hands of tbe old portress. 

The moming came, and with it the veiled lady. 
It would haye seemed more natural that this Sin- 
gular visit should' take place in the dusk of evening 
rather than the fiill moming light. But Sara was 
anxious to seize the very first moment that his 
strength would permit it, to have the interview 
with Lainberti which she now began to fear she 
had delayed too long. The time for concealments 
was over : it was a hard reality, what she had in 
hand now, and it was not unbecoming that this 
should have the clear and searching light of day. 

Had she fully arranged all that she was to say 
in this interview? Perhaps not. She trusted 
chiefly to the overwhelming strength of her posi- 
tion, and the force of her impassioned eloquence 
on the spur of the moment But inasmuch as she 
had been looking forward to this moment for 
months past, she could hardly be said to be unpre- 
pared. She had followed, though at a distance, his 
every step in Italy . she had tracked him to Paris, 



AU CINQUiiaiE. 197 

she had dogged him day by day, and watched his 
manly bat inefiectual struggle ; and she had waited 
as a falcon hovers above his prey, for the moment 
when his strength and fortitude should be reduced 
to the lowest ebb. Had she not waited too long ? 
Ah t That was the question. 



198 CABB OS CABBLYQN. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Hb had passed a good night, the portress said ; 
and be was now up and dressed, and had had 
some cofiPee, though it was scarcely eight o'clock. 
But he was still so weak that he could not walk 
across the room without the aid of a stick, and 
had been forced to acknowledge with a groan 
that it would be useless to attempt going out 
that day. 

So much the old woman communicaled below 
to her visitor. It was then arranged that they 
should both go up together, to avoid any diflEi- 
culties, and that while Sara remained outside 
the old woman was to go into the room and pre- 
pare him for the reception of afriend. 

The plan worked well. Sara, with a beating 
heart, as she. listened outside the door, heard the 



Air CINQUIME. .199 

few qttestlonsr and answers that passed within* 
That yoice^ once so deep and rieh, bow holloir 
and broken^ int^mpted at intervals bj a hard 
cougk; it made her slmdder as slie keard it 
Thentib^^wa a pause; the old woman's heary 
Step moved o^er tibe room^ smoothmg- the thingsr. 
for the visitor's reception, . ^now drawmg a bed- 
cnrtaiir, now^ remoring^ the remau ef the sick 
man's breakfast; and then, Ihrowmg open tiie 
door with a cheerfhl nod of the head^ she HStde 
the visitor enter. When she closed it after her 
again, I w3I not undertake to say that her 
cnriosily may not have prompted her to linger 
round ii rather longer than was necessary. But 
if so she was sa|^int^5 for the conversation 
inside was carried on entirely in Italian. 

He was looking aBriously towards the door, 
and when he saw a woman enter he tarted ; then 
slowly rose ftom his chair, and remained standing 
She raised her veil, and an expression of acute 
annoyance crossed his face. 

^^Are you surprised to see me. Guido?" ske 
began. ** Did I not tdl you that in any crias of 



200 CARR OF CAERLYON. 

your Ufe I should be near you? and have you 
not reached one now ?'* 

"I was aware that you were in Paris," he 
replied, coldly; *^and perhaps it is your gene 
rosity, madam, that suggested this anonymous 
gift?" he pointed to the bank-note on the- table, 
c^fso "" 

" Do you suppose I would insult you by sending 
you a paltry alms anonymously ? You must 
looK to your noble friends the Carrlyons for this 
sort of child's play. I know you too well for 
that If you made up your mind to aeeept money 
under any streng vital necessity you would not 
try and blind yourself to the faet, or think the 
Obligation less because you didn't know where it 
came from." 

^'You are right. Were I ever induced to 
accept money, I had far rather know to whom I 
might honestly feel I owed the debt; but the 
Lambertis have not been used to live on charity. 
If you know positively, therefore, that Lord 
Carrlyon " 

''I told him of your being in Paris, and of 



AU CINQlbfE. 201 

your present calling and mode of llfe. I know 
nothing more I did not come here/' she added 
impatiently, *'to talk of the Carrlyons, but 
to speak of yourself; to appeal to you in this 
juncture earnestly and solenmly. There is no 
use disguising the fact, if you do not change 
your course of living, if you work and starve as 
you have been doing, your lifo must fall a sacri* 
fice I You will teil me, as you did once before, 
that Is worth very little. God who created you 
apparently ihinks othermse^ or you would not 
have been spared through every peril and pesti- 
lence ! Do you know what it is you are doing ? 
You are deliberately committing suidde. This 
is not a virtue ; it is a crime ; and more to you 
who have boasted principles and moral courage, 
it is a cowardice, which is only pardonable in us 
wretched women. Now listen to me, Don't 
reply tili you have heard .me," she. exclaimed 
more passionately. *' I come to offer once more 
what may be a means of salvatlon to you in this 
World . to me, perhaps, in another! You are 
ruined in fortune, broken in health, exiled, name- 



202 CAKK OiF GAKRLTOX. 

less^ friendlesf . Do jou still rejecfc the offer of 
aheart deyoted io you.? of one who wonkL sncrir- 
fice all in this vorldl and the next for yonr sake? 
Aul I insane? Was there ever a woman who 
loed a man after tbis. fashion before ? Is it an 

m 

ordmary pasrfon that made me sacr^ce aU 
womanly pride in acknowledging long ago to a 
love that was not retumed? I know I am at 
present nothing to you ; but I only say suffer me 
to be near you for awhQ . to work for you, 
vratch for you . if necessary, starve for you I It 
camiot be but that m time you would grow to 
pity, and so, perhaps, to love, the woman whose 
band smoothed your pillow, whose eyes knew 
no rest for you, who toiled and conquered in this 
warfare for existence, where you. Guido, have 
fought a man's fight, and failed I Tes, I am rieh 
now; but do not think I would insult you by 
using such an argument as this of wealth. I 
would do no more than implore you to take such 
a portion of it as should support your present 
wants. The rest . rank, poeition . everything to 
which I have risen . I would thankfally sacrifice. 



A CINQUIEME. 203 

and eomrt i. gaEm, to C0me and w(N:k wj fingers 
to the bone in tiids^ miserable ganret I** 

Shf cl^eil bor hands before her fac^ and 
stood trembliiig^ tliere* A brigbi spot had been 
risiag^ in Goido'a eheek dining the ktter pari 
of liiis extraoidmarj speech, and there was aa 
indignsmi aah in bis eye, as be replied^ . 

^ shonld hare used. anodier term tban rising, 
had I been jovl. I don.'t ask wfaether the title 
70U bear be hcHiestlj yoors ^ I don't seek ta 
knaw how mueh or hovr litlle joa are culpable, 
according to 060*8 Standard of moraty ; but I, 
too^ haye heard somewhat of your life^ of your 
habits and associateis ; of the wiles by which 
you have indnced mea to supply yon with large 
sums of money, while no love . no! not one 
particld of love vas in your heart ! This I 
take to be tiie preatitution of the soul! whether 
the body be an accessory to it or not. Compared 
with this^ the trade of half the poor women 
in the world is. yirtue I And it is money thus 
gained ihat you would ofier an honest man I 



204 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

It is a heart thus polluted you do me the honour 
to say has always beeil devoted to me I 

" Oh, Guido I Guido l do not crush me to 
the earthl" cried the wretched woman, throw- 
ing her arms up wildly in the air. *'Do not 
despise me utterly f ' If you only knew half 
of what I have sufiered I The loathing/ the 
utter disgust and weariness with which I have 
gone through it all, night after night, month 
after month 1 That horrible craving for power 
possessed me, which those alone who have been 
poor and dependent, know I But I call God 
to witness, that it was no delight to me! It 
never gave me a moment's pleasure, and I only 
waited for the moment when I might fling it 
all aside. Don't be too hard on me ! If I am 
abased in my own eyes and in yours, remember 
it is you who have wrought this 1 When I had 
watched you day and night at Peschiera, and 
that you drove me finally away from you, did 
I not warn you whither I should be driven? 
Oh I Guido, you are cold and passionless I have 



AU CINQUiiME. 205 

pity on a natore which is onlj capable of love 
or hatred . ^good or evil . ^in extremes ! ** 

**The passion which your imagmation^ rather 
than your heart, has conceived^ resembles the 
terrible curse of one of the heathen fates. It is 
not lovel Love . love worthy of the name . 
purifies and strengthens through all calamity 
It binds np every wound in this world, and 
enables us to bear all . save loss of honour, 
with resignation. This is the only thing between 
man and woman which can endure^ and which 
raises their passion above that of the beasts of 
the field. Such a tie^ under .no conditions^ 
conld exist between us ; since the essential dement 
of it is wanting ; and that no pity or gratitude 
could fester into growth. Has this dream* passion 
guarded you firom temptation ? Has it elevated 
your desires, ennobled your nature, enlarged . 
your charity ? If it has done none of these, 
and according to your own showing, it has only 
helped to degrade you^ it is no more than a 
diseased fancy I " 

^'It is disease^ madness^ the terrible curse 



206 CABR OF CABBLYON. 

of fale . call it what you vnll . bot ihere it is ! 
It throbs in evwy vein. It riots in my blood^ 
it renders me o langer mistress of my own 
aetians; and my redemption lies in yonl Oh^ 
Guido 1 don^ cast me away now and for ever ! 
Har prty on me, for God'^ sake ! Pnt me 
through any probation, only don^ send me back 
to t^Lai bideous life! Save me . ^ye me from 
it, for yon only can do so 1^ 

She flung herself npon her knees before bim 
in a fcenzy of despair, Who would bave 
recognized in this abject woman, tbe insolent 
Dachesse de Valentine, bard, brilliant and 
domineering ? The sclding tears raizied tlbiok 
npon bis band, as he endeavaured to raise her. 

^* You ask what is impossible, Why renew 
this painfal subject. If you are minded to' 
abandon tbe life you are leading, what is there 
to prevent you? Do you understand tte real 
meaning of repeniance ? Do you tlunk that 
God is a man to be deceived, as you would tiy 
to deceive yourself and me, into the beKef Ifait 
you cannot quit Ibis life you loatbe, that you 



AU CINQUIEME^ 207 

cannot be regenerated, bot linder the infloence 
of another weak and erring human bdag like 
yourself? I should be mocking God were I 
to assist in yonr self-deoeption that true repentr 
ance coold have anj part in tihis insane passion.I 
Formyself Ihave lived a lonely man^ and such 
I shall die. God has been mercifiil to me^ may 
He be so to you I There was a time . ^not far 
distant . ^when I had no faith, carce any hope 
in a future State. I thank Hirn that He has 
given me ikaty when everything eise has been 
taken away. It will make the passage irom 
this life to another a happy release when it comes^ 
whether now, or " 

"You are dying . dyingl" ahnest shiid^ed 
Sara. ** Ob, my God 1 Listen to him 1 He 
knows it, and he will not iet me be with hini 
to receive bis last breath^ to. to. oh. Guido I 
you are hard . you are cruel ! God is more 
merciful than you are I He has pity, but you 
have nonel He can forgive sin% but you will 
neither forget nor forgive I " 

He waited tili the violence of her hysterical 



208 , CABB OF CABRLYON. 

sobs had somewhat abated again before he replied 
more gently. 

**The pity or forgiveness of men is worth 
very little ; you have both, Sara, from me. But 
turn to God who judges not as man judges : may 
He who sees what your temptations haye been, 
purify your heart, and strengthen you to lead 
a new life. Lay the axe to the root of the tree 
yourself . no one eise can for you. And as this 
is the last time we must meet . ^yes I understand, 
it must be the last . I woijd beg of you to lay 
my words to heart as those of a dying man, and 
to act upon them when I am gone ! " 

The sobs had ceased: she remained for some 
minutes quite silent and motionless, her head 
buried in her hands. It would have been im- 
possible to say what thoughts were passing 
through the darkened, troubled brain of the 
unhappy woman. Slowly, she let her hands 
drop at last, and slowly, falteringly, she mur- 
mured, without lookirig up, 

** My life has been a brden to me hitherto, 
and^how shall I support it noto? Is there any 



AU CINQUiiME. 209 

rest to be found in this world . any waters of ' 
oblivion that I may drink and forget the past? 
There is none! I have no hope, no courage, 
HO strength to cast off this chain that weighs 
me down. And yet . you say well . anything 
were better than to struggle longer under it If 
you have any faith in the efficacy of prayer, pray 
for me^ Guido Lamberti. All seems dark before 
me I ^ She shuddered, and pressed her hands to 
her eyes, as if to shut out some dreadful vision; 
then rose quickly to her feet. ^* Swear to pray 
for me to-night, that Imay not be cvrsedfor everl^* 

Her face was ghastly white, and the bloodless 
lips quivered as she spoke : but ihe deep, hoUow 
eyes had drunk back their tears again, and looked 
as though carved in black marble . ^utterly lifeless. 

" I will," he replied, solemnly. ** Not to-night 
only, but every night, as long as I live. God be 
merciful to us both I ^ 

'' Amen 1 " 

She was gone. Without another word, without 
another look, that strnge being tumed and fled 
from the room. Down-stairs, and across the 

VOL. HL 14 



210 CABB OF GAEBLTOK. 

ooort, post the portress' open door^ and out into 
ihe Street^ with her head bent down^ and her veil 
mnffled close about it, she roshed blindly on. 

And the hard metallic tone of that " Amen," 
rang, like a knell, in the ears of the sick man all 
day long. 



AU CINQliME. 211 



CHAPTER VIII. 

It was in ihe afternoon of this day that Carrlyon 
received the following lines : . 

*'Mt Lord, 

"Pbbmit me to return a note of five 
hundred fi^ncs, which, if I am not mistaken, 
your sympathy for a poor exile prompted you to 
leave here anonymously. It is true that I am 
very poor, and that my health has suffered under 
fatigue and privation, but if God wills it, these 
clouds vriU pass away. My wants are few; my 
Courage not easily daunted. Between man and 
God, the basis of all faith is dependence. Between' 
man and man, the basis of all respect is indepen- 
dence. This being estabUshed as a principle in 

14.2 



 



. 



212 CARR OF CARBLYON. 

my mind, you will pardon the apparent mgratitude 
of one, who, in declining your generosity, begs to 
subscribe himself^ 

" Your lordship's 

" Grateful and obedient servant, 

*^ Guido Lambekti." 

" Let him starve, then, if he chooses it ! " said 
Carrlyon, as he flung the letter on the table 
amid a heap of others, bills, cards, etcetera. " The 
prig! with his moral axioms about ^the' basis 
of all respectP I should think the basis was 
existencey having a seif to respect at all, which 
he won't have long I imagine, at this rate. He 
manages even in his letter to give himself those 

d d airs of superiority which used to chafe 

me so. Welll I suppose it was absurd of me, 
thinking I could help a man like that. Shall I 
show the letter. to Gilda? As she chooses to 
make a mystery of his having been here, per- 
haps I'd better not It may send her into 
hysterics again, so I must endure this pleasant 
State of ihings until after Hern ! what incom- 



AU CINQIEME. 213 

prehensible creatures wome^i are I If I really be- 
lieved bow . hj G. dl if I thought my mother 

wasright. i/ " 

He walked straight out of the house^ and up 
and down the wet streets . ^for it was raining 
and now quite dark . until dinner. He then 
came in^ and sat opposite bis wife's pale^ anxious 
face for awhile, but scarcely ddressed her. She 
was accustome to variations of temper now . ^to 
fis of moodiness and depression . and she always 
attributed them to the baneful influencO' of a letter 
from bis mother. But she could not exert her- 
seif to-day, as she generally did, to dispel this 
gloom. Her own heart was very heavy; the 
Image of Guido's worn, emaciated face, the 
sound of bis hoUow cough, iiaunted her like a 
nightmare. She could not get rid of it by day 
or night; and the more she thought of bim, more 
and more dark grew her forebodings. Had it 
not been for her promise, oh, how thankfully 
would she have poured her griefs into her hs- 
band's bosom, and made bim a partner in her 
anxieties on Guido's account. She knew that 



214 CABB OF CARRL70N. 

lie was generouSf he would' certainlj exert liim- 
seif in Lamberti's bebalf, if he onlj coakL be 
aware of tbe latter's present cooditioxL In her 
own larger nobility of soul^ she feit sure that 
any petty jealousy of the past would be for- 
glten hj her hnsband in this great and dis- 
tressing emergency. ut alas I dbe knew too 
'vrell all the Italian's indomitable pride. Even 
had she broken her word to him, he would 
refiise Laurence's assistance in any shape; she 
had Seen how bitter the supposition of such 
assistance had been to him. She must wait a 
day or two. If she only knew where he was I 
If she could only find out how he was I Then she 
would better know how to act 

^Had either husband or wife as they sat iere 
i^ken out on the subject which was engrossing 
both^ ah I how different might the fiiture of at least 
one of them have been I But they were both silent. 
Lord Carrlyon after a time started up^ and 
walked to the fire. He was restless^ irritable; 
he must do something. What is there going on 
to-night? A ball anywhere? He seizes two or 



AU CINQUIEMS. 215 

tkree cards of invittion an tbe mantel-pieoe. 
The Duchesse de Valentine haa a great recqption. 
Whj shonldn't he go there ? 

This is a night of nnusoal triomph for the 
duchesse^ so people 8ay. She has reached the 
zenith of her power and ambition; having sue- 
ceeded in getting many of the great French 
.ladies and uearlj all the foreign ones to acoept 
her Position and her ho6pitalitie& Those yfho 
have still any scruples will at all events lose a 
yery amusing fte; for of coarse every man 
worth knowing in Paris will be there, and 
nothing that money and taste can procure to 
make the eyening brilliant will be spared. The 
duchesse herseif has been locked np in her own 
room aU day, and not even her maid has been 
admitted when she has knocked. Let them make 
what arrangemjents they will, she says, so they 
do not troable her At length that important 
foncticHiary the toiffeuT arrives, aiid the dress 
JErom Camille\ which seems to be a miracle of 
mist and dew-drops. The duchaBse's door is un- 
foarred, and the elaborate ceremony of the toilette 



216 CABB OF CABBLYOI^. 

is in time completed^ to the satlsfaction of the 
femmede chamhre* The dchesse is always pale^ 
and to-night when she enters her aahny she is 
scarcelj more so than usual. Her ejes are un- 
usuallj brilliant^ assisted^ perhaps^ by the flash and 
sparkle of the diamonds in her hair. 

*' Certainly a most striking-looking woman ! " 
says our friend Mrs. Smith (who in spite of her 
moral diatribes^ has fonnd her way here at last; 
*for you know one must relax the rule a Utile 
abroad ' ), '* not exactly handsome, Lord Carrlyon, 
eh ? but very striking. Quito one's idea of Judith, 
now!" 

'* Which would account for her striking appear- 



ance." 



.' And then those diamonds," continued the 
lady, heedless of the joke ; " they quite make 
one's mouth water ! The Russian ambassadress's, 
you see, are nothing to them. By-the-by, it's a 
great comfort to see two or three of the embassies 
here, ain't it? Makes one feel, you know, more 
at home : for one didn't exacy know who one 
was to meet So sorry dear Lady Carrlyon 



AU CINQUiiMK 217 

wasn*t well enough to come. She'd liave en- 
joyed it." 

"I ratlier doubt that," replied his lordship, 
drily ; then, as he caught sight of a sallow, 
melancholy face, *' Hallo, Razzi I my dear fellow, 
. delighted to see you. How long have you 
been in Paris ? I heard you were here." 

" A few days,'' replied the Italian. " I am like 
the motlis who have bumt their wings, and still 
keep buzzing round the light ! " The image was 
not very novel, and there is reason to believe it 
had become a stock phrase in the mouth of the 
por man, whose flights of fancy were few and 
feeble, but he smiled a wan smile at his own joke. 
*' Yes, I called here, and she sent me a card for 
this evening. It was almost more than I expected 
of her, after her treatment of me : but you see, 
coro mioy I am a fool about the woman. I can't 
help it . I hadn*t seen her for more than a year. 
Che vuolef^ 

" And how long is it since you saw our friend 
the marchesa? Teil me somewhat about her. 
Where is she ? '^ 



216 CABB OP GABRLTON. 

^^BsLck again at Bologna, poor woman, and 
leading much the same life as usual. Throngh 
Ler connection wlth one f ihe cardinak, who is 
her uncle, thej oyerlooked the part she took in 
the war ; but the old Lupo^ who is Papista to the 
backbone^ has been inveterate against her ever 
since, and they live now quite apart. The 
Piedmontese coosin . by-the-by, yon remember 
him ? . was killed ai, Novaro, and she was dread- 
fnlly cut up . has neyer recovered her spirits 
since. Poor marchesa I ^e is very much changed 
in appearance^ too. I saw her as I passed throogh 
Bologna . bnt, you understand, that it is not 
quite the most desirable residence for me just 
now I am obliged to keep quiet . ^to keep out 
of the way for a time.*' He nodded and winked 
expressively ; and then, as he looked in the 
direction of ihe duchesse, added, *^ Teil me^ 
milord, if you can, who is the fair man taUdng 
toher?" 

*'A Cousin of mine . a good-looking fellow 
. ^but you needn't be afiraid, Razzi: ke Mi 
rieh.'' 



AU CINQUiiME. 219 

The ducbesse was fiurrrounded by a crowd of 
worshippers, foremost among whom was young 
Fitzhugh. They were evidently uiging vehe- 
meny some request which the divinity was 
indisposed to grant On approaching the group, 
Carrlyon and Eazzi found that expectation had 
been greay raised by theduchesse's name appear- 
ing in a programme among those of some of the 
best artistes in Paris^ who were to ^g in the 
course of the evening. Now, however, with what 
was supposed to be the caprice d*une grnde dame 
she declined to folfil the expectation thos raisec}. 
And to those who had never heard her, it was 
feit that Frezzolini and Gardoni might redonble 
iheir exertions in vain : the disa|^intment wonld 
still be great There was a knot of very fine 
ladies on a sofa, hard-by. One of them, an 
affected litde Frenchwoman, actually rose and 
began supplicating their hostess with many gri- 
maces not to '^ desolate " them by persisting in h^ 
unkindness. Carrlyon langhed in his sleeve. 
*' Well done, Sara Gsbome : they fool you to the 
top of yoTir bent'*- And it was true that there 



220 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

was no mistaking the cold smile of triumph on 
tliat hard marble face. 

A personage was now announced^ however, and 
approached the group, before whom even the 
duchesse's obduracy had to give way. Perhaps, 
indeed^ I am mclined to think, she had walted 
purposely for this moment to cede. The gentle- 

man was short, and not well-favoured. He was 
remarkable for a pair of small keen eyes, an 
aquiline nose, under cover of which, all the other 
features seemed trying to escape detection, and a 
moustache, that to the fancifal vlew might appear 
to be Standing on end at its owner's audacity. His 
voice was soft, and his manner extremely agreeable 
.. at least, so all those he addressed seemed to 
think. Onei or two pf the Faubourg St. Germain 
ladies, however, gathered up the skirts of their 
dresses as he passed, blandly bowing riglit and left ; 
and while they tumed their heads in a d^ametri- 
cally opposite direction, one of them murmured to 
the other, *' Manres de houtiquier ! " 

The gentleman then . ^whoever he was, we will 
not more particularly inquire . succeeded where 



AU CINQUIEME. 221 

others had failed Report said that he didn't care 
a button for pretly music, but very much for 
a pretty woman. To watch the graceful undu- 
lating movement of the dark-ejed duchesse^ as 
yielding her assent with a Btrange half-bitter 
smile^ she moved towards the piano and began 
turning over some music^ no doubt repaid him in 
itself. 

'^ Shall I teil you what you are thinking of ? *' 
she Said, in an mider-voice to Carrlyon, who 
happened to be Standing near, and was looking 
at her. She contrived to draw him a little apart 
as she spoke 

''No doubt you could interpret the thoughts 
of every man here," said he bowing, and smiling. 

" Perhaps I could . ^no matter : I know youra. 
You were thinking of me, as I was two years 
ago. a penniless slave in the house of taskmasters 
I hated. Do you think I was happier> then? 
Stappier and more innocent than I am now? 
Oh 1 you . you needn't have any scruples in saying 
so. Of course I know perfectly well what the world 
ihinh . and yet you see the world goea down 



222 CABB GF CARBLYON. 

upon its knees. For^ as long as it^ amnsed^ iiie 
World will worship anTthing!** She laugbed 
scomfiillj; and while the Englihman cast about 
m his mmd what reply it behoved him to make 
to this extraordinary address^ tlie duchesse con- 
tinned : *' But you are wrong, if you think I bare 
ever kaown what it was to be happy or innocent 
All that, you se, I meant to come after . and 
it bafin't come. Whatever I bave since done^ I 
bad well determined to do in tbose days^ Lord 
Carrlyon, and tbe power tbat I fougbt fbr, I 
bave got Well ; tbere is a satisfaction. in seeing 
tbe World tbat kicked and spumed you . and 
yoor mother be&re you-^ringing and Ucking 
your band." 

" Ob, yes 1 certainly," replied Carrlyon, begin- 
ning to feel ratber uncomfortable at tbe lady's 
vebemence, tbougb sbe still spoke in a low voice. 

'^But as certain evil instincts are transmitted 
firom motber to cbild, it is as well tbat I bave no 
cbildren, you see. Tbat curse wbieb you pro:- 
nounce in your Decalogue witb sucb fervency 
every Sunday is very literally fulfiUed, in one 



AU dNQUIEME. 223 

shape ar anoth^; and^ as far as I am able to 
judge, neither phjsiciaQS of the body or soul are 
able to offer any antidote to ii** 

Carrljon started. The words were an echo, 
only strenger and deeper, of the unspoken thoughts 
in his own breast; as whispers breathed in a vast 
cavem reverberate with twice thelr origmal force, ^ 
Yet an instant aflter he rejoined, . 

**Yonr "views are very cynical, Madame la 
Dnchesse^ and hardly bome out by facts. We 
have dU of ns heard of the virtuous children of 
very bad parents, and the world wonld be much 
worse even than it is, if we were reaping all the 
accumidated vices of onr ancestors." 

^ It wasn't to discuss the point, I spoke thus," 
Said tiie lady^ r^idly ; "or I should beg you to 
look at more than half the great families in your 
own conntry, in which madness, consnmption, or 
scrofola^ are the inheritance of their ancestors' 
vices. As to the moral part of the question I 
havetft time to enter upon that Why I spoke 
on the snbject at all^ is because it so happens> 
curiously enough, that I haven't one friend in the 



224 CARR OF CARRLTON, 

World! Yoiir wife and her mother are the per- 
sons I have knownlongest; but there were reasons 
why it was impossible we shoidd ever be frienda. 
Yqu, however, now belong to them, and I have 
known you two whole years I. a long time in my 
Bohemian life. I feel more inclined to trust you, 
therefore, than any one eise here; for I thiiik 
you're kind-hearted, and that when you liear tlie 
World, whlch you now see at my feet, heaping 
dirt upon my head, as they will when I am gone, 
that you will only say that the eins of fathera are 
visited on tJieir childreru Repeat that to Mrs. 
Courteney, and she will not refuse to forgive 
me, though I deserve no good at her hands." 

** I will certainly teil her what you wish ; but 
you are not thinking of leaving Paris, surely, 
duchesse?" 

" Who knows ? There comes a time when one 
is sick even of such triiunphs as these," she replied, 
with a harsh laugh. *'Tou will not be surprised 
if you hear I have decamped some moming, and 
no one will know where I am gonel And now, 
what shall I sing ? " 



AU CINQUIEME. 225 

She tumed round and asked her question aloud. 
Mrs. Smith immediately^ in a pleading yoice^ 
began^ . 

" I have heard so much of your singing Pio , 
Nono's hymn, . quite carries one away, Pm told. 
Do, please, let us hear it." 

"It would be an anachronism now. I used 
to sing it/' her eye feil on Razzi at that moment : 
his pale face was fixed on hers . ^^ I used to sing 
it at a time when we all had delusions in Italy 
which have now passed away." 

'* Sing that air from the Nina, Pazza per 
Famore, you sang to us the other night, duchesse," 
Said a young attach. " You threw such passion 
into it ; I really never heard anything half so fine 
. quite like the real thing." 

^' What does a boy like you know of the real 
thing?" Said the lady, tuming those glow-worm 
eyes upon him, that seemed to expand with light, 
and then suddenly . contract again. ''Perhaps I 
might sing it too much like the real thing. I 
don't think it would amuse the people here to 
see a woman going mad for loye. Besides, Pm 

TOL. III. 15 



226 CABK QF CABBIiYOK. 

xufA uf ta asjr great mi toHuglitr I will sing jon 
a aimple romoMce, where mj^ vamty will not be 
wounded hj Coming into competition with Madune 
ErezzolinL" 

It was L^in^ IMdm^ that touehing ballad^ 
the words of which maj have ainick aame fevr 
in that asaemblage who thou^t about the words 
at all, a& posaibltf applicaUe to the imknown 
storj of the strnge woman wha sang thenu 
There was a depth oS despair in that deep voice 
as she uttered the last verse^ which drew tears 
&om more than one listenec 

" Je pars, hSl&Sy deception profonde ! 

Oa ma d^daigne^ et mes t.qiue, mes flonpks 
N'ont pas saave de l'ocean du monde 

Quelques debris des plus doux Souvenirs 
Pale et tremblant deyaat ce front s^ydre, 
Je perds Pespoir iyi boa, moa scul bies. 
77.27 me hait, cette en&nt de la terre, 
Dont le Seigneur m'ayait fait le gardien." 

Others looked at each other and raiaed their 
eyebrowa. 

'^ What a great actress she would make!" said 
ose. 



AU CIKQT]lkBCE. 227 

*^ Site ^ 70a mean,*' replied anotli^ ^ There^s 
no real feelixi^ in all tfaat; it's a lote matter 
ofart.* 

"I csa\ believe k,* aid a thiri '*Look I 
her now ; dre ean't shake off die unpresdion ef 
the song. Slie is realljr the embodiment of a 
los^ despnring seul I ** 

It was gmeralljr observed, indeed^ thsl a 
siDgular daaage . ^whether real or afiected . ^had 
come oww the dnchess after giring this song. 
In replj to the; vociferous complimaits lavished 
on 931 sides^ abe coldlj bowed-her bead. No 
expresncxi <^ gratified vanitj illnmimted her 
features. She moved through the rooms^ omitttng 
no act flf Q^emcmions politeness to her gnests^ 
with the same stonj demeononr. Men adced 
eaeh otlier whetber tibos was the brilliant woman 
the7 were aecttstomed to sce ? She passed from 
gronp te gronp with tfaat white fiice^ and ^ding 

 

motion^ nrbasie and gracefa)^ bat all the fire and 
sparkl& of her daring repartee dead I 

There wa none of the fonmdlty of a eoncert 
People were scattered dirongh the rooms ; in one 

15.2 



228 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

of which knots of grave politicians and men on 
the Bourse^ . ^Monsieur R^al amoiig these . ^were 
playing at whist. The stakes were liigh, to 
judge by the piles of gold on ^each table. The 
31-natured^ indeed^ asserted that gambling was 
always one of the great attractions at the duchess's 
to a certain set who frequented her salons. For 
those who were neither musicians nor gamblers, 
the diversion of a conjuror had been provided on 
this occasion: and a large portion of the society 
were now enjoying the enchantment of finding 
their pocket-handkerchiefs suspended to the chan- 
delier . their rings transferred to the conjuror's 
pocket 

I must not dwell on the culminating point of the 
entertainment . the gorgeous supper. When the 
folding-doors were thrown open, and the Company 
streamed into an apartment glittering with plate 
and light and flowers, it was pretty generally 
feit that a woman who had such taste in all 
her arrangements might well be pardoned some 
peccadillos. She led the way, leaning on the 
arm of her most distinguished guest. Hence- 



AU CINQUIEME. 229 

forward her position was establishecL Would it 
not be foUy to ignore a woman who gave the 
best parties in Paris ? If the duchess were not 
triumphant that eyening^ it was no fault of her 
public 

But the most brilliant and successful evening 
must come to an end. The Company began to 
ooze away gradually into the ante-room ; and then 
the rumble of coaches under the porte-cochire below 
announced that the first departures had taken 
place. And among the first was Carrlyon. He 
feit tired and dispirited^ and the duchess' words 
still rang in his ears. As regarded herself^ his 
sentiments had undergone a change that evening 
which he woidd have believed to be whoUy 
impossible a few hours before. Since he had 
a glimpse of the wretchedness and hopelessness 
that was festering unddJr that hard^ insolent 
exterior, he feit the most profoimd pity for a 
woman whom educa^ion and circumstances had 
perhaps tended to make "what she was. He shook 
hands with her kindly, as he afterwards gladly 
remembered, and her last words were, . 



230 CABS OF GASBLTON. 

'^Yon will probaUj hexe fiom me to-mor* 

It was flome me jet before tiie w3iist-plajrs 
Bud knots c^ men scattered tiircm^ the xoams 
dispersed. Cpntrary to her wont, the duchess 
pressed none of them to remain. The circle of 
habiUi^ feit that this stream <kf wit and anecdote, 
which generally flowed uointeiraptedly. At this 
honTj was chilled; and wiih profuse cctfnjJiments 
ipd congratulations upon the brilliant success of 
her first great xeception^ thej took leave of the 
dudiess, and repaired to their dab io finish the 
night^ imd descant on the strnge demeanour of 
their capcicious divinity. 

And now at last she was alone. The candles 
liad bumt low in th^ sockets^ the flowers were 
drooping rom the heat of the room^ vestiges of 
the great ^semblage lay everywheare around her, 
in &e sbcmge diaan-ay of theiumiture; he an 
odd glove; there the artificial rose-bud from a 
dress ; cards and counters on the oor. crumj^ted 
programmes everywhere, 

She walked the whole lesigth of that magnifi 



AU CaSQUIlbOL 231 

ceaait smte of rooms and back iigaiB. Ab she d 
so^ the haxd white mask imying dfopped aside, 
her featores wocked convitlstvdy, iml catclimg 
sight of her own &ce m one of the long pier- 
glasses as she passed^ she started^ and approached 
it. Once before, two years ago, she had scanned 
her own face thus in the mirror, and had tried 
to read then what the futnre had in stre for 
her. And now. what had the futnre in stre 
for her ? What ? 

The groom of the Chambers entering, with 
some of the footmen, to put out the lights, was 
surprised to find his mistress standing before a 
mirror, with her arms wildly clasped above her 
head. She dropped them quickly, and in another 
moment had entered her own apartment, and 
locked the door : nor would she admit her maid, 

saying she had no occasion for her Services. 

***** 

Towards noon the following day, having tried 
inefiFectually to obtain any answer at her mistress's 
door, the maid communicated her alarm to the 
men-servants, and the door was broken open. 



232 ^ CABB OF CABBLTON. 

They found the duchess lying upon her bed quite 
dead, She was still In her gorgeous dress of the 
previous night; and in her tight-clenched hand 
she held a small bottlej which was labelled 
" Prussic-acid." 



A CINQIEME. 233 



CHAPTER IX. 

The noise it made was great for a few days : the 
motives to which it was attributed were various. 
But the event was too common in Paris for it to 
take hold of the public imagination^ as it would in 
this country. By many it was looked on, no 
doubt, as the proper melodramatic termination to 
an erratic career. One heard very little horror 
expressed at the crime, or pity for the unhappy 
perpetrator of it, but plenty of gossiping details as 
to the distribution of her jewels and money, 

for which, as we shall see presently, she left very 
minute instructions. 

A packet was found upon the table, directed to 
Lord Carrlyon. And as this was transmitted at 
once to his address by the head-servants (while 
others communicated with the police), he received 



234 CAES OF CAERLYON. 

very eaxly the tragical confirmatiom of her parting 
words that he would hear of her to-morrow ! 

The packet contained a note requesting him to 
administer to her last wishes, as he was the person 
in whom she feit the most confidence. Enclosed 
was a document^ the Signatare to which had been 
attested by her maid (though ignorant of the Con- 
tents) bequeathing all monies vested in her name 
in the French ftinds to Mrs. Courteney. Her 
jewels, plate, fiimitore, and wearmg apparel she 
directed shonld be sold, and after paynig certain 
legacies, the residue of the sum ihus realized was 
to be given to one f the great hospitals of Paris, 
These legacies were to her serrants, ^ih one 
exception : and her came the remarkable part of 
the docnment. ^ The snm af fonr thousand francs 
I bequeath to Monsieur Lamberfi, teacher of lan- 
guages, resident in the Rne du Bac, No. . y a sum 
so paltry that though he would take nothing &om 
me when I w3 in life^ he will not reftise thisloken 
of my Tegard from beyond the grave." 

Carrlyon read these papers ottoitively orer, 
when the first thrilldP Iiorror was past? und he 



AU CINQlilCfi. ^35 

Ibresaw all the trooble and difSculty that must 
devolve upon him as executor to this wiU in a 
Btrange countiy. Woold tho law acoept this 
docum^it, in its informal state^ s a vaUd one ? 
This and other practical fears crossed Otrrljt)n's 
mind as he bunied towards the Plwce Yendme; 
together with the disasreeaUe reflecfion that he 
auuat thus be thrown again into personal oommn- 
nication with Ghzido LambertL The confusion Jhe 
found may be well imagined? officials of every 
degree from gew d^urmes npwards crowding the 
Tooms^ gesticolating, interrogating lihe fii^^rtened 
servaats^ and placing dieir seals on eveaythmg. 
The painftd natore of the circnmstisbo^ attending 
the dnchess^ deatk rendered n exanunation of 
ievery one connected with ber aeoessarj Tbose 
friends who had remamed latest at ber brilliant 
aira^nUage the previotzs night wea^e called: the 
groom of the Chambers^ the last person who 'saw 
her alire, gave bis depo^aan : bot nothmg ;of iat- 
portance was elidted* And so Ihe winter twili^^ 
crept Uly ad tbe bodj was iricssa sikntly awa j 
nnbononr^ aad aloe, to its final restix^ place. 



336 CAER OF CARRLYOK. 

and solitude reigned once more in the yellow salin 
drawing-rooms. 

.There was no Opposition ofiered to the will, and 
the sale of effects was fixed to take place in a 
week's time. But if the difficulties were less, the 
delays were far greater than even Carrlyon anti- 
cipated. Days elapsed, and he still found there 
were formulas to be fiUed, deeds of transfer to be 
signed, and other irritatmg impediments to the 
winding up of the deceased lady's fiFairs. He 
wrote to his mother-in-law of course, apprising her 
of Sara's bequest, and not omitting to deliver her 
last message to Mrs. Courteney. But he spoke as 
little as possible on the subject to his wlfe ; and 
Said nothing of the legacy to Lamberti : avoiding 
indeed all mention of his name. The efiFect the 
tragedy produced on her was great : for though all 
intercourse and anything like regard had long since 
ceased between them, this sudden and horrible 
termination to that young life recalled with pain- 
ful vividness the time when she and Sara were as 
sisters. Her woman's instinct suggested at once 
the hidden cause that had led to this crime. And 



AU CINQUliadE. 237 

then again that thought led by a natural conse- 
quence back to the terrrible picture of Guido Lam- 
berti as she last saw bim. 

To Guido himself Carrlyon still delayed writing; 
for which he had the plausible excuse, that until 
the sale was over, the money could not be realized 
out of which Lamberti's and the other .legacies 
were to be paid. It would be sufficient to write, 
therefore, when he could teil him that the money 
was there at bis disposal. But something occurred 
meantime to disarrange all bis plans. 

This something was a telegram received four 
or five mornings after the events I have recorded, 
to say that the dowager had had a seizure of some 
sort, and was lying dangerously ill. In less than 
half an hour her son was in the train. 

** I have no doubt you will see me back in two 
or three days," he said to bis wife^ as he kissed 
her. ** My mother has once or twice before 
alarmed me by these sort of messages, and IVe 
found her with only a bad cold, or something of 
the sort. Like all people with iron constitutions^ 
the least ailment frightens her out of her wits. 



238 CABR . CAKRLTON. 

Of conrse I ean't fnttt to* iixat I must go ; bvt 
it^s a bore jast at ifek mom^it^ becarase I wanted 
to wind up the affairs of that poor tt omsn^ and 
hare done wiA &em, BjMlie-bjr, every paper 
or letter you must send on immediatelj^ 
rcmember; and. and I sliouldn't wish you to be 
recerving visitory of any kind wBile I*m away, 
Gilda^ do you imderstand? And youH nefrer 
think of going ont, except in the carriage for a 
conple o{ hoars every aftemoon. On no con- 
sideration let me hear of yonr having walked^ or 
gone in a fiacre. A woman in your position 
can't be too careftiL Good-by, and keep your 
spirits up f You may be sure I shall get back 
to you again as soon as I possibly can. Perhaps 
when you lite expect it, I shall walk in." 

She had seen so Etfle of him lately- . ^he had 
been so constantly out, and so changed in his. 
manner when at home, that she greeted even 
these despotie Orders with pleasure, as a touch of 
his oH seif She threw her arms round him^ 
with a bright smile as she assored him she was 
resdhred to keep her spirits up, even if he should 



AU GCIQUiboL 239 

l>e detainal longer than he expected. Not for 
liis Bake Qoty bat (or y liere sbe hid her 

soft cheek in bis light bromi besrd; and tibey 
made a verj pretty pksture. And yet (O mosi 
imreasonabla man I ) it is not qnite certain that 
he wa& altogether pleased with her ready recon* 
ciation to faift departnre. Yoa were not a clever 
actcess like Saara, my poor Gilda: yon had not the 
** tact," in other words^ yon were too simple and 
trutfafid^ ta assame what was not spontaneous at 
the moment^ or yon might have averted many 
snch shadows 1 

It was bot a transitory gleam^ after all. When 
he was actnally gone she feit very lonely, in 
spite of her best efibrts, and one of fiiose 
ines^ressiUfi loQQgingB for her own s^ent mother 
which came arer her, alas ! too often now, made 
hear aeiza her pea the fbllowing day^ and 
endeavonr sa ponr out oa paper some of the 
thonghts which oppressed her heart As a more 
tmthfuL pictare of the State ci her mind tfaan 
any description I conld give, I bere transcribe 
this letter. 



240 CARR OF CABRLTON. 

*^I am alone^ dearest mother . alone in this 
great city 1 for Laurence has been called suddenly 
to England by bis mother's xUness. Oh, how 
I long for you to be here, that I migbt lay 
my head on your bosom, as I usedl I think 
all would be right tben. I believe all the sad 
thoughts, all the gloomy forebodings which are 
now crowding in me, would be then drxven away., 
But will that time ever come? Shall I ever 
look into those dear eyes again, and read my 
pardon or my condemnation ? Ah ! there is one of 
my dark shadows. When I wrote to you only 
four d^ays ago, I could think of nothing but poor 
Sara's horrible end, which will, I know, have 
shocked you terribly. I could not write of 
myself, though I had never greater need of your 
comfort and support, dearest mother 1 But you 
must listen to my selfish sorrows to-day : I must 
disobey you, for I feel as if the "v^eight at my 
heart would crush me, if I did not write. You 
need not be afraid if I name Laurence; it is 
only to ask for your counseL I complain of 
nothing. I am afraid I make him less happy 



AU CINQUiiME. 241 

than I used, tut it is no doubt my own fault, 
and pary perhaps my health, which prevents 
my sharing in liis amusements. I do not doubt 
bis love. I am sure he would never neglect 
me for any one eise, and indeed it is / who 
always urge bis going into the world, wbere 
he is so much admired and appreciated. Besides, 
when OUT child is bom, I know he will find 
an interest in home. There is one thing . only 
one . I feel a kind of despair about, as regards 
bim. I do not feel as if I inspired bis condence. 
I thought . I hoped . after all that was past, that 
he would impHcitly trust me. And oh, dear 
mother 1 thia brings me to speak of what is 
hanging about my heart like a stone I Guido 
Lamberti is bere, I mucb fear in the greatest 
distress rYou know he is exiled, and that the 
lite he bad was seized. on and confiscated. He 
is trying to get a precarious livelibood by teacb- 
ing; but I am afraid scarcely gains enougb to 
Support lifel Nor is this even the worst If 
bis bodily strengtb lasted, bis imdaunted heart 
would carry bim througb any privations, I 
YOL. m. 16 



242 CABB OF CL^kSRLTON. 

belle ve; but als! it is not posnble to hok. isAo 
bis facej and not p%eive xe tecribie "cbaage 
which has passed tuver Ilbbel ILe k v^om to 
a sbadow; bis eyes look xmnatnrally large and 
biigbt, and bis CDUgb . it cats eoe to tbe beart 
to bear You will uoderstand rom ibis iat Z 
have Seen bim. He called here about a week 
ngo, under a^ iiapressicm that Laoiwace Lad 
aent bim some money anonymously^ wbicb be 
desired to retum. We know hds pride of 'old 
too todl ! Wben I assured Jiim tbat neitber my 
busband nor I were even. aware n bis being in 
Paris^ be seemed only anxious to get away as 
qiiicklj as possiUe; bis dread bemg, I could 
see^ tbat it sbould be tbougbt be came bere 
to make known liis condition. He tberefore 
extracted a prcnnise wbkdi I most reluc^santly 
gave^ and wbicb I bav since repcoacbed myaelf 
with baving given . ^tbat I woold noi jnention 
bis calling to Lanrence. I would ihave broken 
tbat promise^ in tbe hope tbat Laurenoe migbt do 
sometbing for bim, bad I not known faow tbat 
fiital pride would make Mm fed sucb assistance 



A ClNQUI^Mas. 248 

e^en taore hiedj ihan any Ibobs er prii^tion I 
Bat Bow 'that Laurence ib g^ns, and muab he 
awaj man j days at least^ I begin <k> repent Jiot 
bawng told iiim I The tbought has ven crossed 
mj mind, 4i|iposii]g lie sihoiild bave iieard of 
thifl iiiterview somehow, and jnisccmstrae my 
silence ? But I do not beUeve he could do that 
He would at least have spoken to me on liie 
subject: mnd tben I coiald have told bim alL 
No, it is on onr poor Guido's own aocojot 
tbat I feel tbis terxible acbun^ responsibilitj^ wbicb 
now rests upon mj own w^ak sbonlders alona 
I have no means of ascertaming bow he is, &ar 
I kncfw not ^eie he u to be found. He may 
be reduced to tbe greatest de0dtution befire 
Laurence^s xcftura I Oh I it is homble I I sbudder 
to ihink :of it. and then no remedy I Hk gaimt 
pale face is oyer be&re xne, so sad, and yet 
so proudj and I 9ak wbat wiU the eod <of it 
allbe?" 

Here she tboew 'omtk the pen^ wearied ^ith 
the veiy act of mnbvrdeiung her overduurged 
heari^ and meanmg te &aisx her Jdtter anotber 

16.2 



244 CABB OF CABBLYOK 

day And by a curlous coincidence she had scarcely 
written the above words when she accidentally 
obtained the information she so eamestly desired. 

A tradesman who had left his bill some'days 
before called with a pressing demand for its 
payment. The bill, Gilda knew, had been given 
to Carrlyon, and was probably now upon his 
table^ amongst a heap of other papers. She went 
there tp look for it, and ahnest the first thmg 
her eye feil upon was an envelope, the band- 
writing upon which she could not for an instant 
mistake. With trembling finger she moved aside 
paper after paper, until she came upon the crumpled 
note we have read^ signed Guido Lamberti, and 
dated Rue du Bac 

She sank down in a chair, and read it over and 
over again. What did it mean ? Could it be, after 
all, that Laurence had sent the money? Would 
he not have told her ? On the other band, would 
Guido return to this persuasion without streng 
evidence? She found herseif painfully troubled 
to answer these questions. But one thing was 
evident. Whether cognizant of Guido's position 



A CINQUIEME. 245 

before or not, whether by a generous Impulse, 
her husband, or some other person, had tried to 
assist bim, it was impossible, after that letter, 
tbat Laurence shoid take any overt pari in 
helping bim. Did tbat lessen her responsibility ? 
However tbe world might answer tbis question, 
the tender, loving woman's heart answered, No I 
Gould sbe tbink of bim as sbe last saw bim; could 
sbe be baunted by tbat face day and nigbt, and 
not stretcb out her band now tbat sbe knew 
wbere be was? Her wbole nature gave a pas- 
sionate denial to so cold-blooded and monstrous 
a supposition 

It was too late to send Marietta tbat day The 
following moming, however, her trusty little mes- 
senger set out to tbe Rue du Bac, to obtain 
what information sbe could conceming tbe Italian 
teacber. 



246 CABK OF CABKLTON. 



CHAPTER X. 



...." 



FiTB days, St days o rapidl j d^reasing strength, 
and now tke eod i (bawing near. 

The eyesdi^ of the day that Sara took her 
final leaye of him in this world, Guido> afier 
writmg to Lord Carrlyon, again ruptored a 
blood-vessel. The old woman who tended him 
was at her wit's end. She sent for tbe^ lite 
apothecary hard-by, but he did littde more than 
shake his head, recommending qoiet and good 
food. He saw that the man was doomed: tiie 
loss of blood had reduced his strength to its 
lowest ebb. 

And in cruel mockery, as it seemed, of his 
fruitless efforts for employment all these months, 
when employment might have saved him, he 



AU CINQmiME. 247 

recdhred instmetkm^ from a publisher the very 
next moming to commence an important trans- 
lation. whkk would be weU^ paid.. The poor 
felloTT sat up in his bed propped hj pillows for 
Bome hcmrs erery dsy-y and worked as^^ long" aa 
it was possibia for Mm to hold a pen 

^ It IS no iise," he said at Iist^ as he sank back. 
"^It Gomes tfflCblatet" 

He took, or tikd to take^ what the good wonmn 
brought him (and it was marvellous how &r 
that napoleon spread itsdf with her care and 
jndgment I) r bot from, habits o long abstinene^ 
the atonach was now too weak to d^st much 
fbod. After swaBowing a few monthfuls^ he 
wonld retom the baain of soup^ grealdy to her 
discomfitnare^ and she wonld say angrily, . - 

" TienSfinona^ni . if yonhaire been bred npon 
truffles^yottmaj'tnm up your nose at this; but 
ril be bonnd you nevear got a better potage for 
breakfest at home ; pure and wholesome, and 
atrongi taol" 

^^TSa douib^ ma merey iJr is excellent; but I 
h aye no s^petitiL'' 



248 CABB OF CARRLYON. 

*^But how do you expect to live, if you do 
not eat ? ** 

" I do not expect to live : I grow hourly 
weaker, God wiUs it so, ma mbre, and you 
know," he added, with a smile, **I do not leave 
very much behind me to regret. When I am gone 
you will find five francs and a little gold cross 
in that box, . ^which are yours. The cross was 
my mother's; and I have called you by that 
name lately : you will keep it for my sake. My 
sword and pistols, and the few books you see, 
will fetch something . enough to pay for my 
burial and this last fortnight's rent. And, ma 
mirBy there is a favour I would still ask of you, 
after I am gone. Let this glove be buried with 
me. See: I have always carried it here next 
my heart Let it remain there still." 

**I am an old fool," muttered ma mire to 
herseif, as she wiped her eyes with the comer 
of her apron. **ror I feel just as if it were 
really my own son. Ah! if iMs one had only 
been in a good shop, hke the Maison de Lille! 
That glove, ^ndeed I What is the love of these 



AU CINQIEME. 249 

fine ladies worth, when they leave him here to 
die^ witb only an old woman like me ne^r him ? 
If he had some of their fine wines and jellies even 
now, who knows but he might recover? That 
thick-veiled lady who left me the money, why 
has she never called since ? I have only three 
francs left . ^if I did but know where to find her ! 
Ah ! mon Dieuy it is shocking, it is inhuman to let 

bim die so I " 

And the old woman hobbled out of the room 
to finish her cry unrestrined below. The short 
winter twilight had closed rapidly in. Presently, 
the frosty sharp-cut moon rose over the high 
Paris roofs and chimneys, and shone fll into the 
garret window. The dying man raised himself 
on his elbow and looked long and wistfully at that 
streng pure light ruling over the darkened city. 
The cries of the closing day had not yet ceased. 
The grind of carts and carriages, tiie shouts of 
street-hawkers, the nasal twang of organs, still 
mounted to that garret^ bleut into one indistin- 
guishable roar. To the Imagination of him who 
heard them^ as he looked at that calm clear light^ 



250 CAEB OF CAJESBIiYON. 

. ihey aonnded like the^ fiur*off cries^ aood stmggleff af 
a life that wonld ttnon be at sleep fbr ever, while 
iheH gbrioasi Ught whidbi liad rTsen npon ds sonl 
sbould shine imdimined tlirongh tiie darkest hoaz:;^ 

A manrelloTiS: cfaar^e had been wrovgkt in his 
inwsrd idiongl^ durizig the fire days ke kad 
lain there. Skice the slow^ snre conrictiion had 
da^vmed npoii him. I&a^ Dealh . ^Death hs 
friend" . was at hand, a veil seemed to have 
fallen froiu him. He started to find how diSSsrent 
was the outlme of all mere human taw^^rs of 
strength against the etemal skyT Ay he lay 
there now, with the moon shimng down upon him, 
he buried his fiice m his hands : and if we dare 
reveal the secret recesses of a soul whose deep- 
drawn fervent praise and prayer was beard hj 
no mortal ear^ his thoughts may have framed 
themsely^ thns : 

** My eyes are open^ and my sin is before me* 
The pride^ the vain-glory of a mortal wbo hath 
foolishljr thonght he could stand alone im thy 
World . is there angfat so hatefnl in thy sight aa 
this ? Bat tium art merdfiiL I thank thee that 



AXT CESQUlEMm. 251 

thoa hast brovgldr m low; Is my atrengtb thou 
werihidd^i firom mine ejes b^r tiie thick mist of 
snperstitkm men spread bebre thy glorions hce. 
In Tay weakness tiiose eyes thovL hast opened to 
WS ihsA a& thoi^ art . infinite, m merc^r and 
wisdom. O thoiL who^ (iwdilest neither iiL heav^^i 
Dor in esat&r ^^ perradeat all eresAion^ from 
wfaont. all tibat is tme^ aad wise, and beautifol 
doth Gome; who, m thy inscratable wisdom, 
permittest evil to esist fbr a tnne upon this earth, 
men ignorantly woi^p ihee as a God of Revenge 
to he eonciliated by raim saeriee, fasting, and 
oblation l Thou hast stmeken me down ; thou 
hast takai from me,. one hy ene> each hope that 
held me to life; and now thoa hast robbed me 
of that pride wherein I boasted of my self-depen-* 
dence I am humbled in the dust I Yet not in 
wrath bat in pfty hast thou thus dealt with nue^ 
I worship in thee a God of Mercy. Had mine 
own right arm gotten me thls yictory, should 
I hare tumed to hee? Thou hast taught me ^aat 
Tain is tite starength of man. I stand on the brink 
of the grave^ an/d where is my^ pride? the stubbonx 



252 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

arrogance of my heart that opposed a dread of the 
contempt of my fellow men to sympathy, to love, 
to the blessed gifts which shall endure beyond all 
time? Thou art present in the least of all ihy 
works. How much more, then^ m the love that 
binds thy creatures together upon earth 1 In my 
blindness.I put away from me the cp of love 
thou heldest to my Ups. Too late, O Father ! too 
late^ I acknowledge how mistaken is the prIde 
that separates two of thy creatures whom thou 
hast ordained for each other! Yet, through 
absence and trial, though silent and unrecognised, 
in the secret recesses of my soul this passion has 
guarded me from all lower aflTections men falsely 
call ^ love.' Thereby, I know it is of thee. I 
thank thee for it now that lifo is fast ebbing 
away : and I thank thee too for that belief which 
hath risen up slowly in my soul, like yonder moon 
into the night, guiding the Wanderer in daxkness 
to the skirts of everlasting mom ! that belief in 
a future and higher State of being where all creeds^ 
all diiferences, all sorrows, all human stains, shall 
be swept away, and love shall be made perfecta 



AU CINQUIEME. 253 

and joy sliall be made pure^ and superstition shall 
hide its face, and we shall know thee as thou art, 
and looking back upon this lower life, shall praise 
the mercy and truth that led us over that dark 
and narrow bridge, into the light of thine etemal 
glory ! " 

At noon the following day, Marietta^ran into 
her mistress's room. Her face was pale, and with 
all an Italian's vehement gesticulation, she cried 
out, 

** He is dying, signora I The apothecary says he 
cannot last the day ! and the old woman who is 
with him says^h, signora, it is horrible !. htj 
says it ia wantoffood . that he is dying of hunger, 
and that his friends have let him die." 

Gilda had started to her feet, and was looking at 
her with a stony gaze of horror. Then she sud- 
denly pressed her band before her eyes, and a low 
groan burst from her. 

'^ Oh, my God ! and it is I . ^I who have killed 
him I All these days . all these days . and I might 
have saved him ! Dying and alone ! Oh, horrible ! 
Bat it may not be true; it may not be too late . 



224 CABB QF CAEBIJrON. 

I 

Mamettal" she .drofq[>ed her haiids, azid iher imam 
was kBit mth a ituddaa detemmijcfaoii, as he 
graspedhermaid' acm: ^Run . ^nm . getafiacre 
. not a moment% delay I jdiould not faaTe-the 
heart of a woman to letliim-to letany ma. die 
thu!" 

While the little Italian ran ant, Lady Carifyon 
nearly puUed the bell down in her agitation, arder- 
ing the astonished waiter, when he came, to fiU a 
basket with wme, meat, and whatever nourishment 
was available at a moment's notioe. Her trenxbling 
fingers had scarcely strength to tie the string, 
of her bonnet and cloak, as she hurried down- 
stairs. 



AXT CINQUIEME. 255 



CHAPTEE XI. 

LoBD Cabblton reached London bj the mail-train 
on Monday night He fonnd the dowager very 
^lightly indisposed^ as he Iiad anticipated, bnt in a 
great State of excitement relative to the change of 
ministry which had, been imminent on Saturday, 
but which on Mondaj no longer admitted of a 
donbt. Now, she built all her hopes of her son's 
'^getting something" on this changa She had 
herefore adopted the verj characteristic i'nse of 
appealing to Laurence's filial &elings in order to 
bring him across the Channel, as she knew his 
habitaal indolence and reluctance to act decisively 
in such nuutters. 

Bat XSacrljon chose to be verjr aogry with his 
mother, and it was in vain that she tied np her face 
and laj on a sofa, and assured Jiim she had been 



256 CABE OF CAEBLYON. 

very, very unwell. He coold hardly be persuaded 
to promise that he would seek an interview with 
the embryo Prime Minister, who was a distant 
Cousin, before returning to Paris the following 
day. 

Wheri that day came, he found, as is always the 
case, so mach to do, that he just missed the mail 
train. He was resolved to go on however, and 
sleep at Dover. He had not written to Gilda ; 
intending to surprise her at breakfast the following 
morning. Now, however, he could not reach her 
tiirthe middle of the day. He was uncomfortable, 
dissatisfied with himself . with his mother, with the 
Prime Minister, with everybody. The Minister, 
though a cousin, had politely pointed out that a 
man who lived abroad, and kept sedulously aloof 
from public affairs, could hardly expect to be 
entrusted with the important post Carrlyon had 
asked for. And Carrlyon could not himself but 
feel that the frivolous hfe he had been leading 
unfitted him for any career of constant and 
laborious work. He was annoyed; his vanity 
mortified ; his temper irritated by a fruitless 



AU CINQUIEME. 257 

joumey into which he had been decoyed: and 
over and above all, bis nervous temperament 
agitated by ill-defined anxiety conceming Gilda. 
He ought to have spoken to her calmly, kindly, 
bnt resolutely before he left. He was a fool not to 
have done so. There was some mistake . he was 
sure of it . which she would clear up ; and some- 
thing very like ihe actual truth did in fact occur to 
Carrlyon. Still he was tormented by douht That 
Caliston blood! Could the veins in which it 
flowed be ever pnrified from the poison which was 
so fatal an inheritance? Now oftener than ever 
the thought recurred, in spite of bis best efforts to 
drive it away. And in this firame of mind he 
reached Paris. 

It was early in the aftemoon when he drove 
up to the hotel. There were a couple of waiters 
lounging nnder the archway with napkins .under 
their arms. 

'^ How is madame ? " cried Laurence, as he 
jumped out of the carriage.* " She is not ill ? " 

** No, milord, she is out" 

" Out ? when did she go out ? " 

VOL. in. 17 



258 CARB OF CARRLTON. ' 

^' Hillf-an-hoiir ago, in a fiacre^ with her msrid.** 

Carrykm bit bis lip : then said with an 
affetation of indifferenoe . 

^ So she did not wait for her camage ? Do 
you happen to know what took her out so 
arly?" 

^' N05 milord. Miladi took wipe and other 
things with her, and I heard her teil ie driver 
to go as fast as he conld to the Bue da Bac." 

Garrlyon, in a calm voioe, desired ihe man to 
take his things upstairs. His &ce was deadly 
pale, and he set his teeth hard. Tbeti tnming 
abruptlj round he walked ont intb tiie street 
He hailed a fiacre, and jumped into it. Yes ! 
he would follow her : he would track her out ; 
he would not stand this state of horriblo doubt 
and suspenso anj longer. There might be some 
mistake, and she be innocent, but if his worst 
suspicions were confirmed . if she proved to have 
Jbeen fahie to him, by G . dl he would not spare 
her, he would show her no mercy, no I not even 
for the sake of the child she was about to bear. 

The man's excitement was so great that he 



A CINQI^MB. 259 

clenched his fists tili the nails entered theflesh. 
He shri^ed out to the driver to double Itis 
pace. He could hardly sit stiH: tliose &w 
mmntes Beemed hours of agoasy to liim who was 
inside that jingling little dtadine. 

At last it pulled np : and again he leapt ont. 

There was no one in tbe porter's lodge but 
a little child^ who was left to mind the cardan^ and 
who knew nothing. Garrlycm sprang upstdrsu 
On the fourth landing he fonnd the old portres85 
seated cm the top step, and stiing her sobs with 
her apron. With innate ddKcaej she had left 
tbe room, not to intrude on those^ who^ sa she 
believed^ had more right to watch the djing man. 
Bat she had got no farther than the door; 
there^ on tiie landing, she could give way to her 
grief comparatively without restraint, and there 
Carrlyon found her. 

^ Is any one with Monsieor Lamberti ? '^ he 
mastered himself to ask with tolerable codipoareu 

*' Oui,^' flobbed the old wonwm, *' n^ mianneury 
cette dorne y esL^ 

^' What lady ? Do yon kow her, then?** 

17.2 



260 CARR OF CARRLYON. 

'^The same who has been here twice before ; 
but ahl she comes too latel You, too, if you 
are bis friend . stayl now I recognize monsieur. 
I kept your secret, but you should have come 
again, you are too late now, too late," and 
putting up her finger knowingly, through her 
tears, good old soul, ^^you understand that just 
at this moment you might be de trop. You 
had better not disturb them. It is the last time, 
poor things, that " 

*'Yes! the last time," said Carrlyon hoarsely, 
as he brushed past her. 

Ahl ma mere^ your mistake in confusmg this 
veiled lady wiih the one whose face you never 
saw, has only tended to hurry on fatal events 
which could hardly have been averted ! 

He flung the door open, and there remained 
motionless. Between him and the bed, so that 
its occupant was hidden, was Gilda, her face 
buried in her hands. Marietta was stooping 
over the pillow, but both women started as the 
door opened, and then Gilda, with a faint cry, 
ran towards her husband. 



AU CmQUIEME. 261 

He waved her back^ and husband and wife 
stood opposite eacb other for a second or two^ 
tili he said^ in a voice liardly audible with 
passion, . 

^^ So, Lady Carrlyon, I retum to find you here, 
I am thankful, at least, that my eyes should be 
opened 1 " 

" Opened ? Oh, Laorence, I am miserable and 
suffering as it is; . . . . don't look at me ihus ! 
You don't know what I have gone through, 
or you wouid not add to my agony and self- 
reproach by suspecting " 

" Suspecting f I admire your choice of words, 
I do not suspect As to your self-reproach, I 
am glad you have some sense of shame left I " 

"Laurence! Laurence! You know not what 
you are sayingl For God's sake, don't speak 
thus, and at such a moment too! Dear Laurence, 
listen to me." 

" I have listened long enough. I am not to be 
duped any more," he exclaimed yehemently. 

" Duped ? Oh, my God, Laurence, is it 
possible ? " she gasped, " can you ihink that " 



262 CASB OF CABBLrOK. 

^ I think ihat this nun is your paratnour^ 
Ladj Carri jon 1 Yo bare had repealed dandes- 
tine intendews wh him^ both here amd at yofor 
own home.'* 

She caught at the table near her. A look of 
horror and Indignation shot from those eyes, 
which Carrlyon never forgot 

*'6od forgive yoa for those false and cmel 
wordsl" Sbe panted fbr breath^ and pressed 
her band to ber side^ wbile a ^lastly diange 
stole over ber face, ^ You will be aorry for them 
one day, Carrlyon. You will remember them 
long after I am gdne ! Thank Godj ht did not 
hear yoal He  deadi and bis. last moments 
were peace . ^yes, peace ! " 

Sbe sank back into Marietta's arms. Upon the 
bed bebind hsr, bis eyes already dosed^ bis 
emadated hands folded on bis breast^ lay all that 
remained of wbat was once tbe proud Guido 
LambertL Tbe expression of tbe face did, indeed, 
betoken an end of mitronbled calnu 

Carrlyon walked np to tbe bed, and looked on 
wbat lay tbere for a moment or two in silence* 



A GINQUlbfE* 263 

As he stood thus, with a throng of conflictmg 
emotions in bis heart^ may not a certain envy for 
that rest^ that calm secnrity biM liyal sjeemed 
to be enjojing^ have oome over bim? The rain^ 
mercurial5 jet kindly tnsjx of the yrorld, easy of 
Impression, bot-beaded, and as qnickl j repentant, 
could not gaze at tbose bollow cbeeks and sanken 
eyes over wbicb the lids bad closed for erer . 
tbe ruined tenement of wbat be remembered so 
fall of noble manbood, withont a thnll of awe and 
compassion, even tboogb the object of it was tbe 
man be believed to be most inimical to bis own 
bappiness. Bat tbe vials of bis jealoas wrath 
were empticd w and flung asidej Remorse, oa 
her sable wing, was already hurrying towards 
bim. 

Md mhre bad come into tbe room, seeing tbat 
tbe lady was ill; and bolii tbe good woman and 
Marietta were bosily engaged in trying to restore 
ber to aiiimatinn. As ma mire rabbed oe band, 
sbe ooald not realst exclaiming, in a low voice, to 
herseli^ . 

^' Mcn Dieu ! Pauvre gargon, ry-enrava deux. 



264 CARB OF CARRLYON. 

alors. See ! the other had dark eyes^ and this one 
is fair as a child." 

Carrlyon had walked up^ and was standing 
beside her as she mttered this ; . ' 

^'If monsieur has anjthing to do with this 
lady," Said the old woman, suddenly looking up, 
" I recommend him to get her home as fast as 
possible, I am an old mother myselfi This 
sudden shock ^" 

He stooped down and lifbed her in his arms 
like a lite child. He stopped to ask no question : 
he spoke no other word; but silently, swiftly, with 
a troubled brow and trembhng lip, he bore her 
downstairs, foUowed by the affrighted Marietta. 

.P ^^ 9^ W^ ^^T 

At twelve o'clock that night Lady Carrlyon 
was prematurely delivered of a boy. The child, 
however, though small, was pronounced to be 
healthy; and the anxiety of the physicians was 
concentrated on the mother. Her husband was 
imremitting in his attention : he scarcely left her 
bedide day or night, but her prostration was such 
that she lay apparently in a Stupor, unconscious 



AU CINQUIEME, 265 

of his presence. The doctors Said there had been 
some shock to her nervous System^ which it had 
not recovered ; and as the days went by it became 
evident to every one . ^to that miserable husband 
last of all. that she was gradually sinking away. 

She recognized him once before she died. She 
opened her eyes in the night, and they wandered 
vaguely round the room, as if looking for some- 
thing, The nurse, at Carrlyon's desire, brought 
her the baby. She looked wistfully into its little 
face, as though she would have read its futore 
there ; ihen pressed it with her feeble Ups. Her 
eyes almost instantly afterwards kindled with a 
faint ray of life as they met those of her husband. 
She could not speak, but she looked back at ihe 
child, and then again at him ; and he understood 
her. As she saw Aat he did so, a smile flickered 
over Gilda's pale Ups ; and to this token of trust 
and of forgiveness . ^the last she was able to give 
. the widowed husband still clings, whenever he 
thinks of his departed wife. 



d 



266 CABB OF CASBI/TON. 

I bare fittle left to teO^ and I will saj diat 
in as few irords as posnbla 

For a time Carrlyon's paflioBate grief ahnoit 
approacbed insamty. fie accnsed huam^ of being 
bis wife'ft mnrderer; snd it required Ute phy- 
sician's solemn assertions that her dealh was ihe 
result of natoral caztses consequent on dbild- 
birth^ to migaie ihe violence of bis poignant 
remorse. The discorery of that nnfinished letter 
to her mother^ with ie touching expressioQ of 
her sorrows and diScnlties, moved hhn to &esh 
and unavailing self-reproach. He had never 
reay known the angel in his house tili she 
had been taken firom bim. 

Ten years bare passed since then. 

Lord Carrlyon is not yet married again^ but 
is devoted to the education of bis child. The 
boy is a fine, bandsome creature; and, fartnn- 
ately fbr bis ftitnre bappiness, perfaaps^ wboUy 
nnlike bis mother or matemal grandmofher. It 
is impossible to be reminded of any one but 
Carrlyon bimself as you look in the child's face. 
The dowager adores bim; the servants all spoil 



AU GINQliMK 267 

him: there is no one bat die father to exercise 
any wbolesome influeoce and controL Bnt Iie 
lias not forgotten the errors of his own edaca- 
tioDy the faults and foUies (no one can discem 
them moore elearly than hunself^ in certain moods) 
conseqnent on a pampered jonth Abore all^ be 
has not &rgotten the solemn tmst thoBe dyiiig 
eyea reposed in him. No! so &r as be can, it 
shall be bis care to train her boy in the fear 
of God, in the loye of tmtb and yirtae, in p^> 
seyerance and indnstry, in abn^gation of seif. 
He shall not be a mere man of pkasore; a 
dilettante of ibe arts, a pet of society ; be shall 
be a working man in a jnrofession for some 
years. All tbis the amdons sitber plana in bis 
bead, as be watehes day by day tfae cbild's 
growth and promise Wbetber libose plans will 
be carried out, wbetber tbat promise will be fbl- 
fiUed, who sball say? 

Lord Carrlyon tben may be snpposed to be 
*^ a sadder and a wiser man.'' The effect of his 
wife'ii deatb npon bim was no donbt great; bis 
self-accnsation bitter, bis tmavaiHng regrets poig- 



268 CABB OF CABBLYON. 

nant and lasting. To this very day he cannot 
^ allude to her, to the sunny days of their early 
married lifo, to the many associations connected 
with Italy, without emotion. Bat early habits 
are not easily changed. The character is ex- 
ceptional which, after a man has reached his 
fll moral stature, suffers material alteration from 
any single circumstance in lifo. I am not aware 
that Carrlyon has set to work to achieve any 
greatness that should raise him above the adven- 
titious advantages of birih. He is identified with 
no particular cause; he devotes his energies to 
no reform, or other practica! result that I ever 
heard of. He has ahnest given up painting, 
and has become so fastidious in the matter of 
Society, that it is esteemed a rare honour when 
he submits with languid tolerance to the adula- 
tion of a country house . the female portion of 
it, that is to say. For it is natural that mothers, 
whether ^* Belgravian " or not, should feel anxious 
for their daughters to shine to particular advan- 
tage whenever that excellent, charming, accom- 
plished man, Lord Carrlyon, is by ; and it always 



AU CINQUIEME. 269 

amuses me to watch the flutter of anxlety into 
which his arrival throws the whole brood, But, 
hitherto^ as I have said^ he has escaped them^ 
in spite of the dowager's excellent advice, and 
kind recommendation of three or fonr soitable 
part eveiy year. Some women think him super- 
cilious ; but they all remark that he is invariably 
kind to children^ and to those who appear to be 
suffering, or lighted, Especially noticeable is 
it in a hard man of the world, how angry the 
ordinary chaffing scandal among men makes him^ 
and how warmly he takes up the defence of 
any woman of whom defence is possible. 

Is there any particular tree you can distinctly 
remember in your childhood, and have you seen 
it again after a long lapse of years ? The hole is 
the same^ ihere is the same twist in the main 
brauch^ but time has wrought a change in the sky- 
outline. For here the current of its sap was stayed, 
and here the cold wind tumed its topmost boughs : 
so that^ to a casual observer^ it scarcely looks the 
same tree. Such a change^ and no more^ have 
years and circumst^ces effected in Carrlyon. 



270 CABB OF CA&RLTON. 

Jt cbIj remaiss for me to speak of one oiher 
person^ in whose fate the reader of these pages 
maj feel some interest or coriosity. Mrs. Cionr- 
teney^thotwom fragile woman^ whose life seemed 
lianging on a tbread eleven jears ago^ still lives. 
It has pleased the Giver of life and death to spare 
her^ while she has se^i all she lield most dear on 
earth depart In the early days of his bereave* 
ment stnng wiih remorse, her son-in-law wrote to 
entreat that Gilda's mother would come and take 
permanent charge of the child. He was perfectly 
sincere when he said there was no one living 
in whom he could place such confidence. Bnt 
Mrs. Courteney did not allow her feelings to blind 
her to all that such an arraDgement would entail. 
She had had the fortitude to banish herseif from 
her own danghter's society : she would not be an 
element of discord in this child's life. She fore- 
saw that when the first season of his grief was 
past, and that Carrlyon retumed to old habits and 
assodations, above all, if the dowager should 
conceive any affection for the boy, Mrs. Grar- 
teney's presence would be a gene, if nothing worse^ 



AU CINQI]^MIL 271 

and migbt imperil her grandchild's fiiiure hap- 
piness. 

^^Believe me," she wrote, "it is better that the 
hoy shottld leam to look to yau in all Iiis joys and 
troubles^ that he shoold be dependenton you alone 
from his verj earliest year& A chain will thos 
be riireted which will stand the test of time, and an 
influenae established far beyond ihat of parental 
authority. This, I believe, would be our darling's 
wish, were she alive. Much as she might desire 
me to be near her child, she would much more 
ardently desire that you should be his sole guide 
and guardian. I might use many other gobd 
arguments to combat thoe so warmly urged by 
you, but I feel that this one is sufEcient. The 
remaining sand of my lifo must run out.here, 
Laurence, in the land of my adoption. If you 
will come, and bring the child to see me, it will 
be a ray of sunshine in my solitary existence. 
But do not try and shake my resolution. You did 
80 once, and God ordained that I should take up 
my cross again. XJnless He points out. some 
clear line of duty elsewhere, I most continue 



272 CABR OF CARRLYON. 

to bear that cross of expiation here, until He 
sees fit that I should lay it down," 

And so she bides her time^ in faith and charity : 
in hope and patience : self-denying unto the end, 
her hands slacken not in God's Service of love and 
mercy here, while she looks forward to the blessed 
fiiture, when tears shall be wiped from every 
eye, and sin and sorrow be unknown. 



THE END. 
