POET AND PEER. 



CHAPTER I. 

/\NE August evening, before the harvest 
^ moon had risen over the golden wheat- 
fields and slopes of orchard land that surround 
the village of Ripple, a little girl of eleven was 
seen driving home a cow and her calf from the 
hill-side pastures where they had been feeding. 
She was seen, I repeat, and it was by a lad of 
sixteen, who stood alone, leaning over a gate 
which divides the Athelstone woods from certain 
common grounds over which the owner of those 
woods is also lord of the manor. Ripple be- 

VOL. 1. B 



4 POET AND PEER. 

the linen bonnet tilted over her pretty face^ and 
glorifying the skirt of her lilac print frock, 
which the breeze drifted backwards as she 
danced along. She held a stick . it might 
almost be termed a wand . in her hand, where- 
with she made believe to drive the mild-eyed 
mother and her offspring before her, though, in 
truth, they showed no reluctance to return for 
the night to their shed and litter of straw. 
The child was delicately made, and her uncon- 
scious grace^ and the sweet clear voice in which 
she caroled snatches of some old country song, 
as she advanced, fired the young poet's imagi- 
nation. 

Her way led directly past the gate on which 
he leant. She stared somewhat affrighted on 
seeing him, and brought both little hob-nailed 
boots together with a courtesy which resembled 
a futile effort at sitting. 

"Good evening," said Wilfred, in a half 
shame-faced way (bad he addressed a duchess, 
he would have been bold enough, even to 
defiance). . . . "What is your name, little 
girir 



POET AND PEER. 5 

" Nellie Dawson, if you please, sir, . . . my 
lord," replied the sweet little voice. 

"Oh, you know mel . . . Not that I am 
* my lord,' Nellie . never call me that. Where 
do you live I Who is your father ?" 

" I ain't got none, sir. Mother and me lives 
in yon cottage,'^ and one rosy hand pointed to 
the first low thatched roof that showed above 
the apple-boughs. 

" Oh ! you're the child of John Dawson, who 
died two years ago . I remember. . . . What 
does your mother do ?" 

" Mother does everything." 

"You ought to go to school, Nellie, instead of 
minding the cows." 

" I do go, only it's over at four, if you please, 
sir, so I run up the field to bring the cow 
home." 

" And you can read and write well ?" 

" Yes, sir, and 'rithmetic too." 

"That's right. There's nothing like know- 
Hedge. It makes all men equal." The child 
fitared at the aphorism, and said nothing. The 
young gentleman continued, in his gently 



6 POET AND PEER. 

dictatorial way, " You must work hard, and 

then you'll rise. Everyone ought to try to 

rise, you know." The child had heard her 

mother talk about the bread "rising." She 

had also heard a distich about . 

" Early to bed and early to rise, 
Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise f 

but what the young gentleman meant by her 
" trying to rise," she had no sort of idea. He 
continued, ** I shall come and see your mother. 
I've never been in your cottage in my life. I 
am so little at home now. How did you know 
me?" 

" I've a-seed you in church, sir." 

" You mustn't say, ' I've a-seed.' Say, * I've 
seen. . . . By-the-by, can you milk your cow?" 

" Oh I yes, sir, I always does." 

*^ Always do, Nellie. Give me some, then, in 
this leather cup. Milk warm from the cow is a 
draught fit for the gods." 

The child looked puzzled at this last utter- 
ance, but she dropped her little courtesy again, 
as she took the cup from his hand, and ran to 
the cow, which was nibbling the grass under 



POET AND PEER. 7 

an apple-tree a few yards off. KneeliDg down, 
she deftly filled the cup with the frothing 
liqaid ; then, holding it between both her rosy 
hands, with careful footsteps, she brought it to 
Wifred, at the gate. 

"Just like Hebe,'' murmured the boy, as he 
took the cup. She had no idea what he meant ; 
bat felt proud to have rendered this small ser- 
vice to '' the young lord," as she still called him 
to herself. 

" Thank you, Nellie," said he, drawing a 
bng breath. *' One good turn deserves an- 
other, you know. I shall bring you a book 
when I come. And, if you like it, you must 
learn some of it by heart, and repeat it 
to me." Then, with a nod and a smile, he 
shouldered his fishing-rod, while the little maid 
" bobbed " once more, and hurried after her 
kine. 

Here was a piece of news to give mother I 
The young lord had promised to come and see 
them, and bring her a book. But, oh 1 what 
did he mean by saying that fresh milk was " a 
drink fit for the gods""! It sounded like the 



POET AND PEER. 



Ammonites and wicked idolaters she had read 
of in Holy Writ. Perhaps mother would know 
what the young lord meant. 



CHAPTER 11. 

A WORD or two more as to Lord Athelstone, 
-^ personally and mentally. 

He was now nearly sixty, but more hale 
and active than most men of half his age. He 
was getting bald, and what little hair he had 
was white ; but his eye was keen, his teeth and 
his digestion sound, and he would walk all day 
over the stubble, in the September which was 
at hand, as vigorously as he did twenty years 
ago. A certain obstinacy . which was the only 
point of resemblance between father and son . 
characterized the lower portion of the face. 
The forehead was high, narrow, and the per- 
ceptive organs largely developed. The nose 
was a good serviceable nose: neither aggres- 
sively long, nor meanly diminutive; neither 



10 POET AND PEER. 

refined and sensitive, like his son's, nor power- 
ful and truncular, like the late lord's, as it 
appeared in the effigy of that learned nobleman 
which hung over the dining-room sideboard. 

Lord Athelstone lived in the faith, political 
and religious^ of his fathers^ with just so much 
difference as the change in the times rendered 
imperative ; no more. They had been orthodox, 
and so was he ; but he tolerated a surplice in 
the pulpit, and admitted with reluctance the 
possibility of the world not having been created 
in seven days. They had been good old 
Tories; he was a Conservative ; yet thirty years 
ago he had been held by some of his party to 
entertain unsound views ; voting for the admis- 
sion of Jews into Parliament^ and standing, so 
to speak, on a small headland, in advance of 
the strong clijBEs of Toryism. Now the tide was 
above bis ankles; yet still he maintained his 
footing. He was not a man of parts ; he bad 
never distinguished himself at Cambridge^ or 
in the House of Commons, as a young man, or 
in the other House, of later years ; but he had 
strong common sense, and had done his duty as 



POET AND PEER. 11 

a husband, a landlord, and a magistrate^ on tb& 
whole, wisely. How he would do it, in the yet 
more diflScult part of father which he would be 
called on to play as his son grew up . a part 
demanding in this particular case infinite tact 
and judgment . remained to be seen. 

Lady Athelstone was nearly twenty years 
her husband's junior; but the disparity of age 
was apparently felt by neither ; and as time 
went on, it brought the middle-aged woman 
nearer and nearer to her still active and ener- 
getic lord. Lady Athelstone was neither 
active nor energetic by nature ; but she was 
consumed by a desire to be irreproachable ia 
every detail of life, goading her into a fitful but 
fatiguing earnestness, which at first sight 
resembled both activity and energy. She sat 
at the board of Benevolent Ladies' Institutions, 
and belonged to numberless organizations for 
well-doing, and deserved infinite credit, inas- 
much as it was not pleasure to her, but grievous 
trouble. She read books "for improvement," 
and hoped her information was exact ; if not, 
she begged you would correct her. Her 



12 POET AND FEEB. 

position, in the social scale, both as to rank and 
fortune, was duly weighed, and it influenced 
the choice of her bonnets. She was, even at 
forty, still a pretty woman, of the over-refined 
type which indicates some impoverishment of 
the firmer and healthier forms of beauty, by a 
process of natural selection, in civilization. 

But the perils of personal vanity she had 
never known. Even when first married, 
fifteen years ago, she never seemed to expect 
admiration^ and the suggestion of flirtation in 
connection with her name had never crossed 
the brain of the keenest scandal-monger. She 
was an admirable and a submissive wife on 
every point unconnected with Wilfred. Upon 
this subject she ventured occasionally, in a 
mild, persistent way, to differ from the boy's 
father, who, as she thought . and perhaps 
rightly . did not ^'understand'' his son, and 
rendered scant justice to his abilities. Whether 
the fond mother "understood" him better is 
questionable ; if " understanding " purports to 
include the wise regulation of materials not 
easily reducible to laws. Had she been the 



POET AND PEEB. 13 

arbiter of his fate in those days, Wilfi'ed would 
not have gone to a public school, for Lady 
Athelstone feared the contact of such pate tendre 
with coarse earthenware. But his father was 
resolute; stuff and nonsense about a poetic 
temperament, and high-strung, sensitive organ- 
ization, &c., &c. ; four generations of Athel- 
stones had been educated at Eton; the boy 
must rough it, as his forefathers had done. 
And he did. 

Wilfred's scholarship, in spite of his reputa- 
tion in a narrow circle of connections as being 
**so remarkably gifted," was not very notice- 
able ; but he did fairly well in classics, and won 
some reputation by his Latin verses. The 
utterances of his English muse were yet more 
fluent ; and the impassioned rhapsody and 
revolutionarj- vaticinations of the aristocratic 
youth of tender years won for him a certain 
amount of admiration, not unaccompanied with 
correlative ridicule. To the latter he was very 
indifferent; and, as his geniality and good 
temper prevented his being unpopular even 
among those who called him '^ a young ass/' it 



14 POET AND PEER. 

came to pass, as it always does iu the world, 
that the enthusiast, however small and foolish, 
had a certain following. To these he held 
forth; with the others he argued; among 
both, his love of hearing himself talk had 
full scope. His mother declai-ed he would be 
the Demosthenes of the Upper House one day ; 
at which Mr. Punchett, the satirist, was heard 
to say, '^ it would be a blessing if he prepared 
for the part now by keeping his mouth full of 
pebbles." 

Wilfred was rash in opinions, to which he 
held with tenacity, if they were opposed. The 
temptation of shocking people a little, and 
astonishing them a great deal, once yielded to, 
he found irresistible. His father was a Con- 
servative; therefore, as the lines that divide 
Whiggery from Conversatism are almost im- 
perceptible in these days, nothing remained to 
the youth, if he wished to be original, but to 
declare himself a Red Republican. Had he 
been brought up at a French Communist 
school, or a German university, his combative- 
ness would probably have led him to become a 



POET AND PEER. 15 

staunch upholder of the divine right of kings. 
But at Eton his friends were the scions of great 
houses^ whose traditions, no less than their im- 
pulses, led them to defend the patrician insti- 
tutions in which they had been nurtured. 
These boys fought for their cause with pluck 
and intelligence ; and it required all Wilfred's 
quickness of memory and swiftness of fence to 
uphold the extreme views it was his pleasure 
to adopt. But they liked him ; for he would 
do any fellow's Latin verses for him, bore the 
most merciless "roasting" with perfect good 
humour, and was a very fair stroke in the boats. 
" Athelstone's an awfully good-natured little 
chap," said an idle young giant named Bruce 
to another named St. John, a much older, 
graver, and cleverer lad, with whom Wilfred 
especially delighted to argue . "but how he 
does jaw, by Jove ! and what rot he does talk, 

. 

about doing away with the aristocracy, and all 
that 1" 

'' He will get into some precious mess by- 
and-by, if he don't change his tone," replied 
the other. 



16 POET AND PEER. 

'^Then he's such a romantic beggar . likes 
solitude, and mountains, and all that sort of 
thing/' continued Bruce, . '* at least, he says so, 
and pretends he should like to be poor, and 
have to work for his bread. It's all cheek, I 
believe. He's too bumptious." 

<< He is a poet ; it is part of his stock in 
trade,'' said St. John^ with a smile^ ^'and he 
'fancies himself rather in the character. That's 
all." 

So Wilfred was chaffed; listened to and 
admired by the few, ridiculed by the many, 
tolerated by all, and " put down " by no one. 

It was the evening of the day on which 
Wilfred had met Nellie Dawson. The boy was 
seated between his father and mother at a 
small round table in the great dining-room, 
with the portrait of the late lord in a thunder- 
storm over the sideboard, and the army of 
maroon leather-seated chairs along the wall; 
not a cheerful apartment at any time, but 
forming an especially dreary framework to so 
small a company; for the four servants who 



POET AND PEER. 17 

hovered round the table might have belonged 
to the land of Hhadows, so noiseless were their 
movements over the soft-piled carpet. 

It was Saturday, and the Castle had been 
emptied of its guests that afternoon ; a fresh 
batch was to arrive on Monday; the inter- 
regnum was agreeable to Lord Athelstone, and 
doubly so to his wife, who hailed these intervals 
of rest from the toils of hospitality which she 
endured, as one of the necessary duties belong- 
ing to her station, but never enjoyed. Such 
brief intervals of unshackled intercourse with 
his boy Lord Athelstone always achieved two 
or three times during Wilfred's holiciays, in 
spite of the numerous claims upon his time. 
The soup was not off the table before Wilfred 
began. 

" Father, you know Mrs. Dawson at Ripple, 
don't vou? She lives in the first thatched 
cottage on the hill-side, near the wood I" 

" Dawson ? Oh 1 The widow of that radical 
fellow who died two years ago. Yes . a good 
sort of woman, I believe. Why do you 
ask?" 

VOL. I. C 



18 POET AND PEER. 

m 

.*I met a child to-day . such a child I . who 
gave me a drink of milk, and told me her 
mother was Mrs. Dawson. She was like a 
dream of health and innocence." 

" A dream I God bless my soul ! I daresay 
she has the reality. Always high-flown, Will. 
What do they say at Eton to your . dreams ' ?" 
As his son did not respond, Lord Athelstone 
went on . " Do you know anything of this child, 
my lady ? I suppose she goes to the dame's 
school ?" 

'* Poor little thing, yes. I wish some better 
education could be given her. I have not seen 
her for some time, and meant to make m^'- 
round of the Bipple cottages next week." 

*^ If she lives all her life there, the education 
will do well enough for her," observed Lord 
Athelstone, decisively. 

"But why should she live there all her life?" 
asked Wilfred, raising his head quickly. .* Why 
shouldn't she go out into the world, and become 
a " 

**-^A housemaid? The dame's schooling 
will do well enough for that." 



POET AND PEEK. 19 

" I didn't mean that . a pupil-teacher, or even 
something better. Why shouldn't she rise, 
father ?" 

*'Why should she? That is the question. 
Why not let her remain contented in the station 
in which she was born? This over-education 
and mania to rise are the curse of the present 
day." 

*' The world doesn't stand still, father. 
Things are not as they were fifty years 
ago; the poor can no longer be treated like 
swine." 

" I am not aware that my father treated any 
of those dependent on him like swine," said 
Lord Athelstone, drily. " There is enough 
progress without our helping to push society 
more rapidly down-hill." 

" Up hill, I should say," returned his argu- 
mentative son. ** The true wisdom, I fancy, is 
to educate the people so that they shall learn 
how to bear with fortitude the accident of 
poverty." 

Lord Athelstone shook his head. 

"Stuff! They get dissatisfied with hard 

c2 



20 POET AND PEER. 

labour. That is the only result. We shall soon 
have no servants at all. And, as a matter of 
fact, when you have lived a little longer, you 
will find that poverty presses more hardly on 
people of education than on those who, knowing 
nothing else, are content to live by the sweat 
of their brow.*' 

And so the discussion continued for some 
time, supported with a certain amount of truth 
on both sides ; the complete truth lying between 
the two^ though the vision of each was focussed 
to too narrow a point to perceive this. Lord 
Athelstone sometimes lost his temper with the 
sharp boy's pertinacity ; sometimes rode rough- 
shod over the opinions Master Wilfred ad- 
vanced. Neither course was wise. But have 
any of us known what it is to be contradicted 
by a chit of a boyi How much worse must it 
be when that boy is one's son and heir ! 

Lady Athelstone smiled on her offspring with 
a gaze more fond than far-seeing, and exam- 
ined her nails. She always did so when she 
was not quite at ease. It was so daring of 
him to take up the cause of the poor so enthusi- 



POET AND PEER. 21 

fistically ! so refined, so unlike most Eton boys, 
the interest he evinced in this poor little village 
child! But she wished he would not argue 
with his father. She wished they could agree ; 
it would be so much nicer. No doubt Papa was 
right; but then dear Wilfred's views were so 
^generous, would it not be better not to oppose 
them? For her part, she disliked all discus- 
sion. But she promised Wilfred before he went 
to bed that night that she would go with him 
to Mrs. Dawson's on Monday. 



22 



CHAPTER III. 

SOON after luncheon that day the pony- 
carriage drew Tip at the little wicket of 
Mrs. Dawson's cottage, and Lady Athelstone, 
followed by Wilfred, walked up the narrow 
garden-path, fragrant with the odour of sweet- 
peas and honeysuckle. Mrs. Dawson was 
washing in tbe kitchen, while Nellie helped her 
mother to wring the linen, and hang it on the 
line, stretched between two apple-trees, just 
outside the door, which stood open. 

Many a lady would have been discomposed 
at a visit under such circumstances, there being 
a general sense of steam, and soap-suds, and 
damp linen in the air. But Mrs. Dawson was a 
very simple creature, whose mind was cast in 



POET AND PEER. 23 

an unvulgar mould, and who, when she had 
expressed her regret to Lady Athelstone at 
having to receive her thus, did not distress 
herself further about it, and talked to her visitor 
with a calm self-possession in which there was 
no touch of assumption. She was a pale, thin 
woman, who had been pretty a very few years 
back ; but hard work and sorrow had aged her 
before her time. The face was a joyless one ; 
the voice and manner singularly gentle. 

She hurriedly wiped her hands, and opened 
the door of her little parlour, made glad by 
shells, a basket of bead- work, and a cheap print 
or two. While Wilfred presented the little 
maid with a selection of English ballads which 
he enjoined her to read, and learn some of 
them by heart, especially " King Cophetua's 
Daughter," and the child's delighted face vied 
with the crimson binding of the volume in 
colour. Lady Athelstone seated herself, and 
said . 

*' Your little girl is very much grown, Mrs. 
Dawson . . . she is getting to be quite useful 
to you, I see." 



24 POET AND PEER. 

" Yes, my lady, she is a good child. I wish 
she took more to her needle; but she's well- 
nigh the top o' the school, and the dame says 
there's ne'er a better girl, so I ought to be 
satisfied." 

" Doesn't take to her needle ? That's a pity," 
said Lady Athelstone, with the necessity of 
small minds to fasten on a speck. *'What is 
she to do in her station, if she can't work ?" 

" She'll have to do it by-and-by, my lady, so 
I'm sorry it don't come natural to her ; but she 
is very handy in odd jobs, and helps me all she 
can." 

The child was in the outer kitchen, absorbed 
in the examination of her book, which the 
young gentleman beside her expounded, so 
that neither of them heard the conversation in 
the parlour. 

*' That is right. I am glad she promises so 
well, Mrs. Dawson . . . your only child . so 
important 1 We must see what we can do for 
her, by-and-by . I assure you my son was quite 
interested about her. He takes so much inter- 
est about the . the . our poorer neighbours . . . 



POET AND PEER. 25 

What do you mean to do with her when she 
grows older ?" 

" I hope," said the widow, looking down, with 
a tremulous voice, " that we shall not have to 
separate, my lady. Of course, if it is for her 
advantage^ I shall not stand in the way ; but I 
have nothing else in the world, and I do hold 
by her, my lady." 

*'0f course; still, you see, Mrs. Dawson, 
education is a great thing, and Nellie can't 
improve herself very much at fiipple. There is 
that to be thought of, and she is fond of books 
. evidently fond of books," repeated Lady 
Athelstone, as she observed through the open 
door the child's radiant little face bent over her 
ballads. ^' She will soon get beyond the dame, 
and you must then think of what you will do 
with her. If you have any idea of her entering 

domestic service " Lady Atheist one paused 

a moment, which gave Mrs. Dawson the oppor- 
tunity, without rude interruption, of saying, 

" Her father didn't wish, my lady, that she 
should be a servant, and as long as her and me 
can live independent " 



26 POET AND PEER. 

''Ah I I remember Dawson had ideas 

very well. The only thing is, as the child 
seems intelligent, it is a pity she should do 
nothing but help you in the housework, and 
take care of the cow. However, there is time 
enough to think over it ; and if, by-and-by, you 
care for her to go to one of the middle-class 
schools, let me know, and I will see what can 
be done." 

*^ Her uncle Joshua wants me to go and live 
near him at Warmington, my lady, but I can't 
bear to think of leaving Ripple." 

** Who is her uncle Joshua? What does he 
do?" 

"He's Dawson's only brother, my lady . 
older, and a deal richer. He's in the iron trade, 
and a very good business, and only one son, 
and he'd help me, I know, if I was near him ; 
but he don't seem to care to do anything for 
me here. He's one of them, my lady, as likes 
to have it all their own way. He's a self-made 
man, and thinks a deal of education, and don't 
hold by village schools. But I tell him as I'd 
rather remain poor in Ripple than be well-to-do 



POET AND PEER, 27 

in a black, smoky town like Warmington." 
This was the kind of tentative proposition of 
sentiments on which Lady Athelstone always 
shrank from pronouncing. Attachment to home 
was so nice. That Lord Athelstone's poor 
tenants should be attached to their homesteads 
was so especially nice, and their landlord would 
so approve of it ; it was a drag upon the wheel 
of socialism, he would say. That was one 
view of the question. The other, and less 
sentimental one, would be advocated by all the 
Societies to which she belonged, for the ad- 
vancement of women and development of 
skilled labour in the industrial classes. Re- 
moval to a stirring intellectual centre, and 
profiting by any uncle Joshua's beneficial dis- 
positions, was clearly the wise course for a poor 
widow with an intelligent child. 

Lady Athelstone's mind oscillated, as it had 
an unconquerable habit of doing, on such 
occasions. It was with difficulty she brought 
herself to say, because it was absolutely neces- 
sary to say something . 
" Well .... that is very creditable to you, 
vol. %. c 



28 POET AND PEER. 

Mrs. Dawson. But the matter should be well 
weighed . well weighed. You laust think of 
your child*s future. If her uncle is disposed to 
befriend her, it would be foolish, perhaps, to 
thwart him. Still we should be very sorry if 
you left Ripple. His lordship does not like to 
see his old tenants leave the place; he likes 
them to go on from generation to generation. 
and we would always look after Nellie, you 
know. Still if it is for her welfare . how- 
ever, you must do nothing rashly . nothing 
rashly." 

And with this Lady Athelstone rose. She 
might be led to pledge herself unconditionally 
to one side or the other if she talked more* In 
medio tutissima. So she took leave of Mrs* 
Dawson, promising to call again soon. 

" Did you ever see such eyes, mother I" cried 
Wilfred, as they drove off. "And did you 
observe all her movements ? such natural grace. 
What would the Duchess of St. Leonards or 
Lady Shoreham give for any of their daughters 
to be like her I" 

*'Sbe certainly has a refined look,^^ replied 



POET AND PEER. 29* 

Lady Athelstone . " wonderful for a poor child ; 
but her voice " 

" Her voice 1 Why, it's lovely. Her way of 
speaking is countrified^ of course ; but the tone 
of her voice, why, as an old poet says, it is ' far 
above singing !' " 

** Ah ! what it is to have imagination, my dear 
boy ! . . but do not talk in that way before the 
Duchess and Lady Shoreham, who are coming 
here presently. They would not understand it.. 
The world generally would not understand it. 
I am sure I wish I could do anything for thia 
child," continued Lady Athelstone, with a sigh^ 
which embraced a whole round of regrets, be- 
ginning with her own incompetence, and ending 
with the poverty incident to the present con- 
dition of human affairs. " I wonder if she ha& 
a vocation ?" 

** A wliat r 

"I mean any turn for a religious life. 1 
might get her taken into the St. Martha' 
Sisterhood and educated." 

^' And make her a nun, or something like it I 
What an idea, mother I She'd better wash. 



30 POET AND PEER. 

and hang out linen all her life, than tliat^^ 

*' Perhaps, after all, it is better to let her 
remain as she is. Your papa would certainly 
prefer it." 

"Prefer it? But he hasn't the ruling of all 
the children's lives in this parish. If they 
starve, by-and-by, or go to the bad, does he 
hold himself responsible? What is the use of 
his trying to keep people back from the benefits 
of education ? They'll kick . that's all. There 
may be a Burns, a Hampden, a Giotto among 
these peasants, for aught we know. Think of 
that, mother !" 

Lady Athelstone did think of it. She was 
ready to accept anything, even the embryo 
Giotto in Ripple, from her son ; but she held it 
to be her duty to remonstrate, none the less. 

" I daresay, Wilfred ... it is quite possible. 
Still I wish you would not contradict your papa 
on these matters ; it annoys him. And, after 
all, is it worth that ?" 

** I am very sorry to annoy him, mother. But 
I can't give up the cause of the people because 
he dislikes it. I hope, sooner or later, he'll 



POET AND PEER. 31 

come round . in fact, I'm sure he must. 
Liberty of conscience, liberty of action . he'll 
iBnd out that the true wisdom is to give them 
their head a little, to prevent their getting the 
bit between their teeth, as they have done in 
France." 

"Oh I in France it is different. Roman 
Catholics, you know . the priests." 

'* We are almost as much priest-ridden here 
as they are." 

" Oh 1 Wilfred, don't say that. It is shock- 
ing . so good as our clergy are 1" 

"To those who think as they do . church- 
goers and communicants. Not to the Metho- 
dist, nor to the .infidel. W^hen a man knows 
his family will get no coals and blankets at 
Christmas, unless he pretends to believe all his 
parson tells him, is that liberty of conscience ?" 

They turned a sharp corner in the lane, and 
came face to face with Lord Athelstone, on his 
cob, just as Wilfred propounded this startling 
inquiry. Lady Athelstone felt relieved from 
the necessity of making a reply. This dear 
boy of hers was getting quite too difficult to 



32 POET AND PEER. 

deal with. Such advanced ideas, with that 
generous nature of his. Alas I there was no 
knowing where they would stop. 



33 



CHAPTER IV. 

Ill R. JOSHUA DAWSON was an individual 
.^'.*- of some weight in Warmington. There 
were richer and there were cleverer men ; there 
were none who, from such small beginnings, 
had risen to be so successful. He had come to 
Warmington forty-lBve years ago a penniless 
boy; he had educated himself ; he had striven, 
without rest or relaxation, to build up his for- 
tunes, and he was now a thriving tradesman. 
He spoke truly when he said, " I have no one 
to thank for this but myself, sir." Had his 
burden been " I owe it all to the first kindness 
shown me by such a one," his hearers would 
probably have been less impressed by awe for a 
self-made success ; but there would have been 
VOL. I. D 



34 POET AND PEER. 

more sympathy in their regard for their fellow- 
townsman. It may be that he cared little for 
this. His appreciation of his own merits, being 
unchecked by the doubts and dissatisfaction 
that are apt to cloud the retrospect of less 
practical minds, fed upon the solid nutriment 
which his worldly advancement afforded. 

He was a dry, hard- looking man, carrying no 
superfluous flesh, and of immaculate cleanli- 
ness ; who still wore a stock, though stocks for 
the neck were, even then, well-nigh as obsolete 
a penance as those devised for the other ex- 
tremity of the human body. He had a sound 
digestion, an arrogant disposition, and a clear 
conscience. He attended morning service 
every Sunday, and never grumbled at the poor 
rates. He had defrauded no man, had estab- 
lished a Mechanics' Institute, and subscribed a 
handsome sum to all conspicuous town charities. 
He had done bis duty, in short, by his neigh- 
bour, and by himself, and he meant that the 
world should know it. 

He was, even now, committing an act of 
almost unparalleled magnanimity in bidding 



POET AND PEER. 35 

the poor widow of that incorrigible brother of 
his to come and live in Warmington, and in 
undertaking to provide for his niece's education. 
Most men, he liked to believe, in his position, 
would have sought to ignore this low connec- 
tion ; but not so Joshua Dawson. Warmington 
should recognize with admiration the full 
measure of his exemplary conduct; provided 
his sister-in-law would give up herself and her 
child, body and soul, to him, to do with as it 
might seem good in his eyes. He had never 
helped his brother ; no, because that brother 
had set himself in direct opposition to all 
Joshua's views and principles of life. Perhaps 
the secret irritation . we will not call it by so 
harsh a name as remorse, or regret . caused by 
this reflection was to be allayed by the ointment 
of his present magnanimity. Be this as it may, 
he kept up some communication with the silly, 
obstinate woman, and from time to time re- 
newed his offer. 

1 cannot reflect upon what Mrs. Joshua 
Dawson must have endured in her daily life 
without according to her a more sincere admira- 

d2 



86 POET AND PEER. 

tion than I feel for many a canonized saint. 
She had no great lights, and, like the best men 
and women, she had some little weaknesses. 
But she possessed unfailing patience, unfailing 
affection for him who was, in very truth, her 
lord and roaster, nnfailing charity and kindness 
to all whom she could befriend. If she was 
oppressed at times by a sense of what was due 
to her as Joshua*s wife; if her black silk, which 
cost six and sixpence a yard, and over which 
she spread her handkerchief when she sat down 
before her " chayney " tea-service in the back 
parlour on Sunday afternoons, caused her a 
glow of pride ; and if at church her thoughts 
wandered to the reprehensible extravagance of 
Mrs. Jones's new bonnet, these were but specks 
of small account upon the disk of this guileless, 
benevolent nature. You could not look into 
that round beaming face and doubt it. 

The only offspring of this dissimilar pair, 
Sam, was just nineteen, a youth of colossal 
proportions, with features cast in the common- 
est mould, and much blurred in the casting, 
too. He spoke very little in his father's 



POET AND PEER. 37 

presence ; at other titneB he was loud and con- 
tradictious, and his physical strength gave 
gi*eat weight to his arguments among his 
companions. He had inherited his father's 
arrogance, but not his father's powers of steady 
application; and, with his well-oiled carroty 
hair, his hat cocked over one ear, and his bright 
blue satin tie, he looked as if he were little 
likely to follow in Joshua's steady footsteps. 
But he had a kinder nature^ for all these foibles, 
than his father ; his heart was not hard, when 
one reached it ; only there was so much to be 
connived at in his appearance and manners 
that few penetrated the offensive crust. He 
was not popular among his companions ; indeed, 
behind his back, he was much ridiculed ; but his 
muscular power and his self-assertion brought 
him a certain outward consideration, as it often 
does in this world. With the girls, opinions 
were divided concerning him ; but few of those 
who were unaffected by ulterior considerations 
regarded Joshua's son and heir with any great 
favour. 

One evening, about a year after Lady Athel- 



88 POET AND PEER 

stone's visit to the widow Dawson, Mr. and 
Mrs. Joshua were in their parlour, in expectation 
of some guests by the next train whom Sam 
had gone to the station to meet^ and for whom 
the "ehayney" tea-service was duly laid out. 
These guests were Nellie and her mother^ whose 
coming had been brought about on this wise. 
Negotiations, which had been pending many 
months, had terminated in a compromise. Mrs. 
Dawson would not give up her home at Bipple ; 
she had never known any other since her mar- 
riage, she said, and here she hoped to die. 
Indeed, if Nellie was to be boarded at the Hchool 
near Warmington to which her ancle proposed 
to send her, there was no sufficient reason why 
her mother should be uprooted ; though Uncle 
Joshua pointed out that, when his niece was 
" finished," the Ripple cottage would be no fit 
home for her. But the widow, having brought 
her mind to consent to parting with Nellie 
(chiefly in consequence of Wilfred's advice 
during his last holidays, backed feebly by Lady 
Athelstone), took her stand there. She would 
accompany the child to Warmington, and 



POET AND PEER. 39 

remain with her brother-in-law a few days. 
Then she would return to her solitary home ; 
and from this resolve no arguments would move 
her. 

She felt a little bewildered, poor soul, by her 
journey . the first long railway journey she had 
ever accomplished ; and the enormous young 
man who flourished his cane so grandly as he 
handed her out of the third-class carriage, and 
asked if she wasn't Aunt Su, caused her some 
discomfort . more so than Master Wilfred had 
ever done. But by the time that the aunt and 
cousins had walked down the High Street to 
Uncle Joshua's, followed by a porter with their 
wooden box, Mrs. Dawson had become more 
accustomed to her nephew's swaggering graces, 
and seeing how kind he was to Nellie, and how, 
notwithstanding the cane, he insisted on carry- 
ing the plaid, and the cotton umbrella, and the 
jar of clotted cream (brought as a small home- 
offering to Mrs. Joshua), she said to herself, as 
she afterwards said to her friends in Ripple, 
" He is a good-hearted young man, is Sam, only 
he's so big, and is one o' them as has ways . '* 



40 POET AND PEER. 

and this^ like the foot-note to an obscure text^ 
cleared all difficulties away in its comprehensive 
reach. 

Mrs. Joshua met them in the passage, with 
her moon-like face aglow with geniality. 

**Well, I am glad to see you here^ Mrs. 
John." 

It was the first time she had ever seen her 
sister-in-law^ which circumstance seemed to 
demand a certain outward formality of greet- 
ing in the good woman's eyes, though the voice 
and manner were more than cordial. 

Uncle Joshua stood on the hearth-rug in the 
parlour ; then, as the door opened^ he advanced 
a few iron paces, and held out his hand. 

*' Well, here you are at last," was his greet- 
ing . "and you're welcome, Susan. I can say 
no more. I'm a man of few words. This is 
your girl, is it ? Hm I more like you than John. 
You were a pretty woman when I saw you last. 
How many years ago is that? Fourteen. I 
went over to give John my advice, and be 
wouldn't take it; you remember? I couldn't 
do more than I did. I knewhe^d live to repent 



POET AND PEER. 41 

it. Well, you are altered. I should hardly 
have known you." 

" I've had a deal to change me, Joshua/' she 
replied, gently. ".You're very little changed. 
It's nat'ral . you've had all things going smooth 
with you." 

"Things go smooth with them as hold by 
existing institootions, and work hard, Susan. 
If John'd have done as I told him, instead of 
spouting against Church and State in the public, 
and neglecting his trade, things'd have gone 
smooth with him, too." 

Mrs. Dawson flushed, but held her peace. 
What he said was true; she knew it; but it 
seemed cruel to bring up poor John^s unwisdom 
just now. 

Mrs. Joshua's kind heart felt for her. She 
was engaged in preparing tea, and thought it 
wise to create a diversion by saying, 

" Come, Mrs. John, you sit down here. A 
dish o' tea'U refresh you. And the little gurl . . . 
. . . What's your name ? . Nellie ? Dear Heart I 
That's a pretty name, now. And what a head 
o' hair, Mrs. John I It's a real wonder, it is. 



42 POET AND PEER. 

Corae^ sit yoa here . . . And now, Sam, yon 
band the kettle." 

Uncle Joshua sat down opposite his niece^ 
and fixed a pair of hard, unwinking eyes upon 
her. 

" Your mother says you are pretty good at 
arithmetic . got to compound fractions yett" 

Nellie's mouth being full of buttered toast, 
she could only nod. 

"Know your jography? What's the capital 
of Ireland . eh?" 

" Edinburgh," she spluttered forth. 

*'l thought as much," said Uncle Joshua, 
sarcastically. "I'm never very far wrong. I 
thought what the schooling at Ripple'd be like. 
It's well she's come here, if she's ever to get on 
in life." 

" Please, Uncle Joshua, I forgot," cried the 
child, reddening to the roots of her hair. " It's 
Dublin, and it contains 260,000 inhabitants." 

Thereupon the discomforted mother plucked 
up heart to say, 

"Indeed, Joshua, she's quick at her book. 
They all say so. That's why I thought it 



POET AND PEER. 4? 

wrong to refuse your kindness. If she'd bin 
like me . -just good for house-work, and no 
more . I wouldn't ha' consented to part with 
her. But she likes her book better than any- 
thing; and, as Master Wilfred said to me, 
* You've no right to deny the child the advan- 
tage that's offered to her.' " 

 Who is Master Wilfred?" 

" Our lord's son. He takes a great interest 
. a very great interest . in Nellie, he do, and 
so does her ladyship, his mother. She gave her 
that cloak and hat, and her new prayer-book 
and bible. Oh I she has bin very kind to 



us." 



(( 



The best Saxony cloth, I declare !" said Mrs. 
Joshua, holding up the cloak admiringly. 

"What would John have said to that, Susan?" 
asked her brother-in-law, with a grim smile . 
" John, who couldn't abide the aristocracy ! I 
always told him it'd come to him, or his, having 
to accept their charity. There's nothing like 
keeping independent. Look at me. I owe no 
one anything . I never was beholden to any 
man for the price of a loaf, I'm proud to say.. 



44 POET AND PEER. 

That's why I stand where I do in this towQ 
to-day, Susan." 

'^ I am sure it does you great credit . I always 
says so," murmured Mrs. Dawson ; then, struck 
by a sudden thought, she continued, with more 
vivacity . " Still, you see, if I held by that 
altogether, I shouldn't accept your kindness in 
payiug for Nellie's schooling . though relations^ 
to be sure, is different." 

"They're not bound; I never give in to that, 
remember," observed Joshua, with stern alacrity. 
" I make no promises as to the future for your 
girl. What I say I'll do, TU do. Having no 
girl of my own, I'll educate yours, and she shall 
come here on holidays till her schooling is done, 
and she's fit to make a good liviug fur herself 
in the world. If you hadn't set yourself against 
it, you could have lived hard by, and seen the 
child every Sunday ; but you was obstinate, 
and " 

"Say no more about that, Joshua," mur- 
mured the recipient of his bounty, hurriedly. 
^* It may be foolish, but I couldn't abide to leave 
the house where John and me lived, and where 



POET AND PEER. 45 

he died^ so I muBt just be content to see the 
child twice a year, when she comes home . but 
I thank you, all the same. I'm sure I*d no call 
to expect that you'd be so kind to us." 

" That's because you don't know him rightly 
yet, Mrs. Dawson," cried his wife. " Joshua> 
heart's in the right place. Him and me'll look 
after the little gurl, depend on it, and she shall 
come here on every half-holiday, and Sam'U 
take her a walk, won't ye, Sam 1" 

"I shouldn't wonder," laughed Sam, running 
his fingers through his hair, and then cutting a 
huge piece of cake, he handed it gallantly to 
his cousin. Clearly his father's presence quelled 
him, for he said no more. The latter, after an 
interval employed in imbibing his tea from the 
saucer, with a sound as of escaping steam, 
looked up at Mrs. Dawson and said . 

"I shall take you to the seminary to-morrow." 

She thought he said cemetery, which she had 
been told was the refined name for a burial- 
ground, and she was somewhat startled. He 
continued, however. 

''It is a first-class establishment. Sound 



46 POET AND PEER. 

English education. Turns out a lot of girls 
able to earn their fifty pound a year every half. 
They say there's a great opening now in New 
Zealand. California, too, has been spoke of 
favourably, but the market for educated female 
labour there is getting over-stocked. A great 
trade is done with Roosia . and there's no doubt 
but what I shall place her advantageously some- 
where, if the girl works. If she don't, there's 
no use in my spending my money, and she'll 
have to go back and scrub the floors ; that's all. 
* Knowledge is Power,' as I've wrote to you 
more than once. Look at me. Where should 
I be, if it wasn't for my education ? And I've 
given Sam the best of educations, too, only he 
don't take to work, as I did. Why, I worked 
at a night-school for three years, ma'am, after I 
was turned thirty, and hard at my trade all day, 
too. No publics for me. That's how I rose, 
and how I come to be looked up to in this 
town. Ask any man in Warmington whether 
there's a name as is more respected than Joshua 
Dawson^s." 

He glared defiantly round, and his poor 



POET AND PEER. 47 

sister-in-law's Bpirits sank lower and lower. 
Had she come all the way from Ripple for 
this? Joshua's heart was, no doubt, in the 
right place ; but his self-assertion crushed her. 
And then to think of his wanting to send 
Nellie to New Zealand or California ? And to 
talk of the " trade with Boosia " being good, 
as if her child were like one of the slaves 
she had heard of, to be sold in the market ! It 
made the poor mother's blood run cold. But 
no; not even Joshua's imperiousness should 
prevail here. Nellie should never be sent to 
foreign parts, not even for the certainty of so 
fabulous an income as fifty pounds a year. 



48 



CHAPTER V. 

TP this were a book with ''a purpose," it 
-*. might be worth while to trace the influence 
of circumstancee upon Nellie Dawson's character 
in her early girlhood ; to note how the training 
to which she was subjected in the good middle- 
class school where she remained four years, 
and the companions with whom she was 
thrown, brought into prominence certain 
qualities which might otherwise have lain 
dormant. But we are concerned with effects 
rather than cause, and, as none of these com- 
panions crossed that after-path which we have 
made it our task to trace, a few words will 
suffice to tell of the years that intervened be- 
tween the day that Mrs. Dawson brought her 



J 



POET AND PEER. 49 

little girl to Warmington, and the period when 
our narration recommences. 

Her school-days were, upon the whole, 
happy ; and, as the authorities reported favour- 
ably every half year of his niece's progress, 
Uncle Joshua could extract inexhaustible food 
for self-laudation from the success of his mag- 
nanimous scheme. 

*'My niece, sir, has taken a prize again at 
the seminary. A very promising scholar, sir, 
and highly commended for industry and good 
conduct . owes it all to me." 

"What? . the good conduct?" asks that low 
fellow, Jones. Mr. Dawson treats the remark, 
as it deserves, with silent contempt, and it does 
not prevent his telling the next neighbour 
he sees the same story in much the same 
words. 

The girl, in truth, possessed no startling 
ability; but she had a fair memory, and she 
had learnt now what the ambition *'to rise^' 
meant. Not for herself so much as to satisfy 
her uncle, to please her mother ; perhaps on the 
chance of a smile and word of congratulation 

VOL. I. E . 



50 POET AND PEER. 

from some one else, when she went home at 
midBummer. Her early love of books had 
grown with her growth, though her inclinatioa 
led her still to poetry and works of imagination, 
which were deemed nnserviceable, if not perni- 
cious, to a girl in her station. Ah I Wilfred had 
much to answer for in that first present of 
Border ballads to the little maid. She knew 
** King Cophetua " and many others by heart 
now, and recited them of winter evenings to a 
select circle, when the schoolmistress was out 
of hearing. 

Of what value could such literature be to a 
young person destined for the servitude of the 
school-room, if not of the nursery? Miss Daw- 
son was found reading '^ Marmion " and the 
*'Lady of the Lake," works only suited to 
romantic young ladies, and which, as the 
schoolmistress said, could store her mind with 
no useful knowledge. It is a way some have, 
when youth is craving for bread, to offer it a 
stone. For the rest, she was a good girl. 
(Unfortunately, much too pretty, for it would 
stand in the way of her advancement.) Amiable 



POET AND PEER. 51 

and industrious in school ; a favourite with both 
masters and playmates ; but the mistress shook 
her head when she spoke of Nellie's future 
prospects. " She is too soft and too sentimental 
ever to make much of teaching; she has not 
the stuff in her to keep a class of unruly- 
children in order. I'm sure I don't know what 
we are to do with her. It is a pity, after all Mr. 
Joshua is spending on her education ; but I am 
afraid she will disappoint him. Her head is 
stuffed with poetry, and such rubbish, and she 
sadly wants firmness. She'll be blown this way 
or that by anyone she is fond of." 

The judgments we form of one another in 
life are often wide of the truth ; but perhaps 
none are so fallacious as those pronounced on 
the characters of the very young. When the 
orchard is a flush of blossom, how can we 
determine which buds shall be nipped by cold 
winds, and out of which the goodly fruit shall 
be formed in due season ? The analogy is not 
strictly correct ; for the human tree, in youth, is 
subject to absolute change of character (due, 
possibly, to subtle influences we do not note), 

e2 



52 POET AND PEER. 

whereas we know that grapes do not grow 
from thistles. That the schoolmistress's fore- 
cast of her docile little pupil's character wa 
erroneous will be seen by-and-by. Whether a 
more delicate acumen would have arrived at a 
different conclusion at this stage of the girl's 
young life we will not determine. 

Her midsummer holiday of one month had 
been passed at Ripple each year ; but it so hap- 
pened that only twice in the course of these 
four years had the young hero of her childhood 
been at Athelstone when Nellie was at home, 
and even then it was but for a few days. He 
was travelling abroad with his tutor, or he was 
in London, and the happiness to which the child 
had looked forward of hearing his approving 
words was denied her the last two years of her 
school-life. Each Christmas Mrs. Dawson made 
a pilgrimage of a fortnight to meet her child at 
Warmington. Uncle Joshua had ordained that 
his niece should spend the short winter holiday 
at his house, and Mrs. Dawson felt, as this in- 
cluded an invitation to herself, warmly pressed 
by her sister-in-law, that it would be ungracious 



POET AND PEER. 53 

to offer any opposition to the plan. It was not 
unmitigated joy to the poor mother, for her 
benefactor was a severe trial, especially on Sun- 
days, when the family enjoyed the unlimited 
benefit of his society. During the remainder of 
the week, however, he was devoted to his 
business for nine or ten hours daily, and Nellie 
and her mother had long mornings, during 
which they could converse unreservedly, with- 
out other interruption than the occasional visits 
of Mrs. Joshua to the parlour, fussy with her 
household matters, but ever beaming with kind- 
liness. 

On her last visit to Warmington, Sam had 
been a little trouble to Mrs. Dawson. With the 
keen eye of a mother, she saw, what appar- 
ently no one else did, that the young man's 
attention to Nellie, who was still considered as 
a child by her uncle and aunt, was something 
more than cousinly. The way in which his 
eyes followed her, the efforts he made to secure 
a tete-h'tete walk with her, his little presents, his 
whisperings in corners, were indications that 
were not lost on Mrs. Dawson. Under any 



54 POET AND PEER. 

circumstances she would have been stronglj^ 
opposed to a marriage between the cousins; 
but, placed as she was in reference to Uncle 
Joshua, it would be unendurable that this 
attempt at flirtation on Sam's part should grow 
into serious attachment which she could not 
doubt would rouse his father's ire, and cause 
disunion between the families. That Nellie 
herself was innocent of any attempt to encour- 
age Sam's devotion^ and was, indeed, blind to 
it^ accepting it all as part of the same orna- 
mented surface wherewith it pleased him to 
decorate his intercourse with the world at large, 
Mrs. Dawson felt sure. She knew her child ; 
anything like coquetry was foreign from her 
nature ; and, courted though Sam might be by 
some of the Warmington damsels, his aunt had 
an intuition which she would not have ven- 
tured to put into words that it would never be 
given to the young man to inspire a serious 
passion. 

All the same was it a secret annoyance to her 
that the vacuity of her nephew's leisure should 
be filled, whenever his cousin was a guest at 



-^ 



n 



POET AND PEER. 55 

his father's, by unremitting attentions which 
might hurt him in the end more than they could 
affect her ; as insects who leave their stings . 
behind them die none the less though the mate- 
rial on which the poison is expended be invul- 
nerable. 

Revolving these things in her mind on her 
return home at the end of the third Christ- 
mas, when Nellie had nearly completed her 
jBfteenth year, the good woman arrived at the 
conclusion that, whatever Uncle Joshua might 
say, the girl should not spend her holidays 
again at Warmington. Mrs. Dawson would in 
the meantime consult Lady Athelstone as to her 
daughter's future, before the latter returned 
home at midsummer. She was very nearly the 
top of the school, and certainly able to gain her 
livelihood by teaching in some form ; and, 
though Uncle Joshua spoke of keeping his niece 
at Warmington another year, Mrs. Dawson felt, 
on every account, the desirability of obtaining 
her a situation, if possible, before the expiration 
of that time. 

The widow's diflSculties were happily solved 



56 POET AND PEER* 

one May morning by a visit from Lady Athel- 
stone. The pupil-teacher at the Warley School 
was to leave at midsummer, and Lady Athel- 
stone proposed that Nellie should be a candidate 
for the post. It was the thing of all others 
Mrs. Dawson would most have desired; her 
child to live with her, and yet be profiting by 
her education to earn a fair livelihood. It 
seemed to the poor woman an ideal piece of 
good fortune. But Uncle Joshua, when the 
intelligence was conveyed to him^ did not so 
regard it. 

What ! a miserable pittance of fifteen pounds 
a year, after all the money he had spent on 
her education, when she might, in the course 
of a year or two, easily get double? And no 
one would take her as a governess after she 
had once lowered herself so. Pray what was 
the use of her French verbs, and her piano, and 
ancient history, and all the rest of it now ? 
It was recklessly throwing away her advan- 
tages and truckling to the aristocracy, for this 
was all Lady Athelstone's doing. The girl 
wasn't "finished," and he had meant to pay 



POET AND PEER. 57 

for another year's schooling for her, " and then 
my niece would be independent, sir . independ- 
ent of all my Lady Athelstones, able to support 
herself, and snap her fingers in their faces. 
But now . a miserable pupil-teacher I Her 
mother's a fool, sir, an obstinate fool !" 

Her folly might be debateable; not all his 
hearers were convinced that Joshua's sister-in- 
law was wrong ; but of her obstinacy there 
could be no doubt. To reject a prospect which 
offered all the poor woman desired fit present 
for her child, because their benefactor had other 
views for his niece, was a sacrifice she did not 
feel herself called upon to make. Her letters 
to the potentate of the Dawson family were 
deprecatory and grateful ; but she remained, in 
spite of angry remonstrance, immoveable in her 
resolve. 

She knew that Joshua was aware of one 
of her chief reasons for electing to with- 
draw Nellie from Warmington ; and she could 
not doubt that Sam's father viewed the case 
as she did. That he should persist, therefore, 

in urging her child's return to his house, she 
voL L e 



58 POET AND PEER. 

could only regard^ under the circumstances^ as 
an instinct of his unreasoning love of domina- 
tion. Danger to Sam's peace of mind was not 
to be regarded (nor Nellie's, either, for that 
matter). He had ordained that her schooling 
was to continue another year, and everything 
ought to have been made to bend to his 
will. 

She passed her examination satisfactorily, 
and, backed by Lady Athelstone's influence, 
obtained the coveted appointment. Some 
doubts as to her health standing the drudgery 
of daily tuition were expressed ; the girl had 
evidently outgrown her strength of late, and 
looked fragile and willowy. But her courage 
and good will were indomitable ; she smiled at 
the notion of not being able to work as hard 
as any other girl of sixteen. 

Nevertheless, the few weeks after her return 
home, before entering on her new duties, were 
an interval of enjoyed rest to Nellie. In the 
blue shadow of apple-trees, upon the long June 
grass, she lay for hours, reprehensibly idle as 



POET AND PEER. 5^ 

to her fingers, her late schoolraistresa would 
have declared, and, possibly, her good conscien- 
tious mother might have admitted, while attri- 
buting her child's indolence to the languor of 
over-rapid growth. But, in truth, she was not 
idle ; the imagination was lifted, the thoughts 
expanded, her receptive nature filled with the 
vivid pictures that Pope's ''Iliad," or Spenser's 
** Fairy Queen," . old volumes from the village 
library . supplied. The brain was growing, 
the character was consolidating, day by day. 
Keble's "Christian Year," given her by Lady 
Athelstone at the time, formed an epoch in her 
life. That closely-knit poetry of a lofty 
dogmatism, which teaches the renunciation of 
private judgment, and the acceptance of a 
sharply-defined faith in the inexplicable, fisteu- 
ed upon her memory with its clear and high- 
strung music. Her nature heard and answered 
the appeal. Often, in after-years, when sore 
troubled and perplexed, some couplet of that 
little volume tended to strengthen and uphold 
her. 



60 POET AND PEER. 

Rumours of a disquieting character touching 
"Master Wilfred/* as he was still called, 
reached Warley, and even the remoter Ripple, 
early that spring. The butler had gathered 
fragments of conversation between my lord and 
my lady which, being compared with certain 
other fragments dropped from the eaves into 
the ears of the lady's-jnaid, went to show that 
the young gentleman had got into some scrape 
at Oxford, for which he was threatened with 
" rustication/' . whatever that strange word 
might mean. Whether he had said or done 
anything subversive of Church or State, 
whether he had broken any law against God 
or Man, was not patent to the original pur- 
veyors of this gossip; but by the time it had 
permeated through the still-room-maid to the 
head coachman, and from him, in strict confi- 
dence, to the publican at the "Hen and 
Chickens," and from him all through the village 
of Ripple, till it reached the ears of Mrs. Daw- 
eon and her daughter, the first stitches were 
lost in the mass of embroidery which each 
narrator in turn, having so wide a canvas 



POET AND PEER. 61 

.given him, felt it bis duty to add as he 
listed. 

The old lord was liked and respected; his 
tenants generally expressed their regret that 
his son was not more like him. The female 
portion of the community, indeed, was disposed 
to regard leniently the fact that he did not 
know mangel-wurzel w^n he saw it, that he 
never rode straight to hounds in his life, and 
that he was but an indifferent shot. The im- 
penetrable smoke caused by this far-off fire of 
his iniquity . whatever it might be . almost 
suffocated the good people of Ripple. They 
ohoked and spluttered^ swallowing it all, or 
angrily rejecting it, according to their proclivi- 
ties. He was a terrible young gentleman^ 
given up to idolatry, and a dissolute life, or 
he was the handsomest, sweetest-spoken, 
kindest-hearted youth that ever walked this 
.arth. Mrs. Dawson, it is needless to say, was 
at the head of those who took the latter view, 
and declined to believe a single word reflecting 
upon his character. 

Whatever the scandal was, the young man 
voL i. e 



62 POET AND PEER. 

VTM not rusticated, and the following June be 
got **the Newdigate," which gratified Ladj 
Athelstone, and afforded hie father the mildest 
measure of satisfaction. It was a triumph 
which seemed to him of the most trumpery 
description. If books were his line, why didn't 
be go in for honours 1 Why waste his time in 
writing all this trash ^out Carthage, which no 
human being would ever want to read? He 
had passed his '^ Mods," and, having done so, 
he appeared to have abandoned all honourable 
ambition in his University career. His time 
seemed to be spent in making wild, foolish 
speeches, writing idiotic pamphlets and verses 
('*some people think them beautiful/' mildly 
remonstrated the fond mother), and leading a 
very irregular life. He feared that the gaining 
this prize would only fortify his son in the 
delusion that he was a great poet, and unfit 
him yet farther for the duties of his future 
station. 

All the same, it was a great consolation to 
poor Lady Athelstone, after some keen dis- 
quietude touching her son, to be able to dis- 



POET AND PEER. 63 

seminate the positive and thoroughly respecta- 
ble piece of intelligence that he had written the 
prize-poem at Oxford for that year. 



64 



CHAPTER VI. 

TT was the morning of Trinity Sunday . the 
-*. first Sunday that Nellie had entered upon 
her new duties. She felt a little shy as she 
came into church, in her neat straw hat and 
spotless linen frock, marshalling the children 
with the utmost dignity of which she was 
capable^ but fearing that it fell short of what 
the position demanded. She glanced round ; 
no one seemed to pay any particular attention 
to her except " mother ;" she, of course, from 
her seat in the side-aisle was watching her 
daughter with satisfaction, as the pleased eyes 
testified. The place appointed for the school 
and its teachers was in the chancel, immediately 
in front of the great Athelstone pew, which was 



POET AND PEER. 65 

entered by a small side-door from the park. 
When Nellie took her seat, the pew was empty. 
Not until she turned to kneel in the Confession 
did she see Lord and Lady Athelstone and their 
son. 

She buried her face in her hands, so that none 
could observe the flush of pleasurable surprise 
that mounted there, and then, with contrite 
distinctness, she told her Heavenly Father aloud 
that she had strayed from His ways like a lost 
sheep, had done those things which she ought 
not to have done, and was a miserable offender. 

Wilfred had come down from London with 
Lord and Lady Athelstone for a couple of 
nights. He was now twenty-one, having at- 
tained his majority the previous January. 
Physically he was much improved, though still 
too slight, and with shoulders too dispropor- 
tioned in width to the size of his head to be a 
model of manly grace. The head itself, how- 
ever, was remarkable, and very attractive, with 
its broad radiant brow, beautiful eyes, and the 
winning smile that broke at times over the full 
and somewhat sarcastic mouth. It was this 

VOL. I. F 



66 POET AND PEER. 

agro'dolce^ perhaps, which lent a peculiar charm 
to the face. Men rarely admired him ; bat to 
eyes that are not extreme to mark what is 
amiss in carriage. for he slouched almost osten- 
tatiously, it may be said . he was a strikingly 
handsome young man. This habit of walk, and 
his wearing his hair very long, and brushed ' 
back in a wild, distraught way, were peculi- 
arities which angered his father^ who told his 

son that he looked " like some d d foreign 

musician." 

For the rest, there was a change in him for 
the better, and a change in him for the worse, 
since he was sixteen. His antagonism to the 
things that be had taken too deep root in his 
nature for him to be any longer explosively 
contradictious in ordinary conversation. And 
thus his intercourse with his father was governed 
by a reticence which delighted Lady Athel- 
stone, who never saw much below the surface, 
and satisfied the household fwho had heard 
how Master Wilfred used to aggravate my lord 
in days gone by) that a complete concord of 
sentiment existed between father and son. 



POET AND PEER. 67 

His principles . or the theories he was pleased, 
at this time, to consider as such . and his views 
of life . all in an inchoate or transitive condition 
. will be developed by-and-by. The points in 
his character which concern us now were these : 
that he had come to church, in violation of his 
<3onvictions, out of consideration to his father 
and mother ; and that, finding himself there, in 
front of Nellie Dawson's lovely face, he made 
no effort to detach his thoughts from her, 
but watched the girl's every movement with 
interest. 

He had scarcely thought of her during the 
last two years since he had been at Oxford, 
except as a favourite line of poetry which recurs 
to the memory from time to time. He thought 
that he had thought of her constantly, but it 
was not so. She had been absent from Kipple 
.ach time that he had been home. Now, when 
he faced the prospect of three months with no 
one to indoctrinate, and in utter solitude of 
spirit, the hope of renewing that idyllic episode 
of his boyhood leapt up strong again within 
him. 

F 2 



68 POET AND PEER. 

And there she was, before him ; and as he 
beheld her, shot up into a tall, gracefal girl^ in- 
finitely more beautiful than he remembered her, 
all the boy's passionate admiration for the child 
revived with double force. How unlike she 
was to everything around her I Romeo's simile 
occurred to him. " Like a snowy dove troop- 
ing with crows." She knelt, and his eye 
followed the lines of her lithe young figure^ 
round waist, and delicate throat, with the knot 
of burnished brown hair beneath her hat. She 
rose ; there was nothing of the clumsy village 
lass about her movements ; and in her responses, 
of which he heard every word, the intonation 
was unvulgar, and the voice sweet and clear. 
By-and-by she turned to the east, in the 
Athanasian Creed, so that he saw her perfect 
profile, and the down-drooped lashes, and sweet 
lips parted; and he heard the confession of 
belief that fell from them with terrible distinct- 
ness . . . . " Which Faith, except everyone do keep 
whole and undefiUd ; without doubt he shall perish 
everlastingly r 

The young man frowned, and then smiled 



POET AND PEER. 69 

<5ontemptuously ; but, happily, no one observed 
him. 

" So Nellie Dawson has been made a pupil- 
teacher, I see, mother," said Wilfred, immedi- 
ately they left the church. " I suppose you got 
it for her. Why didn't you tell me ?" 

*' I meant to, my dear, but I forgot it . . . 
I knew you would be interested, having known 
her from a child. I have really had so much to 
do and to think of that " 

" Of course . . . How she is improved I She 
is much too good for a pupil-teacher." 

" Too good, my dear V^ 

'^1 mean too refined and distinguished- 
looking. What a type for ' Una !' such purity !" 

" * Una ' ? Who was she ? This is a very 
well-conducted girl. She has brought back an 
excellent character from school." 

" How could it be otherwise with that face ? 
Is she clever ?" 

'* She passed her examination very well. I 
don't know that she is clever. She may be, and 
she may not. She has not been here long 



70 POET AND PEER. 

enough for the head-mistress to judge, I should 
think." 

k 

" Her judgment would go for nothing with 
me .... The girl looks miles above that wo- 
man . miles above everyone in church, indeed." 

'* What's that?" said Lord Athelstone, who 
had walked on in front, and stopped, overhear- 
ing his son's last words. '* Miles above every- 
one in church I" 

"I was speaking of the new pupil-teacher. 
It is curious the way in which Nature, now and 
again, asserts her right to ignore our class- 
distinctions, and creates a perfect creature like 
this, who, as novelists say, * looks made to 
be a duchess,' . though, in reality, half the 
duchesses are like housekeepers." 

" Stuff! You appear to think that distinction 
consists in being tall and thin." * (Lord Athel- 
stone was short and thick-set.) *' That's a 
very nice-looking girl, and she has a good face. 
I liked, too, the distinct way in which she 
responded to the Creed. But everyone in his 
proper place. Put that girl into a drawing- 



POET AND PEER. 71 

room, with your duchesses^ and see how &he 
would look." 

"I should be sorry for the duchesses," said 
Wilfred, carelessly, with a smile ; then turned 
the subject abruptly to ask his father some 
question about his home-farm, the gate of 
which they were passing. 

Lady Athelstone usually attended the after- 
noon service ; but, when luncheon was over to- 
day, she declared it was too hot, and she could 
not face the walk across the park a second 
time. She was additionally and most agree- 
ably surprised, therefore, when her son said he 
thought of going. Lady Athelstone had experi- 
enced some vague fears lately as to his ortho- 
doxy ; but this sef the mother at rest. She 
took care to draw her lord's attention to the 
fact in the course of the day ; but he seemed 
hardly to attach as much importance to it as she 
could have wished. 

The service was over, the little congregation 
was dispersed, and still Wilfred lingered in the 
churchyard. What was he waiting for? He 



72 POET AND PEER. 

had seen her again with the children. Did be 
expect that she would return here when thcjr 
were dispereed ? flardl j ; and yet he wander- 
ed among the grass-grown graves until he 
found the one whose headstone told how John 
Dawson had departed this life eight years 
before. It was curious the turn his thoughts 
took. Was that active, turbulent spirit at rest, 
or was it possible that he still watched over 
his child? Amid all his theological doubts, 
Wilfred clung to the immortality of the soul* 
Did the dead man see him now ? Did he frowu 
and motion him back from the pursuit of that 
innocent child f Wilfred said to himself that 
he meant no harm; yet he turned away, and 
left the churchyard. But, when once he was in 
the road, the habit of self-gratification was 
stronger than superstitious and fanciful scruples, 
and he saw no reason why he should not pay 
Mrs. Dawson a visit. 

He reached the lane in which her cottage 
stood, and opened the wicket. The flowers 
were in full bloom on either side the narrow 
pathway; the cabbage roses, sweet-williams. 



POET AND PEER. 73 

and sweet peas ; and the bees, whose hive stood 
in an angle of the little garden, were humming 
busily everywhere. Only the cottage itself 
was silent; a tortoiseshell cat lay blinking in 
the sunshine on the doorstep ; but the door, 
when he tried, after knocking, to raise the 
latch, proved to be locked. 

Very well ; he would sit down on that old 
cask, partly under the shadow of the house, 
partly under the apple-tree, and wait. He was 
to return to London with his father and mother 
the next day. He would not be down here 
again for a month. He was not used to being 
balked ; the dinner at Athelstone would not be 
for another three hours ; he would pass two and 
a half of them here, and it would be hard 
if he did not get speech of Nellie in that 
time. 

The afternoon sped by ; the bees murmured 
on among the flowers, the cat slept tranquilly, 
an insignificant bird or two twittered among 
the fruit-trees, a white butterfly poised on the 
blue bottle-brush beside him; there was the 
distant lowing of cattle, the occasional bark of 



74 POET AND PEER. 

a dog on the road ; no cart-wbeelS| no cry or 
grind of labour, for it was Sunday. Such 
sounds as there only served to enhance the 
tranquillity ; man, and the beasts of the field 
that serve him were at rest; that portion of 
creation only that was free sang its low, under 
song of enjoyment. 

After a time, Wilfred pulled out his note-book^ 
and began writing. His muse at this time was 
draped in a somewhat pre-Raphaelite garb of 
the Italian cut, that delights in concetti, and it 
was not always as easy to follow his embodi- 
ments of human emotion as it was in the 
present instance. He never got beyond the 
first stanza, which ran thus : . 

*' I looked for Love among the leaves of June, 
But only Beauty, passionless and pale, 
Glided, white-robed, adown the flowery dale. 

To the gold twilight of the afternoon. 

I struck my cythem, telling the old tale 

That Love hath some time heard and answered soon. 
My passionate singing was of no avail. 

Beauty returned not. Love denied the boon 
I sought, and, sorrowful as exiles feel, 
I watched the darkness o^er the landscape steal/' 

The church clock struck seven. Another 



POET AND PEER. 75 

quarter of an hour, and be must turn his steps 
rapidly homewards, across the woods, unless he 
meant to be late for dinner. Where could she 
and her mother be ? He had asked himself this 
question for the twentieth time, when he heard 
the click of the wicket-latch, and a light step 
on the pathway. He remained quiet, hidden 
in some measure by the apple-tree. Nellie 
came near, twirling the house-key on her finger^ 
She had just placed it in the lock, and was 
about to turn it, when she saw him seated upon 
the barrel three yards from her, with an amused 
look on his face. She started, and turned quite 
pale. 

'*I believe the sight of me has actually 
frightened you," he began, laughing. " Where 
have you been? Do you know, I have been 
waiting here hours to see you." 

" I am very sorry, sir," she said, with great 
gravity, *' I have been a walk with mother 
and some of the children." 

*' And where is your mother ?" 

'* She stopped in the village to see Mrs* 
Miles, who is ill, so I came home to put on the 



76 POET AND PEER. 

kettle for tea. . . . But I beg your pardon. . . 
Will you please to walk in, sir I" 

''No. I must be going almost directly. I 
am only at home for a few hours ; but, seeing 
you in church, I wanted to ask you how you 
liked your new position. Don't you find it very 
irksome, keeping those brats in order!" 

" No, sir, I have not found it so as yet." 

"You will. You're not fit for it, you 
know." 

She looked down, and coloured. 

*^ I am sorry you think that, sir. Indeed, I 
try to do my best." 

'* You misunderstand me. I mean that you 
are a thousand times too good for it. I hear 
you passed a very good examination." 

** Yes," she replied, simply. " But it was not 
very difficult. . . I got beyond that at school. 
 . . May I show you the prize, sir, they gave 
me at leaving !" 

She ran in^ and came out the next moment 
with a gaudily-bound volume in her hand. It 
was ** Paley's Evidences of Christianity." 

"Have you read this? and do you under- 



POET AND PEER. 77 

stand it ?" he asked, abruptly, as he looked at 
the title. 

** I have read parts, only. I think I under- 
stand those." 

" And you believe it all ?" 

She looked into his face inquiringly, and 
remained silent. 

'' By-the-by, Nellie, I wish you wouldn't 
respond so fervently in that Creed we had 
to-day, which condemns everyone to everlasting 
punishment who doesn't implicitly believe what 
is incomprehensible." 

" I thought I ought to say the responses out 
loud,^' she replied, after a momentary hesita- 
tion. 

" Do you know that you are consigning me 
with many millions more to everlasting punish- 
ment r 

*' Oh, sir !" She looked unutterably shocked. 

" Creeds do a great deal of harm by trying 
to force those who have naturally religious 
instincts, but are . . . well, perhaps unruly . . . 
into straight waistcoats." 

She opened her pretty brown eyes wide. 



78 POBT AND PEER. 

'* Bat the Creed ie in the Prayer-book, sir, 
and if I go to church ^" 

** I know what you are thinking, that / have 
710 business to go ; but Tve Sciipture authority 
for it. There's a fellow in the Bible who 
prayed that it might be forgiven hira, when he 
bowed down in the House of Rimmon." 

**0h, sir!" cried Nellie, startled out of all 
shyness by her distress. " You don't compare 
our parish church with the House of Rimmon T* 

*^ Only inasmuch as superstition and human 
invention have spoilt the simple faith in a 
Creator of this beautiful world. That is what 
I want you to believe, and nothing more. All 
that cursing of others only does harm." 

" I'm sure I don't mean it," said she, looking 
contrite. *'I suppose it was only put in to 
frighten people a little." 

" Fancy frightening people into belief 1 No, 
Nellie, I shall teach you some day a better sort 
of belief than that. Promise not to run away 
from Ripple, till I come down here to stay, in 
August." 

She opened her eyes wide, and smiled. 



POET AND PEER. 79 

"Run away, sir? What should make me 
nin away ?" 

" You may want to ' better yourself/ as it is 
called. You are thrown away here ... or you 
may even think of marriage," he continued, 
looking at her searchingly. ** You are very 
young, but there will be plenty of young fel- 
lows after you very soon." 

" I have never thought of such a thing," she 
said, gravely. "I shall never leave my mother, 
either to marry or for anything else, sir, as long 
as T can teach at the school here." 

*' You have no higher ambition ? Come, now, 
tell me, as your friend . ^your oldest friend, 
Nellie . was there no young fellow at Warm- 
ington whom you ever thought of as " 

"Never . never!" cried the girl, emphatic- 
ally. 

"I am awfully glad of that," said Wilfred, 
slowly. "If there had been, I should like to 
have punched his head .... I must go now." 
He rose, and took her hand, and held it within 
both hie, while he continued . " Since that first 
evening when I met you, as a little girl, driving 



80 POET AND PEER. 

your coWy you have always been to me like a 
poem of purity and simplicity. Remain so. 
Don't let admiration and conventionality spoil 
you. And remember me. I shall be back again 
later in the summer." 

Then he walked rapidly away. 



81 



CHAPTER VII. 

i GREAT change, though a subtle and 

-^ gradual one, began in Nellie from that 

hour. She was awaking, as the marble nymph 

awoke beneath Pygmalion's touch . awaking to 

the life of womanhood, to the consciousness of 

a heart and senses that were no longer those of 

a child. But with this consciousness came a 

terror and a shame from which the poor girl 

found her only refuge in prayer. Not even to 

her mother could she pour out her heart ; for 

her mother could never understand her trouble. 

Only to the Father, from whom no secrets are 

hid^ could she turn for comfort in the silent 

watches of the night, and, asking His forgive* 

ness for all her wicked and foolish thoughts, 
VOL. I. G 



82 POET AND PEER. 

pray to Hira for strength to overcome them* 
Mrs. Dawson attributed the young girrs ex- 
treme quietude and apparent weariness at times 
to the hard work and confinement in a some- 
what close schoolroom. The weather was 
relaxing. Nellie was new to the labour of 
keeping a score of children in order, and her 
voice, not being strong, was tried by the con- 
stant demands upon it. Thus the mother 
accounted for the change, when she found that 
her daughter refused to admit that she was un- 
well, and shrank from seeing the village doctor. 
Mrs. Dawson hoped the return of cool weather 
would bring back the rose to her Nellie's cheek ; 
the school-holiday, too, was at hand. 

At this juncture she received a letter which 
surprised and perplexed her a good deal. 

Since the expression of Uncle Joshua's dis- 
totisfaction at his niece's being withdrawn from 
school to accept so poor a post as that of pupil- 
teacher, Mrs. Dawson had not heard firom the 
family at Warmington. That was three months 
ago. The letter which now arrived, and which 
Mrs. Dawson bad some difficulty in decipher- 



POET AND PEER. 83 

ing, owing to the running stream of words 
being embanked in so many flowery flourishes, 
was from Sam's pen. He wrote, he said, by his 
father's instruction, to request Mrs. Dawson and 
Nellie to pass the three weeks' holiday which 
the latter would shortly have at Warmington. 
Sam, on his own part, warmly expressed a hope 
that his aunt would accept this invitation ; but, 
if circumstances should unfortunately prevent 
her doing so, then Sam proposed, having re- 
ceived, he said, his father's full sanction, to run 
down to the " Hen and Chickens " at Ripple for 
a few days^ that he might have the pleasure of 
his aunt's and cousin's society. 

Mrs. Dawson, as I have said, was both sur- 
prised and perplexed. Could it be that Uncle 
Joshua, far from being angered, actually en- 
couraged his son's admiration for his cousin? 
She had told him plainly enough, why she 
thought it better the girl should be removed 
from Warmington. Yet here he was, not only 
inviting her expressly to return, but sanctioning 
Sam's pursuit, even to the " Hen and Chickens I" 
It was incomprehensible, and she felt sorely 

g2 



84 POET AND PEER. 

puzzled bow to act. The visit to Warmington 
was* of conrae, without the pale of coDsidera- 
tion; though, under other circumstances, she 
would have hailed a change of air for her droop* 
ing child. And| if Sam chose to come here, of 
course his aunt could not prevent it. The 
question was, how to avoid inflicting pain oq 
the young man, and unnecessary annoyance to 
the girl^ without incurring the charge of in- 
gratitude to Uncle Joshua. 

*' What am I to say to Cousin Sam's coming 
here?" she inquired of her daaghter, after 
weighing the matter over in her mind for some 
hours. She was engaged in ironing when she 
asked the question, and never looked up. Nellie 
handed the linen to her from the clothes-horse 
every now and then. Mrs. Dawson continued . 
'* It's a fuUish waste o' money." 

*^ If Uncle Joshua does not mind that, mother, 
we ought not to say so, ought we? I think 
you must say you hope he'll come." 

" But it isn't true. I wish he 'd stop 
away." 

** What harm can he do^ mother ? Perhaps 



POET AND PEER. 85 

lie is a little vain and silly, but he was always 
kind to me. He will find everything very poor 
here, after Warmington, and dull too, I am 
afraid ; but, if he wants to come, you must not 
mind him, mother. I will keep him out of your 
way." 

" That's just what I don't want," said Mrs. 
Dawson, ironing more vigorously than ever. 
" There's no knowing the fullishness as young 
chaps is capable of talking to girls ; and I won't 
have him come here with his silly stuck-up 

ways, fancying fancying I don't 

know what all." 

Nellie looked at her mother, surprised, and 
remained silent for a minute. Then she said, 
with a smile, 

" You think I am still a child, mother." 

"No, that's just it. You ain't no longer a 
child, my dear. That's why I ought to speak 
out open to you." Here she laid down her 
iron, and^ leaning both hands upon the table, 
looked at her daughter for the first time as she 
went on . " Your uncle's bin very good to us. 
There's no saying as he hasn't, and I should be 



86 POKT AND FEEB. 

.ony if trouble came to his Bon through us, 
NeUie." 

 What sort of trouble is likely to oome to 
him r 

'* I faucy he's a mind to ask you to be fafs 
wife/' 

**What an idea, mother I Sam? . . . Sam^ 
who thinks so much of himself, marry met 
Why, the Princess Royal is hardly good enough 
for him I" 

*' Maybe; but the Princess Royal ain't here, 
and you are. I'm afraid the lad's fallen in love 
with you; and, what's more, I don't fancy, 
somehow, as your uncle minds it. It's strange 
. I can't make it out. You, without a penny, 

and his cousin, and all It's scarce to be 

credited ; yet it's my opinion as it is so. Now, 
I don't give you my advice, remember, my dear. 
You must make up your own mind, if he asks 
you, what you mean to say. Only, if you don't 
mean to have him " 

**How can you ask me, mother!" The girl, 
for once, w^s roused to something near akin ta 



FOET AND PEER. 87 

indication. " I shall never, never marry any- 
one ; but to think of marrying Sam /" 

"I didn't believe as you would, toy dear. 
That's why I'm speaking to you now. Else it'd 
be easy to let things go on as they are. But, if 
Sam comes here, you must let him understand 
how it is. It'd be cruel not to show him, plain 
enough, that it's no use his thinking o' you.'* 

^' I think you are mistaken, mother. I'm sure 
I hope so ... I hope he won't be so silly as to 
say anything to me , . . but if he does, well, I 
will certainly tell him the truth," 

After this, no more passed between mother 
and daughter on the subject. A letter was 
despatched to Sam, declining with gratitude 
the invitation to Warmington, and sajnng that, 
if he came to the ^' Hen and Chickens," his aunt 
would of course be glad to see him, though she 
feared he would find Ripple dull. She omitted 
all mention of Nellie^s name, and endeavoured 
to strike the mean between forgetfulness of past 
obligations and a cordiality which should mis- 
lead her too-easily-encouraged nephew. 



88 POET AND PEER. 

He came. It was on the afternoon of a dajr 
in Angnstj soon after Nellie's holiday had 
hegnn. There had been torrents of rain all the 
morning, but towards five o'clock it cleared; 
the clouds drifted oS, leaving patches of pale 
blue sky visible ; the rushing streams of water, 
which had forced themselves channels in the 
sandy roads, subsided, and the birds began 
calling to each other from the dripping boughs 
that the sun was not yet gone to bed, and 
would come out presently. 

The town-bred young man, with his tall hat 
and blue satin tie, his mackintosh and umbrella, 
excited some attention, as he swaggered up 
the street, and demanded the way to Mrs. 
Dawson's cottage. 

The mother and daughter were at work as he 
entered. 

"*I hope I don't intrude?' as Paul Pry says. 
How do you do, Aunt Su ? . . . How are you, 
Nell? A little pale. . . Well, here I am; and 
I hope you are glad to see me, for the journey 
here is horrible . three changes! These cross 
lines are the devil." 



POET AND PEER. 89 

.* They are ill-convenient," observed his aunt, 
in a deprecatory tone. 

" And what a deal of rain you 'ave in these 
southern counties. Why, it was quite fine when 
I left Warmington this morning, and 'ere it's all 
of a sop." 

*'It was fine here, too, very early," said 
Nellie, a little resentful at the aspersion on the 
Ripple climate. 

'* Well, you've a nice nut-shell of a place," 
continued Sam, condescendingly, as he divested 
himself of his mackintosh, and opened his um- 
brella to dry. Then he sat down, extended his 
legs, like a pair of tongs, and looked around 
him. "It wouldn't do for the gov'nor, you 
know. He's so precious partic'lar ; but I don't 
mind your rough and ready style, when beauty 
presides over the 'arth." The interesting 
youth here leered at his cousin; but, as she 
continued stitching, without raising her eyes, 
it was only Mrs. Dawson who observed the 
expressive glance. 

" Fve only just cleared away tea, Sam," she 
said. "Shall I make you some, or will you 



90 POET AND PEER. 

have the cold neck o' mutton, and TU bQe yon 
a potato V 

*' No^ 1 ehall 'ave supper at the inn, by-and- 
by; but you may give me a glass o' beer, 
Nell." 

^*Tll run and fetch you some. It*s onlj 
roun' the corner ; but Nellie's a bit tired/' said 
his aunt. 

''Bless my stars I No beer in the 'ouse? 
Buty Lor', do you think I'd let you fetch beer 
for me ? No, that won't do, Aunt Su. Make 
me a cup o' tea. That's the ticket . . . and 
Nellie shall pour it out for me^ won't you ? . . . 
Why^ you sit there like mum-chance I Haven't 
you word to say to me, after four months ? . . . 
Ah I Nellie, the 'igh Street 'as seemed an 'owl- 
ing wilderness to me since you went." 

** I seldom went into High Street," . the girl 
roused herself to reply, laughing . '*so I'm 
afraid I cannot take your compliment to my* 
self, Sam. But you haven't told us yet how 
uncle and aunt are ?" 

*' Oh I pretty bobbish. I say, Nell," he con- 
tinued, seeing that his aunt had gone into the 



J 



POET AND PEER. 91 

kitchen to set the kettle on the fire, *' what 
do you. think the gov'nor says! That 'e feels 
as though you were 'is daughter. He often 
says there's no gal in Warmington he'd so soon 
'ave for a daughter." 

" That's very kind of Uncle Joshua," returned 
his cousin, quietly. ^*It is because I am the 
only girl who ever stayed in his house. Of 
course, he would take to others just as mucb^ if 
he knew them all as well." 

"Not at all. He ain't very soft-hearted, 
ain't the gov'nor. You know that, Nell; but 
he's right down fond of you, and no mistake.'? 
Here Mrs. Dawson returned, and Sam, with 
some show of hesitation, pulled out a photo* 
graph, framed in scarlet leather, from his- 
pocket. " I've brought this for you, Nell. I 
'ad it done on purpose. I'm afraid it ain't very 
good. . . In fact, it's a 'orrid thing. They 

say it don't do me justice, and I believe it's . 

Anyways, it ain't flattering ; but, such as it is, it 

will remind you, when absent, of yours truly^ 

ehr 

. Mrs. Dawson looked over Nellie's shoulder^ 



92 POET AND PEER. 

and they both exclaimed, ''Oh I '* 

** But it's the very image of you, Sam I'' 

" Just the way you always sit." 

** And the expression of the mouth I and the 
whiskers j" 

'' And the curl of the hair I and the collar I" 

** And the tip of the nose I" 

<( Oh I come, now, my nose ain't so snub ao 
that . and the tie don't sit so genteel as mine . 
and the light on the 'air makes me look as 
though I was bald," 

*^ Well, it's a most capital likeness," main- 
tained his aunt. '' Say what you will, Sam." 

'' I really think you ought to be quite satis- 
fied/' chimed in his cousin. '' I don't think it 
could be better." 

Let us acknowledge this was aggravating. 
To be told by the object of one's affections that 
the monstrosity in her hand does you ample 
justice would be trying to more philosophical 
natures than Sam's. 

''Well, there are those as think different," 
said he, running his fingers through his hair, 
and looking round the humble little room in 



POET AND PEER, 93 

Tain for a square inch of mirror. " There are 
those that think Tm a deal better-favoured than 
that beastly thing, I wouldn't have brought 
it, if I'd thought you'd have bin so unkind as 
to say that, Nellie." 

** I can't help saying what I think, Sam. I 
am sorry it hurts you . ^you shouldn't have 
asked me." 

''You think me a fright, I suppose, now, 
then ?" He was by this time in a state of con- 
siderable irritation. .* You didn't always. But 
it's out of sight, out of mind, I suppose, with 
you as with so many." 

" What fuUishness you're talking, Sam," said 
his aunt, almost sternly. " Out o' sight, out o' 
mind, indeed ! What's that got to do with the 
pictur' being like you or not? You think a 
deal too much of what others think about you, 
Sam. That's your fault." 

" Oh I of course ; and I come all the way from 
Warmington to Ripple to be told that by youy 
aunt. Well, I didn't expect it of you, and ^^ 

"Now, take your tea, Sam, and hold your 
tongue. You're no better than a big baby. 



94 POST AND PEER. 

faring np Hke that, when no one means nothing 
unkind. Why, what does a man's looks sig^- 
nify? If we all made ourselves, we'd all be 
beauties. You can't help being what you are 
any more than I can. It's what we does in life, 
Sam, that signifies . that draws hearts to us 
like, and makes' us remembered when we're 
gone. You're little better than a lad, and have 
got life before you. Don't you waste it all in 
ibUy, Sam." 

He drank his tea in silence. He was 
thoroughly put out. This was not the kind of 
reception he had looked for. He had expected 
to meet with great consideration ; firstly, as 
Sam, irresistible to Nellie as to her sex in 
general ; secondly^ as son and heir of the pros- 
perous Joshua Dawson. His aunt and cousin, 
though they lived in this mean cottage, seemed 
to have no respect for his position ; and the way 
in which they had spoken of his nose . ^it was 
disgusting. He felt, like the man in the para- 
ble, "Some enemy hath done this," Some 
fellow had come between him and Nellie, and 



POET AND PEER. 95 

had turned tlie hearts of both the women 
against him ; there was no accounting for such 
conduct otherwise. Mrs. Dawson tried to make 
conversation, her daughter threw in a remark 
or two ; but Sam maintained a dogged silence 
until he had finished his tea. Then he rose, 
and, looking at his cousin, said . 

" It's a fine evenin'. I s'pose you ain't goin* 
to refuse to take a walk with me ?" 

She glanced up at her mother, but laid down 
her work and rose. Mrs. Dawson interposed. 

** Indeed, Sam, and I think, if you'd excuse 
her, she's a deal better at home. She's bin that 
tired and weakly of late that I haven't liked 
her to walk at all, and- ^" 

" Oh, mother," said Nellie, quickly, seeing the 
angry cloud on Sam's face, "I have not been 
outside the door to-day, and the air will do me 
good. Sam won't take me too far . . . I'll run 
and put on my hat." 

She returned a moment later, and the cousins 
left the cottage together. 

*' Well, p'rhaps it's better," said Mrs. Dawson 



96 POET AND PEER. 

to herselfy as she watched them turn down the 
lane towards the Athelstone woods. ** I s'pose 
he'll speak now, and shell give him his answer, 
and then there will be an end to it.'' 

There was an end to it ; bnt not quite the 
one she anticipated. 

Thej had been walking nearly a quarter of 
an hour on the outskirts of the Athelstone 
wood. Sam had by this time quite recovered 
his good humour, together with his self-confi- 
dence, which had only received a temporary 
shock. He was depicting in all the glowing 
colours his imagination could suggest the joys 
incident to an existence spent in a back street 
in Warmington, "in a 'ouse of my own, with 
the party of my choice." He was approaching 
his object in view by this sure, if circuitous, 
route, from which Nellie saw no side-path of 
escape, and with a beating heart she awaited 
the moment which her mother had foreseen, 
and which the girl felt she must nerve herself 
to meet. She certainly had never felt so ill- 
disposed towards her cousin as now, never had 
his vulgarity and conceit been so offensive to 



POET AND PEER. 97 

her. She felt inclined to cry. If she could 
only get rid of him I Why, oh I why did she 
ever consent to come out? 

Just then^ when Sam's blatant voice had, in 
his excitement, reached its culminating point, 
a gate in the Athelstone wall close at hand 
was opened, and Wilfred stood before them. 
Nellie was so startled that she gave a faint cry, 
and, unconsciously, grasped the hand he held 
out to her for support. 

The two men stared at each other, the one 
with his shabby shooting-jacket, long hair and 
slouching gait, possessing with it all the un- 
mistakeable air of a gentleman, the other, in 
spite of his spick-and-span clothes, best dog-skin 
gloves, and erect carriage, the unmistakeable 
air of a snob. He glared angrily, and tilted his 
nose at Wilfred. The latter surveyed him 
calmly from head to foot, as he spoke to the 
girl whose hand he held. 

"How is you mother, Nellie? I was on 
my way to your cottage. I only came home 
to-day." 

*' Mother is very well, thank you, sir,'' 

VOL. I. H 



98 POET AND PEER. 

sbe replied, feebly, as she disengaged her 
band. 

" And wbo is tbis person ?" inquired Wilfred, 
ratber coldly. '^ A stranger to me." 

'^It is mj cousin Sam, sir. . . . Uncle 
Josbua's son, wbo's come from Warmington to 
. ^to see us.'* 

"From Warmington? Tbat's a long dis- 
tance," said Wilfred, addressing Sam, but with- 
out the shadow of a smile on his some- 
what scornful mouth. **How long do you 
stay r' 

'^ As long as I feel inclined. I aiu*t taken a 
return-ticket," replied Sam, eyeing the stranger 
jfiercely. 

"Oh I indeed. . . . Well, I won't interrupt 
your walk any longer^ Nellie. I hope you will 
enjoy it. But my mother wishes to see you to- 
morrow morning. Can you come up before 
eleven? . or are you too much occupied with 
your cousin to spare the time ?" 

The poor child was so confused and 
annoyed that she could only stammer out, 

" Of course, sir, I shall wait upon my ladyJ 



99 



POET AND PEER. 99 

Then he nodded, and, without taking any 
ifurther notice of Sam, walked on. 

That young man was struck dumb for a 
moment at the mention of " my lady ;" then his 
ire found tongue . 

"So that's my lord, is it? And a seedy- 
looking lot 'e is, and as impudent a one as ever 
I met . looking at me like that, and I'm every 

bit as good as 'e is, d n him. I dessay the 

gov'nor could buy 'im up; these haristocrats 
are mostly sewn up, I'm told. I'm sure 'is coat 
looks like it. Why, I wouldn't pick it off a 
dung-hill 1" 

*' You're not worthy to. do it," cried Nellie, 
struggling between her anger and her tears. 
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself, speak- 
ing so rudely to Mr. Wilfred when he 
was good enough ,to address you, Sam. 
What must he think of you? I felt so 
ashamed . and he who has been so good 
to us r 

"Oh I that's the ticket, is it? I ought to 
grovel in the dust and lick 'is feet when 'e 
condescends to speak to me, eh? I tell you 

h2 



100 POET AND PEER. 

what it is. I don't care Hud^^ and Sam snapped 
his fingers defiantly in the direction Wilfred 
bad taken, *^ what 'e thinks of me, or any dozen 
like 'im But now I know the sort of man 'e 
is, let 'im look out, that's all. I can see 
through a nine-inch wall as well as any chap^ I 
flatter myself. ''d better take care what 'e's 
after. 

'' What do you mean, Sam If I think you are 
mad.'^ 

 Never you mind. I know what's what. I 
ain't got eyes in my 'ead for nothing. It's no 
puzzle now why we're so changed . that's all ; 
why a fellow who you was glad enough once to 
walk with, when he comes down here is ridi- 
culed and abused, and treated like this." 

*' I will walk with you no more, Sam," said 
his cousin, stopping dead short and looking him 
in the face. '' I don't know what you mean, 
but your temper is quite changed since old days. 
Tou seem to wish to make yourself disagree- 
able, and I won't go on listening to you. I 
shall go home." 

She turned away, and this seemed to bring 



POET AND PEER. 



101 



liim to his senses. He followed, and in humbled 
accents entreated her to continue their walk ; 
he had so much still to say to her ; he begged 
her pardon ; his temper had got the better of 
him just now ; but his tongue should not offend 
again. She remained obdurate, however. She 
declared, what was indeed the truth, that she 
felt tired. The emotions of the last ten minutes 
had quite upset her. To listen to Sam's declar- 
ation now was beyond her powers. 

He was upon his best behaviour the rest of 
the evening; but Nellie crept to bed early. 
Sam said no word to his aunt of what had 
passed. 



102 



CHAPTER VIII. 

VITILFRED ATHELSTONE'S rage, as he 

* ' walked away, was none the less that it 
was self-contained. He could glance coldlj at 
Sam^ and nod carelessly to Nellie, but his blood 
boiled with indignation all the same. That 
angelic girl " keeping company " with a vulgar 
brute like this I Had it been a simple plough- 
boy, Wilfred felt that he could have tolerated 
him better than this impudent, swaggering 
snob. 

The chief attraction he had held out to him- 
self in returning home to pass his long vacation 
was the prospect of seeing Nellie Dawson daily ; 
of instructing and elevating her mind ; in short, 
of moulding this beautiful and, as he doubted 



POET AND PEER. 103 

notj plastic clay, to his liking. And what af1;er 
this ? He never asked himself. If the thought 
suggested itself, he put it away. He shut his 
eyes to anything beyond the pleasure the hours 
thus spent would afford him. A man with more 
self-control would have resolved to shun such 
peril ; peril to himself no less than to her, unless 
he was prepared to sacrifice father and mother 
to a passion which as yet had been nourished 
chiefly by his imagination. But Wilfred, with 
too kind a heart knowingly to inflict pain, had 
never consulted any other law than that of his 
inclination. Happily it had not led him to in- 
dulge very deeply in the dissipations common 
to his age. A woman without refinement, a 
woman whom he could not surround with 
something of the halo of romance, could gain 
no real ascendancy over him. He had made 
the acquaintance of many such who had striven 
to ensnare him ; but he had never been subju- 
gated for more than a few hours. He had 
broken his bonds like Samson, and regarded 
Dalilah cynically as a subject for dramatic 
study. 



104 POET AND FEEIK 

The Sskct 18, his principles about women, as 
about religion, were as yet only sketched in 
wavering, undeterminate lines. He had read 
Mary Wolstonecraft, Godwin and Shelley. He 
felt inclined to believe, with the latter, that 
** Love withers under restraint ; its very essence 
is liberty ; it is compatible neither with obedi- 
ence, jealonsy, nor fear ; it is there most pare, 
perfect, and unlimited, where its votaries live in 
confidence, equality, and unreserve." And, as 
a natural corollary from this proposition, he was 
wont to maintain in discussions with his friends 
that constancy had no virtue in itself, and 
that people should remain united only so lon^ 
as they loved each other. At this time, indeed, 
the idea of marriage, of a tie binding him for 
life, was practically repugnant to him ; though, 
regarded as a mystical and entirely delightful 
union of two congenial spirits, it appealed to 
the poetic side of his nature. To pass one's 
life at the feet of an ideal woman was a raptur- 
ous dream ; but was there any woman in the 
flesh at whose feet he could pass his life ? 

He said to himself that he should probably 



POET AND PEER. 105 

never marry. As regarded the little village 
maid, whose sweet eyes and modest ways had 
first attracted him as a child, he certainly did 
not contemplate any such act of egregious folly. 
If he disgraced himself . so his father would 
consider it . by marrying beneath him, Wilfred 
knew that Lord Athelstone would never for- 
give his son. Indifferent as he was to social 
distinctions himself, his parents valued them as 
next in importance to. their religion, and the 
fact had been duly impressed on Wilfred since 
his boyhood. Like some able orators, it might 
be said of him that he was never so strong 
as in opposition ; but Wilfred now rarely 
opposed his father openly. He loved him ; he 
respected him ; and he pitied his narrow- 
mindedness. Discussion was worse than useless 
with a man of Lord Athelstone's stamp; 
therefore his son would avoid discussion, avoid 
angering the old gentleman, whose health bad 
been a good deal shaken during the last two 
years. Only a passion which over-bore every 
filial consideration would drive Wilfred to com- 
mit an act which would be a virtual separation 



106 POET AND PEER. 

from the parents whom, with all his wilfulness, 
be loved welL 

Under these circumstanees he resented . ^and 
all the more, perhaps, that he felt be bad no 
right to resent . the intrusion of this detestable 
cousin upon pleasure grounds which Wilfred 
had marked for bis own. He brooded over it 
all the evening, while apparently absorbed in 
the '* Earthly Paradise," which had just been 
published. At one time he resolved to relin- 
quish his plan of waylaying Nellie when she 
left his mother the following morning. He 
would never seek out the girl again, never hold 
other than the most casual intercourse with 
her. But such resolves, wise though they 
might be, were only bred of irritation and 
disgust. When eleven o'clock struck next day, 
it found him on a bench in the maple-wood 
through which the girl must pass on her way 
back to the village. He had seen her shown 
into Lady Athelstone's boudoir a few minutes 
before. 

The interview was soon ^ over. When Lady 
Athelstone had questioned the young pupil* 



POET AND PEER. 107 

teacher relative to some children in whom she 
"was interested, she said, 

" Gossip travels quickly. My maid told me 
just now that you ivere thought to be engaged 
to a cousin of yours, who is come here from 
Warmington to see you. Is it true!" 

Nellie flashed scarlet. 

*' No, my lady, certainly not." 

" Oh, really ? Well, I was in hopes . not but 
that you are very young. . . Still . . . ." 

" Indeed, my lady, I have never thought of 
such a thing. . . and I wouldn't marry my 
cousin on any account." 

** Indeed I . . . Well, I daresay some worthy 
young man by-and-by ... I believe you to 
be a very good girl, and we are quite pleased 
with you in the school. . . You can go now. 
Good morning." 

With these disjointed sentences, after her 
peculiar fashion, the patroness dismissed the 
dependant; and Nellie, thankful to escape^ 
crossed the garden rapidly, and entered the 
maple-wood. A few yards in, the path was 
intersected by one running at right angles. 



108 POET AND PEER. 

She turned to tbe left, and immediately per* 
ceived Wilfred on tbe bench at some distance 
off. She would bav^e giv^en worlds to retrace 
her steps. Though only to look npon him now 
was a joy to tbe poor child, which all the 
schooling of her rebel heart could not repress, 
she shrank from encountering him at this 
moment. She felt afraid of herself. How be 
would despise her, if she betrayed, by any 
weakness, that all bis kindness to her had been 
misunderstood, and that tbe interest be bad 
shown in her must be evinced no longer ! 

She bad no choice, however, but to go for- 
ward with slow and rather uncertain footsteps, 
until she approached him, when be rose. 

"You look a little pale, Nellie," he said, 
kindly. ** You had better sit down here for a 
few minutes. . . Are you not well V 

'* I have not been very strong lately, sir." 

*^ You are over-worked in tbe school. I told 
you you were not fit for it." 

*' Indeed, Fm not over-worked, sir. . . Mother 
thinks it's the weather." 

**Well, at all events, you won't be over- 



POET AND PEER. 109 

-worked much longer. I hear you are to be 
married/' 

" It is not true . . . not a word of it." 
''It seems to be the talk of the village. 
That very smart young man who is staying at 
the * Hen and Chickens ' gives it to be under- 
stood, I hear." 

"If I thought it, I'd never speak to him 
again," cried Nellie. "But Sam would never 
be so base. I'll not believe it, sir." 

'^ You allow him to live on hope, perhaps ?" 
"Mr. Wilfred, indeed I don't . . . please 
don't say that." 

" Why do you walk with him, then f " 
*'How could I refuse, when he is come all 

this way to see us, sir, and " 

"And to ask you to marry him, no doubt." 
" After all Uncle Joshua has done for me, I . 

I ^" here she burst into tears. 

" Don't cry. I didn't mean to make you 
cry. Only, do you remember what I said to 
you the last time we met ? I felt inclined to 
punch your cousin's head yesterday. He look- 
ed as if he only had a right to be with you 



110 POXT AND PEER. 

and I was an intruder. After all, I am an 
older friend than be is, ain't I V* 

She wiped away her tears, and ninrmnredy 
*. Yes, sir." 

^*And you like me better? Saj that yoa 
like me better, Nellie." 

She did not dare lift up her eyes. 

.* Ob, sir," she stammered, " it is so . so 
diflferent, you know, the respect " * 

*^ Hang the respect. I want liking. I want 
you to say you like me better than that 
cad." 

What could she say? She could not lie to 
bim. She almost imperceptibly nodded her 
bead. It was enough for Wilfred. 

" Now promise me that you'll walk no more 
with him, and that you will walk sometimes 
with me." 

*' No ; I can't promise that." 

*'Why not? If you could walk with him, 
why not with me ?" 

'* I can't tell why, sir ; there is a differ- 



ence." 



*' There are so many things I want to 



POET AND PEER. Ill 

teach you, Nellie . so much I want to read 
to you." 

"Oh I dear. How I should like thatl" she 
exclaimed, forgetting herself for a moment. 

" You think you would like it f I shall bring 
down some books to-morrow." 

She looked frightened. 

" Oh, sir, not to-morrow ; because . be- 
cause " 

^* Because this cousin will still be here T and 
everything must give way to him 1" 

" Sam is so passionate I He will only be here 
a day or two. Please don't come, sir, till he's 
gone." 

She put her hands together, and looked up 
with that sweet, child-like expression which 
Wilfred found so bewitching. He bent his face 
till it almost touched her. 

** Tell me," he said, " are you afraid for Sam 
or for me V^ 

"For you,^' . the words escaped her in- 
voluntarily. 

The next instant he had clasped her in his 
arms. She rose, trembling in every limb, and 



112 POET AND PEER; 

tried to walk away ; but her head swam round ; 
she staggered, and fell fainting on the path. 
Wilfred, much alarmed, lifted her up, and laid 
her gently on the bench. 

^*My darling, look up I I am so grieved. 
What a brute I was I Nellie. Speak to me ! 
Say you forgive me 1" . but her eyes remained 
closed^ and, though not insensible, she could 
not speak. He bethought him of a stream not 
far 0S9 and dashed through the trees to fetch 
some water. As he did so, a rustling among 
the boughs and leaves a few yards off attracted 
his attention for a moment. Could he be 
watched? He looked rounds but saw nothing; 
and his anxiety about Nellie absorbed every 
thought. He ran on, and brought back some 
water in his hat. He bathed her face, and in a 
few minutes she sat up, pale, indeed, but 
declaring that she felt able to walk. 

*' Wait here till I run home and fetch you 
some wine in my flask." 

She said nothing ; she let him go. Then, as 
soon as he was out of sight, she rose resolutely, 
and walked as fast as she was able, poor child^ 
through the wood towards Ripple. 



POET AND PEER. 113 

When Wilfred returned to the spot a few 
minutes later, he found to his disgust that she 
was fled. He meditated pursuing her, when he 
heard a step among the dead leaves close bj^ 
and, turning round, Sam Dawson stood before 
him. 



VOL. I. 



lU 



CHAPTER IX. 

rpHE young shopkeeper's &ce was white, and 
-^ bis lips tight-clenched. He grasped an 
oak stick in his hand, and his demeanour, in the 
intensity of passion, lost much of its vulgar 
assumption. 

" May I inquire what you want here 1 These 
grounds are private." 

It was Wilfred who spoke first, and with a 
calmness which, to say the truth, he was far 
from feeling. This fellow's intrusion was inso- 
lent, and irritating in the extreme. What if he 
bad been playing the eavesdropper ? 

" You know well enough why Fm 'ere. Fm 
Nell Dawson's cousin, and I mean to be 'er 
'usband," replied Sam, between his teeth. 



POET AND PEER. 115 

" I doubt that. Did you overhear our con- 
versation? If so, you must have been grati- 
fied." 

" I didn't ^ear a word . but I saw. That was 
enough. If you think Tm going to stand your 
^umbugging her . if you think I*m going to 
take your leavings, you^re d ly mistaken." 

'' I think nothing of the kind. In the first 
place, Nellie Dawson will never be your wife . 
she told me so." Sam ground his teeth; but 
Wilfred continued, and the words that fell from 
him were certainly not those he would have 
used an hour before . " I am ready to account 
for my conduct to her mother, but certainly not 
to you." 

Sam looked at him in silence for a moment, 
and something like a demoniacal smile crossed 
his lips. 

" 'Ow if I tell all over the village what I've 
seen ? You'll like that, won't you ?" 

Wilfred inwardly winced ; but he was not 
going to allow this blackguard to see the ad- 
vantage he had over him. 

" It is just what I should expect from you," 

i2 



116 POET AND PEER. 

he replied. "A fine, manly action, certainly, 
to come down here and try to ruin your 
cousin's reputation by spreading a groundless 
scanda]." 

" Groundless ? Come, I like that I" 

'^ Tes, groundless. I have known her since 
she was a little child. No one who had not a 
black imagination would fancy that I meant to 
harm her." 

" ^Arm her? You don't mean to marrj/ her, I 
suppose? That's about it. It's 'arm enough, 
if you turn the girVs 'ead, and make 'er unfit 
for 'er station^ and then walk away, and leave 
'er I But I tell you what it is," he continued, 
raising his voice, and thrusting his clenched fist 
almost in Wilfred's face, " I'm not to be put off 
with your 'igh and mighty airs. I'm not a fool. 
I know what sort you are. And I tell you, if 
you seduce that girl, Fll have your bhod . I will, 
if I swing for it I" 

With that he turned upon his heel and strode 
away. 

Wilfred had a certain sense of being worsted, 
a certain sense of humiliation, which he could 



POET AND PBER. 117 

not account for. He had explained nothing; 
he had promised nothing; he had given this 
insolent fellow no pledge of any kind ; and yet 
he felt somehow as if Sam had gone away vic- 
torious from the encounter. The whole thing 
was vexatious beyond measure. The incidents 
of the morning had inflamed his passion four- 
fold. Nellie loved him ; there could be no doubt 
about it. Her modest reluctance to avow that 
love only enhanced its value in his eyes. To 
abandon the treasure which he had won, on 
account of any paltry obstacle which the world 
or its laws of convention might set between 
them, he began to say to himself, would be 
miserable weakness. But what course was he 
to adopt! This troublesome brute's interfer- 
ence had complicated matters, and rendered it 
essential that Wilfred should take a decided 
line. After some deliberation he resolved to 
<5all on Mrs. Dawson that afternoon. 

He found her alone. Nellie, on seeing him 
<5ome up the garden, had fled to her own room. 
The widow's demeanour was civil and respect- 
ful as usual, but there was a certain constraint 



118 POET AND PEER. 

in her manner that did not escape Wilfred. He 
learnt, mnch to his surprise and satisfaction, 
when he made a casual remark about her 
nephew, that the young man had left Bipple by 
that afternoon's train. Wilfred's curiosity could 
not be restrained. 

" Why did he go so suddenly ?" he asked. 
Mrs. Dawson hesitated a moment. 
*' fle wanted Nellie to say she'd marry him, 
for one thing, sir." 
" And she refused !" 

''Yes, Mr. Wilfred, and then him and me- 
had words." 

*^ I can guess what about. It was about me,, 
now ; wasn't it, Mrs. Dawson t" 

'^It was, Mr. Wilfred. He spoke shameful, 
and I told him he should never come inside my 
doors again. I know you're an honourable 
gentleman as would never lead my girl astray, 
and I know what he said was all malice^ 
because she won't have him. But at the same 
time, Mr. Wilfred, I've had it in my mind I 
ought to speak to you, and I will. You 
mustn't meet Nellie in the wood, sir. We're 



POET AND PEER. 119 

poor people, and our characters is all as we 
have to look to . ^we can't make h'ght of what 
folks say, as the rich can, when they knows 
they're doing nothin' wrong. Therefore, Mr. 
Wilfred . ^I'm sure as you mean too kindly by 
my girl to wish to injure her . you must not 
meet her alone, else evil tongues, besides Sam's, 
'11 be set waggin'.". 

*'I may come here?" said Wilfred, quite 
humbly. "You will let me bring her books, 
and read to her here, Mrs. Dawson!" 

The good woman looked puzzled. She could 
not conceive that there could be anything 
wrong in this, yet instinct told her it was 
one of those innocent things that are better 
avoided. 

*'If you lend her books, Mr. Wilfred, I'm 
sure as Nellie '11 be grateful. And if you drop 
in promiscuous now and then, as you've often 
done since you was a boy, Mr. Wilfred, folks 
can't say nothin'. But I think you'd better not 
come too often." 

Wilfred sighed, and stroked the cat, who had 
jumped upon his knee, and mused. 



120 POST AND PEER. 

'^ I know I wish I and the few people I care 
for in the world were living in a desert 
island, where there was no snch thing as 
* propriety/ and all did as they liked." 

" Lor I Mr. Wilfred, that'd be a pretty state 
of things I No, depend on % sir, we^re better 
as we are. Yon'U think so some day. When 
I've bin in trouble, and the Lord's bin good to 
me, and delivered me out of it, Tve thought to 
myself that all the contrairies was perhaps just 
put here to bring out the good. If we had all 
we want there'd be no need o' patience and 
sacrifice and kindness, and a lot o' things as is 
drawn out of us like." 

" Exactly so," said Wilfred, looking up from 
the cat with a little ironical smile. ''If we 
didn't require them, there would be no use in 
worrying ourselves about them. I, for one, 
should be very glad to dispense with patience 
and self-sacrifice." 

Mrs. Dawson meditated a moment. Then 
she said, gravely^ 

** Perhaps not in others, Mr. Wilfred." 

He laughed. 



POET AND PEER. 121 

" You are very hard on me, Mrs. Dawson. I 
had no idea yoa were satirical." 

"Does that mean scoffing-like? No, Mr. 
Wilfred. But you're young, and haven't 
known trouble yet. You've had everything 
pretty much your own way, I take it. It 
can't be always so. When sorrows come, 
you'll learn the valley o' those things you want 
to do without." 

" I have not everything my own way now. 
I want to educate Nellie. I want to teach her 
a great many things that will make her wiser 
and happier ; and, because of the world's mis- 
chievous folly, I am not to be allowed. I don't 
see the beauty of patience or self-sacrifice here 
at all." 

" The child will do very well as she is, sir ; 
she has edication enough; don't think about 
her. 'Tis only her health troubles me. This 
last month^ I don't know what ails her, but she 
is grown as pale and weak as anything, and, 
though she won't own it, I know she don't 
sleep o' nights." 

Wilfred looked up anxiously. " Doesn't she ? 



122 POET AND PEER. 

Poor Nellie I*' Then he remained mient for a 
mionte. It was jnst a month since Trinitj 
Sunday. Could he be the cause of her illness ? 
Was it the struggle to repress her love for him 
that had affected her health . was, perhaps^ en- 
dangering her life ? *' Has she seen the doctor V* 
he asked, presently. 

^^ No, I can't get her to see him. She says 
there's nothing the matter with her." 

^^ But she mmt see him ; I insist upon it. I 
shall make my mother come and talk to her. 
It's nonsense going on like this. She has no 
cough ? no pain ?" 

'*No; it seems a kind o' wasting like, and 
her sperits is quite changed; but she donH 
complain o' nothin', and so she may get strong 
again, I hope, when the warm weather is past. 
It was terrible hot last week.'' 

" She must see the doctor at once. Whatever 
is the cause, she ought to have advice. My 
mother shall send him here." He sprang up. 
^' Tell her what I say ; and now, good-bye, Mrs. 
Dawson." 

Lady Athelstone, obedient to her son's com- 



POET AND PEER. 12S 

mands, sent a message to the village apothe- 
cary, desiring him to call and examine Nellie 
Dawson, and report to Lady Athelstone what 
his opinion was as to the girl's condition. 

But before Mr. Dole had gone his round the 
following morning, he was sent for post haste 
to the Castle. The messenger informed him 
that his lordship had had a fit in his dressing- 
room; that he was insensible, and that her 
ladyship was greatly alarmed. 



124 



CHAPTER X. 

rpHE post arrived daily at the Castle between 
-*. seven and eight o'clock, and it was one of 
Lord Athelstone's peculiarities that no one 
should open the bag but himself. It was 
brought him, with his hot water ; he unlocked 
it^ took out his own letters^ and gave back the 
others to his valet for distribution. 

On the morning in question he rose, not feel- 
ing very well. The bag was laid, as usual^ on 
his table. There were four letters for him. 
One, which he had been expecting, from his 
lawyer; two from friends upon business con- 
nected with the approaching Borough election ; 
and one in a handwriting which^ from its copy- 
book flourishes, he concluded was a trades- 



POET AND PEER. 125 

man's. This he laid aside, while he digested 
the contents of the others. 

So the purchase of that farm was effected, 
and his man of business wrote that he was 
satisfied that the transaction was an advan- 
tageous one to my lord. He was much pleased 
at this, and thought over it a good deal while 
he was shaving. The next two letters gave 
him much food for reflection, and of a less 
pleasant kind. His correspondents wrote very 
much to the same effect; that if^ at the ap- 
proaching election, the Honourable Wilfred 
Athelstone would come forward upon Conserva- 
tive principles, his return for the Borough could 
be almost ensured. If it could be ascertained 
beyond doubt that the young man was guided, 
in his political views, by his father, Lord Athel- 
stone's name would be sufficient guarantee for 
his son. Indeed, even as a moderate Liberal^ 
though there might be a contest, his chances of 
election were very good. But a rumour had 
got abroad of his holding very extreme JBodi- 
ccd opinions. Should this rumour be unhap- 
pily verified, the writers both stated plainly 



126 POST AND FKEB. 

enough that they must decline to support him. 
Lord Atbelstone could not but approve their 
decision. In their place he would do likewise. 
Then came the question, could any arguments, 
any persuasion of his, induce Wilfred to 
modify, if not his present convictions, at least 
such expression of them as must alienate the 
suffrages of the main body of electors 1 Lord 
Athelstone's good sense, which seldom per- 
mitted him to indulge in delusions, constrained 
him to negative this. His son had become 
much more docile in discussion of late ; he was 
affectionate to his fother, and that he possessed 
good abilities of a certain kind was unquestion- 
ed. He was spoken of as a young man who 
might do almost anything, '* if he liked." (Jn- 
fortunately, he did not like, apparently, to 
work in the particular groove which alone 
could bring solid distinction, and give him a 
claim to personal consideration in the county . 
for what was a prize for poetry, or any such 
rubbish, worth? Then the boy's opinions on 
most subjects at present were altogether perni- 
cious. He hoped, he believed, they would 



POET AND PEER. 127 

change, as Wilfred grew older ; but it must be 
a work of time; he was not deceived by his 
son^s reticence, he knew full well that there 
were rocks of obstinacy beneath the fluid 
amiability of Wilfred's home-relations which 
nothing would remove. It was hopeless to 
expect from him at present any renuncia- 
tion of opinions, which he held none the less 
that he was silent concerning them when at 
home. 

It was annoying, it was even irritating, for 
Lord Athelstone wished, above all things, that 
his son should have some experience of 
parliamentary life before the time came that he 
should be called to the Upper House. And 
who could tell how soon that might be? Lord 
Athelstone was scarcely a very old man; he 
was not fanciful or nervous about his own 
health. But he had had two warnings in the 
course of the past twelve months which were 
not to be disregarded ; he knew he might die 
any day. Was his son fit for the responsibilities 
that would devolve upon him? Was he not 
rather, in spite of his cleverness and amiability, 



128 POET AND PEER. 

lamentably ill-calcalated to fulfil his daties as 
a peer, a prominent and influential man in the 
county, a landlord whose wisdom or unwisdom 
would leaven the opinions of large masses in 
his neighbourhood? 

Lord Athelstone said to himself, with a sigh, 
that it was so. He had sat down a few 
minutes before, feeling a little giddy; and 
there he was, leaning back, half dressed, in his 
arm-chair^ with his correspondence lying on 
the table before him. The tradesman's letter 
was as yet unread, and at last, after a long 
interval, he listlessly opened the envelope. 
The writing was clear enough, in spite of its 
flourishes, yet it was some minutes before he 
could grasp the meaning of what he read. 

'* My Lord, 

^ I was witness of a scene to-day in 
your wood, which makes me write this letter, 
as I think you should be informed of the 
blackguard conduct of your son towards the 
pupil-teacher in your parish school, Miss Nellie 
Dawson, fie is using all his arts to seduce the 



POET AND PEER. 129 

girl, and she is so infatuated about him that 
there is little doubt he will succeed, if you do 
not prevent it. You can separate them fast 
enough, if you choose. If you do not, I can 
tell you that you and yours shall hear of it. 
And what is more, besides the scandal, my lord, 
I have took an oath. If that girl, who is my 
cousin, is seduced, I will shoot your son, like a 
dog. So I warn you plainly. 

'^ Your lordship's obediently, 

" Samuel Dawson." 



What happened, after Lord Athelstone had 
mastered the contents of this letter, was never 
known. His servant heard a noise, and, enter- 
ing the room, found his master in a fit upon the 
floor. No one connected the attack with any 
sudden emotion occasioned by his letters that 
morning. They were swept hurriedly into a 
drawer, unread by anyone, and it was only 
long, long afterwards that Sam's effusion fell 
under Wilfred's eye. 

The village doctor, when summoned, did not 

VOL. I. K 



' 130 POET AND PEER. 

seem gravely alarmed. It was a slight apo- 
plectic seizure, similar to one his lordship had 
had early in the year^ aud the usual course of 
remedies were administered. Lady Athelstone^ 
however^ wished for further advice, and a 
physician from London was telegraphed for, 
and arrived that evening. Absolute quiet, free- 
dom from excitement, from thoughts of any 
kind, if possible, was the presciiption this 
authority chiefly insisted on, and had eighty 
guineas for doing so. 

The enforcement of this during the next few 
days was not difficult ; for Lord Athelstone lay 
in a sort of lethargy from which it was almost 
impossible to rouse him, even to take nourish- 
ment. Wilfred was unremitting in his atten- 
tion to bis father, and Lady Athelstone never 
left the room but to take necessary rest. On 
the fourth day there seemed a decided change 
for the better, and the doctor^ when he came, 
was surprised at the improvement. He per- 
suaded Lady Athelstone that she ought to take 
a drive ; she was beginning to suffer from her 
constant presence in the sick-room, and the 



POET AND PEER. 131 

absence of fresh air. Wilfred accompanied the 
doctor into the hall, and then said, 

" By the by, in all our anxiety here, it has 
escaped my mother to ask if you have been to 
see the Dawsons. What do you think of the 
girl f ' 

'^ Has been a little over-worked, I suspect, 
just when she was growing. Tells me she has 
a holiday now for three weeks. Wants rest, 
and plenty of good nourishment." 

When his mother was going out that after- 
noon, Wilfred, after repeating the doctor's 
words, continued . 

" Why not invite her up here, mother, where 
she would be very useful to you just now in a 
thousand ways, and where she would be better 
fed than she is at home 1 The change would 
be much the best thing for the poor child, I feel 
sure." 

Lady Athelstone demurred a little. Was it 
advisable? She was not sure. Would it be 
taken " as a precedent ?" Her son asked, " A 
precedent for what ?" To which her reply was 
not very lucid. Finally, she shifted the respon- 

k2 



132 POET AND PEER. 

siUlity of decision upon her maid, of whose 
disapproval touching all matters that concerned 
'' the household " she lived in great awe* Nellie 
happened to be a favourite with this function- 
ary, and she consequently accorded her sanction 
to the scheme. Then Lady Athelstono went on 
her way, and graciously intimated to Mrs. 
Dawson that, as a little change might do Nellie 
good, she was to come up to the Castle for a 
few days. The good mother was touched at 
her ladyship's kindness, which she believed to 
be spontaneous^ and glad, in her unselfishness, 
that the child should leave her for awhile, fare 
sumptuously, and rest from even the small 
labours of the cottage. To her surprise, the 
girl seemed to shrink from going. Mrs. Dawson 
could only attribute her reluctance to shyness, 
which the mother sought to overcome by all 
those sensible arguments which are so entirely 
powerless to affect our inclinations. Nellie's, it 
is true, would have led her too joyfully to where 
she should see Atm, hear him speak, feel under 
the constant influence of his presence^ were it 
not for the instinct of self-mistrust which shook 



POET AND PEER. 133 

her heart with fear. She had prayed, poor 
child, to be delivered from this peril, and lo 1 
the net was closing round her, and she saw no 
escape. 

Between her and her mother there existed 
the tenderest affection ; but the girl's superior 
education had placed her stand-point of obser- 
vation and reflection at a distance from Mrs. 
Dawson's, so that the intimacy which grows 
with years, from an interchange of thought, 
unchecked by any sense of inequality between 
friends, could not subsist. Mrs. Dawson's 
nature was loving and upright ; she was, more- 
over, by no means a stupid woman. But she 
had been used all her life to view things directly 
before her in the straightforward line of sight ; 
wearing blinkers, so to speak, which prevented 
any side-glance at disturbing objects. That 
Nellie should have permitted her gratitude and 
her admiration to deepen into a passionate 
attachment for one immeasureably above her in 
station would have seemed to Mrs. Dawson not 
only gravely reprehensible, but as almost be- 
yond the pale of belief. Still less would she 



134 POET AND PEER. 

have been able to understand the conflict goiug- 
on in her daughter's mind, the struggle to fight 
or to flee, the weak yielding, the terror, the 
remorse. Her calmer nature could so little- 
understand a temperament opposed to her own 
that any other course than the plain one indi- 
cated by duty, of doing or of leaving undone, 
would have appeared impossible to her, and 
would have met with little sympathy. And 
Nellie knew this. Also, it is not impossible 
that^ in some vague and far off way, Mrs. 
Dawson was conscious of a chasm between 
her dear young daughter and herself, which 
it did not lie in the power of either to bridge 
over. 

Therefore Nellie now, in her dire necessity,, 
could not bring herself to open her heart to 
her mother. The girl knew she had better not 
go and be an inmate of his home ; but to tell 
her mother why was impossible. Do not be toa 
hard on her ; she was but sixteen. 

That evening she and her little box went 
up to the Castle. 



135 



CHAPTER XL 

SOME days elapsed, and Lord Athelstone in 
many respects seemed better. His mind, 
though it was far from having regained its 
vigour, was much clearer in its apprehension of 
surrounding objects ; his powers of speech 
returned, though he used them but sparingly ; 
and he still kept his bed, declaring that he felt 
quite incapable of rising. 

Wilfred's close attendance upon his father 
had necessarily relaxed with the amendment in 
Lord Athelstone's health. Indeed, Lady Athel- 
stone herself was less constantly in the sick- 
room ; she read the papers to my lord in the 
morning, and wrote most of her correspondence 
by his bed-side ; but in the afternoon she went 
out daily. 



136 POET AND PREH. 

Wilfred bad been in tbe babit of never 
leaving bis own ''den/' as be called it, till 
Inncbeon. Tbat babit, being broken in upon 
by Lord Atbelstone's illness, bad not been 
resumed. It seemed very natural tbat be 
sbonld sit in bis motber's bondoir, wbicb was 
close to tbe sick-room, and tbat be sbould ask 
ber to allow Nellie Dawson to come tbere of a 
morning, and make berself useful by copying 
some of bis almost illegible MSS. under bis 
personal supervision. Tbe girl wrote sucb a 
clear band, and sbe was so intelligent, it would 
immensely forward tbe completion of bis 
volume, if be used ber as an amanuensis. 
Lady Atbelstone was deligbted witb the idea. 
She left them to go to her lord, and, when 
she returned to ber boudoir, she always found 
the pale, modest girl seated on one side of tbe 
table, writing, and Wilfred on the other, 
apparently absorbed in the arrangement of 
the blotted sheets which were littered about. 

Between father and son, no word had passed 
as to the subject of Sam's letter. Whether 
the recollection of it had been partially e&ced 



POET AND PEER. 137 

from Lord Athelstone's mind, until subsequent 
events brought it back, or whether he waited 
for renewed strength to speak to his son, 
matters little. He said nothing; and, though 
his eyes watched Wilfred with perhaps greater 
scrutiny than before his illness, this was the 
only change apparent. 

He was not aware of Nellie Dawson's proxim- 
ity, for nothing had led his wife to name a cir- 
cumstance so little likely to interest him, as she 
believed. And the pupil-teacher's visit at the 
Castle might have remained a mystery to the 
sick man for some time, but for a circum- 
stance which happened about a week after her 
arrival. 

Wilfred had gone to the neighbouring town 
on business, and Lady Athelstone debated in 
her mind whether she, too, might leave her 
sick lord to attend a Dorcas Society, of which 
she was president, and whose accounts were 
in a hopeless state of muddle. The invalid had 
told her repeatedly to-day . and the last time 
with some irritation . that he did not want her 
to stay with him. Lady Athelstone wished 



138 POET AND PEER. 

some one would decide whether she ought to 
obey him or not. Perhaps he was better alone ? 
But then, there was the reading? He certainly 
could not read to himself; and he still took an 
interest in the papers. A brilliant idea struck 
her^ and she hurried to his room. 

" I was thinking of going in to the Dorcas 
Society V* she began, in an interrogatory tone. 

'* Well, go . go by all means." 

^^ But I do not like leaving you quite alone* 
I was thinking, if you did not object, of asking 
Nellie Dawson to.-" 

** Who?*' almost shouted Lord Athelstone. 

^* Nellie Dawson. She has not been well, 
poor girl^ and I have had her up here for change 
of air. She reads very well, and if you will 
allow her ^* 

Lord Athelstone was sitting up in his bed, 
having raised himself by a sudden effort, and 
was staring at his wife, while every vein in his 
forehead was swollen, and his face was almost 
purple with excitement. 

"How long has she been here?" he inter- 
rupted her to ask. 



POET AND PEER. I39 

** A week." 

" And was thiB your idea . to ask the girl . 
or did . Wilfred suggest it?" 

"Well, Wilfred certainly suggested it, be* 
cause the doctor said ^" ^ 

"That's enough. That's all I wanted to 
know. Good God 1 It is true, then 1 And 
you have been playing into this wretched boy's 
hands ! He must go at once. He shall go this 
very day !" 

" Go ? My dear 1 go where ? What do you 
mean? Surely you don't suppose for an instant 
that Wilfred, so good, so high-minded '' 

" I donH suppose . I knowy^ cried Lord Athel- 
stone. " If it had not been for my illness, which 
seems to have prevented my thinking of any- 
thing, I should have sent him away long ago* 
He shan't stay another day here . and the girl 
. the girl must return home at once. Do you 
hear? At once. See that she is gone before 
he comes in, and I'll pack him off to London 
to-night. I tell you, Jane, if they meet again^ 
God knows what may come of it." 

Had a thunderbolt fallen, Lady Athelstone 



140 POET AND PEER. 

could hardly have been more alarmed. In the 
first place, her hosband'B excitement was very 
prejudicial to his health, she well knew ; and 
then she asked herself, had he taken leave of 
his senses ? What could this dreadful suspicion 
of dear Wilfred mean ? Banish him ? Banish 
his only child now that he, the father, was so 
ill? Impossible. She was at her wits' end. 
She stood irresolute at the foot of the bed, 
saying . 

" My dear^ pray calm yourself. This idea of 
yours, I assure you, is quite . . quite.." 

*^ Never mind what it is," said her lord, in the 
same excited tone . *'see that my orders are 
obeyed, Jane. Go. Don't stand there . go at 
once^ and send Wilfred to me immediately he 
returns. Stay" . and he rang the bell vio- 
lently, . ** I will send orders to the stables." 

Then Lady Athelstone saw that nothing was 
to be done. She went out, and told Nellie to 
put up her little box, and walk down to her 
mother's cottage at once. 

^* My lord is in a very strange state," she said, 
thinking it necessary to account for the girl's ' 



POET AND PEER. 141 

sudden dismissal. <I suppose it is the idea of 
anyone being here which irritates him. I am 
sorry to send you away, but there is no help 
for it." 

Nellie felt a great paug at leaving the Castle. 
How happily those days had sped I There had 
never been any like them in her life before ; nor 
could there ever be again, she said. If she 
should pass the remainder of her existence in a 
routine of drudgery^ she had at least these 
blissful hours to look back to; nothing could 
rob her of them. He had bent down from his 
high estate to her, as she had read of the fabled 
sun-god stooping to a humble flower; and 
though it was but a ray, perhaps, in passing, 
though he should go on his course through the 
heavens, and forget her, and the glory he had 
shed on her, the memory of that noontide hour 
would be a joy to her through life. A romantic 
little girl, this, with all the unwisdom that 
belongs to sixteen, but very pure at heart. No 
vain or ambitious fancies troubled her love. 
She did not expect, nay, she did not even hope 
for, anything beyond the pride and happiness 



142 POET AND PEER. 

of these few days, and she could kneel down 
beside her Jittle bed that night and thank her 
Heavenly Father for His goodness to her^ add- 
ing, with all the fervour of her soul, a prayer 
that Wilfred Athelstone might be guided and 
.strengthened in his onward course. 

Lady Athelstone, meantime, returned to her 
lord's room, and was alarmed at the condition 
in which she found him. His excitement had 
been followed by complete prostration. After 
giving his valet orders that Wilfred should be 
4Bent to his father immediately the dog-cart re- 
turned^ Lord Athelstone had fallen back upon 
his pillows, and seemed incapable of even open- 
ing his eyes. The doctor was at once sent 
for; but he was out, and had not arrived at 
the Castle when Wilfred returned home. He 
ran up at once to the sick-room, and found 
his mother greatly agitated. Why did the 
doctor not come? What was to be done? 
The stimulants seemed to produce little effect. 
Wilfred sat down by the bed-side^ and took 
his father's hand. Lord Athelstone was appar- 
ently unconscious of his son's presence. He 



POET AND PEER. ] 43 

breathed heavily ; but did not move for nearly 
an hour. Then he opened his eyes, and they 
fell upon Wilfred, and gradually there kindled 
a light in them which told of returning memory, 
force, intelligence. He attempted to sit up. 

"You must keep quiet, my dear," said his 
wife. 

** Leave the room, all of you . except Wil- 
fred," he replied, in his old peremptory way; 
only the voice was weak. 

" Just wait, my dear, till the doctor comes," 
pleaded Lady Athelstone. 

"If I wait, it may be too late. I have 
strength enough to say what I want n6w. 
Go." 

Lady Athelstone saw that further opposition 
to his will would only excite him ; she left the 
room. 

The old man turned to his son, who still held 
his hand, and said, slowly, 

** You and I have never had a quarrel, Wil. 
We have not the same opinions, and I'm sorry 
you hold those you do; but your conduct . 
tliat has never given me real uneasiness un- 



144 POET AND PEER. 

til now. If what IVe heard is true . I hope 
to God it isn't . you're doing a rascally thing. 
What's there between you and this Dawson 
girl!" 

Wilfred started, and flushed crimson. He 
was angry to feel that he did so, and replied, 
impetuously, 

'^ Nothing, father. I hope no one has been 
telling you any lies ?" 

Lord Athelstone, instead of replying, con- 
tinued, as though his son had not spoken, 

**I have always considered the endeavour, 
on the part of a man in your station, to take 
advantage of it for the purpose of ruining a 
girl in humble life, as black an act as a man 
can commit. A young fellow can't lead the 
life of a saint. I don't expect it. But this . 
here in your own village . a girl you've known 
since she was a child . it's a shame and a dis- 
grace! The anger I felt, when I heard you 
accused of this was the immediate cause of my 
attack." 

" Good God ! Father, who can have poison- 
ed your mind against me? I will give you my 



POET AND PEER. 145 

oath that I had sooner cut off my right hand 
than injure Nellie Dawson. She is as pure as 
any girl in the laijd." 

*'I am glad of it," said Lord Athelstone. 
One fear was, indeed, set at rest by his 
son's energetic denial; but the other dread, 
present in the father's mind, only waxed 
stronger. . " I am glad of it ; but your warmth 
shows the interest you take in the girl. She 
has been up here in the house, I find, at your 
suggestion. What folly 1 What does it all 
mean? Do you suppose you can play this 
sort of game with impunity? It's handling 
fire, I tell you. You'll turn the child's head, 
and damage her character, and then . then, with 
your romantic ideas, I shouldn't wonder if you 
offered to marry her 1 Now, mark my words, if 
you do, she'll be a miserable woman. She may 
have every virtue under the sun, but you can't 
make her a lady. She will be looked down 
upon by your own class, and her life will be a 
succession of humiliations." 

He spoke with great excitement, and the 
fear of agitating his father caused Wilfred to 

VOL. I. L 



146 POET AND FIXR. 

reply with more calmness than he might other- 
wise have done. 

'^I assure you 1 entertain no such idea. 
Pray disabuse your mind on this subject, 
father. If I have been foolish, I promise you 
I will give idle tongues no cause to wag about 
Nellie for the future. I will remember your 
words." 

The dying man would, perhaps, have done 
well to leave the matter there. But he 
could not be satisfied without going a step 
further. 

" Then you will promise me never to marry 
this girll" 

Wilfred shifted uneasily, though he still held 
his father's hand. After an instant's pause, he 
said . 

^' I have a horror of promises of this nature. 
I think no man has a right to bind himself in 
this way. But I will pledge myself to this, 
father : to avoid the temptation you fear for me 
as fax as possible ; not to seek the girl in any 
way. You believe me?" 

^^ Yes/' said Lord Athelstone, after an inter- 



POET AND PEER. 147 

val of at least a minute, during which he 
arrived at the decision he now pronounced ; 
** and, this being so, there is but one thing to 
be done. My life may be prolonged for days, 
or weeks . who knows ? I will not have you 
hanging about here, and thrown in the way of 
the temptation you promise me to avoid. We 
will take leave of each other now, and you 
must go away to-night." 

** Go away? Leave you, father, now ?" 
" Yes, a little sooner or later . what matter I 
I cannot last long, and I shall not be easy as 
long as you remain here, Wil." 

The son knelt down and pressed the old 
man's hand to his lips. His voice was choked 
as he murmured . 

" Let me be with you to the end, father." 
" No ; you will come back to bury me, and 
then it is my wish that you take your mother 
away, and shut up Athelstone. If you mean to 
work at Oxford, if you mean to go in for 
honours, return there. If not, you had better 
cut the place. It has done you no good. You 
had better go abroad with your mother. On 

l2 



148 POET AND PEEK. 

your return in the springs you will take 
your seat, and, I hope^ change your politics^ 
and I hope, too, that you will marry early . a 
girl in your own position. That's all I have fa 
say. And now, God bless you I" 

His voice was growing weak with much talk- 
ing, and Wilfred saw that further opposition to 
his father'B wishes was impossible. He had no 
choice but to obey, and to master his emotion 
at this trying juncture, as far as it was possible 
to do so. 

Lord Athelstone, like most Englishmen, 
had seldom in his life, when deeply moved, 
shown what he felt ; and now, upon the 
threshold of the grave, he was beyond such 
displays. 

Wilfred kissed his father's brow, and their 
eyes met in one long look which Wilfred never 
forgot. Then the dying man nodded his head 
once, and Wilfred, taking this as a signal for 
bis dismissal, hurried from the room with a 
bursting heart. 

He found his mother anxiously awaiting him* 

" Well, my dear, what is it '?" 



POET AND PEER. 149 

He leant his head between his hands upon 
the mantelpiece, and jerked out . 

*' You are to go to him. He has bid me 
good-bye. He says I am not to stay. What 
ahall I do r 

" Do as he desires you," she replied, quickly. 
It was, perhaps, the only instance on record 
of Lady Athelstone's answering so decidedly. 
** Tour conscience would not feel easy, my dear, 
if you disobeyed his last commands ; and . 
besides that, he would probably find it out if 
you stayed, and be very angry. Go to Oxford ; 
you can be with me in a couple of hours if I 
telegraph for you." 

For some time after Lady Athelstone entered 
her husband's room he did not speak. She sat 
down by the bedside, and he looked at her ; but 
either he was weighing what he should say, or 
was too much exhausted by his conversation 
with his son to utter. At last the wife was 
startled by these few words, enounced with a 
feeble voice, but most distinctly . 

"Pack them off, mother and daughter, to 
Australia . if you can." 



152 POET AND PEER. 

ber . they would start for the continent, and 
pass the winter in Italy. If disposed to return 
to Oxford and work for honours, in the spring, 
he could do so. 

He felt that this was the wisest plan, all 
things considered. It was incumbent on him 
to leave Athelstone, which was now full of sad 
associations, not unmixed with self-reproach. 
Though his father's fears had gone far in ad' 
vance of the truth, there was no escape from 
the conviction that the interest Wilfred had 
shown in Nellie had occasioned comment that 
might damage her, and that the discovery of 
this had so agitated his father that it might 
be said to be the remote cause of his death. 
The old man's words rang in his son's ears; 
and Wilfred resolved that, suffer as he might, 
he would be better than his promise, and 
resolutely avoid Nellie, if chance brought 
them together. Absence was the only remedy 
for the evil he had wrought. He did not 
believe, as regarded her, that the mischief could 
be lasting. As for himself, he would not, in 
his present condition, attempt to analyse his 



POET AND PEER. 153 

feelings. He had loved his upright, unvaryiDg- 
ly kind old father very truly, and the thought 
that his last hours had been clouded by dis- 
quietude concerning his son, cut the young 
man to the heart. 

It was in this frame of mind that he heard 
his father's will read aloud, after the funeral, 
with the codicil, bequeathing five hundred 
pounds to Mrs. Dawson, if she should desire to 
emigrate, and a further sum of five hundred 
pounds to her daughter, on the day of her mar- 
riage, provided that such marriage met with 
Lady Athelstone's approval. 

To the trustees, who heard the codicil read, 
it had no special significance; to Wilfred it 
naturally had, and, as evidence of the dread 
which absorbed his father's thoughts at the 
last^ it added a stone to the cairn which had 
accumulated on the young man's heart. The 
thought that he was now absolute lord over 
lands producing a clear rental of fourteen 
thousand a year was far from being a consola- 
tion, as it would have been to many. He cared 
nothing for money; he hated trouble in any 



154 POET AND PEER* 

direction Mrhere daring indiyiduality was 
cramped. No original system of administering 
an estate having occurred to him, he regarded 
the responsibilities that now devolved upon the 
possessor of the Barony of Athelstone with 
little short of dread. And this reluctance to 
assume responsibilities being the temper of his 
mind at the moment was another reason why 
he hailed with satisfaction a lengthened absence 
from home. 

Lady Athelstone had an interview with Mrs. 
Dawson, whom she sent for, the following day. 
It was Saturday, and on Monday Wilfred and 
his mother were to leave the Castle. 

This was what passed. 

" I sent for you, Mrs. Dawson," began Lady 
Athelstone, ^' instead of communicating the fact 
through the solicitor, to tell you that my dear 
lord left you a legacy in his will, under certain 
conditions." 

" A legacy ? dear me I my lady, I " 

Lady Athelstone raised her hand from her 
chin. 

"Wait a minute. He has left you five 



POET AND PEER. 155 

hundred pounds, provided you will emigrate . 
that is, of course, if you have any desire to 

do BO." 

"Any desire to emigrate?" repeated the 
astounded Mrs. Dawson. ''No, my lady, I 
haven't none. I'm sure it was most good of 
my lord to think of me ; but what ever should I 
do a " 

" Wait a minute," again interrupted Lady 
Athelstoue, and again she raised her hand 
"You must hear all, and not decide rashly. 
That is why I wanted to talk the matter over 
with you. My dear lord was much interested 
about Nellie." (This was strictly true, in a 
certain sense.) " He thought that, with her 
intelligence and . and good looks, you know, 
she was likely to make a better marriage in the 
Colonies than she could expect to make here." 
(This, I fear, was not strictly true.) " He has 
left another sum of five hundred pounds for her, 
if she marries in such a way as I approve of." 

Mrs. Dawson was struck dumb. She did not 
know if she was in a dream. 

"Dear! my lady," she faltered at last, "I 



156 POET AND PEER. 

can scarce believe it . I, who never so much as 
knew my lord had ever noticed Nellie . . . But 
as to the emigration, my lady, I haven't no call 
to reflect, for I couldn't do it. I've lived at 
Hippie, and I'll die there, please God. Joshua 
(that's my brother-in-law) wanted me to go and 
live at Warmington, but I wouldn't, and it 
would be worse to cross the seas, and go among 
strange folk. I'm too old for it, my lady. I 
hope you won't be displeased." 

** Oh, no, Mrs. Dawson," replied Lady Athel- 
stone, a little nervously. "It was only for 
your own good, and your daughter's, my dear 
lord suggested it. In case you declined, he 
desired me to try to find her a situation as 
nursery-governess, which would be an advance- 
ment on her present position. You would not 
object to her leaving you, I suppose ?" 

" Well, my lady, I did hope to keep her here 
a bit." 

"But for her advancement, you know?" 

"Oh I In course, if. if it's for her good, I 
can't say nothing, my lady; only she is not 
over-strong, you see." 



POET AND PEER. 157 

** That is just it. She wants the best nour- 
ishment, and light work. This school-teaching 
is too much for her." 

" Very well, my lady . anything but to emi- 
grate ; not that." 

Lady Athelstone looked abstractedly at a 
paper-weight on the table before her, and 
mechanically moved it. Then she moved it 
back to its original position. Had she done 
all that was demanded of her ? Had she failed 
in carrying out her lord's instructions to the 
letter ? No ; if she had not pleaded the cause 
of emigration with the earnestness which a 
conviction of its importance in this case could 
alone have given her, she had repeated what 
she had been told to say, and it only remained 
for her now to write certain letters in the girl's 
behalf. Her conscience would then be clear. 

" I am going abroad with my son," she said, 
looking up, after a pause, ^^and we shall be 
absent all the winter. I will write to some 
institutions and offices for the employment of 
young women where I am well-known ; and, if 
Nellie has any applications during my absence, 



158 POET AND PEER. 

the ladies can be referred to me, and to the 
ficboolmistresB. Now, I will detain yon no 
longer, Mrs. Dawson, for I have a great deal to 
do ; but I made a point of seeing jon myself; 
and remember that, if at any time yoy change 
yonr mind about emigrating, it will be a pleas- 
ure to me to carry out my lord's views," 

**I haven't words, my lady, to thank you 
enough for all your kindness," said Mrs. Daw- 
eon, in a tremulous voice, " nor yet to say, what 
I hope you won't take it as a liberty, my lady, 
how I feel for you in your trouble, which I've 
known the like myself. May God support you, 
my lady, under your loss. We know it's our 
own loss, too, for there wasn't a better landlord 
in all the country-side, though I make no doubt 
that Master Wilfred . that is, my lord . will 
follow in his father's steps, and be a blessing 
and a comfort to you, my lady, and an honour 
to his name." 

What comes from the heart goes to the heart, 
if there be a heart to reach. Lady Athelstone 
had not shed many tears since her husband's 
death, which his long illness had so prepared 



POET AND PEER. 159 

her to expect that it was no shock when it 
came ; and, not being of an emotional nature, 
her feelings did not seek the relief which many 
demand. But she had a heart, and she did feel 
more deeply than anyone guessed, except her 
son, the severance of a companionship which 
had never faltered in faithfulness for five and 
twenty years. There had been nothing of 
romance in their early attachment, nor was 
there that close communion of souls in later 
times which is like a glimpse of heaven given 
to certain married lives. But they had suited 
each other very well, for all that ; and Lady 
Athelstone knew, with an instinct in advance 
of her mental acuteness> that, in spite of the 
affection which subsisted between herself and 
her son, he would never open his heart un- 
reservedly to her, never come to her in trouble 
or annoyance, as his father had always done. 
There was something lost from her life which 
nothing could replace ; and the poor widow's 
words, in their simplicity, touched a chord 
which brought tears into the rich one's eyes. 
She held out her hand. 



160 POET AND PEER. 

*' Thank you. I shall always remember your 
sympathy with gratitude, Mrs. Dawson, and 
shall always befriend Nellie, depend upon 
that." 

With what startling vividness she remember- 
ed those words long afterwards! There are 
moments in most lives, apparently unimportant, 
which, for some unexplained cause, remain en- 
graved on the memory. The sweet, refined 
face of the poor woman, the unspoken trust 
which shone in her eyes, as they met Lady 
Athelstone's, were never forgotten by that 
lady. 

The next day was one of heavy showers, 
alternating with half hours of a brilliant falla- 
cious sunshine. Wilfred attended morning ser- 
vice. He had done so, out of deference to his 
father's views, during the old lord's life-time ; 
and he would not seize the first opportunity of 
proclaiming his emancipation from doctrinal 
restraints. It was a trial ; he occupied the big 
pew alone ; he knew that the eyes of the curious 
were upon it, and he felt as if he were a humbug. 
The Psalmist, exultant in his own righteousness. 



POET. AND PEEK. 161 

and crying out for the extermination of his 
enemies, had nothing in common with the 
young man, nor had the venerable chronicler of 
the bloody wars of Judah ; he wondered why 
their utterances were read, and of what profit 
they (;ould ever be to anyone ; to him, at this 
moment, they were so much sound and fury 
signifying nothing. His thoughts were with 
the old man who had gone to his rest, doubting 
nothing, fearing nothing, able blindly to accept 
all ; and Wilfred's heart, as he buried his head in 
his hands, sighed . 

" O, that it were possible 
For one short hour to see 
The souls we love, that they might tell us 
What and where they be !" 

Towards five o'clock that day, the sun shone 
slantwise through the dripping red and yellow 
leaves for the last time before it sank into the 
belt of woods westward. Wilfred knew that 
the afternoon service was over, and that the 
churchyard was likely to be deserted at this 
hour. He was minded to look once more on 
the spot where his father lay, and, as if the 

VOL. I. M 



162 POET AND PEER, 

mute, unconscious clay could hear him^ to pour 
out his heart on that spot in bitter self-reproach 
to the departed shade whom he had vexed so 
sorely. His mind was in an abnormal condi- 
tion ; neither his remorse nor his grief was al- 
together natural and healthy. But for him, 
his father might be alive at this moment. 
That was the thought that haunted him. He 
had behaved very wrongly about Nellie; his 
conduct had been self-indulgent and mischiev- 
ous, and the first to suffer from it was his up- 
right, sensitively-honourable father. He de- 
spised and loathed himself; and perhaps the 
best thing for the girl was that she should be 
brought to despise and loathe him too. He 
would not see her willingly again for years, nor 
would he write to her. But the reflection that 
each action we commit carries consequences 
with it that are interminable and incalculable, 
forced itself inconveniently upon him. No ; the 
laws of cause and effect were not to be 
reversed for him, by profession or performance 
either ; the past must, assuredly, bear its fruit 



POET AND PEER. 163 

. nay, Itad already borne it in one grievous 
direction. 

With his bead buried on his chest, he 
walked slowly up the churchyard. The place 
was dark with wide-armed yews and tall black 
cypresses, which almost completely shut out the 
glimmering gold of the evening light. Not 
until he was close upon the ivy-grown balus- 
trade which fenced in the large square family 
vault did he become conscious of a woman's 
form, with her back towards him, within the 
enclosure. She was scattering a few of the last 
roses of autumn on the fresh-laid stone. At 
the sound of Wilfred's approaching footstep, 
she turned quickly round. A chance sunbeam 
made an aureole of the soft brown hair, and the 
face beneath looked that of a young saint. It 
was Nellie. 

He stood suddenly still ; nay, he drew back ; 
the movement was not to be mistaken. 

Pale and hesitating, she advanced towards 
him. In order to escape from the enclosure, 
she must pass close to where he stood. 

m2 



164 POET AND PEER. 

"I beg your pardon, sir," she began, very 
gently, '* I . I did not know " 

But he had started at the first sound of her 
voice as if he were stung, and the strange, 
almost savage air with which he glared at her 
frightened her so much that she stopped short* 
For one moment he hesitated; then, with a 
heavy sigh, and without a word, he turned 
sharply on his heel, and walked rapidly away. 

The girl clung to the railing, and presently 
her wounded heart found relief in sobs. 

^^ He is oifended with me. I have done some- 
thing wrong. What, oh I what is it? He 
never treated me so before ... he was always 
so kind. Is it because I came here? I thought 
no one would know it was me, and that he 
would like to find the flowers when he came. 
And now he will go away, angry with me, and 
I shall see him no morel" 

He did go away the next day, and she saw 
him no more. But his anger was directed all 
against himself, and not against her. It would 
have consoled the poor child, could she have 
known it. 



165 



CHAPTERXIII. 



TN December Wilfred and his mother were at 
.*. Florence, and there they passed nearly the 
whole winter. He had never been abroad 
before, and decided to remain in the Tuscan 
capital^ and see it and the neighbouring cities 
thoroughly, rather than hurry through, with the 
great tide of travellers, to Rome and Naples. 
These should be left for another year, since it 
was necessary that he should return to England 
in March, to take his seat in the House of Lords. 
Under the influence of sunshine, and the novelty 
and interest of all that surrounded him, the 
young man's mind soon recovered its tone. 
The shock of his father s death was passed ; the 
painful impression left on his heart by his part- 
ing from Nellie, his self-reproach and regretful 



166 POET AND PEER, 

retrospection, grew fainter and fainter as the 
weeks sped on. Perhaps it would have been 
unnatural had it been otherwise. He was still 
very young, and his temperament was one of 
which the morbidity found a safety-valve in poe- 
try concerning his devastated youth ; while its 
buoyancy asserted itself in the keen pleasure he 
experienced as he looked up from the banks of 
the Arno and beheld Giotto's campanile clear 
cut against the cloudless sky, or down from 
San Miniato on the city, lying like a jewel in 
the lap of lilac-tinted hills. His imagination 
was stirred by those storied walls ; his senses 
were quickened to appreciate the beauty of 
things he had never before beheld. Art, as Art, 
he did not understand ; but its poetical, imagi- 
native, and historical qualities appealed strongly 
to him. He stood among the tombs of Santa 
Croce; he wandered among the cloisters of 
Santa Maria Novella ; and peopled the arcades 
of the Palazzo Publico with the shadows of the 
mighty dead. 

He only wanted some human sympathy^ 
which he could not look for in his amiable 



POET AND PEER. 167 

mother, to be really very happy ; and this he 
found before long. Lady Athelstone took a 
daily drive on the " Colle," or in the ** Cascine," 
and pajssed the rest of the day immersed in cor- 
respondence, chiefly on business. 

Perhaps the complete change of climate, 
scene, and association was better for her than 
seclusion at Athelstone would have been ; but 
it was not within the limit of possibilities that 
those influences which operated so beneficially 
upon her son should be felt by her. She 
remained much depressed ; and neither Michael 
Angelo nor Giotto availed to distract her 
thoughts. She would like to say all the right 
things about Florence when she left it ; but at 
present her intercourse with her son was of an 
affectionate realism, undisturbed by ulterior 
considerations ; the quality of the beef, and the 
odours of the Hotel d'Arno, being of more 
interest and moment than the Tomb of the 
Medici. 

An old acquaintance of hers. Lady Bannock- 
burn, with her daughter, Lady Frances Cope, 
arrived at the same hotel; and Lady Athel- 



168 POET AND PEER. 

fltone, though she paid no vieits, consented to 
see them. After this, they " dropped in " very 
often of an evening, and, the first impression 
of Lady Frances's plainness having worn off, 
Wilfred found her a most agreeable companion. 
He escorted them daily to one or other of the 
palaces or villas, and the acquaintance very 
rapidly ripened into an intimacy which Lady 
Bannockbum viewed with great satisfaction. 

Lady Frances was short and plain. But she 
was clever^ quick, and humorous ; she had read 
a good deal, had considerable independence of 
character, and very warm affections. Wilfred 
had never met a young woman the least like 
her. She amused . nay, she interested him, in 
some degree. But his pleasure in her society 
was chiefly due to the fact that he bad found 
himself appreciated. She argued with him, she 
contradicted him ; but he felt that she nnder- 
stood him. And that her society was congenial 
he frankly . perhaps too frankly . evinced. His 
mother only felt a sense of relief that his 
thoughts had been diverted from the little 
pupil-teacher. She attached no great import- 



POET AND PEER. 169 

ance to the flirtation, if flirtation it was ; but 
Lady Frances had a considerable fortune, and, 
regarded in every respect, she was . except the 
mere shell . a desirable young person for Lord 
Athelstone to marry. His mother was in no 
hurry for this event ; and more brilliant daugh- 
ters-in-law were, no doubt, waiting ready to 
accept her peerless Wilfred when the moment 
arrived for him to renounce his independence. 
But he might do worse than marry Lady 
Frances Cope ; and Lady Athelstone felt that, 
for the time being, at any rate, this friendship 
was a benefit to her son. 

How the young lady viewed it will best be 
nhown by some passages from letters to her 
great friend. Miss Sylvia Brabazon, at Naples ; 
to whom the reader will be introduced later. 
The first of these ran as follows : . 

'* I wish I could describe Lord Athelstone to 
you, dear Sylvia. He is a hero, begun with the 
finest intentions by a sculptor who had not 
quite enough marble to finish him. He is too 
short (being a dwarf myself, I like tall men, 
of course) ; but he has a handsome head, with a 



170 POET AND PEER. 

veiy intellectual and speaking countenance, the 
expression of which, unless he is bored, is 
singularly agreeable. He has a charming 
voice and manner, and there is something 
about him quite unlike the ordinary young men 
one meets. He seems to like being with us, 
and, though we have only known him ten days, 
we are already almost intimate. Ton see, Lady 
Athelstone, being in the first three months of her 
widowhood, goes nowhere, and her son knew 
no one, and was quite alone until we came; 
and, though he talks a great deal about liking 
solitude, he never refuses to join us in our 
walks and drives, and be certainly seems more 
cheerful than when we met him . ^without 
knowing who he was . looking like Manfred, a 
prey to gloomy thoughts, the day after our 
arrival. At first I thought he rather encouraged 
that resemblance ; be seemed made up of ice and 
thunder; scowled at us in the passage, and 
bowed in the most freezing manner, without 
ejaculating a sound, when he was introduced. 
However, the sun broke through the thunder- 
cloud at last, and then he did not take long to 



POET AND PEER. 171 

melt. I wonder what you would think of him, 
dear ; for 1 know no one whose opinion I value 
as I do yours, and I cannot make up my own 
mind. If he is as charming, on further acquaint- 
ance, as he appears at first, you would agree 
with me there are few men, out of a book^ to be 
found like him. His conversation is really 
delightful ; all he says is so fresh and unex- 
pected . sometimes even startling ; but I can 
pardon anything that is original. He is a poet, 
my dear, and (I imagine, for I have read nothing 
of his) of the most advanced modern school. 
Still one cannot listen to him and not feel sure 
that whatever he does must possess merit, how- 
ever eccentric it may be. But I must not run 
on, or you will think . . . I do not know what 
you will think of your faithful and foolish 
friend, F. C." 

The next extract is from a letter written a 
fortnight later. 

"Lord Athelstone repeated to me some of 
his poetry yesterday. It is most musical, and 
delightful to listen to ; but I felt a little bewil- 
dered ; I am not sure that I understood it all. 



172 POET AND PEEB. 

He has apparently been very unhappy^ for a 
^reat deal of it is in a most miserable strain, 
dan it be that, at bis age^ he has already been 
disappointed in love ? It seems to me impossi- 
ble that anyone to whom he was attached could 
remain insensible to his affection. He reminds 
me of some poet of another age . Ariosto, per- 
haps. There is a fire and tenderness, a resolute 
and eloquent obstinacy in his discussions, very 
unlike the curbed and careful utterances of most 
of the men I know, who are not fools. 

^*He is sitting before the fire now, reading 
'Galignani/ and the lamplight falls upon his 
head . let me sketch it for you. A massive 
brow, from which the hair waves backwards in 
a dark mass ; light grey eyes, over which the 
lids droop languidly, and the black brows close 
into one straight line above them^ when the 
interest or excitement that kindled their fire 
dies down ; a perfectly cut nose, and delicate 
little moustache, as yet too slight to veil (as it 
one day will, no doubt) the only error of this 
face . a mouth which, I must confess it^ is 
somewhat large and sensual. Except this in- 



POET AND PEER. ITS- 

fantine moustache, there is no hair on his face, 
and the shape of the chin and jaw, which are 
firm even to obstinacy, rising from a throat like 
that of Antinous, is perfectly displayed with the 
loose open collar which he wears h la Byron. 

"He is a great worshipper, by the way, of 
this poet, whom it has been the fashion of late 
years, he says, to under-rate. He wants me to 
read everything Byron wrote, and is disguster? 
with mamma for laying an embargo on * Don 
Juan.' Thereupon ensued a hot argument 
between them; mamma maintaining that the 
knowledge of evil came to us all soon enough, 
and that the longer a girl could be kept from it 
the better ; Lord Athelstone vehemently declar- 
ing that human beings, when they arrived at 
years of discretion, were meant to choose 
between good and evil, and that it was a very 
poor compliment to a girl to suppose she could 
be hurt by * Don Juan,' the many beauties of 
which would enrapture her, while its immorality 
would be distasteful. * This is no question of a 
compliment^ mamma replied. * It is a question 
for judgment, founded upon observation. It is 



174 POET AND PEEB* 

too mnch the fashion now for young women to 
read everything. I do not think the tone of 
their minds is improved ; there is no bloom left ; 
nor is there any gain to compensate for this 
loss/ 

*^ Of course Lord Athelstone did not give in ; 
he never does ; but in spite of his great clever- 
ness, and of my desire to believe him right, I 
think mamma had the best of it." 

Again, three weeks later, she wrote as fol- 
lows : . 

*'I am miserable and elated by turns, 
Dearest Heart. Your warning came too late. 
But of what avail are warnings in such a case ? 
Had I been armed with warnings before we 
ever met, it would have been the same. God 
knows whether I am deceived in thinking 
W. A. cares about me I I only know that^ 
intentionally or not^ he has won my hearty and 
that the past six weeks have sped like a dream. 
Shall I wake and find it so ? Alas ! I begin to 
have my fears. Until three nights ago he 
spent almost every evening with us. His 
mother never came; sometimes we went to 



POET AND PEER. 175 

her ; but she often sent to say she was too tired 
to receive us, and then Lord A. generally came 
to our room. For the last three evenings he 
has not done so. His manner is just as charm- 
ing to me as ever ; he always delights in what 
he calls ' drawing me out ;' and on Wednesday, 
when he drove us to the Poggio Imperiale, he 
was in unusual spirits, and, as I was so too, we 
talked a great deal of nonsense. He said it 
was the pleasantest afternoon we had yet 
passed in Florence. But, though we have 
seen him since, he pleaded some excuse for 
not accompanying us, as he had promised to do, 
to Vinciliata on Friday, and again yesterday. I 
asked him point-blank where he was going, 
and he replied, * to call on some Italians,' 
whose acquaintance he had made at the 
Pergola on Wednesday night. Mamma said I 
ought not to have asked him ; but 1 cannot see 
the harm, intimate as we have been. Yester- 
day he brought us a basket of camelias and 
violets ; but he did not remain ten minutes. As 
we drove in the Cascine later, we saw him at 
the door of a carriage drawn up in the square, 



176 POET AND PEER. 

after the idiotic fashion of these Florentines^ 
who sit there, day after daj, shivering in their 
open carriages, listening to the compliments or 
the gossip of the * golden youth ' who crowd 
ronnd them. What an existence I Is it possi- 
ble that he^ with his high aspirations, his poetic 
mind, should be content to swell such a 
throng? The lady he was talking to was 
dark, and looked quite old. I was glad to see 
that." 

Tet another ten days, and Miss Brabazon 
received a sad letter from her friend, out of which 
we take the following passage, which is the last 
we shall quote from her correspondence : 

" It is all over. Everything is changed now. 
I can no longer remain under a delusion. We 
meet daily, sometimes in Lady Athelstone's 
room, sometimes in the street, or on the stairs ; 
and he has paid us two mn^tf. think of that! 
When we meet, he always seems desirous, for 
the moment^ to regain the footing from which 
he has slid voluntarily away ; but it is useless. 
His voice, his smile^ are always the same . 
always charming ; but there is an effort in his 



POET AND PEER. 177 

manner and conversation, which is apparent 
even to mamma. Poor mammal She little 
guesses how deeply I have felt all this, for I 
have from the first exercised all my powers of 
repression, seeing how improbable it was that 
such a man could really care for me. When 
she animadverts severely upon his capricious- 
ness, I try to laugh it off; but every word 
drives a dagger into my heart. 

** And now you will ask, what is the cause of 
this change ? I am told it is the fascination of 
a certain Madame Uberti's society . a woman 
no longer young, nor even good-looking^ and of 
very bad reputation, though she still lives with 
her husband. Is it not dreadful to think that a 
vile creature like this can attract such a man as 
Lord Athelstone ? I do not understand it . 
sometimes I refuse to believe it. But there is 
the fact that every evening now he goes to her 
box at the opera, and afterwards to smoke in 
her horrid rooms. 

** Mamma is indignant ; she says this is the 
result of reading ' Don Juan,' and such litera- 
ture. It is in vain that I have supplicated her 

VOL. I. N 



178 POET AND PEER. 

not to let the smallest difference be apparent in 
her manner ; it is no business of ours what 
society he keeps; but she is too sincerely 
interested in him not to let her anger be 
apparent, and the result, I foresee, will be that 
he will never come near us. As to Lady 
Athelstone, who is most amiable, but may be 
said to be a goose stuffed with sage opinions, 
she says she is ^so glad dear Wilfred has 
taken to going out a little again^ now that it is 
the fifth month, you know ; and it is so nice, he 
has got into Italian society. Foreign society is 
such an advantage.' Mamma, to do her justice, 
never opens her lips to Lady Athelstone on the 
subject. She says it is better that we should 
leave Florence. Perhaps she is right. You 
know we did not originally mean to remain so 
long ; and, though I shall be unhappy wherever 
I am^ elsewhere I should not be subject to the 
irritation and mortification which 1 now experi- 
ence here daily. Though I try to keep up, and 
make stupid little jokes, and wear a stereo- 
typical grin on my face, I am cut to the heart. 
I know I shall never care for any other man as 



POET AND PEER. 179 

I have done for this one, and I say to myself, 
^What a fool you have been to put all your 
eggs into one basket, and set that on the head 
of a man who capers about the world, and prob- 
ably makes himself equally charming to every 
woman he comes near.' Our lot is hard, dear 
Sylvia. We may sit in the sunshine, and accept 
the fruit it pleases men to bring us ; we must 
utter no murmur when they ride away in the 
<;ool of the evening, and only the stalks and the 
rind are left us to feed on through the long, 
long night 1" 

Poor Lady Frances I Yes, nothing but the 
stalks and the rind were left you. The apples 
were green, and would have proved very indi- 
gestible for life's sustenance ; but they seemed to 
you delicious in that brief Florence time, which 
you cannot bear to look back to now. 



N 2 



180 



CHAPTER XIV. 

rpfl lady to whom Atbelstone was presented 
-^ the first eveniDg he set foot within the 
< Pergola/' and who has been named in the 
foregoing letters as Madame Uberti, was a 
person of considerable mark in the Florentine 
world. Lady Frances had said truly she was 
not very young ; but few men (at least, after 
half an hour's conversation) would have ratified 
her judgment that the lady was not good- 
looking. She had beautiful eyes, a profusion 
of black hair, and a faultless figure. Her fea- 
tures were not regular, certainly ; but there was 
a charm in her smile^ and a bonhomie in her 
manner, that -^ere irresistible to many. In 
fact, she had the attraction that belongs so 



POET AND PEER. 181 

peculiarly to her nation, of perfect naturalness, 
which made it impossible for anyone to feel ill 
at ease in her company. Her salon was very 
popular in consequence ; and, whatever people 
might say behind her back, there was no one in 
Florence whose invitations were more prized. 

Madame Uberti was one of those soft, ease* 
loving natures that like to see everyone around 
them, including their husbands, happy, and all 
the wheels of the domestic machinery well-oiled. 
As neither of this amiable couple had the 
shadow of a principle, or entertained any jea- 
lousy of the other, there was no obstacle to the 
gratification of their separate inclinations, and 
they lived most harmoniously, meeting at meals 
. nay, occasionally driving together, and lead- 
ing absolutely separate lives. One man after 
another had his seat, by a well-understood pre- 
scriptive right, in Madame Uberti's box, and 
was to be found, day after day, smoking his 
cigarette in that lady's blue satin bergere 
by the fire. Then his dominion . sometimes 
abruptly, sometimes gradually . came to an 
nd, and another reigned in his stead. There 



182 POET AND PEER. 

was no violent disseverance ; like over-ripe fruit, 
they dropped from the bough, and were swept 
away. 

This was just the woman to obtain a brief 
ascendancy over Wilfred Athelstone at this 
early stage of his career. She attacked that 
side of his character which was weak, and, as 
yet, comparatively untried. The Italian nature, 
with its frank flattery, its momentary fervours, 
its self-indulgence, and its amiability, the 
existence steeped in oblivion of all beyond the 
present moment, the sans gene of society at the 
Palazzo Uberti, were new experiences ; and the 
unknown had always an attraction for him. It 
was a relaxation, too, after the hard high 
standard of Lady Bannockburn, and the 
intellectual qui vive on which he had been kept 
by Lady Frances. No bow can stand too long 
tension ; and he remembered in those days that 
the greatest minds had generally found solace 
in women who were, so to speak, pillows of 
softness, and not boards of mental resistance. 
He sank into the blue satin bergirCf and watch- 
ed the clouds of smoke curl upwards to the 



POET AND PEKH. . 183 

paiated ceiliDg, while he composed couplet after 
cocplet in praiee of Madame Uberti's charms. 
Her arms, her throat, her chiu, the pulsations of 
her heart, the perfume of her hair, were 
chronicled in alliterative verse of great ingenu- 
ity and uncastigated exuberance. There seem- 
ed no reason^ indeed, why they ever should 
stop; for, though the human body would not 
appear to be an ineichaustible theme, the changes 
that may be rung upon every portion of it are 
of endless variety. He thought of Byron at 
tbe feet of another fair Florentine ; but it did 
not strike him that Byron's instinct was too fine 
to destroy the efifeot of one touch of colour by 
loading his canvas with all the other tints 
upon his palette. 

I have no wish to linger over this episode 
in Wilfred's career. It lasted but two months, 
and then Madiime L'beiti passes from these 
pno-es to be seen no move; while, except for 
ftuence which every action of a man's life 
1 his character, \^'ilf"red'8 intimacy with 
'ht no consequence, and left but little 




184 POET AND PEER* 

I could not^ however, be altogether silent on 
the imbject, for reasons that will be apparent 
bj-and-by; since the fact was soon known in 
England to all who were interested in Lord 
Athelstone's future. It offered some obstruction 
to the clear caligraphy of eulogium in which 
the name of a youth so endowed was sure to be 
inscribed ; as an inequality on the surface of a 
fair sheet of paper makes the pen splutter that 
would fain glide over it. The pen does glide 
on again ; but the splutter remains. 

His mother came to him one morning towards 
the end of February, and said, 

" I think it would be better . I wish, indeed, 
to return to England now. The wind is 
getting very cold here . and there are those 
leases . and then your seat in the House, dear, 
and altogether I believe it is best." 

** If you feel the wind cold here, my dear 
mother, what will you do in England f " 

*' Oh I it is not the same thing there, in one's 
own warm house . and I want to get back to 
it, dear. There are so many things to arrange 
.so much I left undone, coming away in that 



POET AND PEER. 185 

sad hurry . and, besides, you talk of going to 
Borne next winter." 

" Yes ; but Florence is just beginning to be 
delightful now . in the spring." 

" Oh ! the heat of the sun here will be very 
trying soon, and ^" 

" Why, just now you complained of the cold 
wind." 

** So I do ; but I am sure it would be worse if 
it were hot. I shall be quite glad to get away 
from these nasty smells. They are really too 
dreadful. I feel as if I should have typhoid 
fever, if we stayed here till it got really warm." 

"I never heard you complain of them 
before," said her son, as he turned away. 

The explanation of this sudden desire to 
quit Florence was not far to seek, though 
Wilfred did not surmise it. 

The Bannockburus had departed that morn- 
ing, and on the previous evening, in wishing 
Lady Athelstone good-bye, her friend's reti- 
cence, which had been proof against great and 
increasing irritation all these weeks, pai-tially 
gave way. 



186 POET AND PEER. 

"If you have your bou'b real interests at 
heart, my dear Lady Athelstone, I must warn 
you that the sooner you can quit Florence the 
better. If I were not going away myself, for 
obvious reasons, my tongue would be tied. 
But I cannot see a young man drifting away 
to destruction, and not do something . if only 
for your sake . to try to save him !" 

"Good gracious! Lady Bannockburn^ what 
do you mean ? ' Drifting away to destruction ' ? 
Impossible ! Wilfred, I am glad to say, has 
never had any taste for gambling, or low com- 
pany, and I am sure a better son " 

"I know thaty^ interrupted Lady Bannock- 
burn, with some sharpness; "and as to low 
company . no, it would be almost less danger- 
ous if he were addicted to it, my dear friend. 
An entanglement in his own sphere is so much 
more '' 

" An entanglement in his own sphere? Oh t 
Lady Bannockburn, what do you mean? I 
brought him here on purpose to break off " 

She stopped short, and grew red and white. 
It was very foolish to allude to Nellie Dawson, 



POET AND PEER. 187 

ehe knew ; but she felt so nervous, she hardly 
was conscious of what she said till the words 
were beyond recall. 

Lady Bannockburn, like a well-bred woman^ 
did not ask for a completion of that sentence. 
She covered her friend's confusion by replying 
quietly, 

" The very air of this vicious place is poison 
to a young man. The Italian society he fre- 
quents is corrupt . the house he frequents most 
is, I am told, one of the worst. I can say no 
more. After this, you must be guided by your 
own judgment as to the length of your stay 
here." 

Lady Bannockburn was as good as her word ; 
she could not be brought to say more than this, 
but it was enough for Wilfred's anxious mother. 
Whether this thing was true or not . true, that 
is, to its worst extent . it behove her to remove 
her darling out of temptation's way. Lady 
Bannockburn, she felt, was sore at the intimacy 
between him and her daughter having cooled ; 
it was probable that she exaggerated matters ; 
but there was something . or, at all events, the 



188 POET AND PEER. 

world would suppose there was something ; and, 
for once, she felt tolerably sure her judgment 
was not at fault in following the path to which 
Lady Bannockburn had acted as a finger- 
post. 

Wilfred walked away ; it was a bore to leave 
Florence just now ; he would like to have re- 
mained six weeks, or it may be two months^ 
longer ; to have visited the Villa Uberti up in 
the Apennines, when its fields were carpeted 
with April flowers; to have wandered, and 
sketched, and written verses under the sweet 
influences of ^' climate and the affections," as the 
lady says in '^ Lothair." But that the affections 
were not very strong, not strong enough to 
resist the strain of so small an exigency as this, 
might be inferred from the ease with which he 
decided that it was difficult to let his mother 
return to England alone, and impossible to 
urge her remaining abroad, against her inclin- 
ation. 

Could Lady Bannockburn have known that 
they were not gyves of iron, but ropes of sand, 
which had bound him, that vigilant and ad- 



POET AND PEER. 189" 

mirable mother might have been yet further 
exasperated. 

As he walked down the Lung' Arno, medi- 
tating how he should break to his fair friend 
the fact of his approaching departure, he nearly 
ran against a tall, heavily-built young man, in 
the unmistakeable shooting-jacket and round 
hat of the travelling Euglishman. Wilfred did 
not look up ; he was mentally rehearsing the 
scene at the Casa Uberti, when a hand was laid 
on his shoulder. 

'' Hallo, Athelstone !" 

" Why, St. John, old fellow, where do you 
come from ? How long have you been 
here?" 

"I come straight from England. I only 
arrived last night." 

"And how long do you stay? Where are 
you going?" 

" I am thinking of going to Corsica in a few 
days. Will you come ?" 

" Hm ! I don't say no. I must think about it. 
I should like nothing better than a little tour 
with you ; but there's my mother " 



190 POET AND PEER. 

The young men bad not met for some years, 
and both were changed, but Hubert St. John 
perhaps the most so^ for he was three years 
Wilfred's senior. The coarse features which, in 
Eton days, had been characterized by a strength 
and decision unusual in a boy, were in some 
measure relieved now by a fair bushy beard. He 
was unquestionably ugly, and there was little 
vivacity to redeem the ugliness ; but it was an 
interesting face, for all that. The brow, be- 
neath a shaggy mane of dull brown hair, was 
corrugated with horizontal lines, and impended 
somewhat over a nose of that undeterminate 
shape, which the clever author of '* Notes on 
Noses" designates as cogitative. The passion 
of the wide-spread nostrils, however, belonged 
more to the man of energy and action, than to 
the student or philosopher. The eyes were 
small but clear, and of singular directness in 
their glance. The habitual expression of the 
&ce was one of melancholy; but gleams of 
humour and sarcasm flashed over it in conver- 
sation, and at times a look of infinite tender* 
ness came into the eyes. 



POET AND PEER. 191 

Instead of three, there seemed to be thirteea 
years' difference between the two friends now ; 
life's stream having carried the one rapidly 
along, through vicissitude, sorrow, and convic- 
tion, while with the other it had crept between 
the flower-fed banks of prosperity, fretting over 
the little pebbles of its daily course, unvexed by 
eddies, unopposed by rocks, 

"Is it true you are going to be married?" 
said St. John. " I heard so in London." 

" To whom, pray ? It is the first I have heard 
of it." 

.'Lady Frances Cope . a charming girl, I was 
told." 

" What nonsense !" He flushed, and looked 
annoyed, however, as he continued, " Just be- 
cause we were great friends here ! She is the 
last girl I should think of marrying, however 
. . . not that I mean to marry for an age. I 
am only beginning to know the sex. I must 
have more pre-matrimonial experience first." 

" You will be married before two vears are 
over," replied St. John, with an incredulous 
smile. '' You are just the fellow to meet with 



192 POET AND PEER. 

jour 'fnte' early, and then to the wind with 
your resolutions I" 

Wilfred shook his head. 

'^No; I may have momentary aberration. I 
may be carried away to . to a certain point ; 
but marry . no, I never " 

He looked over the glittering Amo, and in- 
stead of the Ponte alle Grazie^ and the dome of 
the Carmine beyond, a little face arose he had 
once believed to be his "fate." He stopped 
short. Somehow, the conviction that what be 
was about to say was not true smote him. 
How sorrowful, how reproachful that little face 
looked I His resolutions had not been scattered 
to the winds. But Madame Uberti? 

It all flashed by him in that moment's pause. 
Then, rousing himself, he said, quickly, 

" And you ? You have been in India these 
three years. Did you never think of marrying 
there ? Tell me all about yourself." 

A cloud of pain crossed St. John's &ce. He 
looked at his friend fixedly for a moment. 

"No, I never thought of marrying. Some 
day or other I may tell you what befell me in 



POET AND PEER. 193 

India . as a warning, Athelstone . but not now. 
My father was a judge, as you know. He died 
there last summer, so I threw up my office and 
came back in the autumn." 

 Why did you do that ?" 

"Oh! for several reasons. I hated office 
work, and there were circumstances which ren- 
dered my remaining in Calcutta very painful. 
Besides, my father left me far better off than I 
expected. Not that that would be sufficient 
excuse for being idle. Every fellow is better 
for work. Unfortunately, I am now too old to 
grind away at a profession." 

" Why not turn artist ? You have plenty of 
talent." 

^' A certain amount," replied his friend, simply. 
'* Enough for the amusement of an amateur, not 
for the vocation of a painter." 

"Stuff! You have more than half the 
painters whose works are exhibited in the 
Academy." 

"I don't think it is worth while adding to 
the amount of indifferent pictures in the world. 
If I believed in myself, the want of training all 

VOL. I. 



194 POET AND PEER. 

these years should not prevent mj setting to 
work at anatomj, and all the rest of it now. 
As it is, I mark, learn, and inwardly digest the 
good things in nature and in art that I see ; and 
some day or other you may find me blossoming 
out into that wonderful exotic of recent times . 
the art-critic, with all his jargon of word- 
painting.** 

" Well, I know nothing about art, but I be- 
lieve these critics you laugh at have done good 
work . destroyed some of theoldfetish-wo^hip, 
and taught people to look and judge for them- 
selves." 

His friend returned, with an amused look^ 

**Tou were always apt to do that about 
everything, Athelstone. Have you given up 
holding forth about liberty of opinion, and so 
onr 

" My views are only strengthened with time. 
As to ' holding forth ' " 

" Yon will have an opportunity of doing that 
in the House. A Radical lord will be a variety." 

Wilfred laughed. 

''Come and dine with me at seven. We 



POET AND PEER. 195 

will have a smoke and chat afterwards." 
He had little admiration, and less reverence^ 
for most living men : the poets, the philoso- 
phers, the politicians of the day, he generally 
" pooh-pooh'd." But for this Hubert St. John 
at Eton he had always felt a regard, blent with 
a strange measure of respect for a lad only 
three years his senior ; and, as he now parted 
from his friend, he fell to moralizing upon the 
unusual character which had stood out in relief 
from his other companions. 

" It is very odd that he should have liked me. 
We had nothing in common, except that I took 
an interest in his drawing. He thrashed that 
bully Norton, who had kicked me . -that was the 
first thing drew me to him. I used to call him 
* Sir Galahad,' because he was so chivalrous . 
always succouring the oppressed. I wrote a 
poem about him. He tore it up, and said I was 
a young ass. I don't think he ever appreciated 
my poetry. I wonder whether he would do so 
more now ? He could be awfully passionate, I 
remember; though he generally had his pas- 
sion wonderfully under control for a boy. 

o2 



196 POET AND PEER. 

Took no end of prizes, I remember, though it 
was more by his determination and persever- 
ance, I fancy, than by transcendent talent* 
He never cared for anything light . anything 
fanciful; he was always so awfully earnest* 
That's what makes him look so melancholy 
now. He has loved ' not wisely, but too well ^ 
. of course. Poor old Hubert I Well, of all 
the fellows I have ever known, he is the one in 
whom T would soonest trust." 

How much reason he had to think thus, the 
reader will see, if he has patience to follow 
Wilfred Athelstone's career. 



197 



CHAPTER XV. 

^* TIT HAT have you been doing here for the 
' ' last three months ?" asked St. John ot 
his friend that eveniog. 

** Studying Italian character, chiefly," replied 
Wilfred, after a moment's hesitation, '* First 
its art and literature ; secondly, in its people." 

"Talking of literature, have you given up 
writing poetry ? You had a turn that way." 

Wilfred did not like the expression . *'A turn 
that way !" It was clear his friend had been in 
India, and was not aware with what enthusi- 
asm and reprobation- his fugitive verses had 
been received in fashionable literary circles, 
and to what lively discussions they had given 
rise. He rose, however, and, walking to a 



198 POT AND PEER. 

drawer, took out a pile of MSS^ and said, 

^If jon care to bear them, these are some 
of the last things I have written," and he 
began reading a sonnet in the deep rhythmical 
singHSong which is the triumph of sound over 
sense, affected by many latter-day poets. 

St. John was silent for a few moments. 

**I am not sure that I quite understand it, 
but the versification is clever, and the lines 
melodious. You always had great verbal fa- 
cility." 

"Men like you, Hubert, seldom judge of 
poetry by the only right standard. You want 
the dry meaning of every word ; whereas it is 
the feeling evoked, the imagination stirred, 
by the general colour of a poem, you should 
consider." 

" Certainly I want thoughts I can understand. 
My imagination refuses to be stirred without 
that. Surely words are like beautiful clothes, 
meant to adorn the body underneath, not to 
conceal emptiness and a few wires, like a 
dressmaker's stand." 

'' Well, if you want a human body, here is Sk 



POET AND PEER. 199 

poem about one. Perhaps you will understand 
this^^ said the poet, with a slight touch of scorn ; 
and he began to read a poem consisting of 
forty couplets, inspired . if such a word is ad- 
missible . by the charms of Madame Uberti. 

'^I do understand that," said St. John, taking 
the pipe out of his mouth, when Wilfred had 
finished. *' I do understand all that, and I 
must say I don't care for it. It is like an 
auctioneer's list of a woman^s attractions. I 
don't see the use of writing that sort of thing." 

"It is anacreontic; of course, if you can't 
throw yourself into the spirit of the singer, it is 
not to be argued about. All human passion 
has a certain sacredness about it . ^is a worthy 
theme for the poet . and the gist of my poem 
(perhaps you missed it?) lies in that verse . 

" ' It is not for these I have woo'd thee, 
As the wind woo^d the mountains of old ; 
It is not for these I have sued thee, 

As the sun sues the rose to unfold, 
The fragrance of thyme from the summit. 

The passion of scent from the south. 
It kissed, and I could not overcome it, 

The wann breath of love from thy mouth I' " 



200 POET AND PEER* 

*. Humph I There is a great deal to get to 
BO little, Athelstone. I think you might do 
much better than that if you had a mind ; you 
used to be interested in deeper matters. Have 
you nothing there that is more thoughtful . 
more in that line ?*' 

"Oh I yes. Here is a thing I sent to the 
* Pantheon' a few months ago, and which 
bad a good deal of success. But I doubt 
whether you will like it. You are orthodox, I 
know." 

They were fiery verses, written in one of his 
combative moods, directed against all formu- 
las of Faith, and far more intolerant than 
the intolerance they deprecated. There was 
nothing new in them ; St. John had heard the 
same cry repeatedly, in less hysterical prose. 
Still he was bound to admit that some of the 
lines had a fine ring that was calculated to 
carry away a hearer who was more open to the 
impressions of rhyme than reason. 

" The worst of them," he continued, " is, that, 
in spite of their vehemence, they don't bring 
with them any sense of your conviction to me. 



POET AND PEER. " 201 

You can't believe all you say there ; it is impo8- 
8ibl< 



" * The righteous, whose rigour and rancour 
Have blighted the young buds, like frost . . / 

You can't believe that the effect of all righteous- 
ness is to blight, sadden, and destroy! You 
must have known good people whose religion 
was a living faith, working in their lives, and 
tending to make them really happier ?" 

" Yes ; but they are the exceptions. I see 
lying, worldliness, and greed, hand in hand 
with long prayers, fasting, and all the rest of 
it; and I say, if those people believe in their 
religion, what is it worth to them ? They put 
it on and off at their church- doors, like shoies 
at the door of a mosque. But the fact is, not 
one tenth of the people who go to church do 
believe. They go from habit. for 'example's 
sake,' or out of regard to the wishes of those 
they love, and among the latter is myself. If 
men really believed what they pretend, they 
could not lead the lives they do." 

'. Do you think there is any scheme, compact, 
or career possible to Humanity, that can com- 



202 POET AND PEER. 

mand thorough Bincerit j f How manj books, 
how many pictures, how mauy lives are lies I . 
self-deceptions, sometimes, but none the less 
untrue to some portion of the inner man. Do 
you remember what Faust says about our two 
angels . our double nature? How can we 
expect absolute thoroughness in religion, when 
we find it in nothing else V^ 

'* But, as I pointed out just now, St. John, 
religion is a premium upon insincerity." He 
stood up, and kicked vigorously at the wood- 
fire, then faced about, having gathered his 
antagonistic forces in hand, and continued . ^^ It 
is far worse than any other insincerity can be 
in life, because it eats into the heart of what 
ought to be proof against all humbug. How 
can a structure built up of a lot of fables . 
which were all very well in the infancy of the 
world, but which no one believes now . be a 
citadel of truth and a refuge? How can it 
stand against the beleaguering armies of science, 
when its own garrison is split up into fifty dif- 
ferent sections? It served its purpose once; 
everything does in this world of progress ; but 



POET AND PEER. 203 

it is obsolete, an anachronism ; we have got 
beyond it." 

"Beyond it? and where?" said St. John^ 
with a sigh. " Into chaos . into a world with- 
out form, and void; while the conditions of 
Humanity remain the same. If you destroy, 
without giving us anything in its place, shall 
we be the better or the happier for that ? Are 
we so much cleverer than Plato, or Marcus 
Aurelius, or Thomas k Kempis, or Shakspere (I 
take great names at hazard^ no matter what 
their faith), that we can be cut adrift from all 
beliefs, and not be sufferers by it ?" 

"I don't want men to be cut away from all 
belief . only from priestcraft and the dogmatism 
of the Church." 

" For which you would substitute some sort 
of Pantheism, I suppose ?" 

" I don't care much what you call it. I 
believe in a First Cause, and in Nature's un- 
erring laws. I believe in that * absolute religion 
which is hidden in all other religions,' a 
Theodore Parker says. But I loathe and 
abominate the endeavour to cram doctrinea 



204 POET AND PEER. 

down men's throats which their reason repa* 
diates, and from which their sense of justice 
revolts." 

"That is all very well; but how do you 
decide what is right from what is wrong, if 
you reject all authority except Nature! The 
conscience of a man who has no unalterable 
standard of right and wrong is certainly not to 
be trusted. He may be high-minded, benevo* 
lent, patriotic ; and, because he does not recog- 
nise any Divine law over-ruling what he con- 
siders an heroic impulse for the good of his 
fellow-men, he may become a regicide. That's 
where Nature's laws land you." 

^'The conscience of civilized man in the 
present state of the world denounces any crime 
against his fellow. Aberrations cannot be used 
as arguments." 

'^ But our civilized consciences are addition- 
ally open to sophistry," St. John said, quickly. 
Then he stopped and looked, as if he hesitated 
to continue. " I can only speak for myself," 
he added, after a pause. *^ Doctor Johnson said 
that every man knows probably worse of him* 



POET AND PEER. 205 

self than he certainly knows of his neighbour. 
Experience has taught me that conscience can 
be made^ by plausible arguments, to accept any- 
thing . will drift hither and thither with the 
tides of opinion . until anchored to a rock from 
which it cannot break away." 

The conversation between the two friends 
continued far into the night. Wilfred fought 
with all the intemperate zeal of an enthusiast 
for theological and intellectual freedom; Hu- 
bert's arguments did not touch him. Perhaps 
few arguments ever do, in a discussion of this 
kind; the combatants stand too far apart. 
Hubert did not expatiate upon his past. The 
longer he talked to Wilfred, the stronger hi& 
conviction grew that his friend would profit iqr 
by no vicarious experience. He must " learn in 
suffering " something better worth teaching '* in 
song" than the worship of Liberty, and the 
destruction of Law. 

Nevertheless^ as I look back upon the past, I 
am disposed to regard it as very unfortunate 
that circumstances prevented Wilfred Athel- 
stpne accompanying his friend to Corsica at this 



206 POET AND PEER. 

time. The inflaence of one mind upon another 
in daily intercourse may be incalculable, how- 
ever valueless the result of a mere contest of 
opinions may prove. Lady Athelstone urged 
her son so strongly to return to England with 
her (fearing, I have no doubt, that he might 
be lured back to Florence from Corsica), that 
Wilfred felt he had no choice but to yield. He 
was never inconsiderate of her comfort ; in all 
that concerned her personally, he was amiable 
and self-denying, though he often ran counter 
to her wishes in other respects. 

So the two friends parted, not to meet again 
for months, and then only casually. The sad 
and solitary man went and took counsel of 
nature as to what he should do with his future ; 
the spoilt child of fortune returned to the small 
world where this lover of liberty reigned 
an autocrat, and to the bigger world where 
his vanity was ministered to in a thousand 
ways. 



207 



CHAPTER XVI. 

LADY ATHELSTONE, along with her in- 
decision and mistrust of her own percep- 
tions, worked with the steady perseverance 
and untiring energy of a mole for the attain- 
ment of any object the accomplishment of 
which she had at heart. She had given herself 
infinite pains, while in Florence, to secure for 
Nellie Dawson a good situation as nursery 
governess. Until this was accomplished, she 
felt that it was out of the question to think of 
returning to Athelstone. Her son's interests 
demanded that the girl should be removed ; 
her kindliness demanded that this should not 
be at the expense of Nellie's comfort, but 



208 POET AXD PEER. 

thai it should be a benefit to ber in ereiy 
way. 

Lady Atbelsione had adyertiaed for tsome 
weeks^ bad written letters to yariona sodeties 
in London on her protigi$ behalf and had 
answered several letters from ladies requiring 
a domestic slave to undertake the mdimentarjr 
education of their children^ before the right 
situation offered. 

Mrs. Goldwin was known to Lady Athel- 
stone, not only as the wife of a rich shipbnilder 
in the north, but as a perfect lady of very culti- 
vated tastes, whose health was indifferent, and 
who led^ in consequence, a somewhat retired 
life. She had two children, to whom she was 
devoted, and Nellie would therefore possess the 
rare advantage of close and constant intercourse 
with a woman of refined and elevated character. 
Lady Athelstone did not hesitate to accept for 
her protegee the liberal terms which <Mrs. Gold- 
win offered. It was the position, of all others, 
best suited to the girl's present needs, as she 
wrote to tell Mrs. Dawson, who, though sorely 
troubled at parting with her daughter^ thank- 



POET AND PEER. 209 

fully assented to Lady AthelstoDe's arrange- 
ments. 

All this had happened some weeks before the 
departure from Florence, and Nellie had been 
established nearly a month at the Goldwins, in 
Northumberland, when Wilfred and his mother 
returned home. 

It was then the middle of April. Wilfred had 
arrived in London in time to take his seat before 
the Easter recess, had elected not to return to 
Oxford, and was now at Athelstone with his 
mother, occupied with business matters which 
demanded his attention. 

He announced many strange doctrines upon 
tenant right, which made his father's old steward 
open his eyes^ and shake his head with a sigh ; 
but his dealings with the farmers and cottagers 
on his property were not characterised by any 
conspicuous acts of folly. Until one day, when 
the bailiff declared the young lord had taken 
clear leave of his senses. It was on this wise. 

Lady Athelstone had, after much mental 
exercise, broken to her son, while they were in 
London, the fact of Nellie Dawson's removal 

VOL. 1. P 



210 POET AKD PEER* 

firom Ripple. Wilfred receiyed the annoiiDce- 
ment in silence. What could be bbj ? He knew, 
in bis bearty it was tbe best tbing tbai coold 
bare bappened for tbem botb. Bot be bad been 
making all manner of beroic resolves ; and to 
find tbat tbese would be of none effect . ^tbat 
tbe ground was cut away from bim, so to speak 
. and tbat no merit of selfnBacrifice migbt now 
be bis, was a little trying, a Uttle irritating to 
one of bis temperanient. Had time and ab- 
sence lessened tbe young girl's impression on 
bis beart? He answered no; and perbaps be 
was rigbt; for certainly no other image bad 
effaced or interfered witb it. He tbougbt of 
tbe tender light in her eyes, be recalled the 
sweet tones of her clear young voice, witb as 
vivid and passionate delight as he did the day 
they parted. But tbe shadow of his fstther 
stood between them. He had resolved to resist 
the temptation against which the old lord bad 
so urgently warned him, but the temptation 
was removed out of his path. He felt de- 
frauded. 

One morning he walked over to Bipple. 



POET AND PEER. 211 

*' What accounts have you of Nellie, Mrs. 
Dawson ?" he asked, after he had sat down in 
the widow's cottage. 

" The very best, my lord," replied the widow, 
quickly. She was peeling some onions, and did 
not look up; but her face flushed slightly as 
he continued . ** She is quite happy and con- 
tented, as I'm sure she's every reason to be. I 

couldn't have expected such good fortune for 

< 

her as to find such a home as she's got, and 
Buch a lady as Mrs. Goldwin, my lord ; and I'm 
ure I return my lady my most grateful 
thanks." 

" We are both very much interested in her, 
as you know, Mrs. Dawson," said Athelstone, 
drawing patterns with his stick upon the 
floor. 

" Yes, my lord ; and my lady'U like to know 
that the girl is making advances every day in 
her studies, she tells me. Mr. Goldwin is a 
great deal from home, and she reads to Mrs. 
Goldwin of an evening when the children are 
a-bed. The lady's a kind o' mother to her, and 
never tires of explaining things to the girl, it 

?2 



212 POET AND PEER. 

seems. It's a happy change from the drudgery 
of school-teacher, which was almost too much 
for her. It's only me as it comes hard on to 
lose her ; but I don't mind, for I know she's a 
deal happier than she could be with me here." 

This was an unusually lon^ oration for Mrs.. 
Dawson ; she must have been moved by some 
powerful motive to make it ; but it did not com- 
pletely satisfy her auditor. Of course he was 
glad that Nellie was in such good keeping; 
glad to find that Mrs. Goldwin was a cultivated 
as well as a kind woman ; glad that the girl 
should have already attained to some moderate 
degree of contentment. But, whatl not a 
regret for the past? A happy change to leave 
Ripple, and his vicinity? The separation, 
which he had nerved himself for with what he 
believed to be an heroic effort, did it cause no 
struggle in Nellie herself? He could not be 
completely satisfied. He knit his brows and 
sighed. 

*' It must be a great trial to her all the same 
to part from you and. and Ripple, Mrs* 
Dawson." 



POET AND PEER. 213 

" Oh 1 she's a good child to me, my lord, and 
:Hii affectionate ; but life is all before her, and 
new things is pleasant to the young. She was 
glad to leave Ripple, though she's as fond of 
me as I could wish ; but she knows as it's for 
her good, and so do I." 

" We know that physic is good for us, but it 
does not make us relish it. Mrs. Dawson, you 
have occupied this cottage ever since you mar- 
ried, have you not?" 

" Yes, my lord ; nineteen years come Michael- 
mas." 

" Well, you would be sorry to be turned out. 
Life is uncertain ; my possession here may be a 
short one. It is in my power to make over this 
cottage to you, free, for the period of your life, 
and I am going to execute a deed to that effect. 
It will save you a few pounds, and my succes- 
43or, if you live to see him, might raise the 
rent." 

" Vm sure, my lord, I don't know how to find 
words to.." 

" Don't try, Mrs. Dawson. I know you are 
grateful, and that is enough. Tell Nellie I have 



214 POET AND PEER. 

been glad to do this for your sake and hers, 
will youV" 

Then he shook hands with the somewhat 
bewildered woman, and left the cottage. 

Mrs. Dawson stated the fact briefly when she 
wrote to her daughter ; she did not dilate on it, 
nor did she give the young lord's message. 

There was a fund of good sense in this gentle, 
uneducated woman. She had got to see pretty 
clearly how matters stood between the wilful 
and ill-disciplined young man, whose heart had 
many a kind impulse, but whose conduct was 
at the mercy of every gust of passion, and her 
pure and tender little daughter, whose health 
had been so severely tried, in the past year, by 
the struggle to overthrow the love which had 
grown up within her unconsciously, year by 
year, since childhood. Something the poor girl, 
in her bitter desolation and self-abasement, had 
let fall after Lady Athelstone and her son were 
gone abroad. It was but a few words, wrung 
out, in the watches of the night, when she was 
ill, and her mother sat beside her bed. The 
widow did not press her child to say more ; she 



POET AND PEER. 215 

soothed her with gentle words of encourage- 
ment and comfort; then, as the girl grew better 
able to bear the tonic of graver and stronger 
language, Mrs. Dawson applied her styptic to 
the wound with firm though loving hand. This 
evil, which clung like a bind-weed round her 
child's heart, must be pli^cked out, and trodden 
under foot. There was no good to be got out 
of it, only poisonous exhalation, which threat- 
ened to destroy the healthy activity and equi- 
poise of body and mind. Such was the spirit 
and substance, if not the framework, of the 
mother's exordium. 

And, to outward seeming, it worked its 
effect, though slowly, painfully, and after many 
a hard-fought battle. When the time came 
that Nellie should leave her home, she was pale 
and thin, but quite composed. The great 
sorrow in her eyes was hidden away; she 
smiled rarely, but had regained her strength, 
and capacity of application, and self-controL 
Mrs. Dawson was satisfied. 

Nellie's new employer was at first puzzled and 
disappointed to find the girl of scarcely seven- 



216 POET AND PEER; 

teen she had hoped would be a blithe com- 
panion to her children^ so joylees and subdued. 
But Mrs. Gold win had keen instincts, as well as 
a kind heart ; they led her to the conclusion 
that there was some immediate cause for this 
depression^ which might be removed in time. 
It was not natural that a well-grown girl 
should rigidly perform her duties day by day, 
and the sound of a glad laugh be never heard. 
She would give her a trial ; and this was the 
beginning of a course of wise and tender treat- 
ment to which the young governess was sub- 
jected at the hands of her mistress. Some of 
Mrs. Goldwin's friends told her she would 
completely spoil the girl . make her forget her 
station . unfit her for the drudgery of a 
nursery school-room. The lady smiled, and 
heeded not. She had her own opinions upon 
most matters ; and, being left at perfect liberty 
by her husband to do as she liked, she seldom 
troubled herself about the approval of others. 

She led a very solitary life with her children, 
Mr. Gold win seldom being at home for more 
than a few days, and her health obliging her to 



" V" *. .' ^.'-^^WP^BBIKB 



POET AND PEER. 217 

remain a prisoner in the house daring the 
winter months. She read a great deal, and 
enjoyed discussion upon what she had read, 
having lived at one time in a circle of intel- 
lectual men and women, who had fostered her 
natural tastes. She rarely met anyone now 
who talked about books ; the state of trade, the 
weather, and the crops forming the main loaves 
of conversation with her husband's friends, into 
which a few plums of country gossip were sur- 
reptitiously introduced by the wives from time 
to time. 

Perhaps it was less meritorious, therefore, 
than it might at first appear, when Mrs. Gold- 
win, being interested in her young governess's 
appearance, resolved to try the experiment 
upon her of that education, so far higher and 
more precious than all the teaching of the 
schools, which constant intercourse with a 
thoughtful, cultivated mind can alone give. 
She found that Nellie's nature was not only far 
more refined and sensitive than that of most 
girls in a superior station of life ; it was also 
singularly receptive. Not that her memory, or 



218 POET AND PEER. 

.what is commonly called " quickness," was re- 
markable; but her fine taste to distinguish 
the true from the false in literature, her sym- 
pathy with all that was noble, her fancy, so 
swift to follow wild flights of poetry, were 
gifts which no artificial training can impart. 

By slow degrees the poor little frozen heart 
thawed under the warmth of kindness and con- 
stant occupation for her thoughts. She had no 
time to sit and meditate. During the day she 
and the children were often with Mrs. Goldwin ; 
driving with her, or walking beside her garden- 
chair, as the spring came on, or playing about 
the drawing-room, when she bad no visitors ; 
and, after the children were in bed, every even- 
ing Mrs. Goldwin sent for her governess to 
read and talk with her. The girl's mind 
expanded like a flower. Her powers of reflec- 
tion had been too early forced by circumstances, 
perhaps, for the elasticity of youthful spirit ever 
completely to return ; but before many weeks 
were passed Mrs. Goldwin saw that her children 
laughed and romped fearlessly with their new 
governess, and clambered upon her knee and 



POET AND PEER. 219 

hugged her with a vehemence which spoke well 
for the understanding that subsisted between 
them. 

Into Nellie's past she never inquired ; and the 
girl would sooner have died than confess, even 
to this excellent friend, the sorrow that had 
overshadowed her young life. Alas 1 at night, 
when she knelt down beside her little bed, and 
prayed, her lirst thought . she acknowledged it 
with shame . was of him. All else was still 
secondary to that one idea. She might school 
herself throughout the busy day ; she might, for 
a time, banish that image, but, at this hour, 
when the poor child laid bare her heart, she 
<;ould no longer dissemble with herself. 

" All thy best blessings, my Father, keep 
for him. Guard him from harm ; give him true 
wisdom ; and may the echo of his good deeds 
reach me from afar. I ask no more than this. 
I have sinned, Lord. What was I that I 
should raise my eyes so high ? Thy hand hath 
been laid heavily upon me, though not in 
anger. I thank Thee for all thy mercies. Be 
patient with me still.^' 

vol. u p 



220 POET AND PEER. 

ThiS) or something like it, was the substance 
of her prayer^ night after night. The months 
went by ; she never heard his name mentioned,, 
nor did her mother, since the return of the 
family to the Castle, ever speak of the yonng 
lord, after that brief statement to which I have 
referred* 

Mrs. Goldwin was too clever not to have 
arrived at some approximation to the truth as 
regarded Nellie, by that process of induction 
which is called ** putting two and two together." 
She never dropped a hint that she read between 
the lines of the girl's enthusiastic praises of 
Lady Athelstone, her eloquent description of 
the Castle^ its woods, its gardens, its stately 
rooms; and her absolute silence as to the 
young man who now reigned there. But all 
this was not lost upon her auditor. 

One day the girl was reading aloud, when 
she came to a quotation . 

'^ Tis better to have bred and lost, 
Than nerer to have loved at all !^' 

Struck by the line she, half unconsciously^ 



POET AND PEER. 821 

paused. Mrs. Gold win sighed, and then looked 
lip. 

"You are too young, my dear, to feel the* 
truth and beauty of that." 

The girl coloured, and replied, after a mo* 
mentary hesitation, 

" No, Mrs. Goldwin, I think I can understand 
that the worst fate in life would be never to 
have loved anything." 

Mrs. Goldwin said no more. 

Another time she was arranging some flowers 
in a vase, when Mrs. Goldwin entered the room, 
without the girl's hearing her. She was re- 
peating a verse of poetry in a soft, low voice,, 
as she took up the roses, one by one, and smelt 
them. Mrs. Goldwin listened. 

" Unto my rose I gave a rose, 
And, ' Never more,' I said, 
' Sliall this fair flower its scent disclose, 

When its warm heart lies dead. 
But though Love's heart be wounded, crushed. 

Its sweet breath never dies, 
And when our voices both are hush'd, 
It still will scent the skies.'" 

'* What is that you are repeating, my dear?" 



222 POET AlfD PEER. 

Nellie started. 

^^ Nothing, Mrs* Goldwin* I mean, only a 
verse I . ^I once heard." 

"Do you know who wrote it? It sounds 
almost like Waller, or one of those old fitncifal 
poets." 

^^ It is Lord Athelstone%" she said. 

^'Ohl You have not read much of his, I 
#uppose ?" 

^'I had to copy some . his prize poem ou 
Carthage, and some translations from the Greek 
. ^when I was at the Castle." Then, after a 
moment's demur, she added, quickly, without 
looking up . " They are published. I saw them 
advertised in the paper yesterday. Would you 
not like to read them, Mrs. Gold win ?" 

She had read them, and the book was in the 
house ; but she answered^ unhesitatingly, 

** No, my dear ; I don't think it is at all the 
sort of reading I should like." 

In Mrs. Goldwin's monotonous existence, the 
successful endeavour to rouse and interest her 
young companion, was an occupation which 
drew Nellie closer to her heart each day. And 



POET AND PEER. 223 

with the increasing affection which she felt for 
the girl, there was thankfulness that she had 
been removed from the perils which had, no 
doubt, environed her position at home^ and that 
she was safely harboured here. And thus the 
summer passed by. 

In the meantime, to return for a moment to 
the transaction I have spoken of as taking place 
at Ripple in the spring, it was not effected 
without strong remonstrance from Wilfred's 
agent^ and some mild expostulation from his 
mother. 

'' It is a precedent, my lord, which you will 
find leads to no end of trouble and future diffi- 
culty," said the former. 

" I don't admit the force of precedent in such 
a case. I have a right to do what I choose 
with my own ; and I choose to give that cottage 
to Mrs. Dawson for her life. As to trouble and 
difficulty," he added, laughing, "that will be 
your look-out, Matcham. If it wasn't for that 
sort of bother, I should be my own agent, you 
know." 

Mr. Matcham went his ways; but he was 



r 
t 



224 POET AND PEER. 

heard to say more than once that this was the 
next thing to CommaDism, . suddenly, without 
rhyme or reason, to give up one of the best 
cottages in the village of Ripple, held by a 
woman who was well able to pay for it^ when 
there were such a number of indigent tenants 
out of whom Mr. Matcham had infinite trouble 
to screw the rent I 

"Have you considered well, my dear boyf* 
said Lady Athelstone. ^^ Is it . is it quite wise 
to do this sort of thing? I do not think your 
father " 

"Did not my father propose to give her five 
hundred pounds if she went to Australia?'' 

" But . but she declined. You see, my dear 
Wilfred . under all the circumstances people . I 
really think people might talk." 

" Let them ; it won't influence me/' and the 
young man walked away. 



225 



CHAPTER XVII. 

T ORD ATHELSTONE'S first volume of col- 
." looted verse was published that June, and 
oreated oonsiderable stir. The audaoity of this 
young patrician poet's utterances took away 
people's breath. Was he a second Byron or 
not? Were these whirlwinds of passion, these 
scathing denunciations, mere sound and fury, 
signifying nothing? Or was he, in truth, one 
of those rare beings in whom all that is irra- 
tional, unprincipled, and offensive to good taste 
must be pardoned for the sake of their tran- 
scendent genius ? 

Ecclectic-fashionable circles fought over these 
poems; some declared them to be "entirely 
noble, informed with that far-seeing spirit of 

VOL. I. Q 



226 POET AND PEER. 

the poet (or prophet) which subjects all minor 
moralities to the great exigencies of our 
Human Nature." Others compared the new 
star to a dancing dervish, ^ fluent and flatu- 
lent ; his excitement being begotten of a rota- 
tory motion of rhjme which lashes him into a 
frenzy of froth and foam/' Severe strictures 
and extravagant praise of the book appeared in 
the critical journals. One article^ beginning 
"This will never do/' was said to have sent the 
volume at once into a second edition. 

They were discussing him at Lady B 's 

one night, in whose salon opinions the most 
opposed met upon common ground, and lances 
in politics and literature were freely broken. 

'*Are we to encourage this young man?" 
asked the lady of the house of an eminent 
statesman. ^' I am afraid he is very immoral ; 
but how original I What ingenious versifica- 
tion 1 What subtle harmony 1" 

'* His philosophy amounts to this/' observed 
the statesman. '* There is nothing true^ and 
there is nothing new; and it don't signify. 
Enjoy yourselves." 



I 



POET AND PEER. 227 

"It is horribly irreligious/' said his wife, 
severely, " besides its immorality. It is a book 
I would never allow to lie upon my table.'* 

" By all means, my dear. Keep it under the 
sofa-cushion," and the statesman smiled grimly. 

*^ Irreligious ? Oh I but its Pantheism is so 
exquisite. It breathes the piety of the prairie, 
if not of theology," piped a young man with a 
long, yearning throat, who spoke like an 
expression-stop, and wrote sesthetic essays. 
'' Have you read Lord Athelstone's * Wail of 
the Wandering Winds'? People call it blas- 
phemous, but there is more of unconscious de- 
votion in the sad soughing of the breeze, the 
wild agony of the screaming tempest, as one 
hears it in those strophes and antistrophies, than 

in many a psalm. Indeed, it is a psalm, full of 

 

the remorse of unaccomplished desire, of struggle 
from trammels of the finite towards infinity 1" 

" Struggles from trammels, I admit," ob- 
served the cynical statesman. ^*As to the 

rest " he shrugged his shoulders, with a 

smile. 

But let one half the world deride or reprobate 
vol. i. q 



228 POET AND PEER. 

the other . which incladed most of the young 
men and women whose ejes and ears were 
more sensitive than their understandings . the 
vast crowd who are swept, resistless, every 
year into maelstrdms of enthusiasm over some 
vain thing, held the new poet to be *^ a reve- 
lation/' and fed on him in secret, or avowed, 
delight. 

Towards the end of July Hubert St. John 
returned to England, after visiting the Greek 
Islands, and wandering slowly up the little- 
visited Dalmatian coast; writing, sketching, 
pondering over the scenes and monuments of 
historic interest he visited, or, better still, 
letting Nature and Sunshine, in silence, work 
their beneficent influence on wounds which, 
though outwardly healed, had left him numbed^ 
and, as it seemed, disabled for social enjoy- 
ment. He was too soundly built, however, 
intellectually and physically, for his recupera- 
tive power not to be strong at six and twenty. 
He came back happier than he had been for the 
past two years, with hopes and convictions 
which had been fluent, consolidated, and ready 



POET AND PEER. 229 

to find expression in immediate action. What 
these were will presently be apparent. 

He met Athelstone on the steps of the St. 
James's Club the day after his arrival. After 
inquiring where his friend had been during the 
past four months, Wilfred said, 

'^I suppose you have not seen my book yet? 
I daresay you have not even read a review on 
it? I am glad to say it has been awfully cut 
up . just what I wanted." 

"I suppose you think it necessary for a 
book to be cut up in order to be devoured? ^^ 
said the other, smiling. " But the only notice 
of your book I saw did not slash at it very 
viciously." 

"You mean that it damned it with faint 
praise ? That was the work of an enemy, then. 
My only friends among the critics are those 
who ' deplore that this young man, with all his 
great gifts,' &c. Those who pat me on the 
head, as a young lord, who has ^really, in 
spite of his birth, got something in him, and 
who may perhaps do better things by and by,' 
I should like to strangle them. I wish you 



230 POET AND PEER. 

would review the book, old fellow. Til send it 
you to-night.'' 

Hubert shook bis head, laughing. 

" You won't complain of my lenity, if I do, 
Tou had better not ask me. Remember what I 
told you at Florence." 

"I do remember. Our views are not the 
same on most points ; but you have capital 
brains, and you are not prejudiced. Above all, 
you are not bound to turn out so many pagee^ 
of ill-digested matter a week. Come down to 
Athelstone next week, and let us argue out our 
philosophies under the cedars on the lawn. We 
leave town on Monday." 

'* I am sorry I cannot at present. I am kept 
by business in London for the next fortnight^ 
and then I have promised to go to a cousin of 
mine in Northumberland. Later in the autumn, 
if you will ask me " 

** Write when you can come. We shall be 
there till November. After that, it is probable 
I may go to Rome. But I shall send you the 
poems, and, remember, you are to write a 



POET AND PEER. 231 

criticism. The Regent Street Review will take it, 
I know;' 

As a matter of fact, St. John did not leave 
London for some weeks. Before that time 
came be had found work for his hands, and an 
object for the outlay of a large portion of bis 
ample income. It came to his knowledge that 
a mechanics' institute was needed in a certain 
very poor district in the East-end of London ; 
but funds were not forthcoming to establish 
this. There was, moreover, a hunger for 
intellectual help among the keen-eyed and 
inquiring artisans who swarmed in those 
narrow alleys, which there was none to satisfy. 
Those who had the capacity had not the time, 
those who had the time had not the capacity. 
The demands upon the over-worked clergy 
were too numerous for them to be able to 
devote many hours in the month to seeking out 
and becoming friendly with men who perhaps 
never, or very rarely, came to church. 

This was the want which St. John saw it was 
in his power to supply. The erection of a suit- 



232 POET AND PEER. t 

 

able buildiog, and the formation of a library, 
would be the work of several months; and 
having concluded the purchase of the site, and 
approved of the architect's plans, his presence 
in London was no longer necessary. But^ in 
the interval which must elapse before any 
personal supervision and organization of his 
scheme could begin, might he not pave the way 
to that free and friendly intercourse which he 
hoped to establish between the artisans and 
himself, by a little weekly chat upon paper, 
carried on from wherever he might chance to 
be, on whatsoever subject it pleased his corre- 
spondents to suggest? 

The plan which he conceived and carried out 
was this: to print, and to distribute^ on the 
payment of a small sum quarterly, a paper each 
week, in which one subject should be treated, 
and a certain number of questions propounded 
by his readers. For, as they read, objections 
would probably arise in their minds, and it 
might be that some of these he would find it 
hard to meet. But, when it was so, he would 
frankly confess his inability; for his aim was 



POET AND PEER. 233 

to establish himself on the footing, not of an 
instructor, but of a friend, ready to discuss 
difficulties, with no assumption of omniscience : 
a friend who, by adventitious circumstances, 
had enjoyed facilities for study and travel de- 
nied to those with whom he now talked ; but 
not, necessarily for that, deeper-sighted or 
more highly-endowed than they. There were 
things he could tell them which they knew 
not : theories, arguments, quotations^ which 
would be new to them, and which they would 
ponder over, or discuss among each other ; but 
he divined that there might be acute and logical 
minds among those artisans, who would detect 
a fallacy in the theory . a flaw in the argument, 
and who would brush away quotations like flies 
from a window . possibly as obstructions to the 
light . whose buzzings could not affect the 
truth, as each individual intelligence receives 
it. 

It was with no delusion, therefore, as to the 
smoothness of his task that he left London, 
after establishing the machinery of which he 
was to be the motive power. The preliminaries 



234 POET AKD PFHSR. 

had offered few difficulties ; he supplied money 
and a scheme; some coadjutors among the 
middle class presented themselves; the men 
themselves contributed a zealous curiosity and 
desire to forward their new friend's views. 

He had found a stimulant for his mental 
energy. Work, the best calculated to satisfy 
his needs, was now ready to his hand. He felt 
a certain anxiety as to its success : that is inci- 
dent to all new undertakings ; but to feel 
anxiety about anything is preferable to the 
indifference as to all things which had threaten- 
ed to mildew the young man^s mind a few 
months since. His hopes might be only par- 
tially realized, but here was work to be done 
which he believed he could do, and for which, 
perhaps, few were so well-fitted by circum- 
stances as himself. Anyhow, if he over- 
estimated his strength, if he failed in what he 
had undertaken, the impetus given to his life, 
linking it with other lives and other interests 
than his own, was higher than aimless study or 
a search after the picturesque. 

He went straight to Northumberland, taking 



POET AND PEER. 235 

-with hira a box of such books of reference as 
he thought he was not likely to find in his 
cousin's house. She was, however, a woman 
of cultivation and refinement, and her namo 
was Mrs. Gold win. 

They had been together a great deal as chil- 
dren ; indeed, up to the time of Mary St. John's 
marriage, she and Hubert had constantly met 
during his vacations, and had been more like a 
younger brother and elder sister than cousins 
often are. Between them existed a strong re- 
gard . the regard that springs from sympathy 
and a complete understanding, even more than 
from a community of tastes. During the last 
six years, however, they had only met once^ 
and that was for a few hours in London, on 
Hubert's return from India last November. 
Much had befallen them both during those sir 
years, and both were much changed. Hubert 
had leapt from boyhood to mature manhood . a 
manhood that had sinned and suffered, that had 
learnt its idols to be of clay, and had found 
the fruit of the tree of knowledge bitter to th& 
taste. 



236 POET AND PEER. 

The Judge^ though a fond^ had been a some-' 
what rigid and severe parent ; there had been 
an episode in his son s life in India which he 
sternly reproved ; and almost immediately after 
this he died, while yet the estrangement be- 
tween them existed. These circumstances had 
very powerfully aflfected the young man ; nay, 
more^ they had wrought a considerable change 
in his character. Had he been subject to such 
influences later in life, it would have been dif- 
ferent. When the bark is toughened, and the 
branches naturally beut, no wind can alter the 
contour of the oak; but stripling trees are 
swayed one way by the south-wester, and for 
ever retain that inclination. 

Hubert had been highnspirited, enthusiastic, 
enterprising, as a boy; that his temperament 
was only modified at six-and-twenty was shown 
by the vigour and alacrity he displayed in 
maturing the scheme he had now devised ; but 
Mrs. Goldwin knew that a great revolution bad 
been wrought in her cousin's character. The 
events of his life, his letters, all had prepared 
her for this ; and she awaited his coming now. 



POET AND PEER. 237 

not without a certain fear that between the 
Hubert she had known so intimately and this 
man had grown up another individuality with 
whose complexities she would find it more diffi- 
cult to sympathise. 

As to her own life, it might be summed up in 
a few words. She had been reared in an atmo- 
sphere of intellectuality and refinement ; she had 
married, at four-and-twenty, into an atmosphere 
of ox-like calm, splendour, stupidity. Her hus- 
band was termed . and he well deserved the 
encomium . "a very worthy man." He was 
really fond of his wife, and had the most un- 
bounded confidence in her ; but he was engrossed 
in business, which obliged him to be a great 
deal from home, and Mrs. Goldwin's health, 
since her last confinement, had compelled her 
more than once to go abroad. Thus months 
sometimes elapsed without the husband and 
wife meeting ; and it must honestly be admitted 
that this was not a loss calculated to disturb 
the current of Mrs. Goldwin's existence. She 
respected her husband; she was grateful to 
him ; and he was the father of the two children 



1S38 POET AND PEER. 

in whom her life was bound up ; bnt between 
this strangely-assorted pair there conld only be 
a community of interest, none of thought. If 
the truth must be told, she rather dreaded a 
Ute-brUte with him. When they had talked of 
the children, and the new glass-houses, only the 
fly-leaves of conversation were left to be turned 
over between them ; the body of the book was 
done. She could affect no interest in the iron- 
trade, or in county-business, or even in the 
broader field of politics ; he could affect none in 
literature or in art. She could not despise 
him; she knew he bad capital abilities of a 
certain kind ; he had strong common sense, and 
was liberal in his dealings with all men. On 
his side, he admired, though he did not the least 
understand, his wife. 

He knew as little of her now as he had done 
six years ago, when he asked the beautiful and 
penniless Mary St. John tp marry him. Why 
had she said ^^yes"? It was the old story; 
love at eighteen, disappointment; an interval 
of five years^ and then acceptance of an excel- 
lent offer, in the world's estimation, from a sense 



POET AND PEER. 239 

of the expediency, if not the obligation, of a 
woman's marrying to affluence and apathy, 
when the alternative was spinsterhood with 
straitened means. She would probably have 
acted no differently now, had the same alterna- 
tive been placed before her ; for she possessed 
what is called " strong good sense." In other 
words, though she had some romance in her 
composition, with an exalted ideal of what mar- 
ried life should be, she was not deficient in 
worldly wisdom. The cousins had each had a 
story ; only hers was simple enough, his full of 
passionate complication. The past with her 
had long been dead and buried . hope and ex- 
pectancy only lived in her children now ; how 
would she find it with Hubert ? 

It was this question she propounded to her- 
self constantly in the days that preceded his 
arrival at Danecourt. His letters indicated that 
all the buoyancy of youth was gone ; but men 
are differently constituted from women ; surely, 
at six and twenty, the capacity for another love, 
which should vivify the young man's life, was 
not impossible? 



240 POET AND PEER. 

The busy weaving brain of woman, that 
tarns out fabrics of such marvellous and un- 
serviceable texture, sent its shuttle to and fro 
with gossamer threads of possibilities. Her four 
years' seniority now seemed to her as twenty ; 
and it was with almost a maternal feeling of 
affectionate solicitude that she greeted St. 
John to her home^ resolved to afford him 
every opportunity of reconstructing a romance 
which should this time have a happy termina- 
tion. 



241 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

rpHE Miss Brawnes were handsome, highly- 
.*- cultivated young women. They were so 
decorative in a room, and all they did was so 
well done, that it seemed surprising they 
should lack the subtle charm by which inferior 
women often enslave a number of helpless 
men. 

Men never became helpless under their influ- 
ence. -They flirted, but with discretion; and, 
on learning that the sisters were poor, turned 
their thoughts in other directions, without 
poignant regret. It was chiefly by their own 
sex that the Miss Brawnes were enthusiastically 
admired; and Mrs. Goldwin, who was not 
much given to neighbour cultivation, duly 

VOL. I. R 



242 POET AMD PEER. 

appreciated and always invited them to 
stay at Danecourt when she had other 
gnests* 

They were established there when Hubert 
arrived* '^ Either of them would make him a 
most suitable wife/' thought Mrs. Goldwin; 
** but I should prefer Eliza . ^I do hope he will 
fall in love with Eliza ;" and, if such thought 
can be termed a scheme, she certainly planned 
one for the realization of her wish. But the 
futility of such is proverbial. 

"I hope^ now you are come back to 
England, and are tired of wandering, you 
tell me, dear Hubert, that you will think of 
marryiug." 

They were alone in her boudoir the morn- 
ing after his arrival, when she said this. He 
shook his head, with a smile, and something 
like a sigh. 

*^ Not until I meet such a woman as I have 
never yet known, Mary." 

She paused ; then felt impelled to say^ 

**But you loved once^ dear boy, though 



POET AND PEER. 243 

xinwiBely . why not again, and to better pur- 
pose I" 

" I was blind. A fellow may be blind once 
. especially at one and twenty . he is a 
fool if he is blind twice. My eyes are too 
wide open, I believe, ever to fall in love 
again." 

" Nonsense I Yon would be so much happier 
married, Hubert." 

" Marriage must be either Heaven or Hell, in 
my opinion. To have a companion who is not 
only flesh of one's flesh, but soul of one's soul, 
is the happiness accorded but to few. Less than 
this I should not be content with." 

Mrs. Goldwin's fair face contracted for a 
moment. 

** Yqu expect too much of human nature. If 
all exacted so much, how many marriages 
would there be? And is not the balance of 
happiness with those who do marry, have 
children, and merge their personal interests in 
others, rather than with those who lead solitary 
lives r' 

r2 



244 POET AND PEER. 

** I don't know about the aggregate, Mary ;' 
every man must judge for himself. Some soft- 
hearted, easy-going fellows seem to be so con- 
stituted that they only ask that a woman 
should be fond of them to take her to their 
bosom at once. It is much the same whether 
she be Jane or Eliza." 

"How very odd," laughed his cousin. 
"Are you aware that those are the Miss 
Brawnes' names?" 

" No. I beg their pardon for taking them in 
vam. 

" Very handsome girls, ain't they?" 

" Y . yes . good-looking, certainly." 

'*And so clever." 

'* Ah 1 1 daresay." 

'* Eliza is really delightful . so very agree- 
able." 

" Just a little self-conscious . isn't she ?" 

" Not at all. That is only manner. I assure 
you it entirely wears off." 

"Does it? Well, she may be charming, but 
she is not the kind of woman who would ever 
interest me. By-the-by, was the young girl 



POET AND PEER, 245 

who came in after dinner your governess? I 
didn't speak to her, but she struck me as lovely, 
and the young parson seemed to think so, for 
he never left her side." 

" Miss Dawson has a very sweet face, and is 
a very nice girl. She is only a nursery gover- 
ness, and of very humble origin, but she has 
great natural refinement, and I find her quite a 
companion when we are alone." 

" What a lucky thing for her to have come 
here I I suppose this is her first place ? She 
looks so young." 

" Yes ; and if I had not received such a 
very strong recommendation of her from Lady 
Athelstone " 

'* From Lady Athelstone ?" 

'. She was pupil-teacher in their school, and 
her mother lives in their village." 

" How small the world is ! I have not a large 
acquaintance, as you know, but Athelstone was 
a school-fellow of mine, and, I may say, is still 
my friend." 

'*. Dear me ! 1 should have thought, from 
-all I have heard, he was not at all the sort 



246 POET AND PEER. 

of man you would have chosen for a friend/' 
** Friendship is sometimes the result of circum- 
st8uces Certainly Athelstone and I agree upon 
very few points; but we were in the same 
house together at Eton, and he exhibited a 
blind reverence for me then (1 am a good deal 
older), which, I am sorry to say, years have 
corrected. Still he is very cordial ; and I feel 
that, in spite of all his nonsense, there is much 
that is good in him, which I think will pre- 
dominate . if he falls into wise handfi." 

" And that is the reason you cling to him ? 
Why did you not prevent his publishing all this^ 
abominable poetry?'* 

" I could not have prevented it, had I been 
in England. He is very obstinate ; and when 
I talk of wise hands, they must be hands that 
do not appear to guide, but, gently superim- 
posed, use a magnetic influence of which the 
Hubject is unconscious. Have you ever seen a 
person willed to do a thing. That is how Athel- 
stone must be moved. He is a strange fellow,, 
and I fear may cause much trouble to those who 
love him ; but he interests me." 



POET AND PEER. 247 

*' I think he must be a very unprincipled man* 
I have been obliged to put away his book, for 
fear Miss Dawson should see it. She is natu- 
rally interested in all that relates to the Athel- 
stones. Say nothing about these poems^ unless 
she asks you." 



That afternoon Hubert declined to drive with 
his cousin and the Miss Brawnes to a ruin some 
miles distant, alleging that he had his forth- 
coming paper to prepare. Mrs. Goldwin was 
disappointed; but she was too clever not to 
know that a man shut up in a carriage, against 
his will, for two hours and a half, would be in 
a frame of mind unfavourable to the first in- 
roads of fascination, and she submitted in 
silence. To-night, she said, after a solitary 
afternoon, he would, by a natural rebound, find 
keener enjoyment in the society of these charm- 
ing girls. Hubert had always a fine taste 
for music. Eliza should play that scherzo 
of Mendelssohn's . it would at once delight 
and astonish him. This would lay the first 



248 POET AND PEER. 

stone* And so the fair builder of a Spanish 
castle went a-driving. 

It was a very still, golden day, early in 
September. In the garden it was jnst the mo- 
ment when the glories of summer and autumn 
meet ; when the advancing dahlias and china- 
asters come face to face with the retiring 
geraniums and calceolarias. Hubert looked out 
upon it all from his open window, and, after 
writing a few sentences, it occurred to him that 
he might as well be seated under one of those 
widenspreading beeches^ inhaling the sweet 
breath of all the growing things around, as re- 
main imprisoned in his bed-room^ now that he 
was secure from interruption ; for the other men 
staying at Danecourt had gone out partridge- 
shooting early. 

fie sauntered across the lawn, note-book in 
hand^ till he came to a little stream which 
divided the garden from the beech-wood be- 
yond. He crossed the small foot-bridge, and 
had advanced a few yards down the winding 
path, when a pair of stout little legs, carrying 
a small rosy blossom of a face, ran up to hitn, 



POET AND PEER. 249 

in all the sweet confidence of five years' old. 
She had been picking beech-nuts, and the white 
serge frock she clutched tight with two hot 
hands was filled with her treasure. 

"Look, what Fve dot for de pigs I Dere's 
lots more ; turn along, and Til show you. Will 
you put dese in your pocket ? Den I will pick 
up more." 

" But if we carry off all the nuts. Tricksy, 
there will be no young trees to grow up." 

" Oh, 'es, dere will. God sticks in de trees, 
I know." 

In an incautious moment she let go her frock 
to tug at his coat, and the pigs' dessert lay 
scattered on the path. 

Hubert was fond of children; but, as he 
stooped to pick up the nuts, he remembered his 
essay with a sigh. For the evolution of exact 
thought, he would have done better to remain 
in his bed-room. 

" Well, I will put these in my pocket for you, 
Tricksy, and stay here while you run off and 
look for more." 

But this arrangement did not suit Miss 



250 POET AND PEER. 

Tricksy^ ^ho was partial to the institution of 
slavery. 

*' No, no. You must turn wid me. Dere is 
lots of boo'ful flowers, and . " she pulled lustily 
at his coat ; but here a sweet voice, belonging 
to a speaker whom St. John had not heard ap- 
proaching behind him, broke in. 

**You must not be troublesome. Tricksy. 
Come here." 

He turned. She was standing, in her dark 
blue dress and garden-hat, against the silver 
stems and yellow leaves of the beeches. A 
little flush tinged the ivory face, the sweet, 
grave brown eyes were bent upon the elder 
child, while the younger one toddled at her 
heels. This was the picture he often recalled 
in after-years ; it was thus he thought of her, 
thus he felt that he had flrst seen her ; for the 
glimpse of the previous evening had left no 
enduring impression. But every incident of 
this afternoon remained in his memory. Not a 
word she let fall . and how unimportant would 
they seem if set down here 1 . that Hubert St. 
John ever forgot. She said but little; he had 



POET AND PEER. 251 

most of the talking to himself; but now and 
again he put some question which drew from 
her a reply. They strolled along the pathway, 
the children playing before them ; they sat on a 
bench, while the children gathered more nuts ; 
the sunshine made a network of blue shadows 
among the fallen leaves ; a little wind rustled in 
the branches overhead as the evening wore on, 
and stirred the edges of the girl's soft brown 
hair. He talked of Athelstone, and. she lis- 
tened ; he asked about her old home^ and she 
felt drawn to speak to him, as she never did to 
the curate and the other gentlemen whom she 
saw occasionally at Danecourt. For this was a 
friend of his, who had known him since boyhood. 
It was a link between them ; she could talk of 
Ripple, and feel that he was interested in what 
was nearer to her heart than anything in the 
world. 

She was a little shy at this time, as was only 
natural. Not that she was afflicted with self- 
consciousness ; but a fear of putting herself, or 
of being put, into undue prominence, and a very 
humble estimate of her own powers, kept her 



252 POET AND PEER. 

mostly silent in company. She looked bewiU 
dered at a compliment, and was a little slow to 
seize the jests current in society. Though 
never awkward or embarrassed, she needed 
sympathy to be able to converse, and it was 
this she had found in Mrs. Goldwin. The eight 
months passed with that kind and clever woman 
bad done more to enlarge and mature the young 
girl's intellect than years passed in the old life 
at Ripple would have done. But the talks she 
had in those long teie-h-tete evenings, though 
they helped to form her judgment upon many 
things, did not teach her to talk nonsense with 
grace and assurance. The truth is, she would 
never, under any circumstances, have kept up 
the ball of banter with spirit ; it was not in her 
nature; and, circumstanced as she was, her 
reserve sat well upon her . ^at least, so thought 
all except the young men who were disap- 
pointed to find the pretty governess " awfully 
slow and well-behaved . doesn't understand 
chaff I" 

Now, however, sitting on the woodland bench, 
she found herself listening with interest to the 



POET AND PEER. 253 

young man's conversation, which flowed so 
easily, and yet was so full of thought and sug- 
gestion, so free from compliment or personality, 
that from response she was drawn on to ques- 
tion and argument insensibly. 

*' Children should be allowed to read no 
poetry but the Old Ballads, and Walter Scott, 
and Macaulay's ' Lays/ " . St. John was saying 
. " nothing that is morbid and unhealthy." 

" The first poetry I read was * Percy's 
Reliques/ " said Nellie, looking up, with a 
smile. "Lord Athelstone gave it me when I 
was very small." 

" I am glad he gave you such wholesome 
food," St. John replied. ** His taste in poetry 
has deteriorated since then, 1 am afraid." 

She paused, and hesitated a moment. 

"I read in a paper some time since that he 
had published a volume of poems. I will not 
believe what they said about them was true; 
but Mrs. Goldwin. would not send for the book. 
Have you read it 1" 

" I have . it is not a book you would like, it 
is not one you would even understand. You 



254 POET AND PEER. 

must rest satisfied with this assurance: you 
tnow I am his friend." 

*' He did write beautiful poetry once," said 
the girl, in a low voice. 

** And will again, I hope. Lord Athelstone 
18 very clever ; but he is young, and his judg- 
ment is not matured. What he writes now he 
will condemn and repudiate later. I have told 
him so." 

"Is her ladyship vexed with him?" asked 
Nellie, anxiously. 

" 1 don't know. Perhaps she has something 
of a mixed feeling ; the mother's vanity may be 
.flattered. The book has made considerable 
stir. Tell me," he added, abruptly, desirous of 
getting off ground where he felt himself to be 
trammelled, '' who is your favourite poet, Miss 
Dawson ?" 

"Lord Byron. Mrs. Goldwin says I ought 
to like Shakspere better ; perhaps when 
I know more I shall. But I cannot pre- 
tend to care for more than parts of his plays 
now." 

" I am not surprised. Shakspere's wonder- 



POET AND PEER. 255 

ful humanity seldom appeals to the very young. 
One must have thought, and known^ and 
suffered a good deal before the deep truth, the 
insight into human nature, the beauty of many 
a transient touch can be appreciated. I shall 
read some of Shakspere to my cousin and you, 
when the other guests are gone, and try to 
make you see he was a far wiser and greater 
man than Byron." 

" Dere's a 'quirrel running up dat tree," cried 
Tricksy, running. "P'esse, Mit Dawton, let 
gentleman go after de 'quirrel for me," and 
she pulled lustily at Hubert's coat once 
more. 

*'It is time for us to be going home," said 
the young governess, rising, with a scarcely 
perceptible flush at the child's suggestion that 
she was detaining St. John. "Come, Flossy, 
come in to tea. Come, Tricksy." 

She took the younger child's hand. He rose, 
but did not accompany them back to the house. 
There was his essay to be written ; and now 
he was alone. The last fold of the dark blue 
dress had disappeared among the now d^rk 



256 POET AND PEER. 

grey beech-stems, the .last babble of the 
children's joyons voices had burst and died 
npon the air ; he had the woodland path in the 
gathering twilight to himself. And there was 
his essay to be written. 

He had some difficulty in concentrating his 
thoughts. 



257 



CHAPTER XIX. 

TIITISS ELIZA BRAWNE had a very attentive 
-"-** listener that night, and the scherzo met 
with a reticent, measured approbation carrying 
with it a conviction of its sincerity which might 
not have accompanied more vehement applause. 
When it was done, St. John rose, and came to 
the piano, and stood there, discussing the new 
school of music in Germany with the intelli- 
gent conservative exponent of Mendelssohn, 
who shuddered at the names of Wagner, 
Brahms, and Raff. Mrs. Goldwin wished he 
would sit down ; but he did not ; he asked Miss 
Eliza to play a certain andante of Beethoven's, 
and then he wandered away ; strolled up to the 
fire-place, examined a picture on the wall, said 
VOL. I. S 



258 POET AND PEER. 

a few words to the elder Miss Brawne (who was 
engaged upon some high art embroidery, on a 
sad-coloured ground, representing a nameless 
fruit, like gigantic scarlet wafers transfixed on 
thorns), and finally drew a light cane chair 
near to the table at which Nellie was seated, 
working, 

Mrs. Goldwin was a little vexed. This was 
not at all what she wished. It was giving her 
nice little governess an importance which was 
undesirable in every way. She was sincerely 
fond of her . too fond to desire that the child 
should be spoiled, or that she should rouse any 
feelings but sympathy and benevolence in the 
breasts of the Miss Brawnes. It was hardly 
possible that this marked preference should not 
be resented. He sat there the whole evening, 
and no manoeuvre of his cousin's succeeded in 
making him abandon his entrenchment behind 
the table, and so near Nellie that what he said 
could be overheard by none. 

The Miss Brawnes were left to two uninter- 
esting and ineligible sportsmen, who knew 
nothing of Mendelssohn or high art embroidery, 



POET AND PEER. 259 

while Mrs. Goldwin had to talk to the curate. 
It was altogether wrong ; his place was beside 
Miss Dawson, with a view to whose especial 
edification this excellent young man had been 
invited to spend a few days at Danecourt ; and 
here was Mrs. Goldwin, having to pump up 
conversation about the neighbourhood to him, 
while she tried to catch with one ear the mur- 
mured talk that was going on at the table 1 It 
would have tried any temper less sweet than 
hers ; but she was not going to allow matters 
to continue thus. 

'^ Hubert," she said that night, as he banded 
her her bed-room candle (the ladies were gone 
upstairs, the men to the smoking-room), " you 
must oblige me by going with us on our expe- 
dition to-morrow . I can't spare you." 

** But you are to be out the whole day . and 
I have work I must get through. I did so little 
to-day." 

"Because you chose to play with the chil- 
dren, and talk to Miss Dawson in the wood. 
No, the Brawnes are only here for a few days, 
and they are much too good to be wasted on 

s2 



260 POET AND PEER. 



those two stupid men. You really must 



come." 



" How long do the Brawnes stay ?" 

'* Why do you ask f ' 

"Because I will make this sacrifice for you 
oncCy Mary ; but remember, when I came down 
here, you promised I should do exactly as I 
liked." 

"So you shall, after to-morrow. But I am 
sure you will like it. The Brawnes are so de- 
lightful, if you would only cultivate them." 

"They are so cultivated already," said her 
cousin, laughing. 

"Nonsense 1" cried Mary Goldwin, impatient- 
ly. " You are determined to shut your eyes to 
everything except Miss Dawson's pretty eyes. 
I am ashamed of you, Hubert. I had expected 
better things of you. I will not have you turn- 
ing my little governesses head. I have much 
too great a regard for her. Good night." 

But neither did the expedition the following 
day, nor any subsequent effort which Mrs. 
Goldwin made daring the Miss Brawnes' stay at 
Danecourt, succeed in producing premonitory 



POET AND PEER. 261 

jsymptoms of admiration for either sister from 
Hubert St. John. He conversed pleasantly 
with both; they were really well-read, agree- 
able women, and justified, in a great measure, 
Mrs. Goldwin's enthusiasm ; but neither sister 
touched, or even interested him in the faintest 
degree; and it needed no very keen sight to 
detect this. 

At the end of a week his cousin threw up the 
game. She did not attempt to detain the 
Brawnes when the limit of their visit drew near ; 
43he even felt a certain relief, though it was ac- 
companied with a sense of failure, when the 
sisters drove away from the door ; of relief, that 
is, from a continued strain and effort to accom 
plish the unattainable. " You may take a horse 
to the water, but you can't make him drink," 
she murmured to herself, with half a smile and 
half a sigh. Now she and Hubert would be 
alone together . without interruption, without 
any disturbing element ; and she would get to 
understand his condition of mind better than 
,she felt she did at present. 

He spent the greater part of his days ostensi- 



262 POET AND PEER. 

bly in writing and in walking. He bated 
driving, and therefore never accompanied bis 
cousin, and wben sbe came bome sbe always 
lay down for a conple of bours. Tbns it came 
to pass tbat St. Jobn^ as it seemed^ in tbe 
natural course of tbings, was a great deal '< witb 
tbe children" . tbat was tbe euphemism by 
which it pleased him to designate bis daily 
study of Nellie Dawson's character. It was not 
complicated. Barring tbat one secret in her 
young life, tlie current of her thoughts and 
feelings flowed clear, and was reflected in her 
sweet, truthful eyes. There was none of tbat 
reserve and careful balance of words which . 
occasionally bred in early youth by untoward 
circumstances . are the species of wisdom tbat 
geniality most cordially resents. He read her 
. or thought that be read her . like a book, and 
it was a study that never seemed to tire him. 
After the type of woman be had seen chiefly in 
India, how fresh and lovely did this young 
creature's nature seem to him! What could 
the world . all the Miss Brawnes, with their 
highly-surfaced minds, all tbe " eligible connec- 



POET AND PEER. 263 

tions" Mrs. Gold win could recommend him . 
.what could the world offer him that was worth 
this? 

One evening that Hubert had been reading 
aloud some passages in various plays of Shak- 
spere to the ladies, while the children played 
in a distant corner of the room, when they and 
Nellie had retired, Mary Goldwin said abruptly 
to her cousin . 

" Do you know, I am afraid there is a certain 
similarity between the case of my little govern- 
ess and Helena in * All's Well that Ends Well.' " 

" What do you mean ?" he said, quickly, 
looking up. 

" That her affections are set hopelessly in a 
very different station from her own." 

He flushed to the very roots of his hair. She 
saw it, and continued, ruthlessly . 

" Of course you know to what I allude ? To 
your friend, who has stood in much the same 
position towards her that Bertram did to 
Helena." 

He started and grew suddenly pale ; it was 
nearly a minute before he said, 



264 POET AND PEER. 

"What reason have you for thinking this, 
Mary!" 

"My own observation . especially when she 
first came here. Even now, whenever his name 
is mentioned, I see the change that comes over 
her face." 

'^ Her gratitude to the Athelstone family is 
enough to account for that. I should be very, 
very sorry if you were right. Good God I To 
think of the girl sacrificing her life to such a 
chimera I" 

" As to that, Hubert, time and absence will 
cure her, I make no doubt. But have you not 
told me yourself how attractive Lord Athelstone 
is ? What is more likely than that her affec- 
tions should be set on the * bright particular 
star ' that first shone down on her 1" 

" I can't believe it. Athelstone writes mis- 
chievous stuff . propounds all sorts of theories I 
hate ; but he is not the man to try to entangle 
a girl's affections for the mere gratification of 
vanity." 

** I did not say he had tried." 

*' You believe, then, that this modest, retiring 



POET AND PEER. 265 

little girl would become enamoured of a man 
who did not care . or, at least, pretend that he 
cared . for her ? It's monstrous." 

** What did Helena do ? Did not Shakspere 
understand human nature ?" 

** I have always thought her the least attrao- 
iive of all the women he meant to be so. She 
was an artful, persevering minx. He has given 
her some beautiful things to say, but her con- 
duct removes all sympathy from her, in my 
opinion." 

" Well, she was a thousand times too good 
for that miserable Bertram. She must have 
repented of her persistence in after-life, poor 
thing 1 But this is wandering away from the 
point, Hubert. You know as well as I do it is 
possible for the most charming, modest girl to 
set her affections on some man who cares 
nothing about her. One sees it every day. 
My theory is that this simple child has been 
dazed by your brilliant Byronic friend. She 
will recover, but it will take time . probably 
some years, and then she will marry, I hope, 
fiome nice schoolmaster or country curate." 



266 POET AND PEER. 

" Prosperity has had itg usual effect on you, 
1 see, Mary. You are become very worldly," 
observed her cousin, with a sarcastic smile. 

" Why so r 

^'You adjust the social balance with such 
nicety. There must be a rise . ^but not too 
great a rise, for your governess. You like her 
very much indeed. but a schoolmaster or a 
poor curate is as much as you can afford.'' 

*' And if I do ^ adjust the social balance with 
nicety/ as you call it, . what then? Do you 
think it is because I attach an undue importance 
to position? No. I am ever so much older 
than you^ Hubert, in knowledge of the world, 
and I know that marriages in different stations 
of life rarely answer . either when a woman of 
rank and fortune marries much beneath her, or 
vice versd. Such marriages are certainly not 
to be desired as offering the best chance of 
happiness." 

*^ That depends on the character of the con- 
tracting parties/' returned Hubert, smiling again. 
*' Speaking as a man who doesn't care a rush 
for worldly distinctions, I say that, if a girl is. 



POET AND PEER. 267 

in feeliog, in education, and in manner a ladj/y 
she is what many a woman of high social stand- 
ing is not, and any man may be proud to win 
her." 

*' That is all very fine theoretically ; but the 
more sensitive and W7ivulgar she is, the more 
she will feel she is in a false position . admitted 
into many houses upon sufferance, as it were, 
and possibly conscious that she is an obstacle 
to her husband's advancement." 

'* There is your worldly way of looking at 
things again I A man who is worth his salt 
will never go to a house where his wife is ad- 
mitted ^ on sufferance/ and his merits must be 
colourless indeed, if his wife's parentage is to 
counterbalance them. In the present day, if a 
fellow was a shoeblack, and his wife the rat- 
catcher's daughter, provided he has ability, he 
must rise . nothing can keep him back." 

**You are thinking of the Duke of Lucca's 
groom, who rose to be his prime-minister," said 
Mary Goldwin, laughing ; " but I beg to re- 
mark that is beside the argument. I don't 
object to the shoeblack or the groom ; it is the 



258 POET AND PEER. 

a few words to the elder Miss Brawne (who was 
engaged upon some high art embroidery, on a 
sad-coloured ground, representing a nameless 
fruit, like gigantic scarlet wafers transfixed on 
thorns), and finally drew a light cane chair 
near to the table at which Nellie was seated, 
working. 

Mrs. Goldwin was a little vexed. This was 
not at all what she wished. It was giving her 
nice little governess an importance which was 
undesirable in every way. She was sincerely 
fond of her . too fond to desire that the child 
should be spoiled, or that she should rouse any 
feelings but sympathy and benevolence in the 
breasts of the Miss Brawnes. It was hardly 
possible that this marked preference should not 
be resented. He sat there the whole evening, 
and no manoeuvre of his cousin's succeeded in 
making him abandon his entrenchment behind 
the table, and so near Nellie that what he said 
could be overheard by none. 

The Miss Brawnes were left to two uninter- 
esting and ineligible sportsmen, who knew 
nothing of Mendelssohn or high art embroidery. 



POET AND PEER. 259 

"while Mrs. Goldwin had to talk to the curate. 
It was altogether wrong ; his place was beside 
Miss Dawson, with a view to whose especial 
edification this excellent young man had been 
invited to spend a few days at Danecourt ; and 
here was Mrs. Goldwin, having to pump up 
conversation about the neighbourhood to him, 
while she tried to catch with one ear the mur- 
mured talk that was going on at the table 1 It 
would have tried any temper less sweet than 
hers ; but she was not going to allow matters 
to continue thus. 

" Hubert," she said that night, as he handed 
her her bed-room candle (the ladies were gone 
upstairs, the men to the smoking-room), " you 
must oblige me by going with us on our expe- 
dition to-morrow . I can't spare you." 

" But you are to be out the whole day . and 
I have work I must get through. I did so little 
to-day." 

"Because you chose to play with the chil- 
dren, and talk to Miss Dawson in the wood. 
No, the Brawnes are only here for a few days, 
and they are much too good to be wasted on 

s2 



260 POET AND PEER. 

those two stnpid men. Tou really must 
come/' 

** How long do the Brawnes stay f " 

 Why do you ask ?" 

*' Because I will make this sacrifice for you 
once, Mary ; but remember^ when I came down 
here, you promised I should do exactly as I 
liked/' 

'*So you shall, after to-morrow. But I am 
sure you mil like it. The Brawnes are so de- 
lightful, if you would only cultivate them/' 

"They are so cultivated already/' said her 
cousin, laughing. 

'.Nonsense 1" cried Mary Gold win, impatient- 
ly. *' You are determined to shut your eyes to 
everything except Miss Dawson's pretty eyes. 
I am ashamed of you^ Hubert. I had expected 
better things of you. I will not have you turn- 
ing my little governess's head. I have much 
too great a regard for her. Good night." 

But neither did the expedition thd following 
day, nor any subsequent effort which Mrs. 
Goldwin made daring the Miss Brawnes' stay at 
Danecourt, succeed in producing premonitory 



POET AND PEER. 261 

ymptoms of admiration for either sister from 
Hubert St. John. He conversed pleasantly 
with both; they were really well-read, agree- 
able women, and justified, in a great measure, 
Mrs. Goldwin's enthusiasm ; but neither sister 
touched, or even interested him in the faintest 
degree; and it needed no very keen sight to 
detect this. 

At the end of a week his cousin threw up the 
game. She did not attempt to detain the 
Brawnes when the limit of their visit drew near ; 
43he even felt a certain relief, though it was ac- 
companied with a sense of failure, when the 
sisters drove away from the door ; of relief, that 
is, from a continued strain and effort to accom- 
plish the unattainable. " You may take a horse 
to the water, but you can't make him drink," 
she murmured to herself, with half a smile and 
half a sigh. Now she and Hubert would be 
alone together . without interruption, without 
any disturbing element ; and she would get to 
understand his condition of mind better than 
,she felt she did at present. 

He spent the greater part of his days ostensi- 



272 POET AND PEER. 

Athelstone, od the contrarj, she had never been 
without a certain sense of fear, begotten of her 
blind admiration and craving for his approval. 
With this far graver and more imposing man^ 
she experienced no solicitude as to her talk. 
It never occurred to her to consider what he 
thought of her. It was pure benevolence that 
made him join her in her dailj walk with the 
children, and converse with her of an evening, 
instead of with the Miss Brawnes or any other 
ladies that might be present. She was not 
concerned to show her ignorance before him^ so 
she spoke freelj. 

He had been telling her of his London 
project, and how sanguine he was of its 
success. 

** The thing that is most wanted among the 
poor of London is the sacrifice of time and 
brains. People are readj enough to help with 
their money ; but few, comparatively, are able 
or willing to devote any portion of their lives, 
like the late George Denison, to humanizing 
some of their fellow-citizens. I am happily 
so situated that I can ; and I mean to do so." 



POET AND PEER. 273 

" How I should like to do it, too, if I was 
able !" said Nellie, simply. 

He was leaning his head upon his hand, 
his elbow resting on his crossed knee, so that 
he could look under the garden-hat which 
shaded the girl's face, as she bent over her 
work. 

** Will you help me ?" he asked, in a low 
voice. " Not now . not at once . I do not ask 
for an answer yet . you know me too little, 
perhaps, though I feel I know you so well. by- 
and-by " 

He paused for a moment, and the girl, who 
had raised her eyes in wonder, somewhat dis- 
concerted him by exclaiming^ 

" How could I help you, Mr. St. John ? I am 
sure I would, if I could." 

"Could you ever like me well enough, do 
you think, to become my wife ? Do not look 
so frightened, dear. I have given you my 
heart . ^it is yours . but I do not ask you to 
make me any promise now; I shall never 
change. You are very young . ^you have 
seen nothing of the world. Wait. Only 

VOL. I. T 



274 POBT AND PEER. 

think of me as jour best, unalterable friend."^ 

*^OhI Mr. St. John. this is some mistake. 
Oh I sir, if Mrs. Goldwin kxiew-^^" 

*'Be qnite at ease; she does know. She 
even urged my speaking to you. She " 

** Oh, pray. pray do not go on. You distress 
me. I don't know what to say. I so little 
thought " 

** I have taken you by surprise. Say nothing 
. or only say this : that there is no obstacle in 
the way of our union . no one to whom your 
affections are engaged." 

" No, no/' cried the girl, in an agony of terror. 
' There is no one; how could there bef It 
seemed as if her secret were about to be dragged 
from her. Her cheek crimsoned and paled; 
then she burst into tears, indignant tears. It 
was cruel; it was shameful, to make her tell a 
lie. Her heart was hardened against the kind^ 
brave fellow who sat there, and who would have 
given up his life for her. 

" Don't cry, dear . don't cry, my child. That 
is quite enough. I am satisfied, and will say 
no more now. I have to go to London to* 



POET AND PEER, 275 

morrow, and I do not think my cousin would 
care that I should return here. But she talks 
of wintering in Rome ; and if so, I shall cer- 
tainly take a month's holiday and follow her. 
If you can give me any hope then, I shall be 
the happiest man alive. But remember, what- 
ever happens, I am your friend . you cannot 
deny me that . and a true friend is worth some- 
thing in life. Dear, God bless you 1'" 

He took her hand, held it a moment in his, 
and left her. 

But those daisy-chain makers were not wholly 
unmindful of what passed. 

" Mamma," said Tricksy that evening, ** why 
did Coudin Hubert make Mit Dawton cwy 
under de tedar dit afternoon ?" 

Mamma said nothing to Cousin l^ubert, but 
discreetly held her peace. When he bade her 
good night, however, the young man said, 

" I am going to-morrow, Mary. I have busi- 
ness in London, and, after what you said to-day, 
I feel I should only be a disturbing influence 
here. I have spoken, and it was not as you 
thought. But I have no answer. It is only 

t2 



276 POET AND PEER. 

fair she Bhould know eomethiog of life, and see 
more of me before deciding. Like Bavenswood, 
* I bide my time/ ^ 



277 



CHAPTER XX. 

/\NE crisp, sparkling morniDg in the following 
^ December a tall lady, singularly clad, 
stood on the sunny terrace on the Pincio in 
Rome. Beside her was a large, comfortably- 
furred white poodle, her only companion. She 
was sketching in a small book, as she leant 
there on the balustrade; but it was not St. 
Peter's, nor any of the glittering domes of the 
fair city, with its background of the Monte 
Mario, that tempted her to draw. At the back 
of the Via Babuino, upon which she looked, was 
a wooden balcony to which the last yellow 
leaves of a vine were clinging. Upon this bal- 
cony were hung sundry clothes to dry. Two 
great earthen jars and a string of onions were 



278 POET AND PEER. 

also accessorieB to the picture, the onlj figures 
in which were a mother and her child. The 
woman wore a white panno on her head, and 
the sunlight touched a spot of scarlet in her 
sldrt. But, as is generally the case^ they moved 
before the artist had completed drawing her 
unconscious sitters ; and, as she closed her book 
and turned her steps homewards to the 
''uropa/' she became aware that her steps 
were followed, though at a respectful distance, 
by a joung man, who happened to have been 
the only other person on the terrace at that 
early hour. 

The lady's appearance was so striking that 
indeed it was no wonder she should attract 
attention. She had a peculiar nobility of aspect, 
which was more remarkable than her beauty, 
and, though eccentrically attired, it was impos- 
sible to associate the idea of vanity or coquetry 
with such simple dignity. She wore a dark 
red robe . it would be sacrilege to call it a gown 
or frock . trimmed with fur, and made as nearly 
as possible like that we are accustomed to 
associate with Faust's Marguerite. A velvet 



POET AND PEER. 279 

and gold bag was slung at her side, and on her 
head was a small cap of fur. Beneath it her 
hair, which was of a reddish brown and very 
thick, hung in loose coils in a net far down her 
back. Her face was pale, and her features not 
absolutely regular ; but the light grey eyes were 
singularly lustrous, and the mouth, though per- 
haps too large for perfect beauty, had the charm 
of combined sweetness and decision which was 
felt by even casual passers-by. 

The passer-by on this occasion . and he could 
not be called casual, for he had passed several 
times while she was sketching without her 
looking up . was Wilfred Athelstone. He and 
his mother had arrived in Rome a few days 
previously, and taken up their abode at the 
"Tempietto," that charming house at the 
corner of the Vi^ Gregoriana, overlooking the 
Trinitk del Monte steps. 

He ran into the drawing-room where Lady 
Athelstone sat, a quarter of an hour later, and 
flung down his broad-leaved hat on the table, 
and himself into a chair. 

" I have just seen the most divine creature, 



280 POET AND PEER. 

mother I . a goddess walking this earth in a 
tnediadval costume, Burne Jones never con- 
ceived anything more lovelj . and then her 
dress . so entirely delightful. She is like a 
Botticelli, or Lippo Lippi ^stepped oat of a 
frame T 

^'Indeed, mj dear I How very cnrionsi 
Botticelli was a Florentine, was he not, bom, if 
I remember right, in 1437? How very odd 
that a young woman in the present day should 
go about dressed like that I" 

'^Not at all odd. It shows she has a soul 
that is above subscribing to those horrid French 
fashions . those degrading swathing-bands, 
that reduce every woman to a tailor's block. 
The idea of any M. Worth dictating to the 
women throughout the universe how they are 
to clothe I Wait till you see this girl. I have 
discovered who she is . and, curiously enough, 
I remember now having heard all about her 
from Lady Frances Cope/' 

'^ Really I Then she is in society ? I thought 
t/be must be some painter's model, from your 
account, my dear; but Lady Bannockbum, I 



POET AND PEER. 281 i 

know, is very particular as to whom she lets 
Frances associate with." 

** Lets her associate with ? Why, that dumpy 
little thing is not fit to tie the shoestrings of 
this goddess 1" laughed Wilfred. 

" The qualities we look for in an associate," 
remonstrated Lady Athelstone, with a weak 
attempt to improve the occasion, '* do not de- 
pend . eh, my dear? . upon . upon looks. You 
can know nothing about this person's mind and 
character. What is her name ?" 

"Her name is Brabazcn; and my instinct, 
my perception, would tell me a great deal about 
her miad and character, if I had not already 
heard so much of both from her friend. She 
used to say she was unlike any other woman 
in the world, and so she is . I feel sure 
she is." 

" Brabazon," repeated Lady Athelstone, medi- 
tatively. "There used to be some Brabazons 
I knew in Park Lane." 

" You are not likely ever to have known 
these. The father married an Italian, and they 
have lived chiefly abroad. The father died 



282 POET AND PR 

here a few years ago. Miss Brabazon has never 
gone out ID London, and her acquaiDtance there 
is chiefly in the literary and artistic world. 
They are here at the *uropa' (I followed 
her in there, and asked the porter). I wonder 
who knows her? I must get introduced at 
once." 

^^ I am going to the Embassy to-day. I will 
ask about them there," said his mother^ with 
something approaching to a sigh. 

This dear, brilliant^ gifted son of hers was 
sadly difficult to manage . always breaking out 
into some extravagance. Heaven only knew 
what these people were like I She prayed 
they might be unobjectionable; but she felt 
some doubt on the subject, in spite of Lady 
Frances's supposed intimacy . for that might be 
only dear Wilfred^s assumption: he always 
jumped so rapidly at conclusions. 

The inquiries at the Embassy, however, 
proved perfectly satisfactory. Mrs. Brabazon's 
birthy it is true, was supposed to be obscure ; 
but she had always been of irreproachable con- 
duct, and that in spite of considerable tempta- 



POET AND PEER. 285 

tion ; for she had been remarkable for her 
beauty, and her husband had always led the 
life of an invalid. His income had been scarcely 
more than moderate, but it was found, at hi& 
death, that he had lived within his means, 
and his only child was heiress to a considerable 
fortune. Since she was iBfteen . and she waa 
now six and twenty^-she had never had a home. 
They lived at hotels, six months in one place, 
or as much as nine months in another : health 
and education being the two motive powers 
that had regulated their course during many 
years. Since Mr. Brabazon's death they had 
been even less in England than before, passing 
each winter in a different capital. The untried 
had attractions for both mother and daughter : 
they liked travelling, despised what is ordinari- 
ly understood as comfort, and were indifferent to 
general society. 

" You will find a lot of their intimates . and a 
very queer lot they are . if you ever drop in there 
of an evening," said Beauport, a merry young- 
attache, to Athelstone at the English club that 
day . " painters and poets, with shaggy beard& 



284 POET AND PEER. 

and BuspiciouB linen, strong-minded American 
females, and a few persevering Italian fortune- 
hunters, who, undeterred by the very tall talk 
that goes on, and by Miss Brabazon's treat- 
ment of themselves . for she can be contemptu- 
ous at times, let me tell you . worship at her 
shrine constantly* I go in sometimes for the 
fun of the thing; but I can't stand it very 
long, or very often. My intellect is not very 
strong, and the strain is too great. I should 
have blood to the head." 

"Can't you take me to-night? I want to 
know her at once." 

*' No, I can't," replied the attach^, decidedly. 
** I tried that on once, but I found they objected 
to having people brought to them. If we meet 
them, I'll ask to introduce you ; but I warn you 
they are peculiar. They don't care about posi- 
tion, and that sort of thing, a bit. Miss Brabazoa 
will like to know you because you are a poet . 
that's all." 

Nothing could have quickened Wilfred's 
desire to make the acquaintance of this original 
3'oung lady more than this speech; and the 



POET AND PEER. 285 

following Sunday afternoon at our charming 
ambassadress's little reception the introduction 
"was effected. 

Lady Athelstone looked in astonishment at 
the apparition of a tall young woman in faded 
green, with puffed sleeves tied up with faded 
blue ; but the face was wonderfully sweet, and 
Lady Athelstone could not but greet it with 
forbearance. In the mother there was nothing 
to be connived at ; she was still a very hand- 
some woman, with that grave grace which 
belongs to Italians, and her attire was only 
conspicuous from her chancing to be the only 
woman in black. 

Wilfred at once monopolized Miss Brabazon^ 
and Lady Frances Cope was naturally the 
ground he first broke. 

** I have heard so much of you from her . I 
feel as if I knew you." 

"I have also heard of you," replied the 
young lady, looking directly into his eyes. He 
did not wince, and she went on, " Do you know 
that she and her mother are coming here very 
soon f " 



286 POET AND PEER. 

" No, I didn't," he replied, careleBsly . ** I am 
Tery glad She is capital companj . only I 
wish she could come without her mother, who 
iH meddlesome, and a bore/' 

*' I never found Lady Bannockburn meddle- 
some ; and Lady Frances is somethinfz: better 
than 'good company/ She is a loyal, noble 
girl ; and I have the greatest respect, as well as 
affection, for her." 

'*You ought to have," returned Wilfred, 
nothing daunted, ^'for I never heard one 
woman praise another as she did you*" 

'* Perhaps you have been unfortunate iu 
your experience of our sex," said the young 
lady, gravely. 

He understood it all. She had heard of 
Madame Uberti from Lady Frances or her 
mother. '* Confound those gossips!" was his 
secret objurgation. 

'^ I have known some very good women/' said 
be, biting his lip. 

'' Have you ? I should not have thought so 
from your poems." 



POET AND PEER, 287 

"You have read them, then?" He looked 
pleased. 

 I have." 

He looked less pleased. 

"From the tone in which you say that, I 
fear you liked nothing in the book? Of 
course, I am aware it is not one for a conven- 
tionally brought-up young lady ; but I fancied 
you were not that." 

" No, I am not that, or I should hardly 
acknowledge I have read it." 

*' Why did you do so ?" 

She paused a moment. 

" Because I had some curiosity, having heard 
of you from my friend." 

*. And you hated the book altogether?" 

^'I thought it showed misapplied talent . a 
capacity for doing better things." 

'< These poems are meant to illustrate the 
various phases of a young man's inner life. 
Nothing must be hid. His soul's vicissitudes . 
the outpourings of his rapturous though transient 
passions . his discouragements as to this present 



2b8 POET AND PEER. 

-world . his doubts as to the next. Ton most 
take it as a whole, not condemn isolated 
passages/' 

Miss Brabazon looked up at a small Byzantine 
trjptich on a gold ground^ which hung on the 
wall opposite. To the uninitiated it was crude 
and harsh : to her it seemed full of solemn 
majesty and fervour. 

** If I tell you what I really think^ you will 
not mind?" she said, slowly. 

'* I shall not mind." 

^^I do not hear in your verse the throb- 
bing pulse of real passion, any more than I hear 
the cry of a soul's real anguish. It seems to 
me like a clever imitation of both, and leaves 
me unmoved. As to the doubts expressed, it is 
the fashion for every young man to have them, 
and talk about them, now. But when I look 
at such a picture as that, which has soothed 
many a troubled spirit for centuries past, and 
think of the simple lives that produced work 
like that, I feel how miserable and insignificant 
is all the labour and learning of the present 
day, the outcome of which is a lamentable cry 



POET AND PEER. 289 

that can only grieve and startle those whose 
souls are at peace, and bring no comfort to 
those who are afflicted." 

A little colour had come into her pale cheeks 
with the excitement of saying unreservedly 
what she felt to a stranger about his writings. 
It was boldness which extorted Wilfred's admi- 
ration^ in spite of his annoyance. There was 
neither assumption nor vehemence in her man- 
ner, and the lovely look in her eyes, as she 
bent them upon him, was that of a reproving 
angel. He could not be angry. 

"Sylvia," said Mrs. Brabazon, approaching, 
**itis time we are to be going. It make dark 
so soon. Lord Athelstone^ I am at 'ome nearly 
always in prima sera. I shall be 'appy to see 
you, when you like to call." 

And thus ended Athelstone's first interview 
with Sylvia Brabazon. 



VOL. I. U 



290 



CHAPTER XXL 

rpHE woman upon whom Wilfred Athelstone's 
-.. thoughts were now riveted presented a 
combination which to some minds was inex- 
plicable. She had an artistic love of what was 
picturesque, and that which appeared delightful 
to her in colour or in form, she saw no good 
reason why she should not wear. That this 
love of strange attire should co-exist with an 
indifference to general admiration, and an ab- 
sence of all coquetry, seemed impossible to 
many. But, after all^ given the grand, simple 
outline of such a character, it was not difficult 
to explain how the filling up had come to have 
this apparent inconsistency. Her father had 
much affected the society of artists, and from 



POET AND PEER. 291 

childhood she had lived a great deal with them, 
and with many of the free lances of literature, 
whose company Mr. Brabazon had found divert- 
ing in the various towns where they resided. 
Her eye had been early trained to judge many 
things by the standard of persons who were 
ignorant of, or revolted from, the canons of the 
" comme il fautr 

Her fine intelligence and elevated instincts 
were, indeed, vastly superior to those from 
whom she imbibed many of her opinions, and 
it was curious to note how a mind, unspotted 
by affectation, accepted the formula of men 
who were blatant impostors. She lived very 
much in a world of her own . a world the in- 
habitants of which but little resembled those 
she saw around her. She had, as yet, never 
loved : she had had no delusions : she was 
happy. 

Mrs. Brabazon had never sought to exercise 
any influence over her daughter. She was 
intellectually Sylvia's inferior, in every respect^ 
but a strong affection subsisted between them. 
Mrs. Brabazon had seen things for twenty years 

u2 



292 POET AND PEER. 

through her hnuband's eyes, and for the last six 
through her daughter's. She was simple, and 
profoundly indolent ; unworldly, amiable, with 
occasional outbursts of passion ; a devourer of 
French novels, rarely going out if she could 
avoid it, but living for her prima sera^ and the 
gossip it brought with it. In her the Italians 
were sure of a ready listener, and round her 
they were generally grouped, while Sylvia was 
discussing literature or art with persons of 
whom Mrs. Brabazon knew little besides their 
names. They were her daughter's friends, and 
belonged to the category of things that were 
to be accepted, but not understood. It had 
been so in her husband's time, and she had be- 
come used to the presence of those strange, 
mildewed professors, or others like them, and 
to hear a jargon talked of which she barely 
understood the rudiments. 

At the imperative desire of her son, Lady 
Athelstone called next day at the ^'Europa,'^ 
and left her card. She hoped she was not act- 
ing unwisely ; these people were received at the 
Embassy, and Lady Bannockburn knew them. 



POET AND PEER. 293 

The daughter, too, had a sweet face ; but it was 
not good taste to render herself so conspicu- 
ous : her dress made one shudder. Still she 
was respectable, and after that Ctberti episode, 
and dear Wilfred's avoidance of all society in 
London or in the country during the last eight 
months, it was something to see him willing to 
visit people who were above reproach. On the 
other hand, Lady Porchester had said at the 
Embassy that " no one had ever heard of these 
Brabazons," and that if there was a thing she 
abhorred, it was **a woman who goes ia for 
being artistic." Lady Porchester was known 
to have an exceedingly bitter tongue, and she 
had a young daughter to whom Wilfred had 
not vouchsafed a syllable. Therefore Lady 
Athelstone was a little afraid. She hoped Lady 
Porchester would not think that she was going 
out of her way to encourage an intimacy be- 
tween Wilfred and these people. 

That evening Athelstone made his first bow 
in Mrs. Brabazon's drawing-room. He was 
received with cordial graciousness by that lady, 
whom he found seated before a tea-table. He 



294 POET AND PEER. 

was surprised at the transformation which taste 
had effected in an ordinary hotel apartment. 
Hangings of old Italian embroidery, fine in 
design and general *' tone/' though much &ded^ 
concealed the hideous doors, and covered one 
long stretch of putty-coloured wall opposite 
the fireplace. On the sides of the room hung a 
number of oil-sketches and small pictures of Miss 
Brabazon's painting. An easel stood near the 
window. There was an odd mixture of books 
upon the tables: English essays; German 
poetry ; Italian MSS. on vellum ; the last enun- 
ciations of Zola and Daudet. A mandolin lay 
upon the piano; the white poodle upon a 
Turkish rug. The air was heavy with the scent 
of flowers in majolica jars. 

Mrs. Brabazon and a dark little woman who 
sat on the same sofa were supported on either 
side by a young Italian, olive in complexion 
and oily in manner. The Marchese Tivoli and 
Count Scappa were good-natured and impecuni- 
ous. The one was big, and the other little. 
They did nothing, thought nothing, aspired to 
nothing that a shepherd from the Abruzzi, with 



POET AND PEER. 295 

a six months' veneer of civilization, might not 
have done. Politics were a dead letter to 
them ; so was Literature ; so was Art, Neither 
had ever been inside the Gallery of the Vatican, 
nor had visited the Palace of the Caesars. The 
Pincio, the Opera, the legs of a thorough-bred 
or of a ballet-girl, the fortune of the last Ameri- 
can heiress (as per invoice), the chances of 
so-and-so succeeding so-and-so in such a 
married lady's good graces . these were their 
only subjects of conversation. They talked 
and laughed freely with Mrs. Brabazon ; they 
were at their ease with her. At her daughter . 
" quel bel' pezzo di donna " . they looked much 
as flies may be supposed to gaze at a lump of 
sugar in an impenetrable glass case. So desira-* 
ble, from every point of view, and so unattain- 
able ; nay, so absolutely unapproachable I 

The object of these sighs stood leaning 
against the mantelpiece conversing with a 
gentleman and lady as Wilfred entered. She 
wore a high dress of some dark brown material, 
in which, here and there, appeared a thread of 
gold. She held a fan of peacocks' feathers in 



296 POET AND PEER. 

her handy and in the cloud of hair drifted over 
her brow were stack three marigolds. As she 
leant there over the fire, she seemed to Wilfred's 
imagination to be some wonderful enchantress 
of old come to life. 

The lady who sat near her on the sofa, 
however, belonged to the nineteenth century^ 
without the possibility of misapprehension. 
Athelstone was introduced to her as Miss 
Decker, and with the first words she spoke he 
saw she was American. She was a vivacious, 
clever, determined little woman of five-and 
thirty, the correspondent for two newspapers, 
one in New York and one in Philadelphia, who 
pushed her way everywhere, interviewed every- 
body, gave her decided views upon every sub- 
ject (and some were very strange ones for an 
unmarried lady to attack), and had not a scruple 
in reporting all the private conversations she 
succeeded in obtaining with persons of note. 
Her dress was of the smartest prose, from the 
Boulevards ; strongly accentuated, but sinning 
against no laws of fashionable grammar, as 
contrasted with the wild, indefensible poetry of 
Sylvia's attire. 



POET AND PEER. 297 

The gentleman who balanced the equilibrium 
of power at this end of the room, until Athel- 
fitone upset it, was tall and thin, and all his 
movements were willowy. He was apparently 
about forty, was guiltless of any hair upon his 
face, and very little on his head ; had a high, 
narrow, and receding forehead, and pale eyes, 
which at times flashed malevolently behind his 
short-sighted spectacles. It was a pity he 
was not better-looking; one felt he would 
have been so much happier. One fancied him 
sighing, as he gazed at his own image, " Alas I 
I cannot be beautiful, but at least I can be grace- 
ful. I owe it to my reputation." He had an un- 
comfortable way of knotting and writhing his 
members, down to the very roots of his body, 
when conversing, which would have impressed 
one as the result of a distressing humility, had 
it not been for the curious affectation ot 
his delivery and the arrogance of his upper lip. 
Mr. Spooner was an apostle of culture ; he had 
written a .great deal, and lectured a great deal, 
and was considered an authority on art in every 
form, but especially Christian art. Persons who 



298 POET AND PEER. 

did not like involved and nebulous English, 
anathematized his works ; but he could afford to 
smile at these : he had a large public of the 
young men and women who sip with delight at 
criticism that is presented to them with a froth 
of fine language. 

Wilfred had meant to monopolize Miss 
Brabazon ; during the early part of the even- 
ing be found this was impossible. After intro* 
ducing him to Miss Decker, she had at once 
renewed a discussion with the professor, which 
Wilfred's entrance had interrupted. And the 
little American fastened upon her new prey 
with a tenacity there was no shaking off. 
It must be confessed she amused Wilfred. 

** You're a great poet, I hear. I haven't read 
your works ; but I shall do so, and write them 
up in America." 

"My works won't take you long . they're 
contained in one small volume." 

" Oh I . They're rather voluptuous, I hear." 

He looked her full in the face, and said, 
"Very." 

She laughed. Then she tried another tack. 



POET AND PEER. 299 



i. 



So you have just come right away from 
England, have you. Lord Athelstone ? Well, I 
hope we are going to have a good time in 
Rome presently. We have been vurry dull till 



now." 



** I don't care how dull it is. I didn't come 
for society. I hate it." 

"Do you, now? That's because you are 
a poet, I suppose. But pray, don't you call 
this society ?" she added, with twinkling eyes. 

" This is sociability. There is a difiference. 
Can you tell me who the lady is sitting by Mrs. 
Brabazon ?" 

*' She is a marchesa. Oh, my 1 I forget her 
name. Let me see. I have it written down," 
and she took a note-book from her pocket. 
" Pulci. that's it." 

" Is she married I" 

" Why, yes . more than most women. I have 
heard she has quite a number of husbands, of 
one sort or another. But I believe she has 
given up love for politics of late." 

''It is about time. She must be near 
fifty." 



SOO POET AND PEER. 

'* That's so; but she is vurry clever. All 
the men like talking to her. She knows 
everything that goes on. Some people say 
she is a spy." 

"She can't worm much out of those two 
young, stupid-looking Italians, I should think f 

'^A woman can sometimes get more out of 
a fool than out of a genius^ Lord Athelstone," 
and her eyes twinkled merrily again. " Besides, 
she belongs to the Quirinal party, and, I guess, 
has few opportunities of meeting any of the 
*Neri' except here, or in some other foreign 
* salon/ Those two men belong to the Guardia 
Nobili, and will tell her all the gossip of the 
Vatican. They're a couple of geese; but I 
often pluck them myself, and serve up their 
scanoal in my letters." 

Wilfred laughed. 

'* Now tell me who is the man just come in, 
who looks as if all colour and starch had been 
washed out of him 1 So languid a specimen of 
humanity I have not seen for some time, is he 
English !" 

"No; he ought to be, but he's Amurrican; not 



POET AND PEER. 301 

a type of our go-ahead race, however, I gues& 
that young man was bom tired ; and then he 
was raised in England, which just finished him. 
I am told half the young fellows in England 
are like that . a kind o' cross between Lord 
Dundreary and John the Evangelist. This is 
quite a model young man^ and nourishes a 
hopeless passion for Miss Brabazon." 

" Why does she have him here ?" 

"Why? I've just told you! Isn't that 
enough to melt any woman to pity ? Here is 
another of her worshippers coming in . Mr. 
Briggs, the artist." 

"Is that Briggs? . that burly, red-haired 
man ? Well, he is not a beauty ; but I admire 
his pictures. They are so bold and unconven- 
tional." 

"That they certainly are . and the man is- 
like them. Nothing limp and washed-out about 
him. Vurry sensual." 

"Strong and coarse. yes. But I like the- 
face, for all that." 

" Sympathy ?" suggested Miss Decker, mali- 
ciously. "No doubt he admires your poetry.. 



/ 



302 POET AND PEER* 

I went to his studio two weeks ago to see a 
portrait of Miss Brabazon he is painting, 
and '' 

^' Is it like ! Has he done her justice ?*' 

^' Welly it does look like her ; but he has given 
her too much colour ; and then she is located in 
a sort of a bower of red azaleas . wonderfully 
painted, no doubt, but harassing to the eye. 
Still when I gazed round upon all the fair-haired 
goddesses, with their drapery . nowhere^ . it was 
a relief to return to the picture of a woman 
clothed, and in her right mind." 

^' He is Venetian in his luxury of form and 
colour. What is akin to that in Miss Brabazon's 
beauty he would seize. I should not expect 
him to reproduce the Umbrian delicacy, the re- 
finement, and dignity . that must be beyond 
him. My heavens I what a laugh I Does he 
always roar like thatt" 

'. Always, when he has Professor Spooner for 
his butt." 

Wilfred turned and listened. The professor 
had taken up his parable again, after one scorn- 



POBT AND PEER, 303 

ful glance at the great hirsute painter. He fixed 
a vague, far-seeing gaze on the tapestried wall 
opposite. 

*' Yes," he continued, ** until we learn to take 
the sandals from off our feet when we enter the 
Temple of Art, until we drive the money- 
changers from its courts, and offer up the turtle- 
doves of sacrifice and obeisance, we shall never 
be purified. We shall continue to eat the flesh 
of swine with unwashed hands, and drink to the 
lees the debasing draughts of sensuality, by 
painting the superficies of flesh and goodly 
raiment delightful only to the grosser parts of 
man, and informed and elevated by no spirits of 
ethereal beauty." 

Briggs's laugh was heard again. 

" Sorry you don't like pork, Spooner. You're 
not a Jewt No, I thought not. As to spirits, 
I * inform ' myself very often with a glass of . 
not ether . but absinthe . never enough to * ele- 
vate ' me, however." 

*' Yes, Mr. Briggs," said Miss Brabazon, shak- 
ing her head, with a smile, "you take other 



804 POET AND PEER* 

spirits worse than yourself, and . ^you know 
the rest. Is all life a jest to yout I wonder if 
you are ever serious/' 

Strange to say, he looked for once discon- 
certed. 

" You should know," he said, with a sudden 
change of manner. 

"Indeed I don't. When you appear to be 
so, I always suspect you are laughing in your 
sleeve. For instance, at my sketch for *La 
Belle JeuneGirofl6e.'" 

" I have no sympathy with the pre-Baphaelite 
language of painting which you have adopted," 
he said, bluffly. "That you know: I never 
have concealed it. I don't like angular forms, 
and I do like aerial perspective. But between 
that and laughing at anything you do, there is 
a vast difference. 1 see a great deal honestly 
to admire in your work . a remarkable feeling 
iot colour, a wonderful power of expression. 
The drawing of the limbs is not quite . quite 
right, sometimes " 

** Could Giotto draw limbs correctly ? or Fra 
Angelico?" burst in Mr. Spooner, with a sar- 



POET AND PEER. 305 

castic smile; but without looking anywhere 
near Briggs. " That cold perfection belongs to 
the Ecclectic Schools. It is the spirit we want 
. the spirit we so rarely find . not the careful 
reproduction of our miserable limbs " 

**My limbs are not miserable . I deny it," 
shouted Briggs, laughing. '' The human body 
was the last work in creation, Spooner, . conse- 
quently the best ; and I don't see why it is to 
be pooh-pooh'd. You fall into ecstasies over 
a flower, or piece of jewellery, or pattern on a 
robe, minutely copied by one of these old fellows 
who, if he had devoted half the time to the 
human body, would not have given it to us dis- 
located. And your extravagant praise of all these 
minutiae does a deal of harm." 

The idea of telling Professor Spooner that he 
did " a deal of harm 1*' It made even Wilfred 
the bold wince. Miss Brabazon said, with de- 
cision, 

" I think you are quite wrong, Mr. Briggs. 
It is delightful to see the smallest thing in 
nature painted as well as the painter knows 
how. Anatomy is incalculably more difficult; 

VOL, I. X 



306 POET AND PEER. 

if he could have painted legs and arms perfectly, 
he would have done so. That is no reason he 
should not have copied accurately, and with a 
loving handy the beautiful objects of still life 
around him." 

*' Very delightfully expressed," said the pro- 
fessor, gently waving his head up and down^ 
in the young lady's direction. "Of course 
you are right. Of course there is no com- 
passable voyage of opinion on other seas 
for the earnest mariner. Let us be thankful 
(the imperious brevity of human life precluding 
universal perfection) for any piece of genuine 
work . the filigree of a Van Eyk, or the fungi 
ofaMabuse. Do they not indicate subjection, 
humility, patience? . those fruits of the spirit so 
conspicuously absent, in these latter days, from 
Art !" 

** And its critics/' laughed the painter. It 

was not in the professor's power to inflict a 

wound on him, as Wilfred observed ; he was 

only vulnerable to Miss Brabazon's words. 

" Will you show me Home of your drawings. 



POET AND PEER. 307 

Miss Brabazon?" asked Wilfred, suddenly, 
before the professor's acrimony had found a 
vent. She walked to the easel, and drew back 
a piece of silk that hung over it. 

'^ This is what I am finishing. Can you guess 
the subject ? I suppose you know well all the 
old metrical romances ?" 

Wilfred examined the water-colour drawing 
before him for two or three minutes before he 
replied. It represented an ancient church or 
monastery door, close to which grew a venerable 
ash-tree. In the hollow of the tree, a young 
woman upon her knees was depositing an 
infant, wrapped in a rich robe. The dawn was 
breaking over the roofs and turrets of a con- 
vent; far off the husbandmen were hastening 
to their labour in the field ; a priest's figure was 
dimly discernible within the church. 

" It is from one of Marie's Lays," he said at 
last. ** I remember it all now, though I haven't 
read it since I was twelve years old. It is 
called *LayLe Fraine,'and tells how the wicked 
woman who maligned her friend for having 

x2 



808 POET AND PEER. 

twins, when she was similarly visited, aban- 
doned one of her children in an ash-tree." 

" Yes, only this is not the mother, but a good 
little maid who prays . stay, here is the whole 
passage. I have copied it out for the benefit of 
those who do not know it : . 

*^ On her knees she sat her down, 
And said, weepand, her orisoun, 
* O Lord,* she said, ^ Jesu Christ, 
That sinful mannes bedes* hearst, 
Underfongt this present 
And help this sell innocent, 
That it mote y-christened be 
For Marie-love, thy mother free !* 
She lookM up, and by her seigh 
An asche, by her, fair and high. 
Well y-boughed, of mickle price ; 
The body was hollow, as many one is. 
Therein she laid the child, for cold, 
In the pel,t as it was, by-fold 
And blessM it, with all her might. 
With that, it gan to da we light. 
And fowles up, and sung on bough. 
And acre-men yede to the pbugh ; 
The maiden turned again anon 
And took the way she had ere gone." 

Wilfred was no judge of Art. His admiratioi^ 

. Prayers f Receive. J Fur. 



POET AND PEER. 309 

and his dislike were, critically, worth little ; but 
they were, at least, honest. He saw nothing to 
admire ih Raffaelle's '. Transfiguration," and in 
Michael Angelo's "Last Judgment," and he 
said so. On the other hand^ an indifierent 
painting occasionally roused his enthusiasm. 
Miss Brabazon's drawing was by no means 
faultless ; but it was poetically conceived, and 
she had that rare possession which can neither 
be bestowed nor taken away . the gift of 
** colour." The silver-grey shadows over the 
sleeping convent, the flush of dawn in the 
eastern sky, the dim-lit gold embroidery and 
fur folded round the babe, in the black hollow 
of the ash-tree, could not have been improved 
in their rich and tender harmony. The maid's 
kneeling figure was not absolutely right, but 
there was a quaint beauty in it which seemed . 
to Wilfred's imagination, at least . perfectly to 
embody the old poet's intention. In a word, 
he was moved as he seldom was by a design. 
Perhaps . who knows! . the absence of the 
critical in this young enthusiast was not wholly 
unpleasing to the fair artist, who was more 



210 POET AND PEER. 

accastomed to technical praise or strictares 
from the cognoscenti than to the fervid recogni- 
tion of that imaginative facnity wbTch soars 
above perspective and the pectoral mnscles 

She talked to bim for some time, and tbe im- 
pression be made was far more fiivourable tban 
on tbeir first interview. She was not alto- 
gether satisfied with this change of opinion^ 
which she regarded almost as an act of dis- 
loyalty to her friend. She had been displeased 
with his tone in speaking of Lady Frances and 
her mother ; she had thought him a little pre- 
suming . perhaps on his rank, perhaps on his 
abilities. Either way, she had deemed it well 
to show this self-satisfied young lord that she 
was not over-favourably disposed towards him. 
She had^ through the greater part of this eveu- 
ingy bestowed no attention upon bim, until 
obliged, in common civility, to show bim some 
of her drawings. 

'^ He can certainly be very pleasant/' she said 
to herself that nighty when be was gone. '^ I 
am not surprised at poor Frances's infatuation* 



POET AND PEER, 311 

There is a peculiar charm in his manner, just 
because it does not seem to be trying to charm 
you. If he ever loves truly, and loves the right 
womariy she ought to be able to do a great deal 
with him." 



END or THE FIRST VOLUME.
POET AND PEER. 



CHAPTER I. 

i BRIGHT moonlight flooded the Piazza di 
-^ Spagna, as Wilfred Athelstone left the 
"Europa." Instead of turning up the ateps of 
the Trinita del Monte^ he lit his cigar, and saun- 
tered towards the Fontana di Trevi, He was 
not in a mood to go to bed ; his imagination 
was astir ; his pulses were quickened ; he was in 
the right frame of mind and body to be im- 
pressed by romantic associations ; and, since he 
had read ** Corinne," he had always wished to 
visit the " Trevi " by moonlight. 

" What a divine creature that girl isl" he said 

VOL. n. B 



2 Kyrr and pekb* 

to UiiMelfy an he strolled along, bis bands tbmst 
deep into bis pockets, and bis bead a little bent. 
** She is the only woman before whom I ever 
felt awkward, as one might before a goddess 
who looked through and throngh one* She 
doesn^t know what to make of me* She likes 
me better than she did at first; and she shall 
like me more . ^I am resolved on it. Whyt . . . 
Goddesses were not made to be married . nor 
Corinnes either, thoagh for different reasons. 
But she is neither one nor the other, I feel sure ; 
neither coldly perfect, nor tempestnonslj pas- 
sionate and irrational. There is nothing 
'stagy' about her, as there was about poor 
Oorinne. She is a glorious creature, beautiful 
to look upon . delightful to listen to . living in 
a world of her own^ high up above the miserable 
pettiness of the lives that surround her. That 
is the goddess*part of her. Well! Diana 
stooped to woo Endymion. Ay, but she did 
not raise Endymion to Olympus . which is what 
this woman would try to do. Could I exist 
and flourish in that rarified atmosphere t I 
doubt it* And yet, if it were possible, to be 



POET AND PEER. 3 

loved by such a woman as that might make a 
wiser and a better man of me 1" 

He had wandered on, under the sharp, black 
shadow of the houses, pursuing this curious train 
of thought and introspection, until the noise of 
falling waters gained upon his ear, and, turning 
a corner, he beheld the streams of the gigantic 
fountain, smitten by the moonlight, issuing 
from its huge panoply of stone and artificial 
rock. 

He sat down on the edge of the basin, and 
recalled how Corinne, seated thus, had found 
Oswald's image reflected, over her shoulder, in 
the water. Suddenly one of those transitions 
of thought which appear inexplicable brought 
Nellie Dawson's sweet young face before him. 
If any image was projected on the dark, starlit 
surface of the fountain, it was not that of the 
peerless lady who had so recently impressed his 
imagination, but of the far-off village girl whom 
he thought of occasionally with a tender regret 
and some self-condemnation. His conduct, at 
this moment, seemed peculiarly culpable to him, 
not only because the passion which had actu- 

b2 



'.-*." 



4 POET AND PEER. 

ated him was extinct, but because, regarded by 
the light of his present aspirations, it seemed 
almost inexplicable. Little more than a year 
ago, and how changed he was. He drew out 
his note-book and wrote : 

*t In the black wave I would behold the face 

Of my last love, brown-haired, majestic, strong, 
Frest dose against my own. Lo ! in its place, 
Pale, silent lips, and eyes that suffer wrong 
Without reproach, I see : then, cry aloud, 
*' This bve lives not ; it sleeps within its shroud.* 

^^ ^ O dark, deep waters I wash away the past. 
Flow on . flow on, to the forgetting sea. 
Bear on your breast the broken blossoms, cast 

With fruits of folly, far away from me !* 
The fountain heeds not : at my feet it flings 
The rind and husks of bitter-memoried things.*' 

He left the piazza^ without much heeding in 
which direction his footsteps led him. At the 
comer of one street some PifFerari, who had 
arrived for the approaching Christmas, were 
playing on their pipes before a shrine to the 
Virgin. A lamp burned before the figure, and 
touched the bronzed faces of the poor ignorant 
shepherds. 



wmmmmsmmmmmmBmammmBmmmmmn 



POET AND PEER. 5 

" Would that I had the faith of these men I" 
thought Wilfred, as he passed them. 

He had reached a net-work of dark viccoli, 
too narrow for the moon to penetrate, and he 
stood speculating which way he should turn, 
when the sound of feet running rapidly towards 
him struck on his ear^ and the next minute he 
beheld two figures . one evidently in pursuit of 
the other . flying down the narrowest of these 
streets. The first appeared to be a mere strip- 
ling . the other a powerful man ; but the speed 
at which the boy ran was so great that he 
would have distanced his pursuer, had he not 
run against Wilfred, who stood in the middle 
of the way. 

That moment lost was fatal, . Like a wild 
beast the man clutched his prey, and kicked 
him brutally to the ground before Wilfred had 
seized the ruffian by the throat, and, with a 
sudden strength, bred of indignation, sent him 
staggering against the wall. Then ensued a 
tussle which might have ended ill for Athel- 
iJtone. Swift as lightning the man drew a 
knife from his belt, and drove it down into the 



6 POET AND PEER. 

shoulder of the arm which held him fastened by 
the neck. Happily his thick ulster protected 
Wilfred, and the knife, glancing partially aside, 
only inflicted a very insignificant wound. It 
was sufficient to make him relax his hold, how- 
ever, and the man, shaking himself free, darted 
down another street, along which the echo of 
his footsteps, running, resounded in the still 
night air. 

Wilfred turned at once to the boy, who lay 
motionless on the ground. 

" What is the matter ? Where are you 
hurt?" he asked, in his lame Italian. 

But the boy could not reply ; he was insensi- 
ble. Wilfred knelt down, and propped the 
slight attenuated frame against his knee. He 
might be fifteen or sixteen ; but his bones were 
so small, and he carried so little flesh upon 
them, it would have been difficult to decide his 
age. His long, matted hair half hid a face in 
which the deep purple marks under the eyes 
seemed to indicate suffering, and probably 
privation. 

What was Wilfred to do? He could not 



POET AND PEER. 7 

leave the boy, while he went to fetch assistance, 
and there was not a sound stirring in the 
streets. If he could carry him to the Fontana 
di Trevi . and he thought he could find his way 
back there . some water would revive the lad, 
who had probably fainted from fright and 
exhaustion. Though suffering rather acutely 
now from his own shoulder, he lifted the 
inanimate boy in his arms ; but, as he did so, 
there was a low moan, which told of returning 
consciousness ; and, though Wilfred held him as 
tenderly as a mother would her child, it was 
evident the poor little fellow was in pain, for 
his moans increased in intensity, until Wilfred 
laid him on the edge of the fountain and dash- 
ed the water on his face and hands. 

'' Where are you hurt ? Dov i ?" 

'' Mi fe rotta la gamba,'* moaned the boy. 

" Nonsense I Corraggio. Gamba non rotto . 
absurd." 

But when he tried to make him stand up, the 
boy fell back on Wilfred's shoulder, with a 
sharp cry. It was too evidently true. 
Whether from the fall, or the violence 



8 POET AND PEER. 

of that brute's kick, the boy's leg was 
broken. 

Where did he live 1 Who were his parents t 
The boj here burst out a-sobbing for the 
first time. He would not tell . no, he would 
die sooner than return home. His mother was 
married to that man, who^ but for Wilfred, might 
have murdered the lad. Amid his agonized 
sobs, so much fell from him ; and Wilfred felt 
that to take back the young sufferer to such 
guardianship to-night, even if he could have 
learnt where to go, was impossible. He was a 
stranger in Rome; he did not know where 
there was a hospital; he knew none of the 
police-regulations. There was but one thing 
to be done ; carry the boy to the Tempietto, 
and send for a surgeon. 

He lifted him yet more tenderly^ and, in spite 
of the pain he was himself in, succeeded in 
carrying him home. He met only two men, 
muffled in cloaks, and striding in different 
directions. He hesitated whether he should 
ask one of them to help him ; but he shrank 
from the linguistic difficulties of explanation; 



POET AND PEER. 9 

abd he remembered^ besides, to have heard how 
reluctant Italians were to give any asBiatance 
to wounded persons, their tedious course of 
justice entailing endless annoyance to witnesses 
in such cases. So he struggled on, with his 
burden, alone, till the door of the Tempietto 
was opened by his valet, who nearly dropped 
the lucerna in his horror at the spectacle of his 
master, with apparently a lifeless body in his 
arms ; for the boy had again relapsed into un- 
consciousness. 

" There is a spare bed on this floor, Jervie . 
lay him on it . he has met with an accident . 

and then run for Dr. A . You know where 

he lives ? Stay, first help me off with my coat. 
I have been scratched myself, and feel a little 
faint." 

" My gracious 1 Scratched, my lord ? Why 
your dress-coat is cut through, and saturated 
with blood, like anything." 

"Never mind that . get me a glass of wine 
and a towel . it's nothing, I tell you . and now 
run to the doctor. We can do nothing to the 
boy till he comes." 



10 POET AND PEER. 

A quarter of an hour later he returned, 

accompanied by Dr. A . He pronounced 

Wilfred^s wound to be trifling; it had been 
aggravated by his exertion^ that was all. He 
then undressed the boy, who had recovered 
consciousness, and examined him carefully. The 
case was one of a simple fracture. 

**What makes it serious," continued Dr. 

A , " is his condition of health. Look at his 

ribs, my lord. The lad has been starved. 
When the system is so low as this, the shock 
may be very dangerous ; and I think it right to 
warn you that, if the lad should die in your 
house, it might, under the circumstances, be 
very awkward for you. You know nothing of 
his circumstances except what he tells you. His 
family will of course institute inquiries about 
him to-morrow, and. you may have a great deal 
of trouble and difficulty in the matter . even 
more than that, perhaps," added the doctor, 
gravely. 

" You mean they might try to make out that 
/broke his leg. I am not afraid. This wound 
and my cut clothes would be evidence they 



POET AND PEER. 11 

would hardly like to encounter; Indeed, if the 
boy is worse to-morrow morning, I will lodge 
my statement at once with the police, and we 
may see then about taking him to a hospital ; 
but " 

" If I set his leg now, he cannot be moved 
with safety to-morrow, nor for a long time, 
probably." 

** I don't care," returned Wilfred. " The poor 
little chap seems easy now, and you had better 
set his leg at once before inflammation sets in. 
As to sending him careering round Rome at this 
time of night to a hospital where perhaps they 
will say they have not room to take him in, I 
can't do it. As to any subsequent difficulties, I 
must risk them." 

Dr. A looked upon Lord Athelstone as a 

benevolent but not very wise young man, who 
clearly knew nothing of the " difficulties " he 
might have to encounter ; but it was not for 

Dr. A to argue the matter further. He 

fetched the necessary splints, bandages, and 
lotions, and set the fractured limb. The boy, 
who was very patient, whose eyes, alone, were 



12 POET AND PEER. 

restless, held Wilfred's hand, and^ looking np 
into bis face with a sharp, imploring glance, 
murmnred . ^* Oh, signor, sto cosi bene. Lascia- 
mi star' qui I" 

Early the next day, Sylvia, attired in a long, 
flowing white robe, was painting at her easel 
when Miss .Decker was announced. 

" Oh, my ! Miss Brabazon I I have heard of 
such a horrible occurrence, I couldn't help 
coming to tell you. Have you heard about 
Lord Athelstone ?" 

" No," said Sylvia, startled. " What about 
him ?" 

^'Attacked and nearly murdered last night 
on leaving this house I Think of that I And it 
seems it was all because he protected some boy, 
who was half killed in the scuffle. And, 
wounded as he was, he carried the boy home in 
his arms. Fancy 1" 

"How chivalrous! how very noble 1" cried 
Sylvia. 

'* That's so," returned Miss Decker. *' I saw 
Dr. A on the street just now, and he told 



POET AND PEER. 1^ 

me . and Fm off borne to write nn account of it 
for America. I gaess he is a regular tip-topper, 
quite a specimen nobleman, this Lord Atbel- 
stone." 

*' Is be much hurt ?" asked Sylvia, who bad 
turned very pale. 

" Not mortally^ (Miss Decker was loth that 
the interest in her narrative should diminish.) 

" Dr. A , indeed, made light of his wound, 

but that was evidently to calm my apprehen- 
sions. I thought him a lovely man last nighty 
but now he has quite won my heart." 

" How little one can judge of character 1" said 
Miss Brabazon, abstractedly, her eye resting 
upon a sketch for ** La belle dame sans merci " 
she had been making. "I should not have 
expected this from Lord Ath^stone. He does 
not give me the idea of a man of action." 

"Ahl and Smiles, if you remember, in his 
essays, puts the men who go right, straight- 
forward at a thing, before all the thinkers . the 
inen of inaction. I'm not sure that he is right ; 
but I think it's lovely for a man to be chival- 
rous and a poet, tool Such a rare combination!" 



14 POET AND PEER. 

" It was not rare in the thirteenth and four- 
teenth centuries. Most of the troubadours were 
knights." 

" That's so. You had better paint his picture 
as a knight, Miss Brabazon. Fix him up in 
some armour, and he would look first-rate." 

Miss Brabazon, whose mind was evidently 
much impressed by what she had heard^ did not 
reply to this sally. She had rung the bell a 
minute before, and to the courier who now ap- 
peared from the ante-room she said, 

"Go at once to the Tempietto. Ask how 
Lord Athelstone is, and whether there is any- 
thing we can do for him, or the sick boy who is 
there." Then, as the man closed the door, she 
said . " He will find himself in some trouble on 
account of this matter, and we know so many 
Bomans of influence that we may be of use." 

** I feel like going to see if 1 could be of any 
use to him." 

** He has a mother, you know." 

" Ah I . What sort of a person is she 1" 

" We only made her acquaintance on Sunday. 
She seems timid, and rather cold ; but English- 



POET AND PEER. 15 

women, as a rule, you know, are stiflF at first." 

''Bamrods are a joke to them. I should 
like to see her face, if I called on her son I 
Wouldn't she think it improper, rather?" 

" I am afraid she would." 

" I really liked Lord Athelstone. I couldn't 
get much out of him, but there's a vurry pleasant 
look in his face. You like him, don^t you, Miss 
Brabazon ?" 

" He is clever and agreeable. From what I 
had heard, I was not prepared to like him . but 
my prejudices, I confess, have a good deal 
melted away . especially since this last trait. 
A man who could act so must at once be brave 
and tender . the two best things a man can be. 
He has been mistaken, and others have been 
mistaken in him ; but he cannot be heartless." 

*^I should calculate," said the sharp little 
lady, with a laugh like hail, " he was only likely 
to have too much heart ; his poems, I'm told, 
look like it. don't they ?" 

" He is still very young . hardly more than 
a boy. One must not be too severe upon the 
follies of youth." 



16 POET AND PEER. 

''Bless J0U9 mj dear Miss Brabazon, I am 
only likely to be too lenient. I tell yon I think 
him a lovely man . quite dangerous." 

Miss Decker ran on a little longer in the 
same style ; dexterous in her powers of probing, 
shrewd in her observations^ and unconsciously 
offensive in many of her remarks. ** H y a des 
managements que Tesprit mSme et I'usage du 
monde n'apprennent pas/' as Madame de Stael 
says. There was a certain coarseness of fibre 
in the clever little American which, in spite of 
all her experience of the world, roughened her 
intercourse with those whose integuments were 
at all sensitive. 

Shortly after her departure, the courier 
returned. He had seen Lord Athelstone him- 
self, who had sent a message in reply to say 
he should esteem it a great favour if Miss 
Brabazon would call upon Lady Athelstone 
in the course of the morning. 



17 



'] ) CHAPTER II. 

"TTTHEN Mrs. Barton, her ladyship's maid, 
' ^ communicated to her mistress early that 
morning the astounding news she had learned 
from Jervis, Lady Athelstone was thrown into 
a state of great agitation. She at once ran 
into her son's room, whom she found fast asleep. 
She questioned Jervis as to all the circum- 
stances of the previous night, so far as he knew 

them, and, being assured that Dr. A had 

pronounced his lordship's wound to be un- 
important, she knelt down, poor woman, in 
the solitude of her chamber, and thanked God 
fervently for his escape. 

She had then leisure to reflect how in- 
considerate it was of Wilfred to bring home a 

VOL. 11. C 



18 POET AND PEER. 

beggar boy with a broken leg, who would pro- 
bably fill the house with fleas. It was so rash . 
so characteristic of him, dear fellow I She 

desired to be informed when Dr. A 

arrived. She would not mind giving any 
reasonable sum to the beggar, provided he 
could be got out of the house ; but fleas were a 
thing she could not stand. And then her 
thoughts turned to the Bishop of Oporto. He 
had preached a most eloquent sermon upon 
Lazarus last Sunday. Would he consider this 
beggar boy to be as Lazarus? She was sure 
she was not like Dives; but what would the 
Bishop say she ought to do ? Fleas were so 
unpleasant. 

Wilfred slept late; but, when he woke, he 
went at once to the boy's room. He had slept 
and had eaten; there was no fever, and he 
seemed very tranquil ; but he looked even more 
ill by the searching light of day than he had 
done the previous night. 

The question for consideration now was, 
what should be done. Ought the police to be 
communicated with t Dr. A , who arrived 



POET AND PEER. 19 

shortly after, advised that the British Embassy 
fihould be iaformed of the circumstances. The 
matter could not be kept a secret ; it was better 
to let the true facts be known at once, whether 
any subsequent steps were taken against the 
malefactor or not. The boy was going on 
well, but it was essential to keep him quiet. To 
excite him by questions might be very preju- 
dicial to him at present. Dr. A had some 

important cases that morning, and could only 
stay a few minutes, but he ran up to Lady 
Athelstone, in obedience to her summons, and 
told her that to remove the boy was not to be 
thought of now. He had urged Lord Athel- 
stone to let him do so last night, and his lord- 
ship had declined: he must abide by that 
decision. 

It was shortly after this that Sylvia's messen- 
ger arrived. She had given him an opening, 
and he did not lack a very plausible excuse to 
himself (if he needed one) for enticing her here. 
She would see the boy, and would understand 
much that he said which was lost on Wilfred. 
She would suggest some means of communicat- 

c2 



J 



20 POET AND PEER. 

ing with the lad's mother : her help might be 
really serviceable. He went at once to the 
drawing-room, and prepared Lady Athelstone 
for her visitor. 

*^ Dear me I" she ejaculated, and then paused. 
'^ Beally all this is so very odd, and unlike any- 
thing that I ever . . . You are not, surely, my 
dear, going to take Miss Brabazon in^ to see 
that beggar in bed?" 

** Why not? I wish you would not call him 
a beggar, by the way. This poor little chap is 
not a beggar, and I am sure Miss Brabazon will 
be delighted to go and see him." 

" Well, it is a very unusual sort of proceed- 
ing. Of course it will oblige me to go 
too." 

Here she began a rigid examination of her 
nails, beginning at the little finger. 

''Not at all. It is not the least necessary. 
Miss Brabazon is above such ridiculous pmdery." 

" It is all very well to call it * prudery,' but 
such things are not done. It would be different 
if she belonged to a Sisterhood, but '' 

"Stuff I What can it signify whether she 



POET AND PEER. 21 

'wears a poke-bonnet or not, if she is doing a 
good deed f " 

" I should like to put it to the Bishop of 
Oporto," said Lady Athelstone, shaking her 
head, without looking up from her nails. "I 
am not at all sure that one has a right to fly 
in the face of public opinion in that way." 

Presently Miss Brabazon arrived, and Lady 
Athelstone received her with a sort of chastened 
resignation. Wilfred felt that only very ex- 
ceptional circumstances would have brought her 
to call on his mother ; and his eyes danced with 
.delight at the success of his plan. Pale, and 
with his arm in a sling, never before had he 
appeared so interesting in Sylvia's eyes. 

"I hope you are not suffering? I hope Lord 
Athelstone is not making light of his wound ?" 
she said, turning to his mother. 

" I believe . I ought rather to say I trust . 
there is nothing serious," returned Lady Athel- 
stone, with becoming caution ; " but it was a 
merciful escape. Fancy a stiletto !" 

" Yes, the thickness of my pilot cloth alone 
fiaved me. It is hardly more than a scratch." 



22 POET AND PEER. 

"I am very thankful," said Sylvia, with a 
fervour and simplicity few English-bred girls 
would have dared evince ; *' and I am sorry 
and ashamed for poor Rome, which I love, and 
cannot bear to hear abused/' 

^* I must say, after this, no one can venture 
to go out alone at night," said Lady Athelstone, 
with unusual decision. 

*' No one can venture to resemble the Pala- 
dins of old, and help those who are in need," re- 
sponded Miss Brabazon, smiling gravely. ^'I 
am afraid that is the moral of it. Will you 
tell me exactly what happened ? I have only 
heard the story third or fourth-hand." 

He related what had occurred, making light 
of his own share in the transaction. She said 
nothing, but there was an expression in her 
eyes he had not seen there before. He had 
been conscious of a certain severity, a certain 
reprobation, in her manner of looking at him,, 
which had now melted away. 

*' You are used to these Boman peasants. Miss 
Brabazon* Do you mind seeing the boy ? You 
will understand better what he says than I do^ 



POET AND PEER, 23 

and perhaps he will tell you something about 
his mother/* 

<< She must be a horrible woman I You will 
not give him up to her I" 

" Not at present, certainly. The doctor's cer- 
tificate is enough to prevent his being moved. 
But ultimately I . . . . What are we to do ?" 

" You must first go to the police . that is the 
first thing . then we must find out who the 
step-father is. Yes, let me see the boy at 
once. The police are not very efficient here, 
but in this case the man is, of course, to be 
found easily enough ; and, with this attempted 
assassination hanging over his head, he could 
be frightened into any terms about the boy you 
chose to dictate." 

She rose, to Lady Athelstoiie's dismay, and 
followed her son from the room, as though it 
were the simplest thing in the world* 

The young Italian opened his large, hollow 
eyes wide at the vision of a beautiful lady who 
glided into his room, and seated herself beside 
Jiis bed, taking one of his yellow emaciated 
hands in hers* Was this a saint stepped down 



24 POET AND PEER. 

from heaven upon a cloud such as he had gazed 
up at in the Church of St. Maria in Vallicella. 
He had never before been tenderly looked upon 
by soft violet eyes, never tenderly handled by 
delicate white fingers. Was he in a dream? 
He had a shrewd, speculative look in his lean 
little face. It might be the cunning bred of ill- 
treatment^ natural inteUigence sharpened by 
the contact of evil ; but, that there was some 
good in the boy's nature^ his radiant smile 
indicated beyond doubt. He might be a shock- 
ing little scamp^ but he was a scamp capable of 
affection. She spoke to him, in musical tones, 
his own sweet, large- voweled language, and 
the boy seemed spell-bound. Conscious of the 
soothing influence of the human voice, that 
expresses sympathy in certain physical condi* 
tions^ she went on talking to him for some time 
without seeking for a reply. She told him he 
was with kind friends who would nurse him till 
he was well ; that he need not be afraid of being 
sent home^ he was safe where he was. And 
then in simple language^ removed from cant^ 
she told him he should thank God for having 



POET AND PEER. 25 

preserved him and sent strangers to tend and 
to protect him. The boy had been taught to 
kneel before the shrine of the Mother of God, 
the Santa Vergine who could redress all 
troubles, if enough candles were burnt in her 
honour ; but of God himself he had heard no- 
thing. He wondered the saint-like lady did not 
60 much as name the beata Vergine. 

Then she sang to him some of the wild 
stornelli of the Campagna in a low voice, and 
the boy smiled. The desire to speak at last 
came, and he broke forth . 

"I know that ! I learnt it when I was tend- 
ing the herd at the Torre de' Schiavi a year 
ago." 

" Indeed I What is your name ?" 

** Lorenzaccio." 

** That is what they have called you in fun . 
you were christened Lorenzo, of course." 

** They have never called me anything else." 

" But your other name V" 

He shook his head. 

*' I have no other name." 

*' What is your father called, then I" 



26 POET AND PJfifiK. 

" He who married my mother is called Balbo ; 
he is not my father." 

" You have lived in the Campagna, you say I'' 

" Not long ; I had the fever, so they sent me 
home. Oh ! I was happy there !" 

" And you have lived in Rome since then ?" 

" Yes, signora." 

"And what have you done for a living here f' 

** They tried to make me help Balbo in the 
pig-sticking, but I was not strong enough. 
Then I was sent to the * Apollo ' Theatre, to 
help the scene-shifters, to run messages, to do 
odd jobs ; but they turned me off two months 
ago, they said I stole something. I didn't steal 
it, but Balbo beat me, and has beat me ever 
since. He says that I am not fit for anything.'^ 

Here he showed such agitation that Sylvia 
was afraid to continue the conversation further. 
She had learned somethings and a dog's bark 
outside the window suggested a happy diver- 
sion for his thoughts. She turned to Wilfred^ 
who was sitting in a corner, watching all she 
did with intense interest and admiration. 

" Do you mind opening that window. Lord 



POET AND PEER. 27 

Athelfltone ? My dog has discovered that I am 
in this room^ and informs me of his presence 
outside. If I call him, he will jump in. 
Marco 1" 

In bounded the gigantic white poodle, the 
impressive wisdom of whose aspect was some- 
what at variance with his vivacious activity. 
He thrust his pink muzzle into his mistress's 
hand, and then, at a sign from her finger, stood 
up on his hind legs, and walked round the 
room. The boy was enchanted. 

" He is like nothing but the Lord Chancellor 
on a tight-rope," laughed Wilfred. 

" Few Lord Chancellors would obey the order 
to die for their country as readily as Marco. 
Die for your country, Marco!" . and the dog 
stretched himself on the ground, and lay there 
perfectly motionless. 

" He is Venetian, you see," she said to Loren- 
zaccio, whose face was suffused with laughter ; 
** the Austrians are his only enemies. You will 
see he takes no notice of any other nation. The 
French are at the arsenal, Marco 1" (He does 
not stir.) "The Germans . the English . the 



28 POET AND PEER. 

Turks. the Russians . the Danes . the Spani- 
ards . the Austrians r 

Whereupon Marco springs to his feet, and 
flies round and round the room, barking furi- 
ously. 

One of this gifted dog's pleasantest attributes 
was the delight he took in his own perform- 
ances. No admonitory taps, no simulated 
severity, no harsh change of voice was neces- 
sary. His sensitive pink nostrils seemed to 
snifif the keen appreciation of his company, 
and he needed nothing more. He displayed a 
variety of his accomplishments with unfailing 
serenity and good breeding, and ended, in 
obeyance to his mistress's injunction, by put- 
ting his fore-paws on the bed, and licking the 
hand of its inmate. 

** Now I must leave you," said Sylvia. " Is 
there anyone . any friend . anybody^ in short, 
you would like to see I" 

"I have no friend in the world," replied 
Lorenzaccio, sadly. 

*. You must not say that now . ^you have us," 
he said, gently ; and it was pleasant to Wil- 



POET AND PEER. 2^ 

fred to hear himself coupled with her even ia 
this way. " Good-bye, Lorenzo. I shall come 
and see you again to-morrow." Then, when 
they were outside the door, she continued to 
Wilfred . ** The step-father's name is Balbo, 
and he is a pig-sticker . so much I know, and 
that is enough for the police. And now, what 
course do you mean to pursue I There is no 
denying that, if the man is apprehended, the 
boy, as soon as he gets well, will probably be 
the object of a vendetta^ 

" I don't want the brute to be punished for 
his attack upon me. It is only for the boy'& 
sake . it is only to have a hold on the man, as 
you yourself suggested. 1 suppose he should 
be taken up." 

She reflected for a few moments. 

" We have a friend who is a clever as well as- 
a very influential man. I will write to him^ 
Will you place yourself in his hands ? Many 
things in this country require interest . all re- 
quire tactr 

" And I have none. I shall abide gratefully 
by your friend's advice." 



30 POET AND PEER. 

ThereupoQ Sylvia, with Marco at her heels, 
descended rapidly the steps of the Triniti del 
Monte. 



31 



CHAPTER III. 

T^O combination of circumstances could so 
-^ ' well have favoured Wilfred Athelstone's 
impatience to become intimate with Sylvia 
Brabazon. She came nearly every day that 
week to see Lorenzaccio, and Wilfred never 
failed to be present at these visits. Insensibly, 
a certain familiarity was established ; not that 
much passed between them directly, and they 
were never Ute-h-Ute ; but a common interest, 
and that interest one of sympathy with suffer- 
ing, binds more quickly than mere intercourse, 
the cords of which are but packthreads of 
agreeability. 

What Miss Brabazon did on these occasions, 
she did with a simplicity and dignity which 



82 POET AND PEER. 

would have "prevented the most fatuous man in 
Wilfred's place from imagining that she was 
led to act thus out of the expectation of meet- 
ing him. Yet many young women might have 
been fairly so charged. The boy was well 
cared for : Miss Brabazon was not called upon, 
in the ordinary demands of charity, to visit 
him. But it pleased her to do so, and she did 
it in a manner which disarmed even Lady 
Athelstone. So true is it that some actions 
must not be judged by themselves : their signi- 
ficance depends upon their agents. 

As regards the boy, it is enough, for the 
present, to say that the Brabazons' Italian 
friend arranged matters, by "interest,*' in 
such a comfortable way as to give Lord Athel- 
stone the least amount of trouble, and secure 
to Lorenzaccio the greatest amount of security 
that was possible under the circumstances. 
The boy's deposition was taken ; how, because 
he was starving, he had been tempted that 
night to appropriate his step-father's supper, 
while the latter was absent ; and how, there- 
upon, the other's ungovernable rage had 



POET AND PEER. 33 

broken forth, and he had pursued Lorenzaccio, 
when he escaped from the house. Then the 
estimable Balbo was unofficially "communi- 
cated " with. It was pointed out to him that 
every circumstance of the night in question 
was known to the police ; that he was subject 
to be imprisoned and tried for the attempt to 
murder an English stranger; that at this 
stranger's intercession alone (who had charit- 
ably taken charge of Lorenzaccio) was he 
allowed to be still at large ; and that upon his 
present and future conduct depended whether 
the law was to take its course or not. As to 
the boy's future, his mother would be communi- 
cated with later. 

Athelstone's passion for Miss Brabazon in- 
creased daily. Unquestionably, never before 
had his admiration been roused in the same 
manner, or in the same measure, for any other 
woman. He was content to sit at her feet, so 
to speak, as he never before had done to any 
human being. She captivated his imagination ; 
she stirred what was best in him, all she did 
and said seemed to him perfect. Had she 

VOL. II. D 



34 POET AND PEEK. 

achieved a yet more difficult task? Had she 
obtained so firm a grip upon the inward man 
that neither time nor trial could affect her 
bold! 

He said so to himself with increasing confi- 
dence. At the end of three weeks he had not 
a doubt on the subject. When he recalled 
Nellie Dawson, it was as some one belonging 
to an anterior state of existence : a sweet little 
lily of the valley whom he might have plucked 
in the hot morning of youth^ had he not been 
prevented ; but between whom and this stately 
r lily of the garden there could be no comparison 
or rivalry. 

But the regal flower was reticent of its per- 
fume. Though she was flattered . as what 
woman could fail to be? . by the ascendancy 
she saw she was gaining over him, she gave 
him no encouragement. What her feelings 
towards him were will be gathered presently. 

'^The Bannockburns have arrived at the 
* Angleterre.* I had a note from her just now," 
said Lady Athelstone to her son one morning. 
"Shall I ask them to dinner?" 



POET AND PEER. 35 

'^ Tes ; and ask the Brabazons to meet them." 

" I only know Mrs. Brabazon so very slightly, 
you see, and " 

"It will be an opportunity of improving 
your acquaintance, mother. Let it be to- 
morrow." 

"You forget we dine at the Embassy, my 
dear." 

 Then the next day." 

" The next day is Sunday, and though being 
abroad does make a difference, still . besides, 
I should like particularly to ask the Bishop of 
Oporto." 

" What ! * cassock, bands, and hymn-book 
too ' ? I shall have to ask some Bohemian as a 
counterbalance, or we shall be swamped with 
orthodoxy. I'll ask Briggs." 

'^ Who is Briggs 1" inquired Lady Athelstone, 
with a plaintive elevation of the eyebrows. 

"Briggs is a very clever artist . rather un- 
couth, but capital company . a very good 
fellow." 

Lady Athelstone sighed ; and examined her 
nails. 

d2 



86 POET AKD PEER. 

'*I thought you would ask two of the 
attaches." 

** Very well . Beauport and Carton ; that 
makes us even . five men and five women." 

"But . but I want . I think^ my dear, we 
must ask the Porchesters," . raising her eyes. 

"Why on earth must wet Are you under 
any obligation to them ?" 

" No ; only you see there is a connection . sJie 
calls herself a relation. Her uncle married my 
grandfather's daughter by his first marriage, 
and I am sure she will say very disagreeable 
things, if she finds we are having perfect 
strangers like the Brabazons to dinner, and not 
asking her." 

" I am sure," said her incorrigible son, laugh* 
ing, " my great-grandfather's daughter-by- 
his-first-marriage's-niece-by marriage might 
remain a perfect stranger to me, and say as 
many disagreeable things as she likes, for all I 
care. However, let her and her ugly daughter 
come, if you wish it, . only that involves ask- 
ing two more men. Let me see: FU ask the 
Marchese Tivoli; he'll talk to Mrs. Braba- 



POET AND PEER. 37 

zon, and . Spooner. yes, Spooner will do." 

" Who 18 Spooner?" inquired Lady Athelstone 
again^ with a recurrence of agony in her eye- 
brows. "You know I am not exclusive, my 
dear ; 1 hope I ever bear in mind that we are 
all alike ; but there are some social distinctions^ 
and really the party does sound so very hetero- 
geneous." 

"Not know Spooner, the great writer on 
Art ? Don't confess it, mother. Why, he'll talk 
.ven the Bishop down." 

" 1 am sure I hope not ; I should be greatly 
distressed. Well, you must take the responsi- 
bility of this party on yourself, Wilfred. There 
are so many^ elements I should eliminate. I 
really don't know what Lady Porchester will 
fiay.'' 

" Tell her who is coming, and then she can 
stay away. I quite agree with you ; it is nearly 
twice too large . strike out the Porchesters and 
the Bishop, and I'll give up any three men you 
like." 

But of course those were the three to whom 
Lady Athelstone clung with tenacity, and invi- 



38 POET AND PEER. 

tations to the fourteen persons specified were 
sent out forthwith. 

He did not anticipate much pleasure from this 
dinner ; for he would have to play the host to a 
number of people, all of whom, save one, were in- 
different to him. He was impatient of the social 
duties of life. But he had effected that which for 
some days he had resolved on, though circum- 
stances had rendered this an easier task than 
he had expected. His mother had formally- 
invited the Brabazons to her table, and had 
done so, thanks to the arrival of Lady Bannock- 
burn, almost without a struggle. 

In the meantime, the prospect of a drive to 
the "Casa di Livia" with Sylvia and her 
mother, which had been arranged the previous 
day . an afternoon in which he and Sylvia 
would virtually be alone . for Mrs. Brabazon 
would be reading one of Zola's novels in the 
carriage the whole way . gave him great pleas- 
ure. His annoyance was scarcely concealed 
when, on his arrival at the *^ Europa/' he found 
Lady Frances Cope in the drawing-room. 

^'Ah, Milordo," cried Mrs. Brabazon, as he 



POET AND PEER. 39 

entered, " 'ere is your old friend, Lady Frances." 
There was a general hand-shaking all round, 
and she continued . ^' Lady Bannockburn is too 
tired from her voyage to take any motion to- 
day . but Lady Frances will come wid us." 

"I have never been in Rome before, and 
Sylvia is going to act as my dcerone,^' said 
Lady Frances, with a little constrained laugh, 
very different from her careless merriment at 
Florence. 

"I am a stranger here, too," returned 
Wilfred; "but I take sight-seeing easily. I 
mean to look at nothing more in Rome but 
what Miss Brabazon tells me I must. The first 
week here my life was a burden to me on 
account of Basilicas." 

"Oh! I can sympathise with you," laughed 
Lady Frances. "My soul sinks within me 
when I get to a new place, and I see in 
* Murray' I have to visit ten or twelve 
churches. If you miss owe, you are always told 
afterwards, thatj of all others, is the one you 
should have seen." 

"You should have the courage of your 



40 POET AND PEER. 

opinions, my dear Fanny; confefls they bore 
you, and not go," said Sylvia. 

'< My dear, I have no particular talents, like 
you. I am obliged to go in for being well* 
informed . what is called * generally' well- 
informed. The demands I find it entails are 
terrible; but I must be general, or I am 
nothing." 

*^ You are generally popular. Lady Frances ; 
that is conceded," said Wilfred, restored to 
good humour by finding himself by Sylvia's 
side in the carriage. Lady Frances would, in 
common politeness, have to talk from time to 
time to Mrs. Brabazon. 

** General popularity is worth very little." 
There was a subdued bitterness in her tone 
that was not lost on her friend. 

'* I don't agree with you. It is worth a great 
deal." 

"I should not have supposed that you 
attach much value to it," said Sylvia, with a 
smile. 

*^ Because I take so little pains to conciliate 
opinion ? Well, you are wrong. In the first 



POET AND PEER. 41 

place, it is a mistake to suppose it is incompa- 
tible with strong affection." (Lady Frances turn- 
ed her head sharply round to look at something 
in the street.) " Your friendship for each other 
proves it. Then the power of attracting many, 
argues a genial sympathy which is a very 
powerful factor in all human concerns." 

"Why do you discourage it, then, by 
affronting people's prejudices?" asked Miss 
Brabazon. 

'^Because I am not genial, unless I like 
people. I am intolerant of bores, and of shams, 
and of many other things that I ought to sub- 
mit to. My sympathies are strong ; but they 
are limited." 

" And capricious, like most men's ?" laughed 
Lady Frances. " What amuses them at one 
moment becomes * a bore ' at another." 

" No, I don't think so," he replied, meditative- 
ly, as though he were deliberating on some one 
else's ease. ''I often unconsciously offend 
people, and perhaps don't care enough whether 
I do or not. But I am not capricious. I know 
what I like, and why." 



42 POET AND PEER. 

*' And wlienl It all depends on that." 

"One can't pretend to be always equally 
glad to see people . at least, / can't; for 
I am not a humbug. What I say, I mean." 

''That is a virtue I have often observed is 
particularly dangerous for people to pride them- 
selves on. A passing impulse makes them 
admire something . no matter what . and we 
take this momentary enthusiasm au serieux, 
and attach a value to it^ it was never meant to 
have." 

" I am impulsive ; I acknowledge it. I say, 
I even write" (here he looked at Sylvia) 
" things which are the outgrowth of transitory 
feelings . things which are not understood " 

'' I did not know there was any diflSculty in 
understanding them," Lady Frances observed, 
in a low voice. 

^' And because of this," he went on, heedless 
of the interruption, "and because I will not 
submit to the treadmill of ' social duties,'* as my 
mother calls them, I am roundly abused." 

" That you rather like, I think." 

" Every man who writes boldly, as he feels. 



J 



POET AND PEER. 4? 

must be indifferent to abuse. And as to society^ 
I can't think that he is bound to waste a large 
portion of his life in a mere sham. If it is to 
serve the cause of humanity, Til sacrifice myself, 
my timej and my inclinations ; but not to con- 
ventionalities, which have no heart, no reality 
in them." 

All this was not at all what Lady Frances 
had in her mind ; and she had the annoyance of 
observing that, instead of striking a spark of 
shame from Lord Athelstone, she had but 
elicited a defence of his conduct upon general 
and wholly different grounds. She was silent ; 
and Mrs. Brabazon, who could make nothing of 
all that was passing, struck into the conversa- 
tion here with some question about Naples, 
from which place Lady Frances had just come. 
For the remainder of the drive the talk was, as 
Wilfred had hoped it would be, split up into duets. 

Sylvia had listened to the somewhat bitter 
words of her friend with annoyance; but the 
apparent unconsciousness of Lord Athelstone 
to any personal application in these remarks 
relieved Miss Brabazon, who would have suffer- 



44 POET AND PEER. 

ed for a loss of her friend's dignity, as for her 
own. His view and theory of life interested 
her: it was not altogether hers, but she had 
some sympathy with it, and she now said, 
taking np his last words, 

" It is not the heroic sacrifices, it is the petty 
ones which try us most, I suspect, and which 
we have the greater merit in making. If we 
were ruined to-morrow, I could work for my 
bread, and be very happy, but I am not sure I 
could live with anyone who made me read 
Tupper's Proverbial Philosophy aloud to him 
every evening." 

Wilfred laughed ; then, with a sudden gravity, 
he asked. 

**How do you think you could stand an 
English country life ? Would that be too great 
a trial? Would you call the dull monotony of 
cottage visiting . the only interchange of ideas 
being with the parson and a couple of pig- 
headed neighbours . would you call tJiat a petty 
sacrifice ? Would it not seem to you an insup- 
portable one^ after the brilliant life of art and 
intellect you have led ?" 



POET AND PEER. 45 

" Nothing is insupportable, I think, but idle- 
ness and uselessness. I should miss many 
things, no doubt, at first . chiefly the glory of 
light and colour Myhich touches everything in 
dear old Italy. But what makes life really 
beautiful ? . our affections, our tastes, our intel- 
lects are independent of surroundings ; they 
are ourselves, and nothing can rob us of 
them." 

^'It is very aggravating to associate with 
people wbo have no sympathy with any of one's 
tastes . who virtually do not understand what 
language one is talking." 

** Do you think," she returned, smiling, " that 
many of our Italian friends . kind, good friends, 
whom I love dearly . have any sympathy with 
my tastes ? No ; one must live one's own life, 
wherever one is, thankful if one gets any light 
from without, but not dependent upon it. If I 
lived in a lodging in Gower Street, a bunch of 
primroses from Covent Garden would carry me 
away to sweet lanes and pleasant uplands,^ 
and I should forget the ugly black walls about 
me. 



46 POET AND PEER. 

" Tou are happily constituted, Miss Brabazon. 
True poets are not obliged to go out into the 
\s^ilderness : they bring the wilderness to them. 
But to be pestered with nuisances is another 
matter. And, allow me to say, your present life 
affords you little experience of such trials. You 
wander about, without the cares of a home, 
without the obligation of duties, without the 
restraints of poverty : you do, it seems to me, 
exactly what you like best, and you surround 
yourself by those worth cultivating." , 

She shook her head and laughed. 

" I am afraid neither the Marchese Tivoli nor 
Count Scappa is as intellectual as your country 
neighbours, and I assure you we have several 
other old friends in the same category. But, 
as a rule, my father's acquaintances were not 
common-place men, and I try to keep up the 
tradition. I do not much care about society, as 
you can see. It comes and it goes. Neither 
ray mother nor I take any trouble about it. 
We seldom go to any of the embassies ; and 
strangers must seek ua out . we never seek 



POET AND PEER. 47 

*' Why should you, when they are sure to do 
sol" he said, pointedly; and Lady Frances, 
who had caught fragments of the conversation 
from time to time, heard the words. " I think, 
in spite of the Tivolis and Scappas, I have 
proved my case. You like intellect, and you 
get it. You like a blue sky, and you live under 
it. You like all that is artistic, and picturesque, 
and wonderful, and you gather strange, beauti- 
ful things about you. No I you have no trials 
. you can't understand them." 

** If you were not joking, I should say nobody 
can tell what trials anyone else has. I have 
had mine, and no doubt others are in store for 
me. But I will reply to your rather sarcastic 
remark about my love of the picturesque. Yes, 
it is my weakness ; I confess it. Civilized life, 
with its inventions and conveniences, and tail- 
coats and trousers, is so hideous now that I try 
to let my eyes rest upon as many paintable 
things as I can. That is the test which my 
passionate love of art puts to all outward 
objects. It is very foolish, I daresay. 1 know 
the world laughs at my dress ; but, as I trouble 



48 POET AND PEER. 

the world very little, I think I am at liberty to 
pleafte myself." 

** Certainly you are. I applaud you for de- 
spising those miserable Paris fashions. But ah I 
if you hate ugliness, I wonder what you would 
say to our drawing-room at Athelstonel It 
was furnished in the reign of WiUiam IV., and 
nothing more solid, more sombre, more hid- 
eously heavy ever was seen. Time has no 
effect on it ; as I remember it in my childhood, 
80 it is now^ and unless, happily, there is a fire^ 
so it will last till I am grey-headed." 

Sylvia laughed. 

*^ If I were the owner of a fine house, I should 
employ some artist to copy the decoration of 
the lovely room we have driven here to look at. 
It is better than all the gold and peacock rooms, 
all the silver-diapered walls with jewelled 
friezes of modern high art. I make you a 
present of my suggestion for your home, Lord 
Athelstone. Here we are; now we must get 
the custoder 

She appeared, and the ladies descended 
into that wonderful remnant of old Boman 



POET AND PEER. 49 

domestic life, excavated a few years since^ 
where the sky is yet blue, and the tangled 
masses of olive and oleander, orange-tree and 
myrtle, are yet fresh all round the walls. Sylvia 
dipped her handkerchief into the bucket of 
water she had bidden the cuatode bring her, and, 
passing it over the surface of the plaster, all 
the delicate foliage shone out as brilliant as if 
it had been painted yesterday ; birds of vari- 
ous plumage flying among the branches, from 
which the glowing oranges and lemons de- 
pended. 

** Oh I it 19 delightful I" cried Lady Frances, 
and she proceeded to scrub with her own 
delicate batiste a fresh bit of the wall. 

Wilfred was quite as enthusiastic and as 
energetic upon another side of the room. 

" See I how exquisitely these leaves are 
turned I" cried Lady Frances. **How natura- 
listic the treatment is I Who ever thought 
those old Romans could paint like this ?" 

" By Jove I it's wonderful I It gives one an 
idea of what the Campagna may have been like 
before the trees were all cut down. One may 

VOL. II. B 



50 POET AND PEER. 

fancy oneself in the grounds round Horace's 
Villa, which he describes." 

*^It gives me an idea of what a pleasant 
people they must have been who devised such 
a decoration for a room," said Sylvia, " Think 
bow delightful to be always looking upon what 
is sweet and refreshing. It is like being sur- 
rounded by an eternal spring." 

*'E molto curioso. One should say, they 
grew, those trees I" murmured Mrs. Brabazon, 
with conviction, seated upon a tub in the centre 
of the room, and regarding the three scrubbers 
with placidity. " I always tell to Sylvia when 
she come here she bring a towel, but she 
always forget. Lady Frances, you ruin your 
hand'chefl" 

"Never mind. I offer it up as a thanks- 
giving to the shade of Livia for having left us 
such a lovely legacy." 

Not till their handkerchiefs were reduced 
to rags, and they had examined every por- 
tion of the walls^ did they come up into the 
softened splendour of daylight in the open 
air. 



wmmmm 



POET AND PEER. 51 

During the drive home, the conversatioa 
was more or less general. 

" Do you receive to-night ?" asked Wilfred, 
as he handed Sylvia from the carriage. 

" No ; we dine with Lady Bannockburn." 

Lady Frances was standing close by, but she 
said nothing about his coming in the evening . 
" which she might just as well do," thought 
Wilfred to himself. 

'* To-morrow we dine at the Embassy," he 
said; *'but what are you going to do in the 
morning?" 

" 1 shall probably take Lady Frances to the 
Vatican ?" 

" May I come too ?" 

^' Mamma would be scandalized," cut in Lady 
Frances, with decision. " Miss Brabazon and I 
can go about with our maid, but not with a 
young man. Lord Athelstone. We are Philis- 
tines, you see, and slaves to vulgar conven- 
tionalities." 

" But I may happen to go to the Vatican at 
the same hour, I suppose! There is nothing 
to prevent that ?" 

E 2 



52 POET AND PEER. 

"Nothing; only, if we go, it will be at an 
hoar when you are still fast asleep, probably." 

Decidedly Lady Frances did not mean him 
to join them. It was very odd, he thought. 
She was so jolly and pleasant with him last 
year at Florence. 



53 



CHAPTER IV. 

REGULATIONS at that time. I do not know 
if they are altered under the new Pope . 
allowed the galleries of the Vatican to be visited 
in the morning only, between the hours of eight 
and eleven. 

At half-past eight the next morning, Wilfred 
drove up the narrow back court which His 
Holiness had ordained, since Rome became the 
capital of Italy, should be the sole entrance for 
strangers to his palace. No carriage stood 
there ; no courier was at the door. They had 
not arrived, so he lingered a little, and then 
wandered on into the first long gallery. A 
few Germans were there, of course, early and 
.earnest, with spectacles, and rings on their 



54 POET AND PEER. 

fore-fingers, and volumes upon "Kunst" and 
** iEsthetische Erziehung " in their hands, argu- 
ing over a head of Jupiter Tonans. Then fol- 
lowed the inevitable English family, root and 
branch : the solid father, anxious to " do " Rome 
thoroughly, the man who would be sure to buy 
some bronzes, and a mosaic table^ and a copy 
of the " Cenci ;" the mother, rather less solids 
and more interested, secretly, in the human 
figures about her than in those of marble ; twa 
daughters, thirsting for information^ one with 
** Murray," and the other with a note-book; and 
a son, in the post-Eton and ante-Oxford stage,, 
pleased to show his father that he does know 
something about Hellas and the wicked Roman 
Emperors. 

" That, my dear," said materfamilias to her 
husband, in accents which Wilfred distinctly 
heard . " that is Lord Athelstone . that young 
man in a brown velveteen coat. Mrs. Jones 
pointed him out to me in church last Sunday^ 
He doesn't look like the sort of person on& 
expects, does he, dear?" 



POET AND PEER. 55 

" I am sure I don't know what yon do ex- 
pect, my dear." 

" Why, something more wild and . and dissi- 
pated. You know he is the man who wrote 
those dreadful poems I was told on no account 
to allow Jane to read." 

Wilfred walked away with a smile, and 
nearly ran against Miss Decker, who was 
hurrying in, talking volubly to an American 
sculptor, whose brains she had brought here 
to pick, and serve them up in an article on 
** Statuary of the Debased Roman Period." 

" Oh, my 1 Lord Athelstone I who ever would 
have thought of meeting you at this hour ! I 
thought you fashionables never got out of bed 
so early." 

" I am not a * fashionable,' I beg you to be- 
lieve, Miss JDecker . I scorn the imputation. I 
am a working man. I get up at seven every 
day." 

" That is an interesting fact. I shall make a 
note of that. The American public have heard 
all about you, Lord Athelstone. 1 headed my 



56 POET AND PEER. 

account, * An Aristocratic Poet and Hero/ and 
you certainly occupj' two columns." 

*' Most heroes occupy only one, so I ought to 
be doubly obliged to you," laughed Wilfred; 
*' but you are hurrying on, I see^ and I will not 
detain you." 

It was now some time past nine^ and the 
truth began to dawn upon him that Miss Bra- 
bazon and her friend would not come. He 
wandered through the galleries, angry and 
puzzled. Was it an excess of prudery on Lady 
Frances's part? or was their non-appearance 
due to some accidental cause? That the ob- 
stacle had been raised by Sylvia herself^ he 
little guessed. 

On her return from the Casa di Livia the pre- 
vious day, she had gone to her room, and the in- 
terval between that and the hour for dressing she 
passed alone in contemplation. She thought 
much of the relative position of herself and 
Lady Frances with respect to Lord Athelstone ; 
he had been Lady Frances's friend, and it was 
owing to that intimacy that Sylvia had first 
heard of him. He had been praised, perhaps 



POET AND PEER. 57 

extravagantly, and then he had been abused, 
perhaps unduly. He was certainly not a model 
young man ; he had written and done things 
Sylvia could not excuse, except on the score of 
youth ; his opinions, if not his principles, she 
saw were in a state of solution. His was not 
the character she admired in the abstract, or 
dreamed of as the remote possibility governing 
her life. And yet she was not insensible to his 
charm . a charm independent of good looks, 
cleverness, courage ; and she had a conviction 
that, if she chose it, she might, in time, exercise 
an almost boundless influence over him. She 
said to herself on this occasion that she did not 
choose ; she would do nothing to interfere with 
the realization of her friend's dream, if such was 
possible. But she had no doubt in her own 
mind that Lady Frances had indulged in the 
wildest self-delusion. Nothing in his manner 
indicated that he had felt more than a cordial 
liking for her bright intelligence and genial 
spontaneity. That Lady Frances still cherished 
some resentment, if not some hope, Sylvia saw 
plainly. After the first interview, when she 



58 POET AND PEKR. 

told Ladj Frances that she had made Lord 
Athelstone's acquaintance, there seemed to be 
a tacit understanding between the friends that 
the subject which had filled so many of Frances 
Cope's letters the previous winter should never 
be alluded to. But the little lady was shrewd 
and observant. After that drive to the Casa di 
Livia, she, too, pondered in the silence of her 
chamber. She might be mistaken, but if it in- 
deed was as she suspected, why, then her mind 
was made up how she would act. 

The result of Sylvia's deliberations was that 
she said to her friend that evening, 

" The Doria Gallery is open to-morrow ; let 
us go there instead of the Vatican." 

And this is how it came to pass that Wilfred 
anathematized among the gods of ancient 
Greece and Rome for two hours that morn- 
ing. 

'^ Should he go to church ?" he asked himself 
the following day. " I went last Sunday, and 
it was only to see her. No ; she would respect 
my motives, if she knew them, for not going* 
She can't like humbug. I'll stay away." 



POET AND PEER. 59' 

It was not by accident that, early that after- 
noon, just at the hour he knew Mrs. Brabazoa 
drove out, he found himself in the Piazza di 
Spagna. The carriage was at the door, and he 
hung about till the ladies had entered it. Then 
he went up to the door, on Mrs. Brabazon's 
side, and shook hands with her. 

'*You like to come drive, Milor?" said the 
simple Italian lady. " Get in. Where you like 

to go r 

" Well, I want to go and see Shelley's tomb* 
Will you take me to the English burial- 
ground ?" 

" Burial-ground ! Ah ! I no like buriaU 
grounds. But you and Sylvia can get out : I 
stay in carriage. I nothing like that is malin- 
choly." 

"Tou forget, mamma, that we promised to 
meet the Bannockburns on the Pincio soon after 
four," said Sylvia, quickly. 

Mrs. Brabazon's good nature was bringing 
about the very thing Sylvia was anxious to 
avoid; she wished to spare her friend annoy- 
ance, and the sight of Lord Athelstone in their 



60 POET AND PEER. 

carriage would annoy Lady FranceB, she felt 
eure. But there was no help for it. 

Wilfred flushed with anger ; surely it was not 
for Jier to raise an obstacle to his coming. 

" Oh 1 never mind/* he said, quickly ; '* if you 
have not got time ^^ 

But Mrs. Brabazon waved her hand impa- 
tiently. 

'* Chi, chi I We back to Pincio in plenty 
time. You not stay long in that malincholy 
place !" 

Wilfred jumped in, and away they drove. 

^^ Where are the Bannockburns gone this 
afternoon?" he asked^ drily, not that he the 
least cared, but it was necessary to say some- 
thing. 

Sylvia replied, 

"They are gone to afternoon church; you 
were not there this morning, were you I" 

" No, I seldom go. All those vain repetitions 
irritate me. I can ask for all I want in ten 
minutes, and keep my attention fixed, perhaps, 
for ten minutes more; after that it wanders* 
Is it not better to remain away ?" 



POET AND PEER. 61 

*'I should have to put several questions to 
you before I could answer that," said Sylvia, 
after a pause. 

 Put them." 

But she seemed in no hurry to do so. Per- 
haps she was balancing the probabilities of any 
discussion on such matters being of service ; 
but, at last, she broke silence. 

" You say, * I can ask for all I want in ten 
minutes,' I conclude, therefore, that you believe 
in the eflScacy of prayer f 

" I believe, at all events, in its beneficial in- 
fluence very often on the individual who prays. 
Whether his prayers affect the decrees of an 
omniscient Deity is another question." 

Sylvia was silent again, until she said, 

**Does that concern usf We trouble our- 
selves too much, perhaps, with what lies be- 
yond our sight. In all ages earnest men have 
found comfort and strength in prayer . even 
men who could only cry, * Lord, help thou mine 
unbelief.' Though you should be a fatalist, it 
seems to me that,, to be logical, you should not 
forego a habit which you admit is of service to 



4>2 POET AND PEER. 

the person who prays. As to the repetitions of 
our service," she added, with a little hesitation, 
*' it is a poor excuse for not attending it, that 
these * irritate you.' They may be blemishes 
in a beautiful liturgy, and the time may come 
when they are removed ; but their very reitera- 
tion has impressed upon our minds in childhood 
the words that have recurred to many in soli- 
tude and despair, when no book was at hand. 
There are people who only believe in extempore 
prayer. I can understand it, where the mind 
is very highly strung ; but, in nine cases out of 
ten, it seems to me like professional * improvisa- 
tion/ an outpouring of conventional phrases, 
without the close symmetry and strength of the 
old Reformers' language, and ^" 

" Oh 1 no one feels the beauty and grandeur 
of the old diction more than I do,'' interrupted 
Wilfred. " Only it seldom interprets what I do 
feel, and constantly proclaims what I don!tJ' 

"And it does not occur to you where the 
fault lies ?" 

" I say distinctly that the fault lies in making 
me read or repeat in church what should only 



POET AND PEER. 63 

be an historical or intellectual pleasure. Take 
the Psalms^ for instance. Some of them are 
magnificent as poetry, outbursts of thunderous 
triumph, wild winds of lamentation, tender alle- 
gories, rich in Hebrew colouring, redolent of the 
odours of the East. But how many of those 
songs have any meaning . can really speak to 
the hearts of the many English people who read 
them daily? One or two favourite verses, of 
universal application, will recur to the mind, 
and to the lips too, perhaps, at certain times. 
But think how the general temper of the 
Psalms . its intolerance, its vindictive ferocity 
. runs counter to the spirit of Christianity, and 
ask yourself how much a congregation can FEEL 
of the words it listens to, and the response 
it utters . words that belong to a condition 
alien (thank heavenly from anything we ex- 
perience now !" 

This language was new to Sylvia : she was 
startled. What he said was, perhaps, true ; but 
her fine intelligence told her there was some- 
thing as true he did not perceive. They drove 
on awhile without speaking; Mrs. Brabazon 



64 POET AND PEER. 

absorbed in her novel, Wilfred watching the 
beautiful and thoughtful &ce opposite to him. 
At last she spoke. 

''I cannot think that the Psalms are meant 
to express the feelings of a congregation. But, 
if you will make them so, cannot all you dislike 
be applied metaphorically to that fight with our 
passions and our pride of intellect, in which we 
should pray for a spiritual conquest? The 
materialists of the present day, may we not say 
of them that they have * deceitful lips, and the 
tongue that speaketh proud things ; which have 
said, with our tongue will we prevail : we are 
they that ought to speak : toho is Lord over us V 
* They that run after another God ' may as well 
be the worshippers of Science as the makers of 
graven images." 

^* Your translation is ingenious, Miss Braba* 
zon ; but you do not mean to say that one in 
ten thousand who reads the Psalms ever thinks 
of them in that fashion ? They are not read in 
church for that^^ 

"They seem to me to be wisely retained 
in our service, as recording the wrath and 



POET AND PEER. 65 

the struggles, the sins, and the repentance 
of a people fighting for their God and their 
country in the fierce infancy of the world. 
They are the songs and lamentations of a nation 
who . like sheep have gone astray ;' and of a 
great king^ who, though a good man, had also 
sinned grievously. Have you never been struck 
by the fact that the men whom Scripture re- 
cords as having been chosen by God to do the 
greatest work, were never immaculate ? There 
is only One who was so. The sins of Abraham, 
Jacob, David, Solomon, Paul, Peter, and many 
others who might be said to be God's special 
instruments, are recorded with particularity. 
If one looks at it aright, how instructive that 
is . ^that practical illustration of * The Prodigal 
Son I' " 

" Tou would say that none are so fallen from 
grace but that they may do God's work? I 
fail to see how that is shown in the Psalms . 
though the position you take up for them is the 
very best, in fact, the only tenable one, it seem& 
to me." 

*. Surely it is well to be reminded that this 

VOL. II. F 



66 POET AND PEER. 

handful of people, whether wandering in the 
wilderness, or surrounded by idolatrous nations, 
tept alive their faith in God ? They sinned in 
all sorts of ways, over and over again ; but " . 
here she raised her large lovely eyes to his . 
*^ in their own savage way they had a religion. 
They prayed." 

The carriage stopped. 

" Dio mio I Is this the Campo santo ?" cried 
Mrs. Brabazon, laying down her book ; for, 
often as she had been in Rome, she had never 
been here. "And is that great pyramid a 
Protestant tomb, Sylvia V^ 

*' No ; it is an ancient Roman monument . the 
tomb of Caius Cestius, mamma. It stood in the 
Via Appia, till x\urelian built that wall. Won*t 
you get out ?" 

'* Ah 1 wherefore I get out, my dear ? It is 
so raalincholy . . I like what is allegro . . . how 
you say? cheerful, Milor. What is sad come 
soon enough . . . and death " . here she sighed^ 
. "ahl I have known it too well. I rather 
turn my eyes away." 

"How curious it is," said Athelstone, as 



POET AND PEER. 67 

Sylvia and he walked along, " that what your 
mother expresses . a terror of the idea of death, 
the impossibility of contemplating it without 
emotion . never seems to have been felt by the 
early Greeks. The figures on their tombs 
express loving regret at a temporary parting. 
It is a mother, with a smile, patting the cheek 
of her young boy . a warrior stroking his 
favourite charger . a husband and wife grasp- 
ing hands with dignified and cheerful mien . no 
tears, no violent despair. It seems to have 
been reserved for the Christian religion, with 
its doctrine of the resurrection, and hopes of 
immortality, to introduce the spectacle of in- 
consolable sorrow on its monuments." 

'^ Had not Stoicism something to do with the 
repression of emotion among the Greeks 1" said 
Sylvia. " They thought it proper, not only to 
die, like Caesar, ' with decent dignity,' but also 
to mourn with it." 

"And they were right," returned Wilfred, 
with his usual rapidity. " There is something, 
far nobler and more really religious in that old 
Pagan way of viewing the dissolution of body 

F 2 



68 POET AND PEER. 

and soul^ than in that of many Christians^ who 
belie the faith they profess. The idea of 
investing death with such terror is due to those 
monkish times when hell-flames began to take 
so prominent a place in theology, and griuniDg 
devils pitch-forked the unorthodox into ever- 
lasting torment. All that is unworthy of the 
present day. . Ah I here lies poor John Keats." 

They paused before the tomb, and read its^^ 
sad inscription. 

*' I hope he knows now that his name is not 
' writ in water/ but is * a joy for ever,' " said 
Sylvia. 

"Poor fellow! I have such an intense ad- 
miration and sympathy for him I I could never 
be ' snuffed out by an article ' . I am too tough. 
But I love this fair earth and all it contains, as 
he did ; and can fancy no hereafter unconnect- 
ed with it." 

She did not deem it needful to reply. 
They walked on in silence, till they stood 
before the elder and greater brother-poet's 
grave. 

'^ I love that inscription/' he exclaimed, after 



POET AND PEER. 69 

a while. " When I die, I could wish for nothing 
better than that those exquisite lines from 
** The Tempest ' I read on this stone could, with 
truth, be inscribed on mine . 

' Nothing of him that doth fade, 
But doth suffer a sea-change 
Into something rich and strange.^ ^^ 

Miss Brabazon stood looking at the stone for 
a few moments in silence. 

"Yes . I do not object to them; though 
many would do so, as expressing no Christian 
hope. But they seem to me appropriate 
to Shelley ; for I translate them after my own 
manner." 

" And hqw is that ?" 

" His sea-like music, with its unrestrained ebb 
and flow of passion, remains with us ; it does 
not fade. That which has faded from us is the 
loving human soul which, after all, was but half 
expressed in his poetry, which was struggling 
to the light, through clouds of error and revolt, 
and which in other realms is gaining a more 
perfect knowledge and a wider range of sight." 

"You have a singular faculty for making 



70 POET AND PEER. 

words assume the colour you desire they 
should wear," said Wilfred, with a smile, in 
which there was admiration, and no tinge of 
sarcasm. He stooped, and picked two violets, 
one of which he gave her. *' They are the first 
I have seen this year. Will you keep this in 
recollection of our few minutes' talk here to- 
day ? And, if we both live to be grey-haired, 
let us look at our violets, and compare our 
thoughts on some subjects with what they now 
are." 

She took the violet in silence. She has it 
still, in a secret drawer of the old leather desk 
which was her father's. 

On the Pincio there was the usual Sunday 
crowd of carriages and pedestrians. The 
Brabazon carriage drew up on the terrace, and 
in a few minutes Lady Bannockburn and her 
daughter appeared. Lady Frances glanced 
rapidly at Sylvia, gmd then at Lord Athelstone. 
He had alighted, and was standing at the door.. 
He handed both ladies into the carriage, said a 
few friendly words ; and, as the coachman had 



POET AND PEER. 71 

orders to drive on, Wilfred raised his hat and 
walked away. 

"Where have you been driving?" asked 
Lady Frances of her friend. 

'* Only to the Protestant burial-ground." 

** Lord Athelstone went with you ?" 

"Yes. He met us as we were starting for 
our drive, and said he wanted to go there. As 
it is such a short distance, mamma offered to 
take him, before coming here." 

A pause. Then Lady Frances said, abruptly, 

"How do you like him, dear, on further 
acquaintance?" 

" He interests me, I confess." 

" So I see. You think him clever and agree- 
able. But have you formed any opinion as to 
his character ?" 

"He seems unsettled in his views/' replied 
Sylvia, with a little hesitation, "and thinks, or 
at all events says, a great deal now that I hope 
he will recant by-and-by. But that there is 
much that is good in him, I feel sure.'' 

" I wish I did," said Lady Frances, quickly ; 



72 POET AND PEER. 

and then, turning to her mother, called her 
attention to the glorious sunset-effect over St. 
Peter's. 

No more passed between the two friends, 
during that drive, which the whole world might 
not have been admitted to hear. 



73 



CHAPTER V. 

JT was the first dinner-party at which Lady 
Athelstone had presided since her lord's 
death; the first time she had laid aside her 
crape. The year of weeds and seclusion, 
prescribed by unalterable laws, was past by 
some months now ; the time was come when, 
in justice to her son, she said, having a due 
regard to his interests, she must open her doors, 
and bring "society of his own class " about him. 
Whether he would not stray from the fold, she 
confessed to herself with a sigh, was very 
doubtful ; but she must do her best. 

She was a very well-preserved woman of 
forty-seven, and still looked pretty by candle- 
light ; albeit a little stiflF, and not quite as self- 



74 POET AND PEER. 

possessed as in the old days, when she had na 
anxieties, and the mechanism of her life was in 
perfect working order. She did not feel sure 
to-daj about the Italian man-cook; and still 
less about the amalgamation of her guests ; 
and, less thnn all, about Wilfred's deporting 
himself towards those guests with a duly- 
balanced measure of cordiality. The guests at 
Athelstone had^always been of one colour, and 
about her dear lord's behaviour she had never 
experienced any anxiety. 

She was alone, standing by the fire in her 
simple but handsome black dress, a piece of 
white lace in her still raven hair, when the 
Bishop was announced. He was a tall, 
imposing-looking man, with a very cheery, 
pleasant manner, who enjoyed life thoroughly, 
and discarded his impressive delivery with his 
lawn-sleeves, retaining just so much dignity as 
was consistent with an apron, and no more. 
He had only seen Lady Athelstone at church, 
or in the street, behind a crape veil, and he was 
quite struck now by her attractive appearance. 

" My son will be down directly. 1 am sure he 



POET AND PEER. 75- 

"Will be shocked not to be here to receive you," 
said Lady Athelstone. 

" Don't mention it. Men of my cloth are 
imfashionably punctual, you know. I am 
delighted at the opportunity of having a little 
conversation with you before your guests arrive. 
I trust, Lady Athelstone, you are here for the 
whole winter?" 

" I think so. It depends on iy son. I am 
sorry to say he does not care about his parlia- 
mentary duties as much as I could wish." 

*' He is young," said the JSishop, benevolently, 
"and cares more for poetry at present, I am 
told. Well, we must have patience. The time 
will come when he will be disposed to turn his 
talents to a practical account, no doubt." 

^'Ah! I hope so," sighed Lady Athelstone, 
*' for I deplore the use he turns them to now. 
His poems give the world such a false impres- 
sion of him, Bishop. You have not read them, 
of course 1" 

** No ; I have not read them." 

** They have made a great stir ; he has been 
compared with Byron and Shelley. It is so sad 



76 POET AND PEER. 

to miBapplj such genius. I wish I knew what 
to do about it. If he would only write some- 
thing like ^The Christian Tear.' I wonder 
whether it would be of any use your speaking 
to him, Bishop ?" 

'*I have not yet made Lord Athelstone's 
acquaintance, and, until we have seen a little 
of each other, I could not take such a liberty. 
I daresay he ^does not think much of the au- 
thority of the Church," added the Bishop, smil- 
ing. *< I must endeavour, in time, to get the 
hold of friendship over him, if any words of 
mine are to have effect." 

Mr. Briggs was here announced, and swerved 
into the room, his face unusually rosy, and his 
frizzy red hair in a state of wild surprise. As 
Lady Athelstone did not know him, she rose (it 
was too annoying Wilfred's not appearing to 
receive Ida friends 1) and bowed, with a tight- 
clutched handkerchief and fan, murmuring that 
her son would be down directly. But the 
jovial Briggs was nowise confused at having 
to return to his trousers-pocket unclasped the 
hand he had stretched out. 



POET AND PEER. 77 

" Mr. Briggs," said the genial Bishop, hasten- 
ing to oil the stiflFness of his reception, ** I think 
we should become acquainted. I had the great 
pleasure of visiting your studio the other day. 
You were not at home, but I was admitted, 
and saw your pictures, some of which I admired 
very much." 

^* I am glad to hear it, my lord. I am glad 
you were not scandalized," ^returned the 
painter, with a laugh that made him look like 
one of Teniers' favourite studies. " I don't find 
that all people are as liberal." 

"That *Nest of Infants' among the beech- 
leaves is beautiful in colour, and original," said 
the Bishop^ ignoring Briggs's direct challenge 
to pronounce upon the Venuses and nymphs in 
various stages of d^shahilUy for which he waer 
most renowned. " And that portrait of a lady 
in a Venetian dress is really a masterpiece. I 
am sure I have seen the original in our congre- 
gation," continued his lordship, turning to Lady 
Athelstone. 

" It is Miss Brabazon," replied Briggs, " and 
fihe is far more beautiful than my portrait." 



78 POET AND PEER. 

" She dines here," observed Lady Athelstone, 
in a minor key. 

" Oh, I am delighted," struck in the Bishop, 
in a loud major. '* I have wished to know that 
charming face ever since I saw it coming out of 
church." 

The charming face, behind the still handsome 
one of her mother, appeared at that moment 
in the doorway. The Bishop, with his keen 
enjoyment of all beautiful things, was greatly 
struck by the picture as they stood there a 
moment, Mrs. Brabazon's dress having caught 
in the door. The grand Italian head looked 
tragic, hung about with its black lace ; its ex- 
pression was full of tribulation, though it was 
only about a torn skirt. The younger one, like 
that of an angel of consolation, bent in sympa- 
thy behind. She wore a pearl net over her 
hair, and her white dress was embroidered with 
seed-pearls. 

** Quite a Portia 1" murmured the Bishop to 
Briggs, who stood beside him. 

But Wilfred followed close upon their heels. 
Had he purposely abstained from appearing 



POET AND PEER. 79 

liitherto ? No, let us not do him that injustice ; 
unpunctuality was a sort of reh'gion with him. 
Lady Athelstone presented him to the Bishop, 
and Wilfred apologized as much as good breed- 
ing demanded, and no more^ for his tardiness. 
The broad-chested dignity and geniality of the 
Bishop, in whom the man of God and the man 
of the world were so happily blent that pub- 
licans and sinners did not shrink from inter- 
course with him, won Wilfred at once. He was 
always susceptible to manner. 

The other guests now arrived in rapid suc- 
cession, the last being Lady Porchester and 
Miss Witley, whose resemblance to a pug was 
heightened on this occasion by her head look- 
ing as if it was screwed into a dog-collar, so 
wide and so tight was the gold-studded band 
strapped round her poor little throat. 

Lady Porchester was very effusive to Lady 
Bannockburn, whom she had not seen since 
the Marlborough House ball^ at the end of the 
season, and, as she sank into the sofa beside 
that lady, she continued, sotto voce . 

" Very mixed society in Rome this year. so 



80 POET AND PEER. 

few people one has ever heard of before. You 
may judge bj the company here. That bowl- 
and-dagger-looking woman opposite^ with the 
wonderfully dressed daughter, who looks like 
the heroine of a drame at the Porte St. Martin^ 
is " 

" Oh I" interrupted Lady Bannockbum, quietly^ 
**you mean the Brabazons. They are great 
friends of ours . the most charming girl in the- 
world.'' 

Lady Porchester drew in her horns. 

*^ Really I Oh I if you know them^ it is dif- 
ferent. The girl's dress is generally rather 
outrie, and, not knowing anything about 
them '' 

*^ I can tell you all about them, if you wish 
to know," said Lady Bannockbum, relentlessly. 
'^ Mr. Brabazon was of as good a family as any 
of us." 

** Really !" ejaculated Lady Porchester again. 

''Miss Brabazon might have married the Duo 
de Marly five years ago, if she had chosen." . 
Lady Porchester now understood why these 
people were invited here. Lady Athelstone 



POET AND PEER. 81 

felt that she, haply, might be entertaining a 
future duchess unawares. . "But she is a re- 
markable girl : she will never marry until she is 
in love," continued Lady Bannockburn. 

" There is a desperate flirtation going on 
hevBy I am told," whispered Lady Porchester, 
behind her fan. *'But Lord Athelstone is not 
a marrying man, I fancy . very imrtioral. I 
should be very sorry for my girl to be seen much 
with him. Of course we all heard about that 
Madame Uberti at Florence ; but I am told 
there was some dreadful scandal about a girl in 
his own village before that, and that is the 
reason Lady Athelstone has been so much 
abroad since her widowhood." 

Did Lady Porchester think that abuse of 
Athelstone must be agreeable to the ears on 
which it fell? Or, as a disappointed mother, 
could she not forbear from discharging a little 
virtuous venom ? 

Lady Bannockburn was saved from the ne- 
cessity of a rejoinder by the announcement of 
dinner. She did not like Lady Porchester, and 
had no mind to discuss Lord Athelstone, whose 

VOL. II. G 



82 POET AND PEEK. 

hospitality she thought fit to accept, with this 
vulgar-minded woman. Lady Bannockburn had 
once or twice expressed herself strongly with 
her intimate friends as to Lord Athelstone's 
deterioration : ^^ He was so nice when we first 

knew him at Florence, but " She was a 

lady, however, and knew what was due to her 
own dignity. To shun the Athelstones now 
would be an open acknowledgment of her dis- 
appointment ; she met the mother with all her 
old friendliness ; she even accepted this invita- 
tion, though she would rather not have done 
so ; but she would not sit at his board, and 
speak evil of her host. 

fle took her in to dinner, and manoeuvred 
successfully, for some time, to keep the place on 
his left vacant for Miss Brabazon. In this he 
was defeated by the young lady herself^ who, 
following immediately after her mother, whis- 
pered rapidly to her, in Italian, to go and 
occupy this seat. Lady Frances, who was just 
sitting down, between young Beauport and 
Mr. Spooner, observed with her sharp eyes what 



POET AND PEER. 83 

passed, as also the contraction of the young 
lord's brow. 

Lady Porchester, who found the rubicund 
Briggs seating himself beside her, turned to the 
Marchese Tivoli, who had taken her in, and 
inquired who the extraordinary-looking man 
between her and Miss Brabazon was. Being 
informed that he was a famous English painter, 
Bhe thought it well to be gracious ; and, as 
Sylvia was occupied in meeting the courteous 
advances of the bishop on the other side, Briggs, 
with his keen sense of humour, amused himself 
by " drawing out " the fine lady beside him. 
Very soon his rich jovial laugh echoed round 
the table. Lady Athelstone looked startled, so 
.did Miss Witley : but there was no withstand- 
ing Briggs ; he was contagious ; actually Lady 
Porchester was convulsed with laughter. Then 
he attacked Mr. Spooner (dodging him between 
the scarlet poinsetia leaves across the table), 
who smiled a thin, acid smile, and said nothing; 
but Lady Frances, with her courage aud her 
ready wit, seized the cudgels for the professor, 

g2 



84 POET AND PEER. 

and attacked the painter in return; and then 
all the table laughed^ and voices rose, and con- 
versation became general* 

Lady Athelstone was much troubled as to 
how the bishop would take such hilarity ; but 
he was delighted. 

*' Mr. Spooner is a clever writer, but I think 
it will do him no harm to be a little chaiFed/' ho 
said, with a confidential chuckle^ to Sylvia. 
"Lady Franceses adversary, however, is very 
able. And'' . here he dropped his voice yet 
lower . "your neighbour is vulnerable. He is 
armed for the fray, but between the greaves his 
adversary's arrows pierce." 

'* I think he hardly feels a scratch," replied 
Miss Brabazon, with a smile. '^ At all events, 
no wound rankles ; and he cannot under- 
stand that any of those he inflicts should do 
so. 

" I am sure you ought not to eat that salmi, 
Spooner," Briggs was saying, with a loud laugh. 
" We look to you, as our model of asceticism. 
St. Anthony never would have yielded to a 
salmi ! How can you keep your high standard 



POET AND PEER. 85 

of purity, if you indulge in * sugar and spice, 
and all that's nice' f" 

"I should conceive that you occasionally 
exercised a little mortification of the flesh your- 
self, when you dine at Lepre's for a few cen- 
tesimi, as you told me you did," said the pro- 
fessor, with a leisurely asperity. " But possibly 
you like gross food . it may assimilate better 
with your nature." 

" I dine at Lepre's because it's cheap," laughed 
Briggs. "If I were rich, like you, Spooner, a 
fellow of a college, and writing beautiful books 
about art that all the young ladies read, I 
should dine on turtle and venison. As to 
* gross food,' bless you, I'm not afraid of becom- 
ing fat. That^s what makes me so lenient to 
the follies of my fellow-creatures. Now, if I 
were sentimental " 

" Instead of Jleshimental" struck in Wilfred, 
laughing. 

''I should take a melancholy view of the 
oase Lady Porchester has just been telling me 
^bout, of " 

"Pray stop; what I said was not for the 



86 POET AND PER. 

-whole table/' interrupted the lady, alarmed* 

" Ah 1 I should be very sorry ever to tell you 
a secret, Mr. Briggs/' cried Lady Frances. 

** Try me ; I am a perfect well." 

**I had rather let well alone/' returned the 
little lady^ with a laugh. 

''Mr. Briggs has certainly divulged a good 
many secrets to us," observed the Bishop, with 
a twinkle of his eye; then, after a mementos 
pause, he gracefully removed any sting that 
might have been conveyed in his words, by 
adding . "For none will the world be more 
grateful than for those difficult secrets to pene- 
trate and to transmit . the character of his 
sitters." 

Here the Bishop glanced at his neighbour. 

** My sense of truth compels me to say, my 
lord, that I fear your compliment is due to your 
having seen but one portrait, that of not only a 
perfectly beautiful person, but one whose char- 
acter is apparent to any student of physiognomy 
in the fine balance of the parts. Few painters 
are fortunate enough to have such a model;, 
and it would require a Leonardo da Vinci to do- 



POET iVND PEER. 87 

her justice. To seize the spirituality of the face 
is beyond the power of any living man." 

He said this as coolly as though he spoke of 
somebody miles distant, but everyone knew to 
whom he alluded. Lady Porchester, indeed, 
asked where this marvel of perfection was to be 
found, but it was understood to be one of those 
questions that are not meant to be answered, 
and are only propounded to relieve the querist 
of a surcharge of spite. 

Miss Brabazon looked straight before her ; she 
did not smile, and the colour mounted to her 
cheek. The Bishop said something, but she 
did not hear him. Lady Frances tried to di- 
vert attention from her friend by the general 
proposition that the mouth was the only fea- 
ture which was a sure indication of character; 
no one could ever be deceived in tTiaU 

Wilfred muttered something about " a cad,'* 
which was only heard by Lady Bannockburn ; 
but Sylvia, glancing towards him, saw the 
scowl on his face, as did also Lady Frances. 

Presently, the buzz of conversation having 
become general again, Sylvia turned to the 



88 POET AND PEER. 

painter, and said, with a warmth very unusual 
to her, 

** I have known you a long time, Mr* Briggs, 
and I have a regard for you ; but, if you had any 
real friendship for m^, you would not make me 
appear so ridiculous, as such fulsome flattery 
can only make a woman. Perhaps I ought to 
pretend not to know whom you meant just now, 
I prefer to tell you that such compliments in 
society are in the worst taste, and that, if you 
repeat the offence, I shall . well, you will find 
it difficult to appease my resentment/' 

" I am awfully sorry," responded the contrite 
Briggs. ** I only said what I think. I couldn't 
say otherwise without lying." 

" Why speak of me at all ? Such absurd 
praise only irritates the world against the 
object of it. Half the men and women here are 
saying to themselves, if not to each other, 
' She is a mass of vanity ; she likes that adula- 
tion, she drinks it all in, and she makes her 
friends of those who will administer the intoxi- 
cating draught without stint.' Do you not see 
how unfair this is to me I" 



POET AND PEER. 89 

Briggs, for once in his life, looked discomfit- 
ed ; but the Bishop addressed an observation to 
Miss Brabazon at that moment, and \\^hen Lady 
Porchester asked the painter if he agreed with 
Mr. Spooner, whom she had just heard stating 
that Overbeck was the Raffaelle of modern 
times . " Raffaelle before his fall " . it acted like 
a red rag to a bull. Briggs plunged into the 
fray once more with undiminished ardour, care- 
less of whom he tossed on the horns of his 
mockery. 

"What is that, Spooner? Desecrate the 
sacred name of Raffaelle by giving it to that 
emasculated old plagiarist? Religious paint- 
ing, indeed I A pack of dry bones stolen from 
the old fellows, without a spark of originality- 
no colour, no life !" 

" Colour and life are inseparable from some 
measure of sensuality in art," observed the 
professor, not looking at Briggs, but gazing 
round the table. *' Compare the spiritual 
abstraction of Fra Angelico, that purest of the 
pure painters, with the domination of animal 
instincts in Lippo Lippi. There is no pander- 



90 POET AND PEER. 

log to the Inst of the eyes, no yolnptuous pas* 
tnrage of form and colour in the work of the 
man who prepared himself by prayer and fasting 
to represent the joys of Paradise. Let the 
colourists," . here his spectacles flashed for a 
moment npon Briggs . 'Met the colonrists keep 
to their gross mythology, which is the apotheo- 
sis of unbridled passions^ their nudities and their 
meretricious splendour, let them not approach 
the white-robed mysteries of Faith. They 
splash and flounder about in their sea of Tyrian . 
dyes, but the patient perfection of an angel's 
wing, the virginal fold of immaculate draperies, 
are not for such as these/' 

" Why, Spooner," cried Briggs, with un- 
dimished good-humour, '* to hear you talk, one 
would think colour was one of the seven deadly 
sins ! Who painted the sky blue, and the fields 
green, and a woman s lips red? What piety is 
there in shutting one's eyes upon the fair 
things of this world more than in tying up 
one*s leg and hopping with a crutch?" 

" It is written, * If thine eye offend thee ' . " 
''But it doesn't offend me," interrupted 



POET AND PEER. 91 

Briggs, ** and if I were moved to * pluck it out, 
and cast it from ' me, I should have no business 
to paint pictures, or to write about them, 
either." 

" I suppose we should all be agreed/' said 
Lady Frances, " that the first necessity of a 
picture is that it should delight our eyes ; 
though different methods appeal to different 
minds." 

"It is the method for which I contend," 
replied the professor, ignoring the truculent 
Briggs henceforth, and addressing his remarks 
through Lady Frances to the table at large. 
" The painter who, with purity of high intent, 
would approach certain subjects, must divest 
himself of all " 

" Not of all his clothes, Spooner ?" suggested 
the dreadful man opposite ; but the speaker, 
Jpftily unmindful of him, continued, 

*' . Must divest himself of every hindrance to 
the swift passage of the soul into a region 
where the air is rarified and earth-mists do not 
rise. He shall leave behind him the idolatry 
of beauty and the license of tangible delights. 



^2 POET AND PEER. 

and, soaring upwards, with steady beat of 
wiDg, shall reach, if he have the strength, to 
the effulgence of unclouded light. It is the 
ambition of the noblest art. the art that is 
.entirely noble, and does not pander to sensual 
appetites for form and colour . to lift us with 
it above the world we grovel in." 

" What you say is very true, and very 
admirably put," said the courtly Bishop, anxi- 
ous to conciliate all parties ; *' but, as Mr. Briggs 
suggested just now, the Creator of this beautiful 
world * saw that it was good.' It was created 
for man ; is it for him to call * unclean,' and 
6hut his eyes upon, that which his Maker has 
approved ? The true wisdom of the painter or 
poet . ^" he paused for an instant, and Lady 
Athelstone coughed. "is surely to use, not to 
abuse, the lovely materials that he finds all 
round him. Wordsworth has taught us how, 
in the commonest things " 

The Bishop went on talking for some time, 
but Wilfred, and those at his end of the table, 
heard no more ; for the latter exclaimed, just 
loud enough to reach the two or three round him, 



POET AND PEER. 93^ 

"Who reads Wordsworth now? He is so 
awfully prosy. If you want nature, read Walt 
Whitman." 

" I would as soon read a street directory, or 
a universal gazeteer/' said Lady Bannockburn. 
" Sooner, indeed, for my sense of decency 
would not be offended, as it is, in a writer qui 
ne V0U8 fait grace de rien" 

*' Ah I you have still insular prejudices. Lady 
Bannockburn. You must get rid of them before 
you can like the bold utterances of this lawless 
poet." 

" I have no desire to get rid of them," she 
replied, quickly; and later, in the drawing- 
room, she said to the Bishop . " Nothing seems 
to be liked now but what is strange and new, 
even though it sins against all laws of propriety 
and good taste. It is sad to see a young man of 
talent, like Lord Athelstone, becoming so per- 
verted. I was glad you spoke as you did at 
dinner, Bishop, about the use and abuse of 
materials. It touched him more than Mr 
Spooner's very high-flown language and ex- 
aggerated spirituality ever could do." 



94 POET AND PEER. 

At the same moment Lady Porchester was 
saying to Lady Athelstone, 

" Really your dinner-table was like a Portico, 
where the Greek philosophers assembled. I 
never heard so much talk about art and ethics 
in my life before. I feel so learned, my dear, 
only rather confused, between the Bishop and 
Mr. Spooner, and that wonderful man, the 
painter, who sat next me. He is very amusing, 
like nothing one ever saw before ; but startling 
in appearance and manner^ certainly." 

"Yes," said her hostess, apologetically, 
** Wilfred thinks that cleverness covers every- 
thing; but I saw that even lie was annoyed 
during dinner. The Bishop was most good- 
natured about it ; he assured me he liked Mr. 
Briggs in spite of everything ; but I confess that 
I. I shrink from anyone so boisterous." 

The object of these remarks had taken a 
chair beside Lady Frances, who was an old 
acquaintance of his. They always sparred, but 
were excellent friends. 

" Does Miss Brabazon mean to marry Lord 
Athelstone ?" he asked, abruptly. 



POET AND PEER. 95 

She gave him a rapid glance, and replied, 

"If I knew, do you think I should tell you, 
Mr. Briggs ? What makes you ask V* 

"Judging by appearances, I should say, if 
she wants to marry him, she can. He has 
hardly taken his eyes off her all night." 

"It is a way he has," said Lady Frances, 
drily. 

" But I can't detect that she gives him any 
encouragement . on the contrary," continued 
Briggs. *'Look how she has hemmed herself 
in between Lady Bannockburn and Spooner, so 
that Lord Athelstone can't get near her. I 
hope she means it. I hope she won't have 
him." 

"Why?" 

" He is not up to her mark." 

" Do you know a man who is ? After your 
speech at dinner " 

" Don't mention that. I put my foot in ih 
She was awfully angry." 

" I am not surprised." 

"I think she was angrier than the occasion 
warranted ; and I had a suspicion why it was. 



96 POET AND PEER. 

Bnt perhaps I was wroug. It looks like it 
now." 

" What looks like it I What do you mean V* 

^* I thought . ^I fancied she might be annoyed 
that Lord Athelstone should hear my enthusi- 
astic praise of her; though how an artist's 
admiration could trouble a mighty young lord^ 
I don't quite see. Anyhow, she was really 
angry, and gave it me hot dnd strong." 

Wilfred was still hovering round the sofa on 
which Miss Brabazon sat. 

" Will you sing that song of Clement Marot's 
I liked so much ?" he asked. 

^'I don't know the accompaniment on the 
piano. I sing it to the lute." 

" Will you sing something else, then ?" 

^^I am afraid I know nothing by heart on 
the piano. I never sing but at home, and then 
generally old songs, or stomellh that go best 
with the lute." 

He turned to the further end of the room, 
where Carton was. 

"Come and sing something. I can't per- 
suade Miss Brabazon." 



POET AND PEER, 97 

" Oh 1 1 daresay when I have sung she will/' 
said the attache, going to the piano. 

He sang a song of Schumann's with taste, 
and accompanied himself even better than he 
sang. 

" Will you not try Gounod's ' Biondina' with 
me. Miss Brabazon?" he asked, when he had 
finished. "You know it went very well one 
night when we tried it." 

She was anxious not to have come forward 
prominently that evening; but what excuse 
could she make? She rose, and stood at the 
young man's side, and their voices floated up- 
wards, blending happily together. There was 
unanimous applause. 

"The difficulty is overcome," said Wilfred. 
" Now, will you not give us something alone . 
something for me ?" 

She was sorry^ she replied, that she could 
not ; Mr. Carton certainly could not accompany 
anything she knew ; she sang songs that nobody 
else did ; and, as she said this, she moved away 
from the piano. The attach^^ with a smile, 
immediately began playing some of the stornelli 

VOL. II. H 



98 POET AKD PEER. 



he bad caught up from hearing her sing them 
once or twice. 

^Wbat excose can yon make now?" he 
asked, laughing. 

** Do be persuaded,'' pleaded the Bishop. 

She, who bad never made a difficulty about 
Kinging in her life before, stood at bay for a 
moment* 

**Dear Sylvia," said Lady Frances^ "I was 
your godmother to-night. I promised three 
things in your name. Ton have only performed 
one. Don't disgrace me." 

Then she turned back ; the ground of resist- 
ance was cut from under her feet, and by 
Frances Cope herself. Until the carriages were 
announced, she continued singing, as the young 
man recalled, one after aiy)ther, wild songs of 
the people he remembered. 

** I think, upon the whole," said Lady Athel- 
stone, in a tentative manner, to her son, as soon 
as they were alone, ** taking into consideration 
the mixture, you know, it went off pretty well 
. eh, dear? The Bishop was really quite 



POET AND PEER. 99 

pleased. He thanked me for such a pleasant 
-evening." 

"The Bishop is a brick. I like him very 
much. I'm only sorry I asked that fellow 
Briggs. He is a noisy cad." 

^^ I was afraid you liked his manners, dear. 
The Bishop was very considerate and kind 
about him, but ." 

" Oh ! he found him a relief from Spooner, I 
-daresay, who * orated' us like an American 
lecturer. No, I can't say I should recommend 
this mixture *to be taken as before.' That 
young Carton is a conceited ass.^^ 

''Really, my dear? I thought him so nice 
and obliging in singing, and so good-natured in 
accompanying Miss Brabazon . eh ?" 

*' Good-natured 1 Anyone could see how his 
vanity was flattered. She refused twice to 
sing when I asked her." 

Lady Athelstone had something on the tip 
of her tongue ; but justice, in defence of young 
Carton, yielded to discretion, in the interests of 
her impetuous and irrational son. She was not 

h2 



100 POET AND PEER. 

snch a fool as some people thought her. 
And the burden of his irritation, as he 
smoked a solitary pipe before going to bed, was 
ever . 

** Why does she let such a fellow as that 
beslaver her with compliments? / should 
never dare to use such language . it's almost an 
insult . as though she were publio property* 
And why would she sing for anyone who asked 
her but me f 



101 



CHAPTER VI. 

"TIARLY one morning two ladies were seen 
-^ riding out into the Campagna, followed 
by a groom. 

"It is extraordinary they should be such 
friends," said Miss Whitley who watched them 
from her window, " after the way they say he 
behaved to Lady Frances last year." 

" Some women have no feeling," replied her 
mother. *^I always thought Lady Frances a 
heartless little creature." 

It was the heartless little creature who had 
planned this ride, and had chosen an hour when 
fihe and Sylvia would be unmolested. They 
rode out through the Porta Salara, upon the 
vast solitary plain . "Cette terre, fatigu6e de 



102 POET AND PEER. 

gloire, qui semble d^daigner de produire/' as 
Madame de Stael calls it. It was ooe of those 
mornings not uncommon at Rome, when there 
is an almost oppressive stillness in the air. 
There was no visible movement in the clouds 
that hung around Mount Soracte, nor in the 
feathered asphodel on the plain. The shepherd, 
stretched full length on the short warm grass, 
scarcely lifted his head at the sound of the 
horses' feet. Everything in nature seemed to 
have lost its energy. 

And the influence was felt by the two friends. 
For some time neither spoke: till at last 
Lady Frances broke silence with these words, 

** I want to say something to you, dear Sylvia, 
and I scarcely know how to begin. It is so 
difficult to speak on certain subjects without 
seeming to ask for a confidisnce . which I should 
be the last to do. Only from myself, at least, I 
feel there ought to be some openness, or you may 
misunderstand, and be . be unhappy about me. 
Do not imagine that I care any longer about 
Lord Athelstone. I give you my word, Sylvia, 
he is as indifferent to me as that shepherd 



POET AND PEER. 103- 

lying there. There was a time . well, I need 
not refer to that. I was a fool, I suppose. I 
can only say I am exceedingly obliged to him. 
Looking at him with the eyes I now do, I would 
not be married to him for any consideration 
upon earth." 

Sylvia, who had shown no surprise or emo- 
tion of any kind hitherto, but kept her eyes 
riveted on the pale blue outline of the Alban 
hills, turned and looked into her friend'^ 
face. 

** Why ?" she asked, slowly. 

"Because he has no stability of character, 
and, as Itog as he lives, will be driven hither 
and thither by any chance wind that catcher 
him. Perhaps few men are rocks to anchor 
one's hopes on ; but he certainly is not one of 
them." 

** He is young. You must not be too hard on 
him, Fanny." 

" Yes, darling, he is very young. That is what 

I want you not to forget. You are the soul of 

loyalty, and therefore, perhaps, you discourage 

his attentions on my account. But since 1 tell 

vol. it. A 



104 POET AND PEER. 

yon the simple truth, that I no longer care for 
him, JO a may be moved bj his devotion . for 
he is devoted, at present^ to yon. Anyone can 
see that. It isn't to probe your feelings, dear, 
that I speak ; but to warn you in time. He is 
unstable as water, and has no principle what- 
ever." 

*^ That is a hard saying, Fanny." 

^^ It is not a bit too hard. I know what you 
think. that my foolish vanity led me to attach 
a meaning to his preference for our society last 
year which he never intended. Perhaps it was 
so. But there are far worse charges against 
him. His is what is called ^ the poet's tempera- 
ment/ I suppose. He is carried away by every 
gust of temptation^ without making an effort 
to resist. Such men are better not married. 
Isn't it Monckton Milnes who says, 

' . . . the heaven-enfranchised poet 
MuBt have no exclnsiTe home ; 

He muift feel, and gladly show it, 
Phantasy is made to roam. 

H^ must gire his passions range . . . * ^* 

Sylvia was silent for some minutes. 

^ Dear Fanny," she said at last, *^ is it only 



POET AND PEER. 105 

on account of that Florentine lady you speak 
of him as carried away by every gust of 
temptation 1" 

*' No, it is not," replied Lady Frances, with 
a mixture of hesitation and decision . decision 
in the negative, hesitation as to how much be- 
yond this she should say. " I have heard things 
more than once ; even the other night mamma 
was told something about his conduct at home 
in his own village. It may not be true, but for 
it to be said, and be believed^ shows how his 
character there is regarded." 

" He is not likely to conciliate opinions in a 
country neighbourhood. You know he is 
essentially a frondmr^ and I think sufficient 
allowance is not made for him, considering the 
disadvantages under which he has evidently 
always laboured." 

" Disadvantages ? What can you mean 1" 

" His mother, though she worships, does not 
the least understand him, it is clear. His 
father, he tells me, was an excellent man, but 
had no sympathy with any of his son's pursuits. 
He was an only child, and, of course, made a 



106 POET AND PEER. 

great deal of, but bad no one to talk out tbe 
ideas upon religion aud life tbat were simmer- 
ing in tbe boy's active brain. He feeds on 
Shelley, and, when he goes to Oxford^ is thrown 
with a set of young men all more or less scep- 
tical. Are not these great disadvantages? 
With his peculiar temperament, can you won- 
der at the result ?" 

^'I don't wonder at it at all," returned her 
fnend. *^ All I say is, that such a man would 
make a woman like you wretched. There are 
women who might marry him, and not mind. 
Oh I Sylvia dear, when I used to write to you 
last winter, how very differently I thought of 
him I I seem to have grown years older since 
then . and my eyes are opened." 

Sylvia rode on for a little while without reply. 
At last she said, 

" I daresay he has behaved very foolishly . 
very wrongly, dear Fanny ; but he is not cor- 
rupt at heart, I feel certain of that. And I do 
believe that his present condition is only a 
transitory state, out of which a far finer char- 



POET AND PEER. 107 

acter may arise than casual observers think 
possible." 

Lady Frances pursed up her lips, and instead 
of replying, as she felt inclined, said something 
quite diflFerent. 

"I hope it may turn out as you predict, 
Sylvia. I shall be the first to acknowledge I 
was wrong. But as I do not share your belief, 
I also hope you will wait . at all events, a year 
. to see the eflFect of time, before you engage 
yourself to become his wife." 

The tears gathered in Sylvia's eyes; she 
looked away towards the purple line of the 
sea. Presently she leant forward, and took her 
friend's hand. 

** Whatever happens, I shall not forget your 
words, dear . I shall not forget this ride." 

Then, by tacit consent, they cantered across 
the plain, and no more was said upon the sub- 
ject nearest to the hearts of both. 

For two days Wilfred Athelstone had ab- 
stained from calling at the Hotel Czerny. He 



108 POET AND PEER. 

neas annoyed and puzzled by the change ia 
MiBS Brabazon's manner of late . a change 
nehich had been accentnated, in a way he could 
not fail to perceive, on Monday night. It is 
true he could not pretend to himself that he 
had ever received any durect encouragement 
from her. She never asked him to the house, 
or to accompany them in any drive : it was he 
who had to propose it. When her daily visits 
to Lorenzaccio ceased . and it was impossible 
for the wildest fatuity to misinterpret their 
object . it was only by manoeuvre, or by direct 
application, that he saw her. 

" And yet/' he said, " if I am not a vain fool, 
she takes no common interest in me. I have 
read it in her eyes, which are so eloquent ; she 
has shown it in her discussions with me, even 
as late as on Sunday, though she scarcely 
wished me to drive with them. What does 
this avoidance of me mean ? She is not a girl 
to be swayed by anything that others may say, 
otherwise I might think that the Bannock- 
burns. .But no, she forms her own judg- 
ments. I have never tried to make myself out 



POET AND PEER. 10& 

to her a bit better than I am. But, with all my 
faults, flhe likes me . might be brought to love 

me, if ^" 

Here he stopped short. What was the result 
of his five weeks' study of Sylvia Brabazon ? 
Had he resolved to ask her to marry him ? He 
was very sure he should never feel the same 
admiration for any other woman . an admira- 
tion which amounted almost to worship at 
times. as he did for this one. She was not as 
other women were, though none was more 
womanly ; there was an orginality, a poetry, a 
nobility and* independence about her which 
captivated him the more he saw her. This 
would not be a union born simply of passion- 
ate desire, which, when satisfied by possession, 
would be sterile of sympathy. Their thoughts, 
it was true, were opposed on many points, but 
she struck chords which produced an echo 
within him ; he felt spurred on, under her influ- 
ence, to run the race set before him, and win a 
healthier renown, just as, under certain other 
influences a year ago, he had lain down, ener- 
vated by the heavy-scented flowers on the way,, 



110 POET AND PEER. 

and done nothing better than write erotic 
flonnete. 

Why then, if he showed her this, as in some 
measure he believed he had done, did she now 
avoid him ? Spoiled child of fortune as he was, 
it was a new and irritating sensation to find 
the fruit which^ at that moment, seemed the 
onlj fruit in the world worth having, withheld, 
when he had led himself to believe that, sooner 
or later, it might drop from the tree into his 
outstretched arms. He rode off to Ostia alone, 
and spent some hours in the Fusano forest, 
writing bitter, wrathful verses against the 
fickleness of woman. 

On his return after dusk, he found a three- 
cornered note which acted like an April shower 
upon bleak, wind-bitten fields in March. It 
was ostensibly from Mrs. Brabazon, but the 
handwriting and the diction were clearly her 
daughter's. It ran thus : 

** If you have nothing better to do this even- 
ing, will you come to our box at the 'Apollo'? . 
the Bellotti-Bon Company, No. 2, is arrived; 



POET AND PEER. Ill 

they give the * Trionfo d'Amore/ a good speci- 
men of the modern Italian drama. 

" Yours truly, 

** GlACINTA BrABAZON." 

He threw over a dinner with some men at the 
English Club, dressed himself, and dined hastily 
with his mother (who was too much accustomed 
to his wayward moods to feel much surprised 
at his hilarity), and arrived at the theatre a few 
minutes after the play had begun. 

Sylvia sat at the back of the box, and some* 
thing in her manner of shaking hands with him 
made Wilfred feel at once that the restraint 
which he had noticed in her of late was re- 
moved. She said no word, neither did Mrs. 
Brabazon, who sat in front beside another lady. 
They came there to see the play, and not to 
chatter. The faces of all three were turned reso- 
lutely to the stage. Wilfred attempted to say 
something to Sylvia, but she put her finger to 
her lip with a smile; then he turned to the 
book of the drama, and tried to master the 
situation. 



112 POET AND FEEB. 

It was not till the termination of the act that 
the attention of the three ladies was relaxed^ 
and their tongues unloosed. 

'^ Milor'y let me prasent jou to Madame de 
Snrville . lafamosa^ la diva '* 

** Stop I my dear Giacinta ; this is a most un* 
English mode of presentation ; you will frighten 
Lord Athelstone out of the box/' cried the lady, 
with a humorous expression on her fine coun- 
tenance ; she was indeed a remarkable-looking^ 
person, and Wilfred, who only now saw her face 
for the first time, as she turned completely 
round, felt considerable curiosity as to who she 
was. About her nationality there could be no 
doubt, for she spoke English without the small- 
est foreign accent or intonation. She had 
reached middle-age : her hair, which was brushed 
back from her face, was already grey ; she had 
none of the adventitious aids of toilette to 
soften the shadows and conceal the lines that 
the years had left there. But there was an 
eternal youth about the woman's nature which, 
in spite of sorrow and suffering, shone out im- 
mediately she spoke, and would prevent the 



POET AND PEER. 113 

face from ever becoming old. The beantifal 
eyes still kindled with enthusiasm or sparkled 
with merriment ; the fine swerve of the lips 
relaxed to laughter or curled with scorn, as in 
her girlhood ; the voice was unrusted, clear, and 
ringing ; the quick sympathy with all that was 
human, belonged to the fresh and eager climber, 
rather than to one already on the descent over 
life's weary road. She was dressed in black, 
with a lace handkerchief tied under her chin ; 
her hands, which were ungloved and peculiarly 
beautiful, and with which she gesticulated more 
than Englishwomen usually do, held a large 
green fan. 

Wilfred's curiosity was yet further excited 
by Madame de Surville's next words. 

" How is your mother, Lord Athelstone f I 
knew her many years ago. I do not think she 
will have quite forgotten me, though I have not 
seen her since you were a baby in arms." 

'^ That I am sure she will not. My mother 
has a very good memory." 

^' She has many other good things too. Tell 
her I have not forgotten her kindness to me 

VOL. II. I 



114 POET AND PEER. 

many years ago ; she was very pretty in those 
days." 

**I am sure my mother will do herself the 
pleasure of calling on yon," said Wilfred. 

**Ohr' replied Madame de Sxurville, with a 
gravity which was belied, only to a close ob- 
server, by a slight twinkle in her eye, "I know 
what a bore visits are, when you are travelling. 
Do not let her give herself that trouble.  am 
out driving almost all day. If she really wishes 
to see me, I will call upon her . ^but I do not 
go into society; I pass my life between the 
Campagna and the old clothes shops . don't I, 
my Sylvia ?" 

** You certainly did, when we were in Rome 
together two years ago," replied Miss Bra- 
bazon, smiling. " As you only arrived yester- 
day " 

" My dear, I have already been to the * Ara 
Coeli,' and bought such an enchanting bit of 
tapestry I It will require a great deal of repair 
. ^it is in rags . but the design ^" 

She clasped her hands with a pantomimic 



POET AND PEER. 115 

expression of ecstasy, while Mrs. Brabazon 
cried . 

" Ah I why you buy that robaccia ? You that 
have so beautiful things, Barbara, in your 'ome 
in Paris I Why, there must be room no more 
for one pin's 'ead." 

" My dear, we must make room somehow. 1 
couldn't do without these angels with their pots 
of carnations and quaint birds . not if I had to 
starve for it. They will be the sunshine of my 
life .... I hope you are not strong-minded, 
Lord Athelstone? If you don't care about 
bric-a-brac, you will think me a very silly old 
woman." 

''I admire all that is old, and some things 
that only call themselves so," said Wilfred, 
smiling. ^'I want to buy some cabinets and 
hangings myself, but I am quite ignorant about 
what is good and what is rubbish, and I hope 
Miss Brabazon will help me to choose them." 

" We will have a cabinet council ?" cried 
Madame de Surville. " Next to buying myself, 
I like helping my friends to buy. We won't 

i2 



116 POET AND PEER. 

have you, Giacinta. You will be telling us that 
the wood is worm-eaten, and that the locks 
won't lock, and that you saw a cabinet fifteen 
years ago that was much better and cheaper. 
I remember how you deterred me from buying 
a faded Genoa satin, on which I had set my 
aifections. I have never forgotten that satin . 
and never forgiven you, my dear, never !" 

" Ah I Sylvia make such follies once, but now 
I say no more. She buy a stuff which go 
'crac' the first time one sits himself down 
on it." 

" Mamma highly approves of Miss Decker,'' 
said Sylvia, laughing, '^ because she said, when 
she looked at my old Venetian portiirCj * Well, 
we like to put up our fixin's when they're new. 
Youy over here, seem only to hang them up 
when they're worn out V" 

Madame de Surville was delighted. 

^' Oh I Giacinta, you must have taken that 
woman to your heart, I know I How did you 
ever come to produce such a child as this, who 
never thinks about cost, or *wear and tear,' 
only about what is picturesque !" 



POET AND PEER. 117 

"Dear Madame Barbara I" . it was thus 
Sylvia always called her friend . *' I am not so 
unpractical as all that. I can drive a hard 
bargain, if I know people are trying to cheat 
me. Only about the things that are to sur- 
round one daily, and delight one's eyes, if one 
has the money, I think it foolish to deprive 
oneself of something which would be a lasting 
pleasure . as I have seen many of my friends do 
. for the sake of a few francs." 

" That test, which so many collectors apply 
to their purchases, * I could sell it to-morrow 
for twice what I gave,' seems to me entirely 
inconsistent with any genuine love of art, in 
any form," said Wilfred, decisively. ** One may 
as well become a dealer at once, as entertain for 
a moment the idea of parting with what one 
has loved well enough to make it a household 
god." 

" Speak respectfully of dealers, if you please, 
young man,'' said Madame de Surville, with 
mock solemnity, fixing her expressive eyes upon 
him, while her nostrils slightly dilated. "1 
myself have been a dealer . nay, I have now 



118 POET AND PEER. 

two hideous cabinets at home, which I bought 
in a moment of aberration some years ago, and 
which I shall be happy to sell you. The fact 
is," she added, breaking into a genial smile, 
*^ one is but human, you know. Sometimes the 
things one has liked best one gets tired of . 
one sees them in a diiferent light." 

'^Not the things one has liked bestf surely? 
Only the things one has liked pretty well." 

Madame de Survillie looked at him very keenly 
as he spoke. That was rather well said ; she 
wondered if it was a true index to his character. 
She hardly thought so : there was an impulse 
of speech and certain wavering lines in the 
handsome face which did not belong to un- 
alterableness. Yet, on the whole, what she had 
seen of him she liked. 

.* The curtain is for going up. Zitti /" whis- 
pered Mrs. Brabazon ; and, for more than half 
an hour, there was absolute silence in the box. 
Sylvia had praised the first act: the leading 
idea of the drama had commended itself to her ; 
the style in which it was written was admirable, 
and the acting she thought first-rate. Wilfred 



POET AND PEER. 119 

glanced from his book to the stage, and from 
the stage back to his book^ and tried to think 
it as beautiful as he was told it was. 

At the conclusion, Sylvia leant forward, and 
said, eagerly, 

" Dear Madame Barbara, how do you like 

itr 

" My child, I think it clever, and even pretty, 
but, like most modern Italian things, decidedly 
dull. As to the acting, it is excellent all round. 
These people have what in England is so much 
wanted, a school . traditions . art, in short. 
They know how to produce their effects ; it is 
a matter of training; so it is in France. In 
England a man of genius gropes his way occa- 
sionally to the light, in spite of every obstacle, 
and one hears it said, * What a pity he was not 
taught to speak properly, or to walk the stage, 
or to get rid of such and such a trick of gesture.' 
All that is impossible where there is a proper 
school, like this one of Modena, the founder of 
modern acting in Italy. It may turn out no 
genius, but it will turn out thoroughly capable 
performers, on whom you may depend." 



120 POET AND PEER. 

** Ah ! cara mia, you wanted no school . bah I" 
said Mrs. Brabazon. ^* Ah ! if you had heard 
herl" 

'*No one worked so hard as I did," returned 
Madame de Surville, shaking her head. *' If I 
succeeded, it was by dint of sheer study. That 
is what I understand as an artist whose career 
I respect. The impudent creatures we see 
every day who have gone on the stage because 
they have pretty faces, and who don't know the 
A B C of their work, are not artists. They 
degrade the profession, and make one loathe 
the stage. I seldom go to the theatre on that 
account." 

She was now cloaked, and Mrs. Brabazon 
begged Lord Athelstone to offer Madame de 
Surville his arm. He was thus deprived of the 
opportunity he hoped to have had of asking 
Sylvia who and what their interesting friend 
was. As he put her into the carriage, however, 
he said . 

"Shall you be at home to-morrow? Will 
you take me to some old shops ? Do have pity 
on me." 



POET AND PEER. 121 

** Old shops ?" cried Madame de Surville, from 
inside the carriage. '' What is that about old 
shops? Of course we'll take him. Come to 
the Czerny at three." Then, as they drove off, 
she continued . " To think of that bright, hand- 
some young fellow being the son of the stiff, 
good woman I remember! What odd tricks 
Nature plays !" 

**I cannot fancy you and Lady Athelstone 
together, dear Madame Barbara 1" laughed 
Sylvia. 

**It was what astrologers called *a strange 
conjunction of stars,' wasn't it ? I don't think 
she knew what to make of me, and I confess 
that she bored me horribly. But I stood it, 
because she meant kindly, and it was in the 
teeth of all her narrow little prejudices." 

** How you find the young man f " asked Mrs. 
Brabazon. 

" How can I find him anything but delightful 
when he pretends not to look on me as an old 
woman! He evidently possesses both tact and 
discrimination." 

*'And 'e is clay-ver . oh! very clay-ver." 



122 POET AND PEER. 

Good Bimple soul I she seldom troubled her 
head about Sylvia's admirers; but it began 
slowly to dawn upon her that this young lord 
was entering the lists^ and that her daughter 
might possibly smile on him. She, who was 
the least worldly of mothers, would be gratified 
if this marriage should be brought about. For 
was he not a charming young man? Had not 
even her oracle, Madame de Surville, approved 
of him? . 

Therefore was it that Mrs. Brabazon declared 
him, emphatically, to be " veiy clay-ver." 



123 



CHAPTER VII. 

TITHEN Wilfred questioned his mother as to 
' ' Madame de Surville the following morn- 
ing, he was surprised at the start Lady Athel- 
stone gave, and the emotion of real pleasure 
she evinced. 

"She is a woman for whom I have the 
greatest . yes, the greatest respect and admira- 
tion, Wilfred. I shall be truly glad to see her 
again." 

"But who was she! You forget I don't 
know." 

" She was a famous singer and actress, 
Barbara Pierson . * La Barbara ' she was called, 
but who was only on the stage a short time. 
You wonder how 1 can have been thrown with 



124 POET AND FEEB. 

her ? The secret was this. My brother wanted 
to marry her. He was, as you mast have heard, 
very wild ^ 

" Yes. She had a lucky escape." 

'^ I have always thought he might have been 
-diiferent if he had married her. He was des- 
perately iu love, and she would have gained, 
perhaps, great iafluence over him. I was just 
married. He begged your father to let me 
make Miss Pierson's acquaintance. He thought 
that perhaps the connection and . and all that 
might influence her. He begged me to talk to 
her. I did so, and found her very nice . really 
very nice indeed . quite highly-principled. She 
was the only woman of genius I have ever 
known who was not disagreeable to me. I 
really was not afraid of her^ brilliant as she was, 
and different in all her ways and . and so on . 
from anyone I had ever met. However, as 
regarded your uncle, it came to nothing. What 
I said had no effect on her. She said to me 
repeatedly that she would continue on the 
49tage, though she did not like the life, rather 
than marry a man she did not care for. About 



POET AND PEER. 125 

a year after that she married Monsieur de 
SurviUe." 

"Was that a brilliant match for her?'* 

"In a worldly point of view, your uncle 
would have been far more so ; but she became 
attached to Monsieur de Surville. He was 
fairly well off, and was a man of great charm 
and accomplishment. We asked them repeat- 
edly to stay with us, but somehow . T don't 
know why . there was always something to 
prevent their coming." 

Thought Wilfred, " / could tell you why.'" 
He asked if the De Survilles lived in Paris. 

" I believe so, but I have lost sight of them 
for years . indeed, Monsieur Surville I never 
met. I believe all her children died youngs 
except a daughter, who, I think, I heard mar- 
ried a year or two ago. Monsieur de Surville 
has estates in the Mauritius, which he visits 
occasionally; and then, I suppose, his wife 
travels.'' 

" She comes to Rome very often, apparently, 
but goes into no society. She said, if you 
wished it, she would call on you, but begged 



126 POET AND PEER. 

you would not go through the ceremony of 
calling on her, as she was almost always out." 

" It is the proper thing for me to call first, 
and I shall certainly do so," said Lady Athel- 
stone; then she added, reflectively . "I will 
ask her to dine here. Perhaps she might like 
to meet the Bishop." 

" Good gracious I Why ? He is a very good 
man, but " 

"My dear boy, he is something more than 
that." 

*'I am surprised, mother! What can be 
more than goodness ?" 

** Oh I I know what you meant, Wilfred, by 
your tone. His . his intellect and hers, I am 
sure " 

" My dear mother, spare yourself the trouble. 
She goes nowhere but to the Brabazons. She 
and Mrs. Brabazon seem like sisters." 

"Really I Then she can tell us '' She 

would have added, "who she was," but she 
stopped short, and concluded, after a pause . 
." what part of England they come from." 

"What can it signify whether they come 



POET AND PEER. 127 

from John o' Groat's house or the Land's 
End ? They are deh'ghtful people. Isn't that 
enough ?" 

Her son's coarseness of apprehension in such 
delicate matters rendered it hopeless to make 
him seize the drift of her observations. She 
said no more. 

It was a sight for a painter and for a hu- 
morist to see Madame de Surville with her two 
companions that afternoon in a back-shop in 
the "Ara Coeli." A heap of gorgeous stuffs, 
tossed upon the floor around, seemed to catch 
the sunbeams, and hold them. There lay gold- 
coloured brocades, and pearly satins starred 
with blossoms, pomegranate velvet hangings 
from a Doge's palace, and quaint embroideries 
of birds and beasts, with armorial devices. 
The grim old Hebrew was now holding up to 
view, and appraising at a preposterous figure, 
what Madame Barbara called an " April-colour- 
ed" saque, all tender greens and raindrops of 
silver. Madame gave a little shout of indigna- 
tion, and inquired if the soul of honesty had 



128 POET AND PEER. 

quite departed from the bouse of Aaron? 
Thereupon she offered bim half. He shook his 
grey head; impossible to abate a single cenr 
tesimo . it was dirt-cheap at the money. Then 
Madame rose, with simulated alacrity, and de- 
clared there was no dealing with him at all ; 
she exhorted her friends, in Italian, to leave 
that Hebrew's house, and shake the dust from 
off their feet. 

Then the dealer, fearing that the rod would 
snap, hastily let out his line. ** Aspetti . 
PazienzaT Would the Signora, on behalf of 
her friend, make an arrangement with him for 
that ebony cabinet clasped with silver, and the 
painted cassone, and the velvet hangings, &c. 
&c.? Then ensued a passage of infinite sub- 
tlety, which nearly suffocated Wilfred with 
suppressed laughter, between the crafty old 
salesman and the lady with the tragic face 
whose eyes alone betrayed her enjoyment and 
sense of fun in the encounter. He suggested a 
sum; her nostril indicated unmitigated scorn 
at the attempt to impose on her, as she wrap- 
ped her cloak around her, and said once more. 



POET AND PEER. 129 

" Let US go." Then he asked what she would 
offer. She named half. With gesticulation and 
vociferation, he vowed it was impossible, and . 
in the end accepted it. 

"You have got some treasures/' said Ma- 
dame de Surville, impressively, as they left the 
shopj " and I behaved like an angel ; for I no 
sooner saw those hangings than I was smitten 
with a mad desire to possess them myself^ 
and '^ 

" But pray, Madame de Surville, in that case^ 
take them. I would not deprive you of them 
for the world." 

" Certainly not. What do you take me for ? 
I should not have told you if I had not sur- 
mounted the devilish temptation. And now it 
is getting too dark to drive in the Campagna, 
which I do every day. Come and have a cup of 
tea." 

Madame de Surville lived in a small apart- 
ment in the Foro di Trajano. It was dusk 
when they entered the drawing-room; but a 
roaring wood-fire sent its bright light into the 
hollows of the arm-chairs and sofa drawn near 

VOL. n. K 



130 POET AND PEER. 

the hearth. Madame de Surville said she must 
go and take off her hot dress. , 

^* I shall not be ten minutes. Shall I ring for 
the lamp 1" 

Both her guests declared that the twilight 
and firelight combined were far pleasanter. 
Miss Brabazon sat on the sofa, took off her hat 
and fur-lined cloak, and leant back^ where the 
flames did not burn upon her face so fiercely. 
As to Wilfred, he had drawn his chair into the 
full blaze, and, leaning his elbows on his knees, 
he looked alternately into his companion's face 
and at the great logs of burning pine. 

^* These things I have bought will be like the 
new wine in old bottles at Athelstone," he 
began. "Figuratively, they will burst the 
wretched Georgian decorations and furniture. 
You are answerable for it all I I never should 
have dreamt of trying to make things better, if 
you had not instilled the poison into my veins. 
The least you can do now is to come to Athel- 
stone, and arrange it all." 

She took the words lightly, and laughed ; her 
cheeks told no tales. 



POET AND PEER. 131 

"You had better- educate your eye for 
colour, and learn to be independent of anyone's 
help." 

"I don^t believe in being independent of 
anyone^s help . a woman's, that is. If she is 
the right one, she supplies all the man's defici- 
encies. There are other matters besides the 
education of the eye in which you could supply 
mine." 

There was no mistaking this ; and she was 
too far above petty coquetry to affect to do so. 
She cast about in her mind how to reply, so as 
to ward off what, as regarded them both, she 
felt was premature. 

" You are very young . in a transition stage. 
Lord Athelstone. You will alter in many ways 
as you see more of life, and some of the things 
you fancy you want now will perhaps seem to 
you worth little by-and-by. Do you know,^^ 
fihe continued, nt allowing him to reply to 
this, " I think most utterances . most decisions 
. made very early in life are mistakes. If it 
were possible to delay fixing on a career be- 
yond boyhood, many a man would do better 

k2 



132 POET AND PEER. 

work. So it seems to me about public-speaking' 
and publishing books " 

*' Ah I you are thinking of my poems." 

*' TeSy I am ; but, also, of the regret I heard 
Lady Athelstone express the other day at 
your not devoting your talents to oratory 
in the House of Lords. I cannot help think- 
ing it is better you should not speak for ten 
years, than that you should speak now that 
which you will regret having said ten years 
hence." 

"And why should I necessarily say that 
which I shall regret ?" 

*' Because there are few young men at one 
and twenty who . . " 

" I beg your pardon ; I am two and twenty . 
shall very soon be three." 

" Well, at three and twenty, even, who do 
not profess many opinions they would not en- 
dorse after ten years' additional experience of 
the world. Your book is a case in point. It 
has given many people a false impression of 
you even now. But by-and-by it will less and 
less represent what you are. You will regret 



POET AND PEER. 133 

and wonder you could ever have written it ; but 
the book will remain." 

"Everyone does not regard it as you do/' 
aid Wilfred, staring gloomily into the fire. 
'' You know it has gone through five editions 
already." 

*^ Yes, and I am aware that it has been very 
much praised, and that you have acquired a 
notoriety which would turn the head of many 
a silly young man. But that does not affect 
my argument; on the contrary. The better 
known these writings are, the more likely are 
they to be cast in your teeth hereafter by 
public opponents, when you have become, as I 
hope, wise in deliberation and eloquent in 
debate. It is unworthy warfare, but these are 
fitones that never fail to wound." 

" According to your own showing, then, it is 
necessary for me to have some lamp to guide 
my footsteps. Without this, I shall go stumbling 
on to the end." 

"Why should you do so? That is a con- 
fession of weakness no man ought to make." 

" I have no tact. Tact is a woman's quality. 



134 POET AXD PEEB. 

I bare not even discretion, I eappoee^ aooording 
to the world's standard ; for I say what I think, 
and do what I like, regardless of opinion. No 
one has ever yet obtained any influence over 
me. The woman who does so. and it most be 
a woman . ^will be the lamp I need.** 

** Whoever she may be,** replied Miss Braba- 
zon, in a low voice, but very distinctly^ ** will 
do well to pause and feel sure that she is the 
lamp . the only one who can brighten your 
future path without flickering, and even, per- 
haps, without utter extinction, . before she 
assumes so serious a responsibility. In youth, 
we take so many Will-o'-the- Wisps for steady 
beacons.'* 

" I have had my Will-o'-the-Wisps ; you have 
heard it, I daresay ? But I know now, . I have 
felt more and more, every hour since I first saw 
you, that a light which will burn steadily in my 
life." 

At ibis moment, to Sylvia's great relief, 
Madame de Surville entered. Wilfred bad no 
opportunity for nearly a week, though he spent 
hours at Mrs. Brabazon's daily, of renewing that 



POET AND PEER. 135 

interrupted tUe-h-tHe, Miss Brabazon was anx- 
ious to avoid it, and she succeeded; she felt 
more deeply interested in Athelstone than she 
would avow, even to herself, and her friend's 
words, painful as they had been, had removed 
the only impediment to a further and unre- 
stricted development of her interest. But she 
set a guard . or believed that she was doing so 
. upon her heart. Frances Cope's view of his 
character was a prejudiced one; for all that^ 
Sylvia knew there was some grain of truth in 
it. The passion he now avowed so distinctly 
might be enduring ; her heart whispered to her, 
oftener than she would admit, that it rested 
but with her to consolidate her empire. And 
yet his past, his youth, his temperament should 
warn her. 

Unfortunately the engrossing interest of such 
a daily study as this is hardly compatible with 
a complete mastery over the feelings. Sylvia 
was not a cold woman ; she felt herself drift- 
ing . drifting towards that great sea which 
absorbs nearly every human heart for good or 
.evil ; but she had yet strength to cling to the 



136 POET AND PEER. 

bank, and not let herself be swept utterly awtiy 
beyond the power of volition. 

His manner all that week was fretful, humor- 
ous^ yet suspicions and irritable, hanging upon 
her words, yet warmly disputing her proposi- 
tions, tender, submissive, arrogant ; his nerves 
were in a constant state of tension, his senses 
quickened to suffer from every inflection of her 
voice. The necessity of unburdening his heart 
had grown upon him hourly since those few 
minutes' Ute-orUte in Madame de Surville's 
room, but Sylvia contrived that they should 
never be again without the presence of a third 
person. Towards the end of the week he 
wrote, " Will you not see me, for half an hour, 
alone to-day ? I beg of you to do so." She 
replied, " Wait a little; we are going to make 
a party to Castel Fusano in a few days, we will 
talk together then." Wilfred was furious ; she 
was cold-blooded and calculating. Then he 
reproached himself and melted into despair. 
She was right, he was utterly unworthy of her ; 
he wore his heart upon his sleeve, so that such 
daws as Lady Porchester, meeting him on the 



POET AND PEER. 137 

Pincio, pecked at it with infinite satisfaction. 

His mother could not fail to see what every- 
one saw, and she became uneasy. Madame de 
Surville, sitting with her, was subjected to an 
examination which would have outraged that 
independent lady, had not her sense of humour 
been touched, and her maternal sympathy, as 
well as her great affection, for Sylvia been 
enlisted. 

" I understand you knew Mrs. Brabazon well 
formerly? I suppose it is not true that she 
was a . ^you know people do say that she was 
a ' 

There was a pause. 

'*Awhatl" demanded Madame de Surville, 
at last; those terrible eyes resolutely fixed 
upon Lady Athelstone greatly discomposed 
her. 

'*A . a ballet-dancer, or something of the 
kind, they say." 

** She was a chorus-singer, if that is what you 
call * something of the kind.' " 

*' Really ! I . I hope quite respectable V" 

" You shall judge. She was a beautiful girl. 



138 POET AND PEER. 

and might have lived ia splendour ; she re- 
mained poor, and supported a sick father on her 
hard-earned wages till Brabazon married her. 
That is rather different from the respectability 
of certain great ladies we could name, I 
think r 

" Oh I very creditable . very much so, indeed. 
And you knew her when you were singing in 
Italy^ I suppose?" 

'^ Tes. It was at Milan, when I was singing 
'Norma,' that I was attracted by the noble 
beauty of a girl in the chorus. I spoke to her ; 
and, with the simplicity that belongs to Italians, 
she told me all about herself. I visited her 
father. I was able to be of service to the girl 
in some important ways, and from that day I 
never lost sight of her. A few months after 
Brabazon met her, and they were married al- 
most immediately." 

"Dear me I flow very curious! He must 
have been an eccentric man. The daughter 
inherits a little of it . perhaps!" She began 
examining her Uttle finger. 

Madame's eyes twinkled, but her fece other- 



POET AND PEER. 139 

wise indicated absolutely nothiDg, as she re- 
plied, 

" Do you mean that she is out of the com- 
mon, or that she has a touch of insanity f I 
think her perfectly sane ; and I think her very 
much out of the common." 

**Sane? Ohl yes," . Lady Athelstone gave 
a little nervous laugh . '* only her dress, you 
know . . . not like other people, and living so 
much with artists, and . and other people of 
that kind " 

"The best kind, I hope you think?" Ma- 
dame smiled. ** You will not forget that I am 
an artist." 

" Oh ! but you were always quite different . 
such a very high standard. Men like that Mr. 
Briggs, for instance, whom she seems so very 
intimate with, one can't help fearing " 

" What ?" again demanded Madame, sternly. 

"Well, a certain . I don't know how to ex- 
press it . a certain laxity. She certainly goes 
to church very regularly, and the bishop spoke 
very favourably of her, when he met her here. 
Still I am so . so dreadfully afraid " 



140 POET AND PEER. 

She stopped short, and Hdgeted at her 
watch-chain. Why would that immovable 
woman sit looking at her with those onyx 
yes, and not help her out in what she had to 
ay? 

*'You see," she began again, "perhaps you 
have observed . thrt is, I can't help fearing 
that Athelstone is falling in love with Miss 
Brabazon. He is very young and susceptible, 
you see, and, in shorty it is a great anxiety to 
me whom he marries. I am not a worldly, 
ambitious mother, dear MadcMue de Surville. I 
know we are all equal^ and though, of course, I 
49hould like a little family connection, it isn't the 
fact of Mrs. Brabazon's origin that would lead 
me to oppose such a marriage. I daresay he 
might do much worse . but " 

" Worse I" cried Madame, with inflated nos- 
trils, as her eyes travelled from the crown of 
Lady Athelstone's head to her boots, and back 
again. " Let me tell you, if she consents to 
marry your son, I consider him the luckiest man 
in Christendom t She is one in a hundred thou- 
sand I She is an angel with brains! Most 



POET .V>fD PEER. 141 

angels on earth are mere vapours of goodness^ 
She is one of the strong angels . capable of 
wrestling with evil." 

" I hope," said Lady Athelstone, a little hurt, 
"you do not think, if she marries my son, she 
will have to do that V He has such a good heart, 
and always means so well, though sometimes 
he may be led to do and say things I . I de- 
plore. Therefore it is so important he should 
fall into the right hands, you see. He is so- 
very Radical at present, which I regret, and I 
am so afraid of . his being encouraged to go 
more and more out of his own sphere." 

"Into a higher and better one?" inquired 
Madame, with perfect gravity. " Depend on it, 
if Sylvia accepts your son, she will encourage 
him in nothing that is not for his good. But, 
to tell you the truth. Lady Athelstone, I 
have strong doubts whether she will accept 
him." 

"Not accept Athelstone, if he proposes 1" 
ejaculated his mother, aghast. The idea of 
any girl resisting this paragon seemed impos- 
sible. " Why does she encourage him, then ? . 



142 POET AND PEB 

for she does encourage him, yon must admit, 
though it 18 true he has seemed verj low 
duriug the last few days. Can it be that she 
has given him to understand . .  oh I I cannot 
believe it I'* 

^^I have not spoken to her on the subject^ 
dear Lady Athelstone, nor shall I do so. She 
likes your son . ^likes him very much ; I have no 
doubt of that. But my belief is that she will 
not accept him in a hurry. Tou must remem- 
ber she is three or four years older than he. 
Bhe is too wise not to know that, under such 
circumstances, a woman ought to test the 
strength of a young man's attachment. She 
may have told him, and this may cause his 
depression, may it not V^ 

Lady Athelstone conceded that it was pos- 
sible. And if Madame de Surville's surmise 
was correct, it was not only creditable to Miss 
Brabazon, but it afforded the most hopeful view 
for the future. 

*^ Time is everything. I have no doubt he 
would get over the fancy in time. If he did 
not, of course I should make up my mind to it.'' 



POET AND PEER. 1 43 

'' It certainly would be a pity that you should 
have to make up your mind uselessly, and have 

to unmake it ^" But the delicate sarcasm 

was entirely lost on the anxious mother. 

From that day forward her cordiality towards 
Sylvia increased fourfold. She was re-assured 
by Madame de Surville's words ; the girl was 
certainly not scheming to entrap her son. It 
might . ^probably would . come to nothing; in 
which case her friendly attitude towards mother 
and daughter could do no harm. If anything 
could act prejudicially on Wilfred, it would be 
manifest opposition. She would take another 
line ; she would make friends with Sylvia, and 
gently encourage her in the policy of procrasti- 
nation. If, after all, it should unfortunately 
end in a marriage . she still regarded it as a 
misfortune, though with mitigations . her rela- 
tions with her daughter-in-law would, at all 
events, be of a friendly character. There was 
more of the serpent's wisdom in all this than 
most people who listened to Lady Athelstone 
might have given her credit for. 



144 



CHAPTER VIIL 

TT is now necessary that I should say a few 
.*. words touching Lorenzaccio, who, about 
this time, was allowed by the doctor to rise 
from his bed, and hobble round the room on 
crutches. The long rest, the good food, the 
kindness, and the stimulants to his natural 
intelligence which he had received from books^ 
had wrought a marvellous change in the boy. 
The pale, hollow cheeks were filled out, and 
almost ruddy ; the eyes no longer burned at the 
further end of two blue caverns ; the shadow of 
fear was fled, and the light of gladness had 
come into the young face at last ; he was grown 
nearly two inches. 
Miss Brabazon's daily visits had been discon- 



POET AND PEER. 145 

tinued ever since the drive to the Casa di Livia. 
She still went to see the boy occasionally, when 
she had reason to believe Lord Athelstone was 
not in the house, and she kept him supplied 
with books and prints ; but, out of regard to her 
friend, she had scrupulously avoided putting 
herself voluntarily in Wilfred's way, until those 
words had passed between Lady Frances and 
herself which I have recorded, and which left 
her free. And now, from a diiFerent motive, 
she rarely ventured to the house, unless she 
had positive assurance that Wilfred was not at 
hand. She felt sorry, for she knew her visits 
were of real use to the boy, and his delight at 
seeing her was touching ; but it could not be 
helped. Marco, escorted by a servant, was her 
ambassador at other times, bearing a book in 
his mouth. Lorenzaccio and the poodle became 
great friends ; the boy always saved some tit-bit 
from his dinner for his four-footed visitor, and 
whispered into his ear a message of humble 
devotion to her whom Marco was happy enough 
to call his mistress. The boy was intensely 
grateful to Athelstone ; he would have died for 
VOL. n. L 



146 POET AND PEB. 

bis preserver ; bat for Sylvia be bad a feefiog 
wbicb approacbed to adoration* 

Witb tbe quick intnition of bis nation in all 
matters connected with tbe beart, be bad 
divined Wilfred^s love. In bis ricb **bocca 
Bomana" bis entbnsiasm and reverence for tbe 
divine lady sounded very deligbtful to Wilfred's 
ear. Tbe intercourse between tbe man and tbe 
boy, bowever, thougb constant, was not very 
free, by reason of Atbelstone's imperfect Italian. 
He was interested in watcbing Lorenzaccio's 
improvement and mental development, for tbe 
boy almost daily asked bim questions relative 
to wbat be bad been reading wbicb Wilfred bad 
some difficulty in answering; but tbere was, 
necessarily, a certain amount of restraint in 
tbeir relations. With 'the dear lady of the 
heavenly eyes, on tbe other band, he was com- 
pletely at his ease. That these two bene&ctors 
should be united, and that he should serve them 
all his life long, was the dream upon which his 
imagination had fed during the last few days. 

What was to become of him ? The question 
to Athelstone was growing imminent. He had 



POET AND PEER. 147 

waved it aside for some weeks : but, now that 
the lad was on his legs again, the difficulty 
stared the young man in the face each time he 
saw his proUgi. Lorenzaccio, when spoken to 
about his future, declared with a passionate 
burst of tears that he would die a thousand 
deaths rather than return under his step-father's 
roof. He would drown himself in the Tiber if 
Wilfred sent him back ; of what good was his 
life to him, to be starved and beaten ? The idea 
of apprenticing him to some trade occurred to 
Wilfred, but the boy seemed to have no turn 
for a ny ; and Sylvia, when consulted, gave it as 
her opinion that, if properly trained, he would 
be best suited to domestic servitude. "He is 
intelligent, and, one sees, will be zealous. If 
we did not lead a wandering life, I would take 
him for my own page." 

This decided Athelstone. He asked Loren- 
zaccio whether he would apply himself to learn 
English, and accompany him to England, and 
become his valet in the course of time, when he 
had mastered the duties of that calling. The 
lad, snatched from the brink of despair, was 

l2 



148 POET AND PEER. 

nearly beside himself with joy. One half of bis 
dream >vas already fulfilled. That the other 
half would be accomplished ere long, and that 
he should serve the divine lady as his mistress, 
he never doubted. A man came daily, thence* 
forward, to give him English lessons, and 
Lorenzaccio, who was henceforward to be 
called Lorenzo, made rapid progress in his 
studies. 

The Villa Albani is only shown on certain 
days. The concourse of visitors on a fine 
afternoon, therefore^ is sure to be large. About 
a week after the conversation between Madame 
de Surville and Lady Athelstone, part of which 
was retailed in the last chapter, those ladies, 
with the Bannockburns, the Brabazons, and 
Wilfred Athelstone, had met by appointment 
among the statues, and clipped hedges, and 
ilex groves of that typical summer-palace of 
Italy. Mr. Spooner was there, and discoursed 
eloquently upon heathenism in art. Miss 
Decker, note-book in hand, was fluttering 
about like a lively and somewhat impudent 
sparrow, devouring the crumbs that were scat- 



POET AND PEER. 149 

tered, and chirruping all the time. Beanport 
and Carton, who had arrived somewhat earlier 
than the others, met them on the terrace. They 
were full of a new beauty, whom they had just 
jseen . she was in the villa now. 

" Tivoli is following her. He and Scappa 
-can't take their eyes off her. She is evidently 
English." 

" Dressed in red ? I met her in a store this 
morning,"' cried Miss Decker. " I knew she 
was English by her accent. A fine girl, but 
rather too voluptuous, for my taste." 

Carton laughed immoderately ; Miss Decker 
could not conceive what at. 

" 1 assure you this young lady does not an- 
4swer that description, and she is dressed in 
black." . 

" I saw her just now," said Mr. Spooner, who 
had joined them. " Quite a crowd was round 
her^ but she seemed unconscious that she was 
the object of attraction. She appeared to me 
-a virginal type of loveliness, not unlike the 
Psyche of Naples, but christianized." 

" What does he mean T* murmured Madame 



150 POET AND PEER. 

de Surville. *^ leu't the little heathen perfect ? 
. what remains of her, that is to say ? I am 
curious to see this marvel. Where is she ? Let 
us go and look for her." 

She turned to Sylvia, who stood a little 
apart with Athelstone, and had not heard the 
foregoing. Her eyes were fixed upon the Alban 
hills, beyond the straight walks, the formal 
hedges^ and marble balustrades of the stately 
villa. The lights and shadows of the soft 
January day chased each other on those un- 
changing heights. So, she said to herself, 
would the fleeting pains of this transitory life 
pass without affecting the unalterable love that 
was fixed and elevated above the plain of vul- 
gar vicissitude and the malaria that reigns 
there. The chords of the woman's heart were 
drawn closer to the man who stood beside her 
that day than they had ever yet been. He 
looked ill ; he told her he had not slept all 
night, and that, when he did so towards morn- 
ing, he had had a painful dream. He fancied 
that he had fallen from a great height, and was 
paralyzed in every limb. 



POET AND PEER. 151 

"Is it prophetic?" he said. **Ara I to fall 
from the height to which I am trying to attain ? 
If so, I know full well I shall be paralyzed in 
mind and in energy." 

Should she stretch out her hand, and land 
him on the height? Her resolution faltered. 
She heard Madame Barbara's voice ; she saw 
them moving away. 

"The party to Castel Fusano is arranged for 
the day after to-morrow," was all she said to 
him, as they followed in the wake of their 
friends. 

There is a bas-relief at the Villa Albani, of 
the finest period of Greek art, similar to one in 
the museum at Naples, and one at the Louvre, 
but perhaps more perfect than either, the subject of 
which has been variously explained, but is gene- 
rally supposed to be the parting of Orpheus from 
Eurydice in Hades, in consequence of the latter, 
when enjoined not to look back, having dis- 
obeyed the command. The tender reproach in 
Orpheus, the sorrowful submission to the decree 
of the gods in the leave-taking Eurydice, who 
is led away by impassive Mercury, are touch- 



152 POET AND PEER, 

ingly rendered. There is no violence, no melo- 
dramatic agon J ; the sentiment has passed into 
the higher region of deep, self-contained grief* 
The Greeks, like Englishmen of the present 
day, contemned a liberal display of feeling. 

Before this marble stood two ladies ; the one 
still young and comely, though apparently in 
delicate health, leant on the arm of her com- 
panion, who, though her back was turned to 
the party now entering the room, it was easy 
to see was but a girl, and very slight. She 
was simply dressed in deep mourning; the 
elder lady in rich velvet and fur. Two or three 
men stood a little distance off, and watched 
every turn of the girl's head . a fact of which 
her friend was perfectly aware, though the ob- 
ject of this admiration herself had too little self- 
consciousness, and was too much absorbed in 
the treasures of art around her, to perceive that 
she attracted special attention. 

Toung as she was, she had known poignant 
sorrow, which perhaps lent to her rare beauty 
that depth of expression which is seldom seen 
in the outset of life. Mr. Spooner was right ; 



POET AND PEER. 153 

the lovely fragment known as "Psyche" more 
nearly resembled her than did any other mas- 
terpiece of Greek art; yet, as she stood here 
now, with lips slightly parted, and questioning 
brown eyes riveted on the bas-relief before her, 
there was a tender, almost tremulous sympathy 
in the girl's face which no marble could ever 
reproduce. The longer she looked at it, the 
more pathetic that composition appeared to her. 
Was it an allegory pointing to the danger of 
looking back, the sinfulness of longing after 
what was left behind, the sweet, brief hours 
that were beyond recall ? 

It chanced that of the English party of 
friends, who were scattered throughout the villa, 
the first persons to enter this room were Lady 
Athelstone and Lady Bannockburn. They 
were ignorant of the special attraction which 
had led Tivoli and Scappa hither; they had 
heard nothing of the unknown beauty, and of 
the general curiosity concerning her. 

" I suppose this is the thing. Murray says one 
ought to look at," said Lady Athelstone, as she 
approached the bas-relief. 



154 POT AND FEER. 

" Yes," observed Lady Bannockbarn, with a 
smile. ** This is what Mn Spooner, in his pecu- 
liar phraseology, says is * the most perfect piece 
of work conveniently visible' that he is ac- 
quainted withy and * among Pagan works, of 
spiritual joys the abundantest/ " 

" Dear ! What can he mean . spiritual V* 
repeated Lady Athelstone. ^* A young woman 
turning round, and ^" 

Very quickly a young woman, just in front of 
her, did turn round, struck by the sound of that 
familiar voice, and uttered a little cry of recog- 
nition. 

"Dear me! Is it possible? Nellie Daw- 
son?" exclaimed the astonished Lady Athel- 
stone. 

The girl went very pale, then flushed to the 
roots of her hair. 

"Oh! my lady." She struggled to repress 
her emotion, but it was in vain ; she burst into 
tears, and turned away. 

" She has just lost her mother ; perhaps you 
did not know it ?" whispered Mrs. Goldwin. 

" Indeed I did not. How long is it since 1 



POET AND PEER. 155 

I have not heard from Athelstone for nearly a 
month." 

^' It is just a month, I think, since I sent Miss 
Dawson to wish her mother good-bye before we 
came abroad ; she was at Ripple for a few hours, 
and rejoined me in London. We had only got 
as far as Paris when we heard of poor Mrs. 
Dawson's death, which was sudden, and quite 
painless." 

" Dear, dear I I am so sorry. She was such 
a good woman; I had such a respect for her. 
Sudden death is so very shocking." 

"Only to the survivors, I think," returned 
Mary. " When anyone is as well prepared to 
die as Mrs. Dawson, I cannot fancy a happier 
end ; but to the poor girl the shock was terrible, 
in fact, her nerves and health are only slowly 
recovering, and meeting you has completelyupset 
her. Travelling, I think, has been the best thing 
for her ; she has such a receptive nature that 
it is impossible she should see new countries 
and beautiful things without her mind becom- 
ing interested." 

**Ah, yes, she was always very intelligent. 



156 POET AMD PEER. 

xtnd I have heard how kind jou have been to 
her, Mrs, Goldwin.** 

" Oh I I could not be fonder of her if she was 
my own sister* I have grown more and more 
attached to her; she is a pearly Ladj Athel- 
4Btoney and| as long as she lives, she will always 
find a home with me/' 

'' Most lucky for her, indeed I So few gover- 
nesses, you know, are treated in this way. I 
am really ^^ 

Wilfred and Sylvia had entered the room, 
and Lady Athelstone saw them approaching. 
She felt tongue-tied* How would he and this 
girl meet % She had been weak enough to feel 
glad to see her proUgie again, and to find her 
so wonderfully grown and improved in appear- 
ance ; she had been touched by her sorrow, but 
now ulterior reflection came rapidly to sweep 
away all this. The tide of common sense was 
rushing in, and had already submerged the few 
inequalities in the level sands of this eminently 
practical character. 

Nellie had by this time controlled her emo- 
tion, and was, in some degree, prepared to meet 



J 



POET AND PEER. 157 

the further trial which she felt was at hand. 
She had moved a few paces away, with her face 
towards the wall ; she now tui'ned back, and 
stood again beside Mrs. Goldwin, but the beau- 
tiful pale face was only indistinctly seen 
beneath the black crape veil she had drawn 
down. 

She saw him approaching : she saw the quick 
flush of wonder on his face . the momentary 
doubt, the momentary hesitation . how should 
he greet her ? She felt it all. " Will he avoid 
me still?" she asked herself, with a throb of 
anguish. Their last meeting rose up before her : 
the red autumn sunset behind the fir-trees at 
his father's grave ; the young man's stern face, 
and resolute avoidance of her . it all came back 
vividly in those few moments. But in less than 
a minute he strode across the room. With 
Athelstone there were no half measures. He 
held out his hand with a bright smile. What 
his words were, and how she replied, she never 
could recall. She had a sense of the crowd 
passing to and fro, and leaving them there . 
Lady Athelstone and Mrs. Goldwin a little 



158 POET AND PEER. 

apart. She remembered to her dyiDg day tho 
tender sympathy in his eyes, whec^ glancing at 
her deep mourning, the knowledge of her loss 
flashed upon him. 

They stood there for a quarter of an hour. 
Sylvia and the rest had passed on. Lady 
Athelstone was upon thorns. She clung like 
a limpet to Mrs. Goldwin, and devised a little 
jaded talk about the requirements of the times 
as regarded women's education. Wilfred should 
not be left alone in conspicuous conversation 
with this girl on whom all eyes were fixed, if 
Lady Athelstone could help it. So long as his 
mother was with him, the young man's atten- 
tions were robbed^of their significance . ^at least, 
Lady Athelstone hoped so. Thank goodness I 
Madame de Surville, Lady Frances, and Mr. 
Spooner were entering the room ; it might 
create a diversion. And it did so, in a manner 
quite unlocked for by Lady Athelstone. Ma- 
dame Barbara had hardly raised her double- 
glass, and transfixed the group, when she 
tittered a little exclamation of pleasure, which 
was echoed by Mary Goldwin, and the two 



POET AND PEER. 159 

ladies went forward and greeted each other 
with genuine cordiality. 

They had passed some weeks together at 
Ereuznach two years before, and, though Ma- 
dame de Surville hated letter-writing too much 
to have kept up any intercourse with Mary in 
the interval, she had conceived a real regard 
for her young countrywoman, and showed now, 
in her warm-hearted way, how glad she was to 
meet her again. Presently Nellie was intro- 
duced to her, and the tete-a-tite with Wilfred 
was broken ; the party moved on slowly into 
the adjoining rooms. Lord Athelstone had no 
more conversation with Mrs. Goldwin's gover- 
ness that day. 

What were his feelings on this occasion ? Did 
he ever, long afterwards, analyze them? Did 
he ask himself whether any remnant of the old 
boyish passion had survived the separation of 
sixteen months? Whether it was more than 
sympathy with her sorrow, deep interest in the 
child he had loved long ago, some remorseful 
tenderness which a more absorbing love could 
not utterly obliterate, which he then felt? If 



160 POET AND PEER. 

not . a1a8 1 for human natnre . ^it conld onlj be 
gratified vanity that caused the glow of pleas- 
ure bo felt at seeing bow bis appearance stirred 
to the very depths of her being the lovely girl 
who was the object of general curiosity ! Her 
emotion might be concealed from those who 
did not know her ; to him the broken accents of 
her voice, the tremulous pressure of the little 
black'gloved fingers, one against the other, 
told their tale. She had forgotten nothing in 
the course of those sixteen months. From the 
child she had shot up into the woman; the 
blushful little village teacher had developed into 
a beauty of rare perfection ; but in her heart she 
was unchanged* 

"It is a face full of lucent delights," mur- 
mured Mr Spooner, regarding her with his 
head on one side . " the soul of a Madonna trans- 
fused into Aphrodite V^ 

**No, Mr. Spooner, stick to your Psyche . 
that is your best simile . there is nothing of 
Aphrodite about her/' said Madame de 
Surville. 

"Do you know who she is?" asked Sylvia. 



POET AND PEER. 161 

She had watched the girl with intense curiosity 
for some minutes. 

" She is Mrs. Goldwin's governess," replied 
Lady Frances, with that peculiar inflection 
which conveyed to her listener . as it was in* 
tended it should . the impression that she could. 
say more, and she would. 

''And before that?'' 

" Have you no idea ?" 

" None. How should I ?" 

" You have heard of Lady Athelstone's village 
protig^e^ about whom ill-natured tongues were 
so scandalous ?" 

'^ You don't mean that this is she? A village 
girl ? Impossible 1" 

"I am sure I am right. Did you observe 
Lady Athelstone ? She was upon thorns." 

"I observed Lord Athelstone. He treated 
the girl with a sort of tender deference . quite 
unlike a man's manner to ... . Well, I know 
nothing about it. He is certainly different from 
most men." 

" He is. His mother has always been afraid 
that he would marry this girl for a whim." 

VOL. II. M 



162 POET AND PEER. 

Sylvia said nothiog ; she appeared to be ab- 
sorbed in the coDtemplation of the Apollo of 
Praxiteles. Bat, a quarter of an hour later, 
when Wilfred joined her^ she at once questioned 
him, with her fearless directness, as to the 
owner of that beautiful face. 

He told her all, or nearly all, there was to 
tell about Nellie; how he had first seen her 
driving her cow, how he had become interested 
in the sweet intelligent child, and had induced 
his mother to befriend her ; how she had gone 
to school and had become a teacher ; and then, 
at last^ how Lady Athelstone had found this 
situation for her with Mrs. Ooldwin. Of his 
own feelings towards the girl, of the quarrel 
with her cousin, Mr. Samuel Dawson, and of 
the late lord's conditional legacy to Mrs. Daw- 
son, he naturally said nothing. But he was 
not a dissembler ; he acted too much from im- 
pulse ever to be cautious or politic, and he was 
really anxious to enlist Sylvia's sympathies for 
Nellie. Therefore he was at no pains to conceal 
the interest he had taken, and, indeed, that he 






POET AND PEER. 163 

still took, in the village girl whose growth he 
had watched since she was a child. 

*' You will make her acquaintance ? You will 
be kind to her?" he said. '^ It would be such a 
thing for her to know you. Mrs. Goldwin has 
done wonders for her, I see. I am amazed at 
the development of her mind within a year. I 
am sure she would interest you." 

" I have no doubt she would," replied Sylvia, 
quietly. Presently she added . "If you have 
an opportunity, by-and-by, introduce me to 
her." 

The acquaintance, which was destined to 
aflfect so deeply the lives of both women, was 
effected among the clipped yews and tempietti 
of the formal garden. Madame de Surville, who 
was still walking with Mrs. Goldwin, made her 
and Sylvia known to each other at the same 
time. But the afternoon was rapidly closing 
in ; people were all hurrying to the gate ; there 
was time for little more than an interchange of 
salutations. 

"I shall come and see you to-morrow, and 

M 2 



164 POET AND PEER. 

bring "MiBB Brabazon with me/' said Madame de 
Sunrille, as she bade Maiy Goldwin good*bje. 

Lady Athelstone and the Bannockburns were 
already gone. Lady Atbelstone's last words- 
privately uttered to Nellie had been . 

^^ I shall write and ask you to lunch with me 
some day, my dear. Do not come and see me 
till then. I shall call upon Mrs. Goldwin. She 
seems a superior woman, and you could not be 
more happily situated. I . I only hope you will 
not be spoilt. Take care of that." 



165 



CHAPTER IX. 

TITILFRED called on Mrs. Gold win at her 
' ' apartments in the Via del Babuino the 
following day, but she was not at home ; or, at 
all events, she denied herself. An hour later, 
Madame de Surville and Sylvia found her on 
her sofa, with Nellie reading aloud, and the 
children playing with their dolls in a comer of 
the room. It was a pretty picture ; and if Miss 
Brabazon had been struck by the young govern- 
-ess's beauty in her bonnet and veil the previous 
day, she was doubly so now, when the classical 
head and throat, the soft brown hair, and pure 
oval of the girl's face could be seen without 
obstruction. While Madame Barbara talked to 
her friend, Sylvia devoted herself to the study 



166 POET AND PEER. 

of this fair youog creature, in whom she felt a 
growing interest. The visit was a long one, 
and what passed between these two, if written 
down here, would sound bald, and convej but 
little, without the aid of voice and e3q>ression. 
There must be always more of intuition thaa 
analysis in any rapid estimate of character. 
Like a flower that opens, petal by petal, beneath 
the sun, the unfolding of that fresh young mind 
beneath the warm beams of Sylvia's gracious 
and searching influence was a process that 
mighty indeed, have been seen by any bystander, 
but could not be described ; still less could it be 
conveyed by a literal transcript of their conver- 
sation. 

The result of that morning's visit is what 
concerns us. To Nellie, Miss Brabazon seemed 
to be little short of a goddess ; a superior order 
of being, utterly unlike and beyond any with 
whom she had come into contact. The pale, 
large-eyed beauty of her visitor, her great 
height, the slow grace of her movements, and 
the grave sweetness of a manner free from any 
of the tricks of fashion, removed alike from 



POET AND PEER, 167 

languor and abruptness . nay, even the strange 
phantasy of her trailing garments, impressed 
the girl from without, as did the sympathy of a 
nature above pettiness, and undimmed by a 
taint of artificiality, from within. As to the 
idea that she herself could ever, for an instant, 
be weighed in the balance against this peerless 
woman, it never crossed the child's brain. She 
was now nothing to 1dm . could never be any- 
thing ; and the question had recurred to her 
frequently since the previous day . " Is he be- 
loved of the beautiful lady who walked beside 
him, and does he care for her ?" She had heard 
nothing; she could only say to herself when 
Sylvia was gone, " He must love her, and she 
will make him a noble wife* Thank God for 
that I" 

She sobbed her heart out that night, and 
prayed for him upon her bended knees. But 
jealousy . the possibility of rivalry . was far 
removed from the girl's heart. She could meet 
him now calmly, she assured herself; the delu- 
sion of her childhood was all past and over 
now. He belonged, or would belong soon, to 



168 POET AND PEER. 

another. If it was given her to do so, she 
would love and venerate his wife ; and, strange 
as it may seem, while she foresaw this eventual- 
ity, she did not shrink from Sylvia Braba- 
zon. 

Mrs. Goldwin's affection for Nellie had 
strengthened fourfold since the girl's utter 
forlornness and dependence upon her friend ia 
the hour of her sharp and sudden trial. From 
that day forwards^ as she told Madame de 
Surville during this visit, she felt that she had 
taken the place of her mother to the girl. She 
had long been more to Mary than the mere 
governess of her children. 

'* I feel that I have undertaken the responsi- 
bility of her future now," she added, "as 
far as one can that of another human being.'' 

"And I love her for saying itl" exclaims 
Madame Barbara, when she repeats this after- 
wards to Sylvia. " It is so warm-hearted and 
imprudent in the eyes of the cautious world ! 
How everyone will cry out against the folly of 
taking the child out of her station! Even 
Lady Athelstone yesterday 'hoped the girl 



POET AND PEER. 169 

wouldn't be spoiled.' As if love ever spoilt 
anyone 1" 

Sylvia says but little in reply. Perhaps she 
thinks she can divine why Wilfred's mother 
fears her former village-school teacher may be 
*' spoilt." Though she does not entirely believe 
what she has heard from Lady Frances, the 
subject of the young governess gives her much 
food for reflection. 

Madame Barbara, quoting La Fontaine, 
inquires whether " son ramage se rapporte k 
son plumage V whether Sylvia found the girl as 
charming, when she talked to her, as she look- 
ed ? To which Sylvia returns for answer that 
Miss Dawson gives her the impression of an 
angel, saddened, as an angel would be, by con- 
tact with the sin and sorrow of this world. 

It rained, as it can only rain at Rome, several 
days consecutively after this. The party to the 
Castle Fusano had to be deferred. Wilfred 
passed every evening at Mrs. Brabazon's, and 
Sylvia showed no reluctance to converse with 
him, no diminution of interest in what he said. 
Only she warded off every approach to the 



170 POET AND PEER. 

subject he had near at heart ; and, vfhen be was 
not present, her mother . not a very observant 
person . noticed that she remained silent and 
abstracted for long periods. The pencil she 
held would lie idle^ or the page of the book 
remain unturned, and her eyes would be fixed 
dreamily on the leaden sky and streaming roofs 
beyond ber window by the half hour at a time. 
Once Miss Dawson brought the children and 
stayed with her an hour. She made a pencil 
sketch of the girFs head, while Mrs. Brabazon 
stuffed the little ones with bon-bons ; and she 
begged them to return. 

Wilfred, during these days, did not once see 
Nellie. Whether by design or accident, she 
was not in the room when he called again on 
Mrs. Goldwin, and was admitted. Wherever 

he went . at the English club, in S , the 

sculptor's studio, in Mrs. Brabazon*s salon . he 
heard the girl's beauty discussed. Briggs was 
one of the few who declared she could not ^' hold 
a candle " to Miss Brabazon. He was indifferent 
to classic regularity of feature, and an admirer 
of great height. But the sculptors were un- 



POET AND PEER. 171 

animous ; so perfect a head bad not been seen 
in Borne for many a day. Neville Steele, tbe 
most fastidious man in London, an autbority in 
all matters of taste and ton for tbe last tbirty 
years, declared sbe would be tbe rage, if proper- 
ly introduced. 

" Sbe would be tbe making of some penniless 
nobody, wbo would accept tbe rSle of * le mari 
de la femme/" said tbe not unkindly cynic* 
** He must not be squeamisb about ber receiving 
gorgeous presents, and being followed by a 
train of adorers . of course, hopeless adorers . 
from royalty downwards. He must submit to ber 
being mobbed wberever sbe goes, and, to over- 
bearing, as be follows ber, all tbe remarks tbat 
are made, complimentary or otberwise, in ignor- 
ance of bis vicinity ; be must allow ber pboto- 
grapb to be in every sbop-window, and ber 
name to figure in every weekly paper; and 
then I can assure bim tbat every door sball 
be tbrown open to bim in London, and tbe 
zenitb of bis bappiness sball be reacbed." 

Sucb, assuredly, was not Atbelstone's vision 
of bappiness. Witb all bis errors, begotten of 



172 POET AND PEEK. 

wilfulness or weakness, in the past or in the 
future, he could be debased by no ignoble vanity 
of this kind. At the same time, there is no 
doubt that he was pleased at the almost uni- 
versal homage offered at the shrine of the little 
teiTa-cotta image he had set up and worshipped 
in early youth. It was a relief to his con- 
science to find that she had not apparently 
suffered by this folly. Her health did not seem 
to be impaired ; her beauty was decidedly in- 
creased. Though she had recently undergone 
a heavy trial, her spirits had sufficiently revived 
for her to take an interest in what surrounded 
her. She could not be as much hurt as, at 
times, he had feared she might be. He felt 
much comforted by this reflection. 

The marble altar before which he now knelt 
was higher, and the Madonna above it, per- 
haps, unreachable . it seemed so to him at 
hours when he wandered, discouraged, out into 
the Campagna, through the driving rain. But 
he never turned back, nor even wavered in his 
devotion. Though his prayers should not be 
heard here, yet the Deity remained, none the 



POET AND PEER. 173 

less, supreme. If he looked back to the hum- 
bler altar, it was only with a tender regret and 
thankfulness. The little shrine was unbroken. 
His terra-cotta image was recognised by the 
world as matchless, and he still thought, in its 
own material and dimensions, it was so. But 
between the fragile clay and chiselled marble^ 
polished, indestructible, what comparison could 
there be ? 

The first morning that the sun rose glorious 
over the city, after the rain, sparkling upon 
roof, and dome, and tower, and drinking up 
the pools that had settled in every hollow of 
the uneven flags, Wilfred, standing at his win- 
dow in the Tempietto, saw Nellie and the 
children ascending the Pincio steps. Without 
a moment's hesitation, he called to Lorenzo, 
who was in the room, for his hat and stick. 
He seldom weighed the prudence of any step 
he was minded to take. He wished to join the 
girl in her walk, to converse with her as a 
friend, and manifest the unchanged interest he 
felt in all that regarded her. Was it not natu- 
ral and right that he should do so t 



174 POET AND PEER. 

The only pair of eyes that watched him from 
the window were Lorenzo's, and they flashed 
angrily. Would the noble Signorina whom he 
was to marry be pleased that Milordo should 
join girls in their walks ? An hour later, Lady 
Athelstone^ desiring to see her son, called to 
the boy, and questioned him as to when his 
master went out. Sylvia's young champion 
found a pleasure in informing her ladyship of 
the circumstances under which Lord Athelstone 
had suddenly left the house an hour ago. 

In the meantime, Mrs. Goldwin, lying on her 
sofa in the Via del Babuino, received an unex- 
pected and most welcome visitor. Nellie had 
scarcely left the house when Hubert St. John 
was announced. He had arrived that morning 
from Paris, having made the journey without 
a halt. His cousin had been ignorant of his 
movements for some weeks. She had written 
to him in London as soon as she arrived in 
Borne, and this was his reply. He looked 
worn, but his long journey might account for 
that. She asked about the work to which he 
was devoting himself, and he told her it was 



POET AND PEER. 175 

doing well; he had been very busy np to 
Christmas, and had now given himself a few 
weeks' holiday? How was Gold win? Oh! 
very well ; she heard from him once a week. 
And the children? When this inquiry was 
satisfactorily answered, began the real interest 
of the cousins' duologue. 

"Tell me about Miss Dawson, Mary. You 
wrote that she had lost her mother." 

" And is still in very low spirits, poor child, 
at times, though I think she is getting better. 
I do all I can to make her look to me now . to 
supply, as far as may be, her mother's place. 
I am grown even fonder of her, Hubert, than 
when you were at Danecourt in the summer." 
Here she looked at him with meaning. '^I 
have altered some of my opinions. I should 
not oppose now any marriage for her which I 
thought really for her happiness. But she is a 
peculiar child. With all her warm affection 
and gratitude. to me, there are certain subjects 
she always avoids. Do you know that Lord 
Athelstone and his mother are here ? 

"Nol But surely you have not the same 



176 POET AND PEER. 



siupicioD, Mary? She told me hemelf- 



** . That she was quite free. Oh I of conrae* 
I daresay the Byronic yonng lord is innocent in 
the matter. We met hy chance at the Villa 
Albani. He showed that he was delighted to 
see her, and talked to her some time . ^as an old 
friend would, nothing more ; and Lady Athel- 
stone was very gracums . that is the right word, 
I think. She has left her card here, and her son 
has been here twice . the second time I saw 
him, and he sat here an honr." 

^And A^?. did she see him? Tell me 
everything, Mary." 

^^ There is very little to tell. I did not let 
him see her. If my suspicions are right, the 
less she sees him, for her own happiness, the 
better. He certainly is not in love with her 
now, whatever he may once have fancied him- 
self. Indeed, I feel persuaded he is in love 
with somebody else ; he spoke of her with great 
interest, and with admiration. (I must tell you 
that her beauty has made quite a sensation in 
Borne.) But it was admiration, and not pas- 
sion. He is a very odd young man, exceeding- 



POET AND PEER. 177 

ly agreeable, very fascinating to many women, 
I should think ; but wayward and unreliable, if 
I am not mistaken.*' 

" He does not love her, you say ? That is all 
I care about, Mary. But she ? . tell me more. 
Are you really sure she still thinks about 
him r 

" I believe it, my dear Hubert, by that intui- 
tion you always give me the credit for possess- 
ing. If you ask for the grounds of my belief, 
I have none to give. She never mentions him, 
and the only time I saw them together . though 
she was upset at meeting Lady Athelstone, 
whom she had not seen since poor Mrs. Daw- 
son's death . she was comparatively calm when 
he came up and spoke to her ; my conviction, 
therefore, is from within. I have always felt 
certain, and I feel certain still, that this is a 
secret passion which has grown with her since 
she was a child." 

*^ But if she sees it is hopeless ? Now that 
she is a woman, surely she must understand the 
delusion she was under, surely she will do her 
best to eradicate " 

VOL. n. N 



178 POET AND PEER. 

'^ A woman's love is not to be reasoned out 
of ber, dear Hubert ; her pride will aid her to 
conceal it, but it won't destroy it, . time alone 
can do that." 

He was silent for some minutes. 

"I shall never change, Mary, you know that, 
and I shall not despair; my life is bound up 
with this girl's. I can't help it. All these 
months I have found no pleasure in any other 
woman's company; there has always been a 
mental comparison with her. And leading the 
life I do, the alternations of hard work and 
solitude, it is not likely I shall be different. I 
am not a sentimental fool, but I tell you now, 
and you may believe me, unless I marry Miss 
Dawson I shall never marry at all." 

" I no longer oppose it, Hubert ; if you can 
win her, do. You will think me even more 
horridly worldly than you did, but I will be 
frank. This change in my views for you is not 
solely due to my increased affection for the girl. 
I see that her beauty and grace create for her 
so exceptionaUa position that I do not think 
you would suffer socially by such a tie. It 



POET AND PEER. 179 

would not militate against you in your career 
(and I am ambitious for you, Hubert), as I feared 
it might. If she ever makes up her mind to 
marry you, I feel sure she will be happy ; but 
this will take time, I fancy. You must not be 
too impatient. Perhaps Lord Athelstone will 
marry ; I shall have better hopes for you 
then." 

" Whom do you say he is in love with ?" 
'^ A Miss Brabazon, about whom opinions are 
much divided ; some people rave about her 
(curious to say, Nellie among the number, who 
declares she is the most beautiful and noble- 
lookipg woman she has ever seen), others will 
not admit that she is more than a very fine girl 
who is disfigured by her dress. That she 
should have captivated Lord Athelstone for a 
time is not surprising. There is an originality 
about her, a subtle grace and charm, to which I 
myself succumbed. Whether he means to pro- 
pose, and, if he does, whether she will accept 
him, is more than I can say ; but I hope it may 
come about, for Nellie's sake, lind yours, my 
dear Hubert." 

n2 



180 POET AND PEER. 



}> 



*^ She is out, I suppose, with the children ? 
be said, presently. 

" Yes ; they are gone on the Pincio." 

A tradesman was announced, and St. John 
rose. 

*' I am going to drive with Madame de Sur- 
yille to-daj/' she said, as she held out her hand, 
"but we will organize some sight-seeing to- 
gether for to-morrow. You will dine here to- 
day at seven? . and remember, whenever you 
have no engagement, there will be a place and 
a welcome for you here." 

His eyes acknowledged her words, and as- 
sented. He pressed her hand silently^ and left 
her. 

A quarter of an hour later he stood on the 
Pincio. He walked up and down the terrace 
to the front, and then round to the north side . 
he could not see her. There were but few 
pedestrians at this hour, and no carriage. His 
eye could sweep the broad road and footway, 
without encountering any object more interest- 
ing than some flurses, a priest in shovel hat and 
long cloak, a soldier, and two English spinsters 



POET AND PEER. 181 

in seal-skin jackets. He turned into the centre 
walks, where the philosophers, the poets, the 
great men of the past look down in stone upon 
the straight, or crooked, ways which are paths 
of pleasantness to the Romans of to-day. 
Ariosto, the chivalrous, and Petrarch, the faith- 
ful and tender, seemed to smile on the eager, 
simple-hearted man, striding forwards in pur- 
suit of what was perhaps a shadow as unattain- 
able as the favour of Madonna Laura ; but with 
what cold wonder Plato, and Aristotle, and the 
astute Macchiavelli glared at him I 

This fancy shot through Hubert's mind as he 
glanced up at their busts in passing. The next 
minute he came upon what he sought ; and his 
heart failed him. Should he go forward, or 
turn back ? She was there . a few yards from 
him . but not alone. Athelstone walked beside 
her; the children (as it were, an advanced 
guard) in front. His hesitation was but for a 
second or two. Tricksy had espied him, and 
shouted . 

'' Coud'n Oobert I" 

He went forward, and, stooping down, hid his 



182 POET AND PEER* 

great bearded &ce against the child's rosy cheek* 
Then Flossy had to be kissed. When he stood 
erect again, and held ont his hand to Mis 
Dawson, and afterwards to Wilfred, his counten- 
ance betrayed no emotion. 

There had been nothing worth record in their 
talk ; all the world might have listened to it ; 
but how happy she bad been, poor foolish child, 
during that half-hour ! At first she had been 
startled, and had clung tighter to the two little 
hands that clutched hers on either side, when 
he came up and spoke to her. The old spell of 
his voice made her shiver^ but^ as he talked on, 
about this and that, as he spoke with real feel- 
ing of her mother, and showed the interest of 
a true friend . no more . in all that concerned 
herself, the wise wall of resolution she had been 
building up, fell brick by brick, and left her de- 
fenceless. The children broke away from her, 
and ran on in front ; he drew nearer^ and acci- 
dentally, in walking, his hand touched hers: 
it sent a thrill through her frame. She hardly 
heard what he said ; the sense of happiness in 
having him close to her was so great. Never 



POET AND PEER. 183 

had the sky seemed so blue, the air so sparkling 
with sunlight. A breath of violets was borne 
to her from afar; the scent of those flowers, 
years afterwards, always brought back to her 
that walk upon the Pincio. 

She knew nothing of the world and its cen- 
sorious tongue. What harm could there be in 
her walking beside the oldest friend she had, 
who had outlived the passing folly of his boy- 
hood, and treated her as a little sister 'i Wil- 
fred took off his hat to two ladies who passed ; 
but the girl did not see the sneer upon Lady 
Porchester s mouth. Not till she look^ up, ^ 
and saw, advancing towards her, the big frame 
and ugly face of the young man for whom she 
had a strangely-mingled feeling of gratitude, 
respect, and di-ead, did the thought obtrude 
itself . 

"What will Mr. St. John think? Will he 
imagine..'' 

She almost hated him at that moment. 
Why had be come and broken in upon her 
dream ? 

*' Why, St. John 1 where did you drop 



184 POET AND PEER. 

from r cried Wilfred. .* When did you arrive ?" 

" This morning only." 

"And. surprise upon surprise 1 . ^you know 
Miss Dawson?" 

** Of course. Mrs. Goldwin is my cousin." 

" How odd 1 never knew it I Then you have 
met in the country?" 

.'Yes . we have met once." 

Wilfred was conscious of a certain coldness in 
his friend's manner which he could not account 
for. 

"Is this your first visit to Rome?" he 
asked. 

"I was here for a few days on my return 
from India." 

"Then you have seen nothing. We will 
poke about among the ruins together, and 
philosophize. I hate regular sight-seeing. Miss 
Dawson is so delightfully fresh that she tells 
me she enjoys it all . galleries, and catacombs, 
and everything 1" 

" I am glad to bear it," said St. John, who 
was looking at her. Yes, her beauty had cer- 
tainly ripened and expanded most marvellously 



POET AND PEER. 185 

in the course of these four months. A young 
lady of the world would have said something ; 
but St. John's expression of satisfaction did not 
positively demand a reply, and she was silent. 
She turned away, and called to the children. 

** It is time to be going home." 

They all walked as far as the steps together. 

" Will you come in to luncheon, St. John ?" 
asked Wilfred. 

" Thank you, no. I breakfasted very late." 

" Will you have a walk with me afterwards, 
then r 

" I am afraid I can't to-day." 

*' What the deuce has come to him ?" said 
Athelstone to himself, as he turned away. *^Is 
it possible that he is sweet upon my little 
Nellie ? . (well, not mine any longer now). Can 
it be that he is jealous of me?" And, so 
strangely is human nature constituted, he 
felt a certain resentment at the idea of another 
conquering the domain which he himself had 
voluntarily abandoned. 

In the meantime, Hubert walked by the girl's 
side across the Piazza di Spagna, and down the 



186 POET AND PEER. 

Via del Babuino, in almost complete silence. 
His heart was sore troubled, bat it was a trouble 
which it was hard . perhaps unwise, perhaps 
even unjustifiable . to put into words. Nellie, 
with no suspicion of what was passing through 
his mind, still felt a certain awkwardness from 
which she took refuge in the children's chatter* 
The bronze greyhound and rearing horses on 
yellow marble slabs roused Tricksy's enthusi- 
asm ; while the more sensual Flossy devoured 
in imagination a whole window-full of bon-bons 
in a confectioner's shop. Then, further on^ 
there were gay beads, and trumpery, and 
games, and gawdy pictures equally to the taste 
of both, so that the fountains of infantile gar- 
rulity flowed unchecked until they reached the 
door of their house. 

Up to the very last moment he hesitated 
whether to speak or not. He held her hand for 
a moment. ^' I am coming to dinner to-night," 
he said ; then he turned away. It had better 
come from Mary, since Mary, through the chil- 
dren, would assuredly hear of that walk. He 
would say nothing. Like David, he would 



POET AND PEER. 187 

refrain from good words, though it was pain 
and grief to him. For he felt that it was possi- 
ble those good words might be misinterpreted, 
and do more harm than good. 

He went back to his room at the hotel, and 
lit his pipe, and buried his head in his hands. 

** He shall not trifle with her . he shall not 
make her life miserable ; of that I am resolved* 
If it is true that he means to make another 
woman his wife, this girl shall not be the pas- 
time of his idleness. I will watch . I will make 
sure before I speak to him. It may be nothing 
on his part; he has known her from a child; 
but, whatever he feels, whatever he means, the 
ii^ui^y to her is the same. If he has a spark of 
manly feeling he will desist." 



188 



CHAPTER X. 

OF course Lady Athelstone heard more of 
that hour's walk on the Pincio through 
Lady Porchester. Wilfred's mother was secretly 
much disquieted ; but for the present she held 
her peace. She had learned by experience 
that remonstrance with her son in such a case 
only roused his antagonism. She said nothing 
to him, therefore^ and treated the matter lightly 
in reply to Lady Porchester. Her son walking 
with Miss Dawson ? Ah I indeed 1 Yes, he had 
always taken a kind interest in the girl; she 
was really so very respectable and good; her 
head not the least turned by being taken notice 
of; so very satisfactory. But Lady Porchester 
was not easily hoodwinked. She smiled super* 



POET AND PEER. 189 

ciliouflly, and carried her gossip straightway to 
Lady Bannockburn and Lady Frances, through 
whom it filtered next day to Sylvia Brabazon. 

The previous evening this note had been 
written and received . 

" Dear Mrs. Goldwin, 

" Will you, with your children and 

Miss Dawson, join a party we are making to 

Castel Fusano the day after to-morrow ? We 

shall start at ten. 

" Truly yours, 

" Sylvia Brabazon." 

Mary hesitated some time what reply she 
should make to this proposal. It came after 
dinner, while Hubert and Nellie were present. 
The cousins had had no private conversation 
since the morning; but Nellie had told Mrs. 
Goldwin very straightforwardly of her meeting 
Lord Atheist one; and consequently Mary was 
at no loss to account for Hubert's profound 
dejection. She now tossed him Miss Braba- 
zon's note. A few minutes later Nellie, plead- 
ing fatigue, retired, and the cousins were left 
alone. 



190 POET AND PEER. 

**Well? What answer are you going to 
givet" he asked. 

" I should like to go extremely, myself; but 
taking her would be foolish/* 

"WhyT 

Mary opened her eyes. 

" You ask why^ Hubert ? . Because I wish to 
avoid every opportunity of throwing her in 
Lord Athelstone's way." 

" Tliey can meet every day, you see, if they 
choose it, and ^*' 

*' They will not meet henceforward. I can im- 
plicitly trust her. She told me quite simply of 
his walking with her to-day on the Pincio, 
and of your walking back with her. I pointed 
out to her that, though all this was perfectly 
innocent in itself, it had not a good effect in 
the world's eyes. She looked sad, poor girl; 
but she promised me she would not let Lord 
Athelstone join her again. Nor must you do so, 
either. Tou can see her as much as you like 
here. If I take her, however, to Castel Fusano, 
it is hardly possible that she will not be a good 
deal with him during the day.'' 



POET AND PEER. 191 

"I think it is very possible; and that 
is the reason I advise your taking her. 
You can get an invitation for me, I sup- 
pose ?" 

"Certainly I can . but I don't understand 
you. Explain yourself." 

*' If you are right in your conjecture . if he is 
seriously in love with this Miss Brabazon, he 
will, of course, devote himself to her. At all 
events, there can be no divided service when both 
are present. If it is not as you think, if he 
cares for her, as you believe she does for him, 
he must marry her. Yes; he shall not hang 
about her, and spoil her life. I am resolved 
of that. If, on the other hand, he means to 
marry Miss Brabazon, it may open Nellie's 
eyes, it may cure her of this infatuation, to see 
them together. I have thought much over it 
since this morning, Mary. I have tried to put 
my own feelings aside, and only consider her 
happiness. She must know the truth, what- 
ever it is, as regards Athelstone, and so must I. 
And the sooner it is, the better for us all." 

** I believe you are right," said Mary. " And 



192 POET AND PEER. 

yet I feel sure she has no delusions as to 
Lord Athelstone's ever marrying her. I have 
purposely mentioned to her . as if casually . the 
rumours connecting Miss Brabazon's name with 
his; and she has received them quite calmly, 
'v\'ithout even the surprise that might be 
natural. That she is fully prepared for his 
marriage is certain. Still it may be well for 
her, poor child, that the evidence of her own 
senses should prove to her that he is devoted to 
another." 

Though it was still January, the sun had 
considerable power the next day ; the sky was 
of that intense blue we know not in northern 
climes, the light upon the houses dazzling, the 
shadows sharply cut as with a knife. The 
open carriages that drove away in procession 
from the Piazza di Spagna were crowned with 
parasols and white umbrellas; the professor even 
appearing with a " puggeree '' which had seen 
some inferior Alpine service, and clung to his 
" wide-awake " with a grim and flaccid tenacity. 
Sylvia had begged to be allowed to drive with 
Madame de Surville, in a two-seated Victoria, 



POET AND PEER. 193 

.which obviated the possibility of their offering 
a place to anyone. Her friend expressed no 
surprise at this stipulation, whatever she may 
have felt ; the girl had, no donbt, her own 
reasons for the arrangement. Lady Athelstone^ 
Mrs. Brabazon, the Bishop, and Tivoli occupied 
another carriage. The Bannockburns, with 
the professor and Miss Decker, filled a third ; 
the Goldwin party, including Hubert St. John^ 
a fourth. 

When it was made kuown to Wilfred, the 
previous evening at Mrs. Brabazon's, that the 
carriage in which Sylvia was to drive held no 
seat for him, his brow clouded over.^ W^hen it 
was further suggested that his carriage should 
take some of the rest of the party, he abruptly 
announced that he should ride ; if anvone liked 
to accompany him, he could do so. 

Let UB float, for a moment or two, on the sun- 
warmed air alongside three of those carriages in 
turn, and catch the chance words that may be 
drifted to tia. 

''Yes, Bishop/' Lady Athelstone is saying, 
.*I am anxious, as you may believe, about my 

VOL. II. O 



194 POET AND PEER. 

dear 8od. The future, yon know . such re- 
sponsibilities . ^you noderstand. With his ardent, 
poetic temperament, it is important he should 
&n into good bands." 

"May I say, dear Lady Athelstone," . ^here 
the Bishop leans forward, so that Mrs. Brabazon, 
who is chattering volubly to Tivoli shall not 
hear him, . ** may I say that be seems likely to 
do so ? Yon will esteem yourself blessed, I feel 
sure, in the choice which there can be little 
doubt he means to make.'' 

*^AhI yes, indeed, I have got to think thai 
would be, on the whole, most desirable. I wish 
it were certain, I do indeed, though I might 
have wished a little more family. But I am not 
worldly. Bishop ; I know we are all equal, and 
your approval of her weighed with me so much. 
Unfortunately, my dear boy is so swayed by 
his impulses, I cannot feel sure that some other 
influence-HBometbing . may not . ^may not in- 
terfere, you understand?" 

** I should be grieved, indeed, if I thought so. 
What counter-influence can yon dread?" de- 



POET AND PEER. 195 

mands tho Bishop, with a mellowed earnestuess 
in his melliflaous voice. 

" I . I scarcely know . that is, I could not ex- 
plain. There are circumstaoces that. he is so 
very impulsive, you see, Bishop, and his gener- 
ous nature may be misunderstood. I fear Miss 
Brabazon may misunderstand his kinduess to 
that young governess. I wish you could point 
out to him how wroog it is, how damaging to 
the girl, and how likely to . to ruin his own 
prospects." 

" To a high-spirited young man that last 
argument would not appeal," replies the Bishop, 
shaking his head. '^ Nor could I take the liberty 
of speaking to Lord Athelstone as to his con- 
duct in a purely personal matter, unless circum- 
stances came under my immediate observation 
which should seem to me to justify such inter- 
ference." 

In the Goldwin carriage the children are 
twittering like unfledged birds, and the pale 
girl in black smiles at them from time to time, 
with an admonitory word, after which her eyes 

o2 




196 POET AND PEER. 

fix tbemeelves again upon the far blue Koe of 
the hori:^OD, over the 'wiad'hlown asphodels, the 
flat grey plain, and the solifarr oBtena; the 
other two occopaDts of the cairiage now and 
again cast their bread npoa the waters of 
ailence, into which it is absorbed ; neither seems 
in a mood to sastaia conversation. 

St. John has been tefemog to bis "Murray." 

"That mnst be the Vtcui Alexandria the 
ancient Bomao village tbey speak of here as 
having been discovered by Professor Nibby." 

The young governess rouses herself aad looks 
rotind; she feels it is but fitting that she, as 
the iastructor of youth, should evioce an inter- 
est in Professor Nibby'a discovery. But the 
interest is languid; she gazes at the few old 
stones, and can fiod nothing to say. 

Trictsy's attention is attracted by the horse- 
men galloping across the plain. 

" Look dere I Look, MIt Dawthon I Dat 
gen'ieman in font thendth all de mud over tie 
udder hortbeth. How faflit he go'tb! and he 
lookth like if be wanted to get away f'om 
dem." 



POET AND PEER. 197 

"Not Mike if. say 'as if/ Tricksy," Miss 
Dawson returns. 

How noble and gallant a gentleman astride 
his horse! she thinks. An old green lane at 
Eipple in the hawthorn-time, and a boy upon a 
white pony, come back to her. She has not 
Been him a-horseback since those days. 

"Why, he'th de gen'Ieraan what walked wid 
uth de udder day 1" cries Tricksy again. 

"Not t?Aa. 'who walked' . ^yes, it is Lord 
Athelstone," she replies, quietly. 

"We are drawing near the salt-marshes 
mentioned in Livy as existing in the time of 
Ancus MartiuB," says St. John, anxious to 
break an awkward silence^ as it seems to him. 
But this time she does not even simulate any 
curiosity as to the Roman historian's saline 
bog, and the valuable information drifts away 
unheeded. 

Further ahead, between the two ladies 
Bwathed in furs in their Victoria, conversation 
has never flagged ; the following is an excerpt 
of it. 

" What is to be the end of this, then 1" 



I9S POET AND PEER. 

It is Madame de Snrville who asks the ques- 
tioD, in reply to something Sylvia has been 
saying. The girl is silent for a minute. 

" I hardly know . ^I cannot tell at present. I 
must wait and see." 

*^ Surely, dear child, you have seen enough 
of the man by this time to know the one only 
thiog that signifies . whether you care for him 
or not?" 

Under the fur^ Sylvia's hand presses her 
friend's, as she says, in a low voice, 

"There w another thing that signifies . to 
feel very sure of the man one marries. I do 

not feel sure of him. If I did ^" Here she 

breaks oflT, and then continues . "But I have 
such an exalted idea of married life that, 
unless I have the most absolute, implicit 

trust '' 

"Ah! child, do not expect too much. Take 
what you find now; trust to the ascendancy 
you will gain over him more and more to keep 
him yours. He has been a little wild . he says 
and writes foolish things . but there seems ta 
be good ground to work upon in him. He has a 



i 



POET AND PEER. 199 

warm heart, and he has brains. If you care for 
him, my advice is, marry him.'' 

** Not as long as there is the shadow of doubt 
on my mind that he could ever return to an- 
other. I am proud, dear Madame Barbara, and 
I know myself. I will give body and soul to 
the man I marry . live for him, slave for him, 
die for him . but I must know that he is mine. 
It is not enough that I hold him captive for a 
few weeks : his love must be tested." 

There is something of bitterness in Madame's 
smile, as she shakes her head^ and ajiswers . 

**I believe you are wrong, my dear. Sup- 
posing the man to be no better nor worse than 
the rest of them . supposing he is a little volage 
. the scent of weaker flowers may attract him 
for a moment, he may flutter away from time 
to time, but he will return with ever-renewed 
zest to the full-scented heart of his rose. Un- 
less I greatly misjudge him, he would never be 
able to break away from such a wife as you 
would make him. Your hold upon him would 
become stronger as the years advance. He 
loves you now as an impassioned young man> 



200 POET AND PEER. 

Ab he learns, more and more, the force and 
nobleness of your character, his will be raised 
and purified ; he will worship you, my child . 
at least, he'll be a brute if he doesn't.'' 

** I have no claim to worship, and I am four 
years older than he," says Sylvia, slowly. 
. ^'My dear^ I have always thought it irra- 
tional that the accident of being born a year or 
two sooner or later should affect the marriage 
of two people who are really suited to each 
other." 

"But am I suited to him? In some re- 
spects, I know I am. I know, too, that he 
is the only man I have ever seen I would 
marry. But might not, in the long run^ 
some younger, lovelier, more pliable creature 
retain an empire over him when I am middle- 
aged and faded? I have asked myself this 
question very often during the last fortnight ; 
during the last few nights it has kept me al- 
most sleepless. I think Frances Cope is unjust 
to him, but I believe her advice is sound. For 
his sake^ as much as for my own, I will not 
marry him yet. His love must be tested." 



POET AND PEER. 201 

"Reflect well, my dear. He is not indiflfereut 
to you. You are casting away, for au idea, 
that which you may never find again." 

" I know it." 

" You will lose him, and repent of it, I am 
afraid." 

^^ If he is so easily to be lost, dear Madame 
Barbara, I ought not to repent. I cannot act 
otherwise." 

After this there comes a long silence between 
the two friends. 



202 



CHAPTER XL 

A N boar later thej were seated ronnd a table, 

-^ OD wbicb the servaats, wbo bad preceded 
them, bad spread luQcheoo, in the old casino of 
the Chigi^ which is situated in the midst of the 
pine forest. Though the sun was powerful, the 
air was keen^ and the elders of the partj had 
decided that to plaj at summer, and feed under 
the trees, was not to be thought of. So within 
the square grey bunting-lodge, dominated by 
its stone sentinels, who stand seaward, as on 
the outlook for pirates from Sicily or Morocco, 
the party lunched. Miss Decker was the life 
and soul of it. But for her, the preoccupation 
of some of its members would have interrupted 
the current of magnetic fluid which should flow 



POET AND PEER. 203- 

Tonnd any circle of fourteen persons socially 
disposed. Her happy immunity from personal 
care, and avidity for general rather than par- 
ticular conversation, her capacity for extracting 
the grist that each individual could bring to her 
mill, and her readiness in firing off verbal pop- 
guns to right and left, incited even St. John, 
whose mind was not attuned to pleasantry, to 
reply to her attacks across the table. No one 
could resist the contagion of the little Ameri- 
can's volubility. Chance had placed Nelh'e be- 
Bide the amiable, courtly bishop. He directed 
his eyes and devoted his conversation almost 
solely to her, and she found herself upon the 
happiest terms with him before the luncheon 
was over. 

Food and personal geniality, in combination, 
will disperse . temporarily, at all events . many 
of the clouds that gather on the more sensitive^ 
human horizons, when mind and body alike 
need stimulant. Those with whom we are 
chiefly concerned rose from table unconsciously 
braced and in better spirits. Foremost among 
these was Athelstone. He had been out of 



204 POET AND FEES. 

faumoar at starting; had consolidated bis 
gloomy views of life in a bitter sonnet as be 
galloped across tbe Campagna. His manoeavres 
to seat himself beside Miss Brabazon at lancheoa 
met with no opposition, and his spirits rose as 
be talked to her. They were both drawn, by- 
and-by, into the machinery of general discus- 
sion^ of which Miss Decker was the strong motive 
power; he said one or two good things which 
elicited Madame de Surville's sympathetic laugh. 

''How pleasant he is I" she sighed, looking 
into Sylvia's eyes with a humorous sadness, as 
they rose from table. 

Then, by twos and threes, all the party wan- 
dered through the great pine forest, where 
straight red stems, and dark canopies of shade 
cutting the blue sky overhead, form a stately 
aisle down to the still sea, whose white fringes 
advance not, nor retire from the yellow shore. 
Two or three coral-fishers from Capri, scarlet- 
capped, were mending their boats upon the 
sand ; some curlews circled high in the cloud- 
less air; not another living creature was ia 
sight. 



POET AXD PEER. 205- 

She had, without affected reluctance, walked 
on with him alone along a carpet of pine-fibre, 
strewn with cones. The moment had come 
when she must listen to him, and be prepared 
to reply. Gladly would she have avoided it; 
willingly would she have prolonged that un- 
defined state of things between them which 
enabled her judgment, perhaps, to have freer 
scope than it would exercise under the limita- 
tion of conditions. But this could not be. 
Perhaps it was not even fair to him. Like all 
women of imagination, she endowed her hero 
with something he had not ; but, like few such 
who are capable of a strong and deep attachment, 
her heart never completely blinded her quick 
perceptions. She would hardly acknowledge 
to herself, some weeks since, that she was be- 
ginning to love a man against whpm she had 
been warned, and concerning whom she felt, 
avowedly, doubtful. She did acknowledge it 
now; and yet "the little rift within the lute" 
had rather widened, than otherwise, since 
then. 

"Let us get away from them all," he said, 



206 POET AND PEER. 

qnicklj. ^^ You promised me this hour. I am 
not going to let it be ioterrupted." 

They walked oq rapidly for a few minutes in 
silence. Then he tamed to her, and said, with 
nervous abruptness . 

<<Miss Brabazon, you are torturing me by 
your conduct. You must see that I love you . 
love you passionately; and I cannot discover 
what your real feeling for me is. Is it only a 
friendly regard, made more tender at moments 
by a little pity f If it is only this, for God's 
sake tell me so at once I" 

^'It is more than thi#/' she replied, in a low 
voice, after a moment's pause. '^How much 
more, I will not tell you ; but this I will say, 
that, if you were a few years older, and if I 
believed your decisions to be unalterable, I 
would marry you. But you are four years 
younger than I, and it has been my lot to see a 
great deal of life in those four years. I know 
what men are . what they will ever be. There- 
fore I will not let you sacrifice your youth to 
what may prove to be a delusion." 



POET AND PEER. 207 

"A delusion? My love for you is the one 
thing in my life that can never prove so. I 
swear this to you . and I know myself. I am 
passionate, unstable^ easily led to evil, unless I 
am under some strong, good influence. Be my 
guardian angel ; for you can be this. My future 
is in your hands. If you reject me, such an 
ascendancy for good will never be gained over 
me again." 

" So you think now; and so hundreds of men 
at your age have thought who have repented 
their rashness a few years later." 

** But why is this * rash ' ? You surely do not 
regard the slight difference in our ages as an 
insuperable objection t" 

" I do not say insuperable. Still it is a great 
one." 

*'My mother does not think so. She is most 
anxious for it." 

"She is most anxious for your welfare . 
anxious that you should use your abilities well 
in life, and take your proper station in your 
county. She thinks, perhaps^ I can influence 



208 POET AND PEER. 

you beneficially . more so than *' . she pansed . 
''than those yon have hitherto been much 
thrown with. If you wish to prove that she is 
right, if I have really any power over you, 
follow my counsel simply as a friend, and put 
aside for the present all question of marriage 
between us." 

" I don't waot the cold counsel of a friend," 
he exclaimed, angrily. '' Do you think all the 
wisdom of the sages of Greece will do me any 
good when we are parted? I want you. you 
as my wife; I want close daily sympathy, a 
voice to rouse me t^ exertion, to cheer me 
in despondency. If you will not give me 
this, I tell you nothing else is of any use to 

me. 

" Your confession of weakness makes me feel 
how doubly dangerous it would be for you to 
undertake life-long obligations at your age," 
said Sylvia^ gently. "You have the poet's 
temperament. open ta every impression, and 
you will say, as other poets have done before 
you, thai such impressions are not to be 
reasoned away. Mine is strongest with you 



POET AND PEER. 20? 

just now. How long has it been sol How 
long will it remain so? Would it stand the 
test of absence, and, still more, the test of time ? 
You will return to England, and some fair 
young image will chase mine from your heart, 
and if you meet me, ten years hence, a faded 
woman, you will bless me for my resistance to 
you to-day." 

She spoke these words playfully, but her 
voice shook a little towards the close, and the 
tears gathered in her large grey eyes. The 
young man, in his anger, however, heeded them 
not. He was too mucb engrossed by his own 
strong emotion to be very watchful of any sub- 
dominant effect of hers. 

"You do not love me, and never will," he 
said, in a thick, husky voice. " Say so at once. 
It would be more honest than to trifle with my 
devotion, and then coldly speculate on the 
effects of time. as if that questio ever occurred 
to anyone who truly loved I If you cared for 
me, it would be enough for you that my heart 
and life are yours now . ^you would not talk 
about the future !" 

VOL. n. p 



210 POET AND PEER. 

*^ You cannot believe in lore that is nnselfisb, 
tbenr 

'^I cannot beUeve in love that can be 
smothered hj prudence." 

*' Prudence is an ugly-sounding word; but 
what does it mean in our case f You are a very 
young man, and I not a very young woman. 
You have talents, riches^ rank . all the good 
things of this worlds and some of a better 
world, too, I believe. Life, with its infinite capa- 
cities, lies before you ; it is untried as yet. You 
do not know what you most need for happi- 
ness. You think it is me. But you will find 
heaps of better, cleverer, and . ^younger women 
to choose from. And conscience . which is 
another name for prudence^ perhaps . ^tells me I 
have no right to accept this sacrifice at the out- 
set of your career." 

" You are afvaid." 

"Well, yes. I am afraid . ^not that you 
would be unkind . not that you would ever 
reproach me. But should I live to see the love 
dying out of your eyes, should I grow to feel 
that you were weary of your chain, I could 



POET AND PEER. 211 

never forgive myself. never know another 
moment's happiness on earth." 

He kicked aside the pine-cones that lay 
before him, and stalked along in a gloomy 
silence for some minutes. Then, stopping 
suddenly, and stretching out his hand. 

**Will you do this," he exclaimed. '^Will 
you promise to marry me in one year from this 
time, if I remain unchanged ?" 

There was a moment's hesitation. Was she, 
indeed^ about to cast away for an idea, as 
Madame de Surville had said, that which she 
might never find again ? Was not this which 
he proposed, after all, a probation t Yes; 
but not such a one as she had proposed to 
herself. 

"Let us both be free as air. You might 
fancy such a conditional engagement bound 
you, as a man of honour, as much as marriage. 
You do not know your own mind yet. Per- 
haps," she added, with a smile which was more 
sad than gay, " I do not quite know mine." 

*' You are frank at last/' he rejoined, bitterly. 
" I ought to have known from the first that a 

p2 



212 POET AND PEER. 

woman like yon never could care for me/' he 
added, with one of those odd revulsions of 
humility which alternated in him with a high 
estimate of himself. *^ Yon lifted me for a mo- 
ment ; I shall sink now to the level of those 
who are not so hard to satisfy." 

"I hope, on the contrary, you will keep a 
lofty standard before you, and never let me 
feel otherwise than proud of my friend." 

*' Yon might have been proud of me some 
day. It was in your power. But now " 

They were standing at the edge of the blue 
sea. He stooped, and, instead of completing 
his sentence, picked up a pebble, and flung it as 
far as he could into the water. 

The next minute Miss Decker and Mr. 
Spooner came up with them. With vigilant 
alacrity the lady was drinking in materials for 
<*copy" by the next mail, to be entitled 
<< Conversations with an eminent Essayist,** 
while the professor held forth on what he called 
"the harmonious complexity of the divine 
scheme in the articulation of a weed," which, 
like the foreground of his fiivourite pre- 



POET AND PEER. 213 

HaphaeliteSy he held so close to his eyes 
as to obstruct the westering glory on the 
far, faint hills. The fact of a young man 
and woman walking off from the rest of the 
party, and found standing at the water's edge, 
the young man, with knit brow and a vicious 
Jerk, sending stones into the sea, had no signi-* 
ficance for the American, as it would have had 
for a Lady Porchester. 

"I guess it's about time we were making 
tracks," she said. 

A hundred yards further off Madame de Sur- 
ville was pacing the sands, linked with Mary 
<3 old win. The children were loitering behind^ 
watched over by Nellie, on whom, neverthe- 
less, no movement of the two dark figures 
against the blue sea^ far ahead, was lost. 
Hubert St. John's object was, apparently, 
gained. She could be no longer under a delu- 
43ion, if she ever had been so, as to the object of 
Wilfred's present devotion. He had addressed 
no more than a few kindly words to herself on 
arrival; since then he had been absorbed by 
Miss Brabazon. Nellie was left to make these 



214 POET AND PEER. 

observatioDS for herself* St John had purpose* 
\y abstained from joining her ; he was with some 
of the other ladies in the rear. 

^^I suppose that is a settled thing?" said 
Mary, tentatively, with a slight movement of 
her head in the direction of Wilfred and 
Sylvia. 

*'0n the contrary. I am afraid it is quite 
unsettled/' replied her companion. 

" How so ?" 

*^ Because my Sylvia is high-minded and 
romantic^ and expects too much from life.*' 

^'Surely there is much to satisfy romance 
there 1 A poet^ a noble name, and great per* 
soual attraction!" 

^^ Above and beyond all, my dear, she is in 
love with him I" 

" Then what is to prevent it V" 

*'Her own will . her own fears. She has 
made up her mind, I believe, to refuse him." 

Mary stared at her. Such an instance of 
human perversity as this appeared had not yet 
fallen in her way. But the demeanour of both 
the subjects under consideration, who were now 



POET AND PEER, 215 

drawing near, left little doubt that Madame de 
Surville was right. Miss Decker and the pro- 
fessor separated the two; Sylvia, pale and 
silent^ but simulating some interest in Mr. 
Spooner's discourse, from Wilfred, with tight- 
clenched lips, utterly heedless of the American 
lady's inquisitive rattle. Her efforts to cull a 
few flowers of poetry from the young bard of 
the British aristocracy failed utterly this time. 
He observed a moody silence, broken at most 
by an occasional monosyllable. 

Of the return to Rome, which was only 
reached long after dark^ I have nothing to say* 

An hour later, Mrs. Brabazon, sitting over 
the fire with her French novel, was surprised 
when her daughter, who had been alone in her 
own room^ as soon as she entered, walked up 
to the fire with these words . 

"Mamma, let us go to Naples for a few 
weeks. Uncle Georgio proposed it the other 
day^ and I am sure you would like to see him ; 
you only refused because you thought I wanted 
to stay here. I don't want to do so now . in- 
deed I had rather go away for a little while, and 



216 POET AND PEER; 

return for Easter. What do yon say ? May I 
write to my uncle t" 

This uncle was in business at Malta, and 
business alone bad brought him to Naples* His 
stay there would be short, and he had not time 
to visit his sister in Rome. A strong affection 
subsisted between them, though they had met 
but rarely since early youth. Mrs. Brabazon 
would have started for Naples some days since^ 
had it not been for Sylvia. The question had 
never been mooted between them ; but the 
mother believed that her daughter's interests, 
as well as her wishes, pointed to their not 
quitting Rome just now ; therefore the possi- 
bility of meeting her brother had been at once 
dismissed from her mind. Her astonishment at 
Sylvia's proposition partook of both pleasure 
and disappointment ; but she had grown accus- 
tomed to accept her daughter's decisions 
tinquestioned. The warmest affection subsisted 
between the two ; but the intimate discussions 
which arise from perfect sympathy, even when 
one mind is immeasurably superior to the other, 
would have been impossible in this case. The 



POET AND PEER. 2 1 7 

utmost length to which Mrs. Brabazon's curi- 
osity prompted her upon this occasion was to 
eay . 

" Will Milordo come to Naples too, carat" 

*' I do not think so." 

"And you really wish to go ? You are sure t 
Are you not very 'appy here 1" 

" I think I shall be happier . at all events, I 
think it is better for me to be absent from Rome 
now for a time." 

She stooped and kissed her mother, and no 
more passed between them. 

Two days later their departure for Naples was 
fixed. 



218 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE consternation of *'the Cdterie/' as it 
might be called, at this announcement 
expressed itself openly from every mouth but 
one. Wilfred was silent^ unless directly 
appealed to, when he affected to accept the 
reason assigned for this abrupt decision as the 
true one. His pride was deeply hurt; too 
deeply for him to entertain the idea of pur- 
suing Sylvia to Naples. He considered that he 
had been encouraged . ^led on, step by step, 
till he had committed himself to a declaration . 
and then treated like a school-boy who could 
not be supposed to know his own mind. She 
had never cared for him . she never would; and 
the further she drifted away, the more blank 



POET AND PEER, 21& 

and desolate the future looked to him without 
her. Lorenzo, with Ub searching eyes feed 
upon his young master as he lay, his bead 
buried in his hands, was the only human being 
who guessed how much he suffered. 

The boy limped down the Spanish steps with 
a stick the evening before Sylvia's departure. 
On asking for her at the hotel, and giving his 
name, he was admitted. She was in the salon, 
alone, packing up her sketches. 

"You have come to wish me good-bye, 
Lorenzo?" she said, with a smile. ^'That is 
very kind of you." 

"Ahl signorina," returned the boy, with all 
the passionate earnestness of his race, ''if I 
knew what I could do for you 1 It is a pity 
you are going. . Will you come back quickly I" 

" We shall probably be back at Easter." 

" Oh 1 it is a long time to Easter." 

"Nine weeks fly very quickly. You must 
work hard at English while I am away. Sup- 
pose you write me an English letter?" 

" I will write to you, signorina, if anything 
happens." 



f 20 POET AND PEER. 

The tone in which he said this struck 
bar. 

'^Tou are quite happy now, are you not, 
Lorenzo V* 

** I should be, if you were there always/' he 
replied, with a sigh. 

** That is impossiblei you know. But I am 
aure my lord is very kind to you ?" 

*' Yes . oh, yes. He is very kind ; but that 
makes the servants jealous, and I cannot speak 
their tongue. And my lord's mother does not 
love me, either." 

'^ Ton must not fancy these things. You must 
do your duty without troubling yourself about 
what people think of you.'' 

" My lord is very unhappy, too." 

" Unhappy t Nonsense 1" 

'* Yes, he sits o," and Lorenzo buried his 
head in his hands. On raising it, he looked at 
her with that curious astute expression which 
came into his coal-black eyes at times. **I 

fear '* then he shook his head, and paused* 

The cunning little fellow waited to be question- 
ed. Sylvia fell into the trap. 



POET AND PEER. 221 

" What is it you fear f 

" When you are gone, he will be so wretched 
. so wretched that some other signorina . 
quella biondina ^*' 

She interrupted him with a sternness he had 
not conceived to be possible from his divine 
lady. 

"Stopl You are an ignorant lad. You 
know no better than to talk thus ; therefore^ 
I forgive you this time ; but, remember, it is the 
last. If you ever repeat the offence, I shall 
never speak to you again." 

The boy tried to protest ; but she rang the 
bell, and pointed to the door. 

They were gone; and the days dragged 
themselves wearily along. Wilfred would 
show his wounds to no one. Against his 
mother's irritating solicitude he held a target of 
unassailable calm. 

His grief found vent in written words, elo- 
quent and pathetic, as every emotion in him 
had a facility of doing. Here are some lines he 
wrote at this time . 



.S22 POET AND PEER. 

** Her love is not for me. The light is yanished 
From the far hills 1 thought to reach so soon, 
And all the gladness from the plain is banished. 
And all the glory of the afternoon. 

-** The summer gardens now are wildernesses, 
Strewn with the leaves of unfulfilled desire. 
In vain I look unto her mouth for kisses ; 
I meet with friendship when I ask for fire. 

**' And from her eyes, when seeking, as I must. 
For some poor comfort to allay my pain. 
Some answering gleam of tender, tearful trust, 
I meet a smile of pitying disdain. 

** Her love is not for me. Her soul^s election 
Will fall on one who might have stood alone : 
And for warm passion gives her cold perfection, 
And for the human bread of love. a stone 1** 

But to no human being did be speak of bis 
"disappointment. 

To none would be bave done so less willingly, 
trange to say, tban to bis old friend, Hubert 
St. Jobn. An impassable barrier bad arisen 
between tbe two young men since tbeir first 
encounter in Borne. Hubert bad indeed dined 
witb Atbelstone more tban once ; but on tbese 
occasions conversation bad been upon public or 
abstract questions, never as to wbat toucbed 
eitber of tbem most deeply. 



POET AND PEER. 223 

Hubert's anger against his friend was, how- 
ever, much mollified at this time, not only by 
the positive information he had obtained 
through Mary Goldwin of Athelstone's pro- 
posal to Miss Brabazon, and his rejection, but 
also by reason of the fact that, far from seeking 
to meet Miss Dawson now, he seemed to avoid 
her. He did not call on Mrs. Goldwin ; he was 
never seen on the Pincio; all his sight-seeing 
and art-study collapsed. He passed the morn- 
ings in his own room, writing. In the after- 
noons he walked or rode^ generally alone. If 
he went into society, some hardened, married 
flirt was the object of his attentions. 

One lady who arrived in Rome about this 
time caused Lady Athelstone some temporary 
disquiet. Not that Mrs. Crosbie could be 
justly designated as a hardened flirt. She was 
a poseuse who encouraged admiration. Mr. 
Spooner greatly admired her ; he said her type 
was so very "pure and early." She had, in 
truth, thinly-penciled eyebrows high-arched 
in an acre of forehead, narrow eyes under 
heavy lids, very little hair, and a long, yearn- 



224 POET AND PEER. 

ing throat. She was always in an attitnde, 
and, somehow or other, jon generally saw her 
face en profit perdu. There was an air of lofty 
and yet complacent weariness which belonged 
to her character as a fine lady, perhaps even 
more than to that of a saint. For the world 
had decided that she was very like a saint upon 
a gold ground, by Cimabue ; though which, it 
had not yet determined; only the cynic, Mr* 
Punchett, declared it could not be Santa Lucia 
. she made such use of her eyes. Mrs. Crosbie 
herself inclined most to the Madonna^ and drove 
generally on the Pincio, with a very ugly child 
erect upon her lap, a blue mantle, and an ab- 
stracted air. But, as Punchett said, one could 
not but feel that the thoughts of this Ma* 
donna, while admitting the worship of the 
vulgar crowd, were directed to, and wholly 
coloured by, the set she lived in *^down in 
Judee.'' 

Athelstone found some distraction at the 
Embassy, and in other bouses where he met 
her, in talking sentiment with Mrs. Crosbie* It 
was not very profound, and it meant as little 



POET AND PEER* 225 

ou one side as oq the other, but it was enough 
to alarm Lady Athelstone* 

** I shall never be easy until he is married,'^ 
she observed to the Bishop one night at the 
Embassy, when Wilfred had sat for upwards of 
an hour on a sofa beside Mrs. Crosbie^ whose 
neck was craned rounds so that one who sat 
opposite could only see her rounded cheek and 
the tip of her nose as she listened to the young 
lord. " I shall never be easy until he is mar- 
ried . suitably married. It is so unfortunate 
Miss Brabazon having gone away. Dear boy 1 
he is so impulsive, and that Mrs. Crosbie is so 
dangerously fascinating. It makes me very 
uneasy." 

The poor mother had no cause for real un- 
easiness in this case^ as we know. But Lady 
Bannockburn and her daughter perceived it; 
and Lady Frances conscientiously believed she 
was doing her friend a real service when she 
wrote to Naples reporting Lady Athelstone's 
annoyance at the way her son was '* going on 
with Mrs. Crosbie." 

^' Last night " . thus ran a passage in one of 

VOU lU Q 



226 POET AND PflEU. 

Lady Frances's letters . ^^ Lady Porobester bad 
one of ber terrible parties. For tbe first time^ 
Lord Atbelstone condescended to bonour ber 
mritb bis company, tbougb, indeed^ be sbould 
ratber be said to bave bestowed it on Mrs. 
Crosbie^ as sbe was tbe only person be spoke to 
tbe wbole evening. It is as good as a play to 
watcb ber wistful, angelic way of looking up 
into bis face. Tbat be can be taken in by tbis 
electro-plate simplicity and innocence I cannot 
believe ; be is too clever ; but sbe flatters bis 
vanity, wbicb you bave wounded, and tbis 
flirtation, wbicb makes bis motber miserable, is 
tbe result.'' 

Witb tbe impression wbicb tbese letters 
produced on Sylvia we are not concerned at 
tbe present moment. Tbe fact to wbicb they 
bore witness was bailed by St. Jobn and Mrs. 
Goldwin as indicating tbat tbe young lord, 
since tbe destruction of bis more serious bopes, 
bad found a pastime less harmless to tbe 
object of bis attention tban tbe prosecution of 
a sentimental intercourse witb Nellie Dawson. 
Tbe girl accepted tbis, as sbe bad done tbe evi- 



POET AND PEBR. 227 

.dence of his devotion to Miss Brabazon, with- 
out visible emotion of any kind. It was named 
. purposely named . in her presence. She did 
not raise her eyes from her work ; but stitched 
away in silence. She might give way in the 
fiolitude of her little room at night. When she 
prayed that he might be kept from all evil, it 
may be that her voice broke down in sobs ; but 
before men she successfully exercised her self- 
control. Mary Goldwin felt more hopeful than 
she had yet done as to her young governess's 
recovery from this fatal passion, which threaten- 
ed to over-shadow her whole life. 

Nothing contributed to this sanguine view of 
the question more than Nellie's gradual return 
to a footing of firm and easy friendliness with 
St. John ; the ground on which both stood^ so 
to speak, having been loosened at the time of 
his proposal, and nevep since, spite his best 
efforts, having consolidated. But it would have 
been hard, indeed, for any woman with a heart, 
not to be touched by the faithfulness which 
brought him, day after day and evening after 
evening, with books and drawings to illustrate 

Q2 



228 POET AND PEER. 

some point of Italian literature, or history, or 
art ; to enrich her from the treasury of his well- 
stored mind ; in short, to complete the educa- 
tion which Mrs. Goldwin had so profitably 
begun ; never obtruding his own desires upon 
her, but biding his time with manly patience, 
subordinating all to her present profit and 
pleasure. 

Possibly the comfort both found at this time 
was based upon a false security in the mutual 
renunciation of their hopes ; but the repose and 
confidence in St. John's judgment, and respect 
for his character, which the girl felt more and 
more each day, were never afterwards shaken. 
Whatever might come between them in the 
future, the regard which she contracted for him 
now could not change. And Mary, who knew 
that the girl's nature^ though too diffident to be 
quickly receptive, retained with tenacity every 
feeling and impression once formed there, built 
much upon this. The rest must be left to 
time. 

The beauty of the young English governess 
was one of the topics of Borne that winter* 



POET AND PEER. 229 

Wherever the trio went . and they visited some 
villa, gallery, or church daily . there was sure 
to be a knot of young men following her with 
that undisguised admiration which Italians 
regard as the natural homage to be paid to 
beauty. Mary had to decline numberless 
humble supplications that she would allow the 
signorina's bust, portrait, and photograph to be 
taken. She did not esteem it an advantage to 
the girl that her face should adorn the shop- 
windows of all the capitals in urope, though 
ehe recognised the full value of her beauty in a 
worldly point of view. 

She mentioned to St. John, as an illustration 
of this, one day, the invitation she had received 
from the Embassy to bring her children to a 
child's party. The note, which was informally 
worded, expressed a hope that Miss Dawson 
would come, too. '* Of course, if she was plain, 
her name, her very existence, would be ignored," 
said Mary to her cousin. 

'* Probably," he replied. "And would that 
much signify ?" 

This party, which took place some weeks 



230 POET AND PEER. 

after the Brabazons^ departure, was one to 
ivbicb those only who had children^ and a few 
young men, were invited* It began at dusk, 
and there was an understanding that it was to 
end quite early. Tricksy and Flossy bad beea 
looking forward to this evening for days; it 
was their first '^ party," and, as such, an event 
of much curiosity and excitement. Unfortunate- 
ly, the day before, Mrs. Goldwin caught a 
violent cold; the following morning it was 
evident that her going out, delicate as she was, 
was not to be thought of. She could not bear to 
disappoint the children, and, as Miss Dawson 
had been specially invited, it was arranged 
that she was to accompany them. Like the 
children, she had never been to a *' party '^ 
before ; she felt a little frightened ; she wished 
Mr. St. John had been invited ; he was so kind, 
he would have told her what to do. However, 
she comforted herself by thinking that no one 
would notice her. She would sit in a corner 
and have to watch Tricksy that she did not get 
into mischief, and^ above all, that she did not 
eat to repletion. 



POET AND PEER. 231 

Mrs. Crosbie had notified to Lord Atbelstone 
that she with her boys . ^like the mother of the 
Gracchi and her "jewels" . would grace this 
juvenile entertainment. Was he invited ? Oh I 
he knew the ambassadress well enough to feel 
sure she would welcome him, if he liked to look 
in; she had not asked him to this juvenile enter- 
tainment, for she knew he never danced. 

"You need not dance. I shall be sitting 
down, watching my darlings; you can come 
and talk to me." 

Then he had promised that he would come, 
and he kept his promise literally, so far. But 
the spirit of that promise was assuredly lost, 
when, on entering the room, and espying Miss 
Dawson alone in a corner, he walked straight 
across and took the vacant chair beside her. 
In vain Mrs. Crosbie clasped a very sleepy boy 
. her youngest . upon her knee, in the most 
Madonna-like of attitudes, throwing ever and 
anon a soft dreamy gaze across the room to- 
wards the young man, who made as though he 
saw her not. Nor did he once address her 
throughout the evening. That this was ex- 



232 POET AKD PEER. 

ceedinglj ill-nmniiered I shall not deoj; bat 
the maonen of those who are guided solely hy 
their impulses at the moment are not apt to be 
above reproach* The cool way in which he 
utterly ignored Mrs* Crosbie inspired more 
mirth,  fear, than commiseration for that lady* 
But she had her revenge. the revenge of a 
truly virtuous woman . ^later on* 

To formulate the conduct of such a man as 
Wilfred Athelstone, to refer any particular action 
to agencies not directly traceable in a character 
so singularly mobile, is a dangerous exercise of 
a writer^s prerogative. That he had been 
tempted more than once during the past month, 
when be had felt the need of a woman^s sym- 
pathy, to seek out the girl he bad known from 
childhood, and pour his grief into her ear as be 
would have done to some loved sister, and that 
he bad resisted this temptation, it is only fair 
to admit. He probably came to this children's 
party without any idea of meeting her. But 
when he saw her looking so sweet and sad, in 
her high black dress, sitting a little apart, her 
attention riveted on the children, the past came 



POET AND PEER. 233 

back with a tide of pleasant memories, and all 
his virtuous resolves gave way. After all, why- 
should he not sit beside her, and cheer her 
evening? Why should they not talk of old 
days? Why should he not tell her that, al- 
though life, as we advanced, developed new 
passions and new hopes, in him nothing could 
extinguish the first pure affections of boyhood ? 

How swiftly, poor girl, the remaining hour of 
that short evening passed I It was grievous, 
but she had to interrupt him to go and look 
after Tricksy, who was found with her fat 
fingers buried in a plum-cake. He followed, 
carrying Flossy in his arms, who was waxing 
weary and fretful. Nellie, with despair at her 
heart, said she was afraid it was time to depart ; 
Mrs. Goldwin had charged her to bring the 
children home early, and it was already half- 
past nine. 

Wilfred went to look for Mrs. Goldwin's 
servant. He came back, saying the carriage 
was there ; but it was pouring with rain, and 
there were no hack-cabs to be got. 

"I have no carriage; I shall have to walk 



234 POET AND PEER. 

home in my thin boots, unless yon will take 
pity on me, and give me a seat." 

Of course she ought to have said '^ no " ; any 
properly-educated young lady would have 
understood the impropriety of allowing a young 
man to sit opposite to her in a close carriage 
for ten minutes, though two children should sit 
beside her : and it was a night when one would 
not turn a dog out of doors. They drove 
rapidly from the Porta Pia to the Via Gregori- 
ana, where Athelstone was deposited, and 
during the drive his conversation was chiefly 
with Tricksy. Some words of the chattering 
little imp's were of moment^ as the event 
proved. 

"I hope to-morrow '11 be a fine morning. 
We're going out after breakfatht to get 
enemieth." 

<< One gets plenty of enemies without going 
out for them," laughed Wilfred. 

''She means anemones/' explained Nellie, 
laughing too. 

"Yeth. Mamma p'omithed we thould go, 
'cauth it'th Mith Dawthon'th birthday. The'th 



POET AND PEER. 235 

going to be eighteen. The tbayth tbat'tb an old 
woman. Itb it?" 

"Quite venerable 1" 

 Wbat'tb venerable ?" 

"To be respected. You respect Miss Daw- 
son, Fm sure ?" 

" Ob 1 yetb. I tbpect ber. I'm going to give 
ber a p'esant. Tball you ?'* 

"Tricksy, I am asbamed of you," said ber 
governess, severely. " Your mamma would be 
very angry if sbe beard you." 

" Sball I come and belp you to pick ane- 
mones, Tricksy I" be wbispered. 

" Yetb 1" said tbe cbild in bis ear, witb a 
certain consciousness of revenge in tbis secret. 

And tbeu tbe carriage stopped. 

Meantime tbere was an engine of miscbief at 
work more potent tban an enfant terrible. Mrs. 
Crosbie, witb her angelic, far-awaj^- gaze, bad 
been draping herself in tbe ball when sbe saw 
Atbelstone and Nellie step into tbe carriage 
together. 

" It is quite too sad 1" sbe said, with sorrowful 
incision, to everyone sbe met. " Such a young 



286 POET AND PEER. 

creature . so lost to all sense of propriety . not 
only engrossing Lord Atbelstone the whole 
evening, but aetually taking him home with 
her I I never was so shocked . so grieved. I 
am sure, if I could have stopped her, I would. 
Such an example, you know, for those children I 
Mrs.. Goldwin is not in my set; but really 
some one should let her know what a way that 
unhappy girl is going on I" 

Lorenzo, who was sitting up for his master, 
and opened the door to him, informed him 
that the Signora Madre was not yet a-bed; 
but Wilfred, without reply, went straight to his 
own room^ threw off his evening clothes, and, 
lighting a pipe, drew his chair before the 
blazing wood-fire, and gave himself up to 
reflection. The boy leisurely folded away the 
membra disjecta of his lord's wardrobe, watched 
his face with that aptitude to construe expres- 
sion in which an uneducated nature occasionally 
far surpasses a trained observation of men. The 
fact of the fair girl in the carriage, whose face 
he had distinctly seen, being the same whom 
he had once before observed his master join on 



POET AND PEER. 237 

the Pincio, was not lost upon him. For more 
than a month past he had not seen a smile that 
was neither hard nor mocking npon that brow. 
Storm-clouds drifted across it still ; but ever 
and again faint gleams of sunshine pierced 
them. If there were mists, impeding a fuller 
warmth, they were mists of pei'plexity, and not 
of moroseness or acrid despondency. 

Though it is impossible to chase the swallow- 
flights of thought, what Wilfred felt may possi- 
bly be summed up somewhat thus : " Have I 
not been deceiving myself, after all? Is it not 
the repose of such a simple, guileless nature as 
this that* I need in contact with my ownt 
What a refreshment to 'find a being absolutely 
unspotted by the world, into whose mind one 
sees down-rdown as in a crystal stream. There 
is nothing here* * too wise or good for human 
nature's daily food.' I need no strain or effort 
with her ; she has no unattainable standard of 
perfection in man as Sylvia has. She would 
love me as I am, with all my imperfections on 
my head; and 1 require love, absolute and 
devoted, which Sylvia will never give me* 



938 POET ASn) PEER* 

Nererl She treats me as a hoj. She looks 
down on me from her superior altitude of 
years. She pities me only . and she Vould 
improve me. It is no use. I should nerer be 
worthy of her. But would she ever think me 
worthy ? that is the question. Love must be 
undoubting, and Sylvia sees and judges too 
<;Ieverly to yield to such weakness. Shall I 
waste my life in a vain dream^ then^ hungering 
after that which I shall never get ? I wish I 
bad never seen her . I wish I had never seen 
anyone but Nellie. No I It is a lie. My poor 
little Nellie I I will not deceive you, nor my- 
self^ either. Though I love you for loving me, 
though in your presence I feel soothed and 
comforted, you can never be to me what that 
cold-blooded woman is V* 

The next morning was bright, and very 
warm. 

** Order my horse to be at the English Club in 
an hour's time, Lorenzo. Go yourself to No. . 
Corso ; learn^ if you can^ when the signorina and 
children are going out, and hang about the 



POET AND PEER. 239 

^portone' till they appear. If they walk, 
follow them so far as to see which gate they 
go out by. If they drive, listen to the direction 
given to the coachman. Come and bring me 
word at the English Club." 

The boy, following his master a few minutes 
later down the Spanish steps^ saw Athelstone 
turn into one of the large jewellers in the 
Via Condotti, and, peeping through the win- 
dow, watched him choosing a gold locket. 
He then obeyed the instructions he had re- 
ceived to the letter, and an hour later brought 
bis master the intelligence that the signorina 
and children had driven to the Villa Pamfili 
Doria. Subsequently, with that proclivity to 
ihtrigue which is natural to Italians, and 
which had been developed in this case, no 
doubt, by the boy's apprenticeship at the 
"Apollo," where the fetching and carrying of 
love-letters, and being set to play the spy on 
some fair object of jealousy, had been part of 
the lad's education, he hastened to a public 
letter-writer, and proceeded to serve his beloved 
lady to the best of his ability, by inditing three 



240 POET AND PEER. 

anonymous letters. One, addressed to herself 
at Naples, adjured her to return to Rome 
instantly, if she would not be supplanted by a 
hated English rival. The drive at night, the 
locket (for Lorenzo jumped at conclusions), the 
pursuit to the villa were dully given, to indi- 
cate the pressing nature of the peril. Another, 
with much the same details, was addressed to 
Lady Athelstone. A third and briefer docu- 
ment, warning her not to endeavour to 
alienate affections that were already disposed 
of, was addressed to the young English 
governess. The difficulty was that Lorenzo 
was ignorant of her name. For the moment, 
therefore^ this was bestowed in his pocket, 
waiting an opportunity for transmission to 
the signorina's hands, without danger of the 
sender's detection. 




241 



CHAPTER XIII. 

TJUBERT ST. JOHN had faithfully obeyed 
.*~^ his cousin's injunctioiis to him, delivered 
the day after his arrival in Rome. During the 
past six weeks he had abstained from joining 
NelUe and the children in their morning walks. 
The utmost he permitted himself was^ occasion- 
ally, if he knew where they were goings to 
follow and watch them from a distance. It was 
strange that he should derive any satisfaction 
from this ; that a practical man of the nineteenth 
century should indulge in a pastime more in 
character, it would seem, with some love-born 
knight of the middle-ages ; but it was so. 

On the morning in question, the children had 
told him they were going to the Pamfili Doria ; 

VOL. n. R 



242 POET AND PEER. 

and near the Porta San Pancrazio the carriage 
passed him, slouching along in his shabby 
shooting-jacket^ a black-thom in his hand, a 
pipe in his month ; altogether such a figure as 
stirs the bile of those who ask why men should 
attire themselves at Rome as thej would never 
venture to do in London or Paris* 

When he reached the Villa, the two children 
were already running wild in the flower- 
enameled grass, plucking the lilac cyclamens, 
whose breath made the whole air sweet, and 
the flaming anemones, whose beauty is their 
only joy. He turned aside, up among the lofty 
pines, beneath whose red stems, in a tangled 
undergrowth of bay-trees and budding almond- 
blossoms^ stood a stone seat. From this van- 
tage ground he could see the undulating slope 
for some distance, and the carriage-drive, hidden 
now and again by clumps of trees. But it was 
not to the carriage-drive, and the rare pedes- 
trians upon it, that he turned his eyes. They 
were riveted upon the slight, black-robed figure 
which moved along the sunlit grass, now stoop- 
ing to pluck a flower, now halting to receive 



POET AND PEER. 243 

the precious load of colour and perfume which, 
from time to time, the children discharged into 
her arms. Something of the unconstraint of 
old days, when she danced, singing, after her 
oow^ in the meadows of Bipple, seemed to have 
returned with the sweet spring morning. She 
ran, once or twice, after the children^ and her 
-clear young voice, in laughter, reached Hubert's 
ears, as he watched, with a smile, the three 
blue shadows that flickered among the waving 
grasses. It was a pleasure to him to note the 
fiway of her lithe figure in its unaccustomed 
freedom. He had heard her likened to Psyche ; 
but it was the chastened Psyche, sorrowful and 
unsatisfied, before she received the crown of the 
immortals; she seemed to him now like the 
maid, in her innocence and glee, with the flush 
of the pure morning still upon her. 

The burden of blossoms had grown nearly as 
large as Nellie could carry in her two arras, 
when the sound of a horse's hoof, trotting up 
the gravel road, struck Hubert's ear. He turned 
his head, and, suddenly, the blood rushed up 
into the young man's face. . He took the pipe 

b2 



244 POET AND PEER. 

from bis month, and sat there, motionless, with 
tight-clenched lips* He heard the joyons shouts 
of the children greeting the rider, who, as he 
approached, sprang lightly from the saddle, 
and, throwing the rein over his arm, walked 
towards the gronp npon the grass. He saw 
the awkward grace of the girl's reception, in 
which^ though there was embarrassment, there 
was also pleasure. He saw the lingering of 
the hands that were clasped as Wilfred spoke 
a few words, and gave her a little packet which 
he took from bis pocket. He watched her faint 
effort to refuse the gift, how she shook her head 
and turned aside ; and then how be successfully 
urged some plea . probably that of the anniver- 
sary which he bad often made glad with a 
present in old times . and she, a little fright- 
ened, a little reluctant, but nevertheless with a 
joy that danced in her sweet eyes, yielded. He 
watched Tricksy tugging at his lordship's coat- 
tails, and clamouring for him to come and help 
her in a district^ blazing with purple aud scarlet, 
which they had not yet explored. Then more 
words . deprecatory ones, apparently, on the 



POET AND PEER. 245 

girl's part, and spoken with hesitation, impa- 
tient ones on the man's . passed between the 
two. She was telling him that he must not 
remain with them ; she was forbidden to allow 
him to walk with them ; he must, please, ride 
on. 

He argued the question, as he argued every- 
thing ; but he obeyed, mounting his horse, and 
riding slowly away. He looked back more than 
once with a friendly nod to the children ; then 
he was hidden among the trees by the windings 
of the road, and the flower-gatherers were alone. 
If Nellie had not thought so, at least, if she had 
suspected that every movement of hers was 
anxiously watched, she would not have sat 
down under a tree, and, gazing at something 
she held in her hand, have pressed it to her lips. 
She was oblivious of children, and flowers, and 
the flight of time, till recalled to a sense of duty 
by a shout from Tricksy. Then she started to 
her feet. 

A few minutes later they had joined 
the carriage at the Villa, and were driving 
home. 

vol, iu r 



246 POET iVND PEER. 

The loving heart of the man who had been a 
spectator of this little drama was sore and 
wrathful; but it was not against her that his 
indignation was raised. The poor child was 
innocent of wrong; this was no assignation. 
Athelstone bad followed her, and she had 
bidden him depart ; so much seemed clear to St. 
John. It was against the man who had once 
been his friend that the honest fellow's blood 
boiled ; and this was not solely from jealonsj. 
What did this secret pursuit, tliis giving of 
presents, this tenderness of demeanour un- 
avowed before men indicate, but a base purpose 
which shunned public scrutinj? Could this be 
anything but the old miserable story of Faust 
and Marguerite? The infamous intent to make 
a pure young creature minister to vanity and 
passion, regardless of the future ? How guile- 
less and upright she was, Hubert had not needed 
the testimony of his eyes to feel assured of. 
But, alas! have not many as strong in their 
own innocence as she fallen a prey to insidious 
designs like this young reprobate's ? For she 
loved him ; Hubert St. John could not conceal 



POET AND PEER. 247 

this from himself as he buried his head in his 
hands and groaned aloud. And now, how could 
he best protect her ? That was the question. 

Walking along one of the crowded streets an 
hour later, he nearly ran against the portly 
figure of the Bishop issuing from a portone, St. 
John was passing on with a slight bow, for his 
acquaintance with the genial prelate was but 
slight, when the latter stopped short, and called 
to him by name. The gravity of the Bishop's 
manner, so different from the beaming, some- 
what florid address usual to him in society, 
struck St. John at once. 

" I want very much to have a few minutes* 
conversation with you, Mr. St. John. If you 
are not particularly engaged, would you mind 
stepping up to my apartment, where I could 
say better what I wish than in the street ?" 

Hubert followed him upstairs to the first floor 
of a dark and gloomy house. There was a 
ricochet of sunshine in the apartment from the 
dazzling light upon the houses opposite, and 
this fictitious brilliancy was helped by some 
apricot stuff-curtains. But for this, and the 



243 POET AND PEER. 

moral cheerfulness imparted by a number of 
books and papers scattered about the room^ it 
was even less inviting than the generality of 
Bomau lodgings. The Bishop gave his visitor 
the only arm-chair, and then seated himself, 
crossed his legs, and smoothed his apron, before 
he said . 

*' The matter I wish to speak to yon upon, 
Mr. St. John, is a delicate one. Ton are, I be- 
lieve, a cousin of Mrs. Gold win's ? and, I know^ 
are very intimate with her, and also, I believe, 
with Lord Athelstone V* 

St. John assented by a movement of his head, 
and the Bishop continued . 

*^ Some time since, Lady Athelstone, for whom 
I have a great regard, asked me to volunteer 
some advice to her son. I felt he might justly 
consider it a great liberty, as I was not . and 
am not now . upon terms to warrant such in- 
terference ; and I pointed otit to his mother that 
meddling in young men's private affairs, with- 
out very grave cause, seldom does any good. I 
have heard this morning something which has 
given me considerable pain. Lady Athelstone 



POET AND PEER. 249 

has again urged my speaking to her son. Before 
promising to do so, I wished to speak to you. 
It has occurred to me that your assistance, from 
the position in which you stand, would be more 
valuable than anyone else's. If you think 
otherwise, if you decline to act in the matter, 
well and good. I shall know what to do." 

He paused for a moment. St. John said 
nothing, but looked the Bishop straight in the 
face. 

" You are, of course, aware/' pursued the 
prelate, " that Lord Athelstone has known Miss 
Dawson since she was a child ? She was in a 
very humble position in the village, and her 
beauty and intelligence attracted him, it seems. 
The folly of boyhood was put a stop to at the 
time by his father. But here, I am afraid, he 
has fallen a victim to the same attraction 
again, and committed far more culpable folly. I 
understand that last night, at the Embassy, 
after spending the entire evening at her side, 
he actually drove home with her in her car- 
riage. Lady Athelstone, whom I saw half an 
hour ago, had heard this, and was very greatly 



250 POET AND PEER. 

distressed. The impression was jet farther 
coDfirmed by an anoDjmons letter she received 
while I was sitting with hen One takes snch 
commnnications, of course, for what thej are 
worth ; but the writer stated that Lord Athel- 
stone had presented Miss Dawson with a 
valuable locket, and met her this morning at 
the Pamfili Doria Villa. Now, of course, the 
idea of his marrying her is absurd. Taking the 
best view of it, he is only amusing himself. I 
am loth to believe that the young man really 
harbours any evil intentions with respect to t\m 
poor girl ; but his conduct is very reprehensible 
. very reprehensible, indeed. He must be 
aware what interpretation the world puts upon 
acts of such a nature between a man in his 
position and a girl in Miss Dawson's. Ton 
agree with me in this, Mr. St. John f 

Hubert kept his eyes rigidly fixed upon the 
Bishop. His parched lips refused to utter a 
sound for some minutes. What was he to say t 
He felt stunned. It wa^ a blow for which he 
was unprepared. The one he had received that 
morning had been cruel enough. But this was 



POET AND PEER. 251 

far more severe. It cut him to the heart to 
think that he could no longer hold her entirely 
blameless. If there was not complicity here, at 
least there was weakness, and such a disregard 
of the most elementary laws of conventionality 
as had clearly already imperiled the poor child's 
reputation. 

An anguish too deep for words in the 
strongly-marked countenance of the young 
man opposite him must have struck the Bishop. 
He had waited for a minute or two for some 
expression of assent ; he now rose, placed fresh 
logs on the fire, and then, facing about, re- 
sumed, while he stood with his back to the 
blaze, 

'< The question is, what had best be done ? I 
am quite ready to speak to Lord Athelstone. 
At the same time, I cannot conceal from myself 
that, holding the Church, as I believe he does, 
in little respect, no words of mine are likely to 
have any special weight with him. Mts. Gold- 
win would probably be the best person to speak 
to him, which she would do with some authority 
as responsible for her governess's reputation. 



HSi POET AND PEER. 

She would also point out to the poor girl, who, 
I take it, is entirely ignorant of the world, the 
damage to her character which the continuance 
of this intimacy must entail. But I know Mrs. 
Ooldwin very slightly. It has struck me that 
you, Mr. St. John, as the friend of all parties, 
are the most fitting person to lay the facts 
before her. Sooner or later they would be sure 
to reach your cousin's ears ; therefore it is 
causing her no unnecessary pain to tell her. 
She will act, I make no doubt, with leniency 
and kindness to her young governess, and I 
trust that further evil may be avoided." 

Then Hubert rose, and the bland Bishop 
looked into his white face, and listened without 
manifestation of undue surprise to the low, 
husky voice which said, 

" 1 thank you, my lord, more deeply than you 
can possibly know, for what you have told me. 
I ask you to leave this matter in my hands. 
This evil shall not continue. Miss Dawson's 
good name is dear to my cousin, and . to me. 
You are right in believing it is only her ignor- 
ance of the world has led her to . to such 



POET AND PEER, 253^^ 

impradence. She is pure and innocent as a 
child . I could stake my life upon it." 

" I never doubted it for an instant, Mr. St^ 
John. To watch that beautiful countenance i 
enough . the expression is so ingenuous. But 
you see we must consider the world. And also- 
. I am bound to say it . the possibility of even 
the best^ in moments of peril, ceding to tempta- 
tion. We are all of us frail, Mr. St. John.. 
We must guard, not only against the semblance 
of evil, but against the real danger . the evil 
itself. As regards Lord Athelstone, I am in- 
clined to hope . I repeat it . that he acts upon 
the impulse of the moment, without an arrikre 
pensie. His feelings for Miss Dawson cannot 
be deep-seated, for it is not many weeks since 
he was paying his addresses to another lady ; 
and, in the interim, I am told, he has made a 
married lady rather conspicuous by his atten- 
tions. As I pointed out to his mother, there- 
fore, I am sure she need have no cause for 
alarm, as regards him." 

'* I don't understand you, my lord. I should 
think there was sufficient cause of alarm in that 



254 POET AND PEER. 

Athektone'B condact is unwortbj the name of 
a gentleman by blasting a girl's future for the 
gratification of bis miserable vanitj. If there 
toere any deep, strong feeling, it might be more 
readily pardoned." 

" You misapprehended my meaning/' return- 
ed the Bishop, blandly. ^^  alluded to Lady 
Athelstone's very natural fear lest, in some 
unguarded moment, her son should be led to 
offer bis hand to this young woman. I do not 
think there is any fear of this." 

** No ; he is not likely to disgrace his name 
thus ; we can all be thankful for that !" 

The sarcasm was in the words; St. John's 
voice and manner were inflexible as before; 
then he rose. 

^^Tou have nothing further to say, my 
lordr 

*' Nothing. Perhaps you will let me hear 
what Mrs. Goldwin ^^ 

** Mrs. Goldwin will have little to do in the 
affair. Tou have done me the honour to trust 
me ; I take the management of it upon myself* 



POET AND PEER. 255 

There shall be no further food for scandal . I 
give you my word for that." 

Then the amiable dignitary placed his shovel- 
hat on his head^ and led the way to the door. 
They passed out together, and parted in the 
street . the Bishop with the pleased conviction 
. good, short-sighted man I . of having effected 
his excellent purpose with consummate diplo- 
macy; St. John with the burning desire to 
break every bone in the body of Wilfred Athel- 
stone. 



256 



CHAPTER XIV. 

TT was dnsk when he stood in the doorway 
*'- of the Tempietto. Lorenzo admitted the 
burly, slouching Englishman, whom he knew 
as his master^s friend, to Athelstone's private 
room. Had he understood English, the con- 
versation which ensued would have had a deep 
interest for the ill-disciplined youth who hung 
about the ante-room. As it was, voices raised 
in altercation were all his curiosity elicited ; to 
what purpose will be seen later. 

Athelstone was in his dressing-gown and 
slippers before a table, on which were some 
proof-sheets, which he was correcting, and 
several MSS.^ a Dante, lying open with an 
Italian dictionary upon it, the last numbers of 



POET AND PEER, 257 

two or three reviews, and Bandelaire's " Fleurs 
du Mai." 

He raised his head from his work as the door 
opened, and, seeing St. John enter, pushed 
back his chair from the table. 

**How d'ye do, Hubert? Sit down, won't 
you ?" he continued, seeing that his visitor 
neither held out his hand nor took a seat. 
" Have a cigar I" 

" Thank you, I won't smoke, and I prefer 
standing. I have not come for a sociable chat, 
Athelstone. It is a bad business brings me 
here. Are you aware that, at this moment, the 
tongues of all the English society in Bome are 
busy in tearing Miss Dawson^s reputation to 
pieces, and that you are the cause of this cruel, 
damnable injury?" 

Wilfred flushed to the roots of his hair. 

"I do not understand you. 1 have done 
nothing to be ashamed of, nor has Miss Daw- 
son. I take a deep interest in her . I have al- 
ways done so ; I have known her since she was 
a child." 

" More's the pity. But she is not the pupil- 

VOL. II. S 



358 POET AKD PEER. 

teacher here, and you are not lord of the 



manor/^ 



tfi 



Do yoQ mean to say that I mayn't talk to 
ber when we meet (which is seldom enough), 
without there being a scandal abont it If It is 
nothing but a set of infernal old women, who 
are jealons of her becanse I don't make lore to 
their daughters, who have trumped up this. I 
wonder at your listening to such rubbish r 

**I have used my eyes . ^that is enough," 
returned the other, sternly. 

" What do you mean V 

^^I mean that I was in the Pamfili Doria 
grounds this morning. I saw all that passed." 

Wilfred laughed, but the laugh sounded arti- 
ficial, uneasy. 

^^ It is a pity there is not some mystery, some 
dark secret, to be unravelled, my dear fellow, 
since you have taken to play the spy. I hap- 
pened to be riding through the villa, and, see- 
ing Miss Dawson and the children, I got off 
my horse and talked to them for five minutes. 
That was all, as you yourself must have seen." 



POET AND PEER. 259 

" It was not all. You forget the locket which 
you came there expressly to give her." 

" And if I choose to give her a locket on her 
birthday, who the devil has a right to prevent 
me I" cried Wilfred, firing up at last. 

" Possibly her friends, if they think it disad- 
vantageous that she should receive costly pres- 
ents from a young man in your position. But I 
will pass on to another matter . one far more 
grave. Old acquaintance cannot justify your 
driving away from the Embassy alone with Miss 
Dawson, as you did, last night. You know the 
world as well as I do. You know in what light 
such a defiance of public opinion must be re- 
garded. But you are selfish and reckless ; you 
don't care if the girPs reputation is destroyed, 
provided you have your amusement." 

^' I shouldn't stand this language from anyone 
but you, St. John," said the other, biting his 
lips, while his voice shook with anger, " and I 
only excuse it from the strong personal interest 
it is evident you feel in '* 

" Don't trouble yourself with my motives or 

s2 



260 POET AND PEER. 

feelings," interrupted the other, yet more stem* 
]y. '< I am here to speak to you about fact9^ 
-which you can't deny." 

''You are making mountains out of mole- 
hills. What does all this piece of work about 
last night amount to ? It was pouring ; I had 
no carriage ; she and the children were passing 
very near my door ; I asked her to drop me. It 
is a thing that would be of the commonest 
occurrence in America, and thought nothing 
of." 

" We are not in America, and everywhere in 
Europe it happens to be thought so very much 
of, whether rightly or wrongly, that, if Mrs* 
Goldwin were to dismiss her governess to- 
morrow^ she would certainly not find another 
situation.'' 

'* Did Mrs. Goldwin send you here T 

*^ No ; I am not aware that she has even heard 
of this as yet." 

'* But will do so from you^ of course. In the 
meantime, I don't see what business it is of 
yours to interfere between Miss Dawson and 



me. 



POET AND peer: 261 

" It is my business," replied St. John, speak- 
ing very distinctly, '' because I have asked her 
to be my wife . because I am ready to give her 
the protection of my name, which you will 
never do. Love . the love that is capable of 
sacrifice . has no part in your feeling; she is 
acknowledged to be the most beautiful girl in 
Eome, and your vanity is flattered at the 
ascendancy you have over her ; but, if you have 
a spark of manly feeling, you won't let the girl 
destroy her whole future by nourishing an idle 
.dream; you will tell her frankly that you have 
deceived her, as you have perhaps been deceiv- 
ing yourself; you will do your best to dispel 
the glamour which has surrounded you in her 
eyes. So much is in your own power. But 
something is in that of her friends. If you 
choose to act generously, you may remedy 
some of the mischief you have wrought. At all 
events, you shall not continue to work it. All 
communication between you and Miss Dawson 
must stop." 

Tact was not St. John's strong point. Athel- 
stone, whose eyes, a moment before, bad lost 



262 POET AND PEER. 

their antagonistic glitter, flaBhed up again, like 
a half-sheathed sword from its scabbard. 

" Hectoring doesn't do with me ; you should 
know that. Let Mrs. Goldwin turn Nellie out 
of doors to-morrow^ if she chooses, and my 
mother shall take her in. I shall like to see 
who will prevent that^ or who will have a word 
to say against her then." 

" Nothing would ever make my cousin turn 
her out of doors ; she is as fond of her as if she 
were her own sister. But she would leave 
Rome sooner than subject Miss Dawson to your 
continued pursuit ; and in this, I feel sure, she 
would have Lady Athelstone's cordial sup- 
port." 

.* I have the greatest regard for Nellie, and I 
am not going to give up my friendship at 
anyones dictation,'^ returned Wilfred, dog- 
gedly. 

**Tou shall give up compromising her, I 
swear to that. My God 1" he continued, with a 
sudden burst of, passion, " to think that you . 
youy whom I remember a noble-hearted boy^ 
can, for the gratification of your miserable 



POET AND PEER. 263 

vanity^ want to sacrifice the good name and 
future happiness of an innocent girl I" 

'^ If she thinks she will not find it in marry- 
ing you^ I can't help it," said Wilfred, with a 
sarcastic smile. 

St. John's lips quivered; but pride was 
swallowed up in his great simple-hearted 
devotion, and he replied, 

" Yes, you can. Tell her what I know is the 
truth, Athelstone, that your heart is another's. 
Disabuse her mind of any false hope ; as long 
as you encourage it by your conduct, how can 
she be brought to entertain any more solid ones 
for the future ? She may never be able to care 
for me ; that I know well. But she may form 
some other honest attachment. And that which 
you have fostered, for your pastime, is not 
honest . it is morbid, unhealthy . and can only 
end in misery." 

The door at this moment opened, and Lo- 
renzo appeared with a message from my lady, 
begging her son to come and speak to her as 
soon as he could. 

" Va bene>" said Wilfired ; then, turning to 



264 POET AND PEER. 

St. John, "I can't ask you to stay now. I 
shall reflect on what you have said, and. shape 
my conduct accordingly." 

St. Jobn^ in default of more definite promise, 
felt that it was wise to accept these words as 
an acknowledgment of error and an earnest of 
amendment. At all events, Wilfred Athelstone 
had now been fairly warned. They would fight 
henceforth, if fight they must, with their vizors 
up. His antagonist knew that his conduct was 
laid bare ; and he also knew Hubert's unalter- 
able determination. The most difBcult portion 
of the victory, though at first sight the easiest, 
must now be accomplished by Mary Goldwin* 
That Nellie would obey her benefactress meekly 
he felt sure ; that she might be brought to re- 
gard Athelstone's conduct as selfish and heart- 
less he could not very sanguinely hope. 

Lady Athelstone, informed by Lorenzo that 
the tall English signer was closeted with her 
son, and that loud words were being inter- 
changed, acted with more decision than usual, 
but unfortunately with less than usual judgment. 
She had not a doubt as to the cause of quarrel* 



POET AND PEER. 265 

The scandal she had heard . the anonymous 
letter she had received . her mind was naturally- 
full of the subject. She did not forget that Mr. 
St. John was Mrs. Goldwin's cousin. He was, 
of course, sent to Athelstone by her. There 
might be a very serious altercation between the 
young men . her mind even glanced at a duel. 
Her alarm rose to white heat ; and her habitual 
nervousness at "interviewing" her son gave 
way before the imperative necessity of appeal- 
ing to him. adjuring him not to bring the name 
of Athelstone into evil repute, nor to give 
further cause for scandal. 

Wilfred, upon his side, attended his mother's 
summons more promptly than he would perhaps 
have done, because he was glad of the plea to 
terminate a discussion which had greatly irri- 
tated him. The secret of .this irritation lay, not 
in St. John's plain speaking, but in the fact that 
Wilfred's own better nature recognized, and re- 
proached him with, the truth of nearly all his 
friend had said. 

Like many other men, he was not without 
principles ; but they were laid by in lavender, 



266 POET AND PEER* 

with the garments of the past, oocasioiiallj 
aired, bat seldom worn . at least bjr himseUl 
They fitted all bis acquaintance^ bat he rarelj 
dropped the loose-fitting habits of impnlse^ to 
impose apon himself the restraints of sach on- 
pliant raiment. Like Carlyle's old king, he 
seemed to think himself '^ saper-grammaticas.^ 
It was not till the mirror was held ap before his 
eyes, and that he was made to regard his acts 
and their consequences full in the face, that he 
shrank back, angry and distressed, and a little 
ashamed. 

We are never so little conciliatory as when 
we are dissatisfied with ourselves. He entered 
bis mother's room in a perturbed frame of mind, 
undecided, ill at ease. Her first words struck 
the key-note of their interview. 

*^ My dear boy, I am in such terrible distress. 
I am BO shocked at all I have been hearing. I 
could not rest till I had sent for you. And 
when I heard Mr. St. John was with you. of 
course reproaching you bitterly . ^I was o afraid 
that something . something dreadful might hap- 



POET AND PEER. 36T 

pen. Dear Wilfred, don't look so angry. Do 
tell me what passed between you ?" 

"Nothing worth repeating. We are not 
going to cut each other's throats. He is in lover 
with Nellie Dawson. That is about the long 
and short of it." 

"Oh, dear I How I wish he would marry 
her I But I suppose . I am afraid that now . 

now I hope, my dear, you assured him 

there was nothing . nothing in it 1" 

" Nothing in what f 

" Why, in the foolish, I must say, culpable^ 
way you have been going on with her. Not 
but that I blame her exceedingly. Of course, if 
she had not en . encouraged you, you never could 
have behaved so. But oh I it is terrible, it is 
terrible to think what the consequences of all 
this sentimental folly may be to her 1 Of course 
I don't believe in any worse evil than this ; but 
the censorious world, Wilfred, will never put an 
innocent construction upon it. Suppose Mrs* 
Goldwin should dismiss her " 

" You will take her in. But Mrs. Goldwia 



268 POET AND PEER. 

will not dismiss her. And, if she and yon stick 
to Nellie, she can defj the world/* 

" But how can I uphold her, Wilfred . how 
can you expect that I should do so, when . 
when she permits you to . to . to go on as you 
have done ? The Bishop was saying to-day . " 

" D the Bishop. I'll give him something 

to talk about, if he meddles in my affairs." 

" Oh 1 don't. don't, Wilfred I It horriBes me 
that you should use such language. What 
would your poor, dear father say, if he could 
hear you? . if he could know what discredit 
you are bringing on the noble name you bear ?" 

''Far greater discredit will be brought on 
that noble name by your declining to give your 
moral support to a slandered girl . a girl whom 
you know to be innocent. Am I to understand 
that you are positively going to countenance 
these lies by not upholding her ?" 

For almost the first time in her life, poor, 
foolish lady I she stood firm against her son. It 
cost her a great struggle ; but she believed, in 
her short-sightedness^ that she was acting for 
the best. 



POET AND PEER. 269 

"I cannot certainly consider that . that I 
should be doing right, you know, to go on 
patronizing a girl who has permitted herself to 
. to behave as she has done. I daresay she 
is innocent . I have no doubt of it. Still there 
has been levity; and it would seem to be . 
encouraging such conduct, if I did not make 
a difference, if I did not mark my disap- 
proval." 

" You had better mark it to me than to her," 
returned her son, indignantly. " You know 
very well that I am the one to blame, if there is 
blame." 

Lady Athelstone, kneading the handker- 
chief between her hands into a ball, and 
looking up with her mild, remonstrative eyes 
at her son, was like some hunted animal at 
bay. 

" Of course you are chiefly to blame, my dear. 
Still a girl at Nellie's age should know better. 
To begin with, it is compromising for any girl, 
whatever her position, to receive jewelry from a 
young man. Miss Brabazon never would haver 
done so," she added, with, as she hoped, a 



S70 POET AND PEER. 

suddea inspiration to awake another chord in 
her son's breast. 

*^ No," he said, bitterly. ** Because she cared 
nothing about me . because she looked on me 
as a boy. because her pride would never be 
behoven to me for anything. It is not thus 
that love acts . balancing the value of a gift^ 
or the propriety of accepting it. It is mon- 
strous . it is vile," he cried, passionately . "to 
try to twist every harmless thing of this sort 
into a crime." 

''No one says a crime/' murmured Lady 
Athelstone. " It is only compromising, as being 
against all the conventional ^" 

"Yes, that's it . conventional! What do I 
care for the world's conventions? I will soon 
show how little I value its prejudices and 
opinions. Mother, I shall call on Mrs. Goldwin 
to-morrow. Will you go with me I" 

 What. what for I" 

" To ask her and Nellie to this house." 

** It is impossible^ my dear ; don't ask me." 

"I tell you it is the only way to prove to this 



POET AND PEER. 271 

precious world of yours . the Lady Porchesters^ 
and all the rest of them . that you give no 
credit to these lies. Will you, or will you not, 
do your best to save Nellie from them f " 

" Do be reasonable, my dear. Of course, I 
shall tell everyone I don't believe in anything 
really wrong against her ; but . but don't you 
see, Wilfred, that, if 1 had her here, it would 
seem like throwing her and you purposely 
together ? I should be justly blamed." 

*' If your conscience tells you the blame would 
be just," replied her son, sarcastically, ** I have 
no more to say. You must be guided by that ; 
only you must take the consequences, whatever 
they may be, that's all." 

He left the room, and his mother saw him no 
more that night. He dined at the club. 

But some words she spoke long ago . a 
promise to that poor dead mother that she 
would always befriend her child. recun-ed 
with painful distinctness to Lady Athelstone's 
mind that evening, when she sat alone. Was 
she acting up to that promise? Should she 



272 POET AND PEER. 

'write to her 1 . ^should she go and see her on 
the morrow? She wished some one wonld 
decide what she ought to do. 
And so the golden opportunity was lost. 



273 



(CHAPTER XV. 

Tlf ARY GOLDWIN'S apprehensions with re- 
-*"'-*- gard to what she termed Nellie's " unfor- 
tunate pre-occupation " had been subsiding 
during the last two months. She had begun 
to feel moderately confident that Lord Athel- 
stone's clearly- pronounced preference of another 
woman, and his equally marked avoidance of 
the young governess since his rejection by 
Sylvia, would surely, if slowly, work the de- 
sired cure. The girl's eyes would be opened 
in time to distinguish good from evil ; to prize 
an honest fellow's devotion ; to perceive that it 
was but a shadow of something in the far past 
which she had been cherishing . a shadow which 

VOL. II. T 



274 POET AKD PEEB. 

became fainter as the reality grew daily more 
distant. 

But now, like La Fontaine's milkmaid, at 
one rode shock her complacency was dispelled, 
her castle in the air shattered, flnbert bad sat 
with her for an hour. She had been indignant, 
perplexed, and, above all, very heartily grieved* 
The question of ** what had beet be done V had 
been discnsoed between them, and the matter 
turned over and scrutinized on every side^ 
without any decision being arrived at. All this 
had taken place late in the evening, and Mary 
Ooldwin had passed a sleepless night, while 
the innocent subject of her disquietude wan* 
dered in the blissful land of dreams, through 
flower-starred fields and sweet spring-passages 
of verdure, hand-in-hand with her beloved. 

In the morning, she came to her friend with 
an open letter in her hand. It was in Italian^ 
and Nellie's knowledge of that tongue was ele- 
mentary ; she could not decipher, much less 
<K)mprehend it. 

Mrs. Gold win flushed as she read the anony- 
mous accusation, laid down the letter, and then 



POET AND PEER. 275 

bade the girl sit beside her oa the sofa. Here 
was an opening ready-made for the exordium 
he had prepared. For the first time, she spoke 
without reserve of Athelstone ; for the first 
time, she pointed out the fatal consequences 
that would ensue from a continuance of this 
intimacy . the loss of peace of mind, of self- 
respect, of reputation. He was another's in 
heart; he had no thought of Nellie but as a 
.hild in whom he had always taken an inter- 
est, and whose society was at this moment a 
refuge, in his disappointment, of which he, in 
his careless egoism, did not scruple to avail 
himself. She probed the girl's heart to its very 
depths. Never willingly did Mary handle sur- 
gical instruments, but she knew that, if the 
knife has to be used, it must do its work tho- 
roughly. The extent of the evil, which she 
had hoped would not be diiSGicuit to excise, it 
must be confessed, startled her, but she did not 
lose her nerve. When the girl flung hei'self, 
sobbing, into hei; arms . when all the barriers 
were broken down, and the shrinking, passion- 
ate young heart stood self-confessed, perhaps 

T 2 



276 POET AND PEER. 

for the first time . Mary's calm voice soothed 
her, speaking words of comfort and wisdom. 
Nevertheless, she felt, with a pang, that all 
hope for her good faithful Hubert was at an 
end. 

She wrote him a hurried line, telling him not 
to come to them that evening. And for two 
days he only saw his cousin alone in the morn- 
ing. Nellie kept out of his way. She nourish- 
ed no resentment now at the part he had played 
in this . he had acted for the best . but her 
heart was sore ; she felt humiliated, and shrank 
from seeing him or anyone. 

On the afternoon of the third day she was 
gone to her room ; and Mary had been upon the 
sofa, trying to read, for nearly an hour, when the 
door opened. She did not hear the name that the 
servant announced ; and, looking up, her pleas- 
ure was infinitely less than her surprise, when 
she saw Lord Athelstone within two yards of 
her. The blood mounted to her cheeks. What 
was he come for? How w^s she to receive 
him ? She felt very angry ; she tried to rise ; 
but the couvrepied was tucked so tightly round 



POET AND PEER. 277 

her that, before she could extricate herself, he 
had drawn a chair close to the sofa, and, in 
his gentlest, most winning way, was begging 
her not to move. That voice, and the expres- 
sion of his handsome young face, rarely failed 
to exercise an influence over even the cleverest 
woman. Mary would not shake hands with 
him ; no, she clasped hers firmly over the book 
she held ; she looked at him, without her usual 
smile of welcome ; but she made no further 
effort to rise. 

He broke the ice at once ; and she was 
indignant with herself at finding the water 
that bubbled up already had the chill off" it. 

" I have come here, first, to make my apolo- 
gies to you, Mrs. Goldwin. I fear I have 
caused you infinite annoyance . which is the 
last thing I desired . on Miss Dawson's account. 
You would never believe any ill of her, I feel 
sure. But none the less I am heartily sorry you 
should have been pained and worried through 
any fault of min." 

" Do not think of me, Lord Athelstone . think 
of herr 



278 POET AND PEER. 

** I do think of her . more than you expect^ 
Best assured you will never be annoyed in this 
way again." 

*'I am glad to have your assurance of 
it. Miss Dawson has already given me hers 
that " 

"Forgive my interrupting you. Much that 
you are going to say will seem, perhaps, super* 
fluous after you have listened to me. It is a 
long story. You don't mind ?" 

Mrs. Goldwin, bracing her mind to meet and 
overthrow any Mephistophelian arguments in 
support of a Platonic friendship between her 
governess and this young lord, intimated by a 
movement of her head that she did not mind 
his long story, and he proceeded. 

**To begin with, Mrs. Goldwin, you know 
that, as a boy, I was desperately in love with 
her?" 

*'You have fancied yourself desperately in 
love with several people, 1 am told." 

'*No, I haven't. I have flirted, and com- 

. mitted follies, like most young men. I have 

never even fancied myself in love with anyone 



POET AND PEER. 279 

except this child, until lately . until I met Miss 
Brabazon. You can't wonder that she capti- 
vated me . that she completely blinded me to 
the fact which she never forgot herself; that 
there was something more than the four years* 
difference between us in mind and character. 
She is a peerless woman. I have never seen 
anyone like her, and never shall; I say so 
frankly. I would have married her . I make 
no secret of it to you . but she would not. 
Perhaps she was right. She is too grand to be 
tolerant of my weaknesses. That's not the 
right attitude between husband and wife (at 
least, she thought so), the pitying protection of 
a perfect woman for a boy who is full of 
faults. That is how she regarded me. If she 
had accepted me it would have been from 
compassion . or she might in time have been 
persuaded to do so by her friends . though I 
don't think she would ever yield to that 
pressure. I tell you all this, Mrs. Goldwin, to 
prove to you that I have thought the matter 
out calmly . at all events, as calmly as a fellow . 
of my temperament can. It has been a hard 



280 POET AND PEER. 

struggle ; but I see now that she can never be 
mine, as 1 eovM toish her to be. I have, there- 
fore, renounced the hope. I have even brought 
myself to believe that, in the long run, my life 
is likely to be happier passed %vith one who 
loves me as I am, with all my imperfections on 
my head, and to whom I was sincerely attached 
long before I ever saw Miss Brabazon. I am 
going to ask Nellie to be my wife." 

Mary Goldwin remained speechless with 
astonishment for at least a minute. She could 
only murmur at last, 

" This is very sudden." 

'' It is. I had a conversation with my mother 
two days ago, and have passed two sleepless 
nights. This is the result." 

^' You had better pause before taking such a 
step." 

" No, I don't want to pause. There are reasons 
why, if I do this at all, I should do it at 



once." 



'' I understand you. Your motives are good, 
but . I am afraid it is not wise." 
*' Why not r 



POET AND PEER. 281 

" You have changed your mind too often for 
your friends to feel any confidence in so rapid a 
decision as this." 

" Remember, it is only a return to my de- 
cision eighteen months ago." 

** If you had been of one mind all those 
eighteen months it would be different. As it 
is, consider. You are going to take a step 
which will drive your mother to despair, which 
will affront all the prejudices of your class, 
which will subject you to annoyance, and, 
it may be, to more serious pain and mortifica- 
tion " 

"1 beg your pardon. That is impossible. 
I am completely indifferent to the world's 
opinion." 

"For your own sake I . but for hers? Are 
you sure that, from a mistaken sense of honour, 
* the world's opinion ' has not something to do 
with your proposing to marry her ? You are 
generous and enthusiastic .... and, besides 
this (I must speak plainly), you are piqued. 
The woman you consider * peerless ' has refused 
you. You try to believe that a return to 



282 POET AND PEER. 

the fancy of your boyhood will console you for 
your disappointment. Thus, it seems to me, 
you are actuated, perhaps unconsciously, by a 
double motive . the impetuous desire to re- 
place Miss Brabazon's image, which you my is 
overthrown, in your heart; the chivalrous in- 
tention of removing any aspersion upon Nellie's 
name. Oest magnifiquey maia ce ripest pas-^le 
mariage I Pray do nothing rashly. Lord Athel- 
stone. You may rue it, and she too, all your 
lives." 

It was a very unusual thing for Wilfred 
Athelstone ever to pause. As sporting men 
sa}', he always '' rushed at his fences;" and, in 
that headlong career, every obstacle was disre- 
garded. He seldom weighed the arguments of 
an opponent; he formed a conclusion^ he de- 
vised a scheme of conduct, and seemed incapa- 
ble of apprehending the objections advanced 
against it. 

But, for once, he remained silent for some 
minutes, pondering on Mrs. Goldwin's words. 
Had she shown this thing in some new light 
which his inner self had not already revealed to 



POET AND PEER. 283 

him? On the contrary, it was as the echo of 
a voice which had made itself heard from time 
to time during the past night . the night in 
which he had formed his resolution . that her 
warning affected him. 

There is no doubt that if his mother had 
called, the day following their interview, upon 
Nellie, and had taken her warmly and resolutely 
by the hand, he would not have acted thus. 
Nay, had Sylvia Brabazon sent him a friendly 
word from time to time during those eight 
weeks, through Lady Frances or Madame de 
Surville, he would now have been restrained 
from taking this step. Mrs. Gold win was right, 
and he could not but acknowledge it. Yet he 
answered her in the same plausible manner 
that he had reasoned with himself. 

** There is truth in what you say, but it isn't the 
whole truth. These influences may have work- 
ed in me to some extent, but there are others 
you require to know me better than you do to 
understand. To begin with, I want to be mar- 
ried. If Tm not married soon I shall go to the 
dogs 1 Of course I know there are heaps of 



284 POET AND PEER. 

girls who would marrj me because I atn a lord^ 
because I could make a good settlement oa 
them, perhaps because I have won a certain 
celebrity. That isn't what I want. I want 
affection . disinterested affection ; I want devo- 
tion. Sylvia Brabazon would never have ^vea 
me that, as I now understand. If this girl ac- 
cepts me, she will. If she can't love me for 
myself alone . without ulterior considerations, 
without thinking, like Miss Brabazon, that I 
ought to pass through a purgatory of probation 
. she won't marry me at all. Honestly, I feel 
persuaded at this moment, Mrs. Goldwin, that 
to make ber my wife is my best chance of 
happiness." 

Mary still urged delay with all her eloquence* 
But there was no evicting him from his position 
. marriage was a necessity to him ; and Nellie 
possessed all he wanted in a wife. Mary Gold- 
win saw that she had no choice in the matter* 
The utmost she could do was to warn Nellie 
against precipitance: beyond this she had no 
right or power to offer opposition; and, how 
ineffectual this frail barrier would prove against 



POET AND PEER. 285 

the flood-gates of the girl's loving heart, she 
knew beforehand. 

That afternoon St. John, hurrying under the 
portone of Mrs. Gold win's house, nearly ran 
against a figure who, with a quick step and 
erect triumphant carriage, was issuing forth at 
the same moment. This knight had just ob- 
tained a very easy victory ; he was now excited, 
and eager for another encounter in which he 
anticipated real difficulty. His mind was so 
wholly engrossed with the importance of bend- 
ing his mother's will to accept the inevitable 
with a good grace^ that no thought of bis friend 
had crossed it. As there never could have been 
the possibility of rivalry between them, so there 
could be no unseemly exultation now. He had 
felt very angry with St. John on the previous 
day, but Wilfred never cherished his resent- 
ments. The past, as regarded Hubert's inter- 
ference in the affair, was forgotten by him; 
only now, as the two men touched each other, 
it flashed upon him what St. John would suffer. 
He would fain have broken the truth gently to 
him, but, as he met Hubert's astonished gaze. 



486 POET AND PEER. 

the only thing he could say was: "Weill 
it's all right, you see," then wrung his 
hand, and, without waiting for a rejoinder, 
fitrode away, touched for a moment by the 
thought of that great hulking fellow's misery, 
but personally too absorbed in what lay before 
him to bestow more than the largesse of a^ 
generous heart, in passing, upon his stricken 
friend. 

" He has been to Mary. he has apologized," 
thought the other, as he went upstairs ; ** and 
perhaps he has already heard-^ . " 

The servant happened to be at the door of 
the apartment ; he walked in, and, unannounced, 
entered the drawing-room. Though not yet 
dusk, all sunlight had left it ; but the shabby 
old Roman furniture glowed under the fitful 
flare of a pinewood fire, which irradiated the 
sweet, happy face of a young girl seated on the 
hearth-rug in front of it. 

He had just left her, and she had sunk down 
there, still bewildered with her sudden joy, still 
asking herself if it were possible that all this was 
not a dream ? That morning she had stood upon 



POET AND PEER. 287 

the grey, hopeless sands, and had watched the 
waters of happiness receding further and further 
from her. And now the race of the swift in- 
coming tide fairly swept her away. As to her 
kind friend's advice, her urgent solicitations 
that the girl would not act precipitately, that 
ihe would not yield to Athelstone's solicitations 
without considering this marriage in all its bear- 
ings, it produced some effect as long as Mary 
poke to her ; but when Nellie had entered the 
room where Athelstone awaited her, when he 
had begun his eloquent pleading, when he had 
told her the whole truth as regarded Sylvia 
Brabazon, and declared that his salvation or 
perdition now lay in her own hands, all Mary^s 
admirable counsel was scattered to the winds, 
flow could poor eighteen, with its ignorance of 
life, and its unbounded belief in one perfect 
human being, shut the door of its warm, loving 
heart, heaping against it borrowed foresight 
and wisdom ? The barricades all tumbled ; 
there was confusion in the citadel, but a great 
joy reigned there. It was the realization of 
some fairy-dream in her childhood, to hear him 



2b8 POET \KD FEER. 

pleading to her with hin sweet persnasive elo- 
qnence* He could make her believe anything, 
as in the old days at Bipple ; and how this re- 
called those days when he read to her ^^ King 
Copbetna's Daughter ^ in the apple-orchard, and 
she wondered if life wonld be a poem ronnded 
to a close like this. When he had swept away 
all remonstrance as to her present un worthiness 
and his f atnre welfare, there fell a rain of happy 
tears ; and he sat and talked the passionate poetry 
of lore to ber there for nearly two hours, with her 
head upon his shoulder, planning the future 
with all a boy's sanguine exultation in his pro- 
spective bliss* And now he was gone, and she 
sank upon the rug before the pine-wood fire, 
but the golden silence of her reverie was broken 
in a few moments by some one entering the 
room; she heard the door open, she heard a 
heavy step behind her, and, turning ber head, 
saw Hubert and started to her feet ; she had 
not thought of him once all day, and now, what 
was she to say to this good, &ithful friend, 
towards whom her heart felt more softened at 
that moment than it had ever done before! 



POET AND PEER. 289 

But, because of this, it was unendurable to her 
to find herself alone with him. She knew the 
part he had played in this 4 she knew his loyalty 
and courage, and she could not bring herself to 
tell him that which she knew he had a right to 
be told at once. Her courage failed her. The 
b^ood came and went in her face ; she pressed 
her hands tightly together ; he spoke to her ; 
she hardly heard what he said, and^ mur- 
muring a few unintelligible words, quitted the 
room. 

He was left a long time . a time that seemed 
to him to be hours . alone. Then the door 
opened slowly, and Mary entered, looking pale, 
and with eyes full of a great pity, as she held out 
her hand. But he scarcely heeded this in his 
impatience to speak. 

'' I met him. I am glad he came. Of course 
it was to excuse himself to you? And now 
there will be an end to this for . have you heard 
the news f " 

She scrutinized his face with painful curi- 
osity. 

"What news!" 

VOL. II. U 



290 POET AND PEER. 

^^ MiBS Brabazon is returned. I believe tbw 
will set all right; I feel sure she is the only . " 

^* Stop I say no more. She is come too 
late/^ 

'^Too late? Good God I what do you 
mean?" 

**Re has proposed to Nellie, and she has 
accepted him/' 

8he spoke the words in a low voice, and then 
walked to the window. She could not endure 
to look upon the poor fellow's agony. He bore 
it, as a strong man should^ in silence. He sat 
down and covered his face for a few minutes 
with his hands. Then he rose^ and, coming 
behind Mary, touched her on the shoulder. His 
voice sounded hollow. 

*^Ib there no chance of his breaking it off, 
after all ? His mother *^ 

^^He declares his mother will receive her 
when she finds that his decision is unaltera- 
ble." 

''Poor child T It was more a groan than a 
sigh. Then he said, slowly . ^* I shall go back 



POET AND PEER. 291 

to my work to-morrow. There is nothing more 
to keep me here now." , 

*^ Dear Hubert I Don't grieve too much. I 
see now it never would have done. She loves 
him so." 

**Ay." After a moment's pause, he added, 
but almost inaudibly . " And he will make her 
miserable, I fear." 

Mary sighed. "Perhaps he will. But she 
would prefer being miserable with him to a life 
of outward happiness with anyone else. I feel 
ure of this now. Let it be your consolation." 

He walked back to the fire, and remained 
a, long time silent after this. At length he 
said . 

" It's no use talking. All the joy seems taken 
out of my life. I won't see her again, Mary ; 
it's no use. Tell her . no, don't tell her any- 
thing. We shall meet when she is married, I 
suppose. *God bless her! That is all I can 
say." 

He wrung his cousin's hand and left the 
ihouse. She did not try to detain him; why 

U2 



292 POET AMD PEER. 

should she ? Grieved as she was, she knew it 
was best for him, best for all, that he should go 
now that the die was cast. 



293 



CHAPTER XVI. 

TITRS. BRABAZON'S brother had left Naples ; 
.^"-*- there was no longer a motive for linger- 
ing on there ; her return to Rome on the day in 
question had been fixed the evening before 
Sylvia received the anonymous letter we know 
of. Its contents agitated her more than she 
oould have believed possible. It might be un- 
true ; it was contrary to all she had heard from 
her correspondents. Her mind at once glanced, 
though without positive certainty, at its author. 
Had it arrived a few hours earlier, her pride 
might possibly have raised a barrier to this 
immediate journey, which might seem conse- 
quent upon the communication she had received. 
But they had given notice of departure at their 



294 POET AND PEER. 

hotel ; they had telegraphed to the " Europa '' 
for rooms; what plea could she urge to her 
mother, or to the worlds for this sudden change 
of plan? She thought the matter over, and 
resolved to let things take their natural course. 
She did not know . ^we seldom do when arguiag, 
as we think, diHpassionatelj . how large a share 
her intense desire to return to Rome had in 
this decision. 

She had been restless, uneasj, dissatisfied, all 
those weeks at Naples. Her friends' letters, 
especially Madame de Surville's, had tended to 
increase this conditioa. The latter wrote . " H 
faut qtiune parte soit ouverte ou fermie. Do you 
love him, or do you not? He certainly had 
grounds for supposing he was not indifferent to 
you. You evince a deep interest in him, and 
then when he proposes, though you confess to 
the impression he has made, you give him no 
hope, and fly off to Naples, leaving the youag 
man a prey to melancholy, and nourishing the 
most cynical views of our sex in general. He 
shuts himself up, and sees no one for days; 
then he suddenly goes out, and flirts desperate- 



POET AND PEER. 295 

ly with some heartless little baggage or other, 
like Mrs. Crosbie. The responsibility of all this 
vests with you. If you don't care for him, of 
course you are quite right ; if you do care for 
him, you are quite wrong." 

She knew now, even better than when he 
had been present, that she did care for him ; 
and yet, though she was tortured by the 
thought that this episode between them might 
be hurtful to him, her conscience refused to ac- 
knowledge that she had done wrong in leaving 
him without a promise, without even a hope, 
to stand the test of time. Ah I if he had only 
been strong enough to wait 1 

It is strange that dominant women . not the 
fanciful heroines of fiction, but the women 
whose force of character has influence for good 
or evil on all around them . are often subju- 
gated by attractions which seem to us wholly 
incompetent to effect this result. In the eye 
of the world that would not be so in this case. 
The young man had much to captivate nine- 
tenths of the women he addressed. * It was 
only to outsiders, calm watchers of the drama. 



296 POST AKD PEER. 

like myself, with some inngfat into character, 
that it neemed wonderfol to see 8adi a woman 
aa this rendered nnhappj by the instability of 
a boy, against whom her judgment had pro- 
nounced and her instinct had warned her* She, 
who had remained untouched by the devotion 
and constancy of more than one man of a suii^ 
able age, distinguished in position and eminent 
in ability, had succumbed to the charm of 
youth and brilliancy, which she had secretly 
believed she should consolidate into a character 
of enduring nobility* 

It was a short-lived dream; she was even 
now awaking from it. I was a great deal with 
her in those hapless days, and saw^ though 
others did not, and least of all her mother, that 
she was not happy. She guarded her secret 
very closely; she wars not a woman to make 
confidences . she had never made one in the 
whole course of her life. This pride was at 
once her strength and her weakness. She suf- 
fered with the receipt of those weekly letters, 
but she made no sign. In her replies to Ma- 
dame de Surville, she had twice gone so far as 



POET AND PEER. 297 

to ask whether Lord Atbelstone was ever seea 
or known to be with Miss Dawson. The reply 
was a distinct negative. Peril was not to be 
looked for from that quarter. And yet her in- 
stinct told her otherwise. She was longing to be 
back in Rome . a thousand indications told me 
80 . to judge with her own eyes ; but she would 
do nothing to precipitate their return. Then 
came the uncle's somewhat sudden depai*ture^ 
and Mrs. Brabazon herself proposed that they 
should start for RoVne as soon as possible. 

Lorenzo's letter was a cruel blow, embitter- 
ing the journey. She had been hoping, as she 
now knew . hoping against her judgment ; nay, 
in spite of herself, she still hoped. There might 
be exaggeration, if not positive untruth. Who 
would believe an anonymous letter? 

Early the following morning . they had just 
finished breakfast, and Mrs. Brabazon was in 
her dressing-gown . the waiter announced that 
Lady Athelstone was below, and desired par- 
ticularly to see the Signorina. Sylvia was a 
good deal surprised. What could be the mo- 
tive of an act so unauthorized by all Lady 



298 POET AKD PEEK. 

Atbelstone'B conventionalitieB ? Mrs. Brabazon 
rose hurriedly, and, gathering her flowing robe 
round her, beat a retreat. 

*' She come not to see me^ Sylvia, and I not 
want to eee her." 

The visitor was shown in, looking pale, and 
with eyes unmistakably red from crying. 

'* I have to apologise for so early a visit. Miss 
Brabazon. I only heard of your return late 
last night through my maid, and, being very, 
very anxious to see you without loss of time, I 
ventured . I hope you will excuse me." 

Even in the midst of her distress, the force 
of habit was too strong to be broken down; 
what she had to say must be reached by cir- 
cumlocution. 

" Is there anything I can do for you ?" asked 
Sylvia, simply. 

Lady Athelstone took her hand^ and, looking 
into Sylvia's face with her sorrowful eyes, said, 
almost in a whisper, 

"I see you have not heard the sad news. 
Tou do not know the terrible scrape my poor 
boy has got himself into." 



k_ 



POET AND peer: 299 

Sylvia's heart beat violently. 

" No. What is it, Lady Athelstone I" 

" My dear Miss Brabazon, I can scarcely bring 
myself to tell you. And yet my only hope is 
in you ! If there is a chance of. of saving him 
yet, it must be through you. The bishop says 
so, and I am sure he is right. Oh I if you 
had only accepted him two months ago I" 

Sylvia's lips refused to utter a sound. Her 
eyes were fixed on a certain spot on the 
mantelpiece. She would have liked to with- 
draw her hand, but Lady Athelstone held it 
tight. 

"You see he is so impressionable . so im- 
pulsive," she continued. *' His poor dear father 
saw all the danger before he died. And then 
his romance and chivalry, because the girl has 
been maligned, have unfortunately helped it 
on. And now he is deaf to reason . deaf to 
all my entreaties, and I feel our only hope is in 
you 1" 

"How? What has he done?" asked Sylvia, 
in almost a whisper. 

" He has proposed . actually proposed . to 



300 POET AND PEER. 

that governess of Mrs. Gold win's. a girl out of 
our village, a child whom I had mado pupil- 
teacher in our school I Is it not too dreadful? 
And the worst is, I know he doesn't care for 
her really. It is not a case of desperate infatua- 
tion. He behaved foolishly about her two years 
ago, and his dear father made him promise . . . 
in short, he broke of all communication with 
her. It is only his disappointment about you 
that has brought it on again. You are the 
person he really cares for . the person he ought 
to marry. I think . I feel sure . that, if you 
would still hold out some . some encourage- 
ment, this dreadful thing might yet be put a 
top to." 

Sylvia's colour rose ; her breath came quick ; 
ahe gave her visitor a startled look^ and, as 
43he contrived to disengage her hand, said, 
hurriedly, 

"Surely I misunderstand you. Lady Athel- 
48tone. You can't suppose that, when your son 
has plighted his word to another, I should en- 
deavour to make him break it?" 

"Oh I my dear Miss Brabazon, pray let no 



POET AND PEER. 301 

false pride stand between Wilfred and you at 
this moment." 

** Pride I This is no question of pride. It 
is common truth and honour. Your son has- 
pledged his word." 

" But you care for him. I am sure you do^ 
It was a misunderstanding. Perhaps I . . .  
perhaps you . you thought I didn't wish it^ 
and " 

" There was no misunderstanding, and your 
wishes did not influence my decision. I thought 
Lord Athelstone too young to know his own 
mind. And, you see, I was not mistaken." 

"You were . indeed you were! If you 
would only let him know that you care for 
him " 

" Lady Athelstone, there must be an end of 
this." Sylvia spoke rapidly, and her voice 
shook a little. ^' Your feelings as a mother 
blind you. You cannot know what it is you 
are asking me to do. When your son spoke to 
me two months ago, I hesitated. There could 
be no hesitation possible now. He has chosen, 
and I hope it may be for his happiness." 



302 POET AND PEER. 

** But, dear Miss BrabazoD, if he were to come 
to you and say " 

'' He will not say anything now, which, as a 
man of honour^ he should not. If he did^ my 
reply would be the same." 

" I shall go to the girl," said Lady Athel- 
tone, desperately. *' Yes, I shall appeal to her 
myself." 

" You will act as you think right," . Sylvia's 
manner was tinged by a coldness as she spoke 
these words . ** but pray bear in mind that Miss 
Dawson's decision will in no way affect mine. 
Whether your son is likely to be tolerant of 
interference in matters that regard him so close- 
ly* you know best." 

Poor Lady Athelstone knew too well that he 
would be anything but tolerant ; and yet, even 
at the cost of an open quarrel with her . his 
mother. he must be saved if it were pos- 
sible. 

When her visitor was gone, Sylvia walked, 
flushed and bewildered, to her room. She felt 
stunned by the suddenness of this news. She 



POET AND PEER. 303 

said nothing to her mother, but pleaded a head- 
ache for remaining alone all day while visitors 
poured in to see Mrs, Brabazon. Lord Athel- 
stone's engagement had not yet got wind. 

Late in the sweet April evening, Sylvia, 
thickly-veiled, walked with her Italian maid to 
the church of Santa Maria del Popolo. Like 
many whose religion has a strong imaginative 
tinge, the atmosphere of a Roman Catholic 
church at twilight, when the priests' monotone, 
and the acolyte's tinkling bell, and the operatic 
organ are all hushed, and the shuffling of feet 
and scraping of chairs are no longer heard, 
exercised a peculiarly soothing eflfect upon her 
in any mental conflict and trouble. From her 
earliest childhood, she had been accustomed to 
regard these vast silent churches, with the faint 
breath of incense yet lingering about them, as 
refuges from the outer world, where those who 
entered in a right spirit might find a peace that 
'' passeth all understanding." 

She had never before been tried as she was 
now tried. She began to know, too late, that 



304 POET AND PEER. 

she had loved this man far better than she bad 
believed ; that, in despite of her insight into bis 
character, she bad built up for herself a stmc- 
tnre of hopeful belief whose foundations had 
been in the air. She had told him to go his 
waj9 and had refused to bind herself^ or let 
him be bound, bj a promise* And she had done 
this because it had seemed to her right. But 
oh I how little did she think he would have 
taken her so quickly at her word ; that he would 
so speedily have justified her misgivings ! He 
was unworthy of her ; she knew it ; and yet, 
alas I she loved him none the less. Her pride 
revolted from acknowledging this ; she hid her 
burning face in her hands, and said it could not 
be. She had deceived herself; it was a differ- 
ent man she loved . not this one, who had come 
to her with vows and protestations of devotion, 
while his heart had, in truths always been 
another's. For this was the fact which seemed 
clearest to her : he had never really loved her ; 
he had never really loved anyone but this child, 
to whom he bad now returned. AH that inter- 
vened had been bom of imagination or a transi- 



POET AND PEER. 305 

tory passion, and conld have no enduring 
element. He had striven to eradicate that first 
love ; he had done no more than cut it down ; 
the roots remained, and had sent up fresh shoots. 
She had done well, oh I how well, to wait ; but 
her woman's heart was sorely bruised. She 
needed all her strength and courage ; or, rather, 
she felt that she must seek for them above. She 
arose, with a great sob at her throat, and knelt 
at one of the dimly-lit side-altars. 

After a time the silence was broken by the 
flap of the leathern curtain over the door ; there 
was a faint rustle of some one coming up the 
nave. Sylvia was conscious that a figure stood 
behind her. She rose, and, turning round, 
found herself face to face with Nellie Dawson. 
The girl shrank a little, but did not move away. 
Sylvia held out her hand. 

This is how it came about. 

An hour before, Lady Athelstone had left the 
girl in anguish and doubt as to how she ought 
to act. Wilfred had enjoined her to hold fast, 
and let no one come between them. But his 
mother had placed things in such a light as 

VOL. n. X 



306 POET AND PEER. 

made the poor child feel that bj marrying Wil- 
fred she would sacrifice him^ not onij in his 
temporary interests, but also in his real happi- 
ness. Miss Brabazon's refusal had caused the 
temporary aberration under which he had 
offered Nellie his hand. Lady Athelstone could 
extract no absolute promise, for the girl per* 
sisted, through her bitter tears, that her word 
was pledged to Wilfred, and that he alone could 
free her. But when his mother, after expending 
all her artillery of warning and supplication, 
had departed, the girl's misery was piteous to 
behold. 

It was then, from her window in the Via 
Babuino, that she saw, in the swift gathering 
twilight, the tall, unmistakeable figure, thickly 
veiled, gliding along, accompanied by her maid* 
An idea suddenly occurred to her which she 
acted upon without consultation with Mrs* 
Ooldwin, indeed without a minute's reflection* 
She seized her hat and jacket, and ran into the 
street. As she reached' the Piazza del Popolo, 
the two women passed into the church* 



POET AND PEER. 307 

She lingered on the steps outside for some 
time. She would wait till Sylvia re-appeared. 
Her education disinclined her to treat the House 
of God for other purpose than that of prayer, 
nor could she dare to intrude upon Sylvia's 
devotions. But, when more than a quarter of 
an hour had elapsed, a fear suddenly came upon 
her that Miss Brabazon had left the church by 
another door. 

Then she swiftly raised the leathern curtain, 
and, passing under it, walked down the dark 
and solitary church, till she drew near the chapel 
where Sylvia knelt. 

When the latter had risen and turned round, 
she started. 

" I saw you pass, I followed you here ; I hope 
you will forgive me/' said the younger girl, in a 
low, fluttering voice. 

Sylvia stood over, shadowing her like a 
sorrowful angel. 

" You wanted me, then !" she asked, gently. 

" Yes. Oh I Miss Brabazon, do help me, do 
tell me the truth ; I am so wretched." 

x2 



308 POET AND PEER. 

Sylvia inwardly shrank; bat she nerved her- 
self to meet what she felt was coming. The 
girl went on, with a force of earnestness which 
swept away her usual diffidence, 

** You have heard . you know all t They tell 
me that he loves you still, and that you love 
him ; that there has been only a misnnderstanding 
which may be set right between you ; that if he 
marries me he will be miserable, and that I shall 
never forgive myself for ruining his life. Is it 
so ? Oh, please speak the truth I Don't fear, 
don't think of sparing me ; I had so much, much 
rather be told the truth now, before it is too 
late r' 

"I will tell you the truth, my dear," said 
Sylvia, with a quivering voice, as she took the 
girl's hand in hers . " I will tell you the truth 
as regards myself, humiliating as you may think 
it to my pride. I did believe Lord Athelstone 
cared for me ; I am now very sure he does not. 
I refused him on account of my age, and because 
I was afraid he might not know his own mind. 
I was right, you see. There was no ' misunder- 



POET AND PEER. 309 

standing' between us . nothing which can be 
^ set right.' I would not marry him now, upon 
any consideration ; I believe he has loved you,, 
and only you, in his heart of hearts, ever since 
he was a boy. He was deceived, and I deceived 
myself, that is all. He has returned to his first 
allegiance. You can marry him with a clear 
conscience^ my child." 

** You are sure?'' said the girl, eagerly, with 
her upturned face, over which the tears fell like 
rain. ** Oh, you make me so happy I for ho is 
dearer to me than my life, and I would sooner, 
far sooner die to-morrow than be a burden to 
him. I know I am very unworthy to be his 
wife, but he says I can bring him peace and 
happiness^ and, if devotion can do so, it 
will." 

** Pray that it may do so, Nellie ; we both 
believe in prayer. As to the rest, give it no 
thought. God bless and prosper you, and make 
you a happy wife I" 

She stooped and kissed her on the forehead, 
and passed out of the church. 



310 POET AND PEER. 

One month later Wilfred Athelstone wa 
married to Nellie Dawson, at the British 
Embassy in Paris. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
POET AND PEER. 



CHAPTER I. 

TF by " history " is meant a bare narrative of 
J- events, the history of my poet-peer daring 
the n^xt year can be comprised in a sentence 
or two. To indicate the gradual changes 
which these snccessive months wrought in him 
and others, until we take up the story of bis 
daily life once more, is a somewhat longer 
process, for which I must claim the reader's 
patience. 

Immediately after his marriage, he took his 
bride to Athelstone, and there they remained, 
chiefly alone, the entire summer. Wilfred con- 

VOL. in. B 



2 POET AND PEER. 

stantly affirmed to himself, and in bis letters to 
bis mother, that he was perfectly happy. He 
rather gloried at first ,ia the difficulties of his 
wife's position* There was novelty, and he 
liked novelty ; there was excitement in watch- 
ing for the first moves of the county magnates 
towards his bride, and he liked excitement of 
the combative kind. He read to her ; he recited 
bis poetry as they walked through the woods ; 
be indoctrinated her with his various theoi-ies. 
She was only too willing to learn of him . to 
drink in the words of wisdom that fell from bis 
lips; she was almost perfectly happy. Some 
neighbours called, some kept aloof. The first 
were prompted by a variety of human motives 
. respect for his father, kindliness towards the 
foolish young man himself, a desire to shoot 
the Atbelstone coverts the ensuing autumn, a 
curiosity to " interview," and, if possible, turn 
into ridicule, this peasant-peeress. The faction 
of non-callers, on the other hand, was actuated 
by a singleness of purpose . that of resolving 
not to countenance so dangerous and immoral 
a precedent. If such offence against all social 



POET AND PEER. 3 

laws was to be condoned, what was there to 
prevent their sons from marrying the game- 
keepers' daughters, or, for the matter of that, 
their daughters from marrying the gamekeep- 
ers' sons ? 

You must draw a line somewhere. Once 
open the door, and you cross the threshold into 
sheer socialism. Lord Athelstone for two or 
three years, ever since his Oxford days, had 
been no better than a socialist, and this was the 
end of it 1 

The dowager had not visited her son's home 
. indeed, she had not been invited. The tact- 
less manner in which she had opposed his mar- 
riage up to the very last rendered this almost 
inevitable. Time, the great healer of all 
wounds, would soften his mother's heart to- 
wards Nellie, and make her accept the inevit- 
able, Wilfred hoped. At present, he could not 
subject his young wife to the pain and restraint 
of the*dowager'8 presence. He did not go to 
London ; he would not attend a single debate 
in the " Lords ;" he was, as his mother piteous- 
ly sighQd, " sunk in the lap of idleness in the 

b2 



4 POET AND PEER. 

country, as was only natural after bis unfortu- 
nate marriage." 

To two or three intimate friends, Lady Ban- 
nockburn among tbe rest, sbe spoke witbout 
reserve. Tbe effect of ber son's sacrifice to a 
mistaken sense of bonour (for as sucb sbe per- 
sbted in regarding it, ratber tban as tbe pas- 
sionate compensation to pique) could not but 
be prejudicial to a character wbicb needed 
every stimulant to ambition, as bis mother 
understood tbe word. He would not go to 
Court; be shrank from coming to take his 
proper place among bis peers ; be even avoided 
all the great county meetings^ tbe agricultural 
shows, and other gatherings where his presence 
would be of weight. He made no effort to 
conciliate opinion by entertaining hospitably 
those who had called upon bis wife; be pre- 
ferred to wander about tbe woods with ber, 
writing poetry, and satirizing the outside 
world. He was afraid even to ask hevy bis own 
mother, down to Atbelstone. Sucb was tbe 
enervating result of bis misalliance^ in tbe poor 
dowager's eyes. 



POET AND PEER. 5 

In Nellie's one great happiness all else was 
swallowed up during those first months. She 
possessed him whom she had loved since child- 
hood, but had never dreamed she should pos- 
sess. She lived for him, and he seemed to 
desire nothing more. As long as this lasted, 
what did any difficulties or mortifications sig- 
nify? She might feel painfully at times the 
awkwardness of her position as regarded some 
who had formerly been her companions in the 
village ; she might regret, when a scoffing allu- 
sion of Wilfred's brought it to her notice, the 
pointed neglect of some who formerly had been 
his friends. But these were no more than 
specks on the radiant disk of her happiness. 
His temporary estrangement from his mother 
was the only real cloud which occasionally 
overshadowed the sunshine of that summer. 

Wilfred told her repeatedly it was better for 
them jihat the dowager should not come to 
Athelstoue just at present. He wrote to her 
weekly ; and in the autumn he meant to invite 
her to visit them, when he hoped she would 
^accept the logic of accomplished facts more un- 



6 POET AND PEER. 

reservedly than she seemed disposed to da 
hitherto. Still the wife's sweet loving nature 
could not feel satisfied until the mother and 
son were once again together as thej had been 
in old days. As the months slipped by, she 
became more and more urgent with Wilfred on 
this head. 

At last, in October, she came. The first 
beckon from her son brought her. Was he 
beginning to feel the monotony of his existence, 
though he declined all invitations for himself 
and his wife ? Or did he really think that his 
mother's presence would now add to his happi- 
ness^ and to that of Nellie ? 

Let us hasten to say at once that Lady 
Athelstone, as far as Nature and a painfully 
sensitive conscience would permit her, behaved 
very well. She greeted her daughter-in-law 
kindly ; without effusion, indeed^ which would 
have savoured of hypocrisy ; but with the clearly- 
indicated endeavour to try to forget the past. 
She acted thus, under the Bishop of Oporto's- 
advice. 

*' W^hat is the use of crying over spilt milk 1" 



POET AND PEER. 7 

that amiable dignitary of the Church had said. 
** The thing is done. Make the best of it, my 
dear lady." 

And she did, using strenuous efforts to lift 
her son from the slough of inactivity into which 
he had sunk, and to spur him, through his 
wife's agency, to assume his proper place before 
the world. What she said to Nellie, a morn- 
ing or two after her arrival, appealed to the 
young wife's good sense, though it pained 
her; 

^' You must not encourage his remaining at 
home, my dear. You must urge his mixing 
more with the world, and fulfilling the duties of 
his station which he has been neglecting sadly, 
or people will say it is your fault . you under- 
stand ? Of course, your position is difficult, but 
you muQt face it. Yes ; it is cowardly to shrink 
from it, my dear. The longer Wilfred puts off 
asking people here, you see, the worse it will 
be. The house has not been opened since his 
poor father's death ; and it oijight to be, if he is 
to retain his position in the county. Instead of 
discouraging visits, as he almost seems to do, 



8 POET AND PEER. 

he should give the best families au opportunity 
of making your acquaintance, if.- if they are 
inclined to do so. So much depends upon you 
in this ; and also about going to London. You 
must really make a point of his going at the 
opening of the Session. As your confinement 
is to be in March, it . it will do very well. I 
want him to throw himself into political life, and 
gradually, I hope, by mixing with the world, his 
views may alter. It is so dreadful, you know, 
for a peer to advocate universal suffrage, and 
equality, and so on I And though, of course, 
marrying as he has done, it is difficult for you 
to prevent his being a radical (I quite see that), 
still I hope . I do hope . you will do all you 
can to make him respect existing institutions, 
and so on." 

There was one existing institution, at all 
events, which Nellie would do her best to 
prevent her husband's treating with disrespect. 
Almost the only comfort the dowager could 
find in the marriage was that her daughter-in- 
law was a good, sound church-woman. When- 
ever he began to rail against priests, or inveigh 



POET AND PEER. 9 

against some particular dogma, a glance from 
his young wife's pleading eyes checked him. 
He was tender and thoughtful for her in 
many ways; and his hope of becoming a 
.father made him specially careful not to pain 
Nellie. 

Had this aflfection . really made for itself any 
deep bed in his nature, out of which its course 
could never more be diverted! Or was it no 
more than a placid, somewhat shallow stream, 
taking pretty reflections just now, as it flowed 
along between flowery banks, but whose forces 
might be dispersed or expended long before 
they reached the sea? Lady Athelstone, with 
perceptions quickened by her maternal anxiety, 
soon saw that Nellie, even in these early days, 
had no real ascendancy over her husband. He 
complied with her wishes, it is true, when she 
expressed them, which was but rarely ; what 
was passing in her inward heart he never 
divined. 

That subtle magnetism existing between two 
human beings whose love has drawn them to- 
gether, in spite of every adverse circumstance. 



10 POET AND PEER. 

was absent here; She 'woshipped him blindly : 
that was her fault from the beginning ; she did 
not attempt to criticise, or argue, or even ex- 
press many of her thoughts so that he re- 
mained unconscious of the aepth of the mind, 
with the surface of which he was hourly in 
contact. He treated her, indeed, intellectually, 
much as he had done ' two years ago, with a 
lively solicitude for her advancement, and 
astonishment and]]admiration at her quickness 
to absorb instruction of any kind. But as a 
finely-organized piece of human mechanism, 
capable of original reflection and the formation 
of judgments widely divergent from his own, 
above all, as a woman of a rapidly-forming and 
distinct individuality, it never occurred to him 
to think of her. 

Though it was not given to Lady Athelstone 
to see all this, what she discovered very plainly 
before long was that her daughter-in-law's 
mental attitude towards her husband was one 
from which bat little good was to be looked for, 
and it exasperated her. 

" Why, if she had influence enough over him 



POET AND PEER. II 

to make bim marry her, cannot she use it 
now to prevent his wasting his life as he 
doesf 

Nevertheless, by egging on her daughter-in- 
law to ask certain things of Wilfred, as wishes 
emanating from herself, . never as observance& 
it was fitting on every account to subscribe to, 
. Lady Athelstone accomplished somewhat^ 
The coverts were shot by some neighbours con- 
vened together to that end ; certain magnates, 
who had written kindly to the dowager touch- 
ing her son's young wife, were bidden at Christ- 
mas ; a tenant's dance was given in the big 
hall. Finally, the move to London early in 
February was made^ without any opposition on 
Wilfred's part. To say the truth, he wanted 
change. He probably would have preferred to 
go abroad : his wife's condition precluding that, 
however, he was well pleased to find himself 
among those who could appreciate and sympa- 
thise with him better than did the squirearchy 
around Athelstone. 

From that hour began the change in Nellie's 
life. She and Wilfred were never as much to-^ 



12 POET AND PEER. 

gether after the removal to London. It was 
inevitable; the state of her health for many 
months kept her in a ^reat measure a prisoner, 
and precluded her accompanying her husband 
into any society. He was busy . or supposed 
to be busy . in the House several nights a week 
.and she encouraged this. His mother was 
pleased ; he was beginning to assume his proper 
position. Political dinners and assemblies he 
shunned, if possible ;^but there were literary and 
" Bohemian " gatherings which the young wife 
on her sofa had less difficulty in persuading him 
to frequent. She saw that be liked them, and 
she urged his going. Perhaps it was a mistake, 
but so it came about that the habit of leaving 
her constantly alone was gradually formed. 

Her hope of becoming a mother was frus- 
trated, and she suffered very keenly under the 
disappointment, as did Wilfred. He sat by her 
bedside, with her hand in his, and scarcely left 
her. Then, when her peril was passed, he slid 
into the old life ; writing or reading alone in 
his room all the morning, receiving strange, 
shabby-coated men, who held forth to him on 



POET AND PEER. 13 

political or private grievances, and seeing but 
little of his wife during the remainder of the 
day except at meals. 

Arcadia was over for her, never to return. 
She felt inexpressibly lonely in the big old 
house in Whitehall Gardens, though she would 
have died sooner than confess it either to him 
or to his mother, when she called, as she did 
daily. In all, except the not giving an heir to 
Athelstone, the dowager was better satisfied 
with her daughter-in-law than she had yet shown 
herself. The change in Wilfred's life, if not 
wholly ascribable to Nellie, was one which she 
might very seriously have impeded. She had 
not done so. His name was in people's mouths 
as that of a young man to whom, if he would 
moderate his views, a place would probably be 
given in the next Cabinet, when the Opposition 
came in. He had spoken once, and his speech, 
though short, had arrested attention. His 
object seemed to be to prove that the separa- 
tion between aristocracy and democracy was 
not so complete as Mr. Matthew Arnold, and 
thinkers of his school, believe. He did not 



14 POET AND PEER. 

absolutely decry the order to which he belonged, 
lut he believed that its retention as an integral 
portion of the State depended on its higher 
^cultivation, its wider sympathy with the people, 
the education of the rising generation to sacri- 
fice selfish pleasure to the public good. All this 
was very far from what Lady Athelstone would 
have wished. Still it was better than downright 
Socialism. 

After this came the Easter Recess, and Nellie, 
pining for the sweet spring air blowing over 
hedges white with hawthorn and uplands fra- 
grant with blue hyacinth, was carried off to the 
hideous glare of Brighton, which the doctors had 
ordained for her. She hated the place for itself, 
but she hated it still more because she saw how 
the unloveliness, the hard vulgar prose of every- 
thing around him, jarred upon Wilfred. He 
looked so unutterably bored and disgusted, as 
he walked alongside her chair on the esplanade, 
that she felt almost relieved when, on the third 
morning after their arrival, he asked her whether 
she would very much mind being left there for a 



POET AND PEER, 15 

day or two alone. " I will be dowa on Satur- 
day again, but I have business which I really 
ought to attend to." The momentary pang 
was stifled; she bade him go, and not think 
about her. 

In her chair that day she came face to face, 
for the first time since her marriage, with Hubert 
St. John. He had just come down from London, 
where he had been the whole winter devoted to 
his work, and living but little in the West End. 
He had not called upon the Athelstones; he 
knew of their being in London ; he had heard 
of Nellie's illness, and had inquired after her 
constantly; but, though he desired exceedingly 
to see her, he shrank from the formality of a 
first visit, and from the *pain of meeting Athel- 
stone. This chance encounter was what he 
most wished for, as taking the edge off what 
was to him a sharp trial. Perhaps it was not 
altogether chance; he knew they had come 
down to Brighton, but assuredly he was not 
conscious of Wilfred's departure, as he strode 
along the parade and came to a dead halt in 



16 POET AND PEER. 

front of the lovelj creature whose pale face 
flushed with unexpected pleasure as she recog- 
nised him. 

After this, the ice being broken, he came 
constantly, and Wilfred, on his return, greeted 
his old friend with all his former cordiality . a 
cordiality which, while it rendered St. John's 
position possible, was hurtful to him, as some- 
thing which he could not honestly reciprocate. 
Was it jealousy which made him unjust ? He 
asked himself this repeatedly, and always with 
the same . perhaps with increasing . vehe- 
mence denied it. Athelstone did not properly 
appreciate his wife ; thus it appeared to Hubert. 
Many would have failed to detect this ; Wilfred 
was uniformly kind, careful for her bodily wel- 
fare, solicitous for her amusement ; what could 
she want more? But love is keen-sighted; 
Hubert felt there was something beyond this 
which young Lady Athelstone ought to have^ 
and which she had not. Therefore, although 
he visited her constantly, and believed that his 
intense interest in her was only now that of a 
friend, he did a violence to his feelings in 



POET AND PEER. 17 

acceptiDg Wilfred's hospitality. But, as long as 
they remained at Brighton, it was hardly possi- 
ble to decline it. When they returned to Lon- 
don, it would be different ; his world and theirs 
lay wide apart, and he would very seldom go 
to Whitehall Gardens. Here she had no friends ; 
when Wilfred was in London, she would be 
absolutely alone but for Hubert, and this he 
pleaded to himself as an excuse for his daily 
visits. 

At the end of three weeks Nellie said, as she 
walked up and down for a few minutes, leaning 
on Wilfred's arm, 

" I am getting quite strong ; I am quite able 
to return to London. Let me go when you go, 
dear." 

*' No ; you must stay here a week or a fort- 
night more at least. When you do come up, 
you will have to begin London life, and that 
will tax your strength ; not that I want to drag 
you about into all the vulgar crowds people call 
* society,' but there are friends of mine whose 
acquaintance you will have to make, and a great 
deal you will have to see. And then my mother 

VOL. III. C 



18 POET AND PEER. 

is bent upon your being presented. I think it 
folly myself, only '* 

" Oh, Wilfred, not unless it is absolutely 
necessary, please not !" 

" The only reason why it can be necessary is 
because," . here he stopped and turned his 
sentence diflferently, . " in short, to prove that 
there is not a breath against you . that you 
have every right to be received as my wife by 
your Sovereign, and to take place among the 
peeresses. Having ODce established that, I 
should never care for you to go through the 
empty ceremony of attending a Drawing-room 
every year." 

They sat in the balcony at Harris's that 
evening, watching the sun's red disk dip into 
the steel-grey sea, when Hubert, who had been 
asked to dinner, joined them. Nellie had re- 
ceived a letter from Mrs. Goldwin that day. 
She was still at Algiers, where she had been 
passing the "winter, and it was possible she 
might not return to England at all this summer. 
Mr. Goldwin had suflfered severely last winter 
from gout, and was recommended to take the 



POET AND PEER. 19 

baths at Wiesbaden. If he could be persuaded 
to do so, Mary would joia him there, and avoid 
the double crossing, as her health still prevented 
her wintering in England. From the Goldwins 
and their plans^ the conversation turned on 
Home, and their common acquaintances there. 
Suddenly Athelstone, without taking his eyes 
from the sea, asked Hubert if he knew anything 
of Miss Brabazon. It was the first time he had 
named her since his marriage. 

*' She is in England. They are come to live 
here." 

He took his cigar from his mouth and turned 
sharply. 

"Where?" 

" Somewhere on Barnes Common, I believe. 
An uncle of Mr. Brabazon's died last winter, and 
left his house and all he had to his great-niece. 
Miss Brabazon and her mother came over, and 
they like it well enough to make it their home, 
for the present." 

Wilfred puflfed away in silence for a minute. 

"She will not stand it for six months," he 
43aid, at last, with a certain sharpness of tone. 

c2 



20 POET AND PEER. 

^' Sappho was never meant for prosaic English 
life. She is not in keeping with Barnes Com- 
mon." 

*^I shoald have thought she was a woman 
who, living her own life, would be independent 
of her surroundings; but jou know her^ of 
course, much better than I do." 

The reproach covertly conveyed in these 
words was not lost on Nellie. She flushed, and 
said^ quickly . 

*' Wilfred only meant that one cannot fancy 
Miss Brabazon leading a common life like every- 
body else. She is so immeasurably above all 
other women that " 

*' That the vulgar details of domestic life must 
be unendurable to her. Those grand creatures 
have no idea of submission, no pliancy, no 
tolerance of weaknesses. They live in a high 
and rarefied atmosphere, and cannot breathe at 
a lower level." 

Wilfred had not forgotten, then. He could 
not think of her without bitterness. He put 
away the past from him as far as he could ; but, 
when it was thrust upon him, he soothed his 



POET AND PEER. 21 

wounded vanity by the invention of a theory 
which his conscience^ in the rare moments when 
he stood face to face with it, repudiated. 
Hubert, as he listened to him, felt certain of 
this. In a letter to Mary Goldwin that night 
he wrote : . 

" Wilfred Athelstone is like a man who looks 
up at a lofty tower which he still covets^ and 
thinks with self-reproach that he might have 
dwelt there, had he but persevered. His feet 
were on the lower steps, and there was no ob- 
etruction before him. Only it was a task of 
time, and one that demanded unfaltering re- 
solve. That is just what he wants; he is 
obstinate in opinion, and in action that runs 
counter to advice ; he is not resolute, for good or 
for evil. Therefore he wavered, he fell back, 
and entered the fair villa which stood at hand, 
open-doored, and with no stairs to climb. He 
tries to believe . ^because he is not a bad fellow 
at heart . that he has rightly selected this 
dwelling, embowered in sweet flowers, to be 
his home. But it is not so. He is restless, dis- 
satisfied. He asserts vehemently that lofty ' 



22 POET AND PEER. 

towers are not made for the uses of ordinary 
life ; but his very vehemence belies his sincerity. 
Do not think, Mary, that I see things with a 
jaundiced eye. He loves his wife, in his own 
way, and she is devoted to him. Just because 
she is so, her life will be one of suffering and 
disappointment. A more lukewarm affection 
would be content with what she gets, and make 
the best of things. But she is too sensitive not 
to be sorely hurt by the thorns which, I feel 
sure, beset her onward path." 



23 



CHAPTER II. 

TJROBABLY no man with very strong affec- 
-*. tions but is a victim to self-deception at 
some time or other. Hubert St. John had 
strength of mind and force of will, but he lin- 
gered on at Brighton as long as Lady Athel- 
stone remained, pleading first one excuse, and 
then another, to the secret monitor that whis- 
pered, " It is folly to remain here . go." For 
himself, it so little signified ; absence from her 
for a whole year had not changed him ; seeing 
her daily could not add to the loneliness and 
heart-solitude which he felt whenever his 
thoughts were not actively employed. He 
could be something to her now, however little ; 
in Wilfred's absence, his society filled some 



24 POET AND PEER. 

hours which would otherwise have been void, 
and this was enough for him. 

To Nellie, on the other hand, the presence of 
this kind and clever friend, who had only once 
committed a mistake . not such a mistake as is 
unforgiveable to woman . was a greater solace 
than she cared to express. She had never been 
used to be alone; she wanted a companion 
when Wilfred was away, and Mr. St. John was 
80 wise and so well-informed ; she could ques- 
tion him unhesitatingly about so many things 
which, strange to say, she avoided doing with 
her husband. She dreaded discussion with him. 
Now Wilfred would have liked nothing better ; 
the indifferentism or disapprobation of silence 
was the one thing he could not stand. He 
would have liked to expound all his theories, 
and crush all his wife's opposing arguments, 
and subjugate her judgment, even if she did 
not embrace his views with the same avidity as 
himself. This was what Nellie, with all her 
boundless admiration for her oracle, could not 
quite do, and it pained her to hear him hold 
forth on certain subjects. With developed in- 



POET AND PEER. 25 

telligence, the time was past when she could 
regard him as absolutely infallible. His slight- 
est wish was law to her ; his principles were 
not. 

And this was Hubert St. John's chief diffi- 
culty. To nearly all Athelstone's extreme 
views his own were opposed ; and though he 
ne^er hesitated to express them in Wilfred's 
presence . and many were the discussions to 
which Nellie was witness . he felt as if it were 
almost disloyal, in the husband's absence, to 
expose the fallacy of Wilfred's principles, and 
fortify his own position with all the arguments 
of which he was master. But, with the sweet 
tyranny of a woman who knows her power, 
young Lady Athelstone often urged him to 
explain to her more fully the bearing of some 
question upon which Wilfred had, perhaps, 
pronounced with much vehemence the previous 
evening, and St. John could not but yield. 

One of these subjects, which I will name 
here, as it has a bearing on events in this nar- 
rative, was the due relations of master and 
domestic . how far the institution of servitude 



26 POET AND PEK. 

-was compatible with human dignity, and to 
what measure of equality ** helps/' whether 
male or female, were to be admitted. It was 
the topic of the hour, the cause of lady-house- 
maids, who should be permitted to play the 
piano in the intervals of dustings being elo- 
quently set forth by some of their literary 
sisterhood. 

It is almost needless to say that Athelstone 
had from the first drawn his sword to attack 
what he termed "domestic slavery." On his 
return to England, when he established himself 
with his bride at Athelstone, he inaugurated a 
new system, which was gravely reprehended 
by all his friends and scoffed at by the world 
at large. The "liberty of the subject" was 
almost complete, and had it not been for the 
presence of two or three old servants, who 
maintained authority, there would have been 
anarchy in the household. But for the wise 
old housekeeper, who had nursed him in her 
arms^ Wilfred would have had the servants 
dine at the same table with himself. His an- 
cestors did so in olden time : why should not 



^^^^^ uod 

r 



POET AND PEER. 27 

he return to a fiue patriarchal cnBtom 1 Thej 
would then all feel really like oue family, with- 
out class diviBioDs, bound together by a com- 
mon aympatby, if they met at one board. Mrs. 
Clove positively refused ; if the liberty of the 
aubject meant anything, it meant her having 
her " meals comfortable " in her owa room, 
with the upper servants. She argued the point 
etoutly, and at last, with a freedom and temei^ 
ity which her yeara alone justiEod, she said, 

" If you want to keep up my lady's dignity, 
my lord, you'll do nothing to lower her in the 
eyea of the village. You've got to think o' her. 
I'm sure it's not my lady's wish . as is as nice* 
behaved as any high-born lady could be . bat 
they'll put it down to her. They'll say as ahe 

wanted to take her victuals with " 

There . aay no more, Mrs. Clove. Under 
the circumstances, perhaps you are right. But 
understaud, I yield solely on my wife's ac- 

lant. It is a mere base truckling to custom." 

lorenzo, now shot up into the semblance of a 

g man, though barely seventeen, was the 

erson on whom his master's new theories 



28 POET AND PEER. 

told . and the reverse of advantageously. He 
grew idle, and his idleness was unreproved ; for 
was he not a free agent 1 If his soul's develop- 
ment needed greater freedom than was con- 
43istent with the varnishing of boots and brush- 
ing of coats, if his conscience told him that 
these duties were secondary to others of which 
Wilfred was not cognizant, he would not inter- 
fere He treated the boy with an indulgence 
which was hurtful to him in all ways, and led to 
endless quarrels. 

Lorenzo, who, with great acuteness and un- 
limited curiosity, was addicted to the womanish 
vice of tittle-tattle, did little else all day long but 
smoke cigarettes and repeat what he picked 
up : I fear with additional avidity, if it was 
calculated to create mischief. Many a careless 
word, that was never meant to go beyond the 
parlour, reached the servants' hall ; and many 
a jest concerning my lord's crackiness and my 
lady's parentage was transmitted in return to 
Wilfred's dressing-room. The boy saw his 
master wince ; and, though he was sternly re- 
proved, and ordered, under threat of dismissal. 



1 



POET AND PEER. 29' 

never to repeat such vile rubbish again, he only 
felt that he must exercise more discretion : the 
taste for spying and tale-bearing had become 
ineradicable. 

His secret antagonism to his young mistress 
remained unabated, curious to say. She was 
always kind in her manner; she never evinced 
distrust of him, though there were things which 
occasionally made her wonder at the unlimited 
confidence Wilfred placed in the boy; but 
against the successful rival of his beloved Si- 
gnorina . as he still regarded her . his heart re- 
mained hardened. Oddly enough, this peasant 
boy's indignation at her usurping a position 
which, in his estimation, was rightfully an- 
other's, was greatly heightened when he learnt 
her parentage. She was no better than he ; 
she was born of the people ; why should she 
have been raised to the nobility? What was 
there about her to justify such a choice? A 
slight, meek-mannered girl, how could she have 
been preferred to that goddess-like woman who 
seemed born to a position of command ? Why 
had his master been so blind, so mistaken? . 



30 POET AND PEER. 

for that he had been mistaken the keen-witted 
lad felt no hesitation in determining. He had 
opportunities for seeing more than anyone. 
No passing expression on the countenance of 
Wilfred ever escaped him. He marked and 
inwardly digested much. Yes, my lord had 
made a mistake. 

When one reflects how absolutely at the 
mercy of a clever servant one is . how very few 
can remain heroes to such . perhaps it is well to 
be careful that one's valet is a fool. 

The diflSculties of the young wife's position 
had been greatly aggravated by these crotchets 
of her husband's. But as long as they remained 
at Athelstone, where Mrs. Clove reigned supreme, 
things went on tolerably well. It was only in 
London, where her maid left her, after a fiery 
altercation with Lorenzo, that the domestic 
complications incident to a complete emancipa- 
tion from restraint began seriously to afflict 
Lady Athelstone, who felt much like a child 
lifted suddenly into a chariot drawn by horses 
in whose mouths is no bit, the infantine 



~1 



POET AND PEER. 31 

charioteer being enjoined to guide his course by 
the law of love alone. Since she had been at 
Brighton, she had enjoyed peace. The only 
horse was a docile one ; her new maid was 
silent and civil, but her antecedents were not 
such as to inspire unlimited confidence in the 
use she might make of the liberty accorded her. 
The fact is, Miss Staples came from a re- 
formatory. 

Mrs. Tullia Whiteside, a lady of whom we 
shall hear more presently, took a lively interest 
in the establishment in question, and it was she 
who had successfully urged Lord Athelstone to 
prove by his example that his desire to help 
those who were fallen was not an empty form 
of words. 

Wilfred went straight to his wife; repre- 
sented with all his persuasive force the case 
of this penitent Magdalene, anxious to be re- 
stored to respectabilility, but with the doors of 
all the Pharisees closed against her; and, of 
course, he prevailed. St. John, to whom 
Wilfred proudly related the story, expecting to 



82 POET AND PEER. 

meet with sympathy from a man who gave up 
his whole life to his poorer neighbours, said 
bluntly that he thought him wrong. 

" It is well meant, but it is not wise. You 
are young . your wife is young . and inexperi- 
enced in the world. In her innocence she will 
not detect whether this woman is good or bad ; 
whether she is really reformed or a hypocrite. 
The woman's past will almost certainly become 
known ; you ought to consider what the world 

will say, how " 

" I never consider what the world says." 
*'I said you ought. If you and your wife 
were thirty years older, you might brave 
public opinion. For Lady Athelstone's sake, 
with the tongues of a good-natured world ready 
to seize upon any strange departure from 
domestic usage, you should be careful. This 
may be a very good woman now ; I don't judge 
her. But it is not fit that she should be in con- 
stant attendance upon one so pure and simple 
and ignorant of evil as your wife. The best 
woman in the land would delight in serving 
her . and how many are starving I 'It is not 



POET AND PEER. 33 

meet to take the children's breads and to cast it 
Tinto the dogs.' " 

*'Well, and you remember the answer to 
that." 

" It has no application whatever in this case. 
You ask my opinion, and I give it. Your house 
is not one into which it is expedient to receive 
Magdalenes." 

The woman Staples, be it said at once, was a 
good-hearted, easy-tempered creature, who 
became attached to her mistress. It was hard- 
ly to be accounted her fault, if, with such a 
training, her standard of right and wrong, as 
will be seen hereafter, was not elevated or un- 
alterable. She considered herself as "un- 
fortunate ;" but her present principles of virtue 
were formed rather with relation to expediency, 
or retributive justice, than from hearty contri- 
tion. Thus it is to be feared that she chiefly 
deplored her past because it would make a 
respectable marriage difficult for her; and, as 
regarded that institution, she had a vague im- 
pression that a wife whose husband neglected 
her had a full right to be revenged. Dp to the 

VOL. III. D 



*M POET AND PEBR. 

present time, however, all that her mistress 
saw of the woman's conduct was in her 
favour. 



35 



CHAPTER III. 

Tlf RS. TULLIA WHITESIDE was a lady of 
-"-*. distinguisbad philanthropy, and what is 
termed **an enlarged mind." She had no 
prejudices; all men were alike to her, whatever 
they had done, provided it was done off the 
narrow line of conventionality. There was no 
form of delinquency she could not pardon : 
adhesion to the old faiths, acceptance of recog- 
nised truth, a dull respectability, being the only 
conditions of the human mind she could not 
tolerate. 

She was untiring, enthusiastic, eloquent. 
It was impossible to deny that she bad done 
some good. She had visited the most repellent 
haunts ; she had written upon the most un- 

d2 



36 POET AND PEER. 

savoury themes. It was, unfortunately, at the 
same time equally impossible to deny that her 
ill-considered impulsiveness, and her desire for 
domination^ had wrought considerable mischief. 
She was, of course, strong upon *' Women'a 
Bights ;" but it is to be feared that the cause, 
in its moderate appeal to public judgment^ 
suffered from her exposition. The onslaught of 
so reckless a champion could not but imperil 
institutions which even reformers prized; and 
people began to regard the theories over which 
she threw the eegis of her protection with mis- 
trust, if not with alarm. Her advocacy of the 
oppressed . or those she lashed herself into a 
belief were the oppressed . roused the admira- 
tion of some and the ridicule of others. But 
she was rich and generous ; and her receptions 
were crowded by a motley crew. Begicides and 
Boyalists (provided that the Boyalty was 
a deposed one), Oerman philosophers and 
American spiritualists, actresses of limited 
ability and almost universal benevolence, 
politicians of the narrowest, and divines of 
the broadest creed, were here met together. 



POET AND PEER. 37 

To such a Woman Lord Athelstone was sure 
to be more than welcome. His reputation^ his 
rank, his good looks, were doubtless points in 
his favour here, as they would have been in any 
other drawing-room; but what really distin- 
guished him, what constituted him a prize of 
the first magnitude to Mrs. Tullia Whiteside, 
was his daring disregard of all the canons of 
his class. A man wl^o could shock society as 
he had done, first by writing outrageous verses, 
and then by marrying a village school-teacher, 
must, indeed, be worth cultivating. 

He was introduced to her at the Winter 
Exhibition in the Grosvenor Gallery one day, 
shortly after he came to town. They sat upon 
a bench discussing Blake's pictures, which Wil- 
fred, as a poet, admired more than the lady did ; 
and from the tendencies of Art in the present 
day, they fell to more serious matters. Wilfred 
was surprised and interested to find that Mrs. 
Whiteside's views and his own coincided on so 
many points. He dined with her that evening, 
throwing over an engagement with some Philis- 
tines at his club, and thenceforward was a 



I 

I 



88 POET AND PEER. 

constant visitor in Fitzroy Square* She in- 
habited a fine old house^ dating from the early 
part of the last century, before the nobility 
deserted this quarter for comparatively poor 
residences further west. It was heterogene- 
ously furnished, with odds and ends from all 
parts of the world ; a picturesque confusion of 
form and colour, more pleasing to the eye of a 
painter than to that of a ^thrifty housewife ; for 
dirt reigned everywhere supreme. It could 
hardly be otherwise with such a household, 
composed of lady-helps, incompetent foreigners 
picked up out of the streets from charity, 
women who could get no "character" from 
their last places^ and presumably-reformed con- 
victs on leave of absence. 

Mr. Whiteside was so rarely seen that his 
very existence was doubted by many ; but the 
better-informed knew that he was '^ something 
connected with hides/' and that his business 
kept him chiefly in Russia. He made meteoric 
appearances every six months or so in Mrs. 
TuUia's drawing-room, where he comported 
himself more as a guest than as the master;: 



POET AND PEER. 89 

and, for the rest, accorded her his full confi- 
dence, and a considerable income to spend as 
she liked. 

His confidence, it may be said, was less mis- 
placed than his income. The money, if wisely 
applied, might probably have achieved more 
good ; but she never did anything which she 
would have cared to conceal from her husband 
or any other human being. She had a singu- 
larly open, benevolent face, with a vast fore- 
head, from which the hair, parted over one 
temple, was brushed away into a little demo- 

. 

cratic crop at the back of the head. She wore 
spectacles, and was generally attired in a black 
velvet jacket. She was tall^ and had a fine 
bust, white even teeth, which she showed a good 
deal, and a well-formed but capable-looking 
hand^ with which she habitually stroked her 
cheek as she talked. She never gave in to the 
fashion of trains ; even of an evening her dress 
barely touched the ground, which ill-disposed 
persons attributed to the fact that her chief 
physical attraction was a very neat foot. She 
called most people "my dear," and her large 



40 POET AND PEER. 

aympatbies made her so lenient to the errors 
incident to the flesh that the cynical Punchett 
nsed to declare she would take Beelzebub him- 
self to her bosom, and ** make allowances " for 
him. To this tendency was allied the ruling 
passion of being paramount in influence over 
everyone with whom she came into contact. 

Wilfred Athelstone was the individual on 
whom her energies were chiefly concentrated 
this spring. She looked that he should work 
wonders in the House of Lords in furtherance 
of various causes she had at heart, and that he 
should rouse the slumbering world to enthusi- 
asm for the same with his stirring verse. Her 
first efforts, as we have seen^ culminated in the 
introduction of Staples into the Athelstone 
household. This was followed by a poem which 
Wilfred wrote, chiefly at Mrs. TuUia's instiga- 
tion, and which she insisted upon having 
printed, and distributing broad-cast, as the pious 
do tracts. The Dowager Lady Athelstone 
received one by post, and shuddered. There 
stood her son's name at the bottom of these 
fiery couplets, which were headed : 



POET AND PEER. 41 

DOMESTIC SLAVERY. 

Wood-hewers and drawers of water I 

Not yet of their bondage rid, 
The wailings of son and of daughter 

Rise up, as their fathers^ did. 

By the bloody foam ye may see it, 

Their mouth with the bit is torn ; 
Their back is bowed . ^we will free it 

From the burdens too long borne. 

The law that of old was spoken, 

To-day shall it bind the land? 
The tables of stone are broken, 

And deliverance near at hand I 

It comes .yea, a voice has arisen 
Frq^ the wilderness, crying, " Repent I 

Open wide the door of the prison, 
Be the bondsmen in liberty sent I^' 

When the walls of the dungeon are riven, 

And the winds of despair set free, 
And the cry of souls that have striven, 

Break up, like the waves of the sea. > 

When Hagar shall be as Sarah, 

And there be no more tears 
Bitter as waters of Mara, 

Fed by reproach and fears . 

And each man be as his brother. 

And servitude only a name. 
And the light we lend one another, 

Be lovers sacrificial flame . 



42 POET AND PEER. 

Then their names shall be blessM in storj, 

Who lightened a burden of cares, 
And the honour, and power, and glory 

Of souls that are freed be theirs I 

Athelstoke. 

When the dowager read these lines, it seemed 
to her as if a firebrand had been dropped into the 
midst of her peaceful household. She showed 
them to the Bishop of Oporto, with tears in her 
eyes, when he called on her that day. That 
wise and bland prelate folded up the paper, and 
returned it unperturbed. 

" Your son is in favour of greater liberty of 
the subject. He thinks servants are not suf- 
ficiently considered . that the pact should not 
be one of money only, against manual labour 
. that, from the moment they become members 
of our homes, they should be regarded, in a 
sense, as our children, for whom we are, in a 
manner, answerable. Perhaps his poetical way 
of stating what he considers a wrong is . well, 
is a little violent . not quite wise, but he is right 
in the main, my dear Lady Athelstone . quite 
right." 

But^ though the dowager might in some 



POET AND PEER. 4? 

measure be tranquillized by her reverend friend^ 
the world at large regarded this, and similar 
outbursts of a levelling tendency, as proofs how 
**that poor fellow Athelstone's misalliance haa 
utterly ruined him." Fitzroy Square and the 
poisons of heterodoxy he drank in there at 
every pore were, as yet, unknown quantities in 
the popular calculation. It did not transpire for 
. some little time that, wliile his wife was absent 
at Brighton, he passed nearly every evening in 
the congenial circle of admirers to whom a 
democratic lord was a novel and very precious 
boon. 

Among these admirers, the only dangerous 
one, perhaps, to his wife's peace of mind wa& 
a lady of great personal attraction, who arrived 
from Germany shortly before Lady Athelstone's 
return to London. Madame de Waldeck was. 
an Englishwoman divorced from the Prussian 
she had married three or four years since, by 
mutual consent, and with that facility which the 
laws of that country afford. She thought of 
delivering a course of public lectures on this 
subject (with the laudable view of freeing the 



44 POET AND PEER. 

British mind from the swathing bands of preju- 
dice), and also one upon dress, her principles 
concerning which she practically illustrated in 
her own person. She held that a return to the 
simplicity of the ancient Greeks would be both 
becoming and economical, and, if she could only 
persuade the world of this^ she felt that she 
should enlist the sympathies of both sexes . the 
couturHres excepted. No doubt few but the vain- 
est women could be brought to believe that they 
would look as well in a peplum and cestus as Ma- 
dame de Waldeck, whose figure was symmetry 
itself. But the scale was more than weighed 
down, on the other hand, by the effect which 
this unimportant fact produced on the male 
mind. What was the use of stays, and furbe- 
lows, and other meretricious rubbish, when a 
woman could appear to such advantage in a 
simple statuesque robe ? 

Athelstone, like the rest of his sex, was not 
altogether proof against this influence, and that 
of adroit and subtle flattery from the lips of a 
fascinating woman. Mrs. Whiteside was Ma- 
dame de Waldeck's staunch friend and up- 



'^1 



POET AND PEER. 45 

holder; the latter was now an inmate of the 
house in Fitzroy Square. As regarded facili- 
tated divorce, Mrs. Tullia had not a doubt that 
it would be a blessing to the human race ; she 
introduced the subject whenever it was possi- 
ble, and spoke enthusiastically in its favour. 
She pressed tickets for her friend's lectures 
on this subject upon every visitor; it almost 
threatened to drive the lady-helps and reform- 
ed criminals from the field. As regarded Ma- 
dame de Waldeck's other crusade, Mrs. Tullia 
was not at all so warm. She would not, indeed, 
have objected to sandals, but she clung to her 
succinct garments, and felt a necessity for the 
sustaining power of which Madame de Wal- 
deck would have deprived her. On the whole, 
though she was tolerant of her friend's classical 
costume, she was inclined to think . sculpture 
not having preserved for us the eflSgy of a stout 
woman in a peplum . that the experiment would 
be dangerous, and she did not press the tickets^ 
for these lectures on her visitors. 

These were the friends whose acquaintance 
Lord Athelstone was desirous his wife should 



46 POET AND PEEK. 

make, and whose intimacy he looked that she 
hbu1d cultivate, on her return to London. 

A card of invitation to an evening party was 
awaiting her arrival. The dowager called for 
her daughter-in-law the following day, to intro- 
duce her to certain great ladies who had ex- 
pressed their willingness to receive the new- 
Lady Athelstone . a concession to the benefits 
of which Wilfred was haughtily blind, though 
his mother assured him it was ^^ a great thing/' 

*<But first," said Nellie, "I must drive to 
Fitzroy Square." 

** Fitzroy Square I What can you want there, 
my dear!" 

"Wilfred desired me to leave cards upon 
Mrs. Tullia Whiteside and Madame de Wal 
deck." 

**Mrs. Tullia Whiteside I Who on earth is 
she!" 

" Wilfred says she is a very delightful per- 
son." 

** I am sure I hope so. 1 know nothing of 
her. And Madame de Waldeck . that is the 
name of the woman I see placarded about as 



POET AND PEER. 47 

giving lectures. I have a horror of a woman 
giving lectures or putting herself prominently 
forward in anj way. These must be some of 
his revolutionary friends, I am afraid. Poor 
dear fellow I it is very sad his having got into 
such hands. You must work hard to counter- 
act this influence, my dear . ^you really must. 
I am not quite sure . I hardly think . that I 
should call tipon these women." 

" Surely you would not have me disobey 
Wilfred, Lady Athelstone ?" 

** Well . no . not generally, of course ; but 
you might put it off . I really think you might 
put off this visit. You see, in your position, 
you must be so careful. The world not un- 
naturally attributes to you this . this increase 
of democracy in dear Wilfred's opinions. They 
think that his marriage has alienated him from 
his own class, and that you encourage his asso- 
ciating with people of another sphere. You 
must do all in your power to prove that such is 
not the case." 

Nellie flushed to the roots of her hair. 

''I quite understand; but the world must 



48 POET AND PEER. 

think as it likes. I will not disobey Wilfred.*' 
"Well, leave yonr card, then, my dear; but 
let it go no further. I am almost sure, now I 
come to think about it, that this Tullia White- 
side is the woman who first put those dreadful 
ideas into Wilfred's head about servants . 
wanting us to treat them like ourselves^ setting 
class against class, and doing a world of mis- 
chief.'' 

Nellie thought it wiser to be silent touching 
that invitation. She would be required to go 
to Mrs. Whiteside's party, she felt sure. There 
was no use in discussing the point with Wil- 
fred's mother. It was her first experiment at 
 tact." 



49 



CHAPTER IV. 

rpHE assembly in Mrs. TuUia Whiteside's 
.*. rooms, -when young Lady Athelstone 
entered them with her husband the following 
evening, struck her as remarkable. To anyone 
used to society, the aspect of the crowd would 
have seemed still more strange. There Were 
none of the elements of an ordinary party. 
The complacent chaperon, in matronly and 
unobtrusive attire ; the golden youths, towards 
whom the eager eyes of countless maidens are 
turned . maidens, all immaculately dressed, and 
as like each other as sheep in a pen ; the con- 
ventional wits, and married flirts and gossips, 
and professional beauties, and nondescript per- 

VOL. ni. E 



50 POET AND PEER. 

sons who make up the crowd of a Londoa 
drawing-room, . where were they I 

In their place were a number of women who 
were all supposed to have " done something/* . 
women^ mostly elderly, but without caps, and, 
in two instances^ with long grey tresses hang- 
ing far down their backs ; politicians of the 
wildest and most advanced school ; a Fenian or 
two ; a bricklayer who had blossomed out into 
oratory, and was supposed to have founded a 
School ; destructionists with trim whiskers ; 
philosophers with capacious brows and strong* 
soled shoes ; painters and poetasters with dis- 
traught locks; and three or four Communist 
refugees. There were, besides these, a gentle- 
man who was called ** the General," because he 
had i^erved in Garibaldi's army, and still wore a 
red shirt, and a fiery denunciator of the Estab- 
lished Church, who once held a livings had 
abandoned it for his conscience's sake, and had 
sought refuge in Bome, and now lectured 
eloquently in favour of nothing in particular, 
and had a large following. Furthermore, there 
were a few Americans, and a few younger 



POET AND PEER. 51 

women, some of whom had adopted the learned 
professions, as might be inferred from the rigid 
severity of their costume, while some pursued 
the flowery paths of light literature, and were 
of more festive appearance. One lady in span- 
gles, with a paste star upon her forehead, was 
said to be an amateur actress of such capacity 
that a London manager had offered to engage 
her, if she would make the stage her profes- 
sion. But, as it transpired that he had valued 
her abilities at thirty shillings a week, it seemed 
doubtful whether she was deterred from accept- 
ing the offer by "family considerations alone," 
as she averred. 

Conspicuous among these, "like a snowy 
dove trooping with crows," stood Madame de 
Waldeck, attired in white drapery, her arms 
bared to the shoulder, where the robe was fast- 
ened by brooches of Greek design. She wore no 
gloves, nor was there a single ring upon the 
long taper fingers that held a sprig of myrtle. 
A gold armlet, fashioned like a snake, high 
above the right elbow, and a fillet of the same 
material through the dark hair which bound 

e2 



52 POET AND PEER. 

her classically-shaped .head^ were her only orna* 
ments. She was undeniably a very striking- 
looking woman, and moved with ease and 
grace. One felt what an effect she would make 
upon the platform or the stage. 

Her only glaring personal defect was con- 
cealed by the folds of her long drapery. Her 
enemies whispered that her feet were of 
elephantine dimensions, and her ankles of 
preternatural bulk, but few persons had ever 
succeeded in seeing them. The face was a 
curious one, very attractive to some, and almost 
repulsive to others. "A sa physionomie Ton 
voit que c*est une femme compliqu^e/' said a 
French painter, looking at her. The mouth 
was rather hard ; the eyes were merciless . 
glittering eyes that could not be fathomed, and 
were never taken by surprise ; the nose, hand- 
some in profile, was somewhat too thick in full 
face ; the smile, the voice, the manner, were all 
most winning. Her self-confidence, without 
amounting to unfeminine boldness, was amaz- 
ing. Nothing seemed capable of disconcerting 
her; her colour never varied, her voice never 



POET AND PEER. 53 

trembled, unless she meant it to do so. She 
took as much pains, perhaps, in most cases, more, 
to captivate women than men. Situated as she 
was, she was too clever not to know the enor- 
mous value of having the moral support of her 
own sex. She was generally successful; men 
more easily distrusted her than women ; but some 
few women did instinctively shrink from her 
At first sight, and never could conquer their 
repugnance. 

Among these was young Lady Athelstone. 

Mrs. Whiteside came forward with extended 
hands and a beaming smile. 

'* I am rejoiced to make your acquaintance, 
my dear Lady Athelstone. I have long desired 
to know you : first, as the wife of Wilfred Athel- 
fitone, a name that will be revered hereafter by 
^very lover of humanity ; secondly, as one 
whom our great poet chose from among the 
peopUy regardless of the prejudices of caste. It 
is this that will make your society doubly preci- 
ous to us all here. We love the dear people . 
the very smell of honest toil is sweet to us.-" 
and this admirable woman sniffed the air, as 



M POET AND PEER. 

though the aroma of labour were borne to her 
from the vicinity of the oratorical bricklayer. 
Nellie, who was not generally afflicted with 
self-consciousness, felt exceedingly uncomfort- 
able. Her innate good breeding shrank from 
this familiarity. She was anxious to please 
and to like Wilfred's friends ; but she could not 
simulate an enthusiasm she did not feel; and 
the odd manners of the strange-looking men 
who stood round, staring at her with an 
admiration unrestricted by the laws of ordinary 
society, made her shy. Wilfred had left her 
side, and was talking to the lady dressed like a 
statue^ who now advanced, twirling the myrtle- 
sprig in her hand, with her glittering eyes fixed 
in keen scrutiny upon the young wife, while 
she smiled in reply to some remark of the 
husband's. 

" This is Madame de Waldeck, Nellie." 
Madame de Waldeck felt the hand shiver 
slightly, which she pressed with so much 
warmth ; and the sweet, shy eyes fell beneath 
her own. 

"I hope we shall become great friends,"' 



POET AND PEER, 55 

said the lady, in a silvery voice. Nellie mur- 
mured something ; she scarcely knew what ; her 
new acquaintance became voluble in personal 
compliment. She turned to Wilfred. 

" You did not say half enough about your 
wife's beauty, Lord Athelstone. Her head is 
like that o Atheni. And she has what the 
French call *la ligne.' So few have it. She 
should adopt my costume ; it would suit her to 
perfection. Most of the women here have 
figures like battered wooden dolls . or else pin- 
cushions of saw-dust . no ease, no pliancy of 
pose . so un-Greekl And I am afraid it is 
hopeless," she added, with a sigh. " Unless I 
can effect a revolution from the artifices of 
fashion, the next generation will be no better- 
stiff and stilted puppets. . Do you like my robe 
and peplum f " 

" It looks very well on you," replied Nellie, 
timidly. But Wilfred's eyes were upon her; 
she felt that she was expected to say some- 
thing more. *' It must be very difficult to make 
it hang so beautifully." 

''Not at all. It is cut- like this, you see. 



56 POET AND PEER. 

Nothing can be simpler. And it is just pinned 
here. and here. Let me bring yon one to- 
morrow, and try it on. Yon would be quite 
charming in it." 

'' Thank you. I have not a figure like you 
. and my arms are thin . I should not 
dare." 

She felt relieved at this moment to catch 
sight of a familiar face, radiant with smiles, 
approaching. 

'^Oh my, Lady Athelstonel This is un- 
expected. I am ever so glad to see you. I 
heard you were poorly, and gone right away 
somewhere. I wanted to meet you again ever 
so much, and Lord Athelstone too.'* 

Miss Decker, who was the only woman in 
the room dressed . a little over-dressed, per- 
haps . as a Parisian, and who carried a costly 
bouquet in her hand, seemed genuinely glad to 
greet her Boman acquaintances. 

"I have travelled right round since we 
parted, and been twice to Amurrica and back, 
and up the Nile, and to Jerusalem, where I had 
a real good time, and to Constantinople. In 



POET AND PEER. 57 

ehort, for the last fourteen months IVe lived on 
the sea or in the cars, and I'm just about glad 
to rest awhile and enjoy a little social inter- 
course. These are vurry interesting assemblies. 
Do you know my eminent countryman, Josiah 
Spark I That's he with the abnormal develop- 
ment of brow. He's a lovely man ; he offered 
me a dinner to-night, and bunched me too. He 
lives at the 'Alexandra/ like a prince . the 
dinner was exQUisite . he is awfully rich ; and 
yet that man rose from nothing . all by his 
brains 1" 

Nellie looked at the man with the abnormal 
development ; he had such a kindly expression 
of face that she felt little Miss Decker's happi- 
ness would be tolerably secure, if the dinner 
and the bouquet should prove to be precursors 
to an " offer" of something lesft perishable. She 
did not know how little significance such atten- 
tions have among that hospitable and generous 
people. Wilfred, with Madame de Waldeck, 
had moved to a sofa a little distance off. 

" Do you know Madame de Waldeck well ?" 
asked Lady Athelstone of her loquacious friend. 



58 POET AND PEER. 

 Why, no. I guess she's a difficult womaa 
to know weU^^ responded the little American^ 
with a twinkling eye. " Perhaps her husband 
knew her well, and that's about all that ever 
did." 

" She is a widow, then f ' 

" Not a bit. She's divorced. She's ever so 
strong upon divorce, you know. She lectures 
on it. She wants to go to Amurrica . but it's 
nothing new there. It's common enough id 
some of the States." 

'*What is common? I do not understand. 
Did she . do nothing wrong!" 

Miss Decker laughed. 

.* I daresay plenty ; but that wasn't why she 
was divorced, if you mean that. It was by 
mutual consent. You can't do that in England 
yet ; but she wants to get it made the law." 

Her hearer looked distressed. **She won't 
succeed, I hope ?" 

**I don't know. She's vurry clever, is 
Madame de Waldeck. She gets round most 
people. There is quite a number of women 
who are devoted to her. TuUia Whiteside 



POET AND PEER. 59 

believes in her. Josiah Spark's as 'cute as most 
men, and lie believes in her. That man there^ 
waving his hand, he's been in the Protestant 
ministry, and in a Catholic monastery, and now 
he believes in nothing, they tell me; but he 
seems to believe in Madame de Waldeck. Any- 
how, he listens to her. And your husband 
believes in her . one can see that." 

Nellie felt an unaccountable antipathy to the 
"handsome lady in classic robes ; but her faith in 
her husband's judgment, insight, and wisdom 
was yet unshaken. 

" Wilfred is so large-minded. He recognizes 
good where others do not ; and then he is so 
charitable in his opinions. He always makes 
allowances." 

" I guess he doesn't think she requires allow- 
ances," laughed Miss Decker. Then, with a 
sudden change of tone, she said . " Have you 
seen Miss Brabazon since she is fixed up in 
England ?" 

" No, I have not." 

" I met her on the street two weeks ago ; but 
she comes scarcely any into London. She in- 



<0 POET AND PEER. 

habits a very eligible location in the neighbour- 
hood. That*8 rather a different style of woman 
from Madame de Waldeck/* 

" Oh !" responded Nellie, warmly, ** no one in 
the world was ever like Miss Brabazon." 

"That's why she don't marry. Women of 
fiuperior intelligence rarely marry." Nellie 
smiled; the remark was so naively rnde, and 
intended so entirely to applj to the speaker. 

** To be unmarried/' returned the young wife, 
** must be far better than to be wrongly mar- 
ried . to exchange no vows better than to wish 
them unmade, like this poor lady." 

** Well, anyhow, it don't stop at wishing in 
her case. She tries marriage ; it don't answer ; 
and then she tries something else. Miss Braba- 
zon will never do that. If she marries, she'll 
atick to the man till all's blue. Do you know, 
we all thought in Rome she would marry Lord 
Athelstone. I'd have bet my bottom dollar on 
it, at one time." 

Nellie was spared from the awkwardness of 
finding something to reply to this by Mrs. 
Whiteside's bringing up a little wizened man at 



POET AND PEER. 61 

that moment, whom she begged to introduce to 
Lady Athelstone. 

**One of our chief political lights, . ^very 
amusing, . and, moreover, an ardent admirer of 
beauty," she whispered ; then continued, aloud, 
" You prophesy great things of Lord Athelstone,* 
do you not, Mr. Punchett? Mr. Punchett thinks 
he will go far ^ and we sadly need such men among 
the nobility . men who are not afraid to cast 
a^vay the chains of prejudice and the manacles of 
superstition. Men of genius in the high social 
position of Wilfred Athelstone can do much to 
liberate the world," added Mrs. TuUia, expand- 
ing her chest, ^' and we look to them for it. I 
hope you go with us, my dear? I hope you 
encourage your husband . that you will ever 
urge him onward. A woman's voice can do so 
much. Our responsibilities are very great- 
very great indeed." . Here she stroked her faco 
reflectively. . "There is no limit to what we 
can effect, if we only deUrmint to accomplish it. 
I am proud to say 1 made him write those mag* 
nificent lines of his on * Domestic Slavery 1' He 
has promised me to recite them by-and-by ; but 



62 POET AND PEER. 

we "Will not begia with that . we will keep that 
for the bouquet^ my dear." 

Herewith she moved on. The wizened man's 
conversation was not much to the young 
woman's taste. Some of his wit was . ^perhaps 
fortunately . ^lost upon her; but she felt the 
cynicism of his tone, and his flattery was of a 
kind that can only be pleasing to a very silly 
woman, being at the expense of her intelligence. 
She was glad when the lady with the paste star ^ 
on her forehead began reciting, with mellifluous 
monotony, ** The May Queen." The poem was 
a great favourite of Lady Athelstone's, and 
always recalled to her her cottage home, her 
dead mother, and the far-oS days that were so 
dear to her. She liked to listen to it now better 
than to the wizened man. 

" Horrid trash 1" he declared, when the lady 
had finished. "*If you're waking, call me 
early,' indeed I Why, it's enough to send one 
to sleep 1" 

A Frenchman, who was understood to be an 
alien, on compulsion, from his native land, was 
then asked to perform his famous imitations of 



POET AND PEER. 63 

the live-stock of a farm-yard. He sang a song 
in which the crowing of cocks, and quacking of 
ducks, the barking of dogs, and the braying of 
donkeys, the neighing, and lowing, and baaing, 
and bleating of every quadruped familiar to the 
bucolic ear were introduced ; and the reproduc- 
tion of those unmusical sounds afforded the 
same sort of pleasure to many of the assembled 
company that a Dutch picture of two drunken 
tboors, or of an old woman washing a cabbage, 
does to persons who would not be entranced 
by either spectacle in real life. 

After this followed some pianoforte playing, 
to which no one, not even Mrs. TuUia herself, 
thought it necessary to listen. To this ac- 
companiment several introductions to Lady 
Athelstone took place. They were all persons 
of mark, she was assured : an eminent painter 
who desired ardently to paint her portrait ; a 
writer in the Blackwall Reviewj who purposed 
contributing her biography to that periodical 
(the unusual features of the story would be 
fraught with interest) ; and two ladies of mascu- 
line intellect, to whom a peasant peeress was 



64 POET AND PEER. 

a gratifyiDg subject to be worked upon, and one 
out of which considerable profit ought to be 

made. 

Nellie felt bewildered. All this talk was 
pitched in too high a key for her voice to i-e- 
spond without an unnatural strain. She was 
not used to exaggerated compliment, which a 
woman of the world, if she is also a woman 
of sense, takes for what it is worthy a ball of 
thistle-down, to be lightly blown away; and^ 
the conversation of Mary Goldwin and Hubert 
St. John had not prepared her for the tone of 
this '^ earnest and intellectual society." Wil- 
fred's wild denunciations, to right and left, she 
regarded, half unconsciously, as the aberrations 
of genius. She listened ; she accepted some 
portion of nearly all that he said as true ; her 
fine instinct, without argument, without reason- 
ing almost, rejected the rest. Here, however^ 
wei*e a set of men and women who seemed 
mostly to be as dissatisfied as he with the con- 
dition of everything in this world . except them- 
selves. Had she read Faust, she would probably 
have asked with him, 



POET AND PEER. 65 

" Seems nothing ever right to you on earth?" 

The ladies of masculine intellect troubled her 
much with questions, and with requests . which 
might almost be termed demands, they were so 
imperative . that she would sign certain peti- 
tions, attend certain meetings, and vigorously 
support certain measures they were bent on 
imposing upon the world. Their jargon fright- 
ened her ; she timidly declared that she had as 
.yet no fixed opinions on many of these sub- 
jects. It was a relief when Mrs. Tullia cried 
" Hush 1" in a loud, clear voice, and Wilfred . 
dear Wilfred, looking so noble^ so unlike every- 
one else present . stood up, and with emphatic 
declamation spoke his verses on '' Domestic 
Slavery." The enthusiasm with which they 
were received justified his yielding to the gene- 
ral demand that he would favour the company 
with something else. " Such a rare privilege," 
as Mrs. Tullia said, '^ to hear a poet recite his 
own poetry." 

Upon the subject of this poem Nellie had 
suflFered a good deal. Her mother-in-law had 
bewailed the spirit in which it was written ; St. 
VOL. in, F 



66 POET AND PEER. 

John had said openly he thought it calculated 
to do more harm than good; a scoffing criticism 
of it had appeared in one of the weekly papers. 
Yet the sympathy with what seemed to him to 
be oppressed appealed strongly to Nellie, and 
the lines had a ring which was beautiful in the 
young wife's ears. Therefore was the applause 
sweet to her. Whatever some might think^ 
there were those who appreciated her Wilfred's 
verses at their just value. 

The poem Athelstone next recited was new, 
even to Nellie, and^ unfortunately^ was much 
less to her taste. It was a rabid attack upon 
Church and State. He foamed at the mouth 
in his denunciations of *' priestcraft/' in his 
Cassandra-like prophecies that the hour was 
at hand when all the formulsB of religion 
and all ecclesiastical authority should be set 
at naught. The reign of liberty . which 
meant the reign of tyranny over those who 
desired to cling to their old beliefs . was to 
follow. Then should Royalties be at an end, 
and class-distinctions loyelled in the dust, 



POET AND PEER. 67 

and the lion should .lie down with the lamb 
{which probably meant that the lamb should 
nibble up the lion's food), and the prison doors 
be open^ and the world should for the first time 
learn the full meaning of those words, '' Peace 
and good-will to men." 

 

There was nothing new in this. It had been 
better said by abler men a hundred times 
before. But the swing of vehement verse " al- 
most persuadeth " many who are proof against 
sober prose, and the audience . even some who 
did not hold sudh views . were ready to be 
carried away by a handsome young lord, advo- 
cating equality in fiery numbers, and ready to 
pull down the little pedestal upon which Provi- 
dence had set him, even if in so doing he de- 
molished edifices of more enduring utility. 

The enthusiasm was great. Madame de 
Waldeck clasped her hands above her head in 
an ecstasy, but Nellie felt, none the less, dis- 
tressed. Whenever he spoke to her in this 
strain, she begged him to desist. She had 
hoped that he would never put forth these 

f2 



68 POET AND PEER. 

opinioDS, which she felt confident he would not 
hold through life. And now he had committed 
himself to them, as he had committed himself 
before to sentiments which his better nature 
regretted. 

She heard the verses praised on every side, 
and she heard, almost in the same breath, things 
she had been taught to venerate since child- 
hood slightingly or patronizingly spoken of. 
Mrs. Tullia said the Bible was a collection of 
very beautiful myths ; it also contained some 
fine poetry. It had done a great deal of harm, 
of course . had propagated a vast amount of 
error; but there were portions that, if freed 
from superstition, were calculated to benefit 
mankind. Some one else doubted this ; all that 
was good was taken from the Koran, he said. 
Another declared that Nature, whose wise laws 
were only beginning to be understood, was his 
only god, her dictates those alone which he 
obeyed. Among these people the old land- 
marks seemed to be all swept away. Science^ 
research, philosophy had destroyed faith. Who 
believed in religion now as religion was fifty 



POET AND PEER. 69 

years ago? None but the ignorant poor. It 
was time their eyes were opened. The young 
wife went home saddened. 

Some weeks afterwards (she had been study- 
ing Italian sedulously since she was at Rome) 
fihe came upon an epigram of Giusti's, which re- 
called this party of destructionists. 

" II Buonsenso, che gik fa capo-scuola, 
Ora in parecchie scuole ^ morto aff atto : 
La Scienza, sua figliuola, 
L'uccise, per veder' com' era fatto !" 



70 



CHAPTER V. 

TT is probable that if  the world ".that world 
-*. which the Dowager Lady Athelstone regard- 
ed with respect, and her son with contempt . had 
shnt its doors, at this time, against the beauti- 
ful young woman whose first appearance at 
Derwentwater House made a considerable stir, 
the best side of Wilfred's nature, no less than 
his combativeness, would have been roused; 
and he would very seldom have left her. As 
it was, a thing not without precedent came to 
pass. The small county magnates round Athel- 
stone had looked upon her as an unfit associate 
for their wives and daughters: some of the 
greatest of London ladies received her with an 
effusion which made cynics like Mr. Punchett^ 



POET AND PEER. 71 

smile bitterly. She was " a new thing," and 
might become " the fashion," it was evident, if 
she were so minded. But those who would 
have set her up as a rival sovereign to the pro- 
fessional beauty of the day were disappointed. 
Success only afforded her pleasure as long as it 
did so to Wilfred ; and with him it was short- 
lived. The difficulties of the position once 
conquered, he had no taste for parading his 
wife in crowded drawing-rooms. She was duly 
presented at Court, he took her to a State 
Concert, and to one or two of the great Liberal 
houses; and then, despite his mother's en- 
treaties, he declined to go into any more 
fashionable crowds. 

The dowager was much exercised as to what 
she ought to do, under the circumstances. Her 
son gave his wife full liberty to accompany her 
mother-in-law wherever she went. Was it 
wiser to secure Nellie's position by letting her 
be seen everywhere, and thus, by degrees, per- 
haps effect Wilfred's return into the fold of 
good society ? or to proclaim at once the inex- 
pediency of a beautiful young woman's going 



72 POET AND PEER. 

about Tf^ithout her husband? She sought ad- 
vice of several of her friends ; and, in the per- 
plexity caused bj opposed counsels, was finally 
guided by the Bishop of Oporto, who said, 

'^ If he is willing to remain at home, my dear 
lady, by all means do nothing to separate the 
young people." 

But remaining at home was what Athelstone 
showed now no inclination for. There were 
men-gatherings after dinner to which he was 
constantly going, when he did not attend the 
House of Lords, and end the evening by driving 
to Fitzroy Square for a cup of tea. He and 
Nellie never now passed an evening alone. 
Even on Sundays, the day on which she looked 
forward to a monopoly of his society, they 
were not much together. He never accom- 
panied her to church. Occasionally he went 
into the City to listen to a lecture upon '' Possi- 
bilities," . for such the invitation to consider as 
tentative all theories, doctrines, and beliefs, 
concerning our origin and future, might be 
termed. He sometimes walked with her in the 
afternoon, but more often paid visits alone, and 



POET AND PEER. 73 

he always invited friends to dinner. She began 
to feel that she was nothing in her husband's 
life. He was invariably kind, constantly de- 
sirous that she should be " improved " by some 
lecture, or democratic meeting, or by intercourse 
with the enlightened, whether male or female : 
solicitous for her health, lavish in expenditure 
for her comfort. But the companionship of old 
days, the sweet interchange of thought between 
master and pupil, between lover and mistress^ 
between husband and wife, was at an end. Her 
life during this spring might be described as the 
gradual awakening from a dream. 

Some have the capacity of sleeping on when 
the uncurtained sunrise pours down upon their 
closed eyelids ; others, with every desire to do 
60, and to shut out the fierce truth of daylight, 
find it impossible. Of that number was the 
worldly-ignorant young wife. She was not a 
fool, who could delude herself into the belief 
that this change was due solely to the engross- 
ing interests and pursuits of a busy London life. 
The hard reality dawned on her . her dream 
was at an end. 



74 POET AND PEER. 

During the day now she scarcely saw him for 
ten minutes alone. At night he either sat up 
writing, or he was at his club, or with some of 
his friends, for hours after she was in bed. He 
rose proportionately late. She breakfasted 
alone. A cup of tea was taken to him while he 
dressed, a couple of hours later ; and, hj this 
time, there was generally a file of persons in 
the hall waiting to see him. His interviews 
with these . chiefly belonging to the "great 
unwashed" class . occupied most part of the 
morning : and it happened more than once that 
he hurried out to an appointment without even 
having seen Nellie. She never looked injured, 
or even patient; her bright smile always wel- 
comed him ; neither he, nor his mother, nor 
anyone, 4^ave Hubert St. John, guessed what 
she sufiered. He could not help it, she said to 
herself; her society was insufficient to him. 
He was a man whose affections required to be 
dominated by intellectual influence, and she 
had none. There was one who, if he had 
married her^ would have possessed this for 



POET AND PEER. 75 

good ; and there was one^ alas I now who she 
feared might possess it for evil. 

No day passed without his seeing Madame 
de Waldeck. To do her justice, she had striven 
hard to become intimate with Lady Athelstone ; 
but Nellie's instinctive dread had increased, 
rather than diminished, at each interview ; and 
the clever lady, who piqued herself on overcom- 
ing the prejudices of her own sex, was incensed 
at finding her advances met with passive resist- 
ance at the hands of this low-born and common- 
minded young person. Had it been otherwise, 
her own interests might possibly have led to her 
adopting a different line of conduct with respect 
to Wilfred. As it was, she had nothing to gain 
by refraining from making a catspaw of him. 

The logic of events induced St. Joho, during 
this time, to revoke the decision ho had come 
to before returning to London. He saw that 
Lady Athelstone was in need of a true friend 
on whose judgment she could lean, and that, 
in her perplexities, she turned naturally to him. 
She avoided all discussions as to Wilfred's 



76 POET AND PEER. 

actions, but not so as to principles which were 
naturally repellent to her, but which her hus- 
band urged her to adopt. St. John persuaded 
himself, therefore, that his constant visits to 
Whitehall Gardens were no longer to be re- 
garded as a dangerous pleasure which it be- 
came him to shun, but rather as a duty which 
it would be cowardly to shirk. He hated the 
whole set of people into whose clutches Wilfred 
had fallen. He could hardly speak of Mrs. 
TuUia Whiteside's mischievous extravagance 
with common patience. Of Madame de Wal- 
deck he conceived such abhorrence that he did 
not trust himself to speak at all. He watched 
Wilfred's growing subservience to her will, 
though he never breathed a suspicion of it to 
the young wife. Only, when asked by the 
latter whether he admired that clever lady, he 
replied, shortly, '*Not at all." 

" Wilfred wished me to like her ... I wish I 
could." 

" The less you see of her the better, in my 
opinion." And then he turned the conversa- 
tion abruptly into another channel. 



POET AND PEER. 77 

It was not till the Academy Soiree that 
Wilfred and Miss Brabazon met; and that 
was more than two months after the Athel- 
stones came to town. Sylvia went into no 
society, owing to her mother having been laid 
up with rheumatism ever since the winter ; and 
the Athelstones had not driven down to Barnes, 
though St. John, as we know, had given Wil- 
fred the Brabazons' address. Lady Athelstone 
had one day, in the dowager's presence, sug- 
gested doing so, but Wilfred made no response. 
When he had left the room, which he did ab- 
ruptly, his mother said, 

** I do not wonder at his not wishing to re- 
new the acquaintance. He suffered very much 
on Miss Brabazon's account. I consider that 
she behaved extremely ill, giving him every 

encouragement, and then If she had not 

done so " 

Here she broke off a second time ; but, though 
apparently incoherent, there was no difficulty 
in supplying the context to this speech. Nellie 
coloured, but made no reply ; she never men- 
tioned Miss Brabazon's name from that day. 



78 POET AND PEEK. 

The only member of the Athelstone household 
^ho had visited Sylvia two or three times, was 
Lorenzo. He would have talked unreservedly of 
his master's concerns, but that she stopped him. 
Still it was impossible to check his volubility 
altogether^ and he had the conviction of a 
common nature that it must* be gratifying to 
his auditor to learn that my lord was restless 
at home, and too plainly dissatisfied in his 
marriage. He suggested, though he never 
actually formulated this in words. Madame de 
Waldeck's name frequently dropped from him, 
and so did Hubert St. John's, as Lady Athel- 
stone's constant visitor. Sylvia Brabazon was 
startled ; she could but think that the boy, for 
flome reason or other, saw things with jaundiced 
eyes. Only fourteen months 1 It could not have 
come to this. She understood his avoidance of 
her : perhaps it was better so ; still her pride 
was hurt : she could not but feel wounded at 
the neglect of an act of common courtesy to- 
wards her mother. 

Madame de Surville was in England for a 
few days, and Briggs, whose big picture of 



POET AND PEER. 79 

** The Rape of the Sabines " on the walls of the 
Academy had met with considerable success, 
tempered with reprobation, had sent Sylvia 
some tickets for the soiree. She had a curiosity 
to see it, and persuaded her old friend to break 
through her rule and accompany her. 

Thus it came to pass that, in the course of 
the evening, the two ladies, escorted by Briggs, 
were standing together in the second room 
when Professor Spooner, with a dissatisfied 
condition of mouth, and spectacles which 
flashed depreciation on all around, approached 
them. 

** What do you think of the Academy this 
year 1" asked Miss Brabazon. 

" Reckless, when not utterly ignoble in aim," 
he replied, shaking his head. '* I see nothing 
wholly commendable but that small picture 
there upon the ground, brushed by the hem of 
your garment . hung, in the insolent ignorance 
of the committee, where its modest truth and 
faithful endeavour are overlooked. Stoop down ; 
examine the worm-eaten cabbage in the right 
corner ; observe the humility, the sorrowful 



80 POET AND PEER. 

obedience to Nature's law of decay in the 
patient following of the canker's path through 
the leaf. The mind, rightly attuned, reads in 
it a homily, far beyond the pomp of perfect 
fruit and flawless flower." 

" It is very carefully painted, certainly," said 
Sylvia. 

" It is dreadfully ugly 1" sighed Madame 
Barbara. 

" There is nothing ugly in Nature but what 
is base/' rejoined the professor, casting a 
mournful glance askance at Madame Barbara. 
** Sensuality is base," . here his eye rested for 
an instant on Briggs, . "foulness and tumult 
are base ; but there is no baseness here ; this is 
a sweet parable. Here is the grass of the field, 
which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the 



oven." 



"No one casts cabbages into ovens, Spooner. 
Go to the school of cookery," laughed Briggs. 

"Full of infinite and beautiful suggestion," 
continued the professor, heedless of the imper- 
tinent interruption, "is the track of the worm 
that has eaten his way through the leaf. the 



POET AND PEER. 81 

record of his persistent course, through good 
report and bad report. The leaf was made for 
him, as it was made for us. Are we not all 
worms ? There is a noble unsightliness in this 
parable which " 

But Sylvia heard no more. At that moment, 
through the doorway of the third room, her eyes 
fell upon two figures; the one was Wilfred 
Athelstone, the other a tall, classically-draped 
lady who leant upon his arm. 

"There's Lord Athelstone," said Briggs, 
" and that is Madame de Waldeck . the woman 
who wants to simplify dress and matrimony. 
She loosens both. Ha I ha I" 

Sylvia turned away, and appeared to be 
engrossed in contemplation of the small 
" Tadema " before her. But Wilfred had seen 
her ; and, after a momentary hesitation, he con- 
ducted his companion to a sofa, and left her 
there, saying he saw a friend to whom he must 
speak. Madame de Waldeck's quick eyes 
noticed that he flushed, and that his manner 
was nervous. She watched the meeting with 
curiosity. Madame de Surville and Briggs had 

VOL. in. G 



82 POET AND PEER. 

walked on a few paces. The tall, slight womaD, 
not unlike the great white lily that was held by 
a band of diamonds in her hair, received him 
with a calmness which did not seem altogether 
unstudied to the accomplished actress who 
looked on. Miss Brabazon affected no surprise ; 
neither did she evince pleasure or resentment ; 
her countenance was inscrutable, as her frame of 
mind would have been incomprehensible, to the 
person who sought to read it. Athelstone, on 
the other hand, coloured, and looked ill at ease, 
fie sought to conceal this by an attempt to 
swagger ; he talked more rapidly and gesticu- 
lated more unnecessarily than usual; he held 
his head high, and tried to give back to those 
deep, unfathomable eyes look for look. But 
Madame de Waldeck saw his eyelids quiver; 
saw, through the thin coating of effrontery, the 
sore reality of wounded vanity, and the irrita- 
tion of an unwonted effort at self-assertion. 

" That must be the woman I have heard of 
who had such an influence over him. She 
jilted him, they say, which made him mairy 
that idiot. Well^ in spite of it, I can see he 



POET AND PEER. 83 

loves her still. She is handsomer than I am. 
If she chose it, I should be nowhere. But she 
does not choose it, and never will," was the 
satisfactory conclusion at which Madame de 
Waldeck arrived. 

**And you are not very much bored in 
England?" he asked, quickly, after the first 
greetings had been interchanged. "You re- 
main here, for the present, as a matter of duty, 
I conclude ? for Mrs. Brabazon must hate it." 

" No ; we have never known what it is to 
have a home ; and we both like it. My mother 
is tired of wandering about always. Without 
roots, one attaches oneself to nothing." 

" What on earth can she find to amuse her at 
Barnes ?" 

*'The housekeeping, the poultry -yard, the 
garden . everything. Then, generally one or 
two of my mother's old friends are staying with 
us." 

" That can't be lively for you. Why don't 
you come and live in London ?" 

" In London one lives for one's acquaintances 

. out of it one lives for one's friends. We are 

g2 



84 POET AND PEER. 

near enough for all who care to see us to come 
down. The only thing I really miss in Eng- 
land is light ; and in London you have even lesa 
than we." 

" But surely you miss your artistic surround- 
ings . and your interesting society at Rome? 
Ordinary society in this country of shams and 
snobbism is unendurable." 

** It may be ; I know nothing of it. I hate 
crowds anywhere. I suppose they are much 
the same in Loudon as in Rome. As to Art, it 
has far more vitality here than in Italy, where it 
is only the bones of the past galvanized. And 
for society," she added, smiling, " in nine case& 
out of ten I find that of my books more inter- 
esting than that of men." 

" You would not say so if you knew some of 
my friends. The only society I frequent i 
where I find people of unconventional views . 
people who go off the beaten lines ; original 
minds, in short." 

** To go off the beaten lines is easy enough . 
perhaps too easy," she replied, quietly. 

" I don't know that," he returned, in his old 



POET AND PEER. 85 

argumentative way. " It requires some moral 
courage." 

" Or immoral . as the case may be." 

'* Oh I anything new and startling is branded 
as immoral. You see that handsome woman on 
the sofa? Now, she is a woman of a decidedly 
original mind. Because she is so . because she 
is trying to reform dress, and . and . the 
marriage-laws, narrow-minded people are pre- 
judiced against her." 

** I am afraid I shall be among the narrow- 
minded, Lord Athelstone," said Miss Brabazon^ 
coldly, and she looked the other way. 

*'Why? Because she is not dressed like 
-everyone else ? You are the last person to be 
severe on that. Let me introduce you to her. 
I assure you she is a most delightful person ; so 
agreeable, and always an especial favourite with 
other women." 

Sylvia turned, and looked straight into his 
eyes. 

" Is she an especial favourite of Lady Athel- 
tone's ?" 

He winced. 



86 POET AND PEER. 

" My wife is not quite up to the mark of bo 
very clever a woman, and " 

*' No doubt Lady Athelstone and I are more 
on a par. and I had rather talk to her. Where 
is she r 

^'I left her in the big room, under St. John's 
care. I did not know that you would like to 
see her, otherwise . otherwise . I would have 
taken her down to Barnes before this. When 
may we come t" 

** Oh, it is too late now. We go to Wiesbaden 
to-morrow." 

** For how long ? I am very sorry." 

" We shall probably go on to St. Moritz. 
afterwards, to give mamma strength, and we 
may return by the Italian lakes ; but we shall 
be back in the winter, I believe." 

He answered quickly . almost without re- 
flection . 

"And that will be too late for me. In the 
winter I shall be in America." 

" In America I What takes you there ?" 

" I . think of giving some lectures. I have 
been invited to do so. And it will interest me 



POET AND PEER. 87 

to visit a country which is the cradle, if 
not the birthplace, of all that is free and en- 
lightened." 

" Of course, Lady Athelstone goes with 

you r 

"No . I think not. I have not named the 
subject to her yet; but I doubt whether her 
health would stand rapid travelling; and she 
hates the sea." 

She said nothing ; she turned away. 

Madame de Surville and Briggs came up at 
that moment; and Athelstone's conversation 
during the next few minutes was devoted to 
the elder lady. She listened to him with 
some curiosity, tinctured by her sense of 
humour, as, in reply to the inquiry, " What are 
3' ou about ? Are you writing V he held forth 
upon the approaching emancipation of all 
classes from slavish bonds of custom, which he 
was helping to inaugurate. 

'^ It. is a pity you wouldn't marry him, my 
dear," she said sotto voce to Sylvia, as they 
sauntered away a few minutes later. "You 
would have prevented his talking . you would 



88 POET AND PEER. 

have prevented his thinking all that stuff." 

Miss Brabazon flushed* 

*' Should 1? I doubt it." 

'' He is that sort of man that a clever woman 
can do anything she likes with." 

" I am afraid she can. It is very sad." Then 
she added^ ^' He is thinking of leaving his 
young wife, and going off to America. If that 
is the consequence of having enlarged ideas, let 
us all remain narrow." 

** He would not think of going to America if 
he had married you." 

'* Who can say V^ She looked magnificently 
scornful as she added, *' I am glad I did not put 
him to the test." 

'*Ah! you might have made something of 
him. I used to like him; there was a great 
charm about the handsome, eager young fellow, 
though he was always dogmatical . always a 
little anxious to astonish one. But he is 
grown ridiculous. I suppose it is living with a 
half-educated young woman who thinks all he 
does perfect." 

*'I am afraid it is from not living enough 



POET AND PEER. 89 

with her. And I doubt her thinking now all 
"he does perfect." 

^' You don't mean that he neglects her 1" 

"Perhaps not absolutely that. I have no 
right to say so. But " She paused. 

'* It comes to what I said. He was really 
attached to you . as attached as he could be to 
any woman ^' 

*^ Yes . that was just it." 

" . And his attachment would have strength- 
ened, you would have had an immense influence 
over him ; he would have been a different man. 
My favourite Landor says, * Love always makes 
us better; religion sometimes; power never.' 
Wilfred Athelstone's love is weak, you seem to 
say ; and certainly he has very little religion. 
He has only a certain power from his talents 
and his position, and this, without guidance, I 
see will prove his destruction." 

'^ A man who requires guidance is not one to 
entrust one's happiness to," returned Sylvia, 
with a touch of something akin to anger. 
*' Look I" she continued. " Look I Do you see 
her there, in white, seated under that picture 



90 POET ANb PEER. 

of * The Forflaken/ . a girl standing at the very 
edge of the cold, grey sea t The expression of 
Lady Athelstone's face is really not unlike that 
of the girl. How thin she is grown, and how 
weary she looks, poor thing ! And this is only 
the beginning I" 

Madame Barbara calmly surveyed Nellie and 
her companion for some minutes without reply. 

"That is Mr. St. John beside her I" she said 
at last. '^ I remember his honest ugly face per- 
fectly. I hope it doesn't belie him." 

"I have heard that he has a fine/ character. 
I scarcely know him. He is a great friend of 
Lord Athelstone's,-' 

" 1 hope he is a true friend ... I hope he is 
honest." 

"Why should you doubt it . you who are 
such a physiognomist ?" 

" The interest he takes in his friend's wife is 
no common interest. Did I not hear that he 
once wanted to marry her?" 

" There was some rumour of the sort. I do 
not know if it was true . I daresay not." 

" What you can see as well as I, my dear," 



POET AND PEER. 91 

said Madame Barbara, turning and looking into* 
Sylvia's face, "is that hie heart and soul are 
wrapped up in that woman now. God help 
herr 



92 



CHAPTER VI. 

A FEW days later, a piece of news, calculated 
-^ to arouse divergent opinions and cause 
some animadversion among elderly dames, cir- 
culated through London society in the space of 
a few hours. It was announced at White's at 
five o'clock, and was discussed at half the din- 
ner-tables that night. The Uowager Lady 
Athelstone had, after much hesitation, consented 
to become the wife of the Bishop of Oporto. 

Why should she not? said some of her 
friends. There was nothing derogatory to her 
dignity in the marriage. The Bishop was a 
most charming person, of independent means, 
and of suitable age. She bad no longer her 
eon to think of; he had married contrary to 



POET AND PEER, 93 

her wishes . why should she not please herself? 
Perhaps there was no answering this, which 
may have irritated the more those who were 
adverse to the match. 

Cynics, like Punchett, said the Athelstone 
family was really worth its weight in gold : it 
was always preparing little surprises for society. 
First the young man outrages public opinion 
by the publication of his very lively love- 
poems ; then he shocks all the traditions of 
aristocracy by the profession of socialistic opin- 
ions ; next he marries a milkmaid. There is 
very little doubt how that will end ; he has al- 
ready taken to flirting desperately with another 
woman ; but in the meantime his mamma pro- 
vides a little interlude to prevent our all getting 
too dull. She has drawn this courtly Bishop . 
who no one will believe is sincere, he is so 
well-bred . into her toils. All this is really like 
an old comedy, so full of intrigue . it is de- 
lightful I 

Wilfred was probably in some measure pre- 
pared for the announcement ; it could hardly be 
but that he must have foreseen the possibility 



.94 POET AND PEER. 

of his mother's marrying again, and six months 
ago he would have been well pleased to receive 
the Bishop as his step-father. Now things 
were changed ; it would interfere with certain 
plans of Wilfred's, in which he meant his 
mother to play a part. He was annoyed, but 
silent. Henceforward his mother's movements 
would be made without reference to him, but 
depend on the will of another. 

He entered his ^wife's room one morning, and 
said, abruptly, 

"I am going to let Athelstone for a year, 
Nellie." 

" Let Athelstone 1 Oh I Wilfred, why ?" 

''I don't care to go back there at present. 
Some of the neighbours behaved insolently 
about you. And, since I have been here, I 
have received ' remonstrances ' from a number 
of the clergy and others about the opinions I 
promulgate. It is disagreeable to me to come 
into contact with all these people just now. I 
have had a capital offer for the place from a 
Birmingham man^ and I have accepted it." 



POET AND PEER. 95 

" Will your mother be very much dis- 
tressed ?" 

*' Horrified ; but I can't help that. It is 
better the place should be lived in than empty, 

and next winter " Here he broke off 

abruptly ; he could not bring himself to tell her 
of his American scheme, he would break it to 
her gradually as the time drew near. ''My 
mother will have her own concerns to occupy 
her now. She will say it is very derogatory to 
my dignity to let the old place; but I don't 
care about that, I only hope the Bishop will 
show her the absurdity of all such rubbish." 

"I can't help being sorry, dear; I was so 
happy at Athelstone. I have always loved it so 
much. But I daresay you are right. Where 
shall we go I" 

"I have heard of a charming cottage in 
Wales, where I should like to spend three 
months. You won't mind!" 

**Mind, Wilfred 1 I shall like it, with you . 
oh 1 so much better than London." Then, with 
a little trepidation, " We shall be alone, shan't 

wer . 



96 POET AND PEER, 

" Yes, virtually ; we may have a friend or 
two. I daresav old Hubert will come down to 
see us." 

A letter of Nellie's to Mrs. Goldwin, written 
about this time^ portrays, in some measure, 
the state of the young wife's mind, and serves 
to show how her character had matured during 
the past year. If she did not write with entire 
openness to her friend, she at least wrote with 
more openness to her than she would have done 
to any other person. Her reliance on Mrs. 
Goldwin's discretion, her confidence that no- 
thing her letters might contain would be mis- 
construed by her tolerant, large-minded friend, 
emboldened her to discuss points she would not 
otherwise have touched upon. The letter was 
addressed to Wiesbaden, where Mrs. Goldwia 
had joined her husband. She wrote : 

" We have been in London three months, 
since I returned from Brighton, and I am glad 
to think that the time is at hand for us 
to leave it^ but not for dear Athelstone, 
alas I . Wilfred has let it, and has taken 
a cottage in Wales. At all events, I shall 



POET AND PEER. 97 

be alone with him, more than I have been 
here, where he is so constantly occupied that I 
cannot expect to see much of him. Nothing 
can compensate to me for that loss, and I may 
confess to you that T hate London, Wilfred 
will not go into what is called * society;* he 
took me to a few of the great houses at first, 
but very soon gave it up. His mother would 
have taken me out . nay, urged it as almost a 
duty, seeing that * the world ' was kindly dis- 
posed towards me . but I declined ; there was^ 
indeed, no virtue in this, for, without Wilfred, 
I should not have been amused. On the other 
hand, I am afraid I am to blame for not 
cultivating my husband's friends more. I 
have tried to like them, indeed I have, but I 
find their society paralyses my energies. No 
doubt this is my fault, but I cannot help it, 
Wilfred says my mind is contracted, and needs 
expanding. I am sure it does ; but somehow I 
do not feel that these are the people to do it. 
Their conversation is distasteful to me; the dis- 
cussion of subjects about which I know nothing 
fatigues me ; while the ridicule of things about 

VOL. m. H 



98 POKT AND PEER. 

which I feel strongly is often offenBive. In both 
cases I am silent, and mj silence is not un- 
naturally regarded as a proof of imbecility* I 
overheard this dialogue the other night : ' One 
might as well try to get sparks from a bit of 
lead as draw anything from that young Lady 
Athelstone I' said a lady to her neighbour, who 
replied, * With her education, one can't expect 
much ; but at least she might follow her brilliant 
husband's lead. When a woman marries such 
a husband as that, all she has to do is to adopt 
his views.' Now, unfortunately, that is just 
what I cannot do ; I cannot shake off the beliefs 
and prejudices in which I was bred. I know 
that, in every respect, I am immeasurably my 
dear husband's inferior, but I cannot see every- 
thing with his eyes ; I even think that, if I could 
make him see with mine, he would be happier. 
There is one perso^ whom he regards as very 
admirable, for whom I have a special aversion. 
She is very handsome and very clever, but she 
has no religion, and disseminates horrible 
doctrines about marriage ; yet dear Wilfred, in 
his chivalrous enthusiasm for what he considers 



POET AND PEER. 99 

a noble and suffering woman^ has taken up her 
oause warmly. This is another reason why I 
am glad w^e are leaving London. 

" How I wish, dear friend, I were cleverer, 
and worthier of him ! This is my daily regret, 
my almost constant thought. A fortnight ago 
I saw Aer, that beautiful, noble woman who 
ought to have been his wife . if she had loved 
him! It was at the Academy soiree. She 
came up and spoke to me with the old sweet 
graciousness, which is unlike everyone else's 
manner in the world. She used to awe me a 
little ; I never could feel that now. There is a 
tender sympathy in her voice which draws me 
irresistibly to her. But circumstances, I sup- 
pose, will prevent our ever being intimate. She 
has left England, and I do not know when we 
may meet again. By-the-by, I think she said 
they were going to Wiesbaden ; so perhaps you 
may meet." 

And they did meet. The acquaintance, which 
had been slight in Rome, was renewed. They 
liked each other, and had one subject of common 
interest . Nellie. The result of those con- 

h2 



100 POET AND PEER. 

versatioDS was to have a painful impressioD 
on Marjr Goldwin's mind. Nellie's letter 
had distressed her; the truth which she in- 
stinctively felt, Sylvia Brabazon's words corro- 
borated. 

'^ Lady Athelstone looks ill," she said ; ^* like 
a person who is possessed by some fear which 
she cannot shake off." 

" That may be morbid. But he ? Does he 
strike you as happy 1 as being really attached 
to her r 

Sylvia waited a minute or two before she 
replied. Her large eyes were fixed upon the 
lake in the public garden, near which they sat. 
She did not look up ; but a slight spot of colour 
came into her cheek. 

^^ Lord Athelstone's is a very difficult cbarac* 
ter to read. I once thought I could read it^ 
but I was mistaken. How much or how little 
he cares for anyone it is impossible to tell, for 
he does not know himself. The marriage is 
I certainly not what I had hoped it would be ; 
but she is very young, and does not at present 
supply the mental stimulus he needs. I dare-* 



_--^ 



POET AND PEER. lOl 

GSLj he 18 fond of her. He does not mean to 
neglect her . has no idea that she suffers ; but 
she has no power over him, and he possesses, 
unfortunately, but little over himself. I have 
grown to think it a miserable thing when a 
man is thus easily influenced. I once thought 
it would be beautiful to exercise such sway. I 
should now dread it.'* 

" Poor child 1" sighed Mrs. Goldwin, present- 
ly. " I wish you were near her. Miss Brabazon. 
I am afraid she has not a single friend to whom 
she can appeal for comfort or advice, except 
Hubert St. John ; and that is not what I 
should wish." 

" Is he not a most excellent man ?" 

" Yes. But he is a man who feels strongly 
. too strongly, I fear, in this case, to be an 
impartial friend." 

Then she abruptly changed the subject, and 
never again spoke of Hubert to Miss Brabazon. 
She felt instinctively how much her cousin was 
suffering at this time. It was a state of things 
for which she saw no remedy. Advice to him 
would be utterly thrown away. And Nellie, 



102 POET AND PEER. 

she knew, was safe. Hubert was sacrificing bis 
life to '* an idea." It was tbus Mary Goldwiu 
viewed tbe passion whicb dominated the young 
man's existence, and wbicb sbe so deeply 
deplored. Sbe felt sbe bad no rigbt to try to 
deprive young Lady Atbelstone of a firm and 
devoted friend. Still sbe beartily wisbed be 
was not so mucb at Whitehall Gardens. 

Wilfred bad not told bis wife tbe true canse 
of bis letting Atbelstone, neither did he tell bis 
mother, when she implored him ** to reconsider 
a decision which must materially lower bis 
position in the county." 

" Say no more about it, my dear mother; the 
thing is done." 

What was the use of aggravating the evil by 
the information that be had largely exceeded 
bis income this year, and that he must retrench 
bis expenses or go to tbe Jews ? He was very 
generous ; and tbe calls upon bis purse since be 
came to London bad been various. His fortune, 
sufficient for his father's manner of life, hospit- 
able as the old county magnate bad been, was 
not such as to admit of bis son's keeping up a 



POET AND PEER. 103 

similar establisbmenty and at the same time 
making munificent donations in support of 
various objects he was induced to befriend. It 
was impossible to say what sums had passed 
through Mrs. Tullia Whiteside's hands ; it was 
only when his banker's book showed him a 
balance considerably on the wrong side of the 
ledger that he was compelled to look his affairs 
steadily in the face. 

The only person to whom he confided his 
difficulties was Madame de Waldeck, and she 
it was who suggested the idea of his giving a 
series of lectures in the chief cities of the United 
States. She said^ 

** Your name is already well known there. 
Your poems, your speeches, are no doubt dis- 
cussed . equally admired and abused. It is 
known that you have enlarged views on all 
subjects; and then you are a lord! The at- 
traction of listening to a lord, who is at once 
a poet and a socialist, will draw crowds. It 
will be a great success. You may clear nearly 
four thousand pounds in three months, and 
enjoy a delightful tour . one which will be * a 



104 POET AND PEER. 

series of ovations/ as the papers say, into the 
bargain." 

The proposition startled even Wilfred at 
first, but by degrees he accustomed bis mind to 
the idea. After that, he sought to fortify his 
position with sophistical arguments against the 
objections which he foresaw would be urged to 
the scheme. He would leave Nellie with his 
mother ; but this plan fell to the ground, natu- 
rally, when the dowager announced her engage- 
ment. A few weeks later, it was decided that 
she and the Bishop were to visit the Holy Land 
next winter. Lady Athelstone would not even 
have the protection of her mother-in-law's pres- 
ence in England. He was annoyed ; but must 
he abandon his scheme on this account ? No, 
he would make a spinster cousin of his come 
and stay with his wife during his absence. No 
one could then say a word ; and as to Nellie, 
why, she always accepted everything that he 
proposed without a murmur. He had brought 
himself to believe that he could easily reconcile 
her to his absence for three months, when he 
represented to her how important to his inter- 



\ 



POET AND PEER. 105 

ests, to his influence, and to his reputation, this 
visit to the States would be. 

Of course, he was conscious that everything 
depended on the way in which this thing was 
*'put." But he was a master in the art of 
*' putting " things, even to himself, being equal- 
ly desirous to satisfy his conscience and not to 
be thwarted in whatsoever he was minded to 
do. 

Sylvia Brabazon was the only person to 
whom he had been stung to speak of his pro- 
ject. Why ? He knew that she would repre- 
hend it ; he knew that, in the old days, she 
would have sought to dissuade him from such 
a step ; he knew that, had she been his wife, he 
would never even have contemplated it. But 
he was irritated by her manner ; he wished to 
startle her ; perhaps he hoped that she would 
urge him eloquently to renounce the idea, in 
order that he might prove how completely her 
influence was destroyed. This was childish ; 
but then Wilfred, Lord Athelstone, aged twenty- \ 
four, reformer, legislator, poet, was but a spoiled j 
child. i 



106 POET AXD PEEK. 

**What is this Miss Brabazon tells me of 
Lord Atbelstone's probable visit alone to America 
next winter ? I have not alluded to it in writ- 
ing to Nellie, for ber busband has not thought 
fit to tell her of his intention yet, it seems. It 
is most deplorable. What will the world say t 
Poor Nellie, left alone, will be miserable. Can't 
you try to persuade him to give up this wild 
idea?" 

Thus ran a passage in one of Mary Gold win's 
letters to Hubert. He had heard nothing of 
this, and was startled. The Athelstones had 
already left London for Wales, where Hubert 
was invited to join them. 



107 



CHAPTER VII. 

'Ij^AGLESCRAG was no more than a long 
." cottage, one story high, situated a few 
feet from the edge of a steep cliff on the west- 
era coast of Wales. In the fact that this cliff 
was thickly wooded with pines, which had been 
cut away in front of the cottage to the extent 
of half an acre, consisted the peculiarity and 
the charm of the situation. All the rooms, 
except the offices, faced the sea. Between 
them and it was a space of level lawn, on 
which were a few old-fashioned flower-beds . 
a sweet tangle of bloom, springing up without 
rule or principle of colour, but harmonious to 
the eye, as all Nature's combinations are. A 
sun-dial stood on this grass-plat ; some benches* 



108 POET AND PEER. 

were on the lawn, overlookiDg the rocks and 
the sea beyond. 

The plan of the cottage, which had been 
built by a rheumatic admiral some sixty years 
since^ was simple. A broad passage, into which 
the hall-door, with its deep rustic porch, opened, 
ran along the back of the house. Into this 
passage all the rooms opened. At the north 
end the offices and servants' rooms bulged out 
towards the east; at the south, a bath and 
some dressing and lumber-closets formed a 
corresponding though smaller excrescence. 
There was but one large best bed-room, which 
still went by the name of " the Admiral's," and 
two smaller ones, all opening on the lawn ; and 
three sitting-rooms, one of which was of con- 
siderable size, being in the centre of the cottage, 
facing the hall-door, and having a very wide 
and deep bay-window. The walls of this 
pleasant chamber were hung with an old 
Chinese paper, such as one rarely sees now, in 
which birds of strange plumage had refuge in 
trees of impossible growth, the atmosphere botb 
inhaled being of a pigeon's egg green. An 



POET AND PEER. 109 

Indian cabinet, some fine Nankin jars/ and 
dishes of Burmese metal-work further indicated 
the sea-faring life which, after every vicissitude 
of climate, had ended peacefully in this quiet 
corner of the world. To him it had been rest ; 
he had wished for nothing more. To his 
daughter, now a middle-aged matron who had 
never journeyed further than London or Har- 
rowgate, it was intolerably dull ; and, whenever 
she could let Eaglescrag for the summer^ she 
was delighted to do so. 

In this room Nellie read, or worked, or played 
on the piano; in which latter accomplishment 
she was desirous to improve herself, being but 
a beginner, and labouring under the delusion 
that Wilfred would be pleased could she become 
a tolerable performer. The fact was that, like 
most poets, he cared little for music ; and his 
wife's ** practising " was a trial which, to do 
him justice, he supported with great fortitude. 
He wrote in the adjoining room ; and, if he 
cursed the piano, it was in silence. During the 
first days after their arrival, he was shut up 
here^ and his wife saw nothing of him till the 
vol. Hi, h 



1 10 POET AND PEER. 

evening. Then, one morning, a MS. was des- 
patched to the printers by post ; after which, he 
came in with the air of a man who is well 
pleased at having achieved a difficult task, and 
proposed to Nellie to go out sailing. 

The sun was hot, and the sea anything but 
smooth^ and she was an indifferent sailor ; but 
she did not hesitate. The delight of being with 
Wilfred alone for some hoars compensated for 
everything. He was passionately fond of sail- 
ing, and was engrossed for some time after they 
started in managing the boat with the man 
who accompanied them. At last, when they 
were well out to sea, and the sail was trimmed 
to his satisfaction, he lit his pipe, and sat down 
on the bench facing her. How handsome he 
looked in his blue jersey, his cheek flushed by 
the wind I This was a different man from the 
sallow student with knit brows she had been 
accustomed to see lately. 

** You look pale, my child," he said. 

She tried to smile. *' I always feel giddy at 
flea." 

"Ah I you would never stand a long sea* 



POET AND PEER, 111 

voyage. I was sure of it." Then, after a 
pause . " What day does old Hubert come ?" 

" The beginning of next week." 

" We have another spare room ; it may as 
well be occupied. I should like you to write 
and ask Madame de Waldeck." 

There was no reply for some minutes. At 
last she said, in a low voice. 

" I hoped we were to be alone here." 

" flow can we be alone, if Hubert comes ?" 

" I had much rather he were not coming." 

'' I thought you liked him ?" 

'* So I do ; but I had rather be alone with 
you." 

"We can't be always alone. A man wants 
some further interchange of thought; and a 
woman, too. As it is, a third person is always 
in the way, and Madame de Waldeck will make 
ns an even number." 

Then Nellie nerved herself for a great effort 
of courage. Her voice shook as she said, 

"Mr. St. John does not like Madame de 
Waldeck . neither do I." 

Wilfred was sui-prised and annoyed. He took 



112 POET AND PEER. 

the pipe from his mouth, and replied, more 
sharply than he had ever done to her before, 

** I am sorry for it. As to Hubert, he hasn't 
spoken twice in his life to her, so it can only be 
prejudice . a prejudice unworthy of a man, and 
which I should have thought him superior to. 
As to you, Nellie, you seem, uufortunately, to 
like no women . especially no clever ones . 
which is a great mistake." 

" I like Miss Brabazon very, very much." 
" You are not likely to see much of her But 
I hoped you would have cultivated some of my 
present friends . women who are strenuous 
workers for the removal of error and the de- 
struction of evil in the world. On the contrary, 
you have avoided them. Madame de Waldeck 
is a very superior woman, and one who has 
suffered injustice and misapprehension. You 
might learn much from her if you chose. Nar- 
row-mindedness is abhorrent to me. I should 
have liked my wife to share my views, and to 
despise public opinion. But then it is no use 
hoping for that, I see. If you choose to bind 
yourself as a slave to the world's chariot. 



POET AND PEER. 113 

you will only find that its wheels crush you." 

Poor Nellie I She felt crushed by more cruel 
wheels than the world's. 

'' Say no more, dear Wilfred. I will write to 
her." 

He was in brilliant spirits during the rest of 
the sail. He took great care that she should 
not get wet, from the waves which broke seve- 
ral times over the boat, covering her with 
tarpaulin, and arranging the cushions for her 
head, as he would have done for a suffering 
child. Was she not a child, whose whims and 
fancies were of no serious account ? 

The child, however, was now a wife, and the 
whim she had expi*essed was one not so lightly 
removed. She remained silent and depressed. 
But neither that afternoon, nor subsequently, 
did the recollection of what she had said dis- 
quiet Wilfred ; and this was characteristic of the 
man. 

That her dislike of Madame de Waldeck 
was deepening into a passionate jealousy was 
what he never saw. Her dread of this visit 
was like a nightmare, it weighed heavily at 

VOL. in, I 



114 POET AND PEER. 

her heart . the restfulness of Eaglescrag was 
gone. 

The reply to Lady Athelstone's brief note of 
invitation came by return of post. Madame de 
Waldeck regretted that she could not leave 
London till the middle of the following week, 
and that her visit must be limited to a few 
days, as she had engagements to lecture in 
Liverpool and Manchester. Nellie breathed 
more freely; she had anticipated that this in- 
fliction would be prolonged for weeks. for a 
short time anything could be endured. 

It was the night of St. John's arrival, and the 
two men were pacing the terrace at the edge 
of the cliffy smoking their cigars after Lady 
Athelstone had retired. The talking had been 
done chiefly by Wilfred during the evening. 
Hubert had struck him as more pre-occupied 
than usual ; but then he had seen very little of 
his fiiend lately. Nellie had observed no 
change. She never looked up from her work 
without finding his eyes fixed upon her . she 
was used to it now. The fidelity she read there 



POET AND PEER. 115 

was pleasant, as the fidelity we read in the eyes 
of a faithfal dog, and it said to her no more. 
Once, when Madame de Waldeck's name was 
.casually mentioned, as being expected later in 
the week, he frowned, and Lady Athelstone 
glanced from him to her husband, hoping the 
expression of dissatisfaction on his friend's face 
would not be lost upon Wilfred. It was en- 
tirely so. He was generally too engrossed in 
what he was saying not to be obtuse to its 
effect upon others ; and this would, no doubt, 
prevent his ever being an orator. The man to 
move multitudes must keep his finger on the 
pulse of his auditory. 

The two men were alone now. It was a dark 
night ; a few stars above^ and the burning ends 
of their cigars, did not give sufficient light to 
see each others' faces ; the wash of the waves 
below, and a little wind through the pine 
branches now and again, were the only accom- 
paniment to their words. 

" Is it true, Athelstone, that you are going 

to America f 

i2 



116 POET AND PEER. 

** Who told your 

^^ Mary Gold win wrote that she had heard the 
rumour from Miss Bratiazon." 

" Women can never hold their tongues. Yes, 
I have some idea of it ; but I have not men- 
tioned it yet to Nellie, and therefore I don't want 
it talked about. You see, I can't take her ; she 
suffers horribly at sea, and would knock up 
with the fatigue of constant travelling, and I 
shall have to make long journeys almost daily. 
I am going on a lecturing tour." 

" What are you going to lecture about f " 

" Oh I a variety of subjects . things I want to 
ventilate my views upon.'* 

^* And is the attraction of lecturing so great 
as to make you leave your wife, and all your 
home-duties in England!" 

^^The truth is, I have spent more money 
than J ought this year ; I am to be paid very 
largely, and it is an easy way of getting out of 
my difficulties." 

" Easy 1 I think it is the worst way I ever 
heard of. You must give up this idea; yon 
must indeed." 



POET AND PEER. 117 

^'Indeed I shall do no such thing! Why 
should IV I could write nothing in three 
months that would bring me a tenth of the 
money, and money I must have." 

'' Retrench ; sell your town house ; take your 
wife abroad, do anything but this. You have 
no idea the injury you will do. Taking simply 
the lowest worldly view of the thing " 

<< . That I decline to take. People will think 
it derogatory to a peer to go round the States 
lecturing for money. I care nothing for that." 

" Then take the next argument in the scale 
against it. You are ambitious to be a reformer. 
Your capacity for influencing the world will be 
entirely marred,if the judgment formed of your 
-conduct be an adverse one. Your wife is absolutely 
alone in the world. From the circumstances of her 
early life, it would be diflSicult to find any other 
young woman as much so. The world at first 
resented your marrying as you did, but at least 
it was in harmony with your views of ' equality.' 
If such a marriage is not justified by devotion, . 
if, at the end of eighteen months, you start off 
for America alone " He stopped dead short 



118 POET AND PEER. 

in his walk, struck by a sudden thought. ** You 
are going alone ? You have no companion f " 

Wilfred^ with all bis faults, was incapable of 
prevarication. He would have given a great 
deal not to answer that direct question. He 
knew the conclusion at which Hubert would 
arrive, and it was a false one. He was not in 
love with Madame de Waldeck. The woman, 
bj her extraordinary cleverness, had obtained 
considerable influence over him ; but it was no.t 
an influence of the passions, still less of the 
heart ; it was purely an intellectual ascendancy^ 
which absorbed his interest for the time being, 
and rendered other society flat. Thus he, no 
doubt, ** put it " to himself. But how far this 
result was due to subtle flattery, and feminine 
skill in pandering to his peculiar weaknesses, 
still more what the ultimate effects of a pro- 
longed subjection to such influence might be, 
were questions he never asked himself. There 
are few things a self-indulgent man will not 
bring himself to believe are justifiable. Wilfred's 
intimacy with Madame de Waldeck had been,, 
up to the present time, in one sense^ innocent* 



POET AND PEER, 119 

He persuaded himself it would always remain 
so. Bat^ not being an absolute fool, he was 
conscious that the worlds . and Hubert stood in 
the light of '*the world" at this moment, . 
would decline to believe this. 

.' If I were to tell you that I am going alone/' 
he replied, reluctantly, after a pause, " it would 
be the strict truth, but I do not choose to con- 
vey a false impression to you. I hope not to be 
^lone during a great part of the time that I am 
in the States. A friend of mine has a similar 
engagement, to lecture, and I hope we may 
travel together. What I tell you, Hubert, of 
course is in confidence; I am going to do 
nothing I am ashamed of, but there are reasons 
why, for the present, I do not wish my move- 
ments to be discussed." 

" I shall speak of your plans to no one," re- 
plied the other, ^'for the best reasons that I 
hope they will never be carried into execution. 
Is your wife the last to be informed of them ? 
And have you reflected how cruelly she will 
suffer ? Why, in God's name," he added, vnth 
sudden passion, ^^ did you marry, Athelstone, if 



120 POET AND PEER. 

it was to tiy her thus f If 70a do this thiog . 
if 70U and your friend go off to the States^ I 
give you my word 1 believe you will break her 
heart." 

'^ You muBt allow me to be the best judge of 
that. Nellie is extremely sensible . far more so 
than you give her the credit of being. She 
unfortunately does not always see things as I 
do ; but I have never found her deaf to reason, 
or given to overstrained sentimentality. When 
I point out to her that my absence for three or 
four months is a necessity which cannot be ob- 
viated, except by crippling our means for a 
considerable time to come, she is too wise^ and, 
I hope, has too much confidence in me, not to 
look at the thing in its just light. But I want 
to spare her the prolonged pain of thinking of 
our separation for months beforehand, and 
therefore I defer speaking of it as long as pos- 
sible." 

^^ I think you are making a great mistake." 
Hubert had regained his self-command, and 
spoke with quiet sternness. "If you are re- 
solved to do this, before you make your final 



POET AND PEER. 121 

arrangements, you ought to speak to Lady 
Athelstone, and not run the chance of her hear- 
ing it by some side-wind. But I shall say no 
more. I have spoken to you warmly, perhaps 
too warmly, as a friend. Henceforward I shall 
give no advice; you must take your own 
course." 

He threw away his cigar, and would have 
turned towards the house ; but Wilfred's desire 
to defend his position, and to air all the specious 
arguments in support of it which he would be 
called upon to use before long, was not to be 
thwarted. He talked plausibly, almost elo- 
quently. St. John remained silent. He was 
not to be entrapped into admitting that, under 
any circumstances, such a course of conduct 
could be justifiable. It was past midnight when 
the two men retired to rest. 

There was but one post, in and out, at 
Eaglescrag. It came in at eleven in the morn- 
ing, and left at one. To answer Wilfred's 
numerous correspondents by return-post was 
impossible. On the morning after the colloquy 
just recorded, the bag contained a thick packet 



122 POET AND PEER. 

of MS. and proof-sheets. Nellie and Hubert 
were present when Wilfred tore open the cover. 

'' I want to return this, corrected, if possible, 
at once," he said. *'Will you both help met 
If we divide the * copy ' into three parts, we 
shall get through it by post-hour. There are 
the first pages for you, Nellie. You have only 
to be careful, and compare the proof, line by 
line, witb the MS.," and he handed to each a 
third of the sheets before him. 

*' Prose 1" exclaimed St. John. "I did not 
know you ever wrote in prose. What is it?" 

** A pamphlet which I have promised should 
be published next week, simultaneously with 
the delivery of Madame de Waldeck's lectures 
at Liverpool. I believe it will sell well," and 
he fell to at once examining the portion he had 
retained for his own correction. 

Hubert's eyes, at that moment, fell upon the 
word "Divorce," heading each page. With 
knit brows, he attacked the fragment before 
him ; certainly in no frame of mind to detect 
the substitution of a comma for a semicolon. 
At the end of a minute or two, he looked across 



POET AND PEER. 12$ 

the table. Lady Athelstone aeemed turned to 
stone. Her face was deadly white ; her respira- 
tion hardly perceptible. She had read the first 
few lines^ and then a film had gathered before 
her eyes. Could it be possible that she had 
truly seized the import of those words ? Could 
it be that Wilfred . her husband . had writtei^ 
them? 

She remembered afterwards that some one . 
she supposed it was Mr. St. John . had fetched 
a tumbler of water, and given it to her. 

Wilfred, engrossed in his proof-sheets, was- 
unconscious of what was passing around him. 

There was a dead silence. She drank the 
water, and then read on, at first mechanically ;. 
but by degrees her mind cleared ; she under- 
stood fully the import of the words before her. 

Here is a passage which shows the style and 
line of argument of this new ** Protest in favour 
of Divorce " : . 

^^ Great men of all ages and of all religions 
have felt the oppression of a chain which, when 
riveted upon them, they believed to be of gold, 
and which, as the years rolled on, proved to be- 



124 POET AND PEER. 

of iron and of lead^ wearing to the flesh, and 
entering into the very souL To go no further 
back than this century, think of Napoleon, 
Shelley, and many other prominent men nearer 
our own day, who have sought to rid them- 
selves of bonds which had become unendurable, 
and have been stigmatized as cruel or immoral 
for acting according to the dictates of a justifi- 
able impulse. How much crime would have 
been avoided, how much misery spared, how 
many a life would have been rendered happy 
and useful that has been blasted by an early 
marriage^ had not the Church anathematized 
the 'putting asunder' of those 'whom God 
hath joined I' The wisdom of any doctrine is 
best shown by its tendency to raise man*s fallen 
nature. The guile and treachery engendered 
by an outward subservience to the ecclesiastical 
law, when hearts have ceased to beat in unison, 
debases it. Why should we expect of a fallible 
human being that, in the tender early summer 
of life, when the flesh and the judgment are 
alike weak^ he should make such election as, in 
the rich maturity of autumn, he shall never 



POET AND PEER. 125 

desire to cancel? Is it not a premium upon 
vice to render a man's freedom from the living 
death of an uncongenial union contingent upon 
his committing a sin, or conniving at his wife's 
committing it ? Constituted as we are, bonds 
which perjury or death alone can dissever are 
immoral, and calculated to produce the very 
evil they aim at correcting. 

" Let the contract of marriage, like any other 
covenant between civilized beings, be binding 
80 long as each contracting party desires it 
should be so. When mutual consent points to 
a separation, and the consequent possibility of 
forming new ties, whereby each may become 
happier, and therefore better, members of the 
great Human Family, it is iniquitous to demand 
that one or other should pass through the de- 
grading courtyard of crime before being per- 
mitted to arrive at healthier upper chambers, 
through which the air of heaven, untainted by 
treachery, untroubled by dispute, blows freely." 

She was quite calm, but it was the calm of a 
person who has received a deadly hurt. After 
eighteen months of marriage, her husband, at 



126 POET AND PEER. 

the instigation of the woman who would be 
^heir guest to-morrow^ bad written in support 
of that woman's horrible doctrines. He advo- 
-cated the loosening of the marriage-tie. To 
poor Nellie it seemed that this could bear but 
one interpretation. 

When she had read to the end of the portion 
allotted to her, she had the courage to take 
the MS. and compare it, line by line, as Wilfred 
had directed her, with the proofs. And then, 
looking up, and finding St. John's eyes fixed 
on her, she stretched her hand across the table, 
and pointed to the sheets before him. He 
handed them in silence. 

A quarter of an hour later, she rose quietly 
and left the room. 

A conversation between Lorenzo and Miss 
Staples, concerning their master and mistress, 
is being carried on about the same time. The 
boy is outside her bed-room, seated on the 
window-sill, and smoking a cigarette, the 
young woman at her work within. They are 
good friends, on the whole, though they have 



POET AND PEER. 127 

their quarrels, chiefly with reference to the 
respective merits of my lord and my lady. 
Staples is a staunch adherent of her mistress. 
That her advocacy is not always wise will be 
apparent presently, but it is thorough. Nellie 
has been invariably kind to her, and the woman 
has a warm heart. Nothing, on the other hand, 
can change the boy's obstinate and almost pas- 
sionate belief that Lady Athelstone is a poor^ 
mean-spirited creature, and quite unworthy the 
honour of being my lord's wife. 

'* The other comes to-morrow," the boy is 
saying. *^ My lord finds pleasure to be with 
her more than with my lady. She has a fine 

" It's my belief she's a devil 1" returns Miss 
Staples. ^* It's a shame her being brought here, 
that it is. Let him go on as he likes out of the 
house . that is what I say; but to bring her 
here, under my lady's nose I" 

" She never complains," he observes, con- 
temptuously. " She never say one word, do 
what he like." 



128 POET AND PEER. 

*. Well, I'm sure I hope she'll have her revenge, 
tbat*s all^ replies the maid, with heat. ^^I 
wouldn't stand it, if / was she. If he wasn't as 
blind as a mole, he'd see that there's others as 
can appreciate her, if he can't." 

" Ah I bah I she not have the speerit to revenge 
herself. But I know something," continued 
Lorenzo, rubbing his hands with malicious de- 
light, as he watched the effect of his words on 
his auditor. ^* I know that me and mj lord we 
go across the seas, we go to Amarica, for ^^ver 
so long, and Madame go too." 

" My lord go to America with that woman % 
Wherever did you pick up such rubbish ? It's 
impossible." 

*^ Is it ? I know better. I read it in a letter 
to my lord." 

*' A letter you found about ? Who from ?" 

*' Madame de Waldeck. I not able to under- 
stand him all ; there is about money ; there is 
about voyaging through towns, and speaking. 
But I know it is fissato . arranged. My lord 
and me will sail in October." 



POET AND PEER. . 129 

'* Well, I never I" cried Miss Staples. '' Of 
all the andacious, indecent things I ever beard 
of I But he'll repent it . you mark my words 
. he'll repent it . and serve him right, too !" 



VOL. m. 



130 



CHAPTER VIIL 

rpO interfere between husband and wife is 
.*. proverbially dangerous. In Hubert St. 
John's case he felt it would be doubly so. He 
had already gone far, in remonstrating with 
Athelstoue, on the subject of his visit to the 
States. He had vowed to himself last night 
that he would speak no more. There was a 
limit beyond which Wilfred might take umbrage 
at his interference, and even misapprehend his 
motives. Yet here, as he sat at the table, 
opposite the man who was ruining his own 
happiness and . that was of far greater moment 
to St; John . that of his wife, he asked himself 
whether he ought not to make one last effort 
to arrest his course. It needed tact and com- 



POET AND PEER. 131 

mand of temper, feeling indignant as he did, to 
fiay what should not do more harm than good ; 
and he waited a considerable time . indeed, 
Athelstone had finished correcting his proofs . 
before St. John spoke. 

" How long, may I ask, have you held these 
views upon marriage?" 

" Ever since I thought about marriage at all, 
I believe." 

"But they have assumed a more definite 
form of late? otherwise why did you never write 
in this strain till now?" 

"There is an intellectual movement now 
arousing attention to the evil, and I have felt it 
a duty to do what I can in endeavouring to 
remedy it." 

" It is a pity that you waited till you were 
married before flinging stones at the institu- 
tion." 

*^ I donH agree with you. My words would 
have lost half their weight had I written as a 
bachelor. People would have said I shrank from 
the responsibilities of matrimony. I have not 
shrunk from them ; and, therefore, I am entitled 

k2 



132 POET AND PEER. 

to say that the law which renders its dissolution 
well-nigh impossible is flagitious." 

" I cannot admit your . title ' to speak thus, 
if the person whom you asked to share the 
responsibilities of marriage with you does not 
hold the same views. Had Madame de Wal- 
deck been your wife, you would be justified ; 
both feeling alike on this subject. But you 
married a person to whose sentiments and 
principles such a doctrine as this is equally 
repugnant. You should have told her in what 
light estimation you held an institution which 
to her is sacred, before you married . you 
should have given her the option of declining^ 
to link her fate with yours, when you had 
candidly avowed your principles . or you 
should now be silent. ; . You are inflicting 
infinite pain. . . . Perhaps I ought not to say 
this ; but you are blind, like all men who are 
absorbed in a subject ; otherwise you would 

see ^' He paused an instant ; and Wilfred 

interrupted him impetuously, though without 
a touch of resentment. 

"You're mad, man. Why, Nellie takes no 



POET AND PEER. 133 

more notice of atiything I write than if it was 
Sanscrit. I wiah she did. I wish it was in 
her nature to rebel against the expression of 
my opinions . to argue with me, to abuse me . 
to do anything rather than receive them with 
stolid indifference. She is very religious . 
she knows I am not: she never was under 
any delusion on that point. She is an angel . 
only too good for this wicked world, in the 
concerns of which she takes no interest what- 
ever. The questions that absorb me . all the 
questions that pertain to humanity . she regards 
with indifference. I am sorry for it ; but so it 
is. To suppose that my views upon this 
matter of divorce can affect her is ridiculous. 
She probably scarcely seized the tenor of the 
sheets she read . and, if she did, regarded it as 
one of my hobbies which she does not pretend 
to understand." 

It was incomprehensible to Hubert that Wil- 
fred should be so obtuse, but he saw it would 
be impossible, by any words of his, to shake the 
husband^s rooted conviction that his wife dwelt 
in a region of superhuman placidity, unassail- 



134 POET AND PEER. 

able by shafts that wound most women. 
Nothing but the assurance from her own b'ps 
that she was not indiflferent, but enduring, 
nothing but her own direct appeal would move 
him. 

The post was gone; the luncheon was an- 
nounced; Nellie did not appear. Wilfred ran 
upstairSj and found her lying on her bed, look- 
ing rather pale. . 

'' What is the matter, my child ?" 

"I have a headache. You won't mind my 
not coming down V* . 

"Of course not. You had better remain 
quiet. Hubert and I are going for a long 
stretch across the hills. By-the-by," he added, 
suddenly inspired to disarm his friend by a 
coup de main, "he has been talking about 

you." 

" What has he been saying ?" she askedy 
quickly. Her white face flushed, and she raised 
it from the pillow, so that her eyes should 
follow him as he walked to and fro. 

" Trying to make me believe that my writing 
gave you ^infinite pain.' As if he could tell 



POET AND PEER. 135 

ivhat you felt as well as I, who have known 
you since you were ten years old I I told him 
you had always recognized the truth that there 
must be freedom of opinion in married life . 
that you concerned yourself very little about 
my views; and I never interfered with yours. 
I told him that, though you were religious, you 
were tolerant. You knew I hated priestcraft, 
and half the dogmas of the Church, when we 
married ; and you have had the good sense to 
leave me at liberty to act according to the dic- 
tates of my conscience since." 

" Yes . all you say is true, dear. Only . only 
I am sorry you should write so about mar- 
' riage." 

" My dear child, I write about a great many 
things you can't understand . or, ought I to 
say, you worCt ? You shut your eyes wilfully. 
I am sorry for it ; but, as you prefer blindness, 
there is an end of it." 

Her head dropped back upon the pillow, and 
she closed her eyes. 

" If I were only cleverer I" 

" You have plenty of intelligence, my child . 



136 POET AND PEER. 

if you would only exercise it ; but orthodoxy 
and mental freedom, I am afraid, are incom- 
patible/' 

He stooped and kissed her. She seized his 
hand, and pressed it almost convulsively be- 
tween both hers. 

 When you are weaiy of me you will tell me, 
won't you ?" she murmured. 

** My darling, what nonsense I" He gave her 
that bright smile she had so rarely seen of late ; 
but it was darkened suddenly by a cloud. 
**What has put this into your head? Has 
Hubert spoken to you about me ?" 

*^ He has never said anything that I should 
not wish to hear. I would not listen to him or 
to anyone against you. Only-. only when I 
see with my own eyes . when I hear from your 
own lips that the chain presses^ dear, . the chain 
that you say becomes of iron and lead . ^I think it 
will snap, and then you will be free." 

Madame de Waldeck arrived late the follow- 
ing day. She responded to Nellie's simple 
greeting with effusion, insisted upon kissing 



POET AND PEER. 137 

her, and thanked her for her very, very kind 
invitation. Nellie coloured, and felt herself 
shrinking up like a sensitive plant: she had 
too little guile to be able to meet this with 
decorum. 

At dinner her guest looked brilliantly hand- 
some in a robe made of soft white Indian shawl, 
without an ornament of any description; and 
she exerted herself with success to be generally 
agreeable, as even Hubert St. John was com- 
pelled to admit. Her conversation was ad- 
dressed chiefly to Nellie, but she talked for 
them all ; even Wilfred, so fond of the sound 
of his own voice, seemed content to play the 
part of listener. She kept aloof from fields 
where there was a possibility of discussion ; she 
gave humorous descriptions of German life, she 
related anecdotes of eminent men she had met ; 
she touched, with the hand of an artist, one 
subject after another, playfully, or with pre- 
cision, as the case might be, appealing occasion- 
ally to Nellie or to St. John . rarely to Wilfred 
. in confirmation of some opinion she ad- 
vanced. 



138 POET AND PEER. 

Perhaps this Mras a little overdone : St. John 
thought so. It seemed to fall short of the 
highest art, that she should ignore Wilfred as 
she did: that her efforts should so clearly be 
directed to winning over Nellie and himself. 
Still Madame de Waldeck's conversational abili- 
ties were unquestionably great; she was no 
ordinary charlatan, whose claim to distinction 
rested upon moral audacity and a peplum. Her 
power over Atbelstone was best shown by hi 
listening to her. Hubert liked her no whit 
better, but he feared her, for his friend's sake, a 
great deal more at the end of dinner than he 
had yet done. 

He scarcely spoke himself. She made sundry 
efforts to **draw him out," but failed. He 
pulled his brown beard, after his wont, and 
watched her with his steady grey eyes. Nellie^ 
who had at heart fiir more true poetry and 
perception of beauty than this woman had at 
the end of her tongue, was silenced . incapable 
of more than a monosyllable or two. How 
could she attempt to compete with such bril- 
liancy, such volubility I 



POET AND PEER. 139 

After dinner, Wilfred proposed that the ladies 
should not retire, but that they should all 
adjourn to the terrace, where the fruit and wine 
should be brought. Nellie hailed the sugges- 
tion ; she had looked forward to even ten 
minutes' tete-a-tete with Madame de Waldeek 
with terror. It was a soft English night. A 
young moon shed its mild lustre on the lawn 
as it rose above the pine-trees ; a single planet 
shone over the quiet sea; the air was heavy 
with the blended breath of honeysuckle and 
sweet peas. It had just that tinge of saline 
damp which is rarely felt on the continental 
coast in summer-time. Nellie fetched her hat, 
and Madame de Waldeek a long black veil, such 
as Iphigenia, or other sacrificial victim, might 
have been wrapped in. 

Soon after they sat down, occurred one of 
those silences which occasionally fall upon a 
company . a silence of less than a minute per- 
haps, and yet which appears like five. It was 
probably utilized by Madame de Waldeek ; she 
had arrived with a line of action definitely laid 
down. Hitherto she had but paved the way. 



140 POET AND PEER. 

" How wonderfully fltill it is, after the turmoil 
of London I It is delightful I But I have lived 
such a busy life in towns always, having to 
struggle for my daily bread, that the inertia of 
country life is almost oppressive to me* I 
suppose you do not feel that, Lady Athel- 
stone?" 

**I like the quiet of the country; I have 
always been used to it, though not to ^ in- 
ertia/ " 

" Ah I yes. Of course you have more leisure 
to pursue your studies in the country. You 
read, I daresay, a great deal. And do you 
play?" 

'' Very little." 

'' My dear child," Wilfred struck in, irrepres- 
sibly, *' I should say you play a great deal." 

" I meant very badly." 

''You must practise; there is nothing like 
constant practice," said the wily guest, who 
instantly divined what Wilfred suffered under 
the infliction. "Solitude and Nature are the 
best conditions for peifecting any talent. You 
know what Goethe says, 



POET AND PEER. 141 

' Es bildet ein Talent sich in der Stille, 
Sich ein Charakter in dem Strom der Welt !' 

Lord Athelstone, with all his wide human 
interests, feels more at home, of course, in the 
* Strom der Welt.' " 

" I don't understand German/' said Nellie. 

"Keally? I felt sure you did. It means 
that a strong character needs the strife of the 
world to develop it. Men whose actions are 
to influence their fellows,. not Hhe idle singer* 
of an empty day,' . must be brought into con- 
tact with them before they wrestle. Lord 
Athelstone is a poet, but he is also a reformer,. 
and there is no rest for such. 

' Still to be strenuous for the bright reward, 
And in the soul admit of no decay, 
Brook no continuance of weak-mindedness, 
Great is the glory, for the strife is hard !' " 

"That is Wordsworth's," said Nellie, with 
more alacrity than she had yet shown. 

Madame de Waldeck concealed her disap- 
pointment with a smile. 

" Yes ; we all learnt those lines in the school- 
room, I think." 



142 POET AND PEER. 

^'Lady Atbelsione 10 better read in the 
English poets than nlost people," observed St. 
John, gruffly. 

'* I am sure of it," returned Madame, with a 
tone of conviction. '* I have no doubt she is 
far better read than I am^ who have been 
too much buffeted about the world, and under 
the necessity of studying hard, dry 'books, to 
afford much time to the lighter fields of litera- 
ture. I believe it would be wiser not to own 
this ; one can conceal one's ignorance so well by 
silence 1" (This arrow glanced from the target 
at which it was aimed^ and struck St. John.) 
** What is the Latin proverb that says * Things 
unknown are taken to be magnificent ' ?" 

"I dareSiay you know it in the original," 
growled Hubert again. 

"I wish I could pretend to know it," she 
laughed, *< but I cannot. 

^ For some small worth he had, the man was prized, 
lie 2M.eA, frankness^ and he grew despised!* ^ 

" Whose is that ?" asked Athelstone, 
" Shenstone's, is it not ? I really forget. 
Lady Athelstone, no doubt, can tell us." 



POET AND PEER. 1 43 

** 1 never heard the lines before," she replied. 

"And are not likely to remember them, if 
you had,* said St. John, quickly. " It requires 
people to have been * buffeted about the world' 
like Madame de Waldeck, . and myself to 
appreciate their satire." 

"I don't know that I appreciate it," she re- 
turned, gaily, "for it is directed against myself. 
I am frank to a fault." 

"As I see j'^ou know Shenstone, I daresay 
you remember one of his prose axioms: that 
' Virtues, like essences, lose their fragrance on 
being exposed^ 

She was beginning to feel a little afraid of 
St. John ; but she was an accomplished actress ; 
she laughed heartily as she said . 

" Frankness, I fear, is seldom * fragrant ' ; but 
it is the one virtue which cannot help being 
exposed. I have made a great many enemies 
in life through it . my own husband, to begin 
with, who could not stand my plain-speaking." 

"It is your plain-speaking which has won 
you the admiration of unprejudiced minds," 
struck in Wilfred, warmly. " Your courage in 



144 POET AND PEER. 

ascending the public platform, and your fear- 
lessness in advancing views at variance with 
received opinions, is beyond all praise. Few 
women dare to speak so plainly." 

Hubert muttered, under his breath, *^ Happily 
not ;" but Nellie was the only one who heard 
him, for Madame had begun hastily to say, 

"You are very kind. Lord Athelstone. Still 
there is no denying that, in a worldly point of 
view, it is impolitic. I am sure Lady Athel- 
stone thinks 80 f 

Thus brought to bay, Nellie hesitated a 
moment before she replied, 

" I know too little of the world to say if it is 
impolitic or not." 

" That is a very politic reply. Ah I you are 
not as frank as I am I" 

St. John could have strangled her. 

" What Nellie says is quite true," said Wil- 
fred. " She knows nothing of the world, and 
does not care to improve her acquaintance. It 
isn't my fault, is it, Nellie ? I tried to make 
her like my friends . she said they were too 
clever. I oflfered to let her go out. with my 



POET AND PEER. 145 

mother, and she declined that also. So she is 
still a school-girl as to knowledge of the 
world." . 

" Ah I In Lady Athelstone's position . having 
all that this life can offer . it little signifies. It 
is when a woman is placed as I am, having to 
battle for existence, that knowledge of the 
world is essential. One has to be armed at all 
points ; though, to be sure, I recollect a line by 
Cesare della Valle, which says . 

" ' E un arma, spesso, il non averne.* 

You understand Italian, Lady Athelstone 1 A 
little I I thought so. I shall never be able to 
test the truth of that line in my own case. 
Patient endurance . to poser en victime is not in 
my way. When I am indignant, I speak out ; 
I try to rouse my sister-women to their wrongs. 
But, by so doing, I rob myself of a great deal 
of sympathy. Of that I am quite conscious." 

Nellie felt that she was expected to reply to 
this . that Wilfred expected it. She could find 
nothing to say, and glanced appealingly at St. 
John. 

VOL. nr. L 



146 POET AND PEER. 

" You do not require such help/' he obBenred, 
coming to the rescue immediately. '^As Tal- 
leyrand said to Madame de Stael^ when she 
asked him whether he would save her or 
Madame de Recamier from drowning, ^Ah! 
Tous qui savez tout savez nager, Madame V " 

** I do not know if that is a compliment or 
not ; I only know I am not Madame de Stael, 
unfortunately." 

The moon had now risen high enough above 
the pine-tops to touch the silver flagon and 
rosy-cheeked nectarines on the table. It 
brought into prominence, moreover^ the soft 
white folds of Madame de Waldeck's robe, as it 
lay upon the gravel-path, her chair being 
pushed back a little distance from the table. 
Unluckily for a daddy-long-legs who was 
hurrying across the path upon business of his 
own, he encountered these snowy hillocks, 
which he was proceeding to traverse when the 
lady uttered a sharp exclamation and drew 
back her dress quickly. She had but one weak- 
nessy perhaps; and that was her dread of 
spiders. It mastered her on this occasion^ 



POET AND PEER. 147 

making her oblivious of everything . even of 
her foot. She extended that terrible engine of 
destruction, and crushed the spider. 

It was, morally and artistically, an ugly 
action. The foot was an offence to the eyes ; 
the cruelty revolted the higher instincts of 
humanity. Even Wilfred could not help say- 
ings 

*. It was harmless. I am sorry you killed it." 

So was she, by this time. Both the men had 
een her foot. And both of them might see, if 
they were not blind, that she would crush as 
ruthlessly whatsoever came in her path. 

'* These are points of resemblance to Madame 
de Stael," growled St. John, so low as scarcely 
to be heard. 

But she heard him. What did he mean? 
Had Necker's famous daughter ever committed 
fiuch a blunder as she had just committed? 
Her quick memory, spurred by mortified vanity, 
lighted almost instantly on the fact that 
*' Corinne " had a hideous foot. She remember- 
ed, with rage, the anecdote of that vain genius 
appearing at a masked ball disguised as a 

l2 



148 POET AND PEER. 

statue, when a passer-by, glancing downwards, 
exclaimed, ^^ J'ai reconnu la statue au piedrde" 
StaeC 

Her dread of St. John deepened into hatred 
from that moment. But she never permitted 
this to appear by word or look. Even to Wil- 
fred she spoke of his friend with the warmest 
praise. It was part of her deep-laid scheme 
that nothing should disturb Athelstone's im- 
plicit confidence in St. John, when he left his 
wife for a period which . to put it mildly . 
should be indefinite. 



149 



CHAPTER IX. 

TJUBERT ST. JOHN'S condition at this time 
-*-.- was uncommon in a man of eight and 
twenty. He was passionately in love ; and yet 
there was no sacrifice he would not have made 
.to secure Nellie's domestic happiness. By the 
wreck of that happiness alone could there be a 
hope for him in the future; but he was too 
loyal not to endeavour to save the man who 
had been his early friend ; too upright to enter- 
tain the thought of profiting by an infatuation 
which v/ould more and more estrange husband 
and wife. 

To attempt to counteract Madame de Wal- 
deck's influence now was useless. All he could 
do in this direction was to bring the fine edge 



150 POET AND PEER. 

jof sarcasm to bear on her favourite views, when 

she gave a serious exposition of them. This 

she never did willingly at Eaglescrag. There 

was nothing to be gained by it ; it was loss of 

time. Whenever she could, she kept to the 

wide field of general topics^ where she enjoyed 

the double advantage of displajring her own 

culture and Nellie's insufficiency. But from 

time to time St. John '* forced a card " on her ; 

and he was pitiless in his grim raillery of her 

crusades. Wilfred saw nothing of this. In his 

eyes Hubert, who had always been rough in his 

manner, had become intolerably bearish; and 

his brilliant friend showed her superiority by 

the good humour and perfect breeding with 

which she met his ill-timed satire. 

Nellie would have been more than human 
had she not on these occasions let Hubert see 
that she rejoiced in Madame*s temporary dis- 
comfiture. His presence was^ indeed, she 
acknowledged to herself, a solace to her at this 
time. His strong, manly nature was a refuge 
to which she could turn for advice; and she 
could speak to him, almost without reserve, of 



POET AND PEER. 151 

Madame de Waldeck. Almost, not quite ; their 
estimation of the lady did not differ materially^ 
except that St. John's was by many degrees the 
worse ; but Wilfred's name in connection with 
hers never passed the lips of either. Both had 
laid down that law to themselves. He was her 
husband ; he was St. John's friend ; his infatua- 
tion for this woman to whom they had a 
common dislike was a subject never to be 
named. Each knew what the other felt. He 
grieved for her, seeing how she suffered under 
Madame de Waldeck's presence . exposed , to 
infinite hourly humiliation and the pangs of 
acute jealousy. If he could have ousted this 
designing adventuress from her position, he 
assuredly would ; though to his own loss. In 
the meantime Wilfred's weakness was ground 
he studiously avoided with Nellie; and she 
respected his reticence. 

Madame de Waldeck had arrived on a Thurs- 
day. The tenor of the two following days 
was what I have indicated, generally, without 
occurrence or conversation worth special record. 
On the Sunday, at breakfast, Wilfred asked 



152 POET AND PEER. 

Nellie if Bhe was going to church. On her 
replying in the affirmatiye, he turned to 
Madame de Waldeck . 

'* Will you come and listen to one of Nature's 
sermons on the shore, instead?" 

The lady assented. 

"What are you going to do, Hubert?" he 
then inquired. 

*'I shall walk to church with Lady Athel- 
stone." 

** I advise you to leave her at the door, then. 
The curate will aggravate you to that degree, 
you will come out in a worse frame of mind 
than you went in. I tried it the first Sunday 
we were here. The man talked such abomin- 
able rubbish, it was as much as I could do not 
to jump up and tell him so." 

"He is a good man," said Nellie, gently, 
" and the poor like his preaching." 

" You don't mean to tell me, my dear, that 
you like it?" 

" Indeed I do. I like it very much." 
" I admire you for your courage, Lady Athel- 
stone". and Madame de Waldeck beamed at 




POET AND PEER. 153 

her across the table with an appreciative smile : 
. ** and I think you, Lord Athelstone, are quite 
wrong. Because such discourses do not suit 
you^ it is no reason that those to whom they 
are specially addressed . the poor and unedu- 
cated . should not have what they like. A 
profound, analytical sermon would be thrown 
away upon them. A village congregation 
Avants a text that shall be repeated over and 
over again^ as though there were some mys- 
terious virtue in the iteration, with a good deal 
about faith and the devil; and I do not see 
why everyone should not have what suits him. 
It does not suit me^ but then I am not ortho- 
dox." 

The covert impertinence of this speech was 
so adroitly blent with its defence of Nellie that 
in the mouth of a less clever woman it might 
have been taken as a blundering attempt to 
reconcile opposite views. Hubert St. John bit 
his lip, and walked to the window. If he spoke 
at all, he felt he might be irritated into saying 
what were wiser left unsaid. When he turned, 
he found that Nellie had left the room. 



154 POET AKD FBEE. 

Half an hour later, she joined him in the 
garden, dressed for church, her Prayer-book in 
her hand* She looked the image of sweetness 
and purity in her white frock, and as be glanced 
from her to the lady sweeping the lawn with 
her tawny-colonred robes, under a Japanese 
parasol, he marvelled at the blindness of any 
man who could hesitate between the two 
women. 

They started to walk. The church was three- 
quarters of a mile distant, across some fields 
inland. It was a lovely August morning; 
everything sparkled in the sunlight. They 
rose over some undulating ground, where the 
feathered edges of long grass shone like silver^ 
and tall butter-cups caught the golden rays 
and kept them. It was not too warm for the 

walk to be enjoyable, yet neither spoke. Just 

 

as the grey church tower came in sight, and 
the toll of its feeble bell reached them on the 
breeze, a small bird rose straight into the air 
near them, singing as he soared. 

" What bird is thatf' he asked. 

"You have not lived in the country,'' she 



POET AND PEER. 155 

replied, with a sad little smile. ** You are not 
one of * the poor and uneducated,' or you would 
not ask . it is a lark." 

" Ah !" Then, responding to her allusion, he 
added . " I think that woman is the fiend incar- 
nate." 

She made no immediate reply ; but, presently, 
** Intellect is a great gift/' she said, "but I see 
it is a dangerous one. It is able to make wrong 
seem like right." 

" How can you say so, when it does not con- 
vince you? When conscience is not wilfully 
blind, no specious arguments can persuade us 
that wrong is right, I believe." 

Apparently she did not care to pursue the 
discussion. They walked on in silence, and a 
few minutes brought them to the church door. 

The service, aesthetically regarded, was ill 
enough executed to justify the criticism of 
those more concerned in the execution than 
in the spirit of the performance. The reading 
was monotonous, the choir nasal ; and, when 
the young curate came to the sermon, it was 
manifest that he had not the most elementary 



156 POET AND PEER. 

knowledge of elocution. But he spoke with 
conviction, and what he said went home to 
Nellie's heart. Possibly it was not his own. 
There was a certain originality in the treat- 
ment of his text which was hardly consonant 
with the mild-eyed yonng man's phrenological 
development. St. Paul places charity above 
the other two cardinal virtues. After repeating 
^\m verse, the curate directed the attention of 
his hearQrs almost exclusively to the import- 
ance of hope. A passage, the substance of 
which impressed Nellie, ran thus : 

" Faith is for God ; Charity is for our neigh- 
bour; Hope is for ourselves. It is true that, 
when we meet together here, we pray . that is, 
we hope . for all sorts and conditions of men, 
especially, no doubt, for all we love. But the 
soul's strong individual aspiration is the source 
of that longing for a future which embraces all 
^mankind. Even as to the things of this world, 
how could we endure the failures, the decep- 
tions, the disappointments that befall us, were 
we not buoyed up by hope? To few is it 
^veu to be universally prosperous, and those 



POET AND PEER. 157 

are not always to be counted the most blest. 
'The Lord loveth whom He chasteneth.' 

"But, whatever your trial, whether it be illness, 
or moneyed loss, or, worse than all, the death of 
some loved one in your home, hope sustains 
you, or you could not face the future, you could 
not work on courageously from day to day. 
The sanguine belief in * better times' enables 
men to 6ght on here, until they fall ; and it is 
the steadfast hope in an existence after death, 
where tears shall be wiped from every eye, that 
we all of us need, to raise our spiritual energy, 
just as our temporal hopes prevent our physical 
energies from flagging. Never let us despair^ 
but, through failure and aiHiction, if we be 
called upon to bear them, let us look forward 
in a manly, Christian spirit, from year to year^ 
knowing that our loss is not eternal, and that, 
when those years are told, our best hope in life 
will be the one that enables us to leave it with 
the certainty of a joyful resurrection, through 
the merits of our Lord and Master." 

Hubert St. John was surprised at the serenity 
he read in Nellie's face, as she came out from 



158 POET AND PEEK. 

the cburcb-porch into the clear sunlight. She 
was infinitely comforted by these simple words ; 
she little thought how soon she would have to 
test their strength. 

That sauntering walk home across the fields 
in the hot noonday . how often he remembered 
it in after-years I It seemed to divide two 
epochs in their lives. It stood on the threshold 
of a time of passionate agoay and bewilderment 
to her, of passionate distress and difiiculty to 
him. Never again, in the bright summer 
weather, should their footsteps linger among 
the meadow-sweet and clover, with their hearts 
lulled into momentary tranquillity by the 
preacher's words. 

On entering her bed-room Nellie saw a paper 
lying on her dressing-table. It was half a sheet 
of note-paper, folded up, without an envelope, 
and closely written over. The handwriting 
was Wilfred's. Where did it come from f The 
few notes of his she possessed (addressed to her 
at Brighton) were all locked away. Had he 
written to her while she was at church? That 



POET AND PEER. 159 

idea was dispelled when she examined the 
document. There was no beginning: it was 
part of a letter, of which the first page was 
torn off, and the words at the top of the sheet 
ran thus . 

** ^resolved that nothing shall prevent my 

sailing in October as arranged. All the arrange- 
ments you have made for me I shall gladly 
concur in. I await your arrival here with im- 
patience, that I may talk them over, and confer 
with you as to our farther plans. Be very care- 
ful not to allude to them during your stay here, 
as my wife knows nothing of my projected trip, 
nor do I mean to tell her till the last moment. 
The pamphlet you wished me to write is already 
in the press, and will be published in time to be 
circulated when you deliver your lecture in 
Manchester. 

*' Ever yours, 

" Athelstone.'' 

She looked round her bewildered. Was she 
in a dream? There stood the bed, the chest 
of drawers, the writing-table, as she had left 



POET AND PEER. 161 

had grown daily stronger. The brilliant^ ac- 
complished woman had made the young wife 
feel, more keenly than she had ever felt before, 
how unfit she was to be Wilfred's companion. 
How could Nellie wonder that he had yielded 
to her rival's fascination ? She did not wonder ; 
but she had believed, or rather she had hoped, 
until now, that the mutability of bis impressions, 
which she knew oftfen exceeded their warmth, 
would render Madame de Waldeck's influence 
transient. She had taken heart with the 
preacher's words ; she would not despair ; she 
would believe in the result of time, and patience, 
and unalterable love on her part, to bring her 
husband back to her again. But now . now 
how could she continue " to hope " ? He had 
secretly planned to cross the seas with this 
woman ; and possessing the fatal influence over 
him she did, if he really carried this scheme into 
effect, Nellie said to herself, he would be irre- 
trievably lost. 

And yet she could do nothing 1 Lying there, 
she felt her isolation as she had never yet felt 
it. There was no one to whom she could turn 

VOL. III. M 



162 POET AND PEER. 

for counsel and support. If Mary bad been at 
band, she might have confided in her ; but to 
St. John she could not speak of Wilfred's in- 
firmities. And^ after all, how could anyone 
help her? She had lost her husband's love; 
she was a burden to him, of which he would 
gladly be rid, did not the law oppose such 
severance. What comfort could any human 
being find for her in this bitter anguish ? To 
God alone could she pour out her heart. And, 
alas I for the first time in her young life, the 
consolation she had always found in prayer 
seemed denied. Her faith was unshaken, but 
her hope was dead. 

By what accident could that fragment of a 
letter have found its way to her dressing-table? 
Had it been placed there intentionally? From 
the central thought burning in her brain, radi- 
ated suddenly this subsidiary one. She rose 
quickly ; she must satisfy herself, if possible, on 
this point. After bathing her eyes, she rang 
the bell. 

" How came this letter here ? Do you know. 



POET AND PEER. 163 

Staples ?" she inquired, when the young woman, 
a little pale, but perfectly composed, answered 
the summons. 

" I put it there myself, my lady." 

For a moment Nellie was taken aback. She 
looked into Staples' bright black eyes ; they 
never flinched. 

" Pray where did you find it I" 

" On the path, just outside the window, my 
lady." 

'^ All the windows open on the path! It 
must have blown out. What made you think 
it was mine I" 

"Seeing my lord's signature, I supposed it 
must be addressed to you, my lady," she replied, 
glibly. 

Nellie had an instinct that this and her pre- 
vious answer were lies . prepared lies. She 
had never thought the woman's natui:^ evil ; 
fihe had no reason to believe that Staples would, 
from pure malice, inflict this torture; she did 
not distrust the heart, but she absolutely dis- 
trusted . from experience . the veracity of her 

M 2 



' 



164 POET AND PEER. 

attendant. Was it possible to believe that she 
should not have read the open letter which 
would have proved the falsity of her pretended 
conclusion ? And yet what motive but a mis- 
chievous one could have prompted her to do 
this thing ? 

'*The letter is not mine/' she said, slowly, 
" and I should wish it to be put back. w?Ar^ you 
found it. You had better not have touched it/' 
she added, gently. 

Staples' face flushed^ and with indiscreet 
haste she blurted out, 

" I did it for the best. I thought it but right 
you should know what was going on. ^ It's a 
shame,' I said^ ^ as my lady should be the last 
to know that my lord's going to America, when 
Lorenzo says as it's all settled, and ^ " 

" I feel sure," interrupted her mistress, " his 
lordship never told Lorenzo ; he learnt this . as 
you have. Staples . by underhand means." 

" Well, my lady, if Madame leaves her letters 
about in her blotting-book ^" 

''Say no more, Staples. I am ashamed to 
think you could imagine for an instant that I 



POET AND PEER. 165 

would countenance such dishonourable con- 
duct." 

"I didn't; that's why I said I picked it 
p. 

" You mean well by me, I hope," Nellie said, 
with a faltering voice. "But I am not to be 
served by such means as these." Then, as a 
faint colour rose in her cheek, she added, 
'* Understand this : what my lord wishes me to 
know, he tells me himself; I do not choose to 
learn anything by Lorenzo or by purloined 
letters, and I have a horror of lies." 

" Well, my lady," retorted Staples, roused to 
further indiscretion (in self-defence, as she 
considered), " when lies is going on all around 
you, where are you, if you remain as innocent 
as a child? That Madame is carrying on such 
a game as you don't see, but / have my eyes 
open, and Lorenzo says " 

" I have told you already I do not choose to 
hear anything Lorenzo says." 

So it had come to this already : that Wilfred 
and Madame de Waldeck were a topic of 
scandal with the servants ! Nellie turned away 



1 



166 POET AND PEER. 

quickly, and walked to the further end of the 
room. She could hardly contain herself, as 
Staples persisted, 

*^ Oh I it isn't against his lordship, my lady. 
Lorenzo is very fond of my lord, and makes 
excuses, for everything . ^but he knows a deal 
about Madame, and he says she is that artful,, 
she could twist any man round her finger/' 

^'If his lordship knew Lorenzo gossiped in 
this way, he would discharge him to-morrow/' 
was Nellie's half choked reply. 

But Miss Staples stuck to her guns. Though 
perfectly respectful in her manner, Nellie's birth 
was not without its influence on her. Sh& 
looked upon her mistress as a poor guileless 
young creature, raised to a position for which 
her ignorance of the world rendered her unfit ; 
and whose eyes it behove her abgail, with her 
extended knowledge of evil, to open, whether 
Nellie wished it or not. 

'* There's gossip, and gossip, my lady; and 
servants will talk of what they see going on 
under the same roo^ no matter who it is. I've 
no wish to make mischief; at the same time, it 



POET AND PEER. 167 

is but right you should know what a viper 
you're nourishing here. You'd far better turn 
her out o' the house at once. And if you ask 
Mr. St. John, my lady, I'm sure he'll say the 
same." 

" If you wish to remain in my ser\'ice," said 
Nellie, with forced composure, **you will never 
renew this subject. Leave me." 

Staples had performed what she honestly 
conceived to be her mission ; she retired. 

At the same moment the sound of voices on 
the lawn reached Nellie's ear. Wilfred and she 
had returned, then ; and Nelh'e must meet them 
with an unruffled brow, as though a chasm 
had not opened under her feet since the 
morning. 



168 



CHAPTER X. 

SHE was white and silent all that day. But 
so she had been, more or less, ever since 
Madame de Waldeck's arrival. There was no 
such alteration in her demeanour as to attract 
the notice of the two persons to whom Nellie 
was concerned chiefly not to betray herself. 
But St. John, ever watchful of the lights and 
shades on that young face^ was troubled by the 
expression he read there . an expression so 
opposed to the hope and courage that had 
illumined it upon their homeward walk from 
church. 

She seemed scarcely conscious of the talk that 
went on around her at first. Indeed, when Wil- 
fred addressed a question to her once or twice. 



POET AND PEER. 169 

it was evident her thoughts were absent. She 
roused herself for a while, and then St. John 
noticed that the lustreless eyes became fixed 
again, and the pinched look about the mouth, 
which told of painful inward straggle, became 
more rigid. 

Wilfred was particularly animated that after- 
noon. He took a more active pai-t in the 
conversation than he had yet done ; evincing, in 
a discussion with Hubert, the old truculent 
spirit which Madame de Waldeck's presence 
had hitherto, in some unaccountable manner, 
quelled. That lady, for reasons of her own, 
seemed content to sit by, for the most pai-t, 
smoking Russian cigarettes, and listening to the 
men sparring. She occasionally threw herself in- 
to the fight . always on Wilfred's side ; but she 
preferred watching the hard straight blows de- 
livered by St. John's heavy hand, without 
finesse^ and with no skill to parry his adversary's 
nimble, though often wild, attack. She learnt 
thus more of the man's capacity than she had 
yet done : its limitations, and its strength ; and 
she saw something, too, of that passionate 



170 POET AND PEER. 

nature which, though subject to restraint, she 
had divined from the very first, and upon 
which she counted as an important factor in 
her designs. 

At last something was said which awoke the 
young wife's attention. They were discussing 
a measure which had passed the Lower House 
during the last Session, but to which obstruction 
had been offered in the " Lords," when Athel- 
stone expressed himself thus . 

** The Upper House cannot last much longer ; 
it has had its day. A few years hence, and 
such folly as hereditary rank will be abolished. 
Those who have served the state will be re- 
warded according to their several capacities, 
and even, perhaps, be distinguished by life- 
peerages, so that their fellow-citizens may 
honour those men individually . not their sons, 
and their sons' sons. Men thus elevated should 
have part in the councils of the nation . there 
should be a distinct place for them. But, em- 
phatically, not for the effete descendants of any 
able man, be he warrior in the sixteenth, or 
banker-lord in the nineteenth, century. We 



POET AND PEER. 171 

shall hear no more of * an empty title,' when 
such rubbish is swept away ; for no title will be 
* empty' that challenges personal admiration 
and respect." 

" You had better not practise what you preachy 
Athelstone, unless you give up public speaking."' 
Hubert's manner had less of sarcasm than his 
words. "A lord/' he continued . *'a lord ad- 
vocating democracy is very attractive, na 
doubt ; and old titles, I believe, are dear to the 
masses. If Madame de Waldeck were Duchess 
of York, we should have all the farmers'* 
daughters in peplums before six months were 



over." 



"But, being nobody/' said the lady, taking 
the cigarette from her mouth and watching the 
smoke curl upwards, "you trust my following 
will not be numerous . eh?" 

** I should be sorry if the women of England 
adopted all your views, Madame de Waldeck. 
How they clothe themselves is a matter of 
perfect indiflFerence to me." 

An evil smile crossed Madame's lips. 

"1 look forward to seeing you a convert 



172 POET AND PEER. 

some day, Mr. St. John. a convert to many of 
my views." 

" Yon are a narrow-minded old Tory, Hnbert, 
who cannot progress with the age," said his 
host. *^ England is moving rapidly onward ; and 
.the more we cast overboard that which is heavy 
and obstructive . what was once ballast^ and is 
now mere lumber . the swifter our course will 
be. A few will shriek out that it is their house- 
hold gods we are casting away, but Humanity 
at large will benefit." 

**Will itf I doubt it. My sympathies are 
with the few whose household gods yon would 
destroy." 

**They will not really be destroyed at all. 
Those who are satisfied have only to hold fast 
by them," returned Wilfred, with a shrug. 

**In momentary anger, or led astray by 
transitory passion," . here St. John's eye 
glanced for an instant at Madame, . ^^ the gods 
will be broken that can never be mended again. 
Did I ever tell you of an old couple in White- 
chapel whom 1 see a good deal of, and whose 
tory supports my conservative view very 



POET AND PEER. 173- 

strongly ? They led a miserable life for years. 
The wife was a good and a clever woman, but 
something of a termagant ; a rigid chapel-goer, 
but incapable of making * allowances ' for her 
husband's weaknesses. In his cups he was very 
quarrelsome. Both have told me fhat, had it 
been possible to be divorced before the first teur 
years were over, they would have been. After- 
that, the man had a long illness, and the wife 
watched him with unremitting care. They 
were drawn nearer to each other; the fellow 
reformed in a great measure ; the wife's tongue 
lost much of its asperity . at all events, towards 
him. Sometimes I find old Jones a little boosy ; 
sometimes I hear Mrs. Jones's voice raised to an 
unmusical pitch ; but what of that ? They are 
sincerely attached to each other. As the years^ 
have rolled on, they have grown more and more 
used to each other's ways . more and more de- 
pendent on each other. If they had beea 
divorced, the old age of both would now be 
desolate and dreary." 

"They would probably both have married 
again," objected Wilfred. 



174 POET AND PEER. 

"I doubt it. To begin with, both would 
bave been afraid to try the experiment again. 
Then the husband^ enjoying the reputation he 
did, might not readily have found a woman to 
take him . or, at all events, who would have 
borne with him as his first wife did. And she, 
on her side, with her youth faded and her tem- 
per soured, would certainly not have had many 
offers of marriage." 

**And so people are to endure misery for 
years, in order that, at the end of life, with 
their spirits broken, they may possibly be able 
to tolerate each other's society I" 

^' Where there is a basis of real affection, 
mutual forbearance ought not to be hard. Of 
course, if there is not a strong attachment . ^if 
there is no sense of the solemn responsibilities 
of marriage^ and of the happiness of both being 
bound up together . the sacred flame of * home ' 
may be blown out by the first pestilent wind 
that blows." 

** There may be real affection, but ^" began 

Wilfred. Here he stopped short, and started 
afresh. '* Characters develop so differently that 



POET AND PEER. 175 

a man marrying young must often find his 
wife at thirty quite another woman from the 
one he married at twenty. In short, she is 
another woman, as he, probably, is another 
man." 

" That is no argument," said St. John, curtly. 
^^ A man has no business to marry till his char- 
acter 18 developed . till he knows definitely 
what he wants, and why. If he is a thistle- 
down, caught by every brier, well, such natures 
as that ought not to marry, and it would be 
monstrous to undermine the foundations of 
domesticity to satisfy his requirements." 

"Far from undermining, it would fortify 
domesticity. It is the fact of the chain being 
indissoluble which . which so many find galling 
. which irritates and exasperates," he said, 
hastily. Then he stopped again. Apparently 
he held it inexpedient to pursue the subject in 
that direct channel further, for, after a mo- 
ment's pause, he added . " However, it is of no 
nse talking to you. You are one of the class 
who cling obstinately to old ideas, and reso- 
lutely refuse to admit new ones. Of course, 
voL iiL m 



I 



176 POET AND PEER. 

all reforms, all innovations meet with obloquy, 
and the innovators, as Madame de Waldeck 
knows, suffer merciless injustice. One must 
not mind that. If one has the enthusiasm of 
humanity . if one has a holy horror of shams . 
one must have the courage to deliver the mes- 
sage that is given us to say. I will repeat you 
a short poem I wrote the other day. I call it 
' Martyrs/ " and he began, with the rich musical 
cadence so peculiar to him, to recite the follow- 
ing:. 

^^ When Day was just beginning 

In a world where reigned the Night, 
And the Dawn, priests called it sinning, 

And the Dark, priests called it light : 
And yictims to Faith or Science 

Suffered for Conscience' sake. 
And fell, in firm reliance 

On Truth, at the martyr's stake ; 

** Was it worse,. that slow submitting 

Of the strong man's patient powers, 
The buffets, gibes, and spitting, 

The cross, and the seven hours . 
Was it worse than our daily trials, 

And the arrows by night that fly ? 
God's death comes once : man's trials 

Of bitterness run not dry. 



POET AND PEER. 17? 

" When fables no more beguile ye, 

And ye cast your myths away, 
And the lips ye loved revile ye, 

Because ye no longer pray ; 
And creeds of the old world vanish, 

And Faith has a wider sense, 
And, because of the false ye banish, 

The real grows more intense . 

" When the bay-leaves all are scattered. 

And the music of praise is dead, 
And crowns in the dust lie shattered 

That might have encircled your head . 
When reproach and loathing duly 

Stone you, my Brothers, then . 
Then are ye martyrs truly 

Who fall for your fellow-men !" 

" How beautiful I . how original 1" ejaculated 
Madame de Waldeck. Then . as Nellie rose, 
with an expression of infinite pain, and walked 
away . " I am afraid Lady Athelstone does not 
appreciate your noble verses . she looks horri- 
fied I" 

St. John said nothing. He scowled at the 
speaker, while he lit another cigar, then slow- 
ly followed Nellie to the terrace facing the 
sea. 

VOL. ni. N 



178 POET AND PEER. 

A little later, as they all four stood there, 
watching the red sun sink into a bank of clouds, 
Wilfred said, 

"I am afraid the weather will change to- 
morrow. It looks stormy." 

" I hope it will not interfere with our fishing," 
Madame rejoined. "You know you promised 
me we should go sea-fishing. and to-morrow is 
my last day," 

Nellie's heart gave a little feeble bound ; she 
had hardly expected such speedy release from 
the torture of this woman's presence. And yet 
of what avail was that . or anything else now ? 
*' She will carry him off across the seas with 
her ; he will be swept away to his destruction, 
unless . unless " 

She was at Hubert's side. The others had 
strolled on ; the young man's thoughtful eyes 
were riveted on the sea. She spoke to him, 
hesitatingly. 

" Will you do something to oblige me t" 

" Anything. How can you doubt it 1" 

*^ Because you dislike Madame de Waldeck. 



POET AND PEER. 179 

Wilfred will, of course, ask you to go out fish- 
ing to-morrow . don't refuse/' 

" I will certainly go. Are you not com- 
iDg?" 

" I should be very miserable." 

Then their eyes met. He understood her. 
It was hardly worth her adding^ " You know, I 
am such a bad sailor." 

He felt sure that something had occurred to 
irritate the soreness of her wound. He would 
have given the world to ask her to confide in 
him, but he had strength to resist the tempta- 
tion ; he hated the thought of leaving her alone 
on the morrow, and of passing the day on the 
sea with Wilfred and Madame, to both of whom 
his company would be unwelcome ; but he had 
no difficulty in divining that Nellie dreaded the 
effect of so prolonged a tete-a-tete upon her 
impressionable husband. 

The restraint, if not the antagonism, of Hu- 
bert's presence, would rob this fishing-excur- 
sion of its danger. He read this thought in 
the young wife's face, as he consented to the 

n2 



180 POET AND PEER. 

act of Belf-renunciatioQ. He would have walked 
bare-footed to London, if it could have served 
her . nay, if it could have eased her heart-ache 
for a single hour. 



181 



CHAPTER XI. 

TTTILFRED^S prognostications were, in a 
' ' measure, justified. With the grey of the 
dawn the wind rose, and Nellie, as she lay in 
bed, heard it lashing the waves into angry 
remonstrances upon the shingly beach. Storm 
there was not, nor rain at present, nor did it 
blow sufficiently hard to prevent any " good 
sailor," as it is called, from going to sea. 
Still, unquestionably, there was " a change ;" 
the warm glory of yesterday was gone ; the air 
was chilly ; some leaves, still green, were blown 
about the lawn ; to anyone not ardent in quest 
of profit or adventure, it was an uninviting day 
to pass in an open boat. 



182 POET AND PEER. 

But to Atbelstone all weather was alike, and 
Madame de Waldeck declared that, with a 
waterproof dress and a glazed sailor's hat^ she 
was impervious to the elements, and should 
enjoy the tossing beyond measure. Then^ 
turning to St. John, as a matter of form . feel- 
ing sure that he had no deep-sea fishing pro- 
clivities . ^Athelstone said, 

"You will not care to come, of course,. 
Hubert ? It would bore you." 

To his dismay, St. John replied that he would 
come. Wilfred, very characteristically^ pointed 
out that he imagined that Hubert would have 
preferred keeping Nellie company at home, . 
"for, of course, you won't come, my dear? 
You would be frightfully ill." 

She shook her head. 

**No. I have promised, too, to go to the 
school this morning, and look at the girls' 
work." 

" How they must prize your presence here !" 
said Madame, with the most benign smile. 
" To have some one who knows, from experi- 
ence, all about it, and takes an interest in such 



POET AND PEER. 183 

tedious work as a village school, must be 
invaluable." 

St. John gnawed his beard, and, if a glance 
could kill, his still grey eyes would have 
stabbed her. 

** Lady Athelstone will be engaged, you see ; 
therefore, I have no compunction in joining 
you," he said. 

At ten they started, taking luncheon with 
them, and it was understood that they might 
possibly be absent all day. 

St. John's position was certainly not envia- 
ble, as he felt himself being carried out to sea 
for an indefinite number of hours with two 
persons who wished him at the bottom of it . 
one a woman whom he abominated, the other, 
formerly his friend, for whom, he was bound 
to confess to himself, he had now lost all 
cordiality of regard. As he sat there, coiled up 
in his pea-jacket, smoking his pipe, with his 
eyes fixed upon the oily surface of the unquiet 
waves, he asked himself what purpose his 
coming could serve. Had he not done all that 
man could do to save Wilfred Athelstone from 



184 POET AND PEER. 

the clutches of this devil ? Had he missed an 
opportunity of exposing the woman's true 
character? Had he 'flinched from that most 
ungrateful of tasks, remonstrance and advice, 
even to the verge of rupture? Could he be 
expected, indeed, was it possible, to do more 
than this ? There was but one answer, a nega- 
tive, to each of these. He was here because she 
desired it; and, with the simple fact of his 
presence, the power of helping her for the mo- 
ment seemed to end. Wilfred was a good deal 
occupied with the men in the management of the 
boat and the nets. From time to time he sat 
down near Madame de Waldeck, who was be- 
tween the two men, wrapped in tarpaulin. She 
did not attempt to engage St. John in conver- 
sation ; a few desultory remarks on the state 
of the sea, the chances of a big haul, and of 
a storm towards evening, were all that passed. 
The hours wore away. They stood well out 
to sea, and as the wind increased it became 
colder. They had caught next to nothing ; to 
windward the sky had grown a deep indigo ; it 
was certain that before evening there would be 



POET AND PEER. 185 

a storm. Wilfred himself proposed to return, 
and Madame, who had behaved like a Spartan, 
confessed that, in spite of whisky within, and 
tarpaulin without, she was perishing, and would 
not be sorry to land. To land at Eaglescrag 
itself, however, was found to be impracticable, 
owing to the tide and the state of the sea. 
There was a little bay a mile up the coast, 
where there were no rocks, and comparatively 
no surf. They ran the boat in here without 
difficulty about three o'clock, just as the first 
drops of the coming storm fell. 

They had walked a few minutes over the 
shingle, and the rain was now coming on fast, 
when Wilfred exclaimed, 

" These confounded stones I We shall be an 
hour getting home over them, and you'll be 
wet through, Madame de Waldeck. You had 
better take refuge under the sand-cliffs . there 
are almost caves there, where you will be quite 
dry, and, when the rain abates, you can walk 
home through the wood. You go home, Hu- 
bert, and tell Nellie we are all safe . she may 
be anxious about us, poor child I" 



186 POET AND PEER. 

St. John felt tempted to observe that Ma- 
dame's waterproof bad resisted (so she valiantly 
declared) all the heavy seas which had broken 
over the boat. Bat his eagerness to return to 
Nellie, and the prospect of being alone with her 
for awhile, held him silent. Madame might 
have parried the attack, and punished him by 
insisting on returning straight to the house. 
Besides, his task was over, it had lasted five 
mortal hours; if Wilfred meant to be alone 
with the lady now, nothing could prevent it, 
whether under the sand-clifis or elsewhere. 
St. John and his companions parted on the 
shingle, he bearing on slantways to the pine- 
wood, which came nearer to the shore a few 
hundred yards ofi", where a path struck into the 
private grounds of Eaglescrag; they turning 
sharp to the left, where, in two or three minutes, 
they were under the shelter of the cliffs. 

Meanwhile Nellie, with a throbbing head, and 
feeling a weariness in all her limbs she had 
never known before, had crawled through the 
wood to the village school-house, about three- 
quarters of a mile distant, where she had re* 



POET AND PEER. 187 

mained some time, trying to rivet her attentiouf 
upon the children's answers, and encourage tbe- 
teachers by showing interest in their work. 

" Would I were one of them !" she said ta 
herself. *' Would I were a poor pupil-teacher 
again, working for daily bread, and cherishing 
an ideal which nothing could destroy 1 I could 
have carried that to my grave with me. The- 
reality is gone . gone never to return I Oht 
mother 1 mother I If I had only the cottage ta 
go back to I . if 1 could only lay my head 
on your breast once more, and find refuge 
there I" 

It was after one o'clock when she left the 
school, and walked slowly to the edge of th& 
cliff. There was a nearer way home through 
the back of the wood ; but the path sha took 
led to a favourite spot of hers, where she often 
brought her book and sat for hours. The after- 
noon was before her; she felt oppressed indoors,, 
and could not touch food ; she heeded not the 
lowering sky ; she would rest among the sand- 
hills, and the sea-winds might cool her fevered 
brow. 



188 POET AND PEER. 

When she left the cone-strewn path, walled 
in hy the red stems of pines on either side, and 
reached the jagged cli^ sparsely clothed with 
tamarisk, and upheld from crumbling hy a net- 
work of pine-roots, the wind blew fiercely. It 
drove the whirling sand into her eyes ; it bent 
the sapling firs^ and bowed the long grey 
grasses ; she could not sit in so exposed a spot. 
But, just below, the cliff was hollowed into a 
succession of natural caves, deep enough to 
afford shelter, and fringed with a pendent 
frame-work of roots. Masses of blue-green sea- 
kale grew among the yellow sand-heaps and 
fihingle here. Occasionally a promontory^ 
crowned with young firs, ran out upon the 
shore, marking the limits that the cliff had 
reached) till land-springs had broken it down, 
wheresoever destruction was not arrested by 
vegetation. Nothing could be less like England 
than the fantastic uncertainties . the depres- 
sions and excrescences and deep hollows in 
these cliffs : nothing more picturesque than their 
colouring, when sunset fed the rich-toned sand 
with fire, and touched the wet slope of lilac 



POET AND PEER. 18^ 

fihingle with a thousand sparkles of gold. 
But now the hue of sky and sea alike was 
that of lead. The only light seemed to be 
emitted by the spray of the foaming waves, as 
they broke against the stones. Sea-gulls and 
petrels were whirling close to the surface of the 
water, uttering their wild, desolate cries. Nellie 
loved the sea in all its aspects ; but this one 
especially fitted her present frame of mind. She 
descended the steep clifi*, and seated herself 
within a hollow just wide enough to shelter a 
single person, but really forming part of a 
broader cavern, from which it was dirfded and 
obscured by a slip of sand which had consoli- 
dated into a species of buttress. As she sank 
down upon the carpet of fine, dry pebbles, thi 
buttress was commodious to lean against. 
Seated there, she could watch the yeasty waves- 
breaking upon the beach, the hard . indigo hori- 
zon of the sea, the fishing-boats scudding before 
the wind, the heavy clouds gathering and ad- 
vancing landward. And yet it was quite- 
possible to pass this aperture, and take refuge 
beneath the wider portico I have named, with- 



190 POET AND PEER. 

out observing the grey-clad figure whose 
.colouring, in deep shadow, was scarcely dis- 
tinguishable from its surroundings. 

The young creature's limbs found rest here ; 
her thoughts, for a long time, found none. 
They beat from side to side of those narrow 
confines beyond which they could not escape ; 
as captive wings beat fruitlessly against the 
wires. She had not slept all night; she had 
scarcely touched food to-day; physically and 
mentally, she was exhauHted. It was good to 
be here, with no other sound in her ears than 
the monotony of breakers, grinding slowly back 
over the pebbles when their strength was spent. 
It was good to be here, absolutely alone with 
Nature ; removed from the friction of any irri- 
tating contact ; relieved from all exigencies of 
restraint or dissimulation. She had rather 
remain here for ever than endure the hourly 
torture to which she had been subjected of late. 
Was this simply jealousy? She answered 
vehemently, ** No." She said now, as she had 
told herself before, that, supposing it were pos- 
sible for Sylvia Brabazon to have resumed her 



POET AND PEER. 191 

old ascendancy over Wilfred, however bitterly 
wounded Nellie might have been, she would 
have felt it was natural . almost excusable. 
The woman whom Nellie admired and rever- 
enced beyond all others would have exercised 
no evil influence. She recognized beyond the 
possibility, of doubt now that his heart had 
always been Sylvia's. He had married out of 
pique, and from a romantic endeavour to re- 
kindle the embers of his boyish passion. He 
had deceived himself, and he had deceived her. 
She did not attempt to blind herself to that fact. 
ut she said that, had he returned to his former 
allegiance, miserable as she might have been, it 
would not have been this misery. At Sylvia's 
feet, his nature would only have been fed with 
what was strong and noble ; while in the lap of 
Circe it would deteriorate from day to day. 
The polished surface of Madame de Waldeck's 
mind, which had such a glittering attraction for 
him, was backed by the quicksilver of ever- 
shifting adaptability ; there was no fixed metal 
of principle behind her brilliant intellect. Ig- 
norant of the world as Nellie was, she saw with 



192 POET AND PEER. 

extraordinary clearness that Madame de Wal- 
deck would be deterred from nothing which it 
was her pleasure or her interest to achieve ; and 
her ascendancy over Wilfred could only be for 
evil. 

Could she save him? Was it possible, by 
any means, to prevent this woman's designs 
from taking effect ? Would it be of any avail 
to write to the dowager? Her good sense 
instantly discarded the idea. Little could ever 
be effected with Wilfred by opposition ; by such 
weak remonstrance as his mother's, absolutely 
nothing. He would strengthen his own position 
^vith specious arguments, and rout the attack- 
ing force, even if supported by the Bishop's 
solid artillery. A step-father's interference is 
rarely well received ; by Wilfred it would be 
resented. No ; help could not come from that 
quarter. 

Her thoughts then turned, almost against her 
own wiU^ to one to whom she had hitherto 
resolutely refused to confide her anxiety, al- 
though that wise and devoted friend was at 
hand. The instinct which made her feel that 



POET AND PEER, 193 

such confidence might be dangerous . seeing, as 
she could not fail to see, that St. John's heart 
was absolutely unchanged . had hitherto re- 
strained her even more than her repugnance to 
discussing Wilfred's infatuation with his friend. 
But now, as she lay there, coiled up on the sand, 
with eyes fixed upon the ocean, which seemed 
to her no unfit emblem of eternity, she asked 
herself whether such paltry scruples should 
weigh in the balance against the immortal wel- 
fare of her husband? Consideration for St* 
John's feelings, and her own delicacy as to 
speaking at all on this subject, must, and ought 
to, give way. His mind, so full of resource, 
might see a way to save Wilfred. Nothing had 
escaped his keen grey eyes; he had seen all, 
and perhaps more than poor Nellie could tell 
him ; he had attacked the woman with trenchant 
words ; was it not time to bid him rescue his 
friend ? 

She would speak openly to Hubert St. John. 
That resolve was uppermost in her mind, before 
nature had its way at last, and she fell asleep. 
It was the deep sleep of exhaustion, absolutely 

VOL. III. O 



I 



1 94 POET AND PEER. 

dreamless. The over-wrought brain, soothed 
by wind and waves, enjoyed a temporary ob- 
livion of its crushing sorrow. 

How long she had slept she never knew, 
when she was awoke by a terrific clap of thun- 
der, which resounded along the* cliffs. She 
opened her eyes with a shiver ; it was pouring. 
The entire aspect of the scene was changed. 
She could scarcely see the sea now for the 
driving rain. At the same moment the sound 
of a voice, so near at hand that not a syllable 
was lost, fell upon her ear. She recognized it 
at once . ^it was Madame de Waldeck's. She 
was speaking with the intonation proper to a 
oontinuous flow of gently persuasive argument, 
instead of with the dominant brilliancy that 
belonged to her utterances in general society. 
Nellie never doubted who was her companion. 
They were both sheltering in that other portion 
of the cave, from which the buttress divided 
her. Though she lost no word of what was 
said, the drift of Madame de Waldeck's harangue 
for the first few moments escaped Nellie. The 
oontext was wanting. Then Wilfred murmured 



POET AND PEER. 195 

43omething, apparently with hesitation, and what 
he said Nellie failed to catch ; but the meaning 
of the reply was at once and painfully appa- 
rent. 

" Only for three days . she cannot be so un- 
reasonable as to mind that. The wife of an 
eminent man must sacrifice herself occasionally, 
and this is a small sacrifice." 

" She will be called to make a greater one 
before long. And, you see, it would be differ- 
ent if she had any sympathy with your views ; 
but she has none. She was annoyed (I confess 
to my surprise, for I had no notion she would 
care) at my writing in favour of divorce. If I 
speak at Liverpool in the same sense . and, of 
course, the papers will report my speeches . I 
shall have a scene with her, I'm afraid. It cer- 
tainly will not reconcile her to being left here 
alone," he added. 

" Why alone ? You can leave that excellent 
man, Mr. St. John, to look after her." 

** You don't understand her . she is a roman- 
tic child, like many who are only partially edu- 
cated. If she hasn't me, she cares for no one. 

o2 



196 POET AND PEER. 

Old Hubert would almost bore her, I am afraid."^ 

"Really I ... It is unfortunate that Lady 
Athelstone should be so little able to appreciate 
your highest claims to the admiration and gra- 
titude of mankind. But she is such a sweet 
creature 1 I can well understand that to any- 
one, as you say, * partially educated,' our wider 
views are incomprehensible. Still, in the in- 
terests of the world at large, I think you must 
make a stand against the encroachments of a 
young wife's selfish affection. This visit to 
Liverpool with me would pave the way for 
your longer absence." 

" For tliat there is a reasonable plea . that I 
am hard up, and shall make a pot of money. 
For thUy I could only plead that . that ^" 

"That you were rendering me a great ser-^ 
vice. Your pamphlet will be sold at the doors. 
An introductory address from you, if it were 
only a few words, would give such iclat to my 
lecture." Then, in a lower key . "Ahl I should 
feel so proud." 

" Well, if you really attach such importance 
to it " 



POET AND PEER. 197 

" Indeed . indeed I do/' 

** . I will come; but my 'rendering you a 
service ' will not reconcile Nellie to my advo- 
cating your views on the platform, 1 am afraid. 
I shall say nothing about it, and trust to her 
not reading the papers : she seldom does. One 
scene is enough, and I confess I rather dread 
breaking the news of my long absence in 
America to her." 

" No doubt Lady Athelstone will propose to 
accompany you." 

" Oh I that is out of the question . she never 
would stand the voyage. I shouldn't think of 
taking her. When the wrench is once made, 
she will do very well. I shall get an old cousin 
of mine to come and stay with her while I am 
absent." 

" And then there is Mr. St. John . although 
you think that he bores her." 

"Ohl she likes him well enough. But the 
fact is, she really cares for no society but mine. 
Of course, I ought to be glad . in one way ; but 
it is a little trying when your wife dislikes all 



198 POET AND PEER. 

your friends^ and takes no interest in questions 
that engross your life." 

" Ah I I feel for you. You require sympa- 
thy.you require a companion of an enlarged 
and highly educated mind. Lady Athelstone 
is an angel^ but of course you must feel a want 
. it could not be otherwise." 

^'Yes, and I must confess that^ since you 

came, 1 have felt it doubly. To know that one 

is understood . to be able to speak of one's 

views and aspirations openly with a woman 

who is free from the common prejudices of her 

sex, is a great privilege. But you are more 

than this ; your brilliant intellect is like a book 

which I constantly open at a fresh page. All 

other reading seems dull after it. You are the 

only woman of whom I could say, as Enobarbus 

does of Cleopatra, 

" 'Age cannot "wither her, nor custom stale 
Her infinite variety.' " 

" Ah ! You are too flattering. Still . I may 
say so without fear of being misunderstood ? . I 
have often thought, I will confess, how different 
life might have been to us both, had we met 



POET AND PEER. 199 

long ago, before either of us contracted ties, 
which . in my case, at least . did not tend to 
happiness." 

" You have snapped the chain that was 
riveted in the folly of youth. I can never 
break mine . even if I wouldJ^ 

At that moment a vivid flash of lightning, 
followed so instantaneously by a crash of 
thunder that it seemed as though the heavens 
had opened directly over the cliff, elicited an 
exclamation of alarm from Madame de Waldeck. 
Nellie sat motionless, with closed eyes. How 
gladly would she have met swift, sudden death 
at that moment I 

As the thunder rolled away in the distance, 
strange to say, a passage of Robert Browning's 
she had lately read recurred to her. The 
human mind is so constituted that it is difficult 
to account for such things. In those few 
minutes, the last hope to which she had clung 
had drifted from her ; her life was absolutely 
wrecked. And yet her mind could not free 
itself of those lines in " Pippa Passes," where 
Ottima describes the storm overtaking her 



i 



200 POET AND PEER. 

and her paramour in the wood. There 
was no similarity of circumstance, but she 
found herself repeating the guilty woman's 
words. 

^^ Swift ran the searching tempest overhead ; 
And ever and anon some bright white shaft 
Burnt thro^ the pine-tree roof, here burnt and there, 
As if God's messenger thro^ the close wood-screen 
Plunged and replunged his weapon at a venture, 
Feeling for guilty thee and me ; then broke 
The thunder, like a whole sea overhead " 



What they said after this was of little 
moment. While the storm gradually cleared 
off, they discussed matters which in no way 
touched Nellie. Madame de Waldeck had gain- 
ed her point. Wilfred Athelstone would accom- 
pany her to Liverpool; her present interests, 
her devilish schemes for the future, would 
profit alike by this. Nellie, with bitterness and 
jealousy at heart, would be left alone with St. 
John. Would she not, herself, "snap the chain"? 
Madame, who knew much of poor weak human 
nature, felt confident that she would do so. 

Half an hour later the wind had abated ; the 



POET AND PEER. 201 

rain had cleared off; a pale streak of light 
appeared on the horizon of the sea ; the storm 
was past, and they who had sheltered under 
the cliff, were strolling up its sandy side by 
a winding path beset with long wet grasses. 

It was some time before the young wife 
found strength to rise, and follow them, with 
feeble steps, to Eaglescrag. 



202 



CHAPTER XII. 

QHE did not see Madame de Waldeck again. 
^ On reaching home, she crept into bed, feel- 
ing 80 ill that it was no fiction to assure Wil- 
fred she was incapable of the exertion of 
appearing at dinner. 

In the morning a flood of golden light and 
the shadow of wavering rose-leaves fell upon 
her bed through the open shutter. He stood 
by the bed-side. Her face was turned to the 
wall; but he stooped and kissed her, asking 
how she felt. She murmured that she was 
tired . very tired ; nothing more. In that case, 
he replied, she had best remain quiet. Madame 
de Waldeck was departing early ; and business 



POET AND PEER. 203- 

also called him away from Eaglescrag for a 
couple of days. She manifested no surprise; 
she neither spoke nor moved. 

" Of course, Hubert remains here," he con- 
tinued. ** I shall be back positively on Thurs- 
day. Hubert will take good care of you till 
then." 

*' I want no care," she moaned, . " the less- 
care the better. Let me die I Let me die ! It 
will be better for all 1" 

"What is the matter? You are over- 
wrought, Nellie. You have been doing too 
much. I shall send for the doctor to look at 

* 

you." 

** I want no doctor," she cried. .' I want 
you . only you . and that woman is taking 
you from me 1" Then, turning suddenly,, 
she cast her arms about him, sobbing hysteric- 
ally. 

<< My dear child, this is really too silly. I 
cannot stand this sort of thing. You must 
learn to control this foolish jealousy. * That 
woman,' as you call her, is not * taking me 
away ' at all. Can't I leave you for a couple of 



204 POET AND PEER, 

days without your jumping at such an absurd 
conclusion f " 

*' You are going with her to propagate her 
horrible doctrines. I know all . all, Wilfred I 
Oh, my husband, for God's sake pause I I 
know you do all this under a blind delusion . a 
belief that men and women will be better for it* 
Ton are not wicked, as site is ; she wants to get 
you from me, but she shan't . she sharCt ! I will 
die first, and then you will be free to marry the 
only woman worthy of you . the woman you 
ought to have married, if you had only waited, 
dear. If you had only waited I Ah I I am not 
fit to be your wife ; you sacrificed yourself to 
me. I have no talents, no powers of persuasion, 
. nothing, nothing but my infinite love. But, 
oh, do listen to me . do, for your own sake, 
dear, not for mine I That woman will lead you 
to your destruction ! If you go with her to 
America '' 

" Who told you I was going to America?" 

** I heard it from your own lips ; I was there 
under the cliff. I heard everything." 

^< I would not have believed it, if anyone else 



POET ^IND PEER. 205 

had told me you had played eavesdropper, 
Nellie." 

He answered angrily, as men often do, when 
their consciences prick them. 

**I could not help it; I had fallen asleep. 
The storm woke me, and I heard you both 
talking close to me." 

" Listening is always dishonourable," he re- 
plied, parading his resentment as a bulwark for 
self-defence. ''If you heard anything that 
pained you, I am sorry for it; but it is your own 
fault. As to my intention of lecturing in 
America, you have only learnt it a little sooner 
than you would otherwise have done. I have 
been offered a large sum, and I want the 
money, which I have no other means of 
making." 

" Then let me go with you. I ask no more 
than that." 

"Nonsense, Nellie 1 How could you stand 
the fatigue of constantly travelling, when your 
nerves are in the state they are . when you are 
knocked up with the slightest thing? How could 
you possibly stand the voyage, when you are ill,. 



206 POET AND PEER. 

if I take you out for an hour in an open boat ? 
It is out of the question. Tou would be a 
<3onstant anxiety, and hamper me in all my 
arrangements." 

"Ah! I hamper your arrangements now," 
she sobbed, as she flung herself back upon the 
pillow ; " but only wait a little . wait till I am 
gone. It will not be very long, dear ; you will 
floon be treef I promise you, I feel it here. Only, 
if I die while you are away, I know you will 
become that woman's. You will never, never 
escape ; she will make you marry her ! And she 
counts upon it now ; I read it in her face. She 
would kill me, if she dare 1" 

" This is raving lunacy. I am really ashamed 
of you, Nellie. Supposing anyone were to hear 
you ? The servants " 

'* . Ah 1 the servants know what she is ; they 
would have opened my eyes before, if I had 
allowed them." 

" They know nothing, and you certainly over- 
heard nothing, to warrant this monstrous 
insinuation. Madame de Waldeck is my friend, 
an intellectual woman^ whose views are in 



POET AND PEER. 207 

eympathy with mine. Unfortunately, yours 
are not. When I married, I hoped to have 
moulded your mind^ but it obstinately resists 
change from old beliefs and ways. I can't help 
that. Is it my fault if others understand me, 
and you do not ? Is it my fault if others appre- 
ciate and encourage my efforts in the great 
cause of liberty, and you remain indifferent or 
else condemn them ? I think you cannot accuse 
me of unkindness. I have done . I shall 
always do, everything 1 can to make you 
happy. But I will not sacrifice my independ- 
ence of thought and of action. You are ill, your 
nerves are upset, therefore I will give up going 
to Liverpool ; but understand, I shall not yield 
in this way again. It would be weakness to do 
so. 

He turned from her without another word 
and left the room. He was thoroughly put 
out; it was so seldom he permitted his arrange- 
ments to be thwarted. Nellie's triumph was 
dearly purchased. Perhaps it would have been 
better to let him go. He would have felt some 
sting of self-reproach at leaving her ailing. 



208 POET AND PEER. 

some contrition on his return at the end of two 
days. As it was, his heart was hardened 
against her by reason of his self-sacrifice to 
what he chose to consider her puerile and 
exacting jealousy. 

Madame de Waldeck was gone. Hubert St. 
John remained ; but he did not see Nellie till 
late that day. 

In the afternoon the two men started for a 
walk, which they performed, after the manner 
of Englishmen, in perfect silence, at the rate of 
four miles an hour. They smoked their pipes 
as they swung along, each absorbed in his own 
thoughts ; neither of them being accustomed, or 
holding it needful between men^ to sacrifice 
largely to the exigencies of courtesy. On their 
return, they found her, almost as wan as her 
cream-coloured tea-gown, in a garden-chair 
upon the terrace. Her hands lay listlessly 
upon an open book in her lap ; but a rose lay 
upon the book, and the book itself was topsy- 
turvy. There were deep hollows under her 
large eyes, and her whole face looked drawn 
and aged. The afternoon tea-table stood beside 



POET AND PEER* 209 

her, and on it lay the day's papers that had 
come by train. 

St. John took one of the basket-chairs that 
were near the table ; Wilfred stood. He asked 
Nellie how she felt ; but there was no tenderness 
. there was little beyond benevolence . in the 
inquiry. Then he poured out some tea^ and 
opened his papers ; after which he walked into 
the house. 

For a few minutes there was a silence. 
Hubert drank his tea and watched her with 
grieved, wondering eyes. Her rival was de- 
parted ; the air was disinfected from her pres- 
ence; yet there seemed to be no relief . no 
shaking off the malaria whose poison had 
entered the young wife's veins. 

She looked away from him towards the pale, 
primrose-coloured sky against the shadowy 
horizon of the darkening sea as she said at last^ 
in a low voice, and with deliberation . 

"Mr. St. John, do you know when Miss 
Brabazon returns to England 1" 

" No ; I do not." 

"I want so much to see her before . the 

VOL. III. P 



210 POET AND PEER. 

middle of October. You know that Wilfred 
meaDS to go to America?" 

" I do . and I deplore it." 

** If he goec;, Mr. St. John, he will be lost ; 
nothing can save him. The only person whose 
influence may prevent his going is Miss Braba- 
zon. mine is of no avail," she added, with a 
quivering voice. ** If I could die, it would stop 
him ; but, however earnestly we desire it, death 
does not come to us all as quickly as we wish. 
It tvill come . for I have not the courage to go 
on living now; but if his deliverance . and 
mine . comes when he is far away, when he is 
under that baleful influence, he will never escape 
from it. My only thought is for him now. If 
Miss Brabazon knew this " 

" She does know it. He told her before she 
left England," interrupted St. John, incau- 
tiously. 

*' Before she left England ? All those weeks 
ago? And I was left to learn this through 
servants 1" she cried, with bitterness. Her eyes 
were tearless; but she clasped her trembling 
hands over her face for an instant before she 



POET AND PEER. 211 

added . " Surely, surely she made an eflfort to 
fitop him?" 

" I do not know . I cannot tell. I feel sure 
she strongly disapproved, from the tone of 
Mary's letter; but whether, under the circum- 
stances^ she felt entitled to remonstrate with 
Athelstone is more than I can say." 

** Will you try to see her when you go back ? 
She may be returned. Mrs. Goldwin men- 
tioned in a letter yesterday that she had left 
Wiesbaden last week. Will you tell her . what 
I could not write . how . how he is changed, 
and whyl Will you implore her to use her 
great influence over him for good, to counteract 
the power of his evil genius, who will otherwise 
be bis ruin ?" 

'*! will, certainly. But Athelstone won't 
leave you . I feel sure he won't . when it comes 
to the point." 

She shook her head. 

*' Why not ? He will persuade himself that it 
is right to resist my entreaties ; and I daresay 
the world will be on his side. I am a weak, 
foolish woman; I ought to be thankful to be 

p .> 



212 POET AND PEER. 

his wife at any price . I who was in such a 
different station. I have no right to oppose his 
leaving me to travel. Other husbands do so . 
why not mine ? That is what they will say^ 
perhaps." 

"It is the . the object of his travelling . I 
mean his lecturing," he added, hastily, ** which 
distresses you most, and you may be sure the 
world will sympathise with you in that. It will 
create a great outcry. But you must not let 
the fear of all this prey upon you and under* 
mine your health ; for I believe it will never 
come to pass." 

He spoke with a confidence he was far fron^ 
feeling ; for he saw that her nerves had sus- 
tained some severe shock, and he was alarmedr 
She would never have spoken as she had just 
done, but under the stress of an acute anguish 
which had almost reached the confines of 
despair. 

He bent forward, with his elbows on his 
knees, his deep, earnest eyes fastened upon her 
face. She did not look at him ; her gaze was 
still fixed on the sea's horizon ; her pale fingers- 



POET AND PEER. 213 

pulled to pieces unconsciously the rose upon her 
lap. 

" You are mistaken," she said, at last. *' He 
has sacrificed himself to me to-day* He has 
^ven up going to Liverpool, and speaking 
there, out of consideration to what he calls my 
* nerves.' He resents having done so ; he thinks 
it an unjustifiable interference with his ' inde- 
pendence of thought and action' on my part. 
He will not do so again unless ^' 

Here she stopped short. 

"Unless what?" he asked, anxiously. 

" Unless I should be dying." 

" For God's sake don't talk like this !" and, 
by an irresistible impulse, he took the hand that 
lay near him, and held it between his. " Think 
how precious your life is to . to some I Your 
trial is only one that numberless women are 
bearing daily . bearing bravely . with hope in 
the future. Think of that fellow's words 
in the pulpit last Sunday . * Never let us 
despair r" 

" I am a coward . yes, I have no courage to 
face the future, knowing that my life is a 



214 POET AKD PEER. 

burden and a detriment to him. If he were 

free ^" she broke off again, with a deep 

sigh. 

It pained him to canterise her wound, but, 
after a moment's hesitation, he said, in his deep^ 
rough voice, 

" Perhaps he would marry Madame de Wal- 
deck. Ton must have courage to live, if only 
to keep him from that fate. This infatuatiou 
will pass. Tou know how his imagination run 
away with him. But, like a restive horse, give 
him his head, and depend on it he will come 
home . sooner or later." 

" Yes," she said, turning her sad eyes at last 
upon him, " but his * home ' is not here. Why 
deceive myself? It was a mistake from the 
beginning. His heart (and is not that * home ' ?> 
will always be with her . the only woman worthy 
of him." 

Worthy of him ? When Athelstone's conduct 
made St. John's blood boil ! Worthy of him ? 
When he had not even, as St. John felt sure^ 
the excuse of an overwhelmiug passion to plead 
for his behaviour towards this divine creature 



POET AND PEER. 215 

who was far too good to be his wife ! How 
blind . how iDcomprehensible I It irritated the 
young man to hear her : his heart felt sore ; but 
habitual self-control enabled him to say, 

** At least his ' home ' can never be with Ma- 
dame de Waldeck . rest assured of that. She 
has obtained a temporary hold over him. If he 
saw more of her it would soon be relaxed. 
Probably their being thrown constantly to- 
gether in America would be the speediest cure. 
He would learn what she really is . he would 
see through her, and the spell would be 
broken." 

" Sooner or later . yes ; but .... his eyes 
might be open too late. Tou understand me ? 
I should like to repair the wrong I have done 
Wilfred before I die, not make it irretrievable by 
letting him fall into evil hands. Will you try 
to see Miss Brabazon f 

** I promise you I will." 

*. And will you speak to Wilfred yourself be- 
fore you go ?" 

What could he say ? He would not tell her 
that he had already urged Athelstone to aban- 



216 POET AND PEER; 

don this scheme, and bad employed every argu- 
ment he could think of against it. He would 
not tell her that he knew Wilfred's combative 
spirit was only roused by opposition. He 
raised the hand he held to his lips, and promised 
to do her bidding. 

She withdrew her hand quickly, and rose. 
The dressing-bell for dinner had sounded, and 
Lorenzo^ for the last few minutes, had been 
stationary at his master's dressing-room win- 
dow, which, like all the others, looked upon the 
lawn, where Lady Athelstone and Hubert St. 
John sat. 



217 



CHAPTER XIII. 

VITILFRED ATHELSTONE continued to be 
' ' restless and pre-occupied during the 
remainder of St, John's stay at Eaglescrag. 
The two men were but little alone together, 
except during their ten-mile walks, when they 
rarely spoke. Not till the last night before 
his departure did St, John once more broach 
the subject of America. What he said was 
said more with a view of discovering whether 
time and reflection had influenced Athelstone's 
decision, than with any hope- that further 
remonstrance from St, John could aSect it. He 
found him more stubborn . entrenched more 
strongly behind a fortification of plausible 



218 POET AND PEER. 

reasoning . than when St. John had last 
appealed to him. The sacrifice of his visit to 
Liverpool still rankled. Madame de Waldeck 
had written of the universal disappointment 
felt at his absence . the ovation that had been 
prepared for him . the rapid sale of every copy 
of his pamphlet . the brilliant success of her 
own lecture. It was annoying to have missed 
all this^ because of his wife's irrational jealousy 
and hysterical demonstrations. She must be 
taught that such sacrifices were not to be de- 
manded of a husband. She had disappointed 
him. He had believed that her affection for 
him would enable her to support any trial 
which he thought fit to impose; but it had not 
done so. Her education as the wife of a public 
man . a man in whose career the benefit of 
mankind at large must supersede all domestic 
considerations . this education had yet to be 
made. It would begin with their separation of 
three or four months. He had even persuaded 
himself, by a chain of sophistical reasoning, that 
this was a wholesome probation for poor ill- 
disciplined Nellie. 



POET AND PEER. 219- 

Such was his contention, briefly stated. To 
reproduce his words to Hubert verbatim would 
be to weary the reader by traversing ground 
with no new features to recommend it. He put 
his case ably and vehemently ; and all Hubert's- 
arguments were powerless to dislodge him 
from his position. He had evidently well 
considered (with a view to demolition) the 
objections that would be raised to his scheme ;. 
they left him unconvinced. 

Hubert departed with a heavy heart. The 
last few days at Eaglescrag he had been almost 
constantly with Nellie. Her condition filled 
him with passionate anguish, with rage against 
AVilfred, and with an anxiety which he dared 
not formulate to himself in words. He waa 
haunted at night by her pale, sad face ; it 
obtained such possession of him as to render 
him unfit for work when he returned to London. 
Unless Athelstone could be deterred by some 
means from carrying the idea upon which he 
was so obstinately set into execution, St. John 
dared not contemplate what the effect upon 
Nellie's delicate organization might be. And,, 



220 POET AND PEER. 

-although he never admitted it to her, he was 
DOW very hopeless of Miss Brabazon's . or anyone 
else's . ^remonstrances being of avail. He walked 
out to Barnes the day after his return* The 
ladies, he was told, were not expected home for 
6ix weeks, at earliest. It was then the last week 
in August. Miss Brabazon could barely arrive, 
therefore, before Wilfred's departure. 

In the middle of September the Athelstones 
came to London, to attend the dowager's 
marriage. It had originally been understood 
that they were to return to Eaglescrag after 
the ceremony, and remain there a few weeks 
longer. Wilfred now announced, however, that 
sundry matters of business would detain him in 
town, and he made no attempt to conceal that 
this business was connected with his approach- 
ing tour in the States. To the young wife all 
pleas were alike just now. She moved about 
as though in a dream. Whether it was the 
rolling Atlantic, flecked with fishing-smacks, or 
the grey Thames and its penny steamers, that 
bounded her lawn, she scarcely noted. The 
garden opened upon the Embankment by a door 



POET AND PEER, 221 

in the wall ; and the room where she habitually 
sat, upon the ground-floor, communicated by a 
few iron steps with this plat of grass. Here, 
under a lime-tree, she often sat in those warm 
autumn days; and it was here the morning 
after her arrival that St. John found her. He 
was homfied at the change in her appearance. 
In the short time that had elapsed since he had 
left Eaglescrag, she was so fallen away that the 
dress which had fitted her lithe figure now 
hung loosely upon her. Dark rings encircled 
her eyes, and the eyes themselves had an in- 
describable expression which startled Hubert 
even more than her pallid cheek and her wasted 
form. She said very little. She wished for 
Miss Brabazon's address; and he promised to 
procure it for her. 

She had been nearly three weeks alone with 
her husband ; the ardent desire of the last few 
months had been realized. And the realization 
had brought, as so often happens in life, an 
anguish far more bitter than its non-fulfilment 
could have done. She felt, with the keen in- 
sight of a " clairvoyante," that all was changed 



222 POET AND PEER. 

between tbem. He was uniformly kind in his 
manner . far more affectionate, indeed, than he 
had been of late. He was solicitous for her 
healthy insisting upon her driving daily, and 
ven going the length of accompanying her 
occasionally, which she knew he detested doing. 
Though, otherwise^ he was not much with her 
during the day, he read aloud to her every 
evening ; but, with the sensitiveness of highly- 
sharpened perceptions^ she was conscious that 
he found in a book the best solution of the 
problem, how to pass an evening alone with 
her. And equally conscious was she that he 
regarded, and desired her to regard, every little 
attention as an item added to the balance of 
compensation against the sum of her fancied 
causes of complaint in the past or in the future. 
He did not see how ill she was ; still less did 
be comprehend the necessity of endeavouring 
to '^minister to a mind diseased." She was 
weak in body, and she was worried . no doubt 
she was worried about his leaving her, but that 
she would get over ; and as to her health, she 
had been in much the same condition as a girl. 



POET AND PEER. 223 

^ben the doctor bad ordered rest and Dourisb- 
merit, and sbe bad stayed at tbe Castle during 
that memorable week. He did not see that 
now the body refused nourishment, and tbe 
mind was incapable of rest. 

His mother saw it, and so did the Bishop, 
when they dined in Whitehall Gardens the 
night of tbe Athelstones' arrival from Eagles* 
crag. The dowager was genuinely concerned 
about her daughter-in-law, and tried to arouse 
her son's anxiety. But there are natures that 
resent the advances of anxiety as intrusive, and 
who seem to regard it as the precursor of evils 
that can be dismissed by simply shutting the 
door against them. Of such a kind was Wil- 
fred's ; and when he boldly announced his ap- 
proaching visit to the States, and stated his 
conviction that Nellie's ailment was due solely 
to temporary depression of spirits consequent 
thereon, though he greatly startled his mother, 
he relieved her apprehensions almost equally. 
What shocked and distressed her ought equally 
to shock and distress his wife. She beat the 
air with a few idle remonstrances ; the Bishop 



224 POET AND PEER. 

held bis peace. He saw that the young man 
was immoveable as a rock, and against rocks 
the Bishop never broke the waves of his per^ 
snasive eloquence. He kept them for the sands 
of indecision, which there was, at least, a chance 
of their consolidating. 

Nellie could not bring herself to say much to 
the dowager on the subject. What she felt 
wais of too complicated a nature to be under- 
stood by a lady of this stamp^ and, indeed, it 
impinged on a domain of wild suggestion, self* 
reproach, and utter hopelessness, which might 
well be docketed by the world as "morbid." 
Even to St. John^ and he was the only person 
who had a partial perception of her condition,, 
she could not commit the prominent dreads 
which, like a swift-spreading tree, cast ita 
dark shadow more widely over her each day* 
If she could only die tefore Wilfred left her 1 
What alternative was there? She was ready 
for any sacrifice, if she could secure his redemp- 
tion by it. In vain she prayed ; no comfort 
came in answer. She was conscious that phy- 
sical weakness accounted for the fact that her 



POET AND FEXR^ 225 

volition seemed to lie more and more at the 
mercy of her imagination, over which she had 
lost all control. Her thoughts 'for ever brooded 
on her husband's future, and how his misery 
and moral annihilation would be the conse-^ 
quences of any connection with Madame do 
Waldeck. He had sacrificed himself by his 
marriage, and he would give worlds now to be 
free. If she, his wife, did not free him . ^if ho 
was not released from that galling chain before 
he sailed for the New World . he would be 
lost. 

What she wrote to Sylvia was very little 
more than this : 

"I implore you to come here, to put away 
all pride^ to forget what our relative positions 
are, only to remember that the future of two 
human souls lies in your hands. You alone can 
save him . and perhaps me too" 

Not a day passed that St. John was not in 
Whitehall Gardens; and, after the dowager's 
marriage^ when Nellie had fewer interruptionst 
he often spent the whole afternoon with her. 
It was not surprising that the servants . Staples 

VOL. IIL Q 



226 POST AND PfiEO. 

and Lorenzo . ^formed certain conclusions* The 
maid regarded her mistress's position with 
abandant sympathy. The boy, with the cnri- 
ons persistence which was indicated by his 
closenset eyes^ never for an instant forgot that 
his master's freedom, by any means whatsoever, 
mnst be preparatory to the installation of 
another as mistress of the establishment, fie 
had foreseen it from the first ; this girl from the 
people was unfit for the position which she 
had usurped ; she was herself tired of the life, 
and my lord was tired of her. The sooner she 
decamped the better. What he had witnessed 
on the lawn at Eaglescrag had sunk into his 
mind: the Signer was devoted to my Miladi. 
Things were ripening daily, but he would drop 
no word to rouse his master's suspidons, if, 
indeed, it were possible to do so. My lord was 
wonderfully blind ; and perhaps it was as well 
so, until the evidence of this was clear and past 
concealment. Lorenzo, in the meantime, was 
vigilant night and day. 

It was at the Villa d'ste, on the Lake of 



POET AND PEER. 227 

Corao, that Sylvia Brabazon found Nellie's 
letter, which, with a packet of others, had been 
awaiting her arrival for some days. It was then 
the 1st of October, and the letter bore the post- 
mark of the 20th of September. Mrs. Brabazon 
was absorbed in her own letters ; she did not 
perceive the effect on her daughter as Sylvia read 
those few lines. Anyone watching her face would 
have observed the pallor that overspread it . 
the anxiety, the consternation, the momentary 
doubt that her whole attitude indicated, as she 
sat motionless for some minutes, the letter lying 
upon her lap, her eyes riveted across the lake, 
which lay in the shadow, upon the sun-tipped 
mountains beyond. The day was dying, pleas- 
ure-boats were returning to the hotel, and the 
laughter that rose from them came nearer and 
nearer across the water. The delicious breath 
of the ** olea fragrans " was wafted to her from 
the garden ; and then, through an open window, 
she heard a man's voice singing. It was one of 
the stornelli she loved so well . one which she 
had sung the night she dined with the Athel- 
stones in Home. 

q2 



228 POET AND PEEK* 

Her eyes saw these things, her ears heard 
them^ she could even recall them afterwards; 
and jet her thoughts were far away, and her 
heart more painfull j perturbed than it had been 
for a long time. No appeal less urgent could 
have moved her to contemplate taking a step 
which was repugnant to her, on all accounts, 
and which might very naturally be misin- 
terpreted by those who knew in what relation 
Lord Athelstone and she had stood towards 
each other. If she considered her own dignity, 
she would certainly not run the risk of placing- 
herself in what the world calls *^a false po- 
sition/' This man, whom she had once so 
nearly married, who had been so unstable that^ 
three months after her rejection (a rejection 
which was certainly not final), he had engaged 
himself to another . this man, who was so care- 
less of retaining her friendship now that he 
never even came to see her in London, how 
could she thrust herself upon him ? What right 
had she to endeavour to influence him, now 
that he was another woman's husband, even 



POET AND PEER. 229 

though the wife supplicated her to do so ? She 
had suffered much because of him. It had not 
been without a severe struggle that she had 
refused him, eighteen months ago ; and, though 
she had never repented her decision, she knew 
that, even now, in spite of wounded pride, 
reprobation, critical estimate of his faults and 
follies, he was not, and never would be, wholly 
indifferent to her. 

Among her other letters was one from Mary 
Goldwin, which she had read before opening 
Nellie's, and which formed the supplement to it ; 
containing, as it did, fuller information, derived 
from Hubert, concerning Athelstone and his 
wife's consequent misery. Mary's commentaries 
on this, her evident alarm concerning hr 
cousin^ whose passion for Lady Athelstone 
seemed to be inflamed by pity, and indignation 
at the treatment to which she was subjected, 
enabled Sylvia to understand . or to believe that 
she understood . the perils to which Nellie al- 
luded, and the part which she, Sylvia, was 
entreated to play in this drama. It sounded 



230 POET AND PEER. 

like the cry of a drowning creature . a snpplica-r 
tion to bold out a saving hand^ which she felt, 
after a momentary hesitation, that she bad not 
the heart to resist. 

But Mrs. Brabazon's condition was such that 
a hurried return to England was impossible ; she 
was unequal to travelling more than a certain 
number of hours at a time. She always ac- 
quiesced in her daughter's arrangements with- 
out a murmur, but she was exhausted with her 
journey to-day, and must have twenty-four 
hours' rest at least. And then she was a 
wretched sailor, and might be detained at 
Boulogne, waiting for a fair passage. Sylvia 
knew that it was impossible to calculate, with 
any approach to certainty, on being in England 
in less than ten days. And Lord Athelstono' 
was to sail on the 12 th I 

Under these circumstances, all she could da 
was to write to Nellie, promising to be with her 
as soon as possible, and enclosing a letter to 
Athelstone, in which she begged him not to 
leave England without seeing her. 



POET AND PEER. 231 

With the uncertainty which sometimes 
attends letters entrusted to waiters at foreign 
hotels, this one^ unfortunately, never reached 
its destination. 



232 



CHAPTER XIV. 

TT was the afternoon of the 10th of October ; 

.*- the air was chilly for the first time that 
autumn, and a grey mist hung over the 
river. 

Lady Athelstone sat at the open window of 
the morning-room; she did not feel it cold. 
There was a bright spot of colour on her cheek ; 
her eyes moved restlessly from her husband, 
writing at a distant table, to the foggy river, 
and then to a sealed letter which her thin hands 
fingered. Her dress was the same grey one 
she had worn that day upon the sands, and her 
garden-hat lay upon the chair beside her. 
She did not utter a sound; she had scarcely 



POET AND PEER. 233 

spoken all day. Hubert St. John had been 
present the previous evening, when the same 
dumb agony, the same eager, glittering eyes 
bad sent the poor fellow away to his sleepless 
bed, a prey to the sharpest agony a man can 
suffer for the woman he worships: a fear for the 
overthrow of her reason. 

He had not called yet to-day ; he had wan- 
dered about in an aimless, hopeless way all the 
morning. Then, feeling that even failure was 
better than to sit down opposite to that pite- 
ous face, without something definite to tell, he 
walked to Barnes to biing back such tidings as 
he might gather of Miss Brabazon. 

Athelstone's letters were finished ; he looked 
at his watch; it was already the post hour. 
Lorenzo entered the roon), at the same moment, 
to ask some question about the preparations 
for departure. 

" You will put up these books," said Wilfred, 
pointing to some ou the table, ''and this 
revolver, and see that everything is ready 
by to-morrow night. These letters . no, I 
will post them myself at Charing Cross, as 



234 POET AND PEER. 

I go out; they will catch the day's mail." 

Ab Lorenzo retired, after giving a sharp 
glance of curiosity at his mistress, Wilfred 
turned to her. 

"I shall not be out more than an hour, 
Nellie ; I have two or three things to get, and 
I shall look in at the * Reform ' before I come 
in. Hadn't you better shut that window ? It is 
getting cold." 

Then suddenly she rose from her chair, and 
they stood face to face in the twilight. 

** Stop a moment. I know it is useless, but 
I would appeal to you once more . ^for the last 
time. Will nothing . nothing induce you to 
delay your departure, only a few weeks I" 

" My dear Nellie, you know that my passage 
was taken a month ago, and all my engage* 
ments are made. I am advertised to lecture in 
New York on the 1st of November. How can 
I put it off?" 

** If you will only wait a little . a very little 
longer, you will have ample excuse." 

^' This is morbid in the extreme^ Nellie. The 
doctor says there is nothing the matter with 



POET AND PEER. 235 

you ; you make yourself ill by encouraging all 
manner of absurd ideas, and then you fancy 
you are going to die. Do be rational. In leav- 
ing you for three, or, at the most, four months^ 
I am only doiog \vhat half the husbands in 
England do. Instead of salmon-fishing or 
bear-hunting, I am going among my fellow- 
meu to speak to them, that's all. You have 
not the slightest reason to be uneasy about me 
in any way. I shall be back by the end of 
January, cleared of all my difficulties, and I 
hope to find you perfectly well on my return." 

" No, you do not hope it, you cannot," sh& 
said, with increasing agitation; "you know, in 
your heart, Wilfred, you desire to be free, and 
you 8haU be free . free to choose more worthily^ 
only wait . only wait, or you will regret it all 
your life I" 

** For God's sake, calm yourself I You talk 
wildly." 

" How can I be calm ? My brain is on fire 
I know that, if you go from me now, that vile 
woman " 

" I will not listen to you if you speak of 



236 POET AND PEER. 

Madame de Waldeck thus," he interrupted, 
fiternly. 

^' She is vile I . she has tried to take you from 
me I" she cried, with increased passion. ** Bat 
she shall not . no, she shall not I I will only 
give you up to Sylvia Brabazon. I will sacri- 
fice myself to her, as she sacrificed herself to 
me. She loved you as that other woman never 
could, and you must marry /^r. when I am 
gone. Grod will forgive me, I think," she end- 
ed, raising her trembling hands to her head^ 
** if I save you in spite of yourself." 

Strange to say, Wilfred's attention at the 
moment was only arrested by one thing in this 
cry of a despairing soul. It was not till later 
that the last words recurred to his mind with 
distinctness. 

**You are altogether under a delusion," he 
said. "There was no sacrifice on Miss Bra- 
bazon's part. She never really cared for me, 
and, when I saw that, I returned to the first 
affection of my boyhood. We are not perhaps 
exactly suited to each other, but, if you will 
only be sensible, we shall be very happy. We 



POET AND PEER. 237 

have probably both a long life before us ; do 
not let us embitter it by useless regrets or fan- 
ciful grievances. If your religion," he added, 
vrith a touch of sarcasm, which he thought 
might have a salutary effect, but which he 
keenly regretted later . " if your religion can- 
not enable you to support our temporary sepa- 
ration with fortitude, Nellie, it is not worth 
much." 

As she stood there, with her hands pressed 
to her temples, there was a singing in her ears 
and a confusion in her brain, where the blood 
seemed to be rising every moment. She scarce- 
ly comprehended his words, and her parched 
lips refused to utter a sound when he had 
ceased speaking. 

He came up, and, putting his arm round her, 
tried to lead her to a sofa. At his touch, she 
shivered, as though stricken by the ague. 

"Go and He down . your nerves are over- 
strung. Try to go to sleep before dinner." 

" Sleep 1" she moaned, half inaudibly, as she- 
sank upon the couch . " oh ! if I could sleep^ 
and never, never wake again !" 



^38 POET AND PEER. 

He stooped and pressed his lips upon her 
burning brow. She stretched forth her fever- 
ed hands, and tried to clutch him as he 
moved from her towards the bell, which he 
rang. Then, as Lorenzo appeared (the foot- 
men were discharged ; the old butler alone re- 
mained), " Tell Staples her ladyship is not very 
well/' he said. "She had better come down 
here, and remain with her ladyship while I am 
out ;" and, seizing his hat, he left the house. 

The maid entered the room softly a few 
minutes later. It was almost dark, but she 
discerned her mistress's figure crouched down 
upon her knees beside the sofa. Her hands 
were clasped, her head was sunk; she was 
moaning, but, .whether the words she uttered 
from time to time were words of prayer, the 
woman could not distinguish. She bent over 
lier mistress and said, 

" Is there anything I can get you, my lady ?" 

The poor young creature started, like some 
-wounded animal that is touched. 

*. No, no . leave the room . don't come near 
me. 



POET AND PEER. 239 

She spoke in a hoarse^ broken voice, and the 
woman obeyed without another word. Lorenzo, 
who had just brought up the reading-lamp, was 
in the hall. 

*' She is in a dreadful way," observed Staples, 
with indignant commiseration. " You had 
better not go in ; she don't want the lamp, Vm 
sure. She desired to be left alone." 

The boy shrugged his shoulders. 

" He have not been here yet to-day . she will 
see Aim." 

Staples muttered something Lorenzo did not 
hear as she ascended the stair. He set the 
lamp down on the hall table. The butler was 
' out ; the boy decided on remaining where he 
was, at hand for the hall door or for his mis- 
tress's bell. He drew " Reynolds* Miscellany " 
from his pocket, and proceeded to enlighten his 
mind and improve his English by the study of 
that periodical. 

It was certainly less than ten minutes since 
Staples had left him, when there was a ring at 
the hall door. 



240 POET AND PEER. 

Hubert St. Joha entered. " Ib Lady Athel- 
stone alone ?" 

Yes, she was alone, the boy said, with a 
smile ; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the 
door of the morning-room, and preceded St. 
John, announcing his name as he did so. 

They both looked round; the room was 
empty. The window, with the iron steps lead- 
ing from it to the garden, still stood open. 

^^Miladi will be out there," said Lorenzo* 
" She have not pass by the hall." 

St. John stepped hastily out. It was now so 
dark and foggy that he could not have distin- 
guished a figure, had it been stationary, at the 
further end of the lawn near the wall. He 
called . there was no reply. And then, sud- 
denly, a dreadful suspicion shot across his mind. 
All day long he had been oppressed by fears 

concerning her ; and now ^He tore down the 

garden to the door in the Embankment-walL 
It stood open ! 

He ran across with a terrible directness to 
the Whitehall steps. Something told him that 
the first . the imminent peril was there. The 



POET AND PEER. 241 

Embankment was almost deserted; there was 
not a policeman in sight . no one he could 
question. The dim gaslight showed a pedes- 
trian or two faintly discernible in the fog on 
the opposite pavement, and a four-wheeler 
approaching at a foot's pace. 

He ran as swiftly as ever man did, who felt 
that the issues of life and death trembled in the 
balance. The fog lay thick on the river. When 
he reached the projecting Btone pier, he could 
only distinguish the first two or three of the 
steps that lead right and left to the water's 
edge. He paused for a second . he thought he 
heard the moan of a human voice at the bottom 
of the right hand flight . and sprang down 
it. 

Something . a shadow swaying to and fro in 
the pale, gaslit mist . was there^ close to the 
wall, upon the lowest step, over which the water 
washed now and then. He clutched at it . he 
grasped it. There was a cry . and he held her 
in his arms ! 

She struggled to be free. " Let me go I Let 
me go l" 

VOL. m. R 



242 POET AND PEER. 

He never relaxed his hold, and she sank down 
in a heap upon the wet stone. 

" What are you doing here ?" he asked, in a 
voice that shook with emotion. "For God^s 
sake, come away 1" 

'*No. He calls my soul to Him. Let me 
go I Do not keep me I I asked Him upon my 
knees whether  might go to Him, and He told 
me I might." 

" This is a delusion ; you are ill. For God's 
sake, come back to your home, before you are 
missed." 

"No . nol" she almost screamed. "If I go 
back, he will sail to-morrow. His soul will be 
destroyed, and his sin will be upon me through 
all eternity ! I can never go back . never 1" 

" You must come away from here, at all 
events," he said, desperately. "It is useless 
struggling ; I will not let you free." 

"Cruel!" She burst into sobs, and lay ex- 
hausted in his arms. "Where am I to go . 
away from him . out of the world . anywhere, 
anywhere where he cannot find me?" 

" He shall not find you. Come with me," he 
said, quickly. 



POET AND PEER. 243 

And she did not resist . she lay passive, 
though sobbing and moaning bitterly. He said 
no more ; not a second was to be lost. He did 
not stop to consider the consequences of this 
Act. His passionate love . his agony at the 
thought of losing her . swept all else away at 
the moment. 

She had been half lying on the stone, en- 
circled by his strong arms. He lifted her now 
like a child, and ran up the steps. He remem- 
bered the cab he had seen going at a foot's 
pace, and he quickly overtook it. A few 
minutes' drive brought them to his small house 
in Great Queen Street. 

Thank God she was safe I 



b2 



244 



CHAPTER XV. 

T ORENZO, from the open window, had seen 
.^ Hubert St. John plunge across the lawn 
into the fog . and he saw no more. A quarter 
of an hour passed . not a sound. Then the 
boy, consumed with curiosity, slipped out, and 
traversed the garden on tiptoe. The door in 
the wall was still ajar ; he peeped out . there 
was no vestige of either St. John or his mis* 
tress. 

He ran back excited, scared, and called to 
Staples. She came down, and the two servants 
scoured the garden together. After that, 
searching the sitting-room for any traces of th& 
missing lady, they found two letters ; one ad- 
dressed to Miss Brabazon, the other a hasty 



POET AND PEER. 245 

scrawl in pencil, so wild and wavering in char- 
acter that it was difficult to recognize their 
mistress's neat handwriting. This was directed 
to Lord Athelstone. 

All doubt was dispelled from the servants' 
minds. Lady Athelstone, stung by her hus- 
band's approaching departure, and moved by 
Mr. St. John's constancy, had eloped. They 
were discussing the event with the passion of 
partizans when they were startled by a ring at 
the front door. It was then nearly seven 
o'clock. Staples remained in the hall; and 
when Lorenzo opened the door, the maid was 
surprised to see a tall lady, whose face was un- 
known to her, but whom the boy greeted with 
effusion, enter the house without inquiry . with- 
out a word. 

The Brabazons had just arrived from Folke- 
stone at Charing Cross, where two carriages 
were awaiting them. Sylvia, who had been 
vexed at the unavoidable delay in their return, 
and whose thoughts had been very constantly 
with Nellie during the journey, begged her 
mother to go straight home with the servants, 



:i 



246 POET AND FEEB. 

and let her drive round to Whitehall Gardens 
in the brougham. She had told Mrs. Brabazon 
of Nellie's letter. 

'' I am anxious/' she said, *^ and every hour 
may be of consequence." Of how much conse- 
quence she little guessed, however, as she 
opened the door of the brougham for herself, 
and rang the bell. 

"flow do you do, Lorenzo? I am just 
arrived, and want to see Lady Athelstone." 

The expression of the boy's face struck her 
as strange, fle shook his head, and then, 
feeling the insufficiency of the English language, 
began to tell her volubly, in Italian, that she 
could not see Miladi, because she was gone- 
gone away with ** un certo Signer St. JohnJ^ 

Sylvia turned pale. But she knew how ill- 
disposed the boy had always been to his 
mistress ; and she had never placed any reliance 
on his statements. She turned to Staples . 

'* Are you Lady Athelstone's maid? Do you 
know where she is ?" 

'^I don't know where she is, ma'am. All I 



POET AND PEER. 247 

know is, she's gone," replied the woman, 

distinctly. 

. " When ? . How long ago ?" asked Sylvia, 

rapidly. 

" About three quarters of an hour." 

'' Did she go . alone ?" 

"Yes. She must have gone out a-foot, by 
the garden-gate. Just afterwards, Mr. St. 
John called, and he ran out after her. They're 
gone, ma'am . it's clear." 

She then described how she had found her 
mistress on her knees, evidently in great mental 
agony, and had been told to leave the room. 
She added how anyone could see (who was not 
as blind as his lordship) the devotion of Mr. St. 
John. Lorenzo here joined issue, enumerating 
instances of this; but Sylvia cut short his 
loquacity. 

"I do not want to hear all this. Where is 
LordAthelstone?" 

" We don't know ; he is out." 

" Then they may be gone to join him." 

The woman shook her head. 



24S POET AND PEER* 

^* ImpoBsible, ma'am. She left a note for 
him." 

" Ha 1 I had forgotten I" cried Lorenzo ; 
and he ran into the room and fetched the one 
directed to Miss Brabazon. Her heart sank as 
she tore it open. Inside was written . 

" When you read this, do not be too hard on 
me. My brain is on fire while I write. I am 
going to make one last appeal to Wilfred ; if 
that fails . he shall be free . he shall not be 
sacrificed. If you had come, I should not have 
done this. If you had spoken, it might have 
saved me . but not for long 1 God forgive me I 
Wilfred never loved me . I know it now. He 
only loved you . he loves you still. I give him 
up to you. Farewell I" 

It was true, then. Was any other conclusion 
possible than the one at which the servants had 
arrived? Sylvia was grievously distressed. 
She felt herself in some sort responsible for this 
mad act ; though the letter showed clearly that 
the young creature's mind was temporarily un- 
hinged. It was from no love for St. John, it 
was not from pique or jealousy, she had left her 



POET AND PEER. 249 

home with this man. It was from some wild, 
wrong-headed impulse to liberate Athelstone 
from the bondage of his marriage, and to 
prevent his going to America with Madame de 
Waldeck. Poor little wife ! Sylvia's heart bled 
for her. 

Could she still do anything ? Was it 
too late to save her? she asked herself, 
quickly. There was yet one chance. She 
turned to the servants. Where did Mr. St. 
John live ? Her decisions were always rapid. 
She would go there. It was just possible-^ 

And five minutes later she was at the door of 
the small house in Great Queen Street. 

Nellie lay upon a sofa near the fire, in a bay- 
windowed room looking upon the park. There 
was no light but that of the fire, which played 
upon the slender figure prostrate on the couch, 
and upon the back of the man who knelt at her 
feet, holding her hands in his, and striving to 
soothe her by words which fell unheeded on 
her ear. For her mind wandered now, and 
she was quite oblivious of what had passed. 
One idea, however, remained paramount; she 



250 POET AND PEER. 

must escape, she must bide from Wilfred* 
"You will not let him kill me?" she kept on 
saying. *^ It is not because I fear to die, but he 
must not have that on his conscience. Keep 
him away . he wants to get rid of me . he said 
so I Keep him away I He will not have long 
to wait, flow cool the river looks I. and my 
head is on fire I I am not afraid. Let me go. 
God said I might go to him ... a little sooner 
or later. What matter ? But he must not kill 
me. I have been his curse through life . it would 
be dreadful in hell to know he might have been 
blessed but for me I Hide me anywhere . any- 
where from him I^' 

** You are safe here, my darling I" cried the 
agonized man who knelt beside her. *^No harm 
shall come near you here. If Wilfred wishes to 
be free, you will free him by staying here. All 
my life is yours to do with as you will." 

But she attached no definite idea to his words ; 
she rambled on about Madame de Waldeck, 
and America, and Sylvia . why had Sylvia not 
come ? Why had she not written ? Well, she 
would get her letter notr. 



POET AND PEER. 251 

The poor fellow was distracted. What should 
he do? Ought he to send for* a doctor? At 
that moment he heard a carriage drive fast 
down the quiet street ; it stopped at his door. 
He ran out to give orders that no one should 
on any pretence be admitted; and there he 
stood upon the stairs, listening with a beating 
heart, and with a strange conflict of feelings, 
for the voice of the man he once called his 
friend . the voice he fully expected to hear 
now. 

But, instead, it was a woman's that he heard 
. and that he instantly recognized ; the 
only voice in the world that seemed likely to 
tranquillize Nellie at this moment. He dashed 
down the stairs ; he brushed aside the servant, 
and^ taking Miss Brabazon by both hands, he 
drew her into the small front parlour. 

She stood there, with her large listening 
eyes fixed on the man's white, agitated face, as 
he poured forth his story. Sylvia gave a sigh 
of comparative relief. 

" She is up there," he said, " and keeps con- 
stantly talking of you. There is evidently some 



252 POET AND FEEB 

presflnre oa the brain. She does not know 
ivbere she is, or what she says, bnt I am in 
hopes that your presence will soothe her.** 

** She cannot remain here, Mr. St. John. Yon 
acted on the impulse of the moment in bringing 
her here, but she cannot remain. Ton must 
feel yourself how impossible it is.** 

*' My God I Miss Brabazon, is this a time to 
discuss propriety ? I have saved her from sui- 
cide . and it is impossible to take her home. The 
sight of Athelstone would drive her to frenzy^ I 
believe. She is pursued by the idea that he wants 
to get rid of her. and I have promised her that 
she shall not go back to Whitehall." 

^* Then she shall go home with me." 

It was as if she had driven a knife into him, 
but he was silent. 

** Her reputation should be dearer to you . as 
her /neni. than anything. Every moment she 
remains here it is in greater danger. Come," 
and she turned to the door. 

When the poor young creature, who lay 
moaning and muttering on the couch, heard 
Sylvia's voice at her side, she started up, and. 



POET AND PEER. 253 

.with a feeble cry, flung her arms about her 
neck. 



Wilfred Athelstone had been detained at the 
Club. It was nearly eight o'clock when he 
reached his home. 

He let himself in with his latch-key, and the 
next moment both servants came forward to 
meet him. 

"I am late. Let dinner be served in ten 
minutes. Is her ladyship dressed ?" he asked. 

'* Her ladyship is . ou^," replied Staples, em- 
phasizing the last word. 

" Out? What the devil do you mean?" 

She looked at him with her unflinching black 
eyes, and handed him Nellie's note. 

'' Perhaps this will explain, my lord." 

He drew near the lamp in a state neither of 
doubt nor fear, simply of wonderment. What 
could have taken her out ? He tore open the 
note. Inside were these words, faintly traced 
in pencil : 

" When you read this, you mil be free, but do not 



254 POET AND PEER. 

sail for America, li is to save you I do this. God 
forgive ris our sins /" 

His face turned ashy pale, and the hand that 
held the note shook as he re-read the lines. 
He was horror-struck, but utterly bewildered. 
What did they mean? He looked up. There 
were both servants staring at him, but his 
tongue clove to the roof of his mouth ; he could 
not ask them^ he could not speak; he stood 
there, speechless with the terror he dared not 
put into words. 

"Tell me," he said, hoarsely, at length, 
*^ what do you know . of . of this ?" 

They told him, as they had told Sylvia. 

**The thing is impossible 1" he cried. **I 
never can believe it. Good God 1" 

He sat down, and, leaning both elbows on 
the table, covered his face with his hands. The 
servants, looking at him, saw that his whole frame 
quivered. But they could little understand the 
revulsion of feeling that agitated him. How the 
past year rose up accusingly I In what sharp 
I black lines his selfishness, his neglect of the 
! poor little, plant he had torn from its native 



POET AND PEER. 255 

soil and left to wither, dow appeared to him I 
What upbraiding memories swept over him, 
wave after wave I Mrs. Dawson's pale, sad 
face, his own father's stern warnings, the sweet 
girlhood, the glad womanhood he had blasted, . 
this was the end of it all ! Casuistry was for- 
gotten ; ingenious self-defences broken down. 
He stood face to face, as men do at rare 
moments in life, with Conscience. We dig 
graves for it, we bury it, we trample it under 
foot, but there comes a day of judgment, even 
in this world, when it bursts its bonds, and 
stands confronting us, and we can blind our 
eyes and stop our ears no more. 

The silence was broken by Lorenzo. He 
told his master, in Italian, of the beloved signor- 
ina's visit, and how she had gone off instantly 
to Signer St. John's house. 

For some minutes there was no reply. Then 
he started up. 

** Call me a hansom." 

The servants left the room. The window 
into the garden was still open, and, at this 
moment, he heard the sound of a footfall ou 



256 POET AND PEER. 

the gravel, and then of feet ascending the iron 
steps. He took a pace forward; he looked 
into the blackness, and St. John stood before 
him. 

He had thought the door on the Embankment 
might still be open, and had preferred to come 
in, as he had gone out, that way, to avoid the 
servants, if possible. 

The two men faced each other, for a moment, 
in silence. Both were deadly pale; but one 
was struck dumb, as much from amazement as 
from the violence of emotion that could not 
readily find utterance; the other had just passed 
through a crisis of such passionate agony that, 
after it, nothing could move him very deeply. 
Even indignation and resentment left him 
cold . but as a merciless judge is cold . be- 
fore the man who was the cause of all this 
suffering. 

"I have come to tell you," he said, slowly, 
" that Lady Athelstone is safe." 

" You come to me, St. John 1 You dare to 
come here I What does this mean ? Where is 
she r 



POET AND PEER, 257 

" With the Brabazons . ^safe, but, I fear, very 
ill." 

" III ! What is the matter I" 

"I imagine it is brain-fever. She is quite 
delirious." 

" That is why she left home then. She did 
not go with you ?" 

"No," he replied, sternly, "she did not go 
with me. I got to the river just in time to 
save her from death, and you from the curse of 
an act which would have embittered your whole 
life. Had your wife died by her own hand, 
you could never have forgiven yourself. Her 
mind has suffered so much under all she has 
been called upon to bear of late that this is the 
result. She saw that you were weary of her ; 
she beh'eved that you were going to America 
chiefly to break away from a chain that was 
unendurable to you. She wai^ haunted by the 
obligation of freeing you, and preventing your 
voyage. This produced the fever of the brain ; 
the river was at hand, and reason, . self-control, 
. were gone." 

" Good God I how terrible I" He turned, and 

VOL. m, S 



258 POET AND PEER* 

took a step or two across the room ; theD^ with 
a qtdek impulse, he came back and held out his 
hand. "I wronged you, old fellow . . . God 
will reward you for what you have done for 
me. 

But the other made no movement forward. 
He looked at Athelstone straight in the &oe as 
he said, slowly, 

** It was not for you . it was for her. I love 
her better than my life . ^I tell you so plainly . 
therefore I will never take your hand again. 
She went home with me^ and, but for Miss 
Brabazon, she might have remained there, for 
she would not return here, and I swore I would 
protect, her. No good to me could have come 
of it, for I am no more to her, and never shall 
be now, than the first waterman who might 
have saved her. But it was not always so. 
There was a time when, if you had not come 
between us, she might have consented to marry 
me ; and, God knows, if devotion could have 
made her happy, she would have been so. You 
took her from me out of pique. out of vanity. 
But she loved you only too well, and this is 



POET AND PEER. 259 

thei result. I have laid bare my feelings ; I 
have told you plainly the part I have played 
in this. Friendship between us is impossible 
henceforward." 

" You have much greater cause of complaint 
against me than I have against you," cried 
Wilfred; "and you have saved her! I owe 
you a debt of gratitude for that which can never 
be wiped out. And if, when she is recovered, 
and come back here " 

Lorenzo appeared just then ; the hansom was 
at the door. The boy's amazement at seeing 
St. John almost paralyzed his speech. 

" I shall drive instantly, of course, to Barnes." 

'' You had best secure the first medical opin- 
ion you can, and take him down with you." 

A couple of hours later, Wilfred, accompanied 
by an eminent physician, reached Mrs. Braba* 
zon's house. 



S2 



260 



CHAPTER XVL 

rpHEY were shown into a Bmall library which, 
-^ in spite of a good fire, smelt damp, and 
the light of one shaded lamp was insufficient to 
illuminate the heavy furniture and book-lined 
walls. 

They were not kept waiting two minutes. 
The door opened, and Sylvia Brabazon entered 
rapidly. She was still in her travelling-dress ; 
her hair was in disorder, lines of anxiety were 
on her face, and yet she had never k)oked more 
nobly beautiful. 

"I will take Dr. upstairs," she saii 

" You must not come . at present/' she added, 
with decision. 

"Why not? I will be quiet . I will not 
speak." 



POET AND PEER. 261 

'* She is terribly excited, and I am afraid 
that you are the person of all others who must 
be kept away. Remain here, and I will return 
to you." 

Wilfred was left alone. He paced the room 
nervously. How long the doctor was! She 
could not be very ill ; he had left her much as 
usual so lately. It was nervousness . ^itwas hys- 
teria. After the revulsion to relief he had just 
experienced, he would not allow himself to feel 
seriously alarmed. And then, when Sylvia's 
ivory-white face stood before him once more, 
backed by the dark books, his heart suddenly 
failed him. 

" What does he say f 

^^ She is in a very critical state, and must be 
kept absolutely quiet. He has ordered ice to 
her head. * He expects the fever will increase 
as the night advances. You will remain here, 
of course, but you must not see her. She is 
pursued by a dread of your finding her, and . 
in short, seeing you would excite her terribly ; 
you must be patient." 

He leant his head against the mantelpiece . 



262 POET AND PEER. 

near which they were standing, concealing hi 
face from her. 

" Tell me, does she know you V 

*^ Yes ; though her mind rambles, she knows 
me^ and seems to like my being near her." 

Then, with his head still averted, he said . 

" Does she reproach me bitterly ? Tell m& 
everything." 

She would not tell him everything; but she- 
replied . 

" There is no reproach. There is a delusion 
that you wish to get rid of her ; that you would 
have dissolved your marriage^ had it been pos- 
sible ; that even her presence is insupportable to 
you. It was this brought on the fever." 

" My poor little Nell ! If I had only known t 
But I swear to you she was mistaken in all she 
fancied. I have been to blame ; I ddh't want to 
defend myself; but she never understood me." 

Then the flame of a righteous wrath kindled 
in the beautiful woman's eyes that flashed on 
him as she said, quickly . 

^'Do not talk of being misunderstood I This 
is no moment to discuss what she fancied ; but 



r" 



POET AND PEER. 26S 

I feel very sure that what she saw . what she 
could not help seeing . would have wounded 
any sensitive nature so situated. I don't wish 
to be hard on you; you mupt be suffering 
keenly ; but don't talk of being * misunder- 
stood.' Think only of her, and of the infinite 
sorrow (for you, more than for herself,) which 
has brought her to this I" 

He walked up and down with agitated 
strides. 

" I do think of it. That cursed pamphlet was 
the beginning. Would to God I had never 
written it I" Then, stopping suddenly and 
looking into her face, he said . '* You do not . 
you do not surely think she is in danger ?*' 

" She is very weak. It would be wrong to 
tell you there is no danger. But I trust in 
God's merdy that her life may be spared, for 
your sake more than for hers." 

"Why do you say that?" he asked, almost 
fiercely. 

*' Because she seems, all through her de- 
lirium, to have the most intense longing to be 
taken. It is strange to see one so young 



264 POET AND PEER. 

without the desire to live, common to us all/' 

A consultation was held the following morn- 
ing. All that human skill could suggest was 
done. But vitality was wanting to resist the 
fever which nothing could allaj. It continued, 
accompanied by delirium, diminishing her 
strength hour by hour. 

Five days went by ; and Wilfred was the last 
to abandon a belief that she might recover. He 
was not allowed to go beyond the threshold of 
her room, but came there fifty times a day, and 
heard his own name invoked in her ravings 
with terror and supplication. Perhaps this was 
his severest punishment : to be debarred from 
the solace of nursing her; to know that the 
sight of him would aggravate her sufferings 
fourfold. He wandered restlessly about the house 
or in the shrubbery, walked up and down stairs, 
sat a few minutes with Mrs. Brabazon in the 
drawing-room, took up the Times and threw it 
down again, and was miserable as only men 
can be ; women having the occupation of their 
bands, and the thousand little duties, the 



POET AND PEER. 265 

mechanism of which affords a wholesome outlet 
for some surface energy. 

St. John came daily, but he took precautions 
not to meet Wilfred, entering by the back 
premises, and remaining there until Sylvia was 
at liberty, and could run down to him for a few 
minutes. His way of receiving the daily bulle- 
tin offered a curious contrast to Athelstone's. 
From the first he had no hope, and Sylvia saw 
that the iron had entered his soul ; but he was 
very quiet, his demeanour was characterized by 
the repression of demonstrative feeling, and he 
never trusted himself to speak of Wilfred. 
On the fifth day he said, as he was going 
away, 

. " I shall never see her again. But, if she 
recovers consciousness before she dies, give her 
this message. Tell her that the only joy which 
has come into my life for years came through 
her, and that her memory will always remain 
green with me, though I should live to be an 
old man." 

During that night the fever left her. But in 
the morning she was so prostrate that th& 



266 POET AND PEER. 

doctors thought it improbable she would live 
through the day. Her intellect was clear, and 
she asked for Wilfred. She was quite calm, 
and smiled peacefully^ as he knelt down beside 
her bed, and tenderly kissed the thin little hand 
he held between his. Sylvia administered a 
stimulant to give her strength to speak to him, 
and then left the room. They were alone. 

He tried to control his emotion, but now and 
again a low sob burst from him. She fixed her 
loving eyes on his face with a fearlessness such 
as she had never before shown. 

"Do not grieve for me, darling!" she said, 
almost in a whisper. *' I am so happy to go. 
All the pain and trouble is gone, and I feel at 
peace. I feared I should die alone, while you 
were across the seas. That was before my head 
began to pain so. And now I have no pain ; 
for I leave you safe with her^ and I am going to 
my Master.'' 

" Forgive me, Nellie I Say that you forgive 
me, though I can never forgive myself f' 

" I have nothing to forgive, dear. Do not 
reproach yourself. it was not your fault. You 



POET AND PEER. 267 

were mistaken in me, and I should never have 
let jou sacrifice yourself. My dying saves you 
fi'om . evil ; therefore I am glad to go. I should 
be miserable now to live on, feeling so unfit to 
be your wife. Ah ! dear Wilfred, I cannot love 
you more in heaven than I have done on earthy 
but my ignorance will not signify there. God 
bless and strengthen you, my darling 1" Her 
head fell back upon the pillow, as she added, 
faintly, " Call Miss Brabazon.'* 

Sylvia entered, and Nellie motioned that she 
should kneel on the other side of the bed. 

"Pray for me and for Aim," she whispered. 
And Sy^lvia steadied her voice to offer up a 
short prayer. The dying woman's eyes were 
riveted upon the pale morning sky, and her 
lips moved, though no sound issued from 
them. 

Then, after a silence, she raised herself by a 
sudden effort, and, looking from one to the 
other, drew their hands together. 

"Be his good angel 1" she said. ''I give 
him to your keeping 1" 

They were her last words. An hour later her 



268 POST AND PEER. 

gentle epirit had passed from a world where 
it had safiered so cruellj, to one where the 
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are 
at rest. 



THE END. 
