
BENEATH THE WAVE. 



CHAPTER L 

SANDA-BT-THB-SBA. 

On a wild headland of our north-eastern 
coast stands the village of Sanda-by-the- 
Sea. The village itself is rather picturesque 
looking, for ioghd among tie humUe 
cottages of the fishermen, of which it prin- 
cipally consists, are some old and curiously* 
built houses of a better class. In one of 
these at the time of which I am writing lived 
the incumbent of Sanda — ^the incumbent 
who, on the Sunday morning in October 
when this story begins, was about twelve 
o'clock preaching his sermon in his grey and 
venerable church. There he stood in the 

VOL. I. B 



2 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

ancient wooden pulpit, where liad stood many 
incumbents before him, telUng his scanty 
congregation, with a certain amount of 
fluency and ease, about the old story of which 
we neyex tirq. A pleasant, rather comical 
face, had the Rev. Matthew Irvine — ^the 
Rev. Matt, as he was very commonly 
called, when he was not present, by his 
not' over respectful parishioners. But he 
had a pleasant face, sweet, thoughtful, and 
humorous, and with a sort of pathetic comi- 
caUty in its expression which surely never 
belonged to an Englishman. He was, in 
fact, Irish, but had lived so long in England 
that most of his original nationalities had 
passed away. But the sweet, comical smile 
lingered about his face still, and he had a 
sort of lightheartedness also which is not 
very usual among our grave and somewhat 
solemn countrymen. 

Yet he had had many trials, and life for him 
had lain along no smooth or pleasant roadway. 
To begin with, he was poor ; to go on with, 
he had a sickly wife; and to end with, he 



BBNftATH THE WAVE. 3 

was a schoolmaster as well as a clergyman, 
and driving Latin and Greek into the brains 
of stupid or idle boys is by no means 
conducive to enlivening existence. 

" But we must take things as they come," 
l;ie used to say ; and so he went on, bearing 
Ids burdens along with him, and stopping 
often on his way to help a fellow-traveller who 
was perhaps more heavily ladeif than he was, 
His heaviest burden most men would have 
thought was his wife. She was not a lady ; 
she was very sickly : and he had never been 
in love with her. Sk marriage came about 
in this fashion. His first curacr was in a 
remote part of the country, and when he was 
appointed, there was not a lodging to be 
procured in the neighbourhood. His vicar 
was in despair ; but at last a grazier in the 
village, a well-to-do and jolly man, oflfered 
the young curate (as an accommodation to 
his jfriend the vicar) a temporary home in 
his house. 

The grazier was a widower with one 
daughter ; and though this young woman was 



4 BFNEATH THE WAVE. 

by no means handsome, she had many suitors, 
for the grazier was supposed to be, and at 
that time actually was, very rich. But after 
the arrival of the Rev. Matthew (then a 
handsome young man of twenty-four), Miss 
Shadwell (the grazier's name was Shadwell) 
would never look again either at farmer, 
grazier, or butcher, or indeed at any of the 
young men of her own class of life, who had 
come courting her before. She fell, in fact, 
in love with the dark, soft-eyed young 
Irishman; and what chance had the poor 
fellow, with his generous nature and sweet 
disposition, to escape? She would marry 
him, and she did marry him ; for the Rev. 
Matthew felt that he could not break the 
poor girl's heart. She was really deeply in 
love with him, and when he saw that it was 
to be he tried his best to return her affection. 
Well, they married, and by and bye, as 
years rolled on, when perhaps the curate was 
naturally expecting from his supposed wealthy 
father-in-law some little help more than the 
small yearly allowance he had agreed at the 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 5 

time of the marriage to give them, the 
grazier himself fell into difficulties. This 
was a great blow. Mrs. Matthew was 
frightfully deUcate. Indeed, as she herself 
expressed it in her somewhat peculiar 
phraseology, she " was only held together 
by a pin." The necessary pin had, however, 
apparently been left out in the composition of 
the various little babes that she had presented 
to the unhappy curate, for one after another 
they had all died. Of the ten children that 
were bom to him, only one survived ; but 
the advent and departure of the little ones 
all cost money, and so the Rev. Matthew 
had got poorer year by year. 

At last he was appointed by an amiable 
bishop to the incumbency of Sanda, which 
was then worth about two hundred and fifty 
pounds a year. There was a large house also 
attached, and the good bishop suggested that 
as Sanda was considered healthy, a school 
would be likely to succeed there. Upon this 
hint the Rev. Matthew acted, and he had 
been tolerably successful in his undertaking. 



6 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

He had indeed a fairly good school — some 
twenty boarders perhaps — and some day 
scholars. He was thus in easier circum- 
stances, and the sweet temper that had 
carried him through all his troubles was 
his still. 

Such was the Rev. Matthew Irvine, 
incumbent of Sanda, who, now some nine 
years ago, was on a certain Sunday morning 
in October preaching to his congregation. 

The congregation is easily described. In 
a square pew near the pulpit sat a pale, 
gaunt woman, who was the parson s wife. 
In the two next pews were the schoolboys — 
pale boys, rosy boys, fat boys, and thin boys, 
but the fat ones and the rosy ones were in 
the majority. 

Among the boys sat Philip Hayward, the 
tutor. He was a broad-browed young man, 
with a straight nose, but not handsome. He 
was clever. You saw that when you met the 
grey, thoughtful, inquiring, dissatisfied eyes. 
He was also unhappy, and was at that age 
when such men as he look for perfection that 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 7 

ihey cannot find, and then see more imperfec- 
tions than really exist around them. 

He was looking now steadily with his grey 
eyes fixed on the red curtains and brass rod 
round Mr. Trevor's pew. Mr. Trevor waa 
the squire of Sanda ; the largest landowner, 
nay, the only landowner, for miles and nules 
around. He was a wealthy man also, having 
married for money; and in his own estima- 
tion, and in the estimation of the little 
world around him, he was a very great man 
indeed. 

So Philip Hayward sat with his eyes fixed 
on the red curtains of the squire's pew, but 
tiiough he could not see through it, we are 
privileged to do so, and I can promise you 
that the occupants of this pew were well 
worth looking at. 

First there was Mr. Trevor — Reginald 
Trevor, Esq., J.P. — a tall, thin, grey-haired 
gentlemanly-looking man, with a narrow fore- 
head and thin lips, and a brain of no great 
capacity, filled with narrow ideas and pre- 
judice to the very brim. Then there was 



8 BENEATH THE WATE. 

Miss Trevor — Isabel Trevor. What was it 
that made you think, when you looked at her 
face, of all the fair and frail ones, famous in 
history and song, who have tempted men to 
destruction and shame ? Yet it was a beauti- 
ful face — ^almost too beautiful, with the rip- 
pling golden hair swept from the white brow, 
and the rarely regular features, and full ripe 
lips. Yes, she was a beauty, and she knew it, 
and prized it above all her other possessions. 
She was Mr. Trevor s only daughter, and 
would be very rich, but she cared or thought 
very little about her wealth. She thought a 
great deal more about the straight, regular 
features, and the large, restless eyes whose 
power she knew. She was then about twenty- 
two, and had had many lovers ; though pru- 
dent men were afraid somehow of this imperial 
beauty, and contented themselves with hum- 
bler women, who gave them more for their 
love than Isabel Trevor ever would have 
done. It was said of her sometimes that she 
had no heart ; but we shall know her better 
by and bye, and be able to judge whether the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 9 

soul within suited the splendid garb in which 
it was clothed. 

Seated near her^ but still at some little dis- 
tance, was her second, or rather third cousin, 
and companion, Hilda Marston. Here was 
a very different face — a sweet sensible, clever 
face, scarcely pretty and yet attractive, and 
with something in it that told you that the 
girl had thought of many things beyond the 
narrow circle in which she lived. She was a 
distant cousin of the Trevors ; but this rela- 
tionship was never mentioned in the house- 
hold, it was understood there that it was not 
to be mentioned ; and Miss Marston under- 
stood that she ought to consider herself a 
very fortimate young woman to be allowed to 
be one of the inhabitants of Sanda Hall. This 
is easily accounted for. She was the orphan 
and penniless daughter of a clergyman, and 
the Trevors naturally considered that they 
had done a very exemplary action in taking 
their poor relation to live with them. She 
was about the same age as Isabel Trevor, and 
very useful to her. She was indeed a clever 



10 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

girl, and tried to do her duty fairly enough, 
but sometimes, no doubt, she found it a little 
irksome. 

These, then, were the three occupants of 
the squire s pew — ^Mr. Trevor, Miss Trevor, 
and Miss Marston — and by-and-bye, after the 
Rev. Matthew had pronounced the benediction 
over his scanty flock in that strangely half- 
pathetic, half comic voice of his, and after the 
commoner portion of that flock had disap- 
peared through the humble doorway of the 
church, the squire opened his pew door and 
walked majestically down the narrow aisle, 
with his head thrown high in the air. Then 
followed Miss Trevor, with her head thrown 
back proudly also, and then Miss Marston, 
who carried herself with a meeker carriage, 
remembering, perhaps, that this was the 
house of God. 

They passed into the churchyard beyond 
— ^the seaside churchyard. Let us pause a 
moment here and look at the fishermen's 
gravestones. Here is one — Joshua Davidson, 
aged forty-two, drowned on such a date ; also 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 11 

his son^ Joshua^ drowned the same date> aged 
eighteen. Turn to another, James Johnston, 
whose fishing boat capsized on such a night, 
drowned with three mates, whose bodies were 
never recovered, and so on. All around are 
the records of the cruel sea. Boys, middle- 
aged men, and old men — all have gone down. 
Some, you will see, have been drowned far 
firom home, when some big ship disappeared 
with all her crew, but mostly the inhabitants 
of this place have perished almost within 
sight of it. Through these monuments by the 
shore, the squire passed down, with his head 
still thrown high in the air. It was its 
natural position, he thought, and he held it 
high to show how superior his head was to all 
the heads of his fellow-creatures around him. 

One of the schoolboys (a curly-haired, rosy- 
cheeked urchin) was lingering behind the rest 
in the churchyard to speak to the squire s 
family. Mr. Trevor looked at him, did not 
smile, but with one of his thin, well-gloved 
hands, gave a little pat on the boy s shoulders. 

"Well, Edward?" he said, and that was all. 



12 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

The boy upon this grinned, touched his 
hat, and then ran up to Miss Marston. 

^' How are you, Hil ? " he said, and Miss 
Marston stooped down and kissed his rosy 
cheek. 

He was her brother, a dependant also on 
Mr. Trevor s bounty, and he was one of the 
Rev. Matthew Irvine's scholars. 

" Well, my dear," said Miss Hilda, " and 
have you been a good boy in church ? " 

" Of course," replied Ned Marston, as his 
sister playfully and unbelievingly shook her 
head. 

By this time the party had reached the end 
of the narrow pathway among the graves, 
and had come to the gate of the churchyard. 
As they passed through this they overtook 
the grave-faced tutor, Philip Hayward, who 
was hngering there under the pretext of 
waiting for his pupil, Ned Marston. He 
touched his hat to the squire as he passed 
him, and the squire touched his hat in return. 
Mr. Trevor paid the tutor this compliment 
because he was a B. A. and a gentleman, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 13 

because he had never seen anything in his 
conduct tliat he disapproved of. Miss Trevor, 
too, looked one moment at Mr. Hayward as 
she went by, aad a faint snule-scarcely a 
smile —stole over her lovely lips in token of 
recognition. She had hardly ever exchanged 
a word with him, but she had been with Miss 
Marston when Miss Marston had talked to 
the tutor about her little brother, and so she 
did not utterly ignore his presence. A sudden 
flush rose to Hayward's face as Miss Trevor 
thus acknowledged him, -and as he took off 
his hat and stood bare-headed before her, his 
eyes were fixed upon her face with a look of 
almost passionate admiration. Then, as she 
passed on, he gave a restless sigh and turned 
away — ^turned to face Miss Hilda Marston, 
who held out her hand to the tutor with a 
smile. 

" What a bright fine day it is, Mr. Hay- 
ward !" said Miss Marston courteously. 

"Yes," answered the tutor, but he said 
even that brief monosyllable absently. He 
was not thinking of the pleasant face before 



14 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

him, but of the beautiful one that had passed 
by. Not of Hilda Marston, who was willing 
and anxious to be his friend ; but of a woman 
to whom he was nothing, nothings at least, 
but one of the many men who greatly admired 
her, and as such, perhaps, he was not quite 
indifferent to Miss Isabel Trevor. 

The tutor did not offer to accompany Miss 
Marston and her brother to the squire's car- 
riage, which was waiting a few yards off the 
churchyard gate on the roadway. He knew 
that to have done* so would have been to 
have forgotten his proper station in the 
squire's eyes ; but he stood still and watched 
the ladies enter the carriage, and saw the 
disappointed look of the boy, Ned Marston, 
when he drove away. Sometimes (not every 
Sunday, though) Mr. Trevor would ask Ned 
to lunch with them at the Hall. He did not 
do so this Sunday, however, and Ned came 
back to his master with a disappointed look ; 
for besides the lunch the squire always gave 
him half a crown when he went away. 

Thus, the half-crown and the lunch and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 15 

not seeing more of his sister combined, na- 
turally created great disappointment in Ned's 
youthful heart. Could we have seen straight 
therein, we should have seen that though the 
lunch was nice, and seeing his sister was nice, 
that the half crown was the nicest of all to 
Ned's unagmation. Pray, do not despise Ned. 
He was merely an ordinary schoolboy, and 
had private necessities of his own for that 
half-crown, in the liquidation of debts which 
he had incurred in the vain expectation of 
receiving it. 

He came back with rather a rueful counte- 
na^ce then to his tutor, and Hayward smUed 
grimly at the boy as he did so. 

" So they haven't asked you ? " he said. 

" No, it's a shame, isn't it ?" answered Ned. 
'^ And I hadn't time to say a word to Hil." 

Oh, Ned, Ned, have you begun so soon ? 
Here was a boy scarcely eleven years of age, 
putting his best foot forward already. " Not 
time to say a word to Hil," indeed 1 While 
all the time he was thinking of that lost half- 
crown. 



16 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

The tutor, who did not know of the half- 
crown inducement to visit the Hall, now 
smiled more kindly on the boy. 

" Well, they'll ask you another time," he 
said, " and then you'll see more of your sister." 
And he drew the lad's arm through his as he 
spoke. 

He, too, did this for a motive ; a motive, 
however, unconscious to himself. This boy 
was the link — ^the one link — ^between him and 
Isabel Trevor. For this reason the tutor 
clung to this boy, and gave him little boats 
and bats, and talked to him as he talked to no 
other boy in the school. Thus, Hilda Marston 
was gratefal to the tutor for his kindness to 
her little brother, and anxious to be his friend. 
But such a friendship would never have been 
allowed, they both knew, by the squire, and 
therefore their acquaintance continued to be 
of a very distant description. 

The two — ^the tutor and Ned Marston — ^then 
followed the rest of theschool boys to the 
incumbent's house. This stood in the village, 
nearly surrounded by the broken-down, quaint. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 1? 

and in many instances, squalid cottages of the 
fishermen. You entered it by rather an im- 
posing iron gateway, and in the front of the 
house was a large grass plot, with a sun dial 
in the midst. Then you came to the house. 
Grey and green with damp and mists were its 
walls, and blown and torn even in October 
were the creepers that the Rev. Matthew 
endeavoured most assiduously to train against 
them. It was a large, roomy, and commo- 
dious house, and built back ; the back win- 
dows looking out on the sea, and the front 
ones ijn the village. Scarcely a healthy place 
for boys, you would say ; and yet it was so, for 
if in the front sometimes came the smell of 
stale fish ajid other impurities, at the back did 
not the glorious sea breezes, fresh and health 
giving, blow with uninterrupted vigour ? 

Presently the effect of these breezes was 
shown at the dinner table. Round the Rev. 
Matthew's substantial board gathered the fat 
boys and the thin boys, the pale boys and the 
rosy boys. Oh 1 how they ate ! But not until 
the Rev. Matthew had blessed the meal. In 

VOL. I. 



18 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

his quaint and pleasant way lie stood up and 
said a simple grace, and after this, with right 
good win, they all began. The Rev. Matthew 
also played a fair knife and fork, and ate his 
dinner with a grateful and contented mind. 
There was real piety indeed in the heart of 
this humble parson. He believed. He saw 
beyond the trials and discomforts of Hs 
earthly home. He saw a kingdom which 
would never end, and joys and glories to 
which he was the heir. Oh ! scorn him not^ 
you higher clergy, who dwell in the pleasant 
places of the Church and sit beneath the 
shadows of the grey cathedral towers. He is 

is the same, and if you have ten talents laid 
out in well-doing, he haa his five also em- 
ployed in his Master's service. 

So the Rev. Matthew enjoyed his dinner 
with a grateful heart, and the boys enjoyed 
theirs too, with no especial feeling about the 
matter except that roast beef and plum pud- 
ding are good and pleasant to the taste. Then, 
when the meal was over, they went bounding 



BENEATH THE WATE. 19 

o\A of doors — ^boundin^:, running, racing:, 

which Sanda stands^ and down the rude road- 
way which leads to the long yellow sands 
beyond. 

On these sands^ this October afternoon, the 
sea was breaking in deep, white-crested waves 
-waves which came rolling slowly and ma- 
jestically on the shore. It was not a storm ; 
not one of those days when the voices of the 
deep bring terror to the dwellers on the land. 
But it waa a heavy sea, and as the boys ran 
on in their play the tutor walked apart, 
moody and restless, as the great mass of 
waters spread out before him. 

Suddenly he was startled by a cry — a cry 
from the boys. Ned Marston ran up to him, 
gesticulating and pointing to the sea. Then 
some of the others followed. 

"Look, Mr. Hayward, look there, Sir," 
cried Ned. 

" It's a corpse ! " said another. 

"It's a whale I " said a third. 

Upon this the tutor looked at the dark 



20 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

object in the sea which had attracted tite 
attention of the schoolboys. This object 
came forward and went backward with the 
waves. It was receding when the tutor first 
saw it, and behind it and around it floated 
something long and dark. Hayward was 
keen-eyed, and he was also brave. 

" It's a body," he said briefly, and as he 
spoke he began to prepare himself to plunge 
into the sea. 

There was no great danger, though the 
surf was heavy and rolling, for the tutor was 
a practised swimmer, and in almost as short a 
time as it takes to tell it, Hayward had swam 
out into the sea, had reached the dark object 
floating there, had twined some of the long 
hair which floated round it over his strong 
arm, and so swam backwards to the shore, 
bringing the body with him. 

The boys ran forward to assist him to land 
it, to assist Tiim in laying it straight and 
decently on the sand, and then clustered 
eagerly round. It was a woman's body — a 
woman past her first youth, and dark and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 21 

foreign looking. Many days apparently had 
this poor corpse tossed in the restless sea. It 
was bruised, and the rich clothing in which it 
had been attired was rent and torn. But on 
the hands glittered and sparkled, as the water 
feU away from them, some valuable rings. 
The tutor lifted the left hand and looked at 
the third finger. The symbol of marriage 
was there. It was a wife, perhaps a mother, 
then, that the sea had given up from its wild 
keeping. 



CHAPTEE II. 

THE STORM. 

There was great excitement in Sanda during 
the afternoon after this incident. Dead 
bodies were not very unusual visitors to this 
shore, but these were mostly of rough seamen, 
or of hardy fishermen, whose little cots stood 
on the great brown cliBfe above. But this 
woman^s body was another thing. The squire 
himself came down on the sands and conde- 
scended to examine the cold damp hands, 
where gHttered and shone four costly rings 
beside the wedding one. The gems in these 
rings he pronounced to be of great value, and 
three of them to be of foreign workmanship. 
One, however, was apparently an English 
ring— a great, heavy, diamond hoop. 



B8NEATH THE WAVE. 23 

"It looks like a family ring," said the 
squire. 

" Ah, poor soul, it won't matter to her now, 
whether it's a family ring or otherwise," said 
the Rev. Matthew, who also had come down 
upon the shore. 

" It may to her surviving relations, though, 
Mr. Irvine," said the squire, throwing his 
head high in the air. 

" I was thinMng of the poor creature her- 
self," answered the gentle parson, " and how 
now she will be far above such gauds as these." 
And he reverently lifted one of the cold, 
damp, decorated hands in his as he spoke. 

" It is our duty," said the squire, pompously, 
" to endeavour to discover who is now the 
legal owner of these rings." 

" To be sure," said the parson, " and in the 
meantime won't ye take charge of them yerself, 
Mr. Trevor? Ye see," he added, with his 
comical smile, " ye're the only one of us about 
here rich enough to trust with them." 

" I trust that this is not so," answered Mr. 
Trevor, yet more pompously. " But if you 



24 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

think it is my duty," he added, "to take 
charge of these jewels as the lord of the 
manor, I will not shirk that duty.'' 

" I thought ye wouldn't, squire," said the 

parson (for you see he was Irish, and loved to 

say pleasant things) ; and the squire bowed 

gravely in acknowledgment of the compliment. 

So the squire became custodian of the 

dead woman's rings, and by his direction the 

corpse was carried up the rough road from 

the sands to the cliflfe, on which Sanda stands. 

The next day the inquest on the body was 

held, but nothing further was eUcited on that 

occasion. The tutor, Philip Hayward, gave 

evidence, and the schoolboys. The coroner,. 

in summing up, said something complimentary 

to Mr. Hayward for the courage he had dis- 

played in swimming out to recover the body. 

"There was no danger," interrupted the 

tutor, gravely. 

Still the coroner considered that courage 
had been displayed; and after the inquest 
was over, Mr. Trevor said pretty much the 
same thing. 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 25 

He went, indeed, up to the tutor as he was 
leaving the room, where the inquiry had been 
held, and slightly touched his arm. 

"Mr. Hayward," he said, as the tutor 
turned sharply round, "I also wish to say a few 
words to you about your conduct yesterday.'* 

The tutor was now facing the squire, and 
measuring him mentally, as such men as 
Hayward unconsciously measure their fellow- 
men. 

" I do not suppose," continued the squire, 
'* that as you justly stated, there was much 
danger to life or limb in recovering the 
imfortunate woman's body that we have just 
viewed. But I consider there was moral 
courage, and promptness of action ; and such 
qualities deserve praise. I, therefore, who 
am ever ready to give praise where it is 
deserved, wish now to express to you my 
sense of appreciation of your conduct, and I 
assure you I do so with much pleasure." 

All the time that this long speech was 
going on, the tutor was looking at the squire. 
The tutor, with his pale earnest face and 



26 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

thoughtful eyes, was looking at the narrow- 
minded being that social position had made 
his superior. 

" I deserve no praise," he answered, 
quietly, after the squire had finished his 
speech. 

" I have pleasure in thinking that you do,*' 
said Mr. Trevor, with a "bow. " I also appre- 
ciate another good quality that you appear 
to possess, which is modesty — a quality 
peculiarly fitted to a young man who has his 
way to make in life — ^and if I can be of any 
future service to you, I assure you, young 
Sir, that I will gladly exert my influence in 
your behalf." 

" You are very good. Sir," replied Hay- 
ward, and the squire then bowed again, and 
having bowed also to the Coroner, majesti- 
cally left the room. 

Isabel Trevor had heard with almost con- 
temptuous indifference of the body that had 
been washed ashore. 

" It is probably some foreign sea captain's 
wife," she said. 



BENEATH THE WATE. 27 

" Poor, poor woman 1" said Hilda Marston 
with a sigh. 

The two ladies were sitting in the drawing- 
room of Sanda Hall when this conversation 
took place. Sanda Hall was then, and is 
^ow, a grey and ancient house, the stone of 
which is green, mildewed and worn ; that of 
the pillars of the gateway being absolutely 
hollowed out with the action of the sea air. 
It is built in two wings, with a broad front, 
and is in the centre of extensive grounds. 
The wood around it is, however, a failure; 
stunted and dwarfed are the trees by the 
piercmg wind, and uncongenial olhnate of a>o 
North-Eastern coast. Everything that wealth 
could do there was done to make it look 
cheerful, yet Sanda Hall was, and is, a cheer- 
less-looking dwelling. In the drawing-room, 
at the time of which I am writing, Isabel 
Trevor's luxurious tastes were plainly visible. 
Everything here was rich and briUiant-hued, 
and well suited the tall, golden-haired, beau- 
tiful woman, who had adorned it to her taste. 

She was standing in one of the deep windows, 



28 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

tormenting a grey and rose-coloured parrot 
with a gold pen, when she made the remark 
about the poor woman's body recovered from 
the sea being a foreign sea captain's wife, and 
she had scarcely noticed Moss Marston's reply, 
so occupied was she with her present amuse, 
ment. She was still thus employed (the 
parrot bristling her feathers and screeching 
her disapproval) when Mr. Trevor entered the 
room, and approaching his daughter, said : 

" I have just returned from the inquest, 
Isabel, held on that unfortunate woman. See, 
these are the rings I told you of 

Isabel turned sharply round at these words, 
and flung down her pen on a table near, and 
stretched out her hands for the rings. 

''Why, papa,'' she said, after examining 
them for a minute, " these are splendid rings ! 
I do not think," she went on, *'that these 
could have belonged to a common sea captain's 
wife." 

" No, impossible," said Mr. Trevor. " Look 
at the diamond hoop, Isabel. Are they not 
splendid stones V 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 29 

" Splendid 1" echoed Isabel, almost covet- 
ously. " I have none such, papa." 

" Well, my dear, if we could only discover 
their rightful possessor, we might buy them, 
perhaps,'* said Mr. Trevor. 

" And there was no clue discovered to-day, 
then?" asked Isabel. "No one identified 
the body 1" 

" There were no witnesses but young Hay- 
ward, Mr. Irvine's tutor, and some of the 
schoolboys," answered Mr. Trevor. " But I 
proposed after the inquiry was over that 
advertisements should be inserted in the 
Times, and some of the local papers; and 
what else can be done ?" 

" What else, seemingly ?" said Isabel. 
*• But, papa," she added, after thinking a 
minute, " if these rings never find a proper 
owner, won't they become legally yours as 
lord of the manor ?" 

" I should not care to broach that claim, 
Isabel," answered the squire, • who was not so 
fond of rings aa his daughter. 

" Well, at all events," said Isabel (who was 



30 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

a woman who took sudden fancies), " I think 
I shall wear this one for the present." And 
she kept turning the heavy diamond hoop, as 
she spoke, slowly round one of her delicate 
fingers. Suddenly she drew it off and 
examined the inside rim attentively. " Look 
here," she cried, " look, papa ; look. Miss 
Marston — there's a discovery ! What do you 
think is engraved here ? See, quite distinctly. 
* To my BelovedJ It's a romance, I declare, 
a complete romance !" 

The squire and Miss Marston examined the 
diamond hoop in turns. The inscription in 
the inner rim was quite plain — " To my 
Bdoved" 

It seemed sad to Miss Marston, who laid 
down the ring gravely and with a sigh. 

" Poor woman I" she said, " then her death 
has left someone's life desolate I" 

" Someone will console himself," replied 
Miss Trevor, carelessly ; and she again lifted 
the diamond ring and this time placed it on 
one of her fingers. 

" I shall wear Mr. Someone's ring until he 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 31 

comes for it/* she said- And she held out her 
slender hand to admire it. 

*•' I would be afraid/* said Miss Marston, 
ahnost with a shudder, looking at the ring on 
Isabel's white finger. 

" Would you V ^answered Isabel Trevor, 
with a little laugh. She was thinking, " Poor 
thing, she hasn't a chance of wearing it," but 
she did not say this. 

Thus Isabel Trevor took possession of the 
diamond hoop and continued occasionaUy to 
wear it. She did this from a mere wL. 
But she took whims-fancied one thing pax- 
ticularly one week and entirely forgot it the 
next. At the present moment her whim was 
the dead woman's diamond ring. 

The dead woman herself was buried a few 
days ailer this, for obvious reasons. She was 
buried in the churchyard of Sanda-by-the- 
Sea, and the Rev. Matthew Irvine read the 
service over her body. 

She had only two mourners who followed 
her to the grave, and one of these was the 
tutor, Philip Hayward ; the other his friend 



32 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

among the schoolboys, Ned Marston. Miss 
Marston was pleased when she heard that 
her young brother had gone, and she told 
him so. 

" Old Hayward wanted me to go," truth- 
fully aflfirmed Master Ned, " but it was rather 
a sell." 

So the poor bruised body lay still beneath 
the earth at last, after its long wanderings 
apparently amid the restless waves. On the 
following Sunday Miss Marston went up and 
looked at the newly-made grave ; but Miss 
Trevor, though she still wore the dead 
woman's ring, did not approach it. This was 
not from any feeling on the subject. The 
freshly cut turf, lying over the poor tenant 
beneath, awoke no emotions in Miss Trevor's 
heart; but she simply left the churchyard 
quickly, because it was beginning to rain, and 
because the weather was threatening to be 
yet more wet and stormy. 

This was not only a threat. The wind 
veered round to the south-east during the 
afternoon, and by midnight a perfect gale 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 33 

was blowing on the coast. Long before the 
night set in, the fishermen had lit the beacon 
on the cliff, and had drawn their boats high 
upon the shore, and had gathered in their 
gear, and had placed everything, as far as 
they could, in safety from the expected storm. 
And the storm came. Such a storm as had 
not raged on the coast for thirty years. 
Isabel Trevor heard it and trembled lying 
in her down bed beneath the substantial roof 
of Sanda Hall. The squire heard it and felt 
uncomfortable ; and Hilda Marston heard it 
and turned on her pillow to pray. 

" Grod help the poor sailors !" she said, 
" God help all those at sea !" 

Other prayers, too, were offered in the 
village of Sanda that night for the poor 
seamen out in this awful gale. The Kev. 
Matthew got up and knelt reverently down. 

" Lord, be with Thy poor creatures exposed 
to this dreadful blast," he said. " God be 
merciful to us sinners, this night and for 



evermore." 



Under his roof, too, the tutor rose rest- 

VOL. I. D 



34 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

lessly, and looked out on the blackened sky. 
He, too, was thinking of the men at sea- 
thinking vaguely and passionately of the 
great unsolved problems which lie between 
this life and the life which is to come. He 
had none of the Hev. Matthew's simple 
faith ; he had only a great heart " crying 
for the light/* To him had not come " the 
peace of beUeving " ; and yet he knew, he 
felt, that his soul would not die here, nor 
perish when the time came that his earthly 
form should be consigned to the dust. 

He stood and looked at the blackened sky 
and heard the raging of the waters below. 
He knew that, unheard and unseen, strong 
men would at that moment be in their death 
agony. Where would these poor souls go, 
he thought, after their brief struggle for life 
was over ? He did not pray for them. He 
stood there gloomy and irresolute, wondering 
if anything could be done — ^if his weak arm 
could save one victim from the cruel sea ? 
When the morning broke, the sky was 
one dull, uniform, leaden grey. The wind 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 35 

was blowing a hurricane, and the rain fell 
in great splashing, blinding drops, and the 
banks and cliffs were white — white with the 
wild sea foam that blew inland every mo- 
ment in huge flakes on the flying scud. 

Below, near the steep cliflfe on which 
Sanda stands, wrecked on one of the great 
shelving rocks that jut out into the sea, a 
ship was lying with her keel uppermost. 
She was a foreign brig, and broke up before 
the day wafi over, and her crushed and 
rotten timbers were all that came on shore 
to tell the tale of her last struggles during 
that wild night. 

The storm continued the whole day, and 
about three o'clock even increased in 
intensity. By this time nearly all the 
inhabitants of Sanda (men and women 
alike) were gathered together on the high 
cliflfe on which it is built to watch the ships 
endeavouring to run for shelter to the 
nearest harbour. About half-past three a 
thin blue line of steam appeared on the 
horizon. This rose and fell. Then a 



36 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

steamer, gallantly holding her own amid 
the mighty mass of foaming water, grew 
visible. Now but her funnel was seen, now 
her decks. The excitement on the cliflfe 
grew intense. The waves seemed to sweep 
right over her, but still she went on — on 
past the wild headland of Sanda — on, 
prayed many a woman present, safe to port. 
As she disappeared there rose a cry — a 
cry that rang through the crowd. Philip 
Hayward, who was among the watchers of 
the sea., turned round when he heard it, and 
as he did so found himself face to face with 
Isabel Trevor. There she stood, the rain 
beating and dashing on her golden hair 
and streaming down her lovely features. 
She was pale and excited. It was so grand, 
she thought, watching this death struggle 
with the waves. 

•Unconsciously, almost, the tutor drew 
nearer to her. Then again rang that cry 
— the cry from the crowd. " Another ship 
in sight ! Look no'ard I Another ship 
labouring in the sea !" 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 37 

"She's a yacht/' said a sailor who was 
standing near Hayward, inspecting her 
through a long telescope that Tie held in his 
strong brown hands. 

" Shell never live through it/' muttered 
an old fisherman, shaJdng his grey head. 

Everyone on the cliffs now saw the yacht 
and her fearful danger. She was driving 
rapidly on — ^fleeing, as it were, before her 
devouring foe. Then, suddenly, when every 
eye was fixed upon her, she veered round. 
She had been running, apparently, for the 
nearest harbour ; now she turned and began 
drifting, drifting fast upon the rocks below. 

"What a cry there was then ! The women 
threw their aprons over their faces and ran 
backwards and forwards, screaming and 
gesticulating, while the men stood silent 
and pale. 

" They've lost power over her," presently 
said the sailor with the telescope, to 
Hayward. 

" Her time's come," said the old fisherman. 
*' Gk)d be merciful to the poor souls on board !" 



38 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

The yacht was now rapidly approaching 
the cliflfe. But before she struck, before 
the fatal, grinding, crushing blow could 
come, a great sea lapped over her, and then 
another. But she rose from the mass of 
waters, though an appalling shriek from the 
crowd told that all believed her fate was 
certain. Then a third sea struck her, and 
this time she went down to rise no more. 

She disappeared so suddenly that she 
might have been a phantom ship. Hayward 
rubbed his eyes. She had been there a 
moment ago, now she was not there. It 
was like a dream. Isabel Trevor gave a 
cry, and the crowd swayed backwards and 
forwards, and pressed nearer to the edge of 
the cliflfe. Every eye was fixed upon the 
sea ; the sea had just swallowed up the 
ship and her living crew. 



CHAPTEE III. 

SIR GEORGE HAMILTON. 

As the crowd swayed backwards and forwards, 
after the ya^ht sank, PhiUp Hay ward found 
himself pressed nearer to Isabel Trevor and 
her companion, Hilda Marston. Hilda Mar- 
fiton WM crying, and praying silently for those 
who, even at that moment, must be struggling 
in their death agony; and Isabel Trevor, 
with parted lips and wide-open eyes, was 
gazing intently upon the sea. 

It was a moment of extreme excitement. 
The yacht had gone down so near the land 
that a good swimmer could easily, in an 
ordinary sea, have swum to shore. But in 
this raging, boiling mass of waters, there 
seemed no hope. No hope ! And yet with 



40 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

a cry — a shout rather — ^that rose above the 
storm, men began to call out that now^ihey 
saw a man — a living man — ^wrestling with 
the waves ! 

For a moment he was visible — and then — 
God ! he disappeared. The next moment 
the head rose once more, and a white, 
despairing face looked upwards. Isabel 
Trevor saw that look, and a sudden passion 
of excitement seemed to seize her. 

" Can nothing be done ? " she cried, loudly 
and wildly. " Are you men ? " she went on, 
running forward to a group of fishermen who, 
in their oilskin coats and caps, were standing 
near. "Will you let a human creature 
perish before you ? Will none of you risk 
your lives to save him ? " And she pointed 
eagerly, as she said these last words, to the 
sea ; and as she did so, her eyes met Philip 
Hayward's. 

"I will, lady," he said, and he stepped 
forward, pale and daring. 

"You are a brave man," she answered 
quickly. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 41 

"You are a madman," said one of the 
fishermen, roughly. " No soul could live in 
a sea like yon." 

" I will try," said Hayward firmly, and as 
he spoke he flung off his coat and boots, and 
then with one look into Isabel's face — a look 
of farewell — ^he began hastily to descend the 
wet and slippery pathway down the cliffs that 
led towards the sea. 

"Thou'st sent him to his death," said 
the same fisherman who had spoken before, 
glancing at Isabel. 

But she made no answer, she was watching 
the tutor's descent ; watching him struggling 
down the dangerous, narrow way ; watching 
him, when he reached the great brown rocks 
below, stand one moment still on one of 
them, and then, seizing his opportunity, 
plunge the next boldly into the sea. 

As he did so, Hilda Marston gave a cry — 
a cry echoed by many of the women present. 

" He will be drowned," said Hilda, with a 
sort of moan, and she put her handkerchief 
over her face to shut out the scene. 



42 BENEATH THE WAVE, 

" If he is," answered Isabel, " he will die 
like a brave man, and not like a coward," and 
she looked tauntingly at the group of fisher- 
men, who moved with a sort of uneasy con- 
sciousness beneath her contemptuous glance. 

" Let's gan down wi' ropes ; maybe we can 
chance to help him," murmured one. " He's 
a brave lad," said another. " He'll never see 
the shore again," muttered a third. 

In the meantime Hayward was resolutely 
swimming onward, and a sort of momentary 
lull came over the mighty waves as he did so. 
He knew he had gone forth to almost certain 
death, but she would see him die. 

" She will see me die — she will know how 
I loved her then," he thought. 

This, at least, was the impulse that had 
sent him into the boiling surf. But though 
it seemed a sort of forlorn hope, he did not 
forget that each stroke of his vigorous arm 
brought him nearer to the man struggling in 
the sea. 

There he was. Hayward saw the dark 
head amid the blinding spray ; amid the huge 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 43 

waves that swept over them, that parted them 
one moment with a great yawning gulf, that 
flung them the next close to each other's 
arms. 

At last Hayward made a dash forward, 
and caught the man's hand. 

" There I rest it on my shoulder," he said. 
^' Don't put your arms round my neck. Lean 
your hand on my shoulder, and I will try to 
save you." 

" I am done," said the man, choking and 
gasping. 

Then came another lull in the waves. 

"Take time to breathe," said Hayward, 
himself drawing a long breath. ^^ Hold on 
fast, and we may yet get safe to shore." 

The man whom he addressed was almost 
exhausted. But he was bold and brave, and 
he saw that his one chance of life lay in 
obeying Hayward's directions. He there- 
fore rested his axm on Hayward, drew his 
breath, and then together they turned towards 
the shore. 

The sea swept them on— swept them oil 



44 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

in the great waves in which they were power- 
less, and was going to sweep them, Hayward 
saw, against the huge, jagged rocks that were 
standing out hard and cold to give them a 
pruel welcome. When he saw this, he made 
an effort. "This poor soul may wish to 
Jive," he thought, glancing at the white set 
face so near his own, and he put out his arm 
in the hope of shielding his companion. 

He heard a cheer as he did so — a cheer 
that seemed quite near to him somehow — and 
then came a shock, a frightful sense of pain, 
and a rush and din of waters in his ears. 
After this he could recall nothing more. 
His head, in fact, had struck on the rocks as 
well as his arm. But, before the fierce waves 
could carry back their prey, one of the 
fishermen, who had gone down the chffs in 
the hope of helping him, and who was stand- 
ing watching with a rope round his waist, 
darted forward and caught Hayward by the 
arm. There was a brief struggle, but the 
hardy fisherman was used to the bUnding 
spray, and Hayward (with the man he had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 45 

saved cUnging to him with the grim clutch 
of despair) the next moment was drawn 
aUve upon the rocks. 

What a cheer was given then — a cheer 
from the cliffs ! Men ran down the slippery- 
path at the risk of their lives, and one woman 
went also. This was Isabel Trevor. There 
she stood, pale, determined, and beautiful, 
looking at the tutor's death-like face, who 
was now lying stretched out on the rocks 
insensible. Crouching near him on his knees, . 
and leaning against some of the fishermen, 
as if he were quite exhausted, was the man 
he had saved. But Isabel never looked at 
him. She was examining Hayward atten- 
tively, and presently she stooped down, and 
laid her hand over his heart. 

" Is he much hurt ? " she said ; and the 
fisherman who had caught him by the arm 
as he was being swept back into the sea, 
and who was the same man who had spoken 
to Isabel on the cliffs, now answered her 
roughly enough. 

*' Ay, it's as I told thee," he said, looking 



46 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

at Isabel with his bronzed handsome face ; 
" thou's sent him to his death." 

" Where is he injured ? " she asked coldly, 
lifting herself up. 

** On the head/' said the fisherman, " and 
his arm's smashed.'* As he spoke he lifted 
up one of Hay ward's powerless hands. 

As he did so, Isabel bent down again and 
took the tutor's cold hand. 

*'Mr. Hayward," she said, "Mr. Hay ward! " 
And somehow to his dulled senses her siren 
voice crept, for he opened his eyes and looked 
at her ; looked at her like the dumb beasts look 
when in deadly pain. 

"Are you better?" said Isabel, and she 
took a flask containing spirit from the fisher- 
man's hand and held it to Hayward's lips, and 
as she did so a sort of life seemed to creep 
into his veins. 

"I — I — thank you," he murmured, and then 
hi, eyes closed agk 

" Have him carried up the cliff at once," 
said Isabel, looking round with her imperious 
air. " Where is the doctor ? Why is he not 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 47 

here ? Let him have everything he requires* 
I am Miss Trevor, of the Hall." 

She need not have made this announce- 
ment. They all knew her, these rough, 
bronzed men ; knew by reputation and name 
the haughty beauty who never went near their 
squaUd homes ; who Uved as far apart from 
them as if she were in another world. But 
she was the squire's daughter, and as such 
must be obeyed : and so, as she turned away 
^th her pLd air, the fahennen, in ihl 
careless, slouching manner, prepared to carry 
Hayward up the cliff. 

As they were lifting him in their arms, Isabel 
Trevor for the first time looked at the man 
the tutor had saved. He was still in a state 
of extreme exhaustion, and was eagerly drink- 
ing some spirit that a fisherman was giving 
him. Isabel's eyes fell on his hands as he 
did so; on the white nervous hands, on the 
carefully kept nails, on the ring on the fourth 
finger, on wLh ^oM beari^s were deeply 
cut. They were the hands of a gentleman, 
and from the hands Isabel's eyes travelled to 



48 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the face. A pale face, with handsome features 
and black brows, and with a heavy moustache 
shading the strong, resolute mouth and jaws. 

"Are you much hurt ?" said Isabel, address 
ing him. 

Then the man looked up, and when he saw 
her, with the instincts of a gentleman, he tried 
to rise. 

" I am completely exhausted," he said in a 
faint voice. " Am I the only one saved ? " 
he asked the next moment. 

" Ay, master," answered the fisherman who 
was giving him the spirit, " and if it hadn't 
been for yon tutor lad at the schule, that they're 
carrying up the cliff there, thou would have 
gone with the rest." 

" What was the name of your shi{) ? They 
were saying it was a yacht ? " went on Isabel. 

" Yes, the yacht Endymion," answered the 
rescued man. " I was her owner — she was a 
good little ship, but no yacht could live in 
such a gale." 

"There's not been the like these thirty 
years," said the fisherman shaking his head. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 49 

" What is your name ? " continued Isabel, 
** You had better be taken at once to the HaU 
— ^to my father's house, Sanda Hall." 

''I thank you/' said the gentleman, "and I 
shall indeed be grateful for some friendly 
shelter. My name is Hamilton," he added, 
" Sir George Hamilton ; and will you tell me 
the name of the brave young man who saved 
my life?" 

"He is Mr. Hay ward, the tutor at the 
school here," answered Isabel. And then 
with the innate coquetry of her nature she 
went on, " I saw you — I entreated Mr. Hay- 
ward to save you." 

" I thank you," said Sir George Hamilton 
again, and this time he looked at Isabel's 
beautiful face. 

Shall I describe her as she appeared to him 
then, standing on the brown, bare rocks, with 
the storm raging around her, and the spray 
and rain beating on her golden hair ? She 
was not pale now, but fair and blooming. Her 
large, restless, strangely-tinted eyes, with the 
dark eyelashes and brows, were smiling and 

VOL. I. E 



50 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

soft. The excitement was over. She never 
thought of the men who had just died. She 
was thinking how one had gone out and risked 
his life at her bidding, and here was another 
man who, perhaps, would become a victim to 
her beauty, too. This was what Isabel Trevor 
liked. She felt herself a kind of heroine 
because she had run down the dangerous, 
slippery pathway from the cliff ; because she 
had sent Hayward out on his almost fatal 
errand ; because she was standing there in the 
wind and the rain, where no other woman had 
ventured to go. 

"And you came here," said Sir George, 
looking round at the bleak spot on which they 
were standing, " to try to help some of my 
poor crew ? " 

"I came because I could not bear to do 
nothing," answered Isabel. " It was dreadful 
only to watch. But," she added, '4et the 
men assist you up the cliff, and then in a few 
minutes you will be at Sanda Hall." 

The shipwrecked man was only too glad to 
avail himself of her offer. He was '' almost 



ft 
it' 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 51 

done/' as he himself expressed it, and with 
diflSculty was dragged up the steep cliff by 
the fishermen, followed by Isabel Trevor. 
When they nearly reached the top, Isabel 
saw her father standing there watching her, 
looking pale and agitated, and he came hastily 
forward. 

" Isabel," he said, " what on earth induced 
you to risk your life as you have done ? '* 
I could not keep still,'* she answered. 
Papa," she added, pointing to the exhausted 
stranger who was supported by the fishermen, 
" this is Sir George Hamilton, the owner of 
the yacht that has gone down — the gentleman 
Mr. Hayward has saved, and I have asked 
him to go to the Hall." 

** Certainly," said the squire, courteously. 
"I congratulate you, sir, on your happy 
escape." And Mr. Trevor held out his hand 
to Sir George Hamilton. 

But by this time Sir George was nearly in 
a fainting condition. He was frightfiilly pale, 
and unable to walk, and Mr. Trevor, s86kig 
this, at once despatched a man standing%|^^'6 



52 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the Hall for a carriage, and Sir George was 
placed in it, while the squire and Isabel stood 
by his side. 

The women present now divided their 
tearful sympathy between the rescued man 
and the tutor who had rescued him. Hay- 
ward at this time was being carried to the 
parsonage, and Isabel heard all around com- 
ments on his conduct. 

" Ay, it's cost him his life," one fine young 
woman, with a red handkerchief tied round 
her comely face, was saying. 

" He had a sad look, like those who gan 
young," answered a weather-beaten matron. 

" Is young Hayward killed ? " asked the 
squire, who also overheard their remarks. 

"They say he's nigh to death, squire," 
answered the comely young woman with a 
sigh. 

*^ Indeed ! I regret to hear it," said Mr. 
Trevor. 

" It is an exaggeration, papa," said Isabel. 
" He spoke to me when he was lying on the 
rocks." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 53 

But now let us leave the group who were 
waiting for the squire's carriage and follow 
those who were carrying Hayward to the 
parsonage. Amongst these was the parson. 
He had not been on the cliffs when the tutor 
had volunteered to endeavour to save the 
man struggling in the sea, nor yet when 
Hayward had succeeded in bringing the one 
survivor of the crew of the yacht to the shore. 
But he had arrived there just when the 
fishermen bore the tutor (who was then again 
apparently insensible) from the rocks below. 
The Rev. Matthew's grief and consternation 
at the sight were naturally extreme. 

" My dear lad, what has happened ? " he 
cried, in dismay, as his eyes fell on the 
tutor's pale face and out-stretched form, as 
the fishermen laid him for a moment on the 
grass. " Oh, Hayward, my dear ! " And 
the parson knelt down and took one of the 
tutor's cold hands in his, and began tenderly 
chafing it. 

Then a dozen voices told what had hap- 
pened, and the Rev. Matthew's kindly heart 



54 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

was yet more moved when he heard the 
tale. 

'* He should not have done it/' he said. 
" My boy, my brave boy, look at your old 
friend I Don't you know me, Hay ward ? '* 

But no words came from the tutor's 
white lips. He lay there still and motionless, 
breathing somewhat heavily, and the Rev. 
Matthew grew even more alarmed as he 
watched him. 

" He's hurt on the head," said one of the 
fishermen. 

" God grant his brain is not injured," an- 
swered the Kev. Matthew, uneasily. " Bun, 
my man," he went on to one of the men 
standing near, " for the doctor, and bring a 
door from Jimmy Watson's, the joiner's. He 
must be carried carefully home." 

In a few minutes the parson's directions 
were both complied with. The doctor, a tall, 
gaunt Scotchman, arrived on the clifl&, and 
Jiaving felt Hayward's pulse, pronounced that 
he must be taken home before anything could 
be done. The tutor, accordingly, was lifted 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 55 

on to the door procured from the village 
joiner's, and then carefully carried to the 
parsonage, the Rev. Matthew walking by his 
side as they went along. 

As the procession entered the paiisonage 
gateway and crossed the rain-soaked grass- 
plot in front of the house, Mrs. Irvine was 
standing at the door looking eagerly out. She 
had heard the report of the tutor's injuries, 
and stood there facing the raging tempest in 
her anxiety on his behalf. What a gaunt 
figure she was 1 So white, so thin, even so 
ghastly, with her large features, sunken 
black eyes, and white, half-open mouth, 
which habitually showed her upper teeth. 
She might have been an animated corpse, 
so deathly did she look, and even her voice 
was shrill and unearthly. 

" Is he dead, Matthew ?" she cried, as soon 
as she caught sight of the tutor's pale face. 

" He is dead ! " shrieked a voice behind 
her, and a plimip little figure fell suddenly 
backwards. 

This was Amelia Irvine, the only surviv- 



56 BENEATH THE WAVli. 

ing child of the Rev. Matthew and his wife. 
She was a stout, rosy girl, with thick waist, 
and thick wrists and ankles, and a face that 
could not perhaps have been called absolutely 
plain. She had been standing behind her 
mother, watching for the tutor's arrival, and 
when she saw his prostrate figure carried by 
the fishermen on the door, and his white un- 
covered face, she cried, " He is dead ! '* and 
fell at once without warning back into the 
arms of little Ned Marston, who was stand- 
ing there also. 

" Don't, Miss Melia ! " exclaimed Ned, as 
the unexpected dead weight fell upon him. 
" I can't hold you — I can't indeed." 

" He is dead ! " again cried Miss Amelia, 
stiffening her ankles rigidly. 

" Please sit on the umbrella stand," pleaded 
Ned, '^ for I can't hold you — I can't indeed." 
And suiting his action to his words, he 
allowed Miss Amelia to fall heavily on the 
hall oil-cloth. 

" Cruel," naurmured Miss Amelia, closing 
her eyes and becoming more rigid still. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 57 

"Don't make a fool of yourself, Amelia- 
Shadwell," said Mrs. Irvine, looking round,, 
as the sound of her daughter's sudden descent, 
reached her ear. " If Hayward's gone, you 
can't bring him back by fainting and that 
kind of nonsense, and if he isn't you had best 
get up and try to do something to help him." 

*^0h ! "groaned Amelia ShadTrell from 

the oil-cloth. But here it ought to be men- 
tioned that Shadwell was Mrs. Irvine's 
maiden name, and she had insisted that each 
of her children should successively bear it. 
All the little Thomas Shadwells, and Mat-^ 
thew Shadwells and Jane Shadwelk, and 
various other little Shadwells, were " gone," 
as Mrs. Irvine expressed it ; but Amelia 
Shadwell remained, and her mother almost 
invariably, in addressing her, gave her her 
full baptismal name. 

" Get up. Miss Amelia, please do," whis- 
pered little Ned Marston, who felt rather 
contrite for having let her go so suddenly 
down. " You'll get all wet if you don't when 
the men come in. He's not dead, I dare 



58 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

say," he continued, soothingly, "and if you 
can't get up, let me roll you to one side." 
And accordingly Master Ned rolled Amelia 
into a convenient comer near the umbrella- 
stand, while her father and the fishermen 
carried the tutor into the hall. 



CHAPTER IV. 



SIB GEOBaE's OFFER. 



When Hayward's injuries were examined, he 
was found to have severely fractured his 
right arm and his wrist. The most serious 
injury, however, which he had sustained was 
on his head. His forehead had apparently 
struck on the rocks, and for two days after- 
wards he lay in a state of semi-insensibility. 

During these days a message of inquiry 
came morning and evening from the Hall. 
" Sir George Hamilton and Mr. Trevor wish 
to know how Mr. Hayward is," regularly 
asked the Hall footman, when he rang at the 
parsonage bell. 

The dwellers in the cottages near, among 
which the footman had to pass before he 



60 BENEATH THE WAVE, 

reached the parsonage, regarded these visits 
with sympathy; with sympathy for the young 
man who wa« lying iU in their midst, and also 
for the stranger who had come so perilously 
amongst them. Some interest was excited 
also, when a gentlemanly, pleasant looking 
man of about forty, arrived at the village in 
a cab, two days after the wreck of the yacht, 
and stopped at the public-house to ask the 
nearest way to Sanda Hall, where Sir George 
Hamilton was at present staying. After the 
gentleman had received the proper directions, 
and had driven to the Hall, the driver and 
the cab returned to the public-house. Then 
it came out that this visitor was Mr. Hanna- 
way, , a lawyer, and Sir George Hamilton's 
man of business. Sir George being a very 
rich man, the cabman had been informed. 

Still, though these things interested the 
fishing population of Sanda, they did not 
create in them the intense curiosity and love 
of gossip which they would almost certainly 
have done in a country village. Whether the 
solemn dirges that are for ever sounding in 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 61 

their ears, that break over so many unseen 
grav. of Mends and iindred, affL them 
with a sort of solemnity, there is no doubt 
that, after the heyday of youth is past, these 
people are, as a class, of a grave and quiet 
deportment, the women as a rule being hard- 
working, sober, and virtuous. 

When, therefore, on the day after his 
arrival at Sanda Hall, Sir George Hamilton's 
man of business was seen wending his way 
past the dilapidated cottages of the fishermen 
in search of the parsonage, there was no 
unseemly staring at the stranger. 

The women, as usual, were to be seen 
standing at their door-ways knitting, dressed 
in their short blue bedgowns pinned back, and 
their short blue flannel petticoats, fully dis- 
playing the blue woollen stockings beneath, 
and the low leather shoes. 

They glanced up as Mr. Hannaway passed. 

'' He'll be the gentleman from the Hall," 
said one woman. 

*' Ay," answered another grave matron, and 
that waa all. 



62 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" The lad yonder, they say, is better, 
then ?" said the first woman who had spoken, 
with a nod of her head to indicate the 
parsonage. 

'* The Lord has been merciful to him,'" 
replied the second woman ; and they both 
Jnt on industriously with the blue, half- 
finished woollen stockings in their hands. 

In the meanwhile, Mr. Hannawav had 
reached the parsonage, and had been ushered 
into the parson's study. 

This was the smallest room in the house. 
A little back sitting-room, dark and shabby, 
in which the Rev. Matthew wrote his sermons, 
smoked his pipe, and spent his serenest hours 
of peace. 

He was not there, however, when the 
prosperous man of business was ushered into 
it, and the prosperous man of business looked 
round with amused dismay at the signs of 
poverty it contained. Worn was the carpet, 
worn the black hair-seating of the chairs, and 
most worn of all the comfortable arm-chair in 
which the Rev. Matthew spent so many hours. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 63 

Mr. Hannaway had not been used to this, 
kind of thing. "The poor man must be 
starving," he thought, and he was, therefore, 
quite astonished when the genial, pleasant- 
faced parson entered the shabby^ Uttle room. 

He (the Rev. Matthew) held Mr. Hanna- 
way's caxd in his hand. 

" Mr. Hannaway V he said, and Mr. 
Hannaway smiled and bowed, and then the 
two shook hands. 

I have called," began Mr. Hannaway, 
at the request of Sir George Hamilton. 
He wishes me to express to the young 
gentleman who saved his life, and who I 
understand is in your estabUshment, his deep 
sense of gratitude, and also to make inquiries 
about his state of health, and will be glad 
to know if any further medical advice is 
advisable." 

"Then, I'm thankful to tell ye I don't 
think it is," answered the Rev. Matthew in 
his sweet-toned, half-pathetic voice. "My 
friend. Dr. MacRay, here, told me this 
morning that he hopes that the dear lad will 



u 



64 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

HOW pull through ; and I feel a happy man, 
I can tell ye, for the news." 

"I am, indeed, pleased to hear it," said 
Mr. Hannaway. " His condition has excited 
ike greatest anxiety in the mind of Sir 
^George Hamilton, who is in a state of great 
anental depression, also, at the loss of the 
whole of his poor crew." 

" It was, indeed, terrible," said the Rev. 
Matthew, with a feeling sigh. 

" It was a fine yacht, the Endymion," went 
on Mr. Hannaway. " Altogether it has been 
a sad business, and Sir George seems to have 
taken it completely to heart." 

'^ No wonder, no wonder," said the Rev. 
Matthew. 

" Sir George further instructed me to say," 
continued Mr. Hannaway, **that anything 
that he can do to promote this young man's 
future — I mean the young gentleman who 
saved Sir George's life — ^he will most gladly 
do. Sir George, you know," added Mr. 
Hannaway with a smile, " is a rich man, and 
can aflford to be a generous one." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 65 

" I shall tell the dear lad," answered the 
Rev. Matthew, *' And this, I may tell ye, 
Mr. Hannaway," he went on, ** a finer, braver 
young fellow there does not breathe. He's a 
gentleman by birth, too," he continued, " for 
his father was an officer in the 84th — ^a lieu- 
tenant — and married when out in India the 
governess of his colonel, and then died, poor 
fellow, of sunstroke, a year after. He has 
a sorrowful history, you see. A widowed 
mother, with her scanty pension barely suffi- 
cient to keep in life, and this one son. Well, 
he has an uncle — some sort of a merchant in 
London, I believe — and this Mr. Moxam 
educated young Hayward, and sent him to 
the University of Durham, under the idea 
that he might go into the Church. But the 
mother fell ill, and what could the poor lad 
do ? He left college, and accepted a tutor- 
ship, so that he might help her, which he 
does — sending her indeed almost all his scanty 
earnings." 

" It is highly commendable," said Mr. 
Hannaway. 

VOL. I. F 



66 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Yes, but the young fellow frets. I'm 
such a poor man myself that I can do nothing 
for him, though I love him as a son, but I 
know he is dissatisfied with his position in 
life, and pines for different work. Therefore, 
you see, if Sir George Hamilton would push 
him on " 

" I am sure he will," replied Mr. Hanna- 
way, as the Rev. Matthew made an expres- 
sive pause. " Sir George will see him him- 
self when he is better, but of this I am certain, 
that any profession is now open to him." 

" Is Sir George a young man ? " asked the 
parson. 

^^ It depends upon what you call a young 
man," answered Mr. Hannaway, with a 
smile. 

" I call him a young man, because he is two 
years younger than I am. He is thirty-eight, 
in fact." 

"And is he married?" went on the Rev. 
Matthew. 

At this question a fain t colour passed over 
Mr. Hannaway 's good-looking, pleasant face. 



u 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 67 

" I — ^beKeve not," he said, with some hesi- 
tation. 

" Well, he had a near escape froin death," 
said the Rev. Matthew, quickly, who now saw 
that he had asked an unfortunate question. 

'' Yes, indeed," answered Mr. Hannaway, 
rising, " and he fully appreciates the courage 

of Mr. Hayward, isn't it ? " 

Yes, Hayward. Philip Hayward." 
Tell Mr. Philip Hayward, then, that Sir 
George will call upon him before he leaves 
this part of the country ; and in the mean- 
while assure him that whatever profession he 
fixes upon he may depend on Sir George's 
influence and purse." And Mr. Hannaway, 
having given this assurance, shook the Rev. 
Matthew's hand, and then courteously took 
his leave. 

After he had gone, the Rev. Matthew pro- 
ceeded to the tutor's sick room. There he 
found his wife and his daughter Amelia. 
AmeUa had spent the last two days in crying 
and in making beef tea ; but now, as the tutor 
was supposed to be better, she had dried hei* 



68 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

eyes, and was making beef tea more ener- 
getically than ever. 

"Pa/' she said, turning round her rosy, 
fat, common-place face, as the Rev. Mat- 
thew entered the room, "he has t^ken a. 
cupfiil" (this was of beef tea). "Isn't 
that nice ? I made it myself, and I know 
it's good." 

"Yes, my dear," answered the Rev. Mat- 
thew, glancing at the tutor's pale face lying 
on the pillow; "but you must not forget 
that he is to be kept perfectly quiet." 

" Oh ! I won't forget," said Amelia, gush- 
ingly ; " but though he is to be kept quiet, 
he's to be kept up, too, and beef tea's the 
thing to keep him up, isn't it, mamma ? " 

" Amelia Shadwell, don't let your spirits 
run away with you," repUed Mrs. Irvine in 
a ghostly voice. "You are always up or 
down, isn't she, Hayward ? " 

At this appeal a faint smUe passed over 
the tutor's face. 

" I have had a gentleman inquiring after 
you, Hayward," said the Rev. Matthew. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 69 

" Who was it ? " asked Mrs. Irvine in her 
hollow tone. 

" I think he must be Sir George Hamil- 
ton's agent or lawyer," answered the Rev, 
Matthew. "This is his card." And he 
placed Mr. Hannaway's card in the long thin 
hands of his gaunt partner. 

" And what did he say ? " she asked, after 
she had examined it. 

" Oh ! well " hesitated the Eev. Mat- 

ihew, '^Hayward ought to hear that first. 
He spoke very generously — ^he made a sort 
of proposal." 

'* Matthew," said Mrs. Irvine, " if he said 
anything particular, tell it now. You will 
tell it afterwards, you know that, for you can 
keep nothing.*' 

"WeU, my dear, Hayward will teU you 
himself by and bye," said the Rev. Matthew, 
meekly. 

'* Amelia Shadwell," said Mrs. Irvine, 
rising from her chair, and addressing her 
daughter, "come away at once. Your pa 
wants us out of the room, I see that. Hay- 



70 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

ward wants us out of the room, I see that 
also ; and I mean, therefore, to go out of the 
room, and you must come, too/' 

"Another brewing will be ready in a 
quarter of an hour, Mr. Hayward," said 
Amelia Shadwell, glancing tenderly to the 
bed, and alluding to her beef tea, " and in a 
' quarter of an hour I will bring you a fresh 
cupful." And then with another tender 
glance she followed her mother from the 
room. 

When his wife and daughter were gone, 
the Rev. Matthew proceeded to deliver Mr. 
Hannaway's message to the tutor, and as he 
did so a flush came over the pale face on the 
pillow, and a new light into the dulled eyes. 

" He said this," said Hayward, as the Rev. 
Matthew paused. " He said " 

" That any profession is now open to you, 
my dear lad," answered the kind parson, 
taking the tutor's hand. "This offer may 
part us; but though I grieve for this, I 
rejoice at the same time at your good for- 
tune." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 71 

As the Rev. Matthew said this, the flush 
deepened on Hayward's face. Of what was 
he thinking ? Ab wild and foolish a thought 
as ever crossed a young man's brain. He 
was thinking, " I may rise now — I may win 
Isabel now " — Isabel, who thought as little 
of him as she did of the countless grains of 
sea sand lying on the shore t 



:! 



CHAPTER V. 



AT SANDA HALL. 

The same day that Mr. Hannaway called 
the parsonage, Sir George Hamilton for t 
first time appeared among the family 
Sanda Hall. His host had visited him 
his bedroom, and the village doctor h 
visited him ; and after Mr. Hannaway h 
arrived, that gentleman had naturally spe 
most of his time with his patron. But t 
ladies had never seen the guest who h 
come so strangely into the household sir 
the day of the storm, when he had been 
once assisted from the carriage to his room 
But though they had not seen him, th 
had frequently talked of him, and Isal 
Trevor had not scrupled to make inquir 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 73 

about his private history from his man of 
business. Mr. Hannaway, however, gave 
only very guarded replies. 

"Is he .married?" asked Miss Trevor,* 
carelessly. 

" No," answered Mr. Hannaway, gravely. 

" How strange ! " said Miss Trevor. " A 
man of his age, too. Is there any romance 
in the case?" 

"Most men have their romances, you 
know. Miss Trevor," replied Mr. Hannaway, 
smiling. 

" What is Sir George's, then ? " asked Miss 
Trevor. 

The lawyer shook his head. 

"How can I tell you?" he answered. 
*' If Sir George has one, he is not a man to 
confide it to his lawyer ; and I do not even 
know that he has one." 

"I shall have to ask him," said Miss 
Trevor, throwing back her beautiful head. 

"And who could refuse to tell Miss 
Trevor anything she asked?" said Mr, 
Hannaway, bowing; and so the conver- 



74 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

sation about Sir George's romance ended 
for the present. 

But Isabel felt curious about their guest, 
and grew impatient of the days that he 
spent in seclusion. Her father had pro- 
nounced him to be a handsome and gentle- 
manly man, and she herself had admired 
him during their brief interview. ^^How 
tiresome it is/' Isabel thought, " of him to 
stay in his own room I I hate tiresome 
people." 

But she did not tell him this when he 
appeared downstairs. She was standing in 
the drawing-room when he entered it, en- 
gaged in what was a favourite occupation 
• of hers^ — ^the arranging of flowers. That is, 
she took a fancy for doing this occasionally, 
as she took fancies for other things. When 
she took a fancy, she was wrapped up in it 
for a Uttle while, and then another fancy 
succeeded. This day she was quite immersed 
in her flowers. She lifted them up, held 
ihem together to judge of their eflfect, and 
then put them down again. She had a great 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 75 

bunch of gorgeou&ly-tinted camelias in her 
hand as Sir George came into the drawing- 
room^ and though she heard him enter, and 
guessed who it was, she did not turn her 
head, but bent down over the flowers. 

She made a splendid picture. A woman 
about whose beauty there could be no 
doubt; a woman with a tall, shapely form, 
dressed with rare taste, and with a sort of 
strange grace in every attitude of her supple 
figure. 

She waited imtil Sir George was close to 
her, and then looked quickly round, with a 
smile that was intended to win his admira- 
tion. But the man who approached her was 
in no mood to give it. He looked gloomy, 
almost sullen ; and as he placed his hand in 
the one she held towards him, he did not 
even return her snule. 

" I have come to thank you. Miss Trevor," 
he said, with grave courtesy, '^ for your great 
kindness to mef." 

"What kindness?" asked Isabel, with 
another bright smile. 



76 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Need I answer that question ? " said Sir 
George, fixing his eyes on her face. 

He was thinking how wonderfully beau- 
tiful she was. He had only a vague recol- 
lection of her appearance as she stood on the 
bare brown rocks, just after he had been 
rescued from the sea by Hayi^ard on the 
day of the storm, and he had scarcely 
ever thought of her since. But just now 
he was in a bitter mood. ^* She is beauti- 
ful," he was reflecting, ''but what does it 
matter ? She will only bring greater misery 
into the world than most of her accursed 
sex." 

''Do you mean by my 'great kindness' 
that I urged the young man to try to save 
you ? " went on Isabel, still smiling, and 
interrupting Sir George's thoughts. " If you 
do, you need not thank me. What I did, I 
did selfishly, for I could not bear to see a 
human creature perish without some eflfort 
being made to save him." 

" Then, as I am that ' human creature,' I 
suppose I owe you some thanks, don't I ? " 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 77 

asked Sir George, with a sort of cynicism in 
his tone that Isabel instantly detected. 

"Yes," she said sharply, "for life is a 
boon, is it not ? " 

"Say rather that death is a dread," an- 
swered Sir George, with a sort of shudder. 

Isabel turned her head away. 

" I never think of death," she said. " I 
love life ; I am young ; death seems far 
away from me." 

" No one can say that," said Sir George,, 
moodily. 

" I say it," answered Isabel, in her bright,, 
defiant way. " I mean to live — I mean to 
enjoy life, and to live a long, long life." 

Sir George Hamilton made no answer; 
and as he stood there, silent and gloomy,. 
Isabel looked steadily in his face. 

He was a handsome man, with a pale, 
slightly olive-tinted skin, high regular features,, 
and a dark moustache. He was about thirty- 
eight or nine years of age at this time, and was^ 
tall and well-formed. Altogether he was a 
remarkable-looking man ; remarkable for his 



78 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

good looks and for his proud and distin- 
guished bearing ; and Isabel Trevor was 
much struck with his whole appearance. 

"And are you better?" she asked, with 
interest. "Have you recovered from the 
frightful shock ? " 

" Yeg, I am better," he answered ; " and I 
am truly pleased to hear from the doctor this 
morning that Mr. Hayward, the brave young 
man that saved my life, is also now pronounced 
to be out of danger." 

" So papa told me," said Isabel. " Yes, I 
am glad — ^it was a brave action." 

" A very brave action," said Sir George. 

" But I knew he was a good swimmer when 
I implored him to try to save you," continued 
Isabel. "He swam out and brought in a 
woman's body quite lately." 

" Indeed ! Well, I have sent Hannaway 
to see him. In any way that I can push him 
on in life I shall only be too ready to do so. 
He is a gentleman, I suppose ? " 

" There is some legend to that effect, I be- 
lieve, in the village," answered Isabel, care- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 79 

lessly, " but I have never paid much atten- 
tion to it. Ah, here is Miss Marston," she 
went on, as Hilda Marston now entered the 
drawing-room. *'Miss Marsfcon," she con- 
tinued, *'Sir George Hamilton is inquiring 
about Mr. Hajrward, the tutor. I tell him I 
know little of him, excepting that he has the 
reputation of being a good swimmer, but per- 
haps you know more about him ? Miss 
Marston's little brother is one of his pupils, 
Sir George." 

Sir George bowed to Miss Marston when 
Isabel mentioned her name, and then again 
when she imparted the information that Miss 
Marston s brother was one of Mr. Hayward's 
pupils. 

" Then perhaps you can tell me something 
about him. Miss Marston ? " said Sir George, 
addressing Hilda, who coloured slightly at 
the question. 

"Do you mean about himself, or his 
family ? " she asked, in a pleasant, low-toned 
voice. 

"About both, if you can give me any 



80 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

information/' answered Sir George. '^ I am 
naturally much interested in him. I owe him 
a debt I can never repay." 

" Yes, indeed," said Hilda Marston. 

"Do you know him well?" asked Sir 
George. 

"Not very," answered Hilda, "but I do 
know him, and— he is a gentleman. His 
father was an officer, I beUeve, and died of 
sunstroke out in India, and left a young widow 
and one little boy, who is now Mr. Hay ward. 
That is all I know, I think," she went on with 
a sort of sweet modesty of manner which was 
habitual to her ; " but I believe he is very 
nice — and you know he is very brave." 

" How do you know he is very nice. Miss 
Marston ? " said Isabel, with a little scoffing 
laugh. "Do you mean nice-looking, nice- 
mannered, or what ? I hate the term * nice ' 
when appHed to a man. I can imagine a 
nice tame cat, but not a nice man." 

Hilda Marston looked annoyed. 

" I mean," she said, " that he seems agree- 
able." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 81 

" I wish I had noticed this paragon of per- 
fection before/' continued Isabel, with another 
laugh. " Is he very good looking ? I really 
forget." 

" He is clever looking," answered Hilda 
Marston. 

^* Which is much better than ordinary 
beauty," said Sir George. " A clever face is 
always an attractive one." 

'^ I think so, too," said Hilda. 

** I don't, then," said Isabel. " A handsome 
face to me is always an attractive one." And 
she looked at Sir George with her beautiful 
eyes as she spoke. 

After this the conversation about the tutor 
was dropped. Isabel volunteered to show 
Sir George her conservatories, and led him 
thither without asking Hilda Marston to 
accompany them. 

"Who is that young lady?" asked Sir 
George, when he found himself beneath the 
gorgeously flower-festooned glass roof of one 
of the conservatories, which was filled to pro- 
ftision with the rarest and choicest plants. 

VOL. I. G 



82 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" My companion, Miss Maxston," answered 
Isabel. ** I was lonely here after I returned 
from school, for there is so little society that 
I care about, and papa therefore proposed for 
me to have a companion. She is a clergy- 
man's daughter, and is very useful to me." 

" And you never had a sister ? " asked Sir 
George. 

" Yes," said Isabel, " but she died when 
we were children. She would have been 
twenty-one now — one year younger than I 
am." 

*' And you are twenty-two ? " said Sir 
George, looking at Isabel. 

" Yes, twenty-two," she answered, laughing, 
and showing her white teeth. "An old 
woman of twenty-two ! " 

She was standing, a3 she said this, beneath 
a long trailing festoon of some bright green 
creeper, and she saw that Sir George was 
admiring her. This was what she lived for ; 
but another idea crept into her heart at this 
moment. 

" He is rich, he is well-born," she thought. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 83 

"Why should I not marry him? I must 
marry some day ; why not marry Sir George 
HamUton ? " 

There was a marvellously subtle grace about 
aus woman which fa^^inated men She was 
a bom coquette, and had the power somehow 
of making every man think that she admired 
hiTISd anyone told Sir George HamUton 
that he would spend two hours this day with 
any woman amid her flowers, when he rose 
suUen and desponding in the morning, he 
would have laughed them to scorn. Yet he 
did spend them. He sat down by Isabel's 
side and talked to her amid the perfumed air. 
He was not very communicative about his 
past life, though. He had spent the last five 
or six years abroad, he told Isabel, and that 
was about all the information that she gained. 

" In what country T she asked. 

" In many countries," he answered. '* I 
have wandered to and fro upon the earth, 
Miss Trevor." 

" Have you been in Spain ? " said Isabel. 

" Yes," answered Sir George, and a flush 



84 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

passed for a moment over his usually pale 
face. " Why do you ask ? " he inquired the 
next minute. 

" You remind me of Spain, somehow," she 
answered. "There is something romantic 
even in this prosaic age, I think, about 
Spain." 

"But there is nothing romantic about 
me," said Sir George. 

" Is there not ? " said Isabel, softly. "Ah, 
you cannot tell." And she gave a little sigh. 

" It's best to keep out of romances," said 
Sir George; rising from his seat by her side. 
"They are dangerous things, ending some- 
times " And he hesitated. 

" In tragedies ? " said Isabel. 

" Or comedies," went on Sir George, with 
affected carelessness of manner. 

" Tragedies or comedies," repeated Isabel, 
rising also, "in which shall we act our parts? 
Well, we shall know some day, shall we not, 
Sir George, before the curtain falls 1 " And 
with a slight laugh she turned away. 



CHAPTER VI. 

A FAREWELL WORD. 

The next few days Isabel Trevor spent in 
trying to fascinate Sir George Hamilton. 
She was an adept in the art, but Sir George 
was either cool or wary. At least he gave 
no signs of being an easy victim, and yet 
Isabel felt sure that he admired her. But 
he was gloomy and taciturn, at times, in spite 
of all her attractions. He spoke, too, of 
leaving Sanda ; of leaving as soon as he had 
aeen the young man who had saved his life, 
and Isabel began to be somewhat doubtful 
about her success. 

Mr. Hannaway left the Hall the day after 
his visit to the parsonage. He had pro- 
fessional business to attend to, he said, 



86 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

when Mr. Trevor hospitably asked him to 
stay. 

" But I dare say we shall meet at Mas- 
sam ? " said Mr. Hannaway, pleasantly. Now 
Massam was a place of Sir George Hamil- 
ton's, in Yorkshire, to which he had heard 
the baronet invite their present host during 
the evening before. 

" Yes, I hope to see Mr. Trevor at Mas- 
sam," said Sir George, who was standing by. 

" And don't you hope to see Miss Trevor 
at Massam ? " asked Isabel coquet tishly, 
who was also standing near. 

"Yes, if Miss Trevor pleases to come," 
answered Sir George, looking at her with a 
smile ; " but there is no lady to entertain 
you there." 

*^I hate ladies in general," said Isabel, 
tossing back her head. " I get on far better 
with men. Ladies in general are jealous, 
narrow-minded, and spiteful. Yes, Sir 
George, you need not try to make that 
excuse," she added, smiling more coquettishly 

stm. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 87 

** I do not wish to make excuses," he said. 
" If you will come, of course I shall be de- 
lighted to see you." 

"Miss Hilda Marston can accompany my 
dauighter," said Mr. Trevor, in his pompous 
fashion. He was not very brilliant, but he 
had penetration to see through his daughter's 
design, and he perfectly approved of it. He, 
in fact, was very anxious that Isabel should 
marry, because he wished and mtended to 
Ma:^' again himself. But he knew that he 
could not do so vdth any chance of domestic 
comfort if his daughter was still unwedded. 
Sir George Hamilton he believed to be a 
suitable person to marry Isabel, and he 
therefore cultivated the baronet's intimacy, 
and was very cordial (for him) in his manner 
to their guest. But a painful episode sud- 
denly ended Sir George's stay at Sanda Hall. 
This was the news which was conveyed to 
him, a day or two after the conversation 
about Isabel's visit to Massam, that the sea 
had once more given up some of its dead. 
Two bodies had been washed on shore at 



88 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Sanda, and they were supposed to be part of 
the crew of Sir Georges lost yacht, the 
Endymion. Sir George could scarcely con- 
trol his emotion when he heard of this. His 
pale dark face grew paler, and his lips 
quivered nervously in spite of his efforts to 
appear calm. Isabel Trevor, who was with 
him at the time when the squire told him the 
news, looked at him in absolute surprise. 

^' How strange he is ! " she said to Hilda 
Marston afterwards. ^' Why, he knew that 
these poor men were all dead, so why should 
he be so agitated at their bodies being cast 
up ? It is rather unmanly, I think." 

" It naturally must painfully remind him 
of what was so nearly his own fate," replied 
Hilda. 

" But it's folly always to be thinking of 
tiresome things," said Isabel, carelessly. 

" But death is such a solemn thing," said 
Hilda, and she went to the window and gave 
a sigh as she looked out. 

This girl had had a very different ex- 
perience of life to Isabel Trevor. She had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 89 

passed through the great winnowing machine 
of trouble, and had seen a father, whom she 
dearly loved, die, with anxiety and poverty 
to embitter his last hours. It was a sad and 
common story, which had ended one summer 
morning at the country parsonage where 
Hilda had been born. Mr. Marston, her 
father, was a well-meaning, kind-hearted man, 
easily betrayed into extravagances, to escape 
from the consequences of which he had 
(without any knowledge of business) em- 
barked in speculations. He died a ruined 
man, heart-broken at the prospect of leaving 
his portionless children to the mercies of a 
cruel world. 

His wife (who was dead) had been a cousin 
of Mrs. Trevor's, of Sanda Hall — a poor 
relation, in fact; and on his death-bed he 
wrote and implored Mr. Trevor to do some- 
thing for his penniless children. Death is 
always terrible, but, oh ! reader, does it not 
add to its terrors when there is not money 
enough in the house even to bury the dead ? 
This was the case at Welldean Parsonage on 



90 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the July morning when Mr. Marston died. 
HUda's eldest sister Marian was forced to beg 
Mr. Trevor to advance them a small sum 
for their present necessities, and Mr. Trevor 
was not hard-hearted enough to refuse her 
request. 

He was touched, indeed, when he went to 
the funeral of his distant relative, to see the 
piteous grief of the second daughter, Hilda, 
for her dear father. The poor girl's white 
face, and overwhelming outbreak of sorrow, 
when he tried to say a few words of comfort 
to her, moved him to compassion, and induced 
him to oflfer Hilda a temporary home at least 
at Sanda Hall. The eldest daughter, Marian, 
was several years older, and better able to 
face the inevitable struggle for subsistence 
before them. Mr. Trevor, therefore, after 
much mental hesitation, decided to oflfer 
Hilda a home for the present with his 
daughter ; and he also, with yet more mental 
hesitation, determined to undertake the ex- 
pense of educating Ned Marston, the poor 
dead vicar's youngest child. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 91 

The family, which consisted of four, was 
finallj disposed of thus : Marian, the eldest 
daughter, procured a situation as governess 
to the six children of a neighbouring clergy- 
man; Paul, the eldest son, went into the 
merchant navy as midshipman ; Hilda to 
Sanda Hall, as companion to Isabel Trevor ; 
and Ned, the youngest, as pupil of the Rev. 
Matthew Irvine. 

This had aU happened only two years ago, 
so that death seemed still very sad and solemn 
to Hilda Marston. She had not laid her 
mourning aside yet for her poor father, nor 
had the painful memories of his deathbed 
faded from her heart. But she seldom spoke 
of such things at Sanda Hall. Isabel Trevor 
would have considered them " a bore," and 
the squire loved not to be reminded of our 
mortal tenure. But her naturally tender and 
sympathetic nature had grown more tender 
and sympathetic during these hours of trial. 
She understood, therefore, what Sir George 
Hamilton must feel, when, one after the 
other, the dead faces of his late companions 



92 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

reappeared upon the earth. He was called 
upon also to identify them as the one survivor 
of the crew of the lost Endymion. All this 
seemed exquisitely painful to Sir George. 
At the inquest held on the bodies of the poor 
sailors he was forced to enter into the details 
of the wreck. The twelve jurymen who sat 
to listen to his account had not often the 
satisfaction of questioning a real baronet, and 
they therefore did it to the best of their 
ability. The proud and reserved Sir George 
was required to tell the history of his cruise, 
the number and names of his crew, how the 
storm came on, and to answer questions which 
he considered utterly irrelevant to the inquiry. 
His replies were brief, cold, and to the point ; 
but he said when it was over that he would 
not care to encounter it again. 

*^If any more of these unfortunate men 
should be cast up," he told his host, as they 
returned together to Sanda Hall after the 
inquest, " the painfiil scene that I have just 
passed through would have to be gone over 
again, if I remain here (as you so kindly wish 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 93 

me to do) any longer. No, I will leave 
Sanda to-day." 

" But," replied Mr. Trevor, " only to 
return, I hope, when these painful recollec- 
tions have faded from your mind ?" 

" That can never be," answered Sir George, 
in a low tone. 

" Time is a great physician," said Mr. 
Trevor, in a tone as if he considered he 
was uttering some new and very sagacious 
sentiment. 

" True," said Sir George, briefly, and then 
he changed the conversation, adroitly com- 
plimenting the squire on the architecture of a 
cottage which they were then passing, and 
which Mr. Trevot (so the politic architect 
allowed him to think) had assisted in 
designing. 

" Yes," went on Mr. Trevor, gratified, " it 
jopives me no small pleasure to think. Sir 
George, that this visit, which for you began 
so unpropitiously, has not ended so. Mr. 
Hannaway also admires the peculiar con- 
struction of this cottage, and I promised to 



94 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

send him the plan, a^ he says that you propose 
to build some labourers' cottages at Massam. 
When I visit you there, I shall be proud to 
see my humble ideas carried out on a more 
extensive scale than it would be judicious of 
me to attempt here." 

Sir George assented carelessly. He was 
not thinking of the Squire of Sanda and his 
model cottage. He was thinking what a 
madman he was himself. What ! had he 
allowed Isabel Trevor's beautiful face to 
bewitch him already, he thought — ^he who 
had no right to seek her love ? The squire 
went on talking complacently, and the 
baronet walked on gloomy and taciturn by 
his side. Then, just as they reached the 
gates of the Hall, Isabel, well mounted, and 
followed by her groom, rode up to them. 

" Is it over ? " she said almost in a whisper 
to Sir George, as he assisted her to dismount 
at the Hall door. '^ I have felt for you so 
much," she went on, in the same soft under- 
tone, "that I could not bear to stay indoors." 

How could he tell that she was lying to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 95 

him ? She had a skin so soft and fair that 
the colour came and went in it with every 
passing emotion of her heart. She was 
wishing him to beUeve in her at that mo- 
ment, and so her bloom deepened, and her 
scarlet lips parted, as the false words lin- 
gered upon them. 

"I thank you," said Sir George, in a 
low earnest voice. 

" You must tell me all about it ! " con- 
tinued Isabel. And she looked up into Sir 
George's face with her changeful, brilliant 
eyes. 

" No, no," he answered, and his head fell. 
*' I must go away ; better for us both that 
I should go away." 

These were the first words that Sir George 
had ever uttered to Isabel which had not 
been spoken in the ordinary language of 
society, and her glittering eyes glittered more 
brightly as she caught his tones. 

*' No," she said, after a moment's thought, 
^* let me try to make you forget the past." 

Sir George absolutely started, and his pale 



96 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

face flushed deeply, as those few words 
reached his ears. Then he spoke — 

" It is a gloomy past," he said, " and I 
must learn to bear its memory as best I can 
— ^alone." 

Had he offered to confide in her Isabel 
would probably have cared very little about 
his confidence. As it was, her interest in his 
past life grew intense. But they were enter- 
ing the haU door at the time that he said 
these words, and as a servant or two were 
loitering near, Isabel was compelled for the 
present to abandon the subject. Then the 
luncheon bell rang, and before that meal was 
over. Sir George rose, with an apology, and 
asked leave of Isabel to go at once and pay 
his promised visit to Mr. Hay ward- 

" I must leave Sanda in time to catch the 
five train for the south," he said, *' and it 
would ill become me to do so without seeing 
the brave young man who saved my life. 
Therefore, I must beg you to excuse me. Miss 
Trevor." 

Isabel coloured, but it was with vexation. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 97 

She had intended to make a conquest of Sir 
George, and she had always hitherto succeeded 
when she had intended to make a conquest. 
But before she could recover from her sur- 
prise, Sir George had left the room, and then 
Isabel looked quickly and inquiringly at her 
father. 

" This is a sudden resolution of Sir 
George's, papa ? " she said. 

"He was much affected when viewing 
the bodies of the unfortunate sailors," re- 
plied the Squire. " He told me in return- 
ing that he could not bear to do so again ; 
'and as in all probabihty more of these 
poor men will be cast up, he has determined 
to leave Sanda at once. But from what I 
gathered," added the Squire, considerately, 
"he will certainly at some future period 
return." 

" Oh ! " said Isabel ; and then she finished 
her lunch, whilst Sir George proceeded direct 
to the Parsonage. 

When he arrived there, he was ushered 
into Mrs. Irvine's drawing-room. This was 

VOL. I. H 



98 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

one of those rooms in which the shabbiness of 
the furniture is attempted to be shrouded by- 
antimacassars. Amelia ShadweU had appar- 
ently spent her time from her earliest infancy 
in manufacturing these doubtful adornments, 
for they were of many descriptions, and of 
divers kinds. Mats, also, of briUiantly-tinted * 
wools, whose borderings were of raised flowers 
of unnatural dimensions, were placed in 
every possible spot that was capable of sup- 
porting them. Then the walls, on which a 
mildewed brown and grey paper hung, were 
adorned with photographs and famt water- 
coloured drawings, also framed by the indus- 
triou^ Amelia, ^^^traw frames and stamped 
leather frames, and various other ingenious 
devices. The photographs chiefly consisted 
of the late numerous little I r vines, and were 
of the gloomy and blotchy description usually 
produced by travelUng photographers. Al- 
together it was a dismal room, and lacked 
the essential quality of comfort, which can 
so easily be given by a tastefiil woman's 
hand. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 99 

Presently the door opened, and Amelia 
Irvine's stiff plump form and rosy common- 
place face appeared. 

" Oh ! Sir George Hamilton," she said, in 
much confusion, "Ma's so sorry, but she's 
not well. She's bilious," went on the lo- 
quacious Amelia, "yellow, almost saffron in 
colour, and she can't come down, and pa's out. 
He's just gone out, and may be back in a 
minute; and ma told me to ask you to sit 
and wait, or, if you are in a hurry, to send a 
message up to her by me." 

" I came to see Mr. Hayward," answered 
Sir George to this prolonged address. " Per- 
haps you will ask your mother if I can see 
him?" 

" Well, I don't know, I'm sure," answered 
Amelia, blushing at the mention of the tutor's 
name. " You see he's to be kept quiet. 
He's had his arm dressed this morning with 
a new kind of bandage, and he seems fidgety. 
I offered to read the lessons to him, and the 
Psalms, or even a light book, but he said his 
head ached too badly to listen. But he takes 



100 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

his beef-tea. As I always say to ma, that's 
a comfort. Beef-tea's so nourishing that he 
can't go down as long as he takes it." 

" Well, kindly ask your mother if I can see 
him," said Sir George. 

But at this minute, while Amelia still 
hesitated, anxious to prolong her conversation 
with a baronet, the Rev. Matthew entered 
the room and held out his hand cordially to 
Sir George. 

"They told me that you were here. Sir 
George," he said. *^ Allow me to congratu- 
late you on your happy recovery." 

" Thanks," replied Sir George. " I am 
leaving Sanda to-day, Mr. Irvine, and I wish- 
before I go to have a short interview with 
Mr. Hayward." 

" No doubt, no doubt," said the genial 
parson. '^ Run, my dear " (this was to 
Amelia), " and tell your mother that Sir 
George wishes to see Hayward." 

" Yes, pa," answered Amelia, and she 
hastily left the room, running as fast as her 
substantial feet could carry her, to the tutor's. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 101 

" Hayward," she said, in her hurry, 
addressing him by his surname as her mother 
always did, " Sir George Hamilton's come I 
Such a grand man. So handsome ! Let me 
put the pillows straight, and pop an antima- 
cassar or two on the chairs, to make the room 
look decent, before he comes in.'* 

"Is he coming up to see me T asked 
Hayward, and his pale face flushed. 

" He's come on purpose to see you,'* 
answered Amelia, hurriedly opening a drawer 
and producing several clean antimacassars. 
" There ! they'll make the room look better. 
Grood gracious !" she cried the next minute, 
*' here they are !" And in her haste, her 
antimacassars fell on the floor, just as Sir 
George and her father entered the tutor's 
room. 

" I came to tell him, pa," she said, now 
absolutely scarlet at being found in the tutor's 
room ; " Ma's so bilious she can't lift her head 
from the pillows, so I was forced to come." 

" No excuse is needed, my dear," said the 
Rev. Matthew, good-naturedly. " Sir George 



102 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

will understand that in a small household like 
orurs we cannot stand on much ceremony." 

Somewhat comforted on the score of pro- 
priety, Amelia, after glancing at Sir George 
and seeing that his eyes were fixed on Hay- 
ward's face, now tried to kick the fallen anti- 
macassars under the bed. 

" We will leave you together," went on the 
Rev. Matthew, addressing Sir George, and 
then glancing with a kindly smile at Hay- 
ward, " I need jiot introduce you, I sup- 
pose," he continued in his semi-pathetic tones, 
" the sea did that for ye." And then, with 
another, kindly look at Hay ward, he beckoned 
to his daughter, and together they left the 
room. 

The two men that they left were both em- 
barrassed. When last they had exchanged 
words, they had been face to face with death, 
and each thought for an instant of that solemn 
moment now. Then, though not quite in the 
cold and haughty tones that were habitual to 
him. Sir George spoke, holding out his hand 
as he did so. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 103 

*' I have come to thank you," he said, " to 
thank you for my life." 

" I — I — ^am very glad," faltered the tutor, 
*' that I was able " And then he paused. 

** I have incurred a debt to you," went on 
Sir George, recovering his composure, ** that 
I can never repay. But in some sort you 
must allow me to try to show my gratitude 
to you. You received my message by Mr. 
Hannaway, did you not ? " 

"Yes," answered the tutor. 

" Have you decided on any profession yet, 
then?" continued Sir George. "But how 
can I ask — how can I suppose that you, lying 
here sick and ill, can have come to any real 
decision ? We will leave, therefore, the ques- 
tion of your profession to a future time, and 
for the present we will only arrange some- 
thing that I hope will be of benefit to you. I 
leave Sanda to-day, but before I do so, let us 
fix when you will come and pay a long visit 
to me." 

" You are very good,'* hesitated the tutor, 
" but I am still so weak " 



104 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"The very reason you require change. 
Massam (my place in Yorkshire) is only a 
short journey from here after all, and when 
you are there I promise you that you shall be 
regarded as a complete invalid, and allowed 
to get well at leisure. I can even promise 
you beef tea,*' added Sir George, with a smile^ 
"though you may not have Miss Irvine — 
is that the young lady's name? — ^to ad- 
minister it." 

Hayward smiled, too, at this, and looked 
into Sir George's face with his thoughtful, 
clever eyes. He liked that face — ^the hand- 
some, proud, sad face of the man whose life 
he had risked his own to save. 

" You are very kind to me," he said, and 
he held out his hand to Sir George. 

" It is settled, then," said Sir George, re- 
turning the tutor s grasp. " You saved my 
life at the risk of your own, and in return you 
are coming to stay with me until you get well. 
Not quite an equal bargain, is it, eh?" he 
added, with another smile. 

But it was not a bright smile. There w^^ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 105 

an indescribable shadow neariy always on Sir 
George's face. " He is not happy," thought 
the tutor, and this feeling somehow drew his 
heart nearer to Sir George. 

After this they fixed it all. As soon as 
Hayward could travel with safety, he was to 
go to Sir George's place in Yorkshire, and 
there they agree^ to settle the plans for 
Hayward's future life. They separated with- 
out any professions ; but each felt that they 
liked the other, and that the acquaintance 
they had formed was likely to be lifelong. 

" I shall ask Miss Irvine for the receipt of 
the beef tea," said Sir George, smiling and 
looking back at Hayward, as he left the room. 
And with that little joke they parted. But 
Sir George had a few words to say to the 
Rev. Matthew before he quitted the parson- 
age, and he said them very briefly. 

*^Mr. Irvine," he began, as he met the 
parson in the hall, just after he descended the 
stairs, " can I speak to you for a moment ? " 

Then, when the Rev. Matthew led him into 
his study, he went on — 



106 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I have a cheque here," he said, " that I 
drew this morning to leave with you for your 
poor. Don't oflfer me any thanks," he con- 
tinued, as the Rev. Matthew naturally began 
a complimentary oration. " I wish to give 
something, and, besides, I owe you so much 
for your kindness to Mr. Hay ward." 

" The dear boy is as a scm to me," said the 
Rev. Matthew. 

" But sons all cost money," said Sir George, 
smiling his ordinary cold smile, which had 
warmed somehow in Hayward s presence. 
" Pray accept my cheque, Mr. Irvine, and do 
with it what you like." And then, after a 
few more courteous words. Sir George left the 
parsonage, and when the Rev. Matthew 
opened the cheque, he found it was for three 
himdred pounds. 

*^ It is a thank-offering for his life," thought 
the parson. " Well, now at least" (and his 
semi-comic look stole over his face), " there'll 
be many a poor soul in the village glad that 
he was saved." 

Sir George walked hastily back to the 



BBNBATH THE WAVE. 107 

Hall, after he had quitted the parsonage. 
He had, indeed, barely time (with the long 
drive that he had in prospect before he could 
reach the nearest railway station) to catch 
the train south that he intended to travel 
by, and he was determined, if possible, to 
do so. 

But as he went quickly up the staircase to 
his own room, after he reached the Hall, he 
suddenly encountered Isabel Trevor. She 
had been watching for him, and still wore her 
riding habit, and as she stood on the dark 
oaken staircase, one step above him, never 
had she appeared so strikingly beautiful to 
Sir George. 

" Well," she said, " and you are really 
going to-day?" 

"Yes, I am really going," he answered. 
For a stranger like myself, I think I have 
intruded long enough on your hospitality." 

"A stranger!" repeated Isabel. "You 
are not a stranger. You can never be a 
stranger any more." 

" Shall I not ?" said Sir George, fixing his 



108 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

eyes on her face. "What shall I be, then ? 
Will you not quite forget me ?" 

" I will never forget you," answered Isabel, 
'* never ! " And as the last words fell from 
her Ups, she passed him, and Sir George, 
after hesitating a moment, ascended the stair- 
case to his own room. 



CHAPTEK VII. 

SIB GEORGE AT HOME. 

A FEW minutes after his meeting with Isabel 
on the staircase, Sir George was ready to 
leave Sanda. But he quitted his own room 
for that purpose with a new nervousness, 
almost fear, in his heart, at the prospect of 
once more seeing her. When, however, he 
appeared downstairs he found no trace of her 
presence. The carriage that he had requested 
to be ready awaited him at the hall door, and 
the squire and Hilda Marston awaited him in 
the hall, but no Isabel was visible. 

"Where is Miss Trevor? I must say 
good-bye to her," said Sir George, after ex- 
changing courteous words of parting with his 
host and Hilda. 



110 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Isabel has mistaken the time of your 
leaving, I think," said Mr. Trevor. " To my 
great surprise, I am told she lias just ridden 
out. I am certain she would not have done 
so, if she had known you were going." 

" She told me that she had already said 
good-bye to you," said Hilda Marston, looking 
at Sir George. 

^^ She did say — one word," answered Sir 
George, and he made no further inquiries, and 
a few minutes later was driven from the Hall. 

It was years since he had been at the home 
to which he was now going. Years since he 
had seen the noble mansion, standing amid 
its wide and magnificently- wooded park, which 
had been inherited by his father with such 
pride and joy. How this was is easily told. 
Massam Park, the ancestral home of the 
Hamiltons, had for centuries been in the 
possession of the elder branch of the family, 
of which Sir George Hamilton's father was a 
cadet. But a singular fatality had pursued 
the original possessors, and one after another, 
in the prime of life, the Hamiltons of Massam 



BENEATH THE WAVE. Ill 

had died. Sir George's father was an officer 
serving with his regunent in India when the 
news reached him that his young cousin Sir 
Wilton Hamilton had been killed on the 
hunting-field, and that by this accident he had 
become the inheritor of the family estates. 

With ill-concealed joy Captain Hamilton 
at once returned to England. He was a 
married man, with one son, and this son 
ivaturally became the object of much pride 
and ambition. But with the proverbial ill- 
luck of the family, the new baronet did not 
long enjoy his honours. When Sir George 
was still a youth, his father succumbed to a 
sudden attack of illness, and the young Sir 
George became immediately surrounded by 
every species of flattery and temptation. 

Through these early days, however, he 
passed without coming to any serious mis- 
chance. He had a good mother, and sua long 
as he remained in England, she exercised a 
good influence over him. But when he was 
about twenty-nine, he became weary of the 
easy and luxurious routine of his life, and went 



112 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

abroad, travelling over various countries, 
refusing, to his mother's consternation and 
surprise, to return home, after what she justly 
considered to have been a lengthened sojourn 
in foreign lands. In vain the anxious mother 
fretted and finally despaired. Lady Hamilton 
died before her son s return to England, had 
died one year before we find him, after many 
years' absence, returning to his home. 

But in the meantime Massam had not 
been neglected. Lady Hamilton had been a 
careful custodian of her son's possessions ; and 
Mr. Hannaway, Sir George's lawyer, and the 
agent of the property, had done his duty 
honourably and well. Massam Park had 
been kept up precisely as if its owner had 
lived beneath its roof imtil the last year, 
when, after Lady Hamilton's death a few of 
the servants had been discharged. But it 
was a splendid place, and a sort of pride of 
being its possessor crept into Sir George's 
heart when he once more found himself 
driving through the beautiful sweep of wood- 
land scenery which led to his stately home. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 113 

For a moment let us follow h\m there, 
follow him to the library, which was a hand- 
some room, containing a valuable collection 
of English and foreign literature. Beyond 
the library was a small reading-room, to 
which you passed through an arch, the 
fluted columns of which were of white 
marble. 

To this room Sir George (after exchanging 
somewhat distant greetings with the servants 
assembled in the hall to receive him) went 
straight after his return to Massam. It had 
been his favourite room before he had left 
England, and it had also been the favourite 
room of his mother, who was a woman of 
refined and cultivated tastes, and who had 
loved its placid stillness, spending much of 
her time here during the latter days of her 
widowed and lonely life. 

Her portrait hung upon its walls. A lady 
with a somewhat sorrowftd face, and gentle 
eyes, that had a look of patient waiting in 
them that was inexpressibly touching — in- 
expressibly touching to her son at least, who 

VOL. I. I 



114 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

knew that he had kept her waiting for his 
return so long ! 

With a bitter sigh Sir George turned away- 
after gazing on his mother's sad and placid 
features. He sat down in a chair where she 
had often sat, and covered his face with his 
hands, and groaned aloud. 

" Oh, my God, why did I ever leave 
her?" he muttered "Or why — ^why have 
I returned with a past like mine ? " 

What galling reflections were in his heart ! 
What was the use to him, he thought, of all 
the luxuries by which he was surrounded, of 
all the so-called pleasures that he could com- 
mand ? He could never enjoy them. There 
was a shadow on his life, a shadow that, do 
what he might, go where he could, would 
always pursue him. 

From such bitter memories he was roused 
by hearing a rap at the library door beyond, 
and presently the good-looking, smiling face 
of his lawyer, Mr. Hannaway, appeared be. 
tween the fluted columns of the arch which 
led to the reading-room. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 115 

" Welcome home, Sir George ! " said Mr. 
Hamiaway, holding out his hand to his 
employer with much cordiality. But Sir 
Greorge made no attempt to respond in 
suitable terms. He put his cold hand into 
his lawyer s, and that was all ; and Mr. 
Hannaway's smiling expression chaoiged at 
once to one of sympathy. 

" You feel coming back ? " he said. " It 
is only natural — ^where poor Lady Hamilton, 
too " And the lawyer paused. 

" Is that like her ? " asked Sir George, 
pointing to the portrait on the wall. 

" Very like her," replied Mr. Hannaway, 
going up to it, and examining Lady Hamil- 
ton's portrait critically. " She got that 
expression of late years. She told me that 
you had requested her to be taken and to 
have the portrait hung here. She said, poor 
lady — she was very ill then — * I shall not be 
waiting for him when he comes home, but the 
picture will ; ' and so she sat to MiUais." 

Every word of this speech, uttered in the 
lawyer's pleasant, easy tones, brought fresh 



116 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

pain to Sir George. Mr. Hannaway was 
not a sensitive man^ and he therefore 
often unconsciously hurt the feelings of those 
whom he never thought of wounding. He 
was aflfable, constitutionally healthy, and good 
tempered, and he enjoyed life and all the 
good things that had hitherto come in his 
way. His father had been a solicitor, with 
a large practice, and Mr. Hannaway had 
succeeded to the practice and many other 
lucrative appointments besides. One of these 
was the management of the estates of Sir 
George Hamilton, and he had fulfilled his 
duty well, as indeed he apparently fulfilled 
all the duties of his life. He was on semi- 
confidential terms with Sir George ; but Sir 
George was not a confiding man, and the 
lawyer knew little of his life that he had 
not been compelled by business arrange- 
ments to learn. But he knew more than 
most people, and Sir George had always 
found him a discreet and reliable man. 

*' At least," went on Mr. Hannaway, with 
easy complacency, as Sir George wandered 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 117 

with restless steps up and down the library 
and reading-room, " I trust you will be satis- 
fied, when you have time to look over it, with 
the condition of the property ? " 

" I have no fear about that," replied Sir 
George. 

" And I trust now," continued Mr. Hanna- 
way, " that you will think of settling amongst 
us ? Is the lady — ^pardon me asking this 
question — ^in England ? " 
"No, no," answered Sir George hastily, "no." 
" Then have you broken it off? " 
" Do not speak of this, Hannaway ! " in- 
terrupted Sir George, with sudden vehemence, 
"now, nor ever ! I am alone in the world now," 
he added. " I have no one with me now ! " 

" Pardon me for approaching the subject, 
Sir George" said Mr. Hannaway, with some 
gentlemanly feeling, noting, as he spoke, the 
ill-concealed agitation of Sir George. The 
next moment he changed the conversation, 
and a few minutes later dinner was announced, 
to which Sir George invited the lawyer to 
remain. 



118 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

They dined in the smaU dining-room, where 
(as, indeed, all over the house) were the 
evidences of great wealth. Massam Park 
waa a show place, with a state dining-room, 
and a large drawing-room, and ante-rooms, 
in which were magnificent specimens of 
china, of S&vres and Dresden, and great 
vases of Indian fihgree work, and cabinets, 
in which were collections of gems and pre- 
cious stones. 

The master of all this wealth sat opposite 
his lawyer with the cloud still on his brow. 
He talked, however, as other men talk, 
drinking freely of the rare wines that had lain 
so long untouched in his well-stocked cellars. 
Mr. Hannaway also was a free Uver, and 
could discourse learnedly about the diflferent 
vintages, of which he professed to be a judge. 
Then, as the good wine crept through his 
veins, he became more careless of his words. 

*' Talking of women," he said, *' where will 
you find such a woman as Miss Trevor ? A 
splendid creature ! A lovely woman, I call 
her." 



BENEATH THE WATB. 119 

" She is very handsome/' said Sir George, 
coldly. 

He also had been drinking freely, but no 
flush had come on his face, nor warmth to his 
heart. He had a strong head, and he drank 
glass after glass, but still the hauntmg memory 
of the past never left him. Yet he felt dis- 
pleased at his lawyer s tones when he spoke 
of Isabel Trevor, and if Mr. Hannaway had 
not been in such a jovial mood, he would 
easily have perceived it. As it was, he never 
noted the change on the dark gloomy face 
opposite to him, and went on speaking rap- 
turously of laabers charms. 

"I do not know how you did not fall a 
victim, Sir George," laughed Mr. Hannaway. 
" Being shut up in that dull old hall for ten 
days or so would, I think, have finished most 
men. Yes, yes; I consider Miss Trevor 
dangerously attractive." 

" Do you ? " said Sir George, and he rose 
from the table. ** Will you take any more 
wine, Hannaway ? " he went on. " If so, 
pray help yourself." But the lawyer took the 



120 BENEATH THE WAVE. . 

hint and shortly afterwards left Massam, part- 
ing with his host in his usual pleasant and 
unruffled manner. 

When he was gone, Sir George retired at 
once to his bedroom, and, opening one of the 
windows, looked out upon the park. A 
half-moon was shining overhead, obscured 
occasionally by drifting clouds, but a gleam 
fell, as he stood there, on his pale face and 
gloomy eyes. He was thinking of his youth, 
of the easy, careless days, scarcely noted then, 
that he had spent in his old home. Every- 
thing around him seemed to recall them. 
There were his cricket bats, his hunting-whips 
— a hundred little memories, in fact, of the 
hours that never would return. To most men, 
perhaps, after a long absence from home, 
seeing these things again might have caused 
some sadness, but to few the overpowering 
emotion that seemed to overwhelm Sir George. 
He looked at them one after the other, and 
then, as he had done when he first saw his 
mother s picture, he covered his face with his 
hand and groaned aloud. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE TUTOR. 

Two days after Sir George left Sanda Hall, 
to the great surprise of Hilda Marston, 
Isabel Trevor proposed to her to pay a visit 
to the parsonage. 

*^We shall ask for * Spectre/ of course," 
said Isabel, alluding to poor Mrs. Irvine, 
but the person I really wish to see is — don't 
be shocked, pray — is Mr. Philip Hayward. 
I have been thinking how horribly I have 
treated him ; first, by sending him into the 
sea to fish out that gloomy Sir George ; 
secondly, by never having taken any notice 
of him since. But I mean to begin to-day. 
To commence with, I will take him a 
bouquet." 



122 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Miss Trevor ! " said Hilda. 

*^Why ^0 Miss Trevor!' pray?" asked 
Isabel. ** If a poor man were to risk his life 
to please you, would you not have the grace 
to thank him ? " 

" Yes— but " 

"My good creature, spare me^both your 
' ' and your * buts.' I am going, so kindly 
put on your hat to accompany me." 

Of course there was nothing for Hilda but 
to obey after this command, and indeed she 
herself was not unwilling to see Philip 
Hayward again. She, in fact, liked and 
admired him, and she was only unwilling that 
Isabel should go to the parsonage, because 
with womanly penetration she had guessed 
his secret. She guessed, too, what Isabel 
had thought of Sir George Hamilton. But 
Sir George was not there ; and if it pleased 
Miss Trevor to amuse herself with the tutor, 
the companion perforce must accompany her. 

They reached the parsonage about four 
o'clock, and their appearance there was 
evidently both unexpected and trying. The 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 123 

rosy-faced girl who opened the door for them 
left them standing in the hall until she ran 
up stairs "to see if the mistress was in/' This 
explanation being given with much confusion 
and hesitation of speech. 

The truth was, that in the drawing-room 
(the one reception room of the family) the 
tutor had this day, for the first time since his 
accident, been conducted, and was at the 
moment of their arrival lying on a couch 
asleep, fairly enveloped in antimacassars, by 
the carefiil hands of Amelia Shadwell. 

" What was to be done then ? " thought 
the maid. " What was to be done ? " 
thought Mrs. Irvine, when she was informed 
that the ladies from the Hall were waiting 
downstairs. 

"I will tell them the truth, Susan, and 
they will go away," at last decided Mrs. 
Irvine ; and so, after throwing a white 
knitted shawl over her shoulders, she 
descended the staircase, receiving the young 
ladies without apparent embarrassment, for 
she was a lady who frequently declared that 



124 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

she never would be " put upon by anyone ;" 
and as the wife of the incumbent of Sanda, 
thought herself fit society for any of his 
parishioners. 

" Well, ladies/' she said, extending her 
gaunt hand, first to Isabel, and then to 
Hilda, "how are you? I'm sorry Susan 
didn't show you upstairs at once, but I may 
as well tell you how it is. My young man 
(I call Hayward my young man, just by 
way of a joke, you know) has got into the 
drawing-room for the first time to-day, and 
he's lying on the sofa, asleep, I beheve, 
Amelia Shad well said." 

*' Do ask Miss Amelia Shadwell to awaken 
him, then," answered Isabel, with cool 
assurance of manner, for she regarded the 
Irvines with the most thorough contempt, 
*' I particularly' wish to see Mr. Hayward. 
I have brought this bouquet on purpose for 
him." 

" Oh, if you wish to see Hayward, of 
course " hesitated Mrs. Irvine. 

" I do, indeed," said Isabel, " and so I am 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 125 

sure does Miss Marston," and she turned to 
Hilda with a smile. " We will take a turn 
round your garden, Mrs. Irvine," she went 
on, " until you have prepared your invalid to 
see us. Tell him from me that I have brought 
him some flowers." 

Hayward was really asleep when Mi's. 
Irvine went upstairs to convey this message 
to him. He was dreaming, poor fellow, until 
he was aroused by a sharp tap on his shoulder, 
and starting up, beheld Mrs. Irvine's grim 
figure. 

" Hayward I" she said, in her sepulchral 
tones, *' wake up. Miss Trevor's come to see 
you, and brought you a great bouquet." 

" What !" exclaimed Hayward, and for- 
getting his broken arm, he sprang to his feet, 
his pale face flushing in a moment a sudden 
crimson. 

'* Don't excite yourself, Hayward," said 
Mrs. Irvine, reproachfully. " Remember 
your bandages, Hayward, remember your 
pride, Hayward, and don't let her see that 
you think anything of her visit." 



126 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Where is she I" gasped Hayward, turning 
pale as suddenly as he had turned red. 

" Taking a turn round the garden," 
answered Mrs. Irvine, coolly picking up 
some of the antimacassars that had fallen off 
Hayward when he started up. " There I let 
me put you tidy a bit — now sit straight and 
hold up your head like a man." 

Mrs. Irvine always addressed the tutor in 
this maternal strain. Whether he had re- 
placed any of the defunct little Matthew or 
Tommy Shadwells in her heart I know not, 
but she always treated him as if he were a 
little boy. But she was very kind to him, 
and there was nothing that it had been in her 
power to do for him since his illness that she 
had not done. She felt a little jealous, there- 
fore, of Miss Trevor coming to see him now, 
when she had never *' once looked near even 
to inquire before," she confided afterwards to 
Amelia Shadwell. 

This young lady felt jealous also, and it 
must be admitted with considerable reason. 
She remembered all the beef-tea that she had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 127 

made and the dresses that she had singed 
during the operation. She was making 
beef-tea in fact when her mother came 
into the kitchen where she was and in- 
formed her that Miss Trevor had called to 
see Hayward. 

Ameha turned pale at this unexpected 
news, and her heart sank. This fooUsh 
maiden had been nursing some very romantic 
dreams of late, and had imagined that her 
devotion to Hayward was sure to be rewarded. 
" Who has ever nursed him, as I have nursed 
him ?" she often thought. " Who has ever 
cared for him as I do T She therefore 
trembled when she heard that Miss Trevor 
had called to see Hayward. Even her feeble 
mind recognized the fact that her small 
domestic virtues would pale before Isabel 
Trevor's great attractions ; and such was her 
emotion at the idea that in her distraction of 
mind she upset the pan of beef-tea ! 

" Ameha Shadwell, what are you doing T 
asked her mother in hollow tones from the 
other side of the kitchen, when this accident 



128 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

occurred ; upon which the unhappy Amelia 
immediately burst into tears. 

" What is there to cry about ? '' said Mrs. 
Irvine, advancing towards her daughter, as 
the fumes of the spilt fluid spread through 
the house. But Amelia went on crying in 
spite of her mother's remonstrances, but it 
was not only for the upsetting of the beef- 
tea. 

In the meantime Isabel Trevor was making 
herself charming to Philip Hayward up- 
stairs. Mrs. Irvine, before she had descended 
to the kitchen to tell Ameha of the arrival 
of the ladies from the hall, had grimly 
ushered them into the drawing-room, remark- 
ing as she did so to the tutor — 

"Now, Hayward, don't talk too much. 
Remember what the doctor said about 
keeping quiet, and I hope these ladies will 
remember it too. Excuse my giving you a 
hint. Miss Trevor, but his head's only weak 
stiU, and I can't have him thrown back." 

Isabel took not the slightest notice of this 
speech. She was advancing towards the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 129 

tutor when it was made with outstretched 
hand^ who had risen at her entrance, and 
stood leaning against the couch, pale and 
trembhng. 

" How are you ? " she asked in her softest 
tones. " Are you better ? 

"Yes — ^yes," stammered Hayward, "it is 
very good of you — ^to come." 

He never saw Miss Marston, who was 
also advancing towards him with outstretched 
hand. Only Isabel — only the beautiful face 
which had bewitched him, which had stolen 
his better sense away. 

" Good," repeated Isabel. " How good ? 
I came to see you the moment I could hope 
to see you. Of course, you know that I 
have sent every day to inquire ?" 

0, Isabel, Isabel 1 A message certainly 
had come from the Hall daily, but not 
through her. Nay, she had forgotten often 
to inquire, or had never heard the answer to 
the inquiries, which Hilda Marston had 
never neglected to send. 

" I can only repeat," said Hayward, 

VOL. I. K 



130 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

regaining some composure, "that you are 
very good/' 

" I owe you something, do I not 1 " asked 
Isabel, fixing her lovely, changeful eyes on 
Hayward's face. " You did for me what no 
other man ever did — ^what no other man will 
ever do." 

" You ^mean ? " asked Hayward fal- 

teringly. 

" You risked your life," went on Isabel, "at 
my light word. I little dreamt that you 
would go. I Uttle dreamt what I would feel, 
when I saw you plunge into the sea that day." 

As Isabel said this, a wild feeling of joy 
rushed into the tutor's heart. 

" I — I — would do it again to-morrow," he 
said, his voice broken with strong emotion, 
" to hear you say these words." 

"Hush, I will not hear such nonsense!" 
exclaimed Isabel, with horror, putting up 
her hands. "I admire bravery, I honour 
bravery, but I trust I shall never have to 
endure again what you made me endure 
during that awful storm." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 131 

" And you went down on the rocks ?" said 
Hayward, his deep feehngs colouring his 
pale face, and lighting up his hazel eyes. 
" You risked as much as I did — ^you who had 
so much " 

Again the tutor s voice broke and faltered, 

and Isabel perfectly understood what feelings 

were struggling in his heart. " You had so 

much — ^love, beauty, wealth. I had nothing. 

Oh ! God bless and keep you for your gentle 
thought of me." 

This was what the tutor was feeling. But 
as the cat sometimes seems to take momen- 
tary compassion • on the mouse, Isabel now 
took compassion on her victim. 

*^ Come," she said, '* we must not talk of 
these things any more. They excite you too 
much. I must not forget Mrs. Irvine's 
hint," and Isabel laughed sweetly. 

Hayward, too, smiled at this. 

" She is very good, and very kind," he 
said, " and you must excuse " 

"Pray don't make any apologies," inter- 
rupted Isabel, still laughing. " I consider 



It ~ 



132 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the ^ Spectre ' quite an institution, for she 
everlastingly reminds us of our latter end." 
She is odd-looking," answered Hay ward, 
but really kind. As for Mr. Irvine, I 
cannot speak in high enough terms of so 
excellent a man." 

" He is very good, I daresay, "i^said Isabel. 
" There is an admirer of his," she continued, 
carelessly pointing to Hilda Marston, whose 
presence during the foregoing conversation 
had been quite forgotten, and Who was now 
occupying herself by looking out of the 
window. 

As Isabel said this about |^her being an 
admirer of Mr. Irvine's, Hilda turned roimd, 
and when the tutor saw her face, he blushed 
deeply, and became greatly confused. 

" Pardon me, Miss Marston," he said, 

" I I did not see you before. I 

think the blow on my^head affects my sight. 
I think " 

" It is no matter," answered Hilda, gently, 
but she felt deeply hurt. The best woman 
is not an angel, and if she were I don't 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 133 

suppose we faulty mortals would like her ; 
and the best woman, therefore (to go back 
to Hilda) has her vanity. To be overlooked 
is never pleasant. Hilda felt that she had 
been overlooked, nay, entirely forgotten, by 
the man for whom, during the last fortnight, 
she had felt great anxiety; and therefore 
Hilda did not like it. Her face told this as 
plainly as if she had said it in words, and the 
tutor felt greatly annoyed with himself for 
his neglect. 

" I hope you understand. Miss Marston," 
he went on, trying to make things better, 
" that I did not mean " 

" You were so much interested in your 
conversation with Miss Trevor that you 
never saw me," interrupted Hilda. "Pray 
don't say anything more, Mr. Hayward, as 
that is the truth." 

" Of course, he was interested in his con- 
versation with me!" said Isabel, coquet- 
tishly. " And to return to our conversation, 
Mr. Hayward, have you heard anything of 
the gloomy and taciturn Sir Greorge ? " 



134 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

There it was at last ! This question was 
the motive of Isabel's visit to the tutor ; was 
the reason why she had gathered the flowers ; 
why she had taken the trouble to flatter him, 
though she certainly had felt some interest 
in the effect of the last named experiment. 

" Yes," answered the tutor, " I heard from 
Sir George this morning. The kindest 
letter," he went on with animation. " I like 
what I have seen of Sir George immensely," 

"He is gentlemanly," said Isabel, as if 
she were thinking. "What makes him so 
gloomy, I wonder ? " 

" Perhaps it is natural to him," said Hay- 
ward. "And, besides, you saw him under 
melancholy circumstances — the one survivor 
of a wreck." 

" For which happy position he is indebted 
to you." 

*^ He seems most anxious to repay that 
debt, then, if it is one," said Hayward. 
" Nothing can exceed his kindness to me. I 
go to Massam as soon as I am able to travel." 

'* Ah ! " said Isabel, inquiringly. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 135 

" Yes — for a long visit, Sir George says, 
but I do not know about that. I — I cannot 
rest long an idle man, Miss Trevor." 

His eyes kindled again as he spoke ; kin- 
dled with a young man's animation and hope. 

'' No ! " said Isabel, and she looked at him. 
**I heard that Sir George had offered to 
advance you in any profession that you may 
choose," she continued. *' Have you decided 
on which it shall be ? " 

" No," answered Hayward. " I wish to see 
Sir George first— of course there are many 
things to arrange." 

"Of course. And you go to Massam 
probably next week ? " went on Isabel, medi- 
tatively. " How strange ! Do you know 
that I am likely to see you there then f I 
have some friends- school friends, they call 
Featherstone — ^who live in a place called 
Featherstone, and Featherstone is only a few 
miles off Sir George's place, Massam, and 
these girls have asked me to stay with them." 

"Yes!" said the tutor, and his breath 
came short. 



136 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

'* Sir George invited us to Massam, also," 
continued Isabel, " and I think I shall go for 
a few days on my way to the Featherstone's. 
So we shall probably meet soon again, Mr. 
Hayward." 

'* I earnestly hope so ; but before I leave 
here, before I leave Sanda, may I give myself 
the pleasure of calling upon you — to say 
good-bye ? " 

Hay ward's was one of those faces which at 
times — though not really so — look absolutely 
beautiful from the force of expression. He 
looked almost beautiful then, as he asked, in 
pleading, earnest tones, for leave to visit 
Isabel ; and Isabel, who was a judge, and an 
admirer of beauty, acknowledged it. 

" Certainly you may come," she said ; *' why 
do you ask ? But all this time," she added 
lightly, lifting the bouquet which she had 
brought from the table where she had laid it, 
*^ I have forgotten to present you with my 
flowers. I know invalids like them," she 
went on smiling, and moving her form with a 
sort of subtle grace which was pecuUar to her. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 137 

'* This is a lovely rose, is it not ? " And she 
pulled from among the rest of the flowers a 
crimson bud, and held it towards Hayward. 

But before his lips could utter his brief 
though heartfelt words of gratitude for this 
act of grace, a portentous rap was heard at 
the door, and the next moment the grim head 
of Mrs. Irvine appeared. 

** Excuse my giving you another hint, 
ladies," she said, " but Hay ward's talked 
enough. He's in my charge, you know, and 
I'm responsible, and if his head gets light — " 

" No fear, Mrs. Irvine," laughed Hayward 
pleasantly. 

*'Lie down, Hayward," said Mrs. Irvine 
authoritatively in her hollow tones. " Wrap 
your head in an antimacassar, and try to 
sleep. Your eyes are bright, though they 
are not generally so, and you have a colour, 
though you are generally sallow, and I know 
what it all means. You are over excited, 
and it is as certain as possible if you don't 
keep yourself quiet, your head will wander." 
** Well, then, lest your head should go 



138 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

astray, Mr. Hay ward," said Isabel, flippantly, 
*'and give poor Mrs. Irvine the trouble of 
running after it, I shall say good-bye. Good- 
bye," and she put her hand in his for a 
moment, and then, after scarcely touching 
Mrs. Irvine's fingers, with a little smiling nod 
she left the room, followed by Hilda Marston, 
who only bowed gravely to the tutor in token 
of farewell. 

" Mark my words, Hayward," said Mrs. 
Irvine, in a sepulchral voice, turning to the 
tutor after the door had closed behind the two 
ladies, " that is a light woman, and no good 
will ever come of her, or to her." 

** Why do you say such a thing ?" answered 
Hayward with sudden temper. " Because 
she is so beautiful, I suppose, that all other 
women are jealous of her !" 

"No, young man, not from jealousy,'^ 
replied Mrs. Irvine yet more grimly, " though 
you might have spared a woman old enough to 
be your mother that taunt. But I judge her 
by her words and looks and by the way she 
lets no man pass her. If my Matthew 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 139 

himself had been in the room just now she 
would have been casting her eyes at him." 

*' What nonsense, what folly !" said 
Hayward. 

" You wiU Uve to find it trae," answered 
Mrs. Irvine, in the hollow tones of prophecy ; 
and then, after stirring the fire, she quitted 
the room, leaving Hayward to his sweet and 
bitter reflections. 

From these, in about half-an-hour, he was 
aroused by someone coming into the room, 
and, turning round, he perceived it was Miss 
Amelia. 

" Oh ! Miss Amelia," he said, good-tem- 
peredly, '* be a kind creature, won't you, and 
bring me a vase and some water for these 
beautiful flowers that Miss Trevor has 
brought ?" 

These words utterly overcame Miss Amelia's 
already exasperated heart. 

*' No, Hayward, I won't !" she cried ex- 
citedly. " I won't bring you a vase, and I 
won't bring you any water, I won't, I won't !" 
And then her voice became choked with sobs. 



140 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

** My dear girl/' said Hayward, in great 
concern, ** what is the matter ? You must 
be ill, Miss Amelia. What is it, my dear 

girl r 

" Don't call me your dear girl," screamed 
the unhappy Amelia, snatching the hand 
away that Hayward had endeavoured consol- 
ingly to take. " Don't, I say, don't !" 

" But what have I done ?" asked Hay- 
ward, in utter amazement at this outbreak 
" How have I oflFended you. Miss Amelia ?' 

As poor Hayward had done nothing, Miss 
Amelia could not make any accusations, but 
continued sobbing spasmodically for some 
time, and then suddenly cried out in a 
gasping voice — 

" She is a bad creature ! She is an upstart ! 
Mamma says — ^mamma says she treated her 
as if she were sweepings ! There !" 

" Who do you mean ?" said Hayward, 
beginning to laugh, and thinking the whole 
family had gone mad. " Do you mean Miss 
Trevor ?" 

"Yes," answered Amelia loudly, "Miss 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 141 

Trevor r And having uttered the name in 
tones of extreme bitterness, she threw up her 
head, and, with a glance of unutterable 
reproach at Hayward, left the room. 



CHAPTER IX. 

AT MASSAM PARK. 

Isabel Trevor walked home after her visit 
to the parsonage, apparently in rather a medi- 
tative mood. She walked on in silence for 
some time, and then said abruptly — 

" How very good-looking he is 1 " 

*'Who do you mean?" -asked Hilda 
Marston, who was still rather in an irrit- 
able condition of mind. 

" Mean !" asked Isabel, somewhat pettishly. 
"Why, Mr. Hayward, of course. What a 
clever face he has — so thoughtful. I could 
imagine him a writer." 

" To be thoughtful doesn't always seem 
necessary to constitute a writer now-a-days," 
said Hilda, still suffering from irritation. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 143 

*'No," answered Isabel, and then she re- 
lapsed into silence again. 

She was weaving a little web, one of those 
small and often incomplete schemes which too 
many of her type indulge in. What she had 
told Hayward about knowing the Misses 
Peatherstone was quite true, but she had 
almost forgotten this fact until the last few 
days. True, a desultory correspondence had 
been carried on between herself and these 
young ladies since their school days, but of 
late years this had almost entirely ceased. 
By accident, however, she had learnt that 
Featherstone lay near to Massam Park. 
Then she remembered her old friends, and 
she was now thinking of what she would 
write to them, speculating pretty correctly 
on what their answer would be. 

You see Isabel Trevor knew her position. 
She was a beauty and an heiress, and as such 
always could command attention and flattery. 
The " Featherstone girls," as she mentally 
designated her old school companions, would, 
she knew, only be too glad to have her. 



144 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

They were not heiresses, and they were not 
beauties. They were the daughters of a 
small landowner in Yorkshire, who had nearly 
ruined himself by horse-racing. Ill-luck sets 
in early with some people, and ill-luck had 
set in for, and always pursued Mr. Feather- 
stone, of Featherstone. He never bought or 
reared a colt but some mischance befel it ; he 
never backed a winner, and never did any 
good all his days. 

He was a widower as well as Isabel's 
father, for his poor wife had sickened and 
died after one fatal Derby, from the eflfects of 
which Mr. Featherstone's finances never had 
a chance of recovering themselves. Mr. 
Featherstone himself was a rakish, good- 
looking man, who affected the horsey style, 
though horses had been the bane of his life. 
He had tried several times to retrieve his 
fortunes by a second marriage with a woman 
with money, but women with money are shy 
of a man whose embarrassments are notorious. 
Yet he always continued to keep his head 
above water. Mortgages upon mortgages! 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 145 

The estate was mortgaged up to the hall 
door ; even the stone steps of the vestibule, 
and the foot-scraper outside, Lucinda Feather- 
stone (the second daughter) declared were in 
pecuniary difficulties. 

Inside, however, everything was jolly. 
The girls were good tempered and good- 
looking, and had fine figures and fine con- 
stitutions. They went to every available 
"meet," archery party, and dance for miles 
and miles around, and rode, flirted, and 
waltzed as if they had not a single care in 
the world. 

"They will be delighted to have me,'* 
thought Isabel Trevor as she walked home 
from the Parsonage ; and she thought it justly. 
So as soon as she returned to the Hall she 
sat down to write to the Featherstones. Papa 
and herself, she informed them, were going 
into Yorkshire ; were going to visit Sir 
George Hamilton at Massam (then followed 
the details of the shipwreck, and Sir George's 
" romantic rescue "), and she could not think 
of being in their neighbourhood without 

VOL. I. L 



146 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

going to see her old friends. When would 
they be at home ? and so on. 

The answer to this letter (which came 
by return of post) was exactly what Isabel 
expected. The Featherstones would be 
deUghted to see her. They were enchanted 
at the prospect of meeting her, and in rather 
exuberant and ill-chosen terms declared their 
satisfaction. Isabel was to fix her own time for 
the visit ; was assured she would be always 
welcome, and they expected that she would 
mtake *' quite a sensation amongst the men 
(married and unmarried) around them." 

What style of women the Featherstones 
were could have been almost told from this 
letter. Jolly, free-spoken girls, who became 
intimate friends with men after half an hour's 
conversation, and who quarrelled and made 
up again with equal frequency and ease. 
They, however, were really pleased at the 
idea of Isabel Trevor visiting them, and good- 
looking, red-faced, rakish Antony Feather- 
stone, Esq. (commonly called Toney), was 
apparently very well pleased also. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 147 

" If she's an heiress. I think I had better 
go in for her, my dears ? " he said. 

" My good old man," answered Lucinda, the 
second girl, affectionately patting her father's 
broad shoulders, " you would have no chance. 
Isabel Trevor is one of the vainest and hand- 
somest girls I have ever seen. She is ambi- 
tious, too, or I'm much mistaken, and probably 
her motive for coming to see us is that she 
wishes to be longer in the neighhourhood of 
Sir George. See by her letters how dexte- 
rously she alludes to him." And Lucinda drew 
Isabel's letter from her dress pocket and put 
it into her father's hands with a little laugh. 

Thus the girls saw through Isabel's motives, 
and perceived smilingly what she thought she 
had hidden so well. 

" If she'a coming after Sir George^ she'll be 
a little out of her calculations, I fancy," said 
Mr. Featherstone, rather roughly. 

" Oh, you mean the old story, I suppose ?" 
replied Lucinda, lightly. 

Mr. Featherstone nodded his head signi- 
ficantly. 



148 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

*'Well, I fancy she is coming after Sir 
George," rejoined Lucinda. "But there's 
one thing certain, as far as I remember of 
Isabel Trevor, she will never break her heart 
for any living man." 

*' Quite right," growled Mr. Featherstone, 
" they aren't worth it." And having given 
vent to this sentiment, Mr. Featherstone 
composed himself to sleep. 

Yes, Mr. Featherstone could sleep appar- 
ently with an easy conscience, after his brandy 
and sodas at lunch, and after his bottle of 
port at dinner, though he knew that at 
his death his daughters would probably be 
left penniless. That dark day, however, he 
never contemplated. He was only a young 
man still he told himself; the girls might 
marry. ^ hundred things might occur, in 
fact, so why should he disturb his rest or 
make himself miserable ? At all events he 
did not, and he was undoubtedly a flourishing 
specimen of a careless, easy, though not a 
badly intentioned man. ' ' 

After Isabel Trevor received the gushing 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 149 

letter from the Featherstones she immediately 
went to her papa. 

" Papa," she said, " you remember the 
Featherstone girls ? The girls I was at 
school with ? " 

" 1 think I do remember the name, love," 
repUed Mr, Trevor, removing his respectable, 
gold-rimmed double glasses from his respect- 
able lofty nose. 

*'Well, they have written to ask me to 
stay with them," went on Isabel, menda- 
ciously ; *' and as Featherstone, their place, 
is near Massam Park, papa, I thought per- 
haps if you are going there soon, as you 
promised Sir George you would, that we 
might travel together." 

"Certainly, my love," answered the squire ; 
and then he paused. He was wondering if 
Isabel still thought of Sir George as at one 
time lie had certainly imagined that she did ; 
but he was too delicate-minded, in spite of 
his obscure intellect, to ask. 

" I thought, you know," continued Isabel, 
throwing back her head, "that I might go 



150 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

with you first to Massam, for a day or two 
— Sir George asked me, you remember." 

" Yes," said Mr. Trevor, slowly. 

" And it would be so nice for us to travel 
together," said Isabel. " Will you write to 
him, papa, and tell him when we could go ?" 

" I think, my love, we ought to wait until 
he writes to us," suggested Mr. Trevor. 

" Oh, I don't know. Say it would be con- 
venient for us to go on such and such a day," 
urged Isabel. 

" I would prefer to wait until I hear from 
him," again said the squire, rather stiffly. 

Isabel looked angry, but she said nothing. 
She knit her brows, and bit her red lips with 
her white teeth, and then, after considering a 
minute or so, she left her father's presence, 
going straight to her own room, where she at 
once sat down to compose a letter to Sir 
George Hamilton. She wrote as follows : — 

" Dear Sir George, — Some old friends of 
mine, the Featherstonee, wish me to visit 
them, and as they are near neighbours of 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 151 

yours, I have been trying to persuade papa 
this afternoon to write to you to tell you that 
if you will allow us we we shall take Massam 
on our road, and look you up for a day or 
two. Thus I would secure for myself a 
travelling companion, for I dislike travelling 
alone so much, besides having the pleasure 
of seeing you again. But papa snubbed my 
proposal unmercifully, telling me to wait 
until we were asked, and making various 
other unpleasant comments ! So you see 
nothing is left for me but to appeal to your 
generosity. Will you write and invite us ? 
Ah, I know you will. Is it a bold thing of 
me to ask you ? Perhaps — ^but I feel as if 
we were quite old, old friends. — ^Yours very 
truly, Isabel Tbevor." 

When Sir George Hamilton received this 
letter he was sitting alone in his library. He 
was sad and gloomy, and he looked so. He 
got up after he had read Isabel's letter, and 
began walking slowly up and down the room, 
with his brows knitted and his lips com^ 



152 BBNBATH THE WAVE. 

pressed. Yet this letter came as a sort of 
relief to him. He was a man whose own 
thoughts were ill-company, but still he shrank 
from seeking other companions. Now they 
were forced on him he thought, for he had 
not forgotten the claims which Isabel and 
her father had on his hospitaUty. Did she 
wish to see him again ? went on his reflec- 
tions. This bright creature, that no man 
could see without worshipping, " Ah — ^ah — 
she little knows ! " And Sir George gave a 
bitter sigh. 

But there could be but one answer to Such 
a letter as Isabel's, he thought ; and this 
answer Sir George speedily wrote. She was 
to name her own day, he told her, for coming 
to Massam, and his poor house would only 
be too much honoured by her presence there. 
He was, perhaps, unaware himself that he 
framed his sentences to Isabel in softer lan- 
guage than he would have done to any other 
woman in the world. Yet it was so. He 
saw in his mind's eye the beautiful face of 
which he had so often thought since his 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 153 

xetum to his splendid but lonely home, as he 
penned the words. Isabel, at least, had not 
been forgotten by this reserved and appa- 
rently care-burdened man. 

She felt elated, almost triumphant, when 
she received this letter from Sir Greorge. So 
she had won, she thought ; for Isabel had 
immense faith in her own attractions, if 
they only had fair play. They would have 
&.ir play at Massam, she concluded, and, 
therefore, her heart felt fall of joy. 

Sir Greorge not only wrote to her, but 
also to the squire. Isabel was in her bed- 
room shortly after she had read Sir George's 
letter, mentally planning irresistible costumes, 
when she received a message from her father 
that he wished to speak to her, and when 
she went to him she found him sitting with 
an air of satisfaction and a letter lying open 
before him. 

"Isabel, my love," he said, addressing 
his daughter, "if you still wish to go to 
Massam, as you said you did a day or two 
-ago, you have now the opportunity of doing 



154 BKKEATH THE WATE. 

80. This is a letter firom Sir Greorge,'' and 
Mr. Trevor pointed to the open letter on 
the table, '^ containing a very courteously- 
expressed invitation for us both." 

*' Oh ! " said Isabel, and she took up Sir 
George's letter. 

There was no hint of the one that she had 
written to him. Sir George merely expressed 
a hope that Mr. Trevor and his daughter 
would now fulfil their promise, and visit him 
at Massam ; then followed a few well-chosen 
words of thanks for the kindness that he had 
received during his stay at Sanda. 

" It has come very opportunely, as you 
wish to visit your friends, the Featherstones," 
said Mr. Trevor. 

" Very," said Isabel, and she gave a little 
laugh. 

" If you will fix the time, I will write to 
Sir George to-day," went on Mr. Trevor. "Of 
course, Miss Marston will accompany you ?" 

** There is no of course about it, papa," 
answered Isabel, brusquely. *'I see no 
reason why she should go." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 155 

"Nevertheless, there is a reason, Isabel," 
said Mr. Trevor. " You could not go to Sir 
George's without another lady." 

"What folly !" said Isabel. " Besides, the 
Featherstone girls will be so near." 

" I know nothing of the Misses Feather- 
stone," replied the squire, " but I am 
competent to judge of what will be the best 
arrangement for my own family, and I wish 
Miss Marston to accompany us." 

" She will only be in the way," retorted 
Isabel. 

" I wish it," repeated Mr. Trevor, 
magisterially. 

The Squire of Sanda, like most silly men, 
was obstinate. He had his own settled ideas, 
and he tenaciously clung to them. He was 
very indulgent to Isabel, and she had far 
more of her own way than was good for her ; 
but if he once fixed anything in his own mind 
there it remained, and he had now fixed that 
Hilda Marston should go to Massam. 

" How can you be so obstinate, papa ? " 
said Isabel, losing temper. 



156 BE51L1TH THZ WATK. 

^Mt love, firmoesB is not obstinacy," 
replied die squire. 

AIl Kow Ke respected himself at that 
moment ! What a great man he was, he 
thought — ao composed, and ret so firm. 

^ I iroold not allow any woman to ruffle 
me/' he reflected. 

^ What a tiresome, pompons old man ! " 
reflected Isabel 

Bat the squire got the best of it, for during 
the arswnent which ensued between them 
after these mutual reflections, Mr. Trevor 
informed his daughter that unless Miss 
Marston went to Sir Qeorge Hamilton's that 
he would not go. Thus, as Isabel could not 
visit Massam without her father's protection, 
she was forced, with a very bad grace, to 
give in. 

So Hilda Marston received an intimation 
during the day that she was expected to 
accompany Isabel into Yorkshire. This 
young person was anything but delighted 
with the idea. She was beginning to tire of 
her rdle of companionship, and to pine for 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 157 

harder and inore independent work. *^ I am 
an absolute cipher here," she often thought. 
" Surely I could spend my life better than 
being so completely useless and despised as I 
am now." 

It was silly, she knew, for she was a 
sensible girl, but she had taken very much to 
heart the fact that Philip Hay ward had for- 
gotten to notice her on the day when she and 
Isabel had called at the parsonage. You 
see she had not been used to this kind of 
treatment. In her father s home, poor though 
it was, she was someone. A fondly-loved 
daughter for one thing ; an affectionate and 
favourite sister for another. So it was a 
great change. Isabel Trevor was not actually 
unkind to her, but she was not kind. She 
cared nothing about her : in fact, cared nothing 
about any woman. She would have given 
her her old dresses, but Hilda was too proud 
to accept them ; but she would have given 
her nothing that she had the slightest value 
for. Hilda, sensitive and tender-hearted, 
felt every moment her nature rise in 



158 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

antagonism with the selfish, cold-hearted one 

with whom she was now continually thrown. 

She naturally was not blinded by Isabel's 

beauty. She even felt sometimes that she 

hated that beauty — ^the subtle, sensuous 

beauty that wiled every man's heart away. 

She therefore often thought of leaving Sanda. 

But there are wheels withinw heels. For 

poor Hilda there were her old home tios. 

Her sister ofl;en wrote to her to say how glad 

she was that she was so well settled, and then 

there was Ned — ^poor little Ned ! Were she 

to offend the squire by proposing to leave the 

Hall, would the squire continue his patronage 

to little Ned ? This meant feeding, clothing, 

and educating him, and who else was there 

to do it if Mr. Trevor turned awav ? All 

these things naturally influenced Hilda, but 

they did not reconcile her to her present 

life. 

Isabel Trevor, too, had allowed her to see 
very plainly that she did not think it necessary 
that Hilda should accompany them to 
Massam — not in words, perhaps, but still 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 159 

Isabel had made her xinderstand^ and there 
were other reasons ako why she did not wish 
to go ; reasons which many a poor lady will 
well understand. 

The squire, however, had thought about 
these last reasons, and did his best to remove 
them. In fact, he had remembered that 
Hilda could scarcely go to Massam without 
a suitable dress or two ; and he, therefore, 
with some ostentation placed an envelope in 
her hand the day after they had decided to 
visit Sir George Hamilton. 

"Young ladies, I believe," he said, "always 
find that they ^ have nothing to wear' when 
they are about to pay visits, so I trust you 
will accept this trifle. Miss Marston ?" 

The Squire of Sanda was one of those men 
who made speeches which Would sound 
almost clever, or at least ordinary, from the 
lips of a clever man. From his they oppressed 
you with a sense of their vacuity. He, in 
feujt, clothed his limited ideas in very toler- 
able language. But it did not impose upon 
you somehow. You felt the hollowness 



160 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

beneath^ just as you recognize ability in the 
simplest words. 

However, he meant to be kind to Hilda^ 
and therefore Hilda need not have blushed 
and looked as uncomfortable as she did when 
he giive her the envelope, 

" You are very kind," she faltered, " but I 
would rather not go to Massam." 

*' I wish you to go," said Mr. Trevor, in 
the tone in which, at the quarter sessions, he 
coudouiued small boys to be whipped for 
stealing turnips and men to be imprisoned 
for snaring hares. 

- But '^ hesitated Hilda. 

** I wish you to go, and I wish you to 
appoiir wollnlressed," reiterated the squire; 
and, after this, what could the poor girl say ? 
Nothing, of course, and it may serve to illus- 
trate Hilda's character to describe what she 
did with the squire s gift. 

When she opened the envelope she found 
it contained twenty pounds — ^four clean, crisp, 
five pound notes. This seemed quite a large 
sum to Hilda at first, and to spend it all upon 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 161 

herself was impossible to her nature. No, 
there was dear Marion, she thought, had long 
cx)veted a new jacket, and so five pounds found 
its way to her eldest sister. Then there was 
little Ned. He wanted a new suit sadly, 
Hilda decided, and thus another five pounds 
disappeared. She finally reserved ten pounds 
for herself, to buy two new dresses. Like 
most women, in fact, who are womanly in 
their ways, Hilda liked to be well dressed. 
She was a fine-looking, sweet-faced girl, 
though not a beauty, and dress, therefore, 
made a considerable difierence in her appear- 
ance. She had the disadvantage also of living 
with Isabel Trevor, who was always magnifi- 
cently dressed. Everything goes by com- 
parison, and many things which would have 
looked well in the quiet parsonage, which had 
been her old home, looked shabby beside the 
elegant and elaborate costumes which Isabel 
Trevor continually wore. But Hilda had 
good taste and knew what became her, and 
so she made excellent use of her ten pounds. 
The whole party left Sanda for Massam 

VOL. I. M 



162 B£9SATH THS WATK 

about five days after Sir Ge(ages inTitation 
had been receired. Isabel TreTor was 
radiant and excited during their jonmey, and 
kept continually lau^iing and talking to her 
&ther and Hilda. 

'' I wonder if our firiend, the tutor, will be 
there ? " she said, alluding to Hayward. 

'' I scarcely think that Sir Greorge would 
invite him to meet us," remarked the squire. 

"Oh, but I assure you that Sir Greoige 
has invited him," replied Isabel " Not to 
meet us, of course, but to go for a long visit, 
and, indeed, it must be admitted that Sir 
George owes him every civiUty." And Isabel 
laughed. 

She knew quite well when she said this, 
that if they remained long enough at Massam, 
Hayward would be there when they were. 
He had paid his promised visit to the Hall, 
and Isabel had seen him. During this visit, 
partly for amusement, and partly because she 
had begun to like the tutor's thoughtful face, 
she had done her best to increase her power 
over him. She knew quiie well that he 



BKNEATH THE WAVE. "• 163 

greatly admired her. She had seen and 
treasured up the parting look that he had 
given her before he had plunged into the sea, 
to try at her bidding to save Sir George 
Hamilton's life. She liked such looks as this ; 
looks which told of wasted hours, of restless 
pain ; of a man's life all turned to bitterness 
out of vain love for her. This may read like 
exaggeration, but it is not so. Nothing was 
so dear to Isabel Trevor as her vanity, and 
she cared not how many hearts she sacrificed 
as long as she gratified this leading passion. 
But she was ambitious also, and this feeling 
stirred strongly within her as they approached 
Sir George's splendid home and drove through 
the glorious woodland scenery by which it 
was surrounded. It was worth winning, 
Isabel thought, as she looked out of the 
luxurious carriage that they had found waiting 
for them at the station nearest to Massam 
Park. It was just growing dusk, but she 
could still see as they went down the long 
avenue how beautiful it was. Here was 
everything a woman wanted, Isabel reflected. 



164 •beneath the wave. 

and she determined that her visit should not 
be in vain. 

Sir George was waiting on the broad 
terrace in the front of the house to receive 
them. The terrace was laid out with orna- 
mental flower-beds and vases, in the Italian 
style, and had a fine white marble fountain 
in the centre. Isabel saw this almost at a 
glance ; and she saw also that there was a 
faint flush on Sir George's usually pale face, 
as he advanced down the steps of the terrace 
and held out his hand in welcome, as he 
approached the door of the carriage. 

'* Well, we have arrived, Sir George," said 
Mr. Trevor, as he returned the baronet's 
greeting ; but Isabel said nothing. She only 
looked into Sir George's face, who gravely 
handed her out of the carriage and then 
ofiered her his arm to escort her up the 
steps of the terrace. 

Inside the house everything was aUke 
magnificent and comfortable. Even Mr. 
Trevor was impressed by the lofty hall and 
broad staircase, both of which were adorned 



BENEATH THE WATE. 165 

with many fine paintings ; the wrought-iron 
balustrade of the staircase being beautifully 
painted and reheved with gold. Hilda 
Marston, who had never been in a house like 
this before, looked round in genuine admi- 
ration and even a Uttle awe. But Isabel 
Trevor held her head high and seemed to 
notice nothing. She did not wish Sir George 
to think that she was particularly struck 
with the splendour of his stately home. 

But no sooner were the two ladies alone 
after dinner than it was quite diflferent. Then 
Isabel ran from one room to another, admir- 
ing and commenting on the beautiful objects 
they contained. She was fond of china, and 
went into raptures over the magnificent 
collection of Sevres and Dresden, and was 
kneeling before a locked cabinet in the small 
drawing-room, which contained precious 
stones, trying if she could open it, when Sir 
Greorge and her father rejoined them. For 
a moment, when Sir Greorge saw her occupa- 
tion, a frown contracted his brow, but the 
next he advanced towards }i6r. 



166 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" That cabinet is always kept locked," he 
said, addressing her, " but I will send to the 
housekeeper for the key." 

" I was trying to get a closer peep at your 
treasures," answered Isabel, not without 
some slight embarrassment, as she rose from 
her rather undignified position. 

When the key of the cabinet was brought, 
Sir George unlocked it and took out the 
gems, one after another, for Isabel's inspection. 

"Was your mother a collector of these 
things ? " asked Isabel, as she handled and 
admired the stones. 

" No," answered Sir George, " my poor 
mother cared little or nothing about them. 
This collection, which is of great value, I 
believe, was made by the Lady Hamilton who 
preceded her. My father, as perhaps you 
know, was not born the heir of Massam. It 
belonged to the elder branch of the family, 
who all in a most singular manner died, and 
thus my father became its. possessor." 

*' A lucky fatality for him," laughed Isabel, 
showing her white teeth. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 167 

" It seemed so then/' said Sir George, 

"yet perhaps had I " And then he 

abruptly paused. 

" Been poor ? " suggested Isabel, with 
another laugh. 

*^Yes, been poor," went on Sir George, 
gravely, " I might have been a better man." 

*' Or a worse," said Isabel, lightly. " I 
must admit I prefer the temptations of 
wealth to those of poverty." 

Sir George made no reply to this. He 
was standing looking at her fixedly. She 
was holding a great sparkling unset sapphire 
in the palm of her slender hand, and it struck 
Sir George for the first time at that moment 
that there was something in the expression 
of her lovely face that he would rather not 
have seen there. 

" Isn't this splendid ? " said Isabel, return- 
ing to her admiration of the gem in her hand 
and moving it so as to catch its glitter in the 
light of the chandelier. 

" If you admire it so much, I will have it 
set for you," said Sir George. 



168 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Will you ? " answered Isabel, looking up 
delightedly, for she was a woman who loved 
gifts. " Ah, how good you are 1 " 

Upon this Sir George" gave rather a harsh 
little laugh. 

"Where are your conservatories?'' asked 
Isabel. " You know I love flowers — ^will 
you show me some ? " 

" I fear they have been neglected since my 
poor mother's death," said Sir George ; "but, 
if you wish, you can see a small conservatory 
which the morning room opens into. The 
others are not lighted." 

'^ I do wish," answered Isabel. " I like to 
see all over a place at once." 

" Come, then," said Sir George. But as 
Isabel prepared to follow him he turned 
courteously to Hilda Marston, who was 
standing in another part of the room looking 
at some books lying on the table. " Will 
you go too, Miss Marston ? " he asked. 

Hilda gave one glance into Isabel's face, 
and reading there strong objections to this 
proposal, she answered with a snnle, glancing 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 169 

^t Mr. Trevor, who was calmly sleeping in an 
easy chair, with the Times over his face, 

*^ No — I will see them some other time," 
she said. "Just now I will stay and keep 
Mr. Trevor company." And she gave a little 
nod at the sleeping squire. 

So Isabel followed Sir George alone, 
through the still corridors of the house, until 
they came to the left wing, in which the 
morning room was situated, and from which 
they passed into the conservatory beyond. 
There was nothing particularly remarkable 
about it, and after Isabel had walked round 
it, she began gathering herself a bouquet of 
the best flowers it contained. 

" Don t you care for flowers ? " she asked^ 
looking at Sir George with a smile. 

" No; I don t know," he answered, absently. 
^' I don't know what I do care for, I think." 

Then Isabel laid down her flowers and went 
up to him, looking at him with her bright, 
beautiful eyes. 

"What makes you always so sad. Sir 
George ? " she said. " And so — ^indifferent ? " 



170 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

She almost whispered the last word, but 
Sir George heard it. 

^^ I am not indifferent," he answered, 
quickly. " I wish I were." 

" Then you are sad ? " said Isabel. 

Sir George turned away his head for a 
moment, and then he said — 

" I must try not to seem so, at least. Miss 
Trevor, when you are here." 

Isabel felt disappointed by this reply- 
. " Oh," she said, " pray do not assume any 
false gaiety on my account." And she threw 
back her head a^ if she were annoyed. 

Upon this. Sir George looked at her kindly. 
" I don't wish you to be sad," he said ; " you, 
who are so young and bright." 

" And I don't wish you to be sad," answered 
Isabel, with a sudden change of mood, and in 
the soft, sweet tones she could so well assume. 
*' You — who are my friend," and she put her 
hand half coyly into his. 

As she did so. Sir George took it, holding 
it for a moment tightly clasped in his own. 
Then, suddenly (before Isabel could speak), 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 17 1 

his expression changed, and he bit his Up and 
dropped her hand abruptly. 

" Let us rejoin the others," he said, almost 
coldly, "the air is chill for you here. Miss 
Trevor." 

*^ I think so, too," answered Isabel, 
haughtily; and angry and annoyed she re- 
turned to her father and Hilda Marston, in 
the small drawing-room. She felt she had 
failed, and failure was very bitter to Isabels 
vain heart. 



CHAPTER X. 

A FIRST PROPOSAL. 

Thb next morning at breakfast, Sir Greorge 
addressed Isabel with a smile, 

" Since you have been good enough to 
honour Massam with your presence. Miss 
Trevor," he said, " I think I should try to 
make it a little more amusing for you than it 
generally is. You know my neighbours, the 
Featherstones, I believe ? " 

" Oh, yes," answered Isabel, rather care- 
lessly, " the girls were at school with me." 

" Well," went on Sir George, " I think I 
had better begin to send out some invitations 
at once. I have been so long away that I 
have almost forgotten everyone — ^but I can 
apply to Hannaway." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 173 

^' Don't trouble to have people here on our 
account," said Isabel. "To begm with, I 
hate country dinner-parties. If you would 
give a ball, perhaps." But Sir George shook 
his head at the suggestion. 

" No," he said, " no, I could not do that.'* 

" Then pray don't have any dinner parties." 
went on Isabel, "for I consider them a most 
dreary waste of time. I know what it is to 
sit and Usten to the interesting catalogue of 
domestic ailments with which the model 
mother regales her friends after dinner. Then 
there is the scandalous dowager, picking little 
holes with great rehsh in the coats of her 
neighbours ; and last, and not least for poor 
me, there are insipid girls, awkward girls, and 
tiresome girls, all yawning behind their fans, 
until the generally not over brilliant speci- 
mens of your sex once again appear upon the 
scene." 

" And you leave out the charming girls," 
said Sir George, with a laugh. " Pray, what 
do they do under the circumstances ? " 

" The charming girls," answered Isabel, 



174 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

boldly and brightly, ^* to whom, of course, I 
belong, don't like it at all. They detest 
stupid men, however large their rent-rolls 
are. They weary of tiresome girls, however 
pretty their faces are ; and they hate 
scandalous dowagers, because they know the 
more charming they are, that the dowagers 
will tear them to pieces with greater satis- 
faction." 

" My dear Isabel," said Mr. Trevor, who 
was buttering his toast, '^ surely you are 
giving Sir George a very exaggerated des- 
cription ? " 

" I could not exaggerate the weariness 
with which such society as we usually meet 
about Sanda inspires me with," said Isabel. 
"Oh, the long dreary drives, and the long 
dreary dinners I have gone through ! I envy 
you. Sir George, to have been out of it all 
so long." 

" Then you did not go into much society 
abroad, Sir George ?" asked Mr. Trevor. 

" No, I kept out of it," answered Sir 
George, " as I mean to keep out of it here. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 175 

But," he added, " I thought, perhaps, to 
amuse Miss Trevor and Miss Marston.'^ 

" Leave Miss Trevor and Miss Marston to 
amuse themselves," said Isabel, lightly, as 
Sir George paused. " May I arrange the 
programme for to-day ? " 

" Certainly, most certainly," replied Sir 
George. 

*' Then I propose to spend all the morning 
in the grounds and in the park," went on 
Isabel. ''The lovely peep I had this morning 
out of my bed-room window was quite enough 
to make me long for more. So if it will not 
weary you. Sir George " 

" It will not weary me," he answered ; and 
he thought at that moment — who would ever 
weary of a woman like this ? 

Yet, at times, she repelled him. He re- 
membered his mother's gentle words, even 
when Isabel was giving her satirical descrip- 
tion of county society. She, the dead 
mother, had seldom spoken of other's fail 
ings or other's sins. Sir George was bitter 
and satirical himself at times, but somehow 



176 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

he loved not to heax harsh words on Isaber& 
lovely lips. But she fascinated him. It was 
her beauty, and he knew it, that gave her 
this strange power over him ; a power that 
he nevertheless sometimes tried to resist. 

But not that morning. Massam lay bathed 
in golden sunshine, sunshine which fell on 
the great trees, on the green glades, on the 
distant woods. These, rich in the tawny 
mellow tints of autumn, stirred and swayed 
in the fresh breeze, while the falling leaves 
stole softly downwards, to wither in the misty 
undergrowth below. 

Through the grounds first, and then 
through the woods. Sir George led Isabel. 
He was her host, he told himself, and so it 
was his duty to pay her every attention in his 
power. But time did not lag that morning 
for Sir George. Into the dim distance, for 
a few hours at least, faded the bitter past. 
Isabel's cheeks were flushed, and her eyes 
sparkled as she met Sir George's earnest and 
admiring gaze. He was worth winning, she 
thought. This man, so cold and reserved to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 177 

others, who sought not the love of either 
women or men. Would she win ? Ah, she 
was very fair, and had a winning tongue, and 
knew her power. Sir George, gloomy and 
taciturn as he was, was yet a man of deep 
and passionate feelings. A man who could 
love and hate — a man who had loved and 
hated only too well. 

Behind them, but at a considerable dis- 
tance, walked the Squire of Sanda and Hilda 
Marston. The squire, for him, was talkative 
and agreeable, and Hilda was absolutely 
enjoying her walk. This may seem strange, 
as her companion was Mr. Trevor ; but our 
Hilda had other companions on that bright 
morning. These were her sweet thoughts, 
her good resolves, her pretty castles in the 
air. These imaginary castles, wherein Hilda 
dwelt in the future and was rich, were gener- 
ally inhabited also by the other members of 
her family. What ponies little Ned rode in 
them that she had given him ! What dresses 
Marion was clothed in, and what sums of 
money she slipped into Paul's not unwilling 

VOL. I. N 



178 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

hand! From the contemplation of these 
airy gifts she was, however, recalled by 
Mr .Trevor's slow, pompous voice. 

" Certainly, Sir George is a most fortmiate 
man," said the squire. 

"Yet a more melancholy-looking man I 
never beheld," replied Hilda ; '^ Sir George 
always appears to me as if he were struggling 
against some settled grief." 

" He should get married," said the squire, 
with an affectation of ease in his voice and 
manner. 

'^Perhaps that would do him no good," 
answered Hilda at random, who had gone 
back into one of her air castles. 

" I think," said Mr. Trevor, " that every 
man is better for being married. Home 
ties are the surest foundation for settled 
happiness." 

"Yes," said Hilda, who was considering 
what colour Ned's first pony should be. 

" Of course there are many things to be 
taken into consideration," continued the 
squire. "In contemplating so serious a 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 179 

step, a man must, of course, consider his first 
family " 

''Yes," said Hilda, still mentally contem- 
plating the pony. 

" But if he sees a prospect — a reasonable 
prospect," went on Mr. Trevor, "of his 
daughter, or daughters, as the case may be, 
settling in life, I think that a man — a man 
with proper means and settled home — ^is 
justified in again contemplating marriage, 
with a suitable person." 

'' Of course," said Hilda, whose mind was 
still wandering in the air. 

" I have thought a great deal lately on this 
subject," continued Mr. Trevor, "and as I 
think that I may now reasonably expect that 
Isabel will marry " 

Hilda did not speak as the squire paused. 
She heard him say something about Isabel 
marrying, but as she considered this a delicate 
subject at present, she was discreetly silent. 

" I need not — I suppose — remind you," 
again continued Mr. Trevor, " that all this is 
in the strictest confidence. In fact, had I not 



180 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the greatest dependence on your character, I 
would not have approached the subject, but 
I have particular reasons for domg so." 

" Yes ? " once more said Hilda, now really 
listening to what the squire was saying. 

" These reasons, my dear Miss Marston, I 
wish you to understand,^ went on the squire, 
a little nervously. "In fact — ah, well — I 
again contemplate marriage." 

"Oh!" said Hilda, thoughtftdly. "Who 
can it be ? " she was mentally wondering. 
" Shall I lose my home ? " was her next 
thought. 

" I have observed with pleasure," said the 
squire, after clearing his throat, "that you 
are not one of those yoimg women who make 
marriage the chief object of their lives, and 
endeavour to attract attention wherever they 
go. But though such aims appear to me* to 
be frivolous, and even degrading, there is no 
doubt but that a woman is better settled in 
life." 

" I suppose so," said Hilda, as the squire 
again paused. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 181 

''There is no doubt of it," reiterated the 
squire, magisterially. " And — now, my dear 
Miss Marston," he added, in a milder tone, 
" I hope I have made you understand ? " 

" I — do not quite understand," said Hilda, 
nervously. 

" I ^wish you to understand in fact— — 

that I well, contemplate marrying you," 

said Mr. Trevor, and Hilda absolutely started, 
and the next moment flushed deeply, as the 
squire declared his intentions. 

" I was prepared for a little surprise," con- 
tinued Mr. Trevor, affably. " The attentions 
that I have hitherto shown you have been 
confined to protecting friendship ; but I have 
not been imobservant of your character during 
the time you have resided under my roof. 
And I have come to the conclusion," added 
the squire, " that, as you made an excellent 
daughter to your poor father, you will make 
an excellent wife for me." 

Of what was Hilda thinking as the squire 
concluded his speech ? My readers, will you 
blame her when I tell you that she was 



182 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

absolutely thinking over his proposal ? Has 
anyone, I wonder, who will read this story 
of Hilda's life ever been entirely penniless ? 
Mind, this girl had not one shilling of her 
own. The clothes she wore belonged to the 
squire (at least his money had paid for them), 
and he had paid for little Med's clothes and 
little Ned's education — and if Hilda married 
him all her castles in the air might come true. 
AU— no, not all, for the imaginary beneficent 
giver of the air castles had always been loved 
by Hilda, and she did not love Mr. Trevor 
— and yet 

Before them, in the winding paths of the 
woods, two figures were just visible. These 
were Sir George and Isabel, who also were 
thinking of the future, though not in so direct 
a manner as the squire and Hilda. Hilda 
looked at them, hesitated, and blushed. If 
Isabel were to marry Sir George, her home 
at Sanda (unless she married the squire) was 
lost to her. And then there was little 
Ned 

" May I think over what you have said ? ** 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 183 

she faltered. "Will you give me time to 
consider ? " 

"Certainly," replied the squire, graciously. 
" I approve of haste in nothing. This day 
fortnight, my dear Miss Marston, I will ask 
for your answer. In the meanwhile," he 
addedj with a self-satisfied smile, " I will 
permit myself to hope." 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE FBATHERSTONES. 

Thus the first morning that she spent at 
Massam Park proved a momentous one for 
Hilda Marston. The proposal that she had 
received was her first proposal, and Mr. 
Trevor was her first declared lover, though 
she had several admirers during the old days 
when she had lived at her father's parsonage. 
It was a momentous day also for Isabel 
Trevor. She had not wasted her time during 
her long walk through the autumnal woods. 
Sir George came in from that walk excited, 
if not happy. His eyes involuntarily followed 
Isabel's tall figure wherever she went, and 
she, conscious of that surveillance, looked 
even more bright and beautiful than usual. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 185 

Hilda, on the contrary, was embarrassed 
and silent during lunch after this eventful 
morning. She had not made up her mind, 
and she felt as if she could scarcely look the 
squire in the face, Mr. Trevor, on the other 
hand, was full of complacency. All seemed 
to be going on rightly between Isabel and Sir 
George he thought, and Hilda now understood 
his intentions. His mind was also perfectly 
at ease about her answer. She was a sensible 
girl he believed, and she would make a sen- 
sible wife. We can imagine, therefore, the 
squire's satisfaction. He scarcely remem- 
bered the long years which really lay between 
himself and the girl he contemplated marry- 
ing. He was the Squire of Sanda, he remem- 
bered, a man of wealth and position, and he 
was in his own estimation an excellent match 
for Hilda. Indeed, he thought that he was 
acting in a most noble and honourable manner. 

'' I have chosen her neither for wealth nor 
even for high birth," reflected the squire during 
lunch, looking at the sweet, blushing, embar- 
rassed face opposite to him. " She will, no 



186 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

doubt, appreciate the generosity with which 
I have acted." 

His complacent reflections and Isabel's 
lively conversation were, however, alike pre- 
sently interrupted by the arrival of visitors. 
These consisted of the Misses Featherstone 
(Isabel's school-companions) and their father, 
Mr. Antony Featherstone, of Featherstone. 
When their cards were brought in, Isabel 
asked if they might be ushered into the small 
dining-room where Isabel, her father, Hilda^ 
and their host were having lunch. To this 
proposal Sir George courteously agreed, and 
presently two fine, tall, ruddy-haired girls, 
made their appearance, followed by jovial, 
easy Antony Featherstone. 

The girls hurried up to Isabel and embraced 
and kissed her ardently, embraces and kisses 
which Isabel returned both scantily and 
coldly. Then Mr. Featherstone was presented 
to Isabel, who received his bold looks of 
admiration graciously, and condescended to 
smile at the free-spoken Yorkshireman s not 
over-refined remarks. 



* BENEATH THE WAVE. 187 

'* My girls have often told me about you," 
he said, looking at Isabel with his once hand- 
some eyes, ** but I'm accustomed to hear them 
exaggerate, so I didn't believe all they said," 

** And what did they tell you about me, 
Mr. Featherstone ?" asked Isabel, not without 
a shade of coquetry in her manner. 

" What your glass tells you every time you 
look in it,'' answered this good-for-nothing 
Antony Featherstone, and a frown crossed 
Sir George's brow both when he heard the 
question ^id answer. 

" Well, Sir George," went on Mr. Feather- 
stone, ttyrning to their host, " I hope you've 
come to settle among us, now that you've 
really got home. I did myself the honour of 
leaving a card at the West Lodge a day or 
two ago, but they said you were from home. 
And I must heartily congratulate you also. 
Sir George," continued the voluble Mr. 
Featherstone, " on the wonderftd escape you 
had a short time ago. Hannaway told me 
the particulars of your rather unpleasant dip 
in the sea." 



188 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

To this speech. Sir Greorge made no reply, 
only gravely bowing his head at its conclusion. 

"But he was a lucky fellow, wasn't he. 
Miss Trevor?" went on the unabashed Antony, 
"to be fished out at your hall door. By 
Jove ! I'd run the risk — shipwreck and all — ^if 
I'd such a chance." And Mr. Featherstone 
laughed loudly and pulled his brown whiskers, 
in which a shade oi grey was now just 
beginning to appear. 

He was a fine specimen this of a reckless, 
good-natured, worthless man. Sometimes, 
indeed, he took a fit of repentance in the 
morning, when he had a very bad headache ; 
but usually he forgot lost opportunities, lost 
honour, and reputation alike. He was hope- 
lessly in debt, so hopelessly that he never 
tried to get out of it. Instead of doing so, he 
spent the mornings in playing billiards and 
drinking brandy and soda water and his 
afternoons generally in doing nothing at alL 
When the day of reckoning comes to such 
men as this, they generally consider them- 
selves unfortunate. They say, "Look how 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 189 

80-and-so has got on ; how lucky he has been/' 
or some such envying words. They forget 
that " so-and-so " never wasted his mornings 
or his afternoons. When they were playing, 
" so-and-so " was at work ; and thus it comes 
to pass that when the player drifts into dis- 
honoured age, the worker sits down to rest 
in peace. 

Sir George, who knew from Hannaway all 
about Mr. Featherstone's embarrassments, 
felt especially disgusted when the jovial 
hospitable Antony began pressing him, Mr. 
Trevor and Miss Trevor, to go over and dine 
at Featherstone on the following Thursday. 

"I never dine out, Mr. Featherstone. I 
go into no society," said Sir George, coldly. 

" But it's a bad plan, my dear fallow," was 
the careless answer. " One gets into the sulks 
and mopes if one doesn't see a friend now and 
then, to cheer one up. Come, surely you will 
follow where such bright eyes lead you?" 
And Mr. Featherstone bowed low to Isabel, 
who laughed a light laugh at these words. 

" I, of course, do not wish to interfere 



190 B£N£ATH THE WAYS. 

with any engagement that Mr. or Miss 
Trevor may form," replied Sir Greorge, yet 
more coldly. 

"Oh dear, Isabel must come!" cried the 
Misses Featherstone, almost together. " We 
have lots of things to talk about, haven't 
we, Isabel ? But when are you coming to us 
for good ? When are you coming to stay 
at Featherstone ?" 

Isabel looked at Sir Greorge before she 
answered these questions, but Sir Greoige 
turned away his« head. He was, indeed, 
exceedingly annoyed that Isabel should smile 
on a man like Mr. Featherstone. Isabel, the 
practised coquette, now blushed and cast down 
her eyes. 

" Sir Greorge, I suppose, is already tired of 
us ?" she said, hesitatingly, " so perhaps — " 

" Nay," said Sir George, quickly, a sudden 
flush dyeing his usually pale face, as Isabel 
paused. "You know that is not so. Miss 
Trevor. As long as you will honour my dull 
house with your presence, need I say how 
heartily welcome you are ? And need I say 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 191 

also," he added, with a courteous bow to the 
Misses Featherstone, 'Hhat all your friends 
are equally welcome V 

" And yet you won't come to us T said 
Lucinda Featherstone (the second girl), with 
her good-natured smile. 

"I go nowhere," answered Sir George, 
" I am, as you know, a complete wanderer, 
and have lived too long out of civilized society 
to care now to go into it. But do not allow 
me," he went on, " to interfere in any way 
with your arrangements. I trust that you 
will come here as often as you wish during 
Miss Trevor's visit." 

" Well, we'll take you at your word," said 
Lucinda, smiling again, ^' and when you are 
tired of us you must turn us out." 

"Very well," said Sir George, almost 
smiling. Then presently the girls, at Isabel's 
proposal, retired into the smaU drawing-room^ 
the Featherstones going into raptures over 
the treasures it contained. 

'^ I remember poor mamma talking about 
the china," said Lucinda. " But for years 



192 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and years no one has ever seen it. Lady 
Hamilton, Sir George's mother, received no 
one after the first year or two that Sir Greorge 
remained abroad." 

" How strange that he should remain 
abroad so long ! " said Isabel, inquiringly, 
looking at Lucinda, who laughed and nodded 
her head. 

'^ People say there was a reason," answered 
Lucinda. " So mind, " she added the next 
minute, half in fun, and yet with a touch of 
warning in her voice, " don't fall in love 
with Sir George, for he is known not to be 
a marrying man." 

'* People always know such wonderful 
things," said Isabel, coldly. " Why, may I 
ask, Lucinda, is Sir George supposed not 
to be a marrying man ? " 

" Because people say he is married already," 
answered Lucinda, promptly. " Ever since 
I was grown up, and able to understand 
things, there has been a mystery about Sir 
George Hamilton. It was said, you know, 
that it broke his mother's heart, whatever it 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 193 

was. At all events, he never returned home 
during her lifetime." 

"It is a strange story/' said Isabel, 
thoughtfully. 

*'Yes, and he is a strange man. Hand- 
some, isn't he, though, and it's such a jolly 
place ! I know of no place to be compared 
to Massam." 

" It is a fine place," answered Isabel, and 
she went to the window to look out. Yes, 
it was a fine place she was thinking, and 
perhaps she was trying to be its mistress 
when Sir George had no power to offer to 
make her so. " He admires me, I am 
certain," went on Isabel's reflections. " Ah f 
well, we shall see." 

The visit of the Featherstones ended in 
Isabel, Mr. Trevor, and Hilda Marston 
promismg to dine at Featherstone on the 
following day. Sir George again declined 
to avail himself of Mr. Featherstone's hospi- 
tality, and the Misses Featherstone during 
their drive home declared that they were 
heartily glad that he had done so. 

VOL. I. o 



194 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

'^ We'll be much jollier without him," said 
Lucinda. 

"It makes one dull to look at him," de- 
clared Patty, the eldest daughter. 

" And with all his money I " said Mr. 
Featherstone. " Why, if I'd a third of it 
I'd be the jolliest dog alive 1 " 

" I gave Isabel Trevor a hint," said 
Lucinda, with a little nod. 

" You don't think she has any idea of 
him ? " asked Mr. Featherstone. 

"I don't think" answered Lucinda^ with 
another nod, *' I'm sure." 

" Pooh ! " said Mr. Featherstone, " she 
needn't, then. But," he added, " there's one 
thing I tell you, she's the handsomest woman 
I ever saw ! " 

" Indeed, papa !" said Patty. " Have you 
lost your heart, then ? " 

"As for heart, my dear, at my age," 
answered the reckless Antony, "it doesn't 
trouble me much. But take her altogether, 
figure and face, she's the finest woman I ever 
saw, and if old Trevor would come down 
handsomely I'd marry her to-morrow." 



BBNEATH THE WAYS. 195 

Both the girls laughed at this. In their 
way they were fond of this reckless good-for- 
nothing. They laughed when he came home 
" screwed," as they called it ; laughed at him, 
and with him, but they would have clung to 
him whatever had befallen him. They were 
not bad girls, in fact, but had been brought 
up in a bad atmosphere. " We can always 
be stable boys, whatever happens," Lucinda 
used to say ; and they were no doubt not 
unfitted for that capacity, for they knew as 
much about horses and stables as most men 
of their age. Men called them jolly, and 
kind women pitied them for their motherless 
and unprotected condition, and unkind women 
called them '*fast." The truth was, they 
were both '* fast " and ''jolly," but there was 
something left in them for kind women to 
love still. One of these good quaUties was 
their real affection for their reckless, good- 
looking father. 

" Dear old boy," Patty said, in answer to 
her father's proposal to marry Isabel (if Mr. 
Trevor would come down handsomely), 
" don't you think of her. Lu told you once 



196 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

before, didn't she, that Isabel Trevor was the 
vainest and handsomest girl she ever saw? 
Well, nothing truer was ever said. When 
she marries, or I'm much mistaken, shell 
marry for ambition." 

"Pooh! How can one girl tell what 
another will do?" said the once handsome 
Antony. He was a good-looking fellow still 
he was thinking at that moment — and why 
shouldn't he "go in " for an heiress as well 
as another ? 

Patty and Lu, you see, were wiser. They 
saw the " dear old man's " face was red and 
his hair grizzled, and that generally an odour 
of brandy lingered about him. If it had 
been for his good they would not have minded 
his marrying, but they were vexed to think 
of his making a fool of himself about Isabel 
Trevor, 

Yet they did everything in their power to 
entertain her handsomely on the following 
day. There were frequent unpleasantnesses 
with the village butcher at Featherstone 
Hall, and he did not call for orders as regu- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 197 

larly as such good customers as they seemed 
to be might have expected; but on this 
occasion Patty and Lu exerted themselves, 
and everything necessary appeared. It was 
astonishing with how Uttle ready money 
these girls got on. True, there was nearly 
always plenty of game in the larder, and 
ducks and chickens and pigs about the 
premises. Spiteful people said that Patty 
and Lu Featherstone reared chickens and 
ducks, and sold them in private to a carrier, 
who re-sold them to the poultry dealers, and 
that thus their dress and entertainments 
might be accounted for. If it were so, it 
was no disgrace to Patty and Lu, who could 
not help their reckless father having involved 
them in such difficulties as they found them- 
selves placed in. 

They did their best also in inviting guests 
to meet Isabel and her father. On such a 
short invitation this was very difficult, and, 
spite of all their exertions, the party dwindled 
down to the vicar of the parish and his wife, 
and his wife's half brother, Capt. Warrington. 



198 BENEATH THE WATE. 

The vicar of the parish, the Rev. James 
Woodford, is easily described. He was a 
meek little man, with weak hair, eyes, and 
voice. His opinions on all religious subjects 
were influenced by his bishop, and on aU 
domestic subjects by his wife. 

His wife was a tall, slender young woman, 
with light hair, and insignificant features, 
who evidently thought herself a beauty. She 
was the daughter of a colonel in the army, 
and had lived much in garrison towns, and 
now found the vicarage at Featherstone 
almost intolerably dull. Yet the vicarage 
was the prettiest old house imaginable, 
covered with ivy, and standing amid its old- 
fashioned fertile garden and grounds. Any 
sensible woman might have made herself 
happy there, with her husband and children ; 
but Mrs. Woodford was not sensible. She 
had married poor Mr. Woodford because she 
could get nobody else ; and it was, therefore, 
plainly her duty to have made the best of 
him and his surroundings. But she did not 
do this. She grumbled at the want of 



BENEATH THE WATB. 199 

society, and grumbled at the society when 
she was asked into it. Thus she was not 
popular, and happened, as usual, to be dis- 
engaged when the Featherstones' invitation 
to meet the Trevors and Hilda Marston 
arrived. 

Captain Warrington, her brother, deserves 
a paragraph to himself. He was only Mrs. 
Woodford's half-brother, and his mother had 
been very rich, and her mother very poor. 
This, of course, made a great social difference 
between them. In fact. Miss Selina War- 
rington married a country parson, and Hugh 
Warrington went into the Life Guards. He 
was a remarkably handsome man ; tall and 
straight, and wonderfully well-made, while 
his features were singularly regular, and his 
expression good. 

"But I have freckles,*' he once said 
pathetically, to a lady on her tellmg him that 
he ought to make a splendid photograph. 
These freckles, however, of which he com- 
plained were not visible on the clear, brown 
skin to any eyes but his own. But this 



200 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

speech may serve to describe what he was. 
He affected, in fact, to be languid and con- 
ceited, but a good judge of character saw 
through the affectation, marking the good- 
tempered satire that lurked in the handsome 
eyes and stole round the corners of the full 
handsome lips. He was between twenty- 
eight and thirty when Isabel Trevor first met 
him, and she was instantlv struck when he 
entered the Featherstones' drawing-room by 
his great personal attractions. 

The drawing-room and everything about 
Featherstone Hall was shabby. The poor 
girls had no money to buy new curtains and 
covers with. Their own dress was procured 
with difficulty, and so they could not afford to 
adorn the old house. Yet they were as 
hospitable and jolly as if their purses were as 
full as their hearts were light. They made 
the best of their situation, if Mrs. Woodford 
did not. They were charmed, too, to have 
got Captain Warrington to dine with them. 
Captain Warrington, indeed, was a rare 
visitor to his brother-in-law's vicarage, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 201 

had only run down for a couple of days at the 
earnest and even pathetic entreaties of his 
sister, to act as godfather to her little newly- 
born son. Indeed, such pathetic terms had 
Mrs. Woodford used when entreating her 
brother to come that the good-natured soldier 
felt he could not resist them ; and, armed with 
a silver goblet and various presents, he had 
arrived at the vicarage on the day previous 
to the one on which the Featherstones gave 
their entertainment. Thus the Guardsman 
was a lucky and unhoped-for addition to the 
party. Isabel Trevor, who had gone unwil- 
lingly, expecting to be bored, brightened up 
at the sight of him, and felt annoyed when 
her elderly red-faced host oflFered his arm to 
conduct her to the dining-room. Mr. Trevor 
was requested to take in Mrs. Woodford; 
Captain Warrington, Patty Featherstone ; 
and the poor little vicar had to oflFer an arm 
to both Lucinda Featherstone and Hilda 
Marston. 

'^ IVe got more than my share of good 
things," he said, nervously, as he endeavoured 



202 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

to hold his thin arms at the same level with 
the tall Lu on one side, and the middle- 
heighted Hilda on the other. 

*' The Church always does,** laughed jovial 
Ailtony Featherstone ; and the poor vicar 
gave a meek little giggle in reply. 

The Featherstones had the art of makinof 
things go oflF pleasantly. They were lively, 
talkative, and rather noisy, and they therefore 
overpowered Mrs. Woodford's complaints, 
made to Mr. Trevor in her thin high-pitched 
voice, of the want of society at Featherstone, 
and drew out Captain Warrington, who, in 
his affected drawl, told some good stories with 
a considerable amount of spirit and humour. 

In the meanwhile, Mr. Featherstone was 
making, or rather attempting to make, love 
to Isabel. Poor Mr. Featherstone ! The 
compliments he paid were very coai'se comph- 
ments, and the love he made was not suited 
to such a woman as Isabel. She might have 
been amused with him for a few minutes if 
she had had nothing else to do, but she was 
not amused at him leering at her with his 






BENEATH THE WATB. 203 

bloodshot eyes before Captain Hugh Warring- 
ton. She therefore snubbed him unmercifully. 
Captain Hugh saw this, and appreciated it, 
and when the gentlemen rejoined the ladies 
in the drawing-room he sank at once languidly 
down on the couch by Isabel's side. 

I may talk to you, may I not T he asked. 
Yes," replied Isabel, smiling, and opening 
her large fan with a jerk. 

" Thank you," said Captain Hugh. 

" Do you mean to stay long in this part of 
the country ?" asked Isabel. 

*' I came for two days," answered the hand- 
some Guardsman, "but if I find it agreeable 
I can remain longer." 

*' Perhaps you will find it agreeable," said 
Isabel, smiling again. 

Perhaps I shall," said Captain Warrington, 
and perhaps — as I understand we are neigh- 
bours — ^we may sometimes see each other 
during the next few days ? " 

In such common-place words did Isabel 
begin her acquaintance with Captain Hugh 
Warrington. But then it must be admitted 






204 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

that most of our acquaintances begin in 
common-place and ^ uninteresting language. 
But she admired him. He was young and 
handsome ; and instead of Sir George's cloudy 
brow and moody manner, he was Kvely, easily 
amused, and apparently as well pleased with 
Isabel's society as she was with his. 

Mr. Trevor fidgeted and frowned when 
he heard Isabel's low laugh ring again and 
again through the shabbily furnished draw- 
ing-room. 

Good heavens ! he thought, was this foolish 
girl going to upset all his calculations and 
throw away such a fine position as she now 
had the chance of by her vain folly ? He 
looked uneasily at Hilda, but Hilda's eyes 
were cast down, and gave no answering 
glance- Then he crossed the room and 
went to her side. 

** Who is that person," he said, " with 
whom Isabel appears to be carrying on such 
a very animated conversation ?" 

*' He is the vicar's brother-in-law, I believe,** 
answered Hilda. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 205 

''She is extremely injudicious/' said Mr. 
Trevor, in a tone that Hilda well understood. 
Mr. Trevor expected she would become his 
wife Hilda knew from that tone, and her 
face flushed and her heart beat quickly when 
she heard it. 

After this there was music, Lucinda Feather- 
stone playing one of the old pieces she had 
learnt at school, and which Isabel Trevor 
remembered so well, as she informed Captain 
Warrington in a half whisper. Then there 
was conversation again, more or less animated, 
and by-and-bye Mr. Trevor rose, and after 
looking at his watch, proposed to Isabel to 
order the carriage. 

*' Is it time to go?" replied Isabel, glancing 
up at her father. " The evening seems to have 
passed very quickly somehow." 

" It is a quarter to eleven," said the squire, 
stiffly. 

"Pray stay the quarter," said Captain 
Warrington, addressing the squire; ''the 
evening has seemed so short." 

" It is quite time to go," answered the 



206 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

squire, yet more stiffly; and Isabel gave a 
little shrug of her fine shoulders. 

"You see what a tyrant I have to deal 
with," she said, smiling at Captain Warring- 
ton. " How do you return to the vicarage ?" 
she went on. 

"As my worthy brother-in-law has not 
been amongst the lucky servants of the 
Church, I suppose we must walk," answered 
Captain Hugh Warrington, also shrugging 
his shoulders. 

" But is it a fine evening ? " said IsabeL 
** If it rains, or if Mrs. Woodford and you 
will accept a seat in the Massam carriage, 
there is plenty of room for us all." 

" Scarcely, I think, my dear Isabel," said 
Mr. Trevor, repressively. 

" See if it rains," said Isabel to Captain 
Warrington, ignoring her father's remark. 

" It rains," said Captain Hugh, solemnly, 
after he had inspected the weather through 
the window, and then returned to Isabel's 
side. Upon which Isabel went up to the 
parson's wife. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 207 

*' Mrs. Woodford," she said, addressing 
this lady, who was fanning herself disconso- 
lately, " your brother tells me it rains, so I 
trust that you will accept a seat in th6 
Massam carriage." 

" I'm sure if it will not inconvenience you 
I shall feel exceedingly obliged. I am so 
unaccustomed to this kind of thing. I feel 
it so much." And Mrs. Woodford sighed. 

*'But, my dear," said poor little Wood- 
ford, advancing towards his wife and rubbing 
his hands together, " there are so many of 
us " 

" You can walk," replied Mrs. Woodford ; 
and so it was finally arranged. The parson, 
with the Massam footman behind him, 
walked to the vicarage, which was only 
about a quarter of a mile distant from 
Featherstone Hall ; the squire and the three 
ladies went inside the carriage, and Captain 
Hugh Warrington sat beside the coachman. 
It was a miserable drive for Hilda Marston. 
She sat next Mr. Trevor, on the back seat 
of the carriage, and Mr. Trevor had the 



208 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

audacity to take hold of her hand ! The poor 
girl turned red and then pale. She dared not 
take away her hand — ^the poor little hand 
that was not by any means at home in the 
rich man s clasp. '^ Oh, what shall I do ? " 
Hilda was thinking, " what shall I do ? " She 
knew what she ought to do, but that meant 
giving up home and help for little Ned. So 
she sat still, while Mrs. Woodford kept com- 
plaining, in her thin, high-pitched voice, of 
the society which, as a country clergyman s 
wife, she was forced to endure, complaints 
of which, however, Isabel took but scant 
notice. 

At last the carriage stopped at the gate of 
the vicarage, and Captain Hugh Warrington 
descended from his seat by the coachman and 
opened the carriage door to assist his sister 
out of it. 

" Good-bye, Miss Trevor," he said, after 
he had performed this duty, holding out his 
hand to Isabel. 

"Good-bye," she answered, and that was 
all ; but something in the way they both 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 209 

spoke made Mr. Trevor more uneasy than 
he had been in the drawing-room. 

In the meanwhile, at Massam, Sir George 
was restlessly awaiting their arrival. The 
great house had felt doubly desolate to him 
during their absence. Isabel's presence there 
for the la«t few days had filled his life with a 
new excitement at least, and as he wandered 
up and down the library he was beginning 
to shape into form the vague feelings with 
which, in spite of himself, she had inspired him. 

" If she only loved me," he was thinking. 
He knew enough of women to know that 
when they love they will forgive much ; and 
Isabel had done her best during the last few 
days to make Sir George think that he was 
anything but indiflferent to her. 

" But perhaps it is Massam she thinks of,'* 
presently thought Sir George with some 
bitterness, — Massam, the splendid home, that 
now seemed no home to him. " But I have 
no right to marry," he reflected the next 
minute, "none, none — and yet she is so 
beautiful !" 

VOL. I. P 



210 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Yes, there it was. It was her beauty, and 
but her beauty, that bewitched him. Sir 
George felt distrust in her, even now. The 
subtle, God-given instinct, with which we 
recognize truth, warned him already; but 
another instinct carried him on. She fasci- 
nated him, in fact, just as she fascinated 
Philip Hayward, and almost every other 
man she had tried to win. 

When Sir George heard the sound of the 
carriage wheels announce the return of the 
party from Featherstone, he went down at 
once to the hall to receive his guests. For 
his amusement, Isabel by-and-bye gave a 
satirical account of their entertainment, to 
which Sir George listened with a smile. 

''And who is Captain Warrington?" he 
asked. 

"A very handsome young man," replied 
Isabel, smiling. 

''A forward person, I thought," said 
Mr. Trevor, so testily that Sir George 
remarked it. 

** Well, you shall judge for yourself," said 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 211 

Isabel^ still smiling and looking at Sir 
George, "for Captain Warrington is coming 
here to call upon me. He complained so 
piteously of the dulness of his life at his 
sister's house that I took compassion on him 
— so I hope you won't turn him out, Sir 
George ? " 

"Any fiiend of yours will always be wel- 
come here," said Sir George, gravely. But 
he was displeased. He scarcely admitted 
it to himself, but he was jealous already of 
Isabel Trevor. 



CHAPTER XII. 

HUGH WARRINGTON. 

But he felt yet more displeased, and more 
jealous the next day. In passmg the door of 
the billiard-room, about twelve o'clock, he 
heard the crack of the balls, and, on looking 
in to see who were the players, saw Isabel, 
cue in hand, with her fair face flushed, while 
leaning on the table by her side was a tall, 
handsome stranger. 

Isabel looked up as Sir Greorge opened the 
room door, and at once beckoned to her host 
to come in. • 

" Come and see me play," she said, '^I have 
got a splendid adversary. Captain Warrington 
Sir George Hamilton." 

As Isabel introduced them, the two men 
looked at each other and bowed. Sir George 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 213 

coldly and stiffly, Captain Warrington cour. 
teously and good-temperedly. Sir George, in 
fact, was jealous, but Captain TVarrington was 
not. Sir George avoided women in general, 
and Captain "Warrington sought them. Thus 
a man accustomed to associate with the belles 
of London society saw nothing so wonderful 
in Isabel's beauty, as the cold proud man did 
who shrank from aU communion with his 
equals. Captain Warrington admired Isabel, 
but that was all, while Sir George was gradu- 
aUy permitting himself to feel for her a deep 
and absorbing passion. 

" I am considered a good player," continued 
Isabel, *'why don't you play with me, some- 
times. Sir George ?" 

" You have got an efficient substitute 
apparently," answered Sir George. *' I will 
not spoil your game." And, with a sUght 
boW, he turned and left the room. 

'* So that is Sir George Hamilton T said 
Captain Warrington, after he had done so. 
" Not a bad looking fellow, eh ? There are 
queer stories about him, aren't there ? " 



214 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

** What stories T asked Isabel, quickly. 

" Don't know. About some lady or other, 
I believe. But it's your turn to play. Hadn't 
we better go on with the game ?" 

Isabel did go on with the gaihe, and she 
also went on coquetting with Captain Hugh 
Warrington. Was Sir George making a fool 
of her, she was thinking all the time ? There 
must be some truth in these reports that she 
was continually hearing about him. She was 
an excellent player at billiards in general, but 
she did not play well that morning. " I will 
not trouble about Sir George any more," she 
decided, and so when they met at lunch, she 
addressed her host with studied coldness. Sir 
George instantly noticed the change in her 
manner, and his restlessness and impatience 
under it soon grew painful. He thought that 
he had offended her in the billiard-room, and 
tried to conciliate her, but Isabel's manner 
continued carelessly indifferent. 

" I am going to ride over to Featherstone, 
this afternoon, papa," she said to Mr. Trevor 
during the meal, " the girls there have got up 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 215 

a riding party. We are going to see some 
abbey or other in the neighbourhood." 

" Are you going, Sir George T asked Mr. 
Trevor, with some discomfort in his tone, 
addressing their host. 

*'I have not even been asked to go," 
replied Sir George, with a forced snule. 

" Oh, it's only the Featherstone girls and 
myself and — Captain Warrington, I believe," 
said Isabel. 

Upon this Sir George bit his lips nervously, 
and his face flushed. 

Oh — " said Mr. Trevor, disapprovingly. 
May I ride Monaco ? " asked Isabel, 
turning to Sir George with something more 
like her old manner to him. 

'* Certainly," answered Sir George, rising 
and ringing the bell, and when a servant ap- 
peared he ordered Monaco (his favourite 
horse) to be saddled for Miss Trevor s use, 
and having done this, with a word of apology 
to Mr. Trevor, he left his guests to themselves. 

" My dear Isabel," said Mr. Trevor, in his 
severest tone, as the door closed behind their 



it 



216 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

host, ''do you think you are acting courteously 
to Sir George in making arrangements in 
which he is in no way consulted ? " 

Isabel shrugged her shoulders, as her father 
spoke. 

" I am getting a little weary of Sir George," 
she said, " and feel inclined for a little more 
lively conversation than he favoured me with." 

'' I — think you are very injudicious," said 
Mr. Trevor, turning extremely red, and 
stammering with indignation. 

" Why ? " asked Isabel, cooUy helping her- 
self to a bunch of grapes. 

*' I — I — repeat what I have said," replied 
the squire, rising indignantly from the table. 
" I repeat, — ^you are highly injudicious." 
And, having said this, Mr. Trevor quitted 
the room, leaving Isabel and Hilda Marston 
alone. 

" What a rage papa is in ! " said Isabel, 
with a light laugh, going on with her grapes. 

Hilda moved uncomfortably — in fact, she 
did not know what to say. 

*' Why should I never speak to any one but 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 217 

Sir George, I wonder ? " went on Isabel, still 
eating her grapes. ** Captain Warrington 
amuses me, and I like being amused." 

" Perhaps Mr. Trevor thinks — " hesitated 
Hilda. 

" That I am losing a chance of Massam/' 
laughed Isabel, rising also. "Ah, well, it 
can't be helped." And with, another laugh 
she turned away. 

She had, in fact, arranged this riding party, 
as she called it, with Captain Hugh War- 
rington alone. They had agreed in the 
morning, over the bilUard table, that Captain 
Hugh was to borrow a horse of Mr. Feather- 
stone, as his brother-in-law, Mr. Woodford, 
was not possessed of one, and that he was to 
meet Isabel on such and such a spot on the 
road between Featherstone and Massam. 

*' If the girls would like to come you can 
bring them," said Isabel, in her careless, 
coquettish way, to Captain Hugh, as she was 
making these arrangements. 

'* Needn't be very pressing about their 
coming, I suppose ? " said Captain Hugh, 



218 BINEATH THE WATl. 

looking at Isabel with his handsome eyes 
and smiling as he spoke. 

" I leave it in your hands/' replied Isabel ; 
and so Captain Hugh never said anything 
about this meeting to the girls at all. 

Thus, when Isabel mounted on Monaco, 
and with one of the Massam grooms behind 
her (splendidly mounted also), rode up to the 
appointed spot, though somewhat past the 
appointed hour, they found Captain Hugh 
gazing disconsolately at the partridges over 
the hedge of an adjoining field mounted on 
a "screw" (as Isabel would have called it) 
firom the Featherstone stables. 

" I am weary with waiting," he said, affect- 
edly, as Isabel, bright and beautiful, as usual, 
approached him. 

"Are you?" she laughed. "Well, you 
see, I have come at last." 

" I was just going away in despair," said 
Captain Hugh. " And after mounting this 
animal " (and he touched the poor horse which 
he was riding) " for your sake, I think it was 
cruel of you to keep me so long." 



ii 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 219 

" I^ must try to console you," answered 
Isabel, smiling. " So — ^that was all they 
could give you ? " she went on, critically 
inspecting Captain Hugh's horse. 

"Unforeseen and unexpected misfortunes 
had happened to thjB whole of the rest of Mr. 
Featherstone's stud," replied Captain Hugh, 
which he and I equally regretted." 

Perhaps they are in the hands of the 
bailiffi," said Isabel, with a laugh, who had 
heard something of the Featherstones' em- 
barrassments since she had been at Massanu 

"Perhaps," replied Captain Hugh, "and 
the bailiffs have been too knowing to lay 
hands on this one." And he once more 
slightly touched the poor animal on which 
he was mounted. 

But presently they forgot aU about their 
horses. Isabel intended to be charming, and 
she perfectly succeeded. You see ordinary 
and common-place words sometimes sound 
charming from lovely lips, and speeches that 
would be called harsh and cutting coming 
from the plain or old, do not seem so when 



220 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the voice is fresh or young. Isabel, tired 
of having made love to Sir George, with 
seemingly so little result, now amused her- 
self by making love to a younger and 
apparently a more susceptible man. But it 
is curious how these outer shells in which 
we are enveloped will sometimes deceive. 
Captain Hugh Warrington, with his large 
pensive grey eyes, which looked so full of 
feeling, was by no means an impulsive 
person. He, in fact, never dreamed of 
falling in love with Isabel Trevor as they 
rode in the misty October evening through 
the Yorkshire lanes. He admired her, but 
she was not the kind of woman he would 
have given his heart to, if he had had any 
thought of giving it away. 

Sir George Hamilton, on the contrary, 
with all his gloom and reticence, was really 
both impulsive and passionate. He had left 
the luncheon table feeling angry and jealous 
almost beyond control, because Isabel was 
going to ride with Captain Warrington — so 
angry and jealous that he did not even 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 221 

condescend to tell her his news. This news, 
that he had just received by telegram, was 
that Philip Hayward, the tutor, was then on 
his road to Massam. 

Thus, when Isabel, flushed and smiling, 
with Captain Warrington by her side, was 
returning in the gathering twilight towards 
the Park, a waggonette passed them — a 
waggonette in which two gentlemen were 
seated, and whom Isabel instantly recognized, 
even before they took off their hats in token 
of her presence. 

These were Hayward and Sir George, 
Sir George having gone to the station to 
meet the tutor, and with a start Hayward 
also recognized Isabel as they passed the 
riders. 

*' That is Miss Trevor, is it not?" he said 
a moment later, with quivering Ups. 

" Yes," answered Sir George, with sudden 
reserve and coldness, for before this meeting 
with Isabel he had been exerting himself to 
be kind and attentive to Hayward. 

"And the gentleman?" asked Hayward. 



222 BENEATH THE WATE. 

" I do not know," replied Sir Greorge. 
"Some oflficer, I think, that she met the 
other day at Featherstone." And as he 
spoke the tutor suppressed a restless sigh. 

Living down at Sanda, living in a lonely 
and secluded spot, and where the great social 
dijBFerences which divide men were ahnost 
forgotten, Philip Hayward, the tutor, had 
lately been nursing a sweet dream of love. 
There was something almost pathetic in ita 
simplicity. He had read and dreamed of 
men and women loving each other too well 
to part, in spite of all obstacles and all laws, 
and he had told himself that his love was as 
strong and great as any man or woman's who 
had ever lived. He had believed in Isabel's 
sweet glances, in her few sugared words, in 
the rosebud that she had given him in jest, 
but which he treasured now as most men 
treasure gold. It came upon him, therefore, 
as a kind of shock when he saw her riding 
with another man — a shock that made his 
lips quiver and his heart beat with a dull 
cold pain. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

FALSE ! 

Isabel was very gracious in her manner to 
the tutor when they met at dinner. She 
smiled upon him^ and all the world seemed 
very bright and beautiful to Philip Hayward 
in that hour. He scarcely noticed the gloomy 
looks of his patron, Sir Greorge. He did not 
notice, or at least did not care for, Mr. 
Trevor's marked coldness of manner, and he 
scarcely noticed that Hilda Marston's soft 
clear eyes wandered more than once involun- 
tarily to his face. The foolish girl was 
comparing him with Mr. Trevor. She was 
listening to his simple words, words which 
told of thought, of strong will, of deep and 
tender feelings — ^feelings which she knew 



224 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

were all wasted on the heartless, beautiful 
woman by his side. 

Then she looked at the Squire of Sanda, 
her lover. For his years, Mr. Trevor was a 
good-looking man. He was tall, thin, grey- 
haired, and gentlemanly. He had a high 
nose, a clear fresh skin, a narrow forehead, 
and small, meagre, pale-coloured eyes. 

Then, when he spoke. Hilda's ears were 
naturally sharpened just now, and she blushed 
and bit her lips when she heard his shallow 
pompous words. Not that any particular 
fault could have been alleged against his 
conversation, but it was like an endless echo. 
Nothing new or fresh ever flowed from Mr. 
Trevor's thin lips. And poor, clever Hilda I 
Was she to sit all her life listening to this 
correct but weary babble ? The poor girl 
sighed a heavy audible sigh when she 
thought of it. She was an honest girl, this 
— honest and pure, and she began at that 
moment to think that even little Ned's 
welfare could be purchased at too heavy a 
price. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 225 

"Your brother sent his best love to 
you, Miss Marston," said PhiUp Hayward 
to her presently, in his sweet, clear-toned 
voice. 

*^ Did he ? " she answered. " Dear little 
Ned ! " And she sighed again. 

This sigh reached Mr. Trevor's ears. 

" I trust that young Edward is fairly 
attentive to' his studies, Mr. Hayward ? " 
asked the squire. 

" Oh, yes," answered Hayward with a 
smile. "As attentive as we can expect a 
fine, bold, healthy lad to be." 

" Which means, I fear, that he loves play 
better than work," said the squire. 

" We all do that, Mr. Trevor," said Hay- 
ward, with another smile ; " only we grown- 
up people know that we must work or be 
nothing." 

"No doubt," replied the squire, "indus- 
trious habits are essential to success." 

There, you see, he talked as well as his 
neighbours ; and yet what a dull dreary 
man the Squire of Sanda was I 

VOL. I. Q 



226 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I hope you cane him well, Mr. Hay- 
ward ? " said Isabel, smiling. 

" I have never struck a boy, and I never 
will," replied Hay ward gravely. 

" Qf course not. I was only jesting," said 
Isabel. 

"Yes, I knew you were only jesting," 
said Hayward, looking at her with his 
thoughtful trustful eyes. 

What a sweet expression he had ! You 
read this young man s chivalrous simple 
nature in every line of his pleasant face. He 
was not handsome — not absolutely handsome, 
at least — and yet he was so goodlooking that 
he was generally called so. He was still very 
pale from the effects of his late accident, and 
his arm was in a sling ; but this first evening 
at Massam he looked so bright, happy, and 
confident. He was so proud, poor fellow; 
proud because he believed he was not quite 
indifferent to Isabel. 

Sir George, indeed, grew pale and bit his 
lip when he saw the smiles Isabel lavished 
on the tutor. He was a madman, he told 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 227 

himself, utterly mad, to be jealous of every 
look that this woman bestowed on another 
man, and yet he could not help himself. 
IsaM, who wa« tired of him, as she tired of 
most things, never noticed his restless ways 
and agitated manner. She was amusing 
herself with Hayward, and gratified at the 
unmistakable devotion that his looks dis- 
played. 

'^And how did you leave the * Spectre,' 
and the lovely Amelia Shad well ? " asked 
Isabel, in her careless way, during a pause 
in the conversation. 

"Both very well," answered Hayward, 
good-naturedly. 

"How terribly tired you must have been 
of Miss Amelia's beef-tea !" went on Isabel, 
smiling. 

" It was very good of her to make 
it," said Hayward. "I never can repay 
either Mrs. or Miss Irvine for all their 
kindness." 

" You could repay Miss Irvine, you know," 
half- whispered Isabel. 



228 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"You should not say that," answered 
Hayward, with sudden gravity. 

" Nay, if you look so serious, I shall think 
you mean to do so," went on Isabel, jestingly. 
But to this Hayward made no reply. He 
only looked at Isabel with some reproach in 
his grey eyes, who dropped hers as he did 
so with affected penitence, 

" You must forgive me," she said in a low 
voice ; " you know I am always jesting." 

" You must not jest about my kind friends 
any more, then," answered Hayward. He 
was indeed too chivalrous to allow it, and yet 
many a man would have smiled and even 
jested over the remembrance of his parting 
with Miss Amelia Irvine. 

This young woman having made up her 
mind that she was in love with the tutor, was 
not one of those who allow "concealment 
like a worm in the bud to feed on her damask 
cheek." When Hayward announced his 
intention of proceeding to Massam, AmeKa, 
indeed, grew desperate, and, bursting into 
tears, began sobbing bitterly. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 229 

" My dear Miss Amelia," said Hayward, 
approaching her, though it must be admitted 
that he was very much afraid to do so. 

"Don't go," cried Amelia. "Hayward, 
don't !" And she threw herself on a seat, 
stiffening her form rigidly, and making 
contortions as if she were about to choke. 

" But I must," said Hayward, nervously. 
"You see, my dear Miss Amelia, Sir George 
Hamilton expects me, and it would never do 
for me to offend him." 

"Will you return?" said Amelia, still 
apparently choking. 

"Of bourse, I will return," answered 
Hayward, kindly; and, indeed, it was only 
after making the most solemn promises to 
do so that he was allowed to go away. 

*' She is only a child," Hayward told 
himself in good-natured excuse for her 
conduct, though in reality Miss Amelia was 
at least twenty — " a kind-hearted child, to 
whom I must always be indebted for her 
goodness to me." And in this kindly spirit 
the tutor endeavoured to think of Amelia 



230 BENEATH THE WATE. 

Shadwell. Thus he would not even allow 
Isabel to laugh at her ; ancT Hilda Marston 
liked him all the better for the way in which 
he spoke of this foolish girl. 

" Well, what do you think of our hero T 
Isabel said to Hilda when they returned to 
the small drawing-room together. 

" I think what I always thought," said 
Hilda, quietly, " even before he was a hero." 

^' And what do you think ?" asked Isabel, 
surveying herself in one of the long glasses. 

*' That he is a gentleman," replied Hilda. 

" A gentleman !" repeated Isabel, arranging 
a curl, '* that does not express much." 

" To me it does," answered Hilda, quickly, 
''for I know few gentlemen." 

Upon this Isabel turned round and looked 
at her companion, whose face had suddenly 
flushed, and whose eyes were sparkling. 

" Indeed !" said Isabel. " Do you mean 
that you know few who possess the quaHties 
that you think a gentleman should possess ?" 

" I know few," said Hilda, with a little 
quiver in her voice, '' on whose Ups you never 



BKNEATH THE WAVE. 231 

hear a mean or ignoble word, few who 
regard the humblest woman with respect 
and honour, and in whose simple assertion 
I could entirely trust." 

" So that is your idea of a gentleman !" 
said Isabel, again turning her attention to 
the glass. " And you think that Mr. Hay- 
ward is all this, do you T 

" I have always seen him act as a gentle- 
man," answered Hilda ; and after saying this 
she left the room, Isabel looking after her 
as she did so with an amused smile. 

"So, she has lost her heart," she was 
thinking. " Poor Hilda Marston, she may 
spare herself the trouble." And she smiled 
again, for she knew it was not Hilda that 
Hayward cared for. 

But the very fact that she thought 
another woman did like him added piquancy 
to Isabel's wish to entirely captivate the 
tutor. Sometimes she had read unspoken 
disapproval of her ways in Hilda's grey 
eyes, and as Isabel deemed such disapproval 
impertinence, she was not displeased to have 



232 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

it in her power to revenge herself by tacitly 
wounding her humble companion. Never, 
therefore, did Isabel make herself more 
charming than she did this evening to the 
penniless tutor. And what could he think ? 
He heard her speak in tones of polite in- 
difference to the owner of the broad acres of 
Massam. He met her sweet smiling glances, 
listened to her winning, flattering tongue, 
and the old infatuation grew stronger, the 
old passionate admiration more powerful, in 
the young man's heart. 

During the whole of the next day it was 
the same thing. Isabel had agreed to ride 
again in the afternoon with her military 
admirer, Captain Warrington, but in the 
morning she received a note of apology from 
him : he had been recalled to town to be 
present at a court-martial ; but he trusted to 
meet Miss Trevor again, and so on. Thus 
Isabel was thrown back for amusement on 
the unfortunate tutor. She drove him over 
during the morning in the late Lady 
Hamilton's pony chaise, to see the Feather- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 233 

stones, and told them before him of his 
bravery in rescuing Sir George Hamilton. 

" Why did you tell them that ?" he asked, 
as they were returning from this visit. 

"Why should I not?" answered Isabel. 
" Why should people not know how brave 
you are ?" 

" 1 fear bravery had very little to do with 
it," said Hayward, casting down his eyes. 

" What had to do with it, then ?" asked 
Isabel, in her bright, fearless way. 

" I went because you bade me go," an- 
swered Hayward, with a passionate ring in his 
voice that almost touched Isabel's cold heart. 

" No, no, that is folly," she murmured, and 
she jerked the reins that she was holding 
nervously as she spoke. 

*^ Is it all folly, Isabel ?" asked Hayward. 

" Of course it is," she answered in her old 
coquettish manner. " But I am glad, sir, 
you went at my bidding," she added. " Re- 
member, you have always to do my bidding." 

"Yes, I will always do it," answered 
Hayward ; and he stooped down and kissed 



232 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

it in her power to revenge herself by tacitly 
wounding her humble companion. Never, 
therefore, did Isabel make herself more 
charming than she did this evening to the 
penniless tutor. And what could he think ? 
He heard her speak in tones of polite in- 
difference to the owner of the broad acres of 
Massam. He met her sweet smiling glances, 
listened to her winning, flattering tongue, 
and the old infatuation grew stronger, the 
old passionate admiration more powerful, in 
the young man's heart. 

During the whole of the next day it was 
the same thing. Isabel had agreed to ride 
again in the afternoon with her military 
admirer, Captain Warrington, bat in the 
morning she received a note of apology from 
him : he had been recalled to town to be 
present at a court-martial ; but he trusted to 
meet Miss Trevor again, and so on. Thus 
Isabel was thrown back for amusement on 
the unfortunate tutor. She drove him over 
during the morning in the late Lady 
Hamilton's pony chaise, to see the Feather- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 233 

stones, and told them before him of his 
bravery in rescuing Sir George Hamilton. 

" Why did you tell them that ?" he asked, 
as they were returning from this visit. 

"Why should I not?" answered Isabel. 
" Why should people not know how brave 
you are ?" 

" I fear bravery had very little to do with 
it," said Hayward, casting down his eyes. 

" What had to do with it, then ?" asked 
Isabel, in her bright, fearless way. 

" I went because you bade me go," an- 
swered Hayward, with a passionate ring in his 
voice that almost touched Isabel's cold heart. 

" No, no, that is folly," she murmured, and 
she jerked the reins that she was holding 
nervously as she spoke. 

"Is it all folly, Isabel ?" asked Hayward. 

" Of course it is," she answered in her old 
coquettish manner. " But I am glad, sir, 
you went at my bidding," she added. " Re- 
member, you have always to do my bidding." 

"Yes, I will always do it," answered 
Hayward ; and he stooped down and kissed 



232 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

it in her power to revenge herself by tacitly- 
wounding her humble companion. Never, 
therefore, did Isabel make herself more 
charming than she did this evening to the 
penniless tutor. And what could he think ? 
He heard her speak in tones of polite in- 
difference to the owner of the broad acres of 
Massam. He met her sweet smiling glances, 
listened to her winning, flattering tongue, 
and the old infatuation grew stronger, the 
old passionate admiration more powerful, in 
the young man's heart. 

During the whole of the next day it was 
the same thing. Isabel had agreed to ride 
again in the afternoon with her military 
admirer, Captain Warrington, but in the 
morning she received a note of apology from 
him : he had been recalled to town to be 
present at a court-martial ; but he trusted to 
meet Miss Trevor again, and so on. Thus 
Isabel was thrown back for amusement on 
the unfortunate tutor. She drove him over 
during the morning in the late Lady 
Hamilton's pony chaise, to see the Feather- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 233 

Stones, and told them before him of his 
bravery in rescuing Sir George Hamilton. 

" Why did you tell them that ?" he asked, 
as they were returning from this visit. 

"Why should I not?" answered Isabel. 
" Why should people not know how brave 
you are ?" 

" I fear bravery had very little to do with 
it," said Hayward, casting down his eyes. 

" What had to do with it, then ?" asked 
Isabel, in her bright, fearless way. 

" I went because you bade me go," an- 
swered Hayward, with a passionate ring in his 
voice that almost touched Isabel's cold heart. 

*' No, no, that is folly," she murmured, and 
she jerked the reins that she was holding 
nervously as she spoke. 

"Is it all folly, Isabel ?" asked Hayward. 

" Of course it is," she answered in her old 
coquettish manner. " But I am glad, sir, 
you went at my bidding," she added, " Re- 
member, you have always to do my bidding." 

"Yes, I will always do it," answered 
Hayward ; and he stooped down and kissed 



232 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

it in her power to revenge herself by tacitly 
wounding her humble companion. Never, 
therefore, did Isabel make herself more 
charming than she did this evening to the 
penniless tutor. And what could he think ? 
He heard her speak in tones of poUte in- 
difference to the owner of the broad acres of 
Massam. He met her sweet smiling glances, 
listened to her winning, flattering tongue, 
and the old infatuation grew stronger, the 
old passionate admiration more powerful, in 
the young man's heart. 

During the whole of the next day it was 
the same thing. Isabel had agreed to ride 
again in the afternoon with her military 
admirer. Captain Warrington, but in the 
morning she received a note of apology from 
him : he had been recalled to town to be 
present at a court-martial ; but he trusted to 
meet Miss Trevor again, and so on. Thus 
Isabel was thrown back for amusement on 
the unfortunate tutor. She drove him over 
during the morning in the late Lady 
Hamilton's pony chaise, to see the Feather- 






BENEATH THE WAVE. 233 

stones^ and told them before him of his 
bravery in rescuing Sir George Hamilton. 

"Why did you tell them that?" he asked, 
as they were returning from this visit. 

Why should I not?" answered Isabel 

Why should people not know how brave 
you are ?" 

" I fear bravery had very little to do with 
it," said Hayward, casting down his eyes. 

" What had to do with it, then ?" asked 
Isabel, in her bright, fearless way. 

" I went because you bade me go," an- 
swered Hayward, with a passionate ring in his 
voice that almost touched Isabel's cold heart. 

" No, no, that is folly," she murmured, and 
she jerked the reins that she was holding 
nervously as she spoke. 

"Is it aU folly, Isabel ?" asked Hayward. 

" Of course it V she answered in Z old 
coquettish manner. " But I am glad, sir, 
you went at my bidding," she added. " Re- 
member, you have always to do my bidding." 

"Yes, I will always do it," answered 
Hayward ; and he stooped down and kissed 



234 BENEATH THE WAVE. 



the small gauntleted hand that held the 
reins. 

Thus you see Isabel was playing with fire. 
She was arousing feelings for her amusement 
that she could not quench. She had done 
this with Sir George Hamilton, but his 
gloom and taciturnity had disgusted her; 
and now she was doing it again with a noble 
honest-hearted man; 

Sir George watiched all the day with pas- 
sionate anger and jealousy her intimacy with 
the tutor. He began to believe that they 
must have been lovers long ago ; to torment 
himself, in fact, with a hundred fancies. But 
Mr. Hannaway, the lawyer, dined at Massam 
the second evening that Hay ward was there, 
and the acute man of the world had a word 
to say to his patron on the subject. 

After dinner Isabel was playing billiards 
with Hayward, and Sir George and Mr. 
Hannaway were watching the game, though 
at a considerable distance from the players. 
Sir George's face was pale, and his brows 
were bent. Mr. Haimaway, having just 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 235 

enjoyed a good dinner, wss rosy and smUing, 
and in the humour to do a good turn to 
everyone around him. 

" That seems an intelligent young fellow," 
he said to Sir Greorge, alluding to Hay ward. 

" Yes," answered Sir George ; " do you 
think him good-looking ? " 

Mr. Hannaway's quick ears detected the 
anxiety expressed in the last sentence, and 
he answered aflFably, 

" Yes —ah yes, tolerably so. It is good- 
natured of Miss Trevor to be so kind to him." 

"Perhaps she likes him," answered Sir 
George, with a forced smile. 

" Or perhaps she likes somebody else, and 
is too proud to show it, eh, Sir George !" 
suggested the acute man of law. 

Sir George made no answer to this, but 
the idea was balm and pleasantness to 
his soul. What if this were* true, he 
thought ? He remembered at this moment 
how she had asked him to be her friend in 
the conservatory ; how she had seemed to 
care for him then, and how he had repelled 



236 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

her kindness. Perhaps it was but her maiden 
pride all this indiflTerence, he began to argae 
— watching with eager eyes the beautifal 
smihng face, and supple graceful form. 

By chance Isabel's eyes fell on his eager, 
anxious, set white face. The expression there 
of deep and concentrated emotion imme- 
diately attracted her attention, and she 
smiled, calling Sir George with a gesture 
to her side. 

" Shall we have a game now. Sir George f 
she said. "I have beaten Mr. Hayward. 
You have never once played with me." 

" No," he answered, in an agitated voice ; 
" but do not let us play. Miss Trevor," he 
went on, in a low earnest tone, " I wish to 
say a few words to you — I must say a few 
words to you !" 

Mr. Hannaway by this time had advanced 
towards Hayward, and had engaged him in 
conversation. Isabel glanced for a moment 
at the tutor, and then said — 

" What is it you wish to say, Sir George ? 
I am — always ready, you know, to listen." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 237 

" Not here," he answered hurriedly ; " I 
cannot say what I would say to you here. 
You once said you were fond of flowers," 
he went on ; " will you let me gather some 
now r 

'*Yes/' said Isabel, slowly. She saw 
something momentous was coming ; and Mr. 
Hannaway, whose face was turned towards 
Sir George and herself, perhaps saw this also. 

" Let us try our luck, Mr. Hayward," he 
said, taking up a cue. "I am no great 
jplayer, but I feel in the humour to try my 
luck to-night." 

Hayward glanced at Isabel, but he only 
saw her talking apparently quietly to their 
host. He had monopolized her nearly all 
day, he remembered, and so he smiled 
pleasantly at Mr. Hannaway. 

" I am a bad player also," he said, " but 
I shall be glad to play." 

As the two men commenced their game, 
Sir George offered his arm in silence to 
Isabel. She took it gravely. She was specu- 
lating on what he was going to say ; was 



238 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

interested in the sudden change which had 
come over him. " Is he going to tell me the 
secret, I wonder T thought Isabel — " the 
secret that people are always hinting at to 
me, about his life T 

She could feel his arm tremble as he led 
her down the dimly-lighted corridors of the 
house. He went straight on until they came 
to the left wing, and then entered the 
morning-room, closing the door behind them. 
This room opened into the small conserva- 
tory, where Isabel had gathered the flowers 
on the first evening that she had spent at 
Massam, and where she had told Sir George 
she had wished to be his friend. 

Sir George was thinking of that interview 
now, of that and of other things. He placed 
a seat for Isabel, and then with sudden 
vehemence took her hand. 

" Isabel," he said, his voice trembHng and 
broken with emotion, "do you remember 
what you once said to me in this room T 

" What was it, Sir George ? " asked Isabel 

" You — a young and lovely girl,'' went on 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 239 

Sir Greorge, with increasing agitation, " told 
me — ^a man old before my time — ^that you 
wished to be my friend. Do you still wish 
this, Isabel ? " he continued ; " or are you 
changed ? " 

" I thought that — ^you were changed, Sir 
Greorge," answered Isabel. 

" No, no. But perhaps I am changed," he 
added, and his voice sank almost to a whis- 
per ; " for now I know your power." 

Isabel's heart gave a great, triumphant 
throb as these words reached her ears. 

" You mean ? " she said, and she looked at 
him with her bright, inquiring eyes. 

" I mean," answered Sir Greorge, " that 
when you came here — ^when, in fact, I first 
knew you, I was, I felt, too old — ^not in age, 
perhaps, exactly — but, Isabel, I have had 
cares and grief, such cares and grief that I 
cannot tell you ! " And Sir George covered 
his face, apparently overcome with emotion. 

^' You mean," said Isabel, speaking as no 
loving woman could have spoken, " that there 
is an obstacle between us ? " 



240 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

'* Yes," answered Sir George, in brief and 
bitter tones. 

" That cannot be overcome ? " went on 
Isabel. 

" No, no ; I do not say that ! *' cried Sir 
George, passionately — " I do not say that 
cannot be overcome." And he began to pace 
the room with hasty strides. "Isabel," he 
went on, coming back to her after a few 
moments, and once more taking her hand, 
" what I mean is this. There was an obstacle; 
there is an obstacle between us ; but — ^if you 
love me — " 

" Yes ? " said Isabel, still inquiringly. 

" It need not part us. If you love me — 
remember, if you love me, Isabel — I ask you 
to be my wife ? " 

Isabel was silent for a moment, and she 
then said — 

" And you can legally do this ? " 

If Sir George had not been so impulsive 
and passionate, and so deeply in love himself, 
he might have heard her true answer to this 
inquiry if she loved him in these cold words. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 241 

As it was, his real feelings blinded him 
to her want of any. He was, in fact, 
too much excited to notice her calculating 
coldness. 

" Yes, yes," he answered, '^ I can do this. 
But remember, Isabel," he went on, almost 
wamingly, "that there is still a great gulf 
between us. You are young, bright, and 
happy — I am a gloomy, care-worn man." 

"And these stories that they tell about 
you ? " asked Isabel. 

" What stories ? " replied Sir George, 
shai'ply, 

" They say," said Isabel, with the fearless- 
ness and defiance of her nature, "that you 
are connected with some woman." 

" The person to whom you allude," answered 
Sir George, with quivering Ups, as Isabel 
waited to hear his answer, " is dead." 

For a moment or two there was silence in 
the room after this announcement, Sir George 
beginning once more to pace up and down 
with restless steps and knitted brow. Then 
Isabel made up her mind. She followed Sir 

VOL. I. R 



242 BENEATH THE WAVE, 

George's uneven steps. She laid her white 
supple hand upon his arm. 

" You asked me/' she said, ^' If — ^if — I were 
changed to you. I tried to change. They 
told me even that you had a wife." 

"It is a lie!" fiercely interrupted Sir 
George, grasping her hand. 

"But — ^but I did not know," went on 
Isabel. " I was afraid to show my feelings 
— I tried to hide them." 

"Then," went on Sir George, with pas- 
sionate eagerness, " I am not indifferent 
to you ? " 

" No," whispered Isabel, and she hid her 
face upon his arm. 

So she won. With a murmured cry of joy 
Sir George now caught her to his breast, 
holding her there, and whispering words of 
love. Then, suddenly, as if some fresh 
thought had struck him, he put her away; 
pushing her apart from him for a moment, 
and looking straight into her lovely face, 

" You will never make me jealous, Isabel, 
will you ? " he said. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 243 

" FooKsh one !" she answered, smiling, 
" why do you ask ? You, whom I have 
chosen before all other men !" 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 

By Isabel's wish this strange engagement 
was kept a secret for the next few days 
between Sir George and herself She had 
various reasons for this, one of which was a 
sort of feeling of compassion, a faint tender- 
ness even (if such a thing as tenderness 
existed in her cold heart) for PhiUp Hay ward. 
Yes, she had a sort of liking for the tutor, 
for the honest, grey, manly eyes that followed 
her movements with such simple chivalrous 
devotion. Isabel liked to know her power, 
and this young man had risked his life to 
please her. She caught herself wishing 
sometimes that Hay ward was the master of 
Massam, and not the gloomy man whose 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 245 

successful love suit had by no means cleared 
away the cloud from his brow. 

But she did not intend to draw back. She 
loved the world and the world's good things 
too well to lose the prize that she had won. 
She meant to marry Sir George Hamilton, 
but the company of her future husband was 
often not a little wearisome to her. 

Thus things went on for a day or two, 
Isabel, in the meantime, playing with Hay- 
ward's heart as if she were actually studying 
how, when he learnt the truth, to cost him 
the most pain. Yet she did not mean this. 
It was the innate coquetry of her nature that 
induced her to trifle with this young man's 
feelings, and not from any wish to hurt him. 
She liked him too well for that. But she 
could not resist the pleasure of seeing him 
devoted to her ; of knowing that these two 
men were jealous of her slightest word. 

But Sir George was too proud to show this 
now, though he hinted to her with some 
gravity of manner that it was unwise of her 
to spend so much of her time with Hayward 



246 BENEATH THE WAYE. 

'^ What do you mean ? " asked Isabel, 
smiling. 

Then Sir George ventured to explain. The 
young man might naturally suppose that she 
was greatly interested in him, he told Isabel 

'' Well, I am interested in him," she 
answered. 

'* But is it kind to show this ? " urged Sir 
George. ^* Hayward is young, perhaps he 

might even think " And Sir George 

paused. 

'^ That I am in love with him, perhaps ?" 
said Isabel, with a mocking laugh. "No, 
he is not presumptuous enough for that." 

This conversation left a painful impression 
on Sir George's mind. There was a heartless 
carelessness in Isabel's words that found no 
echo in his heart. Yet he was jealous of her 
still, though he did not appear so ; and under 
the influence of this feeling, one evening 
after dinner, he asked Hayward to stroll out 
on the terrace with him. Then, when they 
were there, as they smoked their cigars, he 
inquired of the tutor if he] [had come yet to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 247 

any decision regarding his future profession. 
Hayward waa surprised for a moment at 
the question. Sir George had invited him to 
pay a long visit to Massam, and he had been 
there little more than a week when Sir 
George asked it. But before he could reply, 
the Baronet added — 

*' The reason I ask you is, that Hannaway 
told me yesterday that a living, that I have 
in my gift, will probably soon be vacant. 
Do you think that you would like to go 
mto the Church ? " 

Hayward coloured for a moment as Sir 
George said this, and then answered — 

" It is my mother's dearest wish that I 
should do so, but I cannot reconcile myself 
to the idea." 

'' Why ? " asked Sir George. 

" Sir George," said Hayward, with an 
earnest ring in his voice, "should a man 
undertake what he cannot conscientiously 
fulfil ? I cannot satisfy my own mind about 
what I should then be called upon to teach 
and preach to others." 



248 BENEATH THE WATE. 

" About hereafter ? " said Sir George, 
slowly. 

'^ Yes — ^to me so many great questions are 
unsolved, that I am utterly imfit for the 
office of a teacher." 

Sir George gave a heavy sigh. 

" And you have a mother ? '' he said. 

"Yes," answered Hay ward, and a faint 
flush came into his face, and a soft light into 
his eyes, " a dear little mother. You don't 
know, perhaps," he added, smiling, " that 1 
am her only child, and she is a widow ? " 

Sir George sighed again. 

" I too was an only child," he said, " and 
my mother was a widow. But we will not 
talk of it," he went on, abruptly. " Do you 
know, Hayward, what I think the greatest 
curse on earth ?" he added. 

*' No — among the various evils that fledi 
is heir to, which do you consider the greatest 
then, Sir George ? " 

" Memory," answered Sir George, darkly 
and briefly. 

" Memory ! " repeated Hayward, as if sur- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 249 

prised, "I do not think that, Sir George. 
What would life be if we had only the 
present? The past and future from their 
very dimness always seem to me to have 
peculiar charms. About the past I try to 
remember only what was pleasant, and for 
the future I have always hope." 

'^ It is well — ^you have a happy disposition, 
then T said Sir George. 

"Perhaps I have," answered Hayward, 
and he smiled. Both these men were 
thinking at that moment about the same 
woman. Hayward with chivalrous pas- 
sionate devotion; Sir George with vague 
passionate disgust and disappointment. He 
had won her, but she did not satisfy him. 
He felt there was something wanting even 
then, in the bright beauty that had en- 
slaved him. But he was enslaved still. 
Enslaved, though his heart was unquiet 
within him ; though he told himself that 
there were many things unlovable about 
Isabel Trevor. 

Presently he began talking to Hayward 



250 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

again about his future prospects, urging him 
to accept such a lavish allowance from his 
hands for the present that Hayward declined 
it, with modest pride. 

" You count my life so cheap then. Hay- 
ward," answered Sir George, half bitterly, 
half sadly, "that you will not allow me 
in any way to recompense you for saving 
it?" 

•'Do not say that, Sir George," said 
Hayward, in his pleasant voice. " I shall 
gratefully accept help from you, but only] 
sufficient to supply my moderate wants. 
And even this," he added, ''you must allow 
me at some future time to repay." 

" It is false pride of you to say this, 
Hayward," said Sir George, almost harshly. 

"Is it ? " answered Hayward, gently. 
" Then forgive me. Sir George. But one 
recompence for my slight service I shall 
ask," he continued, in his winning manner, 
"which is to be allowed to call myself 
your friend." 

" That is a poor recompence, indeed," said 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 251 

Sir George, moodily, turning away his head. 
" God knows my friendship is of little 
worth ! " 

As Sir George said this they were passing 
near some of the windows of the house, and 
as they did so there came a little tapping on 
one of the panes. Both turned their heads 
at the sound, and then they saw Isabel 
standing inside the lighted room beyond, and 
endeavouring to unfasten one of the windows 
that opened upon the terrace. Sir George 
at once advanced to her assistance and undid 
the fastening. 

" You must come in," she said, addressing 
him smilingly, *^ a visitor has arrived — Mr. 
Hannaway." 

" Oh ! " said Sir George, indifferently. 

^^ But he wishes particularly to see you," 
went on Isabel. " Oh, here he is to answer 
for himself" And as she spoke the tall 
form and good-looking face of the lawyer 
appeared behind Isabel. 

'* Can I have a word with you. Sir 
George ? " he said. " I have a letter here," 



252 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

he added^ '^ that I think it is important that 
you should see/' 

^'I will come with you,** answered Sir 
George. '* Excuse me ! " And he looked 
at Isabel. 

** Certainly," she answered, as Sir Greorge 
followed Mr. Hannaway. " That is a man," 
she went on, speaking to Hayward and giving 
a little nod of her head to indicate the 
lawyer, " who has a remarkably high opinion 
of Mr. Hannaway." 

'* Well, why should he not T answered 
Hayward, with a little laugh. ^' He is good- 
looking, agreeable, and rich." 

*' Good-looking, agreeable, and rich," repKed 
Isabel, '^ and yet to me he has no charm." 

Hayward's heart beat fast at these words, 
and at the subtle insinuation they conveyed. 

*' And what qualities have charms for you, 
then — Isabel T he faltered. 

Isabel cast down her eyes. " Why do you 
ask T she said. " Everyone knows when 
they charm." 

In her waistband was a faded rose, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 253 

as these words fell from her lips, Hajrward 
saw it. 

" Give me that rose, Isabel !" he said, 
" I am jealous of a flower." 

'^ What folly !'' she answered, still without 
looking up; but she unfastened the rose. 
"It is dead," she said, holding it towards him. 

" It has died where I too would die," 
murmured Hayward. 

" Poor rose !" said Isabel. " Poor Hay- 
ward !" she thought, and one of those momen- 
tary pangs of regret crossed her heart, as 
she glanced coyly up once more into the 
young man's earnest face. 

'^We had better go inside," she said. 
" We must not forget that propriety in the 
shape of papa and Miss Marston are 
watching us." 

Indeed, at this moment the squire himself 
appeared advancing towards the window 
near where Isabel and Hajrward were stand- 
ing. 

" My dear Isabel," he said, '' are you not 
afraid of the chill night air? You are 



254 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

causing a most serious draught in the room.** 
And the squire shrugged his shoulders. 

" My dear papa," answered Isabel, shrug- 
ging hers also, " I hope it won't give you 
rheumatism ! " 

" Shall I shut the window, Mr. Trevor T 
asked Hayward. 

''Thank you," replied Mr. Trevor, stiiHy; 
and while Hayward was thus employed. Sir 
George Hamilton came again into the 
room, and walked straight up to Isabel. 

'' Isabel," he said, in a low tone, *' will you 
excuse me if I run up to town for one day T 

" It depends on whom you run with," 
replied Isabel, looking smilingly at her lover. 

" I wish to go with Hannaway," answered 
Sir George, who looked pale and disturbed. 
" A letter, an important letter, that he has 
just shown me, calls me away. But I shall 
return to-morrow night." 

"Very well," said Isabel, still smiling. 

''And — will you look after everyone for 
me ?" asked Sir George, hesitatingly, as if 
he were thinking of a something else. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 255 

" Yes, I will make an excellent cMtelaine, 
or hostess, or whatever is the right thing," 
answered Isabel, still lightly. 

"And — Isabel — will you come out with 
me for one moment V then asked Sir George, 
this time fixing his eyes on her fa^. 

"Yes," said Isabel, after an instant's 
hesitation, and she followed him from the 
room to the corridor outside. 

When they were there. Sir George, after 
glancing round to see that they were alone, 
put his arms round her. 

" Give me one kiss, Isabel," he said, 
" before we say good-bye !" 

Isabel, too, looked round, and then lifted 
her rosy lips to his. 

"Good-bye," she said, but Sir George 
would not let her go. He held her there to 
his breast, pale and agitated. Isabel, on 
the contrary, was quite unmoved. She was 
a little uncomfortable, perhaps, in Sir 
George's embrace, but that was alL Through 
the half-closed door, however, of the small 
drawing-room that they had just quitted, 



256 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

she could see the side of the cabinet contaiii- 
ing the unset gems that she had often coveted. 
This reminded her of what Sir Greorge was 
— the master of all this wealth ; and so again 
she held her lips up for his kiss. 

*' Good-bye," she said once more, and Sir 
George kissed her, pressed her closer in his 
arms, and then with a murmured word or two 
bade her farewell. After he was gone, Isabel 
returned to the drawing-room, and advanced, 
smilingly, to where her father, Hilda Marston, 
and Philip Hayward were standing. 

" Our host has left me in charge of you 
all," she said, " so I hope you mean to make 
yourselves very agreeable." 

The next day was Sunday — a wet Sunday. 
In the morning the whole party drove to 
the parish church, and heard Mr. Woodford's 
very mild and inoffensive discourse. Mrs. 
Woodford, with her insignificant features and 
faded complexion, was yawning during its 
delivery on one side of the pulpit, and the 
beadle on the other. The Featherstone girls 
were there, but they never yawned. Antony 



BENEATH THE WATE. 259 

Feaiiierstone, their father, however, slejpt 
through the whole of the parson's discontde. 
The Squire of Sanda rigidly kept himself 
awake, as ''an example," but his pale eye^ 
winked and bHnked unceasiiagly with theit 
abortive efforts not to close, 

"We were the only two really awake, I 
beUeve, Mi*. Hayward," said Isabel, feii^h- 
ingly, as they drove home. 

" My dear Isabel, do not make such foolish 
aasertions," said the squire. " I wiU not deh;^ 
that Mr. Woodford's sermon was not striking, 
but I never thought of going to sleep." 

"You thought you would not," answered 
Isabel, malicioufidy. 

" I was not asleep," said Hilda Marston. 

" Were you not ? " replied Isabel, as if it 
were a matter of no consequence, and then 
the subject dropped. 

In the afternoon the weather grew worse. 
The blinding rain came beating against the 
windows of the house, and the wind swept 
moamng through the trees. They lingered 
as long as they could over the luncheon table, 

VOL. I. s 



258 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and then first Hilda retired. After she was 
gone the squire went to the reading-room of 
the library, took up Saturday's Times, and 
sank back in an easy chair before a blazing 
fire. Isabel and Hayward were thus left to 
amuse themselves as best they could. Isabel 
having looked out of the window at the 
storm, and regretted that she supposed they 
could not play billiards (at which sugges- 
tion, Hayward smilingly shook his head), 
she proposed that they should go over the 
house and look at the pictures. 

So they went together up the broad stair- 
case, where many valuable ones were hung. 
The great masters, whose hands have made 
the canvas live, were nearly all represented at 
Massam. Catalogue in hand, Isabel went up 
and down the long gallery, pointing out this 
gem or that, to the tutor. She had been 
here with Sir George, and knew where the 
Rembrandt hung, and where the Poussin. 
But she lingered longest before the smiling 
beauties that Sir Peter Lely's art had pour- 
trayed. Amongst these were some of the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 259 

ancestresses of Hamilton's — fair women who 
had played their part in the comedies and 
tragedies of their time, and then had vanished 
from the scene. Isabel kept speculating 
about them to the tutor, and wondering if 
a certain diamond necklace, clasped round 
the plump throat of one fair dame, was yet 
among the treasures of the house. 

*^ I always envy jewels," said Isabel. 
"My good lady," she went on mockingly, 
addressing the pictured lady smiling on 
the wall, " will you give me your necklace ? " 

Hayward made no reply. He was looking 
at Isabel. At the wonderful tints of her 
lovely face, at the glimmer of her golden hair, 
shining even in the dark gallery, with the 
darkening clouds overhead. She was fairer 
than all these dead women hanging around, 
who had been painted, and passed away. 
" Too fair," Hayward thought, almost with 
a groan at that moment. 

" Why are you so silent ? " said Isabel, 
turning round suddenly, and looking at him. 
Then, carried away by the impetuou sfeel- 



260 BENIBATH THS WAYS. 

ings surging in his heaxt^ Haywaxd caoght 
both her white and supple hands in his. 

"I was thinking," he said; 'thinking of 
Isabel — of you '' 

Isabel was startled for an instant by the 
passionate ring in his voice, by the light in 
his eyes, and by his unexpected touch. Then 
she recovered herself. 

" A very stupid occupation, Mr. Hay ward," 
she said, trying to pull her hands from his. 

" Oh ! do not jest any more, Isabel," went 
on Hayward. " I must speak— I cannot be 

But " said Isabel, embarrassed. 

You have known it long ; I know you 
have known it long," continued Hayward, 
interrupting her, "but, lately I have dared 
to think, Isabel " 

" What ?" she asked, and she looked into 
his face. 

"That you care for me — ^that I am not 
indifferent to you," faltered Hayward. Anf 
then, with honest, manly pride ringing in hia 
voice and shining in his face, he went on, 






BENSATH THE WATB. 261 

ft 

'•You know wliat I am ! A poor inan, who 
has yet to win his way. But. IsabeL I will 
™>IV he continued, m hi= fend tenderness. 

'• Whisper one word, say one word, tell me 
what shall be my reward?* 

As Hayward paused, Isabel's eyes fell 
from his face. 

" I — I — do like you/* she said, hesitatingly; 
"but you must know " 

"What?" It was now Hayward's turn 
to ask, as he looked quickly up. 

" That in our relative positions," went on 
Isabel, with some discomfort in her voice, 
"that is — ^if you mean anything serious." 

" I am not jesting," said Hayward, with 
sudden sternness. 

"I mean^ if you think anything about 
marrying," contmued Isabel. 

"Of what else could I think?" said 
Hayward. " Isabel — surely you have not 
been playing with me?" 

"It is impossible," said Isabel, "you 
know it is impossible." 

"Then, why," asked Hayward, indig- 



262 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

nantly, " have you trifled with me ? If 
maniaofe is impossible between us, why 
have you seemed as if you wished me to 
love you ? " 

" Perhaps I have acted wrongly," said 
Isabel. " But Mr. Hayward — I wish to be 
your friend." And she held out her haod 
to him. 

'^ Friend ! " echoed Hayward, bitterly. 
*' No, Miss Trevor, that can never be ! I — 
I — ^love you — ^love you as a man loves the 
woman he asks to be his wife — nothing else 
will satisfy me now ! " 

*^ Then I repeat," said Isabel, *' it is im- 
possible." 

" And you have been fooling me all this 
time ? " went on Hayward, yet more bitterly. 
" What was your motive, Miss Trevor ? 
What honour or glory could you gain by 
deceiving a man so contemptible in your 
eyes as I am ? " 

" You are not contemptible," said Isabel 
*'I — I — as I said before, I like you, and 
wish to be your friend. Everything else is 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 263 

impossible between us — ^because — I may as 
well tell you the truth — I am engaged to 
Sir George Hamilton." 

Even Isabel's cold heart felt ashamed and 
stricken when she saw the grey look of 
despair that passed over the tutor s face at 
this announcement. But he uttered no 
word. He only pressed his teeth tightly 
over his under Hp, and his face turned 
white, and then a cold, sickly grey. 

^'I— I — am sorry if this pains you," 
faltered Isabel, "but it is better that you 
should know the truth." 

"Yes, much better," said Hayward. 
" And now I will go away." And he turned 
to leave her. 

"Nay, stay, let us talk it over," said 
Isabel, But he never looked back. He 
passed straight and silently down the long 
gallery ; and straight and silently, and with 
a heart bursting with intolerable pain, he 
went out into the rain-soaked, storm-beaten 
park. 



CHAPTER XT. 



Thx moBfe bikfaor of Immaii paaaioDs w&te 
ragiHg in Hajwsrfa breast 9&&r he left 
JnbeL Diaafq^oiated love and jealoiisjr had 
poosesBion of him, and desp«ir was not fisor 
awaj. What ? she had been fooling him aU 
the while t It was a {ooYs paradise that he 
had been living in, and now sadd^ j he was 
turned oat in the cold. 

He remembered it aU — all the looks and 
smiles with which she had wiled <m him, and 
now — O God ! O Grod ! was it aU &Ise — all 
adream? 

He never fdt the rain that was beating 
on his face as he went through the damp 
park, nor heard the storm that was raging 



BENEATH IHE WAYX. 265 

around him. His soul seemed all dark. What 
was the use of his liying on ? He had 
nothing to live for. His ambition^ his love, 
his pride were all crushed in one blow; and 
when he reached the first great clump of 
trees, with a groan he flung himself down, 
burying his face in the wet dank grass. 

But in this hour of despau- he was not left 
alone. There had been an unintentional 
listener to the words that had passed 
between him and Isabel in the picture 
gallery, a listener whose cheeks had burnt 
and whose heart had throbbed as she 
heard them. This was Hilda Marston. She 
had been sitting reading in one of the deep- 
oortained ^Z, oTZgallery when I^abTl 
and Hayward entered it. She imagmed that 
they would just pass through it, and then 
go, and she therefore made no sign of her 
presence. Suddenly, however, when they 
were close to her, Isabel had stopped before 
the picture of the lady with the diamond 
necklace ; and to Hilda's shame, pain, and 
consternation, she overheard the momentous 



266 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

words which were then spoken. Before she 
could speak to let them know she was there 
it was too late. Hayward, carried away by 
his impetuous feeUngs, had declared his 
love, and Hilda, trembling with agitation, 
had heard the answer. 

Then she saw Hayward pass down the 
gallery with his grey set face. Its expres- 
sion haunted and startled her. *' She has 
broken his heart," Hilda thought. " Oh ! 
false woman, you have broken his heart ! " 

The false woman who had done this was 
standing looking very uncomfortable at this 
moment. She Uked Hayward. His genuine 
honest devotion, his good looks, and his 
winning manners, were all pleasant to her. 
But to marry him, it was folly, madness. 
" The young man's head must be turned," 
decided Isabel. 

But she knew quite well who had turned 
it. Deep down in her heart was an uneasy 
consciousness. She knew that Hayward had 
loved her long and well, and she knew that 
lately she had flattered him into the belief 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 267 

that she had returned that love. She had 
beUeved him to be, and wished him to 
continue, her devoted slave, and in return 
she meant to give him her honeyed smiles, 
her bright, careless, and unprofitable words. 
But now, when he had rejected these, she 
respected him more. She wished to win 
him back. " He will come back," she 
thought ; and thinking this, she walked 
down the picture gallery, and Hilda Mar- 
ston was alone. 

As the sound of Isabel's footsteps died 
away, Hilda glanced out on the rain-soaked, 
deserted park. Some instinct told her that 
in his misery Hayward would rush from the 
house. She looked out, and there he was 
hurrying on in the bUnding rain — reckless, 
despairing. " My God ! " thought Hilda, 
starting to her feet, ^^ he may do something 
— some rash act that can never be recalled." 
She ran down the gallery and to her own 
room in the next few moments. Hastily 
seizing a hat and cloak when she got there, 
five minutes after Hayward had crossed the 



268 BENEATH THE WATB. 

parky she also was croBsing it. She went 
TTith fear and dread in her heart Oh I if 
she were too late ! The girl ran panth^ 
breathless on, pursued by this thought 
Then suddenly, as she passed the first great 
dump of trees that she came to, a groan 
struck her ears. Hilda gave a shiver and 
went on — ^went on until she came to wh^re 
the prostrate form of Hayward lay in the 
wet grass, his face hidden in it, and his 
hands dashed over his head in his gi^t 
misery. 

"Mr. Hayward!" said Hilda, with a 
half sob, and she went up to him. 

Then Hayward lifted his face and looked 
up, and when he saw her (with sudden shame 
that she should see him thus) he rose to 
his feet. 

" Forgive me for following you !" panted 
HUda; "but — ^but Mr. Hayward, I was 
in the picture-gallery just now. I — over- 
heard what passed between you and Isabel 
Trevor." 

Hayward's face flushed for a moment at 



BENIATH THE WAYS. 26d 

this, and then the siokly grey pallor stole 
over it again. 

'' I heard all the wicked words she 
said," went on Hilda, passionately. **l 
know what she is — she is cmel! Don't 
grieve about her, Mr. Hayward— beautifiil 
» d« is, Ae is not worTTtrue m^i 
r^fret." 

Hayward said nothing. He stood the» 
feicing Hilda, and Hilda, aa she looked at 
him, felt still afraid. 

"You have a mother, have you not?'* 
she said, quickly, "Will you go home 
to your mother?" 

"No — oh, no," answered Hayward, and 
he shivered. 

Something in the expression of his fSeuie 
as he said this yet further alarmed Hilda. 
It was so dark. There was despair in it, 
and so the girl timidly put out her hand 
and laid it on his arm. 

"Come into the house with me," she 
said. "You are so wet and cold. Gome, 
Mr. Hayward." 



•* I csuonotr gno, ' said HawanL "^ I am 

g nincr awav. I will never come bacfc."^ 
Ban Hilrfa kept urging hrm An all erents 

ahe would not Leave hrm^ siie decidei 

•^Stavan lease.'' die said, •^rmtil Sir Georce 

retrama, Rtanember iie is not to blame for 

tiiiss.' 

'* ^o/' said Havwari sharphr. "■ I oannot 

see him. Jfo, I will w.*' 

»^ 

•^ Not to-dav. surelv r adfced Hilda. 

•' Xes^ now,'' answered Havwari *•" There 
will be a train soon. I dare say,'' he cc^itinaedy 
loofririg at his watoh. '^Crood-bve. !Mjss 
Marston — I th^nk voa for voor kindness/' 

Bat HtIHa woold not leave him. 

^Yoa cannot 2:0 as von are.'' she said, 
with womanly reasoning. "Yoa have no 
outer-coat on, and you cannot go without 
your luggage.'' 

He had forgotten all about these things. 
But now he saw that if he left I^fassam 
without them he would expose himself to 
Hilda's grave suspicions. For a moment 
he hesitated, and then he said — 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 271 

"Will you promise me one thing, Miss 

Marston ? Will you tell no one that I am 
leaving Massam V 

" I will tell no one," answered Hilda, and 
after she had given this promise, Hayward 
walked with her to the house. When he 
got there he went straight up to his own 
room for a few minutes, and there wrote a 
short letter to Sir George. Hilda was 
waiting in the corridor that led to his room, 
looking pale and anxious, when he came 
out of it. In his hand he held the letter 
to Sir George, and when he saw^BiMa he 
came towards her. ^^^^ 

" Will you take charge of this V he said. 

"Yes," replied Hilda, glancing at the 
address. 

" I thank you — and now good-bye," went 
on Hayward, and he held out his hand 
to Hilda. 

" No," she answered. " I am going with 
you. I will walk with you to the station.''' 

" Impossible ! You cannot go on a day 
like this." 



272 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Yes, I am going," said Hilda, decisively, 
" or shall I order one of the servants to 
drive you?" 

But Hayward shrank from the delay. 
No, he would go now; and so Hilda followed 
him out. 

They went through the wet park together 
and through the drifting rain. She was 
afraid in fact to leave him ; afraid to Uvxk 
him alone with the blank despair that was 
dragging at his heart. He asked her once 
or twice to return, but Hilda would not go. 

*' No," she said gently ; *' let me stay with 
you. The rain will do me no harm." 

She tried to say some commonplace words 
of consolation, but they seemed to die on her 
lips. In sight of great grief or death, it is 
almost impossible to speak. Words seem so 
cold when uttered in these terrible hours. 
At last they neared the station, and Hilda 
bade Hayward good-bye. Her hand trembled 
in his, and her sweet-toned voice faltered as 
she did so. The tutor was touched even 
amid his own pain by these signs of emotion. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 273 

Hilda's wistful eyes said so much when she 
raised them to his face ; they told him better 
than words could how truly she felt for him. 

"I pray God to bless you," said Hilda; 
and then she wrung his hand and turned 
away to hide the tears that dimmed her 
sight. 

"You have been very good to me/' said 
Hayward, and that was all. He, too, could 
frame no speech. His lips were quivering 
and his face quite pale. Hilda thought of 
that face as she hurried back to Massam 
through the blinding rain, and its expression 
helped her to come to a momentous decision 
in her own life. 

She had, indeed, no sooner reached the 
park than she went, wet as she was, in search 
of Mr. Trevor. She found him half asleep 
in the easy chair in the readingrroom of the 
library, where he had retired after lunch, 
with the Times still lying on his knee. But 
her approach awoke him, and he looked up 
in surprise. 

" My dear Miss Marston," he said, rising, 

VOL. I. T 



274 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

as Hilda drew near to him, "you surely have 
not been out in this terrible weather ? " 

" Yes," answered Hilda, trembling. "And 
— I have come to tell you, Mr. Trevor," 
she went on, speaking quickly and in much 
agitation, " that I cannot marry you." 

The squire looked at her with the most 
profound astonishment. 

'* I do not understand you," he said. " I 
thoiight that it was agreed between us that 
a fortnight was to elapse before this subject 
was to be again mentioned ? " 

" Yes, I know," answered Hilda, " but I 
think now, something has happened now 
which has made me think that it is better to 
tell you at once — ^for, though I am very 
grateful to you, I have quite made up my 
mind." 

" Do you mean to reject my proposal ? " 
asked the squire, with immense dignity. 

" I cannot accept it," said Hilda, trembling 
all over. " I do not feel to you as a woman 
should feel to the man she is about to many. 
It would be wronging you if I were to accept 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 275 

you," went on the poor girl, " and I feel I 
cannot do that." 

Mr. Trevor felt extremely indignant. 
Here was a girl without position, without a 
penny, daring to say such things to himl 
Mr. Trevor thought at that moment of the 
benefits with which he had loaded Hilda 
and her family, but he did not think of the 
girl's honesty in telUng him the truth. 

" I am utterly surprised at you," he said. 
'*Your conduct in coming here in this 
unseemly manner, on a Sunday, too, has 
absolutely astonished me. Your dress, 
also, is completely drenched. May I ask 
if you have been out in the rain ? " 

**Yes," answered HUda, and then she 
suddenly burst into tears. 

"Pray don't, Miss Marston," said Mr. 
Trevor, rising in great wrath, "there is not 
the slightest occasion for you to agitate your- 
self. I understand you reject my proposal 1 
Ah — ^well, of course, under such circum* 
stances you can no longer continue an in- 
mate of my house." 



276 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Very well," sobbed poor Hilda; and 
then she left him, going wet, weary, and 
very sad to her own room. 

When they assembled again before dinner 
time, Mr. Trevor at once noticed Hay- 
ward's absence. 

** Is Mr. Hayward dining out ? " he 
inquired. 

No one at first made any answer. Isabel 
coloured faintly but did not speak, and Hilda 
also was silent. Mr. Trevor glanced from 
the one to the other, and then said, 

" Does any one know where he is ? " 

Then Hilda spoke. 

" He has left Massam," she said. 

" Left Massam ? " repeated Isabel. 

'* Yes," said Hilda, so consciously that the 
squire instantly concluded that Hayward was 
engaged to Hilda, and that this was the 
reason why she had rejected his own pro- 
posal. He felt more indignant, therefore, 
than ever. He felt so angry he could not 
eat his dinner, and Hilda could not eat hers, 
she felt so sad. She was thinking what dis- 




BENEATH THE WAYE. 277 

appointment all this would cause in the 
broken home circle. And little Ned — ^poor 
little Ned ! Hilda s eyes nearly filled with 
tears again whenever she thought of her 
little brother. Would Mr. Trevor now 
cast him out homeless upon the world? 
Hilda kept thinking what she could do 
to make money, all through that melan- 
choly dinner hour. But no sooner was it 
over than Isabel attacked her about Hay- 
ward. 

''What do you know about Mr. Hay ward 
leaving here ? " she asked, the moment the 
two were alone. " Have you seen him ? 
Did you see him go?" 

''Yes, I saw him go," answered Hilda. 

" When, and how ? " then asked Isabel. 

" About four o'clock, I think," said Hilda. 
" He walked to the station." 

" What ! in aU the rain ?" 

"Yes, m aU the rain," said Hilda, with 
some bitterness. 

Isabel caught the tone of her voice, and 
looked at her searchingly. 



278 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Do you know his motive for going ?" 
she asked sharply. 

Hilda's lips trembled, but she was silent. 

"I repeat," asked Isabel, imperiously, 
" Do you know his motive ?" 

"He did not tell me," said Hilda slowly; 
and with this answer Isabel was forced to 
be content. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

DELILAH. 

When Sir George Hamilton returned to 
Massam on the following day, and was in- 
formed that Hay ward was gone, he seemed 
greatly disturbed. 

Isabel told him in her usual careless 
fashion before her father and Hilda Marston. 

'* What do you think has happened," she 
said, " while you have been away ? " 

''Of course I cannot tell," answered Sir 
George. 

"Your protdgd, Mr. Hay ward, has dis- 
appeared," said Isabel, with a slight blush. 
" I suppose," she added, " he must have 
been suddenly summoned home. He left 
after lunch yesterday." 



280 BENEATH THE WAVE. 



cc 



And did he not say what was the 
matter ? Did he not say where he was 
going ? " inquired Sir George. 

'^ No, it seems not," replied Isabel. ** I 
did not see him before he left, but Miss 
Marston did, I believe. Did he say where 
he was going ?" she continued, turning to 
Hilda. 

^^No," said Hilda, her face flushing as 
she spoke. " But — Sir George — " she 
added, addressing their host with some 
embarrassment, '^ he left a letter for you." 

" With you ? " asked Sir George. 

"Yes," answered Hilda. "I met him when 
he was leaving — and — ^he gave me a letter." 

Hilda hesitated and blushed, when she 
said this, and both Mr. Trevor and Isabel 
Trevor looked at her as she did so. 

'' You have kept this mysterious letter to 
yourself, then, it seems?" said Isabel, with 
an angry glitter in her eyes, after Hilda 
had finished speaking. 

" He gave it to me for Sir George," said 
Hilda, nervously. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 281 

^'Oh, I have no wish to interfere with 
Sir George's letters," said Isabel, throwing 
back her head. 

" I wiU bring it," said Hilda; and she 
accordingly left the room for the purpose, 
Sir George looking after her as she did so. 

" It is very strange, is it not ? " he said, 
turning to Isabel as Hilda disappeared. 

'' How can I tell ? " she answered, with a 
sUght shrug of her fine shoulders. 

But she felt nervous. What might not 
Hay ward have written ? she was thinking. 
But she stood her ground. She watched 
Sir George as he opened Hayward's letter 
after Hilda had returned and placed it in his 
hands — watched his usually pale face flush 
as he eagerly read and re-read the few 
written lines it contained. Then he looked 
at her searchingly, and then, when for a 
moment Isabel's eyes fell before his, he put 
the letter silently into his pocket. 

''Does he give any explanation for his 
absence?" inquired Mr. Trevor, pompously. 

" Yes," answered Sir George, briefly ; but 



282 BENEATH THE WATE. 

Isabel knew when she heard that word, that 
she would hear more at some future time of 
Hayward's letter. 

She did so, the first moment that she was 
alone with Sir George. 

" Isabel," he asked, approaching his be- 
trothed with a grave and disturbed expres- 
sion on his face, "can you guess, do you 
know the contents of young Hayward's 
letter ? " 

*' No, I do not," answered Isabel, in a 
slightly defiant tone. 

"Yet he refers me to you," continued 
Sir George, "to explain the reason why 
he left. But you had better read his 
letter." And he put ^Hayward's letter in 
her hand. 

She took it and slowly read the few 
blotted and ill- written words. They were 
as follows : — 

" Deab Sir George, — I leave Massam 
to-day. Miss Trevor will probably explain 
to you why I am . going and tell you of 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 283 

my presumption. I have nothing further 
to say, but remain, — Yours truly, 

'*P. Haywabd." 

"Well?" said Sir George, looking at 
Isabel, inquiringly, after she had finished 
reading the letter, and was commencing 
returning it to its envelope. 

" Well ! " she answered in her cool, proud 
way, " it was as he says — ^he forgot himself, 
that is all." 

" What do you mean ? " asked Sir George, 
quickly. 

** He is a foolish young man," went on 
Isabel. " Because I said a few civil words 
to him — because, in fact, I naturally regarded 
him with interest, as he had saved your life, 

he presumed to imagine " And Isabel 

paused. 

"That you regarded him with a deeper 
feeling ? " said Sir George. " I warned you 
of this before, Isabel ! " And Sir George 
began hastily pacing the room, which was 
a sign with him of quick emotion. 



284 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

As he did so, Isabel kept watching him 
with her bright and changeful eyes. 

*'He is a foolish young man," she said 
a^n presently. " And you are also to 
blame for this." 

** How ? what do you mean ? " asked Sir 
George, suddenly stopping. 

*'You — made me angry," said Isabel, 
casting down her eyes. '* You know what I 
mean — ^you seemed at one time to avoid me 
— and if I misled the young man — I was 
foolish, too — for I did it in pique." 

" Is this so ? " said Sir George, going up 
to her and clasping both her hands and 
fixing his eyes upon her face. "Oh, Isabel, 
Isabel I " 

Yet he only half beUeved in her. Did 
Samson, I wonder, quite believe in Delilah's 
soft cozening words, or did he feel only 
powerless to resist them ? Sir George, at all 
events, was powerless in the white supple 
hands that could turn him to her will. He 
stood there looking at her, and then in 
passionate words of love began pleading that 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 285 

their marriage might not be delayed. For 
a moment Hayward was forgotten. He 
only saw Isabel — Isabel, who cared nothing 
for him except as the owner of the broad 
lands which lay around them. 

It was all settled before the day was over. 
Mr. Trevor was told, and gave his pleased 
consent. Hilda Marston was told, and the 
very butler knew, as he waited at table that 
day, that he was attending his future lady. 

Isabel was a woman who loved all this. 
Adulation and praise were pleasant to her 
ears and flattery was sweet. She loved 
also the jewels which Sir George presented 
her, and when he asked leave to clasp round 
her slender white throat the sparkling 
sapphire that she had coveted the first night 
she was at Massam, and which Sir George 
had had set for her, she told herself, as she 
thanked him with her rosy lips, that she 
must learn in time to care for the giver of 
all these fine gifts. 

She felt very triumphant, too, when she 
told the " Featherstone girls " of her engage- 



286 BEHBATH THE WA7H. 

ment and aaked them to be her brideamaub. 
Patty and La could scarcely coataui th^ 
aatoniahmeat, indeed, within the bonnds of 
good breeding when they heard the news^ 

*'So," said Lu, thonghtfblly, "all those 
stories about him were Kes, I suppose ? " 

'* Lies are not uncommon things, my good 
Lu," answered Isabel, smiling. " For my 
part, I never quite believe what I hear.** 



CHAPTER XVII. 



hatward's motheb* 



But we must return to Hayward, return 
to when Hilda Marston left him at the 
railway station, and when, with a crushing 
sense of pain, shame, and humiliaiion, he 
shortly afterwards started on his journey 
to town. 

He had taken a ticket for London, but 
almost without reason. His mother lived 
there, but he was not going to her. He 
only felt that there he would be unknown, 
for th^^ was a dark purpose in his heart 
and overwhelming bitterness in his souL 
Isabel Trevor, in &ct, had turned his life 
to galL What had been play to her was 
death to hinu He had loved her so much. 



288 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

making an idol of her, with as blind an 
idolatry as the poor heathen gives to his 
imaged god. 

He sat in his carriage in the train, with 
his grey set face turned to the window, and 
his eyes apparently fixed intently on the 
drifting rain. There were other people in 
the carriage, but he scarcely saw them ; 
pleasant words exchanged, but he never 
heard them. He only felt that his life was 
blank for evermore, and that he had thrown 
all upon one cast and failed. 

Presently, at one of the stations, some of 
the passengers got out of the carriage. He 
saw them go, and that was all. One man, 
however, was left in it — a man who had 
been looking attentively at Hayward once 
or twice during the last half-hour. 

He was a clergyman. A tall, powerfully- 
made young man, with smooth fair hair, 
and a fair skin tanned. He had large, rather 
prominent, steady grey eyes, and with these 
he looked at Hayward again and again, as 
they travelled onward. He was, in fact^ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 289 

studying Hayward's face. Then, in a 
pleasant, clear-toned voice, when they were 
alone, he addressed him. 

*^ Pardon me for speaking to you," he 
said ; " are you not Mrs, Hayward's son V 

•^ Yes," answered Hayward, turning his 
grey set face a moment from the window, 
"I am Philip Hayward." 

"I thought I could not be mistaken," 
said the young clergyman, with a smile, 
** I know your photograph so well, and your 
mother has so often talked to me of her 
Philip, that I was sure I was right. I am 
glad," he added, his face re-assuming its 
usual sweet, serious expression, "that she 
has written to you to go to her. I suppose 
she has told you the truth at last?" 

" What truth ?" asked Hayward, sharply. 
For a moment the young clergyman hesi- 
tated. Then he said with much gentleness, 
" I suppose you know she is very ill ?" 

" 111 !" repeated Hayward. *^ I have heard 
nothing of any illness. I know nothing of 
her being ill," 

VOL. I u 



290 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

At this a disturbed expression crossed 
the clergyman's &ce. 

<^ I am indeed sorry to be the bearer of 
ill news, then,* he said, "but it is right 
that jou should know. Mrs. Hayward is, 
I fear, in a rapid consumption.'' 

** It is impossible T exclaimed Hayward. 
'^ When last I saw her she was not strong, 
but she never is. May I ask you how you 
know of her being ill ? And when did you 
last see her?' 

'' I saw her about a week ago," answered 
the clergyman, '^ and I saw the doctor who 
attends her about the same time — and I 
grieve to tell you his opinion was veiy 
unfavourable. It was indeed after I had 
seen the doctor that I urged her so much to 
write to you. But you were on a visit, she 
told me — ^a visit to Sir George Hamilton — 
a visit from which she seemed to expect so 
much, and she could not bear to damp your 
enjoyment." 

At this Hayward could scarcely suppress 
the groan that rose to his lips. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 291 

"But when I saw you," continued the 
young clergyman, " I hoped that during 
my absence (for I have been a week out of 
town) she had broken through her resolve, 
•and told you of her illness." 

" No," answered Hayward, " I have heard 
nothing. I had a letter from her the other 
day, and she said nothing. I — I — am 
completely overwhelmed by the news." 

He turned away his head as he spoke. 
Of what was he thinking ? God ! what 
had he been about to do ? He had forgotten 
all about his poor mother in his dark despair. 
Had forgotten duty, affection, everything, 
under the blow which had struck him down. 
Now, he began to think. His mother — ^the 
gentle, tender mother, that had loved and 
watched over him all these years ! Oh, how 
could he have forgotten her ; how allow his 
selfish misery to drive everything else from 
his heart ! 

"Tell me all about her, sir," he said, 
in a broken voice, to the young clergyman 
sitting opposite to him. "How did you 



292 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

get to know her ? How long has she 
been mV 

" I have known her about a year," 
answered the clergyman. " I am one of 
the curates of the parish in which she Uves. 
I ought to tell you my name, too. It is 
Horace Jervis. I got to know her when 
visiting in my district, and naturaUy soon 
became interested in her. She was ill, even 
when I first saw her — I think she told me 
that she had not seen you for nearly eighteen 
months ? " 

Hay ward thought for a moment, and then 
said : " Yes, it is just about eighteen months." 

" So she told me," went on Mr. Jervis, 
" and she also gradually told me her history. 
Then I learnt that my father and yours had 
been in the same regiment, the 84th, and 
this also naturally increased my interest in 
her and you. I have visited her constantly, 
and lately, as I told you, I have repeatedly 
urged her to tell you of her illness. But, 
with unselfish affection, she could not bear 
to give you pain." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 293 

" Oh I my God ! " groaned Hayward, and 
he covered his face. 

" It would be sad to see her," continued 
Mr. Jervis, " for at times she suffers greatly, 
if her soul were not so pure and white. I 
cannot help thinking of the angels when 
I look on your mother's face." 

Again Hayward groaned aloud. His soul 
was so blank and dark that the young 
clergyman's words struck him like a sword. 

" I — I — must seem a brute to you," he 
muttered. 

" Why ? " asked Mr. Jervis, surprised. 
** You did not even know of your mother's 
illness. But you will go to her now. She 
will die now, where I am sure she wishes 
to die— in her dear son's arms." 

"Yes," said Hayward, and he bit his 
quivering lip. 

At that moment some of the vague 
doubtings and yearnings for lAghtj that had 
so often passed and repassed over his soul, 
recurred to Hayward. Was this meeting 
accidental, he thought, or had the hand of 



294 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

God been put out to save him from a fearful 
crime? Opposite to him was the cahn, 
sweet, pleasant face of Mr. Jervis. Hay- 
ward looked at him with his gloomy eyes, 
wondering if the look of peace imprinted on 
it caane from eaxthly happiness. Then he 
thought of his mother — ^the mother whose 
life for the last twenty years had been a 
weary struggle. And she was dying now 
— dying, and he 

"I know that she has longed, almost 
passionately, and prayed most earnestly, 
to see you," said Mr. Jervis, interrupting 
Hayward's remorseful reflections. " I know 
this from little things she has said. But her 
faith is perfect. The very last time I saw 
her she told me that if it were God's will 
she would see you soon." 

"And yet — and yet — " said Hayward with 
deep emotion, ''unless I had met you " 

" Her prayers might have been answered 
in some other way," replied Mr. Jervis, 
quietly ; " for we are sure that none of them 
will be unheard." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 295 

He said this in the simplest way. There 
was ao feltoring or doubt in tiis yo^g 
man's beUef. Hayward, passion-tossed and 
miserable, looked with strange envy on the 
serene eyes and brow of this young curate. 
They were both about the same age — some 
twenty-six or seven years old, perhaps — and 
both were tall, strong, stalwart men. They 
were both brave, also. Hayward had 
plunged into a raging sea at a woman's 
bidding, with death staring him in the face; 
but Mr. Jervis faced death daily. He faced 
it in the fever wards of hospitals, in dreary 
dens of misery, poverty, and shame. 

He spoke of his work very quietly. He 
had chosen his vocation. Earth and Heaven 
were alike real to him, and he cheerfully 
toiled in one, sure of finding his reward in 
the other. In spite of himself, Hayward 
grew interested. Earnestness about anythiog 
inspires a thoughtful mind with respect, and 
Mr. Jervis was so much in earnest. 

By the time they reached London it 
was dark. 



296 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"It has been a dreary day," said Hayward, 
with a shudder. 

"Yes," said Mr. Jervis; but neither his 
manner nor his tone was dreary. 

Hayward, on the other hand, felt inex- 
pressibly miserable* He was conscience- 
stricken, and crushed down with a sense of 
his selfish cowardice. What, if he had 
stabbed his dying mother in his mad passion ! 
he thought, for he knew what in his bitter 
disappointment he contemplated doing would 
have been a blow to her more cruel than 
death. 

Mr. Jervis was very kind to him. Perhaps 
he saw that something even more terrible 
than his mother's illness was preying on 
Hayward's mind. At all events, he was 
very good to him, gentle, sympathizing, 
and considerate, though not obtrusively so. 

When they arrived in town, he proposed 
to accompany Hayward to the house 
where his mother lived. He had two 
motives for this : one, that he thought 
that in her present weak condition her 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 297 

son's arrival should be broken gently to 
Mrs. Hayward; another, that he did not 
like to leave Hayward alone. Hayward 
made no objection to this proposal — nay, it 
was a sort of reUef to him to have a 
companion in this miserable hour. 

Mrs. Hayward was very poor. She had 
only her paltry pension as a lieutenant's 
widow, and the small sum that her son 
had been able to allow her out of his 
salary. Still Hayward was shocked and 
surprised when the cab in which the young 
men were seated stopped, by Mr. Jervis's 
directions, before the humble dwelling where 
the curate informed him his mother lived. 
It was only a common lodging-house, a 
lodging-house in Eanelagh Koad, in which 
two workmen and their families also lived. 
The poor widow had gone to this house 
to save. Her son was away, and she knew 
no one ; and so in this noisy, over-full house 
she existed, putting away each month half 
of the sum that Hayward had regularly 
sent her. 



298 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

She had only one room — a room which 
looked into the street and at the great 
furniture-removing establishment opposite. 
She was too ill to go out, and she used 
to sit at the Avindow vaguely watching the 
great vans coming and going. It was a 
desolate Ufe, and yet this poor woman was 
not desolate. She lived there, hoping in 
God's good time to rejoin her husband; 
she lived there, praying for and thinking 
of her only son. 

That son felt almost utterly overcome 
as he entered the .house where she lived. 
A hard-faced woman, who opened the 
door in answer to Mr. Jervis's summons, 
received them, and on the curate inquiring 
for Mrs. Hay ward, said : 

** I'm sure I'm glad you've come back, 
sir, to look after her. I don't know what 
to do with her, she's fearful ill — ^but per- 
haps this gentleman's some relation ?" And 
she looked at Hayward. 

Hayward made no answer. He was 
struck dumb with the appearance of poverty 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 299 

around. His mother had written to him 
to tell him that she had changed her 
lodgings, but she had told him nothing more. 

" Where is her room T he asked hoarsely. 

*^ The first door upstairs, to the left, sir," 
answered the woman. ''She's been very- 
bad to-day. She ought to have some of 
her friends about her." 

"Let me go up first," said Mr. Jervis, 
laying his hand kindly on Hayward's arm. 

''No," said Hayward, "no;" and he 
began ascending the narrow, uncarpeted 
stairs. 

When he reached the first door to the 
left he paused. It was slightly ajar, and 
he stood for a moment looking in. He 
saw inside a woman — a woman familiar, 
and yet not familiar — a woman on whose 
face death had set its stamp, and whose 
features were so sharpened and changed that 
he scarcely recognized them. Yet, it was 
his mother. Hayward saw this, and he 
saw also by the same light on the table, 
which flickered and fell on his mother's 



300 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

pale face^ and on her pale, thin hand, that 
she was reading one of his own lettera— 
a letter that he had written from Massam 
when his heart had been full of hope. 
There she sat, reading and re-reading her 
son's words, as she had read them many a 
time before! She snuled <« she did so ; 
smiled, and then a sudden flood of hope, 
of joy, and almost of inspiration, seemed 
to pass over her heart. 

"0 God!" she murmured, looking upwards, 
*^ Let me see my dear boy's face before 
I die." 

When Hayward heard these words he 
came slowly forward, and the next moment 
he was clasped tightly in his mother's 
arms. 



END OP VOLUME FIRST. 
BENEATH THE WAVE. 



CHAPTEE I. 



HATWARDS RELATIONS. 

When Hayward felt himself clasped in his 
mother's arms, for a few momgnt» a sort of 
rest seemed to come over his misemble heart. 
There was someone in the world to loVe him 
still, he thought. Then when she asked 
him with fond affection, as she pushed back 
his hair and kissed his brow, " Why did you 
not tell me you were coming, my dear?"^ 
Hayward gave a bitter, conscience-stricken 
sigh. 

'' Why ? " Oh, poor mother ! She who 
held him to her breast, who kissed him 
as she had kissed him when he was a little 



VOL. n. 



B 



2 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

« 

child^ must never hear this question truly 
answered. Hayward thought a moment. 
Then falteringly, and with quivering lips, 
he said — 

" I — I — came up unexpectedly. But, 
mother,'' he went on more firmly, " why 
did you not tell me you were ill ? " 

" I could not bear to spoil your pleasure, 
dear. You had worked so hard, and it 
must have been so pleasant for you at Sir 
George Hamilton's," answered Mrs. Hay- 
ward ; and as she did so, Hayward, with a 
violent eflfort for her sake, controlled his 
emotions. 

" Sir George Hamilton has left Massam for 
the present," he said, " and so I came away." 

" Oh, of course, dear," said Mrs. Hayward, 
" but you must tell me all about it, my 
Philip," she continued, smilingly — "all about 
the beautiful young lady, and ^" 

But at this moment, while Philip Hay- 
ward's quivering lips were framing a suitable 
reply, a rap came to the door of the room, 
and Mr. Jervis, the curate, appeared. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 3. 

" May I come in ? " he asked in his gentle 
way. " Well, Mrs. Hayward, you see your 
son and I are already friends." 

"I do not understand," said Mrs. Hayward, 
looking from one young man to the other. 

"We travelled up together in the same 
carriage," exclaimed Mr. Jervis. " I knew 
him by his photograph," he added, smilingly, 
"and so took the liberty of introducing 
myself to him." 

" Oh, Philip ! " said Mrs. Hayward, with 
some agitation of manner, " you can never 
thank him enough for all his goodness to 
me ! " And she looked at Mr. Jervis. 

" He must not begin now, at any rate," 
said the curate, again smiUng kindly. " No," 
he added, holding out his hand, " he is tired, 
and you, Mrs. Hayward, are also tired, and 
so for this evening, with your permission, I 
shall take my leave." 

" No, do not go," said Hayward, 
eagerly. He was afraid to be left alone 
with his mother now — afraid of the ques- 
tions that he felt sure she would ask. 



6 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

same hour was praying for her son. Hay- 
ward thought that he had deceived her the 
night before about his leaving Massam ; but 
the sight of love is clear and keen. Mrs. 
Hayward knew that something grievous 
had happened to her boy, and — ^womanlike 
— ^guessed that a woman was the cause. 

So in the dull grey morning, wdfch his 
grey set face, Hayward rose. Many things 
lay before him, for he had to begin a fight 
for daily bread. He would take nothing 
now from Sir George Hamilton, he told 
himself, and he was absolutely nearly penni- 
less. But he was well educated, young and 
strong. These were three things in his 
favour, but even with them he knew that 
employment was sometimes not easily nor 
directly obtained. 

He thought of his chances as he dressed 
himself. In the early part of this history it 
has been told how a certain Mr. Moxam 
was his mother's brother-in-law, and he had 
prospered of late. He was a merchant in the 
city, with great warehouses standing by the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 7 

river edge, to which bales were drawn up, 
and from which bales were let down daily, 
and in whose dusty fusty precincts money 
was made. When a young man he had 
married Mrs. Hayward's sister. They were 
the oi'phan daughters of a clergyman, and 
both pretty girls; but, as is too often the 
case, when their father died he left nothing 
behind him. So they were thrown upon the 
world, and went out as governesses. They 
both married. Mrs. Hayward accompanied 
the family of a colonel to India, and married 
Lieutenant Hayward, who was in the same 
regiment as her employer. Mrs. Moxam 
went to be the governess of a rich trades- 
man's family at Peckham, and married Mr. 
Moxam, who was nephew of the tradesman. 
Thus, when Hayward's father died, Mr. 
Moxam promised to educate his wife's sister's 
only son. And he did educate him, but 
while this process was going on his wife died, 
and he married again after a couple of years. 
This event naturally changed young Hay- 
ward's position. The first Mrs. Moxam left 



8 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

two daughters, the second Mrs. Moxam had 
one son. So as years went on, and they 
grew richer, the second Mrs. Moxam began 
to grudge the money spent yearly on the 
first Mrs. Moxam's nephew. She grudged 
also the trifling assistance which Mr. Moxam 
had occasionally given his first wife's sister, 
ever since the days when, as a poor, young, 
broken-hearted widow, Mrs. Hayward had 
returned to England. Under these circum- 
stances Philip Hayward had felt himself 
almost compelled to leave college. He, in 
fact, accepted a tutorship, so as to be able at 
once to assist in supporting his widowed 
mother. 

Now we come to the time when he lived 
at Sanda; to the time when he first saw 
Isabel Trevor, and when he saved Sir George 
Hamilton's life. He had written a modest 
account of that incident to his mother. His 
mother was very proud of his conduct, and 
perhaps prouder of its results. Indeed, when 
she heard of Sir George's offer to push him 
on in any profession he might choose, she 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 9 

was ftdl of joy, and when he went to stay at 
Massam, her hopes for his future life were 
veryhigh. 

She had seen nothing of her relations, the 
Moxams, for some time. They were getting 
on in the world, and did not therefore care 
to be stopped by poor relations. The girls 
remembered her, and sometimes (very rarely) 
mentioned "poor aunt Hayward." Mrs. 
Moxam the second did not care to be re- 
minded of her existence. So they let the 
poor widow drop out of their sight. They 
knew their cousin was a tutor " down in the 
North somewhere," but they did not care 
for cousins who were tutors. 

All this had grieved and annoyed poor 
Mrs. Hayward once, but the Moxams could 
not grieve or annoy her now. For one thing, 
she was about leaving the world for which 
the Moxams existed; for another, she had 
lately hoped that her son would live to rise 
fitr above them. 

Philip Hayward knew all these things. 
He despised and disliked Mr. Moxam, who 



10 -BENEATH THE WAVE. ^ 

was pompous, silly, and ill-bred ; but for his 
mother's sake he made up his mind that he 
would go and beg Mr. Moxam to give him 
employment. He did not know of the poor 
little store his mother had laid bv. There 
was a letter lying ready written in her desk, 
addressed " To my dear son, to be given to 
him after my death," and in this letter there 
was an enclosure. The poor woman had 
literally grudged herself the necessaries of 
Ufe. She had faded faster because she had 
not taken what she ought to have taken, 
so that she might save this little sum for 
her son. 

Hay ward decided that he would not tell 
his mother of the application he was about 
to make to Mr. Moxam. It would be time 
enough to do that, he thought, when he had 
got work. He therefore went to her bedside 
on the morning after his arrival in London 
with forced smiles on his lips. Poor Mrs. 
Hayward was very ill. She was wasting 
and wearing fast away. Her face had a 
painfully transparent look, and her eyes 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 11 

were large, big-pupilled, and glittering. But 
she was quite prepared to die. She put 
her hot hand into her son's and looked into 
his face and smiled. 

" God has been very good to me, my 
dear," she said, '^ and given me my heart's 
desire, for I prayed long to see my boy's 
face before I died." 

"And — yet you never sent for me, 
mother," faltered Hayward. 

" God sent you to me, dear," answered 
Mrs. Hajrward; and Hayward made no 
reply. 

He sat down by his mother s bed, and 
after a while began talking to her. But she 
asked him nothing about Massam. She 
knew he would tell her by-and-bye, when 
the gap which absence makes between 
those who love each other would gradually 
pass away. 

She had plenty to tell him. How good 
Mr. Jervis was to her, and all the troubles 
of her neighbours in the house. Her circle 
was so narrow that she was naturally 



12 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

interested in the curly-pated children who 
tumbled up and down the stairs, and cried 
and screamed by turns. Of the Moxams 
she said nothing, for she had nothing to say. 
Philip was thankful for this. He feared to 
hear of some fresh slight, which would make 
his task a shade more bitter. 

So after sitting an hour or so with his 
mother he went down the uncarpeted stairs. 
As he descended he was met by the hard- 
faced landlady of the house. 

"Oh, sir, can I have a word with you, 
please ? " she said. 

" Certainly," answered Hajrward; and she 
accordingly ushered him into a small room 
at the back of the house. 

'' It's about that poor lady up-stairs," she 
began, after closing the room door. " You 
see that clergyman who comes here some- 
times told me last night that you were her 
son." 

"Yes, I am," said Hayward. 

"Well, then, you see," continued the 
woman, twisting the comer of her apron as 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 13 

she spoke, " she's certainly not long for here. 
Anyone can tell by her face she's going fast, 
and to tell the truth T can't abide corpses 
in the house. I don't wish to be hard, but 
I must Uve, and coffins are awkward things 
to drag up and down stairs, and then I 
have two other parties to consider. So if 
you can make it convenient to take her 

away at the end of the week " And 

the landlady paused. 

Hayward's face blazed all over when he 
understood what she meant. 

" Do you call yourself a woman ? " he 
said. '• But she shall go." And without 
another word he left the landlady and the 
house. 

" Oh ! my poor mother," he thought, as 
he went along the streets. But this inter 
view nerved hun at once to encounter his 
intended one with his relation, Mr. Moxam. 

He meant to go to Mr. Moxam's place of 
business in the city, and not to his house. 
He had been at this place of business before, 
having gone there as a lad, and had nearly 



14 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

always returned from these visits wounded 
and stung. 

His uncle, Mr. Moxam, was not troubled 
with fine feelings, and tenderness for the 
unfortunate was not one of his qualifications. 
He frowned, therefore, and grunted uneasily 
on the present occasion, when Hayward's 
card was brought up to him. 

" What can this chap want now ? " he 
said, putting the card into his son's hand. 

Let me describe the sire and son. Mr. 
Joseph Moxam, senior, was short, red-faced, 
and pursy. A man of narrow, warped, 
unintellectual nature, who made money his 
god, and who estimated a man exactly by 
the length of his purse. Not an uncommon 
type among his class, perhaps; but Mr, 
Moxam was a shade rougher, ruder, and 
harder than most of his fellows. Now for 
the son, Joseph Moxam, junior, as he was 
named in business transactions, "Young 
Joe " aa he was commonly called in the 
society he frequented. He also was short, 
with a narrow forehead, small mean-looking 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 15 

blue-grey eyes, light musty hair, a high 
nose, and a mouth that unpleasantly pro- 
truded. 

He grinned when his father placed Hay- 
ward's card in his hand; a grin expressive 
of contempt, and expressive also of him. 

" Begging, I dare say T he said, face- 
tiously. 

" Not the right shop to come to, eh, 
then, Joe ? " said the sire. 

" Not the right ticket by any means ; 
but, let him try it on," said the son. 

Then entered Philip Hayward, pale, 
composed, and gentlemanly. He was not 
nervous about this interview now, and over 
his face had passed the shadow of a great 
grief. He bowed to his uncle and half- 
cousin, who nodded in return ; the old man 
extending two fat fingers patronisingly. 

" Well, sir," he said to Hayward, " and 
where are you from?" 

" I have come to ask a favour of you, 
Mr. Moxam," said Philip, in his clear voice. 

" Humph ! " said Mr. Moxam, senior. 



16 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Thought so/' muttered Mr. Moxam, 
junior. 

"Can you give me, or get me, some 
employment?" continued Philip Hay ward, 
briefly. 

"Thought you had a berth," answered 
Mr. Moxam, senior. " A tutorship or some- 
thing of that sort, down in the North? 
Have you got the sack?" 

" No, sir," replied Hayward, still calm 
and cold. " But my mother is dving , and I 
therefore ™h for Lployment ii £ndon.» 

" Dying ! " echoed the old man. " Non- 
sense ! " 

"Yes, sir, dying," repeated Hayward. 
" The doctor gives no hope. She has only 
a short time to live." 

Mr. Moxam, senior, moved his stout little 
body rather uneasily at this piece of infor- 
mation, and a sort of feeling stirred within 
him under the left side of his waistcoat. He 
remembered at that moment his first wife 
and her pretty sister. Remembered how 
proud his poor Anna had been of her sister 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 17 

manying an officer, and the bright happy 
letters that had come from the young bride 
in India. Then he remembered the widow 
coming home — ^the woman who was dying 
now. 

" Humph ! " he said again, " this is bad 
news." 

" So you will understand," continued Hay- 
ward, ^* that I cannot leave her. I am ready, 
therefore, to accept anything you can give 
me ; and I think I could undertake a clerk's 
work." 

" So you should be, lad ; so you should 
be, after the education I gave you," said 
the old man. 

" For which I am very grateful," said 
Hayward, slowly. 

"Well, I'm not grudging it," said Mr. 
Moxam, pompously. "It's a great thing 
education, and a man ought to be grateftd 
for it; and if your poor mother really is 
so ill " 

At this moment yoimg Joe winked his 
eye at his sire. 

VOL. II. c 



18 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" No humbug about all this, is there, 
now ?" said the old man, roughly, taking 
the hint from his offspring. "You are not 
trying it on, are you, eh ?" 

" What do you mean ?" asked Hayward. 

"Your mother is ill, I suppose?" went 
on Mr. Moxam. 

" She is dying," again repeated Hayward, 
but this time his face flushed. 

"Well, well, I hope not," said Mr. 
Moxam. "At all events you think you 
ought to be near her — ^humph ! — well, we 
must see what we can do. Joe, come in 
here a moment, will you ?" 

Joe followed his father into an inner 
office, and the two remained there together 
for about a quarter of an hour. Then 
Mr. Moxam reappeared. 

" I've been talking it over with my son," 
he said pompously, "and we find we have 
no vacancy in our office at present, and 
so are unable to offer you employment. 
But my wife's brother, Mr. Newcome 
(Salkeld and Newcome, the printers), want, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 19 

I understood from Newcome last Sunday, 
a literary chap with a good education, as 
' reader ' or something of that sort, in their 
establishment. There ! do you think that 
will do for you ? It's only to read over 
novels and bosh, I understand, so I think 
you ought to be up to it." 

"I think, perhaps, I could manage it,'^ 
answered Hayward, with a grim smile. 

"Well, then, I'll say a word for you,'* 
continued Mr. Moxam, **I'll tell you what 
— come down and dine with us next 
Sunday, at Florentia Villa, Brixton, sharp 
two,'and you'll meet Newcome himself. And 
now give my respects to your mother,'* 
and Mr. Moxam held out his two short 
fingers. "Sorry she's so ill, but hope 
she'll pull through. Good morning." And 
Hayward's interview with his rich rela- 
tions was over. 

Then he returned to his mother's lodging, 
purchasing on his way thither, almost with 
his last pound, a few little luxuries that 
he thought would please her. Her eyes 



20 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

brightened, and she smiled softly when she 
saw them. Her boy had thought of her. 
This was what she was thinking of as she 
put her thin fingers through his dark hair, 
and murmured her fond thanks. 

But stem care was in Hayward's heart. 
The absolute want of money was oppress- 
ing him, for he knew that his dying 
mother could not now remain in the house 
where she was. He sat there holding her 
hand, thinking what he should do. Then 
he remembered the gentle parson down at 
Sanda, and he knew that the Rev. Matthew 
would help him if he could. So by-and-bye 
he sat down and wrote to that good friend. 
He told him circumstances had happened 
which prevented him now accepting aid from 
Sir George Hamilton, but that he hoped 
soon to obtain work. In the meantime he 
was in immediate want of a small sum of 
money for the purpose of removing his 
dying mother to more comfortable rooms. 
Five pounds would be sufficient for this 
purpose ; and this, with a burning blush 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 21 

paBsing over his face, and, with a trembUng 
hand, he asked the Rev. Matthew to 
advance him. 

" For my mother*s sake," he told himself 
again, as he did this, as he had told him- 
self when he went to ask his uncle, Mr. 
Moxam, for employment. 

But it was bitter, very bitter. Life is 
often so, but to be forced to borrow money 
is inexpressibly galling to a sensitive heart. 
Yet nothing is sweeter to a generous one 
than to lend it. When, therefore, the 
Rev. Matthew received his late tutor's 
letter on the following day, he only felt 
regret that he was poor, and true sympathy 
for Hay ward. But it never crossed his 
mind to grudge the few pounds that he was 
so glad to have it in his power to lend. 
Poor Hayward had asked for five, but the 
kindly parson went at once to his desk 
and took out ten. This did not leave many 
behind; but without a word to wife or 
daughter, he put his hardly-earned money 
into his pocket and started to the post- 



22 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

office, sending from thence an order for 
the amount to Hayward. But he sent 
something else as well, — ^kind, thoughtful, 
gentle words; an offer that whenever he 
chose his old home at Sanda was open to 
him; and though it must be admitted that 
he felt some curiosity as to the cause of 
Hayward's rupture with Sir George Hamil- 
ton, he made no inquiries on the subject. 

'* It will be about a woman, no doubt," 
thought the parson, shaking his head, though 
there was no one near to see him. " Ah, ah, 
they bring a vast deal of trouble." 

Then there came into his mind something 
his wife had told him about Miss Trevor. 
Mrs. Matthew had warned Hayward about 
her, and she had told her husband that she 
had warned him. They had been staying in 
the house together, the parson pondered. 
Was this it ? " Poor lad, poor lad !" was his 
next thought, and with another shake of his 
head he began reflecting on Miss Trevor's 
charms. 

Miss Trevor, as we know, went upon the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 23 

principle of trying to fascinate all men. 
Once or twice therefore, for amnsement, or 
for the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Irvine look 
disturbed, she had condescended to bestow 
a few smiles on the parson. The parson 
remembered what he had felt when he 
received these few sweet smiles at this 
moment, and he gave a little sigh, and his 
comical look stole over his face. 

" And I am fifty," he was thinking, " and 
poor Hayward quite a young fellow still !" 

When he returned home after despatching 
the money order to Hayward, the first 
person that he encountered was his wife. 

"Matthew," said Mrs. Irvine, in her 
hollow tones, " I've a piece of news for 
you. 

'* Well, my dear ? " meekly asked the 
Rev. Matthew. 

"You must guess," said Mrs. Matthew, 
with grim jocularity. 

The parson thought. 

" You have found the lost teaspoon ? " 
at last he said. 



24 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" No such luck," replied Mrs. Irvine ; 
"guess again." 

To please her (for he was very sweet- 
tempered) the parson made various guesses, 
all relating to Uttle household affairs, but to 
each of his suggestions Mrs. Irvine solemnly 
shook her head. At last, the Rev. Matthew 
declared he had exhausted all his surmises, 
and asked his wife to keep him no longer 
in suspense. 

"I always said it," then remarked Mrs. 
Irvine. 

" But what is it, my dear ? " asked the 
parson. 

"Miss Trevor has succeeded," answered 
Mrs. Matthew, with a certain amount of 
triumph in her tone. " I always said it, did 
I not, Matthew? and now my words have 
come true." 

Then Mrs. Irvine proceeded to tell her 
tale. Miss Trevor's maid, Fanny Becker, 
had written to her cousin, Jane Becker, who 
was cousin to Mrs. Irvine's cook, that Miss 
Trevor was engaged to Sir George Hamil- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 25 

ton; that the family were to return very 
shortly to the Hall, and that the marriage 
was to take place soon after their arrival. 

The parson listened to the news, and then 
he remembered Hay ward's letter. So this 
was the probable cause why Hayward had 
parted with Sir George Hamilton — this ! 

" It's a great marriage for her, I suppose ?" 
he said, after a moment's silence. • " That 
Mr. Hannaway, who was down about the 
time of the wreck of the yacht, told me that 
Sir George Hamilton is a very rich man." 

" That's why she is going to marry him," 
answered his wife, sharply. 

" You should not say that, my love," said 
the gentle parson. 

*^ But I do say it," reiterated Mrs. Irvine. 
" Matthew, mark my words," she continued, 
'^ if ever there was a bad woman in the world 
she's one; if ever there was a heartless 
woman in the world, she's one also, and you 
men will live to find it out." And having 
thus distinctly expressed her opinion, Mrs. 
Irvine left her husband to his reflections. 



CHAPTEE II. 

FLOEENTIA VILLA. 

The parson's ten pounds came like a gift 
from God. It enabled Hayward to pay off 
his mother's heartless landlady, to procure 
her fresh rooms, and to buy her various 
small comforts absolutely necessary for her 
condition. 

Thus the last few weeks of Mrs. Hay- 
ward's life were perhaps the most beautiful 
and peaceful ones she ever spent on earth. 
We aU, more or less, I believe, live on hope. 
It is not the present that we clothe in 
shining light, but the dim horizon that we 
scarcely see. Her hope now lay beyond 
the earthly boundaries, and far away in 
imagination she seemed to realize the golden 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 27 

land beyond. Hayward, passion-tossed and 
world-weary, stood awestruck by his dying 
mother's side. Hating his life here, he yet 
could not rise above it. A beautiful face 
came between him and peace — a beautiful 
face between him and hope. But he had 
set himself a task, and he meant to fulfil it. 
This was to comfort his mother's last days ; 
to let her soul pass away imdisturbed to 
rest. 

It was in a neat and modest house, over- 
looking the Chelsea pensioners' gardens, 
where he had found her a home. For 
hours when she was asleep, he would sit 
watching the veterans, for whom ^* life's fitful 
fever " was about over, walking stiffly about, 
arguing and quarrelling. It was like a peep 
into the other days. There was one old 
man that he had once travelled with in an 
omnibus to the city. He was in the last 
stage — drivelling, childish. A bold, ill-bred 
man, who was in the omnibus also, had on 
this occasion begun " chaffing," as he called 
it, the old soldier. 



28 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" So youVe been in hotter climates than 
this, I suppose, old fellow ? " asked this 
obtrusive traveller; but the poor pensioner 
scarcely seemed to understand. Then a 
comrade, who accompanied him, and who 
was perhaps ten years younger, spoke up. 

^^He's not been in India, sir," he said, 
" but he served in the Low Countries. He's 
a Waterloo man." And as his friend spoke, 
the old man nodded his head, and laughed 
aloud. 

Yes, memory came back at the well 
remembered word, and he was ready to tell 
his tale, the tale he had told a thousand 
times before, and which brought such stirring 
memories to the listeners' hearts. 

Hayward used to watch this old fellow 
hobbling about on the verge of the grave, 
from his mother's windows. In his day, 
perhaps, he had been brave and happy ; now 
he was only testy, drivelling, and selfish. 
It was one of the lessons of life, was it not ? 
The lessons which the thinker daily learns. 

The curate, Mr. Jervis, grew deeply 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 29 

interested in Hayward. He saw that he 
was unhappy, and the eflTorts that he made 
to conceal this appealed to the curators 
sympathies. Many solemn conversations the 
two young men held together, as they 
wandered up and down m the evenings, by 
the dusky river's edge. They had begun 
life about the same time, but from two 
very different starting points. Horace 
JeL wa, the ^ of a rich man, 
Philip Hayward of a very poor one. 
But a shadow had fallen on the Jervis 
family while Horace was yet a boy, and the 
bitterest blush that had ever dyed his cheeks 
had been for his mother. He had been a 
refined and sensitive lad, and the agony and 
shame that he had then endured had left 
for a long time a most marked impression 
on his mind. But this was not to last. 
Accidentally, one evening, he accompanied 
a jGriend to hear a well-known and eloquent 
preacher, and the words he listened to that 
night coloured his whole future lite. 

He went into the Church after this, and 



30 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

laboured, as most men labour, for fame or 
wealth. He was so much in earnest. There 
was no doubt in his faith, no fear. Hay ward 
used to look into his sweet calm face with a 
strange longing and envy. They were such 
a contrast — a contrast in everything, except 
that both were true and honest men. 

So they became friends. They made no 
protestations of this, for they were English- 
men, and therefore shy of professing attach- 
ment; but the bond, nevertheless, grew up 
between them, and this friendship was a 
great source of comfort and thankfulness to 
Mrs. Hay ward during her last days. 

But we must now return to Mr. Moxam, 
of Florentia Villa, Brixton. With untold 
aversion in his heart, Hayward had pro- 
ceeded to avail himself of this gentleman's 
invitation to dine with him on the Sunday 
following Hayward's interview with him in 
the City. He went by the train, and had 
not much difl&culty in discovering his uncle's 
residence, for " Florentia Villa" was engraved 
in brass plates on the pillars of the gateway; 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 31 

" Florentia" being on one pillar, and " Villa'' 
on the other. Inside the house and grounds 
corresponded with this arrangement. Here 
was everything in a small way. A lawn, a 
greenhouse, a sun dial ! Everything about 
the place was new, and fresh with paint. 
Mr. Moxam himself, fat and pursy, stood on 
the lawn as Hayward opened the gate, and 
when he recognized his first wife's nephew 
he held out two fat fingers in welcome. 

" Ha, humph, so you've come, have you, 
sir?" he said. "Well, glad to see you. 
Newcome, Mrs. M.'s brother, will be here 
presently. See what you can do with him. 
He Wants a chap of your sort, I believe — 
but, then, there's always a dozen fellows 
out of employment after every situation 
that casts up." 

" Yes, there is scarcely elbow-room in 
England, I think," replied Hayward. 

" Elbow-room ? What d'ye mean by that? 
There's elbow-room and arms-room, too, for 
men who will work steadily, sir. Look at 
me. Where would I have been, d'ye think, 



32 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

if I had sat down with my hands before me ? 
No, it's * the early bird gets the worm' — ^and 
another thing, mind ye, sir, * rolling stones 
do not gather any moss.' " 

Nothing could exceed the self-satisfacti(Hi 
of Mr. Moxam's looks as he uttered these 
two old adages. There he stood, he was 
thinking, on his own lawn, with his own 
greenhouse behind him, and his own villa, 
filled to the very brim with expensive 
furniture; and all this was his own doing. 
After all he had some reason to be proud. 
There had been days of struggle in his 
career, as there are days of struggle in most 
men's, and he had stoutly weathered the 
storm. He was pompous, vulgar, and ill- 
bred ; but he had been industrious, steady, 
and hard-working ever since he knew the 
meaning of the words. So now he was 
reaping the reward; and one of his enjoy- 
ments was to snub every poor man who 
came in his way. 

This Sunday, therefore, was very pleasant 
to him. Newcome, the printer, Mrs. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 33 

Moxam's brother, owed him two thousand 
pounds, which he had borrowed ; and 
Newcome, therefore, trembled before him. 
Hayward owed him his education, and was 
now a candidate for his patronage; so he 
could say what he liked to Hayward, and 
accordingly, during the day, he said various 
things more or less disagreeable. 

Mrs. Moxam, the second, was not an un- 
fitting mate for her pompous self-satisfied 
little spouse. She, too, thought she had 
done well in life, and was proud of having^ 
done so. She was one of those women who 
live for their own narrow circle, and whose 
servants and dinners, and the servants and 
dinners of her acquaintances, served ta 
occupy her whole mind. 

Her stepdaughters, the Misses Moxam,^ 
were also not very interesting. Miss Moxam 
was past thirty, and was jealous of her step- 
mother's position in her father s house. She 
was always giving orders to the servants, 
and then referring them in a marked manner 
to "mamma." Nothing gave her so much 

VOL. II. D 



34 BBKEATH THB WATB. 

pleasure as for anything to go wrong in the 
household. " I tiiink I told yon, mamma," 
■he would say. "I believe I so^eeted," 
and so on. She was not handstmiet bat 
neutral tinted all over. Her eyes, her hair, 
hor skin, were all a pale, rather dingy drab^ 
and her character corresponded. She never 
got into a passion, she never coloured with 
generous warmth on any subject; but she 
gave her fiiiends, and her stepmother in 
particular, little stabs occasionally, and felt a 
feeble pleasure in doing so. Her younger 
sister, Ellen, was much of the same type. 
She, however, was better looking, and had an 
admirer, and both these iacts had a softening 
influence. Young Joe, their stepbrother 
(the present Mrs. Mosam's son), used to say 
of his stepsisters to his chosen companions, 
" that there was a pair of them, but Ellen 
was the best of the two." 

These young ladies received Hayward 
bfioldly at first They had been told by their 
r thi^ he was in bad circumstances, and, 
, it was natural that they should 



BSNSATH THS WAYS* 35 

d(> SO. But they were women, and Hayward 
was goodlooking and gentlemanly, so by- 
and-bye they began to thaw. His appear* 
anoe also was not'without its influence on 
his mide's second wife. When, therefore, 
her brother, Mr. Newcome (of the printing 
establishment of Salkeld and Newcome) 
arrived, he fomid the party all talking very 
pleasantly together. He (Mr. Newcome) 
had a sour look. He had not been very 
prosperous in business for one thing, and he 
disliked his brother-in-law Moxam intensely 
for another. 

"Ha! Newcome," said Mr. Moxam, 
putting out the two £Ett fingers that with 
him did duty for a handnshake, when Mr. 
Newcome arrived. 

*' This is young Hayward," continued the 
rich man, indicating Hayward by a jerk of 
the thumb in his nephew s direction. " The 
young fellow I told you of. He ought to 
understand correcting novels and rubbish, 
for his education cost enough — ^but you can 
talk it over." 



36 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Upon this Mr. Newcome smiled more 
sourly still. He was a peculiar looking man, 
with small features and thick brown hair, 
which gave you the impression that it was 
a wig, though it was not one. He had been 
for years the working partner of the firm to 
which he belonged, and had read and cor- 
rected scores and scores of novek in his day. 
Perhaps this had soured him. At all 
events, life had evidently not been pleasant 
to him, for his expression was habitually 
sneering and wearied. 

He made a slight bow to Hayward after 
Mr. Moxam's introduction, and then looked 
into his face. He had been prepared to see 
something disagreeable in Mr. Moxam's 
nephew, but he now saw (and he was not 
a bad judge) a thoughtful clever face. 

" So you want to go into my line ? " he 
said, addressing Hayward. 

** I want employment, sir," said Hayward, 
"and I think I have been fairly educated." 

Only a few words, but how much a few 
words may tell ! They were enough at least 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 37 

for Mr. Newcome. Before the abundant 
family dinner which followed was over, Mx, 
Newcome had resolved to give Hayward a 
chance. During this dinner, "young Joe/* 
the present Mrs. Moxam's son, made his 
appearance. The fond mother would have 
waited for her oflfepring, but when the 
dinner hour arrived Mr. Moxam took out 
his great gold watch, and shook it angrily. 

" Sharp two, I said, did I not, Maria ? ** 
he said, looking at his wife. 

"But Joe's not in," said Mrs. Moxam, 
glancing at the elaborate timepiece on the 
mantelpiece. 

" I said two, Joe or not Joe," said Mr. 
Moxam. " Dinner, Maria." 

And dinner accordingly wa^ served. 

After the soup and fish had been removed, 
Joe (around whom lingered a strong odour 
of smoke) entered the room. 

" Humph ! " said his father, glancing at 
him; "did you not know the dinner hour, 
sir?" 

Mr. Moxam said this gruffly enough ; but 



S8 BBKBATH THE WAVE. 

hi. round, Bfcaxing grey ey^ had a kindly 
expression in them when he looked at this 
graceless youth. As for his mother she 
absolutely adored him. He was twenty 
times worse than the old man. He was 
mean-minded, snobbish, and vulgar m the 
extreme ; but in her eyes he was all but 
perfection. She admired his loud ties and 
canary-coloured gloves. She boasted of the 
Society that he was in (she little guessed of 
what sort) to her various acquaintances. 
'* Joe's off to one of his balls to-night," she 
would say, with fond maternal pride ; and 
she was ready to excuse late hours and 
misdemeanours of all kinds, in the belief 
that " Joe " was shining, as became him, 
among his admiring friends. 

If it were possible, Mr. Newcome disliked 
his nephew more than his brother-in-law. 
Young Joe irritated him almost past endur- 
ance. He, turned, therefore, during the 
bustle consequent on his appearance, and 
addressed himself almost exclusively to 
Hayward. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 39 

" If you will call at Southampton Buildings 
to-morrow, at ten/' he said, " I will see if 
we can come to some arrangement. It's 
nothing great, remember, I have to offer. 
Hard and worrying work, and a small salary 
— ^but if you really wish for employment ? " 

" I do really wish for employment, sir," 
replied Hayward, earnestly. And the sour 
man he addressed gave a slight nod of his 
head. 

At this moment both Hayward's ears and 
Mr. Newcome's caught an inquiry addressed 
by young Joe to his mother, which they were 
supposed not to hear. 

** I say, mother, what's making old Types 
more crusty than usual ? " asked Mr. Joe of 
that fond parent. 

Then old " Types " (Mr. Newcome) looked 
at Hayward with an ironical and bitter 
smile. A smile which betrayed some of 
the contempt and aversion with which he 
regarded his sister's son. 



CHAPTER III. 

AMONG TYPE. 

Hatward went down to Southampton 
Buildings on the following morning at ten 
o'clock, and saw Mr. Newcome. It was a 
dismal morning, and it seemed a dismal 
place. It was in one of the smaller streets 
near Covent Garden Market that the print- 
ing offices of Messrs. Salkeld and Newcome 
were situated, and here (after climbing up 
the dark dusty staircase) he was ushered 
into Mr. Newcome's presence. 

Mr. Newcome looked sourer than ever. 
He was sitting correcting proofs at his desk, 
and his brown, curly, wig-like hair was rough, 
and his face was flushed, and he had a pen 
thrust, as it were, indignantly behind his ear. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 41 

**0h, it's you?" he said, looking up as 
Hayward appeared. " Well, so you think 
you can do this sort of stuff, do you ?" 
And he dashed his hand down expres- 
sively on part of the proof before him as 
he spoke. 

" If you give me a chance I will try/' 
answered Hayward, with a smile. 

" It's nothing to smile 'about, I can tell 
you," continued Mr. Newcome pettishly. 
" Why people write such stuff — why women 
who ought to be engaged making puddings 
— anything useful — waste ink and paper as 
they do, I cannot conceive !" And Mr. 
Newcome once more dashed his hand indig- 
nantly down on the proofs. 

" Well, it's not all stuff," said Hayward. 

**Well, not all," unwillingly admitted 
Mr. Newcome. '* But it's no use talking of 
it," he added. " I want a man to take my 
place for a time. Do you think you can do 
it ?" And then with both shrewdness and 
cleverness he explained what he wanted to 
Hayward. As he went on he saw he had 



42 BBNEATH THE WAVE. 

got hold of the right man. Hayward had a 
clever face and a clear head. He understood 
at once what Mr. Newcome wished to 
convey. 

" Yes, sir," he said, " I think I can do 
it," after Mr. Newcome had finished his 
explanations. 

" Then begin to morrow," said Mr. New- 
come ; and thus Hayward became '^reader" 
in the printing establishment of Messrs. Sal- 
keld and Newcome. 

It was not, as Mr. Newcome had told 
him, a very interesting or instructive em- 
ployment. The firm printed novels almost 
exclusively, and so from morning until night 
Hayward was immersed in a world of fiction. 
Oh, the involved sentences he had to wade 
through before he came to the happy or 
miserable denouement of many plots ! Lost 
often, both author and reader apparently 
became, in mazes and entanglements which 
seemed to have no end. But, on the other 
hand, fresh and bright there came to him 
sometimes glimpses of fresh bright minds. 



BSNEATH THE WAVE. 48 

The men and women who but Kved and died 
on paper grew realities to him, and he seemed 
to pass through scenes pictured by subtle 
pens. 

Mr. Newcome had no imagination, there- 
fore imaginative works had no attraction 
for him. Hayward, on the contrary, read 
with eagerness the writings of those who 
could pourtray what he felt. Once with 
grim amusement Mr. Newcome stood unseen 
a few moments behind his new "reader" 
watching him sitting literally rapt in some 
proofs lying before him. Hayward's soul 
was not in the dull dusty office. It had 
passed away from beneath the leaden Novem- 
ber sky above ; from the roar and din of the 
traffic around him. He was following the 
temptations of another man's heart. He 
was standing on the seashore and hearing 
the waves, whose cadence broke at the spell 
of the writer's words. Newcome, sour and 
practical, looked with astonishment at the 
expression of Hayward's face. Then he 
gave him a sharp tap on the shoulder, and at 



44 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

his touch the dusty office, the dreary sky, 
the din around, came back to the " reader's *' 
mind. 

"You don't say you can really interest 
yourself, now, in such bosh ? " asked 
Newcome. 

"This is not bosh, sir," answered Hay- 
ward, with kindling eyes, laying his hands 
on the proofs before him. " I would give 
all my life to be able to make men and 
women live as this man does." 

" It's just a trick," answered the cold 
practical printer. 

"A trick of the hand, perhaps," said 
Bayward, "which draws the pictures that 
the soul has seen. These men and women," 
he went on, again touching the proofs, " that 
now Uve for us, have Uved for their Creator. 
The passions that he makes them feel, he 
has felt ; their struggles, their disappoint- 
ments must all have passed through the 
writer's ^heart 1 " 

"Pity him, then," pithily observed 
Newcome, shrugging his shoulders. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 45 

** Oh ! no, sir ! " said Hayward, with 
enthusiasm. " How can we pity one who 
must have such inward consciousness of 
power ? — ^who can look in a man s face and 
weigh him justly in a balance — ^who sees so 
far beyond what we see, that the very 
thoughts of those around him flow from 
his subtle pen." 

" Don't believe it," said Newcome. " D'y® 
tell me, now, that one of these writer fellows 
— aye, the best of them — could look at me 
and tell what was passing in my mind ? " 

Hayward wisely only laughed in answer 
to this question. Mr. Newcome believed 
himself to be a very clever man, who had 
not met with his deserts. He viewed his 
neighbours through what he thought were 
calm, sarcastic, but very superior spectacles. 
He saw the follies of mankind, and alas, 
poor man! forgot his own. He was sour, 
bad-tempered, and not very grateful. For 
instance, he felt no gratitude to his brother- 
in-law, Moxam, for lending him two thousand 
pounds ; yet that two thousand pounds had 



46 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

undoubtedly saved him from bankruptcy. 
But, on the other hand, he was a shrefwd 
and, in some ways, certainly a clever man. 
But it was a hard, uninteresting, self-satisfied 
cleverness. His mind was not big enough 
to see how httle he was, for humility belongs 
to higher and clearer perceptions than hi» 
were. He could not understand Hayward's 
enthusiasm, therefore ; but Hayward could 
understand him. The shrewd narrow mind 
lay open to his " reader's " large, unsatisfied, 
self-condemning soul. 

Yet they got on fairly well together. 
Hayward was industrious, steady, and atten- 
tive ; and Mr. Newcome fully appreciated 
all these qualities. His brother-in-law 
Moxam asked him how the young man was 
getting on, and was so well pleased with the 
answer that he commanded his "Maria" 
to write and ask the *' young fellar " again 
to dinner. 

*' I don't forget he's my nephew-in-law 
any more than I did not forget Newcome 
is my brother-in-law when I lent him that 



BENEATH THS WATE. 47 

two thousand pounds, Maria/' he said, upon 
Mis. Moxam making some slight objection 
to his proposal ; and after this hint (as he 
called it) " Maria " complied with her 
husband's request. 

Thus Hayward received a second invi- 
tation to Florentia Villa, and did not enjoy 
his second visit there any more than his firsi. 
His eldest drab-tinted cousin was distantly 
civil ; but the younger one, Ellen, was a little 
kinder. Still, though Hayward was so good 
looking, she was afraid to be very friendly^ 
These young women had been brought up 
with the idea that all poor people are better 
avoided. Mr. Moxam,^ senior, gave you the 
impression that he was always mentally 
buttoning his breeches pockets at the sight 
of anyone who wanted anything. Mr. 
Moxam, jimior, never " threw away money," 
as he called it, on anything but his own 
gratification. Charity of any sort he called 
" lost money." Thus he regarded Hayward 
with suspicion. He was afraid " the fellar " 
would upon some excuse or other turn round 



48 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and endeavour to borrow five pounds of him. 
Not that young Mr. M oxam was not quite 
capable of guarding his own purse. He 
could do this, and was as acute in pecuniary 
transactions as any young man of his own 
stamp in England. 

" How's your mother ? " asked Mr. 
Moxam, senior, during this second visit, 
shortly after his nephew's arrival at Flo- 
rentia Yilla. 

" She's just about the same/' answered 
Hayward, in his grave sweet-toned voice. 
" The doctor says that during the last few 
days he sees no change." 

"Humph!" said Mr. Moxam, pulling at 
his thick gold watch chain. '* Maria," he 
continued, with a sudden burst of generosity, 
for the memory of his first young wife and 
her girl sister for a moment again came 
back to him, " isn't there any kitchen stuff 
— ^mutton broth or the like — ^you could send 
Mrs. Hayward — and a few grapes ? " 

'• I will see about it," answered the second 
Mrs. Moxam, repressively. And, accord- 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 49 

ingly, a few days afterwards two small tin 
cases of soup and some foreign grapes 
were left at Mrs. Hay ward's lodgings ; Mrs. 
Moxam thinking that she thus fulfilled 
every duty of Christian kindness to her 
husband's dying sister-in-law. 

It seemed like passing into another world 
to Hayward when he reached the small but 
cheerful rooms at Chelsea, where his mother 
lived, after this second dreary visit to the 
Moxams. With his mother he found Horace 
Jervis. The evening service at his church 
was over, and he had come to sit an hour 
with his dying friend. Everything in the 
room had such a peaceful look as Hayward 
entered it. The sick woman was lying back 
in an easy chair by the fire, and she had 
now comforts, nay even luxuries, around 
her, — a bouquet that Hayward had bought 
her from Covent Garden, splendid grapes 
that Jervis's generous hand had supplied. 
The poor lady, who had pinched and half- 
starved herself so that she might return to 
her son some of his hard earnings, was now 

VOL. II. E 



50 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

supported by wine and everything she could 
take. Thus the breath of life within her, 
which had flickered so very low, had gained 
a temporary strength. Mrs. Hayward looked 
much better than she had done when her son 
had come back to her. True, the deadly 
disease had too firm a hold upon her frail 
frame to leave it, but the comforts that 
she now possessed naturally soothed and 
supported her. 

" We have been talking of you, my dear," 
she said, as Hayward approached. 

*' Have you ? " he answered, and he kissed 
her cheek. 

"And how have you enjoyed yourself, 
Phil ? " asked Mrs. Hayward, fondly. 

^*You know the .Moxams, mother," said 
Hayward, " that is a sufl&cient answer;" and 
he sat down with a wearied sigh, putting 
his hand over his face to screen it from the 
fire. 

It^was a simple action, but the way he 
did it told so much. He was tired and dis- 
heartened. Struggle as he might with his 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 51 

feelings, he could not throw off the blight 
that had fallen upon him. It had spoiled 
his life. He might do his duty, was doing 
it; but the hopeful future, natural to his 
years, was now not for him. Both his 
mother and Mr. Jervis heard his sigh; 
both his mother and Mr. Jervis knew he 
was unhappy. 

" Each time I see her — ^pardon me. Hay- 
ward — but I was teUing your mother, when 
you came in, about a poor parishioner 

of mine " presently said Mr. Jervis. 

^'Each time, Mrs. Hayward, I assure you^ 
that I see her, it seems to be like a renewal 
of the promise, ^ And their last days shall be 
peace/ " 

^' And she seems so happy ? " asked Mrs. 
Hayi^ard in a low tone. 

** More than happy," answered the curate, 
" she is radiant and full of joy. Lying there 
chained to her bed by a terrible disease^ 
she knows her release is close at hand, and 
that each pang she feels brings her nearer 
to eternal rest." 



4( ~ 



52 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Does she talk of her death much?" 
said Mrs. Hayward. 

Not as death," replied Mr. Jervis, 
but as the entrance gate to heaven. Her 
journey through the dark valley is nearly 
done." 

As Mr. Jervis said this his face coloured 
and his eyes lit. Hayward sitting in the 
shade watching him, began to ^think what 
a blessed thing this faith must be !— this 
strength which carried you above disappoint- 
ment, disease, and death. He had set his 
affections on an earthly idol, aad when it w^ 
shattered his life seemed done. But these 
servants of God, his mother and Mr. Jervis, 
were full of hope. They accepted their 
earthly troubles meekly, looking steadily 
all the while beyond. 

"It is well that some people can find 
comfort even in their darkest hours," said 
Hayward, half bitterly, half sadly, after a 
few moments' reflection. 

" Comfort !" repeated Jervis, " comfort, 
indeed ! Hayward, come with me some day 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 53 

and see this woman of whom I have been 
speaking! Looking at her from a worldly 
point of view every misery is hers ; looking 
at her from a higher and heavenly one she 
is more to be envied than the richest and 
fairest woman in this land." 

*' And you go to see her ! You talk to 
her T asked Hayward. 

" I go to see her, and I talk to her/' 
replied the curate; "and each time that I 
do so I come away strengthened and 
impressed. Humbly, indeed, I ask that my 
end may be like hers." 

Hayward did not speak, but he got up 
and began pacing the Uttle room restlessly. 
What would he give to feel Uke this, he 
was thinking. Marvellous faith that tri- 
umphed over all earthly ills ; that shone 
brightest and clearest amid what unsus- 
tained mortaUty shuddered at ! 

" Come and see her, Hayward," again 
urged Mr. Jervis. '^Let her teach you a 
lesson." 

" I indeed need one*/ answered Hayward. 



54 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

And then after a few more words the curate 
went away, not, however, before he had 
fixed a time when he would take Hayward 
to see his dying parishioner. 



CHAPTEK IV. 

A CHANGE. 

It was dreary weather. A chill, cold, wet 
November ; and very dreary it often seemed 
to Philip Hayward. Every day he went 
down to Mr. Newcome's office, and every 
day sat correcting and revising proofs. 
Sometimes, as I have said before, bright 
little bits came to him ; sometimes he forgot 
Mr. Newcome ; forgot Isabel Trevor ; forgot 
to be weary and tired of everything ; but 
it was very seldom. For the most part his 
work was monotonous and fatiguing. He, 
however, gave satisfaction to his employer, 
for Mr. Newcome was shrewd enough always 
to recognize ability. 

Thus things went on. Hayward heard 



56 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

once or twice from Sanda; heard from the 
kindly parson, who, after communing with 
himself on the subject, thought it best to 
tell the news of Miss Trevor s approaching 
marriage to his late tutor. Hayward read 
the words, and though they contained no 
news they seemed to fall like a blow upon 
his heart. The November sky seemed to 
be drearier to him that day than it had ever 
seemed before, the air closer and more 
oppressive. He had been trying to become 
reconciled to his lot. He had gone with 
his friend the curate to see those who had 
made him blush for himself. But after he 
had read the Rev. Matthew's letter, all 
the old pain and bitterness came back. He 
did not care to live, he told himself He 
was weary, tired, and utterly disheartened 
with everything. 

But by-and-bye he began to think of hie 
mother. The thick foggy weather was very 
trying to Mrs. Hayward, and she had 
suffered much during the last few days. 
The doctor had told Hayward that London 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 57 

air was very bad for her at this season, 
and that she would breathe better in a 
clearer atmosphere. How often these things 
are said to the poor, and how often listened 
to with inward groans ! It was indeed 
all Hayward could do, with his scanty- 
salary, to provide her comforts and neces- 
saries where she was. So he could only 
watch her panting breath ; only wipe the 
dew from her pale brow as she used to sink 
back exhausted. He had no means to take 
her away from the penetrating mists, from 
the damp chill air that crept almost like 
a poison around her. 

One night she was very, very ill. It was 
the night of the day that Hayward had heard 
from the Rev. Matthew of Miss Trevor s 
approaching marriage. Hayward had re- 
turned to their lodgings, feeling wretchedly 
miserable and out of sorts. It was a wet, 
dismal evening when he went in. Mrs. 
Hayward saw at once that he was greatly 
upset, and though he tried to hide his 
feelings when he met his mother's anxious 



58 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

• 

gaze, he was conscious that he could not 
entirely do so. 

During the night Mrs. Hayward became 
very ill. She could not breathe, and lay 
back in her chair struggling and panting. 
Hayward at once despatched a messenger 
for the doctor who usually attended her, 
and by and bye he was able temporarily to 
relieve her. " But she should not be in 
town at this season," he said. ** You should 
get her away, Mr. Hayward." 

" But how ? " thought Hayward, bitterly, 
as he sat and watched her after the doctor 
was gone. He could not leave his employ- 
ment. He could not afford the money that 
even the briefest change was sure to cost. 

The next few days were very miserable 
ones. The weather was dark and gloomy 
in the extreme, and it painfully affected 
Mrs. Hayward. So dreadful, indeed, did it 
become to Hayward to see her suffer that 
he almost made up his mind to borrow the 
money of his uncle, Mr. Moxam, to take 
her away. Yet how to approach the rude 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 59 

old man on such an errand, how endure the 
vulgar insolence of the son ? 

All one day, as he sat m the ofl&ce, wading 
through the very prosy adventures of a 
heroine who seemed bent on making her 
own misery, he was thinking of the same 
thing. Then, just as it was getting dusk, 
and as the heroine was getting more and 
more self-sacrificing (though there was no 
reason for it), Mr. Newcome came into the 
room where Hayward was, and went 
straight up to his desk, holding a card in 
his hand. 

"That fool Thompson" (Thompson was 
the porter of the establishment), said Mr. 
Newcome, very grimly, " thought, I suppose, 
that anybody coming here in a carriage must 
be coming to see me, and therefore he 
brought me this card." And Mr. New- 
come threw the card as he spoke on the 
desk before Hayward. 

Hayward glanced at it, and his face 
suddenly flushed, and then grew pale. 

''Humph!" said Mr. Newcome, noting 



60 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

with his small shrewd brown eyes these 
signs of emotion. "So you know this Sir 
George Hamilton, do you ? Well, he's 
waiting outside in his carriage to see you. 
Of course when I got the card I went down 
quick enough, thinking some fool of a swell 
was wanting a pack of his precious nonsense 
printed, or something of that sort. But I 
soon found that that ass Thompson had 
made a fool of me. This Sir George 
Hamilton, in fact, let me know at once 
that he had come to see you, and wanted 
no one else in the establishment." 

*' I — knew him when I was in the North," 
faltered Hayward. 

" Well, he seems no end of a swell, 
anyhow," said Newcome. " But you had 
better go down to him. He's waiting in 
his carriage outside." 

Then Hayward rose, and slowly went 
down the dusty, narrow staircase which led 
to the street door of the ofl&ce. 

At the door a tall footman was standing, 
and drawn up near to it was a carriage. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 61 

leaning out of the window of which Hay- 
ward recognized the pale face of Sir 
George Hamilton. 

Hayward could not suppress his emotion 
as he did so. His feet faltered^ and his 
tongue refiised its office. But when Sir 

« 

Greorge saw him he at once got out of the 
carriage and came forward with outstretched 
hand. 

" Hayward ! " he said. But Hayward 
could frame no speech, no reply. 

" I wish particularly to see you," continued 
Sir George, speaking quickly, and also with 
emotion. " Will you come with me in the 
carriage ? I will drive you home." 

" I — I — cannot," hesitated Hayward. " I 
am engaged here." 

" But," said Sir George, with the care- 
lessness of a rich man, ^'cannot your work 
wait? or get someone else to take your 
place. There was a person spoke to me 
just now, wouldn't he ? " 

" I can ask Mr. Newcome," said Hayward, 
and then he went upstairs agjpdn and rapped 



62 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

at the door of the small office where Mr. 
Newcome usually sat. 

"May I go with Sir Gleorge Hamilton 
for a short time?" said Hayward, after 
Mr. Newcome had called him to come in. 

"Oh, of course," sneered Mr. Newcome. 
"Don't let me interfere with your aristo-* 
cratic engagements." 

"It is no engagement. Sir George has 
something to say to me, that is all," answered 
Hayward. 

"Oh, you can go," said Newcome, still 
disagreeably. "Will you come back to- 
morrow ? " 

"Yes, I will come back to-morrow," replied 
Hayward, and with these words they parted ; 
Hayward returning at once to Sir George, 
who was waiting for him outside. 

" Will you get into the carriage ? " said 
Sir George, addressing him ; and when Hay- 
ward complied with this request, Sir George 
followed him, and after giving some direc- 
tions to the footman, seated himself by 
Hayward's side. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 63 

" Hayward," he said, as the carriage turned 
down the narrow street, laying his hand on 
Hayward's arm, "there are some things we 
need not discuss. I was deeply cut up when 
I returned and found you had left Massam 
during my absence. Hush, do not speak — I 
know or guess the cause why you did so — 
and I know also that you are not the person 
to blame. Hush, for one moment. We 
never need allude to that cause again, but I 
cannot, I will not, allow it to interfere with 
my friendship, my gratitude, to you." 

" You are very kind," said Hayward, with 
quivering lips. 

"There can be no question of kindness 
between us," said Sir George. " I owe you 
a debt I can never repay." 

Hayward was silent. His memory went 
back at that moment to the surging sea on 
the wild coast ; to the look of despair in Sir 
Greorge's eyes when he had first met them; 
and to Isabel Trevor, and the cruel shame and 
pain that through her had fallen on his life. 

" I tried to find your address," continued 



64 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Sir George, "and at last I did so. Mr. 
Irvine, the clergyman at Sanda, gave it to 
me ; and, Hayward, can you guess where I 
have been now ? " 

^* No," said Hayward, briefly. Somehow 
he thought he would hear Isabel's name. 

" With your mother," said Sir George, I 
got your address in Chelsea from Mr. Irvine, 
and I came up to town on purpose to see 
you. My dear Hayward," he continued 
kindly, " let me ask you one thing, which is 
to forget any annoyance that happened to 
you at Massam ! I wish to forget it, and — 
I may as well mention her name — Miss 
Trevor wishes to forget it. Let us return 
to our old relationship — which is that I am 
indebted to you for my life." 

" That is nothing," said Hayward, huskily. 

" It is much to my mind," answered Sir 
George ; " so much that I feel uneasy to be 
under such a weight of obligation to. any one. 
But I was telling you that I have seen your 
mother. And — ^yes, I will tell you — I have 
also seen her doctor." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 65 

^^ Why ? " asked Hayward sharply, almost 
sternly. 

"Because — do not be angry with me, 
Hayward — I, too, had a dear mother once." 
(And Sir George sighed deeply). " Because 
I thought, poor lady, that she looked very 
delicate — and " 

"They m me Ae i. dyix>g,» M Hay- 
ward, as Sir George paused ; and he put his 
hand over his face a^ he spoke. 

"At all events she is very ill," said Sir 
George, gently. " And, my dear Hayward, 
the doctor tells me, and my own sense tells 
me, that it is no climate for her to be in." 

" Yes, I know," said Hayward, abruptly. 

"And, therefore, before anythmg else, 
before we discuss your future profession, let 
me entreat you at once to accept from me 
the means to take her away. Do not 
refuse this, Hayward. For your mother* 
sake I am sure you will not." 

Hayward bit his lips and leant back in the 
carriage as Sir George said this. " For his 
mother s sake ! " And yet to accept money 

VOL. II. F 



66 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

firom Sir Greorge, from the man about to 
many the woman he had so madly loved. 
It wa8 a cruel altematiye. On the one 
hand his mother, on the other his jealous 
passionate heart. 

" I do not know what to say, Sir George/ 
at last he faltered. 

"Say nothing/' said Sir George, "but 
take this cheque. Nay," as Hayward 
pushed the slip of paper back, " I will take 
no refiisal. I asked the doctor which would 
be the best place for Mrs. Hayward to go, 
and he proposed Torquay, or some other mild 
spot on the Devonshire coast. At aU events, 
he said, she ought to go at once. Who are 
these people you are with ? " continued Sir 
George. "Your mother said it was a 
printing establishment that you are in. 
We had better see the people at once, 
and arrange about your leaving." 

Sir George asked aU these questions, and 
made all these propositions in a quick tone 
and manner, somewhat dLflferent to his usual 
stately way. He, in fact, was anxious not 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 67 

to allow Hayward time for mucli thought. 
He wished to arrange it all at once. He 
had talked himself into the belief, and Isabel 
Trevor had talked him into the beUef, that 
Hayward's love for her had only been a 
young man s passing fancy, and he now 
(as he had told Hayward) wished to forget 
all about it. 

He did not, however, wish to forget the 
debt he owed to the man who had saved 
his life. This he considered binding and 
sacred, and Isabel Trevor also had not been 
unwilling that Sir George should once more 
seek out Philip Hayward. 

'^ Suppose I go back and see this person, 
this printer, now ? " w^nt on Sir George. 
*'In that case you could take Mrs. Hay- 
ward out of town to-morrow ? " 

" No, no ! " cried Hayward quickly, almost 
passionately, "you must let me think. I 
cannot decide to-day — ^to-morrow, if you 
will " 

*^ To-morrow, then," said Sir George, ^'I 
wm go with you, and arrange with this 



68 BENEATH THE WATE. 

person. If he desires any compensation for 
the loss of your services, I shall be most 
happy to advance it." 

Hayward murmured a word of thanks, 
and then Sir George quietly changed the 
conversation, talking to Hayward upon the 
passing topics of the day until the carriage 
stopped before the house at Chelsea where 
the Haywards lodged. 

" I will not go in to-night," said Sir 
George, "for Mrs. Hayward will be tired, 
but I will call to-morrow. And now, good- 
bye, Hayward ! I am glad indeed to have 
found you, and remember, for your m6ther's 
sake, I expect you will not refiise my 
request." And then Sir George took 
Hayward's hand, and in a few moments the 
carriage was gone, and almost like a man 
in a dream Hayward entered the house. 

He found his mother flushed and ex- 
cited. 

"Who do you think has been here 
to-day, my dear ?" she said the moment he 
entered the room. 



BENEATH THE WATB. 69 

" I know, mother," said Hayward, trying 
for her sake to snule. 

" Sir George Hamilton," continued Mrs. 
Hayward, with evident pleasure and pride. 
•' Oh, my dear, come beside me, and let me 
tell you all he said. He made me indeed 
proud of my boy, my darling." And Mrs. 
Hayward's eyes filled with tears. 

"Hush, mother! never mind," said 
Haywar4. "You will be ill if you excite 
yourself in this way." 

"You never told me half," said Mrs. 
Hayward, with fond maternal pride. "Oh, 
my dear, my dear," and the mother leaned 
her head upon her son's shoulder. " I am 
ready to die now, when I know I leave 
you with a friend Uke this." 

And what could Hayward say? Mrs. 
Hayward seemed so full of joy and pride 
it seemed impossible to her son to damp 
her pleasure. Sir George had said this of 
him, and Sir George had said that ; so the 
fond mother prattled on. Then Hayward 
told her of Sir George's proposal that she 



70 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

should leave town; and the poor mvalid's 
eyes sparkled at the idea. 

" I longed to see the sea once more/' 
she said ; ^^ I will die more easily, my dear^ 
out of this smoky town." 

These words settled it. " For her sake 
I will do this, as I have done the rest," 
Hayward determined, and so he laid self 
aside. 

He kissed his mother when he went away 
the next morning with even more tenderness 
than usual. 

" You, too, are looking pale, my Philip," 
she said, as he did this. " The change will 
do you good as well. I do not know how 
I shall find words to thank your generous 
friend." 

Then Philip went to his work, and sat 
down as usual, with his proofs lying before 
him. But the self-sacrificing heroine that 
he had been busy with the day before grew 
a very hazy personage to his mind as he 
went on. He saw two other faces ever 
before him — Sir George Hamilton's and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 71 

Isabel Trevor's. Then by-and-bye he heard 
a carriage stop before the street door, and 
curiosity prompted him to look out. He 
knew at once to whom the plain dark 
carriage and the two valuable bay horses 
that he saw standing belonged. Sir George 
Hannlton had arrived. But at lea^t a 
quarter of an hour elapsed before he received 
any announcement of the fact. Then one 
of the printers came and told him that Mr. 
Newcome wanted him in his private room. 
Hayward accordingly proceeded there, and 
foimd Sir George Hamilton closeted with 
his employer. 

" This gentleman — Sir George Hamilton," 
said Newcome in an obsequious tone, for 
his philosophy was not proof against Sir 
George's wealth and rank, "has just been 
telling me, Hayward, that he considers 
himself under a great obligation to you. 
As you are a connection of mine, I feel 
gratified that your conduct has deserved 
such favourable notice." And the printer 
bowed to the baronet. 



72 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Sir George is good enough to say so," 
answered Hayward, embarrassed. 

" I took you into this establishment with- 
out knowing much of you/' continued Mr. 
Newcome, secretly anxious to impress Sir 
George with his superiority, " but I must 
say you have given me every satisfaction. 
I imderstand your mother is ill, and that 
you wish for the present to leave? This 
will be a serious inconvenience at this time, 
when we have a great press of business on 
hand ; but of course at Sir George's request 

" And again Mr. Newcome bowed 

to Sir George. 

*^ I have arranged everything with Mr. 
Newcome," said Sir George, who was 
becoming a little weary of the printer's 
speeches. "You will leave your employ- 
ment here to-day, and I sincerely hope, my 
dear fellow, that the change of air will do 
your mother good." 

" I thank you,'* said Hayward, with 
quivering Ups. 

"And now I will say good-bye," went 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 73 

on Sir Greorge. " Good morning, Mr. New- 
come," and he bowed to the printer, who, 
however, followed the baronet downstairs. 
"I have seen your mother," added Sir 
G-eorge, after he had taken his seat in the 
carriage waiting outside, and addressing 
Hayward, " and we have settled it all. You 
must write to me. You know the address ? 
Grood-bye, Hayward." And Sir George 
shook Hayward's hand warmly, and then 
the carriage door was shut, and Sir George 
was driven away ; Mr. Newcome and 
Hayward being left standing together on 
the flags outside the office. 

" I say, young gentleman," said New- 
come, relapsing into his usual sneers as the 
carriage disappeared, for he was disappointed 
in Sir George's manner to himself, " so you 
kept all this grand connection of yours a 
secret from the Moxams, eh? If you had 
such a rich friend ready to do so much 
for you, why did you go to Moxam to seek 
for employment ? " 

" I did not care to ask Sir George for 



74 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

anything," answered Hay ward, naturally 
resenting these questions. 

" Humph ! WeU, I'm glad to find a little 
modesty at last among my kind," said 
Newcome, still curling his thin, upper lip. 
"Well, I hope you'll have a pleasant trip 
to the sea. Try to finish that confounded 
book before you go." And then Mr. New- 
come retired again to his private room, and 
when he got there drew out of his pocket 
a cheque bearing Sir George Hamilton's 
name ; the amount of which, if Hayward 
could have seen the price Mr. Newcome 
had put upon his services, would have filled 
his heart with shame. 

But as he did not see it, he returned 
thoughtfully to his work, and endeavoured 
to do the best he could for his unsatis- 
factory heroine upstairs. Sir George, too, 
looked more than ordinarily thoughtful as 
he was being driven down the narrow 
thoroughfare where the establishment of 
Messrs. Salkeld and Newcome stood. He 
had asked Hayward to write to him. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 75 

He had told him that the usual address 
would find him. But he had not told 
Hayward that to-morrow was his wedding 
day. 



i 

ill 



N 






^ 



« 
#1 



i 



CHAPTER V. 



WEDDING GUESTS. 



Sir George Hamilton had more than or 
reason for not telling Hayward that he vn 
to be married to Isabel Trevor on tit 
following day. These are easy to iinde 
stand. He feared to annoy Hayward I 
alluding to what at best must be a vexatioi 
subject to him; and he also generous] 
thought that perhaps the knowledge of h 
near marriage might make it more painf 
to Hayward to accept an obligation froi 
him. StUl, he did not lay much stress c 
the idea of the young man's love for h 
future wife. He only believed that Ha; 
ward had been led away by her grei 
beauty, and he was quite ready (as we ha^ 



BENBATH THE WAVE. 77 

seen) to forgive this, and truly glad to be 
able to be of some service to the man to 
whom he owed his life. 

He drove straight from the printing 
establishment of Messrs. Salkeld and New- 
come to King's Cross Station. He, indeed, 
had barely time to catch the midday train 
north, and he had promised to arrive at 
Sanda HaU before nightfall. 

He smiled to himself somewhat grimly 
when he remembered his little private trans- 
action with Mr. Newcome. That astute 
gentleman thought he had thrown dust in 
the eyes of the wealthy Sir George, but he 
had not. Sir George knew about as well as 
Mr. Newcome did, that Hayward's place 
could easily be supplied ; and he knew that 
the printer had cheated him, as in fact we 
aU generally know when we are cheated. 
There's a wonderful ring about the true 
metal that the false can never borrow. But 
Sir George had taken a strange fancy to 
Hiayward, and was ready to do a great deal 
to save him from annoyance of any kind. 



78 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Thus he had made no objection to Mr. New- 
come's modest compensation requirements 
for the loss of Hayward's services, but at 
the same time he quite understood Mr. 
Newcome. 

But we may be sure that the very memory 
of the sharp printer had passed away from 
Sir George's mind long before he reached 
Sanda Hall. He was going to be married 
to-morrow to Isabel Trevor — ^to a woman 
who had fascinated him against his will, and 
whom he even now regarded with strangely 
mingled feelings. He did not trust her. 
The subtle glamour of her beauty over- 
powered his reason, but his reason was still 
there. Now his love was the strongest, but 
the day might come when his reason would 
assert itself, and when the subtle glamour 
of her beauty might pass away. 

All the windows of the whole hall at 
Sanda were lighted from within, when, in 
the dark November evening, he approached 
ifc. At his earnest request the marriage was 
to be a very quiet one; but Isabel had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 79 

invited her school firiends, Patty and Lu 
Featherstone, to be her bridesmaids, when 
she had first announced her engagement 
to Sir George; and she insisted therefore 
that they should be present at the cere- 
mony. 

Sir George yielded to her wishes about 
the Featherstones, but he had most earnestly 
requested that there should be no wedding 
festivities. Both Isabel and Mr. Trevor 
were very much disappointed at this, but 
Isabel did not yet dare openly to disregard 
her future husband's requests. 

So in the warm and weU-lit drawing-room 
at Sanda, when Sir George arrived, there 
was only a very small party assembled. It 
consisted of Patty and Lu Featherstone, 
Hilda Marston, and a Mr. Graham, who 
was an immarried man, and a coimtry 
neighbour of the Trevors, and of course 
Isabel and her father. 

They all looked very well pleased with 
themselves and each other, except Hilda 
Marston. This poor girl was sitting apart 



80 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

from the rest, looking pale and anxious. 
And she had some cause to do so. 

*'As I am going to be married. Miss 
Marston," Isabel Trevor had said to her, 
shortly after their return to Sanda from 
Massam, **you ought to be looking out 
for another situation, ought you not T 

"Yes," Hilda had answered, turning 
rather pale. "When do you wish me 
to go?" 

" You can stay until after the wedding," 
replied Miss Trevor, " as there will be so 
many things to do." And thus Hilda 
Marston's days at Sanda were about num- 
bered. 

But it was not about herself chiefly that 
caused her to look so pale and sad, Mr. 
Trevor had resented to the full extent of 
his narrow feelings Hilda's rejection of his 
proposal. It was monstrous 1 the Squire 
of Sanda told himself. A penniless girl 
without any particular beauty, rushing up 
to him as she had done on that Sunday at 
Massam, and telling him she could not 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 81 

many him! Not marry him, indeed! 
Then he would tell her, and meant to tell 
her, that he would do nothing more, either 
for herself or her family. 

And he had actually done this. He 
was not in bad spirits, however, about 
it. Patty and Lu Featherstone had arrived 
at the Hall, and Patty and Lu ha 1 ex- 
changed a sisterly confidence on the night 
of their arrival there. 

" This is a dear old place, isn't it, Lu ?" 
Patty had said, as she unfastened her abun- 
dant reddish-brown hair. 

" Awfully jolly," answered Lu. ** Sup- 
pose, Patty, as you are the eldest, you make 
love to the old gentleman?" 

Patty made a wry face. 

*' Suppose you do yourself, my dear ?" 
she said. 

"Well," answered Lu, deliberately, "it 
is all very fine, you know, amusing oneself 
and that kind of thing, but really — I dare- 
say you won't believe it — but really if Mr. 
Trevor were to ask me to be mistress of 

VOL. II. o 



82 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Sanda Hall, I wouldn't, under the circum- 
stances, say no." 

Both sisters understood the " circumstan- 
ces." The graceless Antony Featherstone, 
their father, had been in a little more trouble 
even than usual when they had left home. 
The girls were fond of their father, and 
always ready to forgive him aU his short- 
comings, but they did not like it. 

So Lu Featherstone made herself very 
agreeable to Mr. Trevor during the few 
days that the sisters were at Sanda Hall, 
before the day fixed for Isabel's wedding. 
Lu was a good-looking, high-spirited, and 
amusing girl, and Mr. Trevor felt that he 
enjoyed her agreeable society very much. 
He walked and rode with the girls as if he 
were a young man. This very day (on the 
evening of which we find them all assembled 
in the drawing-room of Sanda Hall expecting 
Sir George's arrival) Mr. Trevor had had 
a long walk on the sands alone with Lu 
Featherstone ; climbing over the rocks 
after the energetic girl, with the agility 
(he imagined) of a squirrel. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 83 

He felt himself so invigorated by the sea 
air, Lus laughter, and the pleasant belief 
that she contrived very cleverly to instil in 
his mind that he was still young enough 
to be charming, that he determined on his 
return to the Hall to let Hilda Marston see 
that he was not pining after her. She might 
have the bad taste not to admire Reginald 
Trevor, Esq., but all young ladies were 
efvidently not of the same opinion, thought 
the Squire of Sanda, straightening his 
necktie (which had got a little awry with 
his unusual exertions during the morning) 
before the dining-room mirror. So he rung 
the bell, and ordered the butler to summons 
Miss Marston to his presence. 

He seated himself in an easy chair, and 
took up the Times in preparation for the 
coming interview. She should see he was 
not at all nervous about it, he told himself, 
looking attentively at the columns of the 
paper, which, however, he was holding with 
the print reversed. He was nervous, in 
truth, but Hilda had wounded his vanity ; 
he therefore felt very bitter towards Hilda. 



84 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Enter Holda^ somewhat tiinidlj. Was 
he going to ask her again ? the poor girl 
thought for a moment when she received the 
squire's summons. And what must she 
answer? she had thought also with quick- 
ened breath. What must she say? 

She had received one or two very angry 
and disappointed letters from her eldest 
sister Marian on the subject of the squire's 
offer of m^xrUg.. Mks ilarston ij told 
Hilda that she thought she (Hilda) had 
acted ungratefully to Mr, Trevor. She had 
pointed out where they would have been 
but for Mr. Trevor, and she had more than 
hinted how different their position would 
have been now if HUda had not been 
selfish enough only to think of self, when 
she refused a man who had done, and 
would probably have done, so much for 
them all. 

You see this was not unnatural. Marian 
Marston was a governess in a clergyman's 
family where she had visited on equal terms 
during her father's lifetime, and she was 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 85 

very uncomfortable. She could not help 
thinking if her sister had been Mrs. Trevor, 
of Sanda Hall, how different she herself 
would have been ! She might have lived 
with Hilda, and also married in good time. 
And then there was little Ned. He was 
totally unprovided for, and, unlike the rest 
of the family, not of an age to provide for 
himself. What would become of him. Miss 
Marston thought, if Mr. Trevor was so 
angry with Hilda as to entirely withdraw 
his patronage from them? 

Miss Marston had pointed out this last 
fact to Hilda very forcibly. ** Think of 
poor little Ned," she had written to her 
sister, " the young brother we both promised 
dear papa on his death-bed to do our best 
for." Hilda had cried very bitterly over 
this letter, and had begun to think she was 
selfish. She was too proud a girl to make 
any advances to Mr. Trevor, but she had 
thought once or twice that perhaps she 
had acted imwisely. Then the "Feather- 
stone girls " came to Sanda, and after this 



86 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hilda had very little chance of seeing Mr. 
Trevor. 

She felt nervous, therefore, when she 
entered his presence on being summoned 
there by his butler. There he sat ; his 
narrow forehead and well-arranged white 
hair just visible above the newspaper he 
held in his hand. He did not rise as Hilda 
entered. He pretended for a moment not 
to see her; and then, when the poor girl 
said tremblingly — 

" I — I — ^think you sent for me, Mr. 
Trevor ? " He lowered his newspaper. 

'' Ah, Miss Marston ! Ah, to be sure," 
said the squire, in his grandest tones. 
"Yes, yes, I wish to say a few words 
to you — ^pray be seated." 

Hilda meekly took a seat at his com- 
mand. 

" I wish to say. Miss Marston," then 
continued the squire, rustling his paper, 
"that as my daughter is (as you know) 
about to be married, I shall not require 
your further services here." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 87 

" Very well," said Hilda, turning scarlet. 

** And about your young brother, Ed- 
ward," went on Mr. Trevor, with another 
wave of his newspaper, " I have considered 
this question; and I have come to the 
conclusion that under the circumstances 
it will be inexpedient for me to charge 
myself further with the expenses of his 
education. I mean, therefore, to give Mr. 
Irvine notice to that effect." 

If Hilda were red before, she turned very 
pale as JVEr. Trevor ended his speech. Then 
she rose from her seat with a sort of 
exclamation, and stood before him. 

"Oh! Mr. Trevor," she said, "if if 

I have offended you " 

" I am not in the least offended," answered 
Mr. Trevor. " You could not offend me." 

" I mean," faltered Hilda, " don't please 
allow anything that I have done to prejudice 
you against poor little Ned." 

" I am never prejudiced," said Mr. Trevor. 
" But, pray, may I ask, what claim do you 
consider your brother has on me ? " 



88 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Alas, Hilda knew too well he had none. 
Tears rose in her eyes as Mr. Trevor asked 
the question, but with a great eflTort she 
forced them back. 

*' I know he has no claim, sir — except on 
your generosity," she said. " But, of course, 
if you have decided " 

" I have decided," said Mr. Trevor, rising 
also, " and I am not a man hastily to change 
my decisions. I recognize no claim what- 
ever that he has, either on my generosity 
or otherwise. In different circumstances, 
of course I should have acted differently. 
As it is, I trust that you now perfectly 
understand my intentions." 

" Yes, perfectly," said Hilda, and her face 
flushed again. Yes, she understood his 
intentions, and understood also his meanness 
and cruelty. She was glad at that moment 
that she had said no to this man. What I 
he could revenge himself on poor little Ned 
she was thinking as she turned away and 
left the squire's presence. "It was very, 
very small," she thought with curling lip. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 89 

But his decision left the poor girl in a 
most trying position. She could not forsake 
her little brother, and she could not take 
him with her if she obtained any situation 
as a governess or a companion. "What 
am I to do ? " thought Hilda again and 
again during the afternoon, again and again 
as she sat pale and silent in the drawing- 
room after dinner, when all the rest were 
looking so well satisfied and pleased. 

Mr. Trevor was sitting close to Lu 
Featherstone, showing her some photo- 
graphs of Italy which he had brought 
from that country some years ago; Patty 
Featherstone was sitting at the piano, 
chattering and laughing to Mr. Graham, 
and Isabel Trevor was moving rather 
restlessly about. Then came the sound of 
carriage wheels on the drive outside the 
house, and Mr. Trevor took out his watch 
when he heard it. 

"That is Hamilton," he said, and with 
a little laugh Isabel left the room. 

She met her lover on the staircase. 



90 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Are you very tired?" she said. But 
Sir George made no answer. He stood for 
a moment looking at her, and then took 
her in his arms. 

" You are rather late," said Isabel, feeling 
as if she knew not what to say. 

*^ The train got in late," answered Sir 
Greorge. "And you — my Isabel — '^ 

Yes, he loved her. Chill doubts rose up 
sometimes in his heart, and distrust ; but he 
never felt as if he knew not what to say 
to her. She did not weary him as he 
wearied her. Isabel had tried hard to win 
him, but she soon tired of her conquest. If 
a man loved her she was sure to tire of 
him. The coldest heart could have kept 
her longest. Sir George had been devoted 
to her since their engagement, devoted and 
exacting, and already Isabel was weary. 

"Where are the rest?" he asked, 
presently. 

" Papa is making desperate love to Lu 
Featherstone," answered Isabel, lightly, 
" and Patty desperate love to Mr. Graham. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 91 

They are in the drawing-room. Come, let 
us join them/* 

'' Why ? " said Sir George. " Let us go 
into the library. We want no one else, 
do we, Isabel ? " 

Isabel gave a little airy shrug of her 
shoulders. 

"I am too old for such frivolity," she 
said. "No, decidedly let us go into the 
drawing-room and behave ourselves like 
reasonable creatures." 

"Very well," said Sir George, almost 
coldly. He was sensitive and proud, and 
he would not have condescended to ask 
her again. So he followed her into the 
lighted drawing-room. 

"My dear Hamilton," said Mr. Trevor, 
rising and shaJdng his future son-in-law's 
hand with great cordiaUty. 

Then Sir George spoke to the two 
Featherstones, and Isabel rang for tea. Sir 
George had dined on his journey, and though 
»ppi ™ laid for hi J dow^tairB he 1 
dined to partake of it. He stood talking 



92 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

to Isabel, who looked wonderfully beautiful. 
By-and-bye his eyes fell on Hilda Marston, 
who wa^ sitting aknost behind one of the 
window curtains, and quite apart from the 
rest. Sir George at once crossed the room 
and spoke to her. 

" I saw young Hayward in town to-day, 
Miss Marston," he said, after he had shaken 
hands with her. 

" Indeed I " said Hilda, quickly, and she 
was conscious that she blushed. 

" What ! has our hero cast up again ? " 
exclaimed Isabel, and she looked coquet- 
tishly and smilingly at Sir George. 

" Hayward ? " said the squire. " Ah, yes, 
yes, to be sure. The young man who 
assisted in rescuing you. Sir George ? He 
left Massam suddenly — ^yes, I remember — 
he was called away." 

" And where did you find him ? " asked 
Isabel of Sir George. " Toiling in a garret, 
after the manner of heroes ? " 

"I found him very worthily employed," 
answered Sir George, gravely. " I also 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 93 

called upon his mother, who is very ill. 
She seems a very superior woman, and 
Hayward, by her account, at least, is a 
devoted son." 

"Well, we all owe him a certain debt," 
said Isabel, again smiling coquettishly at 
Sir George, which smile for a moment he 
returned. Then his expression suddenly 
changed. His brow contracted, and a look 
of pain passed over his face. But it was 
only for a brief interval. With an effort he 
threw off the dark memory that shadow-like 
had crossed his mind ; with an effort he 
turned to smile once more on Isabel. He 
would forget the past, he told himself; 
the paBt, which, grim and weird-Uke, would 
rise sometimes unbidden to his heart. 



CHAPTER VI. 

A GOOD MABRIAGE. 

The next morning, at half-past ten o'clock, 
Isabel Trevor was married in the little 
parish church of Sanda-by-the-Sea. It was 
a very quiet ceremony as regards the com- 
pany present. No one had been told in 
the village when it was to take place; no 
one at least but the parson and the clerk, 
and one honourable exception. This was 
Mrs. Irvine. When, in fact, the Rev. 
Matthew was sent for to the Hall by Mr. 
Trevor, and informed of the day and hour 
that they had fixed on for the approaching 
marriage, Isabel, who was present, had said 
playfully (as was her wont to men), " And, 
remember, you are to tell no one, Mr. 
Irvine. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 95 

^' Of course not," answered the Rev. 
Matthew, "if you wish it." 

"With, of course, the exception of Mrs. 
Irvine," continued Isabel, smilingly, "as I 
know you could keep no secret from her." 

" Nay, my dear lady, I will do so if you 
command me," replied the Rev. Matthew. 

" I don't expect too much from frail 
human nature, Mr. Irvine," said Isabel, 
laughing; "and I know that you neither 
could nor would keep a secret from Mrs. 
Irvine. Come now, confess. Did you 
ever ? " 

" I am no advocate of confession. Miss 
Trevor," answered the parson, shaking his 
head, and looking at Isabel with his half- 
comic, half pathetic smile. " But if I may 
ask a favour — knowing, as I do, that nothing 
gives ladies so much pleasure as to see gay 
attire, except possessing it themselves — I 
would ask permission to be allowed to 
whisper in my wife's ear the hour of the 
approaxjhing ceremony." 

" Very well," said Isabel, " but remember 



96 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

its a bargain. Mrs. Irvine, and no one 
else." 

Thus Mrs. Irvine (who took her seat 
solemnly in a commanding situation in the 
church precisely at ten o'clock) was the only 
spectator awaiting the bridal party when it 
arrived there. True, at the sight of the two 
carriages from the Hall standing at the 
church door, a small crowd of villagers 
(chiefly children) collected outside. But 
they were not permitted to enter the 
church. Mrs. Irvine, and Mrs. Irvine 
alone, saw the splendour of the bride's 
dress. This was precisely the same as if 
Isabel had expected to be admired by a 
crowd of Mends. The lace on her dress 
alone cost a Uttle fortune, and she wore all 
the magnificent Hamilton family diamonds, 
which Sir George had caused to be re-set 
for her. Sir George was surprised, and 
even annoyed when she appeared in them. 

"My dear Isabel," he said, touching the 
gUttering necklet clasped round her white 
throat, "you surely do not mean to wear 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 97 

all these things when no one is to be 
present ? " 

'' I wear them for my own gratification, 
sir, and I might perhaps add for yours," 
answered Isabel in her bright, bold way; 
her eyes fixed the while on the reflected 
image of herself in a mirror hanging 
opposite to her. 

**But it seems so incongruous," said Sir 
George. 

"How do I look?" asked Isabel. And 
to this question there could be only one 
reply. 

Then, before Sir George could make any 
further objections to the unnecessary splen- 
dour of her dress, the carriages came round ; 
and Mr. Trevor, with no small pride, led 
his daughter downstairs, and presently they 
were all driven to the church ; Mr. Graham 
(the country neighbour who had dined at 
the HaJl the night before) a<;ting aa Sir 
Gteorge's best man, and Patty and Lu as 
Isabel's bridesmaids. Hilda Marston was 
not aaked to be present at the ceremony, 

VOL. II. H 



98 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and she did not go to the church. She was, 
as we have seen, very unhappy. She had 
very little, almost no money — only a few 
pounds-and what would this do to begin 
the world with? After the marriage was 
over she had made up her mind to ask 
Mr. Trevor when poor httle Ned was to 
be removed from Mr. Irvine's. When she 
knew this, she determined to take her little 
brother with her to London and try to 
educate him herself, and at the same time 
endeavour to teach music. She knew that 
this would be very difficult to accomplish, 
but she was a brave good girl, and she 
meant to try. She had been educated in a 
school near London, and she thought that 
perhaps her old governess, the mistress of 
this establishment, would endeavour to 
help her. 

She was thinking of the future when she 
heard the carriages containing the bridal 
party return. Yes, Isabel Trevor had 
gained her object. She was Lady Hamilton 
now, and she thought of this with satisfac- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 99 

tion and pride as she once more approached 
her old home after the ceremony was over. 

Sir George, on the contrary, who of 
course was sitting in the carriage by her 
side, looked pale and agitated. 

"Thank God it is over," he said, and 
Isabel answered by a little laugh. 

"Well, it did not take very long," she 

said. " I am only sorry " And then 

she checked herself. 

" For what, Isabel ?" asked Sir George, 
looking into her beautiful face. 

She was thinking "that there were sq 
few people there to see me married." She 
had not once thought of the solemn words 
that she had just uttered. She had plighted 
her troth, but the holy significance of that 
promise was totally lost to her. She had 
married for the world's sake, therefore she 
would have been well pleased if a crowd 
had witnessed the ceremony. 

But she did not tell this to Sir George. 
The innate coquetry of her nature made her 
check the wish that rose on her Ups. 



100 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"What do you regret, Isabel?" asked 
her bridegroom. 

" It is a secret," she answered, smilingly. 
" Some day, perhaps, I shall whisper it in 
your ear." And Sir George clasped her 
small hand in his tightly as she spoke. 

"Isabel," he said, "you love me, don't 
you ? You really love me ?" 

"Have I not just promised to do so?" 
answered Isabel, smiling again; and Sir 
George tried to content himself with the 
sugared words. 

During the very sumptuous breakfast 
which followed, the cloud, however, cleared 
away from his brow. He drank freely of 
the rare wines which Mr. Trevor had 
produced from his well-stocked cellar for 
the occasion, and he spoke and laughed 
with much less restraint than was his 
wont. 

He had, after the customary manner of 
bridegrooms, brought down lockets for the 
bridesmaids, which he had placed for presen- 
tation in Isabel's hands on the previous 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 101 

evening. He had brought three, meaning 
them for the two Featherstones and Hilda 
Marston. Isabel had not told him that she 
did not mean Hilda to be one of her brides- 
maids, and he naturally concluded that she 
would be so. Each of the lockets was in 
a separate case and package, and addressed 
to L you.g lady it wi intended for. 
Isabel, before they retired for the night, 
had duly presented Patty and Lu Feather- 
stone with theirs, and both the girls and 
herself went into raptures over their beauty. 
Sir George was a very rich man, and had 
a sort of gorgeous magnificence of taste, 
which had shown itself even in the choice 
of his wife. He had therefore ordered the 
bridesmaids' lockets without in the least 
considering the expense. The monograms 
on each were of costly diamonds and emer- 
alds, and after Isabel had seen the Feather- 
stones', she felt annoyed that anything so 
beautiful and expensive should be given 
to Hilda Marston. 

She was, as she had said herself, strangely 



102 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

covetous of jewels. She therefore opened 
Hilda's packet before she went to bed, and 
examined and re-examined the shining 
stones. She might have had the same for 
the asking. In her jewel-box were lying 
ghttering gems of double and treble the 
value ; but it was such a pretty locket, she 
thought, turning Hilda's over and over in 
her white hands. 

^t all events she had not given it to 
Hilda before the wedding breakfast. The 
Featherstones, of course, wore theirs, and 
were profuse in their admiration and thanks 
for them to the donor. This had taken place 
before the marriage, but by chance during 
the breakfast that followed it Sir George's 
eyes fell on Hilda's white dress, and missed 
the glittering ornament that he naturally 
expected to see her wear. 

*'How is it. Miss Marston," he asked, 
with a freedom unusual to him, "that you 
do not honour my poor present like the 
other young ladies ? " 

At this question Hilda looked up 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 103 

surprised, and a sudden blush passed over 
Isabel's face. 

" I — I — ^have forgotten to give Miss 
Marston her locket/' she said, after a 
moment's .hesitation. " How stupid of me ! " 

" It was very good of you to think of 
me," said Hilda, addressing Sir George. 

"After breakfast is over I will give it 
to you," abided the new Lady Hamilton. 
"Pray remind me to do so." 

But she did not need to be reminded. 
As soon as the breakfast was over she sent 
her maid for Hilda, and when Hilda went 
to her at her bidding she told Hilda to 
shut the room door. 

When they were alone, she said, " About 
this locket. Miss Marston. Sir George 
bought it for you in mistake. He thought 
you were to be one of the bridesmaids." 

" Yes," replied Hilda, and her face flushed. 

" But as he did buy it for you, of course 
it ought to be yours," continued Isabel; 
"and I intended to give it to you. But 
I've been thinking — ^it won't be much use 



104 BENEATH THE WATB. 

to you, will it ? And I like it very much, 
and I am willing to buy it of you." 

Hilda was silent. She really did not 
know what to say. 

" I will give you twenty pounds for it," 
went on Isabel. "That will be of more 
use to you, I think, than a locket." 

She knew she was ofltering Hilda not 
a third of the real value of t^p ornament; 
she knew also that Hilda would probably 
not know this, and she was never lavish 
in her deaUngs with others. 

" I — I thank you," said Hilda ; and the 
flush on her face considerably deepened, 
for she was thinking of her necessities. 
**Yes, that will be of more use to me 
than the locket — ^if you think Sir George 
will not be offended." 

" He need never know anything about 
it," rephed Isabel, carelessly. " There is 
the money for you." And she placed four 
notes in Hilda's hand, and with a feeling 
of reUef and gratitude in her heart, Hilda 
put up her face to kiss the bride. 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 105 

*' I have never congratulated you," she 
aaid ; and her grey eyes grew moist as she 
spoke, for she was very tender-hearted. 
" I — I hope you will be very happy, Lady 
Hamilton." 

"Thank you," said Isabel, as she in- 
differently, but not unkindly returned the 
kiss. All women were in fact indifferent 
to her except when she was competing with 
them for admiration of any sort. Then she 
had some interest in their proceedings and 
appearance ; but when it was otherwise, she 
cared very httle or nothing about them. 
She therefore kissed Hilda Marston coldly, 
but not unkindly. 

''I shall be glad to hear from you," she 
said. " Write and tell me how you get 
on — and perhaps by-and-bye you may 
oome to see me at Massam." 

"Thank you — ^you are very kind," an- 
swered Hilda, as, without another thought 
of her companion's future, the beautiful 
bride turned away. 

After this came the bustle of departure, 



106 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the satin slippers and the rice flung after 
the newly wedded pair, and then the 
somewhat oppressive feeling that the ex- 
citement was over, and that it was rather 
diflScult all at once to settle down again 
into ordinary every-day life. 

The Featherstones felt that they could 
not. They were high-spirited, Uvely girk, 
and were not inclined to be . dull if they 
could help it. 

" Suppose we go for a drive ? " said Lu, 
rather coquettishly to Mr. Trevor, who was 
in a state of flutter highly unbecoming to 
his years. 

Lu, indeed, had so effectually flattered 
his self-love, that he imagined he had fallen 
in love with her ! He forgot, poor man, 
his white hairs, his sixty years. He was 
delighted to have married his daughter so 
well, and felt that now he was without 
incumbrances in the world. He eyed him- 
self complacently both in his mental and 
bed-room looking glass. " Yes," he thought, 
glancing at the bedroom one, " I am a fine 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 107 

looking man. Not a boy, certainly; but 
sensible girls prefer men-fine-looking men 
— ^to boys." And then he thought of his 
character. He had contemplated and sur- 
veyed this with satisfaction nearly all the 
years of his Ufe ! He was an upright, firm, 
and thoroughly conscientious, conservative 
gentleman, he thought. He had never 
swerved from the right path, and had gone 
straight as a ramrod all his days. He had 
no pity for poverty, sin, or shame. He 
was not a sinner, and sinners (poor sinners 
in particular) were odious to his sight. And 
all his ideas, personal or ptherwise, Lu had 
cleverly allowed him to perceive were also hers. 
" The dear girl likes me," he thought, 
again glancing at his bedroom looking-glass, 
and arranging his grey whiskers to his 
satisfaction, in preparation for going out for 
the drive Lu had proposed. " There are 
drawbacks, certainly," continued his mental 
reflections, and visions of reckless Antony 
Fea^herstone rose rather grimly before him. 
"Btit she is a fine girl — a fine, handsome, 



108 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

high-spirited giri— and besides I have paid 
her too much attention now honourably to 
draw back." 

So when Reginald Trevor, Esq., seated 
himself in the pony cart, which Lu had 
preferred to drive- in to the other more 
pretentious carriages belonging to the place, 
firstly, because she wished to drive, secondly, 
because she wished to be alone with Mr. 
Trevor, Mr. Trevor had made up his mind 
to ask her to be his wife. 

The pony usually driven in the cart was 
named "Nick." "Nick" was a handsome 
pony, but of wicked tendencies ; so wicked 
that in the stables the adjective "old*' was 
frequently added to his name. But " Nick** 
never dared to play any of his little tricks 
when driven by Isabel. He knew the firm, 
strong, white hand of his mistress too well to 
do so. When he first came to the Hall 
stables she had taught him a lesson or two, 
and " Nick " had never forgotten them. 
Thus his real character was not exactly 
known to Lu Featherstone. She had often 



BENEATH THE WATE. 109 

wished to drive him. He was so handsome 
and clever^ that she longed to hold the reins 
in her hands. 

And now she had got her wish. Away 
went " Nick " in his brisk quick trot, along 
the not over good roads round Sanda, drag- 
ging the Ught cart with the greatest ease, in 
which Lu and Mr. Trevor were seated. All 
went weU at first. Lu was a good whip, and 
liked to have the opportunity of showing 
it, and she was pleased also to look to 
advantage before Mr. Trevor. Suddenly, 
however, the cart gave rather an awkward 
jerk in passing over a stone on the road. 

''My dear girl," exclaimed Mr. Trevor, 
piotectingly laying his hand on Lu's arm, 
who became flurried and nervous at the old 
man's touch. 

" If we could be always driving together ?" 
suggested Mr. Trevor, still retaining his 
grasp on Lu's arm, and Lu laughed imeasily 
in reply. 

" Would you like it ? " continued Mr. 
Trevor, with a weU-satisfied sunper. 



110 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Lu's hands trembled, and her hold on the 
rems grew less firm. You see it is one thing 
for a girl to make up her mind to accept a 
man she does not particularly care for, and 
another thing to do it. Lu Featherstone 
meant to marry Mr. Trevor, but she felt 
very uncomfortable when he first began to 
make love to her. 

" Would you ? " again asked Mr. Trevor, 
in what he supposed to be an arch and 
engaging whisper. 

" I I think so," answered Lu, 

blushing and hanging her head, and with 
the reins held very loosely in her shaking 
hands* But the next moment she gave a 
cry, and looked up. " Nick " had taken 
advantage of the love-making going on 
behind him. He in fact had taken the bit 
between his strong teeth, and had begun 
galloping in a reckless manner along the 
rough road. In vain Lu tried to check him. 
On he galloped ; on along the road, and then 
to the terror of both herself and Mr. Trevor 
he took a sharp turn, and the next minute 



BENEATH THE WAVE. Ill 

was dashing at full speed down a narrow 
pathway which led to the sands, and which 
was only occasionally used by workmen's 
carts, for the purpose of conveying sand 
firom the shore. 

Lu turned pale, and Mr. Trevor almost 
blue. 

" Stop him ! stop him !" cried Mr. 
Trevor, "or for a certainty we shall be 
thrown I" 

" I can't !" answered Lu, pulling desper- 
ately at the reins. 

The road was rough and really dangerous. 
On one side of it was a sort of bank formed 
in making it, which sloped steeply down 
to the sands below, on the other the coarse 
herbage which grew on the uneven hillocks, 
through which the path was cut. It grew 
steeper also as it neared the sands. Jolt, 
jolt, went the cart, dashing from side to 
side of the narrow roadway; while Mr. 
Trevor, pale and trenibling, rose from the 
seat, and endeavoured to get over the side 
of the vehicle. 



112 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" If you do you will be killed," said Lu, 
glandng round. " Don't for heaven's sake 
try to do that I" 

" We must, we must get out !" cried Mr. 
Trevor; and the next "moment he was over 
the side of the cart, the impetus of the speed 
at which it was going flinging him round 
first, and then sending him roUing over the 
edge of the road, and then finally down the 
steep bank upon the sands. 

Lu Featherstone gave a cry, but kept 
her seat, and "Nick" galloped on to the 
foot of the road, and having arrived on the 
sands, seemed satisfied, or perhaps frightened 
at the mischief he had done, for he allowed 
Lu to pull him up, and remained quiet 
while she sprang from the cart, and ran to 
the assistance of Mr. Trevor. 

He was lying rolled up where he had 
fallen, and at first Lu felt afraid that some- 
thing serious had happened to him. But 
when she lifted him up she perceived, at 
all events, that he was alive. Yet, at the 
sight of the girl's anxious face bending over 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 113 

him, Mr. Trevor blushed. He had indeed 
feUen in two senses. The dignified. Mr. 
Trevor to be in such a fright about his life 
that he had scrambled out of the cart, and 
left a woman to her fate ! This dimly 
occurred to him at the moment Lu lifted 
him up. The next, self-love, so powerful 
in his heart, asserted itself. 

" I endeavoured to get out to try 

and stop the pony. Miss Featherston3," he 
Mtered, " but my foot slipped. " 

" Yes, of course," said Lu, good-naturedly. 
She knew instinctively what was passing 
in the old man's mind, and she was ready 
to soothe his vanity at once. 

*^ It was very brave of you," she said, 
and Mr. Trevor smiled faintly. 

"It was a risk," he answered, "but I 
was ready to run the risk — for you." 

" Thank you," said Lu, still helping Mr. 
Trevor to rise. But the next instant he 
gave a sharp cry of pain. 

" Oh ! my foot !" he said, leaning heavily 
on Lu's strong arm. 

VOL. II. I 



114 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

He had in fact severely sprained his ankle, 
and was in no mood to make any polite or 
tender speeches. As Lu could not induce 
him again to enter the pony cart (indeed he 
was quite unable to do so), she, after a 
feeble objection on Mr. Trevor's part, once 
more got into it, and drove straight to 
Sanda Hall for assistance for Mr. Trevor, 
whom she was compelled to leave sitting 
alone in state on the sand. 

The position was very unbecoming, Mr. 
Trevor felt, but he also felt he could not 
move from it. There he sat, with pains in 
his foot, and a very disagreeable sensation 
all over him. He did not care to think 
much, somehow; his complacence had been 
disturbed by that sudden and ignominious 
tumble from the road. But there was no 
help for it. 

"That confounded pony shall be shot," 
decided Mr. Trevor, and that was alL 
" Nick " ran but a poor chance for his life 
in the Squire of Sanda's irate mind during 
these moments. Presently, however, he 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 115 

heard voices on the road above him, and 
a minute or two later Lu Featherstone and 
Hilda Marston came running to his side. 
He frowned when he saw Hilda, but Hilda 
never noticed it. Lu, in fact, had given 
rather a highly coloured description of the 
accident when she had reached the Hall. 
Poor Mr. Trevor had been thrown from 
the cart, she had told them, and quietly 
ignored the fact that poor Mr. Trevor had 
scrambled out of the cart himself, and so 
met with his deserts. Thus Hilda was all 
sympathy, and the squire felt himself 
soothed and comforted by the condolences 
of the two young ladies. 

The carriage would be here directly, Lu 
told him, and the servants to help him into 
it; but she had felt so anxious about him 
that she could not wait to return until it 
was ready. This naturally sounded pleasant 
to Mr. Trevor's yet tingling ears. But still 
he was not happy. 

"I have had a severe shake," he said, 
glancing at Lu, and then at Hilda. 



116 BENEATH THE WAVE. 



"Yes, indeed," answered Lu, "but we 
ought to be thankful that it is no worse." 

*'If 1 had only not endeavoured to 

stop the cart," said Mr. Trevor, rather 
feebly. 

"Yes, if you had thought more of your- 
self and less of me," said Lu, casting down 
her eyes; and these clever flattering words 
dilmost restored the Squire of Sanda to 
himself. 

" I could not do that. Miss Lucinda," he 
said, straightening his necktie, which had 
got rather awry during his tumble. **In 
endeavouring to save you I have met with 
rather an awkward fall, but it was my 
duty." 

" It was very good of you," said Lu, still 
without looking up. And this explanation 
of the squire's sprain was afterwards gene- 
rally received and believed by the whole 
neighbourhood. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Hilda's pupils. 



The squire's accident made some difference 
in the arrangements of the young ladies 
staying at the Hall. It had been originally 
fixed by Patty and Lu Featherstone that 
they were to return home the day after the 
wedding ; but to leave poor Mr. Trevor alone 
when he was in such pain^ Lu said, was 
impossible, and Patty made no objections 
to their remaining. 

Hilda Marston also did not like to speak 
to Mr. Trevor about business when he was 
ilL She wrote, however, to her old friend 
the schoolmistress (at whose school she had 
been educated), and told her the position in 
which she found herself ; and this lady (who 



118 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

ako had known trouble) sent her a kind 
letter in reply. She invited Hilda to come 
and stay with her for a little while, and said 
that she would endeavour to get her pupils 
for singing and music, but warned her that 
at first this would be very difficult, and 
she must not, therefore, raise her expecta- 
tions too high. 

Still the letter was very comforting, and 
enabled her to bear the brunt of her sister s 
displeasure when Hilda informed her that 
all her gloomy prognostications about Mr. 
Trevor had come true. 

" I told you what would happen," wrote 
Marian Marston; "and," she added, "the 
next thing you hear will be that Mr. 
Trevor will be marrying some one else." 

In this prophecy Hilda fully concurred 
with her sister. Lu Featherstone was not 
a girl who did things slyly. She openly 
devoted herself to Mr. Trevor and his 
sprained foot, and the probable consequences 
were, of course, patent to all. Nay, so 
natural is it to women to nurse and be 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 119 

kind to sick people, that Lu grew to like 
Mr. Trevor much better after his fall. She 
got more accustomed to him for one thing, 
for when a man is iU there are many little 
things he requires to be done for him which 
create intimacy, and Lu did everything she 
cotdd for Mr. Trevor. Thus it surprised 
no one when they announced they were 
engaged. Patty Featherstone was delighted 
when this happened, and Lu wa« serious, 
but not unhappy. She had accepted Mr. 
Trevor for his position, but she meant to 
be a good wife to him, and was not 
marrying him by any means in the same 
spirit that Isabel had married Sir George 
Hamilton. 

"If he is generous enough to give me 
money and a good home," she told her sister, 
''I mean in return to give him both duty 
and, I trust, affection. Not every man 
would marry a penniless girl like me." 

As for jovial Antony Featherstone, he 
was overjoyed at his girl's good luck* 
Sometimes a dim vision had passed through 



120 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

his mind that the (ky might come when he 
would have to leave his daughters to the 
world's cold mercies, and an uncomfortable 
feeling for a moment or two had on their 
account disturbed his easy-going and not 
over-tender heart. But now it was all 
right. The " old boy," as he privately 
designated Mr. Trevor, would look after them 
both, and Antony need have no more care 
for their future. So he made merry after 
his fashion on the occasion, and drank and 
boasted to his soul's content. Mr. Trevor 
wrote to him (a pompous letter we may 
be sure), and Antony answered it in his 
careless sprawling hand-writing. But he 
wrote very highly of his daughter, and 
told Mr. Trevor that he was a lucky fellow 
to have got such a prize. Indeed, to do 
Antony justice, he believed in his girls. 
They were good girls he often said, and in 
his way he was proud of them, though 
he would not have denied himself a single 
gratification for their sakes. 

It was about a week after the squire's 



BBNEATH THB WAYS. 121 

accident and Isabel's wedding day, when Lu 
Featherstone announced her engagement 
to her sister and Hilda Marston. Both 
the Featherstones liked Hilda Marston 
very much by this time; and the squire, in 
his gratification at being accepted by one 
handsome girl, had almost forgotten his 
mortification at being refused by another. 
Thus the party at Sanda Hall had got on 
very harmoniously together. But after the 
engagement was announced Hilda felt that 
it was time for her to seek another inter- 
view with the squire. 

This was a much more agreeable one 
than the last. Mr. Trevor was dignified, 
but affable; and when Hilda told him 
about the correspondence which had passed 
between herself and her old schoolmistress^ 
be signified his approval of the course 
she had taken. 

"And I may tell you, Miss Marston," 
he added, drawing out his cheque book, 
'' that I have always intended presenting 
you with a year s salary when you quitted 



122 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

my establishment. I beHeve that it was 
settled you were to receive forty pounds 
a year as my daughter's companion ? Allow 
me, therefore, to present you with a cheque 
for that amount/' And Mr. Trevor handed a 
cheque which he had just filled in, to Hilda. 

** I thank you. I am very grateful," 
said Hilda. 

Mr. Trevor waved his hand graciously. 

"You will find. Miss Marston," he said, 
" that though I admit no claims on my 
beneficence, that when I choose I can give 
with no niggard hand. But I will not 
allude further to my many charities. I 
act, as I may indeed conscientiously say, 
always up to the rules of life that I 
consider the duty of a gentleman in my 
position. Regarding your brother Edward," 
he continued, " I am willing to defray the 
expenses of his education until Christmas. 
After that, as I may have ftiture claims 
on my purse which I cannot forsee, I must 
decline any longer to burden myself with 
his maintenance." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 123 

" I will take him to live with me/' said 
Hilda. "Miss May, the lady I told you 
of, hopes to be able to get me some pupils, 
and I shall also have time to educate 
Edward myself." 

"No doubt, abundant time," said the 
squire. " And I should advise you not 
to over-educate him. I consider this is 
one of the mistakes of the present day. 
Formerly gentlemen and the sons of gen- 
tlemen only were highly educated. Now 
young men without position or fortune 
are pushed forward, and this has caused, 
to my mind, a most dangerous class to 
arise." 

" Yes," said Hilda, meekly, for she could 
not exactly follow the squire's argument. 

" As your brother's future position in life 
will probably be a clerk in an office," con- 
tinued Mr. Trevor, "I should advise you, 
therefore, to teach him only sound English, 
and if he has any idea of a mercantile career 
French would be desirable. But all books 
of a dangerous tendency, such as would 



124 BSNSATH THE WAYS. 

induce to free thinking on any point, 
scmpulouslj keep out of his way. His 
sphere of life will necessarily he a narrow 
one, and his ideas, therefore, should he in 
accordance." 

Hilda could scarcely forhear a smile at 
this. The narrow-minded squire laying 
down the law, and thinking all the while 
how clever he was, touched her sense of 
humour, and with an effort only could she 
preserve a proper humility of countenanca 
I — ^will try to remember," she said. 
Do so," replied the squire ; " and I 
assure you that you have my good wishes 
for your future welfare." 

" And — I must offer you my congratula- 
tions," said Hilda. 

" Thank you," said the squire, graciously. 
** Yes, I have decided," he added, "now that 
my daughter has left me, to form a second 
marriage, and I think that I have been 
fortunate in my choice of the lady." 

" Indeed you have," said Hilda, warmly ; 
for she liked the Featherstones very much. 






BENEATH THE WAVE. 125 

" Miss Lucinda Featherstone is attractive 
as a young lady," continued the squire, " and 
I have no doubt she will be yet more 
attractive as a married one. If you will 
&vour us with your address when you are 
settled in town, I shall desire cards to be 
forwarded to you on the occasion of my 
marriage." 

Again Hilda said " thank you," for these 
gracious words ; and then, after a few more 
speeches, her interview with the squire was 
over. She left his presence with a lightened 
heart. Little Ned was to be taken care of 
until Christmas, and by that time Hilda 
hoped to be settled and at work, and at all 
events to have some sort of home to receive 
him in. Mr. Trevor's gift, and the price 
Isabel had given her for her locket, made up 
a respectable sum, and altogether Hilda felt 
in better spirits than she had done since she 
had known that the squire's patronage was 
to be withdrawn from herself and her family. 

She left Sanda two days after this inter- 
view and proceeded direct to town. Miss 



126 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

May (the lady at whose school she had 
formerly been) received her kindly, and it 
seemed somewhat like the old school days 
again when she found herself once more 
among a lot of girls. But when she had 
been with Miss May before she had a father 
and a home, as most of these young girls 
had now, and the change sometimes made 
her very sad. The prospect, too, which lay 
before her was not a pleasant one, for Hilda 
shrank from going among strangers, and to 
solicit favours was not easy to one of her 
nature. But she had little Ned to think of, 
as well as herself, " the boy brother, whose 
fortunes she had so seriously injured," 
Marian Marston wrote to her; and Hilda 
felt that in some measure her sister's words 
were true. So she practised assiduously, 
and was pronounced competent to give both 
music and singing lessons by the good- 
natured music master who attended the 
school. Miss May promised to try to get 
her some pupils, but Hilda's hopes grew very 
low as day after day passed and none could 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 127 

be heard of. She received one or two kind 
letters during this time from the Feather- 
stones^ and one from Lady Hamilton. Isabel 
had forgotten something at Sanda that she 
wanted, and wrote to her late companion to 
forward it to her at Paris, never remem- 
bering that Hilda would in all probability 
have left Sanda by this time. 

In this letter Isabel mentioned her father's 
approaching marriage. '^ I am utterly as- 
tonished at the news," she wrote ; " but my 
fixture stepmother wishes me to be present 
at the marriage, and we shall therefore 
return to England early next month, when 
I believe the event is to take place." 

But though she wrote thus discreetly, she 
had not spoken so when she had first received 
her father's letter announcing his engage- 
ment. With a contemptuous exclamation 
she had flimg the letter on a table near 
which she was seated at breakfast, and Sir 
George, who was opposite to her, looked 
up in surprise from his newspaper as she 
did so. 



128 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"My dear Isabel, what is the matter?*' 
he asked. 

" He is a fool ! " said Isabel, with curling 
lip* " His Lucinda, indeed I Anyone's 
Lucinda who would be mad enough to 
marry into such a famUy as theire." 

" Of whom are you speaking ? " said Sir 
George. 

" Of my father," answered Isabel " But 
you can read the letter. He has actually 
been infatuated enough to propose to Lu 
Featherstone ! " 

Sir George looked grave for a moment, 
and then he said — 

"Isabel, is that a proper way to speak 
of your father ? " 

Isabel shrugged her shoulders. 

" My good creature," she said, " I did 
not come to Paris to go to school." And 
Sir George, as he heard her answer, looked 
for a moment in her face, and then rose 
from the table with a heavy sigh. 

They had been married just about a fort- 
night at this time, and already Isabel had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 129 

frequently given way to her temper and 
caprices. But he loved her still. The 
power of her beauty held him still. At 
times^ too, she exerted herself to charm 
Mm, but she was very tired of it. She 
liked many things better than Sir George 
Hamilton. Admiration, the world's good 
gifts, *Hhe pride of life." She hr.d all 
these; and Sir Georges generous, nay, 
lavish hand, grudged her nothing. She 
had only to express admiration for a thing, 
and if he could get it for her it was hers. 
But still she did not love him. She was 
not even grateful to him, for she estimated 
herself so highly that she thought nothing 
too good to be squandered at her feet. 

And Sir George saw all this. Not, per- 
haps, that she did not love him, for the 
human heart is vain, and it is hard to 
believe that a violent affection meets with 
no return. But he saw that she was selfish, 
and wonderfully capricious. And yet he 
was ready to forgive her, to tell himself 
that she had been badly brought up, that 

VOL. II. K 



BENEATH THE 'WAVE. 



she liad beea spoilt, that In time all 1 
faults might pass away. 

But he was not happy. He watched ] 
eyes wander away from his to seek a 1( 
of admiration from some passing Strang 
He listened to the words that fell from ] 
lovely rosy lips, and heard ho noble, ] 
even tender one. Isabel was charming s 
coquettish to him sometimes, but he 1 
he could never lay his head on her shouli 
and teU her of his heart's weariness; i 
her what he could have told her if she 1 
been a loving and faithful wife. 

Isabel was exceedingly annoyed, as 
have seen, at the news of her fatb 
engagement. It would affect her social 
she thought. To be connected with 
broken down family like the Feathersto: 
must be a disadvantage to the new Li 
HamUtou, who meant to hold her head 
high. 

But after her first anger was over i 
felt she could do nothing to prevent 
and that therefore it would be well to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 131 

on civil terms at all events with her fatheT^ef 
young wife. But it was a bitter pill. Reck- 
less Antony Peatherstone rose before her 
mind's eye, famiUax a^id encroaching. Then 
there was Patty — ^Patty, who would expect' 
to be chaperoned, and who was too honest 
and freenapoken to be converted into a useftJ 
or convenient friend. Altogether, Isabel 
disliked the match, but she wrote a fairly- 
kind letter to her father when she did write, 
and sent a message to ''his Lucinda," the 
satire of which term she could not resist 
pointing out to Sir George. 

" Let us hope they may be happy, Bella," 
answered Sir George, smiling, when sl36*^ 
showed him her letter; atid he stooped 
down and kissed her fair cheek as he 
spoke: 

''Let us pray so,'' said Isabel, scoffingly, 
" for there is' no reasonable hope." 

These words, as so many of her words 
did, jarred on Sir George's ears. But he 
did not say this. He stood looking at her, 
wondering-' if she ever would be gentle and ' 



132 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

womanly, as his mother had been ; as he 
most ardently longed that she might be. 

*^ She is marrying him," presently con- 
tinued Isabel, still speaking of her father's 
distasteful engagement, "to save herself 
from being a governess or something of 
that sort; for, of course, when Mr. Feather- 
stone dies, if they are still unmarried, they 
will be lefk paupers in the world. Certainly 
one can scarcely wonder at it, for do you 
know I had a letter from Hilda Marston 
to-day, and she is absolutely going to be- 
come a teacher of music." 

" Indeed ! Where is she now ? " asked 
Sir George. 

" At some school at Brixton, I think her 
address is. Oh ! I dare say she will do very 
well," added Isabel; "for she was always 
an industrious patient kind of person. As 
for me, I would kill a child, I think, rather 
than teach one a note." 

"Don't talk like that, Bella." 

" Very well, sir," said Isabel, looking up 
with her bright smile. " I will give you 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 133 

some pretty talk. I will take lessons in 
music from Hilda Marston, so as to be 
able to teach all the dear little unwashed — 
I was going to say brats — ^but I correct 
myself, all the dear little youthful inhabi- 
tants of your estate at Massam, and you 
shall have the pleasure of listening to our 
mutual performances." 

" Very well/' said Sir George ; but the 
next moment Isabel began to talk of some- 
thing else. She had forgotten all about 
Hilda Marston. She allowed her to drift 
out of her mind, and away from the luxu- 
rious pleasures of her life, under the impres- 
sion " that she would do very well." 

But this was far from being the real 
truth of the case. By this time Hilda had 
left Miss May's (her old schoolmistress's), 
and had taken rooms, and begun her 
struggle for daily bread. 

She advertised in several papers, but no 
one, in all human probability, ever read the 
modest lines in which she announced that 
she was prepared to receive pupils, although 



134 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

• 

jlihese modest line^ cost her ^ litt^ mm that 
^^e could ill afford to spare. Thei^.^he askod 
for permission, and paid for pern^ssion, to 
j^lace her cards in the music-shop windows 
pf the p^ort of the town in which she lived ; 
fbut still without any result. Sl^e had been 
^ fortnight alone in her little rooms, with 
only disappointment for her companiop, 
^jvben one morning she receive^ a note from 
Miss ]V[ay, inviting her to go to her hou^e 
^during the a^fbemoon, as she had heard of 
jtyro likely pupils for her. Tbey were old 
pupils of her own, Miss May wrote, and 
.W?wited a musical young lady to practise 
constantly with them ; and Miss May thought 
1Fr,i,1da might probably suit them. 

Poor Hilda ! She was sensitive ^Jid 
tiender, and she trembled whiMi she heard of 
jthe near approach of what she had been so 
anxiously hoping for. Often I think of the 
timid gentlewomen who are left to fight the 
world's hard battles. Men go into these with 
honour, and mostly the best men win; but 
what can women as a rule win ? A bare 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 135 

living and no honour. This is the real truth 
as regards this world; perhaps in the next 
the meek daughters of toil may meet with 
a better reward. 

Miss May's school was not a very grand 
establishment. It was situated in Brixton, 
where a neat villa, enclosed in its own 
grounds, and guarded from the outer world 
by a high brick waU, was rented by Miss 
May, and had been rented for the last 
twenty years. It was an old-fashioned, old- 
established school in fact, and Miss May 
herself was now an old woman. But she 
was a good soul. A little eccentric, perhaps, 
and of sharp and sarcastic tongue; but a 
woman who meant well, fearing God, and 
trying her best to keep His laws, and also 
acting well towards her neighbours. 

She was a lady, too, and had a hard hit 
now and then at the "great families of 
yesterday," amongst which she principally 
lived. 

'* I never mention people's grandfathers, 
my dears," she used sometimes to say to her 



136 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

pupils. " Mine, poor man, was the Vicar 
of Normanton — ^yet, you see !" And she 
would shrug her angular shoulders, to the 
great edification of the girls. "But he had 
better have been a linendraper, or a grocer, 
or a tavern-keeper, or something that makes 
money. Then I should not have had the 
enjoyment of your society." And the old 
woman used to laugh and show her white 
prominent teeth. 

But in spite of her queer ways she was 
very kind. She had taken a sort of fancy 
too (and she took strong likes and dislikes) 
to Hilda Marston. For one thing, she 
came of gentle birth, and for another, Hilda 
was clever, good-looking, and upright. The 
shrewd old woman saw a good deal with 
those blinking eyes of hers, and she 
thought she saw in Hilda's face the indi- 
cations of a true and honest heart. 

" If she had been a linendraper 's daughter 
with twenty thousand pounds for her fortune, 
all the men would have been raving about 
her," she thought. "As, poor girl, she is 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 137 

only a clergyman's and a gentleman's daugh- 
ter, no one will ever rave about her; and 
she will probably end her days, as I shall 
end mine, a lonely old maid, teaching the 
children of those whose grandfathers were 
bom in the position of her grandfather's 
servants." 

So she had tried to do her best for 
Hilda, and was unwilling to let her go 
when the girl announced that she must 
leave her kindly roof. 

"Wait here until you really get some 
pupils," she urged. "Your little stock of 
money will slip away in no time if you 
don't. You are quite welcome to stay 
here." 

But Hilda's sense of right would not 
allow her to do this. She knew that Miss 
May had worked hard for her money, and 
still worked for it, and as her staff of 
governesses was complete she felt that she 
had no right to encroach on her old 
friend's kindness. So she went away, and 
took two small rooms near the Victoria 



138 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Station^ as she thought that this would be 
a central situation to travel from to the 
different parts of London, where she hoped 
to find her pupils. But none had ever 
come. Her money (as Miss May had pro- 
phesied) was sUpping fast away, and days, 
almost weeks passed on, and stil] no pupils 
came. At last the note about the two 
expected ones arrived from Miss May; 
and with a beating heart Hilda found 
herself ringing at the bell of the gate of 
Octavia Villa, Brixton, and having been 
admitted into the neat grounds, was kindly 
received by Octavia herself. 

This was the name that the school girls 
(among themselves) usually gave to their 
mistress. The " ancient Octavia," they 
called her, after the name inscribed on her 
villa gates, though the name had been 
there long before Miss May had taken the 
house. 

But if girls, with homes and fathers, felt 
inclined to laugh at Miss May and her 
peculiarities, the homeless and fatherless 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 139 

girl to whom she had been kind certainly 
4id not. Miss May kissed Hilda, and then, 
having discreetly closed the drawing-room 
«door, proceeded to give her ex-pupil what 
^e called a few hints. 

" Now, my dear," she said, " I've got a 
few words to say to you, and the first 
of these is, remember, you are not going 
among gentle-folk." 

Hilda smiled at this good-temperedly. 

" Eich people can buy nearly everything," 
continued Miss May, " but they can't buy 
.&»e feelings. They can get fine houses, fine 
.carpets and curtains, but they can't get the 
gentle deUcacy of the well-bom in a hurry. 
I m an old woman now, and have gone 
through life in a dependent position, and 
therefore I'm a good judge — ^the lower and 
the more vulgar people are, the ruder and 
more inconsiderate they are to anyone who 
is obliged to work for their daily bread." 

** I can understand that," said Hilda. 

" Well, I suppose that is natural," said 
.Miss May, pithily. "However, to go on 



140 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

with the ladies — you see I give them the 
title by courtesy — ^who are coming here 
to-day to see you, are not real ladies. 
They are the wife and daughters of a 
Mr. Moxam, who is a merchant in the city, 
and a very rich man; and they presume 
on this, and are very disagreeable young 
women in consequence." 

" Still they want music lessons ? " said 
Hilda, laughing. 

"They want a young person — ^pray re- 
member you will be considered a person at 
Florentia Villa — to practise daily with the 
young ladies, so that (as Mrs. Moxam 
graphically remarked) the favoured young 
person may ^push them on.' Their 'pa/ 
she says, is anxious they should be first- 
rate musicians, and they have expensive 
lessons twice a week, but they don't prac- 
tise enough. They want some one to 
grind them, in fact. Do you understand?" 

" I think so," answered Hilda. 

" And now, my dear, I wish to give you 
a hint," continued Miss May, "how to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 141 

behave to people with no grandfathers. 
You must " 

But here she paused abruptly, for a rap 
came to the room door, and the next moment 
Miss May's neat waiting-maid announced : 

**Mrs. and the Misses Moxam." 

"Ah, Mrs. MoxamI" said Miss May, 
advancing to receive her visitors perfectly 
at ease, for she always said that she had 
gone through so much that she would 
not be disconcerted if the king entered the 
room, though she did not specify which of 
their defunct majesties she would have 
received with composure. " Well, my 
dears" (this was addressed to the Misses 
Moxam) ; " and how are you this cold day V 

**Only pretty well," answered Mrs. 
Moxam, languidly. ^' In fact, as I tell 
Mr. Moxam, another year I am deter* 
mined to winter abroad. 

"Well, it's the fashion, you know," said 
Miss May. 

"And so essential to health," said Mrs. 
Moxam. 



142 



B»raATH THE WATB. 



"Have you ever been abroad f 
winter?" asked Miss May, who b 
perfect knowledge that Mrs. Moxam 
had not. 

" Well, not exactly," replied Mrs. Mc 
hesitatingly. " But about this 3 
person of whom you spoke, Miss 1 
she added, changing the conversation, 
we see her?" 

" This is the young lady I mention 
you," said Miss May, moving her hai 
the direction of Hilda^ "Allow m 
introduce Miss Hilda Marston." 

Mrs. Moxam bowed coldly on th 
Hilda; and the Misses Moxam bowed ci 
Then all the three ladies looked her 
as they would have looked over a dre 
a shawl lying on a Unendraper's coi 
She was purchaseable also, so nati 
they thought they had a right to exs 
bar. 

" You — ah ! teach music, I think ? " 
Mrs,- Moxam, affectedly. 

" Yes," answered Hilda, the burning' 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 143 

on her face betraying what she was feel- 
ing. 

*' Ah — well . Do you understand high 

class music, do you think? Are you com- 
petent to push on these young ladies after 
they have received instruction from Signor 
Salviati, whose charges, as perhaps you- 
are aware, are immense ? " 

''I — I — ^hope so," faltered Hilda, 

"Miss Marston is quite competent," 
interrupted Miss May, with decision, 
"otherwise I would not have recommended 
her. She is a young lady of natural 
muaical aJ>mty, and she has been well 
instructed" 

*"Ah, I dare say. Well, then. Miss 
Marston, what are your terms?" 

Then followed a poUte wrangle between 
Mrs. Moxam and Miss May about what 
terms Hilda should ask. Mrs. Moxam 
evinced a surprising meanness during Hm 
discussion for so fine a lady, and Miss May 
showed a good deal of the energetic sharp- 
ness which sometimes distinguished her. 



144 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

While the two elder ladies were arguing 
the point, Hilda Marston sat covered with 
confusion and with her eyes cast down ; but 
the Misses Moxam looked occasionally at 
each other, and smiled superciliously. At 
last Hilda rose, and laid her hand entreat- 
ingly on Miss May's arm. 

''Don't say any more, please. Miss 
' May," she half whispered. " I'll take what 
Mrs. Moxam considers right." 

Mrs. Moxam heard the whisper and saw 
the girl's piteous look, and she grew in 
consequence a shade less hard. Miss May 
also slightly modified her demands after 
Hilda s appeal, and finally the ladies came 
to terms. It was then agreed that Hilda 
was to go every day to Florentia Villa, 
and practise music and singing for two 
hours with the Misses Moxam. For this 
she was to receive a certain remuneration, 
which Mrs. Moxam agreed to increase if 
she gave satisfaction. 

''And my son, Joe," said Mrs. Moxam, 
before she took her leave, with no small 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 145 

pride in her voice and manner, "will, I 
dare say, sometimes join his sisters in 
their duets. He has a fine voice, a true 
bass I am told, but he wants a little 
cultivation they say, though for my part 
I think he sings extremely well as it is." 
*'My dear," said Miss May to Hilda, 
after their visitors were gone, "you must 
take care of youi' heart. Young Moxam, 
whose bass voice you are to have the 
honour of cultivating, is simply the most 
odiously vulgar, ill-bred young man I ever 
met, and that is saying a good deal." 



VOL. n. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" HOW WONDERFUL IS DEATH ! " 

While Hilda Maraton was thus beginning 
her new career in London, at a village by 
the sea, on the coast of Devon, Mrs. 
Hayward was dying. 

She knew it and he knew it, who watched 
and waited on her with a girl's tenderness, 
who, in accepting Sir George Hamilton's 
generous gift, had laid self aside. But for 
his mother's sake Hayward had done this, 
so that she might have every comfort and 
luxury to soothe her last hours. 

They were very peaceful ones. Outside, 
the morning sun was glittering and shining 
on the winter sea, whose waves came rippling 
and rolling into the bay. Inside, the mother 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 147 

lay, with her hajid clasped fast in her son's ; 
while kneeling by the bedside, in solemn 
gentle tones, Horace Jervis, the curate, was 
reading portions of the Bible that he 
thought suitable to one who was so near 
a closer knowledge of their truth. 

Mrs. Hayward had not spoken for some 
hours. Her eyes were apparently closed to 
all outward things; and yet as the waves 
broke she seemed to hear them, for her 
fingers slightly moved, as if with instinctive 
sympathy to the sound. On her face was 
the pallor of coming death, but round her 
lips lingered, as if it could not go, the 
sweet and patient smile which had been 
one of her characteristics during the latter 
years of her life. 

Philip Hayward looked pale and haggard. 
He had been sitting up all night with his 
mother, and his face wa^ worn and 
sharpened. For her the heat and burden 
of the day were over ; for him the toil, the 
sweating brow, the weary task, were still 
to come. 



148 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth 
them, and delivereth them out of all their 
troubles," read the curate ; " The Lord 
delivereth the souls of his servants, and 
they that put their trust in Him shall not 
be destitute." 

As he paused a moment, the dying woman 
began to murmur some inarticulate words> 
and both the young men started and looked 
in her face as she did so. They saw there 
was a strange and glorious change. The 
dim eyes had opened, and the closed lips 
moved. She was looking upwards, as if 
she saw beyond the narrow confines of the 
scene around. A look serene, but full of 
joy and wonder, had usurped the usual 
placid patient expression of her face. 

" She sees heaven ! " said the curate, in 
a voice of awe. 

" Mother ! mother ! " cried Hay ward ; and 
as that loved voice reached the ears that 
were about to close to earthly sounds, she 
looked back once more on her dear son's 
face. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 149 

" Mother, do you know me ? " again 
asked Hayward; and she answered by 
stretching out the hand that was not in 
her son's, towards Horace Jervis. 

"Be his brother," she said, addressing 
the curate in the husky tones of death, 
who eagerly sprang forward and clasped 
her hand. "Be a brother to my boy 
after I am gone." 

"I will," said Horace Jervis, fervently. 

" There will be no sighing nor sorrowing 
there, Philip," continued Mrs. Hayward, 

again looking upwards. " None — ^none ^" 

And then — even as she spoke — a glory 
that was not of earth again seemed re- 
flected on her face, her eyes once more 
lit up with wonder and delight, and, with 
a smile of ineffable joy and trust, the next 
moment her spirit had passed away. 

"She is with God," said Horace Jervis, 
falling on his knees, while Hayward gave 
a startled awe-struck cry. 

'* My brother !" then said Horace, holding 
out his hand. 



150 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

*' Hush !" he added the next minute^ 
"she may hear still — grieve not her pa«rt- 
ing spirit by the thought of your dis- 
tress." 

So the two men knelt there still and 
silent. The waves came rolling and breaking 
into the bay. The voices of the children 
playing on the shore, and the harsh cries of 
the fishermen as they moored and unmoored 
their boats, broke at intervals on their ears, 
but they seemed to hear them like those who 
dream. They were in the presence of the 
mystery of Death. Between them and the 
woman who had just spoken, had come 
a silence that would end no more. The 
loving mother, the faithful friend, could not 
now speak words of comfort. She was 
gone! The awful and inevitable hour was 
come, when all that are bom of woman 
must taste of death. 



Later in the day, when the dusky evening 
had crept over the sea, and the mists had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 151 

wrapped the rocks and headlands^ making 
them seem weird-like and mysterious in 
the murky gloom, Philip Hayward and 
Horace Jervis were walking together on 
the shore. 

'* Pardon me, but I think you are wrong, 
Philip," said the curate. 

" Perhaps so," answered Hayward, gloom- 
ily, " but what matter ? I have nothing 
to live for now." 

'* Nay, do not say that," answered Horace 
Jervis. "We all have something to live 
for, all to hope for, all to toil for. The 
nobler and higher a man's career is, the 
more good he may do — ^therefore I wish 
my brother to be ambitious." 

The curate had a sweet thrilling voice, 
through which the truth seemed to vibrate, 
and as he spoke he gently pressed the arm 
of Hayward, on which he was leaning, who 
was deeply touched by the young man's 
kindness. 

" So you mean to keep your promise — 
to her ^" said Hayward, in rather a 



152 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

broken voice. "Then I shall not be quite 
alone in the world." 

"Not as long as God spares me," an- 
swered Jervis, simply. "But as I was 
saying, I think you are wrong," he con- 
tinued. " This Sir George Hamilton seems 
an honourable and generous gentleman, 
and in accepting help fix>m him to push 
you forward in any career you may choose, 
you are incurring no debt. Remember, he 
is indebted to you for what no money 
could purchase." 

"There are reasons," said Hayward, 
briefly, "why I cannot accept any more 
favours from Sir George Hamilton. While 
my mother lived it was different. For her 
sake I would have done almost anything. 
Now I shall return to town, and Newcome 
will, I've no doubt, give me back my 
old post. 

"Do not decide hastily," urged the 
curate. " Come to me, at all events, first. 
I want you to help me with my work," he 
added, with a smile. " And, you must not 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 153 

be angry — ^I think my brother is too good 
a man for a printer's office." 

"It gives me daily bread— that is 
enouffh," said Hayward : and he turned his 
hJr away to S the bitter emotions 
passing in his heaxt. 

Yes, these were bitter days for Hayward. 
Days when he learned that the man whose 
money he had taken, whose money had 
soothed and comforted his mother's last 
hours, was now wedded to Isabel Trevor, 
had been wedded the very day after he 
had accepted such a favour from his hands. 

When he knew this, pangs of shame, 
humiliation, of fierce anger and pain took 
possession of his heart. He fought and 
wrestled with these like a brave man, 
hiding his feelings for his mother's sake, so 
that she might pass her last days in peace. 
But there were dark hours that she knew 
not of, and groans wrung from his lips that 
the sea-birds only heard. Night after night 
he used to wander on the shore while the 
stars looked down on his restless agony. 



154 BSKEATH THS WAYK. 

Then the change came, and his mother's 
end drew nigh. The wild passion that tore 
his heart grew pale in the presence of death. 
The eternity that she was about to enter 
dwarfed the strongest and bitterest of 
mortal pangs. 

But though this was so, on one point they 
left him resolute. He would accept no 
further favours from Sir George Hauulton. 
Though by far the larger portion of the sum 
Sir George had forced upon him remained 
untouched in his hands after his mother's 
death, yet he gave orders for her frmeral 
to be conducted in the most simple and 
modest fashion He had made up his 
mind, in fact, to return Sir George's money, 
and to decline all further assistance from 
him. 

" She shall not taunt me for being a 
hanger-on of a rich man^ at least," he 
thought, with curling lip. Yes, he thought 
of her still. He was thinking of her when 
Horace Jervis urged him not to refuse Sir 
George's oflfer, when he decided to throw 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 155 

away all chance of rising in life, and to 
content himself with unambitious toil. 

"These will give me my daily bread," 
he said, hol4 out his'stro^ bro™ 
hands, as the curate continued to urge 
him not absolutely to decline Sir George's 
proposal. 

"But what about the strong clear 
brain ?" said Jervis. " Will you hide the 
talents that are your Master's gift, or, as 
the good and faithful servant did, use them 
to the honour and glory of His name T 



CHAPTER IX. 

BRIDE AND BRIDEGROOM. 

Mr. Hannaway had always been a great 
man at Massam. During Sir George 
Hamilton's prolonged absence from England 
he had the entire control of the estates, 
and had managed them with much prudence 
and discretion. He was a popular man also ; 
a man who was at once just and generous 
in his business transactions, and who was 
ever ready to help a neighbour in his hour 
of need. 

The late Lady Hamilton had, however, 
not liked him. He was too free a liver 
for her taste, and had moreover too loose 
ideas of morality to suit the strict. God- 
fearing woman who spent her quiet days 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 157 

of widowhood aknoet alone at Massam 
Park. 

But stiU she did him justice. He waa 
a first-rate man of business^ and had no 
temptations to dishonesty. His father had 
left him a good fortune, and his professional 
income was large. He lived, in fact, more 
like a country gentleman than a lawyer, 
always riding a good horse, Mid hunting 
and shootins: refirularly. He was a hand* 

perous, and was a welcome guest at almost 
every house in the neighbourhood. 

He admired the nlw Lady Hamilton 
immensely, and used to go about saying so 
right and left. "She's a lovely creature," 
he would tell the jovial red-£aced farmers, 
who came to pay their rents at his office, 
when speaking of theu* landlord's new wife. 
"She is a splendid woman," he would say 
to the sporting squires he met on the 
himting field. "Wait imtil you see Lady 
Hamilton ; she's the greatest beaui^ I ever 
saw." 



158 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

Public curiosity was thus excited about 
Isabel's appearance before she returned to 
Massam as a bride. There had always been 
a sort of mystery about Sir George Hamil- 
ton, and people had said things concerning 
his prolonged absence and its cause that 
they would not care to hear repeated now. 
Mr. Hannaway was supposed to know more 
of the owner of Massam's private life than 
he chose to tell. Men sometimes chaffed 
Hannaway about this, but he was always 
reticent. 

"He's been a lucky fellow," he would 
say now, on any of these allusions being 
made. "He's married the handsomest 
woman by far that I know." 

Then the news came that Lu Featherstone 
was going to marry Mr. Trevor, Lady 
Hamilton's father. This created a good 
deal of gossip and excitement in the neigh- 
bourhood also. The Featherstones were 
known to be in such difficulties, and Sir 
George Hamilton was known to be so rich, 
that people began to speculate and wonder 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 159 

if Antony Featherstone would now get out 
of his troubles. 

Antony himself, on the strength of his 
daughter's engagement, boldly asked Mr. 
Hannaway to lend him a thousand pounds. 
But Mr. Hannaway was wary. He wished 
to keep on good terms with Antony, on 
account of his future connection with Lady 
Hamilton, but he was afraid of losing his 
money. He, therefore, advanced five hun- 
dred pounds to reckless Antony, although 
he knew that the property was mortgaged 
to the hall doors. He called, too, and 
complimented Lucinda so cordially on her 
engagement, after her return home, that 
Patty declared that she had nearly lost her 
heart to the good-looking lawyer. Alto- 
gether he was on pleasant terms with the 
Featherstone family, and when Sir George 
Hamilton wrote from Paris to announce 
the day of their proposed return to 
Massam, Mr. Hannaway rode over to tell 
the Featherstones. 

"Your future lovely stepdaughter," he 



160 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

said, smilingly addressing Lucinda, " returns 
on Thursday. We really ought to get up 
some sort of demonstration to show our joy." 

But another letter that he received froia 
Sir George expressly forbade this. " Don't 
make any fuss about our return, pleaa^ 
Hannaway," wrote the baronet, "for you 
know I hate that kind of thing." And 
thus Mr. Hannaway's ideas of ornamental 
arches, of addresses from the tenantry, and 
speeches from Sir George and the beauti- 
ful Lady Hamilton, were all nipped in 
the bud. 

He went to the Park, however, to receive 
the bride and bridegroom, and was waiting 
on the terrace when they arrived. 

"Welcome home, Lady Hamilton!" he 
said, opening the carriage door; '*a thou- 
sand welcomes ! " 

Isabel answered him with a gracious smile. 
It was dark, but by the carriage lamps, and 
the lights from the house, she could see the 
lawyer s handsome face and his looks of 
eager admiration. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 161 

*' Well, Hannaway ? " said Sir George, 
and he shook his lawyer's hand. 

"You snubbed my ideas of welcome so 
cruelly. Sir George," said Mr. Hannaway, 
smiling, "that I dared not allow one of 
the tenants to know the exact time of your 
return. Would you believe. Lady Hamil- 
ton," he continued, addressing Isabel, ^' that 
Sir Greorge forbade us to express our 
feelings of delight and enthusiasm at the 
idea of your return ? He characterized my 
proposal as ' stuff that he hated ! ' " And 
Mr. Hannaway laughed, and showed his 
white and even teeth. 

"Nay, Hannaway, that is an exaggera- 
tion," said Sir George. 

"At all events, I was to do nothing," 
answered Mr. Hannaway. " In fact, I 
confess I felt afraid even to come to the 
Park myself — but the temptation was too 
strong." 

Mr. Hannaway dropped his voice as he 
uttered the last few words, but though Sir 
George did not hear them Isabel did. This 

VOL. II. M 



162 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

was what he intended. He wished the 
new Lady Hamilton to know that he 
admired her immensely, that he was ready^ 
in fact, to become her devoted slave. 

'*You will dine with us, of course, 
Hannaway ? " said Sir George, looking 
back as he was ascending the steps of the 
terrace ; and the lawyer answered that he 
would be only too glad. 

During this meal Isabel exerted herself 
to please, or rather to fascinate, Mr. Han- 
naway. She looked wonderfully beautifid, 
wearing a plain black velvet dress high to 
the throat, round which she wore a white 
ruff, her only ornaments being the diamond 
buttons of her bodice and a diamond 
ornament to fasten her ruff. 

"And what do you think," she said, 
smilingly addressing Mr. Hannaway, "of 
my fathers approaching marriage?" 

" I think," answered the lawyer dis- 
creetly, "that Miss Lucinda Featherstone 
is a very lucky young lady." 

"And a very clever one, I think," said 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 163 

Isabel, with a scornful curve of her lip. 
But Sir George looked at her disap- 
provingly at these words, and so for the 
time she dropped the conversation. 

But during the evening (Sir George not 
being just then present • in the room) she 
resumed it. 

''I did not like to say much before Sir 
George and the servants," she said to Mr. 
Hannaway, who was obsequious in his 
attention to her, " but I am really horribly 
annoyed. Fancy being connected with 
Mr. Featherstone ! " 

''You see no probability of its being 
broken off, then ? " asked the lawyer. 

Not the least," answered Isabel. 
They are, I believe, to be married in 
a fortnight." 

" Of course, as a lawyer — I speak confi- 
dentially, Lady Hamilton — but of course, 
m my position I know of many things that 
might reasonably influence Mr. Trevor 
against Mr. Featherstone," said Mr. Han- 
naway, lowering his voice. " But then an 



44 

44 ' 



164 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

old man in love, you know ! " And he 
laughed. 

" A dotard's folly ! " said Isabel, angrily, 
'* What do you know against him, Mr. 
Hannaway ? Whatever you tell me I will 
not repeat." 

'* For one thing, he asked me the other 
day to lend him a thousand pounds on the 
strength of his new connexion," answered 
Mr, Hannaway, with a smile. 

" And did you ? " said Isabel, eagerly. 

" I gave him half the sum he asked 
for," replied Hannaway. " But this will 
show you what sort of man he is. 

'^ I know what he is ! " said Isabel, rising 
indignantly. " Can we do anything to 
prevent it, Mr. Hannaway? I would give 
much — oh ! how much — if I could ! " 

*^ I think, perhaps," began Mr. Han- 
naway, but just at this moment the door 
of the small dra\ving-room, where they were 
sitting, opened, and Sir George appeared, 
and, with a slight gesture, Isabel motioned 
the lawyer to be silent. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 165 

But she did not let the subject rest. 
Early on the followmg morning a special 
messenger brought to Combe Lodge (where 
Mr, Hannavvay lived) a little note from 
Isabel. It only contained a few words, 
but the lawyer's cheeks flushed and his 
eyes sparkled as he perused them. In 
Isabel's clear handwriting he read as fol- 
lows : — 

"Dear Mr. Hannaway, — Sir George has 
ridden out this moriiing. Can you come 
over at once ? I wish to renew the con- 
versation that was interrupted last night 
about L. F. — ^Yours truly, 

'* I, Hamilton." 

Ten minutes later Mr. Hannaway was 
on the road. A handsome gentleman he 
looked on his handsome bay horse as he 
rode along. He felt full of triumph and 
pride. What, this lovely woman trusted 
him, then? She was about to be con- 
fidential to him; to talk to him as she 



166 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

would not talk to her husband, and about 
her father too ? 

" But Sir George is so gloomy," reflected 
the lawyer, with a self-satisfied smile 
passing over his good-looking face. . " No 
wonder a woman prefers a little more life 
and vivacity." And again Mr. Hannaway 
smiled. 

Isabel received him very winningly. She 
told him, in her light coquettish manner, 
that she thought she could trust him; 
that Sir George (here she shrugged her 
fine shoulders) was so gloomy and stem, 
it was impossible to be confidential with 
him; and then she plainly asked him to 
tell her the full extent of Mr. Feather- 
stone's shortcomings ; adding that it was 
only right that her father should be told 
of them. 

'^ But how ? " asked the lawyer. 

"I will write him an anonymous letter," 
answered Isabel boldly; and so at her 
bidding Mr. Hannaway told her all that 
he knew. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 167 

Mr. Featherstone was deeply in debt; 
he had disreputable connections of all sorts ; 
he drank, he swore. There was nothing 
bad, in fact, that he could do, that he did 
not apparently do, so as still to be out of 
the clutches of the law ; and half jokingly, 
half in earnest, Mr. Hannaway certainly 
described him as not a very desirable 
gentleman to be connected with. 

" I will write to papa, to-day," said 
Isabel, determinedly, ii 

"But do not post it here," said the 
lawyer. " Entrust yoiit letter with me, 
and I wiU run up to town with it to- 
morrow." 

It was a mad thing for a wife to do, was 
it not? But Isabel had at times a strange 
recklessness in her nature that made her 
defy alike conventionality and consequences. 
As for Mr. Hannaway, he was but too 
pleased. Before they parted they had 
arranged it all. Isabel was to write her 
letter in a disguised hand to Mr. Trevor, 
detailing all Mr. Peatherstone's enormities, 



168 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and during the following morning she 
agreed to meet Mr. Hannaway in the 
grounds of Massam at an appointed place. 
She never thought of how she was com- 
mitting herself in the man's eyes. She 
only thought, '' This stupid man is in 
love with me, and will always be ready 
to do my will." 

She carried out her foolish scheme in 
fiill. She wrote a letter to her father 
(purporting to be from an unknown fiiend, 
who was sorry to see a respectable gentle- 
man about to make a fool of himself), and 
in this letter she abused Mr. Featherstone 
and his daughters to her heart's content. 
Mr. Hannaway, to do him justice, even 
to please Isabel had said nothing against 
the girls. 

" Poor things, they are to be pitied ! " he 
told her, but Isabel showed them scant 
pity. She exaggerated in her letter Mr. 
Hannaway 's information, and she cast out 
imputations that he certainly had not 
made. Had the lawyer seen her letter 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 169 

he probably would not have been so eager 
to post it. As it was, he was delighted 
with the commission, and felt that, as a 
man of gallantry, he could not refuse so 
fair a lady's command. 

They met at the appointed place on the 
following day, and Isabel gave him her 
letter. 

" I am giving you a great deal of trouble," 
she said, with her sweetest smile. 

" You could give me no trouble," answered 
the lawyer, with emphasis, and Isabel smiled 
again. 

He left Massam during the afternoon with 
a fair vision ever before his eyes. Isabel 
was so beautiful that she bewitched men, 
stealing their senses away from them, and 
making them forget right and honour. Mr. 
Hannaway never remembered that he was 
acting dishonourably to Sir George. He 
only thought that Lady Hamilton had 
trusted him; that the loveliest woman he 
knew had condescended to treat him as a 
friend. 



170 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

So he went up to town with her letter 
and posted it, and then returned to his 
home. He told her what he had done in 
a few low-spoken words, when Sir George 
was standing in another part of the room, 
on the day following his return. Thus a 
completely confidential understanding took 
place between them, and Mr. Hannaway 
felt a proud and happy man to know that 
it was so. 

But the day was not over — the day of 
his return to Yorkshire, after he had posted 
Isabel's letter in town — when he was once 
more called in to her assistance. 

Isabel had been out driving during the 
afternoon, and was sitting in her luxuri- 
antly-furnished dressing-room, amusing her- 
self until it was time to dress for dinner, 
by turning out the contents of her jewel- 
box. This was a favourite occupation of 
hers. She loved the sparkling stones — 
loved their glitter, and had pleasure also 
in thinking of their value. One after the 
other she was now placing her diamond 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 171 

lings on her slender white fingers. This 
one Sir George had given her, this her 
fkther, and so on. Then she came to the 
one she had coveted and secured, which 
had been taken from the poor unknown 
woman's body that had come ashore at 
amda. She examined thi« ooe BOW with 
some interest. For one thing they were 
splendid stones which composed the hoop 
that had encircled the dead finger and 
clung to it amid the wild waves. Then, 
for another, the inscription on the inner 
rim was remarkable — " To my Beloved'' A 
tale of romance and woe seemed to lie 
in these simple words. Where was the 
lover now who had caused them to be 
inscribed, perhaps kissed them in his fond 
hour of love ? His *^ beloved " now lay in 
the little churchyard of Sanda-by-the-Sea •; 
but where was he who had placed the 
gKttering stones on the hand of her who 
had met so drear a fate? 

Isabel was vaguely thinking some such 
thoughts as these when her maid, after 



172 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

rapping at her dressing-room door, appeared. 
"My lady," she said, "your father, Mr. 
Trevor, has arrived, and wishes to see you 
immediately." 

For a moment Isabel felt disconcerted^ 
but the next she quickly recovered herself. 

" Indeed ! " she said. " Show him up 
here at once. What can he have come 
for ? " 

The maid departed to do her bidding, 
and Isabel at once pulled off the ring 
which had belonged to the dead woman, 
and threw it back into the jewel-case, 
the lid of which she put down. She did 
not wish her father to see this ring. He 
had been annoyed by her keeping it to 
begin with, and before her marriage he 
had told her that he thought it right 
that, she should return it to his custody, 
so that if at any time the woman's rela- 
tions should appear to claim her property, 
that it might be ready for them. 

But Isabel had declined to comply with 
this very reasonable request. 



JBENEATH THE WAVE. 173 

" It will be time enough to give it up 
when somebody asks for it," she had said; 
and nothing that Mr. Trevor could say- 
to her on the subject had any influence 
over her. So it remained among her 
rings, though Isabel had never worn it 
since her marriage, nor previous to it, in 
the presence of Sir George. She was 
afraid, in fact, that if he noticed it he 
would wish her to return it to her father, 
and she had determined that she would 
not give it up. 

So she shut her jewel-box, and a moment 
later her father entered the room. Her 
first glance at his face showed her that 
Mr. Trevor was in a terrible rage. The 
old man's face was pale — ^almost grey — 
his eyes had a fierce, fixed look, and the 
hand that he just touched Isabel's with 
was cold and trembling, 

" Papa," she said, '^ I am so surprised 
to see you. Have you just come ? " 

" I have come on most disagreeable busi- 
ness," jerked out the squire, " Shameful 



174 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

business, I call it!" he added, raising his. 
voice. 

"Some scoundrel, some male or female 
wretch !" said the squire, almost shouting 
in his rage, "has written me a letter — a 
letter I received this morning — ^and I have 
come to investigate it. I shall not leave 
a stone unturned to discover] the perpe- 
trators of so gross an outrage." 

*'.What is it about V said Isabel, look- 
ing at her irate parent with some inward 
sense of amusement. 

" About ? It's about my marriage," 
roared the squire. " Here it is." And ha 
tore an open letter from his waistcoat 
pocket. " It begins," he continued, placing 
his double gold eye-glasses on his high nose, 
which, however, was trembling and snorting 
so with rage that the glasses dropped oflP. 
" It begins," he repeated, replacing them and 
going nearer the toilet lights on Isabel's 
dressing table, and commencing reading — 
" * Sir, — This is written by one who regrets 
to see a respectable gentleman Uke you, wha 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 175 

has arrived at such a respectable age.' — 
There !" shouted the squire, almost beside 
himself, "What do you think of that? 
Respectable age, indeed ! Confounded 
impertinence — age, indeed !" 

"Well, papa, aren't you of a respect- 
able age V said Isabel, unable to resist a 
smile. 

" No impertinence, if you please, Isabel," 
said the squire, recovering his dignity. 
" You may think this is a joke, but I do 
not. I not only do not think it a joke," 
he added, " but I intend to punish, and 
punish severely also, the perpetrators of the 
outrage. He, or she, or they, have commit- 
ted themselves," he continued. "A name 
is mentioned ;" and the squire referred to 
the letter he held in his trembling hand, 
" the name of Mr. Hannaway, Sir George's 
law man and agent, and through him I 
shall trace the offender." 

" What does the letter say ?" said Isabel, 
holding out her hand for it. 

It was, no doubt, a shameful letter. It 



176 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

went on to say (Isabel coolly read her own 
words with an unmoved countenance). It 
went on, then, after referring to Mr. Trevor s 
" respectable " age, to give an exaggerated 
account of Mr. Featherstone s life and ill- 
doings. But this was not all. It insinuated 
that if Mr. Trevor knew all that was to be 
known about the lives of Patty and Lucinda 
Featherstone, he would not i be so ready 
to marry one of them. *^ To prove," it 
ended in, " that this letter is written 
in good faith, the writer received sure 
information that Mr. Featherstone had 
asked for a loan of a thousand pounds, on 
the strength of his daughter's engagement, 
from Mr. Hannaway, the lawyer and mana- 
ger of Sir George Hamilton's estates, and 
that that gentleman (Mr. Hannaway) had 
actually been induced to advance five 
hundred." 

"Perhaps it is all true," said Isabel, 
laying down the letter on the dressing table 
after she had finished reading it. 

" It is not true !" said the squire, again 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 177 

raising his voice. " It is a base tissue of 
lies written for a purpose ; but it will have 
no eflfect upon me. Whoever wrote it may 
tremble," continued Mr. Trevor, glaring 
wrathfully at Isabel, ''for if it were my 
own child I would expose and punish the 
offender." 

Just as the squire concluded this threat 
Sir George came into the dressing-room. 

^'Mr. Trevor!" he said, in surprise, 
holding out his hand. 

Then Mr. Trevor, almost choking with 
rage, began his story again. He had re- 
ceived this shameful letter. He had been 
insulted. The person who wrote the letter 
must have had some motive. Mr. Trevor 
was determined to discover who that 
person was. 

He jerked out these sentences, literally 
white with rage. Then Sir George held 
out his hand for the letter, and as he read 
it, he also could scarcely forbear to smile, 
until he came to the imputations cast upon 
Lucinda and Patty. When he had read 

VOL. II. N 



178 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

these, and finished the letter, he handed it 
back to the squire. 

" It is a shameful letter," he said. " The 
best way to come to the end of it is to send 
for Hannaway at once. If he has lent this 
money to Mr. Featherstone he will know 
to whom he has mentioned the fact, and 
if he has not done so he will certainly tell 
us the truth." 

'^Well, send for him at once then," 
said the squire. 

" At least, let us dine first," said Isabel, 
with a little shrug of her shoulders. 
"And, gentlemen," she added, smiling, 
"pray will you go away> and allow me 
to finish my toilet ? " 

" I will send for Hannaway," said Sir 
George, as he left the dressing-room. 

*' I will find out who has done it," said 
Mr. Trevor, determinedly, as he also dis- 
appeared. 

Sir George, before he dressed for din- 
ner, did send for Mr. Hannaway. He 
wrote as follows : — 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 179 

'* My Dear Hannaway, — ^Mr. Trevor is 
here, and wishes to see you this evening. 
Some person has been ill-natured enough 
to write him an anonymous letter. Your 
name is mentioned in it as having ad- 
vanced a certain sum of money to Mr. 
Featherstone on the strength of his 
daughter's engagement. If this is true, 
and you lean remember (and choose to 
tell) to whom you mentioned the fact, 
Mr. Trevor hopes to trace his anonymous 
correspondent. If it is not true, I doubt 
his being able to do so. 

*' Come over as soon as it is convenient 
to you. — ^Yours, very truly, 

G. Hamilton. 

Sir George despatched this letter to 
Combe Lodge, by one of the grooms, 
about half-past seven o'clock, and Mr. 
Hannaway received it just as he was sit- 
ting down to his well-cooked and luxu- 
rious dinner. Before that meal was ended 
another note was brought to him, which 



180 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

another groom had conveyed from the 
Park. This was from Isabel, and had 
been written in her dressing-room after 
her father and husband had left it, and 
then entrusted to her maid. The lawyer 
opened this second epistle and read these 
words : — 

"DijAR Mr. Hannaway, — ^Papa is here, 
and is in a terrible rage. He is going 
to ask you whom you told that Mr. 
Featherstone had borrowed the money of 
you, and he thinks through this to trace 
his friendly correspondent. I depend upon 
you completely. Decline to tell him ; 
and, of course, I know nothing. It will 
all end in nonsense, if you are true. — 
Yours most sincerely, I. H.'' 



CHAPTER X. 



Isabel's friend. 



Mr. Hannaway always took pains with 
his personal appearance. He liked to be 
considered what he really was — a good- 
looking, well-dressed man ; but he took 
extraordinary pains to look well before he 
started for Massam, after receiving Sir 
George and Lady Hamilton's letters. 

He snuled to himself as he stood ar- 
ranging his brown whiskers and reddish- 
brown moustache before the glass. It 
tickled his sense of humour to think of 
the encounter that was coming. The vain 
old man (as he mentally designated Mr. 
Trevor), wounded in his tenderest feel- 
ings, was no match, he thought, for him. 



182 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Mr. Hannaway was a vain man also, but 
he knew the world too well to show this 
openly. He was generally called "a good 
fellow," and deserved in many things this 
appellation. That is, he was generous, 
courteous, and agreeable. But he loved 
Mr. Hannaway well. His easy conscience 
was satisfied with his own life, and he 
meddled very little, and cared less, for 
the lives of others. He was so prosperous 
and self-satisfied, indeed, that he could 
afford to speak good-naturedly generally 
of his neighbours. 

So he ordered his carriage and drove 
to Massam. The familv were at dessert, 
the butler told him when he anived 
there ; but without further ceremony he 
desired that functionary to announce him. 
Sir George rose courteously to receive 
him when he was ushered into the small 
dining-room, and Isabel extended her slen- 
der hand in welcome. But Mr. Trevor 
only pompously bowed his white head. 
He felt in such a rage that he could 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 183 

have been civil to no one ; and somehow 
he felt that Mr. Hannaway was mixed 
up with his anonymous letter. 

''Have you dined, Hannaway?" asked 
Sir George. 

"Thanks, I have," he replied. "I was 
just sitting down to dinner when your 
note anived," and Mr. Hannaway smiled. 

Sir George smiled also. The butler had 
now left the room, and Isabel, her hus- 
band, her father, and Mr. Hannaway only 
were present. So Sir George began : 

" I wrote to you about this anonymous 
letter that Mr. Trevor has received," he 
said, addressing Hannaway. 

" Yes, indeed ! " said Mr. Trevor, putting 
on his double gold eye-glasses with a jerk. 

"Yes," said Mr. Hannaway inquiringly, 
as if he wished to hear further. 

"Your name is mentioned in it, it 
seems," continued Sir George. " You ar6 
stated to have told the writer that you 
had just lent Mr. Featherstone five hun- 
dred pounds/* 



184 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

"Yes," again said Mr. Hannaway, mth 
much cahnness. 

" Is this true, sir ? " asked Mr. Trevor, 
unable to control himself fuiiiher. "'Have 
you lent Mr. Featherstone five hundred 
pounds, and if you have, who have you 
told that you have done so?" 

"Do you think that I should be justi- 
fied in answering either of these questions, 
Mr. Trevor?" said Mr. Hannaway. 

" Do I think so ? " said Mr. Trevor, in 
a loud voice. "Yes, I do tlunk so. I 
have received a disgraceful letter, a shame- 
fill letter, and your name is mentioned in 
it as having given the miscreant who 
wrote it certain information. Did you, I 
ask, give that information ? And to 
whom ? " 

Mr. Trevor asked these two last questions 
in his most magisterial manner. But the 
severe dignity that imposed on the country 
folk round Sanda had no effect on Mr. 
Hannaway. He did not smile, but he 
looked as if he would have liked to do so. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 185 

"You have never been a professional 
man, Mr. Trevor," he said, after a moment's 
pause, " therefore perhaps you do not know 
the rule of honour among us poor men 
who have to make our bread out of people's 
secrets. For a lawyer or a doctor to tell 
what he knows would be most inexcusable. 
If I had lent Mr. Featherstone money, I 
should be most unlikely to tell it." 

" But you did tell it ! " said Mr. 
Trevor, .very indignantly. 

" To whom ? " asked Mr. Hannaway, 
with provoking calmness. 

"Sir," shouted Mr. Trevor rising from 
his seat, " I am not accustomed to be 
spoken to in this manner. Unless you 
tell me, I shall conclude you have some 
motive for shielding the cowardly mis- 
creant who has tried to stab Mr. Feather- 
stone in the back. Nay, I shall think 
that you yourself 

"Hush, Mr. Trevor 1" said Sir George, 
interrupting the angry old man. " I 
cannot sit here and allow such words as 



186 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

those to be applied to Mr. Hannaway at 
my table. I have known him for years, 
and have ever found him a stricdy honour: 
able man." 

A faint colour passed over Mr. Hanna- 
way's clear skin, and a faint twinge of 
conscience through his heart at these words 
of Sir George. He, however, made no 
acknowledgment but a slight bow. 

" Really, papa," said Isabel the next 
minute, rising from her place at the table 
also, '* I'm fairly tired of the subject. 
Most probably Mr. Featherstone, in some 
'jovial hour,' as I believe he calls a 
known weakness of his, which we might 
designate by a harder name, has himself 
told that Mr. Hannaway has been kind 
enough to lend him this money — ^at least, 
if Mr. Hannaway has ? " she added, looking 
smilingly at the lawyer. 

Mr. Hannaway smiled in reply. He 
thought this was clever of Isabel, so he 
returned her lead. 

" I am sorry to offend you, Mr. Trevor,' 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 187 

he said, speaking respectfully but firmly; 
*'but I am not at liberty to repeat the 
details of any business transactions which 
have passed between myself and Mr. 
Featherstone. If Mr. Featherstone chooses 
to make confidants of his boon companions, 
that is no affair of mine." 

"And you mean to tell me, sir " 

continued Mr. Trevor, glaring at Mr. 
Hannaway. 

" I mean to tell nothing," said Mr. Han-: 
naway, with great gravity. " Sir George 
here would indeed have a right to mistrust 
his confidential lawyer if I were to do so." 

It was now Sir George's turn to colour, 
which he did all over his usually pale face. 
Then he at once sharply stopped the 
conversation. 

"Mr. Trevor," he said, addressing his 
father-in-law, " Isabel has probably given 
you the true explanation of this loan of 
five hundred pounds. Mr. Featherstone is 
an involved man, as I suppose you know, 
and he is also a very convivial one. He has 



188 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

boasted, most likely, of this money, which 
Mr. Hamiaway is fairly justified in declining 
to give any information about. I would 
advise you to question Mr. Featherstone 
himself, and in the meantime we may as 
well talk on some pleasanter subject.'* 

So Mr. Trevor was forced to be silent, 
and sat down again, and tried to speak with 
calmness about other things. He hated 
this cool easy lawyer, who sat there smiling 
just as if nothing disagreeable had passed. 
Nothing disagreeable had passed to Mr. 
Hannaway's ideas, for it would have taken 
many Mr. Trevors to disturb Mr. Hanna- 
way's serenity. 

When he rejoined Isabel in her drawing- 
room, he said a few words to her very 
quietly. 

" What a clever Uttle lawyer you would 
have made. Lady Hamilton ! '' he said and 
he smiled. 

" I thank you," repUed Isabel. ^' Always 
be my friend," she added, and for a moment 
«he put out her hand, which the lawyer took. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 189 

"I will," he answered fervently, and 
looked straight into her face. Nothing more 
passed between them. Sir George came up 
and talked to Hannaway; talked about 
leases and politics, and Mr. Trevor sat 
pretending to read the Times in an easy 
chair, but in reahty he was nursing his 
wrath. He would be at the bottom of this 
business yet, he determined. This cool- 
headed, ilpud^t la^er nught xefuse U. 
answer his questions, but he would force 
Mr. Featherstone to do so. He would go 
over to Featherstone the first thing in the 
morning, and he would learn the truth at 
any rate about this money. 

Poor Mr. Trevor! He retired to bed 
early, thinking that he would hear every- 
thing from Mr. Featherstone in the morning. 
Mr. Hannaway did not retire to bed early, 
and before he did so, he wrote a little note 
to graceless Antony, which was as follows : — 

" Dear Featherstone, — ^Your proposed 
son-in-law, Mr. Trevor, has received an 



190 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

anonymous letter from some person or 
persons ill-disposed to you and your family, 
and in it a certain monetary transaction 
that has lately passed between us is related. 
I fear that in some of your merry hours 
you must have told this, for the old gentle- 
man attacked me this evening with great 
fury on the subject. Of course I told him 
nothing, and I advise you to be equally 
reticent. Say ^some enemy has done this.' 

^' Yours faithfully, 

''W. P. Hannaway." 

*'P.S. — You may (if I am any judge 
of character) expect a storm to-morrow, 
in the early morning." 

This note was lying on Mr. Featherstone's 
breakfast table when he came down to break- 
fast the next morning, so that by the time 
Mr. Trevor arrived at Featherstone, both 
Antony and his daughters were fully pre- 
pared to receive him. 

Antony had a touch of humour in his 
composition, and he got himself up as the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 191 

respectable paterfamilias^ to the best of his 
ability, for the occasion. He had been an 
adept at making fishing flies in his youth, 
and he brought out the old paraphernalia, 
and laid some half-made flies, that had been 
begun twenty years ago, on a newspaper 
before him. Alas ! the shaking hands could 
not now have finished them so as to gull 
the most unwary trout that ever meandered 
in a stream. But the whole thing had a 
piscatorial and rural appearance, and Antony 
felt that they added to the virtuous effect 
of the tableau. Then Patty brought her 
work, and sat down by her father ; but Lu 
was restless, and could not settle in the 
fEimily scene. There was, in truth, an innate 
honesty about this girl that made her hate 
deceptions of all sorts, and though she was 
going to marry an old man for his money, 
she meant to be a good wife to him, and act 
honestly all her days. 

In his heart Antony fully believed that 
he had been the delinquent about repeating 
the story of the five hundred pounds. So 



192 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

many things had he told, and totally forgot- 
ten that he had done so in the morning, 
that why not this ? He sat there, with his 
fishing flies before him, trying to remember 
who it was likely he had made a confidant of 
He had been very "jolly,'* as he called it, 
on the strength of this very five hundred 
pounds, and his daughter's engagement 
combined, and his evening conversations 
were, therefore, mostly a blank to him. 

"But it was a confounded ill-natured 
thing, whpever wrote to old Trevor about 
it," he decided. That Mr. Hannaway had 
something to do with it he never for a 
moment suspected. 

Presently a carriage was heard approach- 
ing the house, and then the door bell rang, 
and a few minutes later Mr. Trevor was 
ushered in on the family scene. 

" Mr. Trevor ! " exclaimed Antony, as 
the squire was announced, jumping up, 
and extending his hand, as if in great 
surprise. 

"You did not tell us you were coming,'^ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 193 

Lu faltered out, as she also shook hands 
with her betrothed, 

"I have come on a most painftd busi- 
ness," said the squire, hesitatingly. 

" A painful business ! My dear sir, what- 
•ever is the matter ?" said Antony. 

" I have received a letter," explained Mr. 
Trevor, rather nervously, " a shameful letter 
— anonymous, of course — abusing you and 
your family ; and as a voucher of the 
writer's good faith, it is aflfirmed that 
you — it's a most unpleasant thing to 
say, Mr. Featherstone, particularly before 
ladies." And Mr. Trevor bowed to the 
girls. 

"Nay, my dear sir, out with it!" said 
Antony, with an assumption of good-natured 
eaae. " Hard words don't break bones, 
you know." 

" Well, then," continued Mr. Trevor, " as 
a voucher of good faith, the writer affirms 
that on sure information he knows that you 
asked Mr. Hannaway, the lawyer here, 
to lend you a thousand pounds since your 

VOL. II. o 



194 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

daughter's engagement, and that he did 
lend you five hundred ! " 

" No such good luck," said Antony, 
shaking his head and smiling. '^ Hanna- 
way is a rich fellow, and a good fellow, 
and I heartily wish he would take it into 
his head to be as generous as your anony- 
mous correspondent makes out." 

"Then am I to understand," hesitated 
Mr. Trevor. 

"That I've not got it," answered Antony, 
with a laugh. " In truth, my dear sir," he 
continued, "though this is a fine property," 
(and he looked out of the window at his 
mortgaged acres as he spoke), "what with 
one expense and another, I couldn't lay my 
hand on five hundred pounds in hard cash 
at this moment. No, indeed, I couldn't," 
wentj on Antony ; and he shook his head 
thoughtfully, as if he were considering 
where he could get it. 

The squire hummed and hawed. A 
father-in-law without five hundred pounds 
in hard cash was not exactly a pleasant 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 195 

prospect; but still Mr. Featherstone was 
evidently such an honest open fellow, 
thought the squire. Reckless, perhaps, but 
honest. Yes, that was a great thing, de- 
cided Mr. Trevor; and so his brow cleared. 

"Then I suppose," he said, "all the 
other information that the letter contains 
is equally false as this story about the five 
hundred pounds?" 

" I dare say, I dare say," answered 
Antony jauntily. " It's as easy to tell a 
dozen Ues as one, you know." 

"Perhaps you had better read it," said 
Mr. Trevor, and he put the letter into 
Antony's hand, who read it through with 
an unabashed countenance (though he 
knew that a great deal of what was in 
it was true), but with many exclamations 
of wonder and contempt. 

" I could not have believed it," he said^ 
after he had finished its perusal. "Unless 
my own eyes had seen it, I could not 
have believed that anyone could have in- 
vented such a tissue of falsehoods." 



196 BENEATH THJL WAYS. 

Then La put oat her hand. ''Let me 
read it, papa," she said, and as she did 
so tears rose in her eyes. 

" It is a crael letter," she said, indig- 
nantly. " Patty and I don't deserve it. 
We may have had to do things that 
rich girls do not do, but we have never 
— I don t care who says it or who be- 
lieves it — ^we have never done anything 
to be ashamed of." And this was strictly 
true. 

" My deal" girl ! " said Mr. Trevor, 
advancing to her and taking her hand, 
" do you think I would believe anything 
against you ? The reason that I have made 
this inquiry is that I am so indignant 
that anyone should dare attack your good 
name. But do not think that an anony- 
mous scribbler could irifluence me. I chose 
you to be my future wife from my own 
judgment of your amiable and attractive 
character, and that judgment I can rely 
upon." 

" You are very good," said Lu, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 197 

she put her hand softly into the old 
man's. She felt grateful to him for trust- 
mg her ; and gratitude, after all, is not a 
bad foundation for the beginning of love. 



CHAPTER XI. 

RANK AND FILE. 

While great doings went on at Massam, 
and all the people in the neighbourhood 
who considered themselves in a position 
to do so, crowded round Isabel to do her 
homage, Hilda Marston was fighting her 
way amid the vast army of the toilers of 
the earth. She was getting on pretty 
well. Besides her two grown-up pupils 
at Florentia Villa, she had got one or 
two young children in the same neigh- 
bourhood, and one or two humbler pupils 
in the immediate vicinity of where she 
lived. 

So when Christmas dawned — Christmas, 
which came to Isabel in her splendid 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 199 

home, surrounded by everything that 
wealth could procure, it came also not 
quite unhappily to her late companion. 
For one thing it brought little Ned. This 
new mouth to feed — ^this new care seemed 
to brighten Hilda's life. The boy had 
never- been in London before, and it was 
therefore a region of dehght to him. 
Hilda took him to the bazaars, and 
bought what she could for him out of 
her slender means, and tried a'l she 
eould to make his young life pleasant to 
him. The shop windows, too, were an 
unending source of delight to him. The 
pantomimes Hilda could not afford, though 
Ned frequently expatiated on his desire 
to behold one. 

** We must wait till the ship comes 
in," Hilda used to say. 

" Oh, bother the ship," Ned would 
answer, with the thoughtless selfishness 
of a boy. *' Don't you think you could 
treat us just to one, Hil ? " 

But Hilda was forced to decline. One 



200 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

treat meant many shillings, shillings too 
rare and precious to be thus disposed of; 
and so Master Ned had to content himsdf 
with reading the bills of the various 
theatres^ and speculating to Hilda on 
which entertainment would probably ba 
the best. 

But a great pleasure was in store for 
them both. Miss May arrived one 
morning during the Christmas hoHdays, 
and took them back to Brixton with her 
to spend a few days. Octavia Lodge 
proved a sort of earthly paradise to 
Master Ned. It happened to be a snow- 
storm while he was there, and the boy 
had the run of the grounds, and could 
make snow men and snow balls to hi& 
heart's content. 

But this was not all. A day came 
*when Miss May told him that she wa& 
going to take his sister and himself that 
evening to the pantomime in Drury Lane. 
Ned could not contain his joy. He was- 
ready dressed in his outer-coat and warm 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 201 

scarf and mittens long before the time 
to starts and when they did start in the 
tramway-car that went down the road, 
no boy in the best appointed carriage in 
London went that night to the theatre 
with a happier heart. 

Humble people, after all, have their 
pleasures as well as great ones. Miss 
May was pleased to see the httle lad's 
pleasure, and Hilda also enjoyed the 
prospect before them, and looked well 
and handsome — so handsome tiiat she 
attracted the attention of a young gentle- 
man, of very meagre and impleasant 
appearance, who edged up nearer to the 
party, and finally addressed Miss May, 
who had been sitting with her head 
determinedly turned to the window, since 
she had recognized him. 

" I say, ain't you Miss May, who keeps 
tiie school ? " at last asked the young 
gentleman, laying one of his ugly hands 
upon Miss May's arm, who turned sharply 
round on being thus addressed. 



It 



202 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

"Yes, I am Miss May, she answered. 
And how are you, Mr. Joseph Moxam?" 
Oh, pretty well," replied Mr. Joe. "I 
say," he added, putting his long nose and 
protruding teeth close to the old school- 
mistress's face, "is that one of your 
pupils?" and he indicated Hilda by a 
slight movement of his thumb. 

" No," answered Miss May, briefly. 

" Pretty girl, uncommon pretty girl ! " 
continued Mr. Joe, eyeing Hilda approv- 
ingly. " I say, old lady, introduce me, 
won't you ? " 

" Don't see any occasion, Mr. Joe," re- 
plied Miss May. 

" Oh, yes ; do now," said Mr. Joe, and 
to her great annoyance. Miss May was 
thus forced to do so. 

"Miss Marston," she said, coldly, "Mr. 
Moxam." 

" Miss Marston ! " repeated Mr. Joe ; 
" why, you are not the girl who teaches 
music, are you ? " 

" Yes, I am," said Hilda, rather amused. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 203 

** By Jove ! '' exclaimed Mr. Joe, as if in 
the uttermost astonishment, and then he 
collapsed, sitting gazing at Hilda contem- 
platively during the rest of the journey. 

" Where are you going ? " he said, at last, 
to the party generally. 

"To the pantomime," replied little Ned, 
grandly, before the ladies could speak. 

" Which one ? " asked Mr. Joe. 

'* To Drury Lane," again answered Ned. 
"They say it's the best." 

" I wouldn't mind going with you," said 
Mr. Joe, looking at Miss May. 

"Thank you," said Miss May, curtly; 
" but we don't want any gentlemen. " I'm 
an old woman, and can take care of Miss 
Marston — and mean to," she added. 

So she would have nothing to say to Mr. 
Joe, who, however, grew profuse in his 
offers, pressing the ladies to have supper 
with him; but Miss May was firm. 

" Thank you, no," she said. " Good even- 
ing, Mr. Joe." And Mr. Joe was obliged to 
leave them, but this accidental encounter 



204 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

afterwards brought some very disagreeable 
consequences to Hilda. 

But she forgot all about Mr. Joe Moxam 
when she got into the theatre. As for little 
Ned, his usual loquacious tongue grew silent 
with astonishment and awe. Once, how- 
ever, he gave vent to his feelings. This 
was during one of the transformation 
scenes, when the fairies seemed to his 
dazzled eyes most beautiful to behold. 

" I say, Hil," he said, pulling at his 
sister s dress, " are these real women, now ? 
They can't be the common sort, like you, 
Miss May?" 

Hilda laughed merrily at the question. 

" My dear," she said, " I Ve no doubt if 
I were dressed up and painted that I would 
look just as well." 

" Don't believe it," replied Ned, seriously, 
shaking his curly head. "You're not bad 
looking, but oh, you could never look like 
them." 

They had a nice little hot supper when 
they got home, and the day remained im- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 205 

printed for some time in Ned's memory 
as one of the red letter days of his exist- 
ence. He was never tired of telling about 
the treat to Hilda when they returned to 
their lodgings, and took a more intense 
interest in theatrical affairs than ever. 

What distressed Hilda very much was 
being obliged so constantly to leave him. 
On these occasions Master Ned naturally 
resented being shut up in two small rooms, 
and therefore insisted upon roaming about 
the streets at his pleasure. Hilda was 
always afraid that he would get into some 
mischief or other, and, we may be sure, 
gave him many charges each day before 
she set out on her ordinary duties. 

The next time that she went to Florentia 
Villa after meeting Mr. Joe Moxam in the 
tramway car, that young gentleman walked 
into the drawing-room, where she was giving 
his sisters their lesson. 

" Well, Joe," said Ellen Moxam, lookii^ 
round as he entered, ** are you going to 
have a lesson?" 



206 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" All right," replied Mr. Joe, and without 
taking any notice of Hilda he went up to 
the piano, and joined in the duet they 
were singing in one of the most discordant 
voices imaginable. 

"Put me right when I'm out," he said 
to Hilda; but to put Mr. Joe right was 
beyond Hilda's capabilities. 

However, he seemed quite satisfied with 
his own performances, though his elder 
half-sister Miss Moxam once or twice 
(after her usual fashion) said something 
unpleasant to him. But Mr. Joe, though 
it was not usual to him, kept his temper. 
He was facetious indeed after his manner, 
and grinned out his prominent teeth, and 
made jokes, and demeaned himself in 
what he believed to be a highly attrac- 
tive way. When the lesson was over he 
bowed to Hilda, and left the room be- 
fore she did, and Hilda felt certainly 
more comfortable after he was gone. 

She walked down to the railway station, 
as she intended travelling to Victoria 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 207 

• 

station by train, and having taken a 
second-class ticket, stood waiting on the 
platform. Great, then, was her annoyance 
at seeing the mean little form of Mr. Joe 
Moxam emerge out of the darkness; and 
the next moment he had walked up to 
her side. 

"Well, you see," he said, with his 
odiously familiar air, " I have not lost 
sight of you ! Couldn't say much, you 
know, before those old sisters of mine, or 
they would have made a fine row ; but I 
wanted to have a little talk to you, for 
all that." 

Hilda felt so annoyed that she did not 
know what to say. 

"Couldn't beUeve at first that a good- 
looking girl like you was a music teacher," 
continued Mr. Joe. "You ain't the style 
somehow. Drab coloured skins and an- 
cient, that lot, mostly. But here's the 
train. I'm going to see you home, if you 
will allow me ? " 

"Oh! please don't," said Hilda; but 



208 BENEATH THE WATS. 

Mr. Joe was peisist^it. He sat dose to 
Hilda in the railway carriage^ and paid 
her coarse compUments, and altogether 
made her Tery Tmeomforiable. Lackilj, 
there was a respectable-lookmg man in 
the carriage, or Hilda would have been 
yet more annoyed. As it was, she felt 
greatly relieved when they reached Vic- 
toria Station ; but she found even then 
that Mr. Joe was not to be shaken oK, 

" 111 see you home. Don t be prudish. 
What nonsense r he said, when Hildas 
politely, but coldly, bade him good evening. 

"Thank you, but I would rather you 
would not," said Hilda. 

" You are too pretty a girl to walk 
about alone,** said Mr. Joe, with one of 
his grins ; and so he followed Hilda^ or 
rather walked by Hilda's side along the 
platform in front of Victoria station. 

But in the crowd, suddenly Hilda came 
face to face with Philip Hayward. She 
knew him at once. He looked paler and 
thinner, but that was all. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 209 

'• Mr. Hay ward ! " she said, stopping, 
and she held out her hand. 

Then Hayward looked down at the 
flushed, rather startled face before him, 
and he recognized Hilda. 

'* Miss Marston ! " he said, kindly ; "I 
never expected to see you here." 

"No," answered Hilda. "But," she 
added, timidly and quickly, " will you turn 
with me ? I have something to tell you 
—about little Ned." 

"Of course I will," said Hayward, and 
he turned as he spoke. 

"Oh!" said Mr. Joe insolently to 
Hilda, " I was in the way, was I ? An- 
other young man, eh ? Oh ! " he exclaimed 
the next instant, looking up and remem- 
bering Hayward, "its you, is it? Well, 
good evening to you both," he added, " I 
wont spoil sport," And with a nod to 
Hilda he turned away. 

" What does that fellow mean ?" asked 
Hayward, quickly. " Do you know him ?" 

"I teach his sisters music, and he came 

VOL. II. P 



210 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

into the room to-day," answered Hilda^ "and 
he annoyed me very much in the train." 

" Annoyed you ! " repeated Hayward 
sharply. •* He has not been rude to you, 
I hope?" 

"Only by forcing his company upon 
me/' replied Hilda. " But do not let us 
talk of him any more. Do you know 
that I am living near here now, and 
who do you think is living with me ? " 

"I cannot guess," said Hayward. 

"Your old pupil, little Ned," said Hilda, 
smiling. "Won't he be delighted to see 
you ! He often speaks about you." 

" And he has left Mr. Irvine ?" asked 
Hayward. 

" Yes—" and Hilda blushed. " You know 
— I offended Mr. Trevor somehow, and — 
he declined any longer to pay for poor 
little Ned's education, and as I could not 
afford to keep him at Sanda, I try to teach 
him myself" 

" I must come and give him a lesson in 
Latin sometimes," said Hayward, smiling. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 211 

" Will you ? I shall be so glad if you 
will." And Hilda blushed and looked very 
pleased as she spoke. 

" Yes, indeed I will," answered Hayward 
kindly ; and then, when they reached Hilda s 
modest home, he accepted her invitation to 
go in. 

The street that she lodged in was a quiet 
little street, and the people of the house 
were humble but respectable. The husband 
was coachman to a nobleman in one of the 
adjoining squares, and the wife and landlady 
had been a cook. They had one son, who 
was a groom in the same stables, and they 
kept the dining room of the house for 
themselves, and let the neat little drawing- 
room and bedroom above. This Hilda had 
taken, and she had no particular reason to 
repent having done so. Mrs. Bargate, the 
landlady, was a kind woman, with a warm 
heart and a warm temper. Mr. Bargate, 
the coachman, was ruled by Mrs. Bargate 
in all things, and smoked his pipe through 
all domestic storms; and the household. 



212 BENEATH THE WAVE, 

therefore, might be fairly considered a very 
quiet one. 

Mrs. Bargate opened the house door for 
Hilda and Hayward, and she smiled as 
she did so. 

"Well, Miss Marston," she said, "it's 
well you're back. Master Ned has been 
making a fine row with the cat next door." 

" Naughty boy !" said HSlda, and she ran 
upstairs ; and as she opened the drawing- 
room door, a great grey cat, with every hair 
on its tail erected, sprang past her, and fled 
down stairs, followed by Master Ned, all 
excitement at the chase. 

But Hayward caught him by the arm 
after he had escaped past Hilda. 

"Well, Master Ned," he said, "this is 
fine play. Whatever have you been doing 
to the cat ?" 

" Teaching her to walk in walnut shells," 
answered Ned; and then, recognizing Hay- 
ward, he exclaimed : " Oh ! Mr. Hayward, 
is it you T 

" Yes, it's me," said Hayward, still holding 






BENEATH THE WAVE. 213 

the boy's arm. " Come, old fellow, let the 
cat alone." 

" She's only one on," confided Master 
Ned, wistfully, alluding to the walnut shells. 
"If Hil had only came in a minute or two 
later, she would have had four." 

Well, never mind," said Hayward, 
come up now ;" and so, holding Ned by 
the arm, he followed Hilda into her sitting- 
room. 

It was a neat little place. A tasteful 
woman's hand had evidently arranged the 
furniture, and added some small decorations 
to the original stiff neatness of its appear- 
ance. 

" You will stay and have some tea with 
us ?" said Hilda, turning to Hayward, who 
smiled, sat down, and drew Master Ned on 
his knee. 

Master Ned became very jubilant over 
his old master's re-appearance. 

"So you're living in London, too?" he 
said. " That's jolly ! You'll take me out 
to see things sometimes, won't you ? Girls 



214 BENEATH THE WAYl. 

^re all very well, you know, but Hil's 
frightened by crowds and that lot, and so 
shell scarcely go anywhere. But well go 
together, won't we T 

While Ned was making these arrange- 
ments for his future amusement, "Hil" 
had gone out of the room to seek her 
landlady, the ex-cook, and make arrange- 
ments for Hayward's refreshment. Mrs. 
Bargate was quite agreeable. She cooked 
a dish of chops to perfection, and some 
fish, and in half an hour the little party 
of young people in the drawing-room 
were sitting enjoying their humble re- 
past. 

Hilda had a bright fresh colour in her 
face and a glad light in her eyes. She 
was so pleased to see Hayward, to see 
some one she had known before, and in 
whom she had always felt a strong in- 
terest. 

" Of course you were at Lady Hamilton's 
wedding ? " said Hayward quietly, as the 
meal went on ; but Hilda noticed the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 215 

effort with which he said, these simple 
words. 

"Yes," answered Hilda, "I was at the 
breakfast, though not at the church. It 
was very quiet — only the two Miss Feather- 
stones were there — and you've heard the 
news about Mr. Trevor, I suppose ? " 

"That he has married Miss Feather- 
stone ? " answered Hayward. " Yes, I 
have heard. I have heard lately once or 
twice from Sir George Hamilton, and he 
told me about it." 

After his mother's death, Hayward had 
written to Sir George Hamilton. He 
had written courteously and gratefully, 
returning at the same time by far the 
larger portion of the money that Sir 
George had advanced to him during his 
mother's illness. In this first letter 
Hayward had made no allusion to Sir 
George's marriage. He merely told him 
the fact of his mother's death, and grate- 
fully declined all further assistance. "Mr. 
Newcome will take me back, I believe," 



216 BENEATH THE WATE. 

he added, "and the salary he ^ves me 
will satisfy my modest wants." 

Sir George was annoyed at this letter. 
He showed it to Isabel, expressing himself 
strongly on the subject. 

" If he is so very independent, why not 
let him alone ? " said Isabel, carelessly, 
who had almost forgotten Hayward by 
this time in the new pleasures and excite- 
ment of her life. 

"You forget what I owe him," said Sir 
George, gravely. 

"But if he won't take anything," an- 
swered Isabel, "you are not to blame." 

"He is sensitive, proud, and refined," 
said Sir George, "and these qualities only 
make me respect him more. That fooUsh 
fancy he took for you, Isabel" 

Isabel shrugged her fine shoulders. 

"But it was so, love," said Sir George, 
" and it hurts his pride, therefore, to accept 
anything from me. But I shall not allow 
this feeling to come between us ; I mean 
always to be his friend." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 217 

So Sir George had written several times 
to Hayward since his mother's death. But 
Hayward had gratefully decKned all Sir 
George's offers, though he had not quite 
declined his friendship. He had returned 
to his old employer, Mr. Newcome, and 
was agreeably surprised when, shortly after 
he had done so, Mr. Newcome voluntarily 
proposed to double his salary. This increase 
did not come out of Mr. Newcome's purse. 
Sir George, in fact, finding that Hayward 
declined help from him, determined in- 
directly to assist him. A correspondence, 
therefore, had taken place between Sir 
George and Mr. Newcome, and the im- 
mediate consequence of this was that 
Hayward's salary was doubled. 

The printer regarded Hayward often 
now, through his small shrewd eyes, with 
positive astonishment. That a man would 
refuse such offers was to Mr. Newcome 
almost incomprehensible. Yet he knew 
it was so. Sir George made no secret to 
the printer of his wish to help Hayward, 



218 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and his reasons for doing so. But Mr. 
Newcome kept Sir George's secret. It 
suited him to do so. He got a good man 
for a low salary (the part that came out 
of his pocket), and he got credit for being 
a generous man with Hayward, which he 
was not. 

The first thing that Hayward did with 
the larger means at his command was to 
return all the money he owed to Sir 
George. Sir George thus received his 
own money back, as it were, but he did 
not think less of the young man for his 
scrupulous honesty. Then Hayward sent 
back the parson's ten pounds. The Rev. 
Matthew's kind eyes grew moist as he 
read his old tutor's letter, and learned 
that he was alone in the world. He 
immediately wrote pressing Hayward most 
cordially to pay a long visit to Sanda ; but 
Hayward could not leave his work, and to 
have seen Sanda again would only have 
recalled most painful memories. 

Thus, when Hayward met Hilda Marston 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 219 

in London, he was once more the *^ reader " 
in Messrs. Salkeld and Newcome's establish- 
ment. He told Hilda this, and then gradu- 
ally the conversation drifted to Hayward's 
mother. Ned perched himself on his old 
tutor's knee, and they sat round the fire 
and talked. Hilda's sweet womanly sym- 
pathy and her gentle questions about Mrs. 
Hayward's illness, touched Hay ward; and 
he found himself telling Hilda of his 
mother s death, of Mr. Jervis's kindness to 
her, and how, when she had felt her end 
approaching, she had sent for the curate 
and asked him, with her last breath, to be a 
brother to her son. 

" And he is a brother," said Hayward, his 
earnest face lighting up when he spoke of 
his friend. * ^ Without him I could not have 
borne her loss ; he has been everything to 
me, and he is — but why talk of him? — you 
will think I am an enthusiast if I were to 
tell you my real opinion of Horace Jervis." 

" What is he Hke ?" asked Hilda, with 
interest. 



220 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

'* He has a good face, made absolutely 
beautiful by its expression," answered Hay- 
ward. " Somehow you think of heaven 
when you look in Jervis's face." 

" Oh ! Mr. Hayward !" 

"And his life," continued Hayward, "is 
the most utterly self-denying one that it is 
possible to conceive. He has a good fortune, 
but how does he spend it ? Literally in 
going out into the highways and byways, 
and helping the poor. He seeks not those 
who sit in the high places of the world, 
but those who are hungry, sick, and in 
prison." 

"A good and faithful servant," said Hilda, 
thoughtfully. 

" It is impossible to live with him, I 
think," said Hayward in a low tone, "and 
not to believe." 

A great change, indeed, had come over 
Hayward's heart since his intimacy with 
Horace Jervis. After Mrs. Hayward's death 
Philip had returned to town with the curate, 
and had spent a week or two with him, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 221 

had thus seen much of his daily Ufa. That 
practice is better than precept is an old 
adage^ and a sort of calm seemed to come 
over Hayward's restless dissatisfied heart 
when he found himself constantly thrown 
with a man who sought not happiness or 
gain for himself, but simply the good of 
others. He had an aun in life, at least, 
Philip Hayward perceived ; an aim which 
he followed with sure serenity. He was not 
tossed backwards and forwards by the waves 
and tides of circumstances around him. 
As lie stood on the shore of Time, his eyes 
were fixed on the great ocean of Eternity. 
Unconsciously his perfect faith influenced 
Hayward. He who had cried out in his 
despair, and whose soul had been crushed by 
the idol he had set up, now began to reahze 
that there were many other things to Uve 
for than a selfish and absorbing passion. 
Horace Jervis always spoke of things here 
as for a little while. He prized not, there- 
fore, the treasure that the ** moth and rust 
doth corrupt." Between the starlight and 



•^•^•^ JESZJ^r^ ^'^TO TTI^yH. 



lie amnnj^hi: "here: ttus oo ;jri( 

tauuL htiT^v^^t^i ihifr maa^i -Mm! iod, hmosI cf 

t^Lose unimii aim. 

OIL BEav-:vacri : oil BEsEvwaiii. w6i> was ao 
eaznesc 'mpaaffrnngiL :inii ^aic&iiaQigc&L Heie 
was i Ti;m oe: <:!aiilii aontTorL ck imuL be could 
lovi^ Tlie Ttean ^ifms^ mt^ snaH .-unligtinng 
^le peniTT xiTTesf ami vTBrfirii^. xiaa^ with a 
jocm^ moEL^ jQcrrngly bmaged jo^meiit he 
ii£bd tie^iaed ami hiK&ed. w&ae: iznGesiT afasent 
in J«vT5. 

** I fisel asfcamfid of ntv^elf besade hiiiL'' 
Hayward tijld Hiliia: iiiii tihe girl smfled, 
veil pleased to hear h^ genenxis praise of 
Ide friend- 

**Woald voa Eke to know him, Xedf 
asked Havward of hk ex-popil, who was 
stin sitting perched npon his knee. 

Upon this question being asked, little 
Ned smiled and wriggled. He had, in £su^ 
not been paying much attention to the 
conversation, but had been vaguely contem- 
plating the possibility of Hayward taking 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 22*3 

him some evening to see the representation 
of the " Forty Thieves," of which he had 
seen engaging pictures (the " forty thieves " 
being enclosed in brown jars) pasted on 
the city walls. 

Before Hilda and Hay ward parted that 
night, they agreed that each alternate even- 
ing Hayward was to call and give little 
Ned a lesson in Latin. 

" And you must tell me," said Hayward, 
kindly shaking Hilda's hand in farewell 
before he left, "if ever my interesting 
connexion, Mr. Jos. Moxam, annoys you 
with his company again." And Hayward 
smiled. 

Hilda smiled also as she returned Hay- 
ward's hand-shake. This evening had been 
very bright to her. It seemed to the poor 
girl that in all that great city she had 
now one person at least whom she could 
call a friend. 



CHAPTER XII. 

AN UNEXPECTED BLOW. 

The next few weeks were very jolly ones 
for little Ned. Hayward not only taught 
him Latin (which Ned felt he could have 
dispensed with), but he also took him to 
nearly every sight in town suitable for his 
years. The Zoological Gardens and the 
pantomimes were, however, his greatest 
delight. Hilda sometimes went with them 
to the gardens, and while Ned was gazing 
with entranced delight at the animals. Hay- 
ward and Hilda would walk together. They 
soon grew very intimate with each other. 
They were not unlike in mind, but Hilda 
was gentler and not so enthusiastic as Hay- 
ward. It seemed almost as if she were the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 225 

older of the two during their conversations. 
Yet this was not so ; her training in the 
school of adversity, perhaps, had been longer, 
or at least she had learnt to bear herself 
more meekly and wisely along life's trouble- 
some way. 

But they were great friends — lovers Hay- 
ward never contemplated that they should 
be; for his means were utterly inadequate 
to maintain a wife, and, besides, it seemed 
to him that his heart was dead and cold. 
He had exhausted all its emotions, he 
thought, in the deep and ardent love that 
he had lavished on Isabel Trevor. He 
knew now that love had been an unworthy 
one. He had given it unworthily, unthink- 
ingly, for the sake of the beautiful face and 
winning tongue; and he had reaped the 
bitter fruits. But he had loved her too 
well soon to forget the exquisite pleasure 
and the cruel misery she had caused 
him. 

Hilda saw quite well that Hayward was 
not in love with her. She had seen him in 

VOL. II. Q 



226 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

love with Isabel; and she knew that the 
even kindness of his manner to herself 
sprang from a very different feeling to the 
jealous engrossing one of love. Was this 
knowledge pain to Hilda ? If so, she made 
no sign. She was not a girl to let a man 
see that she cared for him more than he 
cared for her, or in any way to seek to gain 
his affection. She accepted his friendship, 
and an incident which presently occurred 
made her feel that she had a right to be 
grateful to him, and to show her gratitude. 
This happened through the unwelcome 
agency of Mr. Joe Moxam. This young 
gentleman had continued to annoy Hilda, 
and during her visits to Florentia Villa 
frequently came into the room while his 
sisters' singing lessons were going on, and 
would glance knowingly with his odious 
little green bloodshot eyes at Hilda when- 
ever he had an opportunity of doing so 
unobserved. Then twice he had met her 
when she was returning home, and had 
insisted on escorting her to the station. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 227 

But a crowning injury was yet to come, 
and one which Hilda felt in her unpro- 
tected position that she was compelled to 
resent. 

One evening she received a letter by thei 
post from him, whose purport at first she 
really could not understand. It commenced 
as follows : — 

" My dear girl, don't go humbugging on 
any longer, but let a fellow who likes you 
see you sometimes, though for reasons we 
both know, our meetings must be for the 
present under the rose '* 

And so on. 

Hilda's face turned literally scarlet as 
she read the impertinent words ; and when 
Hayward called in the evening to give 
little Ned his Latin lesson, she placed the 
vile letter in his hands. 

" You said you would speak to this 
person if he insulted me," she said. " What 
do you think of this ? " 



228 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hayward read the letter through with 
an angry frown. Then he put it in his 
pocket. 

" Let me answer it," he said. " Insolent 
scoundrel ! " 

"You — ^might tell him at least not to 
annoy me any more/' continued Hild^ 
beginning to be afraid of getting Hayward 
into some trouble. " Surely if he knew 
who I am — ^if he knew I was bom a lady " 
— and Hilda blushed — "he would let me 
alone." 

"Whether you were born a lady or not 
he has no right to molest you," answered 
Hayward. " I'll tell him to-morrow that 
if he ever speaks to you again I'll horse- 
whip him." 

And Hayward carried his intentions into 
eflfect. He went down on the 'following 
morning to his uncle's place of business in 
the City, and found there (after sending 
up his card) his uncle and Mr. Joe Moxam 
in their private office. 

He spoke civilly to his uncle, who had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 229 

heard of his connection with Sir George 
Hamilton from his brother-in-law, New- 
come, and was, therefore, inclined to treat 
him with more respect than usual. Then 
he turned to Mr. Joe. 

" Can I have a few words with you ? " 
he said, and Joe looked rather uncomfort- 
able, and fidgeted on his high office stool. 

" With me ! " he said. ^* What can you 
want with me ? " 

" Just to say a few words," answered 
Hayward; and so after winking at his 
father, Joe Moxam descended from his 
stool, and followed Hayward into the 
street. 

*^Mr. Moxam," said Hayward, as soon 
as they got there, drawing out from his 
pocket the letter Mr. Joe had addressed 
to Hilda, " you sent this to a young lady 
I've known for some time." 

"Who do you mean ? " asked Mr. Joe, 
sharply, his yellow skin turning suddenly 
red. "What business of yours is it, if I 
chose to write letters to any girl I like?" 



^ 



230 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"It is if you write to this young lady," 
answered Hayward. 

" Lady ! " sneered Mr. Joe. " A fine 
lady, who goes out to give lessons for a 
few shiUings ! " 

"Yes, Miss Marston is a lady," said 
Hayward; "and moreover, she is a lady 
whom I mean to protect from receiving 
such insulting letters as this." 

" You mean to protect, indeed !" retorted 
Mr. Joe. "You are a fine protector, I 
must say — a fellow who only the other day 
came begging to the governor to "get you 
something to do to keep you from starving." 

Hayward could scarcely restrain himself, 
but he did. 

" I came to give you warning to-day," 
he said, coolly enough, after a moment's 
consideration; "but if you write again to 
Miss Marston, or address her, or annoy 
her in any way, I'll horsewhip you." 

Mr. Joe turned almost livid with rage. 

" You !" he screamed, " you, you beggar ! 
You horsewhip me ! See if you dare." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 231 

"I will dare if you don't leave Miss 
Marston alone," answered Hayward ; and 
then, without another word, he turned and 
left Mr. Joe, who kept muttering ' impre- 
cations and vengeance for some time after 
on " Newcome's beggarly clerk," as he 
designated Hayward. 

Hayward did not tell Hilda of this en- 
counter, but his blood was up, and he deter- 
mined to keep his word, and really horse- 
whip Mr. Joe Moxam if he annoyed the 
poor girl any more. He knew the hour 
that she returned from Florentia Villa, and 
on the following evening, after arming him- 
self with a serviceable whip, he took the 
train to Brixton, and was loitering on the 
road leading to the station, when Hilda 
passed him, walking very quickly. A 
minute later Mr. Joe Moxam pounced out 
of a shop near the railway bridge, where 
he had been waiting for her, and imme- 
diately joined her. 

" My dear girl," began Mr. Joe, " don't 
wAlk so fast." 



232 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Don't speak to me, please," said Hilda. 

" Nonsense !" said Mr. Joe, rudely laying 
his hand on her shrinking arm, and trying 
forcibly to detain her, while Hilda gave a 
half cry of fear, and endeavoured in vain to 
shake off his odious grasp. But the next 
minute, with a scream of terror, Mr. Joe 
had released her, for a stinging cut from 
Hayward's whip (who by this time had 
overtaken them) fell across his face, and 
he turned hastily round to see who was 
his assailant. 

" There !" cried Hayward, " take that, 
and that ! Remember, I gave you warning. 
Scoundrel, to persecute an unprotected 
girl !" 

But as the third lash fell, with a shriek 
of terror Mr. Joseph fled. He ran as fast 
as his feet could carry him straight into 
the station, and when a few minutes later, 
Hayward and Hilda entered it, he was 
clinging spasmodically to a policeman. 

" There !'' he screamed, when he saw 
Hayward and his whip appear, " that's him ! 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 233 

I give him in charge. He's assaulted mel 
I give him in charge ; do you hear ? 
take him up !" 

For this assault Hay ward was summoned 
the next morning to the police court. Mr. 
Joe gave his evidence with the bitterest 
rancour, describing himself as walking inno- 
cently down the road, when he was sprang 
upon by the ruffian before them, who, 
without any provocation, struck him across 
the face. 

Perhaps Hayward's appearance was in 
his favour, but the magistrate asked him 
what he had to say to this. Hayward 
repUed by handing Mr. Joe Moxam's 
letter to Hilda to the magistrate for per- 
usal. 

^' That was my provocation, sir," he said. 
** That letter was addressed to an old friend 
of mine, the daughter of a clergyman, and 
a young lady of the highest respectability, 
by the person who accuses me of assaulting 
him. I called upon him after reading the 
letter, and by the lady's wish requested him 



234 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

never to address her again, or I would 
horsewhip him— which I did." 

The magistrate read the letter, and then 
returned it to Hayward. 

"It is. a disgraceful letter," he said, " to 
address to any lady, or indeed any respect- 
able woman. Am I to understand that 
Mr. Moxam did annoy this lady again 
after you spoke to him on the subject?" 

Then Hayward related what had hap- 
pened, how Mr. Joe had sprang out of 
the shop, and rudely seized Hilda's arm; 
and on this testimony being corroborated 
by witnesses, the magistrate dismissed the 
case. 

" You assaulted the young lady," he said, 
addressing Mr. Joe, "and it was the duty 
of any man to protect her. I trust that it 
will be a warning to you in future not to 
annoy innocent women with your base 
advances. I do not attach any blame to 
Mr. Hayward." 

Nothing could exceed the indignation of 
the Moxam family at this occurrence. It 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 235 

appeared in the police reports, and Mr. Joe 
was chaffed by his male and female acquaint- 
ances until his life was simply a burden to 
him. Old Mr. Moxam was furious. He 
went down to his brother-in-law Newcome's 
oflBlces, and demanded that he should at 
once dismiss Hayward, or repay him the 
two thousand pounds that he had advanced 
to the printer. 

But Newcome took high ground. He 
declined to dismiss Hayward ; said it served 
him (Joe) right; and as for the two thou- 
sand pounds, he would see about it. 

"You shall see about it, and hear about 
it, too, sir," roared Mr. Moxam, purple with 
rage, "if you keep this ungrateful scoundrel 
in your service ! What ! Didn't I educate 
him? Didn't I keep him from starving? 
— and to drag my name before the public 
like this!" 

"Maria utterly spoils that lad of yours, 
that's the truth," said Newcome. 

"Well, sir, spoilt or not spoilt, it's no 
concern of yours," answered the angry old 



236 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

man, seizing his hat. "But that money I 
lent you is a concern of yours; and if it 
isn't paid up this day fortnight, I'll proceed 
against you, as certain as my name is Joseph 
Moxam, after this day's work." 

The money, however, was paid up before 
the stated time. Mr. Newcome, in fact, 
had an interview with Sir George Hamilton 
concerning it, and became his debtor for 
the amount instead of his brother-in-law, 
Moxam's. We may be sure he made a 
good case out to Sir George. He was not 
going to give up his brave clever young 
friend, for any man's bullying — but, then, 
this confounded two thousand pounds. 

He managed it all very cleverly. Sir 
George thought better of the printer, and 
so did Hayward, after the affair. As for 
Hilda, she was very grateful to Hayward, 
though she received an indignant note of 
dismissal at once from Florentia Villa in 
consequence. 

But she had got a few more pupils now, 
and kept on hoping that she would get 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 237 

more still. Miss May, however, was, or 
pretended to be, angry about it. She told 
Hilda, sharply, that she had no business to 
have acted as she had done; and that she 
should have protected herself from Joe 
Moxam's advances. 

*'You forget you have your bread to 
make, I think," remarked the old lady, 
*'My dear, young women who have to go 
out into the world are required to have 
no fine feelings." 

But it drew Hilda and Hay ward closer to 
each other, and that was really very sweet 
to poor Hilda's heart. She had a right to 
be grateful to him now, she told herself; a 
right to trust and confide in him, when he 
had risked so much for her sake. 

Thus things went on. The winter passed 
away, and the pale cold spring came as if 
imwillingly. Then, just at the end of 
March, — poor little Ned, over whom Hilda 
had watched with such tender care, sick- 
ened and grew ill. 

How he caught it no one knew. Whether 



238 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the poison came in the white miste, or 
whether some infected child or person had 
touched him in the streets, they could only 
surmise ; but the boy was struck with fever, 
and with a sinking heart HUda heard the 
opinion of the doctor when she first caUed 
him in. 

" It is a bad case of scarlet fever," he 
said ; " the boy is very ill." 

*'He — ^is not in danger, I hope?" Al- 
tered Hilda. 

The doctor declined at this early period 
of the case to give any positive opinion. 
He recommended Hilda to get a nurse; 
he prescribed for poor little Ned, and then, 
after promising to call again in the morning, 
he went away. 

It was night when Hilda (after becoming 
alarmed at her little brother's increasing 
illness) had sent for him, and when in 
about an hour after the doctor s departure, 
Hayward called, the poor girl completely 
broke down. 

^'Ohl what shall I do?" she sobbed. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 239 

"I shall have to give up my pupils. Oh! 
Ned, poor little Ned ! " 

Hayward did his best to comfort her. 
She must not distress herself about her 
pupils, he told her. As for money, that 
would be all right. She could pay him 
back when little Ned got well. And Hay- 
ward smiled and took her hand. These 
were kindly words. Poor Hilda had been 
breaking her heart as she sat by the little 
sufferer's bed during the last hour. If she 
gave up her pupils they would starve, she 
thought; and she must give up her pupils 
while the house was infected by a danger- 
ous disease. 

But Hayward tried to cheer her, and 
offered his services also to sit up during 
the night with the sick boy. This HUda 
would not hear of, but she felt grateful to 
him. She looked up into his face, with 
her soft grey eyes, ahnost piteously. 

^^ Oh ! if he gets worse ! " she said. 

" We must hope he won't get worse," an- 
swered Hajrward, trying to speak hopefully. 



240 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

But he also felt uneasy. The boy was 
m high fever, and wandered in his talk. 
As Hilda sat through the dismal hours of 
her night watch little Ned's brain took 
strange fancies, and he frequently addressed 
the forty brown jars that he had seen 
depicted on the walls, supposed to contain 
the forty thieves, and which he imagined 
were standing in the room, tenant-ed by 
their celebrated guests. 

It was a dreary night watch. The girl, 
ftdl of her sad thoughts, heard hour after 
hour pass eternally away. On the bed the 
little fevered patient tossed and struggled. 
Then he began to cry, and call for " Papa," 
— ^the father who on his death-bed had 
confided this child of his old age to his 
daughter's care. Poor Hilda cried too. 
Had she done her duty to him, she was 
thinking; had the struggling life that they 
were forced to lead led to this dire illness, 
perhaps to the child's death? 

" Oh God, spare him, spare him I " prayed 
poor Hilda many a time during her lonely 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 241 

vigil. But when dawn broke little Ned 
was no better. The doctor came about 
nine o'clock, and looked very grave after 
he had examined his young patient. 

"He is very ill," he said; "it is a bad 
case." And with these words ringing in her 
ears Hilda was forced to sit down and write 
to her pupils; was forced to write to her 
sister Marian; and forced to face the pain- 
ful reality that for the present she was 
deprived of the means of winning their 
daily bread. 



VOL. II. u 



CHAPTEK XIII. 

A HESITATING ANSWER. 

Poor little Ned continued very, very ilL 
Some days there seemed to be reasons for 
hope, and some days hope seemed quite 
to pass away. Through all this dreary 
time Hayward acted as Hilda's faithful 
friend. He came daily, and brought what- 
ever luxuries he thought the sick child 
could take, and he asked his employer, 
Newcome, to advance fifty pounds of his 
salary, as he wished to assist a sick friend. 
Newcome opened his sharp little brown 
eyes to their widest extent upon this re- 
quest being made to him. 

"Why, ye don't mean to say," he said, 
*^that you are such a " (he was going 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 243 

to say "fool," but stopped himself when he 
remembered Sir George Hamilton) "that 
you're such a soft one as that ? To borrow 
money to help a friend ? " 

Hajrward laughed. 

" Yes, I am such a fool," he said; " so 
will you oblige me?" 

Newcome had no objection to this. He 
fancied some day or other, through Sir 
George's agency, that Hayward would 
become a great man, and he was anxious, 
therefore, to give him no oflfence. He was 
also undoubtedly pleased at the idea of the 
thrashing that his nephew, Mr. Joe, had 
received from Hayward's hands. He had 
many a secret grudge to repay this objec- 
tionable young man. He had even con- 
descended to chaff Hayward on the sub- 
ject, and had asked him if he had been 
horse-whipping any more young scamps 
lately. . 

So Hayward continued on good terms 
with his employer, and did not absolutely 
dislike his work. It was not degrading. 



244 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

at all events ; for the worst written book 
he was ever called upon to read did not 
approach in vulgarity and lowness of 
thought such men as his uncle and cousin 
Moxam. 

On the second or third day of little 
Ned's illness, he took Hilda the fifty 
pounds he had asked Newcome to advance, 
and placed the notes in her hand with a 
smile. 

The girl burst into tears when she saw 
them. 

"No, no, I cannot," she said;^ "not all 
these — I might ask Lady Hamilton for a 
little help — ^you too are poor." 

"Yes," answered Hajrward, still smiling, 
**but not too poor to help a friend. We 
must try to pull little Ned through — and 
—you don't mind my saying this ?— but I 
wish you would not ask Lady Hamilton 
for anything." 

Then Hilda dried her eyes, and held out 
her hand, which Hayward took. 

" God will bless you," she said in a voice 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 245 

broken witih emotion. " You have truly 
helped the fatherless and the poor." 

Thus all anxiety about money was over, 
for the present at least; but still little 
Ned got no better. Sometimes he lay in 
a stupor^ and sometimes he raved and 
wandered, but it aU ended in the same 
thing. It was a bad case, as the doctor 
had told Hilda from the first, and gradu- 
ally Hilda almost ceased to hope. 

One evening the end seemed very near. 
The child lay gaspiBg, panang-^gglh>g, 
as it were, with death. Hilda stood in 
tearless agony by the bed, holding up the 
little sufferer, trying vainly to reUeve him. 

It was a piteous sight. By-and-bye 
Hayward came quietly into the room, and 
stood also by the bed. He, too, thought 
the end was drawing near. Suddenly, he 
went up to Hilda, and whispered. 

" Hilda," he said, " would you like to 
see Jervis?" And he coloured like a girl 
as he asked the question. 

Yet he felt this young man might bring 



246 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

them some comfort. The very presence of 
his serene and perfect faith, which left 
all things so confidently in the hands of 
God, might, he thought, console Hilda in 
this trying hour, and thus he asked if he 
might bring his friend. 

"Oh, yes," said Hilda, eagerly. "Yes." 
Anything — ^if they could but do anything ! 
Mrs. Bargate, their landlady, had shaken 
her head and prophesied with the freedom 
of her class during the evening "that it 
was no good trying anything now." But 
it is hard, very hard to believe that we 
can do no more. So Hayward went for 
Horace Jervis, and half-an-hour later the 
young curate entered the room. 

" He had a face like a benediction." Un- 
consciously, Hilda looked up for hope and 
comfort in the serene grey eyes that were 
bent so kindly upon her. And he had some 
to give. He had stood by sick beds and 
death beds so often, that he was familiar 
with the needs alike of the sorrowing and 
the dying. He could tell of the peace which 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 247 

the world giveth not, and cheer the startled 
summoned soul with words of hope and 
pardon. . 

He knelt down by little Ned's bedside 
and prayed; but the child heeded him not. 
The fluttering spmt was dulled by the 
mysterious link that bound it to the 
stricken-fevered frame. And yet mda 
felt thankfiil that the curate had come. 

"Will you come again?" she said, with 
streaming eyes, before he left; and in his 
gentle, kindly way, Mr. Jarvis promised to 
do so. 

*VBut do not be afraid," he said. "You 
are not forsaken. God is keeping watch 
over the child." 

How often Hilda thought of these words 
during the night ! G6d was keeping watch 
over the child. Whether he lived or died 
he had still a father in heaven, and some- 
how this thought seemed to lighten the load 
of responsibility that had weighed on the 
poor girl's heart. 

She told something of this to Hayward. 



248 JBENEATH THE WAVE. 

*' I have blamed myself," she said. " If I 
had married, little Ned might have been 
so differently brought up in every way. 
This is what my sister says. I thought 
only of myself." 

" If you had married ? " repeated Hay- 
ward, in surprise. 

"Yes," answered Hilda, blushing. "I 
never told you, but Mr. Trevor asked me 
to be his wife before I left Sanda. This 
was why he would do nothing more for 
Kttle Ned. I — I fear I was selfish." 

"No," said Hayward, warmly, "you were 
a good and honest girl. Never marry a 
man you do not love ; if you do, you will 
be false to all that is true and noble in 
your heart." 

Hilda blushed more deeply still at these 
words, and her head fell. Life seemed so 
diflScult to her, and there were so many 
things hard to understand. This illness 
of little Ned's, for one thing. She had 
been doing her best. She had tried to 
be honest, and had preferred a life of 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 249 

toil, almost of penury, to taking a false 
oath, and swearing to love the old man 
who had asked her to many him. And 
yet all this evil had come upon her, and 
the shadow of a great grief. 

This did not lighten as days went on. 
Little Ned fought with death, and after a 
weary struggle the grim foe seemed for a 
time to leave the child ; but the marks of 
that deadly fray remained. The strong, 
healthy, mischievous, merry Uttle boy was 
gone. What Hilda had left was a pale 
drooping child, almost deaf, and with some 
other painful dregs of the dangerous dis- 
order through which he had passed. 

He was now a constant care. It took 
all Hilda's time to attend to his fretful 
wants, and to soothe and try to amuse the 
poor Httle fellow, who such a short while 
ago had been so well and strong. Then 
grim care came to add to Hilda's troubles. 
Her late pupils declined to receive her after 
having scarlet fever in the house; and 
what was Hilda to do? 



250 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Horace Jervis and Hayward were more 
than good to her. The curate would never 
allow her to despond. He was greatly 
interested in her, and almost daily he came 
to see Uttle Ned. The poor boy was 
threatened with hip disease, and Jervis 
took him to one of the most eminent 
surgeons in London, and spared no expense 
in endeavouring to restore his health. 

All this threw the curate constantly with 
Hilda. Hayward had told him of her 
refusal of Mr. Trevor s offer, and the girl's 
sweet, unselfish, tender nature, her noble 
struggles for independence ; and her patient 
endurance of poor little Ned's fretful com- 
plainings, when she was doing everything 
for his benefit, deeply touched and finally 
won Horace Jervis's heart. 

But he did not at first tell her so. Had 
he who hved not for earthly things any 
right to form new and tender ties ? Would 
they bind him to life with too strong a bond, 
and make death — which he believed to be 
but the gate of heaven — seem dark to him, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 251 

if it separated him from the woman he 
loved? Again and again he argued these 
questions. But at last the girl's care- 
burdened life decided him to speak ; for one 
day Hilda, with painfiil hesitation, asked 
him if he would help her to gain some 
new occupation. 

"My pupils have left me," she said. 
"Miss May, who was here yesterday, told 
me plainly that she dared not now recom- 
mend me, because if a child were to take 
scarlet fever a year hence, under the cir- 
cumstances she would be blamed for it. 
Yet it is absolutely necessary I should work. 
Do you think I could be a schoolmistress, 
and that you could get me into some parish 
school? I will do anything ; I must do some- 
thing. I might perhaps be a telegraph clerk ?" 

Then Horace Jervis, after a moment's 
silence, spoke. 

" Will you be my wife, Hilda ?" he said 
quite quietly. " I will take charge of the 
boy. Do you think you could learn to 
like me well enough to marry me ?" 



252 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Could she learn to like him well enough 
to marry him? What made Hilda start 
when she heard these words^ and a burning 
blush dye her face? Was it another face 
that rose before her ? A clever, thoughtful 
face, that she had first seen in the little 
village church of Sanda-by-the-Sea ? Yes, 
she was thinking of Philip Hayward. Of 
the man who did not love her, as she had 
so often sadly told herself, but whose 
image now came between her and another 
man. She had ordered herself not to love 
Hayward. He was her friend. She was 
bound to him by extraordinary bonds of gra- 
titude; but this was all. Not until Jer- 
vis said, "Will you be my wife?" did she 
admit to herself that Philip Hayward was 
anything more to her than this. Then, when 
she thought of marrying another man, she 
knew that she loved Hayward, and that 
the thought of anyone else bound to her 
in such close relationship would be hateful 
to her soul. 

But, on the other hand, there was little 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 253 

Ked ; and there was also the generous man 
who in this hour of trial had asked her 
for her love. 

"Well," said Jervis, gently, almost ten- 
derly, looking at the girl's changing fece, 
*' do you think you could learn to love me ? " 

'* You ^you are very good," faltered 

Hilda. 

"How good?" said Jervis. "Sometimes 
I have thought of late, do you know, Hilda, 
that it was not ' good ' or even right of me 
to seek your love. I feared the sweet tie 
might make life too pleasant to me, and 
perhaps interfere with what ought to be, 
and must continue to be, its most absorbing 
interest. But lately I have taken another 
view of this, and I pray God that it is a 
right one. For one thing there is the child 
to consider; for another, can we not be 
fellow workers ? There are many cases of 
sin and sorrow where a good woman's voice 
and presence are more than a man's. If 
you will be my wife we might help each 
other." 



254 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

It was not a romantic wooing, was it? 
And yet Jervis's heart was beating with 
tender emotion, and he loved the girl he 
was asking to share his work. You see he 
esteemed this beyond everything. It was 
his Masters work. If Hilda would come 
and help him, she, too, would enter that 
eracious service. It was thus he argued 
when he decided to <«k her to be his ^e. 
But who knows ? Perhaps the frail mortal 
deceived himself, and clothed his own fond 
yearnings in words of seeming duty and 
reserve. 

" May I think f hesitated HHda. " This 
is so sudden. Let me have time to think" 

" Yes, certainly," answered Jervis. " Tell 
me to-morrow what you think. Be quite 
open with me, Hilda. Let me be your 
friend as well as your lover." 

" Yes," said Hilda ; and she held out her 
hand, which the curate pressed, and then 
after a few more words he took his leave. 

It was a mpmentous question that the 
poor girl was left to decide. Between a 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 255 

good man's love, a settled home and posi- 
tion in the world, and comforts and tender 
thought for the sick child left in her care, 
and a vague shadowy feeling — an unre- 
tumed love — ^for another man. Yet that 
vain shadow disturbed her. It made her 
shrink from the thought of what otherwise 
would have been sweet to her, and trembled 
at a prospect which might have seemed so 
fair and smooth. 

But she was not left alone to make her 
decision. During the evening Miss May 
(who had been very kind in sending little 
Ned jeUies ^d fruit during his illness) 
unexpectedly arrived. No sooner, then, 
did the old lady enter the room than she 
at once noticed Hilda's agitated and absent 
manner. 

" Oh, my dear ! " she said, fixing her 
sharp brown eyes on the girl's face, " surely 
no new misfortune has happened to you ? '' 

" No," answered Hilda ; and then, eager 
for a woman's counsel, she told her old 
schoolmistress of the curate's proposal. 



256 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

As she finished her story, Miss May 
jumped up off her seat and kissed her. 

" My dear I " she said, " I never was so 
pleased." 

" But, Miss May, I don't know — '' faltered 
Hilda. " I— I don't love Mr. Jervis.*' 

"Then learn to do so, as fast as you 
can," answered the energetic old lady. 
"What! you don't mean to say you are 
hesitating ? My dear, are you mad ? " 

" I hope not," said poor Hilda, trying to 
smile. 

"You would be utterly so, stark mad, 
in fact," continued Miss May, " if you did 
not thankfully accept this young man's 
generous proposal. Why ! do you know 
what you are ? A girl without a sixpence. 
No particular beauty either, though you 
have an agreeable face ! And then do 
you forget the unfortunate child that you 
have the misfortune to have attached to 
you ? " 

"No, I don't forget poor little Ned," 
said Hilda, her eyes filling with tears. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 257 

^* Mr. Jervis mentioned him twice — ^he said 
he would take charge of the child." 

" Then I can only say he's a man in a 
Imndred, and you should thank God, night 
^nd day, for having got him ! " piously 
•ejaculated Miss May. " My dear, offers 
of marriage are not plentiful for poor girls 
who have to work for their bread. I had 
•one, and I may tell you, though I wasn't 
bad-looking, and was quite agreeable to be 
married, that I never had another." 

''And you think " 

" I think — no, I don't think, I'm sure, 
it's your duty gratefully to accept this 
proposal, and immediately begin to love 
Mr. Jervis with the greatest fervour. Ah, 
my dear, a good man to help and protect 
you through life doesn't fall to everyone's 
lot ! You are a fortunate girl, and if you 
got to know this young clergyman through 
little Ned being expected to die, I can 
only say that it was very obliging of little 
Ned to appear to be so near his end." 

'' Miss May ! " 

VOL. II. S 



258 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I am quite in earnest, my dear. Bless 
me, what a lucky girl you have been ! With 
your by no means remarkable looks, you 
might have faded and faded, and no man 
ever looked at you." 

The strictly practical view of the case 
was not without its influence on Hilda. 
Another strong practical argument, too, in 
favour of Jervis was the state of her purse. 
That '^ base coin dug from the bowels of the 
earth" has indeed a wonderful influence on 
our destinies. It is all very well for those 
who have never felt the want of it to talk 
grandly and largely on the subject. But 
wait until the pinch of poverty comes, 
before you can estimate money at its full 
value. Hilda had felt this cold pinch. She 
had known what it was literally to want 
the means of existence. She had been 
forced — oh, cruel necessity ! — ^to borrow : to 
accept the grudged dole which usually falls 
from the rich man's hand. 

So, when Horace Jervis came for his 
answer, the next day, she accepted him. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 259 

Then the young curate took her in his. 
arms and kissed her pale cheek. 

"My dear, may God bless the new life 
on which we are about to enter!" he said 
solemnly. " May it be to His glory and 
honour ! " 

Hilda trembled, and her heart was greatly 
troubled when she heard these words. 

"I — I — fear I am not good enough for 
a clergyman's wife," she said, with much 
hesitation. 

"None of us are 'good enough,' Hilda, "^ 
answered the curate, with a smile, " but we 
must try to make each other better." 

" I will try," said Hilda ; and she put her 
hand modestly into her betrothed's. She 
meant she would try to do her best, not to 
make Horace Jervis better, but to do her 
duty in the new life that she had now 
chosen. 

" I wonder what Hayward will think of 
this ? " presently said the curate. " Do you 
know, Hilda, I once thought that you and 
he were likely to marry each other; but 



260 BENEATH THB WAVE. 

when I hinted this to Philip he told me 
that it was not so — that in fact some 
unfortunate attachment had greatly em- 
bittered his life." 

"Yes," answered Hilda, with changing 
colour; "he once cared for the most 
beautiful woman whom I ever saw — ^for 
Miss Trevor, now Lady Hamilton." 

"Poor Hayward!" said Jervis, kindly. 
^- But in time I trust that he will get over 
it — ^in time I trust he will find a good and 
loving wife." 

" Yes," said Hilda ; and she sighed, and 
almost immediately afterwards changed the 
conversation. 

But the day did not end till her interest 
was excited afresh in Hayward. The late 
evening post brought her a letter from 
him, the contents of which greatly sur- 
prised and even alarmed her. They were 
as follow : — 

" My Dear Hilda, — Excuse my not call- 
ing to see you before I leave town this 



BENIIATH THE WAVE. 261 

evening; for I have spent such a busy, 
distressing day that I have not had time 
to do so. Sir George Hamilton called 
upon me last evening, and from circum- 
stances which have occurred, urged me to 
return with him to Massam. Something 
very painful and tragic has happened there, 
but I have not time now to write the 
particulars to you. I write this note so 
that you may know where I am to be 
found, and if you want any money or 
anything ,else that I can possibly do for 
you, please let me know, addressing your 
letter *Care of Sir G. Hamilton, Massam 
Park.' I will write you further particulars 
when I reach Yorkshire, and remain, dear 
Hilda, yours very truly, 

"Philip Hayward." 

"P.S.— Tell little Ned, with my love, 
that if I remain in the country — of which 
there appears to be a probability — ^that he 
must come and stay with me, and that I 
will get him a pony. P. H.^' 



262 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Never before had Hilda received a letter 
which so completely puzzled her. Hay- 
ward had never even hinted at the possi- 
hiUty that some day he might return to 
Massam. Then what could have occurred 
there that was at once tragic and painful? 
Hilda tried in vain to answer this question, 
but she felt uneasy and disturbed. Why 
had Hayward gone back to Massam ? 
Why had he once more approached the 
fatal beauty that had so nearly destroyed 
his hfe ? 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CLOSE ON life's TREAD STEALS DEATH. 

To answer these questions, and to explain 
Hayward s letter to Hilda, we must go back 
two days. Two days, then, before the 
evening on which she received it — ^received 
the letter that caused her such anxiety and 
pain — ^the hbunds had met at Massam Park. 
It was a favourable morning, and a great 
gathering of the gentlemen of the neigh- 
bourhood had assembled there. Isabel was 
now in the zenith of her popularity, and 
was almost universally considered the most 
beautiful woman in Yorkshire. Men raved 
about her charms, and even women as a rule 
admitted them. But she was a greater 
favourite with gentlemen than with ladies. 



264 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

This, perhaps, was only natural. The care- 
less, even slightly defiant manner she often 
indulged in was more likely to fascinate 
men than matrons, and there were faint 
whispers too (not exactly scandals) that she 
was indiscreet in her friendships, and that 
Mr. Hannaway, Sir George's lawyer, was 
more frequently at the Park than there 
was any necessity for. 

But this did not affect her position. Sir 
George's great wealth and her own beauty 
had fully secured this, and Lady Hamil- 
ton of Massam was courted and admired 
wherever she condescended to appear. 

The morning on which the hounds met 
at the Park she had felt very triumphant. 
She went out on the terrace after the break- 
fast was over, and stood there talking to 
the red-coated men, while some of the 
favourite hounds also gathered around her. 
Always gorgeous in her dress and surround- 
ings, she wore this morning a costume of 
dark green velvet and sable, and as she 
stood with the sun shining on her golden 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 265 

hair and wonderfully perfect features, she 
was conscious that every man present was 
admiring her. 

Prominent in the group near her was her 
old acquaintance, the handsome Gfuardsman, 
Captain Warrington. Isabel was jesting 
and coquetting with him, as was her wont ; 
but Captain Warrington was by no means 
as devoted as several other of her admirers 
were supposed to be. There was a certain 
Lord George Ker there also, who raved 
about her, and was ready to do any mad 
thing for her sake. But Isabel in conse- 
quence cared very little about Lord George. 
Captain Hugh Warrington, on the contrary, 
was perfectly cool, and apparently unmoved 
by the beauty before him. He smiled and 
chatted, and looked as he ever did, remark- 
ably handsome, but that was all. Yet 
jealous eyes were fixed upon him. There 
was a cloud on Mr. Hannaway's brow as 
he hovered near Isabel, and saw that she 
lavished most of her looks and smiles on 
the favoured Guardsman. Yet he lingered 



266 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

on the terrace after the other men had 
mounted, and approachmg Isabel, said a 
few words in a low tone. 

" So you have not even one smile for 
me this 'morning?" and the man's voice 
trembled as he spoke. 

Yes ! he was in earnest. She had wiled 
his heart away, as she had wiled Hay- 
ward's, as she had wiled Sir George's ; and 
now she was ready to laugh at the once 
astute lawyer, who had laughed and scoffed 
in his day also at the very feelings to which 
now he had fallen a victim. 

*' And what would you do with a smile, 
even if I were to give you one ?" answered 
Isabel, jestingly. 

" You know how much I would treasure 
it," said Mr. Hannaway, almost passionately; 
and then after a few more such words he 
turned away. 

Isabel looked after him for a moment^ 
but presently returned to the house, singing 
a few lines of the chorus of a hunting song 
iis she did so. She was not allowed to hunt 



BENKATH THE WAVE. 267 

just then; but the excitement of the sport 
had great charms for her^ and she was a 
fearless rider. She was not thinking of Mr. 
Hannaway, however, as she went in, nor 
yet of Sir George. She was thinking of 
Captain Hugh Warrington, and wondering 
if he would ever learn to like anyone better 
than himself. This was his attraction to 
her vain heart. She could not apparently 
make him miserable, and so she was 
absolutely beginning to imagine herself 
sometimes miserable about him. 

She loitered through the next two hours 
in her usual frivolous manner. It chanced 
that she had no visitors staying in the 
house that morning, and she therefore 
spent it principally in her dressing-room, 
planning new costumes with her maid. 
About one o'clock, however, she was 
startled by Sir George coming hastily into 
the room, looking very pale and shocked. 

*' I have come to tell you something very 
painful, Isabel," he said kindly, going up 
to her, and laying his hand on her 



268 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

shoulder. And then as Isabel looked up 
inquiringly in his face, he added, "There 
has been a sad accident on the hunting 
field, and poor Hannaway has had a 
terrible fall." 

" Mr. Hannaway ! " echoed Isabel, and for 
a moment her blooming face grew pale. 

"Yes, he is insensible, poor fellow," 
continued Sir George, "his horse rolled 
over him, and I fear he is badly hurt. 
They are carrying him here, but I hurried 
on to tell you — ^for I was afraid, my dear 
Isabel, that the sudden shock might do 
you harm." 

" You are very kind," said Isabel, slowly. 
Then she asked ^' do you think he will 
die ? " 

" I don't like his looks," answered Sir 
George; and Isabel's brows contracted, and 
an expression of anxiety stole over her face 
as she heard the words. 

A minute or two later they heard a 
strange stir in the hall below ; and Sir 
George, after listening for a moment, left 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 269 

Isabel, telling her, however, that he would 
return almost immediately. But Isabel 
was in no mood to wait. Scarcely had 
Sir George left her than she, too, passed 
swiftly out of the room, and went to a 
corridor which looked straight down upon 
the hall. 

She saw there a mournful sight. On the 
inlaid marble pavement lay a figure, motion- 
less, ghastly. She could see the white 
face, too — ^the changed white face which, 
but two hours ago, had been so full of life 
and love ! By the side of this prostrate 
figure a surgeon was kneeling, and endea- 
vouring to pour something between the 
set teeth. But as Sir George approached 
the surgeon looked up and shook his head. 

** Is he worse ? " asked Sir George, 
bending eagerly down, after pushing his 
way through the Uttle group of gentlemen 
and servants collected in the hall. 

Then the surgeon opened the prostrate 
man's waistcoat, and laid his ear down 
upon his body. 



270 BHNHATH THE WAVE. 

He did thi» fi)r a few moments, and 
then again looked up^ and once moie shook 
his head. 

**It is aR over," he said, addr^sing^ Sir 
€reoi^. " The heart's action has stoj^ped. 
Mr. Hannaway is dead." And he arose 
to his feet affcer having pronounced this 
verdict 

"My Grod! you do not say so?" ex- 
daimed Sir Greorge, and he too proceeded 
to examine the dead man. 

Bat it was all over, as the doctor had 
said. The vain, clever, worldly heart had 
ceased to beat ; and with an anxious firown 
upon his face Sir Greorge rose, after he had 
satisfied himself that this was actually the 
case. 

"Carry him to a bedroom," he said, and 
as the servants obeyed him he followed the 
sad procession, and when the men laid Mr. 
Hannaway's body on a bed he sharply 
and peremptorily desired every one present 
to quit the room. 

The men, with surprised looks, went out, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 271 

and then Sir George went up to the body, 
and with an inward shudder put forth his 
hand and began to search the dead man's 
pockets. He did this carefully, though his 
bitten lips and clammy brow showed his 
shrinking aversion to the task. But he 
was looking for the dead man's keys 
which locked away some of Sir George's 
own secrets, and he wished no prying eyes 
to see that he was doing this. Presently 
he came on what he wanted, and on some 
letters. These he took, and the keys, and 
then with a shuddering glance at the white 
face and fixed half-open eyes he left the 
room, which was presently entered by the 
usual weird attendants of the dead. 

Without a word to anyone in the house. 
Sir George then went straight by a private 
way to the stables, and ordered a horse to 
be saddled. Isabel had seen the servants 
carry Mr. Hannaway's body upstairs, and 
she had seen Sir George follow the body. 
She felt nervous and alarmed, and uncertain 
how to act. Mr. Hannaway had secrets 



272 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

of hers also, and she began to be ftill of 
fear that his sudden death might bring 
these to light. Yet what could she do? 
She presently went down into the small 
dining-room, where lunch was laid, and 
glanced anxiously around the shocked faces 
of the group of gentlemen who were 
standing by the fire discussing the accident 
to see if Sir George was amongst them; 
but she saw that he was not. 

Lord George Ker approached her with 
a few commiserating and feeling words. 

"This is a terrible thing, Lady Hamil- 
ton," he said. 

"Most terrible," answered Isabel, won- 
dering all the while where Sir George could 
be. 

Sir George was riding at that moment as 
fast as his horse could carry him to Combe 
Lodge, where Mr. Hannaway had lived. 
He wished to get there before the lawyer s 
death was known to his household ; before 
anyone could take possession of the dead 
man's effects. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 273 

He succeeded in this. The neat well- 
kept place, with a gardener mowing with 
a machine the trim lawn in the front of 
the house, looked quite undisturbed as he 
approached it. No evidence of the news 
of sudden death was here. The man who 
was mowing glanced up and touched his 
hat as Sir George rode past him, but that 
was all. Sir George knew from this that 
he was in time. He beckoned to the gar- 
dener, therefore, to hold his horse, and 
having dismounted, rang the house door- 
bell, which was answered by a page boy. 

" I wish to look at some papers in Mr. 
Hannaway's library," said Sir George, and 
without hesitation the youth admitted him ; 
for of course Sir George was known to all 
the members of Mr. Hannaway's household. 

Then Sir George went into the library, 
in which a good fire was burning (for the 
late owner loved comfort well), and having 
got there, his first action was to turn the 
key in the door. Secure thus from inter- 
ruption he proceeded with the dead man's 

VOL. II. T 



274 BENEATH THE WAVB. 

keys to open his secretaire, and after 
glancing at its contents, he next opened 
an iron safe which stood beside it. 

Here were kept Mr. Hannaway s most 
private papers. Packets of letters, neatly 
tied together and endorsed, now met Sir 
George's view, and with trembling hand he 
quickly drew out one on which was written 
" Confidential letters from Sir ^ George 
Hamilton, from Spain ; " and to each 
of these was added the date on which it 
had been received. Other documents were 
enclosed in this packet also ; documents 
concerning certain sums of money settled 
on a Dona Catalina Mendoza, and on a 
child. There was another packet, too, lying 
near this one in the safe. Receipts in 
Spanish from Padre Fernandez, of Seville, 
for sums of money received up to a very 
late date. All these papers were methodi- 
cally arranged and docketed; and as Sir 
George lifted out of the safe the receipts 
of the Padre, his eyes suddenly fell on 
another packet of letters lying near also. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 275 

This was endorsed " Letters from Lady 
Hamilton/' and was secured, not like the 
others with an elastic strap, but was tied 
together by a narrow blue ribbon. 

Sir George glanced at this packet for a 
moment in surprise, and then frowned. 
Then he looked at the address of one of 
the letters, and recognized Isabel's clear 
handwriting, and his breath came short, 
and his brow darkened as he did so. 
Next he opened this letter, and an excla- 
mation of rage and shame broke from his 
lips as he read the words it contained. 

It was the first letter that Isabel had 
written to the lawyer ; the letter which she 
had written when she returned to Massam 
as a bride, and in which she had asked 
Mr. Hannaway to ride over to renew the 
conversation about her father's proposed 
marriage with Lucinda Featherstone. 

These were the words that Sir George 
now read; the brief words that his bride 
of a few weeks had written to another 
man : — 



276 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Dear Mr. Hannaway, — Sir Greorge has 
ridden out this morning. Can you come 
over at once? I wish to renew the con- 
versation that was intermpted last night 
abont L.R — ^Yours truly, 

''I. Hamilton." 

Was this real ? Was this true ? Sir 
George could scarcely believe his dazed 
and dazzled eyesight, before which the 
clearly-written Unes seemed to dance and 
whirl 1 

But too convincing evidence lay close 
at hand. This was but one letter, and 
there were many others. Letters which 
disclosed the whole plot about the anony- 
mous letter to Mr. Trevor; letters which 
grew more and more confidential as time 
went on, and in which she constantly 
alluded to himself in semi-contemptuons 
terms : — " Sir George looks a little more 
solemn than usual this morning ; Sir Geoige 
has gone up to town for a day, and I must 
say that the house feels more lively in 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 277 

consequence ; " and so on. In such terms 
had Isabel written to Mr. Hannaway of 
her husband ; and now, pale — ^almost ghastly 
— ^her husband stood reading the condemn- 
ing words. 

A curse broke from his white Hps as he 
went on — a curse, and a cry of bitter, bitter 
agony* This was the woman he had pas- 
sionately loved — ^this ! What ? She had 
lied, then, from the beginning ! She had 
cheated him when she seemed most fond 
— and now — ^and now! 

Oh, what bitter miserable thoughts 
rushed through Sir George's brain during 
the next half-hour. Old memories, ill-deeds 
of his own that he had tried to forget 
and wrongs wrought on an innocent being 
for the sake of the false, fair woman who 
had betrayed him — all rose before him 
revengefully then. 

And what must he do ? Gro to her — 
show her these vile letters — strike her 
dead! 

" God ! God ! " groaned Sir George, 



278 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

as the last thought occurred to him, and 
he buried his face in his hands. 

Of what was he thinking ? Of a blow 
which he had once given in his passion, 
long ago, and the consequences of which 
had ever since haunted his hfe with remorse 
and shame. No, he must not go near her. 
He dare not trust his outraged maddened 
heart. The woman that he had loved — 
the woman soon to be the mother of his 
child — ^he must meet no more. 

"I dare not see her," he thought. "I 
dare not look again on tibe false fair face 
that has fooled my soul so long." 

So he made up his mind to go away. 
He took the letters that he had written 
long ago to Mr. Hannaway, from Spain; 
the letters from the Padre in Seville, and 
all documents connected with this affiiir. 
He took, too, the lettei-s that had stabbed 
his heart with so terrible and treacherous a 
blow. Then he locked the iron safe that 
had given up its dark secrets, and the 
secretaire also, in which some of the dead 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 279 

man's own secret doings lay hidden from 
the Kght. 

But Sir George meddled not with them. 
What was it to him if Mr. Hamiaway had 
deceived other women and lied to other 
men ? He was not thinking of Hannaway. 
In his heart he knew that this man had 
probably been a victim like the rest — *^like 
Hay ward " — thought Sir George — " the 
young man who saved my miserable life." 

Then he thought again of Hayward. He 
knew that he was honourable and trust- 
worthy, and he wanted some one now in 
whom he could trust. There were things 
that must be done. Some one must take 
Hannaway s place and arrange Hannaway's 
affairs, and see after matters that Sir 
George had trusted to the late lawyer s 
hands. So Sir George decided to go to 
Hayward. But before he went he must 
write a few lines to the woman who had 
so shamefully deceived him ; to the woman 
whom he must still call his wife. 

He wrote these in Mr. Hannaway's 



280 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

library, or rather in the room that had 
been Mr. Hannaway's. Only a few cold 
words :— 

" It is necessary that I should go to 
town to-day. I will write to you to- 
morrow." 

This was all. No token of the relation- 
ship between them; no token of the love 
that Isabel had trifled with and flung 
away. Then he directed his letter, and 
entrusted it to the gardener, whom he 
found when he went outside, still holdbg 
his horse. 

" Take this to Massam," he said, placing 
the letter and a gratuity in the gardener's 
hand. "Ask for Roberts, the butler, and 
desire him from me to give it to Lady 
Hamilton at once." And the man touched 
his hat, and held Sir George's horse while 
he mounted, thinking all the while how 
strange it was that the owner of such 
wealth should look so dark and sad. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 281 

Sir George rode from Combe Lodge 
straight to the nearest railway station. 
A train from the South passed in half an 
hour, and in half an hour Sir George was 
on his road to London. He arrived there 
in the evening, and then drove direct to 
Hayward's lodgings. Imagine the young 
man's shock, his shame and pam, when he 
heard Sir George's story. He, too, had 
loved — ^had loved most deeply, this beauti- 
ful woman without honour. It seemed 
a shame and disgrace even to him as he 
listened to Sir George's burning words of 
indignation; to him that he had wasted 
so much on so vile a thing! 

Sir George left Isabel's letters with 
Hayward when he went away. 

" Head them all," he said, " I cannot, 
and then judge between us. If you believe 
she has done me the worst wrong a woman 
can do her husband, she shall leave my roof. 
But if you think — and her nature is so vain, 
and her heart so cold, that it is probable — 
that she has but trifled with the affections 



282 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

of the unfortunate man who died to-day, as 
she trifled with yours, then, for the sake of 
the child that is to be bom, I will bring 
no public disgrace upon her. But from 
this day," continued Sir George, darkly, 
"she is no wife of mine. But what will 
she care?" he added, with extreme bitter- 
ness. "She is Lady Hamilton. If she 
retains her position and her name, she re- 
tains all for which she married me. Well 
was it for you, Hayward, that you were 
a poor man I Had you been a rich one, 
you would have been the chosen husband 
of her love ! " 

With a harsh and grating laugh. Sir 
George turned away and left Hayward 
after uttering these words — left Hayward 
to read the letters, and to sit in judgment 
on the woman whom he had once so 
passionately loved. 



CHAPTER XV. 

HUSBAND AND WIFE. 

The next day Sir George again sought 
Hayward. 

" Well T he said, as he entered the young 
man's room, and Hayward understood the 
unspoken question that was asked by Sir 
George's gloomy and inquiring eyes. 

" I have read Lady Hamilton's letters," 
he said, after a moment's sUence. 

" Yes T said Sir George, still looking at 
Hayward, who was pale and nervous. 

" And I believe," continued Hayward, 
trying to speak steadily, ** that it has been 
as you suggested. Lady Hamilton has 
trifled with Mr. Hannaway's feelings. All 
her later letters are evidently but jesting 



284 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

replies to his earnest ones. It has been 
with this unfortunate man— as it has been 
with others." 

As Hayward with hesitation and pain 
said these words, Sir George gave a sort 
of sigh of relief. Then he sat down by 
the table and covered his face with his 
hand. His heart was sore within him, and 
foU of bitterness. He wa^ thinking of what 
his wealth had brought him. Not love, nor 
peace, nor happiness, but shame and bitter 
padn. What ! had he to listen to such 
words as he had just heard, and yet be 
thankful ! His wife had been but jesting 

jesting away her fair fame scoffing, 

perhaps, at the dead man as in the earlier 
letters, which he, her husband, had read, 
she had scoffed and jested at him ! 

For a few moments Sir George did not 
speak, as one after another the most bitter 
arid galling reflections passed through his 
mind. Hayward also, during this inte^rval, 
was silent, and felt full of embarrassment 
and pain. Then suddenly Sir George held 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 285 

out his hand, and said in a broken voice, 
"Hayward, you saved my life — make it, 
at least, endurable. Let me feel I have 
one friend— one fidend in whom I can 
trust !" 

Hayward was deeply affected at this 
appeal, and at the gloomy misery so visibly 
impressed on Sir George's face. 

" I have always felt most grateful to you. 
Sir George," he said, putting his hand into 
Sir George's cold trembling one, as he 
spoke ; " but the difference of our position 
prevented me ^" And Hayward paused. 

" Then forget that difference," said Sir 
George, rising. " Forget that I was bom 
a rich man, and you a poor one, for that 
is the only difference between us." 

**Very well," said Hayward, and he 
smiled. 

"And be my friend," continued Sir 
George. " Stand between me and my own 
gloomy thoughts — stand between me and 
the woman who mocked and scoffed at me 
when she pretended to seem most fond." 



286 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"And you trust me T said Hay ward, 
looking straight at Sir George with his 
grey and honest eyes. 

" I trust you completely/' answered Sir 
Greorge ; and Hayward's face suddenly flushed 
when he heard the words. 

" I will deserve that trust," he said in 
a low tone ; and after this Isabel's name 
was neither mentioned nor alluded to again 
between them. 

But Sir George made Hayward a distinct 
offer before their interview ended. This 
was to occupy the post held by the late 
Mr. Hannaway as manager of the Massam 
property. A liberal salary had always 
accompanied this appointment, and this Sir 
George now offered to Hayward. Combe 
Lodge as a residence, and a thousand a year, 
seemed to Hayward absolute wealth after 
the pinching poverty he had endured; and 
this was how Sir George proposed to 
remunerate his services. 

'' Let me see if I can manage the work 
first," said Hayward; and it was finally 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 287 

agreed between them that Hay ward should 
accompany Sir George back to Massam, and 
that he should at once relinquish his em- 
ployment with Mr. Newcome, the printer. 
That gentleman received the information 
that his "reader" was about to quit his 
services with apparent equanimity. 

'* Humph ! " he said, when Hayward told 
him of Sir George's offer, "I thought it 
would end so. It's all very fine, young* 
gentleman, to ride a high horse, but one 
generally rides in the end to one's own 
advantage. So ! I suppose you will become 
a country gentleman next?" And Mr. 
Newcome sneered, for it was his nature to 
sneer. 

'*Well, if I do, will you come and visit 
me ? " answered Hayward, good-naturedly. 

"I'll be proud," said Newcome, trying 
to suppress the sneer which still curled 
upon his thin lips; for though his soul 
loved not to hear of any advancement or 
success happening to others, he yet was 
always ready to take advantage of it. 



288 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

*' I always said," he continued, " that this 
Sir George Hamilton would do some- 
thing substantial for you some of these 
days. And you must say," he added after 
a moment's pause, "that I have kept to 
you through ill and good fortune. There 
was Moxam ready to eat my head off 
for not giving you up after that row you 
had with his young hopeful. But I 
flatter myself that I am not quite such a 
fool as Moxam." 

Mr. Newcome said these words proudly, 
for he had a very high opinion of his 
own mental capacity. He had, indeed, 
foreseen that the friendship and regard of 
a man in the position of Sir George Hamil- 
ton was almost sure to end in some 
permanent advantage to Hayward. Thus, 
ever since he had known of the connec- 
tion between them he had done his best 
to be civil to his "reader." This was 
not always easy to a man of his nature, 
and he therefore felt now that he ought 
to receive some reward for his self-deniaL 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 289 

**You have been very kind to me, sir," 
said Hayward, in answer to the printer's 
speech, that he hoped he was not quite 
such a fool as Moxam, ** and I shall 
never forget it. Mr. Moxam was also 
kind to me in his way," added Hayward, 
smiling; "and you must tell him of Sir 
George's offer. I hope now he will forgive 
me about Mr. Joe," and Hayward laughed. 

Newcome smiled too (but sourly), and 
shrugged his shoulders. 

"He'll forgive you fast enough now, I 
dare say," he said. "Moxam is a fellow 
who weighs and estunates every man only 
in a monetary point of view. But that 
cannot be said of me." And Mr. New- 
come no doubt felt at that moment that 
as regards Hayward it could not; and he 
was well pleased with himself that it 
was so. 

After Hayward parted with Mr. New- 
come he returned to his lodgings, and 
there wrote the letter to Hilda which 
caused such anxiety and even alarm in 

VOL. II. u 



290 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

her heart. Then he rejoined Sir George 
at the hotel at which he was staying, as 
it had been arranged between them, and 
together in a late train they returned to 
Massam. 

They were not unexpected there. Sir 
George had sent a special messenger down 
to the Park, after his interview with 
Hayward in the morning; and, in a few 
brief stem words, had told Isabel that 
all trust and love for her was gone out 
of his heart for ever. " Fo;* the sake of 
the child that is to be bom to us," he 
had written, ** I will bring no public 
shame upon you this time. But remem- 
ber, if you remain under my roof, you 
must respect it. I will not permit the 
woman who bears my mother's honoured 
name to stain it more deeply than you 
have already done." 

These were harsh words, and penned 
in a harsh and imforgiving mood. The 
very depth of Sir George s love for his 
wife made him more bitter to her now 



BENEATH THE WAVE, 291 

when he knew how utterly she ha4 
deceived him. 

He would never forgive her, he told 
himself; and stem, bitter, and determined, 
he returned to his now wretched home. 

Isabel received the letter that he sent 
by special messenger without any great 
IpL She, in feet, had gneid th. 
truth when Sir Greorge did not return to 
Massam on the day of Mr. Hannaway's 
death. She knew now, also, of his visit 
to the dead man's house after the fatal 
accident. Sir George had gone there 
probably, she thought, to hide some secrets 
of his own that the lawyer had been 
cognisant of, and thus had discovered hers. 

** Fool ! " she said aloud bitterly, as she 
read her husband s letter, thinking of the 
unfortunate man whose life had ended so 
tragically. " So he must have kept my 
letters 1 What madness induced him to do 
such a thing?" And Isabel began pacing 
up and down the room, wondering how 
much Sir George knew ; thinking what 



292 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

would be best to say to him, so as to 
turn his bitter wrath away. 

She heard the carriage arrive which 
brought her husband and Hayward from 
the station, and sat in her dressing-room 
with a beating heart, expecting momen- 
tarily to hear Sir George's footsteps ap- 
proach. But they never came. 

" Sir George had ordered dinner to be 
served in the library for himself and the 
gentleman," she was informed presently by 
her maid, on making inquiries. 

" What gentleman ? " asked Lady Hamil- 
ton, with quickened breath. 

He was a Mr. Hayward, her maid told 
her ; and Isabel breathed more freely when 
she heard the name. 

^' So it is Hayward ! " she thought ; and 
she went up to her glass, and smiled as 
she did so. 

She could easily win back Hayward, 
she was thinking, and through him pro- 
bably Sir George. She remembered the 
scene in the picture gallery at that moment. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 293 

and Hayward's face of despair. Perhaps 
Sir Greorge had brought this young man 
down to fill Mr. Hannaway's place, she 

guessed ; " and in that case /' And 

Isabel smiled again, for she believed that 
she could mould Hayward entirely to her 
will. 

She waited until she knew dinner had 
been removed, and then sent a few lines 
down to the library, addressed to Sir 
George. 

"They tell me you have returned," she 
wrote, "and yet you have not come to 
say one word to me. What has changed 
you thus ? Surely not a few foolish letters 
that I wrote when I first came here to 
that vain and unfortunate man, who was 
killed on Tuesday ! I was (as you know) 
so angry about papa's foolish marriage 
that I would have done anything to 
prevent it, and I remember writing to Mr. 
Hannaway to try to induce him to assist 
me in doing so, as I knew you were too 



"fiiiiK: if miihii^ ^SBt Go: 'twimiiiWhi 

E SD. iL shE iiABr wul* innaoinr hd 

A — -» ^ 



.«. 



Ksmsova^.. Sz. 3s IkBEr tzf 3:iiBr fifie <ise 

I IsBzac or ^ifiac iniLgvima iag siobls lumse.' 

msr feffirrg!^ "a^w^ar^ t»:ii: ikt ^^^er. I no 
Isopar insfi ^ir Jtyr^ v^it — ^siiai for Ae sike 
cf die rfrJTfi ti&afi s » be biisft to oa^ I 

^. B^i«rL!^,£f^^l^ under 
mj roof ji9a most respect iL I wiD not 
pennil the woomi who bens m j mother's 
hoiKKired name to slam it more deepl j 
flian joa bare alieaify done." 
iKibel had read and le-iead tiieBd woid& 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 295 

What did he know ? she had thought. 
What secrets had the dead man left behind 
him, and how far had they served to 
blacken her character, and destroy her 
husband's love? 

But Sir George did not leave her long 
in doubt on these points. Scarcely had 
she sent her letter down to him, when she 
heard a slow and heavy footstep approach 
the door of her dressing-room, which she 
had not left during the day, as she either 
was, or pretended to be, ill. There was 
something ominous in that slow and heavy 
foot-fall. It was not the step of a man 
who comes with pleasant greetings or for- 
giving words. As Isabel heard it her heaxt 
sank a little, but she was defiant by nature ; 
and when Sir George, gloomy and stem- 
eyed, entered her dressing-room, she at 
once came forward to receive him. 

" You have come to speak to me at last, 
then ? " she said ; and she held out her 
hand to her husband. 

But Sir George made no responding 



296 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

sign of amity. He stood there, silent and 
accusing ; and Isabels eyes fell beneath 
bis fixed and indignant gaze. 

"Why do you look at me thus?" she 
said. " What have I done r 

" What have you done ?" he answered, 
with extraordinary bitterness of voice and 
manner. " Ask, rather, what you have not 
done — you who have lied and deceived, 
as surely no other woman ever lied and 
deceived before !" 

" You are making mountains out of mole- 
hills," retorted Isabel. "Is aU this about 
a few foolish letters?" 

For a moment Sir George was silent; 
and Isabel, eager to propitiate him, came 
forward and laid her hand upon his arm. 

" I told you I was sorry I wrote them," 
she said. " You know how it was ? I was 
so angry about papa's foolish marriage that 
I was ready to do anything." And as she 
spoke she looked up appealingly with her 
lovely face at Sir Greorge. But with a 
shudder he pushed her hand away. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 297 

"Don't touch me," he said, averting his 
eyes. "Dont come near me — don't he to 
me any more. It is enough. I know it 
all now — ^you fooled me from the begin- 
mng. 

"Why should you think so?" asked Isa- 
bel, with an inward consciousness that he 
was speaking the truth. 

" I read your letters," said Sir George, 
bitterly ; " the letters you wrote to the man 
who is now lying dead! The letters in 
which my bride" (and his lip curled) 
" confided to a stranger how weary she was 
of my presence ! Yes," he continued, with 
increasing passion, "the white hand that 
clasped mine so tenderly, wrote at the same 
time how weary it was of that duty ! The 
rosy Ups that were pressed to mine com- 
plained of the bartered kiss!" 

" You use choice terms, I must say ! " 
said Isabel, with some of her old defiance 
of manner. 

" I have a choice subject," said Sir George, 
now looking with bitter scorn at his wife, 



298 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

who had drawn herself to her full height, 
and stood there facing him. 

"If you mean to insult me " began 

Isabel. 

" Be silent ! " interrupted Sir George, 
passionately, " and listen to me. You lied 
to me and deceived me from the first; but 
let that pass. It is of the future I would 
speak. You married me for my money 
and my name, and you shall retain them 
on certain conditions, but only on those 
conditions." 

» "And what may these conditions be?'* 
asked Isabel, contemptuously. 

"That you remember your honour and 
mine," answered Sir George, darkly. " The 
dead man can tell no tales, but if you 
give any other man the same licence to do 
so you shall leave my house." 

"Well, it would not kill me to do so," 
said Isabel, yet more contemptuously. 

" No," said Sir George, with gloomy 
emphasis, looking sternly at the beautiful 
woman before him, "for you are one of 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 299 

those who know not shame. But/' he 
added, ''remember you are warned. My 
honoured mother died here, and no dis- 
honoured wife shall live under my roof." 

" I can find other roofe, then," retorted 
Isabel, defiantly. "And what about your 
secrets?" she went on, tauntingly. "You 
are fond of prying into mine, it seems. 
What if I were equally curious?" 

For a moment Sir Greorge's eyes fell be- 
fore hers as she said this. Then he raised 
them. 

" I shall have to answer for my own ill 
deeds," he said, "but not to you. But 
enough of this,'* he added ; " I came here 
to-night to let you know the truth, and 
not for idle words. Henceforward you are 
nothing to me, but in name — ^but beware 
how you tarnish that name I Let no whisper 
reach my eare, or everything is ended be- 
tween us." And as Sir George said these 
last words he quitted the room, before the 
passionate reply that rose* on Isabel's lips 
oould find utterance. 



300 BENJfiATH THE WAVE. 

Nothing could exceed her indignation 
when she found herself alone. That he 
dare speak to her thus, she thought — ^that 
any man dare ! 

She bit her white lips, and walked 
hastily up and down the room, thinking 
how she could revenge herself. The in- 
sulting words Sir George used, and the 
thorough disbelief and contempt he had ex- 
pressed for her, enraged Isabel's vain soul 
almost to madness. She stamped her foot 
on the floor and clenched her hands. She 
would make him pay for this, she deter- 
mined. Then suddenly an idea struck her. 
Her old victim, Hayward, was in the house 
— she would make him jealous of Hayward. 
This thought seemed to cool her anger. 
Again she went up to the long cheval 
glass, and stood looking at her beauty 
there, well pleased at the fair reflection. 
God had made her very beautiful. The 
lovely features, pre-doomed to fade and 
change, were now in full perfection. Time 
had not touched them, and the strangely 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 301 

truthful tale that time tells, as years pass 
on, of how those years are spent, had not 
yet begun to be written upon that smooth 
and pleasant countenance. But it would 
be written. The wily man is wily to look 
upon, and the honest man honest. After 
youth is past, little by little the soul 
beneath peeps out. The noble thoughts 
and the mean ones each have their separate 
signs. God marks on the mortal part of 
us the semblance of the immortal. Almost 
invariably we carry our characters about 
with us, written in Knes not difficult to 
understand. 

But this time had not yet come to Isabel. 
The tell-tale lines were yet imsketched, the 
blooming skin uninjured by the subtle tracery. 
So she looked at herself in the long glass, 
well pleased. Then, after contemplating 
herself with satisfaction for a few minutes, 
she turned away, sitting down at her writmg 
table, which stood near, and after thinking 
a minute or two, she took up her pen and 
began writing a letter. 



302 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

In the meanwhile Sir George had re- 
joined Hayward in the library, with aU the 
marks of agitation and anger still visible 
on his face. He did not speak for the 
first few minutes after he entered the room, 
but kept pacing restlessly, passing and re- 
passing Hayward, with his heavy uneven 
steps. Presently, however, he stopped. 

" Well," he said, " it is all over. I have 
broken with her — I have told her how 
vile a thing she is I " 

Hayward moved uneasily at these words. 
He, too, was agitated, and strange emotions 
were burning within him. A violent deep- 
seated feeling is not easily overcome, and 
though sense and reason may guard the 
heart, there are undercurrents strong and 
deep that sometimes dash precipitately up 
against these monitors. 

Coming back to Massam had powerfully 
affected Hayward, and he could not help 
feeUng greatly disturbed. He was going 
to meet Isabel again — Isabel whom he 
knew now to be so worthless and so false ! 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 303 

And yet — strange human heart — it moved 
him deeply to hear her called so vile by 
Sir George. 

"This man— Mr. Hannaway," he said, 
hesitatingly, addressing Sir George, "may 
have deceived Lady Hamilton." 

"No," answered Sir George. Then he 
added, with gloomy pathos, " I loved her, 
Hayward — too well, too well. I sacrificed 
for her what honour and every sacred feeling 
bound me to respect. And yet — ^yet when 
I loved her best — when she seemed most 
tender, most fond — she was scoflSng and 
gibing at me ! No," he continued, begin- 
ning once more his restless pacings of the 
room; "make no excuses for her. A 
woman who could act as she has done is 
unworthy of a single thought." 

Yet he was always thinking of her— 
thinking of her with rage, shame, and 
jealousy burning in his heart. " I will put 
her away," he told himself. "I hate her," 
he told himself. And yet he coul(J not 
help thinking of her. Sir George's feelings 



304 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

for Isabel had been one of those deep 
and enduring passions which make or mar 
a man's whole fixture life. 

In very sombre and gloomy fashion the 
two men, who had both loved this woman 
so much, parted for the night. Sir Greorge, 
however, made a sort of effort to speak of 
other things before they did so ; proposing 
that immediately after Mr. Hannaway's 
fimeral (which was to take place on the 
following day) Hayward should enter into 
possession of Combe Lodge. 

"I shall probably be able to purchase 
the furniture at a valuation," added Sir 
George, " so that you can go into the house 
at once. His will will be read to-morrow, 
and we shall then learn who are his execu- 
tors. He has left no near relations, I am 
told." Then, after a few more words on 
business. Sir George and Hayward parted, 
Hayward being ushered by the stately 
butler himself, at Sir George's request, to 
the luxuriously-furnished bedroom allotted 
for his use. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 305 

On the toilet table of this room a letter 
was lying, addressed to him. At the sight 
of this letter Hayward's face flushed, and 
then grew pale. He knew the handwriting 
on the dainty envelope, knew the monogram 
with which it was closed. Then he opened 
it, and read the words that Isabel had 
written but a short while ago. They were 
as follows : — 

"My dear Mr. Hayward, — I am told 
that you arrived here this evening with Sir 
George, and I would have asked to see you 
at once (so anxious am I to explain some 
of my former conduct to you), but I am 
too ill to leave my room to-day to do so, . 
Will you, however, go into the morning- . 
room here to-morrow, at eleven o'clock, and 
I will join you there ? You must not judge' 
me harshly. I have paid heavily enough 
for resisting the dictates of my heart. 

"I. H." 

In his dreams that night Hayward stood 
upon a precipice. He struggled, the loose 

VOL. II. X 



306 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

stones slipping beneath his feet, and the 
dry grass giving way beneath his strained 

and frenzied clutch. He slipped and 

slipped. Below was a great blackness ; 
above, the stars, serene €iid luminous, looked 
down from the blue vault on his terrible 
pain. Then he felt himself falling — ^falling ! 
With a last- effort he flung out his arms, 
but his hands closed upon the empty air, 
and as they did so he awoke. Awoke, 
with his face wet with dew, and his hands 
still clasped. As he opened them, and 
strove to recall his scattered senses, some- 
thing fell from his grasp. It was Isabel's 
letter — the letter in which she had asked 
him to meet her, po that she might tell 
him how she had resisted the dictates 
of her heart. 



END OF VC^UME SECOND. 

BENEATH THE WAVE. 



CHAPTER I. 

OLD LOVERS. 

The morning-room at Massam was a plea- 
sant room. If the sun were out it came 
shining into the wide windows, and glinting 
on the rare and beautiful flowers in the con- 
servatory into which it opened. It had 
been refitted since the late Lady Hamilton's 
time, and the rose-coloured satin covering 
of the furniture and the flower and bird- 
decked paper on the walls all owed their 
existence to Isabel's fanciful taste. 

A pleasant room ! Yet with no pleasant 
countenance Hayward entered it at the 
appointed hour at which the wife of his 

VOL. III. B 



2 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

friend and patron had a^ked him to meet 
her there. He was pale, almost haggard. 
His midnight dream haunted him, but 
other feelings also were in his heart. Sir 
George had trusted him. To Hayward 
this was enough. He was a man way- 
ward and passionate perhaps in some 
things, but his honour was as yet un- 
tarnished as gold. It was Isabel's dis- 
honour, the falsehood and treachery of her 
life, that filled him with such shame for 
himself and her. What! his heart was 
beating fast, and his pulses throbbing, 
because he was again about to meet such 
a woman as this? He scorned himself 
for his own weakness; he recalled, as he 
stood there, Horace Jervis's serene and 
earnest face, and Hilda Marston s sweet 
and patient one. 

^' These two are my good angels," he 
told himself; and as he made the reflec- 
tion he turned, round and behind him 
stood Isabel, Lady Hamilton. 

The words that he had meant to say 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 3 

to her — the cold, reserved words — died on 
his lips. Thoroughly and completely un- 
nerved, he stood before the beautiful 
woman who had caused him such misery 
and shame. With Isabel, however, it waa 
very different. 

^'Mr. Hayward," she said, holding out 
her little hand, and speaking in her softest 
tones, "it is long since we metl" 

Mechanically Hajrward placed his cold 
trembling hand in hers. 

"You are changed," continued Isabel, 
fixing her eyes upon his face, "greatly 
changed since I have seen you. Aht 
yes — I heard of your trouble from Sir 
George. You have lost your poor mother ? 
And '' 

"Gone through a great deal since then," 
interrupted Hayward, with a •harsh Uttle 
laugh, as Isabel paused. Her pretended 
sympathy for him about his mother jarred 
upon his ears. A feeUng of indignation 
took possession of his heart, and the 
memory of the wrongs that he had ex- 



4 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

perienced at her hands seemed at that 
moment very grievous to his soul. 

"It is about this that I wish to speak 
to you," said Isabel, eagerly. " I fear 
you think you have cause — nay, I know 
you have cause — ^to blame me for giving 
you some pain. But, Mr. Hayward, if 
you knew all " 

"Lady Hamilton," again interrupted Hay- 
ward, almost sternly, "we had better forget 
the past. I understand it all perfectly now, 
and it needs no explanation. You were 
amusing yourself, and I was in earnest, 
that is all " 

" It is unkind of you to say such 
things," answered Isabel, quickly. " If I 
had been only amusing myself, as you call 
it, what reason should I have for seeking 
you now? No — I was not amusing my- 
self — I suffered a foolish feeling to creep 
into my heart — after I had promised to 
marry Sir George." 

The old wily one, who tempted the 
woman at the beginning, never made a 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 5 

more insidious speech than this. It wore 
the garb of truth, as it were, just as his 
did. The apples were good for food, and 
were pleasant to the eyes, and for any- 
thing that Hayward knew Isabel had 
learnt to care for him (as she said) after 
she had promised to marry Sir George. 

Hayward cast down his eyes as he 
heard the words. 

The passionate feelings that had once 
swept reason away, came surging over his 
heart. What ! she had cared for him, he 
was thinking — ^perhaps still cared for him ! 

At this moment the subtle influence of 
her great beauty, the blinding sense of 
her gra^iousness aaid trustfulness might 
have resumed its sway, when suddenly — 
quite suddenly — there flashed back into 
Hayward's mind the remembrance of her 
letters to Mr. Hannaway. This changed 
his mood. Isabel, watching him, saw the 
softened look grow hard, the quivering 
lips grow firm. ' 

**I — I still think. Lady Hamilton," said 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 



Hayward, speaking quietly but steadily, 
after the last reflection had occurred to 
him, "that we had better drop this dis- 



cussion." 



"But why?" asked Isabel. 

"For many reasons," replied Hajrward. 
"For one thing, it can do no good; for 
another, you are now Lady Hamilton." 

Isabel shrugged her fine shoulders. 

" Yes," she said, " I am Lady Hamilton. 
I have the title and money for which I 
sacrificed you." 

Hayward absolutely gave a start as she 
ended this sentence. Then the strong 
feelings of his heart — ^the half-dead passion, 
the bitter ■ indignation, the shame and con- 
tempt with which he had read the letters 
that she had penned to the dead man^ 
rushed over hun, and he forgot alike 
respect and reserve. 

"What do you want with me?" he 
said, his fax^e growing pale and his eyes 
kindling. "Why are you cajoling and 
flattering me now, like you flattered poor 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 7 

Hannaway? I won't be your slave. I 
won't write anonymous letters for you, or 
scheme and lie at your word as he did. 
I may as well tell you the truth, Lady 
Hamilton — I know too much." 

Isabel's eyes literally flashed with fury 
as Hayward said this. 

" What ! " she said, passionately, " has 
that coward, then, made you his confidant ? 
Have you also been prying and reading 
my letters, as the grand gentleman" (and 
her lip curled) "who did me the honour 
to marry me has done ? Tell me the 
truth, sir," she went on furiously, "tell 
me everything you know I " 

By this time Hajrward had grown 
calmer. 

"I did wrong," he said, bitmg his lips, 
and trying to curb his feelings, "to say 
what I have done. But you roused me 
almost to madness. Lady Hamilton." 

"What do you know?" repeated Isabel. 

"Sufficient," answered Hayward, with 
some sternness. "Yes," he continued, his 



8 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

conflicting passions again almost over- 
whelming him, " there was a time * when 
to have pleased you I would have laid 
down my life ! When I believed you to 
be good as you are beautiful, pure as you 
are fair. You rejected my love, but still 
I loved you. I left here broken-hearted, 
weary of my life, all through] you ; but 
still I did not blame you. I had been 
mad, I told myself — ^mad ! § All the time 
when cruel trouble was on me — ^when my 
mother lay dying — all the time your image 
never left me. But now — ^now, when I 
know you to be so false, when by Sir 
George's wish I read the letters you had 
written to Mr. Hannaway, what can you 
expect? I did not seek this interview. I 
did not vnsh for any explanation to pass 
between us; but since you urged it, let it 
be so." 

*^You read my letters to Mr. Hanna- 
way ? " said Isabel, slowly. " All my 
letters?" She was beginning to think 
she had indeed played a losing game. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 9 

" I read all that Sir George placed in my 
hand," answered Hayward. " The begin- 
ning and end of a long correspondence." 

Isabel was silent for a few moments after 
receiving this communication. In fact, she 
did not know exactly what to say. Was 
her power over Hayward entirely gone ? 
she was wondering. The very anger and 
passion of his language, perhaps, might have 
told her that it was not. But these 
wretched letters were hard nuts to crack. 
She knew that she had flattered Mr. Han- 
naway in them ; that she had fooled him, 
and it was diflSicult in the face of them 
to begin to attempt to fool and flatter 
ahother man. 

At last she spoke. 

"You know about mv father's foolish 
marriage, of course V she said. " I ought 
to tell you as some explanation of these 
letters that you read, and which I most 
bitterly regret that I ever wrote, that I 
was intensely averse to ray father marrying 
Lucinda Featherstone. I hinted something 



10 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

of this feeling to Mr. Hannaway, and he 
then told me many particulars about the 
Featherstone family that I felt it was only 
right that my father should know. But 
I remembered an old man's — ^in fact, a 
dotard's folly ! If I were to tell him these 
things, would he believe me ? I thought. 
So in an hour of madness I listened to Mr. 
Hannaway. * Write an anonymous letter/ 
he said. ' I will post it,' he urged. Thus 
I fell to a certain extent into his power. 
My father came here and made some ridi- 
culous scenes. Mr. Hannaway and I had 
to meet him, and of course deceive him as 
to our share in the transaction. Do you 
understand now ? It was thus I became 
intimate with Mr. Hannaway. He never 
was anything to me but a tool — I never, 
upon my solemn word of honour, regarded 
him in any other light." 

To some extent Hayward believed this 
story ; indeed, as we know, to some extent 
Isabel was speaking the truth. But there 
remained in his mind certain tender expres- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 11 

sions — certain tender allusions in the letter 
to Mr. Hannaway, that it did not get rid 
of. But it is hard to keep on accusing a 
person who admits his or her wrong. Isabel 
had practically done this, and now Hay- 
ward's anger began to cool. 

*'We can do no good, Lady Hamilton, 
as I told you before," he said, " by talking 
of these things. I should not have men- 
tioned them ; and now I ask you to forgive 
me for using language to you that I should 
not have done. But you understand what 
I have felt ?' 

" I understand," answered Isabel, " and I 
forgive you. I forgive you," she continued, 
"because I beUeve that your feeUngs for 
me were real, and because I know I acted 
wrongly by you. But," she added, " I 
have had bitter cause to repent." 

"To repent what?" asked Hay ward, as 
she paused. 

^^That I married Sir George Hamilton," 
answered Isabel, steadily; and she watched 
Haywaxd's fax^e as she spoke. 



12 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

It flushed, but only for a moment. 

*^Sir George Hamilton," he replied, also 
steadily, " has honoured me with his friend- 
ship. He has trusted me, and he soothed 
my dear mother's last hours by his gene- 
rosity. You can understand, therefore. Lady 
Hamilton, that I can listen to no word 
against him ; that whatever cause of anger 
you have with him, that I can only 
regret it." 

Isabel's lips again curled at this. 

" Has he offered you Mr. Hannaway's 
place?" she said. 

Hayward at once understood the taunt ; 
but if she had wished to regain her power 
over him, she lost more at that moment 
than she had any idea of. 

" Yes," answered Hajrward, with a hard- 
ness of tone that Isabel heard; "so you 
see I am quite bound to his interests." 

" I wish you joy," said Isabel, almost 
scoffingly. " When do you begin your new 
duties ? " 

"It is not quite decided," said Hayward. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 13 

" But if your ladyship will permit me," he 
added, "I shall now take my leave.' I 
promised to join Sir George in the library." 

"Perhaps you will consider it part of 
your new duties ,to repeat this conversation 
there ? " asked Isabel, not without some 
anxiety in her voice, though she strove to 
say it half scoflSngly, half jestingly. 

"Lady Hamilton, why will you not 
believe me to be a gentleman ? " answered 
Hayward, with a ring of pride in his tone 
that made Isabel for a moment respect him. 

" I do believe you are one," she said, and 
she held out her hand to him. " Remember, 
I have trusted you," she added. But 
Hajrward made no reply. With a bow 
he left the room ; and Isabel felt anything 
but satisfied, after he was gone, with the 
result of their meeting. 

In the meantime, while this interview 
was actually going on, the dead man who 
that morning had been lying at Combe 
Lodge, had been carried to his grave. Sir 
George did not go to the ceremony. He 



14 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

was expected to do so, but he gave no 
explanation for his absence. The late Mr. 
Hannaway's nearest relative had been sum- 
moned, and this gentleman (who was a 
cousin) had felt no small anxiety about the 
lawyer's will. But after the faneral was 
over, it became known he had left none. 
He had been cut off in the prime of life, 
many days in all likelihood lying before 
him, and had died and made no sign. His 
cousin who had come to the funeral and a 
sister of this cousin's were his nearest 
relations, and they therefore inherited his 
wealth. Combe Lodge was Sir George 
Hamilton's property, and Mr. Hannaway's 
relations were willing to accept a sum of 
money for the fiimiture and effects it 
contained. 

Thus Hajrward's new home was quite 
ready for him. Sir Greorge told him this 
during the day, and some final arrangements 
were then made between them. 

At dinner Isabel appeared, and the 
husband and wife met once more. Sir 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 15 

George was cold, but not discourteous, in 
his manner to her. Before Hajrward, he 
told her that he had offered, and that 
Hayward had accepted, the appointment 
held by the late Mr. Hannaway. Isabel 
made no remark on receiving this piece of 
information. She still felt most bitterly 
indignant with Sir George — ^he had humi- 
liated her so deeply. But she did not 
choose that her household and her friends 
should suppose that she was on bad terms 
vrith her husband, and she was, therefore, 
outwardly civil to him. But Sir George 
made her understand, and she quite under- 
stood, that in future their lives were in 
reality to be apart. 

During the next few days Hayward 
remained at the Park, but he saw very 
little of Lady Hamilton. Once or twice 
she gave him the opportunity of speaking 
to her alone, but he did not avail himself 
of it. He shrank, in fact, from any more 
of those dangerous interviews which Isabel 
loved so well. She was a woman ever 



J. 6 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

playing with fire. The excitement, the 
danger of making men madly in love with 
her, pleased her better than the "dull 
routine," as she called it, of an honourable 
life. 

Besides this, Hayward was very much 
engaged. Mr. Hannaway's sudden death 
had left many things to arrange. Not 
that the late lawyer had neglected his 
business, but to manage the working de- 
tails of a great estate required both time 
and attention. 

So for. hours Hayward and Sir George 
used to sit in the library at Massam, im- 
mersed in leases and title-deeds. Sir 
George seemed to take a sort of interest 
in Hayward's work, and afforded him all 
the assistance in his power. Then, about a 
week after Mr. Hannaway's funeral, Hay- 
ward formally removed to Combe Lodge, 
and took up his residence in the comfortable, 
almost luxuriously furnished home, where 
the astute and clever lawyer had lived so 
long. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 17 

Sometimes the memory of the late tenant 
seemed to haunt Hayward when he first 
wcfnt there. He had a feeling that he was 
not alone in the silent rooms where the 
desA man's busy brain had schemed and 
thought. Other invisible presences, too, 
haunted him. A beautiful face that had 
tempted and betrayed the late occupant 
of these rooms, and which in turn was 
ready to tempt and then betray Hayward, 
came shadow-like there too often for his 
peace. 

But he reasoned against this delusion, and 
at last wisely determined to counteract it. 
There was another woman's face — a sweet, 
patient, tender face — ^that he sometimes 
tiiought of also. He had not forgotten his 
friend Hilda Marston. He had not loved 
this girl, nor had he permitted himself to 
love her. He had no means, nor pros- 
pect of keeping a wife during their acquain- 
Zc in £onL, and Wore he never 
entertained the idea. But it was different 
now. He had a settled home and a settled 

VOL. III. c 



18 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

income, and he told himself that it would 
be well if he were married. This new tie 
would separate him more completely from 
Isabel. He was separated. In his utmost 
heart he acknowledged her utter unworthi- 
ness, but still she was a snare in his path. 
Gentle looks and confidential glances were 
now freely bestowed upon him when he went 
to Massam Park. Sir George's isolation 
from his ^wife made Hay ward's duty more 
difiicult to him. So the young man argued, 
and gradually he made up his mind to ask 
Hilda to be his wife. 

He had written to her twice while he 
had been in Yorkshire. In his first letter 
he had told her of Mr. Hannaway's tragic 
death, but, of course, he made no mention 
of the discovery resulting from it. Hilda 
had answered his letter, but she in turn 
made no allusion to her new relationship 
with Horace Jervis. She would tell him 
when he came back, she told herself. The 
girl was, in fact, uneasy and dissatisfied with 
herself She had accepted a man she did 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 19 

not love, and though she was doing her 
best to follow her old friend Miss May's 
advice, and had begun to do so, she yet 
had by no means accomplished this duty. 

One morning after Hayward had been 
nearly three weeks at Massam, she received 
a third letter from him. He was coming 
to town for a day or two, he told her. 
He would call upon her at a certain hour 
that he named on the foUowing afternoon. 
There was nothing peculiar in this, and yet 
this letter strangely agitated Hilda. She 
was going to see Philip Hayward again ; 
she would have to tell him now that she 
was engaged to Horace Jervis. 



CHAPTER II. 

A GREAT SURPRISE. 

Hatward arrived at Hilda's lodgings on 
the following day, at the hour he had 
named in his letter. He went into the 
room where she was with a pleasant smile 
upon his face, and a look of unconscious 
prosperity about his whole appearance. 
Somehow he believed that the words he 
had come to say to Hilda would be welcome 
ones. He was no vain coxcomb, but he 
had an idea that she liked him, and that 
that liking would at his wish be easily 
kindled into love. He deeply respected 
Hilda, she was the best girl he had ever 
known, he thought, and would make the 
best wife. Then — since he had made up 



BEKEATH THE WAVE. 21 

his mind to ask her — ^he had naturally 
pictured her in that capacity. He had 
thought of her moving about his home 
and brightemi^ his life. He had thought 
of her as standing between himself and 
temptation, and leading him with her gentle 
hands along the straight and narrow way. 

So he met her with pleasure, holding 
out his hand to her, and looking with 
affection and kindness into her face. It 
was only a troubled face that he saw. 
Hilda had grown thin and pale during 
his three weeks' absence. She was nervous 
and agitated also, and Hayward could not 
understand what ailed her. 

"And — and you are goiug to live at 
Massam ? " asked Hilda, as Hayward 
released the chill little hand that she had 
placed in his. 

" Yes," he answered smiling. " I shall 
be quite a swell now, Hilda. Combe Lodge 
is reaUy a pretty house, and well furnished 
— ^but it's rather lonely." 

"Yes," said Hilda. 



22 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

*^ Sir George has been so kind to me," 
continued Hayward. " Fancy, Hilda, he 
has bought poor Hannaway's furniture, and 
made me a present of it. I wanted to pay 
for it, of course— but he is always bringmg 
up the old debt, as he calls it." 

" You mean his life ? " asked Hilda, 
looking up. 

"Yes — ^but that's long since now." 

"You see he does not forget it." 

" No, he is a splendid feUow, Sir George. 
Noble and generous to the heart's core." 

" I am glad you like him," said Hilda, 
with a sort of dejection in her tone that 
Hayward could not account for. 

" Indeed I do," he answered. " And 
how is little Ned?" he asked kindly. 

" He is asleep ;" said Hilda, and she 
sighed. "Come and look at him/' she 
added, and she led the way to a small bed- 
room through the sitting-room where they 
were, and going up to the bed in this room 
turned down the coverlet, and showed the 
sleeping face of her little brother. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 23 

" How changed he is I " said Hay ward, 
in a low tone, as his eyes fell on the pale 
and sharpened face of his late pupil. 

"Yes, PhiKp," said HHda; and she turned 
her head away. 

" Poor little lad ! " exclaimed Hayward, 
rather thoughtlessly, for the moment after 
he had said it he saw that Hilda had 
turned away her head to hide the tears 
that were gathering in her eyes. 

" Come, leave him to have his sleep out," 
said Hayward the next minute, and he took 
hold of Hilda's hand and led her back to 
the sitting-room, closing the bed-room door 
behind him. 

"You mustn't fret about him, Hilda," 
he said, kindly. " He'll pull through all 
right now, I dare say. He only wants a 
change." But Hilda's tears fell fast, in 
spite of Hayward's consoling words. • 

" Don't, dear Hilda," said Hayward, and 
he put his arm round the girl's drooping 
figure. "Don't, dear. Sit down here, I've 
got something to say to you." 



16 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

playing with fire. The excitement, the 
danger of making men madly in love with 
her, pleased her better than the ^^dull 
routine," as she called it, of an honourable 
life. 

Besides this, Hayward was very much 
engaged. Mr. Hannaway's sudden death 
had left many things to arrange. Not 
that the late lawyer had neglected his 
business, but to manage the working de- 
tails of a great estate required both time 
and attention. 

» 

So for. hours Hayward and Sir George 
used to sit in the Ubrary at Massam, im- 
mersed in leases and title-deeds. Sir 
George seemed to take a sort of interest 
in Hayward's work, and afforded him all 
the assistance in his power. Then, about a 
week after Mr. Hannaway's funeral, Hay- 
ward formally removed to Combe Lodge, 
and took up his residence in the comfortable, 
almost luxuriously furnished home, where 
the astute and clever lawyer had lived so 
long. 



BBKEATH THE WAVE. 17 

Sometimes the memory of the late tenant 
seemed to haunt Hayward when he first 
went there. He had a feeling that he was 
not alone in the silent rooms where the 
desA man's busy brain had schemed and 
tiliought. Other invisible presences, too, 
haunted him. A beautiful face that had 
tempted and betrayed the late occupant 
of these rooms, and which in turn was 
ready to tempt and then betray Hayward, 
came shadow-like there too often for his 
peace. 

But he reasoned against this delusion, and 
at last wisely determined to counteract it. 
There was another woman's face — a sweet, 
patient, tender face — ^that he sometimes 
tiiought of also. He had not forgotten his 
friend Hilda Marston. He had not loved 
this girl, nor had he permitted himself to 
love her. He had no means, nor pros- 
pect of keeping a wife during their acquain- 
tance in London, and therefore he never 
entertained the idea. But it was different 
now. He had a settled home and a settled 

VOL. III. c 



16 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

playing with fire. The excitement, the 
danger of making men madly in love with 
her, pleased her better than the ^^dull 
routine," as she called it, of an honourable 
life. 

Besides this, Hayward was very much 
engaged. Mr. Hannaway's sudden death 
had left many things to arrange. Not 
that the late lawyer had neglected his 
business, but to manage the working de- 
tails of a great estate required both time 
and attention. 

» 

So for. hours Hayward and Sir George 
used to sit in the Ubrary at Massam, im- 
mersed in leases and title-deeds. Sir 
George seemed to take a sort of interest 
in Hayward's work, and afforded him all 
the assistance in his power. Then, about a 
week after Mr. Hannaway's funeral, Hay- 
ward formally removed to Combe Lodge, 
and took up his residence in the comfortable, 
almost luxuriously furnished home, where 
the astute and clever lawyer had lived so 
long. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 17 

Sometimes the memory of the late tenant 
seemed to haunt Hayward when he first 
went there. He had a feeling that he was 
not alone in the silent rooms where the 
d^td man's busy brain had schemed and 
tiiiought. Other invisible presences, too, 
haunted him. A beautiful face that had 
tempted and betrayed the late occupant 
of these rooms, and which in turn was 
ready to tempt and then betray Hayward, 
came shadow-like there too often for his 
peace. 

But he reasoned against this delusion, and 
at last wisely determined to counteract it. 
There was another woman's face— a sweet, 
patient, tender face — ^that he sometimes 
iiiought of also. He had not forgotten his 
friend Hilda Marston. He had not loved 
this girl, nor had he permitted himself to 
love her. He had no means, nor pros- 
pect of keeping a wife during their acquain- 
tance in London, and therefore he never 
entertained the idea. But it was different 
now. He had a settled home and a settled 

VOL. III. c 




it 



22 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

*^ Sir George has been so kind to me," 
continued Hayward. " Fancy, Hilda, lie 
has bought poor Hannaway's furniture, and 
made me a present of it. I wanted to pay 
for it, of course — ^but he is always bringing 
up the old debt, as he calls it." 

^^You mean his life?" asked Hilda, 
up. 
Yes — ^but that's long since now." 
You see he does not forget it." 

^* No, he is a splendid fellow. Sir George. 
Noble and generous to the heart's core." 

" I am glad you like him," said Hilda, 
with a sort of dejection in her tone that 
Hayward could not account for. 

" Indeed I do," he answered. ^' And 
how is little Ned?" he asked kindly. 

'^He is asleep;" said Hilda, and she 
sighed. '^Come and look at him/' she 
added, and she led the way to a small bed- 
room through the sitting-room where they 
were, and going up to the bed in this room 
turned down the coverlet, and showed the 
sleeping face of her Httle brother. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 23 

" How changed he is I " said Hay ward, 
in a low tone, as his eyes fell on the pale 
and sharpened face of his late pupil. 

"Yes, Philip," said Hilda; and she turned 
her head away. 

" Poor Uttle lad ! " exclaimed Hayward, 
rather thoughtlessly, for the moment after 
he had said it he saw that Hilda had 
turned away her head to hide the tears 
that were gathering in her eyes. 

" Come, leave him to have his sleep out," 
said Hayward the next minute, and he took 
hold of Hilda's hand and led her back to 
the sitting-room, closing the bed-room door 
behind hun. 

"You mustn't fret about him, Hilda,'* 
he said, kindly. " He'll pull through all 
right now, I dare say. He only wants a 
change." But Hilda's tears fell fast, in 
spite of Hayward's consoling words. • 

" Don't, dear Hilda," said Hayward, and 
he put his arm round the girl's drooping 
figure. "Don't, dear. Sit down here, I've 
got something to say to you." 



24 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hilda sat down where he told her, and 
then with some nervousness and agitation 
Hay ward proceeded: 

"You know, Hilda," he said, "that I 

once well, made a great fool of myself 

— ^about a woman?" 

Hilda looked hastily up, and her hce 
flushed. 

" Isabel Trevor ? " she said, inquiringly. 
She thought that he was going to tell her 
of some new trouble or grief that Isabel 
had brought upon him. 

"Yes, Isabel Trevor, now Lady Hamil- 
ton," answered Hayward, with an uneasy 
little laugh. "But, of course, that's all 
past and gone. She was only amusing 
herself with me— and I— weU, as I said 
before, made a fool of myself But I 
did not come here to talk about Lady 
Hamilton. I came to talk about our- 
selves, Hilda — in fact, my dear girl, I 
came to ask if you would marry me 1 " 

Haywafti blurted out the last few words 
very quickly and incoherently; but the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 25 

moment after he uttered them, Hilda 
gave a little cry as if of pain. 

"OPhiHp!" she said, "0 PhiUpI" and 
she put one of her hands over her face. 

^'What is it, dear Hilda?" asked Hay- 
ward ; and he sat down beside her, and 
drew her towards him. 

" IVe got a home to offer you now, 
Hilda, you know," he continued, "and a 
fairly good income. The little lad can 
live with us — and I'll try to make you 
happy — '^ And Hayward bent his face 
down to kiss Hilda's lips. But with a 
sob the girl turned away her head, and 
hid it on his breast. 

Don't, don't, you must not," she said. 
Philip, this cannot be." 

"Why?" asked Hayward. "Do you 
mean that you cannot marry me?" 

" Philip, Philip ! " said Hilda, now crying 
bitterly, "why did you not tell me this 
before — ^not until it is too late?" 

" Too late ! " repeated Hayward, in 
genuine surprise. 



U ' 



26 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"Yes, yes," sobbed Hilda, still with her 
head upon his breast. " I have promised 

to marry some one else 1 have pro- 

mised to marry Horace Jervis." 

" Horace Jervis ! " said Hayward ; and he 
bit his lips, and his face grew a little 
pale. 

•' It was for the sake of the child," wept 

Hilda. " I could get no pupils and 

this generous man " 

Hayward rose from her side as Hilda 
said this, and began hastily pacing the 
room. 

"When was this arranged?" he said 
presently, stopping before her. 

"The day ^you went to Massam," 

answered Hilda, trying to compose herself. 

" I meant to write to tell you but 

but 1 could not." 

As Hilda said this, her too-evident dis- 
tress deeply affected Hayward. 

"My poor girll" he said, laying his 
hand on her shoulder, "my poor girlt 
And if " 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 27 

Hilda turned her wet face round and 
rested it against the hand on her shoulder. 

"And if I had spoken be&re?" said 
Hayward, pityingly. 

"I never thought you cared for me," 
half whispered Hilda. " I knew, all about 

Isabel Trevor 1 feared perhaps that 

you still " 

" No," said Hayward, hastily ; " no. She 
is the wife of a man I am indebted to 
in a thousand ways— the wife of a man 
who completely trusts me. No, she is 
nothing — must be nothing to me." 

Yet Hilda heard his voice sharpen as 
he made the denial. Still the words were 
very grateful to her ears. Isabel was 
nothing to him, then — ^thank God at least 
for that. 

"I am glad," she said, simply. ''And 
— and — Philip — could it have been — " 

He understood what she meant. Had 
she been free to marry him she would 
have done so. He looked, in fact, in the 
girl's face, and knew that she loved him. 



28 BENEATH THE WAVE, 

" There is nothing but troubles, I think," 
he said, with some bitterness. He was 
thinking how he had come to town, ahnost 
sure of winning Hilda for his wife. How 
the girl's heart was his, and yet who stood 
between them ? His friend. The best and 
noblest man he ever knew. The man who 
had befriended and succoured him; who 
had watched his mother's last hours, and 
to whom with her parting breath she had 
confided his future life. "Be a brother to 
him," she had said; and truly Jervis had 
been a brother to him. 

" He must not know this, Hilda," said 
Hayward, after a moment's reflection. " We 
— we must bear it for his sake." 

"Yes," answered Hilda; and her head 
fell. Ah, it was not so bitter to him I A 
disappointment, indeed, but not a heart- 
breaking one. Hilda knew this, as she sat 
there silent and sad. He had liked her — 
would have married her — ^but his life would 
go on smoothly without her, while hers 
would always seem an empty void. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 29 

" I should have told you," said Hilda, 
presently, for the silence between them was 
becoming very painfiil. 

"Yes," said Hayward, but still he kept 
thinking. He was indeed greatly surprised. 
Horace Jervis ! A man who seemed to 
have put away earthly things, and lived 
but for heavenly ones. And Hilda ! Why 
had she done it ? He forgot the long strain 
on the poor girl's endurance; forgot the 
bitter necessity for daily bread, not only 
for herself, but for the hapless little brother 
thrown upon her hands. 

"Well, Hilda," he said, after a few 
moments' thought, "I trust that you will 
be happy." 

These seemed cruel words somehow to 
Hilda. Her face flushed and her eyes grew 
dim again. Yet Hayward did not Teaa 
them unkindly. He was disappointed, per- 
haps, that Hilda ^should have done what 
she had done, and yet he felt that it was 
unjust of him to be so. 

"Life is so difficult," said poor Hilda, 



30 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

presently. **I — I tried to do what I thought 
best." 

"And which no doubt is best, Hilda," 
said Hayward, more generously. ^'What- 
ever are my own feelings on the matter, 
I know very well you have chosen for the 
best." But Hilda only sighed and looked 
at him pitifully as he said these words. 

*'We must forget this," continued Hay- 
ward; and he held out his hand to her. 
•'God bless you, Hilda — God bless you, 
my dear, dear girl !" 

Yes, God bless her, he was thi nk ing with 
all his heart. She was a sweet girl, and 
would make a good, sweet, loving wife. 
He had missed his chance; and Hayward 
began to realize at that minute that Hilda 
was, in truth, very dear to him. 

They did not say many words to each 
other after this. Neither of them for a 
moment contemplated breaking the bonds 
that bound them to Horace Jervis. He 
was the friend of one, the betrothed of the 
other. To both he had ever acted most 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 31 

nobly and generously, and for no selfish 
feeling were they going to grieve his unsel- 
fish heart. " He must never know this," 
Hayward had said, and HMa's own sense 
of right had echoed these words. Her life 
had been hard, and it would remain hard. 
She had tried to do her duty, but it 
seemed more difficult when she knew that 
her heart's desire had been so nearly within 
her grasp. 

After Hayward left Hilda he felt very 
much downcast. He wandered about the 
streets until it was nearly dusk, and then 
he went to call upon Horace Jervis. 

He was not at home. "Some of his 
sick sent for him, sir," said the maid-servant 
who opened the door, " but the housekeeper 
expects him back directly, so will you come 
inr 

Hayward went in, and sat down, and 
waited for his friend. Half-an-hour or so 
passed, and then the hard-working curate 
returned. He looked pale and fagged, but 
his face lit up with pleasure when he saw 



32 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hayward, and with great cordiality he held 
out his hand. 

" My dear fellow I This is indeed a 
pleasure," said Jervis ; Hayward felt thank- 
ful at that moment that his hand-clai^ was 
not like that of Judas. 

They had, of course, many things to tell 
each other. Hayward's change in Hfe; his 
brightening prospects^ and his new home 
were all discussed. Then, with a smile, 
Jervis told him what he believed to be 
his news. 

"I am going to surprise you, I am 
sure," he said. " You did not think I was 
a man likely to marry, did you ? " 

"I have heard your news," answered 
Hayward, trying his best to look uncon- 
cerned and happy. "You are going to 
marry one of the best of women — ^you are 
going to marry Miss Hilda Marston." 

" Yes I "Who told you ? Ah I see 

you have been there. Hilda told me that 

she would tell you when she saw you 

yes, I am going to marry." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 33 

Horace Jervis said the last few words 
thoughtfully. He loved Hilda. She was 
the sweetest gift of God, he thought, and 
as such he prized her. Was he worthy of 
this crowning blessing, he would ask him- 
self — this sweet helpmate sent to cheer his 
earthly journey ? No truer and purer love, 
in fact, was ever given to any woman 
than the love that Horace Jervis gave to 
HUda. 

And yet she loved him not. That is, 
she loved him in one way — she honoured 
and esteemed him above all men ; but her 
love — ^the love a woman gives sometimes 
too readily — ^had been given before Hilda 
Marston saw Horace Jervis. She had 
given it imasked, and too late she knew 
that she could not recall it. 

But of this Jervis had no suspicion. It 
never occurred to him to be jealous. Hilda 
was going to be his wife, and with plea- 
sant happy words, he told Hayward of 
iheir arrangements. 

"But that poor little fellow, Ned, is 

VOL. III. B 



34 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

the stumbling-block," he said. *^We would 
be married at once if lie were only better. 
But Hilda won't leave him, even for a 
few days, as he is. The doctors tell me 
he wants a change, and I must see about 
getting him away." 

"Why not let me take hun down to 
Massam ? " said Hayward. " The air is 
splendid there. Poor Mr. Hannaway's late 
housekeeper is staying on with me, and she 
is a kind, motherly sort of person, I think, 
and you may be sure I will look after 
him." 

**Why, I think this is a splendid idea," 
said Jervis. "Will you really take him 
for a week or so, Hayward ? " 

" 111 be delighted to have him," answered 
Hayward. 

" Then I'll settle it with Hilda, to-night," 
said Jervis. " Or will you go with me to 
see her soon, Philip, and then we can both 
persuade her ? " 

But Hayward declined this offer. He 
only sent a kind and pressing message to 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 35 

Hilda to be allowed to take lier little 
brother back with him to Combe Lodge. 

" But you must go and see Hilda again, 
of course, before you leave town," said 
Jervis. '*You know, Philip, she regards 
you with the affection of a sister. Indeed, 
at one time," he added, smiling, " I thought 
that you two would make a match of it 
— ^but I am not jealous now." 

"No," answered Hayward, with rather a 
grim smile, "you see, you are the happy 
man." 



CHAPTER III. 

THE OLD LOVE AND THE NEW. 

Hilda at first was .rather unwilling for 
little Ned to leave her ; he was so fretful 
and so weak. But she knew that he re- 
quired change, and she felt that he would 
be safe with Hayward. It was so kind of 
Hayward, too, she thought, to think of 
this. As for little Ned, he brightened up 
at the very idea. 

" I've no doubt Hayward has a pony," 
said Jervis, diplomatically. 

Now a pony had been the crowning desire 
of Ned's life when he was strong and well. 
.Even now the mention of a pony brought 
the colour back to the pale, thin cheeks, 
and a longing to the weary, fretful little 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 37 

heart. The terrible attack of fever through 
which this poor child had dragged had 
completely changed him. From being a 
fine, healthy, rosy boy, he had become a 
weak, drooping invalid, with a threatened 
disease of the hip joint. He would be a 
great charge for anyone to take him, Hilda 
knew ; but she could depend upon Hay- 
ward. He was accustomed to boys for one 
thing, and for another he had always been 
fond of little Ned. 

So, after thinking it over, Hilda gave her 
consent. But she did not give her consent 
to another proposition that Horace Jervis 
made. This was that they should be mar- 
ried when little Ned was away. No, Hilda 
would not hear of this. "Wait until the 
child comes back better," she said; and 
Horace Jervis yielded to her wish. 

But he told Hayward that he had 
asked Hilda to marry him when Ned 
was away. Hayward felt that he changed 
colour when he heard this; and he felt 
(he could not help it) no small relief when 



38 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

he heard also what Hilda's answer had 
been. 

He knew this when he went to see her 
about making arrangements for little Ned's 
returning with him to Combe Lodge. They 
both were embarrassed when they met, 
but Hilda was the most so. She could 
scarcely, indeed, falter out the words of 
thanks that she had meant to say. 

"What nonsense !" said Hayward kindly, 
in reply to these faltering words. "Of 
course I shall be pleased to have him, if 
you think it will do him good." 

Ned came into the room presently, and 
declared that he was both ready and anxious 
to go. 

"Mr. Jervis says you have a pony, 
sir?" he said; and Hayward laughed at 
the question. 

"What colour do you prefer, Mr. Ned?" 
he said. "I have a choice of ponies, so 
you may as well fix." 

He meant to buy the lad one, and he did 
so. Master Ned had his choice of many 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 39 

ponies, and finally decided on a handsome 
dun animal, of such frisky tendencies and 
high spirits that poor little Ned was totally 
imable to manage or even to mount him. 
In fact, for the first few days he was at 
Combe Lodge he was too weak to attempt 
to ride at all, and when he did so, Hayward 
was obliged to borrow a work-worn, meek, 
and rather dilapidated looking pony from 
one of the farmers near, on which he might 
try his skill. The dim pony was as yet 
only kept to be looked at, but this was an 
unfailing source of pleasure to Master Ned. 
Hayward was leading the pony in use (the 
farmer's) one day down a lane near the 
Park, Ned riding it, when Lady Hamilton, 
driving a splendid pair of ponies, suddenly 
passed them. Hayward took off his hat, 
and Lady Hamilton pulled up her ponies 
almost at the same moment. Then, when 
Hayward approached the carriage, Isabel 
inquired at once who Ned was. 

"Who is your little friend?" she said. 
"A small brother ? " 



40 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I have neither brother nor sister," an- 
swered Hay ward, smiling, "This young 
gentleman is an old acquaintance of yours. 
Don't you remember Ned Marston?" 

"Ned Marston!" repeated Isabel. "Do 
you mean Miss Marston's little brother who 
was at Mr. Irvine's school at Sanda?" 

"Yes, even so," replied Hayward. "He 
has been ill, poor little lad, and that's what 
has changed him so much." And Hayward 
looked kindly at Ned, who grinned and 
wriggled uneasily on his saddle as Hay- 
ward made these allusions to him. 

" And where did you pick him up ? " 
asked Isabel, also looking at Ned. 

" In London," said Hayward. " He was 
Uving with his sister there." 

" And how is Miss Marston ? " continued 
Isabel. " How is she getting on ? " 

"She is very well," answered Hayward 
gravely. 

" Ah — ^well, good-bye. Master Ned. He 
looks as if he wanted feeding up, doesn't 
he ? So, Mr. Hayward, mind you give 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 41 

him plenty to eat." And with a smile 
Isabel waved her driving whip, and the 
next moment had driven on, while 
Hayward proceeded — rather thoughtfully — 
again to lead Master Ned's pony. 

The next day Isabel absolutely drove up 
to Combe Lodge. Ned, who was gazing 
out of the library window, announced her 
arrival to Hayward. 

"Here's Lady Hamilton, sir," he cried. 
" And oh ! my, what a big hamper one of 
the grooms is dragging out ! " 

On hearing this, Hayward at once went 
to the hall door, and found Ked's informa- 
tion had been substantially correct. A 
big hamper was standing on one of the 
mats outside the vestibule, and to this 
Lady Hamilton pointed with a smile. 

"That's for Master Ned Marston," she 
said. " It contains grapes, port wine, and 
jelly, and all sorts of things to make him 
fat. Don't be oflFended. I don't suppose 
you starve him," she added, as Hayward's 
face, perhaps naturally, assumed a look of 



42 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

not very agreeable surprise. *^Boys, you 
know, require stuffing; so, please, let him 
stuff himself." 

" Your ladyship is very good," said Hay- 
ward, hesitatingly, and turning very red. 

"Yes, I thought it was good of me," 
answered Isabel, with a little laugh, * ^ But, 
you see, I knew the child long ago, and was 
sorry to see him look so thin. It was good 
of you, too," she added, " to have him down 
here. And now I mean to be very good,'^ 
she went on, " and to take you and Master 
Ned out for a drive." 

'* Thank you, but I think ," said 

Hayward, endeavouring to make an ex- 
cuse. 

"Don't think — ^but come," said Isabel ; and 
she looked into his face in her old, bright 
way. Oh, weak man ! Hayward had sworn 
to be on his guard against this woman ; had 
sworn to be true and loyal in look, and 
thought, and deed, to his friend Sir George ; 
yet he yielded to that siren glance. He 
seated himself by Isabel's side ; Master Ned 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 43 

taking his place by the groom. He sat and 
listened while Isabel strove to resume her 
old sway over him. She ignored then: 
stormy meeting at Massam, before Hayward 
went to town. She ignored that she had 
been found out, and that Hayward knew 
that he had once worshipped a false idol. 
She was beautiful, and she depended on 
the power that beauty gave her over the 
hearts of men. Hayward felt he was 
being made a fool of, and yet he did not 
take himself away. 

Presently they passed Sir George on the 
road, who was walking vdth his head cast 
down, and when he looked up and his 
eyes met Hayward's, Hayward felt his 
face flush. 

"Are you not going to stop?" he said 
to Lady Hamilton quickly. "Don't you 
see Sir George?" 

" Of course I see him," answered Isabel, 
" but I see no necessity for stopping. And 
with a little careless nod, she passed her 
husband, while Hayward felt excessively 



44 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

uncomfortable to be in the position in 
which he found himself. 

Isabel, on the contrary, was rather gratified 
that Sir George had seen them. He had 
humiliated her so deeply that she longed to 
himiiliate him. He had brought Hayward 
here — ^her old lover — and had made a confi- 
dant of this young man about her, and so 
Isabel had vowed that she would win Hay- 
ward over to her side. So she was very 
gracious to him, but Hayward was uneasy 
after this meeting with Sir George. He 
began thinking of Hilda Marston, even as 
he sat by Isabel, and wishing that he 
had known of her pure love long ago. 
Hayward, in fact, was not a man who 
could be happy in any crooked or unlaw- 
ful path. 

"Master Ned," said Lady Hamilton, 
presently, looking round and addressing 
Ned Marston, " would you like to see your 
sister here V 

" Hil r said Ned. " Yes, of course, but 
I can't. 



>i. » 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 45 

" IVe been thinking of something," con- 
tinued Lady Hamilton, now speaking to 
Hayward. " I always liked Miss Marston. 
I think I shall ask her here to stay with 
me a little while." 

Hayward was silent. 

"It would be a change for her, wouldn't 
it?" proceeded Isabel. "And also relieve 
you of the responsibility of looking after 
our young friend there ? What is her ad- 
dress ? I will write to her to-day." 

Hayward gave Hilda's address, and then 
said, with some hesitation : 

" I should tell you, perhaps, that Miss 
Marston is engaged to be married." 

" Indeed ! To whom, then ? If it's to 
some common man^ I don't think I could 
quite stand that." 

" It is to a Mr. Jervis. He is a clergy- 
man and a gentleman — ^and the best man I 
ever knew," answered Hayward, gravely. 

" Oh, indeed ! Miss Hilda hasn't done 
badly for herself, then ?" said Isabel. 

"No," said Hayward briefly. 



46 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" In that case there can be no objection 
to my asking her," continued Isabel. " I 

will ask her to stay ^let me see ^two 

months." 

Isabel meant until the baby she expected 
was bom. Ned Marston had put Hilda 
into her head, and she had been thinking 
that she would like to have her old com- 
panion beside her when she was ill. Hilda 
was sensible and agreeable, she remembered, 
and would not mind sitting all day in a 
sick room, and this was the treat that she 
intended for her old friend. 

Hayward heaxd of this proposed invi- 
tation with very mingled feelings. He 
would be glad to see Hilda again, and 
yet 

" She may not come," he reflected the 
next moment; but he was not angry when 
he heard that Hilda had accepted Lady 
Hamilton's invitation. 

Hilda, in truth, was glad to do so. She 
shrank from fulfilling her engagement at 
once, and living in lodgings meant money 



BENEATH THB WAVE. 47 

and weary anxiety. Her old friend Miss 
May still dared not ask her to stay with 
her on account of her school-girls, and Hilda 
was lonely without little Ned. So she 
wrote and accepted Lady Hamilton's invi- 
tation; and her sister Marian, when she 
heard of this, thought that there never was 
such a lucky girl as Hilda. To be engaged 
to be married and to go and stay at Massam 
Park seemed two very grand things to 
poor Marian, toiling in her close schoolroom. 
Yet, Hilda was anything but happy. She 
WM co-^oe-MA^ We il could 
not love her lover. Horace Jervis used to 
wonder at the humility of her manner to 
him ; at the subdued and touching gentle- 
ness with which she obeyed his slightest 
wish. All except one. She would not yet 
fix the time of her marriage, and Jervis 
felt that it would be selfish to urge her 
to do so against her will. 

Thus Hilda went to Massam. She could 
not help thinking, as she travelled there, 
of her last visit — of the squire's proposal 



48 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

and Hay ward's despair. Everything was so 
changed now. Isabel was a wife, the squire 
married, she was engaged, and Hayward 

Hilda sighed deeply when she thought 

of Hayward. His life had been so full of 
trouble. Had things been different he 
might have been happy now. Did Hilda 
find herself picturing that happiness ? The 
pleasant country home which was his, and 
the fond wife to watch his coming ? With 
a deeper sigh she tried to turn away from 
the contemplation of that forbidden scene. 
Life (as she told Hayward) was for her 
very difficult and hard to understand. 

Lady Hamilton received her kindly. 
Isabel wished Hilda to stay some time 
with her, and she was also, in a certain 
cold way of her own, glad to see her old 
companion. She drove her ponies to the 
station to meet Hilda, and altogether re- 
ceived her more agreeably than Hilda had 
expected. 

"You have heard about my fathers 
absurd marriage, of course?" said Isabel, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 49 

after the first greetings between the two 
ladies were over, and Hilda found herself 
seated by Lady Hamilton's side. 

"Yes," answered Hilda, with a smile. 

"I was furious about it," continued 
Isabel, "and indeed for that matter I am 
still. Ridiculous old man ! I have got 
into no end of trouble too about it." 

"How is that?" asked Hilda. 

"Well, I was in such a rage," replied 
Isabel, "that I tried to prevent it, and 
wrote an anonymous letter to my father 
to tell him about the Featherstones. I 
told Mr. Hannaway this— you remember 
Mr. Hannaway, don't you ? And he kept 
some foolish letters about it, and when 
he was kiUed Sh- George found these 
letters, and he and I have hardly spoken 
since." 

Hilda cast down her eyes. She, in fact, 
knew not what to say. It was a new 
experience in her life to hear a wife speak 
as Isabel did« 

"And how do Mr. Trevor and his 

VOL. III. E 



50 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

young wife get on ? " presently asked 
Hilda. 

" I'm told its simply sickening," answered 
Isabel. "It's 'My dear Lucinda/ 'My 
dearest Lucinda>' every time he speaks 
to her." 

"Well, that is very well at any rate," 
said Hilda. 

"Can't say I agree with you," said 
Isabel. "I could forgive the girl for 
marrying an old man, as they were so 
horribly poor, but to pretend to love him 
is really too much." 

"Perhaps she is grateful to him," said 
Hilda, slowly. She was thinking of her 
own engagement ; was thinking Lucinda 
Featherstone had not acted very differently 
to herself. 

" And Patty ? " she asked presently. " Is 
she at home?" 

" She's at Sanda. She lives apparently at 
Sanda, and Mr. Featherstone too. Truly a 
nice family to be connected -with ! " And 
Isabel lashed her ponies in her irritation. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 51 

Mr. Trevor and his daughter had, in 
fact, never met since his second marriage. 
Socially, Isabel now held herself far above 
the Featherstones, and she had rejected 
all advances made by Mr. Featherstone 
and Patty with the scantest courtesy. 

But the old man and his young wife 
were on better terms than Isabel and her 
husband. When Mr. Trevor said he would 
marry Lucinda Featherstone in defiance of 
all anonymous enemies, Lucinda promised 
herself that the squire should never re- 
pent his generosity. And he never had. 
Lucinda was a quick girl, and she did 
her best lo make him happy. Mr. Trevor 
was proud of his handsome young wife, 
and the old Hall at Sanda was now by 
no means an unhappy home. 

At Massam, on the contrary, Hilda 
Marston was shocked to find the terms on 
which the husband and wife lived. Sir 
George, proud, reserved, and at one time 
passionately enamoured of Isabel, now re- 
garded her apparently with contempt and 



52 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

indifference. She had wounded him in his 
tenderest feelings. He had given up so 
much for her; he had cast his whole heart 
at her feet, and all the while (as he told 
himself) she had been mocking and jibing 
at him to a man of totally inferior position 
to himself ! Truly the iron had entered into 
his soul on the day when he had read her 
letters to Mr. Hannaway. 

Had he loved her less he could have 
forgiven her more easily. As it was 
he could sometimes scarcely restrain the 
burning words of anger which rose on his 
lips when he met her careless and defiant 
glance. 

So there was not love in the house, but 
the "stalled ox and contention." Isabel was 
bitterly mdignant with Sir George for humi- 
liating her in the eyes of Hayward, and 
made no attempt at reconciliation, even if 
it had been possible. But she tried (as 
we have seen) to win back Hayward. She 
could do this more easily when she had 
Hilda staying with her, as little Ned served 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 53 

as a connecting link between Combe Lodge 
and the Park. 

Thus it happened that Hayward was 
constantly thrown into very dangerous com- 
pany. 

Had Hilda accepted him, he told himself, 
he need have been afraid, but Hilda had not 
accepted him. Nay, the poor girl was now 
trying hard to do her duty. She had no soft 
looks for Hayward; no confidential words. 
She was at war with her own heart, and 
even unnecessarily cold in her manner to 
her old friend. 

She saw, too, that the former infatuation 
with which he had regarded Isabel Trevor 
was not quite ended. This made her miser- 
able, jealous, and uneasy, and at times 
ftdl of anger with Hayward. One day this 
feeling suddenly overcame her, and she 
spoke to him some sharp words of reproach. 
The three were together in the conserva- 
tories when this happened ; Isabel, as usual, 
coquetting and toying with her flowers. Pre- 
sently Hilda saw her give a rose to Hay- 



54 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

ward, and saw also the maimer in which 
he received it. Then by-and-by, Hayward 
approached Hilda, and plucking another 
rose held it towards her. 

"WiU you have it, Hilda?" he said. 

" No 1 " she answered, sharply, turning 
her flushed face round, and looking at him: 
"why do you offer it to me ?" 

"Because- " began Hayward, 

" Mr. Hayward," interrupted Hilda, with 
heaving breast and flashing eyes, "I had a 

fidend once that that I behoved would 

have died sooner than he would have acted 
£U3 you are doing now 1 " 

" What do you mean ?" asked Hayward, 
glancing at Isabel, who, however, was too far 
from them to hear what they were saying. 

" I have not forgotten," continued Hilda, 
passionately, "when the woman you are so 
friendly and familiar with to-day drove you 
away from her miserable and broken- 
hearted ! Yes, you know what she is — ^a 
wife— a married woman— and yet " 

"HUda, you are aa old Wend," said 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 55 

Hayward, with some sternness, " but if any 
one else had said such words to me — " 

" You know they are true," retorted Hilda, 
in her jealous passion and indignation. 

But at this moment Lady Hamilton 
called out to them. 

"What are you quarreUing about?" she 
cried, from the end of the conservatory. 
" You remind me of Snap and Jerry over a 
bone, your expressions are both so warlike." 

" Miss Marston is taking the privilege of 
an old friend, and giving me a lecture^" 
answered Hayward, trying to speak lightly, 
and approaching Lady Hamilton ; but, with 
an indignant glance, Hilda turned away 
and left the conservatory. 

"What has that young woman been 
saying?" asked Isabel, when she saw that 
ahe and Hayward were alone. 

"Ahl — ^you need not tell me," she con- 
tinued, languidly. " Poor Hayward ! so 
she has been scolding you, has she, be- 
cause you have still some little friendship 
and regard for me ? " 



CHAPTER IV. 

A SON AND HEIR. 

Hayward was angry with Hilda after the 
scene in the conservatory, and yet in his 
heart he acknowledged that he had de- 
served her rebuke. He went home almost 
immediately afterwards, and began to call 
himself to account for his folly. Yet he 
found himself making excuses for Isabel. 
Sir George was so cold and hard to her, 
she was so young and beautiful. It was 
the old story — the siren voice chanting 
on the shore, and the mariner drifting 
into danger as he listened to the too- 
enchanting sounds. 

But if Hayward were disturbed after 
their brief wrangle in the' conservatory 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 57 

Hilda was almost completely overwhelmed 
with emotion. The poor girl was scarcely- 
alone when she recalled with bitter self- 
humiliation what she had said. How 
utterly ungrateful she must seem to him, 
she thought. Had she forgotten in her 
jealous anger that Hayward had saved her 
and little Ned absolutely from starving 
in London ? Had she forgotten his con- 
stant friendship and generosity to her, and 
how, the moment that he was in a posi- 
tion to do so, he had asked her to be 
his wife ? Hilda hid her face and cried 
bitterly as she remembered these things. 
What must he think of her ? she thought ; 
and Hayward no doubt at that moment 
felt considerable irritation on the sub- 
ject. 

But his anger faded away when he saw 
Hilda the next day. There was no mis- 
taking the look of pain and suffering 
imprmted on her face. She was walking 
on one of the roads near Combe Lodge 
when he encountered her, and with much 



58 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

nervousness and hesitation she asked if 
she could speak a few words to him. 

" Certainly," answered Hayward. He 
was riding, but he dismounted at once; 
and putting his arm through his horse's 
bridle, prepared to walk by Hilda's side. 

It chanced, however, at that moment, 
that a violent shower came on, and in 
common courtesy Hayward could but oflfer 
Hilda the shelter of his roof. 

"Come, Hilda," he said, smiling, as she 
hesitated; and after a moment's thought 
she followed him into his house, and was 
of course received with marks of great joy 
by little Ned. 

But Hilda was too much agitated to 
respond very cordially to her little brother's 
signs of affection. She sat down by the 
library window and looked at the beating 
rain. Presently Hayward came and stood 
beside her. 

" What a shower !" he said. " It's well 
you've found shelter, Hilda." 

"Yes," she answered. She was not 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 59 

thinking of the rain, nor the shelter, but 
how ungrateful she had been to the faithful 
firiend by her side. Hayward, watching her, 
saw a heavy tear steal down her cheek, and 
fall upon her knee. This touched him. 

"What is vexing you, Hilda?" he said 
kindly, m a low tone. 

HiL only looked at him in aoBwor. 
with her wet sad eyes. 

"Run, Master Ned," said Hayward the 
next monaent, "to Mrs. Watkins (this was 
the housekeeper) and tell her to send up 
some tea for your sister, and stay with her 
until it comes up. What is it, Hilda T again 
he asked when the boy left the room in 
obedience to his request. 

" I — I — am so sorry," began Hilda. " I 
said yesterday what I should not — I was 
vexed — I had better go away from Massam, 
I think." 

" But why ? " said Hayward. " Yes, 
Hilda," he continued, gravely. "You said 
yesterday what you should not," (as Hay- 
ward said that he put his hand kindly on 



60 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hilda's shoulder.) "But I am quite ready 
to forgive you," he added, " if you will 
never say the same thing any more." 

Hilda was silent for a moment. She 
sat with her hot tears streaming down 
her cheeks, and with strong and varying 
emotions struggHng in her heart. Then, 
after a Uttle thought, she turned round and 
took Hayward's hand. 

" I will never say them again after 
to-day, Philip," she said; "but may I speak 
a few words to you now ? " 

"What will be the good, HHda?" he 
answered. " I know what you will say — 
*you made a fool of yourself once about 
Miss Trevor, take care you don't do it 
again about Lady Hamilton.' Isn't that 
it, Hilda? But do not be afraid," he 
added. "As I told you before you came 
here. Lady Hamilton is the wife of a 
man who honours me with his friend- 
ship." 

" But an unloved and unloving wife, 
PhUip," urged HHda. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 61 

•' That may be," answered Hayward 
(and these words of Hilda's were not 
unpleasant to his ears); "but she is his 
wife, I can never forget, under any cir- 
cumstances, what I owe to Sir George." 

Again Hilda was silent for a few mo- 
ments, and then after another Uttle men- 
tal struggle she continued : — 

" I 1 have no right, I know," she 

said. "It is only because I care so 

much that I speak. I can never re- 
pay you what I owe you, and it cuts 
me to the heart to see you again being 
deceived. Don't be angry, Philip, I must 
speak. Lady Hamilton is not a good 
woman. She does not love you, or I 

could forgive her she does not love 

her husband, and she will never " 

"Had we not better end this conver* 
sation, Hilda?" interrupted Hayward. "I 
have given you no cause to say what 
you are doing, and Lady Hamilton has 
given you no cause." 

" Oh ! why do I care ? why do I care ?" 



62 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

said Hilda, rising suddenly, and beginning 
to pace the room with uneven, restless 
steps. " Why did we ever meet, Philip ? " 
she went on wringing her hands, ^'for it 
hns caused me nothing but bitter pain." 

**' I 1 am grieved, Hilda," said 

Hayward ; " but what have I done ? " 

''Nothing! I know you are not to 
blame," continued poor Hilda. "I got to 
care for you without any fault of yours. 
I saw you wasting your heart on Isabel 
Trevor, and I could not put out my 

hand to save you and then ^when 

you knew " 

"You tried to comfort me, Hilda," 
said Hayward, following the girl's restless 
steps, and putting his hand through her 
trembling arm; "and you did do so, 
my dear. We are both very unhappy, 
Hilda," he went on gently. " If you 
could have married me, I would have 
tried not to cost you any pain. I would 

have loved you very dearly, Hilda- 

but as it is not to be '' 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 63 

"No " said Hilda, but that renun- 
ciation was very bitter to her. More 
bitter than it had been in London; 
more bitter now when she had seen 
Hayward every day; when she felt that 
if she could marry him he would be- 
come a wiser and happier man. 

" Let us at least remain friends, Hilda 1 '* 
said Hayward. " It is good for me to 
have such fnends as you and— Jervis." 

"Yes," answered Hilda, slowly, "he is 
a good man." 

"A very good man ^and and, my 

dear, let me think sometimes that you — 
a good woman like you — once cared for 
me. Don't cry, Hilda. Jervis is like 
gold where I am dross. When I am 
with Jervis I always feel somehow a^ I 
do when I look at the stars." 

"0, Philip!" 

" His heart is half in heaven, Hilda. 
That is why sometimes I grudge you to 
him, for no woman wiU ever be to him 
the most absorbing interest of his life." 



64 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

But here Master Ned once more made 
his appearance, speedily followed by Mrs. 
Watkins and the tea-tray, and the con- 
versation, therefore, between Hayward and 
Hilda ended. But it made a great im- 
pression upon Hayward. He went less 
to the Park after it, and kept out of 
the way as much as he could of Lady 
Hamilton's beautiful face. 

She also, as weeks went on, became 
more subdued and quiet. For the first 
time in her life she began to feel fear. 
She had never been used to be ill, and 
she dreaded the time when her child 
was to be bom. Hilda became of some 
use and comfort to her now. But Isabel 
was impatient and weary. She hated 
children, she told Hilda, and did not 
want to be troubled with them. She 
had, in fact, no motherly instincts. She 
could not understand the feeling that 
prompts the bird to build her nest; that 
makes the untamed brute return to die 
by the side of its wounded young. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 65 

But the day came at last, and an heir 
was bom to Massam. The gloomy master 
of the Park heard the news without much 
sign of emotion. 

"What! a boy?" he said to the head 
nurse, who had hurried down to be the 
first to tell the glad tidings, expecting a 
very handsome gratuity for her trouble. 
"I wish it had been a girl." 

" A girl. Sir Greorge ! " exclaimed the 
woman in utter surprise. "What 1 would 
you not rather have an heir like the little 
beauty that has just been bom ? " 

But Sir George made no answer. He 
took no notice of the expectant bows and 
smiles of the head nurse, and very little of 
the more courtly congratulations of the 
eminent doctor who had been summoned 
from town to attend the case. 

"They are both doing well, are they 
not?" he asked. 

" Yes," answered the great doctor, " Lady 
Hamilton and your infant heir are as well 
as I can possibly expect." 

VOL. HI. F 



€6 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I am glad," said Sir George, briefly ; 
but he placed a sufficient sum in the 
doctor's hand to more than make up for 
his scant words. 

Later in the day Hayward entered the 
library. 

" Well, Sir Greorge," he said, holding out 
his hand, "let me congratulate you. I 
hear an heir has been bom to Massam." 

"A son has, at least," answered Sir 
George, coldly ; and Hayward could not 
help wondering at his manner and his 
words. 



CHAPTER V. 

FIXING THE DAY. 

Hilda Marston had been about nine weeks 
at Massam^ when one morning Hayward 
received a letter from his friend, Horace 
Jervis. It was as foUows :— 

"My dear Philip, — I hear from Hilda 
that the little heir, whose appearance has 
been so anxiously looked for, has arrived, 
and that her friend. Lady Hamilton, is 
doing well. Under these circumstances I 
am going to ask you to give me a bed for 
a day or two, as I would like to run down 
to see Hilda, and I see no reason now (as 
little Ned is so well) why our marriage 
should be longer delayed. Could Hilda 



68 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

not be married from Massam ? This seems 
to me to be the most desirable course we 
could adopt. It would not be any trouble 
to Sir George and Lady Hamilton, as I 
am sure it will be HUda^s wish as well as 
mine to be married as quietly as possible. 
If little Ned could remain with you until 
our return from a short wedding tour, all 
Hilda s anxiety about him would be at rest. 
Write and tell me what you think, and if 
it will be convenient for you to put me up 
next Tuesday and for the three following 
days. — I remain, dear Philip, yours aflfec- 

tionately, "Horace Jeevis." 

Hayward felt very much disturbed after 
reading this letter. It gave him a kind of 
shock, and yet it contained no news. He 
knew this marriage was to be, but it seemed 
far off somehow until now. 

He had not seen much of Hilda lately. 
She had been, indeed, constantly with Lady 
Hamilton, and Lady Hamilton was very 
exacting. But he had thought of Hilda 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 69 

a good deal. The girFs trembling and 
agitated confession of how much she had 
loved him had recurred to him again and 
a^^ain. Isabel had seemed further away, 
^HUda nearer to him, during the weefa 
which had preceded the birth of Isabel's 
child. He had not forgotten that Hilda 
was engaged to Horace Jervis, but he had 
always remembered it with increasing 
aversion to the idea. Now it was brought 
to him face to fEice. Jervis was evidently 
coming to Massam to urge Hilda to fix 
the wedding day. 

Yet he could, not of course, refiise to 
receive him. His errand was a legitimate 
one, and Hayward was bound to treat him 
with all courtesy and kindness. 

Strange to say, he expected another 
guest also, just about the time Horace 
Jervis had proposed to come. This was 
no other than his old firiend, the Rev. 
Matthew Irvine. Many letters had passed 
between Combe Lodge and the parsonage 
of Sanda since Hayward had been in York- 



70 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

shire. The parson s welcome loan of ten 
pounds had long since been returned out 
of Hayward's salary in London. But when 
he got to Combe Lodge he did not forget 
the Irvines. Mrs. Irvine's heart had been 
uplifted by a present of a very handsome 
dinner service, and to Miss Amelia Shadwell 
Hayward had forwarded one of the best 
pianos he could procure in town. To the 
parson himself he had sent a gold watch 
with a suitable inscription, and with no 
small pride the Rev. Matthew had donned 
his " boy's gift/' as he called Hayward's 
watch, and had laid the old silver tub, that 
he had worn all his life before, away for ever. 
And now he was going to visit Hayward. 
Mrs. Irvine had been invited also, but her 
stern sense of duty prevailed over her love 
of pleasure. 

" No, Matthew," she had said to her 
spouse, "you go and enjoy yourself, and 
I will stay and look after the school. But 
mind you, write and tell me exactly how 
Hayward looks. Don't be led away by his 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 71 

having a colour, for that's often a sign of 
something wrong. I'd rather hear that he 
looked sallow, as that's natural to him, and 
I'm always doubtful of your fine com- 
plexions.^' 

"Very well, my dear," said the parson. 
" Anythmg else ?" 

" Sound him," said Mrs. Irvine, in her 
hollow tones. " I don't encourage the girL 
I tell Amelia Shadwell that the dinner 
service, and the piano, and the gold watch 
all meant nothing. That is, nothing parti- 
cular; but still they may. If Hayward 
has any fancy for Amelm Shadwell, it is 
our duty to encourage it." 

"But, my dear, I don't think he has," 
answered the parson meekly. 

"You mayn't think so, Matthew, but 
she may," answered Mrs. Irvine, oracularly. 
"At all events there's no harm done by 
sounding him." And the Rev. Matthew, 
having promised to sound Hayward, was 
permitted to prepare for his journey. 



72 BCOATH THK WATK. 

to the genial faiaosL Not many pleasures 
had come in his waj, poor man, all his life; 
but this really was oneL To go and stay 
with his ''dear boy," when that dear boy 
had come in for some <^ the good things 
of this world, and to haTe a few days' rest 
and change, seemed a wonderful piece ci 
good forbme to the Bot. Matthew. 
. He could not resist bragging a little to 
the Squire of Sanda of Hayward's invi- 
tation« 

''You see prospeiily has not turned his 
head, Mr. Trevor," he said. "He has not 
forgotten his old friends." 

'^ I was pleased to hear that my son-in* 
law. Sir Greorge, had offered the late Mr. 
Hannaway's appointment to Mr. Hayward,'' 
said the squire, in his old pompous fashion. 
" Sir George, of course, owed this young 
man a good deal" 

"Yes,*' said the Rev. Matthew, with his 
humorous smile. 

" But he has now amply repaid this," 
continued the squire. '* My father-in-law, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 73 

Mr. Featherstone, informs me that the 
appointment is worth something like £1,000 
a year. An excellent appointment !" 

The squire's family and the parson s were 
now on more intimate terms than formerly. 
Lucinda Featherstone had never been proud 
in her unmarried days, and she was not 
proud now. She was kind to Mrs. Irvine, 
and kind to Amelia. Indeed, Lucinda was. 
•doing her best to win the good- will of those* 
around her, and show her gratitude to her 
-elderly husband. She was gratefiil to him 
for his kindness to her father and sister. 
Graceless Antony Featherstone now spent 
a. good deal of his time at Sanda HaUL 
His debts and his duns couldn't very con- 
veniently follow him there. He had, more- 
over, to eat and drink of the best at another 
man's cost, and a good horse to ride on, 
imd plenty of game to shoot ; so what did 
Antony want more ? Nothing, he told him- 
self, and he was always telling Lucinda 
that she was the pride and darling of his 
lieart 



74 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Patty, too, almost always lived with her 
sister. Two lively young women trying to 
please him was a new experience in the 
home life of the squire, and he decidedly 
liked it. He was vain and pompous, but 
he meant well in his narrow way, and he 
was really fond of his young wife. " She 
had played her cards well," her father 
said ; but Lu had not only played well, 
but was a very pleasant and unassuming 
winner. 

She and Patty Featherstone knew, of 
course, all about the great lady at Massam 
Park. Lady Hamilton had all but cut 
her old friends, and never thought of invit- 
ing them to meet her new ones. But her 
mother-in-law, Lu, and her neighbour, 
Patty, still continued to know a good deal 
about her doings. They had heard the 
rumours about Mr. Hannaway's devotion, 
and it had come out somehow that as soon 
as the breath was gone from the late 
lawyer's body. Sir George had ridden 
over to Combe Lodge, and shut himself 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 75 

up in the library ; and that since then 
the husband and wife had lived on bad 
terms. 

Isabel thought that she hid this, but she 
did not. Her maid had overheard Sir 
George speaking in a stern voice to her, 
when he had first returned from town, 
after Mr. Hannaway's death ; and the lady's 
maid had reported this in the servants' 
hall, and so the stormy interview and its 
upshot had crept out. 

When Lady Hamilton's child was born, 
most of her friends and neighbours knew 
that she and her husband were anything 
but friendly. The good-natured ones argued 
well at the birth of an heir : " This will 
make it all right," they said ; and the ill- 
natured ones sneered, and wished it might 
do so. But both the good-natured and the 
ill-natured came to congratulate Lady Ham- 
ilton of Massam. Isabel was a great lady 
still, even though Sir George might have 
some cause to be annoyed at her conduct. 

Some ten days after the little babe had 



76 BENEATH THE WATE. 

made its advent, to take its share amid the 
lights and shadows of the world, Isabel was 
lying on a couch in her luxuriously furniahed 
dressing room. Hilda Marston was sitting 
near her, and was reading a novel aloud to 
her, when the cries of the newly-born child, 
who was in the adjoining bed-room, dis- 
turbed the mother. 

"Hear that little wretch!" said Isabel. 
"Do, Miss Marston, go and tell the nurse 
to take it at once to another room." 

Hilda rose to obey her command, and 
went into the bed-room, and directed the 
nurse to take the child away. 

*' Did my lady say that ? " said the nurse, 
casting up her eyes in horror ; for to her 
mind babies were the kings of earth, and 
everything ought to give way to their 
comfort and convenience. 

" Yes, the child disturbs her," said Hilda, 
bending down and kissing the little pinched 
red face, enclosed in embroidered flannel 
and lace frills. 

" Does it ? " said the nurse, but she said it 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 77 

like an anathema. " Lady Hamilton would 
come to no good," she was thinking, " and 
deserved no good, after her unnatural con- 
duct, and we would see what would be the 
end of it." 

After all, the nurse was not far wrong. 
The woman who hears her baby cry un- 
moved is not a good woman, and will pro- 
bably — as the nurse thought — " come to no 
good." The heart must be hard and cold 
when no tender instinct thrills through it 
at a baby's trustftd touch. 

As Hilda was returning to the dressing- 
room after having delivered her message to 
the nurse, Isabel's lady's maid rapped at 
the door, and brought in several letters. 
There were five for Lady Hamilton, and 
one for Miss Marston, which, unlike the 
others, bore neither monogram nor crest. 
But Hilda knew the handwriting, and re- 
tired at once to one of the windows to 
read her letter. 

It was from Horace Jervis. A manly 
affectionate letter, in which he told her 



78 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

he was coming to Massam on the following 
day, and that he hoped to prevail upon 
her to consent that their marriage might 
take place almost immediately. Hilda 
read thus far with quickened breath, but 
presently a burning flush spread over her 
face as she went on with the letter : — 

'* I told Hay ward," wrote Horace Jervis, 
" why I wished to come to Massam, and he 
has kindly invited me to stay with him. 
He will keep little Ned with him while we 
are away; so you, my dear one, may be 
quite sure that he will be well cared for. 
Do not let us wait any longer, dear Hilda. 
Lady Hamilton will, no doubt, give her 
permission that our quiet wedding may take 
place from her house, and Hayward will 
act as best man, if one should be required. 
But we need not many attendants to the 
altar, Hilda. If God's blessing goes with 
us, that will be enough. May it be with 
you, my Hilda, now and for ever ! " 

It was a solemn letter to receive — 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 79 

serious and solemn. Hilda knew that 
Horace Jervis never doubted her as she 
read it ; that he beUeved her heart was as 
it should be, and that she would make him 
a loving as well as a faithful wife. With 
a deep sigh she restored the letter to its 
envelope, and as she did so, Isabel called 
out from the other end of the room. 

" What a sigh !" she cried. " I declare 
I feel the draught it made here. What 
has he done, this lover of yours ? Jilted 
you ? Parsons, you know, are always carry- 
ing on semi-religious sentimental flirta- 
tions with the young ladies of their con- 
gregations. * She works religious petticoats,' 
eh ? " And Isabel gave a little scoflSng 
laugh as she made the quotation. 

Hilda made no answer to this speech; 
but she rose from her seat by the window, 
and went and stood by the fire, near which 
Isabel's couch was placed. 

"Here's a lot of flattery and f nonsense," 
said Isabel, once more addressing her, and 
pointing to the various notes of congratula- 



80 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

tions that she had just received, and 
which were lying on the table before her. 
'^There's just one worth having though, 
for it's from the handsomest man I know 
— Hugh Warrington." 

"I think I remember him," said Hilda. 
" He is Mrs. Woodford's brother, is he 
not ?" 

" Her half-brother, and the coldest, hand- 
somest, and most fascinating man I ever 
saw." 

Again Hilda made no remark. Then 
presently she said, with some hesitation: 

"Lady Hamilton, Mr. Jervis is coming 
here to-morrow." 

"Is he really?" said Isabel. "Well, 
you are quite delighted, I suppose ?" 

"He is going to stay with Mr. Hay- 
ward," continued Hilda. 

" Ah, indeed ! Well, I shall be pleased 
to make his acquaintance. Mr. Hayward 
tells me he is a very gentlemanly man." 

"Yes," said Hilda, with rather a sad 
smile. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. " 81 

" When do you talk of getting married T 
asked Isabel. 

Hilda hesitated and blushed. 

"A brilliant idea has struck me," went 
on Isabel, before Hilda could well answer 
her question. " Why not get married here ?" 
We could arrange it in ten days or a 
fortnight, and it would make a little amuse- 
ment in these dull times. We could ask 
the Woodfords, for, of course, the Vicar 
would have to marry you, and I will ask 
Captain Warrington. I declare it would 
be great fun." 

But " began Hilda. 

My dear, spare me the *buts,' and it 
is *such a short time,' and so on, of the 
blushing bride. My advice to you is — get 
married when you can. Not many men 
would marry a girl entirely without money, 
like you." 

"No," said Hilda> "it requires some gen- 
erosity," and her face flushed as she spoke. 
She was thinking of Hayward. He, too, 
had asked her, though she had no money. 

VOL. III. G 






82 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

God bless and keep him for his generous 
thought ! 

" I should think it does require some 
generosiiy," said Isabel. " I'm not given 
to match-making in general, but I think I 
shall try to arrange yours. I shall tell Mr. 
Jervis how much nicer it would be for you 
to be married from here than from a 
London lodging." 

". That is what Mr. Jervis thinks himself 
— ^what he urges in this letter," said Hilda^ 
with just a little touch of womanly pride 
in her tone. 

" Then you don't say you are hesita- 
ting ?" asked Isabel. " Nonsense, my good 
creature! I will settle it all with the lover 
before I have been half-an-hour in his 
company. We shall have a wedding at 
Massam, and get up some Uttle gaiety for 
the occasion." 

" No, please don't," said Hilda, earnestly. 
"It is most kind of you to wish me to 
be married here, but don't have any com- 
pany if it is arranged so. Both Mr. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 83 

Jervis and myself would really dislike 
it." 

"Well, we shall see," said Isabel. And 
so she began planning and arranging 
everything in her own mind. The wedding 
became one of her fancies. When an idea 
took possession of her, she remained im- 
mersed in it for a while, and then another 
fancy succeeded. But when Horace Jervis 
arrived at the Park, on the following day, 
she was still full of the wedding, and 
determined that it. should take place at 
Massam. 

Hilda was very much agitated when she 
saw again the calm sweet face of the young 
man whose wife she had promised to become. 
She felt somehow as if she were guilty 
towards him. His perfect truthfulness, his 
serene faith in her, filled her heart with 
self-reproach. It seemed the greater wrong 
because he never suspected that her love 
was not entirely his own. 

Lady Hamilton received him with great 
courtesy, when he was presented to her. 



84 BESEATH THK WATK. 

She was, indeed, impiresBed bj hk simple, 
yet dignified beaiing, and smiled her 
sweetest smiles daring die interview whidi 
took place between them. Yet she did 
not feel quite as mach at ease in his 
pres^ice as she expected. She had donned 
her most becoming dressing gown for the 
occasion, and was indeed fiur to look npon ; 
and yet, after Jerviss steady gaze had 
rested on her lovely &ce for a few 
minutes, something in its expression re- 
pelled him. Beautiful as Lady Hamiltcm 
was, tiie memory of Delilah's snareful 
charms rose once or twice hauntingly to 
the young clergyman's mind. 

'^ So you and my friend, Miss Hilda> 
contemplate what I consider the very rash 
act of matrimony?" said Lady Hamilton, 
smilingly, addressing Jervis, after they had 
talked together for some little time on 
ordinary subjects. 

"Yes," answered Horace Jervis; and he 
looked at Hilda, who turned her head 
slightly away. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 85 

" And when ? " continued Lady Hamilton. 
" I hope you don't think of having a long 
engagement^ for they are such wretched 
things?" 

*^ It is about this that I have taken the 
liberty of coming to Massam/' answered 
Jervis. "I most earnestly wish Hilda to 
marry me at once." 

"Quite right," said Isabel, with a little 
decisive nod of her head. "Miss Marston 
is an old friend of mine/' she continued 
the next minute, "and it will give both 
Sir George and myself great pleasure if 
she is married from Massam." 

After this it was all settled. It seemed 
to Hilda that she had no voice in the 
arrangement, but stood there with burning 
dieeks and beating heart, listening while 
Lady Hamilton and Jervis fixed every- 
thing between them. 

"My dear, the bride elect never speaks 
on these occasions," said Isabel, repressively, 
when Hilda once, in a faltering voice, 
ventured to make some objection. 



86 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Yes, it was all arranged. When Hilda 
and Jervis left Lady Hamilton's dressing- 
room, their wedding-day was fixed and 
their destiny sealed. It was to be in a 
fortnight from this time, Isabel settled, and 
the wedding dress was to be her gift. 

" May this be for your happiness, my 
dearest!" said Jervis, taking his promised 
bride in his arms, and kissing her cold 
cheek, when they were alone. But Hilda's 
tears fell fast in reply. 

"You are so good," she murmured, "far, 
far too good." 

She thought this many and many a time 
during the next few days. He was so good. 
Always thinking of her, and trying to make 
things easy and pleasant to her. He was 
not a man who cared for gay dress, or indeed 
ever noticed it ; but he sent Hilda a cheque 
for a hundred pounds on his return to town 
to buy her modest trousseau with, and the 
poor girl shed some bitter tears over the 
kindly tender words which accompanied 
this gift. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 87 

" I am not a rich man^ my dear one, you 
know, or I should have sent much more," 
he wrote. Ah ! he was rich, Hilda thought, 
rich in treasures that money could not buy. 
This was what filled Hilda with such con- 
stant self-reproach and pain. If he had 
been a shade less perfect; if he had been 
selfish, rough, or unkind to her, she could 
have borne it better. As it was, she felt 
as if she wronged him every time that the 
recollection of Hayward recurred regretfully 
to her heart. 

These were very unhappy days also for 
Hayward. Of course he heard all about 
the wedding, and the bridegroom's gift, 
and even the wedding dress. Isabel sent 
for him and told him about these things, 
and wondered to him what made the bride 
not appear elated at her good fortune. 

" I think she is a most lucky girl," she 
said to Hayward ; but Hayward made no 
answer to this opinion. 

He never saw Hilda. The girl shrank 
from him, and dreaded the idea of seeing 



88 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

his face again after the time of her marriage 
was fixed with Horace Jervis. Sometimes 
Hay ward would ask himself impetuously if 
all this were right. Was it right thus to 
deceive Jervis? Far better tell him the 
truth, he would mentally argue, and let 
him decide. But then, again, the remem- 
brance of the complete unselfishness of 
Jervis's character rose before him. Hay- 
ward knew how he would decide. He 
would give up self. ** He is so good," 
Hayward also repeated to himself, as poor 
Hilda had done. They both owed him so 
much that their lips were bound to silence. 
But we can understand the struggle. Even 
Sir George noticed, and spoke both to 
Hayward and Isabel, about the change in 
Hilda's appearance. 

*' Is this marriage any arrangement of 
yours, Isabel ? " he asked of her, in the 
cold stem way in which he now habitually 
addressed his wife. 

" My good creature," answered Isabel, 
shrugging her shoulders and putting on 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 89 

her grandest air, "what do you mean by 
any arrangement of mine ? Miss Marston 
was engaged when she came here, and had 
been engaged for some time; and Mr. Jervis 
came by her wish, I understand, to settle 
the exact time of their marriage." 

" Well, all I can say is," said Sir George, 
"she looks anything but happy. I never 
saw a girl so much altered." 

" Well, all I can say is, then, that she is 
a fool," said Isabel, contemptuously. " Mr. 
Jervis is a gentleman — is well off, and cer- 
certainly not ill-looking, and she has simply 
nothing to offer in return — not even beauty." 

" She is better without it," said Sir 
Gteorge briefly ; and he turned away. But 
he said something of the same sort to 
Hayward, and his words left a very painful 
impression on the young man's mind. 

"What is the matter with Miss Mars- 
ton?" he asked, addressing Hajrward, who 
was writing some business letters, for him 
in the Ubrary at the Park. "She looks 
so utterly wretched." 



90 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" I 1 do not know," answered 

Hajward hesitatingly ; but he made up 
his mind at that moment to try to see 
Hilda once more. 

He wrote a note to her to ask her if he 
could do so during the day. But before 
night came, a few ill-written and tear- 
stained lines were brought to him. 

*' I cannot see you, Philip ; I dare not. 
May Grod bless you ! 

" H. M." 



There was nothing more. In these brief 
words Hayward felt that she took leave of 
him. On his desk was lying an invitation 
to be present at her wedding. Lady 
Hamilton had carried out all her plans, 
and her favourite, the handsome guardsman, 
Captain Warrington, had written to his 
sister, the vicar s wife, to say that he 
would be down in Yorkshire on such a 
day, after receiving a private intimation 
of the approaching marriage from Isabel. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 91 

It wanted only a few days to the time 
when Hayward wrote to Hilda ; only a 
few days, and the girl who loved him so 
well was to be married to another man ! 
It was at least a very bitter reflection. 
True love is not lightly won nor lightly 
lost, and Hayward ^ felt that Hilda s love 
was very true. 

He would have left Massam for a time 
if he could have done so ; but it was not 
possible. His old friend Mr. Irvine waa 
still with him, and Jervis had written to 
ask him to put him up the day before the 
marriage. And then there was little Ned. 

Thus Hayward was forced to hide his 
feelings as best he could. They were any- 
thing but happy ones, but it was for Hilda 
he felt more than for himself, when he 
held out his hand to welcome her lover, 
the day before her wedding day! 



CHAPTER VI. 

THB WEDDING DAY. 

It was a wet and dismal morning (though 
in midsummer) on which HHda Marston 
was to be married. But the dull grey 
light that dawned so slowly did not awaken 
the bride. For hours Hilda had lain awake, 
and heard the clocks strike, and counted the 
time. One hour nearer, and then another ! 
Tick, tick, went the clocks ; beating, beating, 
Hilda's sad and aching heart. It was a 
solemn and sorrowful morning to her. Out- 
side the rain was driving and beating against 
the window-panes; inside, the girl was pray- 
ing and suffering, " O God ! help me to do 
right. O God ! help me never to wound or 
pain his generous heart ! " 



BKNBATH THE WAVE. 93 

Such was her prayer, repeated again and 
again in the darkness ; repeated when the 
morning dawned and the dull light stole 
in. *' Help me to do right ! " It was a 
piteous cry, was it not, going up from the 
depths of a very true, tender, and unhappy 
heart? 

The same morning BLayward awoke with 
an almost intolerable sense of pain and 
annoyance. He got up and looked out and 
swore at the weather. Yet he would have 
felt equally disgusted if the sun had been 
shining. Everything had gone wrong, he 
thought, and Hilda — dear Hilda — ^he won- 
dered if she were thinking of him then ! 

No, not then. She was up now, and her 
face was very calm and pale. Isabel sent 
her head waiting woman to dress her, and 
this person knew her business well. Hilda 
made a very fair and graceful-looking bride 
in the tasteful costume that Isabel had 
provided for her. She had never been 
dressed thus before. She scarcely knew 
herself as she saw her reflection in the 



94 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

cheval glass, in the long-trained and lace- 
trimmed skirts that was draped around her. 

" If only, Miss, you didn't look so pale," 
said the lady's maid, admiring her own 
handiwork, *'you would look lovely." 

"Well, I must be content to look pale, 
Ritson," answered Hilda, with a quiet smile, 
and she put her hand to her side as the 
spoke. 

There was a strange aching pain there. 
All night it had been there, and it was 
still there. It seemed to take Hilda's 
strength quite away, and she sat wearily 
down after the lady's maid had finished 
dressing her. 

"My lady will be coming to see you 
directly," said Ritson, as she took her leave, 
and so Hilda sat still and waited. 

Presently Isabel, dressed with all the 
perfect taste which was one of her attrac- 
tions, entered the room. The delicate blue 
silk and rich white lace in which she was 
robed became her fair skin and golden hair 
only too well. Never, Hilda thought, had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 95 

she seen her look so beautiful. She wore 
her diamonds^ and her little hands and 
slender throat were literally ablaze with 
the sparkling gems. 

" How do I look ? " she asked of Hilda ; 
and Hilda answered with all honesty that 
she had never seen her look so well. 

" That is right ! " said Isabel, with a 
gratified smile. "And you too look well," 
she added, glancing at the bride. "Yes, 
your dress becomes you ; Mr. Jervis has no 
reason to be ashamed of his choice." 

While this conversation was going on, 
the wedding guests were beginning to as- 
semble downstairs. It had been arranged 
that the small party invited to attend the 
ceremony was to meet at the Park in the 
first place, and then walk across the grounds 
to the church, which was situated immedi- 
ately outside of them. But the drenching 
rain which was falling upset this plan. To 
walk through the damp park was now 
impossible, and Sir George therefore gave 
orders for three carriages to be prepared. 



96 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"When Isabel went down among her 
guests, she found that the bridegroom, and 
our old friend Mr. Irvine, had already 
arrived. Hayward had not yet appeared, 
but Horace Jervis informed Lady Hamil- 
ton that he would do so presently. Then 
the vicar's wife, Mrs. Woodford, came into 
the room leaning on the arm of her hand- 
some half-brother. Captain Warrington, and 
apologized for bringing him by saying that 
he had arrived unexpectedly the night 
before at the Vicarage. 

" I am always glad to see Captain 
Warrington," said Isabel, in her sweet- 
toned voice, as she gave him her hand ; 
and she looked up smilingly into his face 
as she spoke. 

Neither of them said anything about 
the invitation that Isabel had sent Captain 
Warrington. He, in fact, quite understood 
that he was expected not to mention it. 
He admired Lady Hamilton; and Lady 
Hamilton had the good taste, he thought, 
to return his admiration; and he was quite 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 97 

ready, therefore, to keep as many of her 
secrets as she chose to confide to him. 

There were only one or two other people 
expected. A young girl who was going to 
act as bridesmaid, and who was a cousin 
of Mrs. Woodford's, being amongst them. 
Isabel had not chosen to ask her " society " 
friends on this occasion. Hilda Marston 
was very well, she thought, and she was 
glad to do her this kindness ; but of course 
her position was to be considered. Captain 
Warrington was the only exception that 
she made to this rule, and she was very 
intimate with Captain Warrington. If Sir 
George had read all her letters to the 
handsome guardsman, he would have had 
more reason for his angry jealousy than 
for any of those that she had written to 
the late Mr. Hannaway. She had trifled 
with the dead man's feehngs, but she had 
never really cared for him. But she was 
not trifling with Captain Warrington. He 
was too cold and too vain to be trifled 
with. Isabel knew that her power over 

VOL. III. H 



98 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

him was very slight; and this made his 
power. If he had thrown himself virtually 
at her feet, as her husband, Hajrward, and 
Mr. Hannaway, all in turn had done, she 
would have cared very little more about 
him. But Captain Hugh Warrington made 
no ^ign of throwing himself at her feet, or 
at the feet of any woman. He was so 
handsome and so indifferent, that, for the 
first time in her life, Isabel was beginning 
to think she was in iove. 

Presently Sir George joined the assembled 
wading party, and almost at the same 
moment Hayward did so too. Hayward 
looked gloomy enough, and felt gloomy 
enough. All the morning he had been 
playing host to Horace Jervis and Mr. 
Irvine, and the strain had not been 
light. Jervis was so happy that his happi- 
ness jarred severely on Hay ward's nerves. 
He had stayed behind to have a mo- 
ment's breathing time, he told himself; 
and as he crossed the park in the rain 
he looked up at the windows of the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 99 

room that he knew the bride elect occu- 
pied. 

There >vas a "face at the window" as 
he did so — a pale face, a familiar face. 
Hilda was standing there in her bridal 
dress, looking vaguely out at the rain. 
She saw Hayward, and it gave her a 
sudden shock. The room seemed to grow 
dark to her, and her aching heart to 
stand still. Then she felt herself falling, 
and a cold dew breaking out upon her 
brow. 

In the meanwhile Sir George was in- 
quiring for her downstairs. He had 
agreed to give her away at the coming 
ceremony, and it was therefore settled that 
Bhe was to go in the same carriage as he 
^d to the church. 

•"Perhaps she does not like coming 
down alone," he said to Isabel; and then, 
with the stately courtesy that generally 
distinguished him, he left the room for 
the purpose of bringing in the bride. 

As he crossed the hall he saw Isabel's 



100 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

chief lady's maid, Ritson, hurrying down 
the staircase, looking exceedingly alarmed. 

" What is the matter, Ritson ? " he asked. 

*' Oh ! Sir George," answered the woman, 
*'send for a doctor and come upstairs at 
once. My belief is," she added in a half- 
whisper, so that the rest of the servants 
who were standing about might not hear, 
" that Miss Marston is — dead ! " 

" My God ! what do you mean ? " ex- 
claimed Sir George; and he followed the 
trembling woman at once upstairs to Hilda's 
bedroom. 

Hilda was lying on the floor by the 
window. She had fainted, and in faUing 
she had cut her forehead, for a faint stream 
of blood was oozing from it. In her white 
dress, and with her white face, she had a 
ghastly effect, but the moment Sir George 
lifted her in his arms he saw that she 
was not dead. 

" She has fainted," he said to Ritson. 
" Unfasten her dress, open the window, 
and bathe her face. She will come 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 101 

round presently. See, she is beginning to 



move." 



With some deep-drawn sighs Hilda re- 
covered consciousness. Presently she lifted 
herself up, and looked inquiringly] at Sir 
Gteorge and Ritson. 

"You are better now," said Sir George, 
kindly, " but you must not be disturbed 
any more to-day." 

"But the marriage?" said poor Hilda, 

famtly. 

" It must be postponed," said Sir George. 
Then he sent Ritson for some wine; and 
Hilda having at his request swallowed some 
of it, he desired the woman for a few 
moments to leave the room. 

"Miss Marston," said Sir George, as 
Kitson closed the door behind her, address- 
ing Hilda both with courtesy and kindness 
in his manner, "as your host I think I 
have a right to ask you one question. Is 
this sudden illness which has overtaken 
you caused by any mental unhappiness ? " 

The colour that rose to . Hilda's white 



102 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

face at these words told Sir George some- 
thing of the truth, 

" If this marriage is distasteful to your 
feelings/' continued Sir George, *' pause, 
I beseech you, in time. I have noticed 
that you have looked unhappy lately, am) 
if you have been forced or urged to ac- 
cept Mr. Jervis '' 

" No, no," said Hilda, quickly. *' I am 
going to marry him. Say nothing of this. 
Sir George say I fell " 

But as she spoke Isabel, followed by 
Horace Jervis himself, hastily entered the 
room. A rumour had spread downstairs 
that the bride had been taken suddenly ill, 
and this had soon reached the assembled 
quests. Isabel at once hurried upstairs to 
Ln the truth, and Jervfa. ia much agit^ 
tion, had naturally followed her. 

" What is it ? What has happened ? " 
asked Isabel. 

"Miss Marston has fallen and hurt her 
forehead," answered Sir George, gravely. 
*' I think, Mr. Jervis," he added, looking 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 103 

at Jervis, "that all idea of marriage must 
be given up for to-day." 

" What nonsense ! " exclaimed Isabel. 
*' Bitson, get some sticking-plaister. How- 
ever did you happen to do this, Miss 
Marston ? " 

But Hilda made no answer. She was 
looking at Jervis, whose face showed so 
much agitation and pain. 

" Do not be afraid," she said, addressing 
him, and trying to smile. **I shall be all 
right in a few minutes. Our marriage 
need not be delayed," And she held out 
her hand to him. 

Jervis knelt down by the side of the 
couch where Sir George had laid her, as 
Hilda said this. 

"Hilda," he asked, in a half-whispered 
voice, broken with anxiety, "tell me the 
truth. What has caused this, Hilda ? 
Surely no fear about our future happi- 
ness ? " 

"No " answered HUda. "But 

but, Horace," she added, eagerly, " don't 



104 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

let anyone be present. I will be married 
but let no one be there." 

Hilda made this request with earnest 
eager eyes, as well as lips. Both Sir George 
and Lady Hamilton caught her pleading 
tones, and saw her pleading looks, and 
Isabel spoke sharply the next minute to 
Jervis. 

*' What does she say ? " she said. 

"I also must ask Lady Hamilton," 
said Jervis, rising. " ^ilda still wishes 
our marriage to take place, but naturally 
after her accident she hopes that no one 
will be present except ourselves — and, per- 
haps Sir George ? " he added, looking at 
Sir George, inquiringly. 

" But how can such a thing be ? " said 
Isabel imperiously. "These people down 
stairs have been asked to a marriage, are 
waiting to see a marriage, and what 
excuse can be made to them ? It is impos- 
sible ! " 

"Oh! Lady Hamilton," said HUda, 
putting out her hand and taking Isabel's 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 105 

imploringly, "don't ask me to be maxried 
before anyone now. I could not — I could 
not!" And tears began to roll heavily 
down the poor girl's pale cheeks. 

" No excuse need be made to your guests, 
Isabel," said Sir George, speaking to his 
wife in the cold tones of authority which 
he now habitually used to her. "The fact 
of Miss Marston s accident is sufficient. 
The marriage must either be postponed, 

or if you wish it to take place " And 

he paused and looked inquiringly at 
Hilda. 

" Will you only go with us, Sir George ?" 
said Hilda. " Dear Lady Hamilton, please 
let this be so." 

" It shall be so, if it is your wish," 
said Sir George, decisively. 

"Then I wash my hands of the whole 
affitir," said Isabel, indignantly. "I never 
heard of anything so truly absurd." 

"Your conaments are quite unnecessary," 
retorted Sir George. And upon this, with 
a scornful glance and a shrug of her 



106 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

shoulders, Isabel walked haughtily out of 
the room. 

" If you will let me know when I am 
required, I am quite at your service," 
continued Sir George, addressing Jervis, • 
after she was gone. 

The bridegroom looked at the bride. 
Hilda's face was pale and unmistakably 
agitated, and for a moment a sort of chill 
doubt crept into Jervis s heart. 

•* Hilda," he said, again approaching her, 

and taking her cold hand in his, "if 

if ^you hesitate " 

" I do not, Horace," she answered. " Aak 
Ritson to come to me," she continued the 
next minute, and she rose as she said this 
from the couch. " I will bathe my face 
and change my dress, and then, Sir George, 
we can go." 

" I distinctly imderstand that this is your 
wish," said Sir George, looking pointedly 
at Hilda. 

"Yes," she said, more firmly than she 
had yet spoken. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 107 

And what more could Sir George say? 
Nothing; and a few minutes later all 
the arrangements for this strange marriage 
were completed. There is no need to go 
into details. Presently Hilda, pale and 
trembling, went down the stately stair- 
case of Massam, clinging tightly to 
Jervis s arm, and Sir George followed 
them, and the three were then driven to 
the church. 

There Horace Jervis and Hilda Marston 
were married. Sir George explained to 
Mr. Woodford, who was waiting for them, 
the cause of the absence of the wedding 
guests, and the poor Uttle vicar went rather 
nervously through the service in conse- 
quence. But there was no reason. If the 
bride's voice was rather faint, it never fal- 
tered. The momentary weakness which had 
struck her down was gone. She meant to 
do her duty, and the sense of doing it gave 
her strength. 

"O God! help me to do right," she 
prayed in the morning ; and the same prayer, 



108 BK5EATH THE WATE. 

fbofugh unspoken^ rose firom Hilda's heart 
as she knelt before the altar, with her 
hand tightly clasped in that of Horace 
Jervis. 



CHAPTER VII. 

AFTER THE WEDDING. 

A WOMAN in a rage is generally not a very 
pleasant person to encounter, and Isabel 
was in a towering rage when she rejoined 
tb. weddix^ gu^ Ir her inUr^ew in 
Hilda's bedroom with her husband. 

" AUow me to condole with you all," 
she said contemptuously. '^We are not to 
have any wedding — at least, we are not 
allowed to have the privilege of witnessing 
it ! What do you think has happened ? 
The bride has fainted " 

" What T interrupted Hayward sharply, 
and his face grew pale. 

"The bride — ^your friend, Mr. Hayward, 
and mine — a young person, whom as you 



110 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

know, I have loaded with gifts and kind- 
ness, declines to be married before us. 
What do you think of that ? Sir George 
alone is to be honoured by being pre- 
sent !" 

" Is Miss Marston ill ?" asked Hayward, 
with scarcely concealed agitation. *' Surely 
if she is, the marriage ought to be put 
off." 

"She has fainted, or pretended to &.int 
for effect, most likely," continued Isabel, 
still in a rage; ^'^oid she inakes this Ab 
excuse to exclude everyone from being 
present at her wedding." 

"Won't we survive the disappointment?" 
said Captain Hugh Warrington, in his 
languid sarcastic way. " Suppose, Lady 
Hamilton, we have a game of billiards 
instead, and leave the loving young couple 
to enjoy themselves in their own way, in 
the company of Sir George ?" 

Captain Warrington looked with his hand- 
some eyes into Isabel's face as he said this 
and smiled. He was thinking ''what a 



BENEATH THE WAVE. Ill 

temper she has, but how confoundedly good- 
looking !" Isabel smoothed down her ruffled 
plumes as she met the guardsman's glance. 
She saw that he was only amused by her 
anger ; and she did not care to amuse 
Captain Warrington. 

*^ You are right," she said. " It is absurd 
to be angry about such people." 

*' It is always absurd to be angry,'* 
answered Captain Warrington ; " but we are 
occasionally liable to it." 

While this <5onversation was going on, 
Hayward left the room. Never had Isabel 
seemed so xmlovely in his eyes as when 
she had spoken so contemptuously and 
heartlessly of Hilda's illness. He half 
guessed the cause of this sudden attack. 
The pale face at the window had been 
hers, and that face haunted him. 

Presently he saw it again. Wandering 
restlessly about the house after leaving 
Isabel's presence, he was just about to 
cross the hall when he saw Hilda descend- 
ing the staircase on her way to be married. 



112 BESEATH THE WATK. 

She never lifted her head and never saw 
him* She was dinging tigfatlj to the arm 
of Jervis, and closely following them came 
Sir Greorge. Hajward shrank hack wh^i 
he saw them. Bat he stood in the shadow 
and watched Hildas face. It was very 
pale, and her lips were drawn tightly to- 
gether. She wore her hat &r on her face, 
and it hid the mark on her hrow. She was 
dressed in a plain travelling dress, and had 
laid aside her bridal robes, as it had been 
arranged that she and Jervis were to start 
from the church door on their journey, 
and not return to the Park after the cere- 
mony was over. 

Some of the servants were loitering near 
the door where Hayward stood to see the 
bride come down. They had received orders 
from Sir Greorge (through Ritson) not to 
remain in the hall as she did so, as Sir 
George thought it might annoy Hilda to 
be observed, and now Hayward overheard 
one or two of their comments. 

" She looks more like going to a funeral 



BENBATH THE WAVE. 118 

than a wedding/' half-whispered one good- 
looking young housemaid to an older 
woman. 

"Yes," answered the older woman to 
whom the young girl spoke ; " yet, if you 
look in the priest's face, you'll see she's 
got a good man." 

Hayward turned round and looked at 
the w«m. who «ud this, aod hU heort 
echoed the sentiment. ''Yes, she had got 
a good man — God bless her, God bless 
her — ^" he thought, and with a very hot 
and restless heart he turned away. Then 
he remembered Mr. Irvine, and imagining 
that he and the other guests would have 
accompanied Lady Hamilton and Captain 
Warrington, to see the game of billiards 
that he had heard proposed, he proceeded 
to the billiard-room to seek them. As he 
went along the corridor that led to this 
room, he heard the click of the balls, and 
Isabel's low laugh. The door of the room was 
shut, but he opened it, and stood a moment 
in the doorway, unseen by the occupants. 

VOL. III. 1 



114 BENEATH THE WATE. 

No one was in the room bat Lady Ham- 
ilton and Captain Warrington. The j wero 
leaning against the end of the billiard-table^ 
with their cues resting on it, and over one 
of Isabel's jewelled hands Captain Warring- 
ton's was clasped. Hajward could not be 
mistaken. He stood there, and they never 
noticed him. They were talking and laugh- 
ing, and Warrington was looking into Isa- 
bel's face with undisguised and not over 
respectful admiration. Then she looked 
up, and Hayward saw her glance. It was 
enough. That one look effectually cured 
his passion for Isabel He had been weak, 
flattered, fluttering near the flame ; ready 
almost to forgive and forget what he knew 
of her past conduct ; but he never forgave 
or forgot that scene by the billiard table. 
With Solomon's bitter words in his heart 
about a fair woman without discretion, he 
closed the door and went away. What ! he 
had wasted his thoughts, and almost broken 
his heart, about a thing like this? Truly, 
Mrs. Irvine's prophecy, made long ago 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 115 

about Isabel Trevor at Sanda had come 
true. "She is a light woman," that grim 
lady had said, "and some day you men 
will know it;" and Hayward felt that he 
knew it now. 

• • • • • • 

On the evening of the same day our 
friend^ the parson, from Sanda wrote a 
description of Hilda's wedding to his wife. 
He commenced his epistle in this fashion :— 

" My DEAR Wife, — ^You asked me in 
your last to write a detailed account of 
Miss Hilda Marston's wedding, and I now 
hasten to do so. I must confess it was 
by no means an enUvening afiair, and has 
left a feeling of oppression on my mind 
that is far from agreeable. Knowing that 
I can safely confide in your discretion, I 
will impart some observations that I made 
to you, although I feel sure that in 
future you will always boast how superior 
your discernment of character is to my 
own. 



116 BKSKATH THS WATB. 

'^ But to retam to the wedding. To 
begin with, it was a very wet day; to 
go on with, Hayward came down to break- 
fast looking absolutely miserable; and to 
end with, the unaccustomed luxuries that 
I imprudently indulged in during the day 
disagreed with me exceedingly. 

" One person, however, looked perfectly 
happy during the early break&st at Hay- 
ward's, and this was the brid^room. Mr, 
Jervis has a pleasant earnest face, and a 
sweet smile. He seemed quite content 
with the weather, and indeed with every- 
thing. It had been arranged that the 
small wedding party was to meet at the 
Park, and then walk to the church, aud 
about a quarter to ten o'clock Mr. Jervis 
and myself started. Hayward made some 
excuse about not accompanying us, but 
said he would follow. 

"A few minutes after our arrival at the 
Park, Lady Hamilton came into the room 
where we had been ushered. I know that, 
to entirely please you, I should here be 




BENEATH THE WAVE. 117 

able to describe exactly how her ladyship 
was dressed. But I confess my inability 
to do this. However, she was in gay 
attire, and looked so beautiful that no 
mortal man could behold her without 
admiration. Be not jealous, my Martha, 
at this rapturous description, for, alas! I 
must add that your nature and homely 
charms are more to my taste, if the 
exceeding beauty with which Lady Hamil- 
ton is gifted has to be accompanied with 
ihe lightness — I may say indiscretion of 
manner — that characterizes her ladyship. 
Long ago I remember you making some 
disapproving remarks on her conduct, and, 
as I told you in the beginning of this 
letter, I feel sure that had you seen her 
yesterday you would have been full of 
complacency at your own discernment. 
There was a Captain Warrington present 
— a handsome man, with evidently a pro- 
found consciousness of the fact — and with 
this gentleman Lady Hamilton laughed 
and jested in a manner (I thought) highly 



120 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" Again I observed Hayward's face during 
this announcement : pain, anger, and disap- 
poiutment were expressed in every line of 
it. The dear lad was evidently suffering 
deeply, and made a hasty protest against 
ihe marriage taking place if the bride were 
ill. Then he left the room, and during the 
rest of the day I saw him no more. 

" The wedding took place ; the bride and 
bridegroom started on their proposed journey 
from the church door, and about twelve 
o'clock we sat down to a sumptuous wedding 
breakfast, at which, however. Sir Greorge 
Hamilton did not appear. 

" Somehow this breakfast reminded me 
oddly of the 'baked meats that coldly 
furnish forth the funeral feast.' Of foolish 
talking and jesting there was enough, buty 
to my mind, the shadow of coming evil 
was over the whole affair. The ill omens 
in which the ancients believed oppressed 
me, or, perhaps the unaccustomed luxuries 
of which I unwisely partook ! Excuse so 
weak an attempt at merriment as this last 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 121 

allusion, for, in truth, I feel in no merry 
mood. I grieve about Hayward's unhap- 
piness, and I grieve that this letter and 
the news it contains may cause both im- 
happiness and disappointment in the breast 
of our amiable Amelia. But it is better 
that she should know the truth. I feel 
sure that Hayward loveth her not as a 
man loveth the woman he would take 
to his bosom. To your maternal affection 
and judgment I confide the task of break- 
ing this ; and I feel sure that you will 
do so with due discretion. 

"And now for the present, my dear 
Martha, farewell. I hope to return on 
Thursday; and if httle Ned Marston is 
sufficiently recovered after Christmas, Mr. 
Jervis proposed that he should once more 
become my pupil. This is all my news ; 
and with love to Amelia, I remain your 
affectionate husband, 

"Matthew Irvine." 

This letter caused great disappointment 



122 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

to Mrs. Irvine. This grim woman loved 
in her grim way the young man she had 
nursed back^ as it were^ to Ufe, and had 
a strange sort of vicarious maternal feeling 
towards him, which longed for fuller ex- 
pression. The natural consequence of this 
was that she most earnestly desired to 
marry her daughter to Hayward. She, 
however, with all her strange ways, was 
not devoid of common-sense. Much as 
she wished Hayward to love Amelia 
Shadwell, she was by no means sure that 
he did so. Thus we have seen that she 
directed her husband to " sound " (as she 
called it) the ex-tutor on the point ; and 
the Rev. Matthew's letter, therefore, caused 
her considerable annoyance and pain. 

Her heart sank when, about a quarter 
of an hour after she had received and 
read it, she heard the somewhat substan- 
tial feet of AmeUa Shadwell ascending 
the staircase; and a moment or two later 
this robust, rosy young lady hastily en- 
tered the room where she was. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 123 



" You have heard from pa, ma ? " she 
said, very red and breathless. 

" Yes, Amelia Shadwell," replied Mrs. 
Irvine, solemnly. 

** And he's all right, isn't he ? " con- 
tinued Amelia. " And — Mr. Hayward ? '* 

*' Is aU wrong," answered Mrs. Irvine, 
shaking her head, and in her hollow tones. 

" Wrong, ma ? " repeated Amelia, looking 
in an alarmed manner at her mother. 

" Yes, Amelia ShadweU," proceeded Mrs, 
Irvine in her deepest voice. " Hayward is 
aU wrong. Some one that he wanted to 
marry has married some one else ^" 

But here Mrs. Irvine was interrupted 
by a shriek from Amelia. 

'* Wanted to marry ! " cried poor Amelia. 
And the stout rosy girl turned absolutely 
pale. ** No, ma, dear-^ surely no ^" 

"Yes, Amelia Shadwell," said Mrs. 
Irvine; and the grim gaunt woman rose 
and put her arms with some tenderness 
round her daughter. Perhaps she was 
thinking of the days when she had fallen 



124 BEfXATH THM WATK, 

m lofve, too; aod wheBL her faemrt would 
have alinoet bn^Den if the dad^eyed joong 
anate, who had been her hoedMuid now so 
long, had tamed away. At wH eviraitBy die 
diowed some motibeiiy feding' to AmeKa, 
drawing the girl dose to her AsAekoDriSke 
fbnn. 

'^ Tkmt cry," die said, ^ doni, Amelia 
ShadweH Hayward isn't the oniy man 
in the world, and if he was none of them 
are worth half the tears that are shed for 
'on! They are all mortal day, and prime 
toevfl!'' 

'• But 1 thon^t Hayward cared 

for me, ma," sobbed Amelia, " and after 

all the beef tea I made '* 

"Don't grudge the beef tea," said Mrs. 
Irvine, whose heart still hankered after 
HaywanL ''The young man needed it, 
and love neither comes nor goes at one s 
own bidding. I don't blame Hayward, 
Amelia Shadwell, and I don't blame you.** 

''But ^he sent the piano," wept 

Amelia. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 125 

" As a return, no doubt, for the beef 
tea," said Mrs. Irvine, grimly. 

" If I thought so ! " cried Amelia, lifting 
her head indignantly. 

" It would make no difference," continued 
Mrs. Irvine. " The young man meant 
well, and you have no right to be angry 
because he meant nothing more." 

" If I had only known," said Amelia, 
sighing, and beginning to dry her tears. 

" That's just it," said Mrs. Irvine, 
'* women can't ask, and so they are con- 
tinually making fools of themselves. It's 
best to think that a young man means 
nothing until he really asks you to marry 
him." 

Oh ! Mrs. Irvine, Mrs. Irvine ! In the 
days when the soft-hearted, soft-eyed young 
curate went to your father's house, did 
you act on this principle ? The Rev. 
Matthew might have been unwedded, 
and all the little buried Shadwells and 
the substantial Amelia unborn, if you 
had then practised as you now preached. 



126 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

But it is astonishing how the old forget 
the foUies and errors of their youth. The 
wrinMed dowager shudders at the evil 
tales told of the young and fair, though 
she in her day perhaps caused some old 
i^^oman to shake her head and heave a 
sanctunonious sigh. Thus Mrs. Irvine 
quite forgot how she had insisted upon 
marrying Amelia's kindly father. The 
mists of tune had dimmed the memory 
of her girlhood's heart-aches and anxious 
pain. 



CHAPTEK VIII. 

THE DEAD WOMAN's RING. 

Massam was ajlways beautiful. In the 
spring time its sylvan glades and dells, fresh 
with their bright green verdure, seemed the 
haunts for the fabled naiads and driads of 
old. In the summer time the ghnting sun- 
beams stole through the long green arcades 
of foliage, and fell dancing on the grass 
below, and on the golden gorse, and the 
wild hill-sides decked with ferns. Then 
came the autumn when the trees changed 
their hues, and the bushes and twining 
brambles bowed their fruit-laden heads. 
But before this season arrived, during the 
first year of Isabel's marriage, Massam was 
forsaken by its owners. 



128 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

She had grown weary of it, aad Sir 
George was weary of it. Not quite a year 
ago, when his love was young, he had 
wandered with Isabel along the winding 
tracts, carpeted with their mossy turf, 
which led through the beautiful woods of 
Massam. 

Then he had listened to her flattering 
lowspoken words, fascinated yet half afraid. 
Now he walked with her no more. He 
had won his heart's desire, and it had 
turned to gall and bitterness. The beauty 
that had been a snare to him had been a 
snare to others also, and had brought anger, 
distrust, and jealousy into his home. 

He had been a gloomy man before his 
marriage with Isabel, but he was more 
gloomy now. He was often harsh and 
bitter to her; and shortly after the birth 
of her child, and Hilda Marston's marriage, 
Isabel insisted that a change of air was 
absolutely necessary for her health. 

In this her doctor coincided — ^in fact, 
with pretty pleading words Isabel had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 129 

asked him to coincide. Lady Hamilton 
required change, the great man from town 
told Su* George ; and aa the season was now 
over in town, he recommended Brighton. 

A ^mished house was therefore taken at 
this watering place. It was taken for 
August ; and on the 1st of August Isabel 
and her infant son, and her suite of ser- 
vants, left Massam, and arrived safely at 
the comfortable house which had been 
prepared for them. 

Sir George did not go. He went to 
Scotland, intending to return to Massam on 
the commencement of partridge shooting; 
and he told Isabel before they parted that 
it would be well if she also came back at 
the same time- 
There was one tie still between Isabel 
and her husband, and this was their little 
son. Many a time Sir George would go 
up to the nursery, when no one but the 
nurses guessed he did so, and stand watch- 
ing the cooing babe. He was a lovely child, 
*'the young heir," as the nurses so proudly 

VOL. III. K 



130 BSMEATH THS WAYS. 

called him. But Sir Greoige said nothing 
about his heirship. He would stand looking 
ai the baby boy, and then turn away with 
a sigh. But he was fond of the sturdy 
little fellow that would grasp his finger 
with a tiny clasp. Isabel also was rather 
proud if not fond of the child, and it was 
a link between them. " For the boy's sake 
I wiU bear with her if I can," thought Sir 
George. "For little Reggy's sake I will 
try to be civil," decided Isabel. 

The baby had been called Reginald, after 
Isabel's father, Mr. Trevor. Isabel had 
proposed to call him after his own father; 
but Sir George had requested — ^nay, com- 
manded — ^that this should not be. So his 
grandfather's name was given to him; 
and the old squire at Sanda felt very 
proud when he heard that it was to 
be so. 

He sent Master Reginald a gorgeous 
gold drinking cup as a christening present, 
and a pompous letter of good wishes to 
his daughter on the same occasion. He 



BBNEATH THE WAVB. 13 1 

was not asked to the christening ; for Isabel 
had taken a great dislike to her father'3 
young wife, and, of course, she could not 
invite her father without her. But she 
penned a civil letter back to the squire. 
She hoped that some day he would come 
to see her Uttle Reggy, she wrote, and 
told him that he had no reason to be 
ashamed of his grandson. 

Yet she felt anything but pleased when, 
on her arrival at Brighton, she found her 
father, his wife, and Patty Featherstone^ 
were also staying there. She had intended 
to amuse herself, and she felt very much 
afraid that they would be in the way. 
They called upon her formally the day 
after her arrival, and the squire was appa- 
rently much delighted with his little 
grandson. 

"I trust that we shall often see you^ 
Isabel, as you are here," said the squire, 
« he ki^ hi. daughter. 

" Thank you, papa," repUed Isabel ; but 
she mentally resolved at the same time 



132 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

that she would see as little as possible of 
the family party. 

Yet she had no lust cause of angfer 
.gau^ her father ^e. Lucinda did L 
duty to the old man, and tried to make 
him happy. If she were kind to her own 
people also, was she to blame ? Isabel, 
at all events, thought so ; and she accord- 
ingly behaved very coldly to Patty Feather- 
stone during this first visit. 

When people like, they can very easily 
avoid even their nearest relations. Isabel 
wished to avoid **those Featherstone girls," 
as she still called Patty and Lucinda; and 
Patty and Lucinda were quite sharp 
enough to see that this was the case. 

Naturally they were annoyed, and natu- 
rally Mr. Trevor was annoyed. Then Isabel 
began to be talked about. Her great 
beauty, her husband's wealth, and her own 
careless disregard of appearances, were 
sufficient grounds for this, if there was 
nothing else. But, unfortunately, there was 
something else. Captain Warrington — a man 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 133 

well known at Brighton — ^remaxkable alike 
for his good looks and his money, was con- 
stantly to be seen in the beautifiil Lady 
Hamilton's train. This was first whispered 
to Mrs. Trevor, her father's yomig wife; 
and then when Lucinda was never to be 
seen in pubUc with her lovely daughter-in- 
law, it was openly commented on. 

Whispers pass on in a mysterious way^ 
and the whispers about Lady Hamilton 
were n^ Win reaching Mi«un. Hay- 
ward heard them from reckless Antony 
Featherstone, who laughed, and had his 
coarse joke at Sir George's expense on 
the occasion. As we know, Isabel's folly 
was now no news to Hayward. But he 
was angry, and said some sharp words to 
Mr. Featherstone, for the sake of Sir 
George. 

"He should look better after her," said 
reckless Antony; and then he went away 
to spread the tale, and have his joke and 
laugh again. 

When Lucinda first told her husband 



1$4 RBKATH THE WATS. 

that Isabel was talked of in BiightoA 
about Captam Wsnington^ the Squire of 
Sanda was p^ecdy horrified. His daugh- 
ter to be indiscreet in her conduct I — it 
was impoosible, he argued. Then, when 
with his own eyes he saw how careless 
and defiant Isabel was of appearances, be 
at once determined to speak to her on the 
subject. He did so, and Isabel received 
his advice with scornful contempt. 

Did your youthful Lu," she said, 
send you on this errand? If so, my 
dear father, I may as well tell you that 
you are wasting your time." 

" Isabel," said the squire, trembling 
partly with emotion and partly with anger, 
''have you lost all the respect that is due 
to me as your parent?" 

**You have no right to interfere with 
me," answered Isabel defiantly. 

*'For your dead mothers sake — for your 
husband's sake," urged the squire, "surely 
you will never allow your name to be 
bandied about with this young man's?" 



4t 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 135 

"What do I owe my husband?" an- 
swered Isabel, passionately. " He treats 
me with utter contempt and indiflference." 

"Then it is your own fault," retorted 
Mr. Trevor. "When Sir George married 
you, he was, I am sure, deeply attached 
to you." 

"It did not last, then," said Isabel; and 
in this reckless spirit she absolutely re- 
jected her fathers advice. 

"Then I shall speak to your husband,* 
said the squire, rising angrily to leave ; 
and he actually contemplated writing Sir 
George on the subject; but his wife per- 
suaded him not to do so. 

" She will not stay long," said Lucinda, 
good-naturedly. "Don't make any fiirther 
breach between them, if you can possibly 
help it. Foolish as Isabel is, I cannot 
believe that she will allow her vanity to 
carry her too far." 

But though her father gave Sir Georgse 
no hint of Isabel's indiscretion^ Antcmy 
Featherstone was not ao reticent. 



136 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

''You should look after that handsome 
wife of yours, Sir Greorge," he said in his 
careless reckless way, a few days after 
Sir Gteorge returned from Scotland. " I 
hear she's turning the heads of half the 
young fellows in Brighton, and that good- 
looking guardsman's — ^the parson's relation 
— ^among the number." 

Sir George gave no reply to this im- 
pertmence. He looked with his cold 
haughty gaze at Mr. Featherstone's flushed 
red face, and then, without a word, he 
turned away. But this careless speech 
left its mark; and Sir George acted upon 
it. He wrote, in fact, at once to Isabel, 
and requested her immediately to return. 

She repUed civiUy to this letter. She 
would like to stay a week longer, the sea 
air was doing the baby so much good — 
and so on. But Sir George was not to 
be beguiled. He started for Brighton on 
the morning that he received his wife's 
answer to his letter, and, to Isabel's sur 
prise and consternation, arrived there the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 137 

same evemng, when Isabel was dressing 
to go to a concert at the Aquarium. 

"I have come to take you home," he 
said, after coldly saluting her. 

" But why ? '* said Isabel. " Reggy is 
so well here and as papa is here " 

"Have you seen much of your father?" 
asked Sir George; and Isabel slightly 
coloured at the question. 

"Not so much, of course," she answered, 
"as I would have done if the Feather- 
stones had not been with him." 

" If you mean your father's wife, I hear 
she makes him a most excellent one," said 
Sir George. 

"Of course," said Isabel, throwing back 
her head, "you are sure to say every- 
thing that will be disagreeable to me." 

But Sir George made no answer to this 
petulant reply. His eyes by accident had 
fallen on Isabel's rings, which were lying 
on a table near, where she had carelessly 
thrown them when she had commenced 
dressing for the concert. There were some 



138 BEKEATH THE WAYE. 

half-dozen of them, and they were aU 
diamond ones. It was, indeed, one of 
Isabel's last fancies to wear nothing but 
diamonds, and among the sparkling dr- 
clets Sir Greorge's eyes were fixed intently 
upon one. 

It was the great heavy diamond hoop 
that had been on the dead woman s hand 
whose body had been brought to shore 
by Hayward at Sanda. Isabel had kept 
tL ri^ agai,.* her feWs ^es, but 
she had never worn it at Massam. She 
was afraid, in fact, that Sir Greorge would 
not allow her to retain it if he knew 
where it came from. At Brighton, how- 
ever, she had constantly worn it. It was 
indeed a beautiful ring, remarkable for the 
size of the brilliant stones that it con- 
tained, and for the inscription on the inner 
rim, which, under the circumstances, had 
seemed so sad to Hilda Marston. 

Suddenly — ^before Isabel had noticed that 
his attention was attracted by it — Sir 
G^rge lifted this ring in his hand, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 139 

the next moment, in a voice sharpened by 
some strange agony, he asked : 

" Isabel, where did you get this ring ? " 

She looked up at this, and when she saw 
which ring it was, she sUghtly frowned. 

" I don't know," she said, with affected 
carelessness; "at a jeweller's, I suppose." 

" What jeweller's ? " asked Sir George^ 
in the same strange voice ; and he ner- 
vously turned the ring, and read the 
words engraved on the inner rim as he 
spoke, " To my beloved" 

He read these words, but not aloud; 
and then with something between a sob 
and cry, he sprang forward and grasped 
Isabel's hand. 

"TeU me," he said, "for God's sake, 
tell me, Isabel, where did you get this 
ring ? " 

His agitation was unmistakable, his face 
almost convulsed, and a sudden suspicion 
at once entered Isabel's mind. 

" Why do you want to know ? " she said, 
ferying to free her hand. "Did you give 



140 BBSHATH THB WATS. 

it to gome bdoTed <Hie, thai? Is it a 
soavenir of some lost love?* 

She spoke these words half taiintii^;ty, 
and with a coise Sir Greoige dropped her 
hand. 

''W<»naii,'' he said fiuang her, ''answo- 
me. Where, and b j what means, did yoa 
gain possession of this ring ? " 

'' It was taken from a dead woman's 
hand," imswered Isabel, defiantlj. ''And 
what, may I ask, was the dead woman to 
you?'' 

At this moment Isabel's maid, Bitson, 
who did not know that Sir Geoige had 
arrived, entered the room, and withoat 
seeing him, addressed Isabel : 

" My lady," she said, " Captain War- 
rington is here " Then she paused, for 

she suddenly had perceived that Sir Geoige 
was present. 

" I am ready," said Isabel, and she went 
to the table and put on her other rings, 
looking defiantly at Sir George the while. 
*' Where is my cloak?" she continued. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 141 

speaking to Kitson ; and then, as her maid 
placed it on her shoulders., she once more 
addressed her husband. 

" I am going to a concert at the Aqua- 
rium," she said; ''will you go? Captain 
Warrington is here, and his sister, Mrs. 
Woodford. I am going with them." 

*'You can go," answered Sir George, in 
a low fierce tone, after a moment's hesita- 
tion; and Isabel, with a glance at her 
maid to follow her, drew her cloak around 
her, and quitted the room. 

"Gret him out of the room as quickly 
as possible," she whispered to Ritson, as 
soon as they were on the staircase. And 
the maid, after seeing her lady down- 
stairs, where she was joined by Captain 
"Warrington, returned to the dressing-room, 
where Sir George was still standing. 

" Ritson," he said, speaking to her harshly 
and sternly, " do you know anything about 
this ring?" And he held the diamond 
hoop towards her as he spoke. 

" Nothing, Sir George," answered Ritson^ 



142 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

positively and truthfully. There were 
other rings that Isabel wore that Kitson 
did know something of, but not of this. 
Isabel, in fact, had never confided to her 
maid how this ring had come into her 
possession. 

"Do you know how long she has had 
it?" asked Sir George, in the same stern 
voice. 

** Ever since I have been with my 
lady," said Ritson; "but she never wore 
it until lately. I have seen it, however, 
frequently in her jewel-case at Massam." 

" That will do," said Sir George. " Give 
me your lady's keys, and then leave the 
room." 

"But, Sir George " hesitated the 

confidential maid. 

" I insist upon your obeying me," said 
Sir George. "Give me the keys." 

"I — I haven't them with me," mur- 
mured Ritson, tremblingly. 

"Then bring me a hammer and a file," 
said Sir George ; and the frightened woman 



BENEATH THE WAYE. 143 

left the room^ and as she went down 
stairs she decided to send a messenger to 
recall her lady. 

In the meanwhile Sir Greorge was look- 
ing around at Isabel's possessions. He 
would learn how she got this ring, he 
determined. There must be some clue in 
her desk, or in the locked drawers of her 
toilet table; and as his heart was wrung 
with great agony and doubt, he made up 
his mind at once to search for it. 

Ritson did not return with the keys, 
but Sir George was a strong man, and 
slight locks are easily broken. He waited 
a moment or two for the lady's maid, and 
then rang the room bell violently, and in 
a minute or so the butler (who had 
accompanied Isabel from Massam) answered 
the sunmions. 

It was known downstairs by this time 
that something had happened. Kitson, 
with scared looks, had herself hurried out 
to go to the concert to seek her lady, 
and the butler was, therefore, half pre- 



144 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

pared for the stem expression that his 
master wore when he answered the dressing- 
room bell. 

''Where is Ritson?" asked Sir George. 
" Why has she not brought me the keys 
I ordered her to bring?" 

" Kitson has just gone out, Sir George," 
repUed the butler. 

" Then bring me at once a hammer and 
a ffle." 

This order the butler obeyed, and stood 
listening outside the door of the dressing- 
room, while the crash of wood-work and the 
wrenching open of locks was heard from 
within. The man stood with bated breath. 
He knew that probably some* terrible dis- 
covery would follow this forcible opening of 
Lady Hamilton's locked repositories. Her 
servants had watched and commented upon 
her conduct now for long. These polite, re- 
spectful, household spies knew now, there- 
fore, that a crisis had come. The butler 
heard the wrenching of the locks, and then 
went down and told his fellows what was 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 145 

going on upstairs. He told them at least 
that Sir George was breaking open my 
lady's locks; but he could not tell them of 
all the dark passions that were raging in 
Sir George's breast as he did so. 

With the hammer and file in his hands, 
and with his black brows knitted and his 
forehead wet with dew, Sir George stood. 
He had first forced open the top drawer 
of Lady Hamilton's dressing-table. In 
this, lying on a confused collection of 
female vanities, he found a short open 
note. Sir George took it up and read 
it, and then, with a muttered execration, 
dashed it on the floor. 

Bnt this note was one of many. They 
were all written in one handwriting, aud 
as Sir George read them, there was no 
longer any doubt in his mind of his wife's 
guilt. He had known before that she 
was a base and pequred woman, but he 
knew now that she had forfeited all right 
to the shelter of his roof 

He took out the letters one by one. 

VOL. III. L 



r 



146 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Then, with a bitter curse, he laid them 
on a table near, and went on with his 
search. He was not seeking evidence of 
his wife's sin now. He was seeking for 
what he had remained there to seek — 
some clue as to how Isabel had become 
possessed of the dead woman's ring. 

But he sought in vain. Among all her 
letters, amongst all her secrets, there was 
not one word to unravel this one. Yet 
Sir George could not be mistaken in the 
ring. This ring had been in his hands 
before. It had been given as a token of 
a love long dead. It had come from be- 
neath the wave as an avenging sign. It 
was a symbol of his own guilt and sin ; 
and in seeking for the knowledge of how 
Isabel had become possessed of it, he 
had learned that his wife was no better 
than a castaway ! 

The room was all in confusion. He had 
flung the contents of her desk, her trunks, 
and her drawers carelessly aside as he 
searched them. Her jewels, her love- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 147 

letters, her lover's gifts, all were strewn 
around, when suddenly he heard a light 
and faltering step approach the door. 

Then the handle slowly turned, and, 
pale and trembling, Isabel appeared on 
the threshold. 

She grew more afraid when she saw 
him. The fierce dark light in his eyes, 
and the concentrated passion of his expres- 
sion, filled her heart with dread. 

" Come here," he said, in a savage 
undertone, looking at her; but she shrank 
back. 

"Don't be afraid, I'U not murder you,"' 
he continued, in the same passion-stifled 
voice. " Come here ; I want you to 
answer one question before I see your 
face no more ! " 

Then Isabel approached him, and fell 
grovellingly on her knees. She saw it 
was all discovered. Her sin, her folly, 
her falseness, were all known now; but 
she thought she might move him for the 
child's sake. 



148 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" For Reggy s sake," she said, with half 
a sob, looking up into his stern, pale 
face, "for the boy's sake, don't turn me 
away ! " 

"He will be better with no mother," 
answered Sir George in a hoarse voice. 

" Don't say thai ^" she urged ; but 

Sir Oeorge stopped her with an imperative 
gesti re. 

" Tell me," he said, " if your fialse lips 
can speak the truth — ^tell me, where did 
you get this ring ? " 

"At Sanda," said Isabel, who was too 
much terrified to refuse to answer. "A 
woman's body was brought on shore there 
by Mr. Hayward, and she had on several 
rings. That was one of them. Papa got 
them to take care of, as lord of the manor, 
and I asked him to allow me to wear 
that one. This is the truth." 

"At Sandal" murmured Sir George, as 
if he were thinking aloud. "At Sanda — 
truly my sin has found me out 1 " 

" What was this woman to you ? " asked 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 149 

Isabel^ gaining now a little courage and 
rising. 

" Not faithless like you, at least ! " an- 
swered Sir George, again looking at her 
with withering scorn. " But it is all 
over," he continued, " my roof shall shelter 
you no more, and the name that you have 
dishonoured shall be taken from you." 

"Be it so, then," said Isabel, drawing 
herself up to her full height, and facing 
him. ''I am not a woman to ask a man 
to forgive me twice." And with these 
last words she turned away, and went 
out from her husband's presence. 



CHAPTEE IX. 

NEMESIS. 

A HEAVY thunderstorm broke over Massam 
the day after this dark and miserable 
meeting between Sir George and Lady 
Hamilton took place. 

In the midst of it, amid the bUnding 
rain and the fierce flashes of forked Hght- 
ning, Sir George, pale, travel-stained, and 
visibly disturbed, rode up to the entrance 
of Combe Lodge, and asked to see Hay- 
ward. 

He was at home, and at once went to 
meet Sir George ; holding out his hand 
and looking at him in great surprise. 

" Sir George I " he said, leading the way 
into the library, " when did you return ? " 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 151 

" Just now," answered Sir George. " I 
came to you at once." 

" And on such a day ! " said Hayward. 

''It is a fitting day," replied Sir George, 
gloomily, *'for the tale I have to tell. 
Hayward," he adddd the next moment, 
" why — did you never tell me — of this 
unhappy woman — whose body you I'escUed 
from the sea ?" 

Sir George's looks, his unmistakable agi- 
tation, his broken and passionate accents, 
all alarmed Hayward, and filled him with 
a vague sense of coming ill. 

*' What has happened T asked Hayward. 
" If you mean the poor woman whose 
body was washed near to the shore at 
Sanda " 

"Yes," said Sir George, excitedly, as 
Hayward hesitated ; " I mean the woman 
whose dead body was cast up from beneath 
the wave as a witness against me. What 
do you think I am, Hayward," he con- 
tinued, pacing the room with rapid steps. 
"ShaU I teU you? This hand," he went 



152 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

on darkly, holding out his right hand, 
" sent that woman to her doom ! " 

" My God ! " exclaimed Hayward. 

" Listen," continued Sir George, passion- 
ately, *' it is a tale of shame and pain f 
I have come to confess to you. The one 
man whose friendship and r^ I have 
sought will turn from me with shrinking 
abhorrence to-day ! " 

"That can never bel" said Hayward, 
warmly, advancing arid holding out his 
hand to Sir George. " Whatever you have 
done, nothing will change my feelings to 
you now." 

This assurance seemed a sort of conso- 
lation to Sir George's miserable heart. 
He took Hayward's hand. He looked 
with his dark sunken eyes yearningly into 
the young man s face. 

" I — ^tried," he said in a broken voice, 
"tried to do right. My mad passions 
mastered me — not meaningly did I strike 
the fatal blow." 

Then God, who judges not as men 



u 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 153 

judge," said Hayward, *' knows it. Dear 
Sir George," he continued, *' I earnestly 
entreat you to take some consolation from 
this thought in this unhappy hour." 

For a moment or two Sir George did 
not speak after this appeal ; and then, with 
more composure of manner than he had 
hitherto evinced, he once more looked up 
and addressed Hayward. 

** I will tell you Hie tale," he said, 
*Hhe tale of a wrecked life. To do this 
I must go back to the time when I was 
a young man of some seven or eight and 
twenty, for until then things had all gone 
fairly smooth with me. I had a good 
mother, and was fond of her, and she 
fried all she could to make my life happy. 
But about this age I took a restless fit. 
I grew weary and somewhat jaded of the 
easy and luxurious routine in which I spent 
my days. I wished for change, and I 
determined to make a lengthened tour 
over Europe. I did this, wandering from 
country to country, and about six months 



154 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

after I left home I found myself in 
Spain. It is a wretched story, remem- 
ber, Hayward, that I have to tell you — 
wretched in the beginning — more wretched 
in the end ! " 

"Yes, I understand," said Hayward, 
as Sir George paused. 

" It was at Seville, then," continued 
Sir George, "that I formed the unhappy 
connection that blighted and finally ruined 
my life. In the house in which I was 
staying there was a young Spanish girl, 
beautiful in the dark and passionate beauty 
of her race, and an unfortunate attachment 
sprang up between us. She was the niece 
of the proprietor of the house I was in, 
and for some weeks I was constantly 
thrown with her. She was ignorant, 
and impetuous, and I was selfish and un- 
thinking. Her low birth made her no 
fitting mate for me, and in an evil hour 
I asked Catalina Mendoza to leave her 
home. Hayward, from that day I was 
a hampered and unhappy man. The poor 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 155 

girl reproached me, and my conscience 
reproached me, and daily association with 
an uneducated and narrow-minded woman 
quickly wore away the feelings that her 
beauty had excited in my heart." 

*' I can easily believe that," said Hay- 
ward. 

" Yet I tried not to show this," said Sir 
George. " We lived together year after 
year, and travelled from city to city, and 
I tried — so heaven help me ! — to make 
her life as happy as I could. But she 
was always urging me to marry her, and 
this, for my mother s sake — for my pride's 
sake, perhaps — I refused to do. At last 
she told me she was about to become 
a mother, and on her knees implored me 
not to let our innocent child be bom 
with a brand upon its name. Then I 
did for the unborn babe what I would 
not do for the mother — I married her, 
and our child was bom after the cere- 
mony." 

" What ! " exclaimed Hayward quickly. 



156 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

^'then you have an elder legitimate child 
to Eeggy ? " 

" Yes, I drowned the voice of conscience 
for a wanton ! " answered Sir George, 
bitterly. " Call her by no other name, 
for what is she ? Look at these letters — 
read the evidence of a vile woman's 
shame." 

As Sir George said these last words he 
placed in Hayward's hands the letters he 
had taken from Isabel's locked drawers on 
the previous day. Hayward opened one, 
glanced at the signature, and placed the 
packet on a table near. 

*' I understand," he said. '' These are 
letters that have been addressed by Cap- 
tain Warrington to Lady Hamilton ? " 

" Yes ! " said Sir George, with passionate 
emphasis. ''For this false woman's sake 
I hid away the child that is the legal heir 
to Massam 1 But I have not told you all 
— I have not told you of the dark deed 
that made me free to marry Isabel Trevor | 
I have not told you how the ring — ^the 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 157 

pledge of a love long dead — was cast up 
from beneatli the wave to me in ven- 
geance. Hayward, ttie hand of God has 
smitten me — the dead woman's ring has 
appeared as a witness against me ! " 

*'And this unhappy woman/' said Hay- 
ward, as Sir George paused, utterly over- 
come with emotion, "that I swam out, and 
brought to shore at Sanda, was your " 

"She was my wife," said Sir George^ 
darkly and gloomily; "the low-bom wife 
of whom I was ashamed, and of whom I 
had wearied long ago ! Unhappy she was 
to bear that name — unhappy indeed to be 
wedded to a man who loved her not, and 
whose thoughts and feelings were utterly 
dissimilar to her own. It was a wretched 
marriage. As soon as she found she had 
any legal claim upon me, she ceased, or 
appeared to cease, to have any regard 
for me. We quarrelled constantly, and a 
vile habit that she had learnt of taking 
too much wine added to my aversion and 
disgust. For five long years we were 



158 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

married, and during all these, and during 
thQ five years which preceded them, I 
never returned to England. I could not 
bear to tell my mother my secret. I 
could not bring a woman who was not 
fit to do so, to share her home, and so I 
remained away. At last my poor mother 
died, and I was almost compelled to return. 
But I did not mean to do so for long. I 
requested Hannaway to purchase me a 
yacht — ^the ill-fated Endymion — ^you under- 
stand now, do you not ? I am drawing 
near the end of my miserable tale." 

*' And this yacht was lost at Sanda ? " 
asked Hayward. 

"Yes. We sailed from Havre, and 
were cruising about the Scottish coast, 
when one night — God ! I cannot tell 
it — I cannot tell it ! " and Sir George 
paused, and covered his face with his 
hands, and groaned aloud. 

" Do not do so, then, dear Sir George," 
urged Hayward. " Spare yourself this 
terrible pain." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 159 

*'No, I will go on," said Sir George, 
in a broken and hollow voice. " I will 
tell you how, in a moment of mad pas- 
sion, I struck the woman I had sworn 
to love and cherish ! It was at night, as 
I have said," he continued, struggling with 
his bitter emotion, ** a moonlight night, 
and she was sitting carelessly on the bul- 
wark of the vessel, taunting me, as usual, 
with my meanness and cowardice in not 
taking her to my English home. We got 
to high words. In a moment — ^unthink- 
ingly, passionately — I struck her a blow; 
and the next, O God ! God ! she reeled 
over, and fell — ^before I could put out my 
hand to save her — ^into the sea ! " 

'' O, Sir George ! " said Hayward, deeply 
moved. 

'* We stopped the yacht," went on Sir 
George in stifled accents. '* The boats were 
got out, and hour after hour we lingered 
near the fatal spot. But she was gone ! 
As she fell overboard she gave a cry. 
That weird death cry was heard by the 



160 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

men. I saw tliis in their faces — I saw 
them muttering and whispering together — - 
and I knew they suspected, if they were 
not sure of, the truth. This went on for 
days. 1 was afraid to go into port, lest 
they should denounce me as a murderer; 
afraid to ask them what they knew. Then 
came the storm. Amid that raging tem- 
pest their tongues were loosed. As the 
ship heeled over, and the end came, I 
heard them reviling and cursing me! 
* This is for sailing with a murderer I ' 
one man cried as the ship went down. 
Hayward, that dead man's face came back 
to me ! I was called upon to identify at 
the inquest the very man whose last words 
and looks of hate I had heard and 
seen." 

" How terrible ! how terrible ! " cried 
Hayward. 

"You know the rest now," continued 
Sir George, after pausing for a moment 
or two, when he appeared totally unable 
to proceed. "You know how I remained 



BENEATH THE WAVE, 161 

at Sanda after the wreck, and how the 
fatal beaaty of Isabel Trevor snared me^ 
as it had snared you ! Truly and deeply 
I loved her 1 No other woman had ever 
been to me what she was, and yet I 
struggled with my feelings— telling myself 
that I had no right to form new ties — 
and that the unhappy Catalina's child was 
the legal successor to my property and my 
name. But I was rich," added Sir George, 
with a bitter ring in his deep voice, " I 
was worth winning, and she knew her 
power ! It ended in my acting with dis- 
honest cowardice. I resolved for her sake 
to suppress my legitimate heir, and rear 
him as if he were illegitimate. There was 
but one person in England who half knew, 
half guessed, the secret of my first mar- 
riage. This was Hannaway. But he was 
a man who meddled little with things that 
did not concern him; and though he knew 
of my connection with Catalina, and of 
the child's birth, he was not, I think, sure 
of the marriage. But mark how mysteri- 

VOL. III. M 



162 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

ously my sins have found me out. When 
Hannaway's death happened, I hurried to 
his house, to secure the secret of the 
child's existence from prying eyes. He had 
sent money to the person the boy was 
with from time to time, and I knew the 
receipts would be among his papers. In 
searching for these I learnt that she for 
whom I had done all this was utterly 
unworthy of my love ! Until I read her 
letters to Hannaway, I had loved Isabel 
— ^yes, loved her too well ! These letters 
turned my heart to gall. She had never 
loved me — ^had jibed and jested about me 
from the very first, to this man who was 
almost a stranger to her. Truly, from that 
day the iron entered into my soul. The 
remorse that has always pursued me seems 
now greater than I can bear." 

"Do not say so," said Hayward earn- 
estly. " It was a terrible misfortune, but 
the fatal blow was an unintentional one." 

"Yes," answered Sir George, gloomily; 
"but many and many a time before I 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 163 

had wished that she were dead, and I 
was free. But now — could I recall her 
back to life — I would die a thousand 
deaths to have the power to do so !" 

As Sir George said this, he sank back 
on a chair, completely overcome. The 
storm was still raging outside, and the 
lurid light made the whole scene more 
impressive and tragic. The conscience- 
stricken man, whose wealth was nothing 
to him, whose love had turned to hate^ 
and whose sin had found him out, seemed 
utterly overwhelmed and broken down. 
In vain Hayward tried to comfort him. 
What, indeed, could he say? Nothing, 
as Sir George truly told him ; for in Sir 
George's heart there was the bitterness 
of death! 



CHAPTER X. 

A SOANDAL. 

On the night when Isabel left her hus- 
band's presence, after all her crooked ways, 
all her folly, and all her sin had come 
to light, she hastily summoned her maid 
Ritson, and after writing a few pencilled 
lines, placed them in the woman's hand. 

" Take these," she said, " to Captain 
Warrington; he is waiting outside. Tell 
him to get a cab, and I will join hinn at 
once." 

Then the woman spoke up tremblingly 
and eagerly, " Oh, my lady," she said, 
"don't go. Think a moment what you are 
throwing away. Go to your father's ; and 
in the morning, perhaps, Sir George " 



BEHBATH THE WAVE. 165 

'^ No/' said Isabel^ passionately^ as Bitson 
paused; ''do you think I would go there, 
and whme and beg for protection from 
Lucinda Featherstone ? No/' she repeated, 
''he has done it, I will not go back — I 
will not go back!" 

**Por Reggy's sake, for your little 
boy's sake!" urged the woman; and for 
a moment a more womanly look than the 
hard and defiant one which Isabel's face 
wore passed over it. 

She paused. The God-given, motherly 
instinct, which in her cold heart was so 
sli^t, so overgrown, and overshadowed by 
other feelings, for a moment asserted its 
sway. Then came back darker thoughts, 
the angry passions ; and the child's little 
tender touch was forgotten. 

"It is too late," she said. ''Take this 
note — ^tell him I shall come. And, Eitson, 
you stay behind and pack the jewels — 
I am not going, at least, to leave them." 
And Isabel gave a little bitter and de- 
fiimt laugh. 



166 BKNEATH THE WAYS. 

So she threw it all away ! Her good 
Dame, her young child's love, the world's 
respect and honour, and higher and hoUer 
blessings still, of which Isabel had never 
thought. And for what? Let us, oh 
reader, for a moment foUow Bitson's foot- 
steps, and see how Isabel's decision was 
received by the man for whom she had 
sacrificed so much. 

The lamplights were shining on Captain 
Warrington's handsome face, who was 
pacmg backwards and forwards in the 
streets below as Kitson approached him. 
But there was a frown on that handsome 
face. Captain Warrington hated scenes 
and exposures; and though he walked not 
in the strait and narrow way, he had 
never made himself very conspicuous in 
the broad one. He was, therefore, an- 
noyed and disconcerted. 

"I hope she's not going to get me into 
any confounded trouble," he was thinking; 
and as the thought passed through his 
mind ; he saw Kitson approaching him. . 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 167 

He knew this woman well. She had 
carried his notes and his love-letters— the 
notes and the love-letters were all now 
lying open before Sir George — and he 
therefore advanced eagerly to meet her. 
"Well," he said, "has there been a row?" 

The woman's answer was to place Isa- 
bel's note in his hand, and as he read the 
few pencilled lines by the lamplight that 
she had sent him, a curse broke from his 
lips. 

" What 1 " he cried with passionate anger ; 
and then, with bitten Ups and knitted 
brow, he stood silent to hear the woman's 
tale — the tale that left him burdened 
with a woman for whom he had no love 
and no respect. 

The next day there was a scandal in 
Brighton. The beautiful Lady Hamilton 
had eloped, and everyone was eager to 
tell his or her neighbour the news. Then 
the scandal spread to town, and crept into 
the "society" papers, and was talked of 
and laughed about in the Clubs. Captain 



168 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hugh Warrington was a man well known, 
and Lady Hamilton was a beauty; and 
so the affair made quite a sensation. By- 
and-by the story came to Yorkshire, and 
tongues were loosened, and tales were told 
that had only been whispered or suspected 
before. The dead lawyer, Mr. Hannaway, 
lying in his untimely grave, once more 
was talked of and commented on. This 
person had seen that, another something 
else. Lady Hamilton had flung away her 
feir fame, and everyone now was ready to 
help to blacken it. 

In the meanwhile, at the Park, the 
gloomy master passed his miserable days. 
It seemed now to Sir George (as he had 
told Hayward) that the hand of God had 
smitten him. A settled and profound 
melancholy oppressed him. The remorse 
that he had never succeeded in driving 
from his mind, even during his passionate 
infatuation for Isabel Trevor, now returned 
with ten-fold force. He was for ever 
haunted by his hidden crime. The woman 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 169 

who had loved him — ^the ignorant^ once 
beautiful; Spanish woman — was now bit- 
terly revenged 1 

But he did all he could now to repair 
his wrong. He went up to town with 
Havward a few days after he had told 
binThiB dark sto.y.'Ld ,aw hi» la^er. 
and gave directions for a new will. At 
the same time he made a formal declara- 
tion of his first marriage, and instructed 
his lawyer how, in the event of his death, 
this marriage could be proved. Then he 
wrote to the Padre at Seville, who had 
charge of his till now unacknowledged son, 
and desired him to prepare the boy to 
come to England. 

"He is my heir,'* he said to Hayward; 
and Hayward, by his wish, started for 
Seville about a mpnth after Lady Hamil- 
ton had left her husband, for the purpose 
of bringmg this Spanish youth to his 
English home. 

After Hayward was gone, Sir George's 
gloom and remorse grew darker and deeper. 



170 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

He had pressed on, with all the influence 
that his wealth and position could com- 
mandy his projected divorce from Isabel. 
But he had to wait his turn. Other men, 
,and other women too, were striving to be 
free from broken or dishonoured bonds, 
and 'Hhe Hamilton case" was one of 
many. 

So, alone — ^with some of the bitterest 
feelings that the human heart can bear 
for ever near him — Sir George lived on 
at Massam. It was a gloomy picture : a 
man beset by the darkest passions of our 
nature, and with no hope or comfort on 
which to lay his hand. Even his love 
for his little son was poisoned by the 
memory of its mother. The child had 
golden hair, and the hue of the little 
silken curls ever reminded Sir George of 
Isabel. 

With morbid self-torture. Sir George now 
constantly wore the dead woman's ring. 
He believed that it had been cast up by 
the waves as an avenging sign to him, 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 171 

and as a token that his sin had found 
him out. Conceive, then, this crime- 
haunted man sitting in his stately home, 
with his sunken eyes fixed on the glitter- 
ing pledge of a love that had so drear 
an endl No wonder that his brain reeled 
at times, and that his reason threatened 
to give way. 

One day, when the dark spirit was upon 
him, the idea entered into his mind to go 
to Sanda to see the grave of the unhappy 
woman he once had loved. He went — 
wandering in that seaside churchyard 
among the simple gravestones that re- 
corded many an untimely end. The cruel 
sea whose waves were breaking on the 
rough brown rocks below had swallowed 
up the bread-winner, the father, the be- 
loved son. All around Sir George read 
the tragic tale. But among all the graves, 
among all the tombstones, he saw nothing 
to tell him of the one he sought. At last 
he went to Mr. Irvine, and in faltering, 
ahnost unintelligible words, asked where 



17a 



Ae wammt's hoij h^ diak Imi lMe» 



in^ and ^id «D lepesfc Ai^ tafeL 

'^llhepoGr aool had tosBed msKj- dsjs m 
flie aea^* he aaid; snd^ fittie guesaa^ the 
MgOfBtj' bb wmi mffiebng^ ke proceeded to 
deseiibe aQ the detadk of tiie dead utman^s 
appesnmee to the wBimppy ^or George. 

Then be pointed oat tiie gre&i hillock 
wliere she laj after her lomg wanderii^s. 

^Aje^ said tiie paraoii, ^ ^le deqpB 
here! Wher^ I wcaider, pocnr aea mif, 
are her firi^ids and kindred — where, per- 
haps the husband of her Iotb?" 

Witii knitted brow and l»tten Hps Sir 
Gteorge stood by md heard. Where? It 
seemed to his maddened ears at that mo- 
ment that a mocking laugh rang in the 
air. Where ? Was it some devil that 
laughed, or was Sir Greorge going mad? 
Almost with a cry of terror, he tamed 
from the grave; and the parson, in some 
surprise and dismay, foUowed him. Was 



BENEATH THS WAYS. 173 

Sir Greorge ill? he asked; and he urged 
him in his genial way to return to rest 
and re&eah himself at the Parsonage. 

But in brief harsh words Sir George 
refused. No^ he must go — go at once, 
he said. He scarcely answered the kind 
parson's farewells. He did not know 
how anxiously the good man looked in 
his face as he rung his cold and nerveless 
hand. 

All the way on his journey home he 
heard the sea breaking on the rocks at 
Sanda. Then, as wave after wave broke 
with melancholy cadence on his ears, he 
knew he w» going mad 

But he regained Mb aelf-eontrol before he 
reached Massam. He went straight into 
the library when he got there, and found 
a letter lying there addressed to him from 
Hayward, in Spain. Hayward had found 
the boy, he told Sir George; and when he 
received this letter, he and the young 
Juan, Sir George's Spanish son, would be 
on their way to England. 



174 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

"He is a handsome lad," wrote Hay- 
ward, "with dark fiery eyes, and an 
imperious manner." As Sir George read 
these words, he seemed to see again the 
beautiful and passionate face of the unhappy 
mother, as he had first seen it in the 
bright jdays of her girlish love ; long years 
had passed since then. The ardent love 
had first grown cold, and then had turned 
to weariness and hate. But Sir George 
forgot all this now. He only saw the 
young Spanish girl, with her dark eyes 
fixed on his, and felt her rosy lips in 
their first fond kiss of love ! 

And the boy — ^how could he meet the 
boy ? —he began asking himself. " Where 
is my mother ? " he would say, " Where ? " 

As Sir George repeated this last word 
again and again, he was concious that 
his self-control was once more passing 
away, and that the gloomy terrors of a 
madhouse awaited him. 

"But I shall never go there," he de- 
cided ; and so deUberately and determi- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 175 

nately he made up his mind to end his 
miserable life. 

He took out a pistol and loaded it, and 
then, with heavy weary footsteps, he went 
upstairs to kiss the little child. The baby- 
boy was asleep, and made no sign ; but 
the nurse saw that the stem-eyed gloomy 
man had left a tear on the rosy dimpled 
cheek. 

''His bad wife has broken his heart," 
said the head nurse indignantly, after he 
was gone. " I said how it would end, 
when her ladyship, indeed ! could not bear 
to hear the little angel cry just after he 
was bom ! " 

After Sir George left the nursery he 
went out silently into the night. It was 
bleak and wet and the wind was sighing 
through the trees in the deserted park, 
and the grass was dank and sKppery. But 
Sir George noticed none of these things. 
He was about to take a leap in the dark; 
to begin a journey to an unknown land t 
So he heard the wind, but he heeded it 



176 

■oiy and the lam fdl in great hexwj dmpB 
on Ids £aee^ but he nerer w^ped diem 
awaj. He knew what he was Aokag, hat 
he knew abo that this power woold not 
last for lofog. He felt^ in &ct^ that he 
was going mad, and that his mind was 
gi^ii^ way firom the pndcxiged and teniUe 
strain that had Mien iqpcm it. 

There was a long green arcade of trees 
in the park^ where, in his early manhood, 
he had often lain and dreamed in the 
sammer time a young man's romantic 
dreams. They seemed to pass before his 
mental vision now, when ihey had all 
ended in failure and in shame. He had 
done not good, but evil, he kept repeat- 
mg to himself; and so, despairingly and 
darkly, he went to his self-condemned 
doom. 

He never uttered a prayer. How could 
he pray ? Ah ! poor soul, let us then pray, 
when that death shot rang through the 
still woods, and when with a wild cry 
Sir George fell quivering on the grass. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 177 

There was no one to receive his last 
breath — no one to see his eyes grow dim 
or close them. He died where he fell — 
beneath the green arcade where he had 
dreamed his young dreams, and which 
waved over his still form after his wasted 
and mihappy life wa^ done. 



VOL. III. N 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE BITTKR BHD. 

Whsn the morning broke, and the birds 
b^an to stir among the trees in the 
woods of Massam, and the hares and 
rabbits to peep out their brown heads 
from the misty undergrowth, a harried 
footstep came stealthily along beneath the 
green arcade of trees where Sir George's 
body lay. 

He (was a hunted man^ this new-comer ; 
hunted, desperate. He had been a clerk, 
and had tried to rob his master, and the 
police were closely on his track. But he 
knew the woods of Massam, and he had 
lain hidden there for days; and now, 
desperate,! hungry, almost penniless, he was 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 179 

about to try in the early dawn to make 
his escape. 

Suddenly, as he half ran, half tramped 
along, he came to the spot where Sir 
George lay dead. Even amid his own 
terror he stopped at the ghastly sight 
The white face and the half open eyes 
fixed upon the sky were terrible enough 
to make him, for a few moments at least, 
forget his fear. He knelt down and 
opened Sir George's waistcoat to feel if 
his heart were still. As he did so, the 
clink of gold fell upon his ears. The 
penniless starving man started at the 
sound. A second glance convinced him 
that Sir George was dead, and a second 
thought that he might a& well make the 
best of the chance that had fallen in his 
way. 

So he took Sir George's gold with his 
trembling hands. He took also the dead 
man's watch, his pocket-book, and his outer 
coat, and then fled away down the winding 
paths of the woods, as he had fled before. 



180 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

And all the day passed, and no other 
footstep drew near. The sun rose up and 
shone, and the birds sang, and the sun 
went down, and the birds were silent, and 
still Sir George lay there alone. There 
was no one, in fact, who dared to make 
any inquiries about him. He had gone 
out, and left no word; and who was he 
accountable to? Thus, at least, the ser- 
vants argued, and thus for two days Sir 
George's body lay in the woods. But on 
the third it was discovered. A young 
keeper going his rounds in the early 
morning had his attention attracted by 
the whines and agitation of his dog. He 
turned out of his way to see what was 
disturbing the intelligent creature, and 
came upon Sir George, lying dead. 

Robbed and murdered. This was the 
verdict of all who heard the tale. Every- 
thing valuable about Sir George's person 
was gone, and the pistol also with which 
he had destroyed his life had disappeared. 
There was a hunted man who knew better, 



BEKEATH THE WAVE. 181 

but the hunted man very naturally was 
silent. All the country round was searched, 
and the woods trampled by many feet, but 
no clue was ever found. The hunted man 
had two days' start, and he made good 
use of them, and of the gold he had taken 
from Sir George. 

So when Hayward and the young Spanish 
boy reached Massam, this tale of murder 
was told them. Hayward was utterly 
overcome by the news, and overwhelmed 
with grief about the death of Sir George. 
All the way home this yoimg man had 
been promising himself how he would devote 
his life to comfort and console his friend. 
He only knew Sir George's dark secret. 
He only, when he heard the tale of mur- 
der, felt doubt as well as grief in his heart. 

He went up alone to the gorgeously and 
gloomily-decked room where the remains of 
the rich man lay in state. Sir George 
was in his coflSn, but it was yet unclosed; 
and the stem, handsome, white face looked 
stem and handsome still. 



182 BENEATH THE WAVE 

But he was not unmoumed. Hayward 
knelt down and kissed the cold brow and 
hand of his dead friend. Then in heart* 
felt and broken accents he began to pray. 
Oh 1 could he have known of the wild 
agony that had wrung Sir George's heart 
before he had gone out to die ! But 
he knew enough ; knew of the wearing 
remorse, of the passionate disappointment 
and pain. 



Before they carried him away, Hayward 
took up the boy, young Juan, to see his 
father's face. The lad showed very little 
sign of emotion. Somehow there was a 
sense of wrong in his heart, and he had 
already guessed the truth of the stain on 
his mother's name. He was a proud, 
handsome youth, with dark eyes, and, as 
Hayward had written to Sir George, with 
haughty and imperious ways. So he stood 
and looked at his dead father; and then, 
with undimmed eyes, turned away. 



BBNBATH THE WAVE. 183 

But Hayward was a true mourner. 
With a pale, haggard, face he followed his 
friend to the grave. In that long proces- 
sion he alone knew the truth of the sad 
life that now was done. But before the 
day was over, many knew of Sir George's 
first marriage, and how the young Spanish 
boy claimed to be his heir. 

After the ceremony was over, the Lon- 
don lawyer, who had come down for the 
occasion, read aloud Sir George's last will. 
In this he formally made a declaration of 
his first marriage with CataUna Mendoza, 
and of the birth of their son. To this son 
he left Massam, and the chief of the 
princely fortune that he had inherited. 
But he left also a large fortune to his 
infant son Beginald; and to his 'Mear 
friend PhiKp Hayward," he bequeathed 
the sum of twenty-five thousand pounds^ 
and left him also the guardianship of his 
two sons; beseeching them always to look 
upon him with respect and affection. 

With surprised glances the funeral guests 



184 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

looked at each other after the will was 
read. There had always been a mystery 
about Sir George's life, they were thinking 
— so this was the mystery — ^this Spanish 
marriage a^d this SpaihTon. And what 
a fortunate young fellow this Hayward 
had been, was the next thought that oc- 
curred to some of those present, who rue- 
fully reflected how convenient it would 
have been if Sir George Hamilton had 
left such a sum of ready money to them. 
But there was no one there who made 
any dispute about the will. Mr. Trevor 
was not present, though he had been in- 
vited to be so ; but the proud, vain old 
man's heart was almost broken by his 
daughter's shame. 

At first he could not believe it. " It 
is a lie, a horrible invention ! " he cried. 
But when all doubt was over, and when 
the proposed divorce between Sir George 
and Lady Hamilton was openly talked of, 
the sqjiire bowed his grey head, and told 
his wife that he thought it would kill him. 



BENEATH THE WAYS. 185 

In vain Lucinda tried to comfort him. 
The squire's vanity was one of his strongest 
characteristics^ and his daughter's miscon- 
duct had wounded his vanity to the very 
quick. So when the news of Sir Greorge's 
tragic end reached Sanda^ the old man 
would not move in the matter. He refused 
to go to the funeral when asked to do so, 
and thus there was no one present who 
had any right or authority to resist the 
will. Young Juan Mendoza, therefore, 
who had hitherto borne his mother's maiden 
name, walked out from the room where 
his unhappy father's last testament was 
read Sir Juan Hamilton, the owner of the 
broad lands of Massam, and apparently in 
undisputed possession of his new wealth. 

It was a great change of fortune also to 
Hayward. Twenty-five thousand pounds, 
and one thousand a year for managing the 
property, made him seem ahnost a rich 
man. But he felt a very sad one. He 
had learned to care very deeply for Sir 
George; and his miserable story, his re- 



186 BENEATH THE WAYE. 

morse, and his bitter gloom, had filled the 
young man's heart with intense pity and 
sympathy for his unhappy friend. But 
now it was all over. He could not try 
to lighten the burden which had been too 
heavy for Sir George's strength to bear. 

Among the many letters which Hay- 
ward received about this time, concerning 
the tragedy that had happened in the 
woods at Massam, was one from Horace 
Jervis. Hayward felt his face flush and 
his hands tremble when he read it. It 
was just like the writer, all kindness and 
thought for others, and here and there 
Hilda's name appeared. " My dear wife 

was with me " and so on. She was 

evidently a dear wife, dear and well- 
beloved, as she deserved to be, Hayward 
thought with all his heart. But this 
letter, nevertheless, left a sort of aching 
void and pain in his breast. 

" Do come and see us," Jervis wrote ; 
and aa Hayward was forced to be in town 
a few days after he received it, for the 



BENEATH THE WATB. 187 

purpose of proving Sir George's will, he 
made up his mind to call upon his old 
friends. 

He sent in his card when he arrived 
at the neat, modest, well-furnished house 
that Jervis had taken for his wife, and 
while he WBB rather nervously standing in 
the drawing-room, expecting HUda's en- 
trance, a lady entered, who, for a moment, 
he actually thought was Hilda. 

** Hilda I " he said, rather in an agitated 
voice, holding out his hand ; but without 
any agitation the lady placed her hand 
in his. 

"Mr. Hay ward T' she said, smiling, "I 
must introduce myself. I am not Hilda 
— ^Mrs. Jervis, but I am Marion Marston, 
Hilda's sister. I daresay you have often 
heard of me? At least, I have often 
heard of you," she added, with another 
smile. 

Upon this Hayward looked at the young 
lady before him, and saw one of those 
strange family likenesses which we some- 



188 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

times see in faces which are yet very 
different to each other. In features the 
sisters were extremely alike, but Marion's 
expression waa totally different to Hilda's. 
It lacked the pathetic sweetness of the 
younger sister's, for Marion's nature had 
grown harder in her days of trouble, while 
Hilda had only become more tender and 
more sad. 

But still Marion Marston was a very 
good-lookmg girl. She was Kvely and 
agreeable also, and was bent upon making 
herself pleasant to Hayward. 

"Hilda has told me of what we owe 
you," she said, with some feeling in her 
voice — "little Ned's life, and I know not 
what. In fact, Hilda says that we can 
never repay you for all your kindness." 

As Marion said this she looked very 
kindly at Hayward ; while Hayward was 
wondering what made her voice so differ- 
ent to Hilda's. 

"Your sister is a great friend of mine," 
he said. "I trust that she is well?" 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 18d 

" Oh, yes," replied Marion ; " and she 
will be here directly. She is busy dis- 
tributing some blankets, or something of 
that kind, to some of Mr. Jervis's poor 
people. You know," she continued, with 
a little laugh, "I have only one fault to 
find with my new brother-in-law, and that 
is — ^he is too good." 

" It is a good fault," said Hayward, 
smiUng. 

" Yes," said Marion ; and she also 
smiled. Jervis had at least been very 
good to her, and Marion owed him some 
gratitude. He had, in fact, offered her a 
home, as well as little Ned ; and when 
Hayward first went to Jervis's house, he 
found that Marion lived there, and that 
the tired and hard- worked governess was 
now a welcome guest beneath her brother- 
in-law's kindly roof. 

Just when Marion Marston and Hay- 
ward were speaMng of Jervis, the room 
door again opened, and this time Hilda 
entered. For a moment she did not speak 



190 BSNEATH THB WAVE. 

as Hay ward held her hand tightly clasped; 
for a moment a slight contraction and a 
pallor passed over her face^ but the next 
she recovered herself^ and looked up with 
her calm, soft, grey eyes into his face. 

There had passed over her expression 
a nameless change since Hayward had 
seen her. He could not tell what it was, 
but her face was altered. She was kind 
and gentle in her manner to him, and 
said how glad Mr, Jervis would be to see 
him, but everythmg she said sounded sad. 
Yet she never said anything sad. But 
she had none of the changfe and brigfhtness 

a ma^er which di^ti^U* .a happy 
woman. The petulant gaiety with which 
a loving wife will at times talk to her 
husband, was totally absent in Hilda's 
manner to Jervis. She was tender, gentle, 
and considerate to him in everything — 
"the sweetest, best of women," Jervis 
told Hayward — ^but Hayward felt somehow 
that all this sweetness and gentleness arose 
rather from duty than from love. 



BENEATH THE WAYS. 191 

He stayed to dine with them, and every- 
thing in Hilda's house was arranged to 
perfection. She was a good housekeeper, 
and spared no trouble to keep everything 
in order. It was a pleasant Uttle dinner- 
party. Marion Marston exerted herself to 
be very agreeable, and Jervis was all 
kindness and geniaUty. Then, when the 
sisters retired together to the drawing- 
room, Marion began to talk of HaywanL 

"I declare I have half lost my heart 
already," she said, laughing. " How charm- 
ing he is ! I only wish he would take a 
£Emcy to me, Hilda." 

The younger sister suppressed a sigh, 
and answered kindly, '^Well, I am sure you 
could get no one better, my dear." 

'^And he's weU off, isn't he now?" 
continued Marion, inquiringly. 

" Yes," answered Hilda, slowly. " But," 
she added, after a moment's thought^ 
" don't think of him for that, dear. Philip 
Hayward deserves to be loved for him^ 
self alone." 



192 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

'* But one must Kve, you know," said 
Marion, with another laugh ; and Hilda 
bent down her head and gave a low, soft 
sigh, which her sister did not hear. 

Strange to say, at that moment Hay- 
ward was sitting downstairs, wondering if 
Marion Marston would suit him for a 
wife. " She is good-looking, lively, and 
very agreeable," he was thinking ; and 

she is Hilda's sister " But this last 

thought did not add to her attractions 
in Hayward's mind. Hilda's sister — 
Hilda, whose sweet, grave face wore such 
a sad look to Hayward's eyes. But then 
he must not think of Hilda; and so he 
went up-stairs determined to be very 
agreeable to Marion. 

Marion was dehghted, and responded to 
his advances very eagerly. The two sat 
together chatting and laughing, and then 
Marion sang and played. Hilda was very 
quiet. She sat stitching, stitching on, 
mechanically, at some coarse, hard work. 
All her life had been hard, hard work. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 193 

she was thinking — ^yes, all her life. But 
she must bear it — she must go on with it 
—it was Gkxi's will, and she must submit. 

" Hilda," cried Marion, from the other 
side of the room, "will you go with us 
to-morrow to the Exhibition of Water- 
Colours ? I was telling Mr. Hayward 
about that lovely piece of woodland, 
painted by Horace's fnend." 

" Yes, I will go with you," answered 
Hilda ; but the patient ring in her voice, 
the touch of suppressed pain that she 
could not hide, was heard by Hayward ; 
and he rose from Marion's side and went 
and stood by Hilda. 

" What are you manufacturing ? " he 
said, touching Hilda's coarse work. 

" Clothes for Horace's poor," said Hilda, 
in her gentle way, glancing up as Hay- 
ward addressed her ; and as Hayward 
stood looking at her sweet face he sighed 
deeply. 

Yes, he had thrown away this dear 
woman's love, he was thinking, for what? 

VOL. III. o 



194 BENEATH THE WATE. 

For false smiles that meant nothing, and 
for honeyed words whose very sweetness 
was their sting. Truly, Isabel Trevor had 
cost him dear. But for her 

"Mr. Hayward," said Marion, interrupt- 
ing his reverie and coming to his side, 
''let us settle about to-morrow. Will you 
come here to lunch, and we can go to 
the Exhibition afterwards ? " 

" Yes," said Hayward, looking round, " if 
your sister wiU go with us." 

" Oh, yes, I will go anywhere," said 
Hilda ; and so they fixed it. All the next 
day Hay ward was with the sisters. Marioa 
evidently thought that she was making a 
conquest, and Hayward did not care to 
undeceive her. " She would do very well," 
he began to think. What was the good 
of thinking of Hilda? he ought to have, 
thought of her long ago. So he talked to 
Marion, and Hilda walked gravely and 
quietly beside them. 

Hayward stayed two days in town, and 
then returned to Massam. He had lived 



BENEATH THE WATB. 195 

at the Park since Sir George's death, for 
an especial clause of Sir George's will had 
appointed him guardian to his two sons. 
Thus, when he arrived he was surprised 
by the mysterious air with which the 
butler received him. 

"Can I speak a few words in private, 
Mr. Hayward ? '' half- whispered the man ; 
and he led Hayward at once into the 
library, carefully closing the door behind 
them. 

" Who do you think has arrived, sir ? " 
he said, still lowering his voice. 

" Arrived ? How can I tell ? " answered 
Hayward. 

" My lady came yesterday,'* said the 
butler, with some small pleasure in his 
heart, perhaps, to be the bearer of such 
momentous news. "She informed us that 
she intends to dispute the late Sir George's 
will, and claim the title for her son, the 
infant Mr. Reginald." 

As the butler gave Hayward this in- 
formation the handle of the library door 



196 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

turned sharply ; and when Hayward and 
the man looked round to see who was the 
intruder, Isabel, Lady Hamilton, stood on 
the threshold. 



CHAPTEE XII. 



A woman's proposal. 



Isabel came slowly forward as Hayward 
and the butler looked round. Her face was 
pale, and her expression waa determined 
and defiant. Some shame there must have 
been in her heaxt, some shrinking ; but she 
scarcely showed this. Yet for a moment 
her eyes fell when she met Hayward's 
indignant and scornful glance. 

" You are surprised to see me V she 
began. " Yet can you wonder at me 
coming here to defend the rights of my 
son?" 

'^ His rights are not attacked that I 
know of/' answered Hayward, briefly and 
coldly. 



198 BBNBATH THE WAVE. 

"Then what about this base-born boy, 
who now clauns to be the heir of Massam T 
retorted Isabel. 

"He is simply Sir George's eldest son 
by his first marriage," replied Hayward, 
in the same cold tone. 

" And you believe this ? " said Isabel, 
passionately. " You believe this lie that 
Sir George invented to show his hate to 
me ! But I do not believe it," she con- 
tinued, " I believe this boy to be Sir 
George's son; but his natural son." 

" I cannot dispute the question with 
you," said Hayward. 

" Why ? " asked Isabel. " Leave the 
room," she said, in her old imperious way, 
to the butler. " I wish to speak in pri- 
vate to Mr. Hayward." 

" I cannot stay " began Hayward ; 

but with a wave of her hand Isabel pointed 
to the door, and the butler was thus com- 
pelled to go. When they were alone the 
expression of Isabel's face changed, and 
a softer look came over it. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 199 

" Hayward," she said, and then paused ; 
but Hayward never looked at her. He 
stood there cold^ embarrassed^ and silent — 
the man who had once loved her with 
such passionate love. 

" I do not plead for myself," continued 
Isabel, in her syren voice, glancing at 
Hay ward's stem face, "but for the boy. 
Whatever I am — ^however they may have 
blackened my character, little Reggy is 
not to blame." 

" You mistake the whole thing, I think," 
said Hayward. " Sir George before his 
death acknowledged his first marriage, and 
by his will left young Juan the heir to 
Massam. Aft;er his unhappy death this 

will was proved therefore, no one can 

dispute it." 

" I wiU, then," said Isabel, angrily ; 
" the will of a madman ! Hush, do not 
interrupt me," she continued, as Hayward 
was about to speak. " I know what you 
would say — that it is your duty, and so 
on. But, Hayward, is this justice ? Ton 



300 BBNBATH THE WAVE. 

talk of Sir George's unhappy death, but 
what about my unhappy marriage ? Do 
you know how this man treated me? 
Cruelly, most cruelly ! He found out I 
never loved him; that I loved — well, I 
must not say — ^you would not beUeve me, 
I suppose — ^but, at least, that I did not 
love him!'' 

" No, I would not believe you," said 
Hayward, bitterly, as Isabel paused. 

" But why T said Isabel. " Have you 
heard the truth of my story ? Do you 
know that he turned me out of the house 
at Brighton ? People say that I ran away 
with Captain Warrington, but people were 
wrong ; I did not run away with Captain 
Warrington, but my husband thrust me 
out of doors." 

" He had good cause ! " said Hayward, 
with bitter indignation in his voice and 
manner. 

" Yes," said Isabel ; *'good cause — I never 
loved him." 

As Isabel said this, Hayward lifted his 



BENSATH THE WATS. 201 

eyes and looked at the beautiful face that 
had brought so much ruin and shame. 
Isabel stood there pale and daring. She 
had always liked Hayward ; liked him in 
her cold selfish way^ and she had been 
so used to triumph over the hearts of 
men, that she thought she would triumph 
now. 

"Hayward!" she said presently; and 
this time her voice was very soft and 
low, and her bright eyes fell, and her 
bosom heaved. " Hayward !" 

" Well ? " said the young man, sharply 
and briefly. 

"Don't judge me as others judge me," 
went on Isabel, in the same soft pleading 
tones. "You, at least, should be lenient 
— ^you, for whose sake I could never love 
my husband.'' 

Hayward made no answer. She was 
lying to him, he told himself, so he let 
her go on. 

"I was unhappy," continued Isabel, aft^er 
a moment's pause, "unhappy and reckless. 



202 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

I flirted with these men — ^flirted — ^and they, 
it wajs folly, of course, but they learnt to 
like me too well. This was the truth 
about all those stupid letters that you 
read from Mr. Hannaway, and, I suppose, 
from Captain Warrington. Do you under- 
stand now? Sir George was madly jealous 
because I had no love to give him — and 
I was careless and unhappy because " 

As Isabel said this last word she raised 
her eyes to Hayward's face. There was 
a dark red flush on his usually pale skin, 
and this sign of emotion emboldened her 
to go on. 

" Do you understand now, Hayward ? " 
she said — ^'imderstand how a woman can 
love, and yet sacrifice that love to pride 
and ambition? I did this. I was badly 
brought up, and I was vain and proud. 
I accepted Sir George — and then — ^then 
learnt to care for you." 

'* Yes," said Hayward, with a kind of 
gasp, "go on — let me hear the whole 
story." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 203 

"It is easily told/' answered Isabel. 
*'As I said, I was vain and proud — and 
you were poor." 

" A poor tutor ! " interrupted Hay ward, 
with quivering curling lips. 

"At least," continued Isabel, "you were 
not in a worldly point of view a fitting 
match for me. So I di'ove you away — 
that dark and dismal day in the picture 
gallery — and until you were gone I never 
knew the true feelings of my heart I I 
was engaged to Sir George — Abound to him 
by my own wish — and pride, ambition, 
vanity, all urged me to keep my word. 
I did keep it — I married — I became Lady 
Hamilton of Massam; and then I found 
out what I had flung away. I was weary 
of my new position and my wealth before 
I came back here as a bride, but most 
weary of the gloomy selfish man whose 
name I bore 1 So I was ready to rush 
into any folly — any madness. You know 
all about poor Hannaway? Shall I tell 
you now about Captain Warrington ? " 



204 BENEATH THE WATE. 

"Have you any motive for telling me?" 
asked Hayward, in a passion-stifled voice. 

" Yes, I have," answered Isabel. " I 
wish to cleai* . myself, to a certain extent 
at least, in your eyes. Well, as I said, 
you know about Mr. Hannaway? After 
this affair Sir George turned absolutely to 
hate me ! If he could say a cruel thing, 
if he could do a cruel thing, he did it. 
At last, after Miss Marston s wedding, I 
could bear it no longer, and went to 
Brighton. This Captain Warrington was 
there. I flirted with him, and he flirted 
with me. He wrote me foolish letters, 
and I answered them, and was reckless 
and careless about being seen with him 
constantly in public." 

"Yes," again said Haywaxd, in the same 
husky tones. 

" Then one night," went on Isabel, " Sir 
George arrived, and ordered me, just as 
if I were a dog, to have my things 
packed, and to return at once to Massam. 
As we were talking, his eyes fell on a 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 205 

ring lying on the dressing-table. It was 
one of the rings that dead woman wore, 
whose body you brought to shore at 
Sanda. Sir George sprang upon it like a 
tiger 1 Then he demanded where I got 
it. I refused to teU him. I was going 
to a concert with Mrs. Woodford and her 
brother, and I asked Sir George — ^mark 
this, please, Hayward — ^to go with me. But 
no. He bid me go, and then as soon as* 
I was out of the house he broke open my 
locks — read Captain Warrington's foolish 
letters — and, when I came back, cooUy 
and literally turned me out of the house I " 

"And you went '^ 

"To Mrs. Woodford. Then I went to 
Paris with another lady, and Captain 
Warrington escorted us there — ^but I did 
not run away with Captain Warrington, 
and in Paris I scarcely saw him." 

"And your motive for telling me all 
this?" again said Hayward. 

Isabel cast down her beautiful eyes. 
Then she put out one of her ungloved 



206 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

hands^ and laid it pleadingly on Hay- 
ward's arm. 

"I am free now, Hayward," she said, 
almost in a whisper. "I know now how 
mad a thing I did before— this tune I 
shall not marry for ambition " 

As she said this Hayward turned away, 
and covered his face with his hand. 

"We are both still young," continued 
Isabel; "let us forget the past — let 

us " But with something between an 

exclamation and a cry, Hayward inter- 
rupted her," 

" Hush, hush ! " he said, " do not stain 
your womanhood any more." 

What do you mean ? " asked Isabel. 
This ! " exclaimed Hayward, passion- 
ately, looking round and facing her. " You 
have told me this long story, and for 
what? Because you are free, you say — 
free, do you mean to marry me ? " 

"Yes," said Isabel, though in a half- 
frightened tone ; for his manner was so 
excited and so strange. 






\ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 207 

" Then shall I tell you the truth ? " said 
Hayward, vehemently. " Shall I tell you 
that before I would take your hand in 
mine^ before I would call you by the sacred 
name of wife, I would put a pistol to my 
throat and end it all ! What ! " he con- 
tinned; "do you think I am mad? Do 
you think I have forgotten Sir George's 
broken heart and shame-stained name ? 
Do you think I have forgotten the smiles 
and looks with which you wiled me on, 
or the false words with which you deceived 
poor Han na way, and turned your hus- 
band's heart to gall?" 

" How dare you I " exclaimed Isabel, 
with flashing eyes and burning cheeks, as 
Hayward paused; "how dare you speak 
to me thus ? " 

" Because you have lost all claim to re- 
spect or honour," said Hayward, "Because 
you have been lying to me ever since you 
came into this room — trying to deceive me 
as you deceived me long ago. But a man. 
wakes up from his foUy sometimes," he con- 



208 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

tinaedy with a bitter laugh. " Shall I tell 
you, Lady Hamilton, the day I woke up 
from mine? Do you remember the day 
when Hilda Marston was married? She 
was a good girl, and I had learned to love 
her then with a better love than I ever 
gave to you. But that day ended my 
delusion completely." 

" And how, pray, was that ? " asked Isa- 
bel, scornfully throwing back her head. 

" I opened the billiard-room door," an- 
swered Hayward, "and stood unnoticed a 
few minutes there. Do you understand 
now ? You were there, and Captain War- 
^rington— the man whom you have just 
been telling me was nothing to you ? " 

As these bitter words passed Hayward's 
lips Lady Hamilton's face turned scarlet, 
and then grew suddenly pale. She saw at 
that moment that her power over Hay- 
ward was ended for ever. She had been 
found out. Her falseness had been brought 
home to her, and her cunning words had 
returned as stabs to her own breast. But 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 209 

she had one weapon left, and she used 
it. 

" I have been a fool/' she said, con- 
temptuously, after a moment's thought. " I 
came into this room intending to conciliate 
you; intending to atone to you in some 
way for the disappointment that you have 
so often reproached me with, when you — a. 
tutor in a country school — forgot yourself 
so far as to dare to make love to me» 
But I had another motive," she went on 
vindictively, "as well as this amiable one t 
Can you guess what I mean ? No — I wiU 
tell you, then — I wished to spare the 
memory of Sir George ! " 

" How ? " said Hayward, sharply. 

"I am not quite an idiot, you know/' 
continued Lady Hamilton, "and I can lay 
this thing to that when I choose to do so. 
How about the dead woman's ring, the 
sight of which startled Sir George almost 
to madness — ^the dead woman whose body 
was washed to shore at Sanda, days before 
the wreck of Sir George's yacht — ^the dead 

VOL. II. p 



210 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

woman who was Sir George's mistress 
— the mother of the base-born youth who 
claims to be his heir ? " 

Isabel paused after she had made this 
speech, and she saw in a moment that it 
had struck home to Hayward's heart. So 
she had hit the right nail on the head 
at last, she thought. Hayward knew Sir 
George's secret — ^knew of the guilty deed 
that she had but guessed at. 

" Do you see now what I mean ? " she 
said. **You pretended to be, or were, 
fond of Sir George ; do you wish his 
name to be branded as a murderer s ? " 

"You have no proof," said Hayward, 
quickly and passionately. 

*' A hundred proofe," repUed Isabel. 
"First, this woman's body was washed 
ashore days before the wreck of the yacht. 
Then, do you think that I could live with 
Sir George, and not see that he was 
weighed down by remorse? Do you think 
I heard no muttered words in his sleep 
that I could not understand then, but 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 211 

which I do now ? Do you think that when 
he first saw that ring that he hid his 
guilt? With a cry he exclaimed that his 

sm had found him out and from that 

hour, I knew that Sir George had mur- 
dered this woman 1 " 

" Be silent ! be silent !" cried Hay ward, 
in uncontrollable emotion. 

"No, I will not be silent 1" said IsabeL 
" I will proclaim his deed ! I will blacken 
his name as he blackened mine, unless you 
will help me to do what I came here to 
do — protect the rights, of my son." 

" How can I do it ? " said Hayward. 
" Sir George was married to this Spanish 
woman, and their son was bom after this 
marriage. My hands are tied — I cannot 
help you." 

*' Do you know that he went down to 
Sanda to see her grave T said Isabel. 
"Do you know that Mr. Irvine thought 
that he was mad at least, and that the 
servants here all declare that for days 
before his death— nay, for weeks — ^he was 



212 BEKBATH THE WAYK. 

not in his right mind ? Upon this plaa 
the will can be thrown aside. Sir George 
was mad when he made it — ^mad when he 
declared a marriage which in all human 
probability never took place." 

"Lady Hamilton," said Hayward, "do 
Hot deceive yourself. This marriage did 
take place. I saw the priest in Seville 
who married them-^the priest who had 
diarge, until I brought him here, of this 
yoimg Juan." 

" Then you intend to stand by the 
will?" said Isabel, and her lip curled. 
" The will that gives you twenty-five 
tiiousand pounds, and at the same time 
brands your late dear friend's name as 
a murderer's." 

"I will endeavour to do my duty, what- * 
ever is the consequence," said Hayward, 
firmly. 

"This, then, will be the consequence," 
retorted Isabel. " I mean to dispute the 
will. I mean — ^as you will have it so — 
to let the world know the truth about 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 213 

Sir George!" And having said tiiis, 
Isabel turned and left the room, leaving 
Hayward a prey to the most miserable 
reflections. 



CHAPTER XII. 

A LAWSUIT, 

All that night Hayward never slept. 
How could he stop this vindictive woman's 
tongue, he was thinking ; how save Sir 
George's memory from the awful charge 
with which she was about to blacken it? 

"But, for the child's sake, for Uttle 
Reggy's sake, surely she will be persua- 
ded," at last he began to hope. So in the 
early morning he decided to seek another 
interview with Isabel. 

He went down to breakfast late, weary 
and heartsore. A little note was lying on 
the table, addressed to him, when he 
entered the breakfast-room, and the hand- 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 215 

writing on this he at once recognized as 
Isabel's. Eagerly, then, he opened it, 
and read the following words:— 

"Dear Mr. Hayward, — As you have 
refused to help me, and are determined 
to stand by the will that wrongs my son 
and provides so handsomely for yourself, 
I am determined to do what I consider 
I have full right to do, namely, take 
charge of my own child. When you re- 
ceive this, therefore, I shall have left 
Massam, and taken little Reggy with me. 
Do not attempt to interfere with me. 
I understand that Sir George intended to 
endeavour to obtain a divorce from me if 
he had lived; but, luckily for Reggy and 
myself, he is dead, and I am not divorced, 
but am Lady Hamilton of Massam still. 
When you leave the Park, and take away 
the base-bom boy that you have brought 
there, I may return to Massam ; until 
then, I shall remain in town, and take 
immediate steps to overturn the will of 



216 BENEATH THE WAVK. 

that unhappy madman^ whose crimes, I 
suppose, had upset his reason. 

'' I remain, yours truly, 

" Isabel Hamilton.' 

Hayward read this letter and then 
seized the room-bell, and began ringing it 
violently. The butler appeared hastily 
to answer his simmions. 

" Is Lady Hamilton gone ? " he asked 
the moment the man came into the room. 

" Yes, her ladyship left an hour ago,** 
replied the butler, " in time to catch the 
early train south. Her ladyship informed 
us last night," he added, '*of her inten- 
tions; and said that it was by your wish 
that she and the infant. Master Reginald, 
were leaving." 

"And she has taken the child?" said 
Hayward. 

"Yes, the child and the head nurse," 
answered the man ; and Hayward felt at 
that moment that Isabel had completely 
out-witted him. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 217 

But he was little Reginald's guardian, 
as well as young Juan's. He therefore 
determined at once to follow Isabel, and 
started for town two hours after she had 
done so. 

But when he got there he could not 
find her. He went to nearly all the 
principal hotels, but still he could hear 
nothing of Lady Hamilton. Then he 
went to the lawyer who had drawn out 
Sir George's last will. 

This gentleman was a jovial, smiling 
man, with a pleasant face and a smooth 
and pleasant tongue, and he listened smil- 
ingly to Hayward's tale. 

" She has no chance," he said, when the 
story was finished. " She may dispute 
Sir George's will, but unless she can prove 
he was out of his senses when he instructed 
it to be drawn out and signed it, the will 
will hold good. And," added the lawyer, 
"her own misconduct and Sir George's 
projected divorce from her will fittally 
damage any evidence she can produce.'* 



218 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

-And you think the marriage with tUs 
Spanish woman — ^with young Juan's mother, 
can be proved ? " asked Hayward. 

'^ Certainly ; Sir Greorge instructed me 
how in the event of his death it could 
be proved," answered the lawyer. " There 
is no doubt, I suppose," he added, "that 
Sir George's death was a case of murder, 
and not of suicide ? " 

"Everything valuable that he had about 
his person had disappeared," said Hay- 
ward, " and there was no weapon near 
where he was found with which he 
could have inflicted the fatal wound." 

The lawyer looked thoughtful. 

" He had disappeared two days, had he 
not," he said, after a moment's silence, 
"before his remains were discovered? It 
would be a weak point in our case if there 
were any idea of suicide." 

" But " began Hayward, and then 

he, too, was silent. He was afraid, in fact 
to speak — afraid to think of the dark sus- 
picion which sometimes involuntarily had 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 219 

crossed his mind regarding Sir George*s 
tragic death. 

"Well, we shall hear from her ladyship, 
I suppose, in a few days," said the lawyer. 
" In the meanwhile, I have no doubt 
that her little son is quite safe in her 
hands." 

They did hear from her ladyship in a 
few days. In fact. Lady Hamilton at 
once took formal proceedings to dispute 
her late husband's will. He was insane, 
she stated, at the time it was made, and 
her lawyers gave her cause to suppose 
that she might win her case. 

Sir George had been undoubtedly strange 
in his conduct for a long time, and after his 
miserable discovery of his wife's guilt, and 
of the dead woman's ring, at Brighton, his 
gloom and eccentricity had been obvious 
and remarkable. Then this will had been 
made after these events. And his sudden 
and violent death was also in her favour. 
Had he really been murdered ? Isabel 
instructed her lawyers to endeavour to 



222 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Hayward and smiled. Then Hayward was 
called ; but during a sharp cross-examina- 
tion he firmly stated his belief that Sir 
George was in his sane mind at the time 
the will was made. It was made, he 
said, after Lady Hamilton had left her 
husband, and after Sir George had deter- 
mined to acknowledge his first marriage 
with CataUna Mendoza. He had not 
acknowledged this until the present Lady 
Hamilton had left her home, and he then 
stated to Hayward that he had an elder 
legitimate son by this first marriage. This 
son he had left his heir, while in his sane 
mind, Hayward believed, and his marriage 
with CataUna Mendoza was an undoubted 
fact. 

But it is useless to go on with a long 
story, and to relate all the evidence and 
counter-evidence that was given during a 
case that lasted many days and was con- 
tested by the best lawyers in England. 
It is sufficient to tell that on the direct 
and simple evidence of Padre Fernandez 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 223 

of Seville, a grey-haired and venerable 
priest, who had himself performed the 
ceremony of marriage between the unfor- 
tunate Catalina and Sir George, that this 
marriage was proved to the satisfaction of 
the special jury who tried the case. Thus 
Sir George, also, to the minds of the jury- 
men, had shown no signs of madness in 
leaving his eldest legitimate son his heir. 
The question of his murder or suicide re- 
mained unsolved, and the darker question 
of how the unhappy Catalina came to her 
death also remained a mystery. On this 
last point no cr««xanl.t."n extracted 
any information of the truth from the 
one person who knew. Hayward kept his 
dead friend's secret, and there was no one 
knew that Sir George had confided it to 
his ears. Lady Hamilton might insinuate 
what she liked, but Lady Hamilton had 
no proof to go on. The sea had swal- 
lowed up the only witnesses of Sir 
George's bitterly-repented crime. 

So Isabel lost her case. The twelve 



224 BBNEATH THE WAYB. 

jurymen sympathized with the husband, 
dead though he was, whose wife had left 
him for another man, and could under- 
stand Sir George's gloom and his tardy 
acknowledgment of his first marriage 
when his second had ended so unhappily. 
In an able and powerful speech, the lead- 
ing counsel retained in favour of the 
validity of the will pointed out how this 
wife, who was now disputing it, had 
brought but shame to her husband and 
disgrace to her child. "She would have 
you believe he was mad," continued the 
counsel ; " the gloom that her own conduct 
had caused she ascribes to some hidden 
crime, to some dark secret, forgetting his 
betrayed aflfections, his blighted and dis- 
honoured home ! " 

Lady Hamilton was forced to sit and 
listen to these bitter words — ^was forced 
to sit and learn that she had lost her 
case, and that her shame was known 
from one end of England to the other. 
She went out from court a disgraced and 



\ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 225 

enrafifed woman; and the very man for 
who; she h«l s«=rificed », mad. rrfuBod. 
after such a public exposure, he said, to 
maJ^e her his wife. She was ordered 
also to give up the custody of her child, 
and furious, half-maddened, she returned 
to her hotel after the trial was over in 
a state pitiable to behold. 

But this unhappy disgraced woman had 
one visitor. During the time the case 
wafi pending Hayword had remained in 
town, and had naturally seen much of 
the Jervises. After it was over, and the 
jury had decided in favour of the will, 
he went to tell Hilda and Jervis of the 
decision. 

" And Lady Hamilton," said Jervis, after 
he had heard Hayward's news, "is there 
no one with her in this hour, that must 
be such a very bitter one to her?" 

" No one that I know of," answered 
Hayward, briefly. "No woman, I sup- 
pose, would now care to be seen with 
her." 

VOL. III. Q 



226 BENHATH THE WAYS. 

Then Hilda looked at her husbandL 

"May I go, Horace ?"* she said. "Pel^ 
haps I might be of some use to her/' 

Horace Jervis crossed the room as Hilda 
spoke, and took his wife's hand in his. 

"Yes, go, my dear one," he said; "she 
will truly need someone like you to be 
near her now." 

So Hilda went. She asked for Lady 
Hamilton, but was told she could see no 
one ; and then she asked to see the lady's 
maid, Hitson. 

This woman came to her crying and 
tremblmg. 

" Oh ! • Miss Marston — Mrs. Jervis, I 
mean," she said, " my lady is in a fearful 
state ! She says she'll cut her throat, 
or do something to herself, and I don't 
know what to do." 

" Take me to her," said Hilda ; " I am 
her old friend. I will try to help and 
comfort her now." 

Then Kitson led Hilda to the room, 
where, pacing backward and forward, like 



BENEATH THE WAVK. 227 

a caged wild animal, was the onoe beau- 
tiful and gracious Lady Hamilton. Her 
face was distorted with passion, and flushed 
and stained with bitter tears of rage and 
shame. She was panting and gasping, and 
turned round like a fury when she saw 
EQlda and Kitson enter the room. 

*' Who is that ? " she said loudly. " How 
dare you let anyone in here ? '' 

Then Hilda went forward, and in her 
gentle tender way tried to take Isabel's 
hot clenched hand. 

" Isabel," she said, " don't you know 
me? I am Hilda." 

" Yes, I know you ! " half screamed the 
miserable Isabel. "Have you come to 
triumph over me — come to say spiteful 
horrible things in pretended sympathy, like 
you women who set up to be good, do ? " 

"I am come to stay with you for a 
little while," said Hilda, even yet more 
gently and kindly. " Don't send me away, 
dear — we won't talk — you are tired and 
over excited." 



S28 BINKATH THE WAYS. 

Upon, this, the unhappy Isabel looked 
in Hilda's sweet, patient face ; and then 
saddenly burst into a passion of tears, and 
fell weeping on Hilda's neck. 

"You good women have the best of it^ 
I believe/' sobbed the miserable woman. 
"You never, at leasts were utterly for- 
saken, as I am now!" 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A widower's wooing. 



Hilda stayed many days with Isabel after 
this. Stayed, and tried to soothe her 
when she raved and tossed, and finally, 
when fever crept into her frame, and she 
lay stricken down and powerless. She was 
very very ill. It was low fever at first, 
the doctors said, and then typhus. When 
this word began to be whispered about, 
the proprietor of the private hotel where 
she was staying went to Hilda, and re- 
quested that Lady Hamilton should be 
removed. It seemed a hard thing to ask, 
the man said; but then every one must 
attend to his own interest. 

Hilda did not speak. She wrote a few 



230 BBNEATH THE WAVE. 

lines to her husband to tell him of the 
intimation that she had received; and an 
hour later Jervis arrived at the hotel. 

" What shall we do, Horace ? " she 
asked when she saw him. 

"Who should be our chosen guests, 
Hilda ? " he answered, with his frank 
sweet smile. "The sick and sorrowing, 

dear and Lady Hamilton is both sick 

and sorrowing. Let us take her to our 
home I '' 

So they took the fever-stricken woman 
home ; Marion Marston and little Ned were 
sent away, and the baby Reginald Ham- 
ilton, but Hilda and Jervis remained, and 
watched and tended on Isabel for many 
weeks. Sometimes she knew them, and 
sometimes forgot all about the bitter past^ 
and spoke and rambled about the days 
when she had held her head so high. 

She had another watcher, too, some- 
times, or rather a visitor ; who once or 
twice went up to see her when she lay 
in a stupor, or rambled in her talk. 



BEHEATH THE WAVE. 231 

This was Hayward. He forgave her then, 
and pitied her, and then turned away to 
sigh. But he loved her no more. There 
was another woman there, whose soul 
was so pure and true that he scarcely 
ever dared to look in her &ce; and yet 
that woman's presence was very dear to 
his heart. He saw no beauty now in the 
golden hair that lay uncurled on Isabel's 
pillow — no beauty in the straight features 
and the glittering blue eyes. The dark 
glimpses that he had seen of the soul 
beneath had utterly changed his feelings 
to her, and she was no longer lovely in 
his eyes. 

But Hilda Jervis always seemed very 
fair. As she moved about the sick-room, 
and about the house, Hayward caught 
himself watching and admiring her. But 
he always told himself that he must not 
admire her, and he very often went to 
see Marion Marston and little Ned, in 
the lodgings that Jervis had taken for 
tihem, so as to keep them out of the way 



232 BENEATH THE WATS. 

of any infection from the fever-stricken 
patient lying at his house. 

Thus^ not unnaturally, Marion began 
seriously to believe that Hayward admired 
her. She was indeed a girl whom many 
men might have admired; but she was so 
different, Hayward always kept thinking, 
to Hilda. Not in appearance, for the 
sisters were very much alike, but there 
was something wanting. At all events 
Marion did not charm Hayward, and the 
more he saw of the sister he might have, 
the more he regretted the one he had lost. 
Then he returned to Massam, and shortly 
after he arrived there, he received a visit 
of congratulation on the result of the 
trial, from Mr. Antony Featherstone. 

Never had Hayward seen Antony in 
such full feather as he now appeared. 
The whole get-up of the man — his whole 
air-denoted ease and prosperity. 

" Well, you bowled her ladyship over 
very cleverly, Hayward," he commenced 
his conversation with. 



BENEATH THE WATS. 233 

" Lady Hamilton is very ill, Mr. Feather- 
stone/" answered Hayward quietly. Hilda's 
example had impressed him too much to 
feel any triumph over Isabel now. 

"Ah, she's a cunning fox," laughed 
Antony. " What ! she's been trying to get 
over you again, has she ? Well, well, 

never mind she's a deuced handsome 

woman, and that goes a good way, you 
know, with us men ! " And Antony 
laughed again, and puUed his greyish 
whiskers with much self-satisfaction. 

" Yes, she is very handsome," said 
Hayward slowly. He was thinking of aU 
the evil that her beauty had brought — 
of her husband's broken heart and tragic 
death. 

"No doubt about it," said Antony 
cheerily. " But when a fellow thinks of 
marriage, he needs something besides 
mere good looks." And for the first time 
that Hayward had ever seen him do so 
Antony assumed an air of virtuous dis- 
cretion, which was highly amusing. 



234 BESKAJB THE WATS. 






Ye&," said Hayward, smiling. 
But I must not foiget what I 
specially came for," continned Antony. 
" My daughter Ladnda and her husband 
are staying with us^ and Mrs. Smythe." 

'' Mrs. Smythe ? " repeated Hayward, 
as if he half remembered the name. 

''Yes, Mrs. Smythe, of Leeholme Hall, 
Northumberland/' said Antony, with some- 
thing between a leer and a wink in his 
once handsome but now bloodshot eyes. 
" A rich widow, my boy ! What do you 
think of that?'' 

"Well, Mr. Featherstone, will it do?" 
said Hayward, with a laugh. 

"I'm willing!" answered Antony, with 
a loud laugh also; and to make a long 
story short, Hayward found this absolutely 
to be the case. This Mrs. Smythe was a 
widow, and a country neighbour of the 
Trevors at Sanda, and Antony had courted 
her, as he had courted many a rich woman 
before. But he did it under different 
auspices now. Mrs. Smythe knew nothing 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 235 

of Antony's mortgaged acres — nothing of 
his difficulties and debt. She had met 
him at his son-in-law's, Mr. Trevor's, and 
the good-looking, jovial, middle-aged man 
had taken the widow's fancy. So she 
accepted Antony, and Antony now looked 
and spoke as if he had never had a trouble 
in the world. He was sorry for poor 
fellows in debt, and talked exactly as if 
he had been respectable all his days. 
And now he had come to ask Hayward 
to dine with them on a certain day that 
he named. 

"Patty sent me," he said, with another 
roguish look of his bloodshot eyes. 
" Patty ordered me to go and ask the 
best-looking young man in the neighbour- 
hood, she said — and Patty isn't a girl 
very easy to please, I can tell you — and 
like a good-natured young fellow, you 
know, as I am" (and Antony leered 
again) " I came. Well, sharp seven on 
Thursday, and until then, my dear lad, 
good-bye." 



236 BENEATH THE WATS. 

Hayward went to dine at Peatherstone, 
and he could not help smiling somewhat 
grimly to himself as he dressed to do so. 
He knew well enough why he was con- 
sidered so good-looking now. The twenty- 
five thousand pounds that Sir Greorge had 
left him had straightened and improved 
his features in many eyes, he was well 
aware. We all really know these things, 
but some of us can afford to think of 
them with a good-natured smile. Perhaps 
there was some one who cared for us 
long ago, before the days of prosperity 
came ! Someone had cared for him. Hay- 
ward knew ; and he thought of Hilda as 
he dressed himself to go and dme with 
Patty Peatherstone. 

Patty and Lucinda received him with 
the greatest cordiality. Pine, tall, hand- 
some, reddish-haired Patty, had thought of 
Hayward since she heard of his good 
fortune, in precisely the same way that 
Marion Marston had thought of him. 
" He was a good-looking young man, and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 237 

he would do/' Patty had told her sister; 
and Lucinda was perfectly agreeable to 
assist her in her matrimonial projects. 

So Patty was very agreeable to Hay- 
ward, just as Marion was very agreeable 
to him. She went up to him smilingly, 
and introduced the stout lady, covered 
with black lace and bugles, who was the 
chosen one of reckless Antony's heart. 
But Antony was reckless no more. He 
took Mrs. Smythe down to dinner, and 
exerted himself to be agreeable, just aa 
Patty was exerting herself. The widow 
was not squeamish, and Antony's coarse 
«mplim<«te and hi^y.e.«>ned jokes we« 
very plesasant to her ears. The house 
looked very comfortable, she thought ; 
Patty was sure to marry, and Lucinda was 
well married ; and Mrs. Smythe thought 
that she was making a good match, as 
well as pleasing herself in the bargain. 
Only Mr. Trevor, the old pompous Squire 
of Sanda, did not look on very approv- 
ii^y. He knew where Antony's apparent 



238 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

prosperity came from. He had lent 
Antony money, and he knew in his heart 
that Antony was deceiving the widow 
about his ways and means. But his good- 
natured Lucinda had persuaded the old 
man not to speak. 

" She has plenty for them both," Lucinda 
had told her husband ; and so everything 
went on smoothly, with Antony's court- 
ship. 

" Let me help you to a wing of this 
duck, my charmer, it's deliciously juicy," 
Antony was half-whispering to the widow 
during dinner, for she was a woman who 
loved good things, and enjoyed her meals 
as well as Antony's conversation. " Or 
just one Uttle slice off the breast, then ? " 
he went on insinuatingly, with his fork 
in the breast of the tempting bird before 
him, when the temporary butler, who waa 
waiting, mysteriously touched his arm. 

" What is it, Jackson ? " said Ajitony, 
looking round with a grand air, though 
there had been a time not very far away 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 239 

when a little tap on the arm was rather 
alarming to him. 

" A person, sir wants to see you im- 
mediately," replied the temporary butler in 
a very subdued tone of voice. 

'^I'm engaged," said Antony, still grandly. 
"Ah, Mrs. Smythe," rolling his eyes at 
the widow, "how ttresome these people 
are, who are continually coming begging 
for some charity or other ! Say I'm en- 
gaged, Jackson," he repeated, looking round 
at the temporary butler. 

"I did say so, sir," said the butler, 
" but he won't go away" 

The widow heard the last words, and 
Antony heard them. The widow looked 
up curiously, and Antony looked down, 
and felt very uncomfortable. Then came 
a sort of scuffle at th^ dining-room door, 
and Antony rose hastily and went towards 
it. 

The guests at the table all looked round. 
Hayward was sitting by Patty, and he 
saw her face suddenly turn red and then 



240 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

grow very pale. Then she also half rose^ 
but by this time Antony had quitted the 
dining-room^ and had closed the door 
behind him. 

A stormy interview awaited him in the 
hall. An old creditor whom Antony had 
dodged and put off for many a year^ had 
heard that he was at Featherstone again, 
and his rich son-in-law with him. The old 
creditor decided that this was his oppor- 
tunity for getting his money. He accor- 
dingly had arrived at the Hall' for the 
purpose of trying to do so, and had, as 
the temporary butler subsequently stated, 
taken "a drop too much" before he came. 
His wrath was therefore greatly excited 
when he found that a grand dinner party 
was going on in the house of a man who 
had kept him out of his money now so 
long. In vain the servants had tried to 
pacify him, in vain induce him to go 
away. 

No, he would see the cheating scoundrel, 
he a£5brmed, and he actually was forcing 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 241 

his way into the dining-room, when Antony 
very wisely went out of it. 

And now he told Antony he would not 
go away without his money. 

" My dear sir," said Antony, " hush ! 
I am on the point of marriage," he whis- 
pered, dragging his importunate creditor 
into the breakfast-roofn, and closing the 
door after them ; " on the point of mar- 
riage with a lady of large fortune 1 Think 
of that — property, absolute real property 
in Northumberland ! " 

" Don't believe it," said the inebriate 
creditor. 

" But it is a fact, my dear sir !" cried 
Antony, in a perfect agony. Oh ! if he 
should miss his widow after all, he was 
thinking; and dew broke out on his red 
brow at the very idea. 

" I'll not stir without some of my 
money," said the creditor, doggedly. 

" But listen to reason," said Antony. 

"It's reason that I should have my 
money," repeated the creditor. 

VOL. III. R 



242 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

Antony looked round in despair, and 
wiped his hot red face. He knew not 
where to lay Ids hand on any ready money 
at that moment, and he knew that if he 
went to ask his son-in-law, Mr. Trevor, 
tiiat the pompoua tiresome old man woiild 
make a hundred objections, and be so long 
in promising even fifty pounds that the 
widow must know that something mysteri- 
ous was happening. Then he remembered 

Hayward remembered tiiat he was a 

yomig man, and would part more easily, 
in all probability, with his money than 
an old one would ; and so he made up 
his mind to ask him for a small sum. 

*' It's a pity, on account of Patty," 
reflected Antony ; "but it can't be helped." 

So he told his creditor to wait where 
he was, and he would see what he could 
do. Then he aesut the temporary bntler 
with a message to Hayward in the dining 
room. Hayward smiled when he received 
this message, for he felt sure that Antony 
had got himself ^me trouble, and 



HI 



BENEATH THE VfAVS. 343 

-wtmted Hayward to help him out of it. 
But the next moment he felt sorry for 
Fatty Featiierstone, by whom he was 
seated. The gpLrl's quick ears had over- 
heard t^e half-whispered message that her 
father had sent, and her face flushed 
deejdy, and an espreaaion of paia and 
annoyance passed over it. 

" What is it 1 " she said, with some 
agitation. 

"Your father wants to speak to me 
on huainess fer a minute, that is all," 
answered Hayward kindly ; and Patty 
gave him a grateful look with her bright 
biorwn; eyes as he said tiese few words. 

** Excuse me a moment or two," added 

Hayward, rising; and he then left the 

dSAkgiomn^ and found Antony in a state 

P of great excitement waiting for him in 

the hall. 

"My dear lad," said Antony, seizing 
Hayward by the arm the moment he ap- 
pearec^ " can you do me a little favour ? 

. faliow^^ftif drank, of ooicw©— that I 



244 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

owe a trifle to, wants me to settle with 
him on the spot. I haven't the sum in 
the house, and old Trevor — jou know 
what a pompous old fool he is — ^would be 
an hour before he got his cheque book 
out. So would jou mind just giving me 
a little accommodation, and I'll settle with 
you to-morrow ? " 

Hayward laughed, and drew out his 
pocket-book. 

"I have an unfilled cheque here, by 
chance," he said. "How much do you 
want ? " 

Antony's eyes sparkled with delight. 

" Thank you, my good lad I " he ex- 
claimed. "Ah, well ^you may as well 

fill it in for a hundred pounds. " 

"Won't fifty do, Mr. Featherstone ? ^ 
asked Hayward. 

" Yes, fifty would do, " admitted Antony, 
with a sigh. So Hayward gave him a 
cheque for fifty poimds, and in a few 
minutes Antony got rid of his creditor, 
and returned with Hayward to the dining- 



\ 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 245 

room, trying his best to look as if nothing 
had happened. 

"Excuse me, my dear lady," he said 
to Mrs. Symthe, "but I was called out 

on some business connected ^with the 

ah, the parish and I was forced 

to get my young friend Hayward there 
to help me. " 

"Parish business?" repeated the widow. 
"Then I hope you are a good churchman, 
Mr. Featherstone ? " 

" I hope so," said Antony ; but he could 
not resist giving a roguish leer with his 
bloodshot eyes at Hayward as he spoke. 

In the meanwhile, Hayward had again 
seated himself by Patty Featherstone's 
side. The girl looked at him very kindly, 
but she was nervous and excited. She 
guessed exactly the transaction which had 
been going on outside the dining-room 
door. She saw, too, by both their faces, 
that Hayward had helped her father, and 
she therefore felt very grateful. This little 
affair, in fact, that Antony had feared 



246 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

would destroy his daughter's chances with 
Hayward, made Hayward like Patty fiur 
more than he had ever done before. 

Both Lucinda and Fatty had a kind 
of honesty about them, which was very 
taking. They came straight to the pcmit 
whatever they were going to say, and 
the next time Patty saw Hayward after 
his little accommodation to her father she 
thanked him openly and frankly. 

** I got it all out of the old maii^ * 
she said. ^'I was sure there was some 
trouble or other going on when he went 
out ; and I shall never forget your kind- 
ness, Mr. Hayward." 

"What nonsense," said Hayward good- 
naturedly, " a mere trifle like that !" 

"Don't you get into the way of accom- 
modating him with trifles like that," con* 
tinned Patty. " Poor old dad 1 I belieTS 
there never was such a reckless old man 
before." 

" And what about the widow ? Is it 
settled ? " asked Hayward with a laugh. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 247 

" Oh, I believe it's all right/' aiiswered 
Patty, " but somehow I don't quite take 
to my future stepmother." 

" No ? " said Hayward ; and he looked 
at Patty thoughtfully. 

She was a fine girl, straight and tall, 
and with an honest, good-natured, o^pien 
fece. She was not very refined. She 
lacked, Hayward thought, a kind of grace 
which some much {Gainer specimens of 
womanhood possess. She had a l<md 
laugh, and a loud (dear voices But ^le 
was a good girl, he believed, aiid would 
make -a good wife. He liked her better 
than he liked Marion Marston, and he 
had made up his mind that he wanted a 
wife. 

This conversation took place some three 
or four days after the dinner party at 
Featherstone; when Antony had been called 
out by his mebriate creditor. It took 
place o&e morning at Featherstone, and 
during it Hayward stood and looked 
thoughtfully at Patty. Perhaps a little 



248 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

thing might have turned the scale, for 
small threads sometimes pull our destinies 
in very diflferent directions from what we 
originally intended them ; but just as Hay- 
ward was contemplating Patty, Antony 
and his widow walked somewhat abruptly 
into the room. 

Antony looked quite delighted, and the 
widow was apparently rather fluttered. 

" Ha, ha, ha ! " laughed Antony, *' you 
will never guess, you young folk, where 
we middle-aged ones have been?" 

Mrs. Smythe bridled at this, and cast 
down her eyes. 

" Really Mr. Featherstone " she said. 

"Yes, really y my dear," continued jovial 
Antony, looking at his daughter. 

" What do you mean, papa ? " said 
Patty, rather crossly. 

" We've done it ! " said Antony. " Come 
Patty, kiss your new mother. We were 
married half-an-hour ago, and by this time 
old Woodford will be telling it all over 
the place ! " 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 249 

This startling news was perfectly true. 
Antony had got such a fright when he 
was called away from the dinner-table a 
few days before by his inebriate creditor, 
that other mischaaces might arise, that he 
had wooed the widow with what might 
be called almost desperate affection. His 
circumstances, he felt, justified him in this ; 
and the ardour of his devotion was re- 
warded. 

Antony would not wait — ^in fact, Antony 
could not. " Something might come be- 
tween us," he truthfully urged. " Patty 
might object — the lawyers, hang them ! 
might make delays. No, let us get married, 
and nothing can part us then ! " 

The widow — ^unfortimately for herself — 
listened with too tender an ear to Antony's 
eager persuadings. He wanted her money, 
and pleaded for it with passionate affection. 
Poor Mrs. Smythe believed he wanted 
herself, and so without any settlements she 
married reckless Antony Peatherstone ! 

" I've got it at any rate now," whispered 




.J 



"lUm*. 



CHAPTER XV. 

A TELEGBAM. 

Hatward saw a great deal of Patly 
Featherstone after her father's second mar- 
riage. She was constantly meeting him 
m the lanes and walks about Featherstone 
and Massam^ and was always very lively 
and agreeable to him. Hayward liked her 
very welL This was just one of those 
affabs which might have ended in matri- 
mony, if nothing had happened to prevent 
it ; and the probability is that these two 
would have jogged on together smoothly 
enough along life's troublesome way. It 
was not, and never could have been, a 
real affection. Not one of those absorbing 
atta<5hment8 which end in great happineas 




252 BSNSATH THE WATS. 

or misery. These come once in a lifetime; 
but Patty's feelings to Hayward and Hay- 
ward's feelings to Patty can come many a 
time. In £Etct, most yonng men, and most 
young women, who do not many in their 
first youth, have had various small loves 
and smaU diaappointmente, before they 
finally settle for good or ilL 

So Hayward often saw Patty, and 
thought of her sometimes ; but then he 
had many other things to think o^ also. 
The management of the large estates 
entrusted to his care was no light task, 
and the management of the boy, the young 
Sir Juan, was also by no means easy. 

This lad, with the proud haughty Span- 
ish blood flowing in his veins, had been 
kept in better order by his late guardian, 
the venerable Padre Fernandez. This old 
man had intended the youth to enter the 
Catholic Church ; but now all this was 
changed. Young Juan knew of the great 
fortune that he had inherited, and was 
careless and impatient of control. At last 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 253 

Hayward decided that it would be better 
to apply for him to be made a ward of 
Chancery. This finally was done, and the 
lad sent to Eton ; but before all this 
could be arranged, Hayward had his own 
troubles with the young Spaniard. 

He frequently heard from Jervis and 
Hilda during this time. Lady Hamilton 
still continued very ill. Sometimes Hilda 
wrote hopefully of her chances of recovery, 
and sometimes there seemed to be no hope 
She lay there watched, and tended, and 
prayed for just as if she had been a good 
woman, and a joy and blessing to her 
household and her home. Hour after hour 
Jervis used to pray or sit beside her, 
hoping and trusting to win back this poor 
strayed soul. But all still seemed very 
dark to Isabel. She could not forget her 
beauty, her triumphs, and her bitter and 
sudden fall. She used to tell Hilda of 
women whom she knew, who were far 
worse than she had ever been, who still 
held their heads high in their places in 



254 BENEATH THE WAYS. 

the world. She could not repent. She lay 
there, alike dreading to die and to live. 
Her pride, her vanity, made her shrink 
fixHn once more facing the world that she 
knew would receive her badly, and she 
dare not face that Eternal one, where she 
had no fnend. 

It was a miseraUe state oi mind, and 
her mind re-acted upon her fevered and 
enfeebled frame. Truly she had sown the 
whirlwind and reaped the storm. 

At last there came better accounts to 
Massam. Some of the worst symptoms 
were passing away, Hilda wrote; and they 
began to hope that her originally fine 
constitution would triumph over the wast- 
ing effects of disease, and bitter mortifi- 
cation and pain. 

All this while — during her whole illness 
— ^her father had taken not the slightest 
notice of her existence. When she lay 
at the point of death Jervis had thought 
it was his duty to write to Mr. Trevor, 
a»d inform him of the dangerous condition 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 255 

in which his daughter was. But the vain, 
pompous, hard old man had replied in a 
few bitter words. He wished to hear 
nothing further of a daughter who had 
disgraced herself so deeply, he wrote, and 
begged to iaform Mr. Jervis that Lady 
Hamilton was already dead to him. 

HiB kindly Ludnda .««, however, not 
SO hard. She secretly wrote to Hilda to 
know if Isabel had everything she re- 
quired in the way oi attendance, &a ; 
and she heard almost daily through Fatty, 
from Hayward, how Lady Hamilton was 
going on. 

She used to tell this news regularly 
to her old husband. The squire was 
human, after all ; and, though he was too 
proud to admit it to a stranger, he couM 
not feel quite insensible to his daughter's 
condition. No word was hard enough 
from the squire's lips when speaking oi 
Isabel, but stiU he never reproved his 
good-natured Lucinda for telling him how 
she was. 



256 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

" She is getting better now, they hope, " 
at last said Lucinda. 

" She had better have died, ^ replied 
the squire, bitterly. 

Tet he did not quite feel this. He 
could not quite forget the beautiful girl 
of whom he once had been so proud. 
Isabel had stained her name, and brought 
shame to his vain old heart ; but she 
was his child still. I think he loved his 
Lucinda better than he had ever done, 
for her kindly words and thoughts of this 
&llen one. 

A few days after the news had come 
to Massam that Lady Hamilton was 
better, Hayward was startled one morn- 
ing by receiving a pressing telegram from 
Hilda. 

'* Come to town at once, " were the 
words it contained. "Horace wishes to 
see you immediately. " 

Was Isabel dead? was his first thought. 
He knew that a sudden turn for the 
worse might carry her off at any time. 



BENBATH THE WAYS. 257 

and this idea was a shock to him. He 
had loved her once. He had given her 
what he could never give again — ^the 
chivalrous devotion of his young man- 
hood — ^the first deep passionate affection 
of a warm and sensitive heart. 

And was she dead — gone out on the 
lonely journey that we must all take? 
Hayward's eyes grew moist, and his hands 
trembled when he received this telegram, 
and believed that Hilda had sent it, so 
as to break the melancholy news. 

He went up to town by the first train 
that he could catch, and drove direct, on 
arriving there, to the Jervises' house. 
The servant who opened the door looked 
distressed, but she said nothing, but 
ushered him into the dining-room, and a 
few minutes later Hilda appeared, but 
paused almost as she crossed the threshold 
of the door. 

" Don't come near me, Philip, *' she 
said, with a sad ring in her sweet voice, 
" it is wiser for you not *' 

VOL. HI. B 



258 BKNKATH THS WAYS. 

''Why?" asked Bfayward advandng. 
" Is — is. Lady Hamilton dead ? ** 

«' Oh no, " answered Hilda, '' but I have 
sad news — ^we fear that Horace has taken 
the fever. ** 



CHAPTER XVI. 

NEAR THE GATES. 

" Horace ! " repeated Haywaxd, after 
Hilda had told her ill news. 

" Yes," said Hilda, slowly, and she sat 
wearily down on a .^ nir tte door, a. 
if she were quite worn out. "He has not 
been well for days," she continued. ** I 
have noticed how tired and depressed he 
seemed, and this morning he saw the doctor 
and and " 

"Well, we must hope he will throw it 
off," said Hayward, kindly. " I am glad 
that you sent for me, Hilda." 

" It was by his wish," said Hilda. " As 
soon as he heard that he had taken the 
fever he asked me to telegraph for you." 



260 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

''Yes?" 

'*And he has asked several times for 

you but at the same time, if you 

have any fear " 

" I have none," said Hayward. '* I 
shall be glad to go to' him at once." 

So Hilda led the way to her husband's 
bedroom, and as Hayward entered it and 
looked at Jervis, a certain feeling of awe 
came over his heart. 

Jervis was asleep — an uneasy, fevered 
sleep. As they stood and looked at him 
he moaned and tossed. Then he opened 
his eyes, which had a far-away look in 
them, unlike their usual cheerful and serene 
expression. 

" Horace ! " said Hilda, gently ; and at 
the sound of her voice something of the 
old familiar look stole back. 

" My dear one," he said, and held out a 
hot thin hand. 

'' Do you see Mr. Hayward ? " said 

Hilda. 

Then Jervis looked at Hayward, and a 



BBNEATH THE WAVE. 261 

faint quiver, and then a faint smile, passed 
over his lips. 

" I am glad you have come. Thank 
you for coming, Philip," he said the next 
minute. 

*' But I'm sorry tg find you ill, Horace," 
said Hayward. 

Then Jervis smiled again — a strange, 
solemn smile. 

"I have received my summons, Philip," 
he said, quietly. " I believe I am going 
to eternal rest." 

There was no fear in the young man's 
voice — ^no shrinking. He was going to 
rest, and latterly there had been some dis- 
quiet, some sharp pangs of mental pain 
within his heart. 

"Oh, Horace!" wept Hilda, "do not 
talk thus do not leave me " 

Again Jervis smiled. 

'*It is all for the best, dear one," he 
said. " Our Father in heaven is watching 
over us now." 

" But, Horace," said Hilda, kneeling 



262 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

down by the bed, and taking his hand, 
" why do you think this ? Do you feel so 
very ill?" . 

" Yes," answered Jervis, slowly, '* and 
I have much to do in the Uttle time 
that I have left. This is why I sent for 
you, Hayward," he continued, looking at 
Hayward. ''You must not leave this poor 
little woman alone in her time of trouble." 

*' I will do anything. What can I do ? " 
asked Hayward, much affected. 

"First, I want you to help me to make 
my will," said Jervis. " I will tell you 
what I want to do, and then will you 
draw a rough draft out, and take this to 
some lawyer, and have it properly pre- 
pared, and then bring it to me to sign ? " 

" Of course I will," said Hayward, speak- 
ing brusquely and shortly to hide his 
emotion. 

" Go, dear Hilda, then, until this is 
done," said Jervis. " It would only be 
painful to you, and I wish to see Hay- 
ward alone." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 263 

Then Hilda left him, with stareaming 
eyes; and after she was gone, in a cabn 
clear voice Jervis told Hayward how he 
wished his moderate fortune to be left. 

Everything to Hilda — but he also left 
certain directions and bequests regarding 
his many charities. To these he prayed 
"his dei wife" to continue his suLrip- 
tions, and left in her hands the sacred 
trust to give, as far as her means went, 
to those who needed. 

It was a very simple will, and Hay- 
ward wrote down Jervis's words just as 
he spoke them. Then Jervis said a few 
words about Lady Hamilton. 

*' Don't let her drift ftirther down, 
Philip," he said. "She will live now, 
the doctors say, so stand by her, and 
act as her friend." 

"But " hesitated Hayward. 

"Kemember the poor weak woman has 
an everlasting life to live," urged Jervis. 
Try to make her not forget this — ^you 
and Hilda — ^try to keep her straight by 



264 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

being her friends, now when she wiU 
have so few." 

Hayward thought a moment, then he 
said — 

"I will try/' 

" That is right," said Jervis, with some 
of his old frank manner. "And now," 
he added, after a few moments' thought, 
"I have a few words to say to you, 
Hayward — ^that you m\ist remember are 
spoken now, becaiise I do not know how 
long speech may be left to me." 

"What are they, Horace?" 

" About Hilda," said Jervis ; and for 
the first time his voice faltered. " About 

the dear woman 1 have loved too 

well '' 

" Too well " repeated Hayward, as 

Jervis paused, evidently deeply affected. 

" Yes, too well," he said, solemnly and 
slowly, as soon as he had recovered him- 
self sufficiently to speak; "for my love 

blinded me ^to the feelings of her 

heart." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 265 

" What do you mean ?" asked Hayward, 
sharply. 

" The bitterness is passed," said Jervis, 
as if he were thinking rather than speak- 
ing. " But I know now that for her 
sake 1 am better gone " 

" Why do you say so ? " said Hayward, 
almost passionately. 

"Because," answered Jervis, "because 
1 learnt too late that this dear woman 
this woman, whose love was so pre- 
cious to me ^whose love I believed was 

entirely, most truly my own ^had yet 

a secret from me " 

" What ? " said Hayward, sharply, as 
Jervis paiised. 

" A secret that she had 'kept, because 
she thought it was her duty to keep it," 
continued Jervis. " Can you guess now, 
Hayward, what I mean ? " 

Hayward was silent, but a deep red 
Audi spread over hi, &«. 

" I see you guess," said Jervis ; and for 
a moment a pang darted into his heart. 



266 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

But the next, the serene faith of the man 
triumphed over this momentary weakness. 

'' She is a good girl," he said, " good 
and pure, and it was by no fault of hers 
that I learnt that what she gave to me 
-was not-Hayward, what she gave to 
you '' 

" Do not speak of it," said Hay ward, 
much agitated, and beginning to pace the 
room. 

"In a little while,** continued Jervis, 
with a ring in his voice so holy and so 
sweet that Hayward ever after remembered 
it, " for her, the sorrow for my death 
will be over. This is why I have con- 
quered the weak ^the last weak mortal 

pang that will stab my hearts and God 

has given me strength to conquer it. Do 
not think I did not suflfer, Hayward. She 
was the one woman I had ever loved 

but I loved God. He comforted me. 

His love is all sufficient for me. He has 
given me strength to tell you this ; after 
I am gone, you must love Hilda." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 267 

" Oh ! hush ! hush ! " cried Hayward. 

For a moment or two there was silence 
in the room after this. Then once more, 
in that sweet and ringing voice, Jervis 
continued : — 

" It was shortly before Lady Hamilton's 
illness that I learnt this. It was by a 
simple incident — ^accident I cannot call it. 
You had left your photograph lying on 
the table for Marion. I was sitting read- 
ing behind the window curtain in the 
dining-room, and Hilda came in. She 
never saw me. She took up the photo- 
graph and — and 1 watched her look 

at it, as she had never looked at me. 
Then she lifted it up, and pressed her 
Ups against it, and then the next moment 
flung it passionately down. I will not 

go on. Next I heard a woman praying, 

Hayward — praying that she might always 
make me happy — ^asking Grod there on 
her bended knees to give her strength 
to conquer the feelings of her heart ! It 
waa a bitter moment — ^nay, I will not 



268 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

deny it but ^but with God's grace 

I bore it With God s grace I am able 
to tell it to you now." 

As Jervis ceased speakings a sob broke 
the silence in the room — a passionate, 
heart-wrung sob from Hayward. 

" I 1 ^told her once, " he said, in 

a faltering and broken voice, "that your 

heart was half in heaven, but but I 

never knew before there was a man on 
earth who lived so near to God. " 
• • • • • 

After a little while Hilda came into 
the sick room, and Hayward left it. 
There was no trace on Jervis' face, when 
Hilda returned, of the painful and unsel- 
fish words he had just spoken. Its sure 
serenity had always been one of the 
characteristics of this man s faith, and a 
great calm seemed to fall upon his spirit 
now. He had conquered the last mortal 
weakness of his heart when he told 
Hayward of Hilda s love ; and his last 
days were spent in perfect peace. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 269 

He did not linger long. The unhappy 
woman beneath his roof — ^the vain and 
beautiful Isabel — ^had lain for many, many 
weeks on her bed of fever and of pain. 
But the pure-souled Jervis had a brief 
passage to the grave. Before he went 
he sent a message of farewell to Isabel 
by Hayward, and she wept some very 
bitter tears when she received it. 

" What, dying I " she said. " It cannot 
— cannot be ! " 

" I fear there is no hope, '' answered 
Hayward, much overcome. 

Then Isabel cried out, "He is too good 

to live ! and I have killed him ; I 1 

brought this fever to his ho\ise, miserable 
woman that I am ! " 

"He is fit to go — ^he is truly fit to 
go, Isabel, " said Hayward, trying to say 
some kindly words to her. " Let this 
console you, Jervis need have no fear." 

But Isabel would not be comforted. 
She cried and moaned until Hayward 
began to fear some serious consequences 



270 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

to her own health would be the result. 
He hinted this to her, and Isabel grew 
afraid. 

^'I dare not die/' she said shudderinglv. 
"Hay ward, I dare not die!'* 



It was close on midnight when Jervis 
left them. For some hours he had been 
apparently insensible, but just brfore the 
end came, he opened his eyes and looked 
at the tear-stained faces gathered round 
his bed. He moved his lips as if to 
speak, but his voice was gone. Then he 
looked at Hilda and at Hayward. He 
smiled, and with a last effort held out 
his hand. They both clasped it — both 
held it faat dux4g the next few momente 
—for in these next few moments the 
angels came for the soul of Horace 
Jervis. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

''THERE ARE NO TRICKS IN PLAIN AND 

SIMPLE FAITH.** 

During the next dark dreary days — ^the 
days when the good man's earthly form 
lay still in the home which he had truly 
made a shelter to the homeless, there were 
bitter, bitter tears shed for Horace Jervis. 
The young widow, with her hands clasped 
over her hot and swollen eye-lids, lay in 
her darkened room crushed down with 
self-reproach and grief. Ah, had she 
known of his last tender thoughts — of his 
unselfish words to Hayward — what would 
she have felt? As it was, she recalled, 
with bitter and heartfelt regret, his con> 



272 BE9KATH THE WATK. 

stant kindneas, his unfiulhig consideratioa 
and affection for h^sel£ 

And had she £Euled ? How often she 
asked herself this question. Had she ever 
by look or word betrayed her secret — the 
secret that she had hidden in her breast^ — 
and straggled with so long and sorely? 
She knew not, and guessed not^ that the 
good man who had left her had learned 
itm ; that it had been a bitter blow to him. 
Jervis had never even hinted this to her. 
She had watched and waited on him, and 
when his last hours drew nigh, almost 
with awe she had seen his calmness, his 
peace, his serene and perfect joy. Once or 
twice in her sorrow she cried out, when 
he was giving her some directions about 
duties to be fulfilled after he was gone. 

"Oh! Horace," she said, with streaming 
eyes, "have you no regret at leaving 
me alone?" 

" I am not leaving you alone, my dear 
one," he had answered, " I am leaving you 
in the care of God." 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 273 

He knew at that moment he was leaving 
her an earthly protector also, but he said 
no word of this. It was better for her, 
he thought, that she should not know, 
and as he had lived, thinking of others, 
so he died. 

There was a long procession followed 
him to his grave. But of whom did it 
consist? Not of the rich or the great of 
the vast city where he had toiled. In 
that long procession were the widowed, 
the fatherless, and the fallen — ^to all of 
whom he had been a fnend. 

There was one poor girl — one of those 
gay daughters of sin — a girl yet young 
and handsome, whom Jervis had tried most 
earnestly to save. She heard of his death, 
and when he lay in his coffin she came 
to his house, and asked to look upon his 
face once more. Her message was taken 
to Hilda ; but Hilda had learned from 
the lips that now were closed, "that most 
excellent gift of charity," and she sent 
down a few kind words to her erring sister. 

VOL. III. T 



274 BfiNEATH THB: W^AiYE. 

So the gid wenti upstairs and looked on 
his dead hce. Then she fell down by the 
side of the coflSn, crying: and. weeping, 
saying that it wsb the &ce of an ang^l, 
and from that hour she would! ain no 
more. 

She followed him to his grav^* Dressed 
in mourning) and caying bitterly,, sha stood 
by while the solemn and beautiful words 
of our funeral service, were read, in a 
broken and teaihchokedi voice by one of 
the many who had loved Jervis well;. Then^ 
just at the last £^e sprang forward^, said 
flung a great bunch of blue forgetrme^nots 
into the gra.ve. 

'•' I will never forget you ! " she cried« 
''You were a good man — you tiied to 
save me — ^and your words shall not be 
lost ! " 

She kept the promise that she madfe 
beside his grave. In after days Hald% 
who had heard of this incident, helped hai^ 
and stood by her faithftdly as a friend* 
Thus many of his good deeds lived after 



BSKEATH THE YTATB. 27$) 

faim, and his' namia was blessed when he 
had long, been/ dead: 



When the first bitter days of bereave^ 
ment were past, Hilda and Lady Hamit 
ton went to a quiet spot by the seaside. 
Change was necessary for them both, the- 
doctors told Hilda, and Isabel was only 
too glad to learn that she might go. 

She was recovering from her dangerous 
illness slowly and feebly. But the sea- 
air worked wonders for her, and in a- 
little while the bloom began to steal back 
to her lovely face. When she saw this 
she grew inwardly restless, and impatient 
of the seclusion in which they lived. She 
hailed, therefore, joyfully the news that 
Hayward was coming to see them after 
they had been about a month at the 
little sea-washed spot on the coast, which- 
he had chosen as a^ fitting retreat for 
Hilda during the first weeks of her 
widowhood. 



276 BENEATH THE WAVE* 

Hilda, watching Isabel, saw her on the 
day that Hayward was expected throw 
aside the dress that she usually wore, and 
don a more becoming one. Then she began 
twisting her golden hah- into some new 
fashion, and brought out her rings and 
ornaments. It was like a glimpse of the 
Isabel of old — the Isabel who had tried 
to wm the admiration and love of eveiy 
man who approached her. 

But Hayward when he came scarcely 
looked at her. He looked at the sweet 
sad face beneath the widow's cap, and 
saw at once how ill, anxious, and weary 
Hilda still looked. 

After the ordinary greetings between the 
three had passed, Isabel rose somewhat 
restlessly. 

"My dear Hilda," she said, speaking 
and acting like the Isabel of old, and so 
unlike the terrified and trembling woman 
that he had seen lying on her sick-bed, 
that Hayward could scarcely help smiling, 
"I would like to have a few words on 



BENEATH THE WAVE, 277 

business matters with Mr. Hayward — if 
you don't mind leaving us alone ? " 

Hilda's face flushed, but she at once 
rose to comply with Isabel's request. 

" Why should Mrs. Jervis go away ? " 
said Hayward, quickly. " She knows of 
everything that we can have to talk 
about." 

It was now Lady Hamilton's turn to 
flush, but she answered Hayward coldly 
and haughtily — 

'*You forget, I think, that by that last 
insane will. Sir George left you the 
guardian of my son ? " 

*'No, I do not forget that," said Hay- 
ward ; but by this time Hilda was at 
the room door. 

** Let me know when you have finished 
your conversation," she said quietly ; and 
Bhe left the room as she spoke. 

Then Isabel took a turn across it, as 
if she were thinking, but presently stopped 
before Hayward. 

" Well," she said, " about the boy ? Do 



278 BSmATH TBB WA^ 



you mean to Imng him up to hate his 
mother T 

''No, certainly not," answered Hajward, 
energetically. ''And I trust and hope, 
Lady Hamilton," he added, "that you 
will give me no cause to wkth to do so.** 

"You mean you hope 111 torn good, 
and walk in the straight path, eh. Hay- 
ward ? " said Isabel, with a Uttle uneasy 
laugh. 

"Yes," said Hayward, "I mean, I hope, 
ihsA none of us will forget — what ought, 
what must be a lesson to us all — ^the 
death of Horace Jervis." 

For a moment Isabel was silent. Then 

she said, "He was a good man ; 

the only good man, Hayward, that I 
have ever known." 

" He ^he was " began Hay- 
ward, but he could not go on. The 
memory of Jervis's last unselfish words 
to h^, of his last hand-clasp, utterly 
overcame Mm, and he ^ei '.way h^ 
^head to hide his emotion. 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 279: 

"But we can't all be like Mr. Jervis," 
said Isabel, preseirtly. "He waa iom 
good, I suppose, just like most of «iis are 
bom — ^the 'Other thing ? " 

Hayward did not speak. 

"But I was not bom good" continued 
Isabel ; " and, in truth, Hayward, I am 
quite weaiy of Uving this quiet Ufe down 
here." 

" Where do you wish to go ? " 'asked 
Hayward. 

"Abroad tpeople won't cast up iheir 

hypocritical eyes quite as much at me 
there, yon know. And as I shall be 
pretty well off as regards money " 

**Yes, you will be well off as aregards 
mcoaey, " said Hayward, as Isabel paused. 
" But, Lady Hamilton " 

" Well, what have you got to say ? " 
said Isabel. 

"Shall I tell you," continued Hayward, 
in a trembling voice, "what the good 
iBEan w^o is gone .said io me about you 
before he left iis?" 



280 B£N£ATH THE WAVE. 

'' No, no/' said Isabel hastily ; '' I would 
rather not hear, it will only make me 
uncomfortable." 

'^ But he charged me solemnly/' said 
Hayward, '^to look after you. He said 
I was always to be your friend, and if 
you go away, Isabel " 

"You think I will go to perdition, no 
doubt?" said Isabel again, with that light 
uneasy laugh. ^' But," she added, after a 
moment's thought, "for the boy's sake I 
won't do that — ^perhaps for your sake, 
though you have not been over kind 
to me — but I can't stand the dulness 
here." 

"But," hesitated Hay ward, "you are a 
widow now — ^would it not be the best 
and wisest thing that you can do to 
marry Captain Warrington?" 

" To marry Captain Warrington ! " re- 
peated Isabel, her face turning suddenly 
scarlet. "Do you know what that coward 
wrote to me, Hayward, on the day the 
trial went against me ? He who ought 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 281 

to have stood by me ! He wrote to say 
that after such a public exposure he must 
decline to have anything further to say 
to me ! What do you think of that ? ^ 
she continued, passionately. " It was a 
gentlemanly action, wasn't it?" 

"It was a cowardly action," said Hay- 
ward, *'to strike you then, but '' 

"Oh, yes, I know what you mean," 
said Isabel, still in a rage. "You mean 
that perhaps I would have married you 
before that if you had asked me? So. I 

would ^but he didn't know it, and he 

behaved like a scoundrel." 

"We will not discuss it then," said 
Hayward. "What I meant was, you 
would be better married." 

Isabel laughed. 

" I had a happy experience, hadn't I ? " 
she said. " No. I am free now, and for 
a while at least I mean to remain so." 

Then she began asking Hayward about 
her money, and how it was to be sent, 
and making other arrangemente for Uying 



282 BENEATH THE WATE. 

entirely abroad. In vain ^Hgqrward argued 
with her. 

^^ I meaai to go,'" she said, looking at 
him, smiEngfy. *"WiH you ^^eome over to 
Paris to see nxe, or do you ^Ihirik I am 
too wicked for you 1;o trust yourself with 
mer* 

"I hope Ttot,*' «aid Hay ward, gravely. 
But be saw it was no use. Isabel meant 
to go. She was weary, as ^e ♦did Hay- 
ward, 'df living with SBEilda. 

*'^he is 'always ^thiiifcing;" sflie said, 
^' and I liate >feo thirik. ^So T want to 
live where I shall iiave no time to do so." 

And thus lihe went away. -She was a 
little — just a very little affected wiien she 
parted with HUda. 

*' Good bye," she said, «nd she kissed 
Hilda's c^heeks, wOiich ^was a rare action of 
hers. '"You have been very kind to me 

you are not a bad kind of young 

woman and I suppose by-and-bye, you 

and Hayward will be making a mattch of 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 288 

" What folly, what nonsense I" said Hilda, 
blushing scarlet." 

" Oh, I dare say it will all come right," 

said Isabel, "and then sometimes rU 

come over, and see you and Reggy." 

Long afterwards Hilda told Hayward of 
Isabel's parting words about her little boy. 
And they often talked of them. These 
words left them a kind of hope -a hope, 
which, as time went on, and rumours 
of Isabel's Ufe reached their ears— that 
they clung to in vain; for she has never 
come baok. She lives in Paris, and when 
good women speak of the beautiful Lady 
HamUton they cast down their eyes and 
sigh. But there are other women who 
envy her — envy her beauty, her diamonds, 
her gay, careless, and easy life. But these 
women were not with her when she lay 
in the darkened room in Jervis' house in 
her deadly pain. They were not with her 
when she was ashamed to live, and afraid 
to die. She hates to think, she told Hay- 
ward; but sometimes dark thoughts must 



284 BENEATH THE WAVE. 

come back to her. Sometimes the skele- 
ton that she hides away so well — Chides 
beneath her gay attire, her laughter, and 
the excitement and whirl in which she lives 

must shadow-like re-appear, warning 

her that the day will come when the 
dark hours of dread and fear will ine- 
vitably return. 

But twelve months or more had passed 
away after Jervis's death before Hilda 
told Hayward that Isabel had spoken of 
coming back to see her little child. By 
this time Hayward had asked Hilda to 
be his wife. He did this even then 
with a certain feeling in his heart that 
he was speaking too soon. But he had 
a reason for doing so apart from Hilda. 

This reason was that Marion Marston, 
who had lived with her sister during the 
last eight or ten months, had once or 
twice given Hayward what she called "a 
hint." 

As we have seen, Marion Marston lacked 
in a very great degree, the sensitive and 



BENEATH THE WAVE. 285 

refined temperament that distinguished her 
younger sister Hilda. So as she thought 
that Hayward came too much about the 
house without ever distinctly saying what 
he came for, and as she cherished certain 
ideas about becoming Mrs. Hayward her- 
self, she contrived to allow him to see 
pretty clearly that she did so. 

But if Hayward had ever thought of 
her she ended her chances on the day 
when she gave him her "hint." Hay- 
w«d laugh^ at the time, said «>metl4 
pleasant, and then turned away. But the 
next time he went to the house he asked 
Hilda to be his wife. 

When the faltering words had passed 
his lips — faltering and broken, yet under- 
stood by the blushing and agitated woman 
who listened to them, — Hilda was silent 
for a moment, and then looked up into 
his face, and held out her hand. 

" Oh ! PhiKp,'' she said, " is it not too 
soon to forget ? To — ^to be so happy — " 

"-He, too, is happy, my dear, and he 



286 

wished it," answered Hajwaucd; and as lie 
i^oke Hilda's head fell on the iHieaat of 
the man wfaoia she had loTed so fidth- 
faDj and so wdL 



TH£ ZSlk, 

