Crcesus's Widow. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE PAST AND PRESENT. 

He lived in a great house, the rich man 
whom his friends and neighbours jestingly 
called Croesus. He was very rich, as this 
jest-name implied, for he had money and 
houses and land, and there was nothing in 
all the world that could be bought which was 
not his. 

But there are some things that no wealth 
can buy — can a man " add one cubit unto his 
stature " ; or stop the stealthy footprints of 
approaching age ? Neither could Mr. John 
Trelawn buy — what perhaps he prized the 

YOL. I. B 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



most on earth — the love of the woman to 
wliom he had been married for five long years. 

She was sitting waiting for him, this woman, 
on the evening when this story of her life 
begins. She was young still ; young, fragile, 
and dark- eyed ; and she sighed wearily as she 
sat alone waiting for her husband, for her 
thoughts had wandered far away from the 
present to the past. 

Let us for a moment look with her down 
that long vista. We shall see a girl then ; a 
girl in her fresh bright youth, though youth 
and hope were about all the good gifts that 
fortune had given her. She was the daughter 
of a man who had failed in business, and had 
started afresh with diminished capital and 
credit. Anxious days and anxious nights had 
succeeded. With a sickly wife, two handsome 
girls, and a boy to provide for, carking care 
had followed and pursued Mr. Henry Sudely, 
of Warbrooke, like a shadow. But he had one 
true friend ; a friend bound to him alike by 
bonds of near relationship and love. This was 
his only sister — a sister many years his senior 
who had done well in life, and had (in her day) 
made the most of her charms, and was now 



CROSSUSS WIDOW. 3 

Lady Stainbrooke, the wife of General Sir 
Thomas Stainbrooke, K.C.B. 

Thus, when Lady Stainbrooke returned from 
India, after spending the best part of twenty 
years there, she was able materially to help her 
oppressed brother, ^Ir. Henry Sudely. 

She went down to her native town, War- 
brooke, to stay with her relations, but she did 
not enjoy her visit. She had left her brother 
a stout, jovial-looking, prosperous man, and on 
her return she found him bent, white-haired, 
and careworn. 

" Can it possibly be you, Henry ? " she said, 
gazing at Mr. Sudely's worn face in astonish- 
ment ; and " Henry " was also looking at her 
the same moment in sad surprise. 

Twenty years had made a great change. She 
was an old woman now ; old, brown, and 
withered, with a front of false hair placed low 
on her wrinkled forehead, and she also dressed 
very eccentrically, bringing out "gowns" (as 
she called them) which she must have had for 
thirty years. But she was kind, and had a 
sense of humour and a sharp tongue of her 
own, of which she made abundant use. 

She felt very sorry for her brother. He had 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



been almost a boy in her mind all through the 
years of her absence, and to see him so care- 
worn and changed touched her worldly and 
hardened heart. 

" I will take your two girls by turns and get 
them off, Henry," she told Mr. Sudely. " Sir 
Thomas will not object, as they are both pre- 
sentable, and, poor man, he likes to be seen 
with pretty girls still ! " And Lady Stainbrooke 
laughed. 

Thus it was arranged that Nora Sudely lefi 
her father's house and went to live with her 
aunt, Lady Stainbrooke. She had never seen 
her uncle-by-law. Sir Thomas Stainbrooke, and 
felt rather nervous when the cab in which her 
aunt and she were driving stopped before the 
house, in town, which Sir Thomas and Lady 
Stainbrooke had taken for the season. 

" Now, my dear," said Lady Stainbrooke, as 
they approached Warwick Square, where this 
house was situated, '* I am going to give you a 
little advice. I wish Sir Thomas to like you, 
and therefore you must flatter him and make 
yourself pleasant to him, for however old a 
man is he is always open to flattery." 

Nora Sudely laughed— a girl's fresh, glad laugh. 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 5 

**Very well, aunt/' she said; ''and do you 
flatter him too ? " 

'' I'm married to him, my dear, so I've no 
occasion to do so," replied the old lady, drily. 

But when a few minutes later Nora was 
introduced to the General, who was a little, 
shuffling, rheumatic old man, she thought it 
would be almost impossible to flatter him. 

'' This is Nora Sudely," screamed Lady 
Stainbrooke at the utmost extent of her voice, 
so as to reach her husband's deaf ears. 

The General bowed, and then smiled blandly, 
^nd showed both rows of his yellovv^, false teeth. 

"Hope you're well?" he said. ''Glad to 
see you — always glad to see a pretty face, ha, 
ha, ha ! " And Sir Thomas laughed a peculiar, 
cackling, hollow laugh, which somehow or 
other set your teeth on edo-e. 

Nora Sudely laughed too, and looked with 
astonishment at the first General she had ever 
seen. 

" Hope your fatlier and mother are well 1 " 
•continued Sir Thomas. 

'* They are both very well, I think," said 
Nora, raising her voice to its highest pitch. 

" What do you say ? " asked Sir Thomas, 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



coming nearer to Nora. ''I don't exactly catcb 
wliat you say — I've a cold, and that makes me- 
a little deaf, I think." 

'' You have always a cold, then," screamed. 
Lady Stainbrooke. 

^' What are you screaming about, madam ? '*' 
said the little General, sharply. ''Ladies 
should never scream — they look ugly, horribly 
ugly, when they scream." 

" They shouldn't have deaf husbands, then," 
retorted Lady Stainbrooke. 

'' I'm not deaf generally, madam," answered 
the General. " I've a cold ; I suppose you 
sometimes have a cold ? " 

"Very often," replied Lady Stainbrooke, 
grimly. " But I want you to hear this even 
in spite of your cold, as you call it. Nora 
Sudely, as you know, has come to stay 
with us, and you must try to make her visit 
agreeable." 

"Charmed to do so, I am sure," said the 
General, once more looking approvingly at 
Nora. "Any man would be charmed to hava 
such a pretty young lady to stay in his house." 
And the General once more emitted the hollow,, 
cackling sound which he called a laugh. 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 7 

"Thank you for tlie compliment, Sir 
Thomas," said Nora Sudely. 

" No compliment," said the old soldier. *'It s 
truth — I like pretty women; always liked 'em/' 
And he gave his frightful cackle again. 

" We must take her about a little ; we must 
take her to the opera," said Lady Stainbrooke. 

"Certainly," said the General; "any time — 
•sooner the better." 

"There, my dear," said Lady Stainbrooke, 
turning to Nora ; " you see what it is to have 
a good-looking face ! If I had told Sir Thomas 
that any angular, copper-tinted relation of 
mine was coming to stay with us, he probably 
would have sworn at me ; but he's quite de- 
lighted to have you." 

" What are you mumbling about, madam ? " 
•said Sir Thomas, looking at his wife, for he 
hated not to hear what was going on. " You 
are one of those women who are always 
mumbling or screaming. Now, if you spoke in. 
a steady, even-toned voice, even with my bad 
■cold I could hear you." 

" Very well, I'll try," said Lady Stainbrooke, 
who was anxious for her niece's sake not to 
quarrel with her irate little spouse. 



8 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

*'I sliould be pleased to ride witli you, Miss 
Sudely," said the General tlie next minute, 
gallantly, "but the confounded climate of India 
still affects me, and I'm a little stiff in the 
joints." 

*' You are too old to think of riding," shouted 
Lady Stainbrooke. 

" Nothing of the kind ! Speak for yourself, 
madam. Many men, a great many years my 
senior, ride, but we old soldiers. Miss Sudely — 
we get battered with hard service before our 
time." 

" Yes," said Nora, very loudly ; " but it's a 
noble profession." 

''I think so," said the General "It's a 
gentleman's profession — not a vulgar, money- 
making, pettifogging business such as some 
men, born of good families, now follow. Yes, 
Miss Sudely, I'm glad you like soldiers." 

Poor old man ! He was aches and pains all 
over, yet he had his vanity still, and liked 
(as his wife had told her niece) to be flattered 
and made much of. 

With this quaint old couple, then, Nora 
Sudely found herself domiciled a few days 
before she had reached her nineteenth birthdav. 



CPtCESUSS WIDOW. 9 

She did not find it very lively. Lady 
Stainbrooke had only a very small circle of 
acquaintance, for all the General's family and 
almost all his old friends had passed away 
during his lengthened sojourn in India. But 
some old Indians like himself came occasionally 
to dine at the dull house in Warwick Square. 
Then Nora would sit and listen to dingy tales, 
the actors of which had mostly disappeared ; 
she would hear gossip that had tickled ears 
which now were deaf, and stories of the mischief 
wrought by bright eyes novv' dulled or closed. 
It was a strange life for a young girl, and while 
Lady Stainbrooke and her friends were chuckling 
over lost reputations, Xora Sudely was dreaming 
her first bright dream of love. 

She had not left her father's house heart- 
whole. About six months before Lady Stain- 
brooke's arival in England Nora had made the 
■acquaintance of a young painter who had gone 
to Warbrooke (the town where the Sudely 's 
lived) for his summer holiday, and for the 
purpose of sketching some of the neighbouring 
scenery. 

Nora Trelawn, now sitting in her husband's 
grand house, waiting for his return, saw in the 



10 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

past at tliat moment a picture wliicli love had 
painted on her heart. 

A girl, bright, sparkling, and happy ; and a. 
man, earnest, impassioned, with a profile like 
a Greek model, standing before her, in a soft 
evening in June. He was holding her hand,, 
and words, if not of love, at least of tenderness, 
were on his lips. 

The girl turned aside, half coquettishly. 

" Ah," she said, *^ I daresay you have often, 
made these pretty speeches before ? " 

" Never," answered the painter ; " my loves, 
liave all hitherto been ideal ones." 

*' Very different to the real one," laughed 
the girl. 

" Yes, very different," he replied, candidly.. 
'^Your face is not quite perfect, you know, 
Nora, and you are a brown little girl instead 
of a pink and white goddess ; but to me you 
are — " 

'' Well, what, sir ? " 

"Beautiful," said the painter: "for I see 
your sweet soul in your face." 

A brief love scene — a rift of light still shining 
through the dull, grey, monotonous colouring. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 11 

ivhicli now for five long years liad surrounded 
ricli John Trelawn's young wife. And how 
did these love passages with the handsome 
painter end ? 

They ended thus. Nora Sudely went, as 
w^e have seen, to live with her aunt, Lady 
Stainbrooke, and Lady Stainbrooke meant 
•conscientiously to keep her word to her brother, 
and get his penniless girl married as best she 
could. But one day, at the opening of the 
Academy, Nora stood so long before a picture 
in which her aunt saw nothing particular to 
•admire, that Lady Stainbrooke j)^^^ o^ lier 
gold-rimmed glasses and glanced at the number 
and the artist's name in her catalogue. 

'' Humph ! " said Lady Stainbrooke, " W. 
D. Yyner. Well, I don't think much of him, 
at any rate ! " 

" He is a friend of mine, and a very clever 
-artist," said Nora Sudely. And her face flushed. 

"He may be a great friend of yours, my 
■dear, but he's not a great painter, I can tell 
him, with my compliments," answered Lady 
•Stainbrooke. 

As these words passed her lips both Lady 
-Stainbrooke and Nora heard a liojht short lauorli 



12 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

from someone in tlie crowd beliind them. Nora 
turned round, and her face flushed more deeply 
still as she did so. 

*' Mr. Yyner ! You here ! " she said, and she 
held out a little trembling hand. 

*' Yes," he answered. "So you and this lady 
were criticising my daub ? " 

It was the handsome artist who had stood 
hand-in-hand with Nora on that bright evening 
in June, which she remembered only too well. 
He had left Warbrooke, promising to return,, 
but before he had done so Nora had quitted 
her father's house ; nevertheless the memory 
of Mr. Yyner had not faded from her mind. 

And now, as the two stood exchanging 
greetings amid the London crowd, the girl's^ 
dark eyes shining and smiling in the artist's- 
face, Lady Stainbrooke, glancing from one tO' 
the other, at once guessed their secret. 

"My aunt. Lady Stainbrooke," said Nora^ 
timidly. " Mr. Yyner.'' 

"So you think I shall never be a great painter, 
Lady Stainbrooke ? " said Yyner, smilingly 
looking at the old lady after his introduction. 

Lady Stainbrooke felt a little disconcerted. 
Mr. Yyner v/as such a good-looking man that it 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 13 

seemed impossible to a woman to say anything 
rude to him. She therefore did not hesitate tc 
make a little invention. 

" You mistook my observation, Mr. Yyner," 
she said, graciously. " It was the painter of 
this picture " (and she pointed with her glasses 
at a picture hanging nearVyner's) "that I said 
would never be great." 

" Yet he is great," answered Yyner, some- 
what grimly. "But," he added, "will you come 
and look at another picture of mine ? I don't 
think much of this one myself" 

The two ladies followed Yyner's tall, slight 
form until he stopped before a very striking 
picture. Here was a vnld sea coast, and two 
brown, stalwart, excited fishermen hauling in 
a capsized boat. 

" These rough subjects suit me best,'* said 
Vyner, folding his arms, and standing looking 
fixedly at his work. 

Lady Stainbrooke put up her glasses, and 
also examined the picture. 

"This is good," she said, at length; "very 
good." 

The painter smiled. Praise was sweet to 
him, as it is to us all ; but it was sweeter 



14 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

still because it fell on Nora Sudely's ears. 

Then Lady Stainbrooke looked at the painter 
himself, examining him critically through her 
gold-rimmed glasses, as she had examined his 
picture. 

"I took my niece to the National Gallery 
the other day, Mr. Vyner," she said. " I'm 
an old-fashioned woman, and I like the old 
painters." 

Vyner was now in his element. His large, 
handsome grey eyes lit with enthusiasm when 
he spoke of the old masters and their great 
works, and Lady Stainbrooke listened well 
pleased to his energetic words. 

"We are pigmies," he said, "we modern 
men beside these giants. Ah ! Lady Stain- 
brooke," and he stretched out one of his white, 
nervous hands, " if I could but pourtray my 
dreams." 

Lady Stainbrooke nodded her head, 

" That is ever the cry of genius," she said ; 
" the imagination outstrips the manual power. 
But, young man," she added, "if you have 
the divine fire — the gift which no application 
or study can give you— you will succeed." 

As Lady Stainbrooke spoke, the painter was 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 15 

standing before her with his head erect, and 
with his eyes fixed apparently on something 
far away. Perhaps some ideal picture was 
passing before him — some grand brain shadow 
that his hand could never produce. At all 
events^ after standing in this rapt attitude for 
a few minutes, he gave a restless sigh, and 
looked once more at Lady Stainbrooke. 

"I've been unsettled lately," he said, '^un- 
settled and restless. I have not done my work 
as I should." 

" Perhaps you're in love," said Lady Stain- 
brooke. 

" Perhaps I am," answered Yyner, with an 
uneasy little laugh ; and he glanced at Nora's 
bright, blushing face as he spoke. 

" Well," said Lady Stainbrooke, ''as I am 
not, I would not at all object to some lunch." 

The painter escorted the ladies to the refresh- 
ment-room, and was very attentive to Lady 
Stainbrooke. Her ladyship made herself highly 
agreeable to him, and invited him to call upon 
her at her house in "Warwick Square. Then, 
as she drove home with Nora after they had 
parted with Yyner, she heard all about him. 
He was poor — a struggling man — and no 



1^ CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

absolute declaration of love had passed between 
him and Nora. 

But the girl felt, as she told her aunt this, 
that he cared for her. This kno^Yledge, or 
rather hope, was very sweet to Nora's heart ; 
but it did not at all suit Lady Stainbrooke's 
views. 

The next day Yyner called at Warwick 
Square, and her ladyship saw him alone. Nora 
had been sent out on an errand for her aunt, 
and the painter had received a little note, 
asking him to visit Lady Stainbrooke at a 
certain hour. 

■ *'I wished to see you, Mr. Y}Tier," said 
Lady Stainbrooke, holding out her hand to 
him with a very good imitation of frankness, 
"because I hear there has been some romantic 
nonsense between you and my niece, Nora 
Sudely." 

Yyner's fine skin coloured faintly at this 
attack. 

*' I admire Miss Sudely exceedingly," he 
said. 

" Ah yes, my dear sir," said Lady Stain- 
brooke ; "but you cannot live on admiration, 
nor love either, for that matter. In fact, the 



CT.GESUS'S WIDOW. 17 

truth is that I have sent for you to appeal to 
your honour as a gentleman not to disturb the 
girl's peace of mind any further by the sight 
of vour g-ood-lookinof face. She is eno^ao-ed to 
be married to my friend Mr. Trelawn, who is a 
very worthy and a very rich man, and the less 
you see of Nora now the better." 

" Engaged ! " repeated the painter, and the 
colour faded away again from his handsome 
face. 

" Yes, engaged," repeated Lady Stainbrooke, 
Cjuite calmly ; "and it is a very good thing, too. 
My brother is miserably poor, and his girls are 
penniless ; and what would become of them if 
they did not marry ? You see I am quite frank 
with you, Mr. Yyner. I like you, and shall be 
glad to see you here by-and-bye, and to hear 
of your success. But let me get my young 
lady married first. Nora herself thinks it is 
better not to see you, and I am sure you will 
not wish to make her unhappy." 

The painter rose to take his leave. 

" Certainly not," he said ; but even Lady 
Stainbrooke's heart misgave her when she saw 
the grey, haggard look which stole over the 
man's face as he said these words. 



18 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

As lie descend ed the staircase, another 
gentleman was ascending it. He knew him 
by sight. It was John Trelawn, commonly 
called Croesus. A stout, big man, with a pale,. 
beavy face^ and a very large nose, was John 
Trelawn. Not one for a young girl to fancy,, 
nor a fitting mate for a bright, sparkling woman 
bke Nora. But he was rich. The struggling 
painter thought this bitterly as he went down 
stairs. Pdch ! And what was beauty, genius,, 
tender love even, to that ? 



CHAPTEK II. 

THE GKEAT LEVELLER. 

Xady Stainbrooke's little scheme prospered. 
Nora Sudelv was not eno^ao-ed to Croesus when 
Lady Stainbrooke told the painter this piece of 
news, but Nora Sudely was engaged to Croesus 
very soon afterwards. 

*' My dear," said Lady Stainbrooke to Nora, 
upon her return from the errand on which her 
ladyship had sent her to keep her out of the 
painter's way, " I've had a visit from your 
friend, Mr, Vyner. EeaUy, he is a very agree- 
able young man. You remember I asked him. 
if he was in love yesterday at the Academy. 
Well, I made a very shrewd guess. He has 
just been telling me all about it. It is some 
parson's daughter in Suffolk — an absuid affair 
it seemed at first — no money on either side. 



20 CUCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and as I told him, living on love went out with 
the Flood ! But the strangest things happen. 
This girl has come into a small fortune, and so 
the affair is settled.'^ 

Nora Sudely listened to these words, and the 
bright colour faded out of her cheeks, and the 
love-light out of her eyes. She stood before- 
her aunt, white and troubled, for a few 
moments — a slender girl, trembling, pale, and 
heart-stricken — and yet the old woman kept to 
her purpose still. 

** Aunt," she said at length, trying to speak 
calmly, " is this true ? 

"True, my dear?" repeated Lady Stainbrooke. 
" I can, of course, only vouch for its truth as far 
as the young man told me, and I can't see any 
motive he could have, unless it was true. 
By-the-bye, he told me also that he admired 
you very much, and altogether made himself 
very agreeable." And Lady Stainbrooke gave 
a little laugh. 

Nora asked no more questions after this. 
She did not speak again of the painter; bat Sir 
Thomas, a day or two afterwards, said to his 
wife — 

" That mi is losing her looks — -she has lost 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 2t 

lier vivacity, her charm — what is the matter 
with her, madam ? " 

'' She wants change," replied Lady Stain- 
brooke. *^ AVe must take her more about." 

So, when Mr. John Trelawn called the same 
afternoon, to ask his old friend, Lady Stain- 
brooke, to dine with him at Eichmond, her 
ladyship gladly accepted the invitation. 

'* The fellow is stupid, and a snob," said Sir 
Thomas. 

" The fellow is rich, and that makes up for 
everything now-a-days," answered his wife ; 
''and besides, he is an old friend." 

This latter recommendation, in one sense of 
the word, was true. When Lady Stainbrooke 
had been a handsome young girl in her native 
town, John Trelawn's father had lived and 
made a great fortune there. Queer stories 
about the commencement of this fortune were 
not want in 2: ; but the fact remained that vast 
ironworks and vast wealth belonged to Mr. 
John Trelawn, senior, before he retired from all 
earthly business. 

He left one child only — John Trelawn,, 
commonly called Croesus. This John Trelawn, 
then had known the handsome Miss Sudely in 



22 CECESUS'S WIDOW. 

Ms awkward boyhood. The handsome Miss 
Sudely had married an officer and had left 
Warbrooke while John w\as at school, but still 
he had known her. Trouble had come to the 
Sudely's in the years that had rolled away 
mncQ then, and greater wealth to the Trelawns. 
Old Trelawn had been gathered to his fathers, 
and John Trelawn (Croesu?) was a middle-aged 
man when Lady Stainbrooke returned to her 
native town, but still when they met they 
remembered, or pretended to remember, each 
other. They remembered each other's names at 
any rate, and Lady Stainbrooke made herself 
very agreeable to Croesus. 

Then Croesus came up to town, and was glad 
to meet Lady Stainbrooke there. They were 
in fact mutually useful to each other. John 
Trelawn knew no one in London ; and though 
Lady Stainbrooke had not a large acquaintance, 
still she had some friends, and she liked John. 
Trelawn's opera boxes, his dinners at Eich- 
mond — in truth, his wealth. 

And so she fixed that he was to marry her 
■niece, Nora Sudely, and he did marry her. 
The girl was not a willing victim, but she 
yielded to her aunt's representations. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 23- 

'^ Think how poor your father is, child ; 
think of what will become of you if 3'ou do not 
marry," urged Lady Stainbrooke ; and so, sad, 
silent, almost broken-hearted, Nora Sudely 
accepted her fate. 

She married John Trelawn because she be- 
lieved that the man she loved was about to be^ 
or was, married to another woman. Sha 
married John Trelawn because he was rich, 
and because she could help her father and her 
ailing mother, and her young brother and 
sister. But she never was the same woman 
again. 

John Trelawn bought a grand new house ia 
South Kensington ; he bought a villa by the 
river ; and sometimes he took his young wife 
down to the big house at Warbrooke, where 
his father had died, and they entertained Nora's 
family and his old friends there ; but everything 
always seemed very dull to Nora. 

She tried to do her duty, and indeed did it, 
as well as she was able, but she was not happy. 
A nameless dreariness and dulness always 
possessed her. Her sister married well, her 
young brother entered the army, her mother 
died in comfort, and years passed away, but 



'24 CR(ESL\S'S WIDOW. 

no cliiklren came to lier, and there was no 
brightness in her life Nora told herself, and she 
often wondered why people cared to live, and 
why they fretted and fumed about things that 
seemed of so little worth. 

At last one day (on her birthday) John 
Trelawn presented his young wife with a set 
of such rich and costly diamonds that it was 
scarcely possible for any woman to see them 
and know that they were hers without delight. 

So at least said Lady Stainbrooke, who had 
helped to choose them, and it must be admitted 
that Nora felt a slight glow of gratitude and 
affection for " John," as she gazed upon his 
magnificent gift. 

He gave them to her in the grand house at 
South Kensington. Sir Thomas and Lady 
•Stainbrooke dined with them on the same day, 
•and after dinner her ladyship (haying partaken 
veryfreely of "John's" champagne) said to Nora— 

" Ah, my dear, you may thank me now, I 
think, that by a little innocent artifice I parted 
you from a beggarly painter." 

Nora's face flushed, and slie put her hand 
quickly to her side. Then she asked, almost 
calmly — 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 25^ 

" "Wliat artifice did you use, aunt ? " 

*'I invented a young woman, that was all," 
replied Lady Stainbrooke, with a little laugh. 

" Then Mr. Yyner never told you that he 
was engaged — never told you anything at all, 
I suppose ? " said Xora, still calmly. 

Lady Stainbrooke nodded her head. 

" He told me he admired you, and I told 
him — had the sense and discretion to tell him — 
that you were engaged, Nora, and you see how 
well it has all turned out. You have every- 
thing — diamonds — in fact, everything a woman 
can desire." 

"Except happiness," said Nora, in a low tone, 
and she left her aunt — left her diamonds Ivino- 

^ o 

in their grand new velvet cases ; and the old 
w^oman, as she looked at them with her blinking 
eyes, acknowledged to herself that John Tre- 
lawn's champagne had been too much for her, 
and had stolen awav her wit. 

*' I should never have told her," she thought ;. 
but Nora said nothing more to her aunt about 
Mr. Vyner. 

Yet a few months later (for the fxrst time 
since her marriage), she met him. Nora vras 
at the Academv with some friends, and in the 



•26 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

crowd, just as she had seen him long ago — her 
eyes fell upon his never-to-be-forgotten face. 

She held out her hand to him, and for a 
moment or two no word was exchanged be- 
tween them. Then he said : 

"It is a long time since we met — Mrs. 
Trelawn. 

"Yes," answered Nora, ''a long time indeed — 
and," she added quickly, her pale face flushing, 
"you — you are not married, then V 

" No," answered Vyner, and his face, too, 
flushed. 

" My aunt — Lady Stainbrooke — told me long 
^go — before my o\vn marriage — before my 
engao'ement, in fact — that you Avere about to 
be married," hesitated John Trelawn's wife, 
with trembling lips and moistening eyes ; 
^' otherwise, Mr. Vyner — " 

She said nothing more, and for a minute 
"Walter Vyner made no reply. He stood 
there, looking at the once bright iiice 
which years ago had been his sweetest ideal 
of womanliood. It was a bright face no 
longer. Nora Trelawn was scarcely pretty 
now, with large, sad, dark eyes, and a 
weary look somehow all over the small. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 27 

regular features, that tlie painter remembered 
so attractive and charming. 

" So ! " he said presently, still looking at 
Nora, ''that old woman spoilt two lives, then V 

*' She spoilt mine," said Nora, in a low tone ; 
*' but — we must not speak of it now." 

All around them was the crowd. Other 
tragedies and comedies were perha2DS being- 
played on the same stage, but Walter Yyner 
and Nora Trelawn thought not of these. They 
only remembered when they had stood hand- 
in- hand, that summer evening long ago, and 
dreamed of a future that was not to be. It 
was but a common story, but as the painter 
kept watching Nora's face, he knew he had 
been regretted with no common regret, and 
loved with an abiding love that had not passed 

away. 

• • . * • 

They never met again for years. W. D.Vyner 
rose in fame after 'this, and John Trelawn 
(Croesus) bought one or two of his pictures and 
bung them up in his big houses, but never 
noted how often his young wife's dark eyes 
would wander to the canvas on the walls 
which Walter Vyner's hand had made to live. 



•28 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



And so years passed on. Croesus grew 
ridier and stouter, but there was no other 
change. They had been married five years on 
the eveninjx when Nora was sitting: waitin<]c for 
her husband — waiting for him, but not tliinking 
<3f him— thinking of the past which Lady 
Stainbrooke's little artifice had spoilt. 

Presently a heavy footstep was heard on the 
staircase outside. John Trelawn's wife heard 
it, and moved slightly, for she knew it was 
her husband's. A heavy footstep, and a heavy 
man ! A big, dull man was John Trelawn, 
thouQ:h no fool, and kindlv-hearted withal, and 
at times he would indulge in a ponderous sort 
of jocularity, which his numerous satellites 
unfailingly pretended to enjoy. 

He came into the room now, and laid one of 
his large hands on his wife's shoulders. 

"Well," he said, "and how wags the world 
with you, my dear ? " 

Nora smiled faintly. 

" Do you expect anyone to dinner, John ? "" 
she asked. 

"I met Martin and Prosser," answered Croesus, 
" and the poor devils looked hungry, and I took 
compassion. They'll be here directly," continued 



CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 29 

•Croesus, looking at his watcli, " so I must be 
•oft' to decorate." 

He left the room with a kindly nod to his 
wife, and by-and-bye Martin and Prosser were 
ushered in. 

Martin and Prosser were little men, just in 
the same sense that John Trelawn was a great 
man. Martin and Prosser were poor, and John 
was rich, and that made the difference between 
them. They had known John Trelawn all 
their lives, aad they smiled and sighed faintly 
with envy as they entered the big house and 
saTv on every side the signs of great wealth 
that it contained. 

*' How well Croesus is looking," said Martin, 
facetiously, to Nora. 

" In S23lendid condition," echoed Prosser. 

Nora just answered them, and that was all. 
^lie did not care for these early companions of 
John Trelawn, and one of her objections to the 
large, dull house at Warbrooke, where they 
then were, was that such men w'ere never out 
of it. Still, she could not quarrel with John 
for being kind to his old friends, but somehow 
iihe did not like to live at Warbrooke. 

" I will go and see if Mr. Trelawn is ready 



30 CPvCESUS's WIDOW. 

for dinner," she said, and so left the room, and 
Martin and Prosser looked at each other and 
smiled as she disappeared. 

'' Uppish ! " said Martin. 

*' Set a beggar on horseback," suggested 
Prosser, with a shrug. 

Meanwhile Nora had gone up the broad 
staircase, and was rapping at her husband's 
dressing-room door. 

There was no response. Then she opened 
the door and went in. John Trelawn was lying 
on the soft carpet in the middle of the room,, 
with his face downwards. Nora screamed and 
ran forward. She lifted his head and turned 
his face round, and when she saw the dull, 
half-closed eyes and the ghastly colour of his 
skin, even inexperienced as she was, she knew 
what had happened. 

In a moment — in the midst of his wealth,. 
in the prime of his life — he had been struck 
down ; the rich man had gone up to dress for 
dinner, and the grim foe had been waiting for 
him upstairs. Yes, there was no mistake — 
Croesus was dead ! 



CHAPTEK III. 



THE WIDOW. 



The sudden death of Croesus made a great 
sensation in Warbrooke. A poor man's elegy 
is soon sung, but our respect at least attends a 
rich man to his grave. 

** Terrible ! " said Martin, with a shudder 
remembering that he also was mortal. 

"When he had everything," sighed Prosser, 
whose pecuniary difficulties had made him find 
life at times certainly trying. 

What Martin and Prosser said was echoed 
by the whole town. John Trelawn had made 
few enemies, and even these were awed and 
silent when they heard the news of the rich 
man's sudden death. 

And the widow ? The dark-eyed woman, 
who had never heard a stern or unkind word 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



from liis lips. What did she think and say 
as she sat in the darkened room, where the 
still form lay — the empty shell of the kindly 
soul that had given her nothing but love and 
costly gifts, ever since she promised to be 
his wife; — promised what her heart could not 
fulfil ? 

It was all over now, and there was bitter 
regret in Nora's heart for her own shortcomings. 

She sat there remembering how good he had 
been, how unfailingly generous and considerate. 
He had grudged her nothing, and she had 
grudged him even a little love — even a bright 
smile or two — for she had been sad, though 
uncomplaining, all their wedded days. 

But she was not allowed to sit long alone 
with her dead. By the first express after the 
news of John Trelawn's sudden death reached 
her, Lady Stainbrooke hurried down to War- 
brooke to comfort and attend uj^on her afflicted 
niece. Her ladyship no doubt believed (and 
she was a shrewd old woman) that she would 
have done the same if Nora had been poor. 
But she would not. In that case she would 
have said, " Poor, dear Nora — how sad I " 
and sent her a five-pound note. But in the 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 33 

case of Croesus's widow, lier sympathy was 
active, was gushing. 

*'Poor child, poor darling ! " she said to Sir 
Thomas, but Sir Thomas did not respond. Sir 
Thomas, indeed, had never taken very kindly 
to Croesus. He came of a different class. His 
father had been a distinguished general while 
Croesus's father had been working in a leather 
apron at a forge. And the pride of birth clung 
to the old soldier. Croesus mio;ht be rich, 
" And you women think more of that than 
anything else," sneered Sir Thomas Stainbrooke ; 
but Croesus was not a gentleman, and this Sir 
Thomas could not forgive. 

The j^oor old rheumatic man, close on the 
brink of the grave, clung to the badges of his 
order still. He, Sir Thomas Stainbrooke, was 
not in truth so fine a 2:entleman as rouo-h John 
Trelawn, lying in his darkened room at War- 
brooke, once had been. At least he had not 
been so honest, so pure of life, so true to his 
word, and to the woman he had wed, as 
John Ti'clawn. But these were not Sir Thomas's 
ideas about the term of gentleman. He read 
that word in a different sense. To him it 
meant to be well-born, to be brave, to pay 

VOL I. c 



,34 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

your debts of liouonr, and for the rest — . Ah 
well ! Sir Thomas, like many another man who 
calls himself a gentleman, was not very par- 
ticular. His mind was prejudiced and very 
narrow. His love had been gallantry, and his 
faith — if he had any — was the echo of some 
jDarson's words. 

But the big ugly man who had died so 
suddenly at AVarbrooke had been larger-minded 
than this. He had made no professions, but 
he had given freely and generously of the good 
gifts which fortune had showered upon him. 
There were many to regret him as well as his 
dark-eyed wife. His name had figured largely 
enough in charity lists, but there were other 
charities without lists which had benefited still 
more largely by John Trelawn's honest hand. 

So when they carried him to the great family 
vault, where the first John Trelawn (the 
founder of their vast fortune) lay in state, there 
were some true mourners at least who follow^ed 
the second John Trelawn to his long home. 
There were other mourners, whose hearts were 
racked with anxiety beneath the black silken 
scarves which they wore so decorously. These 
were the relatives of the dead man — those who 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 35 

had hopes that they were not quite forgotten 
ill the will, which it was understood was to 
be read after the funeral was over. 

But when the will was read, only disappoint- 
ment awaited them. John Trelawn had left 
the whole of his great fortune to his wife, " In 
token of the tender love, respect, and affection 
which I bear her." In these words he be- 
queathed enormous wealth to the woman who 
was sitting upstairs, sad and listless. For Nora 
had declined to be present when her husband's 
will was read. She had not recovered yet from 
the shock of his sudden death. His familiar 
presence still seemed to haunt her — she could 
scarcely realize that she was to hear the loud 
voice and the heavy footfall no more. 

But the news of her new wealth soon reached 
hor. Lady Stainbrooke did not wait even for 
the lawyer to finish John Trelawn's will, until 
she hurried from the room, and went to the 
widow. 

*' My dearest child," she said, embracing 
Kora with effusion, " I was determined no one 
else should tell you. Your dear husband — - 
John, my old friend — has acted in the noblest 
manner. He has indeed shown how much he 

c2 



3G CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

loved you, for lie lias left you everything." 

Nora's pale cheeks slightly flushed, and that 
was all, when she heard the announcement. 

" It is a great position," went on Lady 
Stainbrooke, with elation. "Nora, you have 
everything before you now — you can marry — " 

''Aunt, aunt, hush!" interrupted Nora, 
putting up her hand. 

" Well, it is a little too soon to speak of it," 
admitted Lady IStainbrooke, " and naturally 
you must now feel great respect and affection 
for the memory of dear John, after hearing the 
contents of his will. Lm so delighted, my dear 
chikl ! Nothing: is so consolinci: as monev, and 
it would have been so dreadful if any of these 
poor relations of his had got anything. There 
would have been nothing but disputes in that 
case. Now it is all right, everything is yours ; 
and I hope, my dearest girl, you'll live long to 
enjoy it." And once more Lady Stainbrooke 
kissed her widowed niece. 

Then Henry Sudely — Nora's father — came 
into the room. He was a grey-haired man, with 
the marks of care upon his face, and he also 
went up and kissed his rich daughter. 

" Your aunt has told you, then ? " he said. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 37 

■*'Well, my dear, it's a great fortune — may 
it bring yoii happiness." And Mr. Sudely 
sighed. 

He was thinking how a little of this wealth 
— ^just a very little of it — would have lightened 
his heavy burdens long ago 1 Since Nora's 
marriage he had not wanted money, but he 
could not forget the sorely-pinched days which 
jDreceded it. They had made him old before 
his time — old, grey-haired, and bowed ; and 
their memory came back to him now in stransfe 
contrast with his daughter's enormous wealth. 

Nora kissed her father tenderly, and pressed 
his hand. Then, when Mr. Sudely told her 
how John Trelawn's will was worded, she 
became much affected. 

*' Poor John!" she said. " Poor, poor John !" 

She scarcely said anything more than this, 
but her heart was fidl of self-reproach and 
sorrow. How little she had appreciated his 
great love — how little she had given in return ! 
She kept thinking this while her aunt and her 
father were talking of John Trelawn's money, 
and of Nora's future life and position. 

"She will make a great match," she heard her 
aunt say presently, in an undertone ; and as 



38 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

tliese words fell on her ears, a tliought — a 
memory — wliicli she instantly tried to banish,, 
flitted for a moment across Nora's mind. 

During the next few days this thought, 
this memory, often recurred to her. But she 
always checked it. It seemed to her, indeed^ 
almost a sin to think of any future happiness 
which mi^fht be in store for her, so soon after 
her kindly husband's death. 

But as time went on, and weeks passed 
away, her life naturally clianged. For one- 
thing, she left the dull house at Warbrooke and 
went to the pleasant one in South Kensington, 
which John Trelawn had left to her. Her aunt 
and Sir Thomas came to stay with her here ;, 
for, as Lady Stainbrooke said, it was not good 
for her to be alone, and it was also very con- 
venient to her ladyship to live free of expense 
with her widowed and wealthy niece. 

This arrangement also gave Lady Stainbrooke 
a position in society which she had not before 
attained. The story of John Trelawn's enormous 
wealth had crept into the papers, and when it 
became known that all this vast fortune wa^- 
left to his dark-eyed young widow, many a 
scheming mother sought an opportunity of 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 39 

•making the clark-cyed yoiiDg widow's ac- 
<j[iiaintance. 

She in fact became known in society as 
^^ Croesus's Widow." This name was given to 
her very shortly after her retm^n to town, and 
the house in South Kensington where she lived 
soon l)eo:an to he re^'arded with oTeat interest. 

o o o 

The first person who called her Croesus's 
Widow was young Lord Seaforth. Lady Sea- 
forth, his ^vidowed mother, was Nora's next- 
door neio'hbour at her house in South Ken- 

o 

•sington ; had been, in fact, her next-door 
neighbour for several years w^hen John Trelawn 
<lied. 

But Mrs. John Trehiwn — however rich — had 
been a person of no consequence in Lady 
Seaforth's eyes. She would shrug her shoulders 
iind turn away her head disdainfully when she 
saw John's thorouohbreds standins: at his door, 

" Some rich people I know" nothing of," was 
her description of the Trelawns, if any of her 
set incj[uired who vrero the owners of the 
thoroughbreds. She, in fact, would have 
nothing to say to them ; never looked their 
way, and utterly ignored that such people as 
the Trelawns existed. 



40 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

But in tlie five years of Nora's wedded life 
young Lord Seaforth, the only son of tliis 
proud dame, had been running a career which 
threatened to bring his family's lofty name 
into the Bankruptcy Court. Nora remembered 
the young lord, a handsome lad, riding up to 
his mother's door in his first uniform. He was 
about four-and-twenty now, and the shadow of 
his life had fallen on that once bright face. 

Lord Seaforth was no long^er a handsome 
lad. He was a young man with a worn, pale 
face, and wearied-looking eyes, and a bitter- 
tongue. Yet sometimes the sweet boyish smile 
of old stole round his lips to gladden his mother's 
anxious heart. For Lady Seaforth loved her 
son with a tender and devoted love of which 
she rarely spoke. He was her only child — the 
one babe born to her before her lord had thrown 
aside all ties and lived such a life that his wife 
and he could only part. 

The late Lord Seaforth died suddenly abroad,, 
and the young lord, when a boy of seven, 
inherited estates already hampered and mort- 
irao-ed to an almost ruinous extent. But during^ 
the long minority they had partially recovered, 
and when Lord Seaforth entered the Guards 



CJRCESUS'S WIDOW. 41 

lis had a fair iacome as well as an old title ta 
begin life with. 

Alas, in five years the income was muddled 
a^'ay, and the old name no brighter ! A reckless 
father had been succeeded by a reckless son. 
There is no good in telling how the money 
had gone, but it was gone : in diamonds, in 
■expensive pleasures, in a hundred follies. Lord 
Seaforth at twenty-four was an impoverished, 
embarrassed man. Some were richer at his 
expense; but he had lost everything — his 
belief in human nature, his bright, high spirits, 
his good looks — all, in fact, that made life 
worth livinoj for. This was about his state 
when Nora Trelawn returned to her house in 
South Kensington a widow ; when her proud 
neighbour. Lady Seaforth, first began to think 
of her ; when voung; Lord Seaforth first srave 
her the name of " Croesus's Widow." 



CHAPTER IV. 

LADY SEAFORTH. 

Between Nora's drawing-room and Lady 
Seafortli's there was a well-built, substantial 
wall. But, one sunny afternoon in April, six 
months after John Trelawn's death, let us — 
invisibly — be present at the same moment in 
the two drawing-rooms. 

AVe must, by all the laws of etiquette, give 
her ladyship the precedence, and stand for a 
few moments silent and unobserved in the 
somewhat old-fashionedly fitted-up room, where 
a tall, handsome, fair-haired, and still young- 
looking woman was sitting on a faded yellow 
satin couch, crying bitterly. 

This was Alice Elizabeth, Viscountess Sea- 
forth ; and before her was standing a young 
man, with a frown upon his brow, and angry 
words upon his lips. This young man was- 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 43 

Murray, Viscount Seaforfcli, and the mother 
was telling the son some bitter truths. 

" It has simply come to this," she was saying : 
** I shall have to break up my establishment, 
and go abroad to starve ! And when I think 
how the money has been wasted — what wretches 
have got it — " 

"Abuse does no good, you know, mother," 
interrupted the young lord. 

"No," answered Lady Seaforth, biting her 
lips ; " but it is hard — very hard — to keep 
patience with you." 

" Perhaps. I admit I'm a good-for-nothing," 
said Lord Seaforth, and he began walking up 
and down the lono' drawino^-room. 

The mother's eyes followed him. As they 
<lid so, a softer look stole into them, for she 
was recalling his bright boyhood, before the 
shadow had fallen upon his face. She looked 
at him for a few moments, and then she rose, 
dried the tears that still wet her long^ brown 
lashes, and, going softly behind her son, she 
slid her arm throuo'h his. 

o 

"Murray," she said, "there is only one thing 
that you can do — you are young, you are 
^ood-looking — you must marry for money." 



44 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

'' Precisely," said Murray, turning round and 
lightly kissing liis mother's cheek. " Find me 
the unfortunate woman, mother, who will have- 
me, and I shall be charmed." 

Lady Seaforth did not speak for a moment ;. 
then with a certain hesitation of manner, which 
showed her own aversion to the scheme that 
she was about to propose to her son, she said : 

.'^ There is a lady next door, Murray — a 
widow — she is not of our class, for her wealth 
came to her, I am told, through commerce ;. 
but still she is rich — very rich — and for her 
position a very ladylike-looking person." 

" Her appearance is of no consequence," said 
Lord Seaforth, shruoroiDo- his shoulders. 

*' Yes, yes, it is," said his mother, with an 
impatient sigh. 

" Not a whit," answered the young lord,, 
scoffingly. "It is her money, not her face, I 
want ; so it is of no consequence how ugly she 
is." 

'' She is not ugly," continued Lady Seaforth. 
** Nay, she is good-lcoking. A dark-eyed 
woman, with rather a sad expression — yes, 
decidedly good-looking I call lier. Her name- 
is Trehawn — Mrs. Trelawn." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 45 

" But is she really rich — very rich?" inquired 
Lord Seaforth. 

" Immensely rich, I am told," answered liis 
mother; ''something about thirty or forty 
thousand a year. In fact, Mr. Trelawn always 
went by the name of Croesus." 

" And Croesus's widow is next door ! " said 
Lord Seaforth, throwing up his arms with a 
mock theatrical air. " What a huge piece of 
luck ! When will you introduce me, mother ?" 

'' I have only just made her acquaintance," 
said Lady Seaforth. "The truth is, it was 
rather an awkward affair for me to do, as these 
people have lived next door for four or fivo 
years ; but of course I never thought of them 
before." 

" Of course ! Not, I presume, until the fair 
lady became Croesus's widow, and therefore an 
object of interest to a tender mother with a 
beggared son." 

*' You need not sneer, Seaforth. It could 
not be very agreeable to me, you must know, 
to make the acquaintance of these people ; but 
for your sake — " 

*' 'J'hat is quite understood. But why do 
you speak of them as these people ? Surely 



46 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

there are not two rich widows to choose from ? " 

" Her aunt, Lady Stainbrooke, is staying 
with her. Lady Stainbrooke is the wife of an 
oh.1 general, and — well, I must confess I think 
that she is the most objectionable feature of 
the whole connection." 

At that moment, on the other side of the 
wall, in Nora's drawing-room. Lady Stain- 
brooke w^as saying — 

*•' My position, my dear, makes me quite her 
equal. It is very civil of her to call, certainly ; 
but as her son is in the army, and my husband 
is an old soldier, there is nothing remarkable 
in it." 

''I think she has no right to call upon me 
as a widow, when she did not call upon me as 
a wife," replied Nora, gravely. 

" You forget, my dear, that I was not with 
3^ou in poor dear John's lifetime," said Lady 
Stainbrooke, complacently. " And poor dear 
John himself — well, of course, he was very nice 
and generous — but still he was not exactly — 
how shall I put it ? — not exactly fitted for 
Lady Seaforth's society." 

" He was good, he was noble," answered 
Nora, warmly, and her face Hushed, '' and that 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 47 

is better than an old liiQ-li-sounclino: title. It 
is a liberty, I think, of Lady Seaforth to call 
upon me now." 

*' Nonsense, child, nonsense," said Lady 
Stainbrooke, good-naturedly. '' I had the 
highest opinion of poor dear John — did I not 
give my dearest child to him, so I must have 
had ? But there are grades in society that 
cannot be forgotten, and that must, and do, 
influence everyone. Naturally, now you take 
a different position with your large independent 
fortune, to what you did when your husband 
was alive. You are elegant-looking, you are 
young, and you are rich — why, my dear, you 
could marry any one ! '' 

"But I do not mean to marry any one,'* 
answered Nora. " Not even a spendthrift 
young lord, aunt." And Nora gave a little 
lausfh. 

Nevertheless a day or two after this Nora 
accepted Lady Seaforth's invitation to dine 
with her alone. Her reason for doing this, 
however, was not to meet the spendthrift 
young lord. But when Lady Seaforth called 
to invite her, she casually asked Nora if she 
were going to the private view at the Academy, 



48 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

which was to take place the day following 
Lady Seaforth's visit. 

"No, but I would like to go," answered 
Nora ; and then Lady Seaforth, in the interest 
of her son, offered to take Nora ; and Nora 
felt, therefore, that if she accepted this kindness 
from her newly-found neighbour that she could 
not very well decline to dine with her ladyship 
the same evening, when she assured Nora that 
they would be quite alone. 

" I know you will not care to meet any one 
just yet," said Lady Seaforth, in her calm, 
gracious way ; *' but if you will take pity upon 
an invalid like myself, for I am for from 
well to-day, and dine with me this evening, 
I shall be very pleased. I fear my son is 
en^ag:ed, or I should have asked him, but he 
told me he was going somewhere or other." 

Nora accepted this invitation. But when 
she entered Lady Seaforth's drawing-room, 
dressed in her deep mourning, a tall, slim, 
graceful young man rose to receive her as well 
as Lady Seaforth. 

" Permit me to present my son to you," said 
Lady Seaforth. '' Seaforth, this is Mrs. Trelawn/' 

Nora bowed and smiled. She knew this 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 49 

young lord very well by sight. She had seen 
him as a gay and handsome boy, and she had 
seen him when his gaiety had all passed away, 
•and when his face had grown worn, cynical, 
•and sad. 

But she spoke to him now for the first time, 
and she spoke to him with the ease and sweet- 
ness which made one of her charms. She was 
indeed glad to know him, and though she was 
only his own age she somehow regarded him 
as very much younger than herself. She was 
one of those women who can feel perfectly 
friendly with a man without feeling the re- 
motest wish to attract his admiration or peculiar 
regard. So before the well-served dinner 
which followed was over, Lord Seaforth had 
made up his mind that Croesus's widow was 
charming, that she was a dear little woman, 
and that if she hadn't a penny, a man might be 
glad to win her, and make her his Avife. 

The mother looked on well pleased. She 
saw her son was interested and amused, and 
she gladly watched the old sweet boyish smile 
that she now so seldom saw steal over his lips. 

'' He may learn even to love her," she 
thought, wistfully, later on during the eveninor. 



50 CRCES'JS'S WIDOW. 

But when the evening was over, Lord Seaforth, 
havincr escorted Mrs. Trelawn to her house 
next door, went back to his mother's drawing- 
room, and the shadow which now his face so 
often wore had once more returned to it. 

*' Well, what do you think of her ? " asked 
Lady Seaforth. 

The young man laughed, and shrugged hi» 
shoulders. 

" She's too nice a woman for me to think 
of," he said. ''Not the style, in fact. I want 
something that wouldn't cost so much — some- 
thing or someone who wouldn't expect so 
much. No, Croesus's charming widow won't 
do for me ! " 

*' What nonsense," said Iiis mother. 

*' Sad fact," answered the young lord. And 
then he went to his club, and in his careless, 
thoughtless fashion told some of his chums 
when he aot there about "Croesus's Widow." 

Thus the name was given to her. When 
Nora went the next day to tlie private view at 
the Academy, people looked after her, and at 
her, as they had never looked before. It began 
to be whispered, in fiict, that the young widow 
with Lady Seaforth was about the richest!; 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 51 

i-Qclepenclent woman in London. Lady Sea- 
forth's motive for appearing with her in public 
was, of course, well understood. Other dowagers 
with spendthrift sons sighed enviously when 
they saw the young lord join his mother and 
Kora, and saw the soft blush on the rich 
w^idow's cheeks as she listened smilingly to the 
young lord's cynical and often bitter criticisms 
■on those around him. 

*'You wish to destroy my illusions, I see, 
about the ' world of beauty and fashion,' " said 
Nora, with some archness of manner, in answer 
to one of these remarks. 

"The 'world of beauty and fashion' destroyed 
ull my illusions some years ago," said Lord 
Seaforth. " Would you believe it, Mrs. Tre- 
lawn, I was once the most amiable, believing, 
and gushing of young men 1 " 

Nora laughed. 

'' I remember you," she said, ''a bright-faced 
boy." 

Seaforth launched also. 

" That bright face," he said, "was the indi- 
cator of the brightness within. I was a jolly 
boy, wasn't I, mother ? " 

Lady Seaforth answered with a sigh. 

UNIVERSITY OF 
ILLINOIS LIBRARY 



52 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

*' I hope you will yet live to be a liapp7 
man, Seaforth," she said. 

Seaforth shrugged his shoulders. 

" You hope that I'll be a very rare specimeri 
of my race, then, mother," he answered. 
** Happiness after a certain age is, in my 
opinion, unattainable. What do you say,, 
Mrs. Trelawn ? Do you believe that either 
men or women arc ever happy after twenty ? " 

For a moment Nora was silent. Her memorjr 
went back to the few bright days of her owa 
life, which had all been before she was twenty. 
She sav/ again, at that instant, the handsome 
painter's face ; and the evening haze, rising 
from the meadows as it had done in the brief 
hours of her love dream, when her soul had 
been absolutely flooded with happiness and 
hope. 

Her fixce softened, and some of its girlish 
charm came back to it as this vision of byegone- 
hours passed before her. For a minute or twa 
she looked so like the Nora Sudely of old, that 
a man who was watching her almost started,. 
and his heart began to throb as it had not 
throbbed for years. 

This man was Walter Yyner — W. D. Vyner,, 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 53' 

the famous painter now — tlie lover wlio had 
stood liand-in-liand witli Nora in tlie Warbrooke 
meadow's long ago, and who had just learned 
that she was a widow ; that all John Trelawn's 
vast wealth had come to the dark-eyed girl 
whose love had once been his. 

The painter stood still, watching Nora. He 
saw her smile on the young lord by her side, 
and he heard some lady whisper, " It is a good 
thing for Seaforth." 

But, almost as he heard that whisper, Nora's 
eyes fell on the fine face which had seemed so 
perfect to her girlish fancy. She visibly started 
as she recognised Yyner, and the painter saw 
the flush that rose to her cheeks as she bowed 
to him and moved forward so as to take his 
hand. 

*' You are in town, then," said Yyner, with 
some embarrassment. 

" Yes," answered Nora. And then she added, 
softly, ''You must come and see me, Mr. A^yner; 
my aunt. Lady Stainbrooke, is with me." 

" I bear that old lady no love," said the 
painter, and his expression chauged as he spoke, 
"but — I shall be glad to call upon you." 

" Do come," said Nora ; and then, remem- 



54 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

berinr that she was walkino^ with Lord Seaforth, 
she introdiicecl the jDainter to him. 

The two men bowed coldly ; and Vyner bit 
his lips, and Lord Seaforth's pale face slightly 
flushed as she did so. 

"I have already had the honour of an in- 
troduction to — this gentleman, I think," said 
Vyner, in anything but an agreeable tone of 
voice. 

" Yes — I have met Mr. Yyner," said Seaforth, 
with a certain discomfort in his manner, which 
was very unusual with him. 

Scarcely anything more was said. Yyner 
took oft' his hat and passed on with a frown 
upon his brow and an angry feeling in his 
heart. Yet he did not leave the room where 
JS^ora was. He stood lookino; at her from a 
•distance — lookim^ at her and thinkiuor res^ret- 
fully of the past. 

'' It's the old sweet face," he thought ; " the 
sweet, trustfal, honest face which would have 
kept me straight all my life if I'd had the luck 
to win it. But now — what is the use of going 
near her again — now, when it's too late." 

He made an impatient gesture, and the 
frown deepened upon his forehead as the last 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 55 

reflection passed through his miucl. Too Lite ? 
and yet Nora's dark eves had bricrhtened and 
her cheeks flushed a welcome when her little 
hand was clasped in his ! 

In the meanwhile Lord Seaforth was still 
walkiug with his mother and Mrs. Trelawn. 
hut the vouno' lord's manner had chani^^ed 
somewhat since that brief interview with the 
painter. He vras silent for some minutes after 
they parted with Yyner, and then almost 
abruptly he said to Nora — 

" So you know Yyner, the painter, do you ? 
Have you known him long ? '*' 

*'Yes, for years," answered Nora, gravely. 



a 



I knew ]\rr. Yvner before mv marriao-e. 



''Indeed !'"' said Lord Seaforth, as if surprised. 
Then he added, after a moment's thought^ 
''But of late years I suppose- — you know nothing 
or little about him — except as a painter ? " 

" I have been proud of him," said Nora, and 
her dark eyes sparkled; "proud of the old friend 
who has won the fame that he once dreamed 
of — who — who is now what he hoped to be — 
when I knew him as a airl." 

Seaforth made no reply to this. But he 
grew so absent in manner that Lady Seaforth 



56 Croesus's widow. 

proposed to Nora that tbey sliould leave the 
Academy. Lady Seaforth was afraid of wearying 
lier beloved son of the lady whom she wished 
to be his wife ! 

Seaforth escorted his mother and Nora to 
their carriage, and then called a hansom and 
drove straight to one of the entrances to 
Regent's Park. There he dismissed his hansom, 
and proceeded direct to a seat under the shadow 
of some trees, where he expected a friend would 
be waiting for him. 

This friend was waiting for him — a young 
girl fair to look upon — who started up with a 
glad smile of welcome on her rosy lips as he 
drew near. 

" Well, Miss Nellie," he said, holding out his 
hand, '^ I hope I have not kept you waiting ? " 

'' Indeed you have," answered '' Miss Nellie," 
still smiling. '*' I have not the honour of pos- 
sessing a watch, you know, but I think it 
must be a little past four now." 

Seaforth looked at his watch, and then gave 
a sort of impatient sigh. 

"It is past fiYQ, my poor Nellie," he said, 
*'but I really could not come before. I took 
my mother to the private view of the Academy, 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 57 

and who do you think I saw there, Nellie ? " 

The girl shook her head. She was looking 
up in his face — looking as women look on the 
foces they love. 

'' How can I tell ? " she said. 

" Vyner, the painter," continued Seaforth. 
''He spoke to a lady who was with my 
mother — and, little Nellie — somethinnr leaked 
out, you know" (and Seaforth took the 
girl's hand, and drew her down on the seat 
from which she had risen when he approached 
her), '•' something which perhaps I ought to 
have told you before — only it seemed no 
matter." 

"What is it. Captain Seaforth ?" asked ''Miss 
Nellie," and her colour faded a little as she 
spoke. 

" Only a little, little thing, Nellie," answered 
Lord Seaforth, " and really no earthly conse- 
quence to us. But lest at any future time you 
should think me a liar or a q:(\v deceiver, I 
ought, perhaps, to tell you that my honourable 
and respected parent, now lying in his grave — ■ 
who ruined me before he retired to it, by-the- 
bye — was one of that order whom a certain 
Tommy is said to have loved." 



58 CTtCESUS's WIDOW. 

''Miss Nellie" looked up as if she did not 
'anderstand all this. 

"To explain more fully," continued Lord 
Seafortli, " I have the misfortune to be, 
Nellie — well, for one thing, little Ijetter than 
a beggar." 

'' Oh ! I'm so sorry, so sorry," said Nellie, 
and she nestled her little hand more closely 
into his, and looked at him with sweet, wistful 
eyes. "But — but, this will make no difference 
to me ? " 

" AYon't it, though ? " answered Lord Sea- 
forth, trying to speak lightly. "All women, 
you know, love the gauds of this world — and 
you are a little woman, I suppose, like the 
rest?" 

" Not like the rest if they care for monev 
more — more than — " 

"More than love, do you mean, child ? So 
you care for love most of all, Nellie — really 
most of all ? " 

"Yes," half- whispered the girl, and she 
-coloured all over her fine soft skin. 

" And you love me — a worthless fellow like 
me ? Ah, Nellie, you are a foolish, foolish 
little girl ! " 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 59- 

'* Do YOU mean iDCcause you are poor ?" asked 
Nellie, yet more wistfully. 

*' Because I am poor, and because I am 
worthless, and because I have not even told. 
you the truth, Nellie, about my position in 
life," answered Lord Seafortli. 

*' How do you mean ? Please tell me what 
you mean ? " 

'' Yyner, the painter, will tell you — will tell 
your sister most likely to-day, that I have been 
sailing under false colours. Don't look so 
frightened, Nellie — it's nothing awful 1 have 
to relate — simply that instead of being Captain 
Seaforth, as you have known me, I am Lord 
Seaforth ; and Awner heard my title to-dav.''' 

" Lord Seaforth ! " repeated Nellie, and she 
started up, turned quite pale, and stood lookino- 
in the young lord's face. 

*'At your service — but you don't seem to 
like the new name, Nellie, as well as the old ? " 

*'No, no, no!" exclaimed the girl, and sho 
put out her hands with a gesture of pain and 
anger. "Now I know what you mean —I am 
foolish to care for you, you think — when, when 
we are so far apart ? " And she burst into- 
passionate tears. 



=60 CTwCESL'S's WIDOW. 

*'Nay, nonsense, IN'ellie ! " said Lord Sea- 
fortli, and lie also rose, and put his arm around 
ber. *'Husli, child, darling, do not tremble 
so — we will talk it over — we will see what we 
can do — only don't distress yourself ; don't 
^cry, my dear, dear little Nell." 



CHAPTEE V. 

KELLIE. 

Befoke the interview between Lord Seaforth. 
and *'Miss Nellie" ended, Lord Seaforth had 
persuaded her to forgive him for having de- 
ceived her, or rather allowed her to deceive 
herself, about his name. 

The error into which she had fallen was very 
easily accounted for. One morning ''Miss 
Nellie" and her dog, a handsome collie, were 
crossing the roadway near St. George's Hospital, 
when the unfortunate collie was knocked down 
and run over by a hansom cab. The young 
man seated in the cab heard the girl's shriek, 
as she saw what had happened, and he at once 
jumped out, and helped to lift the ]30or dog 
up, and carried it to its young mistress, who, 
forgetting everything but her favourite's suf- 
ferings, knelt down on the pavement, and laid 
the poor brute's head tenderly on her lap. 



62 CRGESUSS WIDOW. 

*' I am so very, very sorry," said the young 
man (Lord Seaforth), ''but I fear the dog is 
done for, and if you will allow me I'll get him 
taken away, and put an end to him at once." 

Then the girl (Miss Nellie) looked up in- 
dignantly, and Lord Seaforth saw how pretty 
she was. 

*' Do you mean take him away to be killed ?" 
said "Miss Nellie." "Kill my poor, poor- 
man " (and she once more bent over the injured 
dog, who looked up in her face, and tried to^ 
lick her hand) " because he is hurt ? You shall 
not do that, sir ! I will never leave Wallace, 
and he shall never leave me whilst he is alive." 

** I am truly sorry," again said Lord Seaforth. 
" Shall I call a cab, then, and drive you home- 
witli vour dos: ? " 

" If you will do that I shall be very mucli 
obliged," answered the girl, who was beginnino- 
to be aware that she was fast becoming the 
centre of a crowd. 

So Lord Seaforth called a four-wheeled cab,. 
and poor Wallace was lifted into it, and held 
partly in "Miss Nellie's" arms, and partly in 
Lord Seaforth's, until they reached the small 
house in the small street near Eegent's Park,. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 63 

where *' Miss Nellie " informed Lord Seaforth 
that her father, Major Ely the, then lived. 

Nellie got out of the cab, and ran into the 
house first to break the news of the door's 

o 

accident to her father. 

" For he is blind," she said to Lord Seaforth, 
^' and that, of course, makes us love him and 
think of him more." 

Lord Seaforth smiled a grim smile at the 
situation he found himself in, after the girl left 
him. Sitting in a cab, nursing a strange dog ! 
But he felt repaid when " Miss Nellie " re- 
-appeared, leading her blind father by the hand. 

"This is my father. Major Blytbe," said 
Nellie, "I — I do not know your name — but he 
has been so kind to dear Wallace, father." 

" My name is Seaforth," answered Lord 
Seaforth, getting out of the cab and smiling. 
^' I am glad to make the acquaintance of Major 
Ely the — for I, too, am a soldier." 

" Thank you for your kindness to my little 
girl," said Major Elythe, " and to the poor dog, 
who is an old and faithful friend to us all. 
Will you come in — Mr. — or are you Captain 
Seaforth ? " 

" I hold a captain's commission," answered 



64 CRCESUS'S WIDO^Y. 

Lord Seafortli, looking with some interest at 
the bUnd Major. 

He saw a tall, grey-haired man, with a noble 
face, and an expression of almost touching 
resignation. This was the pretty girl's father, 
then — the pretty girl who, when Lord Seaforth 
looked round for her, was lifting out her injured 
dog from the cab, and speaking to it in tones 
of sympathising endearment. 

They carried it together — Lord Seaforth and 
Nellie — into the meagrely-furnished parlour 
close to the house door, and Nellie went down 
on her knees and made poor Wallace a bed 
with a simple grace that the young man could 
not but admire. 

She was pretty — not a regular beauty, though 
wdth perfect features — but it was a face with 
a charm. Modest, innocent, and sweet, with 
bright, light, curly, ruffled air, and a fair^ 
smooth, fresh, rosy, girlish skin. 

" She is a little rosebud," thought Lord 
Seaforth ; and as he assisted^ her to make the 
dog's bed, he determined not to lose sight of 
*' Miss Nellie." 

'' Let me bring you a ' vet ' to see Wallace," 
he said. ''I know a verv clever fellow who 



CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 6^ 

belongs to us and he'll do wliat he can for the doo;." 
Lord Seafcrth brought the 'S'-et," and 
"Wallace was nursed and tended until he was 
*' the happiest dog alive," Seaforth told Nellie. 
Seaforth came very often to inquire after the 
dog, and sat in the little parlour and talked to 
the blind Major, and looked at the golden head 
of "Miss Nellie." 

He called her "Miss Nellie" in these days. 
She was the Major's youngest daughter, and 
Miss Blythe — Margaret, the eldest — was from 
home. Seaforth soon learnt all the little simple 
family history. Major Blythe had been in an 
infantry regiment, and his sight had been 
affected by a sunstroke in India. Then he 
had left the regular army, and had become an 
adjutant to a militia corps. But he gradually 
grew blind. They were terrible hours, he told 
Lord Seaforth in his simple way, when he first 
knew that his sight was doomed. 

" She was my little comforter," he said, 
softly, laying his hand on Nellie's fair, ruffled, 
curly air, and the girl looked up and put her 
arms round her blind father's neck. 

" I said I would be his spectacles 1 " she said, 
trying to speak lightly, but Seaforth saw her 

YOL I. D 



66 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

blue eyes grow moist, and the next moment 
slie dashed away a tear. 

A very tender love existed between the 
father and daughter. Major Blythe admitted 
to Seaforth that she was his darling, though 
*' Margaret, my eldest daughter, is a most 
excellent, clever woman," the old soldier told 
his visitor ; '' but, then, Margaret is ten years 
older than Nellie, and so naturally Nellie is 
the spoilt darling of the household." 

" The spoilt darling of the household," how- 
ever, showed very few signs of being spoilt. 
She was a bright, sweet, unselfish girl, with a 
little hot temper, perhaps, sometimes, but the 
moment it was over it was gone for ever. No 
one ever saw a frown or a sulky look on Nellie 
Blythe's fair face. 

" She is like the sunshine," said her fond 
father, and soon Seaforth did not care to tell 
or think how much he thought of Nellie Blythe. 

Their acquaintance went on very smoothly 
and pleasantly at first. Then Margaret Blythe 
returned home, and she shook her head and 
looked very grave when she heard about 
*' Captain Seaforth.'^ 

**It is unwise to allow him to come here. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 67 

father," she said to the Major. ^' He is in the 
Guards, you say, and altogether an unsuitable 
acquaintance for Nellie." 

Margaret Blythe 'was quite different in 
appearance to Nellie, but she also was good- 
looking. She was tall and dark, and very 
determined, and she was a professional artist, 
and an illustrator of books when she could get 
employment. During her meritorious struggles 
(for the Blythes were very poor) Margaret had 
made the acquaintance of W. D. Yyner, the 
painter. The woman usually so cold and self- 
contained was not cold to the handsome artist. 
She admired him, and she grew fond and proud 
of him. Yyner was lonely, and not particularly 
happy, and he liked and respected Margaret 
Blythe, and he had drifted into an engagement 
with her. They had been engaged six months 
when he saw again the face of his first love at 
the Academy — when he learned that Nora 
Trelawn was free — that rich John Trelawn was 
dead, and that all his great wealth had come 
to his young widow. 

Yyner had once met Lord Seaforth at the 
Blythes, and had been introduced to him as 
" Captain Seaforth." But Seaforth only went 

d2 



68 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

very rarely to the Blytlies' house now. Mar- 
garet had given him to understand that he was 
not a very welcome visitor to her, and Seaforth — 
perhaps gladly — had taken advantage of this 
intimation to induce his friend Nellie to meet 
him unknown to her sister. They had met 
each other, and walked together many and 
many a time before Lord Seaforth had been 
urged by his mother to think of Nora Trelawn ; 
before his own overwhelming embarrassments 
had often made him resolve to break with 
sweet Nellie Blythe. 

But this was not an easy thing to the young 
man's heart. His wild and reckless life had 
grown wearisome to him, and the women on 
whom he had wasted his substance had palled 
upon him, but it was too late. Lord Seaforth 
was a ruined man, and what Lady Seaforth had 
told him was but too true. Unless he married 
a woman with a great fortune his career was 
ended. And yet still he did not care to break 
sweet Nellie's heart ; for he believed that the girl 
loved him. Her soft, innocent eyes had betrayed 
this a hundred times, and though no binding 
words had absolutely passed between them, Sea- 
forth knew that in honour he was bound to Nellie. 



CHAPTER VI. 

MARGARET. 

He did not accompcany her home after lie liad 
-told her that his real name was Murray, 
Viscount Seaforth, and that he was little better 
•than a beggar. He left her at the Metropolitan 
Railway Station, which was almost close to the 
street in which Major Blythe lived, and then 
NelKe went on thoughtfully to her father's 
house. 

The street door was opened as she approached 
it, and her eldest sister stood there looking 
anxiously out. 

"Nellie, where have you been ?" she said. 
^' How late you are." 

" Only sitting in the park," answered Nellie, 
while the tell-tale colour flushed through her 
fair skin. 

'' 'Tis too late for a young girl like you to 



70 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

sit in the park alone," answered Margaret.. 
" Have you brought in father's paper ? " 

c^Oh! — IVe forgotten!" exchiimecl Nellie,, 
in real distress. 

"It is thoughtless and unkind of you," said 
Mar<Taret, " when he has so few pleasures, and 
he has asked for it twice. I should have gone- 
for it myself, but I dare not leave Hatton in 
the house alone for fear she sets it on fire." 

'^ I will run and get the paper now, Margaret.'^ 

'^ No, I will get it. But Nellie, come in here ;, 
I have got something to tell you." And 
the elder sister drew the younger one into a 
little back room, and closed the door behind 
them. 

*' Walter Yyner has been here," began Mar- 
o-aret, *'and he has just been telling me a 
shameful thing, Nellie." 

" What has he been telling you ? " said 
Nellie, quickly. 

'' That Captain Seaforth, w^hom you and my 
father think so much of, is actually not Captain 
Seaforth," continued Margaret. " Walter saw 
Mm at the private view at the Academy to-day 
with a lady whom he knew long ago, and this- 
lady was with Lady Seaforth, and the man 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 71 

vrlio has pnssed liimself oJff here as Captain 
Seaforth is really Lord Seaforth ! I call it 
•exceedingly insulting to us." 

For a moment Nellie was silent. Her delicate 
skin flushed, and her lips trembled ; then she 
:said sharply, almost defiantly — 

'' Yes, I know." 

'' You knew, absolutely knew, that a man 
was coming to your father's house under a false 
title, and never told it ! Then I'm ashamed of 
y'ou," exclaimed Margaret, very angrily. 

"Very well, you can be ashamed," retorted 
Nellie, her quick temper asserting itself. 

" When did he let you know this ? " said 
Margaret, scornfully. "After he was found 
out to-day, I suppose, when he knew it was no 
use trying to deceive us any longer ? " 

Nellie bit her lips and did not speak. 

"Can you not see through his motives for 
this?" proceeded Margaret. ''He meant to 
^muse himself with a silly girl, and whenever 
anything serious might be expected to come of 
it he intended to vanish ! There is, indeed, no 
€aptain Seaforth, and Lord Seaforth has 
throughout acted in a most ungentlemanly 
manner." 



72 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" The mistake arose through me," said Nellie. 
'' When he came here first — and you know how 
that happened — I said, ' I do not know your 
name,' and he simply said, 'My name is Sea- 
forth : ' and it is ' Seaforth.' What deception- 
was there in that ? Perhaps he did not care ta 
tell us he was a lord when we were living^ in a 
little house like this. It was from delicacy of 
feeling, Margaret, and not from any wish ta 
deceive. Then father said — Was he Mr. or 
Captain Seaforth (never, of course, guessing his- 
real rank), and he said, ' I hold a captain's 
commission ' ; and he does hold a captain's- 
commission. There ! What lie did he tell ? 
You are unjust, Margaret ; and I think Mr. 
Vyner need not have come here to make mis- 
chief." 

Nellie had talked till she was c[uite hot and 
red. She stood there facing her sister and 
defending her lover with sparkling eyes and 
quivering lij)s, a true type of womanhood ! 
The man had erred, and the woman having 
herself forgiven him, would not permit another 
to disparage him. 

*'It is all very fine to talk thus," again 
commenced Margaret; but at this point her 



CIICESUS'S WIDOW. 73 

words were interrupted by an unkempt red 
head — on which was perched a very funny 
looking cap — being thrust in at the door. 

"Miss Blythe, please, masters howling for 
his papers," said the owner of the head and the 
cap. 

" What an expression, Hatton ! Why do 
you use such words as howling?" said Margaret, 
reprovingly. 

" Isn't it right," asked Hatton, and she put 
the thumb of her left hand on her hip, and 
stood looking contemplatively at her mistress. 

She was a most comical figure ; all angles, 
even the eyes being oblique of vision. She 
was the only handmaiden of the Blythe family, 
^nd Margaret tried in vain to make her pre- 
sentable. She insisted for one thing on calling 
her "Hatton," though "Becky" had been the 
name that this waif of the streets had gone by 
.since her cradle in the dust-pan. 

" But," Margaret Blythe had told her, " in all 
good families the female servants bear their 
surnames." 

" And this is a * good family V " said Becky, 
with a sly look in the oblique eyes. "Oh, please, 
miss, I didn't know it." 



74' CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Margaret could not help smiling at tliis,, 
though still she insisted upon "Becky" being 
<5alled Hatton, but the change of name did not 
change the girl. "Hatton " remained hopelessly 
comical and absurd-looking, and was a constant 
eyesore to Margaret's artistic tastes. But 
Hatton knew how to work. 

" I've been at it ever since I was put down," 
she once told Nellie, "and my legs got that 
bowed with being put down and working 
too soon, that they've kept on that way 
inclined." 

This odd-looking damsel now stood look- 
ing at the sisters, with her thumb upon her 
hip. 

" What have I to say to master, miss, when 
he yells out again for the papers ? " she said,, 
presently. 

" Say I will get them for him. Miss Nellie 
has forgotten them," answered Margaret. And 
Miss Nellie took advantage of this "break in the 
discussion with her sister, and as Hatton turned 
to leave the room she left it also, and went to 
seek her blind father. 

" Father, I have been so naughty," she said,, 
going up to the Major and slipping her little. 



CIICESUS'S WIDOW. 75 

hand into liis. **' I forgot to get your paper." 

""Well, my little girl, nevermind; Hatton 
will get me one, and then you'll read it to me," 
lie answered, stroking lier small hand. 

"And father, have you heard, has Margaret told 
you, what a stupid mistake we have both made?" 
And the Major felt the small hand twitch. 

" No, darling. I've hardly seen Margaret 
to-day. Yyner has been here, and she has been 
talking to him." 

" I know. Well, it seems, father, \>ie have 
made such a silly mistake. Don't you remem- 
ber the first time — when Wallace was hurt, 
you know — how we asked somebody his name, 
and he said it was Seaforth ? " 

**Yes, darling, of course — Captain Seaforth." 

*'He never said Captain Seaforth," continued 
Nellie ; "he just said 'Seaforth, and that he held 
a captain's commission. Well, he is Seaforth, 
and he does hold a captain's commission — but, 
father, he has another title, too — and he told me 
this to-day." 

"Have you seen Captain Seaforth to-day, 
Nellie ?" asked the Major, with just a shade of 
^anxiety in his tone. 

"Yes ; I met him, and he said he had some- 



76 CHCESUSS WIDOW. 

tiling to tell me," answered Nellie, bravely. ' 'And 
what do you tliink this sometliing is, father? 
He is really Lord Seaforth." 

"Lord Seaforth I " repeated the Major. " You 
indeed surprise me, Nellie." 

*^ Yes, isn't it a surprise ?" said Nellie, trying 
to speak lightly. "We have been entertaining, 
not an angel, but a lord unawares, it seems. 
And Margaret has been so stupid about it,, 
father ! She has been scolding me, and talking 
all sorts of nonsense, just as if he could have 
any motive for deceiving us — it is so silly of 
Margaret." 

The Major was silent for a moment or two, 
then he said — 

" I wish this young man had told us this 
before, Nellie." 

"But why, father ? Isn't he just the same? 
He is a gentleman, and you are a gentleman. 
What matters it whether he is Captain or Lord 
Seaforth?" 

" The world would say it was a good deal of 
matter, Nellie. Kank, like money, makes a 
distinct difference of class. It was not right of 
Lord Seaforth to allow us to go on calling him 
Captain Seaforth." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. ^1 

"Now, father, you are just as liorrid as 
Margaret," said the "spoilt darling of the 
household,'' and she put her arm fondly round 
her kind father's neck. "Don't you begin 
scolding too, dear old man, or I'll have a fine 
life between you ! Promise me one thing, 
father, that when he — when Lord Seaforth 
comes — that you will be quite kind to him, for 
you must not forget how kind he has been to 
us — and to the dear old doggie, too !" and Nellio 
stroked the lame collie's head, for Wallace was 
sitting, as usual, at his master's feet, looking up 
with his soft, wistful, brown eyes^ into that 
patient face. 



CHAPTEE VII. 

THE OLD LOVE. 

Walter Vynee kept liis promise, and went to 
call upon his old love, Nora Trelawn, a few days 
after he had met her at the private view at the 
Academy. 

Nora Trelawn was very rich, and she was 
also a woman of taste ; and lately she had 
taken some pleasure and interest in the fur- 
nishing and adornment of her house ; and 
Yyner saw all this, as he stood a moment or 
two alone in her drawing-room, and he saw 
also on the soft-tinted walls two pictures of his 
own, which had been purchased through a 
dealer, and for which Nora had given a great 
price. 

Vyner stood still, looking at his pictures 
thoughtfully, as we sometimes look at our own 
work. Perhaps he was not thinking only of 
his pictures — a dark-eyed girl, in the hazy 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 79 



meadows in the eventide, was standing shadow- 
like before him, also in his mental vision. But 
his contemplation of the real and the ideal was 
speedily interrupted. A lady, not knowing he 
was there, now entered the room ; and sat 
down on the first couch she came to, panting, 
and fanning herself. 

Vyner turned round and looked at her. It 
was Lady Stainbrooke, Nora's aunt — Lady 
Stain brooke, a little browner and more 
wrinkled than she was five years ago, but 
otherwise not much altered. Vyner knew her 
again at once. He remembered at that moment 
the lie she had told Nora — the lie which had 
parted him from the girl he loved. 

He made a slight movement, and Lady 
Stainbrooke looked up and saw him. 

" Is that you, Mr. Vyner ? " she said. '' He 
is looking after Nora's money," she thought. 

Vyner bowed a cold and stately bow, but the 
old lady held out a withered hand, and looked 
at Vyner with involuntary admiration. 

What had the five years done for the 
handsome painter ? His face was darker and 
graver, but he was handsome still. The 
sharply-cut features, the bright grey eyes, were 



80 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

unchanged ; but the expression of the classic 
mouth was altered. The enthusiasm, the 
passion of youth, had passed away ; and a 
calm — almost a proud — look of composure had 
replaced them. The man had gone into the 
arena, and fought and conquered. W. D. 
Vyner's name was known now all over Europe, 
and as Lady Stainbrooke looked at him 
admiringly, with her sharp, brown eyes, she 
remembered this. 

'^ So," she said, smiling, and still fanning 
herself, ^' you are a great man now, Mr. Yyner. 
Well, I prophesied you would be, long ago, if 
you remember." 

Yyner, who was a hater of shams, answered 
wifch more abruptness than politeness. 

" I thought it was exactly the other way, 
Lady Stainbrooke," he said. 

The old lady laughed, and showed her yellow 
teeth. 

" Ah," she said, " I recollect that day, Mr. 
Vyner, when you fancied I was speaking about 
one of your pictures to my niece, Nora, but in 
reality I was alluding to some other artist. To 
be sure, it seems like yesterday, and yet it is 
five or six years ago, for it was just at the time 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 81 

when Nora was first engaged to poor, clear John 
Trelawn. You will have heard, I suppose, that 
he is dead, and that he has left a great fortune 
to Nora ? Ah ! all the men are after her now, 
Mr. Yyner," and the old lady laughed again, 
enjoying her delicate little stab. 

Yyner made no answer. He stood looking 
.at Lady Stainbrooke with a half-scornful 
smile, for he knew that he at least could not 
be accused of seeking Nora for her money. 

"I do not blame people in the least," 
continued Lady Stainbrooke in her jaunty, 
rather humorous way, *'for paying court to 
the rich, for they are so much pleasanter 
acquaintances than the poor ! One can never 
be quite sure indeed that a poor friend isn't 
going to ask for the loan of a five-pound note. 
And then the wealthy have so much in their 
power — even you great artists, Mr.Vyner, want 
patrons, you know ! " 

"Yes," answered Yyner, bitterly, "we sell 
our work. Lady Stainbrooke, as you ladies sell 
your faces." 

Lady Stainbrooke nodded her head and 
fanned herself more vigorously than ever. 

" Not bad," she said, approvingly. " So we 



82 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

do sell our faces, Mr. Vyner, and therefore 
beauty is a great gift. Where should I have 
been now, I wonder, if I had not been a pretty 
girl — though perhaps you are surprised to hear 
I ever was ? And where would Nora have 
been if she had not sold her face to poor dear- 
John Trelawn ? She would not have had 
young Lord Seaforth at her feet, as she has 
now, I promise you.'' 

" She might have been a happier woman," 
said Vyner, gravely ; and as he spoke the room 
door opened, and Nora herself walked in. 

There was a glad light in her eyes, and a 
pink flush in her soft cheeks, and she held out 
her hand frankly and cordially. 

" I am glad to see you, Mr. Vyner," she said. 
I — I — have been expecting you to call." 

" I intended to come yesterday," said Yyner,, 
" but a man's time is not always his own." 

" A lady in the way, ch, Mr. Vyner ? " asked 
Lady Stainbrooke. 

" You are fond of inventing ladies for my 
benefit, it seems. Lady Stainbrooke," answered, 
Vyner, very grimly. 

Lady Stainbrooke looked up at this sharply,, 
and glanced from Nora to Vyner. She 



CROSSUS'S WIDOW. 83 

knew, or rather guessed, at that moment that 
some sort of explanation must have passed 
between them before John Trelawn's death, but 
she was too shrewd to remark upon this. 

" I have been complimenting Mr. Yyner on 
his success, my dear," she said, turning to 
]SI ora. 

" Yes," said Nora ; '' I have been pleased 
— and proud.'' 

Her voice faltered a little as she uttered the 
two last words, and she cast down her dark eyes ; 
^nd Vyner's voice also showed some emotion 
when he spoke. 

" I see," he said, smiling, and with a sort of 
gesture towards his pictures hanging on the 
wall, '' that you have been one of the patrons 
whom Lady Stainbrooke has just been telling 
me that we artists are obligjed to court." 

" Ah, Mr. Yyner, Mr. Yyner, that is a little 
too bad ! " laughed Lady Stainbrooke, with a 
slightly -forced laugh, for she did not wish to 
offend her rich niece Nora. " I said nothino: 
of the kind, my dear ; but I see, I see ! " And 
Lady Stainbrooke nodded her head after her 
usual fashion. 

"Well, what do you see, aunt ? " asked Nora. 



84 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

** Mr. Yyncr is too great a man now to like 
my little innocent jests — ah, yes, tliat is just 
tlie way — success is very trying, Mr. Vyner." 

*' Do you mean to the temper, Lady Stain- 
brooke ? " asked Yyner. 

*' To the temper and the disposition," 
answered her ladyship, agreeably. " It requires 
a strong head not to be turned by adulation." 

*'Mine has had no chance of being turned, 
then," said Yyner. 

*' Ah, ah, so you tell us," said Lady Stain- 
brooke, '' but perhaps we know better. Nora, 
my love, don't you expect Lady Seaforth this 
afternoon ? " 

" She said something about coming in to 
see the new pattern I got at the Art School 
yesterday," replied Nora. '' But it is no 
matter," she added indifferently. 

*' If I am in the way " said Yyner, rising, 

and understanding Lady Stainbrooke's hint. 

** But you are not in the way," said Nora, 
softly, and she looked smilingly at Yyner. 

*^ I am glad of that," he answered, *' for it is 
pleasant to see the face of an old friend." 

** And a patron too !" said Lady Stainbrooke, 
with a little scoffino- lausfh. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 85 

She was a worldly old woman this, and put 
little trust in men, and less in women. She 
knew the world, she thought, and the hearts of 
those who live in it ; but she measured these 
hearts by her own narrow gauge. It was but 
natural that she should suppose that "Walter 
Vyner had come to court Nora for her wealth, 
for she spent a good deal of time in courting 
Nora herself. There are feelings and motives 
that Lady Stainbrooke did not understand, 
and therefore she did not believe in them. 
She understood, however — as we have seen — 
the power of money ; and she esteemed it 
above all earthly, or, alas, heavenly things ! 

But Vyner was not afraid of Lady Stain- 
brooke's sharp tongue. He stood there looking 
at his old friend, and he was not thinking of 
her as a wealthy widow, but as the bright girl he 
had loved long years ago. The shadow of these 
years — which at one time had changed Nora's 
face so much — at this moment seemed quite 
passed away. She, also, was thinking of her 
maiden days, and of the lover to whom she 
had given her young heart. And this lover 
was before her now. No chill poverty to part 
them now — nothing to part them — thought 



S6 CEGESUS'S WIDOW. 

Nora Trelawn, as slie smiled softly, and looked 
on Vyner's face. 

But presently Vyner gave a short, impatient 
sigli, a jerk almost of the grandly- shaped head. 
A memory had flitted across his mind. A woman 
good, true, and handsome — handsome, and yet 
without the nameless charm which makes true 
Leauty — had risen before his mental vision, and 
stood there cold and shadow-like before Nora. 
To this woman he was bound in honour he 
remembered, and so he averted his eyes from 
the sweet attractive face of his first, nay bis 
only love. 

Nora noticed his change of expression, but 
she never thought of any other woman in the way 

" Is this good ? " she said, smiling and 
pointing to a costly vase which she had 
recently purchased. '' I am never quite sure, 
you know, IMr. A^yner, whether my taste is good 
or bad." 

Again Vyner thought of Margaret Blythe as 
Nora said these simple words. Margaret was 
quite sure about her taste. She thought she 
had the best taste in the world, and was fond 
of announcing this, and giving very decided 
advice upon all occasions. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 8/ 

" A little girl I once knew," said Vyner, witli 
an involuntary ring of tenderness in bis voice, 
" used to have a very pretty taste of her own, 
if I remember right, in the way of dresses and 
bonnets, etc., and that is, I think, the best 
criterion of a woman's taste. I hate an 
ill-dressed woman 1 " 

" Quite right, llv. Vyner," said old Lady 
Stainbrooke, blinking behind her glasses ; " a 
well-dressed woman always looks vrell — but 
ah ! — ah, it costs money," and she sighed, and 
moved her lean, wrinkled hands, for she was 
very avaricious, and hated to open her purse- 
f^trino-s even for her owa adornment. 

o 

iVt this moment an exceedingly well-dressed 
woman was ushered into Nora's drawing-room. 
This was her next-door neighbour. Lady 
Seaforth, who, in the interest of her son, was 
now very attentive to Nora. 

But she forwarded this interest so gracefully,. 
and with such well-bred ease, that Nora could 
not help liking her. Lady Seaforth was a 
handsome woman, with all the advantages of 
high caste to add to her attractions. The dust 
of the earth came not near her, and the stock 
from which she sprang for generations had been 



88 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

unmarrecl by labour. She was a haughty 
woman, but she wanted money, and so she 
bowed her proud head and went to Nora's. 
Nora personally she rather liked, but Lady 
Stainbrooke was an eyesore and an obstruction, 
the patrician dame decided, whenever she 
contemplated Nora's marriage with her son. 

She sometimes affected — still in her patrician 
way — the society of people of talent. They 
were gifted, she thought, and so they ought 
to be cultivated. But in her heart she looked 
down upon the giants towering above their 
fellows, unless blue blood ran through their 
veins. Her grace and culture of manner, 
however, prevented this being visible. 

"I am pleased to make Mr. Vyner's 
acquaintance," she said, when Nora had 
presented the painter to her. '' I have long 
known and admired his work." 

Vyner bowed, and took the compliment very 
•quietly. He was past the stage when praise is 
so sweet, and recognition dearer than the 
breath of life. He had his pride too, but not 
the pride of birth, yet of his birthright. He had 
not been born with a great name, but with the 
genius to make one. He was greater than 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 89' 

Alice Elizabeth, Yiscountess Seaforth, whatever 
her ladyship might think. Alice Elizabeth,. 
Viscountess Seaforth, would die and be buried, 
and have her title carved on her gravestone, 
and there would be an end of her ; but Vyner's 
hand had carved a name that would not die,, 
and done work that would live as long as his 
canvass huns^ too;ether. 

So he did not bow very humbly to my lady. 
But my lady was very gracious. 

Mr. Vyner must dine with her some day 
soon, she said ; and again Vyner bowed, and 
wondered if he would meet his old friend, his 
dark-eyed Nora, at Lady Seaforth's. 

Then he went awav, and the imao-e of his 
dark- eyed Nora went with him. 

" She is my Eve," he said, pacing backwards 
and forwards in his studio, with his long strides,. 
as the daylight faded. '' God made her for me 
just as He made the first woman for the first man. 
She is part of me, and yet we are separated — 
ay, I know it well — by a promise I cannot break." 

Yet that night he commenced a picture — it 
was his Eve as she stood in the Warbrooke 
meadows Ions; ago, in her brio^ht maidenhood,, 
before the shadows had fallen upon her face. 



CHAPTEK YIIL 

HIS EVE. 

The man loved liis work, and it throve and 
prospered under liis hand. 

" This promises to be a fine picture," said his 
betrothed, Margaret Blythe, to the painter one 
day, when she hod unexpectedly visited his 
studio, pausing before an unfinished sketch of 
a dark-eyed woman. " AYhat do you mean to 
call it ? " 

"I call it *My Eve,'" answered Vyner, 
gravely regarding his own work. 

" ' My Eve ! ' " repeated Margaret. " What 
An extraordinary name — I am sure I could 
think of a much better one." 
' " Not for this picture," said Vyner. 

" Yes, I am sure I could," replied Margaret, 
for she believed that no one could do anything 
so well as herself. "Fancy a dark Eve — of 
course, Eve was fair." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 91 

" Why ? " asked Vyner, smiling. '^ Besides, 
this may not be intended for the lady who 
brought such trouble and toil upon us all." 
And Vyner gave rather a weary sigh. 

'' "We make our own troubles very often," 
said Margaret. 

" I dare say," said Vyner, indifferently, for 
he was not thinking of Margaret, nor of her 
correct and proj^er ways. 

Margaret thought herself a paragon among 
women, and indeed she might be one, but it is 
sometimes a little wearisome to live with a self- 
conscious paragon. She had the most firm and 
simple faith in her own perfections. Peccavi 
was never heard on her lips. But she loved 
Vyner, and believed in him, though not as she 
believed in herself. He had genius, she thought, 
but she also had genius, only her devotion to 
her home duties prevented her gifts being 
recognised by the world. 

Not the woman to touch Vyner's heart this I 

There was a rugged honesty, truth aud 
humility about this man ; though he, too, be- 
lieved in his own genius, counting it a gift from 
^God. But he knew also of the dust stains — - 
the follies, the passions, the meannesses — which 



92 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

clung to and befouled his heart, as they cling 
to and befoul the hearts of nearlv all the errinsc 
children of men. 

Yet he tried to do ri2:ht and vralk straio-ht, 
and Margaret Blythe was satisfied with her 
choice, and believed that Yyner was devoted 
to her. She knew nothing about his Eve, but 
if she had known it would scarcely have dis- 
turbed her equanimity. x\ll men commit some 
folly or other, i\Iargaret Blythe thought, but 
no '' folly/' she was sure, would change his 
regard for the best and purest of women — 
namely, for Margaret Blythe. 

Yet as Margaret Blythe stood before the 
picture of his Eve, he never before had fully 
realised the bitterness of his bondage. Mar- 
garet — the woman whom he was engaged to 
marry, and yon sweet dark-eyed one, smiling 
from his canvass ! Margaret, tall and slim, a 
little angular about the shoulders, perhaps, but 
handsome withal, and a model of all the virtues 
personified ! 

And his Nora — his Eve — not beautiful, but 
lovable, and pleasant to the eyes, and tender 
and gentle to every living thing. The dumb 
brutes crept to her protecting side, trusting her 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 93 

with their God-given instinct, following her 
with their mute and wistful eyes. 

The painter recalled at this moment — his 
living Margaret standing opposite to his 
pictured Eve — when he had met Nora before 
her husband's death, with the look of life- 
weariness too plainly printed on her face. He 
remembered the brief explanation which had 
then passed between them — the words that 
told the long, dull history of years. 

" So," he had said, looking at John Trelawn's 
wife, " that old woman spoilt two lives then ? " 

" She spoilt mine," Nora had answered in a 
low tone ; " but we must not speak of it now." 

''And not even now" thought Vyner bitterly, 
looking at his Margaret, and turning his eyes 
away from his pictured Eve ! 

'' Walter, will you come in this evening ? " 
said his Margaret, addressing him in her 
measured tones. 

" Not this evening, Margaret," answered 
Vyner. " I am going to dine with Lady 
Seaforth." 

'' With Lady Seaforth ? " repeated Margaret, 
surprised. '' Do you know her then, Walter ? 
She is the mother, I suppose, of young Lord 



94 CRCESUS S WIDOW. 

Seaforth — tlie young man who forgot himself 
so far, and forgot what was due to us so far, as 
to come to our house without telling us his real 
name i 

" Yes, she is his mother," said Vyner. '' I 
met her the other day, and she asked me to 
dine with her this evening, and I accepted her 
invitation." 

** I am glad that you did, for I hope she will 
call upon us when we are married." 

Vyner shrugged his shoulders. 

** She will have cut me most likely by that 
time," he said. " These great ladies take one- 
up and drop one down just for a caprice,. 
Margaret. Don't marry me, please, for the 
sake of visiting Lady Scaforth ! " 

** How foolish you are, AValter ! No ; but 
really I wish you to cultivate good people — 
people of position are so much more agreeable 
than people without any." 

*' Precisely," said Vyner; "and so for this 
laudable reason I am going to sacrifice myself,, 
and dine with her ladyship, instead of smoking 
my pipe at home at my ease." 

"I hope you will give up smoking when 
^^ou are married, Walter." 



CR(ESUSS WIDOW. 95 

''Don't hope so then, Margaret; fori fear if 
you do it will end in disappointment — like 
visiting Lady Seaforth." 

" I wonder if the young lord will say any- 
thing about us to-night ? " continued Margaret. 
^'He has never been to call lately — I can't 
quite find out — but I sometimes think that 
foolish child Nellie liked him ? " 

'' I hope not," said Vyner, gravely. '' I like 
little Nell, and would be sorry if any trouble 
came to her; and even among fast men, 
Margaret, Seaforth bears a bad reputation." 

" I thought so," said Margaret, triumphantly. 
" Oh, I am never deceived ; I was sure he was 
a bad man." 

'' Perhaps it is hard to call him so — he may 
but have been tempted beyond his strength. 
Which of us indeed has a right to fling the first 
or even the second stone, Margaret ? " 

'' I do not agree with you, "Walter. There 
are some, I hope, who live lives quite free of 
reproach. Since my earliest childhood, for 
instance, I have been devoted to my father 
and young sister — not that there is any great 
difi'erence of age between Nellie and myself, 
but then my mind is more advanced than hers — 



96 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

she is more cliilclish ; and as we were motlierlesSy 
I felt it my duty to act as tliougli I were very 
mucti older, and take entire charge of her." 

There were ten years between the ages of the 
sisters, but these ten years were never alluded 
to at home. Margaret might be a paragon 
among women, but it was understood in the 
Blythe family that even paragons have their 
weaknesses, and that her age was Margaret 
Blythe's. Yyner, who thought that all women 
and all men have their weaknesses, only laughed 
in reply to Margaret's sj)eech. 

" Come, young lady," he said, ''if I am to 
have the honour of escorting you home, we 
had better be starting ; for I must have time^ 
you know, to wash the paint off before I a]3pear 
at my Lady Seaforth's." 

The painter walked home with his betrothed, 
and then returned to his rooms to dress. Ha 
had a feeling in his heart somehow that he was 
cfoins: to meet Nora Trelawn. And as his cab 
stopped at Lady Seaforth's door, one of Nora's 
footmen was just opening her door, and Nora her- 
self, in soft black garments, came out, and stepped 
from her own portico to Lady Seaforth's, tha 
"big footman walking behind to carry her cloak. 



Croesus's widow. 97 

She, of course, saw Yyner, and she blushed, 
and then looked the next moment brightly 
and gaily into his face. But her blush 
faded when she noticed the graA^e courtesy of 
his manner. 

^'We are to have the pleasure of dining 
too^ether, then ? '^ he said. 

"Yes," answered Nora ; and so together they 
entered the house, and were ushered into Lady 
Seaforth's drawing-room. 

Lady Seaforth received them in the stately, 
gracious way which was natural to her. She 
was a woman who never allo\ved her feelinsrsto 

o 

influence her manner in society. She had been 
exceedingly annoyed just half-an-hour before 
Yyner and Nora appeared in her drawing-room, 
but now her smooth brow seemed quite 
unruffled. 

The cause of her annoyance had been the 
beloved son. The beloved son had promised 
to dine with her ; had promised to do his best 
to make himself agreeable to Croesus's widow, 
and at the last moment had disappointed her. 
This had happened in a manner that seemed 
quite unaccountable to Lady Seaforth. 

"Mr. Yyner, the painter, is going to dine 

TOL. I. E 



08 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

lierc as well," she said to lier son, and Lord 
Seaforth, who was actually leaving the room 
for tlie purpose of dressing for diuner, made a 
sudden pause. 

*' Vyner, the painter, mother ! What on 
earth induced you to ask him ? " he said, 
turning round and looking at Lady Seaforth. 

" I met him at Mrs. Trelawn's," answered 
his mother. " He is clever and presentable ; 
why should I not ask him, Seaforth ? " 

Lord Seaforth made no answer. He stood 
tliere looking at his mother for a moment or 
two as if he were undecided about something, 
and then he looked at his watch. 

" Mother," he said, " I am very sorry, but I 
have forgotten something — I remember, now, I 
can't dine here to-day ; can't avail myself of the 
chance of making love to Croesus's fair or rather 
dark widow — I have an engagement I can't get 
off." 

Lady Seaforth w\as seriously annoyed, nay 
angry, with her son. 

" What reason have you for making this 
excuse ? " she said. 

*'My unfortunate memory," answered Lord 
Seaforth, in his careless, mocking w\ay. ''I am 



Croesus's widow. 99 

truly sorry — pray give my best regards to 
Madam Croesus." 

"How can you act thus — liow can you speak 
thus — when you know the bitter necessity for 
this step ? " said Lady Seaforth. 

Her son shrugged his shoulders. 

" I will see her some other day," he said, 
" but I must go now. Good-bye, mother ! I 
hope your painter will make himself very 
agreeable." And the next moment Lord 
Seaforth was gone. 

Lady Seaforth felt very angry. She had hoped 
— she had schemed — for her son's marriao-e 
w^ith Mrs. Trelawn, and here the reckless young 
man was throwing his best chances away. 
And for what motive ? Could he have any 
reason for not wishing to meet Mr. Vyner ? 
thought Lady Seaforth, as she extended her 
hand and smiled a welcome to the painter. 

Sitting at the head of her well-ap^^ointed 
table, she was still thinking of her son. Care- 
burdened was this proud lady with the heaviest 
of cares, but her culture made her perfectly 
able to conceal this. Onl}' once she alluded to 
Seaforth. 

*' I am so sorry," she said, addressing Vyner, 



100 CRCESrSS WIDOW. 

*' that my son is not able to meet you to-day ; 
but he is on duty with his regiment. You 
know him, do you not ? " 

" I know Lord Seaforth very slightly," 
answered Yyner, with a certain reserve of tone 
and manner that both Lady Seaforth and Nora 
noticed. 

*' He knows something about him," thought 
Lady Seaforth. " Can he have heard any 
foolish report about me and tliis wild young 
lord ? " thought Nora softly ; and both ladies 
glanced at the painter's f^ice, who was standing 
with his eyes cast down. 

But Lord Seaforth's name was never again 
mentioned during the evening. The graceful, 
well-bred hostess exerted herself to charm, and 
Yyner's presence made Nora look so much like 
the Nora of old that both Lady Seaforth and 
the painter regarded her with involuntary 
admiration. 

" When she is looking so handsome, and 
Seaforth not to see her ! " inwardly sighed 
Lady Seaforth. 

" She is the sweetest woman upon earth," 
thought the painter, also with a sigh ; and 
when Nora rose to leave, he asked permission 



Croesus's widow. 101 

to escort lier next door to lier own liouse, 

Nora smiled lier answer. She put lier little 
black-gloved hand timidly on the painter's arm 
xis they left Lady Seaforth's portico together, 
and her touch for the moment made Vyner 
foro;et his betrothed. 

" It is a fine night/' he said. " Let us walk 
round the Square together, as we used to walk 
lono; ao;o." 

" But — but we were in the country then," 
iinswered Nora, smiling, and glancing up softly 
-at the painter. 

'* Let us imagine we are in the country now, 
then," said Vyner. " Let us be free for five 
minutes from all the conventionalities — ah, 
Nora — pardon me, I should say Mrs. Trelawn — 
why is the world so full of regulation codes and 
rules?" 

Nora laughed — almost a merry laugh. 

" I think, if I remember rightly," she said, 
"" a certain Mr. Vyner in former days was not 
greatly given to follow either regulations, codes, 
or rules ; but, perhaps he is changed now." 

" No, he is not changed — not clmuged in 
•everything, at least " 

His voice trembled a little as he said the last 



102 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

few words, for lie was thiDking lie was not 
changed to her, and the man's thought seemed 
to vibrate through the woman's heart. 

" It seems but yesterday," went on Yyneiv 
" but yesterday, Nora, when we used to meet 
at Warbrooke. But it is a long yesterday,*^ 
he added, with a sudden change of voice and 
manner — the memory of Margaret Blythe had 
tapped him on the shoulder — " and many 
things have happened since then." 

*' Yes, many things," said Nora ; '' but one 
thing has not changed — we — we are friends- 
still." 

For a moment or two Yyner did not speak. 
Words of love and tenderness were rising 
unbidden to his lips. But he put the curb on, 
and tried to think of Margaret, though his- 
tremblinof hand stole out and souoiit for 
Nora's. 

*' We — we will not change," faltered Nora. 

" There are linked souls, I think," said 
Yyner, the passionate ring in his voice^ 
betraying his heart ; '' and, go where we will,. 
do what we will, these invisible chains will not 
break. But — but what folly I am talking," he 
added. " What will you think of me, Mrs. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 103 

Trelawn— a middle-aged man — talking senti- 
mental trash like a boy ? But you must forgive 
me — the old memories are to blame — the old, 
old days " 

" They were happy days," said Nora, 
tremulously. 

" Yes/' answered Yyner, abruptly, " too 
happy — but we must not talk of them." 

Nora felt hurt by the painter's words. She 
looked up in his face when they were standing 
a few minutes later at her own door, and was 
struck with his expression. He was biting Im 
lips, and there was a frown on his brow, and 
Nora sighed uneasily as she entered the grand 
home which John Trelawn's love and wealth 
had made her own. 



CHAPTEE IX. 

Nellie's lovees. 

There is no doubt that it is a pleasant tliiug- 
to be self-satisfied. The man who has a good 
opinion of himself goes through the world 
looking blandly in a becoming mirror. A cer- 
tain young Mr. James Saunders, who lived in 
the same street as the Blythes, was one of 
those happy personages. In mentally contem- 
plating himself, he saw only his good qualities. 
He enumerated them thus : — "I am young, I 
am good-loolving, I am well off — any girl would 
Lave me." 

It will be seen by this that, among his other 
attractions, he was a bachelor. His father — 
Mr. James Saunders also — had been (what he 
termed) a medical practitioner, and he had con- 
tinued a medical practitioner until he finally 
retired from all earthly avocations. A safe 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 105 

TQan this olcl-fasliioned doctor had been con- 
sidered bv all the matrons in his neiodibouiiiood, 
and to be considered a safe man pays. At all 
events, his reputation had paid Mr. James 
Saunders. He died in the goodly position of 
having a large balance at his bankers, landlord 
of many houses, and owner of sundry railway 
shares and other properties, which brought him 
in an excellent income ; and left this wealth 
firstly to his wife, and then to his only son. 

Young; James Saunders was sixteen when his 
father died, and for the next seven or eight 
years his mother did her best to make him 
unendurable. That is, she (morally) knelt 
down and worshipped him, and made a fool of 
him, until the lad fancied himself to be a 
totally different person to what he was. 

He really was an ordinary-looking young 
fellow, with a pert expression and a pert tongue. 
He fancied himself to be witty, good-looking, 
and irresistible. The women (to use his own 
phraseology) had something to do with the 
latter delusion. Mr. James Saunders was heir 
to, and virtually in possession of twenty 
thousand pounds, and among the ladies with 
whom he associated this sum was magnified 



106 CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 

into double the amount, and no doubt cast a 
balo round Mr. James's common, somewhat 
comic face. At some fancy ball he appeared 
as " Puck," and among his facetious young 
friends he was generally termed " Puck," being 
pleased to be considered a " shrewTl and 
knavish sprite ;" and he was also considered 
very good-natured. 

He was good-natured, if good-nature means 
paying for any amount of brandy-and-soda's, 
and for gloves and other small luxuries. But 
he knew where to stop. Stories about him — • 
stories not pleasant to hear or to write about — 
reached his adoring mother's ears, and the poor 
woman was so shocked that she retired to bed,. 
and lay there weeping in bitter distress. Then 
James promised to reform. He would be called 
*' Puck " no longer ; he would give up dubious 
acquaintances, and he would marry some lucky 
girl, and make her a good husband. 

It was at this period of his life that the re- 
forming "Puck" enumerated his advantages, 
and decided that no girl would refuse him. 

'* And I'll have the j^rettiest girl about here," 
he told his mother. " I'll have Nellie Blythe."* 

Mrs. Saunders made no objection to his 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 107 

choice. The Blythes were respectable people ; 
Miss Blythe was an exemplary young woman, 
and Nellie was a very pretty girl, against whom 
JMrs. Saunders had never heard a word. 

"Your dear father," she told James, "at- 
tended the Major when he first settled here, 
and always spoke of him with respect. Miss 
Blj^the, too, is an excellent girl, and has been 
just like a mother to Nellie — and I am sure, 
my darling, I hope you will be happy ! " And 
the fond mother clasped her son in her stout 
-arms, and left a tear on his somewhat motley 
•cheek. 

She also never doubted that Nellie Blythe 
would be but too glad to marry her son. 

" I'll write a note and ask them to dine with 
us in a friendly way on Thursday," she sug- 
gested to James, bent upon forwarding his 
matrimonial intentions ; " and you can take the 
note yourself, my dear, and say how pleased we 
shall be to see them all, and tell them I'll take 
no refusal from the Major." 

She was a very homely woman this, and had 
been a good wife to the late old-fashioned 
•doctor, and lived in the heart of London pretty 
jnuch as she had done in the country towa 



108 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

from whicli tlie doctor had brought her. It 
liad been a surprise to her to find herself left 
so well off when the doctor died, but the money 
did not console her for the loss of her husband.. 

"I have nothing now but James," she sighed,. 
amid her tears, after they had carried away 
her dead ; and as years passed on " James "" 
continued to be the sole delight and pleasure 
of her life. 

James was fond of the "old lady" (as« 
he called her) in his way. She was " a decent 
old woman," he sometimes told his companions ; 
and as we have seen, he promised to amend his- 
lifa when he saw that he was giving real pain 
to his mother. 

The idea of his marriage, therefore, was de- 
lightful to Mrs. Saunders, and she absolutely 
shed tears of joy after James had started on his- 
proposed visit to Major Blythe's family. 

Let us now follow James — James in a pink 
necktie and lavender gloves — decorated for the 
occasion to the best of his taste and ability. 
His round eyes looked a little rounder than 
usual when he rang at the Major's door, for 
though he was quite at his ease with some sort 
of women, he — in spite of his self-satisfaction 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 109 

— felt a little shy at the prospect before him. 

*'But they'll jump at me," he reflected, screw- 
ing up his courage ; and so he rang the Major's 
bell, prepared to be jumped at. 

His summons was answered by the one 
maid-servant, Hatton, who of course knew 
James Saunders by sight, as Mrs. Saunders's 
house was close to the Blythes. 

*' Ladies at home ? " asked James, jauntily. 

Oblique-eyed Hatton put her hand contem- 
platively on her hip before she replied. 

" They told me to say they're out," she said. 

James hesitated a moment, and then slipped 
half-a-crown into Hatton's long, lean fiugers. 

'' Tell them I've called," he said. " I've a 
message from my mother." And Hatton, 
being unable to resist the half-crown, James 
was ushered in on the two sisters. 

Marojaret was sittinsj before her easel, dressed 
in a plain dress, but looking a picture of neat- 
ness ; Nellie was sitting on the floor, her fair, 
bright hair ruffled, engaged in forcibly washing 
the collar of white fur round Wallace's neck, 
decidedly against the old dog's desire. 

Margaret rose gracefully as James entered 
the room, and held out her hand to welcome 



110 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

liim, though she darted a sharp look of anger 
at Hatton, who received it unmoved, inwardly- 
fortified by the half-crown. 

'^ Yon must excuse my sister, Mr. Saunders," 
said Margaret, glancing at Nellie, who had 
jumped up, and was laughing, "but you see 
she is washino; our doo; — he is such an old 
favourite — especially of my father's." 

Margaret always threw the best and most 
attractive light that she could upon everything. 
Yet she lacked the subtle gift which is usually 
called tact. Her discernment was not acute 
enough to possess this, and her intense egotism 
displayed the want. Tact would have taught 
her that nothing is so tiresome and oflfensive to 
others as a self-adoring attitude, and this 
Margaret habitually took. But as far as her wit 
went, she put the most attractive and correct 
colour upon all her own actions and those 
of every one connected with her. 

She was annoyed that Nellie should have 
been caught washing the dog, but she need not 
have been. James, indeed, was fond of dogs, 
and had a bull-dog of his own, with a self- 
important strut like his master's. 

" Very kind of Miss Nellie," he said, looking 



CKCESUS'S WIDOW. Ill 

admiringly at Nellie standing tliere smiling, 
fresh and fair. '* I like girls who like dogs ; it 
shows some sort of — ah — you know what I 
mean." 

" Sensibility/' said Margaret, with her formal 
smile, as poor James paused for lack of ideas. 

*' Yes, kind heart, and that sort of thing. 
But, — ah ! — Miss Blythe, I've called with a 
message from my mother. Hopes you'll all 
dine with us on Thursday. Won't excuse the 
Major. Mother said she would take no excuse." 

" It is very kind of Mrs. Saunders," said 
Margaret. "I will ask my father." Margaret 
left the room for this purpose, and James was 
alone with the lady whom he proposed to 
honour with his hand. 

Poor young man ! This forward, pert youth, 
suddenly found that he had not a word to say. 
Nellie (who regarded him as " little Puck," this 
cognomen being well-known in the neighbour- 
hood) was, however, quite at her ease. She 
considered for a moment what she should say 
to him, and then said, smilingly — 

'^ Have you been at any balls lately, Mr. 
Saunders ? " 

"One or two," answered James, trying to 



112 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

seem at ease ; " but don't care for 'em- — 
ordinary lot, I mean. Fancy balls are splendid, 
Miss Nellie. Once went to one dressed as 
' Puck' — fairy fellow, you know, out of Shak- 
speare — glorious get up — all the fellows said 
suited me — fond of fun, you know, and that 
kind of thing." 

''Yes," said Nellie, wickedly, 'Tve heard 
you are fond of fun." 

"Puck" blushed all over his motley skin. 

. " Mean to turn over a new leaf. Miss Nellie,' 

he jerked out. " All very fine when one's just 

out, you know, as you girls say ; but when a 

fellow gets on a bit — well, it's time to pull up." 

" Yes," said Nelly, very much amused. 

"Mother doesn't like it, you know," continued 
" Puck," confidentially ; " and she's a good old 
woman that ; and a fellow doesn't care to vex 
her. Mean to settle down now, and become a 
respectable jog-trot. Wild days are over. Miss 
Nellie." 

" Then we must not call you 'Puck' any 
more ? " said Nellie, with a little laugh. 

" You may call me anything," said " Puck," 
tenderly ; " anything nice, of course. I mean 
— anything — " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 113 

At this moment the room door opened, and 
Margaret Blythe entered, and " Puck's " speech 
was interrupted. 

" My father desires me to give his compli- 
ments to ]\Irs. Saunders," said Margaret, " and 
he and I shall be very happy to dine with her 
on Thursday, but you must kindly excuse 
Nellie." 

" Can't, Miss Blythe ; can't, indeed ! " said 
James, energetically. '' Miss Nellie must come 
— particularly want Miss Nellie." 

" Very kind of you," said Nellie, '' but I 
never' go out to dinner." 

'* Oh, but do come," urged James. " Mother 
would be awfully sorry if you didn't — it would 
be so jolly to have you — must come, Miss 
NelHe.'' 

" No, thank you," said Nellie, whose 
thoughts had wandered away from " Puck " — 
had wandered to Murray, Lord Seaforth, and 
was wondering if she could manage to meet him 
while Margaret and her father were dining with 
Mrs. Saunders. 

Therefore, poor James urged his invitation 
in vain. Nellie was quite firm ; and, much 
CTQSt fallen, James at last took his departure. 



114 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and returned to his motlier s house in a very- 
uncomfortable condition of mind. 

That fond parent, however, did her best ta 
console him. 

" Girls of Nellie's age," she told him^ 
" seldom go out to dine — and you know, my 
darling," she added, '' she did not know your 
intentions." 

" No," said James, brightening, " of course 
she didn't ! If she'd known I meant husinesSy 
I bet you anythiug she'd come." 

'' And you ideally do mean something serious, 
James ? " asked Mrs. Saunders, looking lovingly 
at her son. 

" I do," said James, solemnly. ^^ It's a 
sacrifice, I know — a fellow has to give up a lot 
of things when he marries — and women are 
bothers with their great boxes to drag after one 
on every occasion — still " — and " Puck " sighed 
— " if one has to do it once in one's life, I 
want Nellie Blythe. She's awfully pretty, and 
awfully jolly, and though Margaret's a poser, 
and the old Major a bit of a bore, still I'll da 
it — you may tell her to-morrow, mother, that 
I'll do it, if you like ; and I mean what I say."" 

Armed with this manlv resolution on the 



^11 Croesus's widow. 115 

part of James, Mrs. Saunders actually did 
call the next day at the Blythes', and had an 
interview with Margaret. 

Margaret could not understand what she was 
aiming at when she kept urging Nellie to dine 
with them. 

" You see, my dear," she said, " I am most 
4inxious James should settle. A better boy 
does not live — he's sweet-tempered like his 
dear father, and straightforward and full of 
pleasantry — but there it is — he's too high- 
spirited, in fact, and wants a wife to sober him 
down a bit — and I'm sure you'll persuade Miss 
Nellie to come on Thursday." 

''I really do not know what to say, Mrs. 
launders," said Margaret. '' It's really very 
kind of you, but " 

" James will be well off, too," continued the 
anxious mother; ^^ very well off. His dear 
father left over twenty thousand, and, of 
€ourse, it's all James's ; and this last year my 
poor brother has gone to a better land, too, and 
I've come in for seven hundred a-year more, 
and I've made my will, and James has every 
penny of it ! " 

"He is a very fortunate young man," answered 



1 1 n 

CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



Margaret, very gravely, for slie now thouglit 
she began to perceive the drift of Mrs. 
Saunders's words. 

"And liis wife will be a fortunate 
young woman, I hope," said Mrs. Saunders,, 
with rather a forced little laugh. " In fact, 
my dear, I may as well tell you what I'm 
driving at — James has taken a fancy to Miss 
Nellie, and I'll be delighted to have it settled ; 
and so I hope you'll all come to dine on 
Thursday, and we can talk it over." 

Margaret hesitated for a moment. She was- 
considering the advantages of this proposal, 
and in her eyes they were great. The Blythes^ 
were in truth very poor — so poor that James. 
Saunders's prospects seemed actually wealth. 
He was good-natured and he was young, 
thoug^ht Maro'aret, and both these latter 
qualities would suit Nellie. 

" It is most kind and flattering of you, Mrs. 
Saunders," began Margaret. " Of course I can 
say nothing — but " 

'' You're so much older than Miss Nellie that 
naturally your advice will have great influence 
on her," continued Mrs. Saunders ; but our para- 
gon's brow clouded at this allusion to her age. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 117 

'Tm not so miicli older, Mrs. Saunders,"' 
she said. 

'' Oh, no, my dear, I know you aie quite 
young," quickly replied kindly Mrs. Saunders, 
vexed with herself for having made sucli a 
mistake, *' but what I mean is, you're so clever 
and all that ; your sister is sure to think a 
great deal of your opinion." 

'' I have always tried to do my duty, Mrs. 
Saunders," said IMargaret, with conscious merit. 

" You always have done it, you mean, my 
dear. My poor man, Y»'ho is gone now, always^ 
admired you. He used to say there were few 
like Miss jMargaret, and I feel sure if he were 
alive to do it, he'd give James, and Miss Nellie 
too, his blessing if they make a match of it." 

" Then am I authorised to speak to ni}' sister 
on this subject ? " 

*' Of course, dear. James said he meant it.. 
And, now I think of it, they're not unlike. 
Both have such pretty round little features — 
not quite regular, perhaps — but so full of ex- 
pression and fun. I call Miss Nellie's a sweet 
face, and so I am sure is my James's." 

Oh, fair Nellie Blythe ! fair Nellie Blythe 1 
She was not a vain girl this — glorying very 



118 CRCESUSS WIDOW, 

little in her gifts of youtli and beauty — but to 
be called like " little Puck ! " Well was it for 
Mrs. Saunders's matrimonial project that she 
■did not hear the comparison. As it was, Mrs. 
Saunders returned to her James full of com- 
placency. 

"It's as good as settled, I consider, my 
darling," she said to Puck ; and Puck's heart 
sank a little at the news. 

" It's like takim? a header in the sea on a 
March morning," he said, with an attempt at 
facetiousness. But, all the same, he did not feel 
very comfortable. Matrimony at a distance, 
and matrimony so near, seemed very different 
things to little Puck. 

In the meantime the girl, whom he was 
making so sure of marrying, was planning a 
meeting with the man to whom she had given 
her foolish, innocent heart. Nellie" was not in 
the least like a London girl. She was too poor, 
and had lived too much out of the world, to 
know anything about it. Ambition troubled 
her not ; and as for society, she knew little or 
nothing of it. The Major's income was too 
small to afford ball dresses, even if Nellie had 
had any balls to go to. She had never been at 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 119 

school — Margaret being quite able to educate 
her young sister— so she had no girl companions 
of her own age. Margaret's friends were chiefly 
art students or governesses, and the Major's 
his ancient companions-in-arms, whom Nellie 
naturally regarded as old men. As for young 
men, she scarcely knew any. Little Puck, a 
medical student or two, sons of their immediate 
neighbours, were all the acquaintances Nellie- 
could count until she met Lord Seaforth. 

Here was a young man whom the instructed 
daughters of his class probably merely regarded 
as good-looking, cynical, and fast. But the 
uninstructed Nellie — comparing him wdth little 
Puck and the medical students — saw a man 
high-bred and graceful, and worthy of all her 
foolish, innocent love. 

And Lord Seaforth. Never had this young 
lord paused in his career of pleasure from 
motives of prudence. He had paused from 
weariness ; and, looking sadly and sourly back 
over the past few years of liis life, he freely 
admitted to himself and others that at the best 
he had but played the fooL 

But was he wdser now ? A fresh and bloom- 
ing face had struck his fancy : and thoughtless. 



120 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and reckless as ever, lie wanted tliis fresli and 
blooming face for liis own. Nellie was so 
sweet and fair, a young man might well be 
forgiven for committing some folly for her sake ; 
but Lord Seaforth knew all the while he went 
to meet Nellie Blythe that the folly of marrying 
her was an im230ssible one for him. 

Yet still he went to meet her. It was the 
•old symbol of the moth and the flame. Sweet 
Nellie Blythe was a very innocent flame, but 
no less surely the luring light might prove 
fatal in the end. But of this the young lord 
never thought. He thought of the lovely 
-colour that bloomed and deepened through 
Nellie's smooth round cheeks, and he thought 
it was pleasant that this young creature should 
love him. In her pure love some of his lost 
youth seemed to return. '' I cannot part with 
Nellie," he sometimes told himself, and some- 
times the ruin that stared him in the face told 
him that he must. 

Nellie was writing to this young man when 
Margaret, full of Mrs. Saunders' matrimonial 
ideas, sought her after Mrs. Saunders had left. 

"Nellie," began the elder sister, *' I have 
just had a visit from Mrs. Saunders." 



CKGESUSS WIDOW. 121 

"Hatton told me slie was here/' answered 
Nellie, looking up from her letter with a smile. 
" Well, had the old lady any news ? " 

''She has been telling me about her son's 
prospects," said Margaret. '' Had you any 
idea, Nellie, that young Mr. Saunders will be, 
nay, is now, very rich ? His father left him 
over twenty thousand pounds, and lately his 
mother has had seven hundred a year left her^ 
and young James is to get it all." 

''Lucky little Puck," said Nellie. 

*' Nellie, dear, I wish you wouldn't use those 
foolish nick-names. I do not like to hear 
them — they are not lady-like, ond to a person 
of young Mr. Saunders's prospects they are 
certainly not appropriate." 

Nellie laughed. 

" Young Mr. James Saunders has my hearty 
congratulations, then, ^1 argaret. Is that a proper 
way of putting it ? " she said. 

" I want you to be in earnest, dear," said 
Margaret. " In fact, Nellie, I have a motive 
for telling you about ]\Ir. James's prospects, 
and so had his mother. She wishes him ta 
settle in life — she thinks a wife would sober 
him—" 



122 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

'' IVe heard he wants a little sobering," 
lano-hed Nellie, 

o 

" There is nothino; ag^ainst him," said 
Margaret. " He has been a good son, and to 
be a good soq or daughter means to be a good 
husband or wife. I judge by myself — I have 
tried, as you know, to be a good daughter, and 
I have no doubt that I shall make a good 
wife." 

" Mr. Vyner will be the gainer, then, Mar- 
garet," said Nellie, looking very kindly at her 
sister. 

'* Yes, I think — I am sure, I shall make 
Walter happy. But I want you to be happy 
also, dear — and I think, as Mr. James is so well 
off, and so good-natured — " 

Then Nellie looked straight up in her sister's 
face with a loyal light shining in her eyes. 

'' You are not in earnest about this, surely, 
Margaret ? " she said. *' You don't really mean 
that you want me to think of marrying little 
Puck?" 

" Why not, Nellie ? Mrs. Saunders wishes 
it, and Mr. James Saunders wishes it." 

" Do not speak of such a thing any more, 
Margaret," said Nellie, earnestly — and she laid 



CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 12 3 

her hand softly on the letter she was writing 
— " for it can never, never be." 

" I cannot see why, Nellie ? " 

" That is easily answered — because I do not 
care for him — because I can never care for him." 

" Girls change about these things." 

**I will not" — and again the loyal light shone 
in the blue eyes — '' I will never change ! " 

She was thinking of Lord Seaforth — Lord 
Seaforth, who was sitting at that moment 
in Nora Trelawn's gorgeously - furnished 
drawing-room, looking at Nora with his weary 
eyes, and wondering with his weary heart if 
he could sufficiently forget Nellie to make up 
his mind to ask Croesus's widow to be his wife. 

But he did not make up his mind. Looking 
at Nora, he still saw Nellie Blythe's sweet, fresh 
face. He was not loyal to his love — he was 
never loyal. He lacked the simple faith, the 
fidelity of a larger mind. Yet he was in love 
with the girl ; in love, as he could love ; and so- 
he did not progress in his wooing of Nora. 

Still he sometimes went and talked to the 
dark-eyed widow, and Lady Stainbrooke gave 
him every encouragement to do so. This lady 
had decided, from the time that she had heard 



124 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

that the breath of life had quitted John 
Trehxwn's big body, that her niece, Nora, was 
sure to marry again, and therefore she naturally 
wished that she might marry well. To marry 
well according to Lady Stainbrooke's ideas 
meant to marry for certain worldly advantages. 
Nora had wealth, so she now wanted rank, 
thought her ladyship and her ladyship there- 
fore smiled on, and ogled the young lord who 
lived next door, as she had smiled and ogled in 
the days when her own eyes were bright, and 
when her heart was not perhaps so worldly as 
it was novv'. 

The youDg lord rather liked the worldly old 
woman, for she helped to amuse him ; but Lady 
Stainbrooke's company was gaul and wormwood 
to his proud mother. 

"You need never see her — afterwards — you 
know," she once said to her son. 

" Not my dear, dingy old aunt ! Mother, 
how heartless you are. I shall, I assure you, 
pay her the most tender attention." 

" If you would but be in earnest, Seaforth," 
urged his mother. 

*' About Lady Stainbrooke ? " laughed the 
young lord. 



CEGESUS'S WIDOW. 125 

With an impatient gesture Lady Seaforth 
turned away. Yet that boyish laugh rang in 
her ears. It recalled his bright youth — the 
gay and gallant boy for whom she had hojDed so 
much — hopes that one by one had faded and 
died away. 



CHAPTEE X. 

KOS ELAND. 

Another mau also came occasionally and sat 
in Nora's gorgeously-farnislied drawing-room^ 
on whom Lady Staiubrooke did not smile so 
sweetly as she did on the spendtlirift young 
lord. 

This w\as Vyner. Here again was the moth 
and the flame. In this case the moth was 
strong and clear-eyed. He knew the flame 
was dangerous, but he depended upon his 
streno'th. " I will q:o so far and no further. 

o o 

I did love this gentle woman, and I do love her,. 
but I am bound in honour to another. Still, I 
cannot quite forget my friendship for Nora — - 
cannot forget that but for a wicked old woman 
Nora would now have been my happy wife." 

Thinking thus, Vyner went occasionally to- 
see Nora. She was his friend — had been his 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 127 

friend in the old liappy days — and he was not 
going to turn coldly away. So he hovered 
near the flame, strong and clear- eyed. " There 
is no danger if I do not go too near/' said the 
moth ; " and why should I not gladden my 
sight occasionally by a gleam of sweet, pure 
light ? " 

Poor moth, poor flame ! It is well to be 
strong and clear- eyed; bat safer to go away 
into darkness. The world seemed very dark 
and weary now to Yyner unless he saw Nora, 
and so he did see her, and Lady Stainbrooke's 
blinking brown eyes sometimes showed their 
disapproval of his visits. 

But Lady Stainbrooke was too much a woman 
of the world to be uncourteous to Yyner. He 
was a famous man, for one thing ; for another 
thing it was Nora's house, and not Lady Stain- 
brooke's ; and the old womau knew this as well 
xis anyone else did. 

One close evening in the middle of July, 
then,Vyner was sitting in Nora's drawing-room. 
There were also present General Stainbrooke 
and his wife, and Nora. 

The old General was but a wreck now. There 
were days, nay weeks, when he was never seen 



128 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

in the drawing-room, wlien he retired; and 
during these days and weeks he did not see- 
much of Lady Stainbrooke. 

But Nora w^as always very good to him. 
She pitied him, racked with his sore pains, and 
drifting away from his little tinsel-gilt life.. 
Poor man ! he had even survived his age. He- 
belonged to a school that had grown too fusty 
for the w^orld — that had passed away, leavings 
^t is to be hoped, newer and purer academies 
behind it. 

''And where do you think the General and I 
are going to-morrow, Mr. Yyner," said Nora,, 
looking smilingly at the painter, a pause 
having occurred a moment before in the 
conversation. 

" How can I tell I Well, where ?" said Yyner. 

'' To Eoseland ? " answered Nora, still 
smiling. " Is not that a pretty name ? " 

'' Eoseland ! " repeated Yyner. " And whero 
is Eoseland ? And are you going to Eoseland,, 
General?" he shouted to the old soldier. 

The General emitted his cacklino; laudi, and 
showed all his great yellow teeth. 

" Where she goes I follow," he said. 
"Always my way, Mr. Yyner — if a pretty 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 129 

woman went before me I was after lier — always 
my way." 

*' A very shocking way," lauglied Yyner. 
*' But where, Mrs. Trelawn, really, is Koseland ?" 

Nora cast down her eyes, and a soft colour 
stole over her face before she answered. 

*' When Mr. Trelawn — when my husband 
was alive, Mr. Vyner," she said, '*we had a 
little river yacht — " 

*' You had everything, my dear," said Lady 
Stainbrooke, with a little nod of her head at 
Vyner, pleased to give him a slight passing 
scratch. 

" He was very good to me," continued Nora, 
still with her eyes cast down ; " and, as I was 
saying, we had a yacht ; and one day on the 
river, such a charming scent of roses came 
floating towards us that I asked Mr, Trelawn 
to stop the yacht, and we landed to try to get 
some roses if we could. Close to where we 
landed, a pretty little house in a garden, which 
sloped to the river edge, caught our attention, 
and John and I — Mr. Trelawn and myself — 
stood looking over the gate, and inside there 
was absolutely a rose show. I never saw such 
beautiful roses. And whilst we were standing 

VOL I. . F 



130 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

looking, a young lady appeared in tlie garden, 
and passed close to the gate. ' We are admiring 
your roses,' my husband said to her, and she 
stopped and looked at us with a very wintry 
smile. ' Yes, they are pretty,' she said, 
and she shrugged her shoulders. * They are 
beautiful ! ' answered my husband. ' I suppose 
we could not buy some of them ? ' * No, they 
are not for sale ; but I will give you some,' said 
the young lady. ' Will you come in ? ' " 

"This is quite a romance," said Yyner, 
smiling, as Nora paused in her story. 

*^ A very prosaic romance, as it turned 
out," answered Nora, smiling also. " But to 
go on with my romance. The young lady not 
only cut us the most lovely bunch of roses in 
the world, but she told us her little history. 
She had married an old and eccentric man for 
a home, and the old and eccentric man's chief 
passion was roses. So the young lady — not 
unnaturally, perhaps — was sick of roses. She 
told me their scent absolutely sometimes made 
her feel quite ill, and she was weary of her rose 
garden, and I fear also of her husband, and her 
home. John — Mr. Trelawn — was very fond of 
flowers, and before we parted with our young 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 131 

lady he put his card in her hand. ' If ever you 
can persuade your husband/ he said, ' to part 
with this place, will you let me know ? ' and the 
young lady promised to do so, and seemed very 
pleased at the idea. But months passed away, 
and we heard nothing from her. It was six 
months afterwards, I think, when one day a 
black-edged envelope came to John, and when 
he opened it he found it was from the lady of 
the roses, as we had christened her. Her 
eccentric husband was dead, he had left her his 
rose garden, and she would be glad to part 
with it. Such were the contents of her letter, 
and John was glad to buy it. It is a pretty 
little place, and I asked leave to call it Eose- 
land ; and just now, when the roses are in their 
bloom, it is quite lovely. John bought a little 
land that joins it, and I have a cow there, and 
I make butter, and I have eggs," laughed Nora; 
" and, in fact, I am a farmeress in a small way 

^ when I go to Roseland." 

cj\ "And you like the country life? asked 

r.;Vyner. 

" Far better than the town. My tastes are 
reaUy very simple," answered Nora. 

" All very fine, my dear," said Lady Stain- 

f2 



132 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

brooke ; '' very fine, and very pretty, to play 
at simplicity sometimes among your roses, 
when the sun is shining and the sky is blue. 
But what about a real country life that your 
young friend of the roses lived with her tire- 
some old man ? She did not enjoy it, it seems. 
No ; solitude and sentiment are like poverty — 
very well to have a peep at, and talk about, but 
very bad to bear when they are forced upon us." 

"You are not given to sentiment. Lady 
Stainbrooke ? " said Vyner, with a slight curl 
of his lip. 

" No," answered that lady briskly ; " and the 
consequence is, Mr. Vyner, that I have done 
well for myself and my family, and that Nora 
has now Eoseland to go to, if she will excuse 
me making the remark." 

For a moment Nora looked annoyed, then 
she said, very quietly — 

" Well, at all events, Mr. Vyner, I hope you 
will come and see Eoseland ? " 

"I shall be but too happy," said Vyner. And 
so it happened shortly after this, that, amid the 
golden glory of a summer afternoon, Vyner 
found himself walking by the river edge in 
search of Eoseland. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 133 

He never forgot the picture tliat lie saw 
when he first entered Nora's garden. She was 
standing beneath her white sunshade, leaning on 
a little moss-grown wall, and gazing with a far- 
away look in her dark eyes at the river beyond. 

She did not see him until he was quite close 
to her — until he almost touched her arm. The 
wearied look that he remembered on her face 
in her wedded days had passed away from it. 
Fair she had always been in Yyner's eyes, but 
never so fair as now, with the sweet pensive 
smile of hope lingering round her tremulous 
lips, as she stood in the sunlit garden. 

Vyner did not speak. His eyes were fixed on 
the picturesque face and the picturesque form. 
But a slight movement that he unconsciously 
made attracted Nora's attention, and she looked 
round, and with a start recognised Yyner. 

"You!" she said. 

*' Yes," he answered ; and then for a moment 
they stood hand-clasped, until, with womanly 
shyness, Nora turned away. 

" I must show you my roses," she said, 
nervously. 

"Yes," again answered Vyner, and he followed 
N^ora all over her sweet-scented domain. 



134 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

It was literally as slic had told liim, a rose 
srarden. The rarest and most beautiful roses 
were here, and every species and variety ever 
reared by the hand of man. And the wild 
crimson hedge-rose was blooming among the- 
rest. There were no other flowers, only the 
roses, and Vyner was charmed with the beauty 
of the efl'ect. 

'' Amongst all this wealth," he said, '' do you 
think you can afi'ord to give me one ? " 

*'Yes, or even a bunch," smiled Nora, in 
reply. 

" I shall be content with one," he said ; and 
Nora stooped down and gathered him a moss 
rosebud. 

" I think you will like this," she said, " better 
than the grand ones." 

Vyner did not answer. He took the rose- 
bud, and the hand that held it. They were 
close to the moss-grown wall where Nora had 
been leaning when Vyner first entered the 
garden, and which separated the grounds of 
Eoseland from the narrow pathway by the 
river edge. 

A little moss-grown parapet of stone. The 
damps and mists from the river had stained it 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 135 

green, and the moss floiirislied on it, and tlie 
ivj crept round its time-worn basement. Here 
Vyner leaned with Nora, hand-clasped, the 
rosebud between the love-bound fingers. 

All sunlight ! The glory of the sun on the 
river and meadow lands, and the flowers — and 
Nora's heart, for did not the man she loved 
love her ? she was whispering to herself ; and 
so the glory and brightness of her life seemed full. 

But suddenly Vyner dropped the hand and 
the rose ; dropped the rose in forgetfulness, but 
the hand meaningly. He had remembered 
Margaret Blythe, and a cloud had arisen in the 
sky. 

Nora looked surprised. She saw the rosebud 
fall, and she saw the cloud come over Vyner's 
face, and she wondered at the cause. Then, 
after a moment's reflection, she thought that 
•she had guessed it. 

'' It is because I am rich," she thought. *' Ah, 
Walter, how can you so misjudge my heart ? " 
" How is the General ? " asked Vyner, 
abruptly, the next minute. 

*' I left him sitting reading the papers under 
the awning of the verandah," answered Nora. 
""^ Will you come and talk to him ? " 



136 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

The verandali ran along the whole of the 
front of the one-storied house. John Trelawn 
had built this verandah after he had bought 
Koseland, and it was therefore fitted up with 
every luxury that wealth could supply. 

Sitting beneath the shade of its pink-and- 
white striped awnings, they found the GeneraL 
The verandah itself was very pretty ; roses 
were trained up its rustic pillars, and on a 
rustic table at the General's elbow a dish of 
splendid strawberries was standing. The old 
General was reading the newspaper with " spec- 
tacles on nose," as they approached him ; but 
no sooner did he see them than he hastily 
removed these useful but unornamental instru- 
ments, and shuffled them into his coat pocket. 

*'Ah, Mr. Yyner," he said, with his grand air, 
holding out one of his lean and crippled hands, 
but not rising to welcome the painter, for- 
indeed he could not. " So you have found us 
ruralising. A pretty spot ; and my niece, Mrs. 
Trelawn, becomes her roses, eh? Sweets to 
the sweets, eh ? That's about it ! Ha, ha, ha!" 

**yes," said Vyner, turning round, and 
looking quietly at Nora with his grey, hand- 
some eyes, "she becomes her roses." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 137 

Nora blushed like a girl. 

" It's pleasant to get out of the world some- 
times, eh, Mr. Yyner ? " continued the old 
soldier. *^You painters, I suppose, get your 
ideas — your — whatever d ye call them ? " 

" Inspirations ! " suggested Nora, in her 
loudest tone, in the General's ear. 

" Don't speak quite so loud, my love," said 
the General, rubbing that organ with an injured 
air. '^ Inspirations ! — ah, ah, to be sure — so 
you call your pictures iQspirations, d'ye, Mr. 
Yyner ? Devilish bad inspirations, then, some 
pictures are, that's all I can say. Ha, ha, ha ! " 

Yyner laughed heartily at this sally. 

''Don't be so hard on us. General!" he 
shouted. 

^'Bitof a judge, you know," said the General. 
*' Like a bit of colour — always did — and ' the 
light that lies in woman's eyes' — that's my 
taste still — can admire a pretty woman still, 
painted or unpainted 1 " 

Again Yyner laughed — this time grimly. 

*' But you painters — you modern men, I 
mean — don't come up to my ideas of beauty," 
continued the General. " I like colour, flesh, 
plumpness, &c." 



138 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

*' No woman can be beautiful in my eyes/'' 
said Yyner, " unless sbe lias a beautiful mind 
— beauty to me is the semblance of the 
soul." 

** Of tlie soul ! What the deuce has the 
soul to do with it ? You can't paint a soul ? " 
said the General, testily, for he had not quite 
caught Yyner's words. 

" But I can recognise it," said Yyner. 

'* I am a practical man," proceeded the 
General, '^ and a pretty face is composed of fine 
features, according to my ideas, and of a fine 
skin, and not of soul. But Nora, my love, 
won't Mr. Yyner taste your strawberries ? They 
are very fine." 

" You are a practical man to some purpose 
now," laughed Yyner, and he sat down by the 
General's table and ate some of his strawberries. 

But by-and-by the General's head began to 
nod. He tried — ever gallant — to keep himself 
awake in the presence of a lady, but the worn- 
out old machine wanted rest, and rest it would 
have. Yyner's voice grew distant and dim in 
his ears, and Nora's unheard. He had fallen 
asleep, and presently announced this fact by 
loud and discordant snores. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 139 

Yyner and Nora looked at eacli other and 
-smiled. 

" Poor old man ! " said Nora, softly. 

"It's well to be old," said Vyner, in the 
bitterness of his heart — he still remembered 
Margaret. " Age deadens our feelings. Yes, it 
is well to be old." 



CHAPTER XL 

MARGARET SETTLES IT. 

While Nora and Yyner were wandering 
together in the rose garden by the river, fate^ 
in the shape of Margaret Blythe, was preparing 
to end such meetings. 

Margaret was wonderfully self-reliant and 
self-satisfied. Still, a feeling of uneasiness of 
late had been creeping over Margaret's mind 
regarding Vyner s manner towards herself. 

He had never been a very demonstrative 
lover. But he had been kinder, tenderer,, 
surely, to her once ? Again and again Mar- 
garet had thought this, and she had thought 
also, could there be any cause, and if so, that 
it were well to discover it. 

Once or twice, when she had asked him to- 
spend the evening with them, he had said he 
was engaged. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 141 

" And where are you going, Walter ? " 
Margaret had asked. 

" To ]\Irs. Trelawn's — she is an old friend of 
mine," Walter had answered ; and Margaret 
began to ponder about this old friend, and 
by-and-by heard that she was rich, and that 
she was a widow — that she went by the name 
of " Croesus's widow." 

" You knew this lady long ago, then, Walter?'' 
Margaret said one day, alluding to Nora. 

** Yes," answered Vyner, very briefly. 

*' Before she was married ? " asked Margaret. 

" Yes," again answered Vyner, and then he 
began to talk quickly on some other subject. 

But Margaret did not forget this conversation 
about Croesus's widow. She remembered it, 
and determined to act upon it. She was 
motherless, but so self-reliant a young woman 
required no mother. 

" Father," she said, addressing the blind 
Major a few days afterwards, her usual equal 
measured tones being a little disturbed, " don't 
you think that it is time that something was 
definitely settled about — my marriage ? " 

The Major lifted his bent head with a slightly 
surprised air. 



142 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" Well, my dear," he said, " of course, if you 
and Mr. Yyner wish it. It will be a great loss 
to me ; but little Nellie and I must get on as 
best we can." 

'^ Dear father," said Margaret — for she really 
was a good daughter — " I would not be happy 
if I were to leave you. No ; I have a different 
scheme to propose. Nellie is a dear little girl, 
but she is scarcely competent to take charge of 
a household, I think. What I wish is this — 
that you will live with myself and Walter, and 
that Nellie will marry young Mr. Saunders and 
live in the house with the old lady." 

" What, little Puck ! " exclaimed the Major. 
" Why, Margaret, what an idea ! " 

" Father, it is a very good idea. But I wish 
you would not call James Saunders 'little 
Puck,' just as Nellie does. Do you know how 
well off he is, father ? Mrs. Saunders herself 
told me a day or two before we dined there 
last that the old doctor left James over twenty 
thousand pounds, and Mrs. Saunders has lately 
been left seven hundred a year by her brother, 
and this also goes to James." 

The blind Major sighed. Want of money 
had been one of the burdens that he had been 



\ CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 143 

calfed upon to bear all his life. He had married 
for love, and it had been all that he could do 
to pay his way and pass as an honest man 
among his fellows. He was very poor, 
and small luxuries and even comforts were 
unknown in the economical household managed 
by Margaret's careful hand. 

James Saunders's prospects, therefore, seemed 
to open a vista of wealth to the poverty-stricken 
Major. He was a good, simple man this — 
simple and God-fearing — but he was not a man 
of keen perceptions. His sightless eyes, of 
course, had never beheld the common, comic 
face of "little Puck." He might be a good 
fellow enough, thought the Major, but Nellie 
was his darling. 

'' He may be rich/' he said ; " but Margaret, 
my dear, unless Nellie likes him, I could not 
urge her to think of him — besides, do you 
know that the young man wishes this ? " 

'* His mother formally proposed for him," 
answered Margaret. ''I told her Nellie had 
never thought of young Mr. James ; that we 
were not girls to think of young men until we 
were asked to do so ; but I advised her to tell 
Mr. James to come here sometimes, and I feel 



144 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

sure Nellie, who knows now from me tliat lie 
seriously admires her, will think of him — 
could very easily learn to care for him, if she 
chose." 

"But she may not choose." 

" Father, you know how annoyed I was about 
Lord Seaforth. I have since learned from 
Walter that this young lord bears a terrible 
character. Among fast men he is one of the 
fastest, and at one time I feared — I wish to be 
quite honest with you — that Nellie liked him too 
well for her own happiness." 

'* I pray God not — my poor, innocent dar- 
ling," murmured the Major. 

" This is one reason I am so anxious she 
should marry," contiuued Margaret. *' As for 
marrying Lord Seaforth, that of course is out 
of the question. His rank would prevent it for 
one thing, and for another I. am told he is 
absolutely overwhelmed with debt. The sooner, 
therefore, that Nellie forgets him the better." 

*' Yes, indeed," said the Major. 

"And James Saunders is young and rich, 
and very good-natured," urged Margaret, "and 
is really fond of Nellie. Mrs. Saunders says 
he is very fond, and he will settle money on 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 145 

her, and altogether it is a good match. Now, 
•don't yon think so, father ? " 

''Yes, if the little one likes him." 

" Oh, girls like Nellie easily like and dislike. 
Yon persuade her to think of him, father. And 
now about something else — about AValter ? " 

"Well, dear?" 

^' Walter is very well off now — he gets great 
prices for his pictures, and he must be saving 
money very fast, for he does not spend much. 
And I do not see why we should not be married 
at once. In fact, dear father, I want you to 
speak to him. It is so wearing to a girl to 
have a long engagement, and I think it should 
be settled." 

The Major was silent. He was a gentleman, 
and he felt that the task his daughter proposed 
for him was anything but a pleasant one. 

" It would be so nice if it were aU settled," 
continued Margaret. ** Walter can quite afford 
to take a good house, and you could live with 
us, and I am sure we would be all very happy 
together — for I have the gift, I think, of 
retaining affection." 

" But, my dear," said the Major, " I could 
not possibly propose to Mr. Yyner to live with 



146 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

you. Of course, as you say, it is very wearing 
to a woman, a Ions: eno-aoremcnt, and I can ask 
liim to settle it ; but as for proposing to live 
with liim myself, it is out of the question." 

*'But, father, Walter is just a man to honour 
filial affection. He knows your affliction binds- 
you closer to me. I am sure he would not 
wish us to part, and I am sure also that I can 
make you both very happy." 

" My dear Margaret, any offer of this kind 
must come from Yyner. I will speak to him, 
if you wish, about your marriage ; but ' I will 
certainly not speak to him about anything else." 

" Well, dear father, as you please. If you will 
kindly speak to him about making arrange- 
ments for our marriage, I dare say I shall be 
able to manage the rest, for I have a great deal 
of influence on Walter." 

Up the river in the rose garden, on the very 
day when this conversation took place, Walter 
was standing hand-in-hand with Nora Trelawn. 
Up the river in the rose garden the painter, with 
fast-beating pulses and a heart stirred to its very 
depths, was leaning on the little stone-work 
parapet, close, very close, to sweet Nora 
Trelawn. Nora in her soft womanly prime,. 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 147 



with the sunliofht in her eyes and in her heart I 



o 



ey 



But the painter was to pay a very bitter price 
for his brief foro^etfulness. When he returned 
in the evening from Eoseland he found a note 
lying on his table at home from his betrothed 
Margaret. It was to invite him to call on the 
following: evenino^, " as mv father has a few 
words to say to you, dear AValter," wrote 
Margaret ; and Yyner felt that he could scarcely 
refuse to go. 

So about eight o'clock he found himself 
ringing at the ]\Iajor's door-bell. Hatton, 
her quaint face shining with soap for the 
occasion, opened the door, grinning her wel- 
<iome. 

" Tea's in, sir," she said, " and they're waitiog 
for ye ; " and then she opened the little sitting- 
room door. 

In the room Vyner found the two sisters, 
'' Little Puck, " and the blind Major. " Little 
Puck " was describing a piece he had seen acted 
the night before. Some little humour had 
^' Puck," and the facetious contortions of his 
face were making Nellie laugh in spite of 
herself " Puck " felt that he was successful ; 
and, as he afterwards declared to his fond 



148 . CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

parent, ''a wet blanket seemed to be thrown: 
over the whole party when Vyner walked in/'' 

There was some truth in this. Vyner him- 
self, with care on his handsome face, certainly 
did not look in a humour to add to any 
conviviality. Margaret was anxious and the 
Major uncomfortable. And Nellie ? Ah, Nellie^ 
there was care in your heart also — care and 
great anxiety, and a secret too — for on the 
morrow she had promised to meet Lord Sea- 
forth, and give him an answer to a question 
which he had asked before. 

But Margaret was always composed in 
manner, whatever were her secret anxieties. 
She rose and received Vyner with a smile,. 
j)oured out some tea for him, and talked to him 
about the weather and his pictures. 

"And have you finished the painting you 
call ' Eve ? ' " asked Margaret. 

"No; I have turned its face to the wall,'" 
answered Vyner. 

"It certainly was not my conception of 
* Eve,' " replied Margaret's even tones. "What 
do you think, father ? Should she be a bright, 
dark, certainly rather a pretty woman, like- 
Walter had drawn her ; or a lovely, soft, fair 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 149> 

piece of perfection, as I always mentally pictured 
our first mother ? " 

'*I should say the soft fair piece of perfection," 
said the Major. " But I am no judge of art." 

" Is your ' Eve ' a fancy sketch or a portrait," 
asked Margaret. " I should say a portrait." 

'' I hardly know," answered Yyner. 

" It must be good fun to be able to paint — 
pretty faces especially," said little Puck. '' Once 
thought of being an artist myself — can sketch 
away little heads, you know, and all that lot ; 
but to be the regular thing — to go in for it, 
you know, requires heaps, piles of work, and 
I'm too — what dy'e call it, for that ? " 

'* Too volatile," suggested Yyner. 

Little Puck laughed good-naturedly. He 
was, in truth, really good-natured. A vain 
little fellow, but, as his adoring mother had said,. 
^' he had a good heart." 

Presently Margaret whispered a word in her 
father's ear, and the blind Major rose obediently, 
and, assisted by Margaret, groped his way out of 
the room, going to a small sitting-room at the 
back of the house, which Margaret called ^^ My 
father's study." 

** My father's study " was very dingy. The 



150 CECESUS'S WIDOW. 

outward signs and indications of poverty are 
like the grains of sea sand upon tlie shore. The 
poor little packets of groceries, the miserable little 
^scrag-ends of meat, washed-out covers, darned, 
faded carpets, black horsehair, with the white 
seams of age and bareness appearing on the 
surface. All these signs were to be seen in 
the Major's household, and the dingiest and 
poorest-looking place of all was *' my father's 
study." 

Here in his everlasting darkness the blind 
Major mostly lived. Always in the night — 
and yet, who knows ? Have the blind ever 
visions — glimpses perhaps, of things beyond, 
which we of earthly ken cannot see ? 

Margaret having carefully escorted her father 
to his room, went back to the front sitting-room 
and sat down for a moment or two by the side 
of her betrothed, Walter Yyner. 

*' Walter, dear," she said, " will you go into 
my father's study for a few moments, for he 
is anxious to speak to you about — something 
important ? " 

"Certainly," answered Vyner, and he rose 
and went into the Major's study. 

Major Blythe was looking a little disturbed 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 151 

as lie entered. The task whicli Margaret had 
j)repared for him was not a pleasant one to a 
man of delicate feelings. Still the Major felt 
that if Margaret wished it, it was his duty to 
speak to Yyner. Vyner, unsuspicious of what 
was before him, addressed the Major in his 
usual manner. 

"Well, Major," he said, ''Margaret tells me 
you want to speak to me." 

''Yes, a few words," answered the Major,, 
nervously. "You see, my dear fellow, my — 
my girls have no mother — " 

Then Yyner knew what was coming. 

" You lost your wife when they were very 
young, did you not ? " he said, nervously also. 

" Yes, poor darling — she left me when little 
Nell was almost a baby — but she has had a 
mother in Mars^aret. Mars^aret is an excellent 
girl, Yyner — a girl in a thousand." 

" I am sure of that." 

" But you see, girls who are engaged get 
unsettled. In fact, my dear Yyner, Margaret 
is unsettled — and — and I think it is time that 
something was arranged about her marriage." 

For a moment or two Yyner was silent. 
For a moment or two a cold, dead, physical 



152 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

pain crept into liis heart, and witli an effort he 
roused himself to answer. 

" You mean," he said, *' she wishes — " 

'' She wishes the time of her marriage to be 
fixed. It is onlj natural, you see, Yyner, and 
she asked me to speak to you ; and I am sure 
you will do everything in your power to please 
her." 

'' I will see about — arranging it," said Yyner, 
slowly. He did not blame Major Blythe. He 
knew he had no right as an honourable man to 
ask another man's daughter to marry him, and 
not be ready to fulfil that engagement. But 
this conversation came as a blow to him — a 
sudden, bitter blow. 

But yesterday — but yesterday at Eoseland I 
And now that dream must be ended — ended as 
it had ended five long years ago, in bitter 
■disappointment and pain. 

" I will see Margaret," he said, struggling to 
speak calmly, *'and — and I suppose we will 
-settle it." 

** Yes, do, my dear fellow ! and let me tell 
you, you are a lucky man. Margaret has been 
a pattern daughter, and she will make a pattern 
wife." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 153- 

" The lucky man " laughed feebly, and then 
rose to leave the Major's study, and he hoped 
the house. But Margaret, who had been lis- 
tening for his footstep, opened the front 
sitting-room door, as he was seeking for his 
hat in the little hall, and at once advanced 
towards him. 

"You are not going, are you, Walter^ 
surely ? " she said. 

** I have some work to do, Margaret/^ 
answered Vyner, '^so I must be off at once." 

" Has — has my father said anything to you?"^ 
asked Margaret, anxiously. 

" Yes — and we will talk it over the next 
time I come. Good-night, Margaret." And 
Margaret held up her face to receive her lover's- 
kiss. 

** Good-night, dearest," she whispered. "You 
will come to-morrow, then — and we will settle 
it." 

It was starlight when Vyner went out. . In 
times of great mental darkness, do not the still 
heavens seem to mock our woe ? There — 
serene, unmoved, star-diadem'd, while we stand 
passion-toss'd, impotent in our rage or grief 



154 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Here was Yyner — a painter, a man who loved 
liis work and God's work, and who had lived 
believing that yon blue luminous vault above 
but veils from us greater glories ; yet here was 
Vyner looking upwards with a curse on his lips, 
^nd with his hands clenched, and with weariness, 
nay, rage in his heart, at all things on earth 
below. 

AVhy had he hung this stone about his neck ? 
he was asking himself. Why had he been per- 
mitted in his blindness to do so ? He had 
never loved Margaret Blythe. He had respected 
and admired her for her meritorious endeavours 
to assist her family, and he had believed her 
to be a good woman, and seen that she liked 
him, and feeling unsettled, and not very happy, 
he had drifted into an engagement with her. 

When he knew more of her, he saw how 
narrow and self-appreciative her mind was ; he 
saw, in fact, that they were unsuited to each 
other ; and shortly after he had come to this 
conclusion he met again the one woman that 
he had ever really loved. He learned that this 
one woman was a widow ; and he learned also, 
when he looked in her dark eyes, that this one 
woman loved him still. 



CPvCESus's wroow. 15S 

*' Why, then," he asked, in the great bitter- 
ness of his soul, after his interview with Major 
Blythe, *^ had a wicked old woman been per- 
mitted to spoil two lives by a miserable lie ? " 
But for this Nora might have been his happy 
wife, her children prattling by his knee. 

So there was great darkness on the soul of 
Vyner. He felt that he was bound hand and 
foot, and he felt also that honour at once de- 
manded a bitter sacrifice from him, which was 
to tell Nora of his engagement to Margaret 
Blythe. 

*' I will go to Koseland to-morrow," he told 
himself, wandering up and down with impatient 
strides in the terrace where he lived, beneath, 
the starlight. *' Yes, she shall know ; and I 
would rather be dead than do what is now 
forced upon me." 



CHAPTEE XII. 

IN WHICH NORA FORGETS HERSELF. 

He went tlie next day to Eoseland. He went 
in the evening, and to his great annoyance 
found "that wicked old woman," as he had 
mentally called Lady Stainbrooke so many 
times the night before, sitting admiring the 
sunset in the rose garden with her husband and 
Nora. 

Lady Stainbrooke was in good humour, for 
she had just enjoyed a good dinner, and she 
held out her yellow claw-like hand, glittering 
with the diamonds she had contrived to pick 
lip during her long sojourn in India, to welcome 
the painter as he approached them. 

But Vyner did not take it. He shook hands 
with Nora and Sir Thomas, but bowed coldty 
enough to her ladyship, who, however, only 
gave a little laugh. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 157 

" What ! " she said, '' have I offended you 1 " 

" "We never were very good friends, Lady 
Stainbrooke," answered Vyner. 

"No, no!" said Lady Stainbrooke, nodding 
lier head. *' All the same, in your inmost heart, 
I believe you must feel very much obliged to 
me." And again Lady Stainbrooke laughed, 
this time with rather a wicked ring in it, for 
she believed that Vyner came courting Nora 
for the money that John Trelawn had left 
b>ehind. 

Vyner quite understood her little insinuation. 
He stood there grim, pale, and handsome, 
looking at this " miserable old woman," as he 
was mentally designating her, and wishing her 
— well, the painter was angry, so we need not 
follow all his thoughts. 

But Nora tried to be a peace-maker. 

" Even Lady Stainbrooke is charmed with 
my roses, Mr. Vyner," she said smiling. 

*' Of course I am, my dear," said that lady. 
*' I am charmed with your roses because they 
are pretty, and are cared for by a good gardener, 
for whom you can afford to pay. And I am 
charmed also with your cows, and your ducks 
and chickens, because they, too, have every- 



158 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

thing they require. But I would not be- 
charmed with any of them if they were not 
merely a whim of a rich woman ; ruralising for 
amusement, and ruralising for life, are two very 
different things." 

" Mr. Vyner has not seen my cows, nor my 
ducks and chickens, aunt, which you despise,"' 
said Nora. "Shall we show them to him now ?" 

*' I am very well where I am, my dear," 
answered her aunt drily. 

" I should like of all things to see them,"' 
said Vyner eagerly. 

" Come with me, then," said Nora. And as 
the painter followed her, Lady Stainbrooke 
rose and screamed her opinion into her deaf 
General's ear. 

*' My opinion is," she said, '' that Nora will- 
make a fool of herself and marry that man. It 
is a thousand pities, when Lord Seaforth would,. 
I am sure, be only too glad to have her." 

" "What folly ! " said the General, testily, in 
reply. " What makes you think, madam, she 
will take this painter fellow ? " 

*' Because," answered Lady Stainbrooke, 
grimly, " she is insane enough, I believe, to be- 
in love." 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 159 

The General grunted. This couple were not 
in lore with each other — had not been in love 
for thirty years. They snarled at each other, 
and were very clear- eyed about each other's 
faults, but they went on living with each other 
— in all probability would so live until two of 
their bleared and worldly eyes were closed for 
evermore. That these would be the General's 
eyes Lady Stainbrooke was very happily 
persuaded. She frequently talked of "when 
Tm a widow," but the old man was in no hurry 
to place her in that position. 

^Meanwhile let us follow Nora and Vyner. 
Nora went bareheaded, with a rosy flush on 
her soft cheeks, and with her eyes cast down 
so that she never noticed how pale Yyner was, 
or how gloomy, as he walked by her side. 

Nora's cows lived in a little field at one side 
of the rose garden, separated from it by a 
highly ornamental paling which was thickly 
trained with rose trees. A rustic gateway led 
through this paling to the field beyond, but as 
Nora laid her hand on the gate to open it 
Vyner prevented her. 

"I do not really care about seeing your 
cows, Nora," he said, with rather a painful 



160 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

smile. " Will you put on your hat and walk 
down by tlie river with me ? I — I — have 
something to say to you." 

Nora looked up surprised. Then she saw 
how pale and agitated Vyner really was, and 
she at once did what he asked. 

" Wait here for me a moment, then," she 
said ; and she went into the house for her hat,, 
while Vyner, leaning on the paling, was nerving 
himself for the bitter task before him. 

He looked round when he heard her return,, 
and then, without a word, the two together 
quitted the grounds of Koseland. 

They went down by the darkening river, for 
the sun had set now, and dusky shadows had 
fallen on the water. Still in silence. Nora 
was nervous, and Yyner trying to frame his 
cruel news in gentle words. Then with sudden 
passion and abruptness he spoke, feeling that 
gentle words were vain. 

" Nora," he said, " I have come to tell you 
something to-night that I would rather tear 
my tongue from my mouth than utter." 

" What is it, Walter ? " asked Nora,, 
trembling. 

*' Let me go back," said Yyner, still in the 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 161 

same agitated and passion-broken voice, "to 
the days long ago — to ttie days when you were 
a young girl, and — and I loved you then, 
Nora." 

Nora did not speak. She put her hand 
softly on the painter's arm. 

" I went back to Warbrooke," continued 
Vyner, "to ask you to be my wife. I was 
poor then — a man who had a struggle to live — 
but something in your face had told me that 
you were a good woman — that you would 
marry a man because you loved him, and not 
because he was rich." 

" You know how it was," said Nora, in a low 
tone. 

"I am coming to that. I went back to 
Warbrooke then, and found that you were gone. 
I was received coldly enough at your father s 
house, but I learned in the little town that you 
had gone to live with your father's sister. Lady 
Stainbrooke, in London, and that you were 
expected by your family to make a good mar- 
riage there." 

"You did not believe that?" 

" No, I did not. I told myself the little girl 
I love will do nothing of the kind — she will 

VOL. I. G 



162 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

wait for me — wait till I can make a home for 
her." 

Yyner's voice broke here, and Nora clasped 
his arm closer. 

"Hush," she said, "do not talk of these 
painful things. They are all over now. My 
poor husband is dead now." 

" Yes," said Yyner, bitterly, " and you are 
free ! The cursed story that Lady Stainbrooke 
invented to part us was not true, as you know, 
then, Xora, but now — " 

" There is no lie to part us now, Walter," 
said Nora firmly, "I am free and you are free — " 

" No ! " interrupted Yyner hoarsely. " That 
wicked, miserable old woman's work is not yet 
done. Nora, months and months ago — when 
you were Mr. Trelawn's wife — there crossed 
my path a woman — I believe a good woman — " 

But Nora stopped him with a sudden cry. 

" You are not married ! " she said. " Walter, 
tell me " (and she clung with trembling hands 
to his arm), " surely you are not married ? " 

" No," he answered, averting his eyes from 
her frightened, appealing face ; " not married — 
but bound by a promise that I cannot break." 

Nora grew faint and cold. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 163 

"It cannot be," she said, still clinmnp'to liis 
arm. " Walter, it cannot be ! " 

" What can I say, Nora ? " answered Vyner, 
clasping her cold and nerveless hand. " You 
know how it is — I cared for you long ago — I 
care for you now — but we are parted. In a 
moment of madness, I think — feeling sad, 
lonely, and dissatisfied with my lot, I asked 
Margaret Blythe to be my wife. She is a good 
woman — I have nothing to say against her — 
but when I saw you again I knew I had made 
a fatal mistake." 

Nora could not now control the bitter emotion 
of her heart. Her eyes filled with tears, and 
she trembled so violently that Yyner asked her 
to sit down on the river bank. 

It was a very lonely spot where they were, 
and as they sat down, with a sort of moan 
Nora covered her face with her hand. 

'• I have suffered so much," she said, " no 
one knows how much, in those long years — 
and now — now — " 

There was a weary hopelessness in her tone, 
which touched Yyner to the quick. 

" If I could do anything, Nora," he said, 
earnestly, '' anything, anything, I would do it. 

g2 



164 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

But Margaret Blytlie is poor — I got to know 
lier through a friend, who thought that perhaps 
in time she might become an illustrator of 
books, and so introduced her to me to see if I 
€Ould push her on. This very fact — her 
poverty — makes it more difficult — " 

*^ Still, perhaps, if she knew," said Nora, 
looking up, "knew that long ago we cared 
for each other so much, and that we were 
only parted by a wicked, wicked inven- 
tion—" 

Vyner was silent. He was a proud man — 
with a rough and honest pride in bearing a 
good name among his fellows — and he was 
thinking even if Margaret consented to their 
eno-ao-ement beino^ broken off, what would the 
world say ? To throw over a poor girl for a 
A^ery rich woman ! Yes, he knew what it would 
say ; for Nora's sake he would have borne 
much — but Margaret — 

" You think it would be cruel to ask her," 
faltered Nora. 

"I do not know what to say. Her father 
spoke to me the other night about fixing the 
time for our marriage. This determined me 
to tell you — I should never have come 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 165 

near you, Nora — never — but I was weak — " 

They sat there together after this almost in 
silence. The great broad river kept rolling on 
before them, the twilight crept around them, 
but still they scarcely spoke. Nora felt 
miserably unhappy. She had loved Vyner so 
deeply, and all through the long years of her 
wedded life she had never forgotten him. The 
handsome face that had been the heau-ideal of 
her girlhood was her heau-ideal still. And now 
when she had dreamed — nay, been sure — of 
happiness, to have it all snatched away — all, 
and nothing left I 

At last she rose. 

" Are you going now ? " said Vyner, turning 
his head towards her ; and looking at him she 
saw how haggard his face was, how worn and 
grief-lined. 

There was a great struggle in his heart. 
Honour or dishonour ! To forsake Margaret — 
dishonour ; to leave Nora — a long, weary, 
loveless life. 

" Perhaps you will write? " said Nora, in a 
low tone, as they walked on by the river edge 
towards Eoseland. 

" Yes," answered Yyner, speaking as with 



166 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

an effort. '' I will see Margaret — I will let yoit 
know wliat slie says." 

'' You Yfill tell her— the truth ? " 

" Yes," again answered Yyner ; and without 
any further words on the subject of all- 
absorbing interest in both their hearts, they 
parted at the gate of Eoseland. 

As Nora walked through the garden a feeling 
of great and bitter anger rose in her heart 
against her aunt. Lady Stainbrooke. 

'•' She has caused all this," she thought ; "all 
the misery of my life. I might have been a 
happy woman but for her false and lyiug 
tongue." 

Full of her wronsfs she entered the house. She 
could see, as she crossed under the verandah, 
her aunt sitting in the pretty luxurious drawing- 
room beyond. Lady Stainbrooke was lying: 
back in an easy chair, with her feet very 
comfortably cushioned on a low chair before 
her, reading some very piquant novel, for Lady 
Stainbrooke loved properly-veiled immorality 
well. She was therefore thoroughly enjoying 
her novel, by the aid of the double glasses. 
which before her family she now generally 
wore. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 167 

Then flusliecl, passionate, angry, Nora 
•entered the room, and Lady Stainbrooke 
looked up and peered at her curiously through, 
her glasses. 

" Well, my dear," she said, '' and what have 
you done with your painter ? " 

*' You are a wicked woman, Aunt Stain- 
brooke ! " answered Nora, to the great astonish- 
ment of that lady ; " a bad, wicked woman, and 
I wish I had never seen your face ! " 

Lady Stainbrooke put down her ugly little 
feet, and removed her double glasses with a 
jerk. 

"You forget yourself, Nora, my dear," she 
•said ; " utterly forget yourself." 

" Not so utterly as you forgot yourself," 
retorted Nora, *' when vou invented that wicked 
falsehood long ago about Mr. Vyner." 

" Oh ! that old story ! " said Lady Stain- 
brooke, shrugging her shoulders. *' Bah ! my 
4ear, do not be so absurd. What do you 
want ? If you want this Vyner, he's ready to 
^0 down on his knees to you — yes, a deal faster 
than he went when you were a penniless girl." 

" That is all you know," said Nora, standing 
before her aunt, pale and trembling ; "but you 



168 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

"believe in notliing good nor notliing true. You 
have spoilt my life ! '' And Nora having said 
this, turned and left the room. 

Then Lady Stainbrooke rose and approached 
her General, who had not heard a single word 
that had passed between the two ladies. 

*' Did you hear what Nora said. General ? " 
shouted Lady Stainbrooke in her husband's ear. 
"She has utterly forgotten herself — utterly 
forgotten what is due to me ; and I shall leave 
the house at once, and you must come with me." 

But Sir Thomas had no idea of turning out of 
such comfortable quarters on so short a notice. 

'^ What do you say, madam ? " he said. 
"Leave the house at once for some foolish 
women's quarrel ? Not L What on earth have 
you and Nora been rowing about ? " 

" I was not rowing," shouted Lady Stain- 
brooke, with an attempt at dignity. "Nora 
has foro-otten herself. She has had some 
quarrel with this Vyner, and so she chose to 
attack me. But she may marry him. I give 
her up, after all I have done for her. I wash 
my hands of her, and I will order the carriage 
and return to town ; and certainly you will not 
refuse to go with me ? " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 169 



" But I certainly sliall/' answered the General, 
^ho was not going to expose liis aching bones 
to the damp air by the river at this time of 
night. " I shall encourage no such folly. If 
you choose to go, go ; but don't expect me to 
be such a fool as to go with you." 

" You are contemptible !" hissed Lady Stain- 
brooke ; and then in a towering rage she walked 
out of the room, and very shortly afterwards 
out of the house. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

kellie's temptation. 

Margaret Blythe expected Vyner to call, on 
tlie night that his unhappy interview \Yith 
Nora took place at Eoseland, but he never came. 
She felt a little uneasy and nervous about this,, 
but on reflection reassured herself. 

^' He has had some work to finish. I shall 
see him to-morrow," she decided in her calm 
way. 

Then her eyes happened to fall on the fair 
face of her sister Nellie. 

"Why, Nellie, how flushed you are!" said 
Margaret. " Has anything annoyed you ? " 

Nellie's blooming face turned a deeper pink 
at these words. 

" No, Margaret dear," she said, and she- 
ivent up and took her sister's hand. 

*' You are trembling, too," said the practical 



CKCESUSS WIDOW. 17 1 

Margaret. " I am afraid you are going to 
be ill. Do you think you have got a chill 
anywhere ? " 

"Oh, no," laughed ISTellie, with an uneasy 
laugh, and Margaret, reassured on this point 
also, took up her housekeeper's book, and 
began to enter — as was her wont — every penny 
of their expenditure during the day. 

But careful housekeeper as Margaret was, 
could she have looked into Nellie's heart, she 
would have neoflected her accounts. Durino- 
the day a very trying interview had occurred 
to Nellie — an interview which, had Margaret 
known of, she would have been really unhappy 
about her young sister. 

When lowering clouds gather, we seldom 
escape a storm. Lowering clouds had been 
gathering long round the head of Murray, 
Viscount Seaforth, but the reckless young man 
made no effort to evade them. Nay, in his 
love, or his selfishness — he called it love — he 
had made up his somewhat unstable mind to 
endeavour to persuade Nellie to share his 
uncertain future. Yes, he loved her too dearly 
to give her up, he had decided during one 
•of their recent interviews, and during their 



172 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

meeting this day — the day Yyiier had told 
Nora of his eno^aorement to Maro;aret — Lord 
Seaforth had urged Nellie to marry him secretly. 
''For to do it any other way," he told her, 
"would only bring irremediable ruin on us 
both." 

^' But I cannot — I cannot marry," the girl 
answered in tremulous accents, holding both 
his hands, " I cannot, for my father's sake." 

" Then ' father ' is more to you than I 
am ? " said Lord Seaforth, half- tenderly, half- 
mockingly. 

''He is blind," said Nellie, and her lips 
quivered. 

'^ I wish I was blind ! " said Lord Seaforth,. 
with a little lauoii. 

" He would feel it so dee^^ly," continued' 
Nellie, pleadingly. '-'If I could but tell him,, 
Murray—" 

" And ruin me, my little girl ? " 

''I will never do that — never." 

*MJnder no temptation, eh ?" 

*' No, never," repeated Nellie. And the day 
was yet to come when he asked her to keep 
this promise. 

Thev were standing together, these two- 



CRCESUS'S W'IDOW. 173 

young people, under one of the great spreading 
trees in Eegent's Park, when Nellie made it. 
Overhead the white-flecked summer sky, and 
around them the summer air, and the white 
butterflies on the wing. Only common-place 
surroundings — the trim terraces standing ia 
the distance, the groups of well-dressed childrea 
and their nurses — all commonplace enough, 
and the two young people, Nellie and Lord 
Seaforth, as commonplace as the rest. 

*'A pretty girl and a good-looking young-- 
man, making love to each other," thought or 
said the good-natured passers-by ; and the 
ill-natured ones smiled sourly, their day for 
such pastime being over, or ended in disap- 
pointment, or perhaps not come. 

A pretty girl in a white dress, and a black 
cape, and with a fair, sweet, winning face. So 
fair that Lord Seaforth standing there, looking 
at her lilies and roses, was moved to a depth 
of deeper feeling than had ever before passed 
through his early- worn heart. 

" You are very lovely, Nellie," he said, "very 
lovely and lovable." And he held both her 
hands tightly in his. 

" If you love me really, I care for nothing 



174 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

more," answered Nellie, in her sweet, modest 
way. '' Why should we think of being married 
yet ? I do not care how long I wait — for years 
and years." 

" Years, my dear child ! Where shall I be 
in years ? No, Nellie, we must be married now, 
or we shall have to part." 

" We cannot part," said the girl, speaking 
very earnestly, and turning pale. 

'' No, we cannot part," repeated Lord 
Seaforth. '' Now listen to me, my darling. 
What I propose is — well, I think it would be 
best to be married in Scotland, and we could 
live there on the cjuiet till things blow over a 
bit. Don't speak for a minute, Nellie. It 
isn't from any pride or any folly of that kind I 
wish to keep things quiet. It is simply that if 
some troublesome acquaintance of mine knew I 
had married a penniless lassie, . they would be 
down upon me at once, and I would have to bolt 
— to l)ecome, in fact, a ruined, disgraced man — 
a bankrupt, or worse. If the little woman loves 
me as she says she does, would she like to bring 
all this about my ears ? " 

'' Oh, Murray ! " And Nellie's eyes filled 
with tears. 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 175 

" Don't ! " said Lord Seafortli. " Don t look 
at me like that, child. Perhaps it would be the 
best thing for you, Nellie, to say good-bye to 
me, if you can ? " 

*' But I can't — how could I ? " answered 
Nellie, the tears now rolling down the smooth, 
pink cheeks. 

" I am a selfish brute, I daresay," said 
Seaforth. " All men are selfish, you know, 
Nell. I ought, of course, to say * Good-bye, 
sweetheart,' go and be happy with someone 
else — some happy dog with more pence than 
debts. Shouldn't I now, instead of saying — 
well, all the romantic things I have been 
saying — eh, Nellie ? " And Lord Seaforth 
laughed. 

"I don't think you have been saying anything 
very romantic," retorted Nellie, rather indig- 
nantly, now drying her tears. 

" Haven't I ? Well, don't look angry. I 
meant it at least. Nellie, all my life I have 
had no romance till I met you. That's truth 
at least — if I'm selfish it's because I love you 
well." 

What did the girl answer ? A loving, inno- 
cent girl, who knew very little or nothing of 



176 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

the world ? Margaret, with her proprieties, and 
her art studies, and — recently — her warm affec- 
tion for Yyner, had left Nellie very much to 
herself. This true and tender heart, therefore, 
naturally endowed the man she loved with 
every perfectioD. Seaforth was not only good- 
looking in Nellie's eyes, but noble, high-minded, 
and true. The wiser Margaret could see errors 
even where she loved. But Nellie saw none, 
and there was no one to point them out to her 
over-partial eyes. 

Still, " for father's sake," she would give no 
positive answer to her lover's proposal. But 
she did not refuse it. How could she — " I who 
love him so dearly " — she thought, glancing at 
the o;ood-lookin!2: face, which somehow looked 
more sad than cynical there beneath the trees- 
on the summer day with sweet Nellie Blythe. 



CHAPTEE XIY. 

Margaret's decision. 

Another day passed, and still Vyner did not 
call on his betrothed Margaret. His betrothed 
Margaret, after mentally deciding that it was 
quite time that he should do so, wrote him a 
note, in her clear, firm handwriting, to remind 
him of his duty, "as I feel a little anxious, 
•dear Walter, that thiugs should be settled now." 

Vyner read these words, and then went and 
«tood, pale and deeply moved, before the picture 
of his Eve. He truly loved Nora Trelawn I 
It was no brief fancy — not one of those light 
attractions which come and go, leaving no mark 
on many a human heart. No ; he loved her — 
•dearly loved her — but his honour bound him 
in galling chains to Margaret, and he felt only 
that Margaret could set him free. 

He had made up his mind to tell Margaret 



178 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

the story of his early love. Even tins had cost 
a hard struggle in his heart. A. man knows well 
enouo"h when a woman loves him, and Yyner 
knew that the usually placid, composed Margaret 
loved him well. He had been her only lover,, 
for one thing ; for another, Margaret was proud 
of his position as an artist ; and last, not least, 
his handsome face had won her heart. 

But Margaret did not worship Yyner with 
unreasoning worship. She knew his faults ; 
speculating in her calm, self-confident way how 
it would be best to cure them ; feeling quite 
sure she would cure them, and that the day 
would come when Yyner would be everything 
that she wished him to be. 

Yyner, of course, did not know all the good 
that was in store for him. He only knew that 
Margaret Blythe was a handsome young woman 
to whom he was engaged, but whose nature was 
not akin to his own. But in spite of this want 
of kinship, the idea of giving her pain was very 
bitter to him. Besides, she might mistake hi^ 
motive. Nora's great wealth and her great 
poverty made the position doubly trying. Still, 
for Nora's sake— yes, for Nora's sake — the man 
whispered to his heart, trying to take courage. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 179 

•as his tremblino; hand run 2; that ni^ht at tlie 
house-door of his betrothed Margaret. 

Margaret received him very affectionately. 
Vyner looked pale, almost grim. He had been 
hardening: his heart as lie came alons: the streets 
to undergo a scene. He felt that he was going 
to say a most galling thing to a woman who 
was a good woman, and worthy of better treat- 
ment from his hands. When Margaret kissed 
his cold cheek, he felt like Judas. When she 
put her little caressing hand in his, and sat 
down by his side, he felt he was acting like a 
scoundrel. 

How to begin such a story ! Easy is it to 
say I will do this or that — I will tell this 
painful truth or the other — but it is not easy to 
commence words that we know will inflict a 
stab. Vyner sat silent, pale, biting his lips, 
trying in vain to speak the words he wanted to 
say. Margaret herelf at last approached the 
subject of their marriage with smiling confi- 
dence. 

'^ Well, Walter dear," she said, *' have you 
settled anything yet ? I have felt a little 
anxious to know, naturally, during the last 
two days." 



180 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Then Yyner rose from his seat, so visibly 
agitated that Margaret could not help noticing 
it. 

'' Is there anything the matter ? " she asked,, 
rather nervously. 

"I have something to tell you," answered 
Vyner, not looking at her — '* something that I 
think it is right you should know, Margaret ; 
mind, I don't wish to influence you — I leave it 
in your hands — still I will tell you — " 

" Is there any reason I should know ? " said 
Margaret, her usually calm voice not a little 
disturbed. "If — if it is anything that happened, 
"Walter, before I knew you, I would rather not 
hear it, if it is anything painful." 

"It is painful — most painful — it happened 
before I knew you," said Vyner, forcing himself" 
to speak the unpalatable words. " It happened 
years ago, Margaret — six years ago — when I 
was a younger man — " 

" I do not wish to hear it," again interrupted 
Margaret, and her foce flushed, for she mistook 
Vyner's words. 

" I would not have told you," continued 
Vyner, still with averted eyes, "if the happiness 
of another person was not concerned. For 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 181 

myself — for the sake of my own feelings — I 
would not have told you. But, Margaret, six 
years ago I — I cared very deeply for a young 
girl I then wished to make my wife." 

"Walter, what motive can you have for 
saying this to me ? " said Margaret, with some 
sharpness of tone. " You are bound to me 
now. Why bring up this old story ? " 

*' Still it is right you should know. Well,, 
six years ago, then, Nora Sudely, now Mrs.. 
Trelawn, was very dear to me — " 

" She is very rich, is she not ? " said Mar- 
garet, yet more coldly, as Vyner paused. 

*' Yes, she is very rich," said Vyner, and his 
pale face flushed for a moment, ''but her riches 
or her poverty have nothing to do with it. 
She was not-rich six years ago, when I met her 
as a young girl at Warbrooke. I was a poor 
man, then, too, Margaret," and Vyner tried to 
smile, " and in no position to marry — but I 
cared for Nora, and I believe my regard was 
returned, and after she went to live with her 
aunt. Lady Stainbrooke, I sought her out for 
the purpose of asking her to wait for me. But 
her. aunt, Lady Stainbrooke — a wicked, worldly,, 
lyiug Anglo-Indian — invented a vile story to 



182 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

part us. She told Nora I was about to be 
married to another girl, and Nora believed her 
and married Mr. Trelawn." 

*' He left her a great fortune, did he not, 
quite lately?" said Margaret, whose voice had 
now grown calm, but a little hard. 

" Yes, I believe so — but you will do me the 
justice, I suppose, to believe that I am not 
thinking of her money ? " 

**Yes, Walter, I cpiite do you that justice. 
I think it honourable also of you to tell me all 
this — though I do not quite see your motive 
for doing so. I honour and respect you too 
much for a moment to believe that you would 
think of forsaking the girl to whom you are 
engaged — to whom you are so soon to be 
married- for the sake of a rich widow, though 
you may have had an early liking for this 
Mrs. Trelawn. Even — if my feelings were 
nothing — " and again Margaret slid her hand 
into Yyner's cold, quivering one. 

" Then — you wish our engagement to 
continue?" he asked, in a strange, forced voice. 

*' Walter ! how can you ask such a thing ? '* 
answered Margaret, and she hid her face upon 
vhis breast. 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 183- 

The manliness, perhaps the tenderness, of 
his heart made him only feel pity for IMargaret 
at this moment. What right had he, indeed, 
to feel anything else ? Believing Nora was lost 
to him for ever, he had asked Margaret to be 
his wife. Because Mr. Trelawn had happened 
to die, had he any right to play fast and loose 
with Margaret's affection ? He knew that he 
had none, and he admitted this to himself 
while Margaret's head lay pillowed on his 
breast. 

Then he moved slightly, and Margaret lifted 
her head, 

'* I thought," she said, " instead of telling 
me this — this painful story — that to-night,. 
Walter, you would have fixed somethiug 
definite about the time of our marriage. It is 
so wearins; to a o:irl — and — " 

** Settle it when you like," said Yyner, the 
grim, cold look once more returning to his face ; 
and Margaret smiled, and still held his hand. 

'' Shall I ? " she said. '' Yevy well, Walter ;. 
then we must think of a house, you know ? " 

When Yyner returned to his rooms that 
night, he sat down and wrote a few words to- 



184 CPcCESUS's WIDOW. 

Nora TreLawn. Xora down at Roseland, living 
among her flowers, liad grown during the last 
two days to hate their brightness. The mocking 
sun fell on the river, the mocking sun fell on 
the roses, but there was no light in Nora's 
heart — only silent, desolate suspense — some- 
times despair. 

No letter from Yyner ! So three days 
passed, and she could bear it no longer. Then 
she proposed to her uncle. Sir Thomas, to return 
to town ; and that ancient warrior — heartily 
sick of the place, too, by this time — eagerly 
acceded to her wishes. 

'' By Jove ! the old woman w^as right, after 
all," he said, '' One would get moss-grown 
living in a place like this too long ! " 

So Nora and Sir Thomas returned together- 
to Nora's house at South Kensington. Here 
they found Lady Stainbrooke, who had been 
entertaining her friends, courting her neighbour. 
Lady Seaforth, and altogether enjoying herself. 

She received Nora exactly as if no little 
unpleasantness had ever occurred betw^een 
them. She had, indeed, taken herself to task 
for getting out of tem23er with " the foolish 
<ihild," as she called Nora, at Eoseland. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 185 

" So," tliouglit the worldly-wise old woman, 
'' our handsome painter has got into some 
trouble, I suppose, during the five years of 
Nora's married life, and he has been forced to 
tell her this, and I was called a wicked, lying 
old woQian in consequence." 

Here Lady Stainbrooke chuckled to herself, for^ 
as we have seen, she had got over her little temper. 

" A good thing," she thought, " a very good 
thing. Absurd, with Nora's fortune, to think 
of marrying a painter." 

Bat to her ladyship's surprise and discomfort 
Nora did not seem to have got over her little 
temper. She spoke, indeed, so coldly to her 
aunt, that Lady Stainbrooke thought that her 
dignity required her to remove, for the j^resent 
at least, from Nora's house. 

Nora made no objection to this plan when 
her aunt — at first — rather faintly-hinted her 
intention. 

Then her ladyship got a little warm again. 

*' I do not know what has happened to you^ 
Nora ! " she said. " If you have quarrelled 
with ]\Ir. Vyner, I certainly have had nothing 
to do with your quarrel — yet you treat me 
with rudeness — absolute rudeness." 



18G CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

" I have not quarrelled with Mr. Vyner," 
answered Nora, her pale face flushing as she 
spoke. '' I never quarrelled with him, aunt — 
as you well know." 

*'Then why, my dear child, do you make 
yourself unpleasant to me ? " 

Nora made no answer. She was not o;oino: 
to bandy any further words with Lady Stain- 
brooke ; but she did not ask her to stay any 
longer under her roof. Lady Stainbrooke 
accordingly removed herself to Buckstone for 
,a time, and took her rheumatic General with 
her, 

'' Never again," she screamed in her GeneraFs 
ear, as they drove from Nora's house, " shall I 
endeavour to do any good to anyone I Look 
how Nora has treated me ! I who made her 
— absolutely made her — to be insulted for the 
sake of a painter 1 " 

''You shouldn't have interfered, madam," 
answered the General. " Men do not care to be 
interfered with ; I don't." 

Lady Stainbrooke shrugged her shoulders 
with an expressive shrug, and then relapsed 
into silence, brooding as she proceeded on her 
journey on the general ingratitude of the human 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 187 

race, and the particular Id gratitude of Xora 
Trelawn. 

Nora Trelawn felt more low-spirited and 
miserable than ever after her aunt and uncle 
had left her. Yyner's letter had followed her 
to Eoseland on the very day of her return to 
town, and thus was delayed another day before 
it reached her. 

Her neighbour. Lady Seiiforth, called upon 
her, and the clever woman of the world 
instantly perceived that something unusual 
was oppressing Nora. These days of suspense 
had made her look years older than she had 
done before she went to Eoseland. 

At last, when four days had elapsed sinc& 
her painful interview with Yyner, the letter 
that he had written on his return home, after 
he had told Margaret Blythe the story of his old 
love, was placed in Nora's hands. 

Ah, poor Nora ! Only a few cold, sad words : — 

I have seen M.B,, and told lier how it was with us long. 
ago, but she does not wish to break off her engagement, and 
I cannot. Nora, what more can I write ? I would like to 
see you, but what could I say ? I should never have 
gone near you. Will you forgive me for having done so, and 
may God bless and keep you always, and in this to n^e 
most bitter hour. W. D. Y. 



188 CRGSSUS'S WIDOW. 

Nora read the painter's miserable words, 
and then, literally and truly in the emphatic 
lanofuaofe of old, she " turned her face to the 
wall." "What had she to live for now, she 
thought, when all the love and light of her 
life had suddenly passed away into utter 
darkness ? 



CHAPTEE XV, 

WEDDING GARMENTS. 

Margaret Blythe having obtained Yyner's 
<3onsent to settle the time of their marriage 
when she liked, at once began to make energetic 
preparations for that event. 

She had only very little money for her 
purpose, and to add a trifle more she pinched 
the already meagrely-provided household almost 
to starvation. 

Nellie naturally noticed this, but she said 
nothing. Hatton, however, considered it her 
■duty to give her mistress a hint. 

*' I'm getting that thin, miss," said this 
oblique-eyed handmaiden, putting her hand as 
usual on her hip, "that you can count each rib, 
like a 'maciated greyhound." 

" I am sorry you are getting thin, Hatton/' 



190 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

replied Margaret ; " perliaps if you took oatmeal 
porridge you might improve." 

" Don't think it woukl 'gree with me, miss,"' 
said Hatton, " ijut perhaps a little more meat 
would." 

But Margaret turned a deaf ear to Hatton's. 
"hint." There were certain dresses that she 
must have, she decided, before her marriage,. 
and to o'et these the most rioid household 
economy was required. But Margaret was- 
careful and clever, and as she cut and contrived 
her wedding garments she scarcely noticed how 
pale and stern her promised bridegroom looked, 
or how the blooming colour had waned on the 
cheeks of her fair young sister. 

Full of herself and her own prospects, Mar- 
garet Blythe worked clieerfully on, but at the 
same time she did not forget the scheme that 
she had proposed to her father about his future 
and Nellie's. 

She, of course, had to ask Vyner's consent 
for the Major to live with them — in case of 
Nellie's marriage — before she could propose to« 
make any formal arrangement on the subject. 
Any woman with keener susceptibilities would 
Lave noticed the half start and the frown with 



f 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 191 

wliicli Yyner received lier request. But if 
Maro-aret observed these sis^us of emotion she 
never guessed their real cause. 

" Walter, I have a great favour to ask you. 
If Nellie marries, may my dear father share 
our home ? " said Margaret. 

Then Yyner started and frowned, for the 
words " our home " grated harshly on his ears. 

" I know many men would object to such an 
•arrangement," continued Margaret ; *' but I 
know also, Walter dear, that you are different 
1;o most men, and that you will respect my 
motive for this request. You see, Nellie is 
•almost a child, and if she marries young Mr. 
launders, she naturally will live with the old 
lady who is so devoted to her son, and thus my 
father would be left entirely alone." 

Yyner now forced himself to smile. 

"But is Nellie going to marry young Mr. 
launders ? " he asked. 

" I hope so ; nay, I am almost sure that she 
will. So if my mind were at rest about my 
father—" 

" My dear Margaret, I do not wish to hurry 
jou to leave him." 

Maro^aret's face flushed. 



192 CIICESUS'S WIDOW. 

"Walter, do not trifle," she said. "My 
father is very dear to me — most dear — dearer 
on account of his sad affliction ; but there is 
some one who is twenty times dearer — some 
one that I cannot part with now." And Mar- 
garet put her hand softly and tenderly into 
her betroth ed's, and looked at him with the- 
love she truly felt, shining in her eyes. 

During the last few days Vyner had been 
trying to school himself to play the part which 
he too plainly saw that fate — aod his own folly 
— had allotted to him. He was going to marry 
Margaret Blythe, he told himself; but though he 
knew this, he hated to be reminded of the fact. 

Thus the words " our home " had grated on 
his ears. And yet he felt at this moment — 
with her hand in his — how unjust he was to 
Margaret. He was not a man who perhaps 
would have cared to have his father-in-law to 
live with him under the ordinary conditions of 
married life. But the fact that he did not love 
his future wife only made him more gentle and 
complacent to her wishes. 

" If Nellie marries, and you wish your father 
to live with us," he said, after a few moments'^ 
consideration, " of course, my dear Margaret, I 



CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 193 

shall make no objections — I shall be glad for 
him to be with you." 

Then Margaret expressed her gratitude in 
many tender words. 

*' It is like you to say so," she said. " You are 
always noble, always considerate, my dear, dear 
Walter, and I am the happiest woman in the 
world." 

Margaret was really happy. If an uneasy 
feeling crept over her sometimes when she 
remembered Walter Vyner's confession about 
Nora Trelawn, she soon threw it off. 

"He loves me now," she told herself, " and 
I know that I can keep his love. All men 
have had some early fancy or other, but they 
have but one love, and I am Walter's love — 
and I will prove worthy of his love — I hope I 
am worthy of it ! " 

Poor Margaret ! Wrapped in her ictense 
self-appreciation, she never saw Walter's 
wearied looks, or heard his impatient sighs. 
Trying to do right, when to do wrong was his 
heart's desire, Walter Yyner walked on the 
narrow way with laggard footsteps, looking 
often lingeringly and sadly back at the broad 
and pleasant road he had left behind. 

YOL. I. H 



194 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

But lie never sought Nora. No answer had 
come to his few sad words of almost last fare- 
well, as they both — Nora and Vyner — felt them 
to be. Nora understood and respected Vyner s 
motives even amid her own bitter grief And 
for a time that grief seemed utterly to crush 
her life. She fell ill, and Lady Stainbrooke 
at Buckstone — who was not without her paid 
informants in Nora's household — heard of her 
illness, and resolved forthwith to bury her 
wrongs in the past, and again hasten to her 
rich niece's side. 

In the meanwhile Margaret Blythe was 
going on industriously with her pinching and 
stitching. She told her father how pleased 
Yyner was that he should share *' our future 
home." And then she enlarged to the Major 
on the great benefits that would accrue to them 
all if Nellie would make up. her mind about 
''young Mr. Saunders's proposal." 

This was Margaret's way. Nellie had, she 
knew, made up her mind about *' young Mr. 
Saunders's'^proposal," but as she had not made 
it up the way that Margaret wished, Margaret 
quietly ignored Nellie's decision. And she 
persuaded her father — gradually — to see it in 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 195 

her own liglit. James Saunders was rich and 
good-natured, and the Major was poor, blind, 
delicate, and old. 

" I may die any day," he sighed, '' and where 
would my darling be then ? I cannot expect 
Yyner to look after her as well. You are quite 
right, Margaret, she would be better married." 

" I will speak to her, dear father," said 
Margaret. " I will tell her how happy it will 
make us all to see her happy. We can all live 
near each other, and Nellie will, I am sure, 
come to see you every day. Yes, we must try 
to settle it." 

So Margaret tried to settle it. She began 
very seriously — 

"Nellie, dear," she said, "I want to say a few 
words to you — very serious words." 

Nellie's face flushed, and she looked quickly 
up. 

" Walter and I," continued Margaret, '' are 
getting tired of waiting ; and Walter, in the 
most generous manner, has proposed that our 
dear father should share our future home. You 
see, Nellie dear, we are poor, very poor, and 
this will place my father in an independent 
and easy position for the rest of his life ; and I 

h2 



196 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

am sure I need not tell you that I will study 
Ills comfort in every way/' 

Nellie made no answer to this, but her face 
flushed to a yet deeper bloom. 

"He shall be my first consideration, after 
dear Walter," proceeded Margaret. '' So, Nellie 
dear, only your future makes me anxious now. 
Of course I cannot ask Walter for my sister to 
live with me as well as my father. Generous 
and kind as Walter is, that would be expecting 
too much, especially when he knows, dear, how 
excellent an offer of marriage is only waiting 
for your acceptance." 

" You mean James Saunders, I suppose ? " 
said Nellie, with a certain harshness in her 
voice which was very seldom heard there. 

" Yes. His mother was telling me only 
yesterday that he is quite devoted to you, Nellie, 
and sometimes gets quite low about you. It is 
very flattering for so rich a young man, and 
one so much run after also, to be so devoted, 
isn't it ? You are a fortunate girl, Miss Nellie, 
I can tell you. But jesting apart, dear, I am 
so anxious this should be settled, and then there 
would be nothing to interfere with Walter's 
happiness and mine." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 197 

^'Then am I to understand, Margaret, that 
my father wishes to give up his house — wishes 
to live with you — and that I only am in the 
way ? " asked Nellie, with quick emotion. 

"Dear Nellie, do not put it in that stupid 
way. I have never told you — what good was 
it to tell you, and worry a young girl? — all the 
struggles I have had to keep things straight in 
the house ; and now, when my earnings will be 
gone, I am sure it would be impossible for you 
■and dear father to get along. Everything costs 
so much now-a-days, and servants eat so much, 
and are so extravagant — look at Hatton — that 
unless one has a good income it is impossible 
to keep things square. No, Nellie, you must 
not be selfish. Father does not like to say 
much to you because he is afraid of hurting 
your feelings, but he fully agrees with me. 
And just think how comfortable he will be with 
no coals to buy, or butchers' bills to pay — 
nothing in fact to vex or trouble him. And 
you will live near us too, dear, in the Saunders's 
nice house, and you can bring dear father 
luxuries — I am sure you will like that, 
Nellie—" 

But Nellie had turned away her head. Then, 



198 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

to lier sister's dismay, a sharp sob sounded 
in the room. 

*' You need not make any farther arrange- 
ments about me, Margaret," said Nellie, with 
much indignation in her tone and manner. 'Mf 
father is tired of keeping me I shall not trouble 
him long; but don't, please, deceive poor James. 
Saunders any more. That at least isn't f^ir. 
I am not going to marry him, and you have no 
right to lead him to suppose that I am. You 
have made all arrangements, it seems, without 
consulting me — and, and — so I need not have 
worried myself so much.'* And sobbing bit- 
terly, Nellie hastily quitted the room. 

Margaret felt exceedingly annoyed — more 
than annoyed. But still she hoped Nellie 
would give in. Nellie, on her part, felt angry 
and bitterly wounded that her father was ready 
to let her go — ready to give her up to anyone, 
so that he might live in comfort in IMr. Yyner's. 
house ! 

Let us follow the weeping, indignant girl to 
the little bedroom she called her own. See^, 
she hastily unlocks one of the upper drawers in 
her humble, small, painted chest, and takes 
out from its resting-place there the cabinet- 



CRCESUS S WIDOW. 199 

sized portrait of a good-looking, fair-haired 
young man. Murray, Viscount Seaforth — 
smiling as he now very seldom smiled — was 
portrayed in this coloured specimen of the 
photographer's art — Murray, Viscount Seaforth, 
taken five years ago, in his first uniform, when 
a light and boyish heart beat beneath the 
braided jacket. 

Nellie kissed the smiling face ; pressed the 
smiling face to her heaving, sob-rent bosom. 

" Oh ! Murray, my love, my love ! " she 
whispered, " I need not have grieved so for 
father — need not have vexed you. They want 
me away, and I will go — go with you, my love, 
my darling — my only one now on all the earth." 

Then she sat down, rocking herself to and fro, 
the smiling, pictured face still lying on her breast. 
Loving Lord Seaforth even as she did, to leave 
her home — to leave her father — seemed a terrible 
step to take so suddenly to this modest, tender 
girl. But Margaret had wounded her very 
deeply. Nellie, quick tempered and sensitive, 
did not pause to consider that her sister was 
probably exaggerating their father's wishes to 
suit her own purpose. She only thought they 
xill wished her away. '' And I will go — go — " 



^00 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

wept Nellie, kissing again the smiling pictured 
face. 

Then she read over once more — perhaps for 
the twentieth time — the last words that the 
original of this smiling pictured face had sent 
her — 

When are you going to make up your mind, little Nell 
(she read in Lord Seaforth's careless handwriting), and take 
your worthless — literally, remember — adorer for better and 
for worse ? A friend of mine has offered to lend me for a. 
month or so a shooting lodge, or some sort of house at least,, 
among the wild Western Highlands. Will you come and 
kill the red deer in the forests, and the black game, and fish 
for salmon in the mountain streams, my Nellie ? Ah, child !" 
— joking apart — let us go away for a while from the weary 
life here, and be together by the blue waters of the lochs, 
on which the grand, grey hills picture themselves in a fashion 
which should make our finest painters tear their best canvas- 
in despair. There ! is not that a poetical description, my 
rosy-cheeked little love ? Come then, let us leave duns, 
debts, all sorts of bothers behind ; and we can get the fatal 
noose tied in Edinbro' fast enough — only you must not tell, 
Nellie. You must never, never tell till I give you leave. 
Things may turn out better. Some rich old relation may 
die, and leave me his happy heir, &c. ; but for the present 
you must promise to keep things quiet. The world — our 
little world — must not know. But little Nellie knows what she- 
really is — what she will always be — to her own Seaforth. 

How often she had kissed the scrawl at the 
end of this letter in which her Murray had 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 201 

inscribed his name ! That signature when she 
first saw it had seemed to part them — his 
different rank stared her in the face, as it were 
— but now she felt that no rank could part 
them. Perhaps she only loved the young man 
more for having held out his lordly hand to 
clasp one of hers who came of such low degree I 



CHAPTER XYL 

THE EMPTY ROOM. 

Margaret having allowed lier sister time to- 
" cool down," as slie mentally expressed it, 
went up to the little bed-room where Nellie 
slept, for the purpose of trying to make peace. 

"When Margaret entered the room all signs- 
of recent emotion had vanished from Nellie's- 
face. True, Nellie looked paler than usual^ 
perhaps firmer and more resolved, but Margaret 
did not notice this. She only saw that Nellie 
had not been crying lately, and she was very 
glad to see this. 

" I came up to see after you, Nellie dear," 
began Margaret. '* I am afraid I vexed you 
downstairs ; bat I am sure if you saw it in a 
right light you would see it was all for your 
good." 

Then Nellie said, rather quickly — 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 203 

' 'Please, Margaret, don't say any more about 
this to-day. I have got a headache. I don't 
want to talk any more to-day. Is tea ready 
downstairs yet ? " 

" I have just made it," answered Margaret. 
'' Come down, dear, and get some ; it will do 
you good." And Nellie having promised to do 
so, Margaret vrent away ; but before she 
returned to the front sitting-room where the 
tea was standing, Margaret had a word to 
whisper in her father's ear. 

*' Father," she said, going into the Major's 
study, and speaking very softly, lest Nellie 
should overhear on her way downstairs, " I have 
spoken to Nellie about her marriage, and also 
about you living with us ; so, please, if she says 
anything to you be careful what you say. It 
would be such a happy arrangement for us all 
if she would agree to it, and of course what you 
say will have great influence upon her." 

" But, Margaret," said the Major, " remem- 
ber I won't have her forced into anything. 
If the child likes the young man it is dif- 
ferent." 

" Of course not forced, father dear; but Nellie 
is only a young girl, easily influenced one way 



204 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

or the other, and it would be such a good thing 
for her to be well married." 

*' Yes, but still I should not like to urge her." 

'' But tell her you wish it, father, if she asks 
you," said Margaret, earnestly ; and the Major 
somewhat unwilliugly promised to do this. 

But Nellie said nothing to her father when 
she came downstairs. She was quieter than 
she usually was, and she sat reading, or pre- 
tending to read, most of the evening, and not 
till she was bidding her father good-night, 
when the ever-exemplary Margaret was looking 
after the house doors, did Nellie show an 
unusual emotion. 

Then, as she kissed her father, the old man 
drew her closer, and kissed again her soft smooth 
cheek. As he did this, Nellie gave a little start 
and a quiver. 

"Father," she said, the next moment, in a 
trembling voice, " is it true what Margaret told 
me to-day — that — that — you are thinking of 
living with Mr. Vyner when he marries 
Margaret ? " 

" Well, Margaret wishes it, my darling," 
answered the Major. "She thinks it would be 
best, and she thinks if you marry, my little girl — " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 205 

But Margaret's step was now heard in the 
passage close to the parlour door, and without 
another word Nellie lifted up her head, and 
drew back from her father's arms. 

" Good-night, father," she said, quietly, and 
then went away ; and Major Blythe ever after- 
wards bitterly regretted that he had allowed 
her to go. 

Indeed, the Major determined in his own 
mind, after she had left him, that he would 
shortly come to a fuller understanding with his 
young daughter. But during the following day 
he had no opportunit}^ of doing this. Nellie 
was out the greater part of the morning, and 
Vyner spent the evening with them, and Nellie 
and the Major were never alone. 

But when Nellie parted with him for the 
night, the Major grew more determined in his 
purpose to speak to her. Somehow the old 
man thought that his little girl's arms clung 
more tenderly than usual round his neck as she 
gave him her customary kiss. 

*' And I want you to give me something to- 
night, father," she said, as if she were trying to 
speak jestingly. 

"Well, what is it, my little lassie?" 



206 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

answered the Major, caressingly, holding her 
hands. 

" Just a little bit, a very little bit of your 
hair," said Nellie. "May I cut it off now, 
father ? " 

" What nonsense, Nellie, to worry father 
to-night ! " said Margaret, who was standing 
near them by the side of Yyner. 

" Father won't mind," said Nellie, in her old 
pretty, wilful way, and she went and got her 
scissors, and, stooping over her father, cut off 
a piece of his iron-grey hair. 

'"' Thank you," she said, and she kissed his 
forehead. '•' I will always keep it." 

" But why do you want it to-night, Nellie ? " 
asked Margaret. 

''I want to put it in a locket," answered 
Nellie. "Thank you again, father." 

" Give me another kiss for it then, darling," 
said the Major, and then Nellie put her arms 
round her father's neck, and kissed him very 
tenderly. 

" Good-night, my darling — God bless you," 
whispered the Major, and somehow he fancied 
that a tear for a moment wet his cheek. 

So impressed was he by Nellie's manner, that 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 207 

no sooner was Yyner gone, than he spoke 
seriously to Margaret on the subject. 

'' My dear," he said, addressing his eldest 
daughter, when they were alone, " I want to 
speak to you about Nellie. I don't think the 
child is happy, and I won't have her teazed or 
worried about this marriage with young 
Saunders. If she were fond of him, of course, 
I would be glad to have her well settled ; but if 
she is not, we must keep on this house, and 
manage without you as best we can. Nellie's 
happiness is and must be the first consideration, 
and I have not been satisfied with her manner 
these two nights." 

*' She is a little unsettled perhaps," said 
Margaret, '' that is all ; and I am sure, dear 
father, that it is her true happiness that I also 
am thinking of." 

*' Well, dear, I will speak to her in the 
morning," answered the Major, '' and be guided 
by what she says." 

And determined to carry out this idea in 
spite of Margaret, the Major retired to bed. 

The night wore on over the heads of the 
quiet household. Hour after hour went on to 
join the past. Then the dawn broke, and up 



208 Croesus's widow. 

betimes rose Margaret, sitting down steadily 
to two hours' work at lier wedding garments 
before breakfast time. The Major came down 
late. 

" Nearly ten o'clock, father," said Margaret, 
in mild reproof, *^ and Nellie not down yet — 
I have been np since six." 

As Nellie did not appear at a quarter-past 
ten, Margaret went up to seek her. She 
knocked at Ler sister's bedroom door, but there 
w^as no response, so Margaret walked unbidden 
into the room. 

She started, almost gave a cry, when she got 
there. The bed had not been slept in, and 
there was no Nellie to be seen. There w^as a 
certain strangeness, too, in the ap23earance of 
the room — scraps of paper, pieces of twine, a 
dozen little things that told some sort of pack- 
ing had been going on. Then, as Margaret's 
startled gaze wandered around, her eyes sud- 
denly fell on a letter lying on the toilet table. 

To seize this and read the address was the 
work of a moment. It was directed to Major 
Blythe, and Margaret at once opened it, and as 
she read her young sister's words she grew 
sick and cold wdth fear. How could she tell 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 209 

lier fat]i3r ? she was thinking ; how could she 
break this dreadful news ? 
• For in her letter Nellie bade her father and 
sister good-bye. 

I am going away to-niglit, dear father (read poor trembling 
Margaret), but you must not be uneasy about me if you do 
not hear of me for a long, long time. Where I am going I 
shall be well cared for ; and as you have settled to live with 
Margaret and Mr. Vyner, I hope that you will not miss me. 
But I will not forget my dear, dear father ; and I hope my 
<iear, dear father will not forget his little Nell. Some day I 
will come back to you, father ; and till that day comes I will 
•often, often think of you. But do not vex yourself about 
me ; I shall, I hope, be well and happy, and I hope that you 
will keep well and happy also. Give my love to Margaret. 
Your loving and affectionate daughter, 

Nellie. 

Margaret read and re-read these words, and 
her usual self-possession seemed entirely to 
forsake her. Did she blame herself ? No ; 
Margaret never blamed herself — it was not 
in her nature to do so — but she was greatly 
shocked and overcome. 

While she was standing thus, Nellie's fare- 
well letter grasped in her trembling hand, she 
heard her father's voice callins: from below. 

" Is anything the matter with little Nell ? " 
•called the Major; and^ pale and even faint. 



210 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Mareraret went down to lier father, still holdins: 
Nellie's letter in her hand. 

" Is the child not well ? " asked the Major, 
when he heard his daughter's footsteps approach- 
ing him. 

Then Margaret took her father's hand, and 
led him back into the parlour. 

*' Father," she said in a faltering voice, *'' do 
not be afraid ; Nellie has done a very foolish 
thing. I cannot imagine how she could do 
such a thing, but — but she is not upstairs." 

" Not upstairs ! " repeated the Major. 
'' What do you mean, Margaret ? Tell me at 
once what you mean ? " 

*' She has left a letter," continued Margaret, 
with great emotion, " a letter for you, father. 
I have opened it ; it is a sort of farewell 
letter. Nellie is gone somewhere — -but, but we 
will find her. Father ! father ! " And Margaret 
caught her father by the arm. 

For with a terrible cry the blind man lifted 
Tip his hands when he heard the news. 

" Gone 1 " he cried. '' Nellie, my darling, 
do you say gone P Where has she gone ? Have 
you done this, Margaret ? " he added fiercely. 
*^ Answer me — have you done this ? " 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 211 

" Do not be unjust, father/' said Alargaret, 
to a certain extent recovering her self-possession. 
^' I, who have done everything for Nellie — I 
have done nothing, given her nothing but 
kindness and love. But I will read her letter." 

With a moan, Major Blythe tottered to a 
•seat, and then Margaret read aloud poor Nellie s 
farewell words. As Margaret concluded, the 
unhappy father utterly broke down. 

" My darling, my darling ! " he sobbed. 
^' Oh, Nellie, how could you leave me — blind 
and helpless. I cannot try to find you, Nellie — '' 

'' Hush, father," said Margaret, " do not give 
way thus ; you will be ill if you do, and that 
will only make matters worse. We must try 
to find Nellie — we must find her — and we must 
keep all this quiet, if we can. Let us try to 
think calmly. What can have been Nellie's 
motive for this rash, misguided step ? " 

Again Major Blythe moaned aloud. The 
bitterness of his blindness seemed terrible to 
him at this moment. 

" What about this talk of her marriage with 
young Saunders?" he said. *'I noticed she 
was not herself lately — and she may have 
thought, poor — tender-hearted child — that we 



212 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

wished her to many agcainst her will ? In her 
letter she speaks of my living with you and 
Vyner, does she not ? But I won't, Margaret ! 
I will keep on this house if I starve in it. My 
child shall have a home to come to, at any 
rate, whenever she returns." 

" We will see about all this, father, by-and- 
by ; but don't excite yourself now. You see,. 
Nellie says in her letter she hopes to be well 
and happy, and that some day she will come 
back. Can it be ? Can she have married 
anyone unknown to us ? But no, no ; she 
knew no one — no, she has probably gone to 
some educational establishment or other, that 
she has seen advertised, as a pupil teacher. 
Yes ; this is the most likely thing I can think 
of." 

" She — she knew Lord Seaforth," said Major 
Blythe, slowly and painfully. 

*' Lord Seaforth ! " echoed Maro-aret. " It 
cannot be, father ! And yet — yet — when I 
think of it, she spoke very sharply to me once 
in his defence, whea I so justly blamed him for 
coming here, and allowing us to believe he was 
only Captain Seaforth ! If I thought this^ 
father—" 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 213 

" If I tliouglit this/' said tlic Major, rising 
passionately from the chair, " blind as I am, I'll 
force him to marry her! I'll go to his mother's 
house this very day, and learn the truth ! " 

" But we have no proof, father. Still, there 
is just a probability. He came here a great 
deal, did he not, at one time ? " 

'' Yes, at the time of Wallace's accident, 
^vhen you were staying with your friend at 
AVoolwich. She has seen him since, I know» 
One dav, I remember her tellino; me he had 
told her he was Lord Seaforth — " 

*'And you did not tell me this, father? You. 
did not confide in me, though you know how 
earnestly I have tried to do my duty to you 
and Nellie." 

The Major was silent. He felt that perhaps 
he deserved this reproof, for there were many 
things that he and his little Nellie had not 
told to Margaret. 

*' Did she say anything more to you ? "' 
continued Maro;aret. " At least tell me the 
truth noiv, father — though it may be too 
late.'' 

" Nothing. I remember being uneasy when 
I heard this man was Lord Seaforth. But if he 



"214 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

has done anything to the child he shall answer 
to me for it." 

" He lives with his mother," said Margaret, 
" and his mother lives in one of the South 
Kensington Squares. I know this because 
"Walter has dined there ; and if he has induced 
Nellie to run away with him, he also will have 
left home. AYe must go to his mother, father." 

"Let us go now; at once, then." 

" Stay, let me think — best keep this as quiet 
as we can, father, for all our sakes — for Nellie's 
sake, for Walter's sake, for mine. A woman 
•can do a thing more quietly than a man. Let 
me go alone to Lady Seaforth's ; she knows 
Walter — that alone will be an introduction." 

*' W^ell, if you think so. But be quick, 
Margaret ! How can I wait here — wait help- 
less here — till you return ? " 

''Dear father, it is only a remote chance I 
am going on, so you must not expect too much. 
Still I think we have some just cause of sus- 
picion, at least if Nellie met Lord Seaforth, as 
you say, unknown to me ? " 

This parting reproof being administered, 
Margaret got ready to start for Lady Seaforth's. 
•She did not rush off in hot haste, but prepared 



crq:sus's widow. 215- 

deliberately to encounter lier ladyship. As she 
pinned on her hat and arranged her veil, how- 
ever, the probability of Nellie having run away 
with Lord Seafortli grew upon her mind. 
" This would account for Nellie's otherwise 
unaccountable rejection of James Saunders's 
excellent proposal," thought Margaret. "No one 
in her senses would have refused such an offer 
without cause, and I believe now this causo 
has been Lord Seafortli/' at last she decided. 

Maro:aret — ever economical — would not drive 
the whole way to South Kensington, even 
thouoii her father uro;ed her to do so. She 
went so far in the train, and then took a cab, 
and drove to Lady Seaforth's house. To her 
surprise, when she rung the door-bell and asked 
if Lady Seaforth were at home, the footman ad- 
mitted her at once with a jaunty air and a smile. 

" Oh, y're the young lady from — " (and 
Margaret could not catch the name), said the 
man. " Come in, and I'll ring for Thompson, 
the maid, and she'll take you up to my lady." 

Margaret immediately saw there was some 
mistake ; but after a moment's consideration, 
as she stood there in the hall, she determined 
to take advantage of it. She must see Lady 



216 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Seaforth, slie told herself ; and as Lady Seaforth 
w^as evidently expecting some lady, the easiest 
way to procure an intervievf was to pretend 
not to notice the footman's error. 

In a minute or two Thompson^ the maid, 
appeared. 

" You can come up with me," she said, 
addressing Margaret. " I hope you have been 
able to match it ? " 

Then Margaret's face flushed red beneath her 
veil, and her very ears began to tingle. She 
had been mistaken for some shop girl, some 
milliner's girl, she thought angrily, and she 
'Opened her lips to tell the maid her true 
position. But Thompson never looked round. 
She walked very fast, and Margaret walked 
after her, angry and indignant, until they came 
to a room door, which the maid pushed open. 

" Go in there," she said, " my lady will speak 
to you in a moment or two." 

How degrading, how annoying, thought 
Margaret, who had always prided herself on 
looking perfectly lady-like ! But though greatly 
annoyed, her common-sense told her that the 
best thing to do now was to see Lady Seaforth. 
So drawing herself up, and trying to look as 



CROSSUSS WIDOW. 217 

dignified as she could, Margaret stood for tlia 
next quarter of an hour. Then she heard two 
people outside the door talking in reference to 
herself. 

" You have not seen it, then ? " some one was- 
saying. *' The woman who brought it is here, 
isn't she ? It must match, Thompson, or it 
will spoil the whole eifect." And a moment 
later the door opened, and a haughty-looking, 
fair-haired woman entered. 

Margaret did not know Lady Seaforth by 
sight, yet she felt sure that this was Lady 
Seaforth. The small high features and the 
blue eyes reminded her of features and eyes 
she had seen before. Lady Seaforth bore a 
certain likeness to her son, yet the expression 
of their faces was so totally different that it 
marred the efiect of the features. The haughty^ 
prominent blue eyes of the mother scarcely 
glanced at Margaret as she entered the room. 
Margaret bowed, and Lady Seaforth made a 
hardly perceptible movement of her head. 

'' You have brought the lace ? " she said. '' I 
hope it is the exact pattern — nothing else will 
do.'" 

*' There is some mistake/' said Margaret^ 



■218 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Irving not to seem nervous. ** If you are 
Lady Seaforth, I wish to see you. But I liave 
Lrought no lace — I have come on a very 
different errand." 

Then the Large, haughty, prominent blue 
'eyes did look at Margaret. 

" I am Lady Seaforth," said her ladyship ; 
■*' but if you have not brought the lace from 
Marshall and Snelgrove's, why are you here ? " 

" I — I wish to speak to you," answered 
Margaret, '* and vour servants mistook me for 
some other person. I — I must speak to you. 
Lady Seaforth." 

" What can you possibly have to say to me ? " 

" It is on a most painful subject," faltered 
Margaret, her boasted self-possession all vanish- 
ing avray before the cold, haughty stare that 
the blue eyes had now fixed on her. '' I wish 
to speak to you — about your son." 

" My son ? " repeated Lady Seaforth, in the 
coldest accents. " I decline to speak to you 
on such a subject. I request that you will 
leave the room." 

" No ; I must speak to you ! You mistake 
me entirely. Lady Seaforth," said Margaret, 
eagerly. *'I am not a shop girl ; I have brought 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 21i> 



no lace ; I am a yoimg lady by birth, and I want 
to speak to you about my sister." 

*' I decline, I repeat, to hold any conversation 
with you," said Lady Seaforth, and she turned 
to leave the room ; but Margaret sprang for- 
ward, and stood before her. 

" Do not go away. Lady Seaforth," she said,. 
" for a moment or two — not till you have heard 
what I have got to say, if you would save great 
scandal and exposure. I am the daughter — 
one of the daughters — of Major Blythe ; and 
your son, Lord Seaforth, used to visit at our 
house. I have a young sister — Nellie — Lady 
Seaforth, do listen to me — Nellie has disap- 
peared from her home — " 

" What have I to do with such a story ? " 
interrupted Lady Seaforth. 

"Your son knewNellie — used to meet Nellie,''' 
faltered Margaret, ''and I want to know — is- 
he at home ? " 

" Lord Seaforth ? Certainly he is at home. 
What do you mean by such a question ? " 

"Lady Seaforth," said ^Margaret, galled to 
the quick by Lady Seaforth's contemptuous 
manner, " I think I have some right to ask it. 
Lord Seaforth came to our house first under a 



•220 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

false name. He called liimself Captain Seafortli ; 
and as my father is an officer and a gentleman 
tliat was scarely a right thing to do, was it ? " 

" If your father is a gentleman, he should not 
have permitted such a thing to happen. But I 
have nothing to do with such a question. 
•Once more I ask 3^ou to leave the house." 

" You treat me very rudely," said Margaret, 
her eyes filling with indignant tears, ""'yet — yet 
I am engaged to a gentleman you ask to dine 
here — to Mr. Vyner, the painter." 

" I know Mr. Vyner merely as a man of 
ability, as a painter — I know nothing of his 
belongings," answered Lady Seaforth, with 
unchang^ed coldness. 

'' He has no reason to be ashamed of his 
belongings," retorted Margaret, very angrily. 
*' But all I can say is, if your son has induced 
m}^ sister — " 

Upon this Lady Seafortli rang the bell very 
loudly, and in a minute later the door opened, 
..and her maid Thompson looked in. 

*' Show this person out at once," said Lady 
Seaforth ; and what could Margaret do but go ? 

Wounded and indignant, scarcely able to 
restrain her tears, she followed the maid down- 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 221 

stairs. The hall door was open, and a charger 
with ]nilitary accoutrements, and held by a 
groom, was pawing the ground impatiently 
before the door. As Margaret went out of the 
Testibule she saw why the horse was waiting. 

Leaning against a carriage which was stand- 
ino^ before the door of the next house was a tall, 
slender fig^ure in an officer's undress uniform. 
In a moment Margaret recognised him — the 
delicate profile, the light hair — it was Lord 
Seaforth ; and Margaret started and half- 
stopped. 

Should sbe speak to him ? she was thinking. 
But even as the thought passed through her 
mind his liofht laus^h fell on her ears. Then 
she looked at the lady in the carriage to whom 
he was talking. 

She saw a pale woman with dark, sad eyes, 
dressed in black. Where had she seen that 
face ? She had seen it somewhere, Margaret 
knew, but at the moment could not recall 
where. But she felt that it was impossible 
to address Lord Seaforth while he was talking 
to this lady. So she was forced to pass on, 
having gained the knowledge, however, to take 
to comfort her father, that Lord Seaforth had 



222 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 



certainly not run away with Nellie, as he was 
still living in his mother's house. 

As Margaret went home she remembered 
where she had seen the lady's face. It was in 
Vyner's studio — the face of the picture called 
'' His Eve:' 



CHAPTER XYII. 

CHOOSIXG A HOUSE. 

Pacing to and fro in the little parlour, racked 
with the cruelest anxiety, Major Ely the had 
spent the time which had been passed in so 
humiliating a manner by Margaret. 

Then, when he heard his dauo^hter's returnino- 
footsteps, he groped his way eagerly into the 
passage. 

"Well," he asked breathlessly, as he met 
Margaret ; but for a moment Margaret was so 
worried and annoyed that she made no reply. 

** Have you heard anything ? '' asked the 
trembling old man, and Margaret looked up 
at her father's sharpened face, and answered 
quickly — 

" She has not run away with Lord Seaforth, 
father — I saw him in his uniform at his mother's 
door." 



224 CECESUS'S WIDOW. 

"And did you see Lady Seafortli ? Did you 
ask her anytliicg ? " 

*'I saw her for a few minutes," said Margaret, 
ashamed to confess her bitter humiliation, ''and 
she told me her son was at home — that is all 
I said as little as possible, for all our sakes. I 
repeat, this is best kept as quiet as we can." 

*' But am I to sit down and lose my child 
without making an effort to find her ? " asked 
Major Ely the, indignantly. '' 1 won't do it,. 
Margaret ! Nellie must be somewhere, and I 
shall at once apply to the police.'' 

" Then everyone will know." 

'* What is everyone to me in comparison to 
Nellie ? I must find her ; I will find her ; so 
you need not attempt to prevent me doing so."' 

Upon this Margaret burst into tears. Never 
had she felt so cruelly injured. All her life 
at home she had been looked up to and 
respected, and her will had been almost 
absolute law. She had thought herself the 
incarnation of all womanly virtues, and the 
Major and her sister had never attempted to 
differ openly from the opinion she held of 
herself. And to be insulted thus I First to 
feel powerless, to be tamed, held in awe, as it 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 225 

were, by Lady Seaforth's cold blue eyes, and 
then to be told by her father that she need not 
attempt to prevent him trying to find Nellie ! 

" I have not deserved this," wept Margaret ; 
and her father was obliged to beg her pardon, 
and to praise her and propitiate her, before 
Margaret would attempt to be comforted. 

She felt really very unhappy, for she was so 
afraid of the effect that the news of Nellie's 
flight might have on Yyner. She never 
understood Yyner. The effect of the news of 
Nellie's flight was exactly contrary to what she 
feared. The painter, large and generous, 
whatever his faults might be, drew naturally 
nearer to the weeping woman in her hour of 
trouble. 

He was touched, he was sorry, he kissed 
Margaret's tear-stained cheeks, as he had never 
kissed them in their usual smooth and admir- 
able condition. 

*' Poor little Nell ! Poor foolish child ! " he 
said. He did not reproach Margaret with her 
abortive scheme to marry little Nell to young 
Saunders, though he was pretty well satisfied 
in his own mind that this was really the cause 
of the poor girl's flight. He said only kind 

VOL. I. I 



226 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

words to Margaret, and Margaret — still not 
understanding him — began to smile again, 
satisfied that Yyner loved her too much, 
appreciated her many virtues too highly, to 
permit any family disgrace to come between 
them. 

Sad, is it not, to live with those, to be tied 
to those, to whom, indeed, we have no tie ? 
Between Margaret and Vyner there was a great 
gulf; but Margaret's understanding was not 
large enough to perceive this. She thought 
Yynec had peculiar ideas sometimes, a man of 
vagrant moods, perhaps, like most artists ; but 
she did not see — could not understand, in fact 
— the great difference between them. 

o 

Had Llargaret told Yyner — she carefully did 
not — -liow Lady Seaforth had spoken of him, 
he would but have laughed. He knew why 
her ladyship had asked him to dinner, and how 
she reirarded him. He knew also how he 
reofarded her, thouo^h she mio-ht think herself 
a great lady ; but to be great in Yyner's eyes 
needed something better than a name, however 
high sounding, that would be writ only on a 
crumbling tombstone. 

So Margaret dried her tears, and Yyner did 



CXRCESUS'S WIDOW. 227 

what be could to comfort her, and also to 
comfort the old man in his sore distress. But 
the father's grief was very different to Margaret's. 
Margaret had her lover, her approaching mar- 
riage, to think of, but Major Blythe had nothing 
now to lighten his long dark hours. He had 
been cheerful and content enough — as most 
blind people are — before Nellie disappeared, 
but it was very pitiful now to see his restless 
sorrow. 

Four days passed on, and nothing was heard 
of Nellie. Yyner applied to the police, and 
inquiries were made, and the neighbours heard, 
and there was a talk and a scandal, but nothing 
was discovered. Nellie had vanished, gone out 
in the night somewhere, taking very little with 
her, leaving— she little guessed — how miserable 
and anxious a heart behind ! 

The manner of her flight from the house was 
very easily explained. Margaret always locked 
the doors herself, and took the small basket 
containing the keys with her into her own 
room. The front house door-key was found in 
the lock the morning Nellie's disappearance was 
discovered. Thus Nellie must have entered 
her sister's room when Margaret was asleep, 

i2 



228 CHCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and taken tli« key from the basket, and opened 
the door. Margaret declared this to be im- 
j)ossible, she slept so lightly, &c. ; but the fact 
remained the same, and there could indeed be 
no reasonable doubt about the matter. 

No one appeared to have seen Nellie leave 
her father's house, and not a human soul came 
forward to give any account of her. Vyner 
saw Lord Seaforth a few days afterwards in the 
j)ark, and the young lord smiled and nodded to 
the painter. It seemed impossible, therefore, 
to the Blythes, any further to attempt to trace 
Nellie's flight as being in any way connected 
with Lord Seaforth. Nellie had never spoken 
of him as her lover ; had never told how often 
she had met him ; and gradually the idea faded 
out of Margaret's mind. Margaret finally 
believed that Nellie, for some strange fancy or 
other, had gone out as a pupil teacher, or 
perhaps to other employment, and she was for 
ever tellino: her father that she was sure Nellie 
would soon tire, and then she would return to 
her home. 

But the summer faded into the autumn, and 
still nothing was heard of Nellie. Then Mar- 
garet began to speak again to Yyner of their 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 229 

marriage. During all the time of their grief 
^nd anxiety, she had gone on with her stitching 
^nd pinching. It occupied her mind, she told 
poor weeping, sympathising Mrs. Saunders, 
who was grieving sorely for her James's dis- 
appointment. Mrs. Saunders took a worse 
view of the case than Margaret. She believed 
*' the sweet, pretty young creature " had come 
to an untimely end. She had gone mad, 
perhaps, she thought, and had wandered out 
and might now be lying amid the chill slime 
in the river's bed. 

"And with such chances, too, as she had," 
sighed Mrs. Saunders, thinking of her beloved 
son. *' My James was that fond of her, he 
would have married her to-morrow ! Ay, we 
never can tell. The best and the best loved 
are took first, Miss Margaret. This world's a 
queer jumble, but perhaps in the next, things 
will be put straight a bit." 

Poor little Puck (James Saunders) was really 
terribly " cut," as he expressed it, about 
Nellie's disappearance. The brandy and soda 
that he had swallowed to console himself was 
something terrible, and his eyes were con- 
tinually blood-shot, perhaps with tears. He 



230 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

inclined to his mother's gloomy views about- 
Nellie. 

" No girl in her senses would have done- 
it I " he was wont to say. "I would have mar- 
ried her. Can a fellow do more ? Would a 
girl in her right mind have run away when she 
had such a chance ? No ; the poor darling must 
suddenly have become insane, and perhaps- 
fancied all sorts of things — perhaps that I 
wasn't going to behave well to her — there is- 
no saying when the brain is upset what people 
will think. Mother, can it be in the family, 
do you think ? The Major's blind — that's 
queerish ; there's some connection, isn't there,, 
between the eyes and the brain ? " 

''Don't know, my darling," answered the 
meek, fond mother. " If your dear father had 
been alive he would have told us ; but I never 
went much into the sciences." 

" Nor I," truthfully affirmed James ; and sO' 
in this simple fashion they talked of poor 
Nellie, it beiug more consoling to James's 
feelinsfs to believe her dead or insane, than the 
idea that she had run away when she had a 
chance of marrying him. 

But all this time, though there was no trace 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 231 

or sign of Nellie, Margaret steadily went on 
making tier marriage garments. In spite of 
her father's grief and anxiety she did this ; in 
spite indeed of her own anxiety. But when 
she spoke to her father on the subject, to her 
pain and annoyance she found the old man 
held to his first determination, made after 
Nellie's flight, and would not now hear of 
living with herself and Vyner. 

*' No, the child shall have a home to come 
to, however poor it may be," he said. '' Don't 
attempt to persuade me, Margaret. As long 
AS I'm alive, I'll keep the house waiting for 
Nellie." 

" But, fcither dear, just think, how can you 
manage?" said the careful daughter. "You 
€Ould not aff*ord to pay a regular housekeeper, 
and they are so dreadfully extravagant, even if 
you could— it will be impossible for you to 
manage." 

"I'll keep a home for Nellie," persisted 
Major Blythe; and when Margaret, having 
used all the arguments in her power without 
uvail, asked Vyner to try to persuade him, 
Vyner told her that he thought the Major was 
right. 



232 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

" How do we know wliere sLe is, Margaret ? "" 
lie said. "Perhaps nearer than we think ; and 
if she knew — if she heard that her father was> 
alone, she might come to him. I think you 
are wrong to try to persuade your father 
against his will. If you do not like to leave- 
him, we can wait ? " 

But Margaret would not hear of this. 

" No," she said, " no, Walter I I am weary 
of waiting — surely it is time we took a house ? 
You do not hesitate, do you, Walter, on account 
of this sad affair about poor Nelhe ? " 

*' You know I do not," answered the painter,, 
sharply and coldly. He was stung that she- 
should suggest such a thing — stung and 
indignant. 

"Then you will look for a house at once^ 
dearest?" softly said Margaret; and Yyner 
promised, and sick at heart, the next day started 
on that dreary search. 

In all Margaret's confidences to her betrothed 
— and she was very tender to him — she had 
never told him that she had, she was convinced,, 
seen the original of the picture that he called 
My Eve J talking in her carriage to Lord 
Seaforth. But Margaret had, nevertheless,. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 233 

tliouglit a good deal about this incident. She 
had learned that Mrs. Trelawn, Vyner's old 
love, the rich widow, lived next door to Lady 
Seaforth. The carriage in which she had seen 
the lady that Vyner's hand had, she was sure, 
portrayed in My Eve, was standing before this 
very door. Then the lady was dressed in black 
— in mourning — and looked years and years 
older — so Margaret decided — than the bright, 
smiling, dark- eyed woman whom Yy ner had 
painted. So Margaret concluded that he had 
painted this portrait in Mrs. Trelawn's girl- 
hood, when — "he had admired her" — Margaret 
mentally called it ; but somehow this meeting 
with the dark-eyed lady, whose picture was in 
Vyner's studio, had a little disturbed Margaret. 
So much so that she never mentioned it to 
Vyner ; so much so that she was more anxious 
than ever to marry Vyner. The dark-eyed woman 
was only a youthful dream, ** and all men have 
their follies," she told herself, but still Margaret 
was very anxious to have her marriage over, 
and to have that youthful dream for ever left 
behind. 

Therefore she urged him to look for a house ; 
and Vyner went. To look out for a house is 



234 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

not a pleasant task. To walk up carpetless- 
stairs, gaze into empty rooms, examine cloudy 
cornices, is not, as a rule, an agreeable office^ 
even if love be there to warm the heart with 
dreams of a sweet future, in the now dull 
and dusty space ! 

But what when love is not there ? Our 
supposed lover — unhappy Yyner — said not to 
himself after tramping up the carpetless stairs, 
as he gazed into the dusty rooms, *'My 
Margaret will make all this bright ; my 
Margaret will sit there ; my Margaret, — " 
&c., &c. Why go on with a lover's endless, 
fancies? They are sweet visions these, fulfilled 
or unfulfilled ; they make an Eden again on 
earth for a brief, brief season. The sunshine 
falls on the empty rooms as the fond lover 
walks through them. But a London fog seemed 
to accompany our jDOor Vyner. It was a weary,, 
heavy task, and at last Yyner threw it up. 

Every house he thought of, Margaret objected 
to in her gentle, determined way. One wa& 
too small, the other too large. One looked 
north, and would be too cold ; the other south,. 
and would be too hot. 

" May I go, dear Walter, and see what I can 



CilCESUS's WIDOW. 235 

■do, since it seems to worry you so ? " asked 
Margaret ; and Yyner was only too glad to 
:give his consent. 

After tliis, the question of the house, we may 
be sure, was very soon settled. Hope and love 
accompanied Margaret in her peregrinations, 
and she went very briskly about with these 
two companions. She settled on a house, and 
she took Yyner to see it. He made some faint 
objections, but she overruled them. 

" I see I shall l:>e henpecked," he said, with 
rather a rueful smile, which Margaret answered 
by a proud, confident one. 

But he knew all the while that he would not 
be *' henpecked." He gave in to Margaret 
because he could not be at the trouble^ because 
his heart felt too weary to contend with her, 
and not because he was afraid of her. He 
would never be afraid of her. He knew this, 
and he knew also he would never love her. 
But he was bound by honour. How often 
had he said this to himself, and he said it 
again, looking at her in the dusty rooms of 
the empty house in which these two proposed 
to live ! 

But they took the house. Then Yyner gave 



236 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Margaret a sum of money, and she furnished 
the house. Furnished the house — let us do 
her justice — with taste and discretion. Margaret 
had a sense and appreciation of beauty, and she 
chose her colours well. Even Vyner admitted 
this, though his new possessions gave no plea- 
sure to his eyes. 



CHAPTER XYIII. 

THE OLD ROMANCE. 

All this while, when Margaret was stitching 
and furnishing, a cold grey shadow lay over 
the life of Nora Trelawn. 

She had been very ill — a nameless illness. 
*' Want of tone," the doctors said. *' Utter 
folly," thought her aunt, Lady Stainbrooke. 
But all the same this illness had brought her 
very low, and her beauty had faded, and her 
dark eyes were violet-rimmed, heavy, and sad. 

She was wounded — bitterly wounded — be- 
cause Yyner had never sought her since he had 
told her in his letter that he was bound by 
honour to fulfil his engagement to Margaret 
Blythe. Even if he were bound to fulfil his 
engagement — and Nora admitted that in this 
he was but right and honourable, though it was 
breakinof her heart — but even if he were bound 



238 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

to fulfil his engagement, need he utterly turn 
away from his old friend ? So, woman-like, 
argued Nora. She would rather have seen him 
at any cost. Even " heart-wrung tears," shed 
in his presence, seemed to her to be better than 
this cold silence and absence. She did not 
know — how could she ? — that more than once 
Vyner had stood outside, and looked up at the 
lio'hted windows of her house with strangle ten- 
derness and bitter regret swelling in his heart. 

One nio'ht from her drawinoj-room windows 
— he standing in the street below — he heard 
the fresh pure voice of a girl singing. This 
song seemed to smite him as with bodily pain. 
What ! was he forgotten, then — was she having 
singing and merriment — and he — and he ? 
Then Vyner turned away, and went back to 
his Margaret. He smiled grimly to himself as 
he sat by his Margaret's side, knowing that she 
never noticed his cold abstraction. She was 
not thinking of him, but of her new dresses, 
and her new furniture. 

" Yet she is not a bad woman," thought 
Vyner ; " only a great thick wall is growing 
thicker and thicker each day between our 
hearts." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 239 

What was cementing this wall was no doubt 
Vyner's love for another woman. Margaret 
would have been more pleasing in his sight — 
for she was certainly good-looking — if the soft, 
dark eyes of another woman had not told him 
of the tender, wistful love he was forced to put 
away. He was always comparing her mentally 
with Nora Trelawn. Margaret's self-assertive- 
ness jarred on him when he remembered Nora's 
sweet humility and softness. Nora was very 
womanly — full of womanly faults, perhaps ; 
but faults are sometimes more pleasing than 
virtues, when virtues are too unsparingly 
presented to our gaze. 

*'But Nora has forgotten me," thought Yyner, 
bitterly, sitting by Margaret's side. " Well 
•—it is better so." Yet this idea was not 
consoling to him. Margaret's self-assertiveness 
jarred upon him more than ever that night. 
Hearing of his new furniture, of the colour of 
the dado in his drawiug-room, was dust and 
ashes to his ears. He went home early ; life 
was not worth living for, he decided, with its 
endless worries, its struggles between duty and 
inclination, between rioht and wrono;. 

He was weary of it all, in fact — the dark 



240 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

spirit was upon liis soul ; some envious fellow 
had said liis last picture was bad, and a friend 
had whispered the adverse opinion to him. 
Everything was going wrong, and so, heart-sick 
and sad, Yyner sat by his fire, thinking — 
enviously — that unmarried men at least can 
have the privilege of being sometimes alone. 

He went to his work next day, heavy and 
uninterested. Yet he had loved his work, and 
still loved it. He would live for it again, he 
told himself — thrusting away his weary thoughts 
— as he had lived for it in the past years, when 
Nora Trelawn was Mr. Trelawn's wife, and he 
had no love but one that was dead and buried 
to worry him. 

And as he painted on he forgot Margaret, 
and his new furniture, and his new house. He 
went out from his real to an ideal world. He 
was standing on the wintry shore, and the 
sound of the wild sea was breaking on his ears 
as he painted it dashing against the jagged 
rocks, and carrying home the dead sailor whose 
wife was waiting and watching. 

Vyner was a true artist. The passions that 
he portrayed passed through his heart. His 
sensitive, nervous hand never could, and never 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 241 

would, he used to say, draw wliat his braiu 
and soul had seen before he sat down to his 
-canvas. He knew his power, but with the 
humihty which came of true self-knowledge, 
was ever ready to admit how often he failed, 
how often his work was wanting in his sight. 
But he would live for it, he said again ; and 
so after a hard day's labour he went out to 
have a turn in the Park, late in the afternoon 
of the day following the one on which he had 
sat by his Margaret's side, and thought sadly 
•enough that Nora Trelawn had utterly for- 
gotten him. 

The Park was very empty. The season was 
quite over, and only a few carriages were to be 
seen. Yyner never looked at the carriages. 
He went striding on thinking — absolutely of 
that dark- eyed woman still — when suddenly 
he looked up, and there, sitting in a passing 
•carriage with a grey-haired, bent man by her 
side, actually was Nora ! 

He started, he stopped, and stared at the 
carriaofe, but Nora never saw him. But he saw 
her — saw the sweet face changed and wasted, 
and the dark eyes violet-rimmed, heavy, and 
sad. Then he knew he was not forgotten; 



242 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

grief was on Nora's face and weariness ; the 
weariness that he remembered to have seen 
there in her wedded days, when he had met 
her long ago, and told her that Lady Stain- 
brooke had spoilt their lives. 

Was he glad to see the shadow again on 
Nora's face ? Was life as burdensome to him 
as it had been last night when he turned away 
from Nora's lighted windows ? Strange, the 
man who loved her so, felt more bright of mood 
after he had seen that clouded countenance. 
He was not forgotten. He would go back to 
his work, and she would be proud of him even 
if their hands never met again on earth. Yes ; 
he was not forgotten, and the thought wa» 
balm and comfort to Yyner's soul. 

He knew the old man, too, who sat by her 
side. That pale, pinched face, carried hi& 
memory back to Warbrooke ; back to the days 
when he had wooed Nora in the Warbrooke 
meadows. It was Mr. Henry Sudely, Nora's 
father, for Lady Stainbrooke had advised her 
brother to come and pay his rich daughter a 
visit, as she " wanted rousing." 

Poor Mr. Sudely was not of a very '' rousing '* 
nature. Sitting in his rich daughter's carriage^ 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 243 

•living in lier fine liouse, the old shadows still 
Jiung over him. He had been '' too beaten by 
the world," too battered by its rude shocks, 
-ever to forget them. He had failed ; had to 
face angry, insulting creditors ; he had scarcely 
known where to turn for daily bread ; he had 
struggled and struggled, and then a young 
girl's marriage had changed it all. 

But the "hard times" had left their mark. 
It seemed impossible to Mr. Sudely to be lively 
and light-hearted. The storm-worn old ship 
might be fresh painted and rigged, but the 
leaks were below the paint. Mr. Sudely had 
plenty now, but he never could c[uite forget 
the days when the wolf was at the door, and 
when shame and dishonour had stalked by his 
^ide. 

Thinking of these old days, Vyner went home. 
The old romance, the old love, all came freshly 
back to him. He turned the face of his pictured 
Eve ao-ain from the wall, and there before him 
was Nora — the Nora he had wooed in the 
Warbrooke meadows. 

Then he felt a strange longing, a longing 
that grew upon him day by day, once more to 
see Roseland. He remembered the touch of 



244 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

the soft hand there holding the flower, and the 
sweet glad face of Nora standing in the sunlight. 

*' I am a fool," he told himself, and yet he 
went to have a last look at the rose garden by 
the river. He went on a cold dull day, the 
river dark and rough, and before he reached 
Nora's house rain began to fall heavily, and 
the wind swept by with a wintry chill. 

He thouo^ht of turnino; back : but no — he 
would not perhaps have cared to see Koseland 
again in the glory of the sunshine, as it had 
been on the day when he had stood with Nora 
by the garden wall. He would go on, and he 
went on, and when at length he arrived, he found 
to his surprise the gate of the avenue standing 
open. He went through the gate and down 
into the garden. He did not mean to go near 
the house, or speak to the servants in charge of 
it, unless they spoke to him. He meant — 
*' fool that I am," he said again to himself — to 
lean for a moment or two on the little stone 
balustrade where he had leaned with Nora ; he 
meant to pluck a rose, perhaps, and then — let 
us hope — go back with a lighter heart to his 
work and to his Margaret, and to the life that 
now so plainly lay mapped before him. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 245 

But let us follow him down the wet paths 
among the faded roses. He looked sadly and 
grimly at the flowers. Dashed by the wind and 
rain, out of season, drooping and melancholy, 
stood the rose trees. Then he looked for the 
moss-grown wall at the end of the garden. He 
looked and stood still ; a thrill, a sudden bodily 
pang, darting to his heart. 

There — leaning against the very stones 
where they too had leaned in the sunshine — 
her head down, the rain beating on her black 
dress — was Nora Trelawn ! Yyner's breath 
came short for a moment or two, his face 
flushed ; then a sudden glow of love, passion, 
and regret swept over him, and with quick,, 
uncertain steps he went on. 

Nora heard the footsteps behind her, and 
lifted her head. She looked round, and when 
she saw Yyner she gave a sort of cry, and 
started back. 

'' Nora," said Yyner, advancing and holding 
out his hand, *' I did not expect — I did not 
hope to see you here?" 

What did the poor trembling woman answer ?" 
Nothing. She stood there opposite to Yyner,. 
with a white and tear-stained face, and with 



•246 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

•sad and startled eyes. The rain kept beating 
•down upon lier, the rough dark waters of the 
river rolled beneath the garden wall, the sky 
was black with clouds. Involuntarily there 
passed through Vyner's mind, as he looked at 
her, a vision of sunshine, and the summer 
flowers, and the smiles on a sweet, glad face. 

The contrast touched him, pained him, fanned 
the tenderness in the man's fast beating heart. 

" And you came here," he said, still holding 
her hand, ''where — we were once so happy, 
Nora?" 

** I came," said Nora, trying to speak calmly, 
*' to — say good-bye to Eoseland — I — am going 
to sell it." 

Somehow this idea was painful to Vyner. 

" I am sorry," he said. 

" Why should I keep it ? " answered Nora, 
with sudden bitterness. " It— it is nothing to 
me now." 

" No," said Vyner, and he turned away his 
head. 

"You might at least have come to say good- 
bye," continued Nora, her face flushing and her 
voice trembling. "You owed me this, I think. 
You are right, of course — you are acting rightly. 



\ 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 247 

but still — I — I — think you owed me this." 

Then Yvner looked round. 

** And why did I not come, Nora ? " he said. 
" Because I dared not — because I had no right 
to come — because it is better that I should see 
you no more." 

** Yet you came here ? " 

"Yes — to have one last look at Eoseland." 

" What is Eoseland to you ? " said Nora^ 
passionately, and with a sob. 

" You are unjust, Nora. "What is Eoseland 
to me ? Shall I tell you ? — but you know I 
you know ! " 

" Yet you never — " 

" Went to your house ? Nora, why should 
I go ? — only to talk of things that could not 
be." 

Nora w^as silent. But Yyner saw her eyes 
2frow wet and bis: with tears. 

** I did not go — " went on Yyner. " I 
thought perhaps you had forgotten me — it was. 
better that you should forget me — but the 
other day I saw your face in the Park — and — 
and — the longing came over me, Nora — the 
old romance, folly, call it what you will ; but 
I felt I must see Eoseland once more — take 



248 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

one of your dead flowers away with me, Nora, 
as a memento of my own weakness." 

A tlmll, almost of joy, seemed to throb 
throusfh Nora's heart as she heard these words. 

o 

*' It was so bitter to me," she said, casting 
down her eyes ; ''so bitter that you should go 
away with a fevr cold words. If you had 
come — if we could have talked about it — " 

**AVel], Nora, we can do that now," said 
Yyner, and he smiled sadly, and once more 
took hold of Nora's hand. 

Nora did not draw it away. She looked 
into his face and saw how aged and worn he 
looked. The handsome face was lined and 
sharpened, and Nora understood then how great 
had been the struggle in Yyner's heart. 

" It is hard, — " she began, but she could 
not go on, for her tears choked her. 

** Yes, said Vyner, '' very, very hard — so 
hard, Nora, that I have felt sometimes I could 
not bear it." 

*' We must try," said Nora, softly, in her 
tear-broken voice — the man had touched the 
rio-ht strinir in the woman's heart. " We — we 
must help each other, Walter — for I know you 
-are right." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 249 

**I liave no choice." 

*' And— and—has it to be soon ?" faltered Nora. 

Yyner's resolution failed him. He could not 
stab this pale woman, standing before him 
with her tear-stained face, any more just now. 

*' I know nothing," he said ; and he coloured 
under his dark, pale skin, remembering at that 
moment his new furniture, his dados — all the 
things that he hated to think of I 

" You will let me know 1 " said, Nora, still in 
the same faltering voice, and turniDg away her 
head. " But come in now ; I think they have 
lit a fire in the house somewhere. We had 
better go in." 

So Nora and Yyner went into the house out 
of the rain, and Yyner felt that he had been a 
coward. They stood together by the newly-lit 
fire in the drawing-room, and talked of things 
quite calmly. Not of Margaret, not of the old 
love, the old romance, but of pleasant passing 
things, such as we talk of, even if our hearts 
are heay)\ 

" I am going to drive back presently," said 
Nora. *' Will you come with me, Walter ? '' 

For a moment he hesitated, but the tempta- 
tion was too strong. 



250 CECESUS'S WIDOW. 

*' If I am not in the way ? " he said with a 
smile. 

Xora only smiled in reply. Then she left him 
for a little while, and when she returned her 
face was no longer tear-stained. It was pale, 
composed, and sad, but the traces of the late 
storm were gone. 

And all the way, as they drove together to 
town, no word was spoken of the old love or 
the recent sorrow. They talked as friends talk 
— friends, whose friendship has seen years ; 
and though Nora's heart was very sad, there 
was no bitterness in it. 

But just as they neared the house she said 
one word. — 

" Walter ! " and she turned her sweet face 
round, and looked into his, and held out her 
hand, " promise me one thing — whatever 
happens, let us be friends." 

"If you wish it, yes — most faithfully, yes," 
iinswered Yyner emphatically, and he clasped 
Nora's hand tight in his firm and nervous clasp. 

Nothing more was said after this of the clays 
that were past or the days that were yet to come. 
Bat a promise had been made, and each felt 
tliat it would not be broken. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 251 

Then when they arrived at Nora's house she 
asked him to stay and dine with them, but 
Vyner said he could not, as he had not time to 
go to his rooms to change his dress. 

" What matter is it ? " said Nora. " There 
is no one at home but my father and the 
General and Lady Stainbrooke, and the General 
is confined to his room with one of his bad 
attacks of rheumatism, poor man ! " 

And Yyner did stay. Lady Stainbrooke,. 
who was sitting, waiting impatiently in the 
drawing-room for her niece's return, as it was 
past the usual dinner hour, lifted her eyebrows, 
or what used to be her eyebrows, in surprise 
when Nora entered followed by the handsome 
painter. But she was too much a woman of 
the world to express this. She concluded, in 
fact, when she saw them enter together, that it 
was all settled ; that their quarrel, or whatever 
it had been, was made up, and that her 
rich niece was going to make a fool of herself, 
and throw herself away. 

Mr. Henry Sudely, Nora's father, too, 
remembered Yyner, and wondered secretly if 
his daughter were going to marry the painter. 
But as the evening passed on, Lady Stainbrooke 



252 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

more than once put up lier double gold eye- 
glasses, and peering through them began to 
doubt if her first surmise were right. The 
flush of happy love was not on Nora's pale 
face, nor the proud light in Vyner's eyes which 
Lady Stainbrooke expected to see there, if a 
woman with Nora's immense wealth had just 
accepted him. They both were calm, pale and 
composed ; Yyner a bit grim in his manner to 
Lady Stainbrooke herself, for he never could 
forgive her, and Lady Stainbrooke — remem- 
Ijering the scene at Koseland — did not dare 
even to mention Vyner's name to Nora after 
he w^as gone. 

Vyner walked home to his rooms in a very 
restless and excited mood. The old love, always 
deep down in his heart, seemed now so fresh 
again. Nora's sweet face haunted him, her sad 
vvistful looks were pain, yet joy, to him. She 
loved him, and he loved her so dearly, thought 
Vyner — and, but for ]\Iargaret — 

A letter from jMargaret was lying on the 
table to OTeet him as he entered his rooms. 
Vyner looked at it, bit his lips, and a somewhat 
strong and angry word rose on his tongue. 

He lit ft cio-ar and smoked it before he had 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 253 

courage to open his love letter. Shall we glance 
over his shoulder, and read it with him ? 
Margaret wrote a most charming hand, and it 
was very easy to decipher. The words were 
very plain, and so was their meaning ; they 
were exactly as follows : — 

My clearest Walter, — I expected you to call last night, but 
as you did not, I must write to you to tell you my good news. 
Our house is quite ready at last. I saw the last set of 
curtains put up yesterday, and everything looks lovely ; and 
now, dearest Walter (as you told me to settle it), shall I fix 
our wedding day ? I have thought of the 18th of the month, 
if that will suit you ? There is no good, of course, in 
deferring it any longer now. My dear father is very unsettled 
and unhappy still about poor Nellie, but I fear this sad state 
will continue until we hear something, from her, and 1 think 
lie would be happier if he knew that one of his dear children 
at least was happy and settled. I shall make a point of see- 
ing him every day after we are married, and our kind 
neighbour, Mrs. Saunders, has promised to look after him 
when we are away on our wedding tour. Thus my mind is 
-at ease about my dear father, and you must try to cheer him, 
dearest Walter, about Nellie when you come. 

I shall expect to see you to-morrow night, dearest. Tell 
me then if the[_18th will do. We might arrange to have it 
perhaps on the 15th, but you must tell me to-morrow which 
of these days will suit you best. And now for the present 
^ood-bye. 

Your affectionate and loving 

Margaret. 

Vyner received this letter on the 8th of 



254 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

September, and Margaret had fixed on the- 
18th for their wedding day! There are some 
things that are not good to look at, some words 
that are not good to hear. Let us then leave- 
Vyner for a while after he had first read his- 
love letter ; leave him to fight out a dark, hard 
struo'O'le with his rebellious heart. 

He went the next night to visit Margaret. 
Up and down the room as he entered it, the 
blind father was walking with restless, uncer- 
tain steps. 

He stopped as Vyner went in, and quickly 
held out his hand. 

'' Have you heard nothing, Vyner ? " he said. 
'•' Nothing yet about my girl ? " 

Vyner was touched as he looked on the old 
man's easier, sii;j:htle3s face. 

'* No, Major Blyche," he said gently, " not 
yet. But we must have patience and hope." 

" I try to have patience," answered the 
Major, " but it is very dreary, Vyner — to be 
always in the dark — not even to be able to- 
look for Nellie." 

'' We do that for you," said Vyner. " You 
must cheer up. Major Blythe, and not give 



CRGESUS'S \YIDOW. 255 

way ; it is a great trial, but Nellie will come 
back to you yet/' 

"I am always waiting and listening. I 
■dreamt last niglit tlie child came, Vyner ; but 
it was very strange, I could not speak to 
her/' 

"You had the nightmare," said Vyner, trying 
to speak lightly. 

*' I tried in my dream to open my lips, but 
I could not move my tongue ; I tried to lift up 
my hands to bless her, but they lay still by 
my side, and the child fell down and cried, 
Vyner, and I saw her face, and it w^as changed, 
and sad, and old — it was a terrible dream/' 

" They always go contrariwise, don't the old 
women say ? " said Vyner. " So we must hope 
to see Nellie lookinof well and like herself/' 

" Yet I can't help thinking of my dream — I 
must have been dead, I think ; if any life were 
left in me, I would have had strength to get 
up and welcome Nellie/' 

At this moment Margaret entered the room, 
looking very bright and handsome, 

''' Walter ! " she said, advancing with out- 
stretched hand to Vyner, " that stupid Hatton 
only told me you were here a moment since. 



256 CRCESCS'S WIDOW. 

Have you been liere long ? But you have been 
talking to my father." 

'•' I have been telling Vyner my dream,. 
Margaret," said the Major. 

" And I hope he bas scolded you. Walter,, 
isn't it wrong, now, of dear father to indulge 
in. such foolish fancies ? '* 

'' Unfortunately we cannot always help our 
fancies, Margaret," answered Yyner gravely. 

'' Oh, yes, we can. I never allow myself to 
think of things that I should not— I think it 
is weak to do so, Walter." 

" Perhaps it is," said Walter. 

"And now, dear father," continued Mar- 
garet, going up playfully to her father, and 
putting her arm through his, *' will you go to 
your study for a little while, as I have a great 
secret to tell Walter." 

The Major allowed himself to be led away 
quite meekly. Then Margaret went back to- 
her betrothed. The secret that she had to tell 
him was to know whether the 15th or the 18th 
was to be their wedding-day. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE HOUSE IN THE GLEN. 

On this same 9tli of September — at the very 
time when Major Blythe was telling Vyner his 
dream about his lost Nellie, when Margaret 
was talking to Vyner of their wedding-day — 
away in the Western Highlands, by one of the 
most beautiful lochs in Scotland, a girl was 
standing: in the moonlio^ht. 

She was quite alone. She had come down 
over the rough shingle at the head of the loch, 
and was now looking anxiously over the moonlit 
w^aters. 

The girl stood there half-frightened, it was 
so wild, so lonely, and so beautiful, this silent 
glen. All around her the great jagged peaks 
towered up against the luminous sky, their 
shadows falling dark and weird on the valley 
below. No human creature but herself was to 

VOL, I. K 



258 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

be seen, no sound but the mournful cadence 
of the loch breaking on the stony shore. 

Yet the girl stood listening — she bent 
forward — what did she hear ? The splash 
of the tide on the stones, or a startled wild 
duck on the wing ? No ; it was the measured 
dip of oars, and with a half cry of joy the 
girl recognised this, and in another moment 
or two, out of the shadow of hills, into the 
clear moonlight on the mid-channel of the 
loch, a boat glided into view. 

Then the girl ran a few steps further along 
the rough shingle to the point to which the 
boat was apparently steering. She mounted 
on one of the big stones ; she stood there with 
the moonlight falling on her fair hair and her 
fair face. Two men were in the boat, and as 
the keel grated on the shingle a sturdy keeper 
leapt out and pulled the boat up on the shore. 
As he did this the other man too sprang out, 
and the girl stepped quickly down from her big 
stone and advanced with outstretched hands. 

*' Murray I " she said ; and Murray took her 
in his arms, and again and again kissed her 
sweet face. 

*^ Nellie, what are you doing here ? " he 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 259 

said. " CJiild, you should not come out alone 
at night like this." 

"I could not stay in. I was so anxious," 
she answered. " Do you know how late it is, 
Murray ? " 

" Couldn't help, my sweet one. The train got 
in late ; and then with that confounded ferry 
to cross — and the row down the loch is a stiff one 
— it took us over an hour. Didn't it, Donald? " 

Donald, the keeper, touched his cloth cap. 

" A good hour and a half, sir," he said. 

'* There, you see, it is not my fault, Nellie. 
Come along now ; Donald will look after the 
"boat. Here, take my arm, and Til help you 
over the stones." And he held out his arm. 

Nellie put her hand fondly through it, and 
together, chatting and laughing, they com- 
menced their rough walk up the glen. 

Donald, the keeper, turned his honest, 
weather-beaten face round, and looked after the 
young couple disappearing in the moonlight. 

" Aye, it's laughter now," he muttered, *' wi' 

tears and moans to come." And with an 

.ominous head-shake and a sigh, Donald once 

more seized his oars and began to make the 

boat secure for the night. 

k2 



260 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

In the mean while tlie young couple were 
wending their way up the glen in the white 
moonlight. 

" And have you been lonely ? " he asked. 

" Of course, IVe been lonely," she answered, 
looking up smilingly into his face. *' I've had 
nothing, nothing to do, Murray, but — " 

" Well, what, Nellie ? " 

" Wait for you," she answered softly, and so 
they went on whispering the tale, old as the 
earth's first childen. 

- This young couple, now living in the lonely 
Olen of Strathearn, were called by their neigh- 
bours Captain and Mrs. Murray. That is, they 
had really no neighbours, but the house in 
Strathearn Glen was known to be inhabited at 
this time by a Captain and Mrs. Murray, to 
whom it had been lent for a season by its 
owner, Mr. Kobert Campbell, commonly called 
Strathearn. But when some lady — one of his 
own relatives — asked Strathearn if his friends 
were people she could visit (the nearest neigh- 
bour being some sixteen miles from the Glen), 
Strathearn shruo^Q-ed his broad shoulders. 

" I do not think they would care to visit,'' 
he said ; "and — I know nothing about the lady." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 261 

But Strathearn knew about the gentleman. 
He knew lie was not Capt. Murray, but Murray, 
Viscount Seaforth, and lie knew that he did 
not care that his relations should know Mrs. 
Murray. Thus Mrs. Murray, an innocent, fair- 
haired girl, had lived a month or two at 
Strathearn without being troubled by any 
visitors. The servants and keepers about the 
place made their own comments. Capt. Murray 
■only came occasionally to the Glen, but the 
young wife lived there always. A whisper got 
about from a servant Capt. Murray once brought 
down with him from town, that the Captain 
had a rio-ht to bear another name than the 
simple one he chose to assume at Strathearn. 
Donald, the keeper^ had heard this servant 
xiddress his master as *' My Lord," so Donald 
shook his head and sighed when the people 
about the place said how fond of each other 
the Captain and his young wife seemed. But 
Donald committed himself no farther. "What 
-Strathearn had said to his relative, and Donald's 
head-shakes and sighs, were enough. The lonely 
house in the Glen was avoided. Strathearn's 
deer forest, lying beyond the Glen, marched 
with the deer forest of another proprietor, and 



262 Croesus's widow. 

tlie deer-stalkers on the hills used to smile and 
point out tlie white house standing in the valley 
below. A pretty woman lived there, it was 
said, and so the pretty woman's fair fame was 
smiled away. 

This pretty woman had once been Nellie 
Blythe. Had Nellie seen the smiles and the 
shrugs of the deer-stalkers she would have 
smiled proudly back. She believed herself to 
be Lord Seaforth's wedded wife, and was content 
that for his sake the world should not know 
this. God did, she used to whisper to herself^ 
growing almost solemn, as she often stood alone 
amid the wild beauty of the Glen of Strathearn. 

But Nellie never suspected or dreamed that 
her good fame had been called in question. 
Lord Seaforth had told her, both before and 
after their marriage, that it would be utter 
ruin to him if their marriage were known. 
Nellie had faithfully promised to keep the 
secret. Seaforth told her also that they would 
bear the title for the present of Captain and 
Mrs. Murray. A friend of his, Campbell of 
Strathearn, would lend them a house, and 
Nellie naturally supjDosed that Lord Seaforth 
would make this one friend at least his- 



Croesus's widow. 263 

<!Oiifidant. But slie believed in and trusted 
her husband with perfect faith. She loved him, 
loved him most dearly, and she felt there was 
no sin in her love. But she had one heartache 
■ — a shadow falling athwart her love and happi- 
ness — and this heartache was the thought of 
her dear, blind father. 

More than once Nellie had broached this 
subject to Lord Seaforth, but if Seaforth could 
be stern he had been on these occasions. 

*' Nellie, would you ruin me ? " he said. '' If 
the fellows in town once knew I was married 
to you, I would have to leave the service, and 
probably die in a foreign gaol. Wait, my little 
^irl — something will turn up some day — the 
old man is quite well, I am certain. I saw 
Yyner, the painter, the other day in the Park, 
looking all right. Don't you fret. I'll find out, 
if you like, if your father is well." 

Nellie thanked him very tenderly for this 
concession, and Seaforth did find out. He sent 
his confidential servant, who had accompanied 
Nellie down to Scotland on the night of her 
flight from her father's house, to make private 
inquiries about the Major. 

This man, whose name was Clayton, picked 



264 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



up in the neiglibourliood some news of tlio- 
Major, only part of whicli Seaforth reported to 
Nellie. He did not tell her — did not dare to 
tell her — all that Clayton had heard in the 
shops where the Blythes dealt, of the blind 
Major's restless grief and anxiety about his 
missing child. Nellie's disappearance had been 
greatly talked of. Her beauty, her youth, and 
the respectability of her position made this only 
natural. Then, poor Mrs. Saunders was never- 
weary of wailing about her James's disappoint- 
ment. James, indeed, had taken advantage of 
his disappointment, and made the most of it. 
He knew his mother would forgive him now 
when he came reeling home, and he therefore 
frequently did come in that condition. 

He must have something to keep him up, he 
said, and the fond mother did not gainsay him. 
All his little peccadilloes were now put down 
to his disappointment, and Mrs. Saunders used 
to sigh and talk of Nellie constantly to all her 
acquaintances. 

But the Major was not ill, Clayton told his- 
master ; and this Seaforth repeated to Nellie, 
with the slight alteration that her father was 
quite well. So Nellie tried to console herself ;. 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 265 

"but, sometimes in the moonlight ; sometimes 
when the white mists in the twilig^ht stole down 
the Glen, Nellie would see her father's anxious 
face. 

If she might write him but one little line — 
she used often to think — but one to tell him 
she was well and happy, and that some day 
perhaps he would be proud of his little Nellie, 
But she was quite loyal to Seaforth. He was 
her husband — his wishes were her law — and so 
weeks crept into months, and Major Blythe 
knew nothing more of Nellie than he did the 
first day after she had disappeared from her 
home. 

She led a very lonely life at Strathearn. 
Seaforth never stayed more than a week when 
lie came to the Glen, and this was but his third 
visit there when we find Nellie standing in the 
moonlight by the head of the loch, waiting for 
his coming. But it would all be right some day, 
he told her ; and so waiting for that welcome 
•day Nellie tried to live on in peace. 

It seemed all right the morning after his 
arrival, when the young couple went out 
together and stood looking at the sunlight 
flooding the vast gorges, the mighty peaks — 



266 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

grey and storm-rent — by wliicli they were- 
surrounded. 

The house in the Glen of Strathearn stood 
on a small natural table-land at the head of 
the loch, just above the rough shingle which 
the tide washed when it rose. All round the 
house, save on the side which faced the blue 
spreading waters of the loch, great peaked 
craggy mountains stood towering up, mountain 
upon mountain, crag upon crag. A wild, lone,, 
and lovely spot, where mists and storms loved 
to dwell. But as Seaforth and Nellie went out 
on this bright morning the storms were still and 
the mists had vanished away. Each peak stood 
sharply out against the blue clear sky; the rifts, 
the patches of heather, the bare vast blocks of 
cold grey stone, all plainly visible. 

'* It always makes me think of solemn things 
— it is so grand, so still," said Nellie, in a low 
voice, and Seaforth smiled good-naturedly, and 
pushed some of Nellie's fair curly hair off her 
Avhite brow. 

*' Eomantic young woman ! " he said. 

She was leaning on his arm, dressed in one 
of her favourite white dresses, and her sweet 
face was all alight and glad with love. Seaforth 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 267 

turned round and looked at lier, and drew her 
fondly to liim. He had wooed her and won her 
innocent heart for the sake of this sweet face, 
and its beauty was still fresh and fair in his 
■eyes. 

" Yes, Nellie," he said presently, with a half 
sigh, " it's a fine place. If it were only mine, 
■child, we need not be hiding now." 

*' And is your friend, Mr. Campbell, rich ? " 
asked Nellie. 

** Fairly so, I believe," answered Seaforth. 
" The old Laird was a miserly old fellow, and 
lived here most of his life^ where, of course, he 
•could not spend much, and he quarrelled with 
Strathearn — the present man — because he was 
not quite a saint. I met Campbell in town 
some years ago, and we rather chummed 
together. He was kept close enough then, and 
I helped him out of a hole more than once ; so 
when the old boy retired to the family vault, 
two years ago, Strathearn, to show his gratitude, 
asked me down here whenever I like to come. 
He has a shooting lodge further up the hills, 
and he always brings some fellows down for the 
deer- stalking. I asked Donald, the keeper, if 
they expect him at the lodge soon, and he 



268 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

says tliey talk of him being here next week." 

*' But, Murray, does he not want to come to 
this house — his own house ? " asked Nellie, a 
little anxiously. 

** He has lent it to you for the present,"' 
answered Seaforth, with a laugh. '' Don't 3'ou 
worry, he won't come near you. The lodge suits 
him best, and he professes to be no admirer of 
ladies." 

" I hope he won't come here," said Nellie. 

"Not he. But Nellie, I promised Donald to 
go down the loch a mile or so and land, and try 
my chance with the blackcock. Will you bring 
lunch, and in the afternoon we can fish together 
in the loch awhile." 

Nellie smilingly agreed to this plan. Seaforth 
and the keeper started on their shooting expe- 
dition, and Nellie remained idly about the place 
until she saw Donald rowing up the loch for the 
purpose of taking her and her luncheon basket 
down. Seaforth was standing waiting for her 
when the boat neared the shore, and he held out 
his arms to help her to land with a smile. 

" Well, little wife," he said, " I hope you have 
brouo'ht sometlmiQ: substantial to eat, for I am 
literally starvine:." 



CECEaUiiS WIDOW. 269 

Donald, the keeper, heazd lum call ^Nellie 
'* little wife," and the gnm weather-beatoi £ice 
and the kindly blue ejes of the Highlander 
relaxed into a smile as he did so. This Donald 
had groaned both in spirit and in reality many 
a time over what he sapposed was Nellie's £ite. 
In spite of alL, howerer; her girhsh beanty and 
sweetness had won his honest heart He nsed 
to look at her sometimes with his solemn eyes, 
and wonder if she could be one of those against 
whom he had read such awfbl warnings in his 
wefl-wom Bible Therefore, after Seaforth 
and Nellie had finished hmch, he said grace 
and ate his dinner this day by the loch 
with a cheerftd heart He even pointed 
oat to Nellie with pious pride a lonely hut 
standing amid the wild gorges of the moun- 
tains, and told her how each month a missionary 
came over the hiUs and held a serrice there, and 
how the scattered shepherds gathered together 
to hear the word of €rod. 

** And if the lady would like to go next 
Sabbath,'' suggested DonaM, *^ that's the day we 
look for the minister." 

SeaAnth laug^ied aloud at this, but XeUie said 
softly — 



270 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" Yes, Donald, I would like to go." 

Seaforth laughed again. He was a very 
careless young man this, and if it '' amused " 
Nellie, as he called it, to go and listen to the 
Scotch minister, he cared no more than if she 
had gone to witness some heathenish rites. 

*' Only please don't ask him to the Glen, 
Nellie," he said, in his good-natured, laughing 
way. '^ I could not stand coming dov\^n some 
day and finding the minister's greasy hat hang- 
ing in the hall." 

Donald groaned once more in spirit to hear 
these scoffing words. The minister's visits 
to him were as the ''dew of the morning." 
They raised him above the crosses of his daily 
life ; they brought nearer the Beacon Light 
which burned so clearly for his pious soul on 
high. 

'' You must row me down to hear him, 
Donald," said Nellie gently, for she saw by the 
man's face how hurt he was by what Seaforth 
had said. 

Donald touched his cap. The keeper's face 
was lined and grim aud weather-beaten, but a 
sort of native nobleness of expression lit up this 
homely countenance. Born amid these wild 



CR(ESUSS WIDOW. 271 

liills, lie Lad lived all his life face to face with 
their solemn grandeur. The distractions of busy 
towns, the rush of busy life, the stir, the 
struggle, had come not near him. No crowded 
time had made him forget or neglect eternity. 
In the stillness or the storm he heard the 
Almighty's voice, and hearing it, lived up to 
his simple faith. 

His honesty and uprightness were well 
known. His father had been keeper to the 
Campbells of Strathearn before him, and now 
fifty years of age, Donald was not likely to 
change masters. He was a dead shot on the 
hills, and knew his duties well, and though the 
present Strathearn sometimes called him " that 
over-pious fellow, Donald," he both really liked 
and respected his old servant. 

He lived at the house in the Glen, and had 
always charge of it in Strathearn's absence. 
He had made no fortune ; for his hands were 
clean from "j^i^^'^ing and stealing," as his tongue 
was from '*evil speaking, lying, and slanderino-." 
By groans and head-shakings alone Donald 
expressed his doubts about his neighbours, and 
it must be admitted that this manner of denoting 
an evil opinion is safer than that of words. 



272 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Thus he had never committed himself by 
saying anything about Nellie, whatever his own 
private thoughts may have been. Strathearn 
had told him that a Captain and Mrs. Murray 
were coming to stay at the Glen, but Donald 
had noticed that none of Strathearn's own 
people — none of the Campbells — had come near 
to visit the lady. The women of the household, 
consisting of an old highland woman who acted 
as cook, and a young highland woman who 
acted as housemaid, had not been so reticent. 
They had asked Donald questions, but Donald 
had only groaned and shaken his head. He 
felt great inward satisfaction, therefore, when 
he remembered this as he sat rowing Seaforth 
and Nellie in the boat, after he had heard 
Seaforth call Nellie with his own ears, his 
'' little wife." 

The young couple spent the rest of the 
afternoon on the loch. Nellie would not fish. 
** It was too beautiful to do anything," she 
said ; and truly it was beautiful. On the broad, 
smooth breast of the water lay reflected, as if 
in a mighty mirror, the mountains and hills 
through which it flowed. There was scarcely 
a ripple on the tide, and above the sky was 



CRCESUS'S ^YIDOW. 273 

deep blue and cloudless. Here and there a 
wild duck skimmed, and a big seal raised its 
liead and looked curiously with its mild eyes at 
the boat and its occupants. 

*'If the lady would sing he'd follow us/' 
suggested Donald, as these creatures are popu- 
larly supposed to be great lovers of music. 
But Nellie only laughed in reply, and as the 
big seal did not apparently find her laugh 
musical enough, he soon vanished away. 



CHAPTER XX. 

STRATHEAPvN. 

Seaforth only stayed three days longer in the 
Glen. His mother, he told Nellie, was visiting 
some of her own people in Suffolk, and he had 
promised to join her there. He told Nellie 
also that he had left directed envelopes in 
town with his servant Clayton, and that his- 
letters from Scotland were actually placed in 
these envelopes before being forwarded, so 
anxious was he that no whisper of his visits to 
the Glen should reach his proud mother's ears. 
But Seaforth did not tell Nellie that he still 
allowed his mother to scheme and hope for his 
marriage with "Croesus's Widow;" he did not 
tell her that he also allowed his most pressing 
creditors to believe that this marriage was 
not only possible but probable. Yet such was 
actually the case. This, indeed, was one of 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 275 

the many illustrations of how the miserable 
influences of debt and im]Decuniosity will cor- 
rupt and change the human heart. 

When with Nellie amid the wild beauty of 
the Glen, Seaforth tried to, and actually did 
sometimes, forget his troubles. But money 
•embarrassments have a more faithful memory 
than the tenderest friend. They will not be 
forgotten. They follow a man wheresoever he 
goes, tapping him on the shoulder alike in his 
hours of merriment or woe. In the chamber 
of death, how often the pale expectant heir 
stands counting his debts ! Even with Nellie's 
soft hand clasped in his, Seaforth saw some- 
times the grim shadow of the suspended sword. 

But her sweetness and beauty always had a 
good influence wpon him. It was quite true 
what he told her, that no contemptible thought 
of their difference of rank made him keep their 
miarriage as a thing to be ashamed of, and 
hidden away. It was not this, but the actual 
knowledg^e that he was ruined: that his mother 
would be dragged down by his ruin ; and that 
he was really living on the credit of being a 
young, titled, and unmarried man. More than 
one of his sharp-eyed, beak-nosed, accommo- 



276 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

dating acquaintances, had told the young lord^ 
with a smile and a leer, that it was cjuite time 
for him to '' settled Many a rich City girl they 
knew would take him with his old title and 
his good-looking face. Then they heard the 
report about *' Croesus's Widow," and Seaforth 
had borrowed more money on the strength of 
it. 

But on the morning that he left the Glen of 
Strathearn, as he parted with Nellie and looked 
into her fair trustful face, Seaforth told himself 
that he must do something — that he must 
change his plan of life somehow, and not bring 
any more trouble upon the loving woman who 
clung to him with such wistful fondness. 

Nellie felt very sad after he left. She had 
gone down the loch with him in the boat, 
and as Donald rowed her up again he saw her 
blue eyes grow dim and moist, and a big tear 
or two roll down her smooth soft cheeks. Then 
she turned away her head and bent over the 
side of the boat, but Donald knew that " the 
lady's " heart was heavy within her, and he 
longed to speak, though he did not venture to 
do so, of a comfort which was beyond the 
influence of the fickle moods of men. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 277 

The next few days were very dreary ones at 
Strathearn. The weather changed, and the 
mists gathered on the mountain peaks, and the 
rain and the wind swept down the glen, and 
came dashing against the window panes, and 
the waters of the loch looked dark and angry. 

Inside the house Nellie sat alone, and a 
nameless sadness oppressed her. She tried to 
think of the future — the bright future — when 
she would go home as Lord Seaforth's wife, 
and put her loving arms round the dear blind 
father's neck. This was the future, but the 
present was very sad. 

Living alone in this wild place, with only 
three servants in the house, and Seaforth so far 
away ! She could not even write to him openly, 
and to the house where he was staying in 
Suffolk. Her letters were to be sent to his 
club always, Seaforth had told her, and the 
post only came to Strathearn Glen twice a week. 

Then the first post-day came after Seaforth 
had left, and there was no letter for Nellie ! 
Nellie cried very bitterly at this. When 
she was so anxious, she thought it was very, 
very cruel of Murray to forget her. Mur- 
ray had not forgotten her, but he was bothered 



278 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and worried to death, and hardly knew what 
to write to the poor child alone in the Scottish 
glen. 

So Nellie had nothing to do but to wander 
up and down in the silent house. The mist 
still lay on the hills, and the rain came sweeping 
<iown the gorges. It was very desolate — no 
letters, no newspapers — only anxious thoughts, 
and vague fears, sometimes for Seaforth, some- 
times for the dear father at home. 

Do men ever realise — living in action, living 
amid the excitement and competitions of life 
— how women fret and pine in seeming rest 
and security? The moth eats into the garment 
that is laid carefully away, and so anxiety and 
care wear most the hearts that are shut out 
from the struo^o-le and stir of the world. But 
Seaforth never thought of this, or perhaps he 
would have contrived that his Nellie should 
receive one letter at least on the rare visits of 
the post-bag to the Glen of Strathearn. 

At last the sun shone out again, and Nellie 
'Could get out and watch the mists and the 
clouds creeping, as if unwillingly, away over the 
mountains' peaks ; she went out on the loch 
'{glad of any change), and Donald rowed her 



CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 279 

down to where a famous fishing stream flowed 
into the loch. Donald moored the boat in a 
little bay, and then left Nellie sitting on some 
lichen-grown rocks, looking wistfully over 
the blue waters at her feet and to the blue 
misty mountains beyond. 

Not a human soul was to be seen. Donald 
had disappeared up the stream with his fishing 
gear, and Nellie sat there amid the great still- 
ness. But before Ions; she heard some shots on 
the hills. She looked around, but no sportsmen 
were visible, and so she sat on, thinking of the 
past, and weaving hopes for the days that had 
not come. 

But her day-dream was strangely broken. 

" Donald ! Donald ! " she presently heard 
someone call through the clear air, and rising 
in surprise, she saw the next minute a tall man 
in a rough shooting dress coming hastily 
striding down the hilly ground behind her, and 
apparently making direct for the spot where 
she now stood. 

He advanced straight towards her. Then, 
when a few steps apart, he slightly touched his 
cap. 

" Excuse me addressing you," he said, " but 



280 CRCESUS'S WIDO^Y. 

can you tell me where Donald, the keeper, is ? " 

" He is fishing up the stream," answered 
Nellie, in her fresh girlish voice. 

'' I want help very badly," continued the tall 
man. " The poor fellow out with me on the hills 
there, my keeper, has fallen down apparently in 
a fit, and is in a terrible state. I can make 
nothing of him, and I saw Donald moor the 
boat in the bay awhile since, and so if you can 
direct me to him — " 

" Can I be of any use ? " said Nellie, looking 
with her clear, frank eyes in the tall man's face, 
who OD his part was regarding her with consider- 
able surprise. " There is some fresh water in 
the boat, I think. Shall 1 run and get it? And 
if you will tell me where the poor keeper is — " 

'' You are very good," said the tall man, as 
Nellie paused. He was still looking wonderingly 
at the fair girlish face before him. " You are 
Mrs. Murray, are you not ? " he added, some- 
what abruptly. " The lady living in the 
'Glen ? " 

" Yes," answered Nellie, her rosy colour 
■deepening on her smooth cheek. 

*' I thought so — seeing you with Donald — I 
-am Robert Campbell, of Strathearn." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 281 



Nellie had guessed this before. She had 
heard Seaforth describe their host at Strathearn 
as a " tremendous fellow, all loosely hung 
together," and looking at the brown, healthy^ 
rather handsome face of the long-limbed giant 
before her, Nellie at once had decided that 
this must be Mr. Campbell, commonly called 
Strathearn. 

" Shall we get the water ? " said Nellie. " I 
am almost sure Donald has some in the boat ? "' 

'" Thanks. Let me help you over these rough 
stones I " answered Strathearn, and he held out 
one of his big hands. But Nellie needed no 
help. She sprang lightly over the jutting 
rocks, and soon reached the boat, and found 
Donald's stone water-bottle, from which he was- 
wont to dilute his whisky. 

" I have a flask with me, so we're all right," 
said Strathearn. '* Here, let me carry the 
water. Do you know anything about fits ? 
This fellow Brady, his face is so horribly 
twisted, perhaps it may frighten you to look 
at him ? " 

As Strathearn said this Nellie had jumped 
out of the boat with the stone water-bottle in 
her hand, and was evidently preparing to follow 



282 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Sfcratliearn to the poor keeper who had taken 
the fit. But Strathearn, glancing at her 
youthful face, at her white dress, suddenly 
remembered that this butterfly — as he mentally 
was calling her — was hardly fit to look upon 
the terrible struggles of the stricken, perhaps 
dying, man. 

*^ I am not afraid," said Nellie. ''I will stay 
wdth him while you go and seek for Donald." 

Again Strathearn said, '' You are very good," 
and then went striding up the steep hills 
followed by Nellie, until they came to where 
the keeper Brady lay on the ground, with his 
face all drawn up and contorted at one side. 
He was stricken with paralysis, and had totally 
lost all power of motion over his body. 

Nellie knelt down beside him, and bathed 
his brow. She took ofi' her shawl, and made a 
pillow with it for his head, and she took one 
of his rough, hard, cramped hands in hers, and 
spoke kindly, gentle words. 

" I will stay beside you," she said ; '' and this 
gentleman " — and she glanced up at Strathearn 
— *' will go and look for Donald, and then we 
will carry you to the boat." 

She did not know what to do ; she had never 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 283- 

seen anyone in a fit before, but her kindly 
womanly nature prompted her to act as slie 
did, and the big, tall man standing beside her 
kept looking at her in the utmost astonishment. 

" You're awfully kind," he said. In fact, he 
did not know what to say. He was of rough, 
though honest nature, and the women he had 
known the most of had not raised his estimation 
of womankind. He regarded them with a. 
sort of contemptuous good-nature, believing in 
no noble qualities, but in a thousand frivolous 
ones. He was no reader — the thoughts of 
women who have writ their names in unfadino- 
letters were unknown to him — he judged by 
what he could understand, by what he had seen. 

He was, therefore, quite astonished to see 
a pretty woman like Nellie kneeling by a sick 
man's side, her sweet girlish face so fall of pity. 

*' AY ill you go and seek Donald ? " she said,, 
addressing him a moment later. " The sooner 
he is in bed and we get the doctor the better, 
I am not afraid to be left." 

'^ Very well," said Strathearn ; and he turned 
away. As he went jumping and plunging 
down the rough ground over the hills, he was- 
thinkiuo; of Nellie. 



284 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 



*' Artful little monkey, no doubt ! " at last 
he decided, and his mind felt relieved at having 
come to this conclusion. 

In the meanwhile Nellie was doing all that 
she could for the poor keeper. He had re- 
covered consciousness by this time, but his 
articulation was painfully affected, and Nellie 
felt no small relief when presently she saw the 
figures of Strathearn and Donald hastening up 
the hill towards her. 

This poor Brady, who had taken the fit, had 
been brought down by Strathearn from War- 
wickshire, where Strathearn had another 
property, but Brady and Donald had not pulled 
over well together since his arrival in Scotland. 
Donald regarded Brady as "a cross," a thorn 
in his side. Brady loved to speak in lofty 
terms of ' ' wb at we do in Warwickshire. ' ' Brady 
was a sort of favourite of Strathearn's, and 
Donald (to admit the truth of so good a man) 
had been a bit jealous of the " English keeper." 
But when Donald saw the poor fellow lying 
before him, with his altered face and frightened, 
appealing eyes, all envy and bitterness died out 
-of Donald's heart. 

"It is a stroke," he said, solemnly, and knelt 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 285 

down by Brady's other side, for Nellie was still 
kneeling on the ground holding the keeper's 
hand. 

" If we lift him on the shawl, Donald," said 
Nellie, " you and Mr. Campbell could carry 
him more easily that way, could you not ? And 
the shawl is a very strong one." 

*'If Strathearn will," answered Donald, 
looking at his master. 

'' Of course I will," said Strathearn. '^ But 
won't you be cold without your plaid ? " he 
xidded, addressing Nellie. 

" Oh no," she said. Her " shawl " was a 
pretty tartan plaid, and Nellie had wrapped it 
over her white dress when she went out. So 
the poor keeper was lifted on the plaid, and 
carried down to the boat by Strathearn and 
Donald; Nellie walking by his side, still holding 
his cold, cramped hand. 

Then they lifted him into the boat, Strathearn 
supporting him in his arms while Donald 
rowed. 

" May we impose upon your hospitality for 
a day or two ? " said Strathearn, looking at 
Nellie. '' It would be impossible, I fear, to 
get him to the lodge as he is now." 



286 CRCESUS'S WIDOW, 

"I am sure it would," answered Nellie* 
*' How well it is that it is not far to the house 
in the Glen." 

Scarcely another word was said in the boat- 
Donald rowed on with a swift sure stroke, and 
soon the keel of the boat grated on the rough 
shingle at the head of the loch. Then Strath^ 
earn and Donald carried Brady to the lonely 
house in the Glen. The two women ran out^ 
and the dogs barked as they approached it. 
But Strathearn was a somewhat stern master. 

" Hold your confounded noise, and do some- 
thing sensible," he said to the old highland 
housekeej^er, who was wringiug her hands, and 
openly lamenting over poor Brady. And the 
effect of Strathearn's reproof was that the 
poor man was shortly afterwards conveyed ta 
Donald's bed, and Donald despatched on a stout 
pony in search of a doctor. 

Nellie left the two women and Strathearn to 
look after the keeper when they arrived at the- 
house. She felt she might be in the way, 
so she took off her hat and went into the 
rather scantily-furnished sitting-room which 
was dignified with the name of drawing-room 
at the house in the Glen. 



CRCESUS'S ATIDOW. 287 

This sitting-room liad two windows, one 
looking down the loch, and the other on the 
steep mountain side, which stood immediately 
in front of it. Nellie sat down by this window, 
looking vaguely at the great storm-cleft crags 
before her. But presently a loud rap came on 
the sitting-room door. Nellie turned round, 
and as she did so Strathearn walked into the 
room. 

" I am sorry about giving you all this 
trouble,'' he said, in his somewhat brusque 
way. 

'^ It has been no trouble," answered Nellie. 
** I only hope the poor man will recover. Does 
he seem any better now ? " 

'* Don't know. He has a queer look, and 
I'm afraid it's a bad business for him. So you 
live here do you — all alone in the Glen '? " 

As Strathearn said the last few words he was 
•standing before Nellie, looking at her fixedly. 

" I am very often alone," answered Nellie, 
and she looked up at Strathearn as she sjDoke. 

She saw rather a good-looking face, with a 
distinct mark on his brow where the peak of 
his cap ended. This mark showed he had once 
been fair-skinned, but he was fair-skinned no 



288 CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 

longer. He was a deep, ruddy, healthy brown, 
with a thick brown moustache shading his 
roughly- cut mouth, and thus decidedly improv- 
ing his appearance, for his other features were 
good. He had a good nose, bright, honest 
grey eyes, and a fine square brow. And he 
was almost a giant, long-limbed and careless of 
bearing, and certainly not graceful in his move- 
ments. Yet, taking him altogether, he was 
good-looking — men, at least, considered him 
good-looking, and women said Strathearn 
would be handsome if he were not so gauche 
and so shy. 

*' You had Seaforth down a while ago, had 
you not ? " he continued, still looking steadily 
on Nellie's fair face. 

Nellie blushed ; she moved uneasily, then 
she answered — 

*' Yes ; but you know, do you not, that Lord Sea- 
forth does not wish his name mentioned here ? "" 

Strathearn nodded his head. 

*'I know," he said. ' 'Awfully hard up, isn't he ?'^ 

Nellie blushed deeper still. 

*' I — I — don't know," she hesitated. 

*' Oh yes — horrid nuisance — know what it is,, 
for I once was hard up enough myself. But wo 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 289 

needn't talk about it. I was sorry to miss 
Seafortli — I beg his pardon, Captain Murray, 
when he was here." And Strathearn laughed. 

'* He — he spoke about you," said Nellie, and 
she cast down her eyes. She felt uncomfort- 
able under the fixed gaze that Strathearn still 
kept upon her face. 

** Is he coming back soon ? " 

" I cannot tell — I am not quite sure." 

'* Humph — cool of him, rather, I must say, 
burying a pretty woman like you alive down 
here ! Have you books and papers sent to 
amuse you ? " 

*' There are some books lying about," she 
answered coldly, for she felt annoyed by 
Strathearn's manner. 

** Humph I " again said Strathearn, and then 
he began walking up and down the drawing- 
room, with his long strides, and Nellie turned 
her head and looked out of the window. 

*' My father died here," he said presently. 
"Eccentric old fellow. He kept me horribly 
close. Seaforth was a good friend to me 
more than once in those days. You tell 
him when you write, if he wants a lift 
just now let him come to me. I've a few 

VOL. I. L 



290 €R(ESUSS WIDOW. 

spare hundreds he's heartily welcome to." 

Nellie felt dreadfully embarrassed. She did 
not know what to say, and kept earnestly 
hoping that this rough, big man would go 
away. But Strathearn seemed in no hurry. 
He kept walking uj) and down the room, 
looking all the while at the girlish form sitting 
by the window. 

"It must be awfully dull for you here?" he said. 
. ** It is very quiet," said Nellie. 

" Should think so, indeed ! But I must be 
off. You tell Seaforth what I said — I'll look 
in to-morrow to inquire about Brady. Good 
day." And Strathearn held out one of his big 
brown hands, and a few minutes later Nellie 
saw him disappear up the Glen on his way to 
the shooting lodge. 

But before the day was over a great parcel of 
books, fastened together by a leather strap (a 
most miscellaneous collection) was brought to 
Nellie. 

*' Strathearn sent them down for the lady," 
said the messenger who brought them, and as 
Nellie undid the strap a feeling of uneasiness 
crept into her heart — she wished that she had 
not met Strathearn upon the hills. 



CHAPTER XXL 

BORROWING. 

The next day the doctor arrived at Strathearn 
to see after the unfortunate keeper. He could 
not manage to get before, he said to Nellie, 
when she went out into the hall to speak to him, 
and to ask after the condition of poor Brady. 

The doctor had a shrewd, brown face, and 
;shrewd, brown^ jocular eyes. He looked like a 
inan who enjoyed many a private chuckle, but 
he was slow though sure of speech. He was 
pleased when Nellie went out to speak to him, 
for he had heard of the pretty woman living at 
the Glen, and was therefore glad of the oppor- 
tunity of seeing her. 

" I hope he will recover ? " said Nellie, 
inquiringly. 

**This time — partially," answered Dr. Mac- 
duff, his twinkling brown eyes fixed on Nellie's 
face. 



292 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

'' Do you think—" said Nellie. 
'* Doctor's slioulcln't think, they should know,, 
eh ? " said the doctor facetiously, and he made 
a movement as if he wished to go into the 
sitting-room, and thus have a little further 
conversation wdth Nellie. 

In common courtesy Nellie could not keep 
him standing at the door after this. So the 
doctor followed her into the room, and Nellie 
pointed to a chair. 

'' How do you like Strathearn ? " inquired 
Dr. Macduff. 

"It is very beautiful," said Nellie. 
'•' Plenty of time for meditation, eh ? " said 
the doctor, chuckling. 
Nellie laughed. 

*' Bad place for doctors to live in about here,"" 
continued the doctor. "Air's too good for our- 
profession." 

" I am glad to hear that." 
" Do you mean to make a long stay, then ? '^' 
inquired Macduff, perhaps with faint hopes of 
a possible patient. 

" I do not know," answered Nellie gravely. 
" Strathearn should get a wife, and settle in 
the Glen," proceeded the doctor. " Ah — he's. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 293 

^ wild lad you — tlie old laird and lie could 
never hit it off." 

"I have only seen liim once." 

" Humph ! Some folks says the less the 
better," said the doctor, and having given 
Nellie this hint he took his leave. 

After he was gone Nellie sat down to write 
to her Murray. She told him, we may be sure, 
^11 about the keeper s illness, how Strathearn 
had sent her down some books from the lodge, 
and she even added the doctor's '' hint." 

I hope he will not come here, dear Murray (she wrote) ; 
•there is something in his manner that I do not quite like. 
At least I hope he will not come till you return. When is 
that bright day to be ? AJi, Murray, Murray, if you were 
but always here — 

Nellie was actually writing these words 
to Lord Seaforth, about Strathearn, when 
•Strathearn himself once more appeared at the 
Clen. 

Nellie heard his voice in the hall, so she 
turned the face of her letter on the blotting 
pad, but had scarcely time to do so when 
Strathearn rapped at the room door. 

'' I have come down to ask about Brady," he 
^aid, as if he were making a sort of apology for 



294 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 



intruding on Nellie. " Good morning," and he 
Iield out one of his big hands. "So I hear 
you've had the doctor ? Did you see him? 
What did he say ? '' 

" Very little," answered Nellie, in reply ta 
Strathearn's questions. " I fancy, though,, 
that he thinks the poor keeper's very ill." 

'^ Of course, he's very ill. It's a bore for you. 
We must get him to the lodge ; it would never 
do for him to join the majority, as folks say 
here.'^ 

" Do you mean — to die ? " 

" Yes. That would frighten away some of 
the pink paint out of your cheeks, eh ? " 

Nellie felt offended. She did not answer,, 
and she cast down her eyes and looked very 



grave. 



" Don't mean to be rude, you know," said 
Strathearn, noticing her manner. '^ Vm not a 
lady's man. I never can say the right thing ta 
'em." 

Still Nellie did not speak. 

" Did you get the books ? " continued 
Strathearn. " Ah, I see you did. Sorry I'd 
no better to send. I've ordered a fresh lot 
from Glasgow for you this morning." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 295 

" I am sorry," said Nellie, mucli annoyed. 
" Oh, you should not have done that 1 " 

'' Why ? " 

'* Oh, I don't know. I would rather you 
did not." 

Strath earn lauohed — rather a harsh lauo^h. 

" Are you afraid that Seaforth," he said, *' or 
Murray, or whatever you call him, would not 
Hke it ? " 

Nellie looked up angrily, 

" No," she said, '' I am not afraid that Lord 
Scaforth would be angry — but you are a 
stranger to me." 

Strathearn made a low bow. 

'* Thank you," he said, '^ for snub number 
one." 

"I do not mean to be rude," said Nellie, 
'' but—" 

** All right ! You shall not have the books. 
I'll make a bonfire of them." 

Nellie's natural good nature now came to her 
aid, and she could not help a little smile steal- 
ing over her pretty face. 

" Why not read them," she said. 

*' Can't settle to books, somehow," candidly 
confessed Strathearn. ** It must be a great 



296 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

help to a fellow who can, to get through the 
day. Are you one of the clever ones, then — you 
don't look like it ? " 

Nellie laughed heartily at this, for Strathearn 
was evidently so completely in earnest. 

'^ Fm sorry I look so stupid," she said. 

" Not stupid. But you're not one of those 
awful creatures who give lectures, and write 
books, and make a man feel like a fool ! I've 
a dread, a holy horror of those women ! By 
George ! before I'd let any woman I had any- 
thing to do with stand up and give a lecture, 
I'd shoot her ! " 

** Then you must not marry a clever lady." 

Strathearn made a wry face. 

" I'm not likely to marry," he said. 

*' That is a pity, is it not, when you have 
such a pretty home ? " 

'' Humph ! " quoth Strathearn, staring hard 
at Nellie's sweet, innocent face. He could not 
understand her. He was not, as he had told her, 
a lady's man. He might have been, for his broad 
acres, his long purse, and his old name would 
have made him welcome in most drawing-rooms 
in Scotland. But he very seldom entered one. 
He lived chiefly among men and on the hills. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 297 

for he was a devoted sportsman, and spent most 
of his time in pursuit of this favourite amuse- 
ment. 

Among his own people, the Campbells, he 
occasionally went into society, and there were 
fair maidens who would gladly have smiled on 
Strathearn, but he was too shy or too cynical 
to woo their smiles. He knew well enough 
many a pretty girl would have married him 
for the sake of his position, but he had never 
fallen in love. 

"A fellow is afraid to be with girls," he 
used to say, in his rough way, " the old women 
pull one up so sharp." So he had kept out of 
the way of old women and young ones alike. 
JHe " didn't believe in 'em," he told his com- 
panions after dinner, and as he was now past 
thirty, he was just as likely as not to continue 
a bachelor all his life. 

Nellie's fresh, fair face and innocent manner 
•quite puzzled him. He saw, for he was no fool, 
that she did not wish to attract either his 
admiration or attention, and this seemed a 
wonderful thing to Strathearn, considering the 
-circumstances. 

" Did you live in London ?" he asked, quite 



298 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

suddenly, after staring at Nellie a moment or 
two* 

'* Yes," she answered, ^' in one of the small 
streets near Kegent's Park." 

*' Humph ! " again said Strathearn. " You 
are not very like a London girl," he added. 

" I never went out into any society," said 
Nellie. *' I lived at home just with my father 
and sister. My father was too poor for us to- 
visit." 

" Your father ! " repeated Strathearn, in great 
surprise. " If you have a father, how did he, 
what did he say, about — Seaforth ? " 

Nellie's blue eyes grew dim at these words,, 
and though she quickly turned away her head,. 
Strathearn saw some heavy tears roll down her 
soft pink cheeks. 

" Forgive me," he said hastily, " I am a 
brute — I did not mean what I said — indeed;^ 
indeed I did not ! " 

Nellie did not speak. She was really too 
agitated to speak, for Strathearn's words had 
brought back the ever reproachful memory of 
her father with great vividness. 

" I am so sorry," continued Strathearn^ 
beginning to walk down the room with his long 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 299= 

strides. " I — I — do not know what to say — • 
but I hope you will forgive me." 

" Oh, yes ! " said Nellie, a little sob breaking 
her voice. " But — but, will you excuse me ? " 
And she rose and left the room, leaving poor 
Strathearn completely ashamed of himself. 

He walked up and down the room, muttering 
that he was utterly disgusted with himself;, 
that he was *'an ill-bred brute," for nearly 
half-an-hour after she had left ; and then^ 
finding that she did not return, he strode 
out of the house, and away from the Glen^ 
swearing that he never would go near it again 
as long as *' one of those confounded women 
lived in it." 

But, alas for human resolution ! Two days 
after this, one sunny morning, Nellie was sitting- 
knitting by the left side of the loch, where she 
w^as startled by two handsome pointers coming- 
running in a friendly manner towards her. 

" Jack ! Jack I Jean ! Jean !," cried the voice 
of Strathearn from behind ; and when Nellio- 
looked round there was the long, lanky form of 
Strathearn following the dogs, and coming witb 
his great strides down the hill. 

He touched his cap when he got near her,. 



300 GIIOESUS'S WIDOW. 

and ag^ain called ojff the dos^s, and stood there 
half nervously, evidently not knowing how 
Nellie would receive him. But this very 
morninof Nellie had received instructions from 
Lord Seaforthto be ''civil" to Strathearn if she 
saw him. 

I hear Campbell is down at tlie lodge (wrote Scaforth), so 
if you chance to come across him, my Nellie, mind you do 
the civil to him, for after all it is good-natured of him to lend 
us the house. Tell him I hope to see him the next time I am 
down. I am awfully hard up at the present moment, and so 
can't come for a week or so. I wonder if Strathearn would 
open his purse-strings if I gave him a hint ? Tell me when 
you write if you have seen him (and so on). 

Seaforth had evidently not received Nellie's 
letter, detailing her interview with Strathearn 
on the hills, and the keeper's illness, when he 
wrote this. Nellie's letters were sent to him 
through his confidential servant, Clayton, and 
this of course always caused a little delay. But 
when Nellie saw Strathearn and his dogs 
appear, she knew it was Lord Seaforth's wish 
that she should be civil to his friend, and so 
she made him a little bow and gave him a little 
smile, as he stood nervously before her. 

"How is Brady?" jerked out Strathearn, 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 301 

though he was well aware of the keeper's con- 
dition, as Donald had instructions to go up with 
a report to the lodge every morning. 

" He is a little better, I think," answered 
Nellie. '' I saw him yesterday." 

"I hear you are awfully good to him," con- 
tinued Strathearn. " Donald — by-the-by, you 
have quite made a conquest of Donald — in- 
formed me this morning that the lady read 
more than an hour yesterday to Brady, some 
beautiful things out of a book. " And Strathearn 
laughed. 

" I thought it might make the time seem 
less long to him," said Nellie. " It must be a 
terrible thing for a man who was strong and 
well only yesterday to lie helpless there." 

Strathearn made no answer. He stood look- 
ing down at this girl — this fair-haired girl, who 
seemed beautiful to him — and wondered, as he 
always did when he saw her, how she came to 
be in her present position. 

^' I — I — heard from Murray this morniug," 
said Nellie presently, looking up, and with a 
momentary hesitation in her voice, as she 
mentioned Lord Seaforth's name. " He sent 
a message to you. He hopes he will see you 



302 GECESUS'S WIDOW. 

wlien lie comes, and he was sorry to miss you 
the last time." 

" When is he coming ? " asked Strathearn, 
and somethino^ in the tone in which he asked 
this question made Nellie once more look up 
in his face. 

" I am not quite sure," she answered ; '' in a 
week or so, I think." 

" Humph ! " said Strathearn, in his rough 
way, and he jerked his large feet impatiently. 
*' When he comes," he added, a moment later, 
" you will come out with us on the hills some- 
times ? " 

" W^hat, deer-stalking?" said Nellie, laughing. 
'' No, I am sure I won't." 

" No, no, not deer-stalking ; but you might 
help to shoot the black-cocks." 

" No, indeed ! If I were to shoot anything — 
which I am sure I couldn't — it would make me 
unhappy all day afterwards." 

*•' Lots of women shoot in Scotland." 

*'Then I'm afraid I won't be one of the *lots,'" 
said Nellie, smiling. 

" W^ell, I must say I don't exactly care for 
sporting w^omen. A woman should be a 
woman, I think. I'd rather see a woman 



ORCESUSS WIDOW. 303 

— no, I won't say what I was going to say." 

*' Why won't you ? " asked Nellie. 

" Because you might think I wanted to pay 
you compliments, or some such stuff. But I 
was going to say, I'd rather see a woman hold- 
ing up a fellow's head, a fellow who was ill, as 
you did Brady's the other day, than I'd see 
her the best shot or the best fisherwoman in 
Scotland." 

*' It just depends on how you are brought 
up," answered Nellie, simply. *' If I had been 
born among the hills very likely I should have 
been a sportswoman." 

: ** Perhaps when you write to Seaforth — con- 
found it 1 I must get out of the way of calling 
him Seaforth here — when you write to Murray, 
then — you tell him the black-cocks are waiting 
for him ; and I tell you what, you must do the 
civil sometimes, and bring us out our lunch on 
the hills." 

a Very well," laughed Nellie. 

*'May I sit down here?" continued Strathearn, 
throwing his lengthy form down on the rough 
turf, on which Nellie was sitting. * *It's grand here, 
isn't it, w^atching the sunlight on the water ? " 

" It is quite beautiful." 



304 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

'' A nook out of tlie world, eli ? Yes — but 
go where we will, bury ourselves wliere we 
will, young lady, worldly wishes, worldly pas- 
sions cling to us. There was my father — he 
shut himself up down here, and swore he was- 
done with the world and all things in it ; but 
because I wouldn't go his way, be an anchorite 
or an ascetic, or whatever he called himself, 
just as he was, he absolutely hated me! That's 
no exaggeration ; he'd have cut me off with a 
shilling if he could have done so, but the old 
acres were too tightly tied up. He couldn't 
take them with him into the family vault, but 
he would have done it if he could. So you 
see I He died in yon room." (And Strathearn 
pointed to the house in the Glen.) " Fancy 
him looking out on the loch and on the hills, 
with his heart full of hatred to his first-born I"' 

" It was very sad." 

"I survived it," said Strathearn, with a grim 
laugh. " But do you see there — look down 
the loch, just past that clump of firs — and do- 
you see a man od a pony ? " 

*'Yes." 

** That's the doctor — confound him. I declare 
he sees us. Yes, here he comes — he's rather a 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 305 

gossiping old party, I may as well tell you." 

Stratliearn was quite riglit. Dr. MacdufF did 
see them, and presently rode up to where they 
were sitting, with an amused smile on his 
brown, hard face. 

"Good morning," he said to Nellie, just 
touching his hat. "Good morning, Strathearn. 
Enjoying the view ? " 

"Exactly," answered Strathearn, jumping 
up. " We have been admiring you or your 
pony in the distance." 

"Did 'distance lend enchantment to the 
view,' eh, Strathearn?" chuckled the doctor. 

" Well, I think it did," retorted Strathearn 
coolly, staring somewhat superciliously at the 
doctor and his pony. 

" How's Brady to-day ? " asked the doctor, 
his brown eyes twinkling. " I hear you're very 
attentive, Strathearn, in your inquiries after 
the sufferer." 

" Doubts, you see, about the efficiency of 
his medical attendant trouble me," answered 
Strathearn, with a rough laugh ; and the doctor 
laughed also, and then waved his hand, and 
rode on in the direction of the house. 

Strathearn looked after him. 

VOL. I. M 



306 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" I had best go and see after him, I suppose," 
he said to Nellie. '' Don't you forget my 
message to — I was just going to say Seaforth — 
to Murray, then, about the black-game. Good 
morning." And Strathearn touched his cap, 
and then walked away with his great strides 
towards the doctor. 



End of Volume First. 

Croesus^s Widow. 



CHAPTER I. 

LENDING. 



To Nellie's great surprise, the next post that 
arrived at the Glen brought a letter from Lord 
Seaforth, to tell her that he would be there on 
the following day. 

I want to look up old Campbell (wrote Seaforth), so 
mind you are very sweet upon him, Nellie. He's a rough 
old bear, isn't he ? But I want him to help me out of a hole 
at the present moment, and therefore we must make the best 
of him. And he isn't a bad fellow on the whole ; so you tell 
him I shall be down I expect on Thursday, and that I am 
looking forward, etc., etc.— anything agreeable will do— to 
have the pleasure of seeing him, or his blackcocks, or to speak 
the honest truth, some of his odd hundreds ! 

This letter grieved Nellie very much. She 

VOL. II. B 



2 CRGESUSS WIDOW. 

knew very little about money, and Margaret's 
careful hands liad always kept the little liouse- 
liold at home from the bitter annoyances and 
worries of debt. It was a pang to her, there- 
fore — a pang that made her fair face flush and 
burn — to think that her Murray, her hero, her 
husband, would condescend to borrow mone}^ 
of his friend. Alas, she knew not how low 
h jr hero had fallen ! Lord Soaforth wanted 
money — he must have money — and he cared 
ver 7 little how he got it. Nellie's honest pride 
received a rude shock from this letter. She 
felt ashamed to look in Strathearn's face the 
next time she saw him; and her tongue faltered 
so much when she told him that Murray was 
coming, that Strathearn looked at her in 
surprise. 

''Did you give him my message?" he asked. 

" Our letters must have crossed, I think," 
said Nellie, still without looking up. "I — I 
— wrote to tell him about Brady's illness — and 
that I had seen you — and he had just got this 
letter, I think, when he wrote the one I received 
this morning — he had not got my last letter — 
no, I did not give him your message." 

*'A11 rio'ht — I will see him when he comes," 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 3 

said Stratliearn. '' He's coming on Thursday, 
is lie ? I'll be down, then, on Friday morning, 
and we'll go out with the guns.'' 

Seaforth did come on the Thursday, and he 
looked worn when he came. He had had no 
end of trouble, he told Nellie, and as he drew 
her to his breast he gave a heavy sigh. 

" And that fellow, Strathearn," he said. 
*' He's down here all right, isn't he ?" 

'' Yes, dear, he is here," answered Nellie. 

'*' I want him to lend me five hundred 
pounds," said Seaforth. " Surely he'll do that 
for an old friend." 

" Oh, Murray 1 " said Nellie, laying her head 
softly on his shoulder, and looking up in his 
face with her loving, bright eyes, '' can't we do 
something — something else ? I wouldn't mind 
how poor we were — not a bit, not a bit ! Let 
us go abroad, dear; they say people can live on 
so little there —or let us o;o to Australia evea, 
Murray — but don't, if you can help it, borrow 
money of Strathearn." 

''But I can't help it, you unpractical little 

woman I Go to Australia, indeed — where's the 

money to come from ? ' I cannot dig, to beg I 

am ashamed.' " 

B 2 



CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 



" But it is begging," urged Nellie, " to 
borrow money you cannot pay. Oh, Murray ! 
my darling, let us face the world on ever so 
little — if we are together, what matter ? " 

" Nellie," said Lord Seaforth gravely, " it's 
no use talking nonsense, and if you are really 
fond of me — if you are really the good little 
woman I believe you are — you will do what you 
can to help me, and not bother and worry me. 
Kem ember, I've given up a great deal for you, 
Nellie, and so you musn't be quite selfish." 

Nellie did not speak ; she grew a little pale, 
and she lifted her head. She was thinking 
what she had done for Seaforth. She was 
thinking of her blind father, whose face rose 
reproachfully often now before her, as the 
misty twilight stole over the silent Glen. 

" Don't look cross, my little Nell," said 
Seaforth tenderly, the next minute. '' Do you 
think I like this kind of thing ? No ; but it 
is necessity, the necessity of my position." 

Nellie sighed, but she made no further 
remonstrance. She loved Seaforth very clearly, 
and love beareth much, forgiveth much. But 
she felt sadder than she had ever done before 
while he was at Strathearn. She smiled, she 



CRCESUS S WIDOW. 5 

put her hand tenderly in his, iDut all the while 
she was thinking of the grim shadow which 
she began to see hovered over his head. 

She blushed and winced the next morning 
when she heard Strathearn's voice in the hall. 
Strathearn came in looking flushed, almost 
handsome. 

" AYell, old Strath I " said Seaforth, jumping 
up to welcome him, with outstretched hand. 
*' So you and my little Nellie here have got 
quite good friends," he added. 

Strathearn made no answer to this. He 
shook hands with Seaforth, and he shook hands 
with Nellie, and then he stood moving his tall 
figure about more awkwardly than he usually 
<lid. 

" Thank you for being kind to her, and 
lending her books," continued Seaforth, in the 
gracious, smiling way which was natural to him, 
and which a few years ago had been his ordinary 
manner. "It's very dull for the poor little woman 
sometimes, I supjDose, down here, though she 
raves so about the beautiful mountains and their 
beautiful shadows, and the beautiful lochs, and 
the beautiful I don't know what— that to judge 
from her letters you might suppose she was 



6 CT.CESUSS WIDOW. 

living ill Paradise ! " And Seafortli gave a light 
laugli. 

*' Oh, Murray ! " said Nellie. 

" Well, Nell, isn't it true now ? I'm not 
much given to envy and jealousy, but some- 
times I do envy you, Strathearn," and again 
Seaforth laughed. 

*' What for ? " answered Strathearn. '' Why, 
you couldn't stand the life here, Seaforth, more 
than a month ! We have no clubs here, no opera 
bouffe, no — a hundred things you care about. 
Bah, man ! you would be sick of your life in a 
week," 

" Perhaps I'm sick of it now," said Seaforth 
in a low tone, and with a sudden change of 
manner. 

Strathearn looked at him sharply. 

*' Humph ! down in your luck a bit, eh ? "' 
he said. 

" Yes, that's it," said Seaforth, resuming liis^ 
careless manner. " Something wrong with my 
lack or my digestion — or perhaps both." 

" Come out on the hills, then ; the breeze will 
blow your ills away," said Strathearn. " The 
keepers are here, and — " Here Strathearn 
glanced at Nellie. 



CECESCS'S WIDOW. 



" Yes, let us be off at once," said Seaforth, 
starting up, for lie was always ready to leave 
disagreeable thoughts behind if he could. 

" But won't you — won't Mrs. Murray promise 
to join us," said Strathearn, not looking^ exactly 
either at Seaforth or Nellie. 

" What, Nellie ! " laughed Seaforth in 
surprise. 

" It's an old promise, isn't it ? " said 
Strathearn, now looking straight at Nellie. 
" When Seaforth came, you said you would 
bring the luncheon-basket to us, didn't you ? " 

" Hush, there's no Seaforth here, don't forget 
that, old Strath," said Lord Seaforth. ''To be 
sure, Nellie, why shouldn't you bring the 
luncheon basket? But how is she to know 
where we are ? " 

• " I'll send Donald down to direct her," an-- 
swered Strathearn, and on this agreement they 
parted. 

Nellie watched the two men from the window 
until they vv^ere out of sight — Strathearn, tall 
and stalwart, and Lord Seaforth, slender, hand- 
some, and graceful. They both looked round 
— Strathearn first, and then Seaforth — ^just as 
the dip of the hill on Y^'hich the house stood 



8 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

hid tlicm from Nellie's sight. Seaforth waved 
his hand when he saw Nellie at the window^ 
and Nellie saw him laugh and say something to 
his companion, who went striding on, as if 
impatiently, over the rough and broken ground. 

After they were gone, Nellie went to visit 
the sick keeper. Brady was propped up in 
bed, and his dulled eyes were fixed listlessly 
on the window ojDposite to where he lay. This 
window looked straight out on the craggy 
mountain sides which he would climb no more. 
For only in his dreams would the keeper crouch 
again in the wild gorges, waiting and watching^ 
for the beautiful, keen-scented children of the 
hills. He had fired his last shot at the antlered 
chief, looked for the last time on the proud, 
reproachful expression of despair gleaming in 
the limpid eyes of the stricken and dying stag. 

Nellie spoke very gently to Brady. She sat 
down beside his bed and began to read to him 
some of the news out of the sporting papers 
that Seaforth had brought down with him to 
the Glen the night before. But as she read 
her mind wandered away, and follow^ed Strath- 
earn and Seaforth on the hills. Something in 
her Murray's manner to his friend had made 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



her sure that lie meant to ask Stratliearn for a 
loaD, and Nellie's heart beat faster, and her 
face flushed with annoyance and pain at the 
very thought. 

But in another hour she knew that her 
surmise had been right. Donald duly returned 
about half-past twelve o'clock to the Glen, for 
the purpose of rowing Nellie down the loch, to 
the spot where Strathearn had told him they 
were waiting for Mrs. Murray. They were 
waiting for her ; they had chosen a little sandy 
beach to lunch on, and were sitting on some of 
the rouo^h shino^le smokino; when Nellie and her 
luncheon basket approached the shore. 

Both came forward to help her to land, but 
while Strathearn was looking after the food, 
and opening the champagne basket, Seaforth 
slid his arm through Nellie's, and drew her a 
few steps aside. 

'' Isn't it splendid of Strathearn ? " he said. 
** I just hinted I wanted five hundred, and the 
jolly old fellow offered me a thousand at once I 
I call it splendid of him — it's awfully kind — 
I don't know another fellow who would have 
done it in the way that he did." 

Nellie's face first flushed, and then grew a little 



10 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

pale at tliis news. Seafortli, liowever, was 
overjoyed. A thousand pounds in ready money 
seemed like a gift from lieaven to liim at tliis. 
moment. He forgot the w^asted thousands and 
thousands ; forgot the yawning abyss in wliicli 
this thousand would be as a drop in the ocean., 
But he had now " something to go on with ; " 
a little mud dyke to stem the great sea that 
was gathering round him on every side. 

As he drank Strathearn's champagne, which 
Donald had had orders to bring dowm from the 
lodge, his boyish laughter rang through the- 
clear air. Strathearn drank champagne too, 
but he looked on with a grim smile at Seaforth's 
hilarity. He knew ^vell enough he would 
never see his thousand pounds again, and 
perhaps he knew also w^ell enough w^hy he gave 
it. 

But thouo'h there was a mm look of amuse- 
ment in his grey eyes and curling round the 
roughly-cut outline of his somewhat coarse. 
mouth, Strathearn — in his way — made himself 
very agreeable. He planned other excursions, 
he had his joke and his jibe. Then Nellie knew 
that these two men had been together in scenes 
whose faint echo had never before reached her 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 11 

pure ears. She looked from one to tlie other 
with startled eyes, and Strathearn, rough as he 
was, was yet the first to perceive the changed 
look on the fair girlish face. 

" Come, shut up, old fellow," he said to 
Seaforth, and he rose as he spoke. Then the 
light-hearted, careless young lord, saw what 
his friend meant. He went up to Xellie and 
affectionately took her hand. 

'* Silly little woman," he said. '*' Have I 
offended her ? " 

Nellie did not answer. She looked pale, and 
she presently said she was tired. Yet all the 
rest of the day no one could have been more 
tender, more lover-like, than Seaforth. His 
handsome face did not look worn, his manner 
was bricrht — not cvnical or sad. He was like 
the old boyish Seaforth — the boy his proud 
mother had worshipped — the careless, thought- 
Jess boy who had trifled away his fortune ; and 
now, still the same, was trifling with a woman's 
heart. 



CHAPTEE 11. 

A HIGHLAND STOKM. 

During tlie next few days Strathearn and 
Lord Seaforth were constantly together. They 
were out on the hills generally until late in the 
afternoon, and then they came to the house in 
the Glen. Strathearn dined in the Glen every 
day as long as his friend remained there. But, 
unexpectedly, one morning, Seaforth received 
a telegram. He was forced, he told Nellie 
after he had read it, to return to town the same 
day that he received it. He pressed Strathearn 
to go with him, but Strathearn shook his head. 

" What, lose the best of the season here ? '" 
he said. " Not I, my good fellow, not I ! " 

Then Nellie went out of the sitting-room 
where Seaforth had received his telegram, 
which Strathearn had broui^ht to the Glen, 
and she beckoned Seaforth to follow her as she 
did so. 



CRCESUS S WIDOW. 1 3 

When Seaforth did follow her he found her 
standing in her room, her blue eyes wet and 
stained with tears. 

*' Oh, Murray ! " she said when she saw him, 
and she ran up to him and hid her face on his 
breast, '' don't leave me here alone again ! Take 
me to London with you, Murray — please don't 
leave me here alone." 

** My dear child, what nonsense," said Sea- 
forth, soothingly. ** How can I take you with me, 
Nellie ? It is impossible, dear, starting off at a 
moment's notice, as I am obliged to do to-day." 

Then Nellie burst into a sudden and violent fit 
of crying, and lay there sobbing on Seaforth's 
breast. 

** Don't leave me," she said. " Murray, don't 
leave me T* 

Lord Seaforth was very much distressed. 

" But, my darling," he said, *' what can I do? 
That telegram is of the utmost importance — 
you surely would not willingly ruin me, Nellie ?" 

*' No, no ; but it is so dreadful to be alone — I 
am afraid to be alone." 

" Strathearn will look after you, darling. 
What nonsense, Nellie. Do, my dear, not 
make things harder still for mel" 



14 ORCESUS'S WIDOW. 

He never tliouo'ht that lie was makino; tiling's 
harder still for her. It suited him best that 
she should stay hidden away in this lonely 
Glen, and what suited him best had been the 
way he had followed all through his reckless, 
careless life. He never meant to be cruel or 
unkind, or say a hard or bitter word. He never 
did say a hard or bitter word to Nellie. To 
have done so would have been against his 
nature — the nature that loved ease and pleasure 
too well to encounter a disagreeable scene of 
any kind, if he coidd possibly help it. 

He gave kisses and fond words to the poor 
little woman weeping and sobbing on his breast. 
Kisses and promises that perhaps at the time 
he meant to fulfil He would come back soon; 
she should go with him to town the next time 
he qame to Strathearn. Nellie — loving him, still 
believing in him^— tried to dry her tears. She 
lifted her head from his breast, she looked into 
his face with her steady, true, appealing eyes. 
Their expression somewhat startled him. 

'' Why, little woman," he said, " how much 
older you look ! You have gone from a girl 
into a woman now." 

But she had to be content with his vague 



CIICESUS'S WIDOW.. 15 

promises. He went away, and Nellie was left 
behind. Nellie was ill for a few days after lie 
went, and while she was ill and confined to her 
room with a severe cold, Brady the keeper 
was removed by Strathearn from the house in 
the Glen. Dr. Macdufl' ^^^'oi^ounced him Vv'ell 
enough to travel, and also pronounced that he 
would never be able to fulfil his duties as 
keeper again. So Strathearn sent him back to 
Warwickshire,, but before he went he sent his 
respectful thanks to "the lady'' for having 
been so good to him. 

Nellie, ever gentle and considerate, went out 
of her sick-room to say good-bye to the poor 
keejDer. She found the doctor with his patient, 
and the doctor's hard expression softened a little 
when he looked at Nellie's face. 
• '' So I hear you have been ill yourself ? " he 
said, as he held out his hand. '*! suppose 
you were frightened of being poisoned by a 
country practitioner, as you did not send for 
me ? " 

" Oh no," answered Nellie, smiling ; " but I 
have only had a cold." 

" Well, you must take care of your cold," 
said the doctor, with some kindness of manner. 



16 CRCESUS S WIDOW. 

He felt indeed sorry for this pretty young 
woman living in the lonely Glen. 

" I will not detain you now," said Nellie, " as 
you axe engaged with your patient. Good- 
bye, Brady," she continued, speaking to the 
keeper, who was propped up in a chair, and 
she took one of his cold and still cramped 
hands in her own. *'I hope you will get safely 
home. Warwickshire is your home, is it not ? " 

"Yes, my Lady," answered the man; and 
Nellie blushed all over her fair face, thinking 
that perhaps her secret and Seaforth's had been 
guessed by the household. 

As she was returning down the long, narrow 
corridor that separated the servant's rooms 
from the rest of the house, she encountered 
Strathearn, whom she had not seen since Sea- 
forth left, and who had also come to bid good- 
bye to the keeper. 

He stopped when he met Nellie, and held 
out his hand, looking quickly and eagerly into 
her face. 

"What have you been doing with yourself?" 
he said. " Good heavens, how ill you look ! 
Why, you must have been very ill." 

" Only a bad cold," smiled Nellie. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 17 

" Bad cold, indeed I You have tlie doctor at 
once, young lady.'* 

" No, indeed I won't ; it is really nothing." 

*' You have not " — and Strathearn's face 
darkened — " been fretting, have you ? " 

" No, what nonsense," and Nellie would have 
passed Strathearn, but in his rough, impulsive 
way he clasped her hand. 

" Look here," he said. ** Ma3rn't I come and 
see you sometimes ? If you want leave from 
Seaforth, I've got it " — and his lip curled. " I 
had a letter from him this morning, and he 
told me I was to be sure to look you up. So 
may I come ? " 

''When I am better," said Nellie. *'Good 
morning now," and she went back to her own 
room, and fell sobbing on the bed. 

What ! Murray could write to this man, and 
not to her ! Ah, poor little woman I Murray 
had written to Strathearn about what was of 
more consequence to him than all the women 
upon earth. He had written about his loan, 
^nd as Nellie lay weeping, his thoughts were 
not of her, but of the money he was about to 
get from Strathearn. 

After this, Nellie's cold did not pass away 



18 CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 

very quickl}^ The weather grew stormy, and 
one morning when she awoke the mountain tops 
were capped with snow. All that day the 
wind blew fiercely, and great black clouds rose 
dark and threatening. The waters of the loch 
were rough and flecked with white-crested 
waves, and the birds fiew eddying in the air,, 
as if seekiDg for shelter. 

Nellie grew almost afraid as the afternoon 
darkened in. Donald was away — he had gone 
with Brady as far as Edinburgh, but he was 
expected home before nightfall. But before 
nio-htfall an absolute hurricane was blowino- 
down the Glen. It came thundering, roaring 
down the gorges, dashing against the lonely 
house, and howling as if in rage and despair as- 
it swept on, uprooting the great trees, and 
hurling every small thing it met as a plaything 
in the air. 

The two women in the house were terrified. 
They came crouching and trembliug to the 
sittino'-room door where Nellie was standiucj 
pale and afraid. Nellie called them in, and the 
three women sat together, while the wild 
tempest raged outside, and weird, strange- 
noises were all around. 



CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 19 

Suddenly a terrible crash was heard overhead. 

''It's the windows !" said the old his^hland 
housekeeper, falling on her knees ; and then in. 
Gaelic she began wailing, and called aloud for 
mercy. 

*' We must see what it is," said Nellie, trying 
to be brave. " If it is the windows they must 
be fastened up somehow, or the house will be 
blown down." 

But both the women refused to stir out of the 
room. '' They dare not go," they said ; and 
so Nellie took up a small lamp that was stand- 
ing lit on the table, and as steadily as she could 
began to ascend the stairs. Just as she reached 
the first landings, on the rano-e of which stood 
the principal bedrooms, another crash sounded 
in her own room, and Nellie opened the door, 
and as she did so a great gust of wind swept 
past her, and at the same moment the bell of 
the outer door of the house rang violently. 

The two women downstairs — thinking it was 
Donald — ran gladly to open the door. They 
opened it, but not Donald, but Strathearn, pale 
and tempest-worn, stood before them. He 
tottered into the house. He was utterly spent 
-and breathless. 



20 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" Where is Mrs. Murray ? " he panted out^ 
sinking down on one of the hall chairs. '' I 
did not like the idea of helpless women being- 
left alone on a night like this." 

All this while, the eddying wind was sweeping 
into the yet open hall door, which the women 
were trying to close and lock. The fierce 
current of air rushed up the staircase, it met 
the wild gusts blowing into the broken windows, 
of the bedroom, on the threshold of which 
Nellie stood. The next instant, the far window 
which had still held out gave way, and as Nellie 
stood trying to shelter the lamp, a large piece of 
broken plate-glass was hurled by the force of 
the wind right against her forehead, and, with 
a loud cry of pain and fear, she fell on the floor. 

Strathearn heard that cry, and started to his- 
feet. He ran upstairs — along the corridor he 
called aloud. All was dark, the lamp wa& 
extinguished, the fierce wind was sweeping and 
howling in, but amid the din Strathearn heard 
a moan at his feet. To stoop down, to lift 
Nellie in his arms, to carry her into the dimly- 
lighted hall, was the work of the next minute. 
Then, when Strathearn saw her face — when the 
light fell on it — a cry burst from his lips. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 21 



'' My God," he said, " is she killed ? Oh,, 
my God ! " 

Her face was covered with blood, her fair hair 
was wet and stained, and her arms hung limply 
down. But only for a moment was Strathearn 
overcome. The next he carried her into the 
sitting-room, laid her on a couch, was shouting 
and scolding at the two women with all his 
might. 

The women were frightened at his wild 
passion, and ran hither and thither to get 
remedies to restore her. For a few minutes 
Strathearn was thus left alone with the sense- 
less Nellie. Then he fell down before her on 
his knees by the couch, and clasped her cold 
nerveless hands and kissed them, and laid them 
against his breast. 

" I am a fool, a fool," he murmured, '^ a mad 
fool — but I cannot help it." 

The women came running back, and Strath- 
earn started to his feet. But when in vain 
they tried to recover her, his excitement 
became terrible to witness. 

" He was like a madman," the housekeeper- 
afterwards said ; and as he paced the room, 
biting his lips, frowning, and with his eyes 



22 ■ CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

half starting from liis head, he looked certainly 
like a man deprived of reason. 

Half-an-hour passed and Nellie still lay cold 
and motionless, and then the house door bell 
again rang loudly. This time Strathearn ran to 
open it. 

" It's Donald," he said, and it was Donald. 
The man was in a terrible state. To cross 
the loch in such a storm was impossible, and 
Donald had walked above sixteen miles amid 
the fierce tempest, and in the blinding rain.. 
He was quite storm-beaten, and eagerly 
•drank the whiskey that Strathearn held towards 
him. 

When he had recovered his breath a little, 
Strathearn clutched him fiercely by the arm, 
and led him to the sitting-room door, from 
whence they could see Nellie lying like a dead 
woman on the couch. 

*' Look there— a terrible accident has hap- 
pened," he said in a hoarse whisper. '* She must 
have a doctor^ — either you or I must go out to 
fetch Macduff to-night." 

*' It's worth a man's life to a:o out in such a 
storm, Strathearn," answered Donald almost 
solemnly. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 2^ 

" One of lis must go ! '*' said Strathcarn, 
stamping liis foot lieavily down in liis strange 
excitement on tlie floor. " But be it so — I'll 
go — you stay here and help the women if you 
can." 

** Nay," said Donald, laying his hand on his 
master's arm, *' that shall not be, Strath earn^ 
If one has to s:ive his life — " 

" Fool ! " interrupted Strathearn, roughly 
pushing away his old servant's hand, and going 
up to the stand in the hall on which the coats 
and wraps were hanging, " what is your life 
or mine to hers ? " 

Donald looked with his solemn eyes into his 
master's face. 

'' That may be, Strathearn," he said. '' AVell, 
I'm ready— I'll go." 

'*' I'll double your wages if you will," said 
Strathearn, eagerly. '' And tell Macduff — tell 
him I'll give him a hundred pounds if he'll 
come straight to the Glen to-night." 

'' Ay," answered Donald, wrapping on his 
drenched plaid. 

'"' It's a case of life and death," said 
Strathearn, urgently. 

"Ay," again said Donald, and then he looked 



24 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

wistfully round the hall. *' Good night, master," 
he said, the next moment, and he held out his 
hand, '^ I've served ye long — I'll do my best 
to-nig^ht." 

'' Yes, go," said Strathearn, in his impatient 
haste, and as he spoke he unbarred the door, 
and Donald went out alone into the wild and 
awful night. 



CHAPTER III. 

DONALD. 

All tlirougli this dreadful night — now ever 
memorable in Scottish annals — the tempest 
literally raged and howled round the house of 
Strathearn. One stack of chimneys fell with 
a tremendous crash, but luckily this did no 
mischief, as it fell on some of the outhouses. 
But the noise yet more terrified the two 
trembling women, who clung to Strathearn, 
shrieking with fear. 

Strathearn by this time had grown calmer. 
He put the women aside and went up into the 
bedrooms, and fastened the strons: iron-bound 
shutters over the broken windows. He went, 
indeed, all over the house, and secured it as 
best he could against the storm. Then he 
went back and stood looking at Nellie\s death- 
like face. Long he stood " glowering at her '^ 



•26 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

- — tlio two women whispered to cacli other — 
with almost as wild a tempest raging in his 
own heart as that which was moaning and 
howling in the air. 

Of what was he thinking ? Scarce could the 
man have dared to ansv/er this question, so how 
can we ? Did he w^isli her to die ? Then 
Seaforth could never have come ao^ain with his 
careless love and his lisrht lauorh. But no, no 
— not to die — and Strathearn turned away 
with a kind of c^roan — thinking^ of his madness 
— wishing: that Nellie's fair face had never come 
to the lonely Glen. 

Up and down the room he paced — up and 
down. Nellie still lay in the strange stupor 
iTom which nothino; could rouse her. It was 
not a faint, Strathearn knew now, and it was 
not death ; it w\as some injury to the head, 
perhaps the brain. And so the hours wore on, 
and no Donald came back, and no doctor 
appeared. 

Then, as the dawn approached, the wind 
somewhat subsided. It began moaning and 
sighing up the wild gorges, as if tired of its 
fierce strife. Strathearn opened the shutters 
and looked out. A faint streak of li«:ht was 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 27 



breaking in the east, and as he watched it 
spread — struggling amidst the mists and 
vapours — he determined to go out in search of 
the doctor and Donald. 

A drenching rain was still pouring down 
upon the earth. Indeed nothing could be more 
desolate than the whole scene. G-rey, dark, 
and dreary, the mountain tops hidden by the 
thick mist, the loch black and stormy, the sky 
sullen and leaden-tinted. But still Strathearn 
resolved to go. AYrapping a plaid round him, 
he started down by the right side of the loch, 
plunging every stc^^ he took in the roughs 
rain-sodden ground, almost to his knees. 

As he went on, the wreck wrought hj the 
tempest of the night before, became only too 
plainly visible. Great fir trees uprooted, huge 
blocks and masses of stone rolled down from the 
mountain sides, obstructed his path. But still 
he went on — he grew uneasy about Donald — • 
remembering that amid the darkness and the 
storm he had sent his faithful servant out to 
strufTf^le ao-ainst the same obstacles which he 
now had to encounter. 

About three miles from the Glen he came 
upon a most extraordinary sight. Here a little 



28 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

forest of fir trees, wliich grew almost to tlie edge 
of the loch, had been almost totally uprooted. 
They lay across the narrow pathway, completely 
blockinof it, and Strathearn was about to turn 
back in despair, when a faint moan struck upon 
his ear. 

He stopped, he listened — then another moan 
sounded from beneath some of the fallen trees. 
Strathearn climbed o^'er the rest of the trunks 
until he came to the spot from whence he 
thought the moan had proceeded. When with 
great difficulty he reached it, he saw lying under 
one of the trees the figure of a man. He knew 
him in an instant. It was Donald — Donald, 
rain-soaked, battered, apparently dying. 

*' Donald!" cried Strathearn in horror. 
'' Donald I " 

Then the crushed mass lying beneath slightly 
moaned, and a feeble voice said — 

" Strathearn, master ? " 

" Yes, it is I," said Strathearn, aud he leapt 
off the trunk on which he was standiDg, and 
got down between two of the fallen trees, and 
lifted the crushed and broken form that lay 
beneath tenderly in his arms. 

He was a rough man, Strathearn ; yet as he 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 29 

held his old servant in his arms, this scarcely 
seemed so. He laid Donald's head against his 
breast ; he took off his own plaid and wrapped 
it round him, and then he got out his flask, 
and forced some of the strong whiskey between 
Donald's rigid lips, and rubbed his hands with 
it, and pulled off the rain-soaked boots and 
poured the spirits on his feet. It revived the 
sinking man. He opened his eyes, he looked 
wildly round, first at the grey sky and then in 
his master's face. 

*' I — [ — prayed to live, Strathearn," he said, 
'* prayed to live — I — I tried all I could — but I 
got felled — I could go no further." 

The old devoted spirit still lingered here in 
the lonely, deserted glens, which once had 
thrilled thousands of Highland hearts and sent 
them forth to die at their master's bidding on 
Oulloden's bloody field. The man's words 
greatly moved Strathearn. He, too, came of the 
old stock, when master and servant were bound 
together by such strong territorial ties. 

'' Hush, man, you will not die ! " he said, and 
he dashed his own brown hand against his eyes 
as he spoke. " Why, Donald, you're a brave 
lad, and will pull through yet I Here, man. 



30 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

drink some more whiskey, and let me prop up 
your head. Til run on as fast as I can for tliese 
confounded ruts to the Macintyres. I'll get 
Duncan to come back with me, and send Jim on 
for the doctor. Come, Donald, keep up your 
heart, I'll soon be back." 

In fact, Strathearn saw by Donald's face that 
it was absolutely necessary that the man should 
at once have all the aid that w\as possible. His- 
face was pallid, absolutely clammy, with perhaps 
the dews of death ; and so Strathearn, with his 
great strides, and thankful for his long, strong 
limbs, commenced plunging on in search of 
help. 

Two miles further on the way stood a lonely 
cottage, inhabited by three shepherds — a father 
and two sons — in the service of Strathearn. 
These men (the Macintyres) were just about to 
start in the early dawn to look after their 
scattered flocks, when Strathearn, all breathless 
and soiled by mud and rain, appeared before 
them. 

To tell his errand, to send one of the lads as 
fast as his feet could carry him to the scattered 
village of Glenmally, still seven miles further 
on, where dwelt Dr. Macduff, to get a hurdle; 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 31 

■covered with blankets, and to be speeding 
back to where Donald lay, did not take many 
minutes to the energetic Strathear]i. 

Old Duncan Macintyre and his son accom- 
panied him. When they reached Donald he 
lay like a dead man, so ghastly, so white, so 
•still, that a cry burst from his master's lips. 
But he was not dead. He heard that cry. He 
smiled feebly in Strathearn's face. 

" Thank you, master," he said, as Strathearn 
took his cold hand in his own hot trembling 
one. 

Then, as tenderly as rough men could, Donald 
was carried back to the Glen. They thought 
first of taking him to Macintyre's cottage, but 
Donald prayed hard to be taken home. 

"I would like to die there, Strathearn," he 
said wistfully, and after that, what more could 
be said ? So through the slush and mud they 
bore the keeper back to Strathearn. It was a 
perilous walk, but the sturdy highland men 
were used to danger. At last they reached the 
Glen, and with a kind of sigh of relief Strathearn 
saw Donald* borne into the kitchen of the house, 
and laid before the hot coal fire. 

Then, grim and pale with strong emotion, he 



32 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

went to the sitting-room door to inquire after 
Nellie. 

" She looked a wee bit better," the house- 
keeper told him, " but still had not come round." 

While he was inquiring about her the doctor 
arrived from Glenmally. 

" Nice weather, eh, Strathearn ? " he said, as- 
jocularly as usual. " I hear you have got :i 
hospital ready for me ? '* 

"Tush, man!" answered Strathearn, impa- 
tiently ; "two lives are hanging on a thread ! "" 

Then the doctor went into the sitting-room 
and stayed there more than half-an-hour. 
When he came out he found Strathearn walking 
up and down the hall outside. 

" Well ? " asked Strathearn, unable to control 
his anxiety, as soon as the doctor appeared. 

" Captain Murray, or Captain whoever he is, 
won't be a widower this time," answered the 
doctor, with his hard smile. " It's a slight con- 
cussion of the brain, but she'll come round, only 
she'll not be quite such a pretty woman as she 
was, for it's an ugly cut on her white brow." 

" What matter ! " said Strathearn, under his 
breath, "if only she lives — what matter how 
she looks." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 33 

" Humph I " said the doctor, drily, feeling in 
his heart some pity for Strathearn. " So it s 
gone as far as that," he thought. "Poor fellow !" 

But his report of Donald was not so favourable. 
Donald had received terrible internal injuries, 
and a bad compound fracture ©f his right leg, 
and was bruised and crushed all over his body. 
One of the trees had literally fallen on him, 
and Macduff's hard face wore no smile when he 
came out of the kitchen after his examination 
of Donald. 

" The poor fellow has got his 'quietus,' I fear,'' 
he said to Strathearn. " AVhatever sent him 
out on such a night as yon ? " 

Strathearn turned away his head with a groan. 

'*I sent him," he said. ''She — was lying 
like a dead thing — I sent him for you." 

" Humph ! " again said the doctor, but he 
forbore to make any further remark. He felt 
sorry for Strathearn, whose brown face had 
grown so pale and haggard when he heard the 
doctor's opinion of his faithful servant. 



YOL. II. 



CHAPTER IV. 



A DARK STRUGGLE. 



The doctor stayed at the Glen until Nellie 
recovered consciousness. 

*' Well," he said, when he saw she recognised 
him, '' so you have been obliged to send for me 
after all, you see. You'll have some idea now 
of a highland breeze, eh ? " 

*' It was an awful storm," said Nellie, in a 
low, faltering voice, and she looked curiously 
round. *' The glass struck my head, didn't it ? " 
she said. 

'^ Very well, it didn't knock out your bright 
eyes," answered the doctor. '' We can patch 
the white skin, but the eyes would have been 
a little beyond a country practitioner, eh?" and 
the doctor chuckled. 

" And Donald ? " said Nellie. " Did Donald 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 3^; 



get safely liome ? We expected him last niglit 
from Edinburgh, you know, doctor." 

'' He's home," said the doctor briefly ; and 
Nellie knew nothing more for many days. 

She had to be kept quite quiet, the doctor 
said, and so she was never told how Donald lay 
dying, it was supposed, under the same roof. 
Strathearn was in a terrible state about Donald, 
but the man himself was calm, composed, and 
apparently happy. 

" Don't fret so sore, Strathearn," he said one 
day to his master, "I was getting an old man 
— and we must all go when the Lord calls. But, 
by your leave, I would like a talk wi' the 
minister." 

Donald had a favourite '^ minister." A man 
rugged, stern, half-starved, but '' powerful," so 
said the keeper. Once every month he used 
to come over the hills, and hold a service in a 
lonely little hut by the loch, and during these 
services Donald had found rest and refreshment 
for his soul. So now, as he lay face to face 
with death, he longed once more to hear the 
''minister's "fiery, impassioned words. 

Strathearn hated black-coats. *' Canting 
hypocrites," *' psalm-singing rascals," were some 



SG CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

of the mildest terms lie usually applied to them. 
But Donald's wishes were now law. Never 
iDefore in Strathearn's time had the Rev. 
MacBrayne, or indeed any other reverend, 
crossed the doorstep at the Glen. But now, to 
please Donald, the Eev. MacBrayne was invited 
to do so. He came " rejoicing," he said to the 
grim Strathearn, who went to receive him, but 
was quite determined to listen to none of his 
^*preachifying." 

But to Donald, MacBrayne came as a mes- 
senger of light. No sleek parson was this ; 
no comfortable, easy-going man, but a 
stern mortal facing immortality, and resolutely 
fighting the dark foes that he believed would 
laugh their wicked laughter in hell if his foot 
stumbled. 

With this rugged enthusiast Donald was 
closeted more than an hour, and then before he 
left the house the minister sought an interview 
with Strathearn, determined to administer " a 
word in season " to the godless master. But 
Strathearn was wary as a hawk. 

*' Our dear friend upstairs is bound for a 
better world, Strathearn," began the Eev. 
MacBrayne, in his deep, sepulchral voice. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 37 

" He's been a good servant in this, at all 
•events," answered Strathearn, sturdily. 

" Ah, but, Strathearn, the service of this 
world is but as a ' sounding brass and a tinkling 
cymbal ' when we stand on the threshold of the 
eternal." 

" Have you had the wind in the east down 
^t Ardlinuke these last two days ? " inquired 
Strathearn, with interest, going to the window. 

" I take little heed of the winds, Strathearn," 
:said the minister ; " they blow hither and 
thither, but it is no veering point on which I 
fix my gaze. But, even speaking of the winds, 
see how the summons can come even in them 
to the stout and healthy ; — our dear friend 
U23stairs went out but a week ago, well and 
strong, yet the blast of heaven struck him low I 
It might have happened to you or I, Strathearn." 

'' IVe a cold, and am rather deaf," said 
Strathearn, rubbing his left ear, and coolly 
interrupting the minister. 

" I will then lift my voice to a higher key," 
contined MacBrayne, now absolutely shouting. 
*' As I was saying, in a moment — " 

" Ah, Mr. MacBrayne, ' none so deaf as those 
who won't hear,'" again interrupted Strathearn, 



38 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

with his grim smile. '' Don't waste your breathy 
man — if you like to come and see Donald, and 
he likes to have you, you're welcome — but every 
man to his taste, and " preachifying " is not 
to mine. But don't you think, for all that,,, 
that I'm a heathen, and don't believe in my 
Maker — but to my mind a man gets no nearer 
to him by palavering about it to another man, 
though that other man may be a deal better 
than himself ! No — it is all between one's 
self and God, and God gives us conscience to. 
show us how far we go astray." 

" But as a help, Strathearn ? " urged the 
minister. 

*' I want no fellow-sinner's help," said Strath- 
earn, roughly ; and so MacBrayne was forced 
to go away ; and did so, believing that Strath- 
earn had allowed the Evil One, in the shape 
of arrogance, to take ]30ssession of his heart. 

But in spite of this Strathearn was as good 
as his word, and he allowed the Kev. MacBrayne 
to come as often as he liked to see Donald, and 
Strathearn would even look after the good 
man's creature comforts, and once slipped a, 
five-pound note into the lean hand of the ill- 
paid and hard-working minister. 



CRGESUSS WIDOW. 39 

"It will help you a bit with your poor," 
■said Strathearn. 

" Ah, Strathearn, if I thought I did any 
good — " hesitated the minister, alluding, of 
course, to Strathearn's spiritual condition. 

" You do good if it pleases my faithful ser- 
vant to see you," answered Strathearn, with a 
certain dignity of manner ; and after this affair 
of the five-pound note the Rev. MacBrayne 
began to hope that Strathearn's heart was not 
quite given over to diabolical influences. 

But as the days went on, Strathearn himself 
began to doubt whether indeed the Evil One 
had not taken possession of his heart. For a 
flerce strug^orle — fierce as the man's strons:, 
rough nature — was constantly disturbing him. 
This struggle was between his sense of honour 
to his friend, and a strange powerful infatuation 
which had swept over him as a tempest. 

In vain he tried to keep out of the Glen ; in 
vain did rough work on the hills — only to 
bring the spoils of the chase and lay them — 
not literally — at Nellie's feet He never saw 
her for weeks afcer her accident, but he was 
always pursued by a fair-faced shadow which 
followed him whithersoever he went. Fruit 



40 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and flowers came to Nellie in her sick-room, 
and all sorts of luxuries, but he never asked to- 
see her. One day, however, when he unex- 
pectedly walked into the sitting-room at the 
Glen, the fair face was there, only changed and 
worn, and with a red mark on the white brow, 
which the fair curly hair did not hide. 

'' Strathearn," said Nellie, holding out her 
hand with a smile ; and Strathearn went up to 
her, surprised even himself — though he knew 
his folly — at his own overwhelming emotion. 

He tried to hide this by a little extra rough- 
ness. 

" So you're down, are you ? " he said.. 
"Humph ! can't say you look very well." 

" No, indeed," said Nellie. '' It's a frightful 
mark, isn't it ? But," she added, blushing softly 
all over her white face, " I hope it will go away 
a little before Murray comes." 

These words absolutely sent a pang of bodily 
pain through Strathearn's whole being. 

'' I've had several letters from him, of course," 
continued Nellie. *' He said once he had heard 
from you. Thank you for not telling him how 
ill I have really been, for it would have only 
made him miserable, poor fellow ! It was very 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 41 

kind and thouglitful of you not to do so." 

Stratliearn suppressed a groan. He knew 
well enough it was not to spare Seaforth's 
feelings that he had not told the whole details 
of Nellie's accident. It was from a mad, jealous 
feeling that Seaforth might come to her if he 
knew how much she had needed his presence. So 
Strathearn had made light of her illness, and of 
the whole affair. It was a kind of pleasure to 
him — a miserable pleasure at best — to think 
that he, Strathearn, had done everything for 
her, that his hand had showered luxuries upon 
her ; though he knew all the while she was not 
thinking of him, but of the careless, handsome 
young man who had won her heart, and then 
took so little trouble to keep it. 

*' You have been so very good to me, Strath- 
earn," presently said Nellie, in her old, pretty 
way. " I really do not know how to thank you 
for all your kindness — Murray must thank you 
when he comes." 

" He may keep his thanks to himself," gruffly 
said Strathearn. And Nellie looked up in his 
face, absolutely surprised at his rudeness. 

"You have not quarrelled?" she said, 
anxiously. 



42 , CRGESUS'S WIDOW. , 

*'No, no — quarrelled — wliy should I quarrel 
with him ? I have never seen him — have been 
here all the time, backwards and forwards — 
for I am so anxious about Donald." 
/' And is Donald better ? " asked Nellie. 

'' Can't tell — the doctor says he has a won- 
derful constitution — but I don't know." 

"And is he so ill as that?" said Nellie. 
Then Strathearn remembered she did not know; 
that the doctor had impressed upon them that 
she was not to know. 

" He'll pull through all right, I daresay," said 
Strathearn, taking up his cap. " Well, I am 
glad to see you better — good day ! " And so 
Strathearn went away, and Nellie kept won- 
dering what had offended him and put him in 
such a very bad humour. 

But though he went away from the house 
and back to the Lodge on the hills, before 
nightfall he was again wandering in the lonely 
Glen. He saw the moon rise and silver the 
white mist and mountain tops and the gable roof 
of the house, and shine on the window panes. 
Kestless, r)assionate, in a rage with himself and 
all the world, Strathearn wandered like a ghost 
round and round his home, and then he made a 



CRCESUs's ^yID0W. 43 

sudden resolve. He would go away — he would 
make a fool of liimself no longer — he would bid 
the little woman good-bye in the morning, and 
he would see her face no more. 
' When the morning came he still held to his 
purpose. Pale, haggard, and excited, about 
twelve o'clock he walked into the sittin2:-room 
where Nellie was, and held out his hand without 
any preamble. 

*' Good-bye ! " he said. " I have come to say 
good-bye — I'm off to Paris," 

" I'm sorry you are going," said Nellie. '' I 
hoped you would stay till Murray came— he 
■will be disappointed not to see you." 

Strathearn made no answer. He bit his lips. 
He stood there lookino; straio^ht in her face. 

" I am so much obliged to you for all your 
Hndness," said Nellie. 

Then Strathearn spoke in a trembling and 
broken voice, for he was wrestling with himself 
with all his mig^ht. 

" Be kind to Donald," he said. " I would 
not have left him, but — but it is better I should 

go." 

Something in his manner agitated Nellie in 
spite of herself. She saw, indeed, that some 



44 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

violent emotion was almost overpowering him.. 

'' I will gladly be kind to Donald," she said,, 
trying to speak in her ordinary manner. ** I 
like Donald ; he is quite a friend of mine." 

"Thank you. God bless you ! " said Strathearn,. 
and then he wrung her hand, and without another 
word hurried from the room. 

But before he left the house he went to bid 
his old servant good-bye, and the first tears that 
had wet Donald's eyes since his accident dimmed 
them when he heard his master was about to> 
leave him. 

*' And must ye go, Strathearn ? " he said,, 
wistfully. " It will not be lang now — and I 
would ha' liked ye to follow me to the grave ! "" 

'* Tuts, man I Well, I'll promise — if I'm alive 
I'll do it. I'll follow you," answered Strathearn,. 
with a sort of nervous laugh, and s|)eaking in 
the rough way that he often did when he was 
greatly agitated. 

Donald held out his hand, which was now,, 
alas ! neither brown nor hard. 

" Fare-thee-well, then, master ! " he said.. 
'^ Maybe I'll see thy face no more until I see it 
among the thousand and thousands of the 
redeemed standing before the Lord. Let me 



CRCESUS^S WIDOW. 45 

see tliee there, Stratliearn — and the Lord keep 
thy foot from stumbling, and thy lips that they 
speak no guile ! " 

The man's earnestness and solemnity yet 
more affected Strathearn. He averted his head, 
his hand trembled in that of his old servant, 
and no scoffing word rose on his lips, though 
had the Eev. MacBrayne thus addressed him 
there doubtless would have done so. 

** If you get worse," he said in a moment or 
two, speaking in a husky voice, " ask — her to 
write to me — I will give you an address that 
will always find me — and I will come back." 

"The lady?" inquired Donald. 

" Yes — here, give her this address if she 
wants it — and now, Donald, good- bye ! " And 
the next moment Strathearn was gone. 

*•' He has an awful look on his face," said the 
old highland housekeeper in Gaelic to her 
assistant, as she watched her master take his 
departure. "Ay, Elspeth, I wish Strathearn 
may not have seen his wraith." 



CHAPTER V. 

CARRIED OUT IN THE SNOW. 

The house iu the Glen was very quiet after 
Strathearn went away. Upstairs Donald lay 
dying — each day bringing him visibly nearer 
and nearer to the great change, which his faith- 
ful and trustful soul approached with awe, but 
not with dread. 

Even the gloomy MacBrayne — who was 
more apt to regard his Maker as a God of 
jealousy and wrath than as a forgiving and 
merciful Father — was satisfied with Donald's 
spiritual condition. 

" He was a faithful servant," he said ; and 
so looking out on the wild hills, where he 
had spent his life, or upwards — beyond — to 
the world which his faith clothed with such 
exceeding glory, the keeper lay waiting for 
the hour when the old life was to be left 



\ CRGESUS'S WIDOW.) 47 

behind and the new and piorious one to Lectin. 

Jn these last days, Nellie spent much of her 
time Tith Donald. The man's perfect faith 
and quiet confidence made a deep impression 
on her. For him none of the ancient land- 
marks had ever been swept away. The sad and 
thouo'htful scorn of modern schools had come 
not near him. He mio'ht have seen with his 
mortal eyes the holy, thorn-crowned head, or 
his risen Saviour walking in the garden, so firm 
was his belief in these things — so sure his rest 
in what they had wrought for him and all the 
erring children of men. 

This was a better death-bed, was it not, than 
drifting out into the vast sea without an anchor ? 
Nellie had heard Seaforth theorise and scoff in 
his light way, and Strath earn argue with his 
hard and bitter tongue. But what had they 
tauorht her ? Nothino; ! She learnt more bv 
the bedside of the dying keeper than she could 
ever have learnt from these men — than, perhaps, 
she could have learnt from the most brilliant 
essayist and philosopher of the time. 

Donald told Nellie, in his simple way, how 
Strathearn had promised to follow him to the 
grave. 



4B CROESUS's WIDOW. 

" His father, the old laird, followed my 
father," said Donald ; " and it's a respect I 
asked fra' him, and he promised ; and Strath- 
earn's not one to break his word." 

" I do not think he is," said Nellie, scarcely 
knowing what to say. 

" So when the time comes," continued Don- 
ald, " would ye be so good, lady, as to let him 
know ; he left me this to give ye." And Donald 
held out the address which Strathearn had 
given him, w^hich was to a club in Paris. 

Nellie took the address, and then turned 
sadly away. She felt very sad and very dreary. 
AVeeks and weeks had passed since Lord Sea- 
forth had been to Strathearn, and when Nellie 
had last written to him, she had urged him to 
come and take her back with him to town 
before '' the dreary winter came." But to this 
request, Seaforth had only replied by vague 
excuses. 

He " could not at present," he wrote. His 
'' darling Nellie," his '' fair-haired love," must 
wait a little longer. Pretty phrases and fond 
words came very naturally from Seaforth. But 
he allowed his darling Nellie, his fair-haired 
love, to pine and fret in solitude. Dr. Macduff 



GRCESUS'S WIDOW. 49 

<3veii spoke to Nellie, and asked her when her 
husband was coming, so sorry had the jocular 
-doctor become for the pretty woman living in 
the lonely Glen. 

Indeed the robust and rosy lady who bore 
the doctor's name, and dwelt with him in ih.e 
scattered village of Glenmally, either was, or 
pretended to be, jealous of her doctor about 
this time, and used to question him pretty 
-closely, about his constant visits to Strathearn. 

"Macduff," she said, addressing him one 
evening with some sternness and solemnity of 
manner — though to do the good woman justice 
she had first placed a steaming glass of hot 
toddy in the tired doctor's hand — "Macduff, 
have I been everything to you that a wife should 
be all these years ? " 

" Indeed you have, my dear," answered the 
doctor, with a twinkle of his merry brown 
eyes. "I have no complaints to make — none." 

" Then how is it, Macduff, at your age — fifty 
gone — they say you go gallavanting after a 
light-o'-love *? " 

"My dear," with another twinkle, "incredible T 

"They say — " continued the injured Mrs. 
ilacduff. 



5Q. qncESus's widow. 

" Who say? " asked the doctor, sententiously. 

''It's the common country talk, Macduff; 
they say you are always going to the Glen of 
Strath earn. " 

" And so I am, my dear ; but what for ? 
To see poor Donald the keeper, who is drifting 
fast away, in spite of all I can do for him. And 
as for Mrs. Murray, the young lady who is living 
there, all I can say is, that a better or a prettier 
young married woman I never set my eyes on, 
and I who have known you these twenty years 
ought to be a good judge.'' 

Mrs. Macduff smiled ; this delicate and 
judicious compliment mollified her, but all the 
same, she determined to watch her Macduff" 
pretty closely, believing, perhaps with justice,, 
that " men were not to be depended on." 

But even Mrs. Macduff saw that the doctor 
had been speaking the truth about the cause of 
his frequent visits to the Glen, when a day or 
two later, a note was brought one morning by 
one of the Macintyre's, who was living at the 
Glen to sup23ly the place of poor Donald. This 
note was from Nellie, and the doctor wisely 
handed it across the breakfast table to his wife 
to read. She read : — ■ 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 51 

Dear Dr. Macduff, — Will you come at once when you 
receive this, for I fear poor Donald is sinking fast. He is 
■unconscious while I am writing this. — Yours truly, 

Ellinor Murray. 

" Poor fellow ! " said the doctor. '' Well, lie 
was a decent man, and Strathearn lias lost a 
good servant. But I knew from tlie first he 
couldn't live." 

Then the doctor ordered his stout pony to be 
brought round, and put on his stout overcoat 
to resist the keen wind, and as he did so, his 
wife came softly behind him and kissed his 
brown, hard cheek. 

" What's that for, my dear ? " said the doctor, 
turning round with a smile. 

" I've been stupid about this lady in the Glen, 
I suppose," confessed Mrs. Macduff. ''Poor 
Donald ! " 

" Ay, you have been stupid, my dear !" said 
the doctor, patting his wife under her rosy 
chin. *' D'ye think wdien I've got such a fine 
woman as you at home, I'm likely to look else- 
where ? Not I. Here, give me another kiss 
my lassie !" And Mrs. Macduff having complied 
with this request, the doctor rode quickly away. 

But before he reached Strathearn, Donald's 
sufferings were over. He had crossed the dark 

UNIVERSITY OF 



52 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

valley, lie had wrestled tlie last foe, and he now 
lay calm and still, with the smile of victory on 
Ms placid face. 

*' The change came about daybreak," Nellie 
told the doctor. '' He sent for me, and his last 
words were, ' Write to Strathearn ' ; and when 
I promised, he smiled, and after that he only 
muttered something I could not make out, and 
then he just seemed to fall asleep. It was a 
very peaceful death." 

" He was a good man," said the doctor,, 
clearing his throat. '' And will you write to 
Strathearn ? " 

" Oh yes," said Nellie, in her frank way. 
*^ He wished so much for Strathearn to follow 
him to the grave. I hope Strathearn will get 
the letter in time." 

The doctor promised to post it at once if 
Nellie would write it. Nellie did write it, and 
the doctor also promised to have a telegram 
forwarded from the post-office at Glenmally, so 
that Strathearn might know as soon as possible 
of the death of his faithful servant. 

But two days after Donald's death, when 
Nellie rose in the morning and looked out, she 
saw before her a world of snow. Snow moun- 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 53^ 

tains ; snow valleys ; snow down to the edge- 
of the loch, whose waters looked black and 
stormy with the contrast. A heavy fall had 
occurred during the night, and as the day wore 
on, the air began to fill with the white, noiseless 
particles, which came floating down thicker and 
thicker, faster and faster. 

In the kitchen the servants looked out on the 
increasing storm with the greatest dismay. It 
had been arranged that Donald was to be carried 
to his grave in Glenmally churchyard on the 
fourth day after his death. The funeral had 
been delayed as long as possible, so as to give 
time for Donald's last wishes about his master's 
presence to be fulfilled. But as the snow fell 
and fell, getting deeper and deeper each 
moment, the servants indulged in the most 
gloomy anticipations. 

On the day fixed for the funeral it ceased 
snowing. Over the great hills and the vales 
the sun shone out on the gleaming mass of 
white. The snow lay several feet deep, and no- 
carriage of any kind could approach the house, 
but it was arranged that the keeper was to be 
carried to his grave. 

It was a very solemn sight. That little band 



54 GRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

of black-draped mourners carrying the coffin 
out in the snow, and plunging through it, as 
they went down the steep path which led to 
and from the house in the lonely Glen. 

Bronzed, weather-beaten cheeks were wet, 
and the women wailed and wept as they carried 
the keeper out. But Strathearn had not come. 
The absence of the master was bitterly lamented, 
■tis poor Donald's last wish was well known. But 
while Nellie was watching from the windows the 
sad procession go, she suddenly saw upon the 
waters of the loch a boat swiftly approaching 
the snowy shore. 

She strained her eyes. The keel of the boat 
touched the shingle. The black-draped pro- 
cession stopped. Then out of the boat stepped 
a tall figure, whom she at once recognised as 
Strathearn. He approached the bearers of the 
'dead. He stood bare-headed for a moment or 
two, and then Nellie saw one of the servants give 
him a cloak. The procession then resumed its 
inarch, Strathearn following as chief mourner, 
behind his faithful servant. 

It took them hours and hours to go through 
the snow to Glenmally, and hours and hours to 
return. Twilight had fallen on the Glen, the 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 55 

frozen mist was growing denser and denser eacli 
moment, and still the mourners had not come 
back. Nellie stirred the fire, and wandered 
restlessly and nervously, up and down the long 
sitting-room. The white mountains, the weird 
and ghostly scene outside, seemed to terrify 
her. Perhaps something else dreadful had 
happened, she thought — perhaps someone else 
would be carried back, like poor Douald, to die 
in this silent and lonely spot. 

It was a relief to her when she heard a foot- 
fall on the crisp snow outside — a relief when 
Strathearn, pale and excited-looking, entered 
the room, and held out a trembliDg,^ nervous 
hand. 

" I am so glad you came," said Nellie. '' Poor 
Donald wished so much for you to follow him 
to his grave. You were only just in time." 

" Yes," said Strathearn, still holding Nellie's 
hand. 

" You got my letter, I suppose ? " said Nellie.. 

'^ Yes," again answered Strathearn. '' But," 
he added, a sudden flush passing over his pale- 
and a2;itated face, " whether I had Cfot your 
letter or not, I was coming home. I could sta}^ 
away no longer. I can struggle no more." 



CHAPTER VI. 



AX OFFER. 



ISTellte looked up in Strathearn's face in the 
greatest surprise when she heard these remark- 
able words. 

'' I — I do not understand," she said. 

"No/' said Strathearn, with a sort of pas- 
sionate bitterness, " you women never under- 
stand unless it pleases you to do so ! Yet my 
ivords were plain enough, weren't they ? I 
■could not stay away." 

" But why ? " said Nellie. Then she added 
quickh', " Have you seen Murray ? " 

'•' No, nor did I wish to do so. So he's the 
first thought — always the first thought I " 

*^ And should he not be so ? " answered 
Nellie, with some pride. '^ My husband ! " 

*' Your husband ! " echoed Strathearn, with a 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 57 



scornful laugh, and lie began striding up and 
down tlie room witli his long strides. 

" I do not understand you/' said Nellie. 

" Perhaps not — well, shall I speak more 
plainly, then ? " said Strathearn, and he came 
■up to Nellie and stood before her. " Shall I 
tell you the history of a man's mad folly — how 
a fair face has bewitched him and stolen away 
his sense ? " 

" No, no ! " said Nellie, frightened by his 
manner. " I do not wish to hear." 

'' But you shall hear, now," said Strathearn,. 
and he caught her roughly by the WTist. " Do 
you know w^hat you have done ? I w^as happy 
enough until you came here — I was heart 
whole, at all events ! " And again Strathearn 
gave a bitter laugh. 

" I w^ill not hear this," said Nellie, pulling 
away her hand. " It's ungenerous, ungentle- 
manly of you, Strathearn, to speak as you are 
doing, when Murray — when my husband is 
away ! " 

" You don't believe that ? AVhat a force it 
is I You don't believe you're Seaforth's wife ? 
But even knowing what you are — ay, even 
knowinf^ what vou are, and how the old name 



58 CIKESUS'S WIDOW. 

lias never been smeared before — I ask you — will 
you many me ? " 

" You are mad ! " said Nellie, staring at him 
in utter astonishment. " Strathearn, you are 
mad ! " 

'' Yes, I am mad ! " said Strathearn, bitterly. 
'• Mad to care for a woman who loves a brain- 
less, heartless fool, who has not even the honesty 
to take her by the hand and confess he has 
wronged her. That's about what Seaforth does 
to you. He hides you down here— leaves you 
• — and then — would you like to hear what's 
said about him now ? " 

" I don't wish to hear. I will believe nothing," 
said Xellie, proudly. 

" They say at the clubs," continued Strath- 
earn, disregarding Nellie's words, "that Seaforth 
is about to marry a lady — a rich woman, who 
goes by the name in town of Croesus's Widow. 
What do you think of that ? You down here 
calling yourself his wife, and my lord wooing 
his rich widow in London ! " 

" It's a lie — a lie ; an utter lie ! " cried Nellie, 
with blazing cheeks and flashing eyes. " Go 
out of the room, you coward, who dare come 
here and repeat such wicked, shameful words 1" 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 5^' 

And Nellie burst into a passion of tears. 

''Don't be a little fool!" said Strathearn,. 
roughly. " Why, you must have known the 
fellow didn't really care for you, leaving you 
down here alone for weeks and months, with 
another man dangling after you at his will I 
D'ye think that's love ? Why, I'd shoot a fellow 
who dared look at the woman I loved so well — 
shall I say it ? — as well as I am mad enough, 
Nellie, to love you." 

Strathearn's voice softened, broke and fal- 
tered, as he said these last words. Once more- 
he approached Nellie ; once more would have 
taken her hand, but Nellie pushed his hand 
indignantly away. 

" Mine's an honest love, at least," con- 
tinued Strathearn. " I don't ask you to hide 
in a hole, or take a false name for my 
sake. And don't think I haven't counted the 
cost ! We come of a long race, we Camp- 
bells, and the women have been — but why 
speak of it ? It is enough. I have made 
np my mind. Forget Seaforth, Nellie. Let 
his name never be mentioned between us ; 
and to-morrow — any day — I will make you 
my wife." 



^60 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Nellie by tliis time had somewhat recovered 
her composure. 

'* You have been deceived by circumstances, 
Strathearn/' she said, trying to speak quietly. 
'* Because I am living here, under, as you say, a 
false name, you have imagined, I supj^ose, that 
I am not really married to Lord Seaforth. But 
I am married to him. We were married in 
Edinburo;h last Auo^ust." 

Strathearn looked steadily in Nellie's face. 

''And you believe this, poor girl?" he said. 
'• Then Seaforth is a bigger ruffian even than I 
took him for ! " 

" Why ? How do you mean ? " 

" Because he told me with his own lips he 
was not married to you ; because he told me 
you knew you were not married — that he had 
never intended to marry you ; that, in his cir- 
cumstances, such a marriage was totally out of 
the question." 

Nellie grew white to the very lips. 

"If I could believe this," she said, in trembling 
accents. 

"You must believe," said Strathearn. "From 
the first — the very first — when he brought you 
bere, he wrote me the same story. Don't you 



r-o'c 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 61 

pin your faith on him, Nellie, for he's but a 
broken reed ! He's harrassed to death about 
money affairs, and I have no doubt that this 
story is true, and that he wants to patch up 
his broken fortunes by marrying a rich woman." 

"He cannot marry a rich woman," said Nellie. 
^' No, no ! " she went on, wringing her hands, 
^nd flinging herself to and fro in great agony, 
*' He is my husband ! Oh, God ! if I could 
helieve otherwise, I would die — surely I would 
die 1 '' 

**He is not worth your grief," said Strath- 
•earn, darkly. 

Nellie did not speak for a moment or two. 
Her head was bowed upon her breast. In her 
heart were thoughts more bitter than death. 

" We had a witness to our marriage," she 
flaid presently, looking up. '^ Clayton, Lord 
Seaforth's servant, was present." 

Strathearn shrugged his shoulders. 

*'His creature !" he said. *' If you depend 
on Clayton's evidence to establish any claim, 
3^ou will find yourself bitterly mistaken." 

" I want no evidence," said Nellie, more 
firmly. " I believe and trust in Lord Seaforth. 
I knew he was poor, and that is the reason why 



62 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

our marriage lias been kept a secret ; but it 
shall be so no longer. To-morrow I will write 
to Lord Seafortli, and tell him what you have 
said." 

**A]1 right ; when you get his answer, perhaps 
you willbe more inclined to listen to reason." 

'' I will write," said Nellie ; '^ and now, will 
you go away ? " 

*' Yes ; I will stay at the Lodge. If you 
want me, you will find me there. But one 
thinsf let me add — T believe now, what I didn't 
believe before, that he has deceived you. I 
never could understand you ! You seemed a 
good woman. The first time I saw you, when 
Brady took ill on the hills, I thought you wera 
a good woman ; and yet — there it was ! Mind,. 
I have not been lying to you. I am not a cui% 
whatever I am. I would not tell a lie, even 
to win you. No ; if Seaforth has deceived me^ 
he shall answer to me for his deceit. I am not 
a foolish love-sick girl, that he can trick by his 
pleasant words. And now, good-night ! " 

And a minute later Strathearn had left the 
room, and a few moments afterwards Nellie 
heard him quit the house. 

For more than an hour after he was gone^ 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 63 

Nellie sat as if she were stunned. She put lier 
hand to her head — she tried to think. Could it 
be true ? No, no, no ! Murray would not — 
tie could not- — so cruelly deceive her; and yet 
3ie must have told Strathearn this heartless 
lie ! Eoup'h as Strathearn was, he was born a 
gentleman ; he could not be so base as to invent 
such a story ; and yet — could Murray tell it ? — 
€ould Murray tell it ? 

Nellie remembered, as she sat there, her 
has{:y journey North, on the night when she 
had quitted her father's house. Only Clayton, 
Lord Seaforth's servant, had accompanied her. 
She had stayed a few days in Edinburgh at 
private lodgings that Clayton had taken for 
•her, and then Lord Seaforth had joined her, 
and they were married. They were married in 
the drawing-room of the house where she was 
staying, after the Scottish fashion, by a person 
whom Seaforth told her was a Scotch minister, 
iind whom he called the Eev. Mr. McFarlane. 
Only Clayton was present at the ceremony, as 
Nellie had known from the beofinnino: that their 
marriage was to be kept a secret. She had 
asked no questions, and she had signed nothing. 
She had entirely trusted Lord Seaforth, and he 



64 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

had assured her they were married according^ 
to the law in Scotland ; that they were married 
by a binding law. 

Nellie recalled all this, sitting there by the- 
dying fire after Strathearn had left her. Then 
she started to her feet, trying to make up her 
mind. Eemember, she was but a girl ; only 
of late had the thought, the half-sadness of 
womanhood crept upon her. And she had 
loved Seaforth so dearly I But this was a 
terrible blow that had come to her, crushing 
out her life, weakeniug her love. For love 
that wears so long and well, when the wearer 
is worthy, is apt to grow thin and shrivel up 
when neglected or ill-used. 

But she must do something — of this she was- 
certain. She could not stay at the Glen another 
day after what Strathearn had said ; could not 
stay as his guest. Then she went up to her 
bedroom and counted over the little money in 
her possession. It was only very little. It 
was just as Seaforth had given it to her in 
Edinburgh after their marriage, for Nellie had 
spent nothing while living at the Glen. But 
when she reckoned what she would be forced 
to spend before she could hope to see Seaforth, 



CRCESCS'S WIDOW. 65 

sbe saw with dismay tliat she had not enough 
for her purpose. 

AVhat a miserable thing the want of money 
is ! No one who has not felt it can realise it, 
and none but the sensitive-minded can tell 
what it has cost them. Here was this poor 
girl — Lord Seaforth's wife, as she supposed 
herself to be — sitting turning over her pittance 
in her hand, and thinking how she must do this 
and that without sufficient means ! She could 
not go away from Strathearn without giving 
money to the servants, and she had not enough 
to give them if they supposed she was leaving 
the Glen for good. 

A.t last, uneasy and afraid — hating not to 
speak the exact truth, yet ashamed to say to 
the servants, " I am going away, and can only 
afford to give you so little" — she made up her 
mind to tell them she was going to Edinburgh 
for a day or two, and thus they w^ould not 
expect any considerable sum as a final present 
from her hands. 

She carried out this idea. Early the next 
morning she told the housekeeper she would 
want young Macintyre to row her down the 
loch, as she was going on a short visit to 

VOL. II. D 



66 CRCEsas's widoay. 

Edinburgh. Then she divided all that she 
could possibly spare among the household, and 
before eleven o'clock, was being rowed down 
the blue waters of the loch by Macintyre, and 
gradually saw the mountains and the wild, 
beautiful Glen of Strathearn fade away in the 
misty distance behind her. 

It was a troublesome journey even to reach 
the small railway station on the line nearest 
to Strathearn. But before mid-day she had 
accomplished this, and when once in the train 
she felt more free ; felt, at least, that she would 
soon see Seaforth. 

She travelled to Edinburgh, and from thence 
direct on to London. Utterly wearied out, she 
arrived in London in the early morning, and 
after a short rest at the railway station, she 
started out in search of lodOTno^s. 

She had arranged her plans during her journey. 
She intended to take private lodgings, and then 
at once write to Seaforth, under cover, as usual, 
to his servant Clayton. She expected — she was 
sure — her Murray would come to her imme- 
diately. But in the meantime she must find a 
temporary home, without, unfortunately, the 
means of paying for it. She had determined 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



also that slie would not go near the neighbour- 
hood of her old home. She could not go there, 
she told lierself, until she went openly as Lord 
Seaforth's wife. 

She scarcely knew where to turn in the vast 
wilderness of brick and mortar before her. 
But the waiter who served her breakftist at the 
raihvay hotel looked a respectable man, and 
iS'ellie ventured to ask him if he knew of anv 
rooms he could recommend. The man shook 
his head, and then looked dubious. He knew 
of none, he said. But a few minutes later he 
returned to the room with an address written 
on a card in his hand. 

xlnother of the waiters, he said, had a relation 
who kept a lodging-house in Belgrave Eoad. 
This was the address — she was a maiden lady 
and very respectable. Nellie read the address. 
It was " Miss Brewis, No — , Belgrave Road." 
Were the rooms very expensive ? Nellie in- 
quired. The waiter did not know, but it was 
a large house, and as this was not the season, 
no doubt she had various prices for her different 
sets of rooms. 

Nellie resolved, after a little reflection, to 
try this address. She drove, therefore, to 

D 2 



68 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

No. — , Be] grave Koacl, and asked to see Miss 
Brewis. 

She was ushered into a neat, small back 
sitting-room, where a cheerful, though small, 
fire made the dull November morning not seem 
quite so dreary. This was Miss Brewis's own 
sitting-room, which she did not let ; and pre- 
sently Miss Brewis herself walked into the 
room. 

Miss Brevds had a sour, frosty face. She 
looked at Nellie dubiously, very dubiously. 
Humph ! the lady wanted apartments, she 
understood — and so on ; all the while eyeing 
Nellie's fair face with her small, light, shrewd, 
o-reen eyes. 

" Yes," said Nellie. " Have you any to 
let?" 

Miss Brewis had certainly, if she could find 
a suitable tenant. But she was particular — 
being herself an unmarried female — about whom 
she took. Had the lady any references ? 

Nellie was forced to say she had not. She had 
travelled from Edinburgh that morning, and 
Avas waiting for her husband to join her. The 
sour virginal face softened a little at the word 
husband. 



CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. G9 

'' Oh ! your Imsband, you say, ma'am, is 
comiuQj to join you ? " asked Miss Brewis. 

'^ Yes ; my liusbaud, Captain Murray,'' 
answered Nellie ; and Aliss Brewis having at 
this moment three entire suites of rooms 
unlet, resolved to stretch a point. 

" Perhaps you would like to see the apart- 
ments ? " she said. And so Nellie followed 
her prim, angular form, vdth its small knitted 
red shawl firmly pinned in front, up the neat 
staircase, and into the neat, clean, unoccupied 
rooms. Ever) thing in Miss Brewis's house 
was remarkably clean. 

" I can t abide dirt," she told Nellie. " I was 
not used to it till I came to London : or to foos, 
or other things I do not like to name. But it's 
a constant struggle here. I spend my days 
washing and scrubbing, and trying to keep things 
■decent, and the girls I get spend theirs, it seems 
to me, in undoing what I do — the hussies ! " 

'* You are a North-country woman ? " said 
Nellie, smiling. 

" How did you guess that?" inquired Miss 
Brewis, very sourly. 

"I do not know," answered Nellie, "but I 
thought you looked like one." 



70 CRffiSUS's WIDOW. 

" Well, I am, at all events," said Miss Brewis, 
tartly. ^' I was brought up in the North, and 
always lived in good air till I came here." And 
Miss Brewis sniffed the thick cold air disdain- 
fully with her red nose. 

" Well, it is very thick this morning, " said. 
Nellie. 

" No worse than ordinary mornings, in my 
opinion," said Miss Brewis, with emphasis.. 
" But about the rooms — I can answer for them 
being clean, at all events." 

" Well, that's a great thing." 

" I only answer for what I know," said Miss 
Brewis. " As for answering for anything that 
those dirty hussies of servants have to do with,. 
I won't ! My life's made a torment with them, 
ma'am. Only last night I found a great big 
guardsman in the jam-closet — yes, ma'am^ 
absolutely in the jam-closet ! " 

Nellie tried not to laugh. 

" That was a nice pickle to find among your 
jars, ma'am, wasn't it ? " said Miss Brewis,. 
grimly. "But I soon had him out! I marched 
him, and the hussy who had him thera 
after him, for that matter. I can't abide 
such work — sweethearting, indeed — nice sweet- 



CPcCESUSS WIDOW. 71 

hearting ! " And again Miss Brewis sniffed. 

" "Well, I suppose girls will have lovers," said 
Nellie, meekly. 

" As for lovers, ma'am ; if you mean lovers 
that mean matrimony, I'm not myself averse 
particularly to matrimony. It's a respectable 
institution, and means that the man helps to 
p)ay the taxes and the house-rent, which fall 
uncommon heavy on a single female. It's 
lovers that mean nothing that I object to 
— lovers, indeed ! Lovers of meats and 
drinks that they get out of the mistress's 
pantry ! That's the style of lovers we have 
so many of. If they'd to pay for their galla- 
vantino^ thev'd think twice about it, I'd warrant 
them ! " 

Kellie lauo-hed outrioht at this, and 'Mhs 
Brewis even o-ave a thin o'lo-oie. 

" Well, you may laugh, ma'am," she said ; 
^' you're young, and certainly, for that matter, 
I'm not particularly old ; but wait till you 
keep house yourself. A house looks j^leasant 
enough, and sounds pleasant enough ; but when 
one has to pay for everything in it — coals to 
begin with, meat, taxes, lovers — lovers in jam 
•closets even — you'll see ! The sparrow on the 



72 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

liousetop, ma'am, lias more rest to its legs tliaii 
I have ! " 

''You should get married, Miss Brewis." 

"Well, ma'am, marriage has its advantages 
and its disadvantages. I'm not going to deny 
it would be a great thing to have someone to 
help you with the taxes ; but then to have a 
man standing with his back to the fire, and 
calling out his orders, and trying to be master 
indeed, would be very aggravating." 

'' You don't think they should be the masters, 
then ? " said Nellie, smiling, 

" Why should they, ma'am ? Their bodies 
are not better than ours, nor their souls either, 
for that matter. There's more of them, cer- 
tainly, but cpantity doesn't make quality I " 
And once more Miss Brewis sniffed. 

" No, indeed ! " 

*' But here I am gossiping and talking, and 
never thinking of business," continued Mis& 
Brewis. 

Now Miss Brewis was a good woman of 
business; hard, but honest. She neither wasted 
her own c^oods nor that of her lods^ers. She 
had been housekeeper for many years in a 
respectable middle-class family in the North of 



CECESUSS vnDow. 73 

England, when a relation died in London — a 
small tradesman — and left his niece, Joannah 
Brewis, two thousand pounds. Joannah went 
up to London to look after her property, and, 
struck perhaps with the life and bustle in towu, 
so different to her homely country experience, 
she determined to start a lodoino'-house. 

o o 

She had been fairly successful. She worked 
hard — " night and day," she averred — but at 
oil events she did work hard, waging a constant 
and most acrimonious Vv\ar with her ''girls," 
as she called her maid- servants, in her north- 
country parlance. This long array of ever- 
changing females declared her temper wa.s 
^^ awful." ''But whose temper vrouidn't be 
awful," Miss Brewis herself tartly asked, 
" when she had such a worthless, useless set of 
hussies continually aggravating her ? " And 
perhaps Miss Brewis 's temper might thus be 
xiccounted for. 

But she saved money. She made it ; and 
she knew how to keep it, which is a much more 
difficult matter than making it. And she knew 
how to make a bargain too, and presently made 
one with Nellie — not an unfair one, but one 
that would pay, and before nightfall Nellie 



74 CRGESUS'S WIDOW, 

found lierself located in Miss Brewis's '• dininof- 
room suite," gazing at tlie shining maliogany,. 
and feeling too weary even to think. 

She went early to bed, thankful to lay her 
tired head on the snowy, sweet-scented pillows 
that Miss Brewis had jDrovided for her use. 
When she fell asleep she dreamt of Margaret 
and Vyner — then of the blue waters of the 
loch, and the misty^ shadowy mountains of 
Strathearn. 



CHAPTEE YIL 



NORA S GIFT. 



Now, for a while, let us leave Nellie, and go 
back to those whom she left behind, when she 
started on her rash, hasty, and, to all seeming, 
ill-fated journey north. 

^Ye left Margaret Blythe asking Walter Vyner 
whether the 15 th or the 18 th of September was 
to be their wedding day. Vyner started, coloured, 
and bit his lips before he answered. True, he 
had come prepared by Margaret's letter, which 
he had received the night before, to be asked 
this question. But still it came as a sort of 
shock. 

" Is there any such great hurry, Margaret ? " 
he said, trying to smile. 

Margaret looked quickly and anxiously up in 
his face. 



76 CR(ESUS'S WIDOW. 

" We miglit wait a montli or so, miglit we 
not ? " continued Vyner. 

" But why ? " asked Margaret ; and Vyner 
felt that he had no good reason to give. 

*' Everything is ready," said Margaret. " I 
have even engaged two maids — we cannot put 
it off now, without the cruellest things being 
said — and, after Nellie, surely, surely, we have 
borne enough ? " 

Vyner did not speak. What Margaret had 
said about Nellie touched his heart. He could 
not bring any more trouble and annoyance 
upon them ; and so, after a moment's considera- 
tion, he held out his hand to Margaret. 

"Very well, Margaret," he said quietly; ''if 
vou have settled it so, let it be on the 18th." 

And so the wedding day w^as fixed. Mar- 
garet ran away presently to tell her father, and 
the old man came back into the room leaning 
on his dauQ'hter's arm. 

*' Well, Vyner," he said, ''so Margaret tells 
me you have settled the wedding day. May 
God bless you, and keep you both ! " 

" Thank you," answered Vyner. And he 
shook the blind Major's hand ; and then 
durino' the rest of the evcnino^ tliev all sat 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 77 

and talked very amicabl}^ aud pleasantly. 

We are told liow the well-born during tlie 
first FreQch Eevolution chatted and made mirtli 
together, playing cards and smiling until the 
fatal tumbrel called for them, which was to 
convey them to the spot where their heads 
were summarily severed from their bodies. 
Were the jesters' lips pale, and did their hearts 
beat with a dull, cold pang as they quitted that 
polite circle ? How many of us, too, smile 
when the death-bell rings at our door. Not our 
heads to be taken off in this case, but perhaps a 
summons to a slower death — our hearts to 
be broken ! It is pride, self-respect, maybe 
vanity, which bears us up. 'No one shall 
triumph over us ; no one shall see the vround. 
It is the self-same spirit that made the highway- 
man of old die " game ;" it was the spirit that 
bore Vyner good service that night wheu he sat 
by Margaret's side, and talked cheerfully of the 
coming marriage, knowing all the while they 
were ringing the death-knell of his earthly 
happiness. 

This was on the 9th of September, aud they 
were to be married on the 18tli. 

" Good-night, Margaret ! " said Vyner, rising 



78 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

at last to go away, and lie gravely kissed her 
flushed and happy face. 

'' Good-night, dearest ! " said Margaret softly, 
and she put her hand through his arm and went 
with him to the street door. 

" It will soon be here, now," she said, yet 
more softly, thinking of her marriage. 

"Yes," said Vyner. And then he shook 
Margaret's hand and went away. 

Great sadness was in his heart. He was 
sorry for Margaret — an unloved bride coming 
to an unwilling bridegroom ; and then Nora — 
Nora — 

All the night a dull, cold pain — a memory 
of Nora — had haunted him. But now, w^hen 
lie w^as alone, almost a cry broke from his lips 
as the vivid vision of the sweet w^oman he 
loved, bowled in her great anguish, rose before 
him. How could he tell her? The 18th — so 
near — he must tell her. They had agreed to 
be friends — life friends — but a few^ days ago, 
and he at least would never break this newdy- 
made compact. He would do his duty to 
Margaret, try to be a good husband, but he 
could not help loving Nora. He vrould tell her 
to-morrow, he told himself ; and so, weary and 



CRCESUSS ^YIDOW. 79 

heart-sick, lie went back to liis rooms, and then 
up to his unlit studio. Groping his way among 
the artistic disorder there, he came to the spot 
where the picture of his " Eve " was hanging, 
with only the lamp-light from the street below 
and the starlight to show it in faint, pale out- 
line. 

And great sadness was in Yyner's heart. 
He went up to the picture, he touched it, he 
pressed his lips on the shadowy face. 

"I would have spared her if I could," he 
murmured in regretful tenderness. He was not 
thinking of himself and his bitter disappoint- 
ment — not of the long years of loveless life 
before him — he was thiDking of the girl he had 
wooed in the Warbrooke meadows, the girl 
whose heart had been his, the woman whose 
heart was his still. 

Then he recalled her gentle words during 
their last meeting. 

"We must try to help each other, Walter," 
she had said. 

" God help us both ! " groaned the painter, 
with his eyes fixed on the shadowy face of his 
dear, lost love. 



80 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

The next mornino; broiio-jit him some relief. 
The bitter task that he had set himself to fulfil, 
of telliiiG: Nora that his marriao^e dav was fixed 
for the 18th, Avas persoiiall}^ spared him, the 
early post bringing him a letter from Nora to 
tell him that she had gone with her father to 
stay for a week or so at her old home in War- 
brook e. Nora wrote :— - 

My dear father wished me to do so, and he has so few 
pleasures that I could not refuse to gratify him. It will 
seem so strange to be at Warbrooke again. I have never 
been there since Mr. Trelawn's death, and my father now 
lives ill the house in which my poor husband died. There 
are some of your pictures hanging there, Walter, and I think 
I shall bring them away with me when I return to town. I 
shall be glad if you will write to me, and you must tell me 
all the news about yourself. Do not forget that we are 
friends — and I have very few real ones, and I cannot afford 
to lose them. 

Yours very sincerely, 

Nora Trelawn. 

This letter was a sort of relief then to Vyner. 
He told himself it was cowardly of him, but it 
would spare him (he also told himself) the pain 
of seeino; Nora when she first learnt he was to 
be married so soon. 

And a fe^ days after he received her letter 
he wrote to tell her this. He couched his news 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 81 

in tlie gentlest language, but he wrote tlie words 
with Id expressible pain. 

This letter was delivered the next morniDg 
^t the grand, dull house at Warbrooke, which 
had been one of the joossessions that John 
Trelawn had left behind. 

Nora had asked her father to live in it rent 
free after her husband's sudden death. She had 
never, as she had told Vyner in her letter, 
visited it, since the kindly, generous man who 
had loved her so well, had been carried away 
from its stately portals. 

It made her very sad — or, perhaps, rather 
serious — to return there. She went up into 
the bio' drawino'-room, vrhere John Trelawn 
(Croesus) had spoken his last 'words to her. 
How well she remembered that day ! She w^as 
sitting on that chair, thinking of the past, 
when John came in to tell her he had invited 
Martin and Prosser to dinner. He had laid his 
hand on her shoulder, and laughed in his jovial 
way, telling her the poor devils looked hungry, 
.and he had taken compassion. It all seemed 
like yesterday : John's w^ords, his looks, his 
loud laugh ; then he had gone away with his 
heavy step, which she was to hear no more ! 



82 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

She had never appreciated him, Nora now 
thought regretfully, and she went and stood 
long and sadly before the dead man's portrait. 
How good he had been to her, always good ; 
showeriog his generous gifts upon her, and 
always speaking to her in his kindly, joking 
fashion. 

And now, and now ! Nora turned awa}^ from 
the contemplation of her late husband's homely, 
heavy features, and went up to another picture 
hano^ino' on her drawinc^-room walls. This was 
one of Yyner's best ; one for which John Trelawn 
had paid a heavy price, just in the dawn of 
the painter's rising fame. It was vigorous i 
the man's true and passionate soul thrilled 
through it. How often had Nora gazed at it f 
Gazed at it when she was the wife of John 
Trelawn — perhaps it was a sin then, she thought 
now — sin for which she was paying such a 
heavy punishment. 

Then she went up to the dressing-room, where 
John had died — poor John ! — not even with his 
hand in the wife's whom he had so truly and 
tenderly loved ! It was all very sad, but a 
sharper sorrow was in Nora's heart than the loss- 
of this kindly husband. 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 83 

Yet wlio knows ? Did a vague, undefined 
hope still linger in Nora's breast that something 
might happen yet, to set A^yner free ? When she 
had asked him if his marriacre was to be soon 
at Eoseland, Yyner's resolution had failed him, 
and he answ^ered that he knew nothino;. These 
w^ords had lingered in Nora's ears. There 
might be some change — Miss Blythe might see 
he was not happy — engagements w^re often 
broken. Such thoughts unconsciously flitted 
through her mind during the first few days she 
spent at Warbrooke. Then she went down to 
the meadows, or rather what used to be the 
meadow's in her girlish days, where she had 
stood hand-in-hand with the handsome painter, 
dreaming her bright young dream of love. 

Alas ! the meadows had disappeared ! The 
manager in the great ironworks where John 
Trelawn's wealth had been chiefly made was 
master now, and he had built a smart new villa 
on the very spot where Nora and her lover had 
strayed together in their brief Eden. The place 
had vanished, changed. Where the wild roses had 
^Town in the rustic hedge — the pink soft roses, 
a withered one of wdiich still lay withering 
in Nora's desk — thin ribbon borders of gorgeous 



84 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

lilies now presented themselves to tlie sun, 

Nora turned away with a sigh. Everything 
was changed, but her heart was the same. No, 
not the same, never the same any more — 
sadder, graver, but true still to the old, dear love. 

Nora was not many days at Warbrooke 
before her big drawing-room had many visitors. 
Wealth, we all know, is the most powerful 
talisman in the world. It opens the most 
guarded gates. It influences nearly every 
human heart. The knowledge that we cannot 
carry it away with us, that we can only pur- 
chase perishable goods, does not in the least- 
lessen its value. We bow down before the 
golden calf with the most servile worship. 
The people in and about Warbrooke were only 
as other people. Nora Trelawn, with her vast 
fortune, was courted and run after, by those 
who would not even have bowed to Nora 
Sudely, who had not even visited her as John 
Trelawn's wife. 

But now as a rich widow — Croesus's Widow 
— for the London name had spread to the 
country town — every possible attention has 
showered upon her. 

Her father, sad Henry Sudely, the man who-. 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 



was experienced in the fruits of reverses and. 
poverty, could not lielp smiling bitterly vrlien 
he saw carriage after carriage drive up to his 
door, containing visitors for his rich daughter. 
He remembered Avhen these very people had 
turned their backs upon him ; he remembered 
the cold and patronising bows of some — the 
averted eyes of others. The eyes were friendly 
now, the bows kindly and familiar. He vv'as 
Nora's father, and Nora was a very rich woman ; 
so people forgot that the disgrace of poverty 
had once been his ! 

But in spite of all the attention they received,, 
both the father and daughter were still sad. 
jMr. Sudelv had suffered too much ever to for^'ct 
it— for he had somethino' of his dauo-hter's 
tender and sensitive nature, and Nora was sad 
when she thought of John Trelawn — sadder 
still when she thought of her old, dear love. 

So these two, sitting with every comfort 
around them, had shadows fallino; athwart 
their luxuries which took all zest out of them. 
The feast was spread before them, but they could 
not make merry over it. In the dull, big house 
tbe past clouded the prosperous present. 

They were sitting thus together one morning. 



86 GEGESUS'S WIDOW. 

vrlieii Walter Yyncr's letter, to announce that 
Ills wedding day v/as fixed, ^Yas placed in Nora's 
Land. Nora read it tlirough^ and made no 
■outward sign. Her father spoke to her, and 
she answered him as usual, but something in 
the tone of her voice made Henry Sudely — 
who knew the signs of suffering well — look up 
over the top of his newspaper at his daughter's 
face. Nora was very pale, but apparently 
■quite calm. 

" Will you have some more tea, father ?" she 
said, lifting her hand for his cup. Mr. Sudely 
took some m.ore tea, and the breakfast went on 
exactly as if nothing had happened. Then, 
when the meal was over, with a few kindly 
words to her father and a smile — women can 
smile who have been stabbed — Nora left the 
room, and went up to her own bed-room, 
lockin^x the door behind her after she had 
•entered it. 

Shall we pass by that locked door, and leave 
her alone in her misery, as we left Vyner with. 
Maro^aret's love-letter in his hand to fig^ht out 
a dard strue^orle with his rebellious heart ? But 
it was not a dark struggle in this woman's 
breast. No hard, cruel, or wicked words rose 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 87 

on her lips. She entered the room ; she flung 
herself down on her knees bv the bed, criishino- 
Vyner's letter in her quiveriDg hands. 

"God bless him! God bless him!'' she 
murmured, and that was alL Then chokino- 
sobs came to her relief ; she wept, rihe praved 
— prayed that all good might come to him — all 
happiness. 

" I have loved thee dearly, dearly," she said, 
kissing the crushed letter ; "but it was not to be !"" 

Presently she again ojDened Yyner's letter — 
again read the words it had cost him such pain 
to write : — 

Dear Nora, — I received your letter, and I need scarcely 
tell you I think that the friendship you have so generously 
given me is prized above everything else that I possess, I 
have some news for you of myself. When you asked me at 
Eoseland if my marriage with Miss Blythe was to be soon, I 
said I did not know. But circumstances — very sad circum- 
stances — have occurred in her family, and on this account 
Major Blythe and Margaret both wish the marriage to take^ 
place at once. It is arranged for the 18th of this month. 
Dear Xora, will you be kind to my wife ? She is a good 
woman. It is not her fault — all the pain that has happened to 
us. It is, as you know, the fault of a woman I can never 
forgive — your aunt, Lady Stainbrooke. But I must not re- 
vive such sad memories. God bless you, dear Xora I That 
you may be happy, is my most earnest prayer. 

Yours faithfully, 

W. D. Yyner. 



88 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

A few liours after receiving this letter, Nom 
telegraphed to lier jeweller in tovv^i to send her 
down by an express messenger some very hand- 
some diamonds, lockets, and ear-rings, for her 
to clioosc a marriage present from. Nora's 
great wealth, was well known, and tlie next day 
a magnificent collection of jewels were lying 
before lier. She selected the most valuable and 
beautiful of them all, sucli diamonds that 
"Walter Yyner wrote back to her, when she 
forwarded them to liim as a present for the 
bride, that they were utterly unsuitable for a 
person in Margaret's position of life. " They 
•are fit for a princess, dear Nora, not for an 
artist's wife," wrote Vyner, " and I ask you ta 
give her some mueli more simple token of your 
regard and kindness. I have said nothing to 
Margaret about them, and if you will permit 
me I will return them to the jeweller." 

To this letter Nora answered in a few brief 
Avords — 

i^otliin;,'', clear Walter, can bo too good for your wife. 

Will you ask licr to accept my gift I 

N. T. 

And when Yyner drew out the diamonds 
-again, to present them to Margaret, he bent his 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 89 

lieacl over tliem, and for a moment something 
glittered there as well as the shining stones. 
For Yyner understood Nora's heart ; he knew 
that her tears also had been shed over the 
splendid gift she had sent for his future wife. 



CHAPTER YIII. 



THE BEGINXlXCr OF THE HOME EPIC." 



]\[argaret was perfectly delighted with her 
diamonds. Most women love jewels — the 
beautiful, glittering atoms, that shine like stars, 
and adorn even the fairest throats. A lovely 
woman looks lovelier with a necklace of gems, 
and a plain woman can look grand, imposing, 
almost handsome, in her circlets of wonderfully- 
hued stones, whose beauty seems to grow rather 
than to diminish, each time we look at them. 

So at least thought Margaret Blythe. She 
Avas never weary of opening the handsome 
morocco cases, and gazing at their sparkling 
■contents. 

" It was so kind, so charming, of Mrs. 
Trelawn to send them," she said to Yyner. 
Then she went up to him, and put her hand 
into his playfully. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 91 

" So, Walter," she said, smiling, '' this lady 
and yoii were once Loy-and-giii sweethearts^ 
were you ? Well, she can't be what poor Nellie 
used to call, in her childish way, ' soft ' upon 
3'ou now, or she would not have sent this mag- 
nificent present to your future wife. But it is 
most kind and thoughtful of her, and shows 
she appreciates the choice made by her old 
friend." 

Vyner made no answer. He stood looking 
at Margaret and at the diamonds, perhaps a 
little grimly. He knew what this gift had cost 
Nora — not in pounds, shillings, and pence, but 
]n tears, and silently-endured pain. But Mar- 
garet would never understand^ he was thinking 
— and perhaps it was well. 

" I am so glad you know such nice people,, 
dear Walter," continued Margaret. '' Of course, 
Mrs. Trelawn will invite us to her house, and 
we may meet people there that may be of great 
advantage to you." 

" Really, Margaret ! " said Vyner, shrugging 
his shoulders. 

*' Well, dearest, do you not want patrons ? — 
rich people to buy your pictures, and give you 
large prices for them ? You see when you are 



•92 CRGESUS S WIDOW. 

married your expanses will be greater than 
hitherto." 

With difficulty Yyner suppressed his impa- 
tience. He made some commonplace remark ; 
he turned away. What was the good of arguing 
with Margaret ? She was sure to make some 
answer that worried him ; and so, gloomy, 
dissatisfied, and unhappy, Vyner awaited his 
Avedding day. 

But Margaret's elation, after the arrival of 
the diamonds, was almost boundless. She sent 
for her old friend, Mrs. Saunders, to see them ; 
she hoasted of her Walter's intimacy with the 
rich Mrs. Trelawn. 

Poor Mrs. Saunders admired the diamonds 
heartily, and then a tear stole into her kindly 
eyes. 

" I am sure," she said, with a little whimper, 
pulling out her handkerchief, '' I can't help 
thinking of poor Nellie, when I look at them. 
Miss Margaret. Ay, she would have had her 
diamonds too, if she'd lived to marry my James." 

" Oh, dear ! Mrs. Saunders, do not say if she 
had lived," said Margaret, with some real feel- 
ing, '' I am sure, certain, my dear young sister 
is yet alive." 



CRGESUSS ^YIDOW. 93 

Mrs. Saunders shook lier lie ad. 

" I don't wisli to be a wet blanket, at the 
thne of your wedding, ]\[iss Margaret/' she 
said, '•' but for all that I'm sure Nellie is lying 
at the bottom of the river, if we could only see 
down. I got quite a turn the other day, d'ye 
know, when I was j^assing a shop near Victoria 
Station — it was at some eels — all slimy, twisty 
thing's, wrio'O'lino' about a dish, and I thouofht 
of poor Nellie, and how maybe these horrid 
•eels might be wriggling about her at that very 
minute, and it gave me quite a turn, indeed it 
did ! " 

" Oh, ]^>Irs. Saunders ! hov/ dreadful — what a 
dreadful idea ! " 

" Wasn't it ! I told James about it, and he 
said it made him quite ill, poor fellow, and he 
called for some brandy and soda at once. But 
you may depend upon it, it's true — Nellie's 
lyiug in the mud and slime at this minute, I'm 
certain. 

" She had no motive,'' said Margaret, un- 
easily. 

" No, my dear ; but we never can account 
for our brains. My poor dear husband used to 
say the cleverest people were often half mad, 



94 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

and sometliing must have upset Miss Nellie, 
But we mustn't talk of it just now, when you 
have got all your things, and so beautiful too. 
I hope you haven't got a dinner-set — that's my 
present — it's coming to-day — and my Jame& 
has bought you a silver tea-pot, though he said 
he did it with very poor heart, for he could not 
help thinking of Nellie." 

Margaret kissed Mrs. Saunders, and expressed 
her gratitude. 

" You're heartily welcome, my dear," said 
this kind woman. '' I am truly glad you are 
going to do so well, and I only hope you'll be 
as happy as I was with my poor, dear man. 
But there are few like him — men as a rule are 
a little bit contradictious ; but you must just 
manage as best you can to put up with it." 

" I have no fear," said Margaret. " Mr.. 
Vyner always agrees with me ; he has the- 
greatest dependence on me in every way." 

" Well, I'm very glad, my dear," said Mrs. 
Saunders ; and so she was. She w^as one of the 
simplest and kindest of women, and, as we- 
have seen, an absolutely adoring mother to her 
beloved James. 

She had promised to see Major Blythe every 



CEOSSUS'S WIDOW. 95 



day when Margaret was avray on her wedding 
tour, and Margaret felt quite sure she would 
keep this promise. So Margaret continued 
busily to make her preparations, and tried all 
she could to cheer her father during the last 
few days she was to remain in her old home ; 
but, in spite of her efforts, Major Blythe per- 
ceptibly drooped. The dream that he had had 
about Nellie haunted him, and he was always 
thinking and talking of her. Far away in the 
lonely Glen of Strathearn at this time, Nellie's 
thoughts often stole home to her dear, blind 
father. Could she have seen him — the old 
man broken-hearted for her loss — would the 
love for which she had sacrificed his love have 
kept her from his side ? Who can say ? In 
this world opposing sentiments so often meet, 
that the scale is sometimes turned by the 
smallest circumstance. As it was, Lord Sea- 
forth deceived Nellie about her father's state. 
He told her he was well, but Nellie knew all 
the while he was not — could not be — happy. 

But in spite of Nellie's mysterious disappear- 
ance and her father's depression, Margaret was 
happy. She was elated, triumphant. The 
diamonds had set her up on a pinnacle, as it 



96 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

were, near whicli none of her former companions- 
could approach. Art students and governesses 
came to congratuLnte and admire. In other 
days Margaret had made friendships among 
these ladies, and it was the crown of her 
joy now to affectionately patronise her former 
friends. Her own opinion of herself was so high 
that she was not in the least surprised at her 
good fortune, but some of these less lucky 
young women wondered — all the while they 
were admiring the wedding presents — what Mr. 
Vyner could possibly see in Margaret Blythe.. 
But we may be sure they did not express this. 
Margaret had done well in the chequered role 
of life, and was, therefore, entitled to the com- 
mendations of those around her. 

While Margaret was thinking of her diamonds 
and her wedding, and Vyner was thinking of 
the dark- eyed woman at Warbrooke, the dark- 
eyed woman at Warbrooke had come to a 
sudden resolution. 

"Papa," she said one evening, going up ta 
Mr. Sudelv, and lavino^ her hand on his shoulder, 
and calling him " papa," as she used to do in 
her old girlish days, '' I want you to take me 
to Paris." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 97 

'' To Paris, my love ? " said Mr. Sudely, 
looking up and feeling rather surprised. 

" Yes, just us two ; I don't want Aunt Stain- 
brooke to go with us. I want to go quietly, 
and just to stay as long as we like, and amuse 
ourselves by seeing anything Tve fancy. Let us 
keep it a secret, and go at once, papa." 

**My dear," said Mr. Sudely, tenderly, "I will 
do w^hatever you like. I don't know, Nora, I 
may be wrong, but I fancy, dear, you have not 
been looking yourself these last few days." 

*^ I have had headaches," answered Nora. *' I 
fancy the air here does not quite suit me ; and 
so, dear father, let us start to-morrow." 

Nora felt, in fact, that she could not stay 
in the dull and silent house at Warbrooke 
any longer. Its memories w^ere too painful ; 
her own heart too agitated and unhappy. She 
could not wait here for the pale dawn of the 
18th to break on her sleepless night. She could 
endure it better amid the stir and din of a great 
city — anywhere, anyw^here but at Warbrooke. 

So she and her father left Warbrooke. She did 
not go to her own house at South Kensington as 
they passed through London, but to an hotel. 
Lady Stainbrooke and the General w^ere again 

VOL. II. E 



98 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

located at South Kensins^ton, and Nora did not 
wish for Lady Stainbrooke's company in her 
present mood. Her quiet, broken - spirited 
father suited her better. 

Lady Stainbrooke, however, was anything 
but pleased when she heard her rich niece, had 
o;one to Paris without her. 

*' It is selfish of Nora," she screamed in her 
Oeneral's deaf ear, " and I hate selfishness." 

The old soldier chuckled, for he was too 
rheumatic at the time to have borne the journey 
to Paris. 

'^ Selfishness is a very general fault, isn't 
it, madam ? " he said, showing his yellow false 
teeth, with what he supposed to be a smile. 

" Nora never can repay me," continued Lady 
Stainbrooke. '' I made her. She was a pauper, 
an absolute pauper^ till I took her up, and per- 
suaded poor John Trelawn to marry her. I 
never could feel under the least oblio-ation to 
Nora, whatever I accepted from her — every- 
thing she has came through me." 

'^ Except her good looks," again smiled the 
General. 

" She has no particular good looks that I can 
see ! " snapped Lady Stainbrooke. ** I shall 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 99 

write and tell her I think her conduct is selfish 
in not inviting me to accompany them to Paris. 
I require a little change when I am so much 
with you." 

The General either did not, or pretended he 
did not, hear the last remark, and Lady Stain- 
brooke was really too wise a woman to write 
and tell her rich niece she was selfish. She 
wrote and gave her a pretty broad hint that 
she would like to join them in Paris, but Nora 
took no notice of this hint except to show the 
letter that contained it to her father, with a 
smile. 

The father and daughter were thus together 
in Paris, alone. Nora was very kind to her 
father ; she took him about, she tried to 
amuse him, though all the while the sharp pain 
in her own heart grew sharper, as each hour 
that passed brought nearer and nearer Vjner's 
wedding day. 

Each day simply marked down in the almanac 
of the passing year is yet an epoch in many 
lives. " On that day my John was born," says 
the fond mother. ^* Ah ! on the same sad day 
poor Harry died," sighs the mourner. " It was 
our wedding day," says the smiling wife. 



100 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

So tliis 18 til of September, on wMcli the sun 
rose and went down unmarked and unnoticed 
by millions and millions of God's creatures, was 
a day set apart and always to be remembered 
by three at least of those whose acquaintances 
we have made. 

Nora — in her gaily -decorated Parisian bed- 
room — awoke from a brief sleep into which she 
had fallen after a very restless night, in its 
earliest dawn. She awoke with a painful im- 
pending sense of ill — then she remembered this 
was Walter Vyner's wedding day, and now she 
was parted from him for ever and ever. She 
turned her head upon her pillows with a moan. 
What was her wealth, what was everything to 
her now ? she thought — better to have been 
forced to get up and work for her daily bread 
— better an}i:hing than to lie thinking there 1 

Vyner awoke grave, sad, and perhaps a little 
impatient. He got up and dressed himself, 
and went into his studio. Again he stood 
before the picture of his " Eve," looking at it 
long and tenderly. Then almost the same 
words in which Nora had spoken of him rose on 
liis lips. 

'' I have loved her most dearly ! " he said. 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 101 

''but it was not to be." And be took tbe 23ictiire 
from tbe wall, and baving carefally packed it, 
locked it away in a closet in tbe room. 

At tbis very moment Margaret Blytbe was 
standing gazing at berself witb great satisfaction 
in ber looking-glass. Sbe was tastefully tbougb 
not expensively dressed, for Margaret bad good 
taste, and in ber ears and round ber neck 
^'littered tbe splendid diamond ornaments tbat 
.Nora bad sent ber as a wedding present. 

Her oblique-eyed maiden, Hatton, was in 
attendance on ber, squinting even worse tban 
usual. 

*'You look beautiful, miss," said Hatton, 
admiringly. '* But it*s tbe clotbes tbat does 
it." 

■" And youll be sure to be very attentive to 
my dear fatber, Hatton ? " said Margaret tbe 
next minute. 

" Ob, yes ! miss, I'll look after tbe old gentle- 
man all rigbt," replied Hatton. " Not tbat I 
tbink tbat be'll ever get over Miss Nellie." 

" Husb ! do not speak of it," said Margaret 
^' Tbere is a cab driving up — it is Walter — Mr. 
Vyner. Run, Hatton, and open tbe door." 
. Hatton did run and open tbe door, but it 



102 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

was not the bridegroom, but kind Mrs. Saunders 
come " to have a look at the bride," as she 
expressed it. The bridegroom, however, arrived 
in due time; and very shortly afterwards he and 
Margaret were standing together before tho 
altar of a neighbouring church, plighting their 
" troth " to each other, and exchanging vows 
which one of them knew at least were binding 
to his honour, but not his heart. 

" Till death do us two part." Ah I in life they 
were already parted — between them stood the 
vast difference of a generous and ungenerous- 
mind. 



CHAPTER IX. 

CONTINUATION OF "THE HOME EPIC." 

Margaret liad always fixed to go to Paris for 
iier wedding tour. She had never been there, 
and she considered it the proper thing to do, to 
go there, and Margaret always tried to do what 
she considered proper. 

Thus she had asked Yyner to go to Paris. 
Yyner, who did not in the least care where they 
went, made no objections. He had no know- 
ledo^e of the movements of Nora Trelawn at 
this time, and perhaps naturally concluded she 
was still at Warbrooke with her father. Had 
he known that she was in Paris, Margaret 
would not have succeeded in her ambition of 
visiting that city after her wedding. As it w^as, 
he had smiled good-naturedly and promised to 
take Margaret if she wished to go. For he had 
resolved to do his best to make Margaret 



104 CKCESUS'S WIDOW 



happy ; no man ever started on Lis married lifa 
with more unselfish thoughts and resolves than 
Vyner. 

But before they started on their journey^ 
Major Biythe had a few words to say to hi& 
new son-in-law. Upstairs, Margaret, excited 
and happy, was changing her white dress for 
her travelling one. Downstairs the blind Major 
was counting over with trembling hands a small 
sum of money which he had withdrawn from 
the bank the day before, and which literally 
was the savings of his whole life-time. 

" Vyner," he said, " I want to say something 
to you." And so Vyner followed the Major 
into the shabby little room which Margaret 
designated as his " study." 

*' I can't think of anything else, Vyner,*' 
began the old soldier in trembling accents. 
"Even to-day, Margaret's wedding-day (and 
she's been a good daughter, and a help and 
comfort to me always), but even to-day I can't 
help thinking of Nellie. Something, I'm always 
afraid, is happening to the child. I wake in 
the night shivering — always thinking of ber. 
Now, Vyner, I want you to do something for 
me. You are going to Paris, and the police 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 105 

tliere are wonderfully sharp fellows, and who 
knows ? she may be there ! I want you to make 
enquiries — here is the money, Vyner — can't lay 
it out better than in seeking my child." 

Vyner gently put back the Major's hand. 

" I will make enquiries," he said kindly. *' I 
will do everythiDg I can — but I don't want any 
money. Major. No, I won't take it." (The 
Major was pressing his notes into Yyner's 
hand.) *'Do you think I won't do everything 
I can ? Poor little Nellie — poor girl ! No, 
Major, I do not fancy she is in Paris, but still 
one never can tell, and, as you say, the police 
■are sharp fellows there, and I will make every 
enquiry." 

The Alajor wrung Vyner's hand. 

'* From the time she was born," he said in a 
broken voice, " she — she was my darling and 
my pride. Perhaps I loved her too much — 
but she seemed to love me too." And a sob 
interrupted the Major's words. 

''I am sure she did," said Vyner feelingly, 
^'It will all come right yet. Do you know 
what my theory is. Major, about her disap- 
pearance ? I fancy she has married some 
one who wishes the marriage to be kept a 



166 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

secret ; but some day I hope Nellie will return." 

The Major sliook his head despondingly. 

" I don't know," he said. " I did think once 
about Lord Seaforth ; but, as you know, Mar- 
garet went to his mother's, and the young man 
had never been from home. No ; I fear some- 
thing dreadful has haj^pened to Nellie ; if not^ 
she would never let her father suffer as I do — 
she must know she is breaking my heart. " And 
once more a sob choked the poor Major's utter- 
ance. 

Vyner was affected. He spoke hopefully and 
sympathisingly to the old man, again promising 
to make every exertion to discover Nellie while 
he and Margaret were in Paris. And he kept 
this promise — a promise which, as we know, was 
utterly useless as regards the purpose for which 
it was given. 

Vyner, however, had the satisfaction of 
thinking that he did all he could. Margaret 
even shook her head, in her gentle, deprecating 
way, and told him he was spending far too much 
money on what she feared was a very hopeless 
search. 

"It is to please your father, Margaret," 
answered Vyner, rather sharply. But he did 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 107 

not add that he thought that she had been 
spending too much money among the tempting 
«hops of Paris on useless finery. 

The prudent and economical Margaret had, 
in fact, been a little led away by the excitement 
of her new position. To have plenty of money 
in her purse, to be the wife of a distinguished 
man, was certainly a great change to a girl, or 
rather a woman, who had been forced to con- 
sider how she could make the best use of every 
sixpence before she spent it. So Margaret had 
bouo-ht various thin^^s that she could have 
actually done without, since she had been in 
Paris. But her unusual extravagance and her 
visit there came to a very sudden end. 

One day while walking down the Boulevard 
des Italiens with her husband, Margaret took a 
fancy to a beautifully and artistically arranged 
bouquet in the window of a florist. 

" I wonder if I could afford to be so extra- 
vagant as to buy it, Walter ? " said the bride, 
looking smilingly up in the bridegroom's face. 

Vyner smiled in return. 

''I will buy it for you, if you like," he said. And 
Margaret, looking bright, happy, and handsome, 
entered the shop, followed by her husband. 



108 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 

At the other end of the shop a lady in black 
was standino; bendiner over some lilies in a vase,, 
and giving some orders to the shopwoman. 
She did not turn round as Margaret and Vyner 
entered, but an old, grey-haired, bent man, who 
was with her, did. Yyner glanced carelessly 
at these occupants of the sho}^ as he went in 
but, as the old man turned round, Vyner half 
started and grew a little pale. 

The old man, too, recognising Vyner, touched 
the arm of the lady in black, and whispered a 
few words in her ear. Then, with a sudden 
start, almost a gasp, she turned round. It was 
Nora Trelawn ; and this unexpected meeting 
with Vyner and his newly-made wife for a 
moment or two almost completely overcame her. 

She turned pale, her brow grew clammy, her 
lips white. Vyner also was greatly agitated. 
But with a strong effort he recovered himself^ 
and after a moment's hesitation he advanced to 
the end of the shop where Nora and her father 
were standing. 

" How are you, Mr. Sudely ? " he said, 
holding out his hand. 

Nora by this time was almost fainting. 
Vyner saw she could no longer stand, and 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 109 

silently placing a seat for her, said a few 
common-place words. 

" The scent of these lilies — " gasped Nora, 
now whiter than the flowers. 

" They are very overpowering," said YjTier. 
He then turned away, and began talking quietly 
to Mr. Sudely, and Nora had thus time to 
recover herself. 

At the other end of the shop Margaret was 
holding an animated conversation about the 
price of the bouquet she had coveted. She now 
looked round, and saw Vyner speaking to a 
gentleman she did not know. 

" Walter," she called, " come here and tell 
me what you think." 

Vyner again crossed the shop, and after a 
few words, paid for the bouquet, saying to 
Margaret, as indifferently as he could — 

'' Who do you think I was talking to ? " 

" I don't in the least know, Walter," answered 
Margaret 

But by this time Nora was recovering from 
the sudden shock of seeing Vyner and his bride 
— her pride, her womanhood, came to her aid. 
She rose from her seat, and crossing the shop, 
went up to Vyner and his wife. 



110 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" You must introduce me to Mrs. Vyner," 
she said, addressing Vyner in rather faltering 
accents. 

'' Margaret," said Vyner, with grave courtesy 
of manner, " this lady is Mrs. Trelawn — my old 
friend, of whom you have heard me speak." 

'' Oh yes," said Margaret, and she held out 
her hand to Nora. " I am so pleased to meet 
you, Mrs. Trelawn . My husband — Walter, often 
speaks of you, and I really do not know how 
to thank you for the lovely present you sent 
me. But you would get my letter ? " 

"Yes," said Nora. She was looking at 
Margaret — at the woman who had won the one 
thing she had coveted on earth — and as she 
looked she sighed softly. 

Shall the truth be told ? Nora was astonished 
to find Margaret such a handsome woman — for 
at this moment she really looked handsome — 
and this knowledge gave no pleasure to poor 
Nora's heart. Vyner had never told her the 
girl he was engaged to was handsome. Could 
it be ? thought Nora. Could Walter have 
deceived her ? Perhaps he loved this Margaret 
.after all. 

Nora was a good woman. She had prayed 



CRCESUS S WIDOW. Ill 

for Vyner's happiness — she truly wished him to 
be happy — but, but — poor human nature, weak 
and vain — would she rather that he were happy 
wath a plain woman than a handsome one ? 
Nora would have scorned such an insinuation ; 
she w^ould have despised herself for such a 
thought. Yet there it was ! She sighed softly 
when she looked on Margaret's smiling, hand- 
some, happy face, and did not respond very 
warmly to the bride's advances. 

" I am so pleased that ^YQ have met," said 
Margaret. " Did you know, dear, that Mrs. 
Trelawn was in Paris ? " and Margaret turned 
to her husband. 

*•' Dear " had not had that knowledge, or we 
may be sure Margaret would not so soon have 
had the pleasure of making the acquaintance 
of her husband's old friend. But Yyner did 
not say this. He talked a little more rapidly 
than usual as he stood between the two ladies ; 
he bought some more flowers — at which his 
Margaret looked a little uneasy — and altogether 
he did not behave exactly as a man does who 
feels at ease. 

It was, in fact, a most uncomfortable meet- 
ing. Margaret asked in her calm way where 



112 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Mrs. Trelawn was staying, and proposed to call 
upon her, and pressed Mrs. Trelawn also to 
visit them. Mrs. Trelawn smiled, and said that 
she would be glad to do so ; but even Margaret 
perceived that neither her smile nor her manner 
was very cordial. But she little guessed what 
even that cold smile cost Nora ! 

Then Nora, after standing a little while, 
looked round at her father. 

'' I think that we must go now," she said, 
and she offered her cold trembling hand first 
to Margaret and then to Yyner. Margaret 
was just going to offer to accompany them part 
of the way down the Boulevard, when with a 
slight movement Vyner stopped her. 

''I am so disappointed, Walter ! " said Mar- 
garet, the moment after Nora and her father 
had left the florist's. 

''And why are you disappointed, Margaret ? " 
iisked Vyner, who was not thinking of his wife, 
nor of her remark. 

" I expected Mrs. Trelawn would be pretty," 
answered Margaret ; " but she is not in the least 
pretty, and she looks rather worn, does she not?" 

'' I think her very pretty," said Vyner. 

*' Do you really? Well, there is no accounting 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 113 

for taste ; but perhaps when I see more of her 
I shall begin to admire her. We must call upon 
her to-morrow, Walter." 

But Walter had no idea of calling on Mrs. 
Trelawn to-morrow. However, he did not at 
the moment express this ; but when the morrow 
came, to Margaret's inexpressible annoyance, 
and even anger, Walter not only proposed but 
insisted upon returning to London the same 
day. 

" I have had some letters — I must go, Mar- 
garet," he said. 

" My dear Walter, you must really not," said 
Margaret, effusively. "I am enjoying myself 
so much, I want to do so many things, and I 
want to get friends with your old friend, Mrs. 
Trelawn." And Margaret looked rather sharply 
a,t her husband. 

'' You will have plenty of time to make friends 
with Mrs. Trelawn in London. I am obliged 
to go, Margaret — business calls me away." 

Margaret's brow clouded. 

" What business ? " she said. " Surely as 
your wife, Walter, I have a right to know your 
concerns." 

*'It is something you would not understand 



114 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

— an old arrangement about a picture. I am 
really obliged to go, Margaret," answered Yyner. 

" But, dear, what will Mrs. Trelawn tliink of 
US running away the very day after we met her, 
if you are such old friends ? " 

*' You can write her a note and tell her the 
reason." 

*' Is this the true reasou, AYalter ? " 

Yyner frowned. 

'' My dear Margaret," he said, after a 
moment's thought, "I wish, as you know, to 
consider your happiness in every way ; but if 
our married life is to be as smooth as I hope 
it will be, you must not oppose a thing when I 
tell you it is really necessary." 

Margaret cast down her eyes, and at once 
assumed the role of martyrdom. 

" I will say nothing more, Walter," she said. 

But though she said nothing more, she mutely 
opposed his washes the whole day afterwards. 
An hour later he ^vent up to her bedroom, 
expecting to find her ready to start (having 
settled the hotel bill, and everything down- 
stairs), and found to his surprise and anger 
Margaret lying on the bed in her dressing-gown, 
and with her haii* unbound. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 115 

" Margaret ! " he said, " why are you not 
ready ? "" 

^^ " My head is aching so dreadfully, Walter ; 
I cannot raise it from the pillow," answered 
Margaret, with an air of meek suffering. *' I 
am very sorry not to be able to obey your 
orders." 

" What nonsense, Margaret ! " said Vyner 
impatiently. " What orders did I give you ? 
I merely told you it was necessary I should be 
in London to-morrow — and so it is." 

"I am not accustomed to be spoken to thus, 
Walter," said Margaret, still in the meekest of 
accents. " I shall get used to it, I suppose, if 
it is my duty, as I always try to do my duty ; 
but my dear father made an idol of me at 
home — my words were law there, my slightest 
wish attended to — and the shock, the first 
shock, of finding it is to be apparently so 
different now, has brought on a severe nervous 
headache, and I cannot lift my head." 

*' I am very sorry," said Vyner, sharply ; 
" all the same I am going to start — I must, I 
will leave Paris ! " 

He was determined not to stay. He 
had seen and marked the sudden expression. 



116 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

almost of anguish, wliicli had passed over 
Nora's face when she first recognised him at 
the florist's, and he was determined not to o-ive 
her this pain so soon again. He knew quite 
well, too, that Margaret was feigning her head- 
ache. She had got no headache. Her skin 
was as clear and her eyes as bright as usual,, 
but she intended to make Yyner obey her as- 
she made them all obey her in her old home, 
and Yyner was not the man to do this. 

He was a man, in fact, a woman could lead 
with a silken thread, but not with a cart rope. 
Margaret was trying the cart rope — for her 
discernment of character was not fine enough 
to see the difierence — and Yyner declined to 
be thus roughly pulled the way whither she 
would have him to go. 

" If you are not able to start, Margaret," he 
said a moment later, quite calmly, but with a 
firm, somewhat hard look about his mouth, '* I 
am very sorry, but I shall be compelled to leave 
you, and perhaps to-morrow you will be well 
enough to follow." 

Margaret at once rose from the bed. 

'' In that case," she said, " you leave me no 
option — I will go." And she did go, but a 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 117 

tliroDg of martyrs amalgamated in odc was 
nothiDg to Margaret on the journey that 
followed. Poor Vyner ! Before it was over 
he began seriously to consider whether it was 
worth while to contradict IMargaret if he were 
to suffer for it as he was doing then. "Whether 
it was from vexation, or that the sea was rough 
as they crossed the Channel, Margaret became 
really seriously ill, and as she lay pale and 
uncomplaining, Vyner began to think that 
perhaps he had acted like a brute in forcing her 
to undertake the journey when she had not 
been well enough to do so. 

He said something to Margaret about being 
sorry, but Margaret only sighed. He tried to 
be very kind to her, and still Margaret only 
sighed. If she had said the bitterest things 
r^yner's temper could have borne it better. 
• At last, when they reached London, Vyner 
proposed that they should go to an hotel for a 
day or two, until their own house was made 
ready to receive them. But Margaret gently 
objected to this. 

"I would rather go to our own house," 
she said. *'It will be very uncomfortable, 
must be very uncomfortable, but still I would 



118 CKOESUS'S WIDOW. 

rather be tliere. Perhaps you had better 
go to an hotel — I do not care about myself 
in the least — and I will try and arrange 
things as well as I am able. If I had only 
had a few days' notice, for the servants I have 
engaged are excellent ones, everything would 
have been rig^ht — '* and as^ain Margaret siojhed. 

'^ Well, we must try to make the best of it," 
said Yyner. " Come, Margaret, we must not 
go squabbling into our new home for the first 
time." 

" Squabbling ! " said Margaret. " Oh, Walter I" 
and she turned away her head as if Walter had 
injured her feelings almost beyond endurance. 

Her prophecy about finding the new house 
uncomfortable was fully verified. One of the 
servants whom Margaret had engaged before 
her marriage had been left in charge of the 
house, and this young woman, not expecting her 
master and mistress home so soon, was giving a 
little entertainment when they unexpectedly 
arrived. 

As Margaret and Vyner drove up to the 
house in a cab, they were greatly surprised to 
see the drawing-room windows lighted from 
within ; and the sound of a piano, touched with 



CPvGESUS's WIDOW. 119' 

unclexterous fingers, the next moment smote 
on Margaret's petrified ears. 

She forgot her illness, she forgot her role of 
martyrdom, in an instant. She jumped out of 
the cab unassisted by Vyner. She ran up the 
stej)s to the door. It was fastened, but the 
area gate was open, and down the area steps 
Margaret went with the fleetness of the roe. The 
moment she entered the house she saw what 
had happened, and the next half-hovir was 
spent in alternate indignant reproaches from 
the new mistress, and abuse and tears from the 
new maid. It ended in Margaret peremptorily 
turning the young woman and her friends out 
of the house, and in J\largaret being left for the 
night without a servant, and having hastily to 
send for temporary assistance. 
•3LThus Vyner and Margaret's home-coming 
was an uncomfortable one. The house was 
chill, Margaret was irritated, and Vyner by no 
means in a pleasant mood. But by-and-by, 
when the gas was lighted and the fire burnt 
up, things began to look a little brighter. 
Margaret, however, did not fliil to point a 
moral. 

*' If you will give me a little longer notice 



i-:o 



OKtESUss ^vllH>^v. 



(A^ owv niovoiuouts aiunlior iliuo, doar AValtor/' 
sho sa'ul, '• I trust siu'li a Jroadful scone will 
novor oi'ouv a^j^ain." 

'• \'orv woll," laiiu'iuHl A\nor ; " in fiitinv 
vour cook shall liavo tiino to got lior poliooiuaii 
out bol'oro wo oouio." 

r»ut though ho laughod, \w folt tho sting of 
^argarot's moral all tho sanio. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE STUDIO. 

It liad been arranged before Vyner and Mar- 
garet were married that one of the rooms in her 
new house was to be set aside for Vyner's 
studio. For this reason, Vyner luul given his 
consent for Margaret to take a larger and more 
expensive house than he otherwise woukl have 
done. It was a new house, and was situated in 
a pleasant terrace looking on Regent's Parlv. 
l>oth Vyner and Margaret liked this neighbour- 
hood best : Margaret on account of living near 
her father, Vyner because a little colony of his 
fellow-artists lived there. 

Vyner removed his pictures to his new studio 
the day after their arrival home. He wanted 
to be at his work again. He had told himself 
(when honour had forced him to keep his 
jjlighted word to Margaret) that in future he 



122 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

would live for work ; that he would wrap him- 
self up in the ideal, and put the real life by this 
means further away. So he made haste to get 
all his surroundings settled. Margaret assisted 
him, and gave her advice about everything. 
This Vyner took very good-naturedly. 

There was one deal picture-case, however, 
which he objected for her to open. 

'' Why, dearest Walter ? " asked Margaret. 

" I don't want it meddled with, that's all/' 
said Yyner ; and Margaret noticed how Vyner 
carried this case himself, and placed it carefully 
.ao^ainst the studio walls. 

Then, when everything was ready in the 
room, Vyner gave Margaret a hint. 

" Now, I am going to work," he said, rising 
from the breakfast table on the third morning 
after their return, '' and whoever comes, Mar- 
o'aret, mind, I can't see them." 

" Very well," said Margaret, laying her hand 
on his arm and smiling, "no one shall enter the 
sacred room but your wife." 

*'And my wife must please to remember/' 
said Vyner, smiling also, "that even she might 
.send my ideas flying out of the window." And 
with a good-natured nod Vyner left the room. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 123 

He sighed, liowever, as he entered the studio, 
and closed the door behind him. He loved 
his work, but he felt dull and dispirited. He 
commenced to paint, but somehow it seemed to 
him that his rio;ht hand had ''lost its cunnino-." 
But he persevered. He was getting on better, 
when the room door opened, and in came 
]\Iargaret. 

"My dear Walter," she said, " do you know 
where the hammer is ? " 
Ty No," answered Vyner, rather impatiently, 
without looking round. 

'•'And how is he getting on?" continued 
Margaret, going up to her husband, and affec- 
tionately patting his shoulders. 

" He " tried to look pleasant, but it was a 
failure. 

"I think you are making an error here," 
proceeded Margaret, standing a little back from 
Vyner's picture, and beginning to criticise his 
work. 

" Come, dear Margaret," said Yyner, " I want 
to get on." 

But Margaret did not take these words in 
the sense he intended. 

"I am making some short muslin window 



124 CUCESUS.S WIDOW. 

blinds for the bedrooms/' she said, " and I 
will bring my work here in a minute or two 
and sit beside you, and perhaps I shall be able 
to help you a little with the drapery. I have 
a splendid eye, they say, for colours." 

'* I think I work best alone," Vyner ventured 
to suggest. 

''Oh, but I must get him out of all these old 
bachelor ways ! " said Margaret playfully. " I 
mean to watch whatever you do, Walter. I 
have such good taste that you may depend 
upon my opinion." 

Margaret then went away to fetch her 
window blinds, and Vyner, with a ruffled 
feeling that he could not subdue, tried to go 
on with his work. And this little scene in the 
painting-room was only the first of many such 
little scenes. In fact, Margaret was never out 
of the studio. She came in to ask Vyner for 
money ; to tell him of the smallest things that 
happened in the house — the misdeeds of her 
servants being a favourite theme — and she 
worried him, until one day Vyner threw his 
brush in a rage against the wall, and swore to 
himself that it was utterly impossible to bear 
it any longer. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 125 

No one but those accustomed to mental work 
•can understand how intensely irritating it is to 
he constantly interrupted. Our ideal people are 
about us — we are living with them, sharing 
some great crisis of these shadow-lives — and, 
behold ! a head is thrust inside the door — 

" The boy has called for the milk bill, dear ; 
can I have money ? " There is the money, but 
a shadow-Hfe perhaps is slain, a golden moment 
vanished never to return ! 

Yyner — sensitive and imaginative, like all 
true artists — was nearly driven mad in a week 
by Margaret's perpetual interruptions. He 
tried to bear it, and did bear it for a fortnight ; 
and then he made up his mind, and nothing 
that Margaret could say would induce him to 
-alter his determination. 

^•^ *' It doesn't do, Margaret,'^ he said one day 
to her, " my having my workshop here. I get 
interrupted. So I have re-taken the old place, 
and to-morrow I am going to remove my traps 
back again." 

Margaret absolutely changed colour. 

** You have re-taken your old rooms ? " she 
repeated, in utter astonishment. 

" Yes ; the light suits me better there^ and 



126 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

altogether it will be better. So you'll get 

another s])are room." 

But Margaret was too deeply offended to 

think of the spare room. 

*' I could not have believed this ! " she said. 

" We have only been at home a fortnight. I 

have been w^orried and anxious — how worried 

and anxious about my dear father and the 

servants I have never told you — and, without 

consulting me, without saying a word, you have 

re-taken expensive rooms ! " 

'^ My dear Margaret, do not be absurd. 
Don't 1 tell you the light is better there, and 
that is everything to me ; and, besides, in a 
house one is always getting disturbed." 

* ' By your wife ? " said Margaret. 

" By any one. It makes no matter who it 
is, but it is impossible to do good w^ork w^hen 
3^ou are constantly interrupted." 

*' You should have told me, Walter," said 
Margaret, " that my presence was so disagree- 
able to you. If you had done so, you might 
have spared yourself the expense of taking 
these rooms. I — I am sorry." And Margaret 
burst into tears. 

Vyner tried to be kind to her, but in vain. He 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 127 

liaci woimded lier self-love, and Margaret could 
not get over this. She wept genuine tears. 
She even hinted to her father that she was 
disappointed in Yyner ; and as it was also 
hurtful to her self-love that Yyner should 
oppose her wishes in any way, it showed how 
deeply she felt injured. 

But Major Blytlie gave her no encourage- 
ment. 

" You've got a good husband, Margaret," he 
said, " and you must not expect a man to have 
no will of his own. If he works better at his 
old rooms, or fancies he works better, he is 
quite right to return to them. Try to make 
his home so bright when he leaves his work 
that he will always be glad to come back to 
you." 

" I do try, father," said Margaret, with 
dignity. " Did I not always do my duty ? Is 
it likely I shall fail in it now ? But I could 
have helped Walter — I knew I could have 
helped him ; but his temper is so excitable, 
and he exercises so little control over it." 

" I think he's a fine fellow," said the Major, 
*' and you've been a lucky girl. Ah, my dear 
Margaret, do not make miseries of trifles like 



128 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

these, wlien — " And the Major gave a heavy 

Ee was alluding, of course, to tlie great and 
crushing misery which now always hung like a 
black cloud over his heart. For, as time went 
on and on, he naturally grew less and less 
hopeful that he would ever hear Nellie's glad, 
fresh voice afrain. 

Yyner, of course, had no good news to tell 
him on his return from Paris. The old man 
heard this, and his bowed head sank <a little 
lower on his breast. Yyner felt truly grieved. 
Major Blythe was altering fast ; his grey hair 
had turned almost white ; and he looked so 
thin and careworn sittino; there with his bent 
head, that Yyner's kind heart grew full of 
sympathy. 

" I wish you would come to us, Major 
Blythe," he said. ''You know how pleased 
Margaret will be, and she would be company 
for you, and you also would be company for 
her, as I am obliged so constantly to be at my 
work." 

The Major shook his head. 

*' No, Yyner," he said ; " you are very good 
— more than good ; but the child might come 



CR(ESUS's WIDOW. 129 

— who knows ? — may come ; aucl wdien she sees 
her old home open, she will know she has been 
watched and waited for. But suppose she 
came and saw the old home shut up ? Perhaps 
she might think we had forgotten her. No ; as 
long as I live, I will keep the house open for 
Nellie." 

*'But it's so dull for you being here by 
yourself,'' said Vyner kindly. 

*• I've the old dog for company," said the 
Major, bending down and stroking the lame 
collie's Jiead, for Wallace, as usual, w-as sitting 
at his master's feet. " He understands, d'you 
know, Vyner, that we have lost her. He's 
always listening for the footsteps in the streets 
— just as I am." 

'' Well, we must still hope," said Vyner, rising 
to take his leave. But the dismal picture of 
the old man in his lonely misery haunted him. 
Even the dog seemed to have lost his sjDirits. 
The dumb beast understood that all brightness 
had passed away from his master's heart, and 
so he hung his head too, and grew thin and 
melancholy from sympathy. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTEE XL 

THE PICTUKE AND THE LADY. 

Margaret did not give up the point about the 
studio without a great struggle. But Vyner 
had made up his mind, and was quite firm. 
Neither tears nor smiles prevailed, and at last 
Yyner used an argument which had some effect 
on Margaret. 

'' You know, Margaret," he said, " that my 
income depends upon my success as a painter. 
Do you wish my income to become less ? " 
*' No, certainly not, dear Walter; but still — " 
'*My dear girl, a man must work in his own 
way, or he can't work. Painting and writing 
iire not done by machinery, and ideas do not 
run on wheels at our bidding. To get the most 
out of our brains we must consider them ; and 
mine, I suppose, like solitude, for they won't 
-do anything in company." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 131 

" You have strange ideas, Walter." 

" Perhaps — one of them, you see, is to allow 
no one in my workshop." And to this idea 
Vyner remained firm. 

He made haste, indeed, to remove all his 
own peculiar possessions back to his old studio. 
Margaret stood looking on pensively ; Vyner 
had shaken her faith somewhat during the last 
few days in her own powers of persuasion, and 
she did not understand it. Could there be any 
reason for his obstinacy that she did not know ? 
This thought occurred and re-occurred to her 
mind as she watched Vyner's belongings one 
after the other being taken away. 

While thinking this her eyes happened to 
fall on the deal picture-case which Vyner had 
objected for her to open when it was brought 
to the new house, and which was still standing 
against the wall of the now nearly dismantled 
room. 

" Do you mean to take this case away, 
Walter ? " she asked, touchins; it with her 
hand. 

Vyner looked quickly round, and Margaret 
noticed that he slightly coloured. 

" Yes, certainly," he said. " Don't touch it. 



132 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

]\Targaret. It must go with the Last lot of 
thino-s. I will sfo now and see that everythino: 
is put right, and then I'll come back and take 
this case and whatever else is left. Good-bye 
for the present ; I'll get settled before night, I 
expect, and begin work in the morning." 

Vyner nodded to his wife and ran down the 
stairs after he said this, as a cab was w^aiting 
for him at the house door, and Margaret was 
left alone in the deserted studio. She stood 
lookino; for a moment or two at the deal case 
Yyner had told her not to meddle with, and 
then she went up to it and examined it. It 
was an ordinary picture-case, but Margaret felt 
anxious to know why Vyner had requested her 
not to touch it. She stood looking at it — could 
there be any secret about it ? She might see, 
at all events, she decided, as Vyner would nob 
be back for an hour or so. 

Presently she went and got a light hammer 
and a file, and began opening the case. It 
Avas half opened, when, to her annoyance and 
dismay, Vyner unexpectedly walked into the 
room. He saw what she was doing in an 
instant, and his face grew very pale, while 
Margaret's grew very red. 



CBCESUS'S WIDOW. 133 

"Oh, "Walter, l3cack so soon ? " said Margaret, 
-trying to seem at case. " I wanted to see 
what you had in here. I was just going to 
take a peep and close it up again." 

"So I perceive," said Yyner, very grimly ; 
and he went up and took the picture out of 
Margaret's hands. " I asked you not to touch 
this, did I not ? " he continued. 

" Eeally, Walter, if you speak of it in that 
way I shall think there is some dreadful secret 
-connected with it," answered Margaret. 

"There is no secret," said Yyner, yet more 
grimly. "It is merely a picture of my own — 
a picture you once saw in my studio, when 
you objected to a dark Eve." 

"It is taken from Mrs. Trelawn's face ! " 
exclaimed Margaret, hastily. "I remember 
now — I saw her once in a carrias^e before our 
marriage, and I recognised her face in the 
picture you called ' Eve.' Did she sit to you for 
it, Walter ? " 

" No ; I took it from memory, as I remember 
her lon^' ao'o." 

" She is very much changed now, that is all 
I can say. I thought when I saw her in Paris 
I must be mistaken about this picture being 



134 CPvCESUS's WIDOW. 

lier portrait, and 1 forgot to ask you about it."^ 
Yyner knew when Margaret said this, she 
Avas not speaking the truth. He felt unreason- 
ably angry, too — he admitted this to himself 
— at Margaret having attempted to open 
the case. After all it was no great sin, but 
Vyner was so augry he did not dare to trust 
himself to speak. He had returned home for 
something he had forgotten, and to find Mar- 
garet doing what she would not have done had 
she expected him back so soon, disgusted him 
more than anyone cf a different disposition 
could imas^ine. 

He bit his lips, and without another word 
carried the j^icture-case containing *' Eve " 
away with him. He did not return again to 
the house until dinner-time, and when he did 
the frown was still on his brow, and the 
miserable feeling in his heart that he was 
bound for life to a woman with whom he had 
not one sympathetic thought. 

Margaret, in his absence, had been feeling a 
little uneasy. So Walter had taken this picture 
from memory — the memory of his early love ! 
Margaret had immense self- appreciation, but 
still she felt slightly disturbed. Walter's 



CKCESUs's ^^^DOW. 135 

manner had been absolutely rude to her, she 
thought, and for what ? She did not under- 
stand ^Yhat had chiefly irritated Yyner. Had 
she said, '' I would like to see what is in the 
picture case," he would have shown it to her. 
But that private " peep " jarred on Vyner, and 
he felt he was drifting farther and farther away 
from Margaret. 

As he sat opposite to her at dinner, he could 
not help thinking of all he had lost. He had 
married Margaret from a feeling of honour — 
from a sense of right. He had told himself, 
that because Mr. Trelawn had suddenly died, he 
liad no excuse for breakino: ofl* an eno^ao^ement 
which he would undoubtedly have fulfilled had 
Mr. Trelawn lived. And he had intended to 
^ct rightly to Margaret — to try to love her. 
But sitting opposite to her there, he knew he 
never could love her. He had pitied her before 
their marriage, but he did not pity her now. 
Her self - assertive nature irritated him so 
intensely that he was conscious he was unjust 
iind unreasonable. 

Margaret, on her part, felt offended. She 
thought Vyner had been rude to her, and that 
he ought to apologise. So she was pensive and 



136 CROESUS S WIDOVv\ 

inclined to be disagreeable because lie did not. 
Margaret being injured and Yyner aggrieved,, 
a tete-d-tete dinner was any tiling but agreeable. 

Yyner felt relieved when Margaret rose and 
said slie was going round to see her father. 
He knew he ought to offer to see her safely 
there, and he did offer. Together they arrived 
at Major Blythe's door, to all outward seeming 
a happy newly-married man and wife. 

And so in the days and weeks that followed, 
these near, yet divided lives, continued to all 
outward seeming to run smoothly on. But we, 
who can look behind the veil worn so decorously 
by many hearts, will know how far apart they 
really were, when the subject of the half- opened 
picture-case was never once mentioned between 
them. This subject, this little quarrel, might 
have drawn two, really dear to each other, even 
closer. The woman w^ould have said she was 
sorry — perhaps shed a few not very bitter tears 
— only to be kissed away. But Margaret never 
said she was sorry, and Vyner did not forgive 
her. He sat in his old studio, and tried not to 
think of her. He tried to live in his ideal world 
— to transmit to his caiivas the bright creatures- 
of light that flitted through his brain — the 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 137 

noiseless shadows that came and went unseen 
to all but the painter s soul. 

They had been married two months, when 
one day, on Yyner's return home, he found 
^Margaret looking a little excited. 

" Who do you think has been calling here 
to-day ? " she said. *' Your old friend, Mrs. 
Trelawn." 

This was the first time that Nora's name had 
been mentioned between them since the affair 
of the picture-case, and Vyner was conscious 
that he coloured — that he did not show the 
indifference that he usually did to JMargaret's 
news. 

For he was weary, very weary, now of 
the lono; evenino's at home. Maro'aret talked 
incessantly of her servants, incessantly of small 
things, and always in a small way. No generous 
thoughts, no generous faults, ever made that 
home more congenial to Vyner. Margaret went 
with him sometimes to visit at the houses of his 
fellow-artists, and looked very well, and wore 
Nora's diamonds, and was quite satisfied with 
her success in society, but she was always 
wearisome to Vyner. 
' She was a most correct and proper woman — 



138 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

not above receiving a little quiet admiration 
when she had a chance of getting it — but, alas^ 
ala?!, for the erring, for the weak, if Margaret 
had only been their judge ! If a speck, however 
slight, had fallen on a woman's name, Margaret 
brought up that speck, pointing it out, holding 
up her virtuous hands at it, and casting up her 
virtuous eyes. She was a Christian, of course,, 
a most correct Christian — going to the most 
fashionable church in the neighbourhood ; doing 
everything she thought she ought to do — but 
she did not walk in the divine footprints. 

Had she, however, been told this she would 
have thought her informant was mad. She could 
not even understand the gentle echo which 
these divine footprints must awake in every 
believing, humble heart. He who but bid the 
sinner sin no more has left a lesson which to 
many of us is hard to learn. But, few judge 
their fellows as severely as Margaret Vyner. 
Perhaps self-knowledge helps some of us to see 
with more compassionate eyes. Her mind was 
not large enough to comprehend how small she 
was. 

*^ Mrs. Trelawn looks even worse than when 
we saw her in Paris,'' continued Margaret, 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 139 

speaking of her visitor, and noting, perhaps, 
that her husband had looked eagerly up at 
Nora's name. *' She tells me she has had quite 
a serious illness there ; she really is not in the 
least good-looking now." 

" Her expression would always make her 
beautiful," said Vyner. 

'^Eeally, Walter! I think I ought to l>e 
jealous," said Margaret, with a little laugh. 

'' You need not be. And so she has been 
ill ? " And Yyner suppressed a sigh. 

*' Yes, ' very ill,' she said. But she made 
herself very agreeable — I think she asked after 
jou — but I forget." 

*' Perhaps she forgot," said Vyner, grimly; 
and during the rest of the evening, as he sat 
•opposite Margaret, he was thinking perpetually 
of Nora. 

At last he o-rew so restless that he started 
suddenly to his feet. 

" I am going out, Margaret," he said. 
-''Wilton and Hay asked me to go to their 
rooms to-night — they talked of going to the 
new i^lay at the Gaiety, so it may be late before 
I am back." 

''I am sorry I did not hear of this arrange- 



140 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

ment before, "Walter, for if I had done so, I 
would have fixed to spend the evening with' 
my father — he never tires of my company." 

" Spend the evening with him, by all means,, 
then, Margaret. Shall I send for a cab ?" 

But Margaret declined this offer. She liked, 
no one to interfere with her arrangements^ 
though she loved arranging for other people. 

*•' I will amuse myself with my work, or I 
will read," said Margaret, pensively. ^' I can 
always amuse myself at home, and do not 
require excitement." 

" I do, then," answered Yyner. "Good night, 
Margaret. " And a minute or two later Margaret 
heard him leave the house. 

He felt strangely disturbed. He thought 
when he went out he would go to the rooms of 
his artist friends, Wilton and Hay ; but as he 
kept walking on, the idea of this society grew 
unendurable to him. An irresistible desire had 
in fact seized him, once more to see Nora. She 
had been ill; they were old friends ; what harm 
was there in it ? Thus he argued to himself, 
and the end of his mental cogitation was that 
he called a cab, and drove to Nora's well- 
remembered house in South Kensington. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 141 

He was told she was at liome^ in answer to 
his inquiries, and following the servant that 
aad admitted him up the staircase, he was 
ushered into a small drawing-room. The thick, 
soft carpets prevented either his footsteps or 
the footman's being heard, until his name was 
announced. 

The servant, indeed, opened the door, and 
looked into the room, uncertain whether Mrs. 
Trelawn was there or not. But as he did this, 
Yyner saw Mrs. Trelawn. She vv\as sittimi: bv 
a table in a shaded corner of the room, with a 
book lying open before her, but she was not 
reacliug. She had laid her head wearily down 
on her hands before her, and never heard the 
door open. In another moment, however, the 
footman saw her and announced Yyner 's name, 
and then Nora hastily lifted her head, and rose 
from her seat to receive her old friend. 

She coloured as she came forward, and then 
grew pale. 

" I heard," said Yyner, who also was greatly 
embarrassed, "that you had been ill, and so 
you see I have taken the liberty of calling to 
inc[uire after you." 

"I am pleased to see you," said Nora; "always 



142 Croesus's widow. 

pleased. Will you sit near the fire ? it is chillr 
to-night." 

So Vyner sat down by the fire and talked to 
Nora. They did not talk of Margaret, but they 
talked of many things ; talked as those talk 
whose thou2:hts find some echo in the other's 
mind. It was not wearisome to Vyner to sit 
there. He told Nora about his pictures ; eyen 
about unpainted pictures, whose colours had 
yet only glowed in the painter's brain. 

'' I have a picture, Nora," he said at last, 
^'that I wish you to see — a picture I wish to 
become yours." 

" Well," answered Nora, smiling, "if you will 
tell me its price, I shall be very pleased to 
become its owner." 

Vyner also smiled. 

" This picture has no price," he said. 

" No price ! How do you mean ? " 

" I mean I would sell it to no one, and I am 
going to ask you to accept it — for the sake of 
old times ! " 

Nora moved slightly, and coloured slightly, 
bat showed no other signs of emotion. 

'' Very well," she said, " for the sake of 
old times I shall be pleased to accept your 



CR(ESUS^S WIDOW. 143 

iicture. AVhen shall I see it, Walter?" 
*' Will you come to-morrow morning and see 
ic? Did I tell you I had gone back to the old 
workshop ? The light did not suit me in 
Chester Terrace — and altogrether it did not suit 
me I am in the old quarters ; so, will you 
cah there at any time most convenient to you ?" 
Kora named an hour and promised to call. 
She had made up her mind to live on friendly 
terms with Yyner and his wife ; her mind, 
indeed, to a certain extent, had during the past 
two months become used to the idea of his 
marriag;e. At least she had determined to hide 
— as women do hide — the feelings of her heart. 
She was rich, she was young ; life ought surely 
to have somethinof better for her than this 
disappointed love. 

So she had told herself after the first bitter- 
ness of that meeting with Yyner in Paris, so 
soon after his marriage was over. That meeting 
had cost her an illness — a serious illness. She 
never told what she had suffered in the gaily- 
decorated bedroom where she had lain, turning 
her restless head on the laced pillows, hating 
the sun and the flower-decked walls, hating 
her life, that seemed all desolate to her then. 



144 CRGJSUS'S WIDOW. 

That time was past now. Her illness was 
over, and she had gone back into the world, tc 
act as the world does, to live as her fellows 
lived, and show no signs of grief or pain. 

She therefore promised to call on Vyner at his 
studio the next morning ; and she did cad. 
She asked her neighbour, Lady Seaforth, to 
accompany her, but Lady Seaforth was pre- 
vented by some engagement from doing so, 
otherwise she would gladly have gone. 

For Lady Seaforth had returned to town the 
moment that she heard Mrs, Trelawn was there, 
for the express purpose of trying to arrange a 
marriao'e between her son and Nora. The clouds 

o 

were darkening very fast on her social horizon, 
and she knew that unless her son married some 
great fortune, only absolute ruin was before 
them. So in the droary November weather 
she came back to London, determined to effect 
her purpose. Seaforth must marry, she told 
herself; you must marry, she meant to tell he 
son. 

But an unpleasant engagement that she was 
forced to attend to, prevented her accompanying 
Nora on her proposed visit to Vyner's studio. 
Nora had asked Lady Seaforth to go with her> 



CRCEsrs's WIDOW. 145 

because she tliouglit it was wiser and better to 
do so. Was Nora turning worldly too ? She 
iras living in the world, and perhaps the at- 
mosphere slightly affected her, as it afifects 
most of us. iVt all events, she sent in a little 
note to invite Lady Seaforth to go with her 
^'.to my old friend Mr. Vyner's studio, to see a 
new picture ; " but as my lady was engaged, 
Nora saw no reason whv she should not sfo 
^lone. 

She went in her well-appointed carriage, and 
Vyner, who expected her, who had been walking 
restlessly up and down his studio waiting for 
her, went down to receive her, and presently 
Nora found herself amid the artistic disorder 
■dear to the painter's soul, 

" And where is my picture ? " she asked, 
smiling, and looking up in Yyner's face. 

" Come and see it," he said, and he led her 
up to an easel placed in a good light, on which 
rested the picture that he had called " My Eve," 
the picture of Nora in her girlish days, as she 
had stood in the Warbrooke meadows lonor asfo. 

For a moment or two she did not recognise 
herself, nor the familiar scene. She saw only a 
•dark-eyed girl standing looking wistfully 



146 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

forward, while in the back ground the sun was 
sinkintr —a hisr red ball of fire — and the 
evening haze was creeping from earth to 
sky. 

'"• You remember the spot ? " said Vyner, wh(> 
was standing behind Nora. 

Then Nora started, made a half-exclamation, 
and looked round at the painter. 

" Is— is it Warbrooke ? " she said. " War- 
brooke as it was, long ago ? " 

*^ Yes/^ answered Vyner, briefly. 

Then Nora understood. A choking sensation 
rose in her throat ; tears rose in her eyes. She 
could not help this. The old scene, the old 
days, and the old love, all came back to her, 
Yyner saw her emotions, and he turned away 
his head. 

^' I want you to keep this," he said, in an 
agitated voice ; " to accept it from me." 

For some minutes Nora could not answer 
him. She was trembling violently, and trying 
to suppress the tears that would well in her 
eyes and pour down her cheeks ; and when at 
last she did speak, her voice was very tremulous. 

''I — I — thank you very much," she said. 
*' I will always keep it." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 147 

Nothing more was said. Yyner, moved, 
agitated, and unnerved, began pointing out 
some other picture, and as he did so — ^just 
when he was beginning to speak — the door of 
the studio opened, and to his surprise and 
<ieep annoyance, Margaret, his wife, walked 
into the room ! 

Margaret had a little more colour on her face 
than usual as she advanced towards Nora, but 
Jier manner was quite calm. 

" Ah, Mrs. Trelawn," she said, holding out 
her hand, ''so it is your carriage standing at 
the door ? I was coming to see my husband 
on a little matter of business, and I was quite 
astonished to see a carriage before his studio 
door, as I know he only admits visitors on 
especial days." 

''This is an especial day, as you see, then," 
said Vyner, sharply. Never before had he 
been so angry with Margaret, as he felt at that 
moment. He gave an uneasy glance at Nora, 
but Nora's face was now calm — grave, pale, 
and calm. 

" So you have been showing Mrs. Trelawn 
her portrait, Walter, I see," continued Margaret, 
looking at the picture on the ea-:el that Vyner 



148 cncESuss widow. 

had called " My Eve." '' My liusband says this 
is a likeness of you, Mrs. Trelawn, when he 
knew you as a girl long ago. I confess I see 
no likeness now." And Margaret looked at 
the picture and then at the original critically. 

" I dare say years have changed me very 
much," said Nora. 

" Not in my eyes," said Yyner, with a certain 
defiance of manner. " I painted this from 
memory, and I think it is a good portrait, and 
I am pleased to think that Mrs. Trelawn has 
honoured me by accepting it." 

*' Oh, indeed ! " said Margaret, disagreeably. 

" Your husband is an old friend of mine,"' 
said Nora, with some dignity ; '' and I am glad 
he has painted my portrait. When shall I send 
for it ? " she continued, addressing Yyner. 

" You must not send for it," he answered, 
with a smile. " I will send it to you. But 
won't you look round ? I have some other 
things here I would like to show you." 

Nora walked round the studio, and admired 
and asked questions about this or that, just as 
though she had simply been there to admire 
and ask questions. Then she looked at her 
watch, and said it was time she was returning 



CTvCESUS's ^YIDOW. 149- 



lioniG, as slie expected lier aunt, Lady Staiu- 
brooke, to lunch. 

" You remember the General ? " she said, 
turning to Vyner. " He is so ill, poor man • 
His rheumatism is worse than ever, and my 
aunt and he are staying at Buckstone ; but 
Lady Stainbrookc is coming up to town 
to-day." 

Vyner having expressed himself j)i'operly 
sorr}^ for the General, Nora shook hands with 
Margaret, and was escorted by Vyner to her 
carriao:e. Thev said nothino' to each other as 
the painter stood a moment at the carriage 
door about the disaoTceable interview that had 

o 

occurred upstairs. 

" You will send my picture, then ? " said 
Nora, leaning forward. 

*' Yes," answered Vyner ; and then they 
clasped each other's hands, a warm and silent 
hand-clasp that needed no words to them. 

Nora drove direct home after she had parted 
with the painter. As she reached her own 
door a cab stopped before Lady Seaforth's, and 
she saw Lord Seaforth c:et out of it. He also 
saw Nora just as he was entering his mother's 
door, and he at once went back to speak to her. 



150 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

'' How are yoii ? " he said, holding out his 
hand cordially. ■" My mother told me you 
were in town. I am charmed that you are." 

" Thank you," answered Nora, smiling. "And 
where have you spent the autumn ? " 

"Like a certain gentleman," answered Sea- 
forth, with his easy smile, "going to and fro in 
the earth, and walking up and down in it." 

" And are you going to make any stay in 
town ? " 

" I hope so." 

Nora's door by this time being open, she 
nodded a farewell to the young lord and entered 
it ; and Seaforth a moment later walked into 
his mother's house. 

Lady Seaforth was waiting for him and 
watching. As he went into the hall she came 
out of the breakfixst-room, and held out her 
hand, but there was hardly a smile on the 
anxious mother's face. 

"Is that you, Seaforth?" she said. "I 
expected you earlier. Come in here ; I want to 
speak to you." 

Lord Seaforth followed his mother into the 
breakfast-room with the disagreeable knowledge 
in his heart that he was going to hear some- 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 151 

thing unpleasant. He knew this by Lady 
Seaforth's manner, by the flush on her face, 
and by a certain look round Iier large blue eyes 
that told she had been crying. 

" I have seen Mr. Cairns this morning,. 
Seaforth," commenced Lady Seaforth, after her 
son had closed the room door, '^and things are 
about as bad as they can be. That wretched 
Jew who holds the mortgage on Greystoke is 
determined to foreclose unless he is j^^^^itl. 
Cairns has seen him, and he gives you six 
months — only after begging and praying, and, 
well — the report has got abroad, you. know, 
that you are likely to marry Mrs. Trelawn, and 
Cairns told me — yes, absolutely told me, Sea- 
forth — that he only wrung the promise from 
this wretched man to do nothing for six months 
on the strength of this report." 

" Pleasant ! " said Seaforth, shrugging his 
shoulders, though he had grown a little j^^^lc 
while his mother was speaking. 

'^ It's no use jesting," said Lady Seaforth, 
passionately, " or sneering ; it must be done. 
Not only is this threatened, Seaforth, but Cairns 
tells me, there even may be an execution in the 
house.'* 



152 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Lord Seaforth made no . ansv/er to tliis 
appeal. He began walking up and down the 
room, wliistling softly to himself as he went. 

'' Seaforth," continued liis mother, with deep 
emotion, " I entreat, I implore you to listen to 
me. This lady — Mrs. Trelawn — is young, good- 
looking, and very rich. What would you have? 
For my sake, oh ! my son " — and this proud 
lady broke into passionate, choking sobs — 
''for my sake, Seaforth, do what you can !" 

Seaforth was moved by his mother's distress. 
He went up to her— he took her hand. 

'•'You silly old woman," he said, " don't cry. 
But, mother, even if I were ready and willing 
to marry Croesus's charming widow, how do I 
know she is ready to marry me ? " 

" I'm sure she would," answered Lady Sea- 
forth, eagerly. " Her aunt. Lady Stainbrooke, 
has assured me that she would. Oh ! Murray, 
dear Murray," and the mother kissed her son's 
cheek, " save our name and honour, before it is 
too late." 

" "Well, I'll see about it. So you and the 
dingy old aunt have been laying your heads 
together ? Well, don't scold me any more just 
now, mother, and I promise to go in in earnest 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 153 

for Croesus's widow. There ! tliat will do (for 
again Lady Seafortli kissed lier son). I can't 
promise to many lier, you know, until she 
gives her consent. iVnd now I want some of 
the railway dust shaken off me, so I'll say good- 
bye for the present." And with a nod and a 
smile, Seaforth left the room. 

As he went upstairs to his bedroom, his 
servant Clayton followed him. Seaforth saw 
the man, and turned sharply round. 

*' Any letter from Scotland ? " he said. 

" Not from Scotland, my lord," answered 
Clayton, "but there are two letters — in the 
same handwriting — Mrs. Murray's handwriting'^ 
(and the man lowered his voice), "but they have 
been posted in London." 

Seaforth snatched the two letters from Clay- 
ton's hand and hurried into his bedroom. He 
opened one of the letters hastily, and an excla- 
mation of auger burst from his lips. Nellie 
had WTitten this letter at Miss Brewis's rooms 
in Belgrave Eoad, and had waited and w\aited, 
days and weeks^ heart-sick and w^eary, for its 
answer. 



CHAPTER XII. 

MRS. MURRAY. 

Whilst Seafortli was reading Nellie's letters — 
reading the tender words impatiently, yet 
lovino- tlie lovino; woman still — Nellie was 
sitting in Miss Brewis's dining-room in Bel- 
grave Eoad, in a most unhappy frame of mind. 

She had by this time been three weeks under 
Miss Brewis's roof. At the end of the first week, 
she had had just enough money to pay her 
expenses. Miss Brewis, however, did not 
impose upon her, for she was rigidly honest as 
well as rigidly clean. 

'^No one living or dead can say it, ma'am," 
she told Nellie, pressing her blue lips tightly 
with conscious rectitude, " that I have ever 
cheated them of a single penny. No ; I may 
have my tempers — not to have tempers means 
more than mortal strength in a lodging-house — 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 155^ 

but I've clean hands outwardly and inwardly,, 
and the Lord be thanked for it ! " 

She had also her '' eyes about her," sho 
boasted, and those green enquiring eyes bad 
been fixed on her young lodger during the last 
three weeks with very mingled feelings. 

And during these weeks she had come to the 
conclusion that "there was somethino: wronix 
about Mrs. Murray." Joannah Brewis, having 
her eyes about her, saw thus — 

A young woman, '' that men would call 
pretty, I suppose," thought Joannah, " sitting- 
day after day watching for the postman, 
listening for the foot-falls in the street below, 
eating one may say nothing, and altogether 
behaving totally unlike a happy or even a 
sensible woman." 

Thus frequently reflected Joannah Brewis, 
as she watched her lodger. There was some- 
thing wrong, and at the end of the second week 
of Nellie's stay, w^hen the poor girl with burn- 
ing blushes informed her that she could not 
settle her w^eekly account until " Captain 
Murray's arrival," Miss Brewis came to the 
conclusion " there was something w^orse." 

Yet a vein of womanly feeling — a strange 



156 CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 



entangled vein ^ — -ran tlirougli this soured, 
slirewd, suspicious heart. 

" Whatever she is, she is not brass-faced, at 
least," she told a neighbour of hers, who was 
the wife of a chemist at the corner of Belgrave 
Eoad. ''She's some shame left in her, and that's 
more than can be said of many ladies. But it's 
not all right — I don't believe in the husband 
— if she was married to him she wouldn't pine 
after him as she does ; married folks know each 
other's tempers too well to pine." 

"And you think she really expects him ?" 
.asked the chemist's wife. 

. "Yes; I believe she is watching and waiting, 
poor soul. I warrant he's a bad 'un 1 " 

" Poor young creature!" sighed the chemist's 
wife. 

"People shouldn't do such things, then," 
snapped Joannah. " As you've heard me say, 
Mrs. Benson (the chemist's name was Benson), 
when you can get a decent respectable man like 
you've got, who doesn't look out of his own 
house after ten o'clock, and who keeps himself 
cjuiet, and doesn't interfere at home, but pa};s 
what he's told to pay, and asks no questions, 
then I say a woman may be better married. 1 



Croesus's widow. 157 

don't say slie is, but she mcuj. But if this 
young person has made a fool of herself, and I 
think it looks very like it, I have no pity for 
her." 

But in spite of this speech, Miss Brewis had 
some pity. She would not admit it. She had, 
in truth, no pity for those who flaunt and smile 
under righteous censure. But Mrs. Murray 
was so modest, so downcast, and apparently so 
unhappy, that even Joannah's sour virginal 
heart felt softened, and she said nothing rude 
to Nellie when Nellie was forced to inform her 
that she could not pay her weekly account 
until " Captain Murray's arrival." 

'' Oh well, ma'am, it's no matter," said Miss 
Brewis ; but on reflection. Miss Brewis decided 
it did matter. 

" And do you expect the Captain this week, 
ma'am ? " she asked, during the course of the 
-day, peering with her green eyes at the fair 
face that blushed so deeply at her question. 

"I hope so," faltered Nellie. ''I — I expected 
him before, but he has been detained." 

" So it appears, ma'am. "Well, it must be 
^ery lonesome for you sitting all day without 
any particular employment." 



158 CUCESUS'S WIDOW. 

''I hope he will soon be here, and then he 
will take me out," answered Nellie, uneasily ; 
and Miss Brewis confessed to herself she "had 
not the heart to ask the silly young creature 
any more questions." 

But after this interview Nellie wrote again 
to Lord Seaforth. This letter she enclosed, as 
she had done the first, under cover to his 
servant Clayton. Seaforth had told her she 
must always do this ; but when day after day 
passed away, and no answer came, Nellie 
finally, in her despair, resolved to risk a letter 
addressed to his mother's house. 

The reason she had received no answer to her 
letters was very simple. Seaforth having a sum 
of ready money at his command (his friend 
Strathearn's), had decided on taking a trip ta 
Paris, and had left orders that no letters were 
to be forwarded to him. He wanted to enjoy 
himself, and as his letters were usually of any- 
thing but of an enjoyable nature, he left them 
behind, feeling satisfied that Nellie was all right 
in the Glen of Strathearn. 

But while Seaforth was trying to enjoy him- 
self (for grim care followed him uninvited to 
Paris), Nellie, as we have seen, was not " all 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 159 

right " in the Glen of Strathearn. She had fled 
from Strathearn — fled, frightened, shocked — 
her trust and faith shaken in her Murray, by 
Strathearn's wild, impetuous words. Yet, still 
she tried to believe in Seaforth, though a 
shadow men call doubt — a creeping, lurking- 
shadow, apt to come near in the dark hours of 
night — had stolen, in spite of herself, into 
i^ellie's true and trustful heart. 

And as time went on, and no letter nor word 
reached her, miserable fear as well as doubt had 
taken possession of her. Was she forsaken 
altoo-ether ? Had Strathearn told the truth ? 

o 

Oh God ! if it were so — and Nellie would moan 
aloud. Miss Brewis, perhaps overhearing these 
moans, drew her own bitter conclusions from 
the despairing sounds. 

At last, on the third week of Nellie's stay. 
Miss Brewis determined to take active steps 
regarding her. 

" Not a letter has come for her, Mrs. Benson," 
she told her neighbour. "Not a line these 
three weeks, or a caller of any kind. My belief 
is, she is some poor fool that a man has tired of 
and tossed over ! Serve her rio'ht for bein£^ 
such an idiot 1 " 



IGO CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

'* I'm afraid it doesn't look very well, poor 
tbini; !" said Mrs. Benson, who was fat and soft- 
lie art ed. 

" Well ! it's as bad as bad can be, or my name 
isn't Joannah Brewis ! " snapped Joannah. "But 
to-morrow morning I'll tell her plainly I must 
liave my money, or she must go. I've no family 
to think of. Heaven be praised ! but I've myself^ 
and I can't go on feeding a party who, for all I 
know, ou2:ht to be in a Mandalene institution.'^ 

The next morning, accordingly. Miss Brewis 
rose up determined to have her money. As she 
twisted her scant lio^ht hair into a little hard 
ball at the back, she kept nerving herself to do 
her duty. She came downstairs more war-like 
and snappish than usual. Her red nose seemed 
redder than ever, and her green eyes a more 
vivid green. She commenced with the servants. 
She discharged two before breakfast, and had a 
fight with the milkman, and a skirmish with an 
errand boy before eleven. At this hour she 
determined to attack her unhappy lodger. Nellie 
heard her coming upstairs, and began to tremble. 
The knock she c^ave at the dinino'-room door 
was like a summons. It was a summons, as 
Nellie learned a few minutes later. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. IGl 

*' If you please, Mrs, Murray, I want a few 
words with you," began Joannali, very fiercely, 
and then her eyes fell on Nellie's pale, sad face, 
and her voice unconsciously softened. 

" I don't want to say an3rthing disagreeable," 
she continued, in a milder tone, "but I've to 
work for my living, and being an unmarried 
female, who takes assistance from no one, I'm 
obliged to look after my money ; and if it's 
convenient to you, ma'am, I would feel much 
obliged if you could settle the two last weeks' 
accounts during; the dav." 

I Nellie had grown pale and red by turns 
during this address. She hesitated, she 
trembled ; and again. Miss Brewis, like the 
Egyptians of old^ tried to harden her heart. 

" Or, if not convenient to you to-day, could 
you say to-morrow or Thursday, at latest ? " 
proceeded Joannah. 

*' You shall have it by Thursday," answered 
Nellie, desperately ; and at that moment she 
determined to write to Lord Seaforth at his 
mother's house, determined to see him at any 
cost, and to put an end to the miserable position 
in which she found herself. 

*' Oh, very well, ma'am, that will do," said 

VOL. II. G 



16-2 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Joannali, mollified, thoiigii she did not exactly 
believe she would get the money, for she was a 
shrewd woman, and had seen that look in 
Nellie's eyes which comes to the most t^mid 
creatures when driven to bay. '' And how do 
3^ou feel yourself this morning, ma'am ? You 
don't look over well ; and as for myself, I can't 
boast on account of acidity." 

" I am sorry," said Nellie, who was too 
heart-broken to smile. 

" Yes, ma'am ; I got it from my mother," 
continued Miss Brewis. " She was a Lambert, 
and the Lamberts have all poor stomachs. But 
I mustn't complain ; except one illness, which 
was quite accidental, I've been able to do my 
work since I was turned ten — not like poor 
useless creatures I have in the house, who sit 
fancying this pain or the other — ^just looking 
out for pains, I tell them." 

With this parting shot. Miss Brewis took her 
departure, and Nellie was left alone with her 
unhappy thoughts. She must do something, 
she knew, yet what to do this poor girl did not 
know. She wrung her hands, she wept the 
bitterest tears. 

"Oh ! father, father, why did I ever leave 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 163 



you, clear old father ? " she moaned aloud. 
Could she write to Margaret ? What could she 
do ? She must have this money, and unless 
she heard from Seaforth before Thursday, 
where was she to get it ? 

While Nellie was in this bitter distress, at 
his mother's house in South Kensington Lord 
Seaforth had just received her two letters from 
the hands of his servant, Clayton. 

He read them — he flung them impatiently 
down. 

" The little fool ! " he said, " the dear, stupid 
little fool, she does not know the trouble she 
is bringing upon me." 

Yet his heart softened to her a moment later, 
and once more he took up the poor, tender little 
letters. 

"Poor silly child," he thought, ''whatever 
possessed her to leave Strathearn. But she is 
in want of money, it seems — of course she must 
be. I must see her at once." 

So, putting her letters into his pocket, he 
hastily told Clayton to call a cab and get a 
cheque cashed for him, which he drew for fifty 
pounds. Some of the thousand pounds that 
Strathearn had lent him was still left, and 



164 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Seaforth felt tliankfal that it was so at this 
moment. With this money in his possession, 
he then drove at once to the address which 
Nellie had given him in Belo^rave Road. Nellie, 
heart-sick, almost desperate, heard the cab stop 
at the house door, and, looking up, saw (with 
inexpressible and indescribable delight) Lord 
Seaforth leave the cab, and a moment or two 
later he was ushered into the dining-room. 

"Murray! Murray!" she cried, as he advanced 
towards her, and she fell upon his breast, and 
unable to control her emotion — the long pcnt- 
np agony and anxiety — she burst into hysterical 
sobs. 

*' My darling," said Seaforth, " how can you 
be so silly ? What is the matter with you, 
Nellie ? You are not surely ill ? " 

*' I — I — have been so miserable ! " sobbed 
the poor child. "Oh, Murray ! " and she clung 
to him, " I have gone through so much — have 
suffered so much." 

" And I thought all the while you were safe 
at Strathearn," said Seaforth, trying to soothe 
her. 

" I could not stay at Strathearn," continued 
Nellie. " Oh ! Murray, such a dreadful thing 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 165 

liappened. Stratliearn, Mr. Campbell, came — 
and he said such dreadful things." 

*' What did he say ? " asked Seaforth, and he 
frowned. 

" Such dreadful things, oh ! such dreadful 
things, Murray ! " answered Nellie, beginning to 
€ry afresh. "He — he said we weren't really 
married— that you had deceived me — and — 
4^n(^| — " But here sobs literally choked her 
utterance. 

" It was confounded insolence of him to 
interfere at all," said Lord Seaforth. " Hush, 
darling ! don't distress yourself. What matter 
is it what Strathearn said ? " 

" But, Murray, Murray, it is matter ! " said 
Nellie, raising her head, and looking straight in 
Scaforth's face. '' Strathearn believed this ; he 
believed it so much that — that he absolutely 
asked me to marry him — insulted me so far, 
Murray. What do you think of that ? " 

Seaforth looked surprised for a moment, 
raised his eyebrows, and then gave a light 
laugh. 

" Highly flattering to you, Nellie," he said. 

" Flattering I" repeated Nellie, starting back 
from Seaforth's arms. *' How dare you say so. 



16G CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Murray ! It was an insult, a cruel insult ; and 
you must have deceived him, or he dared not 
have done it I " 

Nellie stood facing Seaforth as she said this, her 
blue eyes flashing, and her whole form trembling. 

" Stupid little girl ! " said Seaforth the next 
minute, trying to speak lightly, and laying his 
hand as he spoke on Nellie's shoulder, '' don't 
you see how easily Strathearn made a mistake? 
It was agreed between us, was it not, Nellie,, 
that our secret was never to be told ? " 

" Never ? " asked Nellie, with quivering lips. 

" At least not at present," proceeded Seaforth ;. 
*' that was agreed, was it not, Nelhe ? " 

" Yes, I know," answered poor Nellie. 

''Then how was Strathearn to know? He 
had no right to interfere. He's a rough, 
uncouth fellow at best — always putting his 
great feet into the wrong place. But never you 
mind, Nellie. So you want money, you tire- 
some little woman, do you ? " 

'•' Yes," said Nellie ; " I've no money to pay 
for the rooms, Murray." 

''Poor little woman. Well, here's some money 
for you — fifty pounds — wiU that do for the 
present?" 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 167 

" Oh, yes, yes ; it is too much — more than I 

-want." 

" Wonderful ! I never knew a woman yet, 
Nellie, who thought she had got enough money ; 
■and as for too much, why, you are a marvel ! " 
And Seaforth gave his light laugh. 

*' But what am I to do, really, Murray ? " 
said Nellie, trying to smile, and putting her 
trembling hand in Seaforth's, and looking at 
him with her blue eyes. 

" How do you mean, dear ? " 

''About our marriage — about letting them 
know at home ? " 

Seaforth's brow darkened. 

" Nellie," he said, " it's no use talking about 
such a thing. I'm in a frightful hole just now 
— how the devil to get out of it I can't tell — 
and if a breath, mind you, a breath, got about 
anything concerning you, I would be utterly 
ruined ! No, my darling," he continued, more 
kindly, " if you have any love for me, any 
regard or consideration, you will ask nothing 
more at present. Do you want to stay on in 
town ? " he continued. 

" Yes," said Nellie ; and she could not keep . 
back her tears. " Don't send me away again. 



1G8 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Murray. I was so miserable, so lonely at 
Stratliearn." 

" You don't look very well, poor little woman 
— and Nellie, why, what is this ? " and Seaforth 
pushed back Nellie's fair hair, displaying thus 
the whole of the severe cut which she had 
received on the forehead during the dreadful 
storm at Strath earn. 

Then Nellie explained. 

*' I did not like to tell you how very ill I 
was," she told him. " I was insensible for ever 
so long — and — Strathearn was very kind, then, 
Murray — " 

Again Seaforth gave his careless laugh. 

" Indeed ! " he said. *' I suppose it was during^ 
this interesting period, then, that Strathearn 
lost his youthful heart ? Did he nurse you,, 
Nellie?" 

" How can you jest, Murray, how can you 
jest?" 

'' Why not, my fair one ? All life's but a 
jest, we are told, arn't we, by some learned 
authorities ; but it's a devilish hard jest to crack 
sometimes." 

*' And — what will you do — about Strathearn, 
Murray ? " asked Nellie. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 169 

*' Do ? What do jou mean ? Do you want 
me to shoot him for having clone you the 
honour, and I can tell you he would think it 
was an honour, of asking you to be Mrs. 
Campbell, of Strathearn ? " And once more 
Seaforth laughed. 

"But Murray, won't you clear my name to 
him, at least ? " pleaded the poor girl. 

'• Look here, Nellie," said Seaforth, "if you 
iind I are to go on being friends, it's no use 
talking in that strain. I can't do anything — 
this is an absolute fact. Confound Strathearn ! 
What matter what he thinks ? " 

" But Murray—" 

" Hush, hush, child. Well, we'll talk of it 
some other day — don't bother just now, Nellie. 
I've had enough to bother me to-day already, 
I can tell you, and I have a weary head- 
ache." 

'' My poor Murray ! " 

" Your poor Murray, indeed I I only got 
back to town about an hour ago. I've been a 
fortnight in Paris, and my mother seized upon 
me before I was fairly in the house to tell me 
a whole lot of trouble about money. In fact, 
little woman, it is come to this — well, it's no 



170 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

good talking about it to-clay, but if something 
doesn't cast up—" 

Nellie put her hand once more into Seaforth s 
as he said this, and laid her head on his 
shoulder. 

"Well," she said, softly, "we won't talk 
of it now." And Seaforth was only too glad 
to escape from a disagreeable subject. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



THE EVIL SPIRIT. 



It was settled after this tliat for the present 
Nellie was to remain with Miss Brewis. 

'•' Tell her what story you like, darling," said 
Seaforth, " only don't tell her my real name. 
I will come and see you as often as I can, and 
you must be content with this for the present." 

But Nellie was not content. What woman 
would have been content ? Yet, woman-like, 
too, she shrank from adding to Seaforth's worries. 
So for the present she agreed to stay on with 
Miss Brewis ; to bear there the name of " Mrs. 
Murray." 

Miss Brewis received her money in full the 
day after Seaforth's first visit, and thus felt 
inclined to look with more favourable eyes on 
Nellie. 



172 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" Then the Captain is not coming to stay here 
regularly, ma'am ? " she asked, still curious. 

Upon this Nellie made the explanation she 
had intended to make. 

'' I ought perhaps to tell you. Miss Brewis," 
she said, " before we come to any arrangement, 
that Captain Murray's family do not know that 
he is married to me — that they object to the 
idea of our marriage — and so, nntil some money 
affairs are settled, we are forced to keep it a 
secret. I tell you this because, of course, if you 
object — " 

Miss Brewis pursed in her thin blue lips. But 
she had the money in her hand, and " Captain 
Murray's " whole appearance (alas, how falla- 
ciously !) betokened wealth. 

" Well, ma'am," she said, " of course, there 
are secrets in families — at least, families suppose 
they have secrets — though, for my part, I 
believe they are better known to other parties- 
than to the parties themselves. But, as you 
were saying, ma'am, you wish your marriage to 
be kept a secret — I suppose only temporarily?" 

'' Yes, certainly," answered Nellie, flushing. 

'' Well, ma'am, in that case I don't think I 
can make any particular objections. Parties 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 173 

Ivnow their own business best, and it's not my 
business to give any advice till I'm asked. I've 
not been asked in this case, and if you wish to 
keep on the rooms on the same terms, I'm 
agreeable — paid weekly." 

** Very well," said Nellie. And so she stayed 
on with Miss Brewis — Miss Brewis feeling 
srrimlv satisfied in her own mind as time went 
on that '^Captain Murray" was tiring of his 
young wife. 

And Miss Brewis had some cause to think 
this. For the first w^eek or so after his return 
from Paris, Seaforth came fairly regularly to 
Belgrave Road. Then troubles thickened 
round him, and one day, as he Tvas returning 
home from a visit to Nellie, an evil spirit began 
whispering in his ear. 

** If it were not for this poor girl," said the 
evil spirit, ''I might end all these w^orrics — I 
might marry Croesus's widow ; and, by Jove ! 
she's a remarkably pretty woman and lady-like, 
and a man w^ould have no cause to be ashamed 
"of her ; but, then, Nellie — if I could but per- 
suade Nellie — " 

The evil spirit remained with Seaforth all 
that day ; and the next day, instead of going in 



174 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

the afternoon to Belo-rave Road, he went to 
call next door upon " Croesus's Widow." 

Nora was looking very well as he entered her 
drawing-room. The lamps were lighted, and the 
fire was burning brightly, and a tall, handsome 
man was leaning against the mantelpiece talking 
to Nora. 

When this man turned round as Seaforth 
advanced into the room, Seaforth saw it wa3 
Mr. Vyner, the painter. Vyner bowed to Seaforth, 
and Seaforth felt a sudden pang of shame strike 
through his heart. He knew that Nellie's sister 
Margaret was married to the painter, and he 
quailed and shrank from Vyner's grey eyes, 
which he felt were now fixed upon him with no 
ordinary interest. 

*'I think you know Mr. Yyner, Lord Seaforth?" 
said Nora. 

" I have that pleasure," answered the 
young lord, assuming in a moment the 
pleasant, gracious manner which was so easy 
to him. 

"It is long since we met, Lord Seaforth/ 
said Vyner. 

" It is, indeed ! " answered Seaforth, still 
smiling, but inwardly wondering all the while 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 175 

how he could find an excuse to escape at once 
from Nora's drawdng-room. 

Suddenly one occurred to him. 

**'My mother requested me to call on you, 
Mrs. Trelawn, to ask if you will go with us this 
evening to see Irving in his new piece ? They 
say it is very good, and we've got a fairly good 
box, I believe." 

" I shall be very glad to go, I think," 
answered Nora. 

"Then," said Seaforth, "I will not trouble 
you any more with my presence just now, 
particularly as Mr. Vyncr, who I believe is an 
old friend, is with you. Good morning, Mrs, 
Trelawn. My mother will be very pleased you 
are going with us, and I am charmed." 

But as Seaforth was thus efiecting his escape 
from the presence of Vyner, Yyner had been 
making up his mind to speak to Seaforth upon 
the very subject that Seaforth dreaded. 

"As you are leaving, I will go with you," 
said Yyner, *' for I would like a few words 
with you. Lord Seaforth." 

*' Certainly," said Seaforth, and the two 
men left Nora's drawinor-room toi^ether. A 
minute or so later they were in the street; then 



176 GRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Yyner, after a moment's hesitation, began: 

" You know Major Blythe's family, J believe, 
Lord Seaforth ? " he said . 
. " Oh, yes," answered Seaforth ; "the pretty, 
fair-haired girl. Why, you married a Miss 
Blythe, did you not, Mr. Yyner ? " 

''Yes, the eldest. Miss Blythe. But it is 
about Nellie Blythe, the youngest, I wish to 
speak to you. Have you heard — do you know 
anything of her ? " 

Yyner spoke with a certain sharpness, almost 
a sternness, of accent as he asked these ques- 
tions. For as Seaforth had recognised him, 
Yyner had seen flit over the young lord's face 
a shadow — a reflection of the pang of shame in 
his heart — and in spite of Seaforth's ease and 
coolness of manner, a suspicion that he was 
somehow connected with Nellie's mysterious 
disappearance had at the moment revived in 
Yyner 's mind. 

'' How do you mean?" said Seaforth in answer 
to these pointed inquiries, and he did his 
best to look innocently round in Yyner's face. 
'' Nothing has happened to that pretty girl, I 
hope?" 

'^ Something very sad has happened," answered 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 177 

Vyner gravely. " Nellie Blytlie disappeared four 
or five months a 2:0 from her father's house, and 
nothing^ has been heard of her since. It has been 
ss. terrible heart-break to the old man ; and as 
you once knew her — " 

" I am truly sorry," said Seaforth, as Vyner 
paused ; " most sorry! Nothing has been heard 
of her, you say ? " 

. " Nothing, not a word ; we have employed 
detectives, we have done everything, but not a 
trace of her has been discovered. I was anxious 
to see you to tell you this, for Mrs. Yyner, my 
wife, who is her sister, as you know, called on 
your mother. Lady Seaforth, shortly after 
Nellie's disappearance to make some inquiries ; 
but probably Lady Seaforth has told you this ? " 

" Called on my mother ! " repeated Seaforth, 
assuming a sudden haughtiness of manner, 
while a burning colour flushed through his pale 
fine skin. " May I ask for what purpose ? " 

It was now Vyner's turn to colour deeply. 

• " It may seem impertinence of me. Lord 

Seaforth," he said, " but certain suspicions were 

aroused in the family about yourself and poor 

Nellie. You were known to be friends — " 

" I knew her as a pretty girl, merely,'* said 



178 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Seaforth, still hanghtilj. '' I am very sorry if 
any trouble has happened to her. But I scarcely 
think Mrs. Yyner should have called upon my 
mother on any such subject — and my mother 
had the good taste never to allude to Mrs. 
Yyner's visit to me." 

Seaforth threw all the cold distinction of class 
into his manner as he said this, and Yyner 
understood and recognised this distinction, 
though he never servilely bowed down before it. 

" I understand you, Lord Seaforth," he 
answered gravely; "but perhaps you will under- 
stand also, that the anxiety of a sister on the 
strange disappearance of a young girl might 
excuse Miss Blythe — for we were not married 
then — intruding even on Lady Seaforth." 

" Certainly," said Seaforth, again resuming 
his ordinary pleasant manner ; "I am only sorry 
such a step could have been thought necessary 
by Miss Blythe — I beg your pardon, by Mrs. 
Yyner, on my account at least." 

*' Then," said Yyner, stopping, " our conver- 
sation may as well end here. I presume — I am 
sure, no man of honour, no gentleman, could 
have said what you have done, if there were 
any just grounds for suspicion on the part of 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 179 

Nellie Blythe's family that you knew anything 
of her strange disappearance, and I trust you 
will excuse me for having mentioned it to you." 

" I am only sorry to hear of it," said Seaforth. 
*'Must you go? By-the-bye, I heard some 
great connoisseurs raving about your pictures 
the other day, Mr. Vyner. For myself, I am no 
judge of art — to my great regret. Good 
morning !" And Seaforth half offered his hand, 
but Vyner only bowed. 

" Good morning ! " said the painter gravely, 
and he turned away, and Seaforth was left alone 
with his own thousrhts. 

He bit his lips, he frowned, he coloured. He 
was ashamed — stung by Vyner s words. " No 
man of honour, no gentleman," the painter had 
said, and Seaforth knew that the painter had 
but spoken the truth. 

" But," said the evil spirit, who now had 
become very familiar with Seaforth, " why 
mind the words of this painter fellow, who is 
not of my class, who was cursedly impertinent 
to speak to me on such a subject ? What, after 
all, are these Blythes ? Nobodies — a broken- 
down old half-pay soldier — it's absurd ! Nellie 
is absurd to expect such a thing ; she is a nice 



180 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

little girl, though she is losing her looks fast,. 
for these childish faces soon change ; but as for 
acknowledging anything about that foolish 
affair in Scotland, I'd best try to put it out of 
her head at once — it's out of the question." 

Thus whispered the evil spirit, and Seaforth 
listened. The old spirit of honour that had 
once dwelt in his heart, that had come to him 
as a birthright, was ttist dying away. Still 
this old sj)irit brought back the painter's words,. 
and taunted him wdth them all the day after- 
wards. " Xo man of honour, no gentleman." 
He heard these w^ords — and they stung him 
still — as he sat that night in the theatre by 
Nora's side, as he smiled on Croesus's widow", and 
half-whispered his cynical nonsense in her ear. 

And his proud and haughty^ mother sat 
smiling too, though black care was racking 
her heart, and intense anxiety. x\nd Nora alsa 
smiled, though between her and the young lord 
by her side she ever saw — mentally — a hand- 
some, worn, sad face, and heard the words that 
Vyner had spoken to her that afternoon. 

'' I am weary of it all, Nora," Vyner had said, 
and Nora had understood the full meanins: of 
these miserable words. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 181 

So these tliree sat together looking at the 
players on the stage and smiling, each also 
playing a part on that larger stage that we call 
life. And while Seaforth was thus courtino- 
Croesus's widow, courting her publicly — for the 
sake of that publicity — where was the young- 
girl whose heart he had wooed and won, and of 
whom now he was becoming tired, as he had 
tired of all his other playthings ? 

Nellie had spent a very miserable day. The 
thought of her blind father and her old happy 
home now scarcely ever left her. Seaforth had 
written her a little note in the afternoon^ — before 
he started on his visit to Croesus's widow — to 
tell Nellie he v»'ould not be with her that day 
at all, and Nellie felt very much depressed in 
consequence. And as the early darkness of the 
November day closed in, an almost passionate 
desire took possession of Nellie to steal out in 
the gloom, and to stand for a few moments at 
least beside her father's house. 

She had not once been in the streets since 
she had lived at j\liss Brewis's, and the want 
of fresh air alone had made her weak and 
nervous. But now she felt she must go ; so 
after wrapping a thick black gauze veil over her 



182 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

face, and putting on a long and heavy cloak, she 
started, and having called a cab, drove to the 
very street, near Eegent's Park, where her father 
lived. 

She could not restrain her tears as the cab 
approached the familiar ground. The entrance 
to the park, which she used to go through to 
meet Seaforth when their love was young, the 
shops, the railway station — how well she knew 
them all. She had passed them since she was 
a little child ; she had gone here and there, 
hand-in-hand with her blind father, a hundred 
times. Everything seemed the same — every- 
thing but the rosy, blue-eyed girl, whose cheeks 
were pale now, and her blue eyes dim with 
tears. 

Nellie left the cab, and went straight up to 
her father's door. She was not afraid of being 
recognised, for she was thickly veiled, and the 
^ir was murky with a November fog. She stood 
before her father's house and looked through 
the window-panes, for the blinds were not 
drawn, and the firelight in the room showed 
her very plainly everything within. 

This was what she saw — An old man, blind, 
white-haired, bent, leaning on his stick as he 



CRCESUSS WIDO\A\ 183 

sat by the fire — his head bowed low, and grief 
and anxiety written on the once patient, happy 
face of her dear father. Nellie gave a kind of 
cry. She leaned on the iron railings before the 
house, and her tears streamed fast and hot 
down her cheeks. 

" God bless you, dear father ! God bless 
you ! " she whispered. Then she dried her 
tears, for they blinded her so she could not 
see, and she tried to think. 

" Murray must give in. I will tell my 
father," she muttered. Oh, how terribly 
changed her father was ! The longer Nellie 
stood there in the darkness looking at him she 
saw only more clearly the wasting signs of 
grief and anxiety on the old man's face. These 
signs made her determined to act. She would 
not let her father die, she told herself, for 
Murray — for anyone. 

" I will tell him to-morrow," she determined, 
as she turned away. " To-morrow, dear father,, 
I will see you again. I w^ill come to you. God 
bless you till then, my dear, dear father ! " 

She felt stronger after she had made this 
resolution. Again she called a cab and returned 
to Miss Brewis's, but all the evenino- afterwards 



184 CRoasuss widow. 

the picture —that she had seen through the 
window — of her broken-hearted father sitting 
lonely and sad by the fire haunted and pursued 
her. 

The next morning when she rose, after a 
restless, almost sleepless night, she still kept to 
her determination to insist upon telling her 
father of her marriage. And scarcely had she 
finished breakfast when something occurred 
which still further added strength to her 
resolution. 

This was a visit from her landlady, Miss 
Brewis. Joannah gave a portentous rap at the 
room door before she entered, and then, sour of 
visaofe as usual, she walked in. 

" Good morning, ma'am," she said, grimly. 
" I've come to say a few words that I think it's 
my duty to say, and so you'll please excuse me." 

Nellie tried to smile. 

'' Very well. Miss Brewis," she said. '' What 
do you want to say ? " 

" It's concerniug you, ma'am, not myself," 
replied Joannah. " But last night I was at the 
Lyceum Theatre — my neighbour, Mrs. Benson's 
brother, has something^ to do with the manag^e- 
ment, and he gave us a pass for three in the 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 185 

stalls. They gave us the worst seats in the place,. 
I suppose because he didn't pay for them, and 
the man with the big fiddle nearly put my eyes 
out several times, we were so near the orchestra. 
But we saw the piece and the folks in the boxes 
plainly enough, and close to us — in one of the side 
boxes, ma'am — was a gentlemau you know." 

Nellie's delicate skin coloured violently at 
this. 

" Indeed ! " she said. 

'' It was no one else, ma'am, no one else, 
than the party who comes here and calls himself 
Captain Murray. I said to ^Jrs. Benson the 
moment I set my eyes on. him, 'That's Captain 
Murray;' but when Mrs. Benson set her eyes 
on him, she said, 'No, Miss Brewis, you're 
mistaken. I know that young gentleman well, 
and so I should, for I've daudh-d him many a 
time in my arms. It's you' :. Lord Seaforth, 
and that handsome, fiiir-hain :ady behind is 
Lady Seaforth, to whom I wa- lady's maid over 
ten years.' These were Mrs. [ienson's words, 
ma'am, and you could have ] )■ icked me over 
with a feather when I heard i ai." 

During this long speech • Miss Brewis's, 
Nellie had sat with a fast 'm<x heart and 



186 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

changing colour. Miss Brewis paused for breath 
and Nellie tried to speak, but before she could 
decide what to say Joannah started off again. 
. '' Yes, ma'am, that's living truth," she said. 
^' I said nothing more to Mrs. Benson about 
him being the party who comes here, for I can 
hold my tongue when requisite ; but I made 
inquiries about this young lord and his mother, 
and Mrs. Benson was full of gossip about them. 
' They say,' she said, ' for you see, Miss Brewis, 
I still keep friendly with some of the old 
servants ; and they say the young lord is going 
in for a very rich widow who lives next door to 
my lord — a Mrs. Trelawn, who goes by the 
name of Croesus's Widow. And that'll be her, 
I've little doubt, in the box with them now,' 
continued Mrs. Benson; and, ma'am, she pointed 
out a dark-eyed lady, who was sitting next to 
the party who comes here ; and, if I may make 
so bold, the party who comes here was bending 
over her and gallivanting her in a manner that, 
if 1 was lawfully married to the j^'^^rty? I would 
see he didn't do it again." 

" You should not repeat this gossip to me. 
Miss Brewis," said Nellie, with quivering lips. 

" Well, ma'am, it may be gossip," retorted 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 18? 

Joannali sharply, lier red nose turning suddenly 
redder, " but if a party comes to the house of 
a respectable unmarried female — and I think I 
may call myself that — and if a party gives one 
name in the respectable unmarried female's 
house, and goes by another when he's out of it, 
then I think the respectable female has a right 
to make inquiries, whatever you think, ma'am ! '^ 
And Joannah having given vent to this 
sentiment in her sharpest tones, abruptly left 
the room, violently closing the door behind 
her. 

She left Nellie trembling and sick at heart. 
But after a few minutes' reflection Nellie 
determined to see Seaforth at once. She 
therefore sent a telegram to him, addressed (as 
his letters were) to his servant Clayton ; and 
all the rest of the day she waited in a state of 
the most restless, miserable anxiety for his 
coming. 

About half-past ^ve Seaforth did come. As 
he entered the room Nellie saw that his face 
wore a harder and different expression to its 
usual careless one. And as she ran up to him 
and took his hand, Seaforth turned away his 
head. 



CUCESUS S WIDOW. 



'' Whatever do you want, Nellie ? " lie said, 
impatiently. " It won't do you sending tele- 
grams in this way — they may fall into hands 
they are not intended for." 



CHAPTEE XIY. 

AX OUTCAST. 

Seaforth said these ^Yords about the telegram 
sharply, even harshly, and indeed for the last 
two hours he had been worried almost past 
endurance. 

He had, in fact, just come from a lonor 
interview with his lawver. And during^ this 
interview the lawyer had told him plainly the 
hopeless state of his affairs. 

" Nothing can save the property from the 
hammer, and my lady and yourself from utter 
beggary, my lord," this Mr. Cairns had toJd 
him, "unless you marry some very rich woman. 
They sa\'," he continued, with a hard smile 
stealing over his hard face, '' that you can do 
this if you like. Tve made it my business to 
inquire into the real state of this lady's affairs, 
of whose wealth we hear so much, and I 



190 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

am told on good authority it is not exaggerated. 
The late IMr. Trelawn left an enormous fortune^ 
totally unencumbered, to his wife. It is a 
chance, Lord Seaforth — a sj^lendid chance." 

Seaforth made no answer. He had known 
Mr. Cairns all his life, and in his long minority 
Mr. Cairns had nursed the embarrassed estates 
his father had left behind him with the most 
conscientious care. With almost unconcealed 
anger the family lawyer had seen the reckless 
young lord treading the same road to ruin that 
his father had done before him. In vain Cairns 
had expostulated ; as long as money could be 
raised on the property, Seaforth "would have it. 
But these times were ended. No more money 
could be raised, and the mortgagees daily 
threatened to foreclose. In fact. Lord Seaforth 
was a ruined man — a hopelessly ruined man, 
Mr. Cairns told him, unless he married, and 
speedily, some lady with, a great fortune ; and 
Seaforth hearing, and fully understanding this, 
stood there thinking of Nellie. 
, "You understand the position," continued 
Mr. Cairns. *' These Jews won't be kept off 
any longer unless they see a chance. Ladies 
like rank, you know, Lord Seaforth, and you 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 191 

have still this to offer. I urge you chiefly for 
your mother's sake." 

Still Seaforth stood silent, thinking of Nellie. 
He had been communing with the evil S23irit 
which was now so familiar to him on this subject 
during the day before he had gone to his 
lawyer. Then he had gone to his lawyer, 
-iind things were even worse than he had ex- 
pected to find them. 

"I can't help myself," the evil spirit said 
now in his ear, as he stood there lookino: at the 
lawyer's hard face. *' Poor Nellie — she must 
go to the wall." 

" Well," he said, the next minute or so, and 
he assumed his society smile as he spoke, " I 
must do my best, I suppose, Mr. Cairns, to win 
this lair, or rather, rich lady. Perhaps she 
won't have me. What will you say, then ? " 

" I fear you will have to enlist, in that case, 
my lord," answered Cairns, who could scarcely 
control his impatience. 

" Well, that's one chance more, then ? " said 
Seaforth, shrugging his shoulders. 

" Yes," said the lawyer ; and then Seaforth 
laughed his light laugh, shook hands with 
Cairns, and went away. 



192 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

*' Eeckless young fool ! " said Cairns, in the 
bitterness of Lis heart, looking after him ; but 
the laugh had died on the lips of the '* reckless 
young fool" the moment that he had left the 
lawyer's presence. 

It was getting dusk now, and hailing a cab, 
Seaforth drove to the park, and avoiding the 
main thoroughfares, he went down and stood 
by the water, where a few children only were 
feeding the ducks. 

He wanted to be alone, but the same com- 
panion that had whispered in his ear at the 
lawyer's office followed him now and whispered 
in his ear again. 

" If she really loves me as she pretends to 
do," muttered the evil spirit, "she will not 
wish to ruin me, but will sacrifice herself for 
my sake. They say women who love will do 
anything for the m^an they care for ; so this 
will put her love to the test. If she does not 
love me, why should I sacrifice my whole life 
for her ? It was madness, folly from the 
beginning. Poor little Nellie ! I would have 
spared her the pain if I could." 

In this strain, for more than half-an-hour, 
Seaforth held self-converse. Another spirit — 



Croesus's widow. 193 

the old spirit of honour and good faith, which 
had dwelt with him before the taint of the 
world had fallen on his heart — once or twice 
flitted past him now. This spirit recalled 
Nellie, guileless, girlish — recalled her in her 
white dress among the wild hills of Strathearn, 
with the bloom of health and happiness on her 
smooth young cheeks. 

*' But this is romantic folly," whispered the 
evil spirit ; and so the spirit of honour and 
truth passed away, and the evil one took entire 
possession of the young man's heart. 

Then he returned to his mother's house ; and 
as he did so, his servant Clayton — who had been 
watching for him — put Nellie's telegram in his 
hand. 

'* This came from Mrs. Murray, my lord," 
the man -whispered ; and Seaforth took the 
paper and read it by the lamp in the hall. 

It was only a few words — " Come at once 
when you get this, Murray." And as Seaforth 
read the single line he frowned, and a hard 
look came over his mouth. 

" This is folly ! " he muttered, half aloud. 
" Call a hansom," he said, the next minute ; 
and very shortly afterwards he was standing 

VOL. II. B. 



19^ CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

beside Nellie in Miss Brewis's dining-room. 

Then he said, almost harshly — • 

" Whatever do you want, Nellie ? It won't 
do, you sending telegrams in this way — they 
might fall into hands they are not intended 
for." 

Nellie looked up into his face with some 
anger. 

**How can you speak to me so, Murray?'' 
she said. 

" But it's a fact, little woman," answered 
Seaforth. " Well, what do you want ? You 
are not going to bother me, I hope, for I am 
weary — weary already, Nellie ! " And Seaforth 
threw himself down in an arm-chair by the fire. 

Then Nellie went and knelt down beside him, 
and put her trembling little hand in his. 

*' I must bother you, darling I " she said, 
looking up in his face, her momentary anger 
having passed away, "I am sorry to do it — 
but oh I Murray, I am so unhappy — so unhappy 
about dear, dear father 1 " 

Seaforth winced impatiently. 

" Oh ! don't begin that old story, please, 
Nellie," he said. 

'' But I must, Murray," continued Nellie, 



CECES CS'S WIDOW. 195 



very earnestly. "Last niglit I went out, Murray, 
when you did not come. I went out for tlie 
first time, and where do you think I went ? " 

" Haven't the least idea." 

'* I went to my father's house. Don't frown 
like that, Murray. I did not disobey you, 
though it almost broke my heart not to o-o in 
and kiss the dear old man. But I didn't. I 
had promised you to keep our marriage a secret, 
and though I love my father so dearly, though 
I saw — for I saw him through the window, dear 
— that he is quite broken down with grief, I 
still kept my word. But I can't keep it any 
longer — darling, darling — " (for Seaforth would 
have now risen and pushed Nellie away, but for 
her clinging arms) — "don't look like that ! I love 
you dearly — most dearly— but I cannot let 
father die ! " 

" Nellie, this is absurd, utterly absurd ! " 
exclaimed Seaforth angrily. " You must listen 
to reason," he went on. "My position is such, 
that, as I have told you before, it is no earthly 
good you talking as you do. And as for telling 
your father about that foolish affair in Scot- 
land—" 

' " About our marriage," said Nelhe, more " 

h2 



196 CECESUSS WIDOW. 

firmly, and slie rose from her knees as she spoke. 
*' I will do it, Murray. Father loves me very 
dearly ; he will never tell it to anyone else if 
you do not wish it ; but I won't let father die 
— no, Murray, I won't, I won't ! " 

Nellie stood there facing Seaforth, wdth her 
cheeks flushed and her blue eyes flashing; and 
Seaforth, after looking at her for a moment, 
cast down his eyes, and gave an unpleasant 
little laugh. 

'* This is all very fine," he said ; *' these 
heroics are all very fine. But about this mar- 
riage, as you call it, Nellie — what if it were no 
marriage ? " 

* No marriage ! " repeated Nellie, and she 
suddenly grew pale to the very lips. 

*' Yes, no marriage," continued Seaforth, and 
the hard look his face had worn when he 
entered the room grew harder. '* I would have 
spared you this knowledge if I could, Nellie — 
but have you spared me ? I have told you a 
hundred times, that it would ruin me if our 
connection were known, yet you see you insist 
on telling it." 

'^ No marriage 1 " again repeated Nellie. 
*' Dare you tell me this ! Dare you stand 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 197 

there, you coward, yon liar, and tell me this ! " 

Nellie spoke in the utmost excitement, her 
face ghastly pale, her lips almost convulsed; 
and ag^ain Seaforth lauQ-hed — the same un- 
pleasant laugh. 

" You are an abusive young woman," he 
said. *'But come, Nellie, don't let us fight. 
I want you to listen to reason. We are not 
really married legally, so you see you can't 
go and tell your father that we are ; but all 
the same, little woman, I will never forsake 
you — never, I swear it ! " 

" And is this true, true ? " gasped Nellie, 
still with her eyes fixed on Seaforth's face. " Is 
it all a lie — all my love, my hopes, given to a 
lie ? " 

" Don't talk nonsense, child," said Seaforth, 
trying to take her hand, " and don't use hard 
words, for they do no good. If we had been 
married twenty times, what difi'erence would it 
have made ? I could never have acknowledged 
such a marriage — I am a ruined man, Nellie — 
I am forced to do what I have no heart for." 

"A ruined man!" said Nellie, stiU with 
that horror-stricken stare fixed on Seaforth's 
changing face. " A ruined man — and you want 



198 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

to throw me over, then, to many this ricli 
woman ? Strath earn told me this, and I told 
him he was a liar, as I tell you now." 

'' What did Strathearn say ? " said Seaforth,. 
and he turned away his head. 

'' Shall I tell you ? " said Nellie. '' He told 
me that with your own lips you had told him 
we were not married — and I threw the false 
words in his face. He told me, too, about this, 
rich lady, and I told him you could not marry 
her. Murray, Murray," continued Nellie, and 
she flung herself down on her knees before him,. 
'* even if you hate me, don't cast me away ! 
Don't, for God's sake, for the babe's sake that 
may be born to us ! If we are not married — le- 
gally married — marry me now — or, or I will die !' 

" Hush ! what folly ! I can't help myself, 
Nellie. Do you think I want to marry this 
woman ? Not T. But if I don't marry her I 
may take a pickaxe on my shoulder and go to 
Australia, for there is nothing else left for me. 
And if I had only myself to consider I would 
do this, but I have my mother." 

" And you really mean this, Murray ? " said 
Nellie, and she rose again from her knees and 
stood before him. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 199 

" I can t help myself, I tell you. Look liere, 
Nellie ; behave like a sensible woman, and it 
will be all right with you and yours, whatever 
happens. Don't think I want to cast you off 
— you thought we were married, though only a 
silly little girl like yourself would have believed 
it." 

*' Then it was all a sham — a lie ? " interrupted 
Nellie. 

Seaforth nodded his head. 

'' That's about it, little woman. I've behaved 
very badly — don't you think I don't know 
that — but things have turned out far worse than 
I expected ; for though I didn't really marry 
you that day in Scotland, I never meant, never 
dreamt of marrying another woman." 

*' And you mean this now ? " 

*' What can I do, child ? " and again Seaforth 
tried to take Nellie's hand. *' When a man is 
in a hole he must get out of it as best he can, 
and the mud is nearly up to my chin now, 1 
can tell you. No ; you be quiet — don't make a 
fuss — stay on here, and you shall have every- 
thing you want by-and-by." 

" My God ! " cried Nellie. " This is too 
much ! " and she flung up her arms. " Go away. 



200 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Lord Seafortli ! Go ! I will never see you- 
more I " 

'' Nonsense, nonsense ! Come, Nellie, be 
friends, be sensible. If you loved me very 
much, little woman, you wouldn't worry me- 
like tins." 

"Go away ! Go away ! " 

" I will, if you like ; but I will come back 
to-morrow. Give me a kiss now, Nellie, and 
say good-bye.'' 

" May God forgive you ! " murmured Nellie in 
stifled tones ; " may God forgive you I " 

" All rio'lit," laufyhed Seaforth, with a lioflit 
tliougli uneasy laugh, " we all need forgiveness, 
little woman. Well, good night ! be in a better 
humour when I come again." And Seaforth 
turned to leave the room. 

But just as he opened the door Nellie sprang-^ 
after him and seized his arm. 

" Tell me the truth, Murray," she said ; " tell 
me, before you go, are you lying to me or not ? " 

" Why should I lie to you, you foolish girl ? 
Do you think I like all this worry ? But I am 
forced to do, what you had better make up 
your mind to do, make the best of the situation. "^ 

Without another word Nellie dropped his 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 201 

^rm, and after a moment s hesitation Seafortli 
quitted tlie room and the house. As he went 
out something urged him to return. 

" Better not," said the evil spirit in his ear ; 
^•'she knows the worst now; she will get over it, 
-and become reconciled to the idea ; better leave 
her alone." 

So Seaforth went away, flinging the better 
spirit that prompted him to return behind hhn. 
Had he returned, perhaps the better spirit 
would have once more gained possession of his 
wavering heart — for what would he have seen ? 

Nellie lying on the floor — stricken, moaning 
like a creature in deadly pain. By-and-by 
Miss Brewis, hearing these miserable moans, 
came to the poor girl's assistance, and lifted up 
her head with some commiserating words. 

*' Don't take on so, ma'am," she said. "So 
it's true, I suppose, that young scamp of a 
lord has been playing you a fine trick ? Well, 
thank Heaven, no man ever tricked me ! Don't 
moan like that, my dear — I'll get you a little 
drop of something in water, that I take myseli 
when my heart's down, and it will do you good 
— but don't give way." 

Then Nellie Hfted up her head and looked in 



202 CIICESUS'S WIDOW. 

Miss Brewis's face with lier wild, miserable 
eyes. 

" Do you know what I am ? '' slie said. " I 
told you I was married ; but I told you, it seems, 
what was not true. I am an outcast — an out- 
cast ! " And Nellie wrung her hands, and flung 
her head down again upon the floor. 

" Well, ma'am," said Miss Br e wis, giving a 
sniff really to hide the tears that, in spite of 
herself, had stolen into her hard, green eyes, 
^' to tell you the truth, I never quite believed 
in the marriage. You see, when folks are 
married they don't fret about each other, as 
you fretted about this young gentleman, or 
young lord, or whatever he is ; but Til warrant 
him a bad \m, at any rate ! " 

Nellie now rose to her feet, with a white, 
despairing, set look in her young face. 

" I am going away, Miss Brewis," she said ;. 
" I am going away to-night — at. once. "Will you 
tell me what I owe you, and I will pay you 
now?" 

"Then I just won't," said Miss Brewis. , 
"Don't you talk of going away to-night — I 
won't let you, in fact. Go away, indeed ; go to 
the river, I suppose, for lodgings there ! No,. 



ORCESUS'S WIDOW. 203 

you shan't go. If this man lias behaved badly 
to you, make him pay for it, for, take my word, 
he's not worth fretting after. Have you no 
friends, no father, to bring him to book ? " 

Upon this allusion to her father, Nellie burst 
into loud despairing sobs, and Miss Brewis put 
her arms round her and drew the poor forsaken 
girl's head down upon her hard breast. 

** I never thought to have done it," thought 
the virtuous Joannah ; " I never thought to have 
taken a poor creature like this into my arms — 
but I can't help it. Hush, hush, my dear ! " she 
•said aloud ; " hush, he's not worth it! You just 
lie down on the couch a bit, and I'll get you 
something in water, and we'll talk it over." 

Joannah ran away to get the *' something in 
water," and having mixed it and tasted it twice 
to see it was all right, she returned to poor 
Nellie, who was now sitting up. 

" You are very good," she said gently to Miss 
Brewis, " but I don't want anything. I would 
rather, please, pay what I owe, Miss Brewis — 
for — for" — and her sobs commenced again — " I 
am not fit to stay in your house." 

" I'm the best judge of that," answered Jo- 
annah, sturdily. "Nonsense, my dear ; if you 



204 CECESUS'S WIDOVv'. 

won't take this — and it's orxlywater witli nothing 
to speak of in it — but if you won't take it, I'll 
just finish it myself, for it's a shame to waste 
even water ; and I'll get you a nice cup of tea 
or coffee, whichever you will have, and get you 
to bed. Novr don't talk of going away. I won't 
let you go to-night, so there's an end of it. 
Folks see things next morning quite different 
like ; but sometimes the next morning's sense 
comes too late." 

And Miss Brewis was as good as her words. 
She got Nellie some strong tea, and she talked 
to her in her homely fashion, and insisted upon 
her going to bed, and having closed the door 
upon her unhappy boarder, she commanded her 
servants, on " their peril," not to make the least 
noise. 

" Mrs. ]\Iurray has had some bad news," she 
told them — for Joannah was above gossipping 
with her maid servants — " and she must try to 
get to sleep." 

But though Miss Brewis might shut the bed- 
room door and command her household to 
preserve complete silence, Miss Brewis could 
not shut out the anguish which was racking 
Nellie's heart. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 205 

*^ She had lost everything," she told herself, 
as she tossed and moaned on her bed, '^ every- 
thing — everything." 

He was quite unworthy — perhaps this gave 
the bitterest pang. He had deceived her, 
purposely deceived her, a hundred times 
Nellie knew this as she lay there, and she knew 
also how fully she had believed in him and 
trusted him. She had cared nothing for his 
rank — nothing for anything but his love. She 
would have followed him to Australia, worked 
for him, died for him — but now — she would 
never see his face again, she told herself — 
never, never. 

She could not live to face all this shame — • 
she would not. She would die — what else had 
he left her to do ? So despairing, crushed, and 
hopeless, this poor child lay hour after hour ; 
and when at last all the household had retired 
for the night, she rose, white-faced and haggard, 
determined to go out and end her misery in the 
dark river, whose tide has swept over so many 
broken hearts. 

But before she went she enclosed in an 
envelope the money — and more — that she 
owed Miss Brewis. She left this on the toilet 



206 CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 

table of her bedroom, with a few pencilled 
words. 

*' I thank you for your kindness/' she wrote. 
" Will you give the other envelope, that I leave 
here as well as this, to Captain Murray when 
he comes. Tell him I was too miserable to 
live." 

In the other envelope, which she had directed 
to " Captain Murray," Nellie enclosed the 
remainder of the fifty pounds which Seaforth 
had given her on his return from Paris. She 
enclosed the notes without a line — a word. 
What could she say ? He had laughed at her, 
told her to make the best of the situation, and 
Nellie, not knowing of the struggle in his heart, 
felt no word of hers would touch him now. 

So, moneyless and hopeless, she went out into 
the dark night. She easily unlocked the house 
door, for the key was lyiag on the table in the 
hall. Once — ^just once — she thought of going 
to her father. But no, no ; she could not. 
Better that he should think her dead — know 
that she were dead — than to g:o back in her 
shame. 

She felt bewildered when she first went out, 
and scarcely koew where to turn. But she was 



\ CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 207 

not very far from the river ; she knew this, and 
so she went wandering on. 

Dark and chill was the night ; dark and chill 
the unhappy wanderer's heart. She never 
noticed that once or twice people looked at her, 
and after her, as she passed them in the streets. 
She was going to her death — death was better 
than a life of shame, she kept repeating to 
herself — and with this one dreary thought in her 
heart, she hurried on her hopeless way. 

She reached the river — the embankment at 
Chelsea. People were walking here ; there was 
a hum of voices. The black river flowed 
beyond, and on its misty breast, as Nellie 
stopped, she saw loom out in shadowy outline 
the big, flapping sail of some barge or vessel. 
It startled her — it came so near — it looked so 
phantom-like, so strange. The girl stood gazing 

it — watchincr it glide on in the darkness as 
we sometimes seem to watch in our dreams. 
Then, as it passed away, the memory of her 
misery came back. 

"I cannot live — " she moaned; and once more 
with hurried steps she hastened on. She would 
go to the bridge, she told herself — ^and then, one 
leap in the dark and her shame would be ended ! 



208 CRCESUS^S WIDOW. 

The bridge was not very far away : below it 
the water flowed noiselessly, behind her the 
lights of the mighty city twinkled and shone. 
Above — but Nellie looked not above, God had 
forsaken her — there was no help for her on earth ! 

As the maddened, unhappy creature was 
actually about to spring from the parapet of 
the bridge, her arm was roughly seized from 
behind. 

" None of this, now," said a man's voice ; 
*' don't you be going and throwing yourself 
into the river like that ? " 

Nellie gave a cry like a snared animal. 

" Let me go ! " she said. " Let me go ! " 

But the man held her firmly. 

*' Don't," he said, as she writhed and 
struggled ; " don't. I won't leave hold of you. 
Come, you must be quiet." 

Then almost in a minute, it seemed to the 
wretched girl, a crowd came round. Faces 
peered at her, questions were asked ; and 
suddenly the crowd seemed to part. It swayed, 
the lig^hts flashed all around her — there was a 
strange surging sound in her eai's, and a 
moment later all had passed into darkness. 



CHAPTER XV. 

MISS BREWIS SPEAKS HER MIND. 

The next morning ]\Iis3 Brewis rose in a very 
grim humour. She had made a fool of herself. 
She had cried over a poor lost creature, and had 
actually insisted on this poor lost creature 
remaining in her house. 

" I've been an ass," said Miss Brewis, sharply 
twisting up the hard knot of hair she wore at 
the back of her head with a very vicious twist. 

She went down stairs, wondering how she 
€ould get rid of Nellie. This, however, did not 
prevent her making some strong tea for Nellie 
before she thought of getting her own breakfast. 
Then she went upstairs with her tea, and rapped 
gently at Nellie's bedroom door. There was no 
response, and Miss Brewis rapped louder. As 
there was still no response. Miss Brewis opened 
the room door and walked in. She (rave an 



210 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

exclamation when she found it empty. Then 
she found the letter Nellie had left for her. She 
opened it, and gave a cry. 

'' The villain ! " she said, " the villain ! he'& 
murdered her." 

She was a hard woman — hard and cold — but 
she turned sick and faint as she read and re-read 
Nellie's letter. 

" Poor soul, poor soul ! " she said, rocking 
herself to and fro ; ''so she was too miserable to 
live. But I'll tell him. I'll make his ears smart 
if words can do it, or my name isn't Joannah 
Brewis ! " 

This last idea seemed quite refreshing to 
Miss Brewis. She hurried down stairs ; she 
sent at once for her friend Mrs. Benson. 

*' Now Mrs. Benson," she said, " you give me- 
the full name and address of that young lord 
we saw at the theatre the night before last — 
the young lord whose mother you were lady's 
maid to." 

" That's young Lord Seaforth ! " answered 
Mrs. Benson. " But, Miss Brewis, what is the 
matter? What do you want with the young 
lord's address ? " 

** Murder is the matter, Mrs. Benson," answered 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 211 

Joannali, grimly. " Murder and cruelty, and all 
sorts of horrid abominations ! " 

" Oh, dear I oh, dear ! how dreadful ! " said 
Mrs. Benson. 

Then Joannah told her tale. How she had 
thought it her duty to tell " the poor deluded 
creature" that the villain who came to see her, 
and passed himself off as " Captain Murray," 
was no other than young Lord Seaforth. How 
the villain had come, and a terrible scene had 
been between them, and then he had gone away, 
and the poor lost creature had fallen on the 
floor, and moaned ^' enough to break one's 
heart." 

" I own I was soft," said Joannah, " and it's 
not my way. I own I took a poor creature no 
better than she should be up in my arms, and 
almost cried over her. And this is the end — 
read for yourself, Mrs. Benson — ay, ay, the 
fishes are eating her at this very minute, I make 
not the sligrhtest doubt." 

o 

Mrs. Benson took the letter and read it, and 
then began to cry. 

'' I nursed him when he was a little babe," 
she said. " I can't believe he's bad — he was a 
sweet child. He may have erred, but he never 



212 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

meant to do any harm — I'm sure lie never 
meant to do any harm." 

" Then he's done it without meaning it ! " 
snapped Joannah. " He's murdered this poor 
creature, Mrs. Benson, and I would like to be 
at his hangiDg." 

" Oh ! Miss Brewis ! " 

" That I would," said Joannah, with relish. 
*' But I'll send for him. I'll speak my mind to 
him, and then I'll send for a policeman.'' 

But Mrs. Benson would not hear of this. She 
pointed out to Joannah how such a scandal 
might ruin her house ; how she ought to consider 
the feelings of " the family." 

" My lady was a very proud lady/' she said, 
^' and had only a sad life with my lord, and she 
is wrapped up in her only son. Think, Miss 
Brewis, if this had happened to yourself — if a 
child of yours — " 

" Don't insult me, Mrs. Benson. I never 
thought of such a thing," interrupted the 
virtuous Joannah. 

'' I don't mean any offence," urged Mrs. 
Benson. " But don't think of making a 
scandal, for your own sake as weU as my 
lady's. How do you know that this poor 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 213 



young creature has done any harm to liersclf ? 
Most likely slie just has had a quarrel with the 
young lord, and has run away to frighten him. 
No, you take my advice. "Write and tell Lord 
Seaforth Mrs. Murray is gone, and I'll get 
Benson to slip to my lady's himself with your 
letter, and he'll give it either to Clayton, who 
is my lord's servant, or to the young lord, so that 
there will be no chance of it falling into my 
lady's hands." 

Miss Brewis was finally persuaded to adopt 
this plan, the idea that a scandal might injure 
the reputation of her house having a decided 
influence upon her mind. She accordingly sat 
down and penned (at Mrs. Benson's dictation) 
the following letter to Lord Seaforth : — 

My Lord, — I beg to inform you that Mrs. Murray, who- 
was staying at my house, and whom you visited here yester- 
day, appeared in great distress after you left, and during the 
night quitted my roof unknown to me, leaving a letter 
addressed to me, enclosing her week's account, and also 
a message to you. I had to tell you she " was too miserable 
to live" — she said. Also she left a letter addressed to you, 
which I have now in my possession. 

JoANNAH Brewis. 

Nothing would induce Joannah to put " yours 
respectfully " — which the old family servant 
wished her to do — before her signature. 



214 CECESUSS WIDOW. 

" No, I won't, Mrs. Benson 1 " snapped 
Joannali. '' His respectfully, indeed ! I've no 
respect for him, or, for that matter, for any of 
the male sex. Some of them may be well 
enough, but the most of them are bad enough, 
.and the less one has to say to them the better." 

While Miss Brewis was writing her letter, 
the young lord to whom it was addressed was 
just rousing himself from the heavy sleep of 
semi-intoxication. This was by no means a 
usual vice of Seaforth's. But the night before 
he had tried to drown in wine the promptings 
of that better spirit, whom during the day he 
had refused to listen to. 

And now when he awoke, hot, restless, and 
with a headache, his first thoughts were for 
Nellie. 

" I wonder how the poor, silly little woman 
is ? " he thought. " Poor Nellie ! she was 
terribly cut up ; I wish there was any other 
way." And Seaforth turned on his pillow and 
sighed, and then tried to forget Nellie and fall 
asleep again. 

But sleep is a very fickle comforter, not to 
b)e won often by its greatest and mightiest 
wooers. Yet it comes unsought on the straw 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 215 

pallet, to the worn-out son of labour stretched 
on his hard, poor bed. It comes beautiful — 
bright-robed in dreams — to the oppressed, to 
the weary. It has a world of its own ; a world 
where all are equal, like to its mysterious sister, 
Death. 

And sleep would not come to the young lord 
who sought in its oblivion to forget the wrong- 
that he had done. His haunting S23irits — the 
good and evil — stood on each side his bed. 
The evil said — 

" It was better to tell her at once. What 
else could I do ?" Then quoth the good spirit— 

"Poor Nellie! poor, tender-hearted little 
girl — it was cruel to stab her, poor Nellie ! " 

So Seaforth lay tossing restlessly, and pre- 
sently a gentle rap came to his bedroom door, 

'' Come in," he called ; and with a scared 
look on his usually composed face, his confi- 
dential servant, Clayton, now entered. 

Seaforth caught sight of the man's flice, and 
at once jumped up in bed. 

" Has anything happened ? What the deuce 
do you look like that for, Clayton ? " he asked 
nervously. 

The man cast down his eyes, and answered — 



216 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

"My lord," he said, ''Mr. Benson — who 
married, as perhaps you remember, my lady's 
late maid, Charlton — has just arrived, and he has 
brought a letter for your lordship." 

" Well ! Is it about anything wonderful ? " 

'' Something very sad has happened, my lord. 
Mrs. Murray — " 

" What ? " cried Seaforth, and he sprang up 
and turned ghastly pale. " Nothing has hap- 
pened to her ? Speak man, or I'll strangle you ! " 
And Seaforth seized his servant's arm. 

" I'm afraid there has, my lord. She has 
disappeared — " 

*' Disappeared ! How and when ? " cried 
Seaforth, in the o;reatest excitement. 

"Last night. It seems you saw her yesterday, 
my lord ; and after you left Belgrave Eoad, the 
poor lady was taken terri])ly ill, and told her 
landlady she would go at once ; but the land- 
lady, Miss Brewis, would not hear of this, but 
got Mrs. Murray to bed—" 

" Go on, go on ! " 

" Well, my lord, it seemed this Miss Brewis 
is a friend of my lady's late maid, Charlton, 
who married Mr. Benson, who has a chemist's 
shop at the corner of Belgrave Road, and this 



CE(ESUS'S WIDOW. 217 

is liow Benson has brought the letter. For it's 
a sad business, I'm afraid." 

" Give me the letter," said Seaforth, eagerly ; 
but the man still hesitated. 

*' Perhaps this Miss Brewis may be mistaken," 
he said. *' Mrs. Benson hopes she is mistaken. 
That is why Benson brought the letter, so as to 
keep things as quiet as possible ; but Mrs. 
Murray, it seemed, left a message for you in 
her letter to Miss Brewis — a sort of farewell 
messao'e." 

o 

With a cry of horror, Seaforth now snatched 
Miss Brewis's letter from Clayton's hand ; with 
another, half-sob, half-cry, he read the cruel 
words. 

"My God! my God!" he said, "can she 
have been so mad ! " 

" Mrs. Benson, my lord, hopes she may not 
have done any harm to herself," said Clayton,, 
who also was very much overcome. " Mrs. 
Benson thinks perhaps your lordship and the 
poor lady may have had a quarrel, and that — ■ 
well, that she may have written this just to 
alarm your lordship. This is why Benson him- 
self, as I said before, brought the letter. And, 
my lord — you'll excuse me — but hadn't I better 



218 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

o-o on at once to Bcl2;rave Road ? Mrs. Benson 
advised this, for Miss Brewis, the landlady, is a 
party with a very bitter tongue, Mrs. Benson 
sent word." 

" Wait for me, I will go at once," said 
Seafortli. And a quarter of an hour later- 
pale, haggard, and trembling in every limb — 
Lord Seaforth drove up to Miss Brewis's door. 

Joannah saw him arrive, and prepared at 
once "to speak her mind." Her green eyes 
gleamed with the vicious gleam of a cat about 
to spring upon its prey, and Seaforth had 
hardly entered the hall when Joannah met him. 

'^ I have called about Mrs. Murray," faltered 
Seaforth. 

'* The poor lady that drowned herself — being 
forsaken," re|)lied Joannah, with grim satisfac- 
tion. '' Walk in here, my lord, and I'll give 
you the particulars." 

Seaforth had scarcely power to follow her. 
Then, as they entered the dining-room, he turned 
and faced Joannah's cruel visage. 

" What reason have you," he said, grasping 
the back of a chair for support, "for supposing 
such a dreadful thing ? " 

Joannah gave a sniff. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 219 



" A very good reason," slie said sharply. 
** Couldn't well have a Letter reason — seeiucr 

o 

what I savv' with my own eyes." 

*' What do you mean ? Good God ! what 
do you mean ? " 

" My meaning's quite distinct," replied 
Joannah. " After your lordship took your 
departure from this house yesterday — which I 
regret your lordship ever entered — the poor 
forsaken creature who had been fool enouofh to 
trust you, fell down on the floor and moaned 
that awful, it would have moved any human 
heart." 

Joannah here stopped in her narrative. She 
was enjoying the unmistakeable sufl'eriDg that 
her words were inflicting on Seaforth, and her 
green eyes looked absolutely ferocious. 

*' After a time," proceeded Joannah, '' the 
moans continuing — though, for the matter of 
that, I had no business with my lodger's moans 
rr-l went to see after the poor creature, and 
found her stretched out on the carpet. I lifted 
her up, and she looked at me with a look I 
can't forget. * Do you know what I am ? ' she 
asked, quite wild-like. Tm an outcast — an 
outcast ! ' Those were her very words, and 



220 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

I wlio liave been bronglit up respectable, and 
have never listened to any male nonsense, felt 
quite a turn." 

" Did you leave her ? You surely did not 
leave lier in sucb distress ? " asked Seaforth, 
wlio was terribly pale. 

Joannali gave a satirical giggle. 

" I, not having caused her distress, did not 
Heave her, your lordship," said Joannah, very 
bitterly, and she nodded her head at the 
unhappy Seaforth. *' /, not having ruined her, 
and brought her young head, and I've no doubt 
her parents' grey ones, with sorrow to the 
grave, stayed with her after your lordship had 
left her. I lifted her up in my arms, though I 
had never had anything that was not respect- 
able in my arms before, and I mixed her some- 
thing in water, and I got her some tea, and I 
did my best for her, though I am a Christian 
woman and go to church regularly, and she had 
called herself an outcast ! I did all this your 
lordehip, after your lordship left her 1 " 

Nothing could exceed the bitter volubility 
with which Joannah poured out these words. 
She felt no pity for the pale, haggard-faced 
young man opposite to her. If he were suffering. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 221 

lie deserved to suffer, she tliought. " Serve liim 
right," she mentally decided, looking with 
relish on Seaforth's white, quivering features. 

*' And having got the poor soul to bed," 
continued Joannah, " I thought I had her safe 
for the night ; but I was mistaken, your lord- 
ship, as you will find after the perusal of the 
letter she has left behind — in which letter I 
may now state, she left her weekly account in 
full, and ten shillings extra, which I now beg 
to return." x\nd Joannah produced her jxirse. 
"Good heavens! woman," cried Seafoith," don't 
talk about such folly ! Tell me how she went." 

Miss Brewis tossed her head and snorted 
indignantly. 

"I may be a woman, your lordship," she 
said. " I am, I hope, a respectable woman, at 
all events, but I am not accustomed to be so 
iiddressed. However, to go on w^ith the poor 
creature's melancholy end, I may tell you I 
heard nothing: throusfh the nio;ht ; but this 
morning, when I took her up a cup of early 
tea, I found her room empty, and this letter 
addressed to your lordship, in the name, I 
suppose, you imposed on the poor unfortunate 
person." 



222 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Seafortli snatched the envelope Nellie had 
left for him out of Miss Brewis's hand, and tore 
it open. When he saw its contents — the bank- 
notes he had given her — an exclamation of 
absolute horror burst from his white lips. 

" Is that all ? " he said. " All ? " And he 
flung the notes upon the floor. 

"■ So she left the money behind her — poor, 
poor soul ! " said Miss Brewis, looking down at 
the notes, and speaking in a more subdued tone 
than she had yet spoken in, during the interview. 

'* Did she leave nothing else — no word ?" 
gasped Seaforth. 

" Yes, my lord ; a word of farewell," answered 
Joannah, resuming her grim emphasis. ''*Tell 
him' — you see she has written here" (and 
Joannah held out Nellie's letter to herself), 
" ' Tell him I am too miserable to live ! ' " 

Even Joannah's heart felt softened at the; 
terrible cry which burst from Seaforth's lips as 
he read these words. The bitter speech she 
was framing died on her tongue, her green 
eyes lost their cat-like gleam. 
. " It's a sad case— " she began. But as she; 
spoke, Seaforth tottered forward, and fell 
heavily on the floor. '^aim ^ 



CHAPTER XVI. 

CONSCIEXCE. 

Miss Brewis's shriek as Lord Seaforth fell 
forward, alarmed the whole household. Clayton, 
Seaforth's servant, who had followed him to 
Belgrave Road, heard it, and ran at once into 
the dininQ:-room, for he had been w^aitinfr in the 
hall in anything but a happy condition of mind. 

** Oh ! my lord ! " he said, and he knelt down 
and raised the head of the prostrate and in- 
sensible man. 

'* What has happened ? " he asked of Miss 
Brewis, who was standing with uplifted hands. 

" It's his conscience," answered Joannah, 
grimly ; but the next minute she hurried out 
of the room and brought some water, and began 
bathing Seaforth's cold hands and brow. 

" We had best send for a doctor," she said, 
and Clavton aorreeino: to this, one of the maids 
was despatched at once to bring a doctor. 



224 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Before tlie doctor arrived, however, Seaforth 
bei^an to recover. Then Joannah produced a 
brandy bottle and sparingly poured a little in 
a glass, which Seaforth drank. 

" Give me more,"' he said the next minute 
hoarsely, looking wildly round, but Joannah 
snatched away her brandy bottle. 

" Too much is not good for you, young man,'' 
she said, but Clayton interfered. 

" Let him have it. Miss Brewis," he said, and 
very unwillingly Joannah allowed Clayton ta 
take her brandy bottle out of her hands. 

After he had taken the spirit, Seaforth tried 
to rise, assisted by Clayton. He was trembling 
in every limb, and terribly shattered, but after 
sitting silent for a few minutes, he spoke col- 
lectedly enough to his servant. 

" We must find her," he said. " Ask at what 
hour she disappeared." 

" Plis lordship wishes to know, Miss Brewis^ 
the particulars about Mrs. Murray leaving your 
house ? " asked Clayton, in a semi-undertone to 
Miss Brewis. '' Don't speak loud — ^just tell me 
quietly, and I'll tell his lordship." 

" His lordship knows all I know," answered 
Joannah. ''I left her, as I supposed, safe for 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 225 

the niglit, aDcl in the morning slie was no- 
where. I have nothing more to add." 

But Qayton was not content with this. He 
beckoned Miss Brewis out of the room, and 
questioned her closely, and seemed very much 
overcome by Miss Brewis's story. 

*' Don't mention it, Miss Brewis," he said, 
when Joannah had finished. " In all probability 
this poor young lady has only run away, and 
in that case we'll find her. His lordship is 
terribly upset — it's a bad business at best." 
And Clayton shook his head and sighed. 

" It's murder," said Joannah. 

" Not quite as bad as that, I hope. However, 
I'll go down to one of the private-inquiry offices 
at once. She had no money, you say ? " 

" Not a penny — she left all behind her — and 
you'll please pick up the notes that his lordship 
threw on the floor before he took the faint, and 
count them, for though I can depend on my 
own honesty I can't on other people's." 

After this Clayton returned to Lord Seaforth, 
and whispered a few words in his ear. 

"It will be best to do this, my lord," he 
said aloud the next moment, and Seaforth 
nodded his head ; and then, leaning on 

YOL. II. I 



226 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Clayton's arm, lie quitted Miss Brewis's house. 

He drove directly from thence (still accom- 
panied by Clayton) to a private-inquiry office. 
Here Clayton got out of the cab, and had a some- 
what lengthened interview with the manager, 
who promised to let them have some news in a 
few days. - >■ * 

'' If she has committed suicide," said the 
manager, '' her body will probably be washed 
up. But she may merely be hiding — though 
not taking any money with her has an ugly 
look." 

"When Clayton returned to Lord Seaforth in 
the cab he did not rejDcat this last remark of 
the private inquiry man. He tried to speak 
hopefully to Seaforth, and Seaforth tried to 
take comfort from his words. But all the day 
afterwards a haunting dread followed Seaforth. 
He sent Clayton to the street near Eegent's 
Park where MajorBlythe lived, to make inquiries 
at the shops in the neighbourhood, as it occurred 
to them that Nellie might have returned to her 
old home. But Clayton soon found out that 
this was not the case. Each post that passed, 
Seaforth hoped that it would bring him some 
letter, but no letter, no word arrived all the da v. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 227" 

Then when night came on, he shrank from 
its gloomy prospect. He was quite unnerved, 
and kept drinking, hoping to forget for an hour 
or two the ghastly vision which his conscience 
had conjured. But even in his dreams, a white, 
despairing face seemed to loom shadow-like 
from the darkness. And as the grey dawn 
broke and the mists cleared from his brain, 
Nellie's last message came back and struck 
again like a sharp sword upon his soul. 

*' Tell him I am too miserable to live.'' 

He started up, he groaned aloud. Then he 
tried to reason with himself, but all in vain. 
Before him was the handw^riting on the wall 
— the fiery letters of death and doom — the 
\varnino: that had come too late ! 

Though it was yet early morning he sum- 
moned Clayton, and ordered him at once to go 
to Scotland Yard and apply to the police. 
The man hesitated. 

" Hadn't we better wait a day or so^ my 
lord ? " he asked. 

" No," said Seaforth imperiously, " go at 
once — I can bear it no longer — offer any reward 
you like, tell anyone — anything is better than 
this hell!" 

i2 



228 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

He looked so excited and utterly miserable 
that Clayton did not dare further to oppose his 
wishes. But Clayton impressed upon the 
police, as he had impressed upon the manager 
of the private-inquiry office, that the affair 
ought to be kept as quiet as possible. 

*' Don't let it get into the papers," urged 
Clayton. '' They are ready to seize on any 
scandal about a noble family, and in all pro- 
bability this young lady has only run away." 

'' But was there any reason for her running 
away ? " asked the Inspector, to whom Clayton 
was speaking. 

" My lord and she had quarrelled, I under- 
stand," answered Clayton, casting down his 
eyes. 

"Well, we must do our best," said the 
Inspector, and he then inquired all the par- 
ticulars about Nellie's flight, and promised to 
keep the affair quiet until he communicated 
further with Lord Seaforth. 

After Clayton had made these arrangements 
with the police, he returned to the house at 
South Kensington. Here he found Lord Sea- 
forth even more excited than when he left him. 
And all through the day it was the same thing ; 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 229 

and during tlie evening, after dinner, Lady 
Seafortli's anxiety about lier son's strange 
manner and appearance grew so great, that she 
broke through her usual reserve, and going up 
to him she laid her hand upon his shoulder. 

" Are you ill, Murray ? " she said. " What 
is the matter with you ? Are these wretched 
money troubles worrying you more than usual V 

Then Seaforth broke into a hollow laus^h, 
and his eves had a strano;e, wild sflitter in 
them. 

" Exactly ! " he said, and he threw up his 
arms excitedly. " These wretched money 
troubles — yes, they did it — they have caused 
it all — have damned my soul ! " 

"Oh! Seaforth, hush, hush!" said the 
shocked mother. 

''But it's true," he went on still more 
excitedly. "The devils are laughing now, 
mother — this was their trap, and I j)lunged 
into it, and dragged down a sweet soul with 
me — a sweet, lost soul!" And Seaforth burst 
into sudden and passionate sobs. 

The mother put her arms round him, and 
laid her hand upon his burning brow. 

" My darhng," she said, soothingly, " hush, 



230 CKCESUSS WIDOW. 

liusli ! you have a fever on you, Scafortli — you 
are very ill." 

'' Yes," lie said, and the alarmed mother at 
once sent for medical advice, for she saw now 
how really ill he was. 

Before the night was over he grew dan- 
gerously so. The fever had attacked his brain^ 
and the miserable strain and anxiety he had 
gone through during the last two days, 
augmented by the quantity of wine he had 
taken to drown the voice of conscience, had 
proved more than his mental strength could 
bear. He grew violent as the night advanced,, 
and raved and called for Nellie ; then shrieked 
out that he saw her, pointing with his hand ta 
some fancied object in the room. 

'' Nellie I Nellie I Nellie I " he kept calling in 
appealing accents ; and his proud mother sitting 
by, bowed her head and stopped her ears ta 
shut out that piteous cry. 

She seemed to understand it all, as she sat 
there watching her only son ; the dark struggle 
that had gone on in his heart ; the tragedy in 
which he had played a part ; but she spoke no 
word, and gave no sign of her secret thoughts. 
'' Seaforth had fever ; he was very ill," she 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 231 

told Nora Trelawn, who went to inquire after 
the young lord, having heard a report of his 
dangerous illness. And what Lady Seaforth 
told Nora Treiawn, she told all who went to ask 
after her son. She did not tell how one name 
was always on his lips ; she did not tell how her 
late maid, Mrs. Benson, came to her in secret, 
and told her, with many tears, of the disap- 
pearance of '' Mrs. Murray " from Miss Brewis's 
house ; for Mrs. Benson, after many doubts 
about the propriety of doing this, and after 
learning of Lord Seaforth's dangerous condition, 
had decided that it was right that his mother 
should know, particularly as the police had been 
to Miss Brewis's house, and that lady had 
declared " it was more than she could stand.'' 

So, after Benson's visit to her "Ladyship," 
her ladyship knew everything. She said very 
little to Benson. Her ^^ale, clear skin flushed, 
and she cast down her large, prominent blue 
eyes as she listened to her late maid's story. 

" Young men will do these things, I suppose," 
she said, coldly. " Ask this person — your friend 
who has the boarding or lodging-house — to keep 
this unpleasant affair a secret, and I will give 
you fifty pounds to give her, Benson." 



232 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Ill could tills proud lady spare this fifty 
pounds. Joannali Brewis, to wliom she was 
sending it, was a great deal richer than Alice 
Elizabeth, Viscountess Seaforth. And Joannah 
was furious when Mrs. Benson produced the 
bribe. 

" Thank you, Mrs. Benson ! " said Joannah in 
her tartest tones, tossing her head indignantly 
as she spoke, '' Thank you, but I want no blood: 
money all the same, or hush money, if you like 
that name any better ! " 

'^You shouldn't take it in that way, Miss 
Brewis," said Mrs. Benson. ''My lady only 
meant — " 

" I know quite well what she meant," inter- 
rupted Joannah. " She meant to stop my 
tongue — to take my natural rights of speaking, 
away from me I But, thank you, T jDrefer my 
tongue, and wouldn't part with it for a hundred 
pounds, let alone fifty ! " 

*' Well, you see, in noble families — " mildly 
sug^o:ested the old servant. 

Joannah snapped her fingers. 

*' Don't care that for noble families!" she- 
said contemptuously. *' Noble families don't 
care that for me, and I return the compliment. 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 233 

If I say notliing about this sad business it will 
be for my own sake, and the sake of future 
lodgers, and not for noble families, I can tell 
you!" 

But for her own sake. Miss Brewis decided it 
was wiser to hold her tongue about ''Mrs. 
Murray's " disappearance, and she accordingly 
did hold it. But she would have nothing to say 
to Lady Seaforth's fifty pounds. Benson duly 
returned this to her ladyship, and my lady 
raised her eyebrows in surprise. 

" I thought these kind of people were always 
ready to take money," she said, and Mrs. 
Benson felt a little hurt by the remark. 

*' If — if you hear anything more, Benson,' 
continued Lady Seaforth, casting down her 
proud, blue eyes, and speaking with a certain 
hesitation of manner that was unusual to her, 
*' will you let me know ? I can depend upon 
your prudence — and there may some further 
annoyance arise to Lord Seaforth about — this 
unfortunate entanglement." 

" Yes, my lady," answered Benson, and then 
she took her leave. But before the day was 
over, Lady Seaforth had another visitor about 



^'this unfortunate entanglement." 



234 census's widow. 

This was Strathearn. Lady Seaforth was 
sitting by lier son's bedside, watching his restless, 
broken slumber, when a card was brought to 
her, on which was engraved the name of Mr. 
Campbell, of Strathearn. 

" I cannot see Mr. Campbell," said Lady 
Seaforth. " Tell him Lord Seaforth still con- 
tinues very ill." 

The servant took down her ladyship's message,, 
but returned after a few minutes' absence with 
another card of Strathearn 's, on which he had 
written in pencil, 

"J must see you on urgent business.'' 

Then Lady Seaforth went down to receive 
Strathearn, who was standing, waiting for her, 
in the drawing-room. She knew him slightly,. 
and when he turned his face round as she 
entered the room, she noticed how pale and 
agitated he was. 

" So," he said, in his rough way, advancing 
to meet Lady Seaforth, " Seaforth is very ill, I 
hear ! " 

" He is dangerously ill," answered Lady 
Seaforth, very gravely. 

'' Humph ! " said Strathearn. " Then I can't 
see him, I suppose ? " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 235 

" Certainly not — lie would not understand 
anytliing that you said to him." 

" Humph ! " again muttered Strathearn, and 
then he began walking up and down Lady 
Seaforth's drawing-room in his old impatient 
way. 

" I am sorry I cannot remain with you, Mr. 
Campbell," continued Lady Seaforth, " but my 
son's health — " 

**Lady Seaforth," now interrupted Strathearn, 
without much ceremony, ^'1 came to see Seaforth 
on a matter that concerns both his honour and 
mine ! Last autumn he brouo-ht down to mv 
place in Scotland, a lady — " 

"Mr. Campbell," said Lady Seaforth, with 
grave courtesy, though her pale face grew crim- 
son, *•' you must pardon me for reminding you 
that these are subjects unfit for discussion with 
n lady." 

"The lady in question. Lady Seaforth," 
•answered Strathearn bitterly, and with a shrug 
of his broad shoulders, " was an innocent young- 
girl, who believed herself to be your son's wife." 

" His wife ! " repeated Lady Seaforth, lifting 
lip her eyes in utter astonishment. " Liipossible, 
Mr. Campbell ! — you arc completely mistaken !" 



236 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" I did not say she was his wife," contiuued 
Stratheani, 3'ct more l)itterly, ''but that she 
believed herself to be so — and Seaforth had 
shamefully deceived her." 

^'I cannot listen to abuse of my son." 

*^ Let us leave him alone then ; but I want to- 
learn the truth. This girl, Mrs. Murray, left 
Strathearn after an interview with me. In this 
interview — your ladyship must pardon me if I 
speak unpalatable truths — in this interview 
then, for the first time, she learned, and from 
my words, what I believe to be her true position. 
She was shocked, indignant, and she left my 
house the day after, and has never returned. 
I have waited and waited, how impatiently I 
cannot tell you, to hear something of her from 
Seaforth, I had given him perhaps just cause 
for anger, and I expected when I found Mrs, 
Murray had left Scotland, or at least Strathearn, 
that he wouJd have written to me. But I waited 
in vain — and now I want to know two things, 
and then I shall trouble him no more." 

"I cannot answer for my son, or meddle 
with his affairs, and I must beg of you, Mr. 
Campbell, to end this interview," said Lady 
Seaforth. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 237 

" I must learn sometlimg before I go," said 
Stratheam passionately. " Is your son going 
to marr}" the rich Avoman they call Croesus's 
widow ? and what has he done with the innocent 
girl he has so cruelly and shamefully wronged ? " 

Strathearn's face was quite pale with passion 
as he asked these questions. He stood there 
facing Lady Seaforth, fierce and indignant, and 
the polished woman of the world shrank back, 
and cast down her haughty eyes. 

" I am astonished, utterly astonished, ]\Ir. 
Campbell, that you should ask me such 
questions," she said ; '* and you must know that 
even could I do so, I would decline to answer 
them. AYhen my son recovers — " 

" And in the meanwhile this poor girl may 
starve," interrupted Strathearn. 

'•' I cannot discuss the question." 

" No ! " said Stratheam, with great indigna- 
tion, *' but Seaforth shall answer for all this to 
me. But if he is not fit to see me," he added, 
"he had a servant — a confidential servant, I 
understood — called Clayton, who came down 
once to Strathearn, and who was present, so 
she told me, at the ceremony in Edinburgh, 
which this poor, wronged girl believed to be her 



238 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

marriage. Now, Lady Seaforth, can I see this 
man ? " 

For a moment Lady Seaforth hesitated. 
Then, in her usual cultured, haughty manner, 
she told a deliberate falsehood to serve her son. 

"This man — Clayton," she said, *'left my 
son's service some little time ago." 

" Where has he gone, then ? Surely, you 
can find out that ? " asked Strathearn eagerly. 

'' I really cannot. My son dismissed him 
for some impertinence or other, I think, and I 
fancy I heard Seaforth say he had gone abroad." 

Strathearn gave an impatient ejaculation. 

" And this is all you know ? " he said. ''All 
— and the unhappy girl ma}^ die in her despair ! " 

Lady Seaforth grew a little pale. She knew 
at this very moment what terrible fears were 
entertained about " the unhappy girl's " fate ; 
she knew that she had disappeared, that there 
was no one to look for her now that Seaforth 
lay ill — and yet for her son's sake, for her 
pride's sake, she would not speak the truth to 
Strathearn. 

'' I can, of course, say nothing," she repeated; 
and Strathearn turned to leave the room as she 
spoke. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 239 

*'Theii I may as well go/' he said, almost 
rudely. " Good-day, Lady Seaforth — 1 might, 
perhaps, have known you would show no pity — '^ 
And muttering, frowning, and indignant. Strath- 
earn quitted Lady Seaforth's house. 

As he went out, he made a vow. 

"I will find her," he said, clenching his hands ; 
" if she is alive I will find her." And yet he 
knew not which way to begin his search. Since 
Nellie had quitted Strathearn the fiercest 
passions by turns had racked this man's unruly 
heart. He loved Nellie — for the first time in 
all his life, he loved with an absorbing passion 
which had overpowered all his other feelings. 
In the last interview he had had with her at 
Strathearn, he had told her this, and in spite of 
his pride in his old name, he had asked this 
nameless woman to be his wife. When he first 
heard that she was gone ; that she had gone 
without a word, a line for him — gone back he 
naturally supposed to Seaforth — he fell into the 
most violent and ungovernable paroxysms of 
rage. He swore that he would forget her, 
that he hated her, that he would never think 
of her more ; yet his very efforts to accomplish 
this only seemed to fix her image more in- 



240 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

delibly on his perturbed and restless heart. 

For some time after Nellie left the Glen, he 
expected each day to receive an indignant letter 
from Seaforth. He would have given anything 
to have received such a letter. He would have 
heard something of her, at least, then — this 
miserable silence and doubt would at least have 
ended. Bat no letter came, and Strathearn 
heard not a word either of Seaforth or Nellie. 
At last, after weeks and weeks, he could bear 
the suspense no longer — he came up to town — 
he made inquiries about Seaforth at his club. 
He then heard two pieces of news about the 
man who had once been his friend. One was 
that Lord Seaforth was about to marry Croesus's 
widow ; the other that he was seriously ill. 

Strathearn then went to Lady Seaforth's house, 
as we have seen, and insisted upon seeing her. 
There was a sort of wild, bitter joy in his heart 
when he heard that Seaforth was about to marry 
Mrs. Trelawn. He remembered how he had told 
Nellie this at Strathearn, and how this marriage 
would of course separate Nellie for ever from 
Seaforth. Then, when he heard of Seaforth's 
dangerous illness, a sudden fear struck chill and 
cold upon his heart. Could anything have 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 241 

happened ? Where was she ? He must know ; 
and so he went to Lady Seaforth's, and the 
result of his interview with her was that he 
knew nothing more than he had known before. 

After he had left her, Lady Seaforth returned 
to her son's hedside,and stood for a few moments 
gazing at his altered face. Deeply, tenderly, 
almost passionately, had this proud woman loved 
her only son. All her hopes, all the joys of her 
life, had been centred on him. For his sake she 
had held her place in the world, and schemed 
and struggled with the difficulties of her position. 
And to-day — what had she heard ? she thought 
bitterly — what had she done ? She stood there 
looking at the fever-stricken face, and then 
hastily turned away and left the room, hurry- 
ing to her own, and scarcely had she got there, 
when she fell down by the bed, utterly over- 
come and broken down with emotion and shame. 

"It is too much, too much ! " she sobbed. 
** That man to come here and insult me as he 
did — better had you died, Murray — died when 
you lay in my arms an innocent child, than 
have lived to have cost me what you have done 
to-day ! " 



CHAPTEE XVII. 



MRS. TOM. 



A CROWD swaying backwards and forwards — 
strange voices — a rusli, a wdiirl of overw^lielming 
emotion, were the last impressions that the 
miserable, broken - hearted woman — girl no 
longer — whom we have of late called Mrs. 
Murray, received on the bridge at Chelsea, 
before her senses became deadened to every- 
thing around. 

When she recovered consciousness she found 
herself borne swiftly along in a carriage, her 
head resting on soft cushions, and the kind, 
sympathetic voice of a woman, who was seated 
beside her, sounded in her ears. 

'* Are you a little better now ? " said this kind 
voice. '' You are quite safe ; don't look so 
startled ; before long we shall be at home." 



CRCESUS'S ^YIDOW. 243 

When Nellie lieard these words she lifted 
her head and tried to think, looking with her 
frightened eyes at the face of the woman who 
was speaking to her ; and then, as her fuller 
■consciousness returned, a moan broke from her 
lips. 

"Don't," said the kind voice, Avhich had 
before spoken, "don't worry — things will all 
€ome right — I am so glad I saw you." And 
Nellie felt her hand taken in a warm little 
palm, and held in a friendly grasp. 

How Nellie found herself in this carriage, 
seated beside a good-looking young woman, 
with a fresh, happy face, and brown hair, in 
which there were flowers, is very easily ex- 
plained. 

The wretched girl, who had left as her last 
message that she was " too miserable to live," 
had scarcely been rescued from her self-sought 
death, when a carriage approached the little 
crowd which had sprung up like magic on the 
bridge. The coachman drew up his horses 
when he reached the crowd, and inquired the 
cause of the excitement. Then a dozen voices 
replied. A young woman had tried to throw 
herself off the bridge — that was the young 



244 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

woman they were holding there, — and so on. 
Upon this a lady, who was seated alone in the^ 
carriage, put out her flower-crowned head. 

" Poor thing, poor thing ! " she said, and as 
the lamps fell on Nellie's white face, which 
looked even now so young and child-like, the- 
lady in the carriage was moved to yet deeper 
compassion. 

" I must get out and see if I can do anything 
for her," she said to her coachman, and she did 
get out. The crowd readily gave way before a 
lady dressed in shining satin, with a white cloak 
wrapped round her dainty shoulders, and so a 
moment or so later, the lady found herself face 
to face with the quivering, panting creature, 
struggling in the arms of the man who had just 
refused to let her die. 

To speak softly to Nellie, to take her hand,, 
to look at her with kind, sympathetic eyes, 
was as natural to this young lady who had just 
left her carriage as it was for her to draw her 
sweet breath. But the quivering, panting 
creature, who had summoned courage in her 
agony to face the threshold of the eternal,, 
neither understood the kind words nor looks. 
Strange noises sounded in Nellies ears, the 



CECLISUS'S WIDOW. 245- 

crowd around her grew indistinct, the lights 
faded, and darkness and blackness fell upon, 
her soul. Then, as she fell back insensible in 
the arms of the man who was holding her, the 
lady in the satin dress, and flower-crowned 
head, took Nellie in her arms, and pillowed the 
dishevelled head of the poor stranger on as kind 
and womanly a breast as ever beat on earth. 

'^ Let me hold her," she said. " Oh, poor 
girl, poor girl I And I see she is married," 
she continued, as her eyes fell on the wedding- 
ring on Nellie's hand, which one of the crowd 
around was now chafing. " I dare say she is 
some unhappy young wife Vvdio has run away 
from some bad, cruel husband — for there are 
bad, cruel husbands, I believe — and I think — 
yes, I am sure, it will be best for me to just 
drive this poor creature home, and get her a 
doctor, and see after her, and I am sure my 
husband will be quite delighted to have her." 

The crowd around made no objections to this 
plan. No policeman had yet appeared, and the 
crowd as a body felt that it was kind of the 
lady, and that they were well rid of the trouble 
of looking any further after the poor young 
woman who had tried to drown herself. The 



24G CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

man, liowever, wlio had caught her by the arm 
first, came forward and put in a peculiar claim. 

"I'm a poor man," he said, rubbing his 
greasy coat pockets with a disconsolate air, 
" and I don't know but it's my duty to get the 
peelice — and there would be a reward then, you 
see, for saving her." 

The lady acted upon this hint. 

"Don't call the police," she said. "Fancy how 
dreadful for this poor young lady if she were 
to find herself in the hands of the police. Here 
are two sovereigns — will that do ? " 

The man thanked the lady, pocketed the 
sovereigns, and assisted to carry the insensible 
Nellie to the lady's carriage. Nellie was 
lifted in ; the lady ordered her coachman 
to drive on ; and as the carriage was vanishing 
a policeman arrived on the scene, and learned 
to his great disappointment that he had come 
too late, and that " a case " had slipped out of 
his hands. 

Thus when Nellie beo-an to recover conscious- 
nesS;, she found herself alone with the lady in 
her carriage. The lady held her hand, and 
kept talking to her in her sweet, pleasant way. 

" I've not told you my name even yet," she 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 247 

said. " Well, I must tell }'oii now. I'm Mrs. 
Tom Bertrim — my liusband's called Tom, you 
know ; and as his father and mother are alive,, 
I go by the name in the family of Mrs. Tom. 
It is not a pretty name, is it ? " And Mrs. Tom 
laughed a sweet, happy laugh. " But I would 
not chauge it for all the world — because it is^ 
my husband's." 

In these simple words, Mrs. Tom told the 
whole history of her married life. She loved 
her husband with all her heart, and he truly 
returned her affection. They were a young 
couple, well off in this world's goods, Mrs. Tom 
being the only child of a wealthy city merchant, 
and Mr. Tom Bertvim had been considered a 
lucky man when Dossie Barrett accepted him. 
She brought him ten thousand pounds at the 
time of their marriage, and the prospect 
of many more thousands depending on future 
contingencies. But she brought him something 
better than all these thousands — a true, honest 
and loving heart. She Jiad been the joy and 
sunshine of her old home, and she was now the. 
joy and sunshine of her husband's. And as 
this sweet, kindly creature held the poor, twitch- 
ing, trembling hand of a woman whose name she 



248 CHGESUS'S WIDOW. 

• did not know, as slie neared her home she felt 
no fear — as some wives would have done — about 
her husband's reception of this unfortunate 
stranger. 

When the carriage entered the avenue of 
Castlewood Lodge, where she lived, Mrs. Bertrim 
again pressed Nellie's hand reassuringly. 

" See," she said, pointing to the open hall- 
door of the house, where a tall, rather good- 
looking man, with one foot swathed in flannels, 
was standing waiting, " that is my husband. I 
will get out first, and just run in for a moment 
to speak to him," she continued, and as she 
spoke she jumped out of the carriage and ran 
up to her husband, and slid her arm into his, 
and began whispering in his ear. Mr. Tom 
Bertrim listened, nodded good-naturedly, and 
then went limping after his wife to the carriage 
door. 

" This is my husband," said Mrs. Bertrim, 
now addressing Nellie. 

'*Tom, dear, help out the lady," she continued. 
^'My husband has gout, you see, poor old 
man, and that is how I was dining with his 
father and mother without him. Lean on me, 
please, dear; I am very strong. Tom, darling. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 249 

run and get a bottle of eliampagne. She want's 
something to keep her up." 

While Mrs. Tom Bertrim was uttering these 
disjointed sentences, she was at the same time 
assisting her husband to lift the prostrate and 
trembling woman whom she had befriended, from 
the carriage. Nellie felt powerless; she leaned 
against the kindly creature who was supporting 
her, and her head fell on Mrs. Bertrim's shoulder. 

" Poor darling ! " said Mrs. Tom, speaking of 
Nellie, and treating her as though she were a 
little child. " She's quite tired out, Tom. Let 
us carry her in here ; and now, dearie, get the 
champagne." 

Tom limped away to get the champagne, and 
Mrs. Tom bent over Nellie, and lifted her head 
on the pillow of the couch on which they had 
laid her, and tried in every possible way to be 
kind to her. But the poor broken-hearted 
creature never spoke. She lay there, Vv^hite and 
tearless — her blue eyes wide open, and full of 
unutterable pain. 

The happy woman who knelt by her, who tried 
to make her drink the wine her husband had now 
brought, who spoke so gently and kindly to her, 
could not realise this mute and terrible despair. 



250 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

"Oh, clont look like that!" prayed Mrs. 
Tom, her own eyes growing a little dim. " Tom, 
dear, bring baby — perhaps if she sees baby it 
may do her good." 

The obedient '' Tom " at once limped away 
to fetch '' baby," and returned in a few minutes 
with a lovely, rosy boy, in his little nightdress, 
crowino; and doublino; his small fists in his 
father's arms. 

" There ! " said Mrs. Tom, embracing the 
child, and carrying it towards the couch where 
Nellie lay. *' This is my boy ; he's a fine fellow, 
isn't he ? Look at his legs ! " 

Master Bertrim's legs were fat, chubby, 
infantine. No one but the fond young mother 
would probably have seen anything particular 
to admire in them. But as she kissed the little 
pink, curled-up toes, the expression of her face 
was touching, from its intense maternal love. 
Then she looked round at her hapless guest. 
Nellie had never raised her head ; never even 
looked at the baby. When she saw this, Mrs. 
Tom gently put back the child in its father's arms. 

" Tom," she whispered, " she must be very 
ill, she has never looked at baby. We must send 
iit once for the doctor." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 251 

They did send at once for the doctor, and when 
the doctor saw Nellie he looked very grave. 

" She has had some severe nervous shock,"' 
he told Mrs. Tom, " and must be kept per- 
fectly quiet. And I would advise you to send 
for her friends." 

Then Mrs. Bertrim was obliged to confess 
that she knew not where to send ; that the 
*'poor lady" was a stranger whom she had 
found wandering about, apparently in despair 
(for some gentle instinct in Mrs. Bertrim's 
heart forbade her to tell of Nellie's misery - 
driven attempt on her young life) ; and the 
doctor, as he listened to the half-told tale,, 
smiled, and good-naturedly shook his head. 

^' It was just like you," he said. " My friend 
Tom will have to start an hospital some day 
for the waifs and strays collected by his wife. 
But, my dear girl" (the doctor had known 
Mrs. Tom all her life) "without jesting, I 
think you had better send this poor creature 
at once to some hospital. She is very low — 
may be ill for weeks." 

Dossie Bertrim's face suddenly flushed at 
this proposition. 

''You are a horrid man, doctor!" she said. 



252 CECESUSS WIDOW. 

half in jest and half in earnest. " Quite horrid ! 
What ! send her out among strangers, to be 
questioned and worried and tormented, when 
she is broken-hearted and so ill ? I don't 
know what you call that, doctor, but I don't 
call it Christian charity." 

*^ What a rage the little Samaritan is in," 
laughed Mr. Tom, patting his wife on her 
pretty shoulders. 

*' I'm not in a rage, Tom," answered Dossie, 
"but I must say I think it is cold-blooded — - 
yes, doctor, cruel and cold-blooded — to bring a 
poor young creature home, and then talk of 
turning her out because she is going to be ill. 
If Tom does not object" (Mrs. Tom knew c[uite 
well Tom would never think of objecting) " I 
will nurse her and take care of her until she is 
well, and it will be quite time enough to talk 
-of sending her away then J' 

*'*I was a stranger and ye took me in,'" 
quoted the doctor, who had been smiling all the 
while that Mrs. Tom had been scolding him. 
■** Well, my dear, it was my duty to tell you 
what you are doing ; but all the same, if, as you 
say, Tom here does not object, I shall be glad 
to have this young lady as a patient." 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 253 

*^ I don't object," said Tom, in his Iiearty way, 
and as lie spoke Mrs. Tom threw her arms round 
Jiis neck and kissed his cheek. 

'' There ! " she said. " Didn't I tell you Tom 
would be delighted to have her? In fact it was 
to please Tom, I think, that I brought her," 
she added, with a little laugh. ^' And now, 
doctor, let us all try to do our best for her, and 
if you do I'll forgive you again." And Mrs. 
Tom held out her kindly hand to her old friend. 

But though these good people did everything 
they could for Nellie, during the next few days, 
she still lay drifting lower and lower, the shadow 
of her grief and shame lying like a black cloud 
athwart her life. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

STKATHEAEN OFFEES A REWARD. 

AYhile Nellie lay very ill at Castlewoody 
watched over by tlie good Samaritans who lived 
there, in the great city beyond Strathearn was 
restlessly wandering to-and-fro in search of her. 

He succeeded after some difficulty in tracing 
her to Miss Brewis's lodging-house in Belgrave 
Koad. He did this through the police, as the 
description he gave of "Mrs. Murray's" personal 
appearance tallied so closely with the descrip- 
tion given by Clayton, Lord Seaforth's servant, 
of the lady who had disappeared from the house 
in Belgrave Road, that the police naturally 
concluded that Mr. Campbell and Lord Seaforth 
must be seeking the same person. 

When Strathearn heard there was a suspicion 
that this lady had destroyed herself, the grey 
pallor that suddenly spread over his face at 
once betrayed his secret to the lynx-eyed 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 255 

inspector of police to whom lie was talking. 

" 'Tis only a suspicion, sir," added the 
inspector, considerately. " The lady dis- 
<appeared on such a night, and has not been 
heard of since ; but on the same night a female 
endeavoured to throw herself off Chelsea Bridge, 
and was prevented by a man who was crossing 
the brids^e at the time. This man we have 
found ; but the strangest ]3art of the business 
is, that a carriage drove up just after the 
occurrence on the bridge happened, and a lady 
o^ot out of this carriao^e and took the female 
who had attempted to drown herself under her 
charge, and drove her away, and we have not 
been able yet to discover to whom this carriage 
belongs." 

" And you think this was — Mrs. Murray ?" 
faltered Strathearn, with a sort of gasp in his 
deep voice. 

" The man who saved her described her as a 
fLxir-haired young woman with small features. 
Does this answer to the appearance of the Mrs, 
Murray you wish to find 1 " asked the inspector. 

" Yes — perhaps. Can I see — this man ?" 

"Certainly, sir. And I may tell you that 
Clayton, Lord Seaforth's servant — " 



256 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



" Clayton ! Lord Seafortli's servant ?" inter- 
rupted Stratliearn, with a start. "Has this 
Clayton been here then ?" 

" He has carried on all inquiries aljout this 
business/' answered the police-inspector, " for 
Lord ^eaforth has been laid up with fever, and 
unable to attend to it ; and this Clayton has 
seen the person who saved the female from 
drowning, and was convinced from the person's- 
description that the female was the Mrs. Murray 
Lord Seaforth was seeking ; indeed, so much 
so that he rewarded this man by Lord Sea- 
forth's orders, and no further inquiries have 
been made by his lordship since then — in fact^ 
I believe he has gone abroad." 

An oath burst from Strathearn's bitten lips 
after he had heard this explanation. He knew 
then, that Lady Seaforth had lied to him about 
Clayton, and he guessed the whole of the 
miserable truth. Seaforth had told Nellie that 
she had been cruelly deceived, and the wretched 
girl had wandered out to die in her despair. 
This had been the secret of Seaforth's sudden 
illness — his conscience had smitten him. 

" If he has murdered her, I will kill him," 
muttered Strathearn in a fierce undertone. 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 257 

turning away liis head from the keen-eyed 
man who was looking at him and inwardly 
speculating on the nature of his interest in 
''Mrs. Murray." 

"Clayton, as I was saying, sir," continued 
the inspector, ''saw this man who saved the 
lady, and he — Clayton, I mean, — informed me 
then, that his lordship was sensible again, and 
was greatly relieved in his mind to hear that the 
unfortunate young woman had not succeeded 
in drowning herself. It seemed from Clayton's 
story that there had been a quarrel between 
them, but his lordship had no idea of forsaking 
her, and was terribly cut up when he thought 
she had made away with herself." 

" And — and Lord Seaforth knows nothing 
more — nothing of where she is now ? " 

" I conclude not, sir, for we have orders to 
endeavour to trace her ; but I heard that Lord 
Seaforth had gone abroad." 

" And Clayton ? " 

" I cannot tell you, sir ; for the last few 
days we have heard nothing, either from Lord 
Seaforth or Clayton." 

" I must find out," said Strathearn ; '"'in the 
meanwhile offer two hundred pounds reward 

VOL. II. K 



258 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

for any information — about, about her, — and 
let me see the man who — " 

Strathearn could not complete the sentence. 
His voice grew husky and then broke, and he 
quickly turned away his head, ashamed to allow 
another man to see the overwhelming emotion 
sweeping like a torrent over his soul. 

He drove direct from Scotland Yard to Lady 
Seaforth's house in South Kensington. It was 
shut up. In vain he pealed at the door-bell ; 
in vain stamped and swore, and knocked with 
all his might. 

" The family are out of town," a policeman, 
who had been benignly watching his exertions, 
presently told him, and this was all Strathearn 
could learn. At the clubs also he could gain 
no further information about Lord Seaforth. 

" He has been terribly ill, and is in no end 
of a hole," one man told him, " and has van- 
ished * until a more convenient season.' But 
they say," added this man, ^' that he is 
going to patch up his fortunes by marrying 
that pretty, dark-eyed little woman, called 
Croesus's widow — good thing for Seaforth if 
he does." 

This was what the world said. But now let us 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 259 

go beliincl the curtain, and learn how far the 
world spoke truth. 

A few days before Strathearn had been vainly 
rapping and ringing at Lady Seaforth's house 
door; in a darkened upper chamber of that 
stately mansion, her son had been lying prostrate 
and exhausted, but once more with the light of 
reason in his eyes. 

By his bedside his servant, Clayton, was 
standing. 

*' My lord," he was saying, "from the man's 
account of the lady's appearance, there is no 
doubt it was Mrs. Murray. Wherever she is, 
you may make your mind easy about her, for 
the man said the lady who got out of the 
carriage was quite a lady — a young, handsome 
lady — and evidently rich." 

Seaforth turned on his bed, sighing restlessly. 

" And the police can't trace this carriage ? " 
he said presently. 

*' They have not been able to do so yet — but 
indeed, my lord, you can make your mind 
quite easy, for the man said the young lady to 
whom the carriage belonged seemed most kind, 
and took Mrs. Murray in her arms, just as if 
she had been her sister." 

k2 



2o0 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Again Seafortli sidiecl. 

'' Poor, poor Nellie ! " lie muttered. " Poor, 
foolisli little girl. Why could she not trust 
me ? " 

Lord Seafortli said these words in a very low 
tone — in fact, only murmured them to himself, 
and Clayton made no reply, and a few minutes 
later Lady Seaforth entered the room, and the 
confidential servant at once left it. 

''You are better, Murray ? " said Lady Seaforth, 
who lookedgreatly disturbed, glancing anxiously 
at her son. 

" Yes, mother,'* he answered, '' but weary, 
weary, weary ! " And he flung his arms 
impatiently over the coverlet. 

" I have been speaking to the doctor about 
you," continued Lady Seaforth, " and he thinks 
an immediate change will do you good — " 

''I can't leave town — don't talk of it, mother," 
interrupted Seaforth. 

For a moment or two Lady Seaforth made 
no reply. She fixed her eyes still more 
anxiously on her son's face ; she opened her 
lips to speak, and yet was afraid to utter the 
words she felt herself forced to say. 

"I don't wish to worry you, Murray," she 



CRffiSUS's WIDOW. 261 

presently began ; " yoa have been too ill to be 
worried — but things could be arranged better — 
-some pressing money affairs could be arranged 
better — by Mr. Cairns if this house were shut 
up, and we were out of the way." 

'' What ? " said Lord Seaforth, looking up. 
*' There's a row then, I suppose ? " 

*' Don't trouble about it," answered Lady 
Seaforth, " it will be settled. A friend — some 
one, Murray, whom you will never guess" — and 
Lady Seaforth's proud mouth quivered — " has 
advanced a sum of money to free iis from 
^ny very pressing difficulties ; and if we were 
away for a time — if you could exert yourself 
sufficiently to go, Murray — " 

Seaforth moved restlessly, and then sighed 
impatiently. 

*' I can't go, mother ; I must stay to make 
some inquiries — to learn something I want to 
know," he said. 

" Leave Clayton to make these inquiries — 
he seems to know all about your affairs," 
answered Lady Seaforth with a curling lip. 

Again Lord Seaforth looked at his mother — 
this time curiously. 

" How long have I been ill, mother ?" he said. 



262 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Lady Seafortli hesitated ; she scarcely dare 
tell her son of all the weary nights and days 
that had passed since that terrible night when 
he had suddenly broken down, and begun 
raving in his delirium about the hapless gii'l 
whom he then feared he had driven to an 
untimely end. 

"It is more than a fortnight now, Murray," 
she said, in somewhat faltering accents, " and 
— I am sure, for many reasons, you would be 
better away." 

Lord Seaforth did not speak. 

" When you were very ill," continued Lady 
Seaforth, casting down her eyes, while a sudden 
flush passed over her face, " I had a strange 
visitor to inquire after you — Mr. Campbell, of 
Strathearn." 

" Oh ! old Strath," said Seaforth, carelessly. 

As his careless tone fell on his mother's ear 
she looked quickly up, some hope and yet deep 
anxiety being betrayed in her glance. 

" Murray," she said, " this Mr. Campbell- 
insulted me — insulted you — and yet you speak 
of him — indifferently." 

As his mother said this, a faint colour spread 
over Seaforth's pale, wasted features, for he 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 263 

now remembered what in liis illness and weak- 
ness lie had for a moment foro-otten. 

"What did he say ?" he asked uneasily. 

"I cannot repeat what he said," answered 
Lady Seaforth, with some passion in her voice, 
though she was striving to subdue this on 
account of her son's prostrate condition ; " I do 
not choose to repeat what he said, Murray ''^ 
— and the proud woman turned away from her 
-son's bedside, and went to the window ; *^ but 
he said enough — you arc best out of his way. 
And there is another reason why this house 
should be shut up, and the servants dis- 
charged." 

" AY ell T said Lord Seaforth, still uneasily. 

" When this Campbell could not see you," 
continued Lady Seaforth, her head yet averted 
from her son, "he insisted upon seeing Clayton 
— he would see him, he said — he was rude, 
impertinent ; and I told an untruth to him, 
Murray — I told him Clayton had left your 
service, had gone abroad ; so you had best send 
him out of the way." 

For a minute or two Lord Seaforth did not 
.speak. Then he jerked out, angrily and im- 
patiently — 



2S4 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

^*It was confoiindccl impertinence of Camp- 
bell to come liere and interfere with my afiairs 1" 

" Do not excite yourself," said Lady Scafortli, 
now returning to tlie bedside ; " but I thought 
it best to tell you, for Clayton ought to be 
kept out of this Mr. Campbell's way." 

^' All right— I'll see to it." 

" And, Murray, Hugh Marchmont has offered 
his house to us, to stay as long as we like there. 
The air is very fine, as you know, at Rye- 
Court, and you want a complete rest — out of 
the way of all worries — and Eyecourt is just 
the place for you. You are not strong enough 
yet to go abroad, but you are strong enough, I 
hope, to go to Hugh Marchmont's — and Mr. 
Cairns can give out we are abroad until things 
are arranged." 

" You have settled it all, then, mother, it 
seems ! So old Hugh Marchmont has come to 
the front — a tribute to the old love, eh, mother?" 

Lady Seaforth did not speak. She drew up her 
haughty head and looked almost wonderingiy 
at her son. What, he could jest still, then ! she 
was thinkino'. 

'' It is well — well," the next moment she 
reflected a little bitterly. " I will send Clayton 



CRffiSUSS WIDOW. 2G5 

to you now," she said, moving towards the door; 
"but remember, Murray," she added emphati- 
cally, as she opened it, " that it is absolutely 
necessary that this house for the present should 
be closed." 



CHAPTEE XIX. 

UNINVITED GUESTS. 

Lady Seaforth had good cause to speak in 
this emphatic tone as she quitted her son's- 
room. No one but herself knew the absolute 
agonies that she had endured during the miser- 
able days of her son's dangerous illness. And 
these agonies were not caused alone by the 
knowledoje that her son's life and reason trem- 
bled in the balance. A report had got about 
that Lord Seaforth was dangerously — nay 
desperately — ill, and a Jew money-lender, to- 
whom the reckless young lord had given a bill 
of sale on the furniture of the house, on hearing 
of this illness, had issued an execution, and had 
obtained possession before the proud mistress, 
bowed down with her grief and anxiety about 
her son, had the least idea of what was 2:oino: 
on under her roof. 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 267 

The servants dare not tell her that the baihffs 
were sitting in her drawing-room. They sent 
privately for her old and attached maid, Mrs. 
Benson, to break the terrible news to her, and 
to the day of her death this good woman will 
never forixet her ladv's crv, when at last she 
nnderstood the faltering, broken words in which 
her old servant endeavoured to express her 
meaning. 

Lady Seaforth, in fact, utterly broke down. 
She had moaned out after Strathearn's visit — 
after she had heard some sharp truths from his 
rough lips about her beloved son — that it was 
'' too much, too much ! " Bat now to find her- 
self ruined, homeless — all, too, by this reckless 
son — seemed more than she had strength to 
bear. She sobbed, she raved, she cried that 
she wished that she were dead. Did any dim 
memories cross her mind in this bitter moment 
■of how she had lived for the world and the 
world's good fame, which now seemed all 
suddenly reft away from her ? She had married 
for position only. In her early girlhood she 
had loved, and been very deeply loved by, this 
Huo^h Marchmont, whom she had mentioned 
to her son ; but Hugh Marchmont, though a 



2G8 CPtCESUS's WIDOW. 

distant kinsman, was Lut the son of a country 
>squire, and she was the beautiful iVlice Guild- 
ford, the second daughter of a noble but 
impoverished family. Hugh Marchmont had 
considered himself eno-ao^ed to her, when in an 
evil hour the young beauty met Lord Seaforth,. 
a man whose reputation even then was such 
that a woman must have been mad who 
expected to live a happy married life with him. 
Yet for the sake of his ancient title, for the 
sake of his position in the world, Alice Guild- 
ford threw over her old love, crushed down the 
love in her own heart, and went to the altar, 
proud, calm, and beautiful, to utter her false 
vows. 

And all through her life she had borne herself in 
the same stately fashion. Her lord had wearied 
of her before the first year of their wedded life 
was over, he had left her, drao'0;ed down his old 
name in the dust, but no one had ever seen my 
lady wince. She had her boy — the handsome,, 
bright-faced boy, the gallant youth — on whom 
her heart and hopes were fixed. She had never 
loved her husband, and she made no wail 
after him. He had seriously embarrassed the 
property before his death, but not quite hope- 



CRGESUSS WIDOW. 269 

lessly so, and Lady Seafortli and Mr. Cairns, 
the family lawyer, liad done their best for it 
and for the young heir, until the young heir 
came into possession and flung the care of years 
away to the winds. 

Yet still the mother kept hoping on. " He 
would marry, he would reform," she whispered 
to her anxious heart, and to the world and 
those around her she had always worn her early 
stately grace. 

But when Mrs. Benson broke to her al- 
ready overburdened heart, that actual and 
immediate ruin stared her in the face, and 
that this ruin was all brought by the son on 
whom she had lavished her heart's best 
love, she seemed utterly to sink beneath the 
blow. 

Then, perhaps, the memory of a love she 
had flung away rose before her, and Hugh 
Marchmont's wasted youth and manhood were 
remembered with bitter regret. 

" Oh ! my lady, don't cry like that 1 '' 
whispered her old servant, trying to comfort 
her. " Don't, my lady, or those wretches 
below will hear. Oh ! my lady, may I give 
you a piece of advice ? " 



270 CRCEsas's widow. 

" What can you say ? What matter is 
anything now?" sobbed Lady Seaforth. 

" But, my dear lady, it is not so bad as that," 
urged Mrs. Benson. " My lord will get well, 
and things can be all put right — it's only a 
matter of money you know, my lady, and if I 
might be bold enough to suggest it, I would 
ask the rich lady next door to advance enough 
to get these men out of the house." 

" I cannot I I cannot ! " moaned Lady 
Seaforth, rocking herself to and fro in ber 
distress. 

*' But why not, my lady ? Peoj^le say this 
Mrs. Trelawn is very fond of my lord, and what 
are a few thousands to her ? " 

'' This wretched entanglement — " said Lady 
Seaforth, looking up. 

*' Don't distress yourself about that, my lady. 
There is no doubt from what Clayton says that 
this poor young woman is well taken care of 
now, and you see she has never written or 
anything. Most likely she has gone home to 
her friends, and when my lord gets better he 
will see it is for the best. Clayton says he is 
sure, from the man's description who saved her, 
that it was the j)oor young woman, and he will 



Croesus's widow. 271 

tell my lord tliis, as soon as he is well enoiigli 
to understand. And IMrs. Trelawn knows 
nothing about this sad affair — no one knows, 
my lady, but your old faithful servant and 
Clayton, and Clayton's not the man to tell my 
lord's secrets. Oh, my lady, don't be angry 
with me, but I feel sure you have only to ask 
Mrs. Trelawn, and she will advance the money 
at a word." 

Lady Seaforth made no answer. It galled 
her to her very soul even to think of this — yet 
where could she turn ? Long; ao;o Seaforth had 
exhausted the patience of her own people, and 
they had refused to lend him money — only, as 
they knew well, to be flung away. But to ask 
Mrs. Trelawn — a woman nob of her own class, 
a woman whose wealth came to her through 
trade — it was dust and ashes to Lady Seaforth's 
proud and imperious heart. But as her old 
servant kept urging the practicability of this 
step, Lady Seaforth at last condescended to 
listen. 

" You see, my lady," said the woman, " if 
these people are not got away at once, other 
disagreeable claims may be put in ; but if 
Mrs. Trelawn comes forward and gets the 



272 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

wretclies out, tliere will be no further trouble." 
Lady Seafortli quite understood what Benson 
meant by this ; she meant that if the money- 
lenders supposed Mrs. Trelawn were going to 
marry Lord Seaforth, that he would experience 
no further annoyance from their hands. And 
if Mrs. Trelawn advanced this money and got 
the bailiffs out of the house, that it would seem 
likely to these men's eyes that she was going 
to marry him. Yet to have to ask Mrs. Trelawn 
to lend this money was absolute agony to Lady 
Seaforth. 

*' I would rather die than do it ! " she said to 
her old servant ; yet she allowed her old servant 
to arransre her dress, and smooth the fair hair 
that she had flung back from her brow in her 
bitter distress ; and then, thickly veiled and 
accompanied by Benson, she left her room and 
went down the staircase on her way to Mrs. 
Trelawn's. 

As she passed the drawing-room door, which 
was wide open, Benson tried to prevent her 
seeing the men in possession who were loung- 
ing there. But Lady Seaforth gave one quick 
glance, shivered, and ran on. Perhaps this sight 
nerved her for her bitter task ; at all events 



CECESUS'S AVIDOW. 273 

she went straight to Nora Trelawn's, and was 
received with unusual kindness and gentleness 
by that lady. 

TJie reason of this unusual kindness was 
simply that Xora kaew what had happened at 
lier proud neighbour's house. Such secrets are 
not long kept, and Nora's kind heart felt full 
of compassion and sympathy when she saw Lady 
Seaforth enter her drawing-room. 

Nora was, luckily, alone. When Lady Sea- 
forth saw this, and remembered her errand, all 
her usual grace and dignity of manner seemed 
to pass away from her. She trembled, she 
was visibly overcome. 

'' Lord Seaforth is not worse, I hope," asked 
Nora gently. 

'^ No, no," answered Lady Seaforth, *' but—" 
•And then her voice broke, and she could not 
speak the hated words she had come to say. 

In a moment Nora understood. 

*'You are in trouble, dear Lady Seaforth/ 
she said, taking Lady Seaforth's trembling hand 
in her own. '' Can I do anything for you — - 
anything about money ? " 

As Nora made this offer. Lady Seaforth, who 
had been struggling to recover composure, lost 



274 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

all control over her emotion, and again began 
sobbing liysterically, as slie had done before she 
went to Nora's house. 

" Hush ! dear Lady Seaforth," said Nora, 
leading her to a seat, " do not distress yourself; 
if it is about money^ you know my poor husband 
left me a great deal, and nothing will please me 
more than to advance some of it to you or 
Lord Seaforth. May I send for your man of 
business ? Do not distress yourself. Lady Sea- 
forth ; indeed you can have what you want." 

Then Lady Seaforth tried to thank her. 

" Forgive me," she said in a broken voice,, 
'' but my son's illness — and other things — have 
quite unnerved me. I — I — do not know whether 
you have heard — but Seaforth in some hour of 
folly — when he was much younger than he is 
now — gave, it seems, a bill of sale on the 
furniture of the house to some Jew money- 
lender, and this wretch, hearing of his dangerous 
illness, has — has — put an execution in the house 
— and the men are there now ; and if you would 
advance — " 

" Certainly," said Nora, very kindly. " These 
men must be got out at once. Lady Seaforth. 
It is too dreadful for them to be there when Lord 



CRCEsrs's WIDOW. 275 

Seafortli is so ill, and you are so mucli worried 
and nj^set by his illness. Will you give me the 
name and address of your man of business ? " 
she added, oroino- to her writiDs: table. " I will 
write to him, and send one of the servants with 
the note at once, so that there may be no delay ; 
and about the money there need be no trouble.'* 

Again Lady Seaforth tried to thank her in 
her broken tear-choked voice. She told Nora 
Mr. Cairns' name and address, and Nora wrote 
to the family lawyer, requesting him to come 
immediately ; and then having despatched her 
note, she did everything in her power to soothe 
and comfort Lady Seaforth. 

And even in her distress Lady Seaforth tried 
to exonerate her son as far as possible from any 
blame. 

" He has had no chance," she said. " His 
father ruined the property before his death, 
and Murray has had to support a title and 
position on totally inadequate means. This 
has made him reckless— he has been placed in 
a most cruel and trying position by his father s 
wicked, selfish conduct." 

'' It will all come right, I hope," said Nora. 

'' He is the best and kindest of sons," said 



2 / 6 CRCESUS S WIDOW. 

Lady Seafortli, witli quivering lips. All, poor 
mother ! 

This " best and kindest of sons " had nearly 
broken her proiKJ heart, had bowed her proud 
head to the dust, and yet she was loving him, 
scheming for him still ! " Who can tell," she 
was thinkiug, noting Nora's great kindness and 
gentleness to herself, " she may actually care 
for him — perhaps even this misery may bring^ 
the marriage about." 

So by the time Mr. Cairns arrived at Nora's 
house (and the lawyer had not dallied after 
receiving a summons from Croesus's Widow) 
my lady had dried her tears, and regained, to a 
certain extent at least, her composure, and made 
the best of the situation to the lawyer before 
Nora, as she had made the best of it to Nora 
herself. 

And Mr. Cairns also quite understood the 
situation, and was ready to make the best of 
it, too. He had known Lady Seaforth for many 
years, and he had pitied her, and though he had 
been very angry of late with the young lord, he 
was quite willing still to give him a chance of 
redeeming his fortunes. Being a practical man 
of business, he thought it looked verv like having. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 277 

a strong and peculiar interest in Lord Seaforth, 
if ]\Irs. Trelawn was so ready to come to his 
assistance, and the Lawyer therefore — as well as 
Lady Seaforth — made as light as he could of 
Lord Seaforth's position. 

" Youns: men will do these foolish thing's,"' 
he said, with his hard smile. "They go to these 
money-lenders, who are so ready to catch the 
unwary, without ever thinking of the conse- 
quences. But we must make the best of it — 
as Lord Seaforth is too ill to act for himself, we 
must act for him — and the first thing; is to 2:et 
these men out of the house." 

And " these men" were very speedily got out 
of the house. It was a cheque for a very large 
amount that Nora drew and placed in Mr. 
Cairns' hand ; but Nora was very rich, and Mr. 
Cairns knew that she was very rich, and the 
Jew money-lender to whom Mr. Cairns gave^ 
Nora's cheque knew this fact also, and as he 
looked at it beo:an to be afraid that he had made 
a false step. 

" They said he was so very ill, confound it !" 
said the money-lender, uneasily. 

"You have been a little precipitate, it seems,"' 
smiled the lawyer; and Nora's cheque did good 



278 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

service to Lord Seafortli tliat day as well as 
get the bailiffs out of the house, for people 
began to believe that she was really going to 
marry the spendthrift young lord. 

Then, as soon as the men were gone. Lady 
Seafortli returned to her own house. But the 
shock and the shame she had gone through 
made her so ill, that she was confined to bed 
for the two following days. During these two 
days Nora went mere than once to see her, and 
never had Nora cared for her proud neighbour 
so much as she did in Lady Seaforth's hour 
of trouble. And Lady Seaforth was touched 
on her j^art by Nora's generosity, and by her 
simple kindness. She had long ardently wished 
that her son might marry Nora for the sake of 
her money, but she now began actually to wish 
that he might marry Nora for her own sake, 
and to believe that if he did marry her he 
might yet be a happy man. 

So, as Nora sat by her bedside. Lady Seaforth 
talked to her as she had seldom talked in her 
self-contained and haughty existence. She told 
Nora about her unhappy married life with her 
faithless, careless lord, and she hinted, with a 
smile and a sigh, at Mr. Marchmont's early 
-attachment. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 279" 

" My people would not liear of it," she said, 
and ao;ain she sio^hed. She did not tell the 
exact truth ; did not tell how she also, as well 
as "her people," had preferred the worldly 
advantages which Lord Seaforth apparently 
had in his power to bestow, to the unworldly 
devotion of Hugh Marchmont*s faithful heart. 

*•' He is still a bachelor," she told Nora, "and 
I have been thinking — Mr. Cairns also thinks 
— that the moment my son is able to be moved, 
that it would be well if he went to some quiet 
country-place where he would be free from all 
worries, and I have almost determined to write 
to Mr. Marchmont, who always calls to see me 
when he is in town, and ask him if we m.iy go- 
to his place." 

Lady Seaforth did write to her old love, and 
told Mr. Marchmont enouo'h of the situation in 

o 

which her son was placed, to excuse her asking 
the favour of her "friend and kinsman," which 
she asked in her letter. This favour was 
that she and her son might go, as soon as 
Seaforth could travel, to Mr. Marchmont's 
quiet country house, where Lady Seaforth 
hoped her son would regain Jiealth and strength, 
faster than amid the worries and constant 



280 CRCESUS S WIDOW. 

anxiety to whicli lie was exposed in town. 

Mr. Marclimont duly replied. He would be 
glad at any time to see Lord and Lady Sea- 
fortli, if tlicy would not be very weary of the 
*' humdrum existence led by a contented old 
bachelor." 

Somehow those last three words in her old 
lover's letter — a ''contented old bachelor" — 
jarred on Lady Seaforth's heart. If once a man 
has been in love with some sort of women, they 
like to believe that he always continues in love. 
Mr. Marchmont has never married, and Lady 
Seaforth had always thought of him as she had 
once seen him, with a look of reproachful 
misery in his eyes. But contented or ^discon- 
tented, it suited her ladyship to accept his 
invitation. And thus it happened, when 
Seaforth was slowly recovering from the effects 
of fever, that his mother urged him, if possible, 
at once to go to Mr. Marchmont's house. We 
have heard the arguments she used — Mr. Cairns 
could arrange matters better if they were out 
of the way ; and the yet more powerful argu- 
ment that both he and his servant Clayton 
Avere better out of the way of Mr. Campbell of 
•Strathearn. 



cr.(Esus's WIDOW. 281 

After his mother left him, Seaforth sent for 
Clayton, and during this interview he arranged 
with the man to endeavour (but quietly) still 
to try to trace Mrs. Murray, after her strange 
disappearance on Chelsea Bridge. Clayton was 
convinced that the unfortunate young woman 
who had so nearly destroyed herself there, was 
"Mrs. Murray," and he gradually convinced 
Lord Seaforth also that this must be the case. 
This idea was an immense relief to Seaforth's 
mind. " Poor Nellie " was safe, then, and 
kindly taken care of, the shallow-hearted young 
lord was only too glad to think. He had 
certainly grieved terribly about her ; he would 
have been glad and happy (let us give him 
his due) to see her again, and to know directly 
that she was well. But, after all, it would 
never do to have that " stupid old fool. Strath," 
come blundering and raging, and taking up the 
cudo'els in her defence. 

o 

" She should have trusted me," decided 
Seaforth. " If I could have helped myself, I 
would never willingly have cost her a tear. 
Poor little woman ! Some day I hope she may 
be happy." 

So he gave in to his motlier's proposal. He 



282 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

would 0^0 to Hu2fli Marclimont's liouse in 
Dorsetshire, and Le did go. And the day 
before lie went, when pale, tottering, and 
greatly altered he dragged himself downstairs, 
his mother, without telling him, led a visitor 
into the room where he was to see him. 

"Come in, Mrs. Trelawn," said Lady Seaforth, 
very graciously. " Murray will only be too 
pleased to see you." 

Murray tried to rise, but Nora went quickly 
forward and took his wasted hand. 

'' You must not get up," she said smilingly. 
*' I am truly glad to see you down again." 

'' When you get well, Murray, you must 
thank Mrs. Trelawn for lier great kindness to 
us — to me," said Lady Seaforth, colouring and 
-casting down her eyes. 

*' Must I wait until I get \vell?" ojiswered 
Seaforth, in his old pleasant way. 

" There is nothing to thank me for," said 
Nora, who knew that Lord Seaforth had not 
been told about the money she had lent. 
*' Lady Seaforth has not been very well, and I 
have taken advantage of my jjrivilege as a 
neighbour to see her a little oftener than usual 
—that is all." 



CIICESUSS WIDOW. 283" 

*' Then I will thank yoii now," said Seaforth 
smiling. " I am very mucli obliged to you for 
being kind to my mother, when she has been 
almost worried to death, I believe, by her 
graceless son." 

There was a sort of charm in Seaforth's 
manner — an easy, graceful way of saying 
pleasant words, and Nora thought this as she 
looked at the smiling, wasted, handsome face. 

She stayed and talked to him a little while 
longer, and when she went away Lady Seaforth 
could scarcely find warm enough words to praise 
lier. 

" She is very well," said Seaforth. 

"Well !" repeated Lady Seaforth, indignantly. 

" Is that all you can say of a woman who has 
acted as she has done ? " And then, forgetting 
her prudence, she told her son about the exe- 
cution in the house, and in how generous a 
manner Nora had advanced the money to pre- 
vent anything more disagreeable. 

Seaforth was terribly annoyed. To be 
indebted to a woman — a lady — galled him 
intensely. He bit his lips, he grew pale ; he 
was so agitated that his mother grew very 
nervous about what she had done. 



•,284 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

*' Do not worry about it," she said. " She is 
the kindest, sweetest woman — " 

'' The very reason we shoukl not impose 
npon her," interrupted Seaforth. 

*' But, my dearest, she was only too glad to 
•do it," urged Lady Seaforth. '' Oh ! Murray," 
and she Vv'ent up and took her son's hand, ''I 
.am sure she cares for you — I am sure you 
woukl be happy with her — she is so good, so 
kind, so gentle, a man could only love her." 

Lord Seaforth made no answer. He sighed, 
and during the somewhat long journey for him 
to Eyecourt, on the following day, he was very 
silent. Of what is he thinking ? thought his 
mother, again and again uneasily glancing at 
him. He was thinking of Nora Trelawn, and 
as he thought of her, ever and anon there passed 
before his mental vision two shadows. One a 
white-robed girl standing in the sunlight — the 
other the frozen look of despair that had 
haunted him ever since he last saw the face of 
the woman who had left a message for him, that 
she was "Too miserable to live." 



CHAPTER XX. 

AT HUGH MARCHMONT's, 

At last Lord Seaforth, pale, silent, and quite 
Aveary — for liis thoughts on the journey had 
not been pleasant company — reached Ryecourt. 
As the carriage, which had been sent to meet 
them at the nearest railway station^ drove into 
the ancient courtyard of Eyecourt, the owner 
came out of the low hall at the back of the 
house to receive them. 

A tall, slim., grey-haired man, with a stoop, 
and a handsome, wonderfullj^ benign-looking 
face, was Hugh Marchmont. He came forward 
with a smile, and handed his old love out of the 
-carriage, while a beautiful, small black-and-tan 
toy-terrier ran forward also, barking his welcome. 
And as Mr. Marchmont led Lady Seaforth into 
the hall, in which stood a well-fitted billiard table. 



286 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

two other splendid dogs rose up from before the 
great fire, and advanced to meet her. 

" Why, Hugh, how many dogs have you ? " 
smiled Lady Seaforth, looking at her old lover,, 
and wonderino; wdiat made him better-lookinor 
now than when he was young. 

" Only these three in the house," said Mr. 
Marchmont, laying his hand on a huge, tawny 
mastiffs magnificent head. 

" And you like them ? " asked Lady Seaforth. 

*' 1 hey are my friends," answered Hugh 
Marchmont ; and Lady Seaforth gave a little 
shrug of her handsome shoulders, and remem- 
bered " that poor Hugh Marchmont had always 
been a little peculiar." 

But no further signs of peculiarity were 
especially visible, Mr. Marchmont welcomed 
Lord Seaforth kindly, just as he had welcomed 
Lady Seaforth kindly, but his heart did not beat 
faster even for a moment, when he touched the 
hand of the woman he had once so passionately 
and devotedly loved. 

Nay, that woman's vain and worldly heart 
would have received a great shock if — as 
perhaps in another state of existence it may be 
— the thoughts of men and w^omen were visible 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 28? 

to each others' often astonished eyes. A terrible 
ordeal to us all, no doubt, to look straight into 
our neighbours' hearts ! Lady Seaforth would 
not have smiled so sweetly on Hugh Marchmont 
as she stood warming her hands by his great 
hall fire, if she could have read the man's inward 
cogitations. 

" Poor xA^lice, how changed she is ! " he was 
thinkino". " Ah ! — the world is an unorrateful 

o o 

mistress." 

Mr. Marchmont cared nothins; for the world. 
Its mists had fallen from his mind, and he 
now led a most placid, benign, and contented 
existence. No poor man was ever turned away 
from his door, and he only smiled and nodded 
his head when he found out that he had been 
taken in, knowing that there were cheats and 
vagabonds abroad ; but this fact did not destroy 
his pleasure in trying to do good. Hugh 
Marchmont's name was hardly known beyond 
his own county ; but as a nameless donor to 
scores of charities he miecht have been known. 

CD 

Lady Seaforth, looking at his placid face, could 
not understand either him or his aims in life. But 
as she sat at his well-appointed table, she began 
to understand something she had not known. 



288 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

before. This was that Hugh Marchmont was a 
rich man. He told her this in the simplest 
way possible during the first evening she spent 
at Ryecourt. 

"Do you remember Uncle Jack — theGeneral?" 
asked Mr. Marchmont, as he offered some wine 
of a rare vintage to the wearied Seaforth, who 
had scarcely strength to sit up through the 
dinner-hour. " He left me this wine and a 
considerable fortune." 

Lady Seaforth opened her blue eyes a little 
wider than usual at this announcement. 

*' I think I do remember an old soldier-like 
looking man being at Ryecourt, when I was 
quite a little girl. So he left you a large fortune, 
Hugh?" 

" Not perhaps what you would call a large 
fortune," smiled Mr. Marchmont in reply to his 
old love. " He left me over sixty thousand 
pounds, and all his belongings beside, including 
some very valuable diamonds, which I must 
show you." 

The large blue eyes sparkled at this offer. 
She thought Hugh Marchmont meant to give 
her some of his diamonds, and she grew — for 
her — quite sprightly at the prospect. 



CKCESUS'S WIDOW. 289 

" x\li, you are a lucky man ! " she said. " No 
one ever left me sixty thousand pounds or 
diamonds, or anything else. Seaforth left mo 
his debts — that was about all." And my lady 
sighed softly, and looked at the calm, handsome 
face opposite to her, and began to think she 
had made a mistake in early life, which perhaps 
might be repaired. 

But nothing was further from Mr. Marcli- 
mont's mind than this idea. He had written, 
on receiving Lady Seaforth's letter telling him 
of her son's dangerous illness, and how the 
doctors had advised his removal to some very 
c[uiet country place, to tell her that Eyecourt 
was perfectly at her service, as long as she and 
Lord Seaforth cared to stay there. He had 
done this from a feeling of kindness — from 
perhaps a faint, lingering, tender recollection 
of the old folly. But it was to the recollection 
of his own folly that he looked back with a sort 
of pitying tenderness, and not to the memory 
of the woman who had heartlessly jilted him. 
Lady Seaforth, still so handsome, as she retired 
that night to bed in the old Dorsetshire 
manor-house, whose possession she had once 
rejected, stood looking at herself in the dim 

TOL. ir. L 



290 CECESUS'S WIDOW. 

and quaintly-fashioned pier-glass, wliere Hugli 
Marclimont's mother and grandmother had 
stood and looked l3efore. She looked at her- 
self, and smiled. " It is an out-of-the-way 
place, this Eyecourt," she was thinking, " and 
poor Hugh is a little peculiar ; but still, to 
have an assured home and a good income, and 
someone so devoted as Hugh has always been 
to me — is not to be despised." 

The idea was pleasing to my lady. She was 
weary of debts and difficulties ; and even a 
quiet home like Kyecourt was better than the 
miserable life she had lately led. 

" If Murray marries Mrs. Trelawn it will be 
different, of course — but who can tell what 
Murray may do ?" went on my lady's cogitations ; 
and when she fell asleep she dreamt that she 
was a girl again, and Hugh Marchmont was 
lying at her feet, as he had done in the days 
when both his life and his love were young. 

The house at Kyecourt was not more than a 
mile from the sea coast, and the air was wonder- 
fully pure. It was a quaint old grey house, 
with a courtyard and two spacious wings and 
3'ambling passages, and the furniture was mostly 
old also, though many modern comforts were 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 291 

iudiciously minoied witli the fittiwo-s that Hiio-h 
Marchmont had inherited with the pLace. He 
lived here quite out of the world, yet in charitv 
with all men, and he had surrounded himself 
with books and flowers and animals ; havino- 
indeed an extraordinary love for the dumb 
brutes, whose friendship he esteemed above 
that of his fellow- creature. 

" They never deceive us," he said, speaking 
of his favourite dogs to Lady Seaforth the first 
morning she had breakfast with him ; and my 
lady cast down her blue eyes and coloured, for 
she thought that Hugh was alluding to her own 
perfidious conduct. But Hugh in truth at that 
moment had forgotten all about her perfidious 
conduct He was looking into the soft, liquid, 
tender eyes of his small black-and-tan ; for 
this beautiful creature evinced the most devoted 
attachment to his master, refusing ever to leave 
his side, and by night as well as by day, the faith- 
ful little ' ' Pen" remained near Hugh Marchmont. 

'' Circumstances sometimes — make us apj^ear 
deceptive— when really our hearts are true," 
hesitated Lady Seaforth with much conscious- 
ness ; so much that Hugh looked up, smiled, 
and remembered the perfidious conduct. 



292 CRCESUS'S WIDOW, 



These two, wlio had once been lovers — who 
had once sat and '^ whispered together, behold- 
ing the moon rise over the pallid sea, and the 
silvery mist of the meadows," were sitting now 
quite alone, when they were lovers no longer, 
with the o:lintinQ; beams of the winter sun 
falling on the faces from which youth, if not 
beauty, had passed aw^ay. 

Lady Seaforth was thinking of Hugh, gently, 
almost tenderly. She was recalling the days 
when they had watched " the moon rise over 
the pallid sea," by the coast at Eyecourt. She 
was recalling the grey look of despair that she 
had seen in Huo-h's face when she had told him 
it must be all over between them ; and she was 
actually flattering herself that the strong feel- 
ing that had caused that grey look of despair 
had lingered through all these years in her old 
lo :er's heart. 

But these long years which Lady Seaforth 
had spent in the world — spent at the best not 
happily — had brought a strange peace and 
serenity to Hugh Marchmont's soul. He loved 
Lady Seaforth no longer, and he knew now 
that even had he married her he would not 
have loved her. She was still handsome. 



rro' 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 293 

Years liad passed lightly over the small straight 
features and the proud blue eyes, and no lines 
of grey were mingled with the fair hair. But 
though the shadowy hand of time had spared 
her beauty, it had not spared her heart. Twenty 
years ago she would not have lied to Strathearn 
.about her want of knowledge of the hapless 
fate of the young girl whose life she knew had 
been ruined by her son ; tv/enty years ago she 
would not have urged that son to throw aside 
all claims of honour and nobility of heart and 
marry a woman for money, v/hen she knew he 
was already bound to another. She, too, had 
listened — as Seaforth had listened — to the 
promptings of an evil spirit. No shadow had 
fallen on her good name (she was too proud 
and too cold to run any risk of incurring such 
a shadow), but none the less a canker had 
eaten into her heart, and she had fallen away 
from the code, which as a haughty young girl, 
lier birth alone would have made her consider 
herself bound to keep. 

But the sight of her old lover — the unfamiliar 
presence of the man with whom she had once 
been so f\imiliar — moved Lady Seafortb, and 
sitting there, opposite Hugh Marchmont, in 



294 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

liis own house, the house which might have- 
been her own, she began to wish that " Hugh" 
woukl look and speak a little more like the 
" Hugh " of old, than apparently he had any 
present intention of doing. 

He looked up, he smiled, he understood ber 
meaning, when she spoke of the weight of 
circumstances ; and then he c^uietly rose from 
the breakfast table. 

" Come with me," he said, " and I will shovr 
you my flowers. They are my one extrava- 
gance." 

Lady Seaforth now rose also, and followed 
her host through two long, low drawing-rooms,, 
where Lady Seaforth's eyes admiringly rested 
on the beautiful and valuable china preserved in 
quaint old cabinets, and on the old circular 
mirrors that the wagaries of fashion had once 
more made fashionable. 

" What pretty things you have in these 
rooms," she said. " I think you have almost 
everything in this old house." And Lady 
Seaforth laui^hed. 

o 

"I have everything I require," answered Hugh,, 
in a grave, practical way, and Lady Seaforth 
felt an angry flush rise to her smooth face. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. fid 5 

From the drawing-rooms Hiigli passed on to 
the conservatories, into which the drawing- 
rooms opened. Here a most beautiful collection 
of rare flowers and tropical plants budded and 
bloomed to give pleasure alone to Hugh March- 
mont and his o-ardeners. 

" And you mean to say that you never 
•entertain — that you never have people to 
dinner, and vet vou otow all these beautiful 
flowers ? " asked Lady Seaforth. 

" I grow them only for my own pleasure 
tind amusement/*' answered Hugh Marchmont, 
smiling ; " but I shall be pleased, if you care to 
have them, to cut some for you now." 

While Huoii Marchmont was cut tin o; the 
flowers for his old love, a gentleman passed 
outside, and Mr. Marchmont, hearing his foot- 
step on the gravel, looked up from his occupa- 
tion. 

" Here is our parson," he said. ''' Having a 
fashionable lady like you for a guest has made 
me forget the time. Every morning, at ten, 
Mr. Wilcox calls here, so will you excuse me, 
and finish cutting your bouquet yourself?" 

Lady Seaforth felt deeply ofl*ended. To be 
left in this cool manner for a common country 



296 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



clergyman was really a little too bad ! She did" 
not fiuisli cuttiDg tlie bouquet ; she walked back 
into the drawing-room, and then went to seek 
her son. She did not understand Hugh Marcli- 
mont ; the stupid man had become moss-grown 
with living such a retired life, and had forgotten 
even the laws of common politeness. 

But Hugh Marchmont had left his old love- 
from no want of politeness, but simply because 
every morning " the parson " came to him on- 
a little matter of business. This little matter 
of business was simply to tell him of all the 
wants and wishes of his poor neighbours. The 
poor, the sick, the sorrowing, were entertained 
by Hugh, if the rich were not. Each morniug, 
"the parson" came up to Eyecourt with hia 
budget, and even Huo-h's cherished flowers were 
sometimes carried to very humble sick rooms. 

While Hugh Marchmont was talking to his 
parson. Lady Seaforth, still feeling ruffled,, 
went to visit her son, who had not yet risen. 
He was looking very ill. The long journey had 
greatly fatigued him ; and the silence at Rye- 
court, the still, country, wintry scene spread 
out before the windows, oppressed his restless 
and uneasy heart. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 297 

^' I can't stay long here, mother," he said 
impatiently. 

" Stay till you are a little stronger," answered 
Lady Seaforth, *' and then you can go abroad." 

While his mother was talking to him, a letter 
was brought into the room, which had just 
•come by the post. This letter Lord Seaforth 
eagerly seized and tore open, for he recognised 
the handwriting of his servant Clayton on the 
envelope. 

I\Ty Lord (lie read), — I went again to-day to the police, 
but they have still not discovered any trace of Mrs. Murray. 
But Mr. Campbell, of Strathearn, has offered two hundred 
pounds for the discovery of the lady — 

'' Confound Strathearn ! " cried Seaforth, 
flino^ino; down his letter. 

" What is the matter ? " asked Lady Seaforth 
quickly and anxiously. 

" Nothing ! Only troubles and worries 
always follow me, I think." 

" Wait here a few days — get strong and well, 
and then go abroad and leave your troubles and 
worries behind," counselled Lady Seaforth. 

And her son understood her counsel. She 
meant that he was utterly to forsake the 
broken-hearted woman that stood in his way. 



CHAPTER XXL 
steatheaen's peesent. 

Aftee Strathearn had A\aiiily enclcavoured to 
see either Lord Seaforth or Clayton, and had 
been told by a passing policeman as he rapped 
and rnno' at Ladv Seaforth's door that " the 
family were out of town," he returned to 
Scotland Yard. 

The inspector of police to whom he had 
spoken was not surj^rised at his news. '' They 
imderstood his lordship was abroad," he said ; 
and then he offered to give Strathearn Miss 
Brewis's address in Belgrave Eoad, so that he 
might personally satisfy himself, that the lady 
wdio disappeared from her house and the lady 
he was seeking were one and the same person. 

Miss Brewis received Strathearn very sourly. 
She sniffed, she tossed her head, and eyed the 
lomr-limbed Scotchman before her with a most 
dissatisfied air. 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 29^ 

*' Hiimpli ! " she said. " Called, you say, to 
make inquiries about Mrs. Murray, who boarded 
with me ? Well — I can't say such a person did 
not board with me — but, if I might be so bold, 
may I inquire are you a relation of this person 
— because that would make a difterence ? " 

During this speech, Strathearn's brown skin 
grew a dusky red, under tlie hard, searching 
gaze of Joannah's eyes. 

'•' Not a relation ! " he jerked out. " I knew 
the little woman down in Scotland — and I want 
to know all you can tell me about her, and Fm 
ready to pay you handsomely for the infor- 
mation." 

'' Upon my word," said Joannah, turning 
suddenly scarlet of visage, while her green eyes 
gave a most A'icious gleam, "that exceeds 
everything ! What do you take me for, sir, 
may I ask ? A female 'tective officer or some- 
thing worse ? But let me tell you I'm neither 
female 'tective, nor anything worse, and I don't 
want any of your re\7ards, and I won't speak a 
word unless I choose, upon any subject, for you 
or your rewards, or any other mortal man's 
rewards — there ! " 

Strathearn's irrim sense of humour was tickled 



300 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

at tlie irate and virtuous Joannali's indignant 
expression, as she thus gave vent to her feehngs. 
He was no fool, and he began to understand 
the woman with whom he had to deaL 

*' Don't scold me so, my good hidy/' he said, 
"'for I meant no ojGfence — I meant something 
very different in fact — to thank you for your 
kindness to Mrs. Murray — for I think the poor 
girl, poor lady I mean, who lodged with you 
must be the same poor soul I'm seekmg, and let 
me tell you that a purer or a better — " 

But Strathearn could not go on with his 
sentence. He never could, indeed, speak of 
Nellie unmoved, and his voice faltered and 
broke now as it had faltered and broke before 
the inspector of police in Scotland Yard. 

^'Well, sir, I am glad to hear it," said Jo- 
annali. " I must say I took to her — she came 
here promiscuous-like — without references, and 
though I'm extremely particular, as all females 
should be — only they ar'nt — but as I was 
saying, I took to her, and she had a modest, 
pretty way of speaking — " 

" Had she fair hair, and a mark on her brow V 
asked Strathearn, in trembling tones. 

Joannah nodded her head. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 301 

" That's the party," she said. " Yes, a red 
mark on her brow rather under her hair, and 
she told me the mark had been got during a 
great storm in Scotland, by the windows of the 
house she was staying at being blown in." 

'' Yes, yes," said Strathearn, visibly agitated, 
and beginning to pace up and down Joannah's 
dining-room with his long strides, " it was at 
the Glen — my house in Strathearn Glen." 

"Your house?" inquired Joannah, sus- 
piciously. 

Strathearn's quick ear caught her tone, and 
he turned sharply round. 

''Yes," he said. "I had lent my house to 
the man whom she thought was her husband — 
that double-dyed scoundrel, Seaforth ! " And 
Strathearn impatiently stamped his foot upon 
the floor. ''But you know the story?" he 
went on, with strong passion and pathos in his 
voice. " They told me— the police— that you 
knew the story, the story of an innocent girl 
trapped and betrayed ! That's about it. Miss 
Brewis." 

Joannah drew up her head, and pursed in 
her thin lips. 

"I understood the story from the party 



302 CRffiSUSS WIDOW. 

lierself," she said ; "and though as a respectable 
unmarried female I prefer not speaking on sucii 
subjects, still I will say that when the party 
first applied to be taken in here, she told me 
she was a married female, waiting for her 
husband to join her, who I understood was in 
the military line ; and as I knew that parties 
in the military line were not generally to be 
depended upon, I was not particularly surprised 
to hear she had been taken in." 

" How did she first learn this ? Tell me 
everything," said Strathearn. 

Then Joannah, in her quaint way, told her 
story — the miserable story we already know. 

" I won't say I'm soft," continued Joannah ; 
'' to be soft and to keep a lodging-house Avhere 
one is aggravated from morning till night 
without cessation, is impossible to a mortal 
being; but though in general. not soft, when 
this poor forsaken creature fell down on the 
floor — ^just where you are standing, sir — and 
cried out she was ' an outcast ! an outcast ! ' — 
then I did feel soft : thouo'h she wasn't what 
she ought to be, and I had been brought 
up resj:)ectable, and my mother — she was a 
Lambert — respectable before me ! " 



crvOb:sus s widow. 303 

"And lie left iier, the scoundrel, in her 
•ao'ony ? " cried Strathearn, who was terriblv 
aoitated hv Joannah's narrative. 

o 

"That he did, tJio villain!" said Joannah. 
" But I o'ave him i\ word of mv mind," she 
added oTimlv. "I told him what I thoucrht 
of him, for when Fm roused I can speak up, 
and I was roused that day and I spoke up ; 
and his conscience — or whatever serves him 
for a conscience — spoke up too, for he came 
tumbling down lik(,' a <lead man on the floor, 
and I thought I was going to have a corpse in 
the house to add to my troubles." 

" He had some shame left, then '? " said 
Strathearn sternly. 

"Oh, for that matter, most o' folks have 
when they're caught," answered Joannah. " But 
I suppose he had some shame left, for I'm told 
he's been most awful ill ever since — quite 
out of his mind — raving and tearing and 
swearing, and fancying the most fearful things ; 
and they've took him away now, whether 
to a private asylum or not I can't tell, but 
thev call it oone abroad, but amono' these 
kind of folks they're very apt to whiten the 
sepulchre." 



304 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

*'Aiid tliis Clayton — his servant," asked 
Strathearn ; "do you know him ? " 

" He's been here, both before and after the 
poor forsaken creature disappeared," answered 
Joannah ; ''and I'll warrant him for a bad 'un,, 
for he's too smooth-tongued to be honest I " 

'* And you would know him again ? " said 
Strathearn eagerly. "He may come here again ? " 

" He may," said Joannah, " for my belief is 
he's hanging about with orders to pick up any 
news of the poor creature he helped to drive 
under the water ; or if she's not under the 
water, for I scarcely believe the fine story they 
tell of the lady who drove her away in her 
carriage — so if she's not under the water, poor 
soul, the Lord only knovrs where she may be !" 

"Look here," said Strathearn, suddenly 
advancing to Joannah, and seizing one of her 
red, hard hands, " if you will get hold of this 
Clayton—" 

" Don't, eir, don't ! " cried Joannah, trying to 
pull her hand away from Strathearn's strong 
grip. " What do you want taking hold of my 
hand ? If you want to talk, or make any decent 
inquiries, stand at a proper distance, if you 
please ! " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 305- 

With a liarsli laugli, Stratliearn released lier 
hand. 

*' Beg your pardon," he said, "I wasn't thinking 
of what I was doing, but of something that may 
help this — this poor lady — to Avhom you have 
been so kind. Look here nov\', Miss Brewis," 
he added, "I believe you're a good w^oman," 
(Joannah tossed her head) " and I believe you 
would help this poor girl if you could ; and if 
you can get hold of this Clayton and keep him 
here, d'ye understand ? till you send for me, I'll 
do anything for you — anything, my good lady 
— if you won't take money, d'ye like sport ? 
Would you like to go down to Scotland ? " 

Joannah held up her hand at this monstrous 
ofler, which was made in all good faith by 
Strathearn. 

"Me like sport!" she said. "Me go to 
Scotland ; you ought to be ashamed of your- 
>self, sir, to put such a question to a respectable 
woman. No," she added, " I've sport enough 
hunting after the hussies I get into my own 
house, and I leave the birds and the beasts to 
be slaughtered by those who have more time, 
and less in their heads than I have, indeed ! " 

Aizain Strathearn g-ave his o-rim laugh. 



306 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

"AVcll," lie said, "whatever you like then. 
AYoukl you like a velvet gown ? " 

" Dear me I " said Joannah, twisting herself 
about, though her hard expression somewhat 
mollified at the mention of the velvet gown, 
*' do you suppose I won't do anything unless I 
get a reward for it. Then 1 just will, then. 
You want to get hold of this Clayton, you 
say?" 

"That's just it!" said Strathearn enthusi- 
astically, and he nearly eaught Joannah by the 
hand again, but was checked in time by a 
virtuous glance. " You get hold of this fellow, 
and I'll tell you why. She — the poor girl, 
Mrs. Murray — told me this Clayton was present 
at the ceremony in Scotland, which she believed 
in ail honesty to be her marriage. D'ye see 
now^ why I want to lay my hands on him ? 
I w^ant to learn the truth. Our laws down in 
Scotland are not over tisfht about marriao'e — 
and perhaps this scoundrel Seaforth may find 
himself bound faster than he thinks himself.' 

" Do you mean really married ? " asked 
Joannah eagerly. 

Strathearn wunced. Deep down in the man's 
heart (in spite of himself) was the hope and 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 307 

belief that Seafortli and Nellie were not mnr- 
ried. Yet for her sake — to give lier back lier 
fair fiime, lier happiness — lie was ready and 
willing to seek out Clayton, to bribe him, and 
do anything, as he told Joannah, to learn the 
truth. 

" You get hold of Clayton," he said the next 
minute. "You're a sharp woman — come, don't 
you think, through this Mrs. Benson, or who- 
ever she is — the old lady's maid you told me 
of, you could ferret out his whereabouts ? " 

Joannah nodded. 

" I'll do it," she said. "Mrs. Benson's turned 
very sly of late, and they are keeping something 
back. I see that well enough, but I'll be equal 
with them, or my name's not Joannah Brewis. 
And if I catch sight of this Clayton, I won't 
lose sight of him, I can promise him that, 
until I've sent for you. So please give me your 
address at once, and let there be no mistake 
about it." 

Then Strathearn i>'ave Joannah his address : 
and in his rouoh wav, ao;ain thanked her for 
her kindness to Xellie. 

"' Won't you shake hands ? " he said. " Thank 
you for being kind to her," he added, as 



808 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Joannali frigidly extended two fingers. ''Don't 
forget our compact. And now, Miss Brewis, 
good day ! " 

But before many liours were over, Miss 
Brevvds again heard sometliing of Strathearn. 
In fact, Stratliearn had seen the softened look 
which for a moment had stolen over Joannah's 
hard visae^e at the mention of the "velvet 
gown," and he acted on that look. A letter 
and a parcel, therefore, were handed to Joannah 
during the day, and when Joannah opened her 
letter, she read these words : — 

Dear Madam, — I hope you will not be offended with 
me, but I have taken the liberty of sending you a slight 
token of my gratitude to you for your kindness to a helpless 
•girl in her hour of need. I have sent you a velvet gown, 
which I hope you will i^lease me by accepting. I am not 
much of a judge of ladies' gowns, but they told me at the 
shop that this colour is the latest fashion, and I hope you 
will like it. — I remain, yours truly, 

Robert Campbell. 
P.S. — Please drop me a line the moment you hear any 
news; and if you require any money to forward inquiries, 
kindly let me know the sum. — R.C. 

Joannah read this letter, gave a gasp, and 
dropped it on the floor. 

" Good gracious ! " she cried, " the man must 
be mad ! " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. SOD 

Then she read the letter again, and finally 
peeped into her parcel. Strathearn had not 
spared expense in his present. Eighteen yards- 
(Joannah measured them) of the richest dark 
sage green velvet that he could buy, lay before 
Joannah's astonished gaze. Joannah was a 
woman, and Strathearn won her heart by that 
" velvet gown.'' 

" He may be a little eccentric," she thought, 
as she fingered it, "but he's a perfect gentle- 
man — and if I don't catch hold of that Clayton 
to please him, I'm not the woman I take myself 
to be." 

Indeed, so delighted was Joannah with her 
gown, that she went the very evening after she 
received it, to pay a visit to her friend Mrs. 
Benson, for the purpose, as Joannah would have 
expressed it, of '' feeling her way." 

But she experienced a great disappointment 
at the very beginning of her undertaking. After 
sitting conversing some time with Mrs. Benson, 
on various subjects, Joannah, as if casually, 
asked after Lord Seaforth's health. 

** And how is that young scamp of a lord 
pulling througli his fever ? " inquired Joannah, 
with affected carelessness and contempt of 



310 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

manner. '' I suppose yon will hear all about 
liim from that fellow of his ? " 

"Yon mean Mr. Clayton," answered Mrs. 
Benson. " I had a visit from Clayton to-day — ■ 
he's o'one to ioin mv lord." 

" And where may my lord he ? " asked 
Joannah, her green eyes in spite of herself 
oivino' an eao-er oieam. 

Mrs. Benson pursed in her good-tempered 
mouth. 

"The family are abroad," she said mys- 
teriously. 

Mrs. Benson hnew quite well that "tbe 
family " were not abroad ; knew that ^' the 
family " were living in a secluded manor-house 
in Dorsetshire, and that Clayton had been 
telegraphed for to join Lord Seaforth at Eye- 
court. But though Mrs. Benson knew all this, 
she knew also she was not to tell it. Lord 
Seaforth's residence was to be kept a secret for 
the present, " until his affairs were arranged," 
my lady had told her old servant, who knew all 
about my lord's financial and other difiiculties. 

" Abroad ! That's a wide place," snapped 
Joannah. " What particular place abroad may 
thev be in ? " 



CRCESUSS ^YIDOW. 311 

Mrs. Benson, upon, this, declared her inability 
to tell. 

" What ! didn't Clayton know where he was 
going ? " ashed Joannah here, sharply. 

Mrs. Benson said she had made no inquiries ;. 
in truth, ]\[rs. Benson had been warned by 
Clayton to be very wary in her communications- 
to Miss Brewis. 

"You see, it's best kept quiet," Clayton had 
said. " I'm uncommon sorry for the poor 
young lady, but then my lord's up to his chin 
in debts and troubles, and I see no way for him 
to o;et out of 'em unless he marries the rich 
widow. And this Mr. Campbell, of Strathearn^ 
is mixing himself up in the business, and I 
thought it my duty to inform my lord of this, 
and how Strathearn — as they call him down 
yonder in Scotland — has offered a reward, as 
much as two hundred pounds, for the poor 
young lady's recovery. It's a cpeer affair 
altoorether. What this Strathearn has to do 
Avith it T can't say — but I fancy my telegram 
is somehow connected with the information I 
forwarded to my lord about the reward of twa 
hundred pounds. At all events, say nothing 
about it, Mrs. Benson, and especially don't say 



:312 CRffiSUS's WIDOW. 



anything to that ]\Iiss Brcwis, for you sec the 
police may send Mr. Campbell of Strathearn 
there, and it must be kept a secret at present 
where my lord is." 

Thus Joannah learnt nothing from her yisit 
to Mrs. Benson, except that Clayton had left 
-town — had gone to join Lord Seaforth abroad. 
And Clayton's surmise about the cause of his 
haying been telegraphed for to go to Eyecourt 
was quite correct. Lord Seaforth had in fact 
become uneasy about haying Clayton in London, 
w^hen Strathearn, judging by the large reward 
he had offered, was making such energetic 
•efforts to discoyer, and of course befriend, 
Nellie. 

Therefore, after a night's thought, Seafortli 
telegraphed to his seryant to join him at Rye- 
'Court, and Clayton went. Joannah thus had 
no news to write to Strathearn— when, in her 
stiff, old-fashioned handwriting, she wrote to 
thank him for his present — except that she had 
learned that Clayton was not now in town, 
" and they are keeping it a secret," Joannah 
.added in her letter, "where the family really 
^re. I saw that plain enough, for I'm not cpite 
such a fool as to be taken in by Mrs. Benson." 



CECESUSS WIDOW. 313 

StratliGani was disappointed by Joannah's 
letter, but lie did not mean to be baffled. He 
had sworn lie would find Nellie, and he used to 
wander up and down the streets staring right 
^nd left, making sure that some day or other 
he would come suddenly on the "dear little 
woman" again. 

His strono' nature had been stirred to the 

o 

very depths by Joannah's touching story. It 
entirely confirmed him in his own impression of 
Nellie's innocence, which he had formed that day 
at Strathearn, after he had told her that he 
believed Seaforth had utterly deceived her. 
The idea of the wronged and broken-hearted 
girl wandering out to die in her despair, 
moved Strathearn to the soul. He would 
have struck Seaforth in these days **like a 
cur," if his eyes had fallen on the handsome, 
pleasant face, that had wrought such bitter 
jU. He hated him, he thought, because he 
had wronged Nellie ; but he hated him, too, 
out of jealousy — jealousy powerful as his 
strong love. 

But while Seaforth was restlessly and wearily 
spending the time at Eyecourt, impatient of 
the weakness and lassitude which his illness 



314 CRCESUS'S AYIDOW. 

Lad left behind, and Stratlicarn was wandering- 
up and down the London streets, wdth his heart 
full of his deep, fierce passions, let us now see 
how the poor broken-hearted woman was faring,, 
of whom these two men almost unceasingly 
thouofht. 



End of Volume Second. 

Crcesus's Widow. 



CHAPTER I. 



It was generally a very happy home — made 
bright and happy by its sweet young mistress — 
where, week after week, Nellie lay utterly 
prostrate. The long strain and anxiety on her 
mind, and then the terrible shock she had 
received, had brought on a sort of low fever, 
and the memory of her misery even at times 
grew dull and dim. 

She was in truth, very, very ill ; so ill that 
even good-natured Tom Bertrim began to look 
and speak very gravely about her condition. 

" I really think, do you know, Dossie," he 
said, " we should try to find out who she is. 

VOL. III. B 



2 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Just fancy, if the poor soul were to die, dear, 
what an awkward position we would be in ! I 
suggest we apply to the police." 

But Dossie would not hear of this. 

"I'll speak to her when she gets a little 
better," she said. " I'll ask her to make a friend 
of me, Tom; and who knows, dear, she may 
become a happy woman yet. Don't be hard 
and horrid, Tom — in fact, I won't let you ! " 

Tom shruowd his broad shoulders. 

" Well, little woman, have your own way," 
he said ; ' ' but what if some despairing husband 
is seeking for this poor lady all this while ? " 

"Then why did he drive her out to try to 
drown herself in her misery ? " replied Dossie. 
" Tom, dear, he's a bad man, I'm sure ; and I 
who have got such a good, kind husband — 
when we are so happy, Tom — shouldn't we try 
to do a little good ? " 

This very illogical argument was quite 
sufficient for the good-natured Tom. He kissed 
his Dossie's rosy lips ; he felt himself strong 
enough to resist all persuasions which were 
against his Dossie's wishes. 

For, as in all earthly Edens there is some 
small, creeping, lurking evil hidden among the 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 3 

flowers, so even in this happy home at Castle- 
wood Lodge, a small evil in the shape of jealousy 
between the respective mothers of the two 
young people, occasionally disturbed Mr. Tom 
Bertram's usual serenity. 

Dossie was an only child, and Turn an onlv 
son. No one, therefore, naturally, was good 
enough for Dossie in Mrs. Barrett's eyes, and 
no one was good enough for Tom in Mrs. 
Bertrim's. This was the first element of 
jealousy between the two mothers, but this 
first element was constantly augmented by small 
social jealousies. If Mrs. Barrett gave a dinner 
party and invited the " best " people she knew, 
it immediately behoved Mrs. Bertrim to give a 
dinner party also, and invite her " best " friends. 
And the social standing of these friends was a 
sore and jealous point between the ladies. The 
line was so fine between them, that probably no 
one else saw it (especially after the young people 
were married), but both Mrs. Barrett and Mrs. 
Bertrim saw it, and were bitter about it in their 
secret hearts. Mrs. Barrett was the daughter 
of a banker, and Mrs. Bertrim the daughter of 
a wine merchant. There was the line ! Mrs. 
Barrett held herself to be above Mrs. Bertrim 



CRGESUS'S WIDOW. 



in position, though they were both married to 
commercial men in the city of about equal 
standing. Mrs. Bertrim resented this holding 
up of Mrs. Barrett's head, and so jealousy was 
between them ; jealousy, however, always pro- 
perly and decorously veiled. 

And we may be sure both the mothers kept 
their eyes on Castlewood Lodge ; and to give 
Mrs. Bertrim her due, she was fond, on the 
whole, of her daughter-in-law Dossie. 

" Tom makes a fool of himself about her," 
she was very apt to say ; but still she admitted 
that " Mrs. Tom" was a very sweet young 
woman, " very different from her mother, 
though she very often did absurd things ; and 
as for taking in this poor woman whom nobody 
knows, and nursing her like a sister — Tom is a 
fool to allow it ! " 

Mrs. Bertrim not only said this to a married 
daughter, but she also told her son Tom her 
true opinion, and Tom began to think that 
perhaps he might be a fool. So he spoke to 
Dossie ; but as Dossie objected, and objected as 
we have seen in so judicious a manner, Tom 
felt strong enough to resist either mother or 
mother-in-law. 



CfKESUSS WIDOW. 5 

" Your mother told you to say this, didn't 
she, Tom ? " continued Mrs. Tom, putting her 
pretty hand in her husband's, and smiling in 
his face. 

Tom nodded his head, and gave a little laugh. 

" Never mind," said Dossie ; " we won't let 
either mother or mother-in-law make us fight, 
will we?" 

" I should think not," answered Tom stoutly. 

" I should think not too," said Dossie. " Of 
course, darling," she added, " I would, and 
-always will try to do what you wish. If you 
wished me to turn a poor broken-hearted young 
creature out, on the cruel mercies of the world , 
I would do it, only I know you wouldn't wish 
me — that you wouldn't be my own dear Tom 
if you did wish me — and so I'm quite safe, 
because you are my own dear old darling Tom!" 

Thus this pretty, kind-hearted young woman 
got her own way. When her own mother 
objected to her nursing the unfortunate stranger 
she had taken in, Dossie told Mrs. Barrett that 
Tom wished it, and that she had consulted Tom 
about it, and therefore what could Mrs. Barrett 
say ? 

" Keep the dear baby out of her way, that's 



6 CROESUS'S WIDOW. 

all I can say/' sighed Mrs. Barrett, and upon 
tliis point (for once in their lives) Mrs. Barrett 
and Mrs. Bertrim agreed. 

They both indeed adored the baby. They 
had no other grandchild, and the baby's robust 
legs, pink curled-up toes, and one tooth, were 
unending sources of gratification and conversa- 
tion to the two grandmothers. And now they 
both took up arms for " baby's " sake, against 
the hapless stranger lying deadly sick under 
Dossie's hospitable roof. 

'•' The fever may be catching, and think of the 
darling baby, Dossie," urged her own mother. 

" As Tom's mother, it is my duty to point out 
to you, Dossie, the danger to which you are 
exposing his son," severely remarked the mother- 
in-law. 

" Please don't scold me," Dossie replied, 
almost in the same words to each mother, " for 
I am only doing what I think right. And 
baby is quite safe — do you not think I love 
my own darling little boy well enough to take 
care of him ? Babies don't take low, nervous 
fevers, though broken-hearted women do ; and 
as I have my husband's leave, I don't think 
there can be any harm in it." 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



"Your husband would give you leave to do 
.anything you wish, Dossie, it seems to me," 
remarked Mrs. Bertrim, with a mother's jealousy 
of the young wife's influence. 

" Yes, isn't he a dear old fellow ? " answered 
Dossie in her bright good-tempered way, for 
she never appeared to notice any of what her 
mother-in-law called "hints," and thus escaped 
many a useless and unpleasant argument. 

And all this while (when the two mothers 
were making their comments), Dossie nursed 
and attended upon her unfortunate guest as if 
she were her sister. And she used, as Nellie 
grew a little better, to take in baby to see her. 
At first the dim, sunken eyes never noticed 
baby, and Dossie considered this a very bad 
sign. But one day Dossie noticed the poor 
invalid was watching the child with a strange, 
wistful look. 

Without a word the young mother carried 
her rosy, lovely boy to the bed, and placed 
him in Nellie's arms. For a moment or two 
Nellie made no sign. But baby, who was quite 
at home with strangers, put his little chubby 
face against hers, and pursed up his rosy mouth 
to be kissed. As he did so Nellie drew him to 



8 CRCESUS S WIDOW. 

her breast, and then quick, sharp sobs came to 
her relief. They were the first tears that 
Dossie had seen her shed since she had been at 
Castlewood, and as she wept and wailed over 
the child, it seemed to Dossie that some hope 
dawned in her face. 

" Kiss baby, dear, again," said Dossie to her 
gently, in a few minutes; "see, the little fellow 
thinks you are angry with him if you don't, 
and then I'll carry him to nurse and come back 
to you." 

Nellie kissed the child, and murmured a few 
inarticulate words of tenderness over the fair 
curly head. 

" Say good-bye to the lady, baby," said the 
young mother, lifting the little one in her arms; 
and after she had given him to his nurse, she 
returned to Nellie's bedside, and knelt clown, 
and took one of the poor wasted hands. 

" Tell me your trouble, dear," said Dossie, in 
her sweet kind voice. " Don't mind telling me 
anything — I'm a woman too, and women are 
often silly you know when they care very much 
for anyone — and I hope you are better now, 
that you are getting better — " 

" It would be better if I were dead," sobbed 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 9 

Nellie. " I wish, to die — thank you very much 
for all your kindness to ine — but I wish to die." 

" But, dear, we can't die when we wish, but 
when God chooses," said Dossie, " and we must 
try to do the best we can for everyone while we 
live." 

" You — you are very good," wept Nellie. " I 
•once saw a good man die — he seemed very 
happy — but, but God has forsaken me ! " 

" He forsakes no one, dear," answered Dossie, 
with her simple, practical faith. " Do not be 
afraid — you are not forsaken." 

" I have been cruelly, cruelly deceived — I 
cannot tell you the story — but I thought, was 
sure, quite sure, I was married — and then — 
then, he told me I was not — that — that — " 

But sobs here literally choked the unhappy 
Nellie, and Dossie bent over her, and kissed the 
tear-stained, burning face. 

"It is not your sin or wrong," she said, " but 
his. Hush, dear ! all may come right yet — 
hush ! — I will always be your friend." 

After this, little by little, Nellie told her 
story, but she did not tell Lord Seaforth's name. 

" I promised not to tell. I cannot break my 
word, though he has broken his," she told 



10 croesus's widow. 

Dossie ; and Dossie, who had listened to her 
pitiful tale with an indignant flush on her sweet,, 
sympathetic face, nodded her head. 

" I would never speak to him more, never 
see him more, if I were you," exclaimed Dossie. 
She could not understand any man treating a 
woman thus, when he had once loved or seemed 
to love her. In all her own sheltered life she 
had been made almost an idol of, for her father 
and mother loved her so dearly, and her Tom 
was devoted to her, and no trouble had ever 
been permitted to approach her. And to hear 
this miserable story, to see this poor broken- 
hearted young creature, crushed down as it were, 
by sorrow, was very terrible to Dossie. 

"I don't know what to advise," she said, jump- 
ing up from the chair on which she was sitting 
by Nellie's bedside, to hide her own tears, 
" except you stay on here, dear, and try to get 
well, and I'll come and talk to you again 
presently." And Dossie stooped down and 
kissed Nellie, and then ran quickly out of the 
room. 

After a while she came back. 

" I've been thinking it all over," she said, in 
her kind, impulsive way. "Of course I couldn't 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 



11 



tell Tom. I have no secrets of my own from 
Tom — indeed, how could I have any secrets* 
when he helps me so about everything. But 
this is not my secret, but yours ; and so I've 
been obliged to think for myself, and I've 
thought that perhaps it would be best for you 
to write to this gentleman, and tell him where 
you are." 

Nellie's pale face flushed deeply at this pro- 
posal. 

" I think it would be right," continued 
Dossie. " He mayn't have meant what he 
said — quite ! He may have repented for having 
been so cruel, and I think you should write." 

Nellie lay silent. It was all so bitter to 
her — more bitter than death — but what was 
she to do ? She knew she could not go on 
living under the roof of these kind strangers ; 
and to o;o back to her father seemed more 
terrible to her than it had ever been. 

"It would kill him," she thought, with a 
moan, turning on her pillow ; and Dossie, 
hearing that cry of anguish, came and lay her 
sweet cheek against Nellie's. 

" Hush, don't distress yourself ! " said Dossie. 
" I know how you must feel it, but I thought and 



12 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

thought what would be best — for I feel so 
stupid when I can't consult Tom — and I really 
think you ought to write. If — if this gentle- 
man has any heart, after all you have suffered, 
he will be only too glad to hear from you." 

And after a while — after thinking her miser- 
able position over and over — Nellie at last did 
determine to write to Seaforth, to make one 
more appeal to his honour and his heart. 

Oh ! they were sad, sad words to write, these 1 
He had crushed the love out of her heart, and 
bowed her head with shame, and for her own 
sake she never would have sought to see him 
more. She sat up in bed and tried to write, 
but could find no words to express her misery. 
These words — the wretched cry for help — 
which at last she penned, need not be repeated 
here. They were never fated to meet the eyes- 
for whom they were intended. Nellie enclosed 
her letter under cover (as in the old days) to 
Clayton ; but Clayton had gone to join his 
master at Eyecourt, and had left no address, 
and the unhappy girl's letter never even reached 
Clayton. 

But in the meantime, at the earnest entreaty 
of her kind, sweet hostess, Nellie was trying to 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 13 

rouse herself; to shake off the deadly stupor, 
almost bewilderment, from her mind. At 
length she was persuaded to leave her bedroom, 
and in a pretty little loom at the end of the 
large drawing-room at Castlewood, Dossie in- 
stalled the shattered, trembling creature, who 
but a few months ago had been fair Nellie 
Blythe. 

But Christmas had come and gone, and the 
New Year begun, before even this change could 
be made. And this change was not made, we 
may be quite sure, without the observation 
and remarks of both the mother and the mother- 
in-law of the youDg people at Castlewood. The 
room downstairs where Nellie was removed, 
was in truth the small drawing-room, but it 
was separated from the other drawing-room by 
folding-doors, which Dossie locked, after giving 
the servants orders that no one was to be 
allowed to disturb the invalid lady. 

But Mrs. Bertrim was a woman who liked 
(as she expressed it) to know the end of every- 
thing. This unknown and nameless guest of her 
daughter-in-law's, was therefore, a perpetual 
worry to her, and she was determined to see 
her. She watched her opportunity. Dossei 



14 crgesus's widow. 

laad driven into London to make some purchases, 
and Mrs. Bertrim, having learnt that Dossie was 
going into town on such a day, chose that day 
for an unexpected visit to Castlewood Lodge. 

She arrived, was told " Mrs. Tom " was not 
at home, but, nevertheless, ordered her coach- 
man to stable his horses. Then, with a deter- 
mined step, she entered the house, and laid a 
determined hand on the handle of the small 
drawing-room door. But Dossie's maid here 
tried to stop her. 

"The poor, sick lady is there, ma'am," she 
said, "and Mrs. Bertrim left particular orders 
she was not to be disturbed." 

Mrs. Bertrim, senior, made no reply to the 
maid's remark. She opened the small drawing- 
room door, and walked straight in. She was a 
stout woman, with the signs of good cheer and 
prosperity on every line of her face. On a 
couch drawn close to the fire, as she entered 
the room, another woman, with a white wasted 
face, was lying, who started up with a nervous, 
frightened look, on the appearance of Mrs. 
Bertrim's burly form and rosy visage. 

Mrs. Bertrim, senior, bowed stiffly, and Nellie 
nervously. 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 15 

" I hope you are feeling better ? " said Mrs. 
Bertrim, eyeing Nellie with hard, curious eyes. 

" Yes, I am a little better, I think," answered 
Nellie, in a low, feeble voice. 

" You have had a long illness," said Mrs. 
Bertrim. 

"Yes/' replied Nellie, in a yet lower and 
more feeble voice. 

(i This is my son's house," continued Mrs. 
Bertrim, "so you must excuse my making 
an observation or two — but I think it is 
quite time you communicated with your 
friends." 

Nellie made no reply to this. She looked up, 
her white, drawn, wasted face flushed for a 
moment, and then grew pale again ; but she was 
too ill, and too weak, to speak. 

" My daughter-in-law," began Mrs. Bertrim, 
senior; but as she said the words she suddenly 
paused, for — voluminous as herself, and with 
indignation imprinted on her rosy features — 
Mrs. Barrett at this moment walked into the 
room. 

" My daughter left particular orders, Mrs. 
Bertrim," said Mrs. Barrett, with emphasis, 
" that no one was to enter this room ; so 



IS CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

perhaps you will excuse me asking you to 
withdraw, as the lady is too ill to be disturbed, 
and my daughter gave positive orders before 
she went to town to that effect." 

" Oh ! indeed ! " answered Mrs. Bertrim, 
tossing her head with a very unpleasant little 
laugh. "I was not aware that there were 
stalie secrets and locked doors in my son's 
house. I was not aware I was intruding when 
I entered any room in my son's house. But it 
seems that I am — it seems that my son's house 
is not open at least to his family." 

"I am only repeating my daughter's wishes, 
Mrs. Bertrim," said Mrs. Barrett. " I am no 
more mistress here, as you are aware, than you 
are. But as my daughter was going to town 
to-day, she asked me to come and spend the 
day with baby. Baby is not quite well — " 

" Not quite well ? " interrupted the other 
grandmother with real anxiety. " I told Dossie 
something would happen to the child if she did 
not take care — I may go up and see baby, I 
suppose, at any rate, Mrs. Barrett ? " 

u Of course, Mrs. Bertrim — your own grand- 
child ! " 

Upon this the two grandmothers left the 



croesus's widow. 17 

room to look after the precious child, and the 
poor weary invalid was alone. But Nellie had 
learned during their brief visit that perhaps 
she might bring trouble and worry on her 
s\*eet hostess if she stayed much longer at 
Castle wood Lodge. 



CHAPTER II. 

WHO COT NELLIES SECOND LETTER. 

Dossie Bertrim was very angry indeed when 
she heard from her mother, on her return from 
town, that her mother-in-law had intruded 
herself upon her unhappy guest. Dossie, in 
spite of her great sweetness and kindness of 
disposition, had a temper of her own when she 
was fairly roused, and she was fairly roused by 
this unladylike act of her mother-in-law. In 
fact, a somewhat serious family quarrel arose 
in consequence ; and to add to Dossiers annoy- 
ance the post one day brought her a letter 
returned from the dead-letter office. This 
letter was the one which Dossie had jDersuaded 
the unfortunate girl under her roof to write to 
Seaforth, under cover to his servant Clayton. 
By Dossiers request, the answer ought to have 
been addressed, under cover, to Mrs. T. Bert rim. 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 19 

Castlewood Lodge. The letter had been opened 
at the post-office, and was returned to Castle- 
wood Lodge with a notification on the envelope 
that no such person as Chiton was to be found. 

Dossie was exceedingly annoyed at this. Her 
husband opened the post-bag as usual, and saw 
the letter, and handed it to his wife, and very 
naturally asked her what it was about. 

Dossie had the good sense at once to tell her 
husband the truth. The poor, unhappy lady 
upstairs had written a letter and sent it under 
cover to this person Clayton, who apparently 
could not be found, explained Dossie, and the 
answer ought to have come under cover to her. 

Good-natured Tom Bertrim listened, and 
then beo-an whistling to himself. 

" I say, Dossie," he said, presently, " I think 
it has a very shady look." 

" Why, Tom ? This man may have gone 
away, mayn't he ? " replied Dossie. 

" He may, certainly," said Tom ; " but all the 
same, little woman, I think you really ought to 
see about getting another home for this poor 
creature. You see the old lady is very much 
offended about all this row, and it makes the 
house so uncomfortable to have rows in it ; 



20 croesus's widow. 

and as, of course, she must go away some day 
or other, I advise you really dear to urge her 
to write to her friends — for as my mother 
says — " 

" Don't tell me what your mother says, Tom," 
answered Dossie, turning very red. " I don't 
want any quarrels, but all the same I won't let 
anyone but you order me about in my own 
house. Of course if you wish it — " 

"I do wish it, dear little woman, only don't 
vex yourself about it," said Tom. " If she 
want's money, of course you know she can have 
it, and there is no particular hurry ; but still if 
you don't mind, I think it is a pity for us to 
have any more quarrels and worries about a 
stranger." 

Dossie was very much upset at this conver- 
sation, and also to be forced to tell the poor 
girl she had befriended, that her letter had 
been returned through the post. 

She broke this news as gently as she could,, 
and Nellie never spoke a word. But by-and- 
by a few heavy tears began to roll down the 
sunken cheeks, and the lips to twitch nervously. 

" This man, of course, may have gone away," 
said Dossie, trying to speak hopefully. " You 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 21 

see the letter has never reached him, so of 
course it has never reached — the gentleman. 
I would advise you to write direct to the 
gentleman — " 

Then Nellie spoke. 

" Mrs. Bertrim," she said, " I had better go 
from here — I ought to go away from here." 

"But why?" asked Dossie, with faltering 
lips, for she was thinking of what her husband 
had said. 

"Because I shall only bring trouble upon you 
— because every one is not like you — and — 
and I suppose I'm not fit to be in your house." 
And Nellie burst into choking sobs. 

Dossie knew at this moment that this was 
her mother-in-law's doing; • she knew that this 
poor broken-hearted creature had seen and 
understood the purport of her mother-in-law's 
visit, and Dossie felt very indignant. 

" I am my own mistress," said Dossie, " and 
no one shall dictate to me whom I shall receive 
into my own house. But " (Dossie still re- 
membering her husband's words) " I have just 
thought of a nice change for you. Our old 
coachman at home married a few years ago, 
and I know them very well, and they let 



22 ckcesus's WIDOW. 

lodgings not far from Victoria Station — and if 
you would like to go to them, you can of course 
have as much money as you want — you know 
I have money of my own ; even Tom knows 
nothing about it." 

Nellie put out her trembling hand, which 
Dossie Bertrim eagerly took. 

" I do not know how to thank you," said 
Nellie. " I would like to go where you name 
— and if you will lend me some money now, 
it shall be repaid to you — my father — " 

" Do not distress yourself, please," urged 
Dossie. 

" I was only going to say," continued poor 
Nellie, trying to speak quietly, " that I know 
my father will repay you this — but I cannot 
go to him just now — I cannot ! I cannot ! " 

" I know, dear ; and about the money, it is 
all right. I will, if you wish it — as soon as 
you feel well enough to move, of course — write 
to this Mrs. Moore. She is a most respectable 
woman, I know, and she will take care of you 
and nurse you. But there is one thing you 
must promise, or I will not let you go." 

"What must I promise? " said Nellie, wearily. 

" Never to — do anything rash again — not 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 23 

to harm yourself, I mean — and also not to run 
away from one. Now, will you promise ? " 

"Yes," half- whispered Nellie, and Dossie 
bent down and kissed her face. 

" Very well, then," she said, " I will trust 
you. I will write to Mrs. Moore, and as soon 
as you are strong enough I will drive you into 
town." 

This arrangement was carried out a few days 
later. In fact, both Nellie and Dossie Eertrim 
felt that Nellie was now better away from 
Castle wood Lodge. And Nellie had made up 
her mind to endeavour to see Seaforth. Surely 
when he saw her — when he knew all — his heart 
would relent. And she could not, of course, 
try to see him at Castlewood. Therefore as 
soon as the doctor would give his consent, 
Nellie begged to be taken to her new home. 
She little guessed how anxiously and constantly 
she had been sought for ; she little guessed how 
bitterly (to do him justice) Seaforth had grieved 
over her uncertain fate ; and how Strathearn 
was unceasingly endeavouring to trace her. 

It was close on the end of January when she 
left Castlewood Lodge. By this time Seaforth 
had grown so utterly weary of Kyecourt that 



124 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Lis mother had urged him to go to Paris for a 
change, and had borrowed the money from her 
old friend, Hugh Marchmont, to take him there. 
Seaforth, however, did not leave England with- 
out making another effort to hear something of 
Nellie. He wrote to the police from Dover, 
and there awaited their reply. They had 
nothing to tell him but what he already knew. 
Mr. Campbell, of Strathearn, had offered a 
reward of two hundred pounds for the discovery 
of the same lady, and was making other strenu- 
ous efforts, he was told, but hitherto without 
result. But there was no doubt that the lady 
who endeavoured to throw herself from the 
bridge at Chelsea and "Mrs. Murray" were 
identical ; therefore Lord Seaforth might reason- 
ably be satisfied that she was well taken care of. 

And with this meagre information Seaforth 
went away. He was best away, Mr. Cairns 
wrote him word. " Strathearn will look after 
her if she casts up," thought Seaforth, with a 
bitter smile. 

Thus when Nellie went to live in the small 
street near Victoria Station, where the late 
coachman of Mr. and Mrs. Barrett lived, 
Seaforth was in Paris. He was miserable enough, 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 25- 

to do him justice, for he had not forgotten 
Nellie, but he blamed her as well as he blamed 
himself. It was heartless and unfeeling of her 
never to have written to him, he thought, not 
to have sent one line to tell him of her safety, 
when she must know how much she must have 
caused him to suffer by her mysterious disap- 
pearance. 

All the time he had stayed at Eyecourt, his- 
mother had never named the subject to him. 
She had named another subject frequently, and 
this was his marriage to Nora Trelawn. She 
had pointed out again and again, how this 
marriage would save him, and when she pro- 
23osed for him to go to Paris, she was only 
carrying out a scheme which she had formed in 
her own mind. 

This scheme was to invite Nora to stay with 
her at Hugh Marchmont's when Seaforth was 
away. She knew it would look too marked ta 
invite her when her son was there, but she laid 
her plans fairly well. 

Nora was to be invited to " take pity " upon 
her, as Seaforth was away, and then Seaforth 
was unexpectedly to return during the rich 
widow's visit. The first act of this social drama 



26 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

was to get Seafortli away, and he was only too 
glad to go. He was weary of the great stillness 
and rest at Ryecourt, and he knew he was 
totally and completely unsuited for the society 
of his mother's distant kinsman — Hugh March- 
mont. 

Lady Seaforth had written to Nora frequently 
during her stay at Ryecourt, and Nora had 
always replied in a friendly and kindly spirit. 
Nora, in truth, liked my lady much better since 
that dismal day when circumstances had com- 
pelled her to bow her proud head and come to 
Nora for help and assistance. So in the early 
days of Spring, when the violets and snowdrops 
were beginning to show their modest heads in 
the woods round Ryecourt, Lady Seaforth 
wrote and asked Nora if she would take com- 
passion on her, and spend a few days with her 
" in this remote and old-fashioned spot, where 
my distant kinsman, Hugh Marchmont, literally 
lives among his flowers. Seaforth is in Paris," 
continued my lady's letter, "and it is very, 
very dull here, for Mr. Marchmont never en- 
tertains, even if there were any one in the 
neighbourhood whom I could have any pleasure 
in meeting. But as far as I can learn, there is 



crcescs's WIDOW. 27 



not. However, I know you love the country, 
and the country is pretty, and the gardens are 
very pretty ; and my kinsman (whom I have 
told of your great kindness to Seaforth and 
myself) desires me to say he will be charmed 
if you will pay us a visit." 

Nora read this letter with a smile, and then 
handed it to her aunt, Lady Stainbrooke, who 
had once more, almost uninvited, established 
herself and her old General at Nora's house in 
South Kensington. 

Lady Stainbrooke put on her glasses and 
read the letter, and then nodded her head. 

" I would go if I were you, Nora/' she said ; 
"the change will do you good — you want 
change," she added significantly. 

V Do I ? " said Nora, and she coloured slightly. 
" I am very well, Aunt Stainbrooke.'' 

" Yes, my dear • but still I think a little 
change would do you good," continued Lady 
Stainbrooke. "It would freshen you up, you 
see, for the season — and Lady Seaforth is a 
very agreeable person." 

Nora laughed quite merrily. She knew how 
anxious heraunt was that she should marry 
Lord Seaforth ; though had her aunt known 



28 croesus's widow. 

how much money she had advanced to Lord 
Seaforth, she would have thought twice about 
the matter. 

But during the time of Lord Seaforth's 
illness, and the great trouble in the house, 
Lady Stainbrooke and her General had been at 
Buckstone, and Lady Stainbrooke only knew 
that Lord Seaforth was an embarrassed man, 
and had had a fever, and that her niece, Nora, 
had been a great deal with her neighbour during 
the time of the young lord's illness. 

Naturally, perhaps, then Lady Stainbrooke 
expected Nora would marry Seaforth. 

" Thank goodness that Yyner is married and 
out of the way now," she had shouted to her 
General, when she first heard the news of Yyner 's 
marriage. She indeed understood everything 
now about Nora's conduct which she had not 
understood before. 

" So he told her he was engaged that day at 
Roseland, I suppose," smiled her ladyship to 
herself, " and this was the reason of Nora's rude 
behaviour to me. Poor man," she inwardly 
reflected, " I really pity him — fancy losing such 
a fortune as Nora's by a mere chance, for she 
would certainly have been fool enough to take 



crcesus's WIDOW. 29 

him. Ay, ay, and I suppose he tried to get off 
fulfilling his engagement, and the girl wouldn't 
let him — yes, I see it all now, and I am thank- 
ful I have seen the last of him." 

But, to Lady Stainbrooke's surprise and an- 
noyance, she found upon her return to Nora's 
house that she had not seen the last of Mr. 
Vyner. Nay, she found that one evening at 
least in the week, Vyner was sure to be seen in 
Nora's drawing-room. She found, in fact, that 
Vyner and Nora continued to be friends, and 
that they seemed to find a thousand subjects to 
talk about, in which they both had a surprising 
interest. 

" Allow me to congratulate you on your 
marriage, Mr. Vyner," she had said to the painter 
in her old jaunty way, when she first met him 
again at Nora's house. " Ah — ah — I used to 
say there was a lady in the way, you remember ? 
I hear the new Mrs. Vyner is a very suitable 
person." 

Vyner only bowed. He could not endure 
Lady Stainbrooke, and was, indeed, hardly 
civil to her. 

" He's getting | very old-looking," Lady 
Stainbrooke told Nora^after Vyner left ; f ' these 



30 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

dark men never wear well, and he is decidedly 
sallow — and do you ever see the wife ? " 

" Oh, yes," answered Nora, perhaps a little 
consciously ; " she has dined here once or twice 
— but I do not see very much of her. Mr. 
Vyner is different, he is an old friend." 

"Yes," said Lady Stainbrooke, dryly; "but 
you must take care, my dear," she added, "the- 
world is censorious." 

"There is nothing to be censorious about," 
answered Nora, hotly, though she felt she 
blushed. "Mr. Vyner is an old friend, and 
shall always be received and treated as such in 
my house." 

So her ladyship said nothing more, but all 
the same she would sometimes watch Nora and 
Vyner rather uneasily. All the world might 
have heard every word they ever spoke to each 
other, but the hours spent in Nora's drawing- 
room were the only hours of Vyner's life that 
were not now very wearisome to him. 

At home he knew he was drifting further and 
further away from Margaret. But Margaret 
never saw this. She was always busy ; her house,. 
her servants, and her father occupying her whole 
attention. She was disappointed in " Walter," 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 31 



certainly. His temper was " variable," she 
confided to her old friend, Mrs. Saunders ; but 
Mrs. Saunders counselled her " to put up with 
it," and she took this excellent woman's advice. 

There were no open quarrels, therefore, be- 
tween the husband and wife, yet they constantly 
disagreed. But still, Margaret felt that she had 
•done well in life, and that she was the help and 
comfort of her father's declining years. She 
was, in fact, a good daughter, and no doubt in 
some ways a good wife also. She did every- 
thing she ought to do ; but she so constantly 
reminded you of this, that her egotism effaced 
her virtues. 

And, weary of this everlasting self-}3raise 
and self-assertiveness, Vyner used sometimes to 
go to Nora's, and tell her his thoughts and 
fancies, as we can only tell them to a few. 
Behind her gold-rimmed glasses Lady Stain- 
brooke, with her blinking eyes would watch the 
painter, and she began more earnestly than ever 
to wish that Nora was married to Lord Seaforth. 
Therefore when the invitation came from Lady 
Seaforth to invite Nora to visit her at Ryecourt, 
Lady Stainbrooke urged her niece to go. 

" The change will do you good," she said. 



32 crcesus's WIDOW. 

She meant it would be better if Nora were out 
of Mr. Vyner's way. 

Nora told her " old friend, Mr. Vyner," of 
Lady Seaforth's invitation also. 

" I think I am going down for a week into 
Dorsetshire to gather primroses, Walter," she 
said smiling. " Lady Seaforth is staying at an 
old country house, which belongs to a distant 
relation of hers, and she has invited me to go." 

The painter suppressed a restless sigh, and 
walked up to the fireplace and stood looking 
absently at the flames. 

He was thinking of a report which had crept 
into the society papers, and which Margaret 
had pointed out to his notice only on the pre- 
vious day. 

This report was that Nora was going to 
marry Lord Seaforth. It was a report openly 
enough discussed, and Seaforth was understood 
to be keeping out of the way until " his affairs 
were settled ; " in fact until he married Crcesus's 
Widow, and thus obtained the money to settle 
them with. 

" It is a very good thing for them both," said 
Margaret, in her practical way, after pointing 
out the report to Vyner. " He has rank and 



crcesus's WIDOW. 33 

she lias money — I am very glad. It will be an 
advantage to us also, Walter, to visit Lady 
Seaforth, and I suppose she won't give us the 
cold shoulder when you and she are such old 
friends." 

"No, I do not suppose she will," answered 
Vyner, and nothing more was said on the 
subject. 

But as he stood gazing into Nora's fire, after 
she had told him she was thinking of goiug to 
visit Lady Seaforth, Vyner was wondering if 
the report were likely to be true. But some- 
thing — a feeling to which he could not have 
given a name — prevented him from mentioning 
it to Nora. 

Presently, however, he asked one question. 

" Is the young lord there too, then ? " he 
said. 

" Oh, no," answered Nora, " he is in Paris — 
this is Lady Seaforth 's letter," and she took up 
an open letter that she had been about to 
answer when Vyner came in. " Yes," she 
continued, after glancing at the letter, " Lord 
Seaforth is in Paris — he has gone there, I 
suppose, for change after his fever." 

" I suppose so," said Vyner, and he made no 

VOL. III. C 



3 4 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

other remark, and after he left her, Nora sat 
down and accepted Lady Seaforth's invitation. 
Nora's letter was delivered to Lady Seaforth 
at Byecourt on the following day, and the same 
post that carried this letter carried another 
letter also, which her old servant, Mrs. Benson, 
had enclosed in a fresh envelope, and forwarded 
to Lady Seaforth. 

This other letter was for Lord Seaforth. It 
was addressed to the South Kensington house, 
which was shut up, but Mrs. Benson went each 
evening to see if there were any letters in the 
box, and if there were, forwarded them to my 
lady. 

Lady Seaforth looked at this letter — the 
letter addressed to her son — looked at the 
somewhat faint, delicate handwriting on the 
envelope, and then her pale face turned sud- 
denly red. " Could it be ? " she was thinking. 
" Could this wretched girl have written to 
Seaforth — written just now— when it was of 
such vital consequence that her very existence 
should be ignored ? Could it be so ? " 

Lady Seaforth had fallen very low. She had 
lied to Strathearn ; she had urged her son to 
marry for money, and forget all claims of honour 



crcesus's WIDOW. 35 

and conscience ; but she felt lower still this 
day. With trembling hands she opened her 
son's letter ; with shocked and startled eyes 
read the first line : — 

" Murray," she read, " not for my own sake 
do I appeal to you — " She read no further. 
Hastily and tremblingly she restored the letter 
to its envelope ; hastily and tremblingly locked 
it securely away. 



CHAPTER III. 



joannah's capture. 



A few days after this, Nora went on her visit 
to Ryecourt, and was received with the greatest 
cordiality by Lady Seaforth. Nora thought 
that Lady Seaforth looked a little worn, but 
she assured Nora she was perfectly well. 

"And my son is almost quite well too, now," 
she added, smiling. " I am so thankful — a 
fever pulls a man down so terribly, and it was 
dreadful to see him so ill — and I hope his affairs 
will soon be put all right now." 

She hid the skeletons that she had locked 
away in her closet very well, this proud lady. 
One of these skeletons (Nellie's letter to Seaforth) 
still lay securely hidden at Ryecourt when Nora 
arrived there. Perhaps my lady's face was a 
shade paler, and a pang of shame sometimes 
crossed her heart when she remembered this, 



crcesus's WIDOW. 37 

but on the whole she looked very well, and 
bore herself very bravely and pleasantly, con- 
sidering the circumstances. 

She took Nora all over the old house the day 
after Nora s arrival at Kyecourt, and smilingly 
told her again of Hugh Marchmont's stupid 
attachment to herself, 

"It has made him so strange, I suppose/' 
she said. " He lives here like a hermit, only 
he has every comfort around him. Then he 
has such wonderful ideas — I believe he thinks 
•of nothing but what he imagines to be doing 
good, and he has pensioners of every descrip- 
tion — he is a very odd person." 

" He struck me last night as being a very 
interesting person, " answered Nora. " I never 
saw such a beniga and peaceful face, I think." 

" Yes, that is so astonishing ! " said Lady 
Seaforth, shrugging her shoulders. " What 
-can make him look so contented ? " 

Something that Lady Seaforth had never 
sought for, and never found, in her worldly, 
unhappy life ! She could not understand Hugh 
Marchmont — could not understand how the 
man, who once had been at her feet, could now 
placidly spend week after week under the same 



38 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

roof with lier, and never show the faintest wish 
or idea of resuming the old lover-like relation- 
ship between them. 

And Lady Seaforth soon saw this After 
that first morning when they had breakfasted 
together, and when she had spoken of " circum- 
stances which sometimes make us appear 
deceptive when our hearts are true," and 
when Hugh Marchmont had left her for his 
parson, she had made no further advances to 
him. She was too proud to woo any man — 
but she could not understand it. She was still 
handsome, and she was free now, and Hugh 
Marchmont had once loved her so deeply. Yet 
here was Hugh Marchmont unmoved, kind and 
placid, day by day, as if he were her grandfather ! 

Therefore, Lady Seaforth told Nora he was 
a very strange person, and really thought so. 
But Nora took quite a fancy to this grave - 
faced gentleman, who lived " imagining he was 
doing good." She understood him better than 
Lady Seaforth did ; and after Hugh Marchmont'* 
quiet, penetrating eyes had rested on the young 
widow's face for a day or two, he made a 
remark which greatly surprised and annoyed 
Lady Seaforth. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 39 

"I don't think your match-making will 
answer/ 1 he said, smiling. " Mrs. Trelawn is not 
the woman to many Seaforth." 

" And why, may I ask ? " said Lady Seaforth 
angrily. 

" You will see," said Hugh Marchmont, still 
smiling ; and my lady felt very aDgry with 
herself, and very angry with her distant kins- 
man. 

" I have been a fool to confide anything to 
him, he is so absurd," she thought. The reason 
she had confided or rather hinted her scheme 
to him about Nora, was when she wanted to 
borrow the money for her son to go to Paris, 
from Mr. Marchmont. 

" It will be all right some day, Hugh," she 
had then said, smiling. u I look on Seaforth's 
marriage with Mrs. Trelawn as almost a settled 
thing. She is quite devoted to him, I am 
•certain — if only Seaforth would settle." 

Therefore she felt very angry with Mr. 
Marchmont, when he prophesied that her 
matrimonial scheme would end in disappoint- 
ment. 

"But Hugh is so absurd," she told herself; 
and she was more agreeable than ever during 



40 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

the rest of the day after this conversation about 
Croesus's Widow, for Lady Seaforth rarely showed 
her real feelings. 

But while Nora was gathering cowslips and 
primroses on the grassy wolds round Ryecourt> 
and Lady Seaforth was standing by smiling and 
chatting, let us return to those in town whom 
the under current of life was drifting nearer to 
Lady Seaforth's path. 

Her old lady's-maid, Mrs. Benson, had had 
more than one visit during this time from 
Joannah Brewis, who was most anxious to 
redeem her promise to Strath earn, and find out 
where Clayton was. But Mrs. Benson had been 

as reserved and mysterious during these visits 
as she had been when Joannah had first called 

to make inquiries about Clayton. 

" I am not at liberty to say anything, Miss 

Brewis," at last she bad told Joannah, and 

Joannah had sniffed indignantly. 

" There's good cause of secrets, I dare say," 

she said. " For my part I'm straightforward, 

having nothing particular to hide ! " 

But Joannah felt very much aggrieved by 

finding that Mrs. Benson could " keep anything 

from her." She despised Mrs. Benson's mental 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 41 

•endowments, and had expected that Mrs. 
Benson would tell her anything she chose to 
ask ; and when she found this was not the case, 
she felt extremely irate, and her temper grew so 
irascible that three maid-servants ran away 
from her in a week, and she received two 
summonses for wages, which she declared she 
would never pay "while alive." 

But while she was in this irritable frame of 
mind, fortune suddenly favoured her. She 
was returning from a register-office one after- 
noon, just as it was turning dusk, when as she 
passed the corner of Belgrave Road her sharp 
•eyes fell on the figure of a man, who was at 
that moment leaving the shop door of her 
friend, Mr. Benson, the chemist, the husband 
of Lady Seaforth's old lady's-maid. 

Joannah looked at this man and at once 
recognised him. It was Clayton himself she 
felt sure ; and it was Clayton. Lord Seaforth 
had not taken his servant to Paris with him 
when he went there, but had sent Clayton 
back to London when he quitted Ryecourt, 
and Clayton had been calling on Mrs. Benson 
when Joannah saw him. 

No sleuth-hound ever felt a keener joy in 



42 crcesus's WIDOW. 

sighting his prey than Joannah felt at the 
sight of this man. Her eyes gleamed, her 
steps quickened, and yet she followed him 
warily, for she wanted him quite away from 
Mrs. Benson's ken before she attacked him. 

But she never took her eyes off him. On 
went Clayton before, and on warily followed 
Joannah behind. Then suddenly she pounced 
upon him ; fixing her long, thin fingers with a 
claw-like gripe upon his arm. 

" And how do you find yourself this evening, 
Clayton ? " she said with a triumphant giggle. 
" You've got home, then ? " 

" Ah ! Miss Brewis," said Clayton, who felt 
a little startled, looking round, " is that you ? 
Yes, I've got home." 

" I'm glad I've met you," continued Joannah, 

still with her eyes eagerly gleaming and fixed 

on the man's face, " for I've something at my 

house I would like } T ou to see — something that 

came for your lord as you call him — I fancy 

from a party we know who has disappeared ; 

and, if you'll come with me, I'll put it into 

your hands, to forward as you please/' 

Clavton at once fell into Joannah's snare. 
j 

u What ! " he said, " has anything come from 



cecesus's WIDOW. 43 

the poor young lady ? I'm glad to hear it, 
Miss Brewis, and my lord will be glad too — 
I know that, for he's fretted terribly about 
this business. Is it a letter ? " 

"I'll show you when we get home," answered 
Joannah, grimly ; and with alacrity Clayton 
turned with her, and a few minutes later was 
entering Miss Brewis's house. 

" Kindly step into my little private parlour," 
said Joannah, as soon as she had closed the hall 
door. " I'll q;o and fetch what I meant in a 
moment or two, if you will stay here." 

Innocently Clayton walked into Joannah's 
parlour, and swiftly Joannah ran upstairs. 
"When she arrived at bedroom number three, 
her actions appeared a little extraordinary, for 
.she instantly took the door-key out from the 
lock in the inside of the room, and placed it in 
the lock outside. Having done this, she glanced 
anxiously round the room, and snatched up a 
little ornament from the mantel-piece that she 
•considered valuable, and put it in her pocket. 
Then assuming as bland an air as she could, 
though she could not help the cat-like and 
ferocious gleam in her green eyes, she descended 
the staircase and went into her parlour, where 



44 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Clayton was standing, looking thoughtfully out 
of the window. 

" Now, Clayton," she said, " if you'll come 
upstairs with me, I'll show you what I mean." 

" Certainly, Miss Brewis," said Clayton 
politely, and he followed Joannah upstairs, and 
walked into bedroom number three, when 
Joannah indicated that he was to do so. 

But the moment he was inside the room 
Joannah shut the door after him, remaining 
herself outside, and before the astonished 
Clayton could turn round, he heard the door key 
turned, and saw at once that he was locked in. 

" Why, Miss Brewis, are you going to make 
a prisoner of me ? " he shouted through the 
door, wondering what Joannah could mean. 

" Yes, young man," shouted Joannah grimly. 
in reply, " you'll stay where you are, till a party 
I know of arrives here to ask you some questions 
that I'll be bound he'll make you answer. It's 
no use you shaking the door or shouting — if 
you shout loud, and anyone hears you, I'll tell 
inquirers that you are a party wailing to be 
conveyed to the lunatic asylum, and, therefore, 
all your tantrums will only be considered 
natural." 



crcesus's WIDOW. 45 

" Come, Miss Brewis, this is a little too bad," 
said Clayton, shaking the handle of the door. 
" Let me out, my good lady, and I'll answer 
any question you wish to ask." 

Joannah gave a sarcastic giggle. 

"I daresay," she said, "but I prefer you 
inside ; and inside you'll stay for the present. 
There's a Bible on the mantelpiece," she added, 
with another bitter giggle ; " and I advise you 
to have a little quiet reading, for you'll have 
time, and may be it will improve your morals!" 
And having given this parting shot, Clayton 
heard Joannah descend the staircase. 

In vain he shook the door, and opened the 
window and shouted for assistance. Joannah 
had secured him in a back bedroom, which 
looked upon her own back-premises, and there 
was no one apparently to be seen. Clayton, 
therefore, tried to resign himself, and sat down 
and began to consider what possibly could be 
Joannah's motive. He came to the conclusion 
it must be some of the creditors of his lord 
who had bribed Joannah to snare him, so that 
they might discover where his lordship was. 
He, therefore, waited fairly patiently for the first 
hour, expecting every moment to be released. 



46 croesus's widow. 

In the meanwhile, Joannah had not been 
idle. She had telegraphed to Strathearn to 
come at once to her house, and she was sitting 
impatiently downstairs awaiting his arrival. 

But hour after hour passed away, and no 
Strathearn appeared. Strathearn, in fact, had 
gone out of town for a few hours, and thus had 
not immediately received Joannah's telegram. 
At nine o'clock, therefore, Joannah went up- 
stairs to look after her captive. 

" I say, young man," she shouted through 
the keyhole, " d'ye want any supper ?" 

" This is too much, really, Miss Brewis," 
answered Clayton, from inside ; " a man can't 
stand such treatment, I can tell you. Supper, 
indeed ! I'm starving, and would give anything 
for a drink o' beer. Do let me out, my dear 
lady, just for a glass o' beer, and then you can 
put me in again." 

" I'd too much trouble to get you in, to try 
the experiment," shouted Joannah, now putting 
one of her green eyes to the keyhole to view 
her captive, who in the meanwhile had lighted 
the jjas, having found a box of matches. "Oh! 
you've lit the gas, have you ? Well, you seem 
pretty comfortable — and if you want any 



crcesus's WIDOW. 47 

supper, I'll slip a sandwich or two below the 
door, and for drink you'll find plenty of water 
in the bedroom jugs." And Joannah indulged 
herself in a giggle. 

" But what on earth do you want w T ith me, 
that you are keeping me here ? " inquired 
Clayton. 

" I want nothing with you/' replied Joa nnah, 
in a virtuous tone, " and the party who does 
want something with you hasn't come ; and till 
he does come you w T on't see the outside of the 
door I can promise you, young man ! But I 
don't wish to deprive you of victuals, and you 
shall have ham and beef sandwiches to choose 
from in five minutes." 

Joannah was as good as her word, and pre- 
sently returned to the bedroom door with a 
plate of sandwiches. 

" Come, young man," she said, " I've cut 
them myself, and you'll find them not like the 
choking articles some people call sandwiches 
— there's one through" (Joannah had by this 
time slid one of the sandwiches below the door) 
— "there's another — when you have finished 
these two, I'll pass in number three." 

" But, my dear good lady, do give me a drop 



48 cecesus's WIDOW. 

to drink ? " pleaded the unhappy Clayton from 
inside. 

Upon this point, however, Joannah was 
obdurate. 

" They say there's nothing so wholesome as 
water," she said, "and you've plenty of it. 
Now just you have another sandwich." 

But Clayton was too angry to eat. He was 
just beginning to threaten Miss Brewis with all 
sorts of legal punishments for her illegal act, 
when a thundering rap and ring at the house 
door announced an arrival. 

" That's the party, I'll be bound ! " exclaimed 
Joannah, and she ran downstairs, and just en- 
tering the hall as she did so, found Strathearn. 

"I've caught him, sir !" she said triumphantly. 
" I have him upstairs, safe under lock and key." 

" Who ? Clayton ?" asked Strathearn eagerly. 

" Clayton himself," answered Joannah. " I 
snared him. They've been too sharp for me 
they thought, but I've been too sharp for them 
for once ! Ha, ha, ha ! " And Joannah giggled 
with satisfaction. 

Then Strathearn followed her upstairs, and 
as she unlocked the bedroom door Strathearn 
gave a harsh laugh. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 49 

" What ! have you him here ? " he said. 

" There he is ! " answered Joannah, throwing 
open the bedroom door. " I said I would catch 
him, and I've caught him — so now I'll leave you 
tog-ether." 

Then Strathearn entered the room, and 
Clayton at once recognised him, and began 
dimly to understand the situation. 

"Now, my man," said Strathearn, " I want 
a few words with you. I didn't tell that good 
lady, mind, to lock you up, but I asked her to 
try to find you, for I want some knowledge I 
believe you possess — and I am ready and willing 
to pay you handsomely for it." 

Clayton bowed like a well-bred servant. 

" Hiss Brewis has certainly treated me very 
oddly, sir," he said, " and as for any informa- 
tion I possess — unless it's against my duty — 
I shall be very glad to give it to you." 

"What do you mean by your duty ? " asked 
Strathearn roughly. "Do you mean your duty 
to the man you call your master, Lord Seaforth, 
or do you mean your duty as an honest man ? " 

Clayton cast down his eyes. 

" I have been a long time in the service of 
my lord, Mr. Campbell," he said. 



50 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

" Exactly," said Stratliearn ; " and now I 
want to make it worth your while to quit his 
service. Look here, man ! " he added, yet more 
roughly, and he walked forward close to Clayton 
— " I know something at least of your past life 
— I know you helped to deceive an innocent 
woman last August in Edinburgh ; but I want 
to know something more than this, for which I 
am ready to pay you handsomely." 

" You mean — " said Clayton, without lifting 
his eyes. 

" I mean did Seaforth — the man you call 
your master — deceive her then or afterwards ? 
I mean, was he married to her in Edinburgh, 
as she believed ; or was that marriage a farce, 
as he told her it was before she disappeared ? " 

Still Clayton stood with his eyes cast down 
before the eager and excited Stratliearn. 

" If you will tell the truth, the exact truth 
mind ye, I will give you five hundred pounds," 
continued Stratliearn. 

Then Clayton lifted his eyes. 

" Five hundred pounds," he repeated. 

What visions this sum conjured up ! He 
could retire from service — he could start 
a bar — he could get married — but, on the 



crcesus's WIDOW. 5 1 

other hand, could he betray his master ? 

" I've been uncommonly sorry for the poor 
young lady, sir," he said, presently, after con- 
sidering both sides of the question ; " uncom- 
monly sorry, and so, I am sure, has my lord. 
But you see, my lord's in a terrible hole, sir — 
it's no secret we had an execution in the house, 
and the bailiffs were only got out by a party 
advancing the money, and this party my lord — " 

But here Clayton paused — he began to think 
he was telling too much, and again he turned 
over both sides of the question in his own mind. 

"If I hold my tongue," he thought, "my 
lord will likely marry the rich widow, and be 
on the swim again : but will this be worth five 
hundred pounds to me — five hundred pounds 
in cash — " 

" Sir," he said aloud, " will you allow me to 
think the matter over ? I am sure you will 
think no worse of me for wishing to act 
honourable to my lord ; but then, on the other 
hand, the poor young lady is to be considered — 
and I'm sure when I thought she had gone and 
drowned herself I was almost as much upset as 
my lord." 

" And you know nothing of her — nothing 

UNIVERSITY OF 
ILLINOIS LIBRARY, 



52 CKOESUSS WIDOW. 

more ? " asked Strathearn, in a faltering voice. 

"Nothing, sir, on my honour," replied Clayton. 
" Nor does my lord. Since the day she ran out 
of this house, after she and my lord quarrelled, 
we have never seen or heard of her. But all 
the same, I think there's no reasonable doubt 
that she's alive, and well taken care of, for 
there's no doubt she was the young person who 
tried to throw herself from the Chelsea Bridge, 
and who was taken away by the lady in the 
carriage — but, of course, you've heard the whole 
story, sir ? " 

"Yes," answered Strathearn, briefly; "and 
now — when will you make up your mind to 
tell the truth ? " 

" Will you give me two days to consider, 
sir, what is best for me to do ?" asked Clayton. 

" Yes," again said Strathearn, and on this 
agreement they parted. 

" He will tell," thought Strathearn, bitterly, 
as Clayton walked out of the room. " And 
I believe now, there is something in this 
marriage," he thought, yet more bitterly — he 
had offered a reward of five hundred pounds 
for knowledge that stabbed him like a sword. 



CHAPTEE IV. 



HOPE DEFERRED. 



In a neat, quiet little house, not far from 
Victoria Station, and close to one of the 
bridges, Nellie had now found a temporary 
home. The mistress of the house had been in 
the service of Mr. and Mrs. Barrett as well as 
her husband, and therefore Mrs. Tom Bertrim's 
recommendation was quite sufficient for Mrs. 
Moore, as Nellie's new landlady was called. 

Nothing could exceed the kindness and 
delicacy with which Dossie Bertrim behaved to 
Nellie at this time. She paid for her lodgings 
a month in advance, and she put a sufficient 
sum into her hand for Nellie to live on for a 
much longer period ; and she told Mrs. Moore 
that " her friend, Mrs. Murray " was the wife of 
an officer, who was abroad at present, and 
requested that Mrs. Moore would pay her every 
attention, " for my sake," added Dossie. 



54 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

Mrs. Moore smiled kindly in reply. She had 
known this sweet young woman, who was 
asking her to be kind to her " friend," since she 
was a little child. Dossie Barrett had been 
almost as much loved by the servants at her 
father's house as she had been by every one 
else. " Every one is always so kind to me," 
she used to say, but the truth w^as that she was 
so kind that it was impossible not to love her. 
Therefore, Mrs. Moore gladly promised to do 
her best for her " dear young lady's " friend. 
And Dossie filled the quaint little vases about 
the room with flowers, and brought grapes and 
other luxuries for the poor drooping invalid 
whom she had confided to her old servant's 
care. 

But there are some ills no earthly kindness 
can cure, and it's vain to try to heal a broken 
heart. 

'• It's sad to see her, ma'am," Mrs. Moore 
confided to Dossie ; " there she sits all day, 
and seems to notice nothing — I fear there's 
something wrons; with her that will not mend." 

It was at this time that Nellie wrote her 
.second letter to Lord Seaforth — the letter my 
lady hid away at Eyecourt ; and while my lady 



crcesus's WIDOW. 55 

was smiling and gathering primroses with Nora 
Trelawn, the broken-hearted young creature 
who had written it, was watching for each post, 
and listening for a footfall that never came. 

Day by day passed away, each more dreary 
than the last. It was wet spring weather, and 
the rain came pattering down on the streets, 
and the sky was grey and cloudy. 

"Will he never come— never, never — "she 
kept moaning. And yet she could not believe 
that he would thus utterly forsake her. In 
the letter that Lady Seaforth had hidden away, 
Nellie had appealed in simple and touching 
language, " not for my sake, Murray," she had 
written, and surely, surely he would not resist 
this helpless cry ! 

Yet he never came, and no letter came. We 
know how this was, but the unhappy girl did 
not know. She had addressed her letter to 
Lord Seaforth, at the house at South Kensing- 
ton, where she knew he lived with his mother ; 
and as this letter was never returned to her, 
and never answered, what could she think ? 

She waited a fortnight — fourteen weary, 
weary days — and then she thought she would 
write again. She must do something she 



56 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

knew ; she could not 2:0 on living at the 
expense of strangers like the Bertrims, however 
kind and good these strangers might be. Her 
letter might have been lost — Murray must be 
awav, she decided — and so she wrote again. 

Then came other weary days and nights of 
suspense — sometimes of despair. Yet she did 
not turn to death now, as she had turned in her 
first dark agony, when she had learned that all 
her love and all her hopes had been given to a 
lie. Other thoughts stirred in her heart — > 
perhaps other hopes. But her second letter 
shared the same fate as her first. Again Mrs. 
Benson enclosed " a letter for my lord " to my 
lady ; and my lady looked at this second letter, 
shivered, grew red, then pale — and locked it 
away beside the first. 

Nora Trelawn was still at Eyecourt when 
this second letter was forwarded there. She 
had enjoyed her visit, and the fresh country air 
had brought back some of her early bloom ; 
and Lady Seaforth, writing to her son in Paris, 
told him that " Mrs. Trelawn was looking 
absolutely charming ; " and she urged her son 
to come over and join them without delay. 

This second letter, therefore, came like a shock 



crcesus's WIDOW. 57 

to Lady Seafortli. She was expecting her son,, 
hoping for him — and yet she grew afraid when 
this second letter was enclosed by Benson. She 
thought even of writing to tell him not to come 
to Eyecourt — but then it was such a chance — 
living in this lonely, out-of-the-way spot, with 
the richest independent woman in England ; 
in town it could never be like this, even if 
Seaforth could be in town, which his circum- 
stances (as his mother well knew) entirely 
prevented. 

She would risk it, decided Lady Seaforth, 
but this second letter somewhat shattered her 
nerves. She did not open it ; she hid it away, 
but she could not forget it. " The wretched 
girl" who had written it, as she inwardly 
designated Nellie, was in the meantime waiting 
and watching. She waited a week, and then 
one day, thickly veiled, she crept out of doors 
and drove nearly to the square in South Ken- 
sington, where Lady Seaforth lived. Then she 
left the cab, and crawled wearily to the very 
square. The house was shut up ; Nellie looked 
up, saw this, and turned deadly faint. She was 
still very weak and ill, and it was all she could 
do to totter back to her cab, and wearily leaning 



58 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

back in it, she returned to her present home. 

That closed house seemed to tell its own story 
to the unhappy girl. So he was away — most 
probably abroad — and what was she to do ? 

" Father ! father ! " the next moment broke 
from her white, parched lips. This piteous cry 
came almost without thought, but it brought a 
new T thought. She would go to her father. She 
clasped her hands, and recalled his constant 
love. Would he turn from her now — now when 
she was quite forsaken — perhaps about to die ? 
No, she would go to this last refuge. Her 
father would take her in and shield her if he 
-could. 

" It is not for my own sake," she moaned 
piteously, pressing her hot hands against her 
burning brow. Oh ! the shame, the anguish of 
that moment ! To go back dishonoured, heart- 
broken — to face Margaret's cold looks, perhaps 
hear her hard, cold words ! 

But she must do something — she must go ! 
If Seaforth had forsaken her, if he really meant 
to marry this other woman, it was only right 
that she should try to seek protection for her 
unborn babe. Perhaps her father, perhaps 
Vyner, might persuade him to do her justice 



crcesus's widow. 59" 



for the child's sake. For herself — what matter 
was it ? She had lost everything when she 
found out she had given all her love, all her 
hopes, to a lie. 

And as she thought and thought, her miser- 
able heart began to take some comfort from 
the memory of her father's love. His dear face 
seemed to shine out of darkness, benignant to 
her still. Yes, she would go to him, but she 
was too ill and weak to go tbat day. 

She was so prostrate and overcome indeed 
that her landlady, Mrs. Moore, privately wrote 
to her " young lady at Castlewood Lodge," as 
she still called Dossie Bertrim, to tell her of Mrs. 
Murray's state ; for Dossie had left particular 
orders that Mrs. Moore was to write to her if 
she saw any change in Mrs. Murray. 

" The poor young lady looks worse and worse 
to my mind," wrote Mrs. Moore. " She drove 
out for a short time to-day, and returned quite 
overcome. She has done nothing but moan 
almost ever since she came in," and so on. 

This letter was delivered the next morning 
at Castlewood Lodge, and caused the sweet, 
kind-hearted young mistress there consider- 
able pain. She would have driven into town 



60 census's widow. 

at once to see after the unfortunate girl 
whom she had befriended ; but they were 
expecting some friends to lunch that day at 
Castlewood, and as it was more than fifteen 
miles out of town, Dossie had not time to drive 
in and return before the luncheon hour to 
receive her guests. 

Therefore she put off her proposed visit to 
Mrs. Moore's until the next day ; and on this 
small and seemingly accidental pivot, a great 
change came to Nellie's hapless life. 

For, after a night's rest, Nellie still kept to 
her resolve to go to her father. She rose 
about ten o'clock, and trembling, shaking in 
every limb, she prepared to go out. She put 
on a black dress and a long black cloak and 
veil, and would not listen to Mrs. Moore's 
counsel and advice. 

"You are not fit to go out, indeed, Mrs. 
Murray," urged the good woman, looking with 
compassionate eyes at the white, quivering, 
agitated face. "Do wait, please, my dear, 
until my young lady comes — I'm sure she'll go 
with you if you have any business that requires 
looking after — for you're not fit to go out by 
yourself — and for that matter, if you like, I'll 
go with you." 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 61 



No, Nellie must go, and go alone. She had 
nerved herself up for the interview with her 
father. Did some recollection of the Prodigal 
Son — of the pitiful cry, " Father, I have 
sinned," — pass dimly through her mind ? And 
the old man " fell upon his neck and kissed 
him." Was there such love in store for her ? 
She had forsaken her father — she was going 
back to him, crushed, heartbroken — but still 
he would kiss her, he would kiss her — Nellie 
was sure of this. 

So she made ready to go. It was now about 
eleven o'clock, and Mrs. Moore called a cab fcr 
her, and exerting all her strength Nellie tried 
to appear calm, and ordered the driver to stop 
-at the Metropolitan Eailway Station nearest to 
her father's house. This station was quite close 
to the street where Major Blythe lived, and 
Nellie thought she would have strength to 
walk this short distance. 

She closed her eyes as she was being driven 
along ; she tried to picture her father's grief — 
she felt thankful he was blind. Then the cab 
stopped with a jerk, and Nellie looked up, and 
recognised the familiar railway station. She 
was close now, she thought — close — and she 



62 cecesus's WIDOW. 

drew a long breath, and feebly got out of t lie- 
cab and paid her fare. 

She felt weaker than she had thought she was,, 
as she slowly crossed the street and turned into 
the one where her father lived. Surely, there 
was a greater crowd than usual in it? A crowd, 
chiefly gathered lower down — lower down, where 
her father lived. Nellie tottered on, her eyes 
fixed on this crowd. She neared it ; suddenly 
she saw why it was there. It was a funeral — 
a hearse and two mourning coaches standing — 
oh, God! before her father's door ! Nellie gave 
a half cry, and then a ghastly smile. How 
foolish she was, she thought — it was only in 
the street — she would ask who it was. 

She turned to a bystander, a respectable- 
looking elderly woman — 

"Whose — " she faltered, for her clammy 
tongue seemed to refuse its office. 

"It's Major Blythe," answered the woman. 
" Ay, poor man, he's lived in the street a long 
time, and they say he's died of a broken heart 
— he never looked up after his young daughter 
ran away." 

As the woman spoke— just after she had 
mentioned the dead man's name — the funeral 



crcesus's WIDOW. 63 



procession began to move. On came the black 
horses and the nodding plumes ; on — then 
there was a sort of stir in the crowd and a cry. 
A woman had fallen down — she fell just as the 
hearse passed her, flinging her arms forward, 
and one of the black horses swerved, and its 
hoof struck down on the woman's extended 
hand. 

A moment later and a policeman had snatched 
her up from beneath the horse's feet. 

" What is the matter ?" asked a gentleman, 
putting his head out from one of the mourning 
coaches, for he had noticed the stir in the crowd 
without seeing the cause. 

" One of the horses has kicked a woman, that 
is all," answered a man standing by ; and so the 
funeral procession moved on, and the woman 
who had fallen and been injured was carried by 
the policeman into the railway station. 

They laid her on a couch and put back her 
veil, and cut the glove off her crushed and 
broken hand. As they were doing this the 
policeman who had picked her up was atten- 
tively looking at her features. Then he retired 
to one side of the waiting-room, and drew some 
memorandums out of his note-book. After he 



64 crcesus's WIDOW. 

liar] read these he returned to the woman, and 
gently moved back her fair hair from her pallid 
brow. Beneath this fair hair was a red scar, 
and as the policeman saw this he smiled and 
made haste to get a cab to convey the woman 
to the nearest hospital. 

A quarter of an hour later she was carried 
into the accident ward of Middlesex Hospital, 
and her hand was dressed and every possible 
attention paid to her. But the policeman who 
had brought her there did not linger to inquire- 
after her condition. He placed her in the 
hands of the proper authorities, and then hastily 
left her. He thought he had recognised her, 
from the printed description, as the woman 
for whose discovery two hundred pounds had 
been offered, and he hurried away in the hope 
of getting the reward. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE WATCHER. 

About two o'clock on the same day, Strathearn, 
visibly agitated, and accompanied by an in- 
spector of police and the policeman who had 
conveyed the woman to Middlesex Hospital, 
were admitted into the accident ward for the 
purpose of identifying her. 

She was lying on one of the narrow beds, her 
dress loosened at her throat, and a nurse was 
bathing her brow. At the foot of the bed stood 
a surgeon, who looked round as the policeman 
and Strathearn approached, and warningly held 
up his hand. 

" Keep very quiet," he said, the next minute ; 
" she is very low — she must not be disturbed." 

Then Strathearn stood silently looking at 
her, his face pale and stern. 

" You are right," he said, a moment later, 

YOL. III. D 



66 crcesus's WIDOW. 

to tlie policeman, "it is she — you shall have 
your reward." 

Yet he scarcely could believe this, even as he 
said the words. The woman who lay there 
had a worn, pallid face, and her uninjured hand, 
which was lying on the coverlet, was thin and 
wasted. But for the red mark on her brow, 
and the fair soft hair, Strathearn might still 
have been uncertain that he had found at last 
the woman he had sought so long. 

" You know her, then ? " said the surgeon 
now addressing Strathearn. 

"Yes," he answered in a husky voice, and 
for a moment he looked away down the hospital 
ward. " How long," he said the next moment, 
trying to steady his voice, "how long will it 
be before she can be moved — before I can take 
her to her home ? " 

The surgeon hesitated. 

" Perhaps she would be better at home," he 
said; "but she will require great care. Her 
hand is very much cut, and one of the fingers 
broken ; but the injury is not serious — it is the 
shock to the system that is serious." 

"Could she go in an hour?" asked Strathearn. 

"Better say two hours," said the surgeon ; 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 67 

" by that time she will revive — but I should 
not like her to leave here without a doctor." 

" Will you go with her, then ? " said Strath- 
earn ; and as he spoke, and before the doctor 
could answer, Nellie moaned slightly and put 
her hand to her brow, which the nurse was still 
bathing, and the next moment opened her 
large blue eyes. 

Strathearn moved his hand for the policemen 
to go, so that the sight of them might not 
startle her, and then he made a step forward, 
and gently took her hand. 

"Are you better?" he said. "You know 
me, don't you ? " 

The blue eyes that he remembered so bright 
— now so pathetic and full of pain — rested on 
Strathearn's face. 

" Strathearn ! " she said, feebly. 

"Yes — hush ! you must not speak — you must 
get home — try to take a little rest, and then 
I'll get you home," said Strathearn, in a low, 
hurried voice. 

" Yes — take me home," said Nellie, and she 
closed her eyes again, as if she were too weary 
to speak. 

The surgeon put his hand upon her pulse, 

d2 



G8 crcesus's WIDOW. 

and whispered something to the nurse, who at 
once proceeded to administer a restorative. 

Then he beckoned to Strathearn, and spoke 
with him a few minutes aside. 

" You are right," he said, " she would be 
best at home ; get her home as soon as possible, 
and I will go with her, until you get another 
doctor to take charge of the case— it is a very 
serious one." 

Strathearn nodded his head. Scarcely could 
he suppress, before the surgeon, the over- 
whelming anguish and bitterness of his soul. 
But he hardly spoke. 

" I will go at once," he said ; and he went, 
flinging himself into the first cab he saw, and 
ordering the driver to drive as fast as he could 
go, to Miss Brewis's house in Belgrave Eoad. 

When he got there, Joannah received him 
with her sour smile, which she mollified as 
much as possible in honour of Strathearn. But 
her smile changed to a look of consternation 
when she glanced at his stern, excited face. 

" What is the matter ? " she asked in her 
quick way. 

" I have found her," answered Strathearn, 
his deep voice broken by his strong emotion, 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 69 

" and — and I believe she is dying, Miss Brewis. 
Will you take her in ? " 

Joannah stood with uplifted hands. 

" Dying ! " she said. " Never ! the poor 
young lost creature to have come to this ! " 

" Will you take her in?" repeated Strathearn. 
xt You will be kind to her — she needs a 
woman's kindness — though, by heavens!" (and 
he crushed his foot down upon the floor and 
breathed hard) " she has a man to avenge her 
wrongs." 

" I'll have no murders here ! " said Joannah, 
positively. i: If this poor forsaken creature 
wants a home, I'm not the woman to refuse it, 
though it is just the beginning of th^ season, 
and I had two good offers of lets to-day. But 
she shall come here if you wish, Mr. Campbell, 
whatever it costs me, if you will promise to 
commit no violence on my premises." 

* You are a good woman," said Strathearn, 
gratefully. " Thank you for taking her in ; 
and I'll promise whatever you like," 

" As for being a good woman," said Joannah, 
dubiously, though she felt the compliment, " I 
don't say I'm good, though I am not exactly 
bad, for I'm honest, and that's something when. 



70 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

there's so many female impostresses going about 
the world." 

" Will you come with me now, then, to fetch 
her here ? " asked Strathearn, in his quick, 
impatient way. " She is very ill — I would like 
you to go with me, and I will take you in the 
cab I came in." 

" Not in one of those hansoms I" said Joannah. 
" They're are not respectable for females, in my 
opinion, and I could not — no, not even in the 
case of a death — be seen in one of them. But if 
you'll get a four-wheeled cab I'll go." 

" Very well," answered Strathearn, and he 
ran out of the house, and before Joannah (as 
she declared) had "time to turn round" he was 
back again with a four-wheeled cab, ready to 
take her to Middlesex Hospital. 

" What a man you are ! " said Joannah, who 
really had not had time to get ready, "you 
fluster one so ! " 

" Never mind," said Strathearn, " come 
alono* ; " and he carried off Joannah, who kept 
calling directions out of the cab window to 
some of her household until they were fairly 
out of the street. 

But Joannah's heart melted within her when 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 71 

she looked at the death-like face of the young 
patient lying in the accident ward of Middlesex 
Hospital. 

Joannah coughed, turned away her head, and 
then drew her handkerchief hastily out of her 
pocket, and tried to hide that she was forced 
to wipe away a pitying tear. But the next 
minute she tapped Strathearn sharply on the 
arm. 

"I say," she half whispered, "don't you 
mind what I said before we came — if you see 
that villain I would thrash him within an inch 
of his life, if I were you ; and I'd like to see it ! " 

Strathearn only answered by a stern smile. 
He was standing looking at Nellie with quiver- 
ing lips, and then he bent down and very gently 
took her hand. 

As he did so, Nellie opened her eyes and 
gazed wildly round. The surgeon had admin- 
istered chloroform before he had dressed her 
wounded hand, and the powerful drug still 
mercifully dulled her senses. But she vaguely 
recognised Strathearn, and knew Miss Brewis 
also, and seemed to understand that she was 
not at home, and that they wished to take her 
there. 



72 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

" Yes, I will go," she said, raising herself up. 
But she was quite unable to walk, and was 
carried to the cab, apparently relapsing into a 
state of semi-insensibility almost immediately 
after she was lifted into it. 

And in the same state of semi-insensibility 
she was carried into Miss Brewis's house, and 
laid on the bed from which she had fled that 
night in her dark and bitter despair. But she 
was not left now. Miss Brewis was not a 
woman to do things by halves, and for the 
next two or three hours she never left Nellie's 
side. Then the unhappy girl grew terribly ill, 
and all that night her life hung upon a thread. 
Strathearn called repeatedly to make inquiries,. 
but towards the pale hours of the morning the 
wakeful and watchful Joannah heard outside in 
the quiet streets a continuous tramp, tramp of 
footsteps backwards and forwards before her door. 

Suddenly an idea struck her, and she went to- 
one of the windows and gently opened it, and 
stretched out her long throat to see who it was. 
The lamplight below, as he passed it, fell on the 
pale, stern face of the watcher, and then Jo- 
annah saw it was Strathearn. A feeling of pity, 
nay of absolute sympathy, for the man's deep,. 



crcesus's WIDOW. 73 

strong, and unreturned attachment rose in 
Joannali's \irginal heart. 

" Humph ! " she muttered to herself, as she 
gently closed the window, and drew in her long 
neck, "that's a kind o' love worth having. 
Most of men would be snoring and grunting in 
their beds at this time o' night if their lawful 
wives were dying around them. Poor man — 
and it's all wasted." And Joannah sighed and 
looked at the unconscious sufferer moaning on 
the bed. 

But Joannah was so touched that she crept 
downstairs and softly opened the street door, 
and the next time Strathearn passed it she 
beckoned him into the house. 

" Come in," she whispered. " No, no, she's 
not any worse." This latter remark was in 
answer to the gleam of inquiring agony in 
Strathearn's eyes. " But, come in, and lie on 
the dining-room couch, and if there's any change 
I'll let you know." 

"Thank you," said Strathearn, for he was 
weary and chill ; and Joannah observing this, 
lit the fire, drew out some of her cherished 
bottles from the cupboard, and otherwise saw 
after Strathearn's comfort. 



74 crcesus's WIDOW. 

" There ! " she said ; " now lie down, and — 
well, on a stretch — I'll put the sofa quilt over 
you, though I never did such a thing for a man 
before." And, in hot haste, Joannah flung the 
sofa quilt over Strathearn, keeping, however, 
at a considerable distance from the tall Scotch- 
man as she did so. 

" Thank you again," said Strathearn, wearily, 
and he pulled a cushion under his head, and 
closed his eyes, and presently fell asleep. He 
was physically exhausted by the strong mental 
strife that all through the day had racked his 
heart. So he fell asleep, and dreamed of the 
white house in the Glen of Strathearn, and of 
the stern dead father who had lived there, 
brooding over real or fancied wrongs. Then 
somehow, misty and indistinct, he saw a fair 
face, and the green mountain steep where 
he had first seen Nellie. The sunlight was 
quivering on the water, as it had quivered 
then — the boat was moored in the little bay — 

He awoke with a start ; he looked up, and 
saw the face of Joannah, who looked pale and 
agitated. 

" What is the matter ? " he said, starting to 
his feet. " Is she worse ? " 



croesus's widow. 75 

'' Yes," answered Joannah, sternly and 
solemnly, "and I awoke you, sir, for you must 
go at once and get that Clayton to tell you 
where the villain is, and bring him here to do 
her justice before she dies." 



CHAPTER VI. 

WOOING AT RYECOURT. 

Eyecourt stood on a grassy slope ; and broad , 
moss-grown stone steps, with a moss-grown 
stone balustrade on each side, lead up this slope 
to the terrace in front of the house. On these 
steps one sunny afternoon, Nora Trelawn was 
sitting with a book lying open on her lap, 
though she was not reading, but gazing vaguely 
at the quiet country scene spread out before 
her. 

Presently there was a little rustle below in a 
clump of evergreens close to the foot of the 
steps, where Nora sat, and two rabbits ran 
across the grass close to her, evidently very 
much at their ease. They glanced at Nora with 
their bright brown eyes, nibbled a delicate blade 
or two, and then scampered away. Nora looked 
after them vaguely, as she had looked vaguely 



CRCESUS S WIDOW. 7 / 

at the still country scene before they appeared. 
She in truth was not thinking of anything 
around her ; she was thinking of her past life ; 
wondering what she ought to do in the days 
that were yet to come. 

She had understood what her aunt Lady 
Stainbrooke meant her to understand, when she 
had urged her to go to Kyecourt. Nora under- 
stood what her aunt called her " hint" more 
quickly, because she was conscious how strong- 
was the interest still with which she regarded 
her old love. And she knew also that Vyner's 
married life was an unhappy one. He had 
never told her this quite plainly ; in fact, they 
never mentioned Margaret's name in their long 
and otherwise confidential conversations. But 
once or twice when the dark spirit had been on 
Vyner's soul, he had told Nora he " was about 
weary of it all," and Nora had understood what 
made him weary. He was married to a woman 
whom he did not love and with whom he had 
no sympathetic thoughts ; and it was a trying 
position — Nora thought this now with a sigh, 
as she sat on the stone steps at Eyecourt — to 
be the intimate friend of an unhappy and dis- 
satisfied married man. 



78 



Yet Margaret might have heard almost every 
word which had passed between them since 
Vyner's marriage. True, she would not have 
liked to hear — no wife would have liked to 
hear — that Vyner " was about weary of it all." 
But he had rarely spoken such words as these. 
He was not the man to speak them. He was 
reserved as a rule about his feelings, and it was 
only when he was very deeply moved that the 
floodgates of his really passionate nature were 
permitted to pour forth. 

And his intercourse with Nora, to all out- 
ward seeming, was simply friendly. He told 
her about his work — talked to her as men and 
women only talk to those who can understand 
them — but after the affair of the picture of 
" My Eve," which he had given her, he rarely, 
if ever, even alluded to their early affection. 
Such subjects were, in truth, tacitly avoided 
between them. They talked of the present, 
and not of the past. Yet, between them, that 
past was always really present. Vyner, look- 
ing at his picture of " Eve," hanging on Nora's 
softly-tinted drawing-room wall, could scarcely 
forget the sweet maiden he had wooed in the 
Warbrooke meadows. And could Nora forget 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 79 

the handsome painter — the lover of her youth 
— because between them now stood the cold 
shadow of a tardily-fulfilled duty ? Both, how- 
ever, recognised this duty, and it was an 
acknowledged element in their daily lives. 
But it was a dangerous position ; and Nora, 
wishing to be a good woman — wishing to walk 
in the straight path — and to live a life free 
from blame and reproach, had thought more 
than once lately, if it would not be well that 
she herself should marry again, and thus 
virtually put an end to a friendship, which at 
best brought often pain. 

And while thinking thus, once or twice, the 
image of Lord Seaforth had flitted across her 
mind. This was only natural. Circumstances 
had, apparently, thrown her into great intimacy 
with Lady Seaforth. And Lady Seaforth — 
charming, graceful, and with all the ease of 
manner which her birth and position gave her — 
had obtained a sort of unconscious influence 
over Nora. Though the elder woman belonged 
to a different class, the wealth of the younger 
woman bridged over this social distinction, and 
placed Nora above her former acquaintances* 
And to these former acquaintances Nora owed 



80 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

very little gratitude. They had cut and snubbed 
her at Warbrooke in the sad days of her 
father's bankruptcy ; they had smiled upon 
her when she was rich John Trelawn's young 
wife ; and they had gone down on their knees 
to her, virtually, when she had, for a brief time, 
returned to her native town as Croesus's Widow. 

And Nora had seen all these changes very 
plainly, for vanity did not blind her eyes to 
the truth, as it blinded Margaret's. And she 
now saw, also, that Lady Seaforth wished her 
to marry her son, and she knew quite well 
why her ladyship wished this. Lord Seaforth 
was poor, and Nora was rich ; Lord Seaforth 
had position to offer, and Nora had none, so 
the bargain was about equal, thought Nora, 
with a somewhat sad smile. 

For it was but a bargain after all. Nora had 
no heart to give — she had given it all once — 
and her love had brought but pain and sorrow 
to her. She must not think of that love now ; 
she was done with love, she told herself, and it 
would be well if she could marry and forget 
all about the old days — the old, fond, foolish 
dreams and hopes. 

Again Nora sighed. Sitting there, she un- 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 81 



consciously began to recall the past ; the very 
past, she was mentally declaring to herself, that 
she must not think of. She shut her eyes — 
she was at Warbrooke, and the evening haze 
was rising over the uncut meadows — she heard 
the painter's voice — the words that had echoed 
and echoed through her heart from those brief 
hours to this. 

Only for a moment or two she indulged 
herself. Then she opened her eyes, gave herself 
a little shake, and lifted her book, and tried to 
forget her own romance by reading; someone 

O JO 

else's. As she read on, the profound stillness 
around her was broken by the distant sound of 
carriage wheels. Hugh Marchmont had not 

o o 

many visitors. He in fact disliked visitors, and 
as this was well known, the people in the 
neighbourhood rarely troubled him. He was 
pronounced by common report to be an amiable 
but eccentric man, and he was quite agreeable 
to be called eccentric. Still, Nora naturally 
supposed that some visitor by chance had arrived 
when she heard the sound of the carriage w T heels 
coming nearer and nearer, and then finally stop, 
after the carriage had evidently entered the 
court-yard at the back of the house. 



82 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

A few minutes later Lady Seaforth stepped 
out of one of the drawing-room windows, which 
opened upon the terrace just behind where 
Nora was sitting, and came down and joined 
her. 

Nora looked round with a smile as she ap- 
proached, and she noticed that Lady Seaforth's 
usual pale, clear complexion w T as slightly flushed. 

" Who do you think has arrived — quite 
unexpectedly arrived ? " asked Lady Seaforth 
rather quickly and nervously. 

" Indeed, I cannot tell," answered Nora, still 
smiling. 

" Murray " said Lady Seaforth. " I am 
so surprised. But here he is to answer for 
himself." 

As Lady Seaforth spoke, Lord Seaforth 
appeared at the open drawing-room window, 
and as Nora looked round he came forward, 
and took off his travelling cap. 

Nora felt that she blushed. She had been 
thinking of this young lord but a few 
minutes ao-o, and she felt rather uncomfortable 
when he thus unexpectedly presented himself 
before her. 

" I — am quite surprised to see you," she 



Croesus's WIDOW. 83 

said, rising from her seat on the stone step, 
and holding out her hand. " I hope you are 
quite well now ? " 

" Yes, quite well," answered Lord Seaforth. 
*' And I need not ask how you and my mother 
are — nothing like country life, eh ? " And 
Seaforth o-ave his lioiit laugh. 

But though he said he was well, he looked 
far from well. He looked haggard and worn, 
and his manner somehow gave you the impres- 
sion of a man who was ill at ease. 

" I do not think he looks very well," said 
his mother, glancing at him with an uneasy look 
in her proud, blue eyes. " We must take care of 
him, Mrs. Trelawn, and make him stay in this 
fine air for a little while." 

" And what have you two been doing here 
to amuse yourselves?" asked Lord Seaforth, 
looking at Nora. 

Nora laughed. 

" I have been gathering primroses," she said, 
" and all sorts of wild flowers, they are so lovely 
about here — and — what else have we done, 
Lady Seaforth ? " 

" Well, you have done what I could not do, 
even to please my old frieud Mr. Marchmont," 



84 crcesus's WIDOW. 

smiled Lady Seafortli. " Slie has been going 
among Hugh's poor, Murray, and he tells me 
doing no end of good." And Lady Seaforth 
shrugged her shoulders. 

" You don't like poor people, mother ? " said 
Seaforth half bitterly. 

" No," answered Lady Seaforth, candidly, " I 
confess I don't — we may as well make the best 
ofth is life, and enjoy it if we can." 

" Yes, if we can — there's the rub ! " said 
Seaforth. 

" We must not expect everything," said Lady 
Seaforth gravely, "but, how stupid of me ! I 
had almost forgotten in the pleasure of seeing- 
you, Murray, that I have an appointment this 
afternoon with Hugh Marchmont. He is going 
to show me some plans or other (and again 
Lady Seaforth shrugged her shoulders) and I 
must humour him ! So for the present, good- 
bye to you both." And Lady Seaforth turned 
and went towards the house in her usual stately, 
graceful fashion. 

Seaforth looked after her, and then gave a 
little, bitter laugh. 

"You know all about the old love by this 
time, I suppose ? " he said, cynically, to Nora. 



CR(ESUS's WIDOW. 8& 

"Hugh Marclimont and my mother were once, 
I am told, the most devoted of lovers — yet you 
hear how she speaks of him now ! It's the 
fashion, isn't it, to make out that women have 
more feeling than men ? I believe it's an utter 
mistake ! " 

" People do not always show their feelings," 
said Nora. 

" Pardon me, but as a rule, I think women 
do — they show them, and easily forget them — 
that's my experience." And Seaforth gave an 
uneasy sigh. 

Nora smiled a little sadly. 

"We do not agree in our opinions, then," 
she said. " I think that most of women do 
not care to show their real feelings — and do 
not easily forget them." And Nora cast down 
her eyes and a faint colour stole over her 
face. 

" Perhaps ! " said Seaforth, moodily enough, 
and he sat down on the stone steps as he spoke, 
and taking up a pebble shied it at a thrush on 
the grass below. 

" How can you be so cruel ? " said Nora.. 
"You might have hit the poor bird." 

"And so happily ended its earthly troubles,. 



86 cecesus's WIDOW. 

Are you a philosopher, Mrs. Trelawn ? " 

" I am afraid not," answered Nora, smiling. 

" To be one, I suppose," continued Seaforth, 
"means to take a wise and rational view of 
everything; put our feelings, etc., into our 
pockets, and make the best of the situation, 
whatever it is. That is modern social philosophy, 
isn't it ? " 

" Indeed, I do not know," laughed Nora. 

"Nor I," said Seaforth. "But d'ye know 
why I came here, Mrs. Trelawn ? " he added, 
turning away his head. 

" No— how should I know ? " 

" To see you," said Seaforth, with a certain 
hardness and defiance of manner, which, when 
he forced himself to say anything, he un- 
consciously assumed. " My mother wrote and 
told me you were here — and she had told me 
something else — something that cut me horribly 
in spite of my philosophy, I can tell you — that 
you advanced a certain sum of money on a 
very pressing emergency, when I was ill." 

" Do not name it," said Nora, blushing 
deeply. "It is nothing — I was only too 
glad." 

"You are most kind and generous," said 



chcesus's WIDOW. ST 

Seafortli, still without looking at Nora, but 
with a ring of real feeling in his voice. 

" Do not name it, please," again said Nora, 
almost entreatingiy. " See, look at that rabbit 
there, peeping his 'bonny brown head' out 
below yon great holly ! And so you don't 
like country life, Lord Seafortli ? " 

Nora spoke quickly and disjointed!}' — she 
wanted Seafortli to say nothing more about the 
money. 

Then Seafortli rose to his feet, and looked in 
Nora's blushing face with some earnestness. 

"I have not liked country life, J\lrs. Trelawn," 
he said, " because — well, I'll tell you the truth 
— I've been a bad man, and one thinks more in 
the country, and I do not often care to think." 

" You are young," said Nora gently, and 
with some sweetness and interest in her manner, 
" and you have plenty of time to be a good 
man yet," 

" If I had a good woman to help me," said 
Seafortli, and Nora nervously turned away. 
She did not want any more of Seaforth's 
confidences just theD. 

But this conversation was but the first of many 
such conversations. Nora and Seafortli were 



88 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

constantly thrown with each other during the 
next few days, which happened to be bright 
sunshiny spring ones, and they wandered 
together on the grassy wolds round Ryecourt, 
until Hugh Marchmont bc^an to think he had 
been wrong in his estimation of the young 
widow's character. 

" She is dazzled by his title, I suppose, poor 
young woman," thought the gentle, philosophic 
Hugh. 

" I hope, I trust, it will all come right," 
almost prayed Lady Seaforth, watching her son 
and Nora from her bedroom windows, and then 
glancing uneasily at a certain despatch box in 
which lay hidden away two letters, whose pre- 
sence there were as skeletons at a feast. 

She could not forget these letters. Looking 
sometimes at her son's worn, anxious face, she 
could not but remember the sad story that the 
letters no doubt referred to, and a nameless 
dread of the consequences of her own act 
oppressed her, in spite of her strong hope that 
Nora was now really going to marry her son. 

Seaforth made very little pretence in these 
days to Nora of being other than he was. 

" I am a ruined man, you know," he told 



CECESUS's WIDOW. 89- 



her, and this frankness gained more from Nora 
than the most garbled description of his circum- 
stances could have done. She, in fact, knew 
he was a ruined man ; knew why his mother 
wished him to many her ; but she felt sorry 
and she felt sad as she listened to the young 
lord's melancholy words. 

" I have wasted my life, 7 ' was the usual text 
of his conversation. He was, in truth, for ever 
crying peccavi. And Nora felt sorry for him. 
She liked him — perhaps she could have loved 
him — if a shadow face, a sad, reproachful face, 
had not flitted before her mental vision even 
while she listened to Seaforth's somewhat 
sombre words. 

At last one day, under an avenue of budding 
elms, Seaforth spoke. 

" I must leave here soon," he said almost 
abruptly, his ordinarily smooth careless manner 
having rather changed of late, "and — I want 
to ask you a question, Mrs. Trelawn — before I 
go." 

" Yes," said Nora, and she blushed and cast 
clown her eyes. 

" I am not worthy to ask it," continued 
Seaforth. " I do not deserve the love of a 



$0 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

woman like you ; but if you will look over my 
many faults — if you will forgive my shortcom- 
ings — you, you would make me very nappy." 

Seaforth knew these last words were not 
quite true, as he faltered them forth. But when 
xi man is asking a woman to marry him he does 
not always speak the truth. And, to do the 
young lord justice, he really liked Nora, and, 
but for the shadow that lay athwart his life, 
he could undoubtedly have cared yet more 
deeply for her. So, as he spoke, there was a 
certain ring of earnestness in his voice that 
Nora understood. 

"It is not entirely for my money," she 
thought ; but for a moment or two she made no 
answer to Seaforth's words. 

" Well," he said presently, " will you give 
me any hope ? " 

Then Nora looked up ; looked at the hand- 
some though worn face of the young man by 
her side, and nervously and with much em- 
barrassment she said : 

" I — I scarcely know what to say, Lord 
Seaforth — I like you very much — but — " 

" Are you afraid to trust me ? " asked Sea- 
forth. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 91 

" It is not that — indeed it is not that — but I 
have not thought of this. Will you give me 
time to think ? u 

" Most certainly ; as I said, Mrs. Trelawn, I 
cannot expect a woman like you to care for a 
graceless fellow like myself, but perhaps in 
time—" 

" Yes," said Nora, and she smiled, and as she 
smiled, Seaforth ventured to take her hand. 

*' Do not be angry with me," he said. " I 
will try — yes, if you will trust me, I will try 
to make you happy* — try to deserve you, and 
be a good man for your sake." 

The two stood, hand-in-hand, beneath the 
budding elms. The sun came shining through 
the branches, and the shadows fell around them, 
and they were silent — both thinking of the 
past. At that moment there flitted through the 
glinting sunrays a white vision before Sea- 
forth's eyes. It stood there, pale and indistinct, 
and yet he saw it, and grew white and cold. 
And before Nora's eyes, too, rose a shadow — 
the shadow of her old dear love — of Vyner, 
" the husband of another woman now," she 
thought an instant later, almost bitterly; and 



92 croesus's widow. 

she turned to smile on the young lord who had 
just asked her to be his wife, and as she did so, 
she saw the change in Seaforth's face. 

" Are you not well ? " she asked, almost 
-anxiously. 

With an effort, Seaforth roused himself. 

" I get these sudden chills," he said, with a 
shiver, "ever since I was ill." 

" I am so sorry," said Nora, and Seaforth 
smiled, and together they walked towards the 
house, and on the terrace they met Lady Sea- 
forth. 

Something in Nora's manner made Lady 
Seaforth look quickly and eagerly in her face. 
Nora was conscious of this scrutiny, and she 
blushed, and made some excuse to go at once 
into the house, and the mother and son were 
thus left alone. 

Then Lady Seaforth looked eagerly at Sea- 
forth. 

" Have you asked her, Murray ? " she said. 

Murray nodded his head, but made no other 
answer to his mother's anxious question. 

" And has she accepted you ? What did she 
say ? " continued Lady Seaforth, yet more 
anxiously. 



crcesus's WIDOW. 93 

" She did Dot refuse me, at least," said Sea- 
forth ; and Lady Seaforth clasped her son's 
hand, and slid her arm through his. 

" My dear, my dear ! " she said, while tears 
swelled in her proud blue eyes, " yon have made 
me too happy. Oh ! Murray, I am so glad ! " 

" Mind, she did not accept me — she only did 
not say no," said Seaforth, trying to speak lightly. 

" That is enough," answered the prond, fond 
mother. "It is all right ; I am sure, Murray, 
that now it will all come right." 

And so sure was Lady Seaforth of this, that, 
before the dinner hour, she told her kinsman 
Hugh, " that it was settled between Seaforth 
And Mrs. Trelawn." Her kinsman Hugh smiled 
good-naturedly when he heard the news, and 
told Lady Seaforth that if it pleased her, he 
was very glad. 

" Yet you said it would not be, Hugh ! " 
said Lady Seaforth with some triumph. 

" You have been right, then," answered Hugh 
Marchmont, still smiling ; and as he turned 
away he owned to himself that he felt a little 
surprised. 

''Poor little woman," he thought, "what a 
sad fate it is to one of her sex to be rich." 



94 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

And during dinner lie looked once or twice 
rather pityingly at the " poor little woman." 
Nora looked nervous and not particularly happy, 
for Seaforth, when they returned to the drawing- 
room after dinner was over, seated himself by 
her side, and altogether marked by his manner 
and attentions that he considered himself an 
accepted lover. 

While they were sitting thus ■ — Seaforth 
lounging by Nora's side, playing with her fan 
— an unusual stir and noise, as of a sudden 
arrival, was heard outside the drawing-room door 

" Who can it be, I wonder ? " said Hugh 
Marchmont to Lady Seaforth. 

" Extraordinary occurrence in life at Rye- 
court," laughed Seaforth, with his light laugh, 
"an arrival ! " 

The laugh had not died on his lips when the 
drawing-room door opened, and Strathearn, pale 
and stern, entered. He looked round, his eyes 
fell on Seaforth, lounging by Nora's side. He 
crossed the room, and laid his hand with a 
fierce clutch on Seaforth's shoulder. 

"Come with me," he said, in his strong, harsh 
voice ; " your wife is dying — she sent me to 
bring you before she dies." 



CHAPTER VII. 



"the worst drop of bitterness." 



As Srathearn spoke, Seaforth sprang to his 
feet. 

" My Gocl ! " lie said, " what do you mean — 
Nellie ? " 

" Yes," answered Strathearn, sternly and 
harshly. " Nellie — the young girl you married 
in Scotland last August— the girl you left to die 
in her despair — is dying now ! " 

" It cannot be — it cannot be ! " cried Seaforth 
in bitter distress, forgetting all about Nora, who 
too had risen, and now stood pale and shocked 
by his side. " Strathearn," continued Seaforth 
passionately, " I did not leave her — God is 
my witness, I did not leave her — never meant 
to leave her — but she disappeared, as you 
know." 

"And how about the letters she wrote to 
you ? " interrupted Strathearn sternly. 



96 CROESUS'S WIDOW. 

" I have got no letters ! On my soul, on my 
honour, I have never received a single line ! " 
said Seaforth with deep agitation ; and then 
suddenly he turned and looked in his mother's 
face. 

" Mother," he said, " have any letters come 
for me here — airy letters I have not received V f 

Lady Seaforth's face grew scarlet in an instant, 
hut she made an effort to hide her secret. 

"I do not understand you," she said, "nor 
yet this disgraceful scene. How dare this man 
come here ! " And Lady Seaforth rose and 
looked indignantly at Strathearn. " If he has 
anything to say to you — matters to discuss 
unfit for Mrs. Trelawn's ears and mine, you had 
better leave the room with him — his presence 
here is an insult." 

"This is all very fine, my lady," said Strathearn 
bitterly ; ' ' but what about the untruth — to use no 
harsher word — that you told me about Clayton 
having left Seaforth's service ? It seems this 
terrible subject — your son's marriage — has been 
discussed by your ladyship before, when the 
witness to it had to be smuggled out of the way, 
and when you condescended to lie to me about 
it." 



CROESUS'S WIDOW. . 97 

" How dare you speak to me thus ? " said 
Lady Seaforth, passionately. " Hugh ! " and 
she turned to Hugh Marchmont. " Will you 
permit this man to insult me in your house ? " 

As she thus appealed to her old lover, Hugh 
Marchmont rose and came forward to the table 
near where Strathearn was standing. 

" When you came into this room," he said, 
addressing Strathearn in his calm, clear voice, 
which sounded so distinct and cold after the 
passionate words which had preceded it, " you 
asked Lord Seaforth to go with you — at his 
wife's request, I understood — to see her before 
she dies ? " 

"Yes," answered Strathearn briefly, "that is 
my errand, my excuse for intruding myself 
into your house, for I presume you are Mr. 
Marchmont ? " 

H I am Mr. Marchmont, and I shall be pleased 
if you and Lord Seaforth will now follow me 
to another room." And as he spoke Hugh 
Marchmont left the drawing-room, and a 
moment later was followed by Strathearn. 

" Seaforth !" said his mother, grasping Sea- . 
forth's arm, who also — shamed and downcast — 
was about to leave the room. "Do not go 

VOL. III. J. 



98 GRCESUSS WIDOW. 

with that man. What truth is there in this 
wretched story ? Surely, Seaforth, you were 
never mad enough — never mad enough — " 

" Mother, let me go — you heard what he 
said — I have acted like a scoundrel — and if 
this poor girl dies I have murdered her ! " 

As Seaforth said this, he tried to pull his 
arm from his mother's grasp, and stood there 
as if overwhelmed with grief and shame. 

" My God ! Why were you born ? Why 
were you ever born V cried Lady Seaforth, and 
she flung her son back from her, and then, with 
a sort of cry of rage and despair, she hurried 
from the room, and Seaforth and Nora were 
alone. 

For a moment Nora stood still and silent, 
but the next she advanced, and laid her hand 
gently on the arm of the shamed and miserable 
man. 

"Lord Seaforth," she said, " do not think 
about me, do not distress yourself about me, 
but go now and do what is right. This poor 
young lady may not die if you go ; do not 
allow your mother to influence you now." 

Then Seaforth looked at her. 

"You are a good woman," he said, almost 



crcesus's WIDOW. 99 

with a sob. " God bless you ! I will go. I will 
tell you some day how it all happened." 

" Go now, or you may be too late," said Nora, 
still gently ; and Seaforth wrung her hand and 
left the room, and after he was gone Nora sank 
down on a seat and covered her face. She was 
shocked, she was surprised, but she was not 
unhappy that she could not marry Seaforth 
now. 

In the meanwhile, Seaforth, pale and deeply 
agitated, had joined Mr. Marchmont and 
Strathearn. 

As he entered the room Mr. Marchmont 
spoke to him. 

"I will not ask you now," he said, "how 
much of this story is true ; but this unhappy 
woman is dying, this gentleman tells me. Will 
3'ou go to her ? " 

" How can you ask me ? " answered Seaforth, 
terribly moved. "Go to her ! yes, at once ! 
But, Strathearn, surely, Strathearn," — and he 
turned his pale face to the stern Scotchman — 
"she is not — dying — " 

"They told me she was, at all events," said 
Strathearn, with bitter emphasis ; " your child 
struggled into life, it seems, before its time, and 



100 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 



the mother is dying ; that was the news I'd to 
bring you. And for the child's sake — not her 
own, poor soul — she prayed and begged you to 
come to acknowledge her before she dies." 

" My God ! " said Seaforth, and he sank down 
on a chair and covered his face. 

" There is no time to be lost," said Mr. 
Marchmont. " Seaforth, I am your kinsman ; 
shall I go with you in this unhappy hour — go 
with you to repair a wrong ? " 

" Yes," said Seaforth ; and a quarter of an 
hour later these three men — Mr. Marchmont, 
Seaforth, and Strathearn — drove out of the 
court-yard at Eyecourt, to start on their 
melancholy journey. There was a night ex- 
press that they could get to town by, and almost 
silently they travelled on their way. 

But they did not lose a moment. Pale, 
grim, and heart-sick sat Strathearn. He knew 
the worst now ; knew all that Clayton could 
tell him of that hurried journey to Scotland, 
and of the marriage in the drawing-room in 
the Edinburgh lodging-house — a marriage un- 
doubtedly binding by the Scottish law, since 
Clayton had witnessed it, and was now ready 
to swear (he had received his five hundred 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 101 

pounds) that in his presence, and in the 
presence of the supposed minister who had 
married them, Seaforth had acknowledged 
Nellie to be his wife. 

But this supposed minister hud been the 
loophole through which Seaforth, in an evil 
hour, had persuaded himself that his marriage 
to Nellie was not a binding one. Clayton had 
accidently picked up this supposed minister's 
acquaintance in the train while travelling down 
to Scotland with Nellie, on the night of her 
flight from home. Clayton was travelling 
second class, and Nellie first ; and in the car- 
riage with Clayton sat a lean, hungry-looking 
man, dressed in the garb of a clergyman, 
though the garb was a very rusty one. 

Clayton had orders to get hold of some 
x< needy parson," Seaforth told him, who would 
promise to keep the whole thing a secret for 
twenty pounds. So Clayton made overtures 
to the man in rusty black, and before they 
reached Edinburgh, the man in rusty black 
knew what Clayton wanted, and was only too 
glad to oblige him for twenty pounds ; and 
would have done it for ten if he had been 
.asked. 



102 ciuesus's WIDOW. 

He called himself the Kev. James Macfarlane, 

but lie had no appointment and held no living, 
that Clayton could discover. But he was a 
Scotch minister, he told Clayton, and Clayton 
having no particular reason for doubting this, 
believed him, and arranged with him about the 
marriage, which duly took place on Seaforth's 
arrival in Edinburgh. 

But when the dark clouds, which even then, 
were gathering so thickly round the young 
lord's head, grew darker, and his monetary 
difficulties became more pressing, it occurred 
to Seaforth one day to make inquiries about 
this Mr. Macfarlane, and he took Clayton with 
him down to Scotland on one of his visits to- 
the Glen of Strathearn, and left Clayton in 
Edinburgh for the purpose of prosecuting these 
inquiries. 

After some trouble, Clayton heard some- 
thing of the supposed minister's former life. 
There was an ugly story attached to it, which 
need not be related here ; he had once been in 
the Scotch Church, but had been ignominiously 
expelled from it. And after the time when 
Clayton had seen him in Eclinbugh — the time 
of Nellie's supposed marriage— this Macfarlane 



CROESUS'S WIDOW. 103 

had mysteriously disappeared. He was known 
to have been in great difficulties, and it was 
supposed he had emigrated. This story Clay- 
ton had repeated to his lord, and it was a 
relief to Seaforth's mind to think that he would 
have no further trouble with this man. 

And gradually — knowing there was now no 
witness to it but Clayton — Seaforth had begun 
to call his marriage to Nellie "that absurd 
affair in Scotland." Then he had listened to 
the promptings of an evil spirit, and turned to 
the one way which seemed left open to him 
to repair his ruined fortunes. To Strathearn 
he had always scoffed at the idea of any 
marriage. It suited him to do this : circum- 
stances forced him to do it, he told himself; 
but he did not mean to forsake Nellie. 

Nay, in his light and careless way he really 
loved her. When he thought he had driven 
her out to die in her despair, the horror and 
.shock had nearly killed him. But his nature 
was shallow ; he tried to forget anything that 
was painful — as he had told Nora Trelawn at 
llyecourt, he " did not care to think." 



CHAPTEE VIII. 



FOR THE CHILD'S SAKE. 



The grey dawn was breaking over the great city, 
when, pale and wearied, the three travellers 
entered it. They had scarcely spoken during 
that long night's journey on their sad errand. 
Seaforth, with his hat pulled over his brows 
and his eyes cast down, was enduring the 
cruellest anxiety. All his love, tenderness and 
pity seemed to come back as he recalled Nellie 
in her bright youth, and as he thought of the 
misery she must have endured during the past 
months, and remembered now that if Strathearn 
spoke the truth, he was but going to see her 
die. 

As they neared London his anxiety became 
almost pitiable. Even the stern Strathearn 
fe]t his heart relent to a certain extent as he 
looked at Seaforth's sharpened, miserable face. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 105 

Hugh Marchmont tried to say some gentle, 
commiserating word, but Seaforth turned away 
his head. 

" If they were only in time," he thought 
unceasingly, " only in time." 

And the woman who lay near her death 
agony, to whom he was journeying, prayed this 
too. Nellie had survived the birth of the frail 
babe, born before its time into this world of 
trouble; but she was "sinking fast," the doctor 
had whispered to Strathearn before he started 
on his journey to Eyecourt, 

But, after her child was born, Nellie's one 
hope seemed to be to live until its father came. 
She knew that Strathearn had gone for Sea- 
forth, and she knew also that Strathearn had 
sought out Clayton, and had learned the whole 
story of her marriage, before he left town in 
search of her husband. 

Joannah, who had never left her, who had 
stood by her in her agony and tried to cheer 
her, told her these things. 

"Don't you give way, ma'am," said Joannah. 
" Clayton's downstairs at this very minute, and 
he says if the babe lives it will be a lord like 
its father ; just think of that ! " 



106 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Joannali's words were quite true. Clayton^ 
when he was sought out by Strathearn, on 
Strathearn learning Nellie's dangerous condi- 
tion, had at once acknowledged all he knew 
about the Scottish marriage. In fact he had 
previously made up his mind to acknowledge it, 
and thus gain Strathcarn's promised reward of 
five hundred pounds. And when the man 
heard from the deeply-agitated Strathearn that 
Nellie was supposed to be dying, he was really 
affected by the news, and gave Strathearn every 
information in his power. Then Stratliearn 
drew a cheque and put it into his hand, and 
bid him go to Miss Brewis's, and tell her 
what he had told him, and Clayton went. 

Thus Nellie knew, as she lay there with her 
babe clasped to her breast, that if she lived 
Seaforth would be forced to acknowledge her ; 
and so, for the child's sake, she wished to live. 
" For the child's sake," she murmured, even in 
her sleep. 

But as the day wore on she grew weaker and 
weaker. Joannah watching her, became so 
uneasy that she once more went down to 
Clayton, and asked if he knew who the " poor 
young creature's" relations were ? Then Clayton 



crcesus's WIDOW. 107 

confessed that lie did. She was the youngest 
daughter of Major Ely the, who lived in one of 
the small streets near Kegent's Park ; Clayton 
knew the street and knew the house, he told 
Joan nah ; and Joannah, after consulting with 
the doctor, determined, without asking Nellie, 
to send for her family. 

" Who knows ! " said Joannah to Clayton, 
" that young scamp of a lord may be off nobody 
knows where to before Mr. Campbell gets to 
Kyecourt, or whatever is the name of the place 
you say he's at. Xo — I can't tike the respon- 
sibility — you go to her father, tell him she's 
Lady Seaforth, and that her babe is born, and 
that her life is hanoino' on a thread. If he's 

o o 

worth the name of a man he'll come to her ; and 
she, poor soul, will feel more respectable with 
her own people about her, even if it pleases the 
Lord to take her." 

Clayton accordingly started for Major Blythe's 
house — the house from which the old, broken- 
hearted man had been carried the day before. 
It was not shut up when he arrived there. 
Inside, the careful Margaret was going over 
" dear father's things," as she expressed it to 
her husband before she started. She was 



108 CECESUS's WIDOW. 

counting the linen and silver spoons ; and yet 
she had really grieved for her father. It was 
her nature to count spoons, and to lock away 
little odds and ends, and to believe that everyone 
was trying to cheat her. And the consequence 
was that she was very frequently cheated. She 
was always watching and distrusting her ser- 
vants and those around her, and her servants, 
not unnaturally, resented this distrust. She 
had shed very bitter and very sincere tears over 
her father's death ; but now— the day after his 
burial — she was hunting all over the house, 
because she was certain the old woman who 
had dressed him in his grave-clothes had carried 
away one of the silver spoons. 

She was talking about this spoon, lamenting 
over this spoon, in her even tones, when Clayton 
arrived, and asked to see the dead man, who 
was no longer there to hear the news Clayton 
brought of his lost child. 

Clayton felt not a little shaken when the 
servant told him, who opened the door in 
answer to his summons, " that the poor old 
master was dead, and only buried yesterday." 

" And his other daughter," faltered Clay- 
ton, "the lady who married Mr. Vyner, the 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 109 

painter. Could I see her, do you think ? " 

The servant told him that Mrs. Vyner was in 
the house at that minute, and then Clayton sent 
up a message to Margaret. " Ask her to see 
me on very pressing business," he told the 
servant to say, and a few minutes later Margaret 
appeared downstairs, and went into the sitting- 
room where Clayton was waiting. 

She bowed, and as she did not know who 
Clayton was, she waited for him to explain his 
business. 

" You will excuse me, madam, asking to see 
you on such a sad occasion as this," said 
Clayton, "but I had an important communi- 
cation to make to the late Major Blythe, and I 
think now it is my duty to make it to you." 

Margaret looked up surprised. 

" It is concerning your sister," continued 
Clayton, "the young lady who disappeared from 
this house some seven or eight months ago." 

" Nellie ! what about Nellie?" said Margaret, 
greatly excited. " Have you seen her ? Do 
you know where she is ? " 

Clayton bowed. 

" Madam," he said, " I have seen the lady, 
and I regret to say the lady is now very ill ; but 



110 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

I have another important communication to 
make — I was present at her marriage to Lord 
Seaforth last August." 

" At her marriage to Lord Seaforth ! " re- 
peated Margaret, in utter astonishment. "What 
do you say ? that she is married ; married to 
Lord Seaforth ? " 

"Yes, madam; I was present at that marriage, 
which was kept a secret for family reasons, but 
circumstances have occurred which render it 
necessary it should be known. But I regret 
much, madam, to tell you that young Lady 
Seaforth is lying; dangerously ill." 

"Is he with her ? Who sent you ? " asked 
Margaret, in the greatest excitement. " Oh, 
poor, poor father!" she thought, the next 
minute, " could you but have heard this news; 
but I always knew," went on Margaret's reflec- 
tions, "that no sister of mine would really 
disgrace herself." 

"My lord is not with Lady Seaforth at 
present," said Clayton, in answer to Margaret's 
questions, " but we hourly expect him — at least, 
when I say that, we expect him before to-mor- 
row morning. But, in the meantime, if you 
could go to your sister — " 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. Ill 

" Of course I will go ! Call a cab at once ; 
and stay — you follow me in a cab also to my 
husband's studio. I wish him to see you." 

Margaret felt proud and elated — she could 
not help it — when a few minutes later she ran 
into Vyner's studio in a state of the greatest 
excitement. The painter was busy, and he 
turned round with not a very pleased expression 
on his face when he saw Margaret enter. 

" Walter ! " cried Margaret, hurrying up to 
him, '"'the most wonderful thing has occurred ! 
But I always knew it — I always told you I was 
sure no disgrace had happened to Nellie — that 
no disgrace could happen to one of us ! " 

" Have you heard anything about the poor 
girl, then ? " asked Vyner, with much interest. 

" Yes, she is married. To whom do you 
think she is married ? You will never guess — 
though I own I have sometimes thought it 
mishit be. She is married to Lord fc'eaforth ! " 

" Then he's a most confounded liar ! " ex- 
claimed Vyner. "I met him at Mrs. Trelawn's 
in the winter ; I did not like to tell you, for I 
thought it would only open the old man's grief 
afresh to mention anything about her, but I 
asked Lord Seaforth, asked him point-blank, 



112 croesus's widow. 

if he knew anything of Nellie, and lie positively 
denied it." 

" lb is a pity you did not consult me about 
this, Walter — I do not see that it would 
have hurt dear father to talk about Nellie, 
when he thought of her so much — and, per- 
haps, had I known that you had had this 
conversation with Lord Seaforth sooner, 1 
might have learnt the secret before. However, 
he is my brother-in-law now. It will seem 
quite strange to be so nearly connected with 
the peerage." 

" And is she well ? Poor Nellie ! I fear she 
has not chosen a happy life." 

" But why, Walter ? Eank is surely a great 
thing ; you will see now the difference that 
this marriage will make, even to us, when it is 
known. I should not be surprised if you get 
a better price for your pictures." 

Vyner gave a grim laugh. 

" Seaforth won't be able to buy them, by all 
accounts, at least," he said. " They say he's 
over head in debt and difficulties — that he's 
hiding, in fact. Perhaps this accounts for him 
not acknowledging his marriage." 

" Oh ! they say so many things," said 



CRCE3USS WIDOW. 113 

Margaret. "They said, you know," she added, 
a little spitefully, "that your friend, Mrs. 
Trelawn, was o-oino; to marry Lord Seaforth, 
and you see he has been married all the time 
to Nellie." 

"You told me that little piece of news about 
Mrs. Trelawn, did you not ? I suppose the 
report arose because she is intimate with his 
mother. 7 ' 

"I do not know what the dowager will say 
now," said Margaret, and she laughed. She 
was thinking of her own interview with Lady 
Seaforth when that haughty woman had in- 
sulted her — *an interview of which Margaret 
had given a very garbled account to Vyner. 

" And where is Nellie now ? " asked Yyner 
the next minute. 

" At a house in Belgrave Eoacl," said Mar- 
garet, "and I am sorry to tell you they fear 
she is very ill. But she'll get all right now, I 
hope. I will go to her, and her husband will 
be with her to-morrow T morning, and I am sure 
we will be able to pull her through. I am 
going at once, but I thought I would come and 
tell you first, as I may not be able to get home 
to dinner." 



114 crcesus's widow. 

"Do not think of me,"saidVyner. "Go to your 
sister, and if you will give me the address I will 
call to inquire how she is during the evening.'" 

Margaret gave the address, and Vyner saw 
her to her cab, and then returned to his studio. 
But he could not paint. He felt greatly dis- 
turbed by Margaret's news. He had heard 
more than once lately that Nora Trelawn was 
going to marry Lord Seaforth, and he had tried 
to school his heart, and to tell himself it were 
well she should marry, that she would be 
happier and more settled married, but he was 
glad at least that it was not to be Seaforth. 

In the meanwhile Margaret had arrived at 
Miss Brewis's, and was standing listening, with 
tears in her eyes, to Joannah's account of 
Nellie's almost desperate condition. 

" She's as ill as ill can be," said Joannah, 
with tears in her own eyes also ; " and the babe's 
alive, certainly, but that's all we can say. Ay, 
it's a bad business from first to last, and no 
doubt the hardships and misery your poor 
young sister has gone through have helped to 
kill both her and the innocent lamb ! " 

" Hardships and misery!" repeated Margaret, 
turning pale. 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 115 

''Don't you know ?" asked Joannah. " Hasn't 
Clayton told you ?" 

" Nothing, but that she is Lord Seaforth's 
wife," said Margaret, trembling. 

"Ay, that's just like him, the smooth- 
tongued villain. Yes, she's his wife, sure 
enough, so they tell me ; but he tried to make 
out she wasn't, and drove the poor, young, 
broken-hearted creature out from this very 
house to lay violent hands on her own life." 

u What ! what S " cried Margaret, much 
affected. 

" It's God's truth, ma'am ! And where do 
you think we found her '? " 

" How can I tell ? " said Margaret, sobbing. 
" This is too dreadful ! " 

" She was found lying in the accident ward 
of Middlesex Hospital," said Joannah. " She 
had been picked up in the streets by a police- 
man, with her poor, dear hand all crushed and 
broken to pieces, like her poor, dear heart had 
been crushed and broken before. Ay, it's a 
sad story, ma'am. Lord Seaforth's wife, in- 
deed ! He's taken good care to kill her, anyhow, 
before he let her have his name ! " 

Margaret was very much overcome. Miss 



116 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

Brewis's pitiable account of Nellie came as such 
a sudden shock, after her elation on hearing 
that her young sister was married to Lord 
Seaforth, When she became a little more 
composed, she asked to see Nellie, but the 
doctor forbade this. 

" I dare not risk it at the present moment,, 
Mrs. Vyncr," he said, for Joannah had called 
him down, and told him who Margaret was. 
" Lady Seaforth — I understand the poor young 
lady upstairs is Lady Seaforth — is lying in a 
most precarious condition ; so precarious, that 
any fresh shock would undoubtedly kill her, 
and I am told you have not lately seen your 
sister ? " 

" No," said Margaret ; " but still, I think, if I 
did see her, I could do her good." 

"Wait until Lord Seaforth arrives, then," 
said the doctor ; "unless I have his authority, I 
dare not risk it. She must see no one but 
those who have been around her, until her 
husband comes." 

So when Vyner came during the evening to 
inquire how Nellie was, he found Margaret 
sit tin g in Miss Brewis's dining-room in a most 
depressed and miserable condition. She had 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 117 

been allowed by Joannali to look in at the 
door of the sick-room when Nellie was asleep, 
and had been terribly shocked at her young 
sister's changed and death-like face. 

"She is dying, I believe, Walter!" wept 
Margaret. And then she told Vyner the pitiable 
story she had heard from Joannah's hard lips. 

Vyner was deeply moved. He bit his lips ; 
he frowned. 

" Thank God, her father is dead ! " he said. 

While Vyner was there — he stayed until 
past midnight — the frail life of the little babe, 
the child for whose sake Nellie wished to live, 
struggled and went out. But the dying 
mother would not part with it. She moaned 
when they tried to take it from her feeble 
arms, which still clasped the little lifeless form 
to her own almost lifeless breast. 

She fell asleep thus, yet murmuring some- 
times in that broken slumber, " for the child's 
sake." And so the night passed on, and then 
the grey dawn stole in, and fell on the pale 
faces of the watchers, and on the white faces 
of the mother and the dead babe. But as the 
morning advanced, Joannah, with streaming 
eyes, softly took the dead child from its 



118 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

mother's arms (who still slumbered on) and 
laid it in the coffin, which had now been 
brought into the house, and prepared for it. 

But about half-an-hour later, Nellie awoke, 
and, after restlessly moving her arms, opened 
her eyes, and then cried out for them to give 
her back her child. "While they were trying to 
soothe her — showing her the little waxen face 
pillowed on the white-lined coffin — there was 
a sudden noise and stir in the house, for Sea- 
fort h, Strathearn, and Mr. Marchmont had 
arrived. Nellie started, looked at the door of 
the room, and a few moments later Seaforth 
ran in, and fell down on his knees by the bed 
where Nellie lay. 

"Forgive me, my darlinff!" he said, almost 
with a sob, taking one of Nellie's burning 
hands and pressing his nice down on it ; " for- 
give me, Nellie, even now ! " 

Nellie's face flushed, and, with a sudden 
■effort, she lifted herself up in bed, grasping 
Seaforth 's hand with her dying grasp. 

She looked wildly round for a moment, and 
then stretched out her other arm, and pointed 
to the dead babe. 

"Tell them now," she said, in hoarse and 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 119 

trembling accents; "tell them now the truth, 
Murray. Am I not your wedded wife ? " 

Lord Seaforth rose from his knees. 

" Yes, Nellie/' he said ; " we were married in 
Edinburgh — everyone may know ! Don't, 
Nellie, don't, my darling, look like that ! " 

"And the child — the babe ? " gasped Nellie, 
still tio-htly holding; Seaforth's hand. 

Lord Seaforth grew very pale as he glanced 
at the dead child. 

" If the child — if your baby had lived, 
Nellie," he said, in a low, broken A^oice, " it 
would have borne my name — would have been 
Lord Seaforth after me." 

Again Nellie looked round, she smiled, and 
then fell feebly back. 

" Nellie ! Nellie ! " cried Seaforth, bending 
over her ; but with one scarcely uttered word, 
she turned her head upon the pillow, and so 
died. 

" Baby — " she murmured, and as this last 
word lingered on her lips, her spirit flitted after 
the child's. 



CHAPTER IX. 
U MY sister, lady seaforth." 

A terrible scene occurred immediately after 
Nellie's death. Seaforth lifted her lifeless body 
in his arms, and in agonised and passionate 
tones implored her to speak to him — to say but 
one word — look at him but once a^ain ! He 
would not believe that she was dead ; and as he 
called out her name, telling her he had always 
loved her, Margaret ran into the room, and 
flung her arms also round her dead sister. 

"Nellie! Nellie!" cried Margaret, but there 
was no answer to that name. 

Everyone in the room was deeply moved. 
Joannah, who had been preparing to say some- 
harsh thing to Seaforth, pursed in her thin lips 
and was silent at the sight of his bitter distress. 
And as Seaforth kissed Nellie — cried to them to 
bring something to revive her, that she had but 
fainted, that she would soon be well — Strath- 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 121 

earn, grim and pale, also entered the room, and 
stood with bitten lips and knitted brows, looking 
at the dead woman he had loved. 

He never spoke a word. Joannah, watching 
him, saw the grey pallor that spread over his 
face, and how his strong form shook with the 
violence of feelings he was forcing himself to 
restrain. She went up to him, she took hold 
of one of his clenched hands, and whispered a 
word in his ear. 

" Come with me, sir," she said ; " you don't 
look well, and it's enough to shake anyone. 
You're best out of the room." 

Strathearn suffered her to lead him away, 
and clutching her arm, as if for support, he 
tottered down the stairs. "When in the hall 
he spoke to her in a husky whisper. 

" When the others are all gone, will — you 
let me see her again ? " 

" Yes," said Joannah, decisively. " The 
sweet lamb's in heaven now, and she knows- 
there's no harm in it. And you did more for 
her than any of them," added Joannah, with 
an energetic rub at her eyes. "If it hadn't 
been for you she would have died in a common 
hospital, and not with everything comfortable 



122 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

about her as she has done to-day. It's all very 
fine crying, and sobbing after one's gone 
■ — it's too late then — the loudest sobs won't 
bring one bask — but. I would rather be cried 
over when I was living. However, it's no good 
talking over it now, but I hope his heart is sore 
within him.'' 

"What time ?" asked Strathcarn, still in the 
same hoarse whisper. 

" You mean what time you can see the sweet 
lamb, to have a last look at her ? " said Joannah, 
almost with a whimper. "Let me see — don't 
let any of them have a word to fling at her 
good name, for perhaps evil tongues might talk 
of her if they knew you came to see her even 
after she was dead, poor dear ! Come at twelve 
o'clock to-night. They'll be away by that time, 
mid you can have your last look in peace." 

Without a word Strathearn wrung Joannah's 
hand and left the house ; and a few minutes 
later Joannah returned to the room where 
Nellie had died. 

By this time Seaforth knew r that she was 
dead. Margaret had laid her sister again 
gently on the bed, and Seaforth was kneeling 
bv the bedside, his face bent down, but he was 



CRCEsrss widow. 123' 

still holding one of Nellie's hands. Standing 
near him, with his hand upon his shoulder, was 
his kinsman, Hugh Marchmont. 

u Leave her with her sister now, Seaforth,"" 
he was saying as Joannah entered. " You 
have acknowledged her as your wife, and I, as 
your relative, will see that all the honour that 
can be paid to her now is paid. Come, Seaforth, 
with me." 

For a moment or two Seaforth made no 
response to this appeal. Then he rose from 
his knees, bent down, and, with a murmured 
word or two, kissed Nellie's face. As he lifted 
his head, he turned to Margaret, who was 
standing near, crying bitterly. 

" I dare not ask you to forgive me," he said 
in a faltering voice ; and as Margaret made no 
reply, he put his arm through Hugh March- 
mont's and left the room. 

u I've kept my tongue ofF him," said Jo- 
annah, bitterly, looking after him, u for the 
sake of the dead lamb ; but I hope I'll live to 
have the opportunity of telling him some day 
that after you've murdered a party it's not 
much good crying over them. No, indeed ! " 



124 crcesus's WIDOW. 

That night, as the clocks all over the great 
city were striking twelve, Joannah, who was 
watching, heard a gentle tap at the street door. 
She guessed who it was, and, softly opening 
the door, admitted Strathearn. She put up 
her finger warningly, and then led him silently 
upstairs to the room, where Nellie already lay 
in her coffin, with her baby on her breast. 

Only her sweet face and her small waxen hands 
were visible, for the whole of the coffin was 
covered with v hite flowers. She looked like a 
young girl asleep, and at the piteous sight, Strath- 
earn completely broke down, and fell sobbing, 
with his head against the foot of the coffin. 

" Leave me for a moment or two," he sobbed 
out, while the fierce storm of his emotion 
swept over him ; and Joannah at once left the 
room, and Strathearn was alone with the dead. 

Lono; he knelt there, his whole form ab- 
solutely convulsed with the strong, deep 
passions of his heart. Then he rose to his 
feet, and stood looking at her, and, after a 
moment or two, stooped down and kissed one 
of the cold, white bands, and took one of the 
white flowers, and hid it in his breast. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 125 

AYhen Nellie lay as though asleep amid the 
white flowers, which Margaret had arranged 
round her fair young sister's placid face, an- 
other visitor also arrived at Miss Brewis's, and 
earnestly desired to see her. 

This was Dossie Bertrim — a sweet young 
woman, the love and tenderness of whose rear- 
ing lay reflected, as on a mirror, in her loving 
and tender heart — and who had endured the 
most cruel anxiety during the last two or three 
days for the fate of one whose troubles were 
now ended. 

When Nellie did not return to Mrs. Moore's 
house, after she had started on her sad short 
journey to seek her father — whose soul had 
wearied of waiting for her coming — Mrs. Moore 
naturally felt very uneasy about her young 
lodger. 

She was uneasy on account of Nellie, and 
yet more uneasy lest she should offend her 
<; dear young lady," as she still always called 
Dossie Bertrim. This "dear young lady" had, 
in truth, about her a certain charm which won 
love for her wherever she went. This charm 
was her unselfish sympathy, and real kindness 
to others. Even her mother-in-law — that most 



126 crcesus's widow. 

trying of family ties — admitted certain good 
qualities in Dossie ; and her husband was more 
dearly attached to her now, after being married 
to her for three years, than when her sweet, 
blithe smile had first made him feel himself the 
happiest person in the world. 

Dossie Bertrim then, on the morning after 
her lunch party (the party which had prevented 
her at once going to see the unhappy Nellie) 
received a letter from her old servant, Mrs. 
Moore, which filled her kind heart with absolute 
consternation. Mrs. Murray had gone out and 
had never returned, wrote Mrs. Moore ; and 
Dossie immediately on receiving this letter, 
ran to her husband, who was dressing to go into 
town. 

" Tom," she cried, " read this ! " And Tom, 
having read Mrs. Moore's letter, looked serious, 
and, as was his wont, took a common-sense view 
of the case. 

" I am afraid, little woman," he said, " all 
your o'ood nature and kindness has been wasted." 

" What do you mean, Tom? " asked Dossie. 

" Most probably this young person wasn't 
quite what she made out," said Tom, laying his 
hand kindly on his young wife's shoulder. 



croesus's widow. 127 

u What does an innocent child like you know 
about the evil ways of the wicked world ? " 

" I know this/' said Dossie, turning very red, 
" that whatever she was, she was a good woman. 
I overheard her once, Tom, praying, when she 
did not think anyone else heard her but God ; 
and she wasn't praying for herself — she was 
praying" (here Dossie suddenly burst into tears) 
* ■ that if her child were born, that it might be 
pure and good — that the evils of the world 
might never come near it — " 

Dossie's sobs now fairly interrupted her, and 
good-natured Tom Bertrim, as he took her in 
his arms, rubbed his own hand over his eves 
also, to wipe away a sympathetic tear. 

" Stupid little woman ! " he said; " why, you 
make a fool of a man with a word. Well, what 
do you want to do, child ? To drive into town 
with me, I'll be bound ? " 

" Yes," wept Dossie ; and in half-an-hour 
the young couple were on their way to Mrs. 
Moore's house. 

There they found the ill news only confirmed. 
Mrs. Murray had never returned, though Mrs. 
Moore had sat up all night waiting for her, and 
Mrs. Moore naturally did not know what to think. 



128 ORCESUSS WIDOW. 

Tom Bertrim called Dossie aside. 

" Look here, darling," he said, "I do not 
want to distress yon, but it is our duty to give 
notice to the police of this. This unfortunate 
young woman must be sought for, and you 
know we could no more find her, when we have 
no clue whatever, than we could fly." 

Dossie could not deny the truth of this, and 
Tom Bertrim therefore at once went and told 
the police at Scotland Yard the whole story. 
The inspector to whom he told the tale smiled 
cynically. 

" It's a pity you didn't come two days ago, 
sir," he said, " at least if you had a mind for a 
reward of two hundred pounds." 

" How do you mean 1 " asked Tom Bertrim. 

" This young lady — you give an exact des- 
cription — was picked up yesterday in one of the 
small streets near Eegcnt's Park, on the occasion 
of an old military gentleman's funeral, and she 
was carried into the railway station by one of 
the force, who conveyed her from there to 
Middlesex Hospital, for she had been much 
injured by one of the horses at the funeral. 
The member of the force thought he recognised 
her as the young woman who had disappeared 



crcesus's WIDOW. 129 

from Chelsea Bridge some time back, and he 
came here, and the gentleman who had offered 
a reward for her recovery was sent for, and 
went with me and the member of the force 
who had found her to Middlesex Hospital, for 
the purpose of identifying the young woman. 
He did identify her, and the reward was paid, 
and the young woman is now with her friends." 

" And who is she ? " asked Tom Bertrim. 

" It's a queer story," answered the inspector. 
" They say she's the wife — not acknowledged, 
you know — of Lord Seaforth. But if you are 
interested in the lady, she is at present at Miss 
Brewis's boarding-house, No. — , Belgrave Eoad, 
and I'm told she is dangerously ill." 

Tom Bertrim thanked the inspector for his 
information, and returned with his news to his 
Dossie, who at once went to inquire " how the 
lady was ? " at Miss Brewis's door, and sent in 
her card. 

The answer to her inquiries was but a sad 
one. " The lady was very ill — unconscious — 
and could see no one ; "and with this sad news 
Dossie was forced to go away. 

Not the next day, but the day following 
that, Dossie as;ain came into town, and again 

VOL. III. 



130 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

went to make inquiries at Miss Brewis's door. 

Nellie was now lying amid her white flowers ; 
and Dossie hearing this, prayed that she might 
be allowed to look upon the sweet face of the 
dead. 

She was shown into Joannah's dining-room, 
and as she sat there shedding some very bitter 
tears over the hapless fate of the poor girl she 
had so faithfully befriended, Joannah, attired 
in black, and looking more grim than ever, 
entered the room. 

" I have called to see — I have just heard 
the sad news," said Dossie, in a voice broken 
into tears, "that — poor Lady Seaforth is dead." 

"Yes, she's at rest" snapped Joannah. 
" She wasn't much troubled with visitors," she 
added, a moment later, " when she lived here 
before — name being unknown — ay, it's the 
way of the world." 

" I knew her," continued Dossie, in her 
sweet, sympathetic voice, " when indeed she 
had no name. You know her story, of course ? 
I am the lady who took her home that night — 
when her misery for the time had driven her 
mad." 

"No!" exclaimed Joannah. " Now, you 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 131 

aren't, are you ? Well, if you are, I wish you 
may live long and be rewarded — and I wouldn't 
say that to many." 

"She stayed with me a long time," said 
Dossie gently, "and I loved her very dearly, and 
if I had had my own way, she would have been 
at Castlewood — that is my home — now. But 
she wished to leave — she wished to see Lord 
Seaforth ; she did not tell me her husband's 
name, though she told me all the rest of the 
story ; but she wished to see her husband, and 
she wrote to him — " 

" Wrote to him, the villain ! " cried Joannah. 
'•' And him cominsf and crying and slobbering 
over her poor lifeless corpse, and making pre- 
tence he really loved her, and taking them all 
in — nearly taking in me — but he didn't ! " 

" She wrote to him, T know, twice," said 
Dossie. " Her first letter was addressed under 
cover to his servant, a man called Clayton, and 
this letter was returned through the post ; and 
she wrote again." 

" Then he shall answer whether be got them 
or not, or who got them," said Joannah. "Ay 
— she's best at rest — she had a tender heart, and 
he'd bruised and broken it too sore to mend." 



132 CRCESTJS'S WIDOW. 

" And did she never mention me," asked 
Dossie, " after she was brought here from the 
hospital?" 

" She never mentioned mortal name/' an- 
swered Joannah, " but her babe's. She was 
unconscious mostly, and when she did speak it 
was always about living for the child's sake. It 
died in her arms, and she kept it there until it 
grew cold against her breast — and then I got it 
away while she slept — but she missed it, and 
then this man — Lord Seaforth — came, and she 
started up and ■ gripped him by the hand, and 
asked him before us all whether she was his 
wedded wife." 

" And what did he say ? " 

" That she was — he found out then that it 
was too late to tell any more lies, and so he 
confessed the truth ; and it killed her, for she 
fell back dead three minutes after he entered 
the room." 

" Oh, poor, poor thing ! " said Dossie, who 
could not restrain her tears. 

" She's best at rest, ma'am ; he wanted money, 
and she'd not got any, and so he would have 
always looked upon her as a burden. But 
would you like to see her ? She's lying, the 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 133 

poor lamb, among white flowers, for the flowers 
that come here for her now are past belief — 
she's my lady now, so she gets every respect/' 
added Joannah with a bitter giggle. 

When Dossie saw the sweet white face lying 
amid the white flowers, she was deeply affected. 
She bent down and kissed the cold brow, and 
touched the chill, small, waxen hands. 

While she was still standing looking at 
Nellie ; telling Miss Brewis how ill she had 
been at Castlewood, and how gentle and patient 
she had always been when she was there, 
Margaret Vyner entered the room, and looked 
somewhat surprised and dignified to find a 
stranger looking at her dead sister. 

Margaret beckoned to Miss Brewis, who 
went to the door to speak to her. 

" Who is that lady, Miss Brewis ? " said 
Margaret. "I do not wish everyone to see 
Lady Seaforth." 

Joannah's visage grew scarlet in a second. 

" I'll tell you who the lady is, ma'am," she 
said, in her tartest tones, for she had taken a 
great dislike to Margaret ; *' that lady is the 
party who took your poor sister in when she 
was homeless —when she was not called Lady 



134 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Seaforth, indeed ! — and when she had gone out 
to end her young life, being driven to it by the 
cruelty of the party who cried and slobbered 
yesterday over her lifeless corpse ! Yes, Mrs. 
Vyner, if anyone has a right to see her, that 
lady ought to have, for she gave the poor lamb 
kindness when she was living, not after she 
was dead ! " 

" Oh ! Miss Brewis ! " said Margaret, much 
shocked. 

Miss Brewis and Margaret were, in fact, on 
anything but pleasant terms. Margaret was 
always talking of " Lady Seaforth " to Joannah, 
and Joannah could not forget all the details of 
the sad story, if Margaret could. Margaret 
irritated Joannah by perpetual allusions to 
"My dear sister's rank," or "We must consult 
Lord Seaforth, of course, before we decide 
anything." It was all Joannah could do to 
restrain herself when Margaret talked in this 
way. And when Margaret brought their old 
friend Mrs. Saunders to see the poor dead 
girl in her coffin, whom Airs. Saunders had 
known since she was a rosy little girl, as 
that good woman wailed and wept over the 
piteous sight, Joannah heard Margaret say,. 



CECESUS'S WIDOW. 135 



in her calm and evenly-modulated voice — 

"Yes, it's very, very sad, isn't it, Mrs. 
-Saunders ? If only dear Nellie had trusted me 
it would have been all right now." 

" And she was married to Lord Seaforth all 
the time, then ? " asked kind Mrs. Saunders, 
drying her eyes, from which her tears were 
streaming. 

u Oh yes, of course, Mrs. Saunders," replied 
Margaret. " They were only waiting to ackow- 
ledge it until some money affairs of Lord 
Seaforth's were settled ; but, of course, when the 
baby was expected, that hurried on matters, and 
<lear Nellie sent for her husband, who was 
staying with some of his relations, and he came 
.at once, for the purpose of telling us about the 
marriage, but you see this is the sad end/ 
And Margaret pointed to her dead sister. 

"Well," muttered Joannah to herself, <f that 
beats everything. And if she isn't took quite 
suddenly, like Ananias, all I can say is, she 
hasn't met with her deserts." 

So when Margaret made any objections about 
Dossie Bertrim seeing "Lady Seaforth," Jo- 
annah felt very angry. But Margaret was too 
wise to continue these objections when she heard 



136 crcesus's WIDOW. 

who Dossie was. She went , therefore, and thanked 
Dossie for her kindness to her " dear young 
sister, Lady Seaforth, under the unfortunate 
circumstance in which you met her." 

Dossie was very good-natured. She spoke 
kindly to Margaret, and said it was very sad ; 
but as she left the house she pressed Joannah's 
rugged hand more warmly than she did that of 
the correct and graceful Margaret. 



CHAPTER X. 

QUITE WASTED. 

By Vyner's express wish, Nellie was buried by 
her father's side, in Kensal Green Cemetery. 
Mr. Marehmont and Vyner arranged this, for 
Margaret suggested that poor Nellie should be 
laid in the family vault of the long- descended 
Seaforths. But Grey stoke was a journey from 
London, and Vyner forcibly pointed out the 
extreme folly of such a proceeding. 

" Let her sleep/' he said, "by the side of her 
poor father — who broke his heart for her loss — 
more than the other man will do, I'm pretty 
•certain." 

"Walter, dear, please do not speak in that 
way of Lord Seaforth now," advised Margaret, 
" remember, he is one of the family, and if we 
do not speak well of him, people will be 
sure to say he behaved ill to poor, dear Nellie." 



138 crcesus's WIDOW. 

" And didn't he behave ill ? " asked Vyner,. 
sharply. 

" Well, dear, we must not speak of the dead, 
except very kindly and tenderly ; but if poor, 
dear Nellie had only trusted her own sister — 
a sister, whom you know, Walter dear, was 
devoted to her — I have not the slightest doubt 
she would have been alive now, and ac- 
knowledged as Lady Seaforth, and perhaps 
going to be presented at the next Drawing- 
room." 

" She made an unfortunate omission, then," 
scoffed Vyner. 

"You need not sneer, Walter dear. Ask 
Mrs. Saunders, ask everyone, if I did not 
devote myself to Nellie from our earliest 
childhood? I never thought of myself; and,, 
perhaps, poor dear darling, she thus learned to be 
selfish — for it was selfish, you know, Walter, 
of her, never to tell poor father and myself,. 
and to leave us to suffer such constant anxiety 
on her account, when she might have relieved 
it with a word." 

" She had promised the man she called her 
husband, I suppose — the man you wish me to 
be civil to, but I won't," answered Vyner, and 



ckcesus's WIDOW. 139 

lie kept his word and would have nothing to 
say to Lord Seaforth. 

The funeral arrangements were therefore 
settled by Mr. Marchmont and Vyner. But 
Seaforth followed Nellie to her grave. He 
looked pale, haggard, and deeply affected, and 
seemed to feel his position very acutely. As 
they were leaving the open grave he said a few 
words to Vyner, but the painter made no 
answer. He could not forget, as Margaret 
wished him to do, that Seaforth had been the 
cause of Nellie's sad and early death. 

Another man also followed the hapless girl 
to her last resting-place. This man did not join 
the mourners round the grave, nor approach it 
until the service was over and the mourners 
gone. Then, when no one was left but the 
grave-diggers, who were commencing to shovel 
back the earth, Strathearn drew near, and went 
and stood looking down into the open grave, 
and read the words inscribed on the coffin lid : 

ELLINOR, 

WIFE OF MURRAY, 

SEVENTH VISCOUXT SEAFORTH. 

DIED 3RD OF MARCH, 

AGED 19 YEARS. 



140 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Strathearn stood quite still until the grave 
was filled in, and the sods laid down, and the 
men who had been busy had lifted their tools 
and gone away. Then, when he was alone, he 
suddenly flung himself on the grave, and laid his 
head on the newly-cut sods. 

"Good-bye, little woman/' he said; "it has 
been quite wasted — all wasted — but you know 
now how well I have loved you, and I love no 
other." 

He was her truest mourner. All the others 
were gone away ; gone back to the world, to 
their everyday life, but Strathearn's heart lay 
buried in Nellie's grave, and yet he knew as he 
had said, " that it was quite wasted." 



Some clays after the funeral he went to see 
Joannah Brewis. 

" Well," he said in his brusque way, " I've 
come to bid you good-bye, and to pay 3^011 
what I owe you." 

" You owe me nothing," answered Joannah 
sturdily. "Why, Mr. Campbell," she con- 
tinued, looking curiously at the tall Scotchman, 
on whose head at that moment the sun was 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 141 

shining, "why, Mr. Campbell, I declare yon 
are turning grey." 

" Yon must get me some patent dye, then, 
Miss Brewis," said Strathearn, with a harsh 
little laugh, "it will never do for a young man 
like me to lose my looks." And he laughed 
again. 

But Joannah did not laugh. She knew well 
enough what had changed him, and how his 
secret grief had been bitter and strong. 

" Ay," she said, still looking at him, " she 
chose the worst man." 

" And how is the e worst man,' then ? " 
scoffed Strathearn. 

" Never seen the face of him again," answered 
Joannah. " The old gentleman they call Mr. 
Marchmont arranged everything and paid 
everything ; and I'm told — mind, I know 
nothing of the truth of it — that Lord Seaforth 
has gone back with the old gentleman — he's a 
kind of relation, I think — to the place where 
you went to fetch Lord Seaforth from." 

" Ryecourt ? " said Strathearn. 

" Yes, Ryecourt — that's the name. And I'm 
told, too, that that rich widow lady is still 
there with old Lady Seaforth — since I suppose 



142 crcesus's WIDOW. 

we must call the dear lamb who is gone, young 
Lady Seaforth now — at least that sister of hers 
has dinned her new name pretty often in my 
ears. But, as I was saying, the young lord 
has gone back with Mr. Marchmont. " 

This news of Joannah's was quite correct. 
Hugh Marchmont had felt sorry for Seaforth 
— sorry for a weak man tempted beyond 
his strength — and he believed (though Jo- 
annah did not) in the truth of his repentance. 
And for another reason, also, Hugh Marchmont 
wished Seaforth to go back with him to Rye- 
court, This reason was, that Seaforth had 
assured him, on his word of honour, that no 
letter of Nellie's had ever reached his hands 
after she had disappeared from Belgrave Road. 

Mr. Marchmont made inquiries upon this, 
and found that Mrs. Benson, Lady Seaforth's 
late lady's maid, had orders to forward all 
letters that arrived at the house in South 
Kensington to Ryecourt. Then he saw Mrs. 
Benson, who admitted having forwarded two 
letters for " my lord," under cover to " my 
lady/' If these were Nellie's letters — the letters 
Mrs. Bertrim declared she knew Nellie had sent, 
— it was but right that it should be discovered 



crcesus's widow. 143 

what had become of them, and that Seaforth 
should be exonerated so far in the eyes of 
Nellie's family by it being proved that he had 
never received them. 

" It will do no good now/' said Seaforth, 
moodily casting down his eyes, as his kinsman, 
Hugh, thus pronounced his views on the 
subject. 

" It is right that it should be known what 
has become of them," answered Hugh March- 
mont. "If they were sent on to my house 
I will learn if they ever arrived there." 

Seaforth did not speak. He could not quarrel 
with Hugh Marchmont, because he was actually 
at this moment indebted to him for the means 
of buiyiug his wife. Seaforth in fact knew he 
was a ruined man, and his real misery and 
regret about Nellie was rendered more bitter 
by his own deplorable difficulties. 

He could not stay in town, and he had no 
money to go abroad and no credit anywhere. 
The story of his secret marriage had got 
whispered about, and Mr. Cairns, with whom he 
had an interview, advised him to " keep out of 
the way for the present, and make the best of 
things afterwards. I understand," added the 



144 cecesus's WIDOW. 

lawyer with a hard smile, " that the lady, who 
with some justice bears the name of Croesus's 
Widow, is still with Lady Seaforth at Eyecourt, 
and I advise yon to go there." And Mr. Cairns 
again smiled. 

Seaforth felt ntterly downcast at the prospect 
before him. He had loved Nellie as deeply as 
it was in his nature to love — loved her selfishly 
for the sake of the fair face that had waned as 
his love had waned — but he had felt her early 
and melancholy death very bitterly. He was 
touched, he was cut to the heart, and yet had 
she lived what would she have been to him ? A 
burden, a worry ; and perhaps sitting there 
gloomily opposite to Hugh Marchmont, he 
knew this — knew that his love had never been 
strong enough to care for another better than 
himself. 

And a day or two after Nellie had been laid 
by her father's side a letter came to Seaforth 
from his mother, embodying in words the 
thoughts w T hich he dare scarcely think. 

Dear, Murray (he read, in the fine, clear handwriting of 
Lady Seaforth), — I am told the unhappy tie which you had 
the great misfortune to contract, is now ended by death. I 
will not preach to you, I will not be hypocrite enough to 
pretend to condole with you. The wretched marriage into 



CRCES17SS WIDOW. 145 

which you were forced could have only brought you misery, 
as unequal marriages always do. Therefore, I will not 
pretend to be sorry that all this is ended now, and that you 
are free to form a new and, I pray and trust, a happier 
alliance. Murray, you know -what I mean — you know whom 
I mean. After that wretched Scotchman, Mr. Campbell, 
who seems to have taken, certainly, a remarkable interest in 
the unfortunate young woman now in her grave — after this 
wretched man, then, was gone, after you and Hugh March - 
mont were gone, I felt utterly prostrated. I refused to see 
Mrs. Trelawn — I was too much ashamed and upset by the 
whole scene to see her. But she was very good. She wrote 
me a little note to tell me not to distress myself — she said 
everything a delicate-minded woman could say ; then came 
the news that you were free — and once more some hope, 
some comfort stole into my miserable heart. Murray, shall 
1 appeal to you in vain ? You know the circumstances, 
you know the whole wretched position. But you will say 
this unhappy affair has changed your relationship with Mrs. 
Trelawn. No doubt, to a certain extent, it has done so ; 
but she is a peculiar woman — the fact, I believe, that you 
went and acknowledged this unhappy girl on her death-bed 
as your wife (though I do not believe actually in the marriage) 
has, I am sure, told in your favour; and, then, I have made 
the best of the affair to her — an old entanglement, long 
before you ever saw her — you understand ? She is romantic ; 
has had some foolish love of her own, no doubt (not 
the late Croesus, I suppose), and I believe she is ready to 
forgive you — ready to believe that j T our love for her led you 
into acting as you have done. Forgive me if I hurt your 
feelings by thus writing plainly. I am your mother, you 
are my dear, dear son, and no tie can be so near and so strong 
as ours. I write in my love for you — a love which you know 
has never changed — 



146 crcesus's WIDOW. 

There were a few more lines in this letter — 
lines of mingled advice and tenderness — ad- 
vice to keep fast friends with Hugh Marchmont,. 
and to avoid any quarrel or meeting with 
Mr. Campbell, of Strathearn. "The sooner 
you come here the better," wrote Lady Sea- 
forth ; and Seaforth, after reading the letter 
twice, sat moodily thinking over his position. 



CHAPTER XL 



THE HIDDEN LETTERS. 



Seaforth's moody cogitations ended in his 
deciding to go to Ryecourt. Mr. Marchmont 
wished this, and his mother wished it ; and 
though shamed and unhappy, Seaforth knew 
there was truth in his mother's letter — knew 
that her estimate of Nora's character was pro- 
bably a just one. 

But it was a bitter thing for the man to do — 
to meet Nora again — to stand before her at best 
as a dishonourable and unprincipled man. But 
on the other hand, if she would forgive him ; 
if all this dreary past could be hushed up and 
forgotten, it would be well — yes, Seaforth knew 
it would be well — and so he went back to Bye- 
court prepared to ask Nora again to be his wife. 

And Lady Seaforth's estimate of Nora's 
character had been a just one. The mother, 



148 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

we may be sure, had cast the best and most 
becoming light upon her son's misdemeanours. 
She had talked to Nora of " this sad affair ; " 
told her how Seaforth had fallen into it when 
almost a boy — " long before he met you " — 
and how the tie had galled and worried him 
into a hundred follies. 

" His great fault is that his heart is too kind,"" 
pleaded the mother ; " this wretched girl had 
persuaded him to give her some promise or 
other in Scotland, and then this Mr. Campbell 
of Strathearn, who I think is partly mad, met 
her, and formed, it appears to me, a very ex- 
traordinary intimacy and friendship with her, 
considering her relationship to Seaforth ; and 
when the girl took ill, they planned together, 
I suppose, to induce Seaforth to say she was his 
wife. This is how I understand the story. 
However, she is dead, and you must forgive 
poor Murray." 

Nora cast down her eyes. 

" I am sorry for Lord Seaforth," she said, 
" most sorry, for I am sure he has a good heart ; 
and if he thinks he wronged this poor girl, her 
denth will be a terrible blow to him." 

" For the moment, perhaps," answered Lady 



CROESUS S WIDOW. 149 

Seaforth. " But, all ! my dear Mrs. Trelawn, a 

woman to retain the affection of a refined man 
like Murray must have something more than a 
pretty face. Her death is a blessing. I can look 
on it in no other light — for if she had lived, fancy 
the misery Murray must have endured. Bound 
to a woman he did not love — to a woman totally 
unfitted for his position — ignorant, low born — 
oh ! poor Murray, it would have killed him ! " 

" Then she was not a lady ? " asked Nora, in 
her gentle, pitiful way. 

" Of course not — what lady would have acted 
as she did ? No ; he has had an escape. But 
he is so unhappy about you — he feels, he says,, 
ashamed to meet you — because you naturally 
do not know aU. the circumstances of the case, 
and Murray is too generous to speak against 
the girl now that she is dead." 

" I am sorry for Lord Seaforth," again said 
Nora, and she really felt so. 

And when she saw him, pale, haggard, and 
looking really wretchedly ill, she felt yet more 
sorry. She pressed his hand with sympathetic 
pressure ; she thought she understood all the 
shame, the self-reproach, overwhelming his soul. 

In judging of the feelings of those around us, 



150 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

we may understand some of them, but as a 
rule there are other feelings that we certainly 
do not understand. That complex and revolv- 
ing machine, the human heart, is rarely fully 
known by its owner's friends. Nora felt sorry 
for Lord Seaforth, because she believed that he 
had done what was right, when to do so was 
to flmor his fortune to the wind. She thought 
vanity did not blind her, because she knew 
that it was her fortune that had at first at- 
tracted Lord Seaforth ; but he had given up 
that fortune — for he could not tell this unhappy 
girl would die, argued Nora to herself — for a 
sense of right, a sense of honour. Nora 
naturally believed Lady Seaforth's story about 
her son. He had given this poor girl a foolish 
promise in Scotland to marry her — perhaps 
called her his wife before this rough Scotchman, 
Mr. Campbell — and when she was very ill he 
had fulfilled that promise, though it was bring- 
ing absolute ruin on himself. Nora knew, 
of course, of the almost desperate condition of 
Seaforth's fortunes. But she was too generous 
to think of this ; her enormous wealth made it 
absolutely of no consequence to her whether 
.the man she married was poor or rich. 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 151 

She therefore received Seaforth kindly, when 
he returned to Eyecourt, and approached her 
with his eyes cast down, and with shame and 
discomfort in his heart. 

His ordinary easy manner was quite changed, 
and he was grave and silent, and dressed in deep 
mourning. This mourning made Lady Seaforth 
feel very angry, for Hugh Marchmont also 
wore black as a token of respect for his kins- 
man's dead wife. 

Yet not a word was spoken of the dead w T ife 
the day that Hugh Marchmont and Seaforth 
returned to Eyecourt, nor yet for two days 
afterwards. Hugh JMarchmont generously 
wished to allow the first strain and annoyance 
of the situation to pass away before he ap- 
proached it, for he was still determined to 
learn what had become of Nellie's letters. 

He sought a quiet opport unity, therefore, of 
speaking to his old love, Lady Seaforth, about 
them, and he placed the circumstances in this 
light before her. 

" I am going to ask you a question," he said, 
with his quiet smile, addressing Lady Seaforth 
on the terrace at Eyecourt, on the third morn- 
ing after his return; "do not answer without 



152 cross us's WIDOW. 

thinking it over, for it is a serious question as 
regards Seaforth." 

" What is it ? " asked Lady Seaforth, and 
she coloured and moved her hands uneasily. 

" It is this — two letters were written by the 
unfortunate girl who is now dead, to Seaforth 
after—" 

" Oh, Hugh ! " interrupted Lady Seaforth, 
deprecatingly, " do not open out again this 
wretched subject. The girl is dead, her child 
is dead ; what object have you in doing so ? " 

" This," said Hugh Marchmont firmly, " that 
if Seaforth received these letters, which were 
undoubtedly sent to him here, he is quite 
unworthy to be — what I presume you still wish 
him to be — the husband of a good woman like 
Mrs. Trelawn." 

Lady Seaforth was terribly annoyed. She 
grew pale and red by turns, she bit her lips, 
and glanced uneasily at Mr. Marchmont. 

" You would not surely," she said at last, 
"tell her anything about these letters ? Surely, 
Hugh, you have more regard for us — some little 
remembrance of old times. Surely you would 
never try to interfere and prevent a marriage 
which would absolutely save Murray from ruin? " 



ckcesus's WIDOW. 153 

"Not willingly/' answered Hugh Marchmont ;. 
" but there is something due to this lady. Sea- 
forth positively, and on his honour as a gentle- 
man, denies he ever received these letters, which 
if he had received would probably have saved 
his young wife's life. If he did not receive 
them, I can view his conduct in a different light ; 
but if he did receive them, and they no doubt 
were forwarded to him by Mrs. Benson, then, I 
repeat, he is utterly unworthy to marry Mrs. 
Trelawn, and it is my duty to tell her that he is 
unworthy." 

" And you would do this ? " asked Lady 
Seaforth bitterly, turning round, and facing 
her old lover. 

" Yes," said Hugh Marchmont. " I would 
do this — from a sense of right, a sense of 
honour, to a defenceless woman." 

" What is Mrs. Trelawn to you ? " asked 
Lady Seaforth passionately. " You take a 
wonderful interest in her ? " 

"I do take an interest in her — the friendly 
interest of a middle-aged man in a very 
charming young woman. But it is not from 
this interest I would act in this matter. 
For your son's sake, for Seaforth 's sake, I 



154 crcesus's WIDOW. 



wish to clear his name from so foul a stain." 

Lady Seaforth clasped her hands — she grew 
pale — she stood there looking at the calm, 
determined face of her old lover. 

" Hugh — " she began, " what will you say — 
you know how I have loved Murray — he was all 
I have had to love in a long, wretched life — rt 
And Lady Seaforth burst into tears. 

" Do not distress yourself," said Hugh March - 
mont, " but does this mean that you kept these 
letters back from Seaforth ? " 

" I knew nothing about this marriage, or 
so-called marriage," said Lady Seaforth, in a 
voice broken with sobs. " I knew of some 
wretched entanglement, that was all — and — 
^nd two letters came for Murray — I guessed 
where they came from — and — " 

" You destroyed them ? " asked Hugh March - 
mont quickly. 

" No — I locked them away. It made me 
miserable enough — but I did it for Murray's 
sake." 

" Will you give me these letters ? " 

" Why ? What good can they do now ? I 
have confessed the truth to you, Hugh — lowered 
myself in your eyes." 



crcesus's WIDOW. 155- 

" No," said Hugh Marclimont, and lie smiled. 
He meant she could not now lower herself any- 
further in his eyes, but Lady Seaforth never 
quite understood her old lover, and she now 
began to dry her tears. 

" I am glad you do not judge me harshly," 
she said. " It was for Murray's sake — my only 
child." 

" Yes," said Hugh Marclimont, and again he 
smiled. " And now, for that only child's sake, 
will you give me the letters ? " 

" You will not show them to Mrs. Trelawn ? 
You will not mention them to her ? " 

" I will not — I simply want them to satisfy 
myself." 

"Very well, you shall have them. Ah, Hugh, 
times are changed indeed when you can speak 
to me thus ! " 

" Yes, times are changed," answ T ered Hugh 
Marclimont, though not unkindly ; " and now, 
will you bring me the letters ? " 

And Lady Seaforth was obliged to bring 
them. She placed them in Hugh Marchmont's 
hands without another word, and Hugh March- 
mont put them into Seaforth's. 

"Your mother had hidden them," he said. 



156 cikesus's WIDOW. 



" I am glad for your sake this matter is 
cleared up, and I shall write to Mr. Vyner 
and tell him how it was you did not receive 
them." 

Seaforth took the letters ; his hand trembled 
— the letters from the dead, — and then he 
Iwan to think of the living. 

" If he writes to Vyner," he thought, casting 
down liis eyes, "somehow, we can never tell 
how, it may reach Mrs. Tr dawn's ears that 
poor, poor Nellie was Vyner's sister-in-law. 
Mrs. Trelawn used to be intimate with Vyner 
— better hush up the whole thing — they think 
as ill of me as they can, I dare say, already. 
What is the good of saying anything now ? If 
it could bring back Nellie — " 

And he honestly believed that if he could 
bring back Nellie, he would sacrifice anything 
to do so. But as he could not — 

" I think," he said, hesitating, and still 
keeping his eyes fixed on the ground, " that I 
would rather you did not write to Mr. Vyner, — ■ 
you see it can do no good now — " 

"Except remove a very disgraceful impres- 
sion of you from Mr. Vyner's mind," rather 
sharply interrupted Hugh Marchmont. 



crce.sus's widow. 157 



" I must bear that — I am willing to bear it 

there is my mother to consider," still hesitated 
Seaforth. 

"I advise you to let me write," said Mr. 
Marchmont gravely. 

"I would rather you did not," said Sea- 
forth. ' : As I said before, it can do no good 
now — " 

" The truth is always good," answered Hugh 
Marchmont yet more gravely. "You are a 
young man — take an old man's advice — tell the 
truth, and face the consequences of any evil 
you have done, manfully, and you will never 
regret it." 

" I would rather you did not write," again 
said Seaforth, and Mr. Marchmont nodded his 
head and left him. 

" He will regret this," he thought ; and the 
day was not far distant when Seaforth had bitter 
reason to remember his kinsman's neglected 
advice. 

Bat in the meantime, as regards Nora, every- 
thing seemed to be going fairly smooth for him. 
His evident depression and shame — his remorse 
even — more favourably impressed her than if 
he had endeavoured to seem indifferent or 



158 croesus's widow. 

heartless under such exceptionally painful cir- 
cumstances. Some days passed away without 
him seeking any private conversation with Nora, 
or making any allusion to what had passed 
between them before Strathearn's sudden ap- 
pearance at Eyecourt. But after some days 
Nora — who had stayed on in Dorsetshire at 
Lady Seaforth's earnest entreaty, and from a 
feeling of delicacy and kindness — thought that 
it was quite time now that she should return 
home, and she accordingly told her hostess this. 

Lady Seaforth pressed her to remain, but 
Nora named a day when she would leave, and 
she determined to avoid, if possible, giving 
Seaforth an opportunity of speaking to her 
alone before she went. She wished, in fact, to* 
test her own feelings on the subject. She was 
sorry for, and interested in a young, good- 
looking man, whom adverse fate seemed so re- 
lentlessly to pursue ; but pity is not love, though 
it may be akin to it. But while Nora was in 
this undecided state of mind, Lady Seaforth 
was urging her son to speak to her, to have 
the affair settled when he had so favourable 
a chance. 

But shame partly, and partly the bitter 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 159 

regret that lie had truly felt for the girl-wife 
whose hapless fate still perpetually haunted 
him, held Seaforth back. 

" It was too soon to say anything," he told 
his mother moodily ; and he probably might 
not have done so if an accident had not unex- 
pectedly thrown him with her alone. 



CHAPTER XII. 

NEMESIS. 

They met by chance, one sunny afternoon, in 
one of the green lanes near Kyecourt, Nora 
having been in a little dene near, gathering 
wild flowers ; and she was sitting on the bare 
trunk of an uprooted tree by the roadside, 
when Seaforth unexpectedly appeared. 

They both were very much embarrassed 
when they saw each other. Nora was looking 
very pretty in her brown straw rustic hat, and 
a great bunch of wild blue hyacinths lying on 
her knee. She was conscious that she blushed 
deeply as Seaforth approached her, and Sea- 
forth saw that blush, and perhaps it nerved 
him to say what he did. 

" You have been gathering flowers, I see," 
he said. " May I sit down ? " 

" Oh, yes," answered Nora, and she moved 
slightly further up on the trunk of the tree, 



CRCESUS's WIDOW. 161 

while Seaforth also seated himself on it. "There 
are such pretty flowers down in that little 
dene," continued Nora nervously. 

Seaforth did not speak for a moment. He 
put out his hand and took up one of Nora's blue 
hyacinths, as if half unconsciously — he was in 
truth not thinking of the hyacinths, but of the 
words in which he could frame what was passing 
in his mind. 

At last he spoke, with some abruptness. 

" My mother tells me you are going to leave 
Kyecourt, Mrs. Trelawn ? " he said. 

" Yes," said Nora, trying to speak with ease, 
and smiling, " I have paid quite a long visit — 
much longer than I intended when I came." 

" There is something," said Seaforth, crush- 
ing in his agitation the flower he held in his 
hand, " something I would like to ask you 
— a question I would like ask you — before you 

go-" 

"Wait— till I see you in town," faltered 
Nora. 

" I may not see you in town," answered Sea- 
forth, regaining to a certain extent his old 
manner. " I'm thinking of going abroad ; but 
before I go, when I have the opportunity of 

VOL. III. G 



162 crcesus's WIDOW. 

doing so, I want you to answer my question. It 
is a very simple one, though a good deal depends 
on the answer. It is — can you forgive me ? " 

Nora was greatly confused. 

" I wish/' she said, " you had not asked me 
this yet, Lord Seaforth." 

" You think it is too soon ? Perhaps it is ;' 
but suspense is hard to bear to a man in my 
position.' 7 

Nora was silent. She kept nervously drawing 
a pattern with the stick of her sunshade on the 
grassy roadway before her. 

" I know," continued Seaforth, " I do not 
deserve a favourable answer — that in your eyes, 
and in my own also, I have behaved ill — very 
ill — but though I cannot explain, there are 
circumstances — ," and here Seaforth's voice 
faltered and broke. 

" Do not speak of them," said Nora, gener- 
ously, now looking up, " I understand — and it 
is painful to you, I know, to recall the past — 
and — and — if you mean — " 

" I mean, can you forgive that past ? " asked 
Seaforth, in a low voice. 

For a moment Nora hesitated : then she 
said — 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 163 

" Yes, I can forgive that past ; but do not 
speak of it just now — come and see me in 
town — and we can then settle our future ar- 
rangements." 

She thus virtually accepted him, and Seaforth 
felt that it was so. He put out his hand and 
took her little trembling one. 

" Thank you," he said ; " from my heart I 
thank you," and these brief words were' all that 
were spoken further on the subject between 
them. 

They returned together to the house, both 
grave and almost silent. But Seaforth felt an 
immense relief steal over his mind when he 
thought of the great change of fortune that this 
short conversation would cause. It excited him ; 
his pale face flushed, and he looked brighter and 
happier than he had done since Nellie's death. 
Yet he could not forget her — a shadow lingered 
by his side, and fell grey and cold athwart the 
brightening prospects of his life. 

• • • • . . . 

The next day Nora left Eyecourt. Seaforth 
escorted her to the train, and they parted with 
the understanding that in a month they were 
to meet in town. 



164 crcesus's WIDOW. 

" It is better that I should many, I suppose," 
thought Nora, very gravely, as the train "bore 
her away from Seaforth's sight ; and as Seaforth 
walked back to Kyecourt he also looked on his 
marriage with Nora as a settled thing, and began 
speculating and deciding what he would do with 
his new wealth. 

But scarcely had Nora arrived at home — she 
was actually changing her travelling dress — 
when a few pencilled lines from Vyner were 
placed in her hand, asking her to see him for a 
few minutes, as he had something important to 
tell her. 

Nora quickly went down to receive her old 
friend, who looked greatly disturbed and agi- 
tated as she entered the room. 

" Nora," he said, advancing and taking her 
hand, " I heard that you were to return to-day, 
and I have not lost a moment in calling upon 
you ; for it cannot — surely it cannot be true, 
what I hear — that you are engaged to Lord 
Seaforth?" 

Nora cast down her eyes, and blushed very 
deeply. 

" I — I — am not actually engaged to him," 
she said. 



CROESUS'S WIDOW. 165 

" Not actually engaged ? " repeated Vyner ; 
*' then there is some truth in this report ? 
Nora, do you know — you cannot know — that 
his young wife — poor, poor Nellie Blythe — is 
scarcely dead ? " 

" Nellie Blythe ! " repeated Nora, in the ut- 
most astonishment. " Your wife was a Miss 
Blythe — no relation, surely, of hers ? " 

" Her own sister," answered Vyner, with 
great bitterness. " Some eight months ago, 
Nellie Blythe disappeared one night from her 
father's house, and it broke the old man's 
heart ; and until she was dying we never knew 
what had become of her. What had happened 
to her afterwards was this : Lord Seaforth had 
married her in Scotland, and, I suppose, wearied 
of her, for he induced the unhappy girl to 
believe he was not really married to her, and 
in her shame and agony, she tried to destroy 
herself." 

"' Oh, Walter ! oh, Walter ! can this be true? " 
cried Nora, deeply agitated. 

" It is quite true — too true, Nora ; and if you 
want proofs and witnesses, I have them ready. 
Poor Nellie in her great distress was sheltered 
by a kind little woman called Mrs. Bertrim, 



166 crcesus's WIDOW. 

and she will tell you the story, if you would 
like to hear it from her lips. And Nellie wrote 
to Seaforth — wrote twice — and still he never 
came to her assistance, or took the least notice 
of the poor broken-hearted girl, until Mr. 
Campbell, of Strathearn, went for him to Rye- 
court, and brought him just in time to see her 
die." 

Nora grew cold and faint. She sat down, 
she covered her face, and then she held out her 
hand to her old friend. 

" If this is true, Walter," she said in a low 
tone, "you have saved me from a terrible fate." 

The next day brought a letter to Seaforth, at 
Eyecourt, from Nora. He received it with a 
smile, but as he read its contents a sickening 
feeling of shame and disgrace completely over- 
whelmed him. 

Dear Lord Seaforth (he read), — I have seen Mr. Vyner 
since my return, and heard from him the true and sad his- 
tory of his young sister-in-law's marriage and death. I do 
not wish to dwell on the painful circumstances, but they 
entirely and completely preclude the idea of any further 
engagement between us, and I must ask you to consider this 
decision a final one. — Yours truly, 

Nora Trelawx. 



CRCESUSS WIDOW. 167 

Seafortli flung this letter on the floor after 
reading it, and as he left the room his mother 
took it up. It was the last blow — Nemesis, 
grim and relentless — and it left Seafortli a 
hopelessly ruined man. 



CHAPTER XIII, 

AT LAST. 

Two years passed away after Nellie's death 
almost uneventfully for Nora. Sir Thomas 
and Lady Stainbrooke still continued to live 
with her, and she was admired and courted, and 
might have changed her name from Croesus's 
Widow " very advantageously," as her aunt 
frequently told her, if she would have consented 
to do so. But she remained a widow, and her 
life to all outward seeming ran smoothly and 
quietly on. 

But if no change had come to Nora in these 
two years, considerable change had occurred in 
the fortunes of Margaret Vyner, for during them 
Margaret had become a very great lady indeed. 

True, it was but reflected greatness, though 
Margaret did not see it in this lidit, and was 
satisfied that the remarkable success which had 



CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 169 

attended Vyner in the last two years as a 
painter was due to her influence and taste. 
Vyner, in fact, had painted a great picture — a 
picture which at once made him not only pre- 
eminent among his fellow-artists, but gave him 
a world-wide reputation and fame. It also 
made him a rich man, at least a man who 
could command a very large income ; and 
Margaret, having the benefit of this income, 
became in her own eyes, and perhaps in the 
eyes of a certain section of other people, a 
great lady. 

She gave artistic and fancy balls, at which 
she wore the diamonds that Nora had given 
her, and to which she invited her husband's 
patrons, and everyone she thought it was 
advantageous or desirable to know. She 
rather patronised Nora than otherwise, and 
shook her head and smiled when Vyner once 
said something about Seaforth having wished 
to marry Nora. 

11 That is such an old story, dear/' she said ; 
""such folly — just like most of these reports. 
Poor Lord Seaforth, I fear he will never get 
over dear Nellie's death ! " 

In her conversation with her friends, she 



170 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

still frequently referred to "Lady Seaforth,"' 
and altogether held herself to be honoured by 
this connection. She used to take wreaths of 
flowers and hang them on the white marble 
cross beneath which Nellie slept after her short 
sad journey. 

" I have been to my poor young sister, Lady 
Seaf or tli's grave," she would say, after these 
expeditions, and she was quite satisfied that 
she went there out of tender devotion to the- 
dead. 

But to this prosperous and self-filled life, a 
sudden end was destined to occur. And, 
strange to relate, this sudden end came by 
Margaret's absolute belief in her own in- 
fallibility. 

Among other pleasures and luxuries which 
Margaret at this time asked Vyner to give her, 
she wished him to buy her a riding horse. 

" AVhy, dear Margaret," laughed Vyner, 
" when you have never been on a horse in 
your life ! " 

"Do not say that, Walter," answered 
Margaret, in her calm, assertive way; "dear 
father, when we were children, always kept 
ponies for us. I have often ridden." 



crcesus's WIDOW. 171 

"You'll break your neck if you try now," 
said Vyner, and he would not buy her a 
horse ; but Margaret, without consulting him, 
went to a livery stable and hired one for a 
season. 

The owner of the livery stable gave her a 
really quiet animal, and provided her with a 
groom and all other accessories, and Margaret 
surprised Vyner one day by riding up to his 
studio, really looking remarkably well. 

He went down to speak to her, and Margaret 
immediately tried to gain her point. 

" As you see, I can ride, dear," she said, " I 
am sure now you will buy me a horse ? " 

Vyner laughed. 

" T won't make any rash promises," he said. 
" And now I advise you to get safely home." 

But Margaret had no intention of not being 
seen in her new accomplishment as a horse- 
woman. She called on her old friend, Mrs. 
Saunders, and that kind woman admired her 
to her heart's content. She also saw poor 
Nellie's old lover, "little Puck," who still 
remained a bachelor, and gratified Margaret 
*also by his open and admiring comments on 
her appearance. 



172 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

She was so pleased and self-satisfied,, that she 
determined next to call on Nora. As she rode 
rip to Nora's door, unfortunately a troop of 
Life Guards were passing. This made a stir 
and a sort of crowd, and Margaret grew nervous. 
But her horse kept steady enough, when sud- 
denly a horse, ridden by a man who was 
also passing, grew restive and reared, close to 
Margaret. The man tried to hold it in, but it 
seized the bit in its teeth, turned sharply, 
cannoned against Margaret's horse, and in a 
moment Margaret lost her unstable seat, and 
fell backwards, actually pulling her horse over 
on her. The animal plunged and kicked, some 
of the guardsmen at once dismounted, anfct 
Margaret was dragged from beneath the horse. 
She was quite insensible, and was carried to 
Nora's door, to keep her out of the crowd until 
an ambulance could be procured to convey her 
home. 

The news of the accident soon reached Nora r 
who happened to be at home, and she ran to 
the door of the house to see if she could be of 
any assistance, and to ask if the poor lady who 
was hurt had not better be brought at once 
into the house. 



crcesus's WIDOW. 173 

When she saw Margaret's face she recognised 
her. It was Walter Vyner's wife — and with a 
suppressed cry Nora bade the men who were 
holding Margaret in their arms to cany her in. 

" She is a friend of mine — take her into the 
house at once," she said ; and so Margaret was 
carried in, and lay like one dead while Nora 
despatched messengers for doctors and for 
Vyner. 

Margaret never spoke again. It was con- 
cussion of the brain, the doctors said, and she 
lingered alive for two days, but she never 
regained consciousness. The end came about 
midnight on the third night after the accident. 
Nora, who had scarcely left her, had been per- 
suaded to lie down, and had fallen asleep, when 
her maid awoke her. 

" What is the matter ? " said Nora, starting 
up. 

" You said we were to call you if there was 
any change," answered the maid. " Poor Mrs. 
Vyner is dead." 

Nora at once ran into the room where Mar- 
garet lay. Vyner was standing by the bed, 
pale, grave, and sorrowful, and he held out his 
hand to his old friend as she ran in. 



174 cecesus's WIDOW. 

" Poor Margaret ! " he said. And as Nora 
stood and looked with tearful eyes at Margaret's 
still face, she too murmured " Poor, poor 
Margaret ! " 



We notice the footsteps of time but by- 
epochs. " To-morrow, and to-morrow, nd 
to-morrow, creeps in this petty pace from day 
to day." But suddenly on some "to-morrow" 
comes a change. Then we count the hours — 
say on such and such a day he died — on 
such a day was born. And so in the re- 
volving days and months that passed after 
Margaret's sudden death ; Nora and Vyner 
scarcely noted them, until one day, when these 
two — who once were lovers, who each in 
truth had loved no other — suddenly broke 
through the half-sad, half-tender reserve which 
had been between them since the day that 
Margaret died. 

They were standing together in Nora's 
drawing-room in the twilight. Outside was 



the hum and stir of the mighty city ; inside a 
great stillness and peace. Presently Vyner 
spoke. 



croesus's widow. 175 



It is a year to-day, Nora," he said. 



"since- 



" Yes, I know," answered Nora softly, and 
her hand crept into his. 

Not many words were said after this — 
strong, deep feeling is expressed in few words 
— but as the darkness stole around them, 
Nora's head fell on Vyner's breast. 

" How have I lived," she half sobbed, " all 
these dreary, dreary years ? " 

They were married very soon after this. 
Lady Stainbrooke could not restrain a little 
stab, in spite of her prudence, at Vyner on 
the occasion. 

" So, you have got Nora and her great 
fortune, after all, Mr. Vyner ! " she said. 

" Yes," he answered, smiling ; " I have been 
a lucky man." And so, indeed, he esteemed 
himself, but not because she had a great 
fortune. 

After their marriage they went abroad for a 
whole year, and during their wanderings found 
themselves in the winter time at Monte Carlo. 
One day, while they were standing watching 
the players staking their gold at the tables, 



176 cecesus's WIDOW. 

they suddenly both recognised a face in the 
crowd. It was Lord Seaforth — he was standing 
watching with haggard, greedy eyes, a small 
stake that he had risked, and he looked miser- 
ably worn and aged. Nora felt sorry ; she 
would even have spoken to him, but Vyner 
drew her away. 

" It would only be painful to us all," he said ; 
yet Nora could not easily forget the look of 
poverty, almost despair, which came over the 
young man's face when the trifle he had risked 
vanished away. 

They heard after this that Lady Seaforth was 
living in Paris in great poverty also ; having 
only a small annuity to live on, which was 
allowed her by Mr. Marchmont. Anonymously 
Nora now frequently sends this unhappy woman 
considerable sums of money ; and Vyner, ever 
generous, is pleased that she should do this. 

Strathearn is still unmarried. Once a year 
at least he comes to town, and never forgets 
to call on Joannah Brewis. He also never 
forgets to send her a haunch of venison in 
October, and various presents of game during 
the season. 

" I don't like it," Joannah candidly confesses; 



crcesus's WIDOW. 177 

"" but it pleases hint, I suppose, poor man, and 
does me no harm, and so I make no objections." 
There is another visit, too, which Strathearn 
never neglects to pay. This is to Nellie's grave. 
No one else goes near it now, but she is not 
forgotten — Strathearn loved her too well for her 
memory to fade in a human life. 



The End. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 



THE 



Silent Watchers, 



CHAPTER I. 

WHAT THEY SAW. 

It was only a dreary picture. The afternoon 
of New Year's Day in a remote farm house,, 
with the rain and sleet driving over the hills, 
and dashing against the kitchen window panes. 
Inside this kitchen also there were few signs 
that in the dark hours of the morning another 
year had been born. 

Yet it was so. This was New Year's Day at 
Eedcote Farm house, but the penurious habits 
of the master — the old farmer, George Kendall 
— had prevented the usual outward emblems of 
rejoicing and merriment being very visible. 
True, on the high mantelpiece, amid the 



182 crcesus's WIDOW. 

shining brass candlesticks, and show brass 
family kettle, a few faded sprigs of holly were 
to be seen. They had been placed there a week 
before, when all over the land the joy-bells 
were ringing for Christmas-tide. But no joy- 
bells stole over the hills in their sweet melody 
to Eedcote Farm. Neither marriage bells nor 
passing bells, nor the solemn tolling of the last 
bells rung for us on earth, were to be heard in 
this silent and lonely place. Full three miles 
away was the nearest church in the neighbour- 
hood, and so no sound of joy nor sorrow was 
was ever borne on the wind to Eedcote Farm. 

In this remote and quiet spot George Kendall, 
the farmer, had lived eighty-five years. He 
had been born here, spent his childhood and boy- 
hood here, brought his wife here, and now old, 
shrivelled, and blear-eyed, he sat watching the 
fire, thinking vaguely that this was New Year's 
Day — thinking vaguely of the New Year's Days 
gone by — of the old days, of the long journey, 
not of the rest which now should have seemed 
so near ! 

He had not a good face, this aged man, 
tottering on the verge of the grave. The lines 
and wrinkles which vears had scored, told no 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 183 

story of endured pain, of noble, patient resolve, 
no tale of benevolence nor love. But they bad 
written with their truth-telling hand of hard 
bargains, of petty schemes, of toil perhaps, for 
he had been a hard worker in his day ; but he 
had toiled, and worked, and thought for money,, 
and for money's worth alone. 

There was nothing like it, he thought. The 
one narrow creed that rilled his heart and soul 
was gain. Yet he could no longer enjoy it, 
though this idea never occurred to his mind, 
His thin legs could scarcely carry his thin, poor 
body, his hands were crippled with rheumatism, 
his bones all aches and pains. But he loved 
the music, that the clink of gold makes, still 1 
When a horse or a cow died, he wept maudlin 
tears ; when a neighbour died he shook his 
head and grunted, and began to consider when 
the dead man's farm stock should be sold, and 
and if it were likely to go cheap beneath the 
auction hammer. 

His household consisted of two sons, a niece r 
and a strong country girl. On this particular 
New Year's Day, Bobert Rendall, the younger 
son, was from home spending his holidays, and 
the inhabitants of the farmhouse w^ere thus 



184 ckcesus's WIDOW. 

reduced to four. The old man, his eldest son 
•George Kendall, his niece Maud Eliot, and a 
maid-servant named Jean or Jenny Wren. As 
the old man sat dozing over the fire, Maud 
Eliot, the niece, entered the kitchen, and began 
to move restlessly about. 

" Where's George, uncle ? " she said at last. 

The old man looked round with a chuckle, 
and an evil gleam in his eye. 

" Thou's always looking after George, Maudie, 
more than he's looking after thee," he said. 

Maud Eliot's face turned scarlet at this taunt. 
She stood behind her uncle, and clenched her 
hands and bit her lips. But she did not speak, 
and with another chuckle the old farmer turned 
from his niece and began once more gazing idly 
into the fire ; and presently, overcome by the 
warmth, he feel asleep. 

In the meanwhile, Maud Eliot had gone to 
the kitchen window, and stood there looking 
out with a gloomy expression on her face at the 
driving sleet and rain. 

She was a pale girl this, with dark eyes and 
hair, with a certaiu beauty and power in 
her countenance, which, however, was scarcely 
handsome. She looked just now as if she were 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 185 

alike anxious, angry, and unhappy. Her 
natural pallor was increased by the strong and 
passionate feelings of her heart. 

Suddenly the pale face flushed, and the 
full, strong mouth moved tremulously. These 
emotions were caused by the sound of a man's 
footsteps outside the kitchen door, and in 
another moment a tall, good-looking — nay, a 
handsome young man, entered the kitchen. 

This was George Kendall, the farmer's eldest 
son. He was twenty-seven, tall, straight -fea- 
tured, and powerfully made, with careless, 
laughing blue eyes, and a sensual though 
handsome mouth. A slightly-annoyed expres- 
sion passed over his face when he saw his 
cousin Maud Eliot standing by the window. 

" Well, Maud, are you meditating on the 
rain ? " he said, addressing her. 

" It is a dreary day," answered Maud, in one 
of those voices which it is pleasant to listen to. 

" Disgusting, isn't it ? " said the young man. 
" And with a long ride before one, too ! " 

" A long ride ? " repeated Maud. " Surely,. 
George, you are not going from home to-day ? 
— not on New Year's Day ? " 

" Why not ? " said George RendalL " It 



186 crcesus's WIDOW. 

isn't so agreeable here, is it ? Y( 

the old man is crosser, and little Jenny Wren 

has declined to clean my boots ! " 

" How dare she ! " exclaimed Maud passion- 
ately. 

George Rendall shrugged his shoulders. 

" You women, my dear," he said, in a slightly 
contemptuous tone, " are wonderful creatures ! 
You are either ready to do anything for a man 
— cut your throats, etc. — or you are the most 
disagreeable, disobliging, contradictious beings 
upon earth ! As I was saying, you are cross, 
Jenny Wren is cross — " 

" Don't name me with Jenny Wren, please," 
interrupted Maud yet more angrily. 

George Kendall gave a careless laugh. 

" All right," he said. " Never name any 
woman to another — they all hate each other — 
they all — " 

" George," again interrupted Maud, " how 
dare you speak to me thus ? How dare you 
talk to me of Jenny Wren, or any one else ? 
Have you no feeling ? You are a bad, bad, 
wicked man ! " 

" Go on, my dear," said George Rendall, with 
.another shrug. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 187" 

" Go on !" said Maud, raising her voice ; " but 
what is the use of going on to a cruel, heartless 
man like you ? You are worthless, you are 
worthless !" she repeated with strong passion. 
" You are unworthy to live — you do no good — 
nothing, nothing but harm ! " 

" Pleasant, blowing a man up like this on 
New Year's Day ! " said George Kendall. "But 
I'm out of it. Don't sit up for me, Maud, I 
won't be home till late — I'm going to the 
Fothergal's." 

" To make love to Mary Fothergal, I sup- 
pose," said Maud bitterly. 

" Please yourself," answered George Kendall. 
" I'm going, that's all. Good-day, Maud — 
I hope you'll be in a better humour to-morrow." 
And with a careless nod the young man turned 
away, while Maud Eliot gave a long-drawn, 
quivering sigh. 

" He is unworthy — he is unworthy," she 
was thinking. "It is his good looks — only his 
good looks — would that God would strike him 
dead, or make him plain, hideous, miserable, 
as I am now ! " 

. . • . . . . 

When the stars, the silent watchers of the- 



188 crcesus's WIDOW. 

night, shone out from among the drifting 
clouds on the eventide of this New Year's 
Day, they shone on this pale, passionate girl 
standing at her bedroom window, with a look 
of desperate and determinate resolve on her 
face. 

She was going to run away. She was sick 
and weary of her bondage. Her cousin, her 
lover, George Eendall, had utterly changed 
to her. The sweetness and devotion of the 
summer days had cooled in autumn, and frozen 
in the chill winter months. He loved her no 
longer ; he was weary of her ; and she had 
loved him too well, He was one of those who 
would have been passionately enamoured with 
a heartless coquette. A woman to have re- 
tained his affections should have tantalised and 
provoked him. A woman who gave him too 
much was certain to tire him. He was not 
generous, and did not understand nor appreciate 
generosity. A small, cold heart beat beneath 
his tall, handsome, and well-made form. 

And Maud Eliot knew all this now. She 
knew she loved a bad, hard man, and yet she 
could not help loving him still. The lonely life, 
the silence and stillness of Eedcote Farm, kept 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 189 

her passion for her cousin ever present in her 
mind. In a crowd we are forced to think of the 
crowd. But when we have the stars and the 
hills alone for company, dangerous temptations 
•and powerful influences are apt to beset the 
human heart. 

She was going away from Bedcote Farm — 
to fly, to hide herself — she knew not where. 
She had, indeed, no other home to go to. Her 
father had been an unsuccessful doctor in London, 
who had married, rather late in life, old Kendall's 
wife's sister. Two years ago Dr. Eliot had died, 
and left his only child, Maud, unprovided for. 
On his deathbed he had written a letter to the 
old farmer at Kedcote, asking him to take charge 
of his orphan girl. The old farmer was furious 
•on receiving this appeal, which only reached him 
.after his brother-in-law was lying in his grave. 
But young George Kendall, after some difficulty, 
persuaded his father to accept the responsibility. 
Young George Kendall had three reasons for 
doing this. One was that he was good-natured 
when his own selfishness did not interfere with 
his benevolence ; another that he thought the 
house would be more comfortable with a lady to 
manage it, for his mother was dead ; and his 



190 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

third reason was that he wished to go to London, 
and so made an excuse of bringing his young 
cousin down. 

This journey proved an unfortunate one to 
the orphaned Maud Eliot. When her handsome 
cousin George arrived for her at the somewhat 
gloomy house where her father had died, half 
her troubles seemed to be over. George was kind, 
and apparently considerate, and as the cousins 
travelled on together over the snowy country 
(it was mid- winter), Maud felt almost ashamed 
to feel so happy so soon after her poor father's 
death. 

We have seen how these joyous hours ended. 
Without thinking of his character, judging the 
man's heart and soul by the fair outward linea- 
ments in which they were clothed, the hapless 
girl too soon learned to love him. The love of 
woman was pleasant to George Kendall, and the 
voice of honour and conscience only dull to his 
ears. Two years had passed since Maud Eliot had 
come to Redcote in mid- winter — years of hope, 
joy, intense happiness, then of dull, cold disap- 
pointment and bitter pain. 

He had broken her heart, she told herself, as 
she dragged her dresses and clothes out of the 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 191 

old-fashioned chest of drawers in her room on 
this New Year's night, when she had resolved 
to go for ever from Eedcote. 

White-faced, trembling, with her dark eyes 
fixed and dilated, the girl went on with her 
task. The clock on the stair-head struck nine, 
and after the last stroke there was great silence 
in the house, as there had been before. Outside, 
the wind had died away, and the sky had 
cleared, and all over the heavens the stars 
twinkled and shone. They were watching her, 
the girl thought — watching her, and she 
shivered and shuddered beneath those count- 
less eyes. 

Then suddenly she paused and clasped her 
hands, and listened with parted lips, as she 
knelt before her half-filled trunk. What was 
that sound breaking the stillness of the night ? 
Those cries sharp and terrible, that reached 
her ears from below ? They were a woman's 
shrieks, and Maud Eliot's face turned absolutely 
ghastly as she heard them. 

She rose from her knees, she staggered to 
the room door, and then she heard her uncle, 
old Kendall, the farmer, calling out in the thin 
and broken tones of age. 



192 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Tottering, holding on by the banister, she 
went downstairs. At the foot of the stairs the 
girl Jenny Wren was lying, apparently in a 
fit. Her hands were clenched, her teeth were 
set, her eyes were starting from her head r 
and her dress and arms were stained with blood. 
Old Eendall was standing beside her, looking 
like a man suddenly roused from his sleep,, 
and a lantern was lying on the passage oil- 
cloth, as if the girl Jenny had dropped it from 
her hand. 

"What is the matter?" asked Maud Eliot, 
speaking as though she were forcing the words 
from her lips. 

" Matter ! Devil knows," answered the old 
farmer. "Jenny has come in shrieking and 
screaming like a mad thing, and look, Maudie — 
look, her hands and arms are all blood ! What 
can have befallen her ? I sent her to lock up 
the stable door and the byre a while ago, and 
then I dozed over a bit, and when I vvoke r 
there she lay screaming and shrieking — surely 
she's fallen somehow. Help me with her, lass, 
and we'll get her into the kitchen, and give her 
a drop of whisky to bring her round." 

Maud made no answer. She helped to lift 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 193 

up the girl, she unfastened the handkerchief 
round her neck, and she bathed her face and 
hands all in silence. She shuddered when she 
touched Jenny's hands — the stained hands — 
but she never spoke a word. Then the old 
man got out his whisky bottle, and forced 
some of its contents between Jenny's set teeth. 
The strong spirit soon revived her. The girl 
sat up, stared wildly about for a moment or 
two, and then seized the old farmer by the 
hand. 

" Master ! " she said in a loud, harsh voice. 
u Master, go and look at Mr. George ! " 

" George — what's the matter with George ? " 
asked the old farmer. " He's away at Fother- 
gal's, and won't be home till late — the girl's 
dement ! " 

" He's lying," said Jenny, still in the same 
loud excited tones, " in the loft over the stable 
— he's lying dead ! " 

" Dead ! " echoed the farmer. " Why thou's 
mad, lass ! George went to Fothergal's hours 
ago. Thou's seen a ghost — thy wits are gone ! " 

" He's lying dead ! " repeated the girl, and 
she once more began shrieking and screaming, 
and fell off the chair in which they had placed 

VOL. III. h 



194 CKCESUS's WIDOW. 

her, and began rolling in convulsions on the 
kitchen floor. 

'■' She's mad," said old Kendall, " utterly mad ! 
Lock the doors, Maud, lass — George won't be 
home till late — and try to get the girl to bed." 

Then Maud spoke. 

" Uncle," she said, in husky accents, "let us 
go and look for George." 

" For George ! Art thou mad, too \ George 
is at Fothergal's, I tell thee, and won't be home 
till dawn, most like. Get the girl to bed, and 
get to bed thyself. I'll sit up for George." 

Maud said nothing more. She half-dragged, 
half-lifted, the now nearly insensible Jenny 
Wren to the little bedroom, or rather hutch in 
the kitchen wall, where she usually slept. The 
girl groaned and moaned, but the strength of 
the spirit which the old man had poured down 
her throat held her senses in bondage, and 
presently she fell into a heavy stupor or sleep. 

The old farmer also soon dozed again in his 
easy- chair by the fire. Only Maud Eliot kept 
awake — only the dark restless eyes never closed, 
and the restless clutchings of her hands never 
ceased. Sometimes she moaned aloud and her 
mind wandered — wandered back to when she 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 195 

was a child — to her dead father — to the summer 
days of sunshine and joy, to the chill autumn, 
and then to the black winter which of late had 
fallen on her soul. 

Was she going mad ? she suddenly asked 
herself. Mad ! There was her old uncle dozing 
by the fire — there was the girl Jenny Wren 
lying in her heavy sleep. Where was George ? 
She started up — she opened the kitchen 
shutter, and looked out at the thousand 
thousand myriads of stars twinkling in the 
heavens. They saw, she thought — they saw 
George now — and she fell down on her knees, 
and covered her face, groaning aloud in the 
anguish of her souk 



H '1 



CHAPTER II. 

BY DAYLIGHT. 

About midnight the old farmer awoke. The 
fire had burnt low, the candle was flickering in 
the socket, and the old man was cold, cross, 
and captious. 

He pulled out his big silver watch, and 
began scolding his niece. 

" What's thou sitting up for, thou fool/' he 
said, "at this hour? Waiting for George, I 
warrant. Ay, thou'll wait in vain — George 
will ha' nothing to say to thee." 

Maud never spoke, but by chance her uncle's 
eyes fell on her face. 

"Why, lass!" he exclaimed, staring at the 
girl, " what's come o'er thee ? Thou looks an 
old woman — like thy old aunt, when we put 
her in her coffin ! " 

" I'm tired," said Maud, in a low, feeble 
voice of pain. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 197 

" Tired ! Then get to bed," answered the 
old man. "George won't come now, he's 
staying all night at Fothergal's." 

" Let us go and look for him," said Maud, 
in the same feeble voice, " his horse may have 
come back." 

"Nonsense — rubbish!" said old Kendall. 
"The girl's demented — what's the matter 
with ye all to-night ? First Jenny, and then 
thou. Get to bed, lass, get to bed." And 
grasping his whisky bottle in one hand, and 
his bedroom candlestick in the other, the old 
farmer tottered out of the kitchen. 

But Maud never went to bed. She sat there 
till the grey, cold winter dawn struggled into 
the kitchen window-panes. There was no fire, 
no light. But she had never noticed this. 
She noticed, however, when the chill daylight 
began to creep over the world, and she rose 
and went across the kitchen, and stood looking 
for a few moments at the still sleeping girl, 
Jenny Wren. 

A handsome woman was this Jenny, of the 
coarse and somewhat full-blown type. Her 
skin was white, her cheeks were rosy, her eyes 
small, brown, and unintellectual. Her nose 



198 crcesus's WIDOW. 

also was small and neatly formed, while her 
mouth was thick and large, and her jaw square 
and determined-looking. Her form was full, 
broad, and developed, and as Maud stood 
watching her, a look of disgust and scorn came 
over her own pale, passionate face. 

Then she turned silently away, and leaving 
the kitchen, she went up to her own bedroom, 
and began quickly to replace all her dresses 
and clothes in the chest of drawers as they had 
been before she dragged them out on the pre- 
vious evening. "When she had done this, she 
returned to the kitchen and awoke Jenny. 

" Get up, Jenny," she said, " it is past seven 
o'clock." 

The girl Jenny could scarcely rouse herself. 
She sat up in bed, she rubbed her eyes, and 
stared in a sort of stupefied way at Maud. 
Then she looked frightened, and began to 
cry. 

" Oh ! Miss Maud," she said, " was I dream- 
ing — or — or — is Mr. George really dead ? " 

" What do you mean, Jenny ? " asked Maud. 

" He is lying in the loft," wept Jenny. " I 
thought I saw him lying in the loft ! I lifted 
him up, Miss Maud — Oh ! — Oh ! — it was 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 199 

so awful ! " And Jenny wept louder than 
before. 

" Hush, girl," said Maud, sternly. " If you 
saw anything — really saw anything — in the 
loft, come now and tell my uncle." 

Jenny trembled, shivered, and cried, but 
finally, on being urged by Maud, she rose, and 
together the two women went up to the old 
farmer's room. 

He scowled angrily when the girls awoke 
him, scowled and swore; called Jenny a "cursed 
fool," and Maud an " idle, fanciful hussy/ 
But at last unwillingly he rose, and shuffled 
his " shrunk shanks " into his brown woollen 
stockings and grey knee-breeches, and grum- 
bling and couching; he went downstairs, fol- 
lowed by the girls. 

Then he unlocked the back door of the 
house, and limped and tottered out into the 
wet and slushy farmyard. This was enclosed 
in a square of farm-buildings ; the stables being 
at the opposite side to the house. Over the 
stables was a roomy and commodious loft, which 
when a youth, George Kendall the younger had 
fitted up for a workshop. Here the two younger 
Kendall's kept all their peculiar belongings ; 



200 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

their fishing tackle, their guns, their best garden- 
ing and farming utensils were all stored here. 
George also, who had a taste for drawing, would 
sometimes take an industrious fit, and draw for 
hours by the loft window, which was furnished 
with a deal table, and which looked out on the 
pleasant green meadows beyond. 

He generally wrote his letters here also, and 
often smoked here, so that the loft was regarded 
in the establishment at the farm as belonging 
to " George," in particular, though the younger 
brother Kobert occasionally used it. 

Grumbling and sw T earing then, the old farmer 
made straight for the loft in the pale, cold light 
of the winter morning. Behind him, wu'th a 
white set face, w T alked Maud Eliot, and shrink- 
ing, cowering and crying, after her came the girl 
Jenny "Wren. 

" Ay, this is a nice fool's errand," growled 
the old man as he unlocked the stable door. 
"George, indeed — George is at Fothergal's — 
but ye are jealous of him, lasses, that's it — 
jealous of him both of ye." 

The lock was soon turned, and the stable door 
was open. A broad-stepped ladder led to the 
loft. Up this the old farmer panting and swear- 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 201 

ing now ascended. His head and body had 
disappeared into the loft ; but his thin legs and 
feet were still on the ladder, when the two 
women below heard him give a cry. 

" George, my lad, George ! " he said, and the 
next moment, more quickly than his age war- 
ranted, he sprang into the loft, and the two 
white-faced, fear-stricken girls followed. 

This is what they saw. George — the hand- 
some George Kendall — was sitting in a chair 
before the table by the loft window. His head 
had fallen on the table, his hands hung limply 
down. They drew nearer — there was blood on 
his bright brown hair, blood on the table, 
blood on the floor ! And his face ! It was 
crushed down on some verses he had been 
writing out ; crushed out of shape, out of the 
fair lineaments which had won the love of 
woman so easily, crushed and broken ; for his 
murderer or murderess had struck him from 
behind, struck him on the head with a leaden- 
topped hammer, which now lay on the floor 
near him, and to which some of his bright hair 
still clung. 

At this terrible sight, Jenny Wren fell 
shrieking on the floor, while Maud Eliot stood, 



202 crcesus's WIDOW. 

looking grey and cold, looking as if she were 
turned to stone. The old man seemed scarcely 
to understand at first. 

" George ! George ! " be kept crying ; but 
George's spirit bad winged its flight from earth, 
hours before that grey chill dawn. He was 
stiff and cold; he had died apparently as his 
head fell beneath the crushing blow which had 
destroyed his life, for there were no signs of 
any struggle, nor even of a brief death agony. 

At last the old man seemed to realise that 
his son was dead, and then he turned fiercely 
and accusingly to the two women. 

" Which o' ye ha done it ? " he said, and he 
kicked the shrinking Jenny with his foot. 

" Thou fool ! " (and he swore a terrible oath), 
"I've had my eye on ye! What! did ye 
come behind, and knock the lad on the head 
because you were jealous mad o' him ? But 
ye shall hang fort ! Hang ! ay, hang, if there's 
law in the land — ye shall be hanged by the 
neck till ye're dead ! " 

These words seemed to recall Jenny's scat- 
tered senses. She ceased shrinking ; she rose 
to her feet. 

" I didn't do it, master," she said. " He was- 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 203 

-a bad man," she added, vindictively enough, 
" he's got his due, raaybe, but not from me — 
though I've had good cause to rue I ever saw 
his face ! " 

" Ay," said the old farmer, savagely, " he 
was a handsome lad, and none of ye would let 
him be ! His blood was on thy hands last night 
thou foul jade, when thou came to the house 
shrieking and screaming like a mad thing. 
Thou'd struck the blow then. Don't lie about 
it— thou's killed my lad ! " 

" I didn't, master," said Jenny, emphatically. 
" I went out to lock in, as ye know, and I had 
the lantern wi' me, and I thought I would ha' a 
look among George's things. I came up the ladder 
from the stable — I mind it all now, though my 
head has been stupid-like ever since ; but I came 
up wi' the lantern in my hand, and I saw him" 
(and Jenny pointed shudderingly to George's 
corpse). " I took hold of him. I saw he was 
dead, and I ran mad-like to the house, and I 
mind nothing more till Miss Maud called me 
this morning. This is the truth, master. I 
know nothing more." 

About twelve o'clock the inspector of police 



204 crcesus's WIDOW. 

at Norsely, which was the nearest police-station 
to Keclcote, arrived at the farm, accompanied 
by two of his men. This inspector came into 
the kitchen of the house in a pleasant, friendly 
way, and shook old Eendall by the hand. 

" This is a bad job, Mr. Kendall," he said. 

The old farmer took out his red-cotton pocket 
handkerchief, and began to wipe his eyes. 

" Who did it, Mr. Pye ? That's what I ask 
— who did it ? " said old Kendall. 

Mr. Abel P}^e, the inspector, smiled benevo- 
lently. He was a big, tall, fat man this, who 
spent his life in ferreting out crimes, but by 
the expression of his face you would not have 
supposed that he believed in the existence of 
evil. He had such a trustful, beaming look, 
and had a most agreeable manner, even when 
he was arresting a man. He therefore smiled 
benevolently, when old Rendall asked, in the 
querulous tone of age, who could be the 
murderer of his son. 

"We must find out, Mr. Kendall," he said; 
"no doubt we shall find out." And then, 
accompanied by his men, he went to view the 
body of the murdered man. 

The arrival of the police seemed to throw 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 205 

Jenny Wren into a terrible flutter. She hated 
the sight of them, she said ; and when they 
returned to the kitchen to take the depositions 
of the inhabitants of the farm, Mr. Abel Pye's 
smiling and benevolent eyes followed Jenny's 
movements with looks of great admiration and 
interest. 

"Some tramp must ha' clone it, Mr. Pye," 
said Jenny boldly enough, before she had been 
asked any questions. 

" A tramp," answered Mr. Inspector, smiling, 
"You think it was a tramp then, my dear ? 
But it must have been a funny tramp, if it was 
a tramp — a well-to-do tramp, a tramp of means 
— for in the poor lad's pockets there was this 
money — three sovereigns, and fourteen shillings 
in silver." And the inspector held out the 
money he had named in his hand. 

"Three soyereigns, and fourteen shilliDgsin 
silver ! " repeated old Kendall, rising from his 
chair hastily, and peering eagerly into the 
inspector's open hand. " I'll just take charge 
of it then, Mr. Pye." 

"Not at present, Mr. Kendall," said Mr. 
Pye blandly and considerately. "For the 
present it must remain in my charge." 



206 crcesus's WIDOW. 

" Three sovereigns, and fourteen shillings in 
silver," again said old Rendall, as if he were 
thinking aloud ; " then George must ha' kept 
back some of the money he got for the turnips 
—I thought he did." 

" And this well-to-do tramp," continued Mr. 
Pye, still looking smilingly at Jenny, "must 
also have despised taking poor Mr. George's 
handsome gold watch and Albert chain — for 
here they are." And the inspector held up a 
watch and chain as he spoke. 

"Ay," said old Rendall eagerly, "that's 
George's watch, sure enough. His mother 
bought it for him out of the butter money the 
day he was twenty-one. You'll not take that 
away, surely, from the farm, Mr. Pye ? " 

"For the present," answered Mr. Pye; "but 
it will be quite safe, Mr. Rendall. When we've 
caught our hare you shall have it back." 

Then in the most agreeable manner in the 
world Mr. Pye began to question Jenny. 

" Take care what you say, my dear, mind," 
he said ; " only just tell me what you saw when 
you went to lock in ? " 

Jenny repeated the same story that she had 
told old Rendall in the loft. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 207 

She thought she would like to et ha' a look 
at George's things," she said, and she blushed 
scarlet. 

The inspector made no comment on the girl's 
tale ; none when Maud Eliot told him that she 
knew nothing. "She had seen her cousin George," 
she said, ''in the kitchen after dinner, and he 
had then told her he was going to Fothergal's 
farm. She had spent the most of the evening 
in her own room, sorting her things, until 
Jenny's cries had attracted her attention. She 
had seen her cousin's body first, when she saw 
it with her uncle." 

Mr. Inspector took his notes, and then made 
arrangements with the old farmer for the 
coroner's inquest to be held on George Kendall's 
body the next day. He would leave one of his 
men at the farm, he said, and after a lengthened 
private conversation with this man the inspector 
took a friendly leave of them all — including 
Jenny — and went smiling on his way. 



CHAPTER III. 

SUSPICION. 

The next day was one of continual excitement 
at Kedcote Farm. Up the quiet lane that led 
to the house, which, as a rule, was so seldom 
trodden by the feet of men or the feet of 
women, a constant stream of visitors was to be 
seen. 

The coroner's inquest on George Rendalls 
body was held in the parlour of the farmhouse, 
about twelve o'clock. Indeed, there was no 
other house near enough to the scene of the 
murder for it to be held in. The jury viewed 
the body in the loft first, and then a lengthened 
inquiry was held in the parlour. 

But nothing further was discovered. Jean, 
or Jenny, Wren somewhat stumbled and 
contradicted herself, however, in giving her 
evidence. She was asked when she had last 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 209 

seen the murdered man before (as she had 
previously stated) she found his dead body in 
the loft. 

Upon this question being asked, Jenny blushed 
and ndgetted. 

" I cannot call to mind quite," she said. 

""What!" said the Coroner. " Not when 
you saw your young master before you dis- 
covered him lying dead ? Did you see him 
after dinner ? " 

Jenny twisted her stout, comely form about 
uneasily. 

"' Did you see him after dinner ? " repeated 
the Coroner. 

" Yes," said Jenny, as if unwilling. 

" AVhere ? " asked the Coroner. 

Again Jenny hesitated. Then she said — 

" I saw him in the stable. He said he was 
going to Fothergal's." 

'''Had you a long coDversation ? What else 
did he say ? " was then asked. 

" I can't call to mind," said Jenny. " I'm 
not very certain I did see him in the stable — 
but I think so — I'd had a host to do that day 
with it being the New Year, and we had a bit 
better dinner nor usual, though it wasn't much. 



210 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

Still it put other things out of my head — 
George wanted his boots — " 

" Then you did see him ? " inquired the 
Coroner severely. 

"I — I— think so," hesitated Jenny, and on 
the whole her evidence gave an unfavourable 
impression against her. 

But she held fast to her original story about 
the manner in which she found George's body. 

" Master sent me to lock in," she said, " and 
before I locked the stable up, as I had the 
lantern wi' me, I thought I would ha' a look at 
George's things." 

" Had you any particular motive for examin- 
ing his things ? " inquired the Coroner. 

Again Jenny blushed and fidgetted. 

" I wanted to know something," she said. 
" Folks talked about him keeping company wi> 
Mary Fothergal — and — I wanted to know." 

"Oh!" said the Coroner, and he looked at 
Mr. Inspector Pye, who smiled pleasantly in 
reply to the Coroner's glance. 

Then old Kendall was called. He looked old, 
shaken, and broken down, and he proved that 
there was no other person known to be on the 
farm premises on New Year's Day but himself, 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 211 

his unfortunate son George, and his niece Maud 
Eliot, and the servant-maid Jenny Wren. His 
two lads were enough to work the farm in the 
slack time, he said ; in the spring, summer, and 
harvest time, they engaged help. But during 
the three winter months George and Kobert did 
what was needed. He had lost his right hand 
when he lost George. And the old man began 
to whimper when he concluded his statement. 

He was asked if he knew of anyone who bore 
ill-will to his deceased son. 

Then old Kendall hesitated, shot an evil 
glance of his bleared eyes at Jenny Wren, and 
then at Maud Eliot. But finally, after con- 
sidering a few moments, he said he did not. 

Maud Eliot's evidence was simply a repetition 
of what she had stated on the previous day to 
Inspector Pye. But she also was asked if she 
had seen her unfortunate cousin after the dinner 
hour was past. 

" Yes," answered Maud, in a low but clear 
voice ; " he came into the kitchen and told me 
he was going to Mr. FothergaFs. He said we 
were not to sit up for him, as he might be late." 

" Did he seem in good spirits ? Was he 
excited in any way ? " asked the Coroner. 



212 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

" He seemed in his usual spirits," replied 
Maud, " and he showed no particular excite- 
ment — only a few words passed between us.'' 

After this, at the request of Mr. Inspector 
Pye, the inquest was adjourned. It was ad- 
journed for a week ; but before Mr. Inspector 
Pye left the farmhouse, he politely asked Jenny 
Wren for the dress she had worn on the pre- 
vious day, and the apron. Upon this, Jenny 
grew very angry. 

" The apron was washed," she said ; " and as- 
for the dress, they might look at it if they 
liked, but the marks on it were gob when she 
lifted poor George up after he was dead. She 
didn't do it. They needn't all glare at her like 
that — she wished she had never come to Bed- 
cote Farm — had never seen George Kendall's 
face." And Jenny ended by bursting into a 
fit of loud and passionate weeping. 

Mr. Inspector Pye smiled more pleasantly 
than ever after this outbreak. 

" It was foolish of you to wash your apron y 
Jenny," he said ; " however, my dear, washed 
or unwashed, I must carry it away with me." 

And he did carry it away with him. He 
also carried away the verses, all stained and 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 213 

gory with George's blood, on which the young 
man's crushed head was resting when his father 
and. Maud Eliot went into the loft. He took 
away again, also, the watch and chain (though 
old Eendall applied for them), but he left two 
policemen behind him this time, and Jenny 
Wren was conscious that these men, and in- 
deed all the visitors who arrived at the farm, 
looked at her curiously. She was suspected of 
murdering her young master, in fact, and no 
doubt various suspicious causes pointed towards 
this supposition. 

But she put a bold front upon it. She went 
about her work, and tossed her handsome head 
when people stared at her. Maud Eliot never 
looked at her. She gave her orders to Jenny 
as usual, but she never once glanced in the 
girl's bold, good-looking face. 

During the afternoon, and after the first 
inquiry or inquest was over, Maud was sum- 
moned downstairs by Jenny, who informed her 
" the parson from Norsely had arrived now — 
she wondered who next." 

Maud went down into the parlour, and found 
the Rev. Mr. Stivers, the Vicar of Norsely,. 
waiting to speak to her. 



214 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

Eedcote Farm was in Mr. Stivers 's parish. 
This outlying, lonely spot was more than three 
miles from Norsely, but Mr. Stivers had started 
on the uneven way which parted him from his 
parishioners at Eedcote, from a sense of moral 
duty or curiosity, the moment that he con- 
veniently could, after he had heard of the 
murder. 

" They were a bad lot," he said to Mrs. 
Stivers, as he buttoned on his overcoat, and 
enveloped his neck in a knitted choker, to 
protect him during his coming journey. 

Mrs. Stivers knew what " a bad lot" meant 
in her husband's vocabulary. It meant the 
Redcote people did not go to church ; did not 
weekly refresh their souls with his sermons of 
emptiness. It meant he got nothing from 
Eedcote — the " old heathen," as he called old 
Eendall, declining to put a penny, or even a 
turkey, into the parson's hands. Therefore the 
parson was satisfied that they were all lost 
souls. The terrible tragedy that had happened 
in the household was a judgment upon them, 
and Mr. Stivers felt no small inward satisfaction 
at this idea. As he neared the farm in the 
jolting dog-cart in which he was driving, and 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 215 

passed on the road a flock of large, beautiful, 
fat, black turkeys, lie thought again of the 
merited misfortune which had befallen the 
Kendalls. On Christmas Day he dined off 
goose — how could a poor parson afford to give 
sixteen or eighteen shillings for a good turkey ? 
And here were twenty turkeys at least walking 
in their lakadaisical way along his parishioner's 
homestead ! 

He was still thinking of his injuries, when 
Maud Eliot entered the farmhouse parlour and 
found him standing there. 

" Ah ! Miss Eliot/' he said, holding out two 
fat fingers, " this is a mournful occasion — a 
crushing blow ! " 

"It is very sad/' answered Maud in a low 
tone. 

" It is terrible ! " said Mr. Stivers, with 
energy. " Cut down like a blade of grass — 
like an ear of corn — like a — " But here the 
parson paused for lack of a metaphor ; and 
Maud also was silent. 

" I called," continued Mr. Stivers, after a few 
moments' consideration, " from a sense of duty. 
Your uncle and the members of his family have 
not sought my spiritual aid — have not listened 



216 crcesus's WIDOW. 

to my words of — I may say comfort and per- 
suasion — but in times like these, I do not wish 
to remember this, I come not to reproach, nor 
as a judge — I come — well — first to hear all the 
particulars of this terrible tragedy ? " 

"They are very few," answered Maud, in 
the same low tone in which she had previously 
spoken. " My cousin was found dead — " 

But we need not go into all the painful 
details which Mr. Stivers forced from Maud's 
white, unwilling lips. The parson was de- 
termined to hear everything. 

"Terrible!" he exclaimed, walking up and 
down the parlour. " It makes one's blood run 
cold — absolutely freezes the — the life current !" 
And he patted his broad, stout chest, with a 
vigorous pat. 

" And he was an alien to his church, too," 
he continued, still walking up and down the 
parlour, " a stranger to the warmth of my 
pastoral wings." And Mr. Stivers held out his 
arms to indicate that these were the "pastoral 
wings " that he alluded to. 

Indeed, he was very fond of alluding to these 
" pastoral wings," and rather liked offering one 
of them to any pretty young parishioner who 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 2X7 

happened to be in need of an escort. He was 
a strictly moral man, but still he preferred a 
young woman to an old one to lean on his 
wing. 

" And do your suspicions point to anyone,, 
my dear young lady ? " proceeded the parson. 
" I have heard rumours — as I came along — 
rumour with its busy tongue pointed to the 
maid-servant ! Do your suspicions turn in 
the same direction 1 " 

" I judge no one," answered Maud, almost 
harshly. " What right has anyone to judge ? " 

The parson was nettled. 

" I did not say judge, Miss Eliot," he said 
pettishly. " I am not given to judge hastily 
or uncharitably — I said suspicions." 

" I mistook your meaning," said Maud coldly. 

" You did," replied Mr. Stivers. But at this 
moment his eyes happened to fall on the green 
before the windows of the house, where the 
large flock of turkeys that he had coveted were 
now pensively walking. This changed the 
current of his ideas. 

" You have fine turkeys here," he said, con- 
templatively, and he went to the window of 
the room to have a better look at them. 



218 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

" They are fine this year, I think," replied 
Maud. 

" Very,"' said the parson, smacking his lips. 
" We poor clergymen, Miss Eliot, cannot afford 
to buy such luxuries — but may I ask the cost of 
one of these in the market ? " 

"I really do not know," said Maud. "We 
only rear them for home use." 

Mr. Stivers sighed, and looked contempla- 
tively at the turkeys again. How lucky 
farmers were, he was thinking. But while his 
mind yet dwelt on the good things which the 
tillers of the ground had in such abundance 
wandering about their own doors, Eobert 
Eendall entered the parlour, as he wished to 
speak to the parson about the arrangements for 
his unfortunate brother's funeral. 

"Ah, Mr. Eobert," said Mr. Stivers, and 
again he held out his two fat fingers, which 
was his usual mode of handshaking. " I was 
admiring your turkeys," he continued, still 
staring at the birds outside. 

" Yes, they're a pretty good lot this year," 
answered young Eobert. 

"Splendid," said the parson, and again his 
lips gave an unconscious smack. " I was just 



THE SILENT WATCHEES. 219 

saying to your cousin here that such luxuries 
are out of the reach of a poor clergyman — yet 
I own I am partial to the bird." 

Robert Kendall gave a little laugh. 

" I am sure," he said, " if you will honour us 
by accepting one, Mr. Stivers, we shall be very 
happy." 

Mr. Stivers's face beamed all oyer. 

"You are very good," he said. "I accept 
one with pleasure, Mr. Eobert — I accept also 
the kindly, friendly spirit in which it is offered. 
I shall have pleasure in eating it — I shall regard 
it — as — shall I say, an olive-branch ? A token- 
of more friendly relations between us — and I 
hope, Mr. Eobert, to see your cousin here and 
yourself on Sunday in your pew in church. 
Let it be no longer empty ! Come once more 
and listen to your pastor's voice ! " 

Again Robert Rendall gave a little laugh, 
but the parson was too much pleased with his 
turkey to be easily ruffled. He went with 
Robert to view poor George's body, and th& 
exact spot where it was discovered. He sighed, he 
pointed a moral, but there was no longer bitter- 
ness on his tongue. Even when old Rendall 
pretended not to hear a w r ord he said, and only 



220 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

shook his head and gave a little whimper in 
reply to the parson's wordy sentences of con- 
dolence and sympathy, the parson was only 
pitiful and condescending. 

" The infirmities of age ! " he said. " The 
slow, the gradual decay of nature ! Ah, poor 
man, we must pity him, truly pity him ! " And 
the parson turned away from the old man with 
a smile on his lips ; but the old man looked 
after him with an angry scowl. 

"Thou's a nice wind-bag," he muttered. 
" Words, words, nothing but words — ay, they 
came cheap to thee. If thou'd to pay for them, 
Mr. Parson, I warrant wi' wouldn't ha' such a 
dose." 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE PARSON'S WIFE. 

A melancholy procession left the homestead 
at Eedcote early on the following morning. 
This was the funeral of George Kendall — the 
funeral of the young man who had been born 
there, whose light step and handsome face had 
filled his mother's heart with joy and gladness 
almost from his birth, and even the sour old 
father had felt a certain amount of pride and 
pleasure whenever he looked on his comely 
son. 

They had carried him into the house the 
night before, and laid him in his coffin. But 
Maud Eliot had never once looked on his 
changed face. She felt that she could not. 
She wished to see him alone, but without 
creating remark this was impossible now. 

The night before, Jenny Wren, who was in 



222 crcesus's WIDOW. 

a semi-hysterical condition, had asked Maud to 
go with her into the room where George's body 
lay. 

'* Do come, Miss Maud," said the girl, and 
w r ould have taken Maud's hand, but Maud 
shrank back. " They say he's awful to look 
at," continued Jenny, " but he's stretched now, 
and I would just like to see him once more." 

" I cannot," said Maud, and Jenny would not 
go without her. 

But as they carried him out of the house, let 
us for a moment look at these two women. Ill 
had it been for both that they had ever seen 
his comely face. He had brought trouble to 
them, and sorrow and shame, and when the 
men were carrying him away for ever, Jenny's 
shrieks and cries were to be heard all over the 
house. 

But from Maud Eliot's locked bedroom no 
cry came forth. The girl had flung herself on 
the floor, and lay there, white, mute, and 
deadly cold. Her hands were clenched 
over her ears ; there was no tear in her staring 
eyes. Then she crawled to the window and 
looked out. The hearse was standing at the 
door ; Kobert, Mr. Fothergal, and another 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 223 

friend were there, too. Maud moaned aloud, 
and her head fell sharply against the sash of 
the window, and for a few minutes she lay- 
unconscious. When she recovered, everything 
•connected with the funeral was gone. Was it 
a dream ? Was it all a dream ? she thought. 
No — for at that instant a burly policeman 
strolled leisurely past the front of the house, 
looking as if time hung rather heavy on his 
hands. It was one of the men left in possession 
— one of the men left to watch the case, as Mr. 
Inspector Pye had said ; and so Maud knew 
that it was all too real — that George Kendall, 
who had given such trouble and pain when 
alive, had left yet more grievous trouble and 
pain behind him. 

They knew on whom it was to fall first, 
during the afternoon. Maud asked no questions 
of Robert Rendall, when her cousin returned 
to Redcote after the funeral, but Robert, who 
was a talkative y r oung man, had much to tell 
her. 

" Who do you think was in the church, 
Maud, sobbing like a child ? " he said, " Mary 
Fothergal ! I am told she says she was as good 
as engaged to poor George — but I don't believe 



224 crcesus's WIDOW. 

it ! " And Kobert looked curiously at his 
cousin. 

This Mary Fothergal was a handsome young 
woman, the daughter of Mr. Fothergal who 
rented the farm next Eeclcote. Poor George 
Kendall had begun to go frequently to Fother- 
gal's during the autumn preceding his murder. 

"They say," continued Kobert Kendall, "that 
the verses he was writing out, poor fellow, 
when he must have been struck dead, were to 
Mary. And they say, too, Maud," added 
Kobert, sinking his voice into a whisper, " that 
a warrant has been taken out against Jenny 
Wren." 

" Impossible ! It cannot be ! " cried Maud r 
and she turned deadly pale, and leaned for 
support against the back of a chair. 

" They say so, at any rate," answered Kobert. 
" Jenny was known to be jealous about Mary 
Fothergal, and she contradicted herself, and 
made a fool of herself before the Coroner. At 
all events, that's what I've heard ; indeed, old 
Stivers told me after the funeral that he knew 
a warrant either was, or was going to be, taken 
out against Jenny." 

Mr. Stivers' information proved correct. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 225 

During the afternoon, Mr. Inspector Pye, and 
another policeman arrived once more at Kedeote, 
and after a few agreeable remarks upon the 
weather, Mr. Pye produced his warrant. Jenny's 
shrieks were something fearful to listen to, when 
she understood she was to leave Eedcote with 
the police, and for the present to be detained 
at Norsely. 

" I didn't do it," she said, falling on her 
knees on the kitchen floor. " He deserved 
what he got maybe, but I didn't do it. Master 

don't let them take me ? Miss Maud," (and 

she crawled on her knees to where Maud was 

standing, and grasped her dress), " don't let 

them take me away." 

Then Maud spoke, though she kept her eyes 

averted from the girl's face. 

" Get up Jenny," she said. " Go quietly 

with Mr. Pye — you need not be afraid if you 

are not guilty — only the guilty shall suffer." 
" Ay — I said thou would be hanged ! " 

said old Kendall, vindictively regarding Jenny. 

" You've hit the right nail on the head, Mr. 

Pye — this foul jade murdered my lad." 

Upon this Jenny started to her feet, and 

soundly abused her old master. But the girl's 

YOL. III. i 



226 crcesus's WIDOW. 

entreaties and rage were alike unavailing. "Just 
for the present she was to be detained," Mr. 
Pye said blandly, and so Jenny was carried 
away in the policeman's dog- cart, and the farm 
homestead knew her no more. 

She was taken to Norsely, and bound over 
to appear at the adjourned coroner's inquiry. 
This inquiry was held at Norsely, a week after 
the first one held at Eedcote, and the final 
result of this second inquiry was, that Jenny 
was committed for trial at the ensuing Northern 
Assizes, charged with the wilful murder of 
George Kendall the younger, at Eedcote Farm, 
on the First of January. 

At this adjourned coroner's inquest, Maud 
Eliot was of course present as one of the wit- 
nesses. She was greatly overcome while giving 
her evidence, and considerable sympathy was 
felt for her. 

One of those who sympathised greatly with 
this pale, dark-eyed, unhappy-looking girl, was 
Mrs. Stivers, the parson's wife. There is an old 
saying that grooms get like horses if they are 
constantly in the stables ; but Mrs. Stivers had 
certainly not got like Mr. Stivers, after living 
with him for nearly ten years. She had a 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 227 

handsome, pale, regular face, this young 
woman, and was therefore totally dissimilar 
to her somewhat coarse-featured, broad-nosed, 
pompous little spouse. 

Mr. Stivers, however, regarded her as his 
inferior, alike mentally and bodily. He spoke 
to her, and of her, almost with compassionate 
lordliness. 

"Ah, my good Mary," he would say (her 
name was Mary), " My Martha, rather, troubled 
as usual about many things." 

But woe would certainly have betided his 
" Martha," if she had not been troubled about 
many things. Mr. Stivers was not rich, but 
he liked to have everything in perfect order in 
his modest household. His dinners he especi- 
ally regarded with favour. The little woman 
who bore his name, studied his likes and dis- 
likes in everything, cooked for him, and 
worried to get things right about him the 
whole day. Yet this little woman was no fool. 
She was gentle and compassionate, and was 
ever ready to help anyone who came in her 
way, and no harsh or unkind word was ever 
heard on her lips. How was it then, that she 
could reconcile herself to her fate ? There was 

i2 



228 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

a little green mound in the churchyard at 
Norsely, which, perhaps, partly accounted for 
it. Beneath this green mound lay sleeping her 
only boy, who had died in his third year — 
and the best part of the mother's heart lay 
with her babe in this quiet resting-place. 

But she gave her duty, her life, to the dead 
babe's father, and the Rev. Gordon Stivers (his 
real name was Thomas Gordon Stivers, but he 
always dropped the Thomas), was quite satis- 
fied, and regarded it as perfectly natural that 
his wife should adore him. 

" Poor little wife ! " he used sometimes to say, 
smiling, and Mary would smile in reply, and 
the Eev. Gordon thought how kind and amiable 
he was, and almost pitied the little woman for 
loving him too well. 

On the day of the adjourned coroner's in- 
quiry held at Norsely on the death of the 
unfortunate George Rendall, the parson and 
his wife, who were shopping in the little town, 
accidentally encountered the old farmer, George 
Rendall, his niece and son, on their way to the 
police station, where the inquiry was to be held. 

The parson stopped and held out the patron- 
ising hand of peace. But the old farmer took 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 229 

no heed of it, except by a little nod, and then 
went tottering, shuffling on, as fast as his thin 
legs could carry him. 

The two young people were more courteous. 
They returned the parson's greeting, and while 
they were exchanging a few words, Mrs. Stivers's 
kindly brown eyes were resting with sympathy 
and compassion on Maud Eliot's pale and woe- 
stricken face. 

" Poor, poor girl, what she must have 
suffered ! " said the parson's gentle wife to 
her husband, the moment Maud and her cousin 
had moved on. " Dear Gordon, I feel so much 
for her — may I wait until the inquiry is over 
to speak to her — she looks as if she needed a 
friend so much ? " 

" My dear, she is not a regular attendant at 
church," replied the Eev. Gordon repressingly. 

" But Redcote is so far from church," pleaded 
his Mary. 

"True," said the parson, remembering the jolt- 
ing his own bones had got when he had travelled 
a week ago over the uneven roads which lay 
between Norsely and Redcote. " But my love," 
he continued, looking at his watch, "it is 
impossible that you can remain to speak to 



230 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Miss Eliot, for it is already time you returned 
to your domestic duties at home, as your maid- 
servant is such a very inefficient cook. I will 
loiter about to hear the end of this inquiry, 
which grows interesting ; but you run home, 
my Mary, and be particular that the turkey is 
brown, and about the bread sauce/' he added, 
with interest. 

His Mary, of course, ran home, and Mr. 
Stivers loitered about until the end of the 
inquiry, the result of which gave him every 
satisfaction. Jean, or Jenny "Wren was com- 
mitted on a charge of wilful murder, and was 
conveyed away, shrieking pitifully, to a cell in 
the police station. 

But she presently had a visitor there. This 
was Maud Eliot. Telling her uncle and cousin 
(who adjourned to refresh themselves at a 
neighbouring public-house before starting for 
Kedcote) that she had some shopping to do in 
the town, Maud really applied to Mr. Pye, the 
inspector, to be allowed to speak a few words 
to the unhappy prisoner. 

Mr. Pye was a good-natured man and gallant. 

" I cannot resist the prayer of beauty," he 
said; " but my dear young lady, do not let your 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 231 

kind heart lead you away. I'm an old bird, 
and chaff ensnares me not. This Jenny of 
yours, I fear, is no better than the chaff. These 
shrieking women are generally bad 'uns." 

" Still, I wish to see her," urged Maud, and 
so she did see her. 

She saw the comely Jenny sitting crouched 
up together, with all the comeliness gone out 
of her face. Only terror was written there. 
Jenny had heard herself committed for wilful 
murder, and that seemed to her narrow mind 
as if she were already tried and condemned. 

u I'm as good as hangit ! " she kept repeating, 
rocking herself to and fro in her terrible misery 
and fear. 
When she saw Maud she fell down on her knees 

" Miss Maud, Miss Maud, I'm to be hangit ! " 
she said. " Did you hear ? It's a wicked, 
bitter shame — I'm to be hangit for what I 
didn't do ! " 

Then Maud tried to explain, and Jenny grew 
somewhat comforted. 

" I'll not say I've been a good girl," she 
frequently confessed presently. " I know I've 
taken things I ouditened to have done — eir^s 
and the like — and, Miss Maud, I may as well 



232 crcesus's WIDOW. 

make a clean breast of it now — I took a little 

Fg-" 

" A little pig ! " repeated Maud. 

"It was the last time the sow liad 'em,'' 
continued Jenny, "and I told the old master 
she had six, but there was seven — and I took 
one — it was only a very little one — and I guv 
it to Jack Foster." 

" Jack Foster, the poacher ? " asked Maud. 

" Ay, Jack Foster," replied Jenny. " He 
sometimes came about the place unbeknown to 
the master, and he'd set his heart on a little 
roasted pig — " 

" And what else did you take, Jenny ? " 
said Maud, as the girl paused in her confession. 

"Nothing to speak on," answered Jenny, 
looking up with some spirit. " Of course, pins 
and hairpins, and the like, all servant girls 
take. But if I never speak again, Miss Maud 
— if I was hangit to-morrow, I'd sware still, I 
never lifted my hand against George ! " 

"I believe you," said Maud, slowly and 
painfully, " and — because I believe this, Jenny, 
I have come to see you now — come to tell you 
that at your trial you shall have counsel to 
defend you — a barrister to defend you." 



CHAPTEK V. 

JOHN DALTON, BARRISTER. 

Jenny Wren was not permitted to languish 
long in prison before her trial commenced. 
The crime of which she was charged took place 
on the 1st of January, and before the end of 
the same month Jenny was to be tried at the 
assizes held in the city of Dereham, Eedcote 
Farm being in the county of Dereham. 

In the meanwhile, Maud Eliot was trying to 
keep her promise to the suspected girl. She 
had to do this, however, without the knowledge 
of her uncle, for had old Eendall known that 
his niece was about to enowe counsel to defend 
Jenny, he would unquestionably have turned 
Maud out of his house. 

But Maud had an acquaintance in the large 
neighbouring town of Oldcastle, in whom she 
thought she could trust. This gentleman, Mr. 



234 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Henley Onslow, was a solicitor in good prac- 
tice, and of undoubted ability, though his witty 
and sarcastic tongue could not resist a finely- 
tempered stab, even if his pocket, which was 
very often the case, had to pay for it. He was 
also a man of considerable literary talent and 
taste, and in his early youth had formed 
a friendship for Maud Eliot's father, who 
when a young man had varied his occupations 
between professional doctoring and unprofes- 
sional authorship. 

Maud Eliot remembered Mr. Onslow coming 
to her London home ever since she was a little 
girl. She remembered his anecdotes, his 
quotations, his admiration for great writers, 
his generous criticisms on small ones. 

Then her poor father died, but Mr. Onslow,, 
though he had a large family of his own to 
think of and provide for, had not forgotten his 
old friend's "dark-eyed little girl/*' He had 
seen her as she had passed through Oldcastle 
on her ill-omened journey to Redcote Farm. 
He managed the little pittance for her that the 
poor doctor had left behind him, and the 
orphan's money lost nothing in passing through 
his friendly hand. Thus Maud had some one 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 235 

to whom she could apply about obtaining 
counsel for the unfortunate girl Jenny Wren ; 
and accordingly, one bitter day in January 
she arrived at the Oldcastle lawyer's office, and 
with some difficulty (though he was a shrewd 
man) made him comprehend her meaning. 

" Then you think the girl is innocent ? " 
said Henley Onslow, looking curiously at the 
girl before him. 

He knew, of course, all about the crime, 
Young Kendall's tragic death on New Year's 
Day had been talked of and written about for 
the last fortnight almost incessantly. He knew 
Mr. Inspector Pye, and respected the profes- 
sional ability of that officer ; but he knew the 
world also, and how often in it, unjust suspicion 
falls on the guiltless. So, looking at Maud, 
and thinking vaguely and curiously what could 
be her motive for the step she was taking, he 
said — 

" Then you think this girl is innocent ? " 

"I am sure she is," answered Maud, with a 
strong rino; of conviction in her voice. 

"But," said Mr. Onslow, still thinking 
vaguely and curiously, " it is a Quixotic thing 
for you to do, young lady, to pay counsel to 



236 cecesus's WIDOW. 

defend her. The Court will, in all probability, 
provide her with counsel if she is undefended 
when the trial conies on." 

" Yes," said Maud ; u but I do Dot wish to 
leave it to chance — I wish to have a good 
barrister — to have everything done for her that 
can be done." 

" But, my dear girl, these bigwigs charge the 
most ruinous fees ! The old farmer at Eedcote 
naturally will not give you money for such a 
purpose, and I cannot feel myself justified in 
spending your own." 

" I wish it," reiterated Maud. " I have 
enough money to pay for this, Mr. Onslow, 
have I not ? " 

" Yes ; certainly you have," answered the 
lawyer, musingly. 

" Then please take it," urged Maud ; and 
Mr. Henley Onslow began to think — was this to 
him a new phase in human nature that he had 
not yet encountered in his varied experiences, 
or had this young woman a stronger motive 
still for her generosity ? 

" Get some one very clever, the cleverest 
man you can find," continued Maud ; but Mr. 
Onslow only smiled sagaciously, and began 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 237 

drumming his fingers on the table before him. 
Then he sat down, and moved to Maud to take 
a chair opposite to him. 

" I think I can tell a clever man when I hear 
him speak," he said presently. " There's a ring 
in the true metal which attracts an observant 
ear" (Mr. Henley Onslow had his little vanities). 
" And there's a young fellow — comparatively a \ 
young fellow — who was here at the Autumn 
Assizes, who will, I believe, make himself a 
name ; and what is more to our purpose, won't 
want a huge fee to take up our case." 

" What is his name ? " asked Maud. 

" He is called D alt on. He is a man who owes 
nothing to the happy accidents of good birth 
or fortune — but the precious ore is within." 
And Mr. Onslow tapped his forehead. " The 
man has the true nobility, Miss Maud — brains, 
brains, and all the wealth and rank in England 
cannot buy them." 

" You study human nature, Mr. Onslow ? " 
said Maud, and she cast down her eyes. 

" It is a part of a lawyer's profession, my dear 
girl. As the doctor measures and weighs the 
wonderful machinery of our frames, so, in my 
opinion, should the man of law study and 



238 crcesus's WIDOW. 

follow the yet more intricate and wonderful 
machinery that we call mind." 

The result of this interview, however, 
amounted to this. Mr. Dalton, the barrister, 
had to be retained to defend Jenny Wren at the 
approaching Assizes, and old Rendall, at Red- 
cote Farm, heard with great anger that Mr. 
Henley Onslow, the well-known Oldcastle 
attorney, had taken up Jenny's case. 

Mr. Onslow saw the girl herself in prison 
after this, and the shrewd man came to the 
conclusion that, in spite of the evidence collected 
against her, Jenny was innocent of the crime 
laid to her charge. But this was not the 
general opinion. In the minds of most people, 
Jenny was already condemned before the Court 
opened on the dark January morning, when she 
was to be tried for her life. 

On the evening before the trial, Maud Eliot 
made the acquaintance of Mr. Dalton, the 
barrister. He had expressed a wish to see her, 
and he was introduced to her by her old friend, 
Mr. Henley Onslow, who had come over to 
Dereham to attend to the case. 

Maud, her uncle, and cousin, were also in 
Dereham, as the trial was expected to commence 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 239 

early on the following morning. Maud called 
by appointment on Mr. Onslow during the 
evening, and as she entered the room where 
the Oldcastle attorney was at present located, 
a tall, pale, fair young man rose and bowed, as 
well as Mr. Henley Onslow. 

" Ah ! my young friend, Miss Maud," said 
Mr. Onslow, extending his hand. " Well, this 
is the gentleman I spoke to you about. This 
is Mr. John Dalton, the barrister. " 

Then Mr. John Dalton bowed again, and 
this time he smiled. Maud saw a gentlemanly- 
looking man, with a grave, sweet expression, 
and a grave and quiet manner. Mr. John 
Dalton saw a girl with large, dark, eyes, 
and a face which struck his fancy ; not a 
beautiful face, perhaps, but there was something 
in it — some charm — which he had not yet 
found in any other woman. 

He had been, and was, a hard worker, this 
young man. In the school in which he had 
been reared he had to encounter some very 
unpleasant would-be masters. But the quiet, 
ambitious lad had fought and conquered. 
Poverty and contempt no longer stood in his 
way, but he had resolutely pushed them aside. 



240 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Perhaps it was the look of endured suffering in 
Maud's face which made him feel akin to her. 
For from the first night they met, John Dalton 
felt a deep and enduring interest in this dark- 
eyed girl. 

u I have known this young lady/' said Mr. 
Onslow smilingly, after he had introduced the 
two young people, " ever since she was a small 
child of three or four, I think. Ah ! many a 
pleasant hour I have spent with poor Frank 
Eliot ! Your father was a genial man, my dear 
girl, and a man also of taste, and talent, but — " 
"Poor papa ! " said Maud, as Mr. Onslow paused. 
" Ah ! — we were always good friends — we 
went into the highest company together," con- 
tinued Mr. Onslow with a half- sad, little laugh. 
" The great dead and the great living were our 
familiar friends ! Frank loved the poets best 
I remember ; but my mind was harder and more 
practical than his — yet, in my day, I have 
jingled a verse or two together. Do you ever 
indulge in a little flirtation with the Muses, Mr. 
Dalton ?" 

The young barrister shook his head. 

" I have no time," he said. 

" You are right, young gentleman," said Mr. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 241 

Onslow. " The Muses, as a rule, are but de- 
luding syrens. Yes, yes, stick to the law-courts 
— briefs being a surer recompense than Homeric 
verse ! " And Mr. Onslow laughed. 

Mr. Dalton answered in a few well-chosen, 
modest words. As he spoke, Maud was alike 
struck by the clearness of his voice and his ideas. 
Mr. Onslow had told her that graceful phrases 
seemed natural to Mr. Dalton ; but the strength 
of these graceful phrases lay in the depth and 
culture of the young man's mind. He used no 
show words, but chose powerful telling words 
to express his thoughts. 

Maud had never before talked to anyone like 
him. The personal beauty, and gay, though 
selfish, good humour of her unfortunate cousin, 
George Rendall, had won the girlish, passionate 
love of her impetuous, inexperienced heart. 
She had loved George Rendall without knowing 
why she loved him. But no woman would 
love John Dalton in this unreasonable way. 
The love he won would not be founded on the 
shifting sand of personal beauty. It would 
rest on a surer hold — a hold that time touches 
not — for time mars only the base alloy. 

But it was of his power to win the ears of 



242 crcesus's WIDOW. 

men, and not the love of woman, that Maud 
was thinking as she sat listening to John 
Dalton's clear and ringing voice. She was 
thinking of the coming trial — of the terror- 
stricken girl lying trembling in the gaol — the 
gaol, whose massive walls she could see in dim 
outline through the semi-darkness of the evening, 
from the windows of her old friend's lodgings. 

Mr. Dalton himself pointed out these grey, 
cold walls. 

" I never pass a gaol," he said, " without a 
feeling of discomfort rising in my mind. They 
should not be built in our midst, I think, as 
this one is." 

" What ! not to point a moral ? " said Mr. 
Onslow, with a smile. 

" The moral does not seem very effective in 
this city, at least," answered Mr. Dalton, 
smiling; also. 

" Well, let us hope that your eloquent words 
will have freed one poor soul, at all events, 
from ' durance vile ' by this time to-morrow," 
said Mr. Onslow. " We have a chance, I 
think, Mr. Dalton — certainly a chance." 

" I hope so," answered John Dalton gravely ; 
" for I believe the girl to be innocent." 



CHAPTER VI. 



jenny's tkial. 



It was into a court crowded to excess in every 
part, that Jenny Wren entered on the grey 
January morning, when she was about to be 
tried for her life. 

The mystery that surrounds death naturally 
gives that inscrutable foe a deep interest to the 
living. Thus the knowledge that the mortal 
existence of a handsome young woman was 
going to be submitted to the judgment of 
twelve mortal men gave undoubted piquancy 
to the trial about to begin. Had Jenny been 
supposed to be a thief, the Dereham Court-house 
would not have been so full. But Jenny was 
supposed to have murdered a man, and had 
thus put her comely neck in jeopardy ; so every 
eye was fixed on her when, half-blind with 
terror, she was led forth from her prison eel]. 



244 CROESUS 's WIDOW. 

Mortal fear is said to have turned dark ]ocks 
to snow in a single night. Mortal fear had not 
turned Jenny's brown hair white, but it had 
told terribly upon the appearance of the girl. 
Her rosy colour was faded, her lips were 
blanched and drawn ; and when her frightened 
eyes first glanced round the crowded court, a 
thrill of pity for her ran through the breasts of 
the soft-hearted spectators who were present, 
even in spite of the heinousness of her supposed 
crime. 

Mr. Wingfield, the barrister who conducted 
the prosecution, opened the case in a very 
temperate speech. Perhaps the good looks of 
the girl were not without influence on the jovial 
smiling man, whose duty, nevertheless, on the 
present occasion was to get her hanged if he 
could. 

He briefly detailed the circumstances that 
we already know, and which were indeed known 
to almost every person present in the court. 

Then a plan of the house and stables at Red- 
cote was produced, and then the old farmer 
gave his evidence. 

" The last time he saw his son alive," he- 
said, " was about three o'clock in the afternoon 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 245 

of New Year's Day. George was then talking 
to his cousin, Maud Eliot, in the kitchen. He 
was telling her he was going to Fothergal's 
farm in the evening. He mentioned the name 
of the girl, Jenny Wren, and said that she had 
refused to clean his boots. He then went out 
of the kitchen, and witness never saw him 
again. About half-past eight o'clock, he (the 
witness) told the girl, Jenny Wren, to go and 
lock in the stable and the byre doors. When 
she came back she was l mad-like,' and fell 
down in a fit in the passage. Witness gave 
her some whiskey, and then she came round, 
and asked witness ' to go and look at Mr. 
George.' Witness thought she had had a fright 
and that her wits were wandering, and took no 
notice. Her hands and dress had blood on 
them. Witness went to bed, and in the morn- 
ing his niece, Maud Eliot, and Jenny Wren 
came to him and told him George had not 
come home. Witness then detailed how he 
found George's dead body in the loft. 

He was cross-examined by Mr. Dalton. 

" Yes, Jenny Wren had said George was 
lying dead in the loft over the stable when she 
first came out of the fit. Witness thought she 



246 crcesus's WIDOW. 

was mad ; thought, she had had a fall, and that 

it had sent her out of her mind. Witness had 

seen Jenny during the afternoon. She had put 

out the tea. Witness thought she had a queer 

look, and that she had been quarrelling with 

George about going to Fothergal's. George 

was laughing and chaffing about her not Clean- 
ed O o 

ing his boots. Jenny fell down in a fit again 
when they found George's dead body in the 
loft. Witness told her that she had murdered 
him because she was jealous of him." 

" But the girl, Jenny Wren, emphatically 
denied this ? " asked Mr. Dalton. 

" Ay," said old Rendall, " she said she had 
found him dead, but I told her it was her hand 
had done it." 

" But she still denied it ? " 

" Ay, she said she bad told the truth, and 
knew naught more." 

Then Maud Eliot was called. Her appearance 
excited great interest in the court. The ex- 
treme paleness of her complexion, her black 
dress, and the look of suppressed pain and 
suffering on her face, created a feeling of 
sympathy, and her evidence was decidedly 
favourable to Jennv. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 247 

She said her cousin was laughing about 
Jenny having refused to clean his boots, when 
he spoke of it in the kitchen, and evidently" 
regarded it as a mere joke between them. 
Jenny had been in and out of the kitchen all 
the time that witness had been there during 
the afternoon. But Jenny had duties outside 
the house. She had the cows to milk, and the 
pigs to feed, and the water-tap at which all the 
dishes and pans used at dinner were washed, 
was also outside in the yard. Witness left the 
kitchen shortly after she saw her cousin there, 
and went to her own room where she usually 
sat. She was there until roused by Jenny's 
cries about nine in the evening. Then she 
went downstairs and found Jenny lying in the 
passage in a convulsive fit. Witness thought 
Jenny had had a fright or fall. The moment 
Jenny came round, she said that she had seen 
George lying dead in the loft. Then the 
whiskey which her uncle had given Jenny 
seemed to overpower her, and she fell into a 
heavy sleep. W 7 hen witness roused her in the 
morning, she again told witness she believed 
she had seen George lying dead. Then witness 
and Jenny roused her uncle, and they found 



248 crcesus's WIDOW. 

George. Her uncle accused Jenny of murder- 
ing him, but this Jenny most emphatically 
denied. She (Jenny) said she had gone up to 
the loft to look at George's things, and seen 
him dead. She said she had taken hold of 
him, and thus her hands and dress were stained. 
She said, " This is the truth, master — I know 
naught more." 

Maud was cross-examined both by Mr. 
"Winfffield and Mr. Dalton. But her evidence 
remained unshaken. She always sat in her 
own room, she said, in which she had a fire, 
because she was unused to the more homely 
^ways of the farm-house, as she had been 
brought up in London. She rarely took tea 
with her uncle, as he liked it in the kitchen. 
Thus she had seen nothing of the inhabitants 
of the farm after she had spoken to her cousin 
in the kitchen, but she had heard Jenny moving 
about in the rooms upstairs during the after- 
noon. Witness's room window looked out on 
the garden in front of the house, and not on 
the farmyard at the back ; so she had not seen 
Jenny busy with her usual duties outside. She 
had heard her voice once or twice, talking to 
her uncle. George never came back to the 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 249 

house after he went out of the kitchen door 
about three o'clock. She would have heard 
his step if he had done so. It was a star-light 
night when she heard Jenny's cries in the 
passage about nine o'clock. The stars were 
very bright. 

Maud's voice faltered and broke more than 
once when she was giving her evidence. "When 
she spoke of the stains on Jenny's hands and 
dress, a visible shudder ran through her frame. 
But her evidence on the whole was favourable 
to Jenny. During her cross-examination by 
Mr. Dart on, she said that Jenny started to her 
feet when accused by her uncle of murdering 
his son, and most emphatically and indignantly 
denied that she had done so. 

But it is useless to follow here all the details 
of a long trial. The doctor's evidence as to 
the ghastly nature of the wound on the head, 
which had crushed out the life of young George 
Kendall, and the smiling statement of Mr- 
Inspector Pye, need not be given in full, 
though Inspector Pye's words made anything 
but a favourable impression as regarded Jenny. 

This benign-looking officer stated that Jenny 
was thrown into a terrible flutter by his ap- 



250 cucesuss widow. 

pearance at the farm. That she said she hated 
the sight of a policeman. That she suggested, 
before being questioned, that a tramp had 
■committed the murder ; that she had washed 
the apron that she had worn when she had 
stated she had first found George Kendall's 
body ; that- the sleeves of her dress had also 
been partially washed. The water-tap where 
Jenny usually washed her dishes and pans was 
close to the stable-door, and the inference of 
this was that Jenny must have seen George go 
away from the homestead during the afternoon, 
if he had clone so, as Jenny stated that she 
supposed that he had. Jenny had stated at 
the coroner's inquest that she had seen George 
in the stable, and that she had said he was 
going to Fothergal's, and then she had stated 
she was not certain that she did see him 
in the stable. In fact she had contradicted 
herself, and had admitted to the coroner that 
her reason for going to look over George's 
things was "because folks talked about him 
keeping company with Mary Fothergal." 

Then Mr. Inspector Pye produced the verses 
all stained with George's blood, on which the 
unfortunate young man's head had fallen after 



THE SILEKT WATCHERS. 251 

lie liad received his death-blow. These verses 
were addressed " To Mary," and were of an 
amatory nature, but the hand that penned them 
had grown cold before the lines were ended. 

Mr. Wingfield summed up his case for the 
prosecution after Mr. Inspector Pye's statement 
was ended. 

It looked very black for Jenny, as Mi\ 
Wingfield wxnt on. " George Eendall had left 
the kitchen strong and well, and had gone into 
the stable, and had never again been seen alive. 
The girl, Jenny Wren, had been continually 
— both by her own account, and by the very 
nature of her duties — close to the stable door 
the whole afternoon. Yet before the coroner 
she had said she was not sure whether she had 
spoken to George or not ; and then again she 
admitted that she had done so. George Eendall 
it was admitted, went into the stable, and the 
whole afternoon, when this murder must have 
been committed, the girl, Jenny Wren, was 
about the place, and close to the stable door. 
There was no one else but the family on the 
homestead. The house dog never barked, nor 
gave any sign of the presence of a stranger, yet 
Jenny Wren stated to Inspector Pye that she 



252 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

believed the murder to have been committed by 
a tramp. But this tramp was plainly imaginary. 
These two young people, George Kendall and 
Jenny Wren, were virtually alone together, for 
the old man was dozing over the kitchen fire, 
and they have heard from Miss Eliot's evidence 
that she never left her room upstairs. These 
two young people were thus alone together 
probably the whole afternoon, and about nine 
o'clock (having been sent by her old master to 
lock in for the night) Jenny rushed into the 
house, and either did, or pretended to, fall down 
in a fit. Then she announced, amid hysterical 
cries, that she had found George Kendall dead. 
Her master and her young mistress believed 
she had got a scare or fright, and the old man 
gave her so much whiskey that she fell asleep. 
Her hands and dress were stained. And," con- 
tinued Mr. Wingfield, emphatically, " I leave 
you, gentlemen of the jury, to draw your own 
conclusions from these facts. You may ask the 
motive for this cruel crime ? Alas ! it is not 
far to seek ! This unfortunate young man had 
trifled with the affections of the unfortunate 
young woman before you, and had forsaken her 
for another. He was writing out some verses 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 253 

to his Mary — to his new love — when the blow 
which destroyed him must have been struck 
from behind. One of the most powerful, the 
most maddening emotions of the human heart 
was plainly the motive. Jealousy — that fierce 
demon — had possession of the heart, which 
(probably without premeditation) conceived 
this crime, and jealousy, no doubt, nerved the 
hand which struck the fatal blow." 

Mr. Wingfield then went on to point out the 
various discrepancies in Jenny's statements ; 
her extraordinary excitement and flutter on 
the arrival of the policemen at the farm ; the 
washing of her apron and sleeves ; and before 
he closed his case, Jenny was as good as 
condemned by nearly everyone present in the 
court. 

Presently, however, Mr. Dalton rose and 
addressed the jury for the defence. 

" This was a case," he said, " in which there 
was only circumstantial evidence against the 
prisoner. The young man, George Kendall, 
had come to a violent death. He had gone 
into the stable alive and well, and the counsel 
for the prosecution had endeavoured to prove 
that no other hand than the prisoner's could 



254 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

have struck him down. But how was this ? 
Miss Eliot in her evidence tells us that she 
heard the girl, Jenny Wren, engaged in her 
household duties in the bedrooms upstairs 
during the afternoon. What was there, then, to 
prevent another hand than this woman's deal- 
ing the fatal blow, when this girl was busy in 
the house ? The counsel for the prosecution 
has also given us a motive for this crime. He 
has told us that jealousy was the motive. I 
concur with him in this idea. But I do not 
believe it was the jealousy of a weak and too 
confiding woman. No ; the unfortunate young 
man whose head fell down on his unfinished love 
verses, had probably, by his reckless disregard 
of the feelings of others, made more dangerous 
enemies than a disappointed and angry girl. 
We are told of other loves — of his last love. 
Had these other loves no lovers that perhaps 
fiercely resented the interference, the success, 
of this handsome wooer ? The prisoner, it is 
stated, contradicted herself before the coroner ;. 
she was flurried by the sight of a policeman. 
No wonder ! For when the old man's eyes 
first fell on his dead son, what did he say ? 
He openly accused the girl, Jenny Wren, of 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 255 

murder. Miss Eliot has told us, and the old 
farmer has told us, how the prisoner started to 
her feet and emphatically denied it. But the 
accusation would naturally haunt the mind of 
an ignorant and frightened girl. She had 
found George Kendall ; she had lifted him up ; 
her hands and dress were stained with blood ! 
What, then, could be more natural than her 
conduct after the awful knowledge had come 
to her that her faithless lover was dead ! She 
rushed into the house, she fell down convulsed 
with her dreadful news. Then, when she 
had found her voice, she told what she had 
seen. Did this look like guilt ? If guilty, 
she would not have been the first to tell her 
ghastly secret. Then, again, in the morning, 
when the effect of the powerful spirit which 
the old man had given her had passed away, 
she once more repeated the same story. 
' George was dead,' she said. Yet, because no 
one else was seen on the homestead ; because 
this excited, frightened girl had washed her 
apron and her sleeves ; because she was fluttered 
by the sight of a policeman, she was accused 
and arrested on the charge of murder ! 

" We are told," continued Mr. Dalton, " that 



256 crcesus's WIDOW. 

on the night when the accused woman first 
discovered and announced this dreadful crime, 
that the heavens were lit and luminous with 
stars. If those silent watchers could find 
tongues, I believe, most solemnly on my soul I 
believe, that they would tell us that the hand 
of the hapless girl now standing before you, was 
not the hand that struck down this unfortunate 
and erring man ! But they are mute — no 
voice from heaven directs us to the truth ; but 
it seems to me that reason, heaven's best gift 
to man, does direct us. It points out to my 
mind the absolute impossibility that by one 
blow a woman could kill a strong and powerful 
young man. It points out the likelihood that 
a vengeful and angry rival was the real slayer 
of this faithless lover of many women. It 
points out the unlikelihood that a murderess 
would rush in and cry out aloud, if her hands 
and dress were red with the blood of her 
victim ! Jenny Wren would have washed 
away these ghastly tokens before, and not 
after, she proclaimed the deed, if she had been 
guilty. 

" I will only add a few more words. The 
prisoner at the bar is a young woman — life is 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 257 

sweet to lier — the untimely grave to which, 
your verdict may consign her is naturally 
dreadful to her mind. On supposition alone 
will you send a frightened, terrified, unfit soul 
to face what I believe to be an unjust doom ? I 
cannot believe it ! This crime was wrought 
in secret, and a shrouded secret: it remains. 
Some day the light may shine upon it, but 
believe me no true ray has yet fallen to point 
out the real murderer of George Kendall." 

Mr. Dalton's clear and ringing voice, his 
emphatic and earnest utterance, full of evident 
belief in his own words, made a powerful 
impression in favour of the trembling prisoner ; 
and when, at the conclusion of his address, 
Jenny burst into loud and passionate sobs, and 
lifted her hands as if to appeal to heaven to 
proclaim the truth, many women present were 
moved to tears. 



YOL. HI. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE EFFECT OF THE VERDICT. 

To wait — to alternate between hope and fear 
— to listen while arguments are calmly and 
dispassionately placed for and against an issue 
which to you means life and death, must surely 
be one of the most terrible trials to which the 
human mind can be subjected. 

Two women who sat in the court at Dere- 
ham, on the grey January day on which Jenny 
Wren was tried, w T ent through this torture 
during the summing-up of the case by the 
judge. 

The woman at the bar, whose "dimly-lighted 
soul " was overwhelmed with one overpowering 
fear — the dread of death — was absolutely gasp- 
ing with terror ; trying to follow the judge's 
•words ; swayed first to hope and then crushed 
back ; until even the cold, stern man who sat 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 259 

in judgment did not care to look in that terror- 
stricken face. 

The other woman, whose face only one man 
noticed, wore a different expression. Intense 
anxiety was written there, and a certain 
determinate resolve. She, too, followed the 
judge's words, followed the calm, even, 
momentous tones ; and as he went on, weigh- 
ing this piece of evidence and that, she began 
to perceive that the judge was summing up in 
favour of the prisoner. 

Then the jury retired to consider their ver- 
dict, and the terrible suspense in two human 
hearts grew, if it were possible, more intense. 

Maud Eliot felt her mind beginning to 
wander under the strain, and grotesque mazes 
and misplaced ideas came floating between her 
and the dread reality of the present scene. 

Jenny Wren was prostrate — a shivering, 
crouching creature, dumb with terror and 
despair. Then in about an hour the jury 
returned. 

The foreman, in answer to the challenge of 
the Clerk of the Crown, said : 

" We find the prisoner not guilty." 

And as the words passed his lips, Maud Eliot 

k -1 



260 crcesus's WIDOW. 

fell forward as if struck by a sudden blow. 

Jenny gave a loud shriek, and then burst 
into passionate and inarticulate cries of joy. 
But while most of the people in the court were 
watching the about-to-be-freed prisoner, John 
Dalton, the barrister, was pushing his way 
through the crowd, until he came to the spot 
where Maud Eliot was lying, to all appearances 
dead, supported by some pitying bystanders. 

" This young lady is known to me, is my 
friend," he said, and he at once took her in 
his arms. " Will one of you kindly help me 
to carry her out ? " 

A man near immediately offered to comply 
with his request, and as quietly as possible, 
Maud was carried through the crowd to a small 
private room adjoining the court-room. 

" Send for a doctor," said John Dalton, as 
he laid Maud's insensible form on a couch, and 
kneeling down beside her, began to chafe her 
stiff, cold hands. 

"When the doctor arrived, he pronounced 
Maud to be seriously ill ; so ill, that any idea 
of her returning on the same evening to Red- 
cote Farm was forced to be abandoned. The 
old farmer, who was bitterly disappointed about 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 261 

Jenny's escape, grumbled and swore at his un- 
conscious niece on being summoned to her side. 

But there was no help for it. Maud lay as 
one dead for some time, and when she revived 
began rambling and talking in such disjointed 
fashion that the doctor significantly looked at 
John Dalton (who still lingered near Maud's 
side) and touched his forehead. 

" It will end in brain fever," he said, and 
before the night was over his words were fully 
verified. 

In the meanwhile, kindly Mrs. Stivers had 
also sought out Maud, and had arranged 
for her to be conveyed to lodgings in the town, 
and finally had persuaded her parson to allow 
her, for one night at least, to remain with the 
unfortunate girl. 

The Eev. Gordon was moved to acquiese to 
his Mary's wishes on this point by a judicious 
invitation from John Dalton. 

" Just this one night, Gordon," urged Mary 
in her gentle way. " Could you not dine in 
town, dear, and remain all night, and we can 
drive home together to-morrow morning ? " 

" I shall be happy if Mr. Stivers will dine 
with me at the County Hotel?" said John 



262 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Dalton, courteously, who could not help over- 
hearing what had passed between the Vicar and 
his wife. 

The Vicar looked gratified at John Dalton's 
proposal. 

"I thank you, Mr. Dalton," he said graciously ; 
u your invitation is agreeable to me, for I have 
a great respect and liking for you learned 
gentlemen of the law. In fact, at one time I 
thought of donning the wig and gown ; but 
circumstances, those iron despots (here Mr. 
Stivers adopted his pulpit style), swayed me 
against my will, and landed me on the quiet 
shores of a country vicarage." 

"A very pleasant landing-place," said John 
Dalton. 

Mr. Stivers shrugged his substantial shoulders. 
But the end of this conversation was that he 
went to dine with John Dalton, and permitted 
his Mary to sit up with Maud Eliot during the 
night. And as the long hours wore, on the 
unhappy girl's mental condition became pain- 
fully evident. She sat up in bed ; she talked 
in a loud, excited voice ; she pressed her hand 
on her burning brow, and looked eagerly round 
with her wandering eyes. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 263 

" The stars ! " she cried presently. " The 
stars — the silent watchers — they saw, they saw ! 
But they are mute," she continued, raising her 
voice to a wild, unnatural tone, and quoting 
the words of John Dalton's speech in the court 
during the day. " No voice from heaven directs 
us ! " And then she burst into a lau^h which 
was very terrible to listen to. 

And all through the night it was the same 
thing ; and when the doctor arrived in the 
morning he pronounced Maud to be dangerously 
ill. 

But while, very sadly and gravely, Mrs. 
Stivers was making preparations to leave her, 
for she dare not even ask her lord and master 
for permission to remain away from her 
domestic duties for another day, to her great 
surprise the Kev. Gordon arrived at the 
lodonno* where Maud was, with his face abso- 
lutely radiant. 

" Ah, little love ! " he said, addressing his 
Mary, " I have hurried at once to tell you my 
news. A letter has just been brought to me 
from Norsely, to tell me that my Aunt Gordon 
— you have often heard me speak of her, you 
know, the rich old lady at Croydon — is dying, 



264 cecesus's WIDOW. 

and this letter is to summon me to her death- 
bed. I know what this means — five thousand 
at least — for I am the old lady's godson, and I 
must start at once." 

" How long will you he away, Gordon V y 
asked Mary, gravely. 

" I won t leave the old lady until her last 
breath is drawn ; upon that I'm determined," 
answered the Kev. Gordon, decisively. " I 
know what the greedy hangers-on are who get 
about death -beds ; and, therefore, it is plainly 
my duty to stay by the old lady's side. 
Prosser will take next Sunday for me, and 
you must see about someone else to officiate if 
I stay any longer. In the meanwhile, you can 
remain here." 

" Very well," said Mary. " I think I can be 
of some use — " 

" Use ! " interrupted the parson, " I should 
think so. Why, you will save that old screw, 
Kendall, all the expenses of a nurse for his 
niece. But I must not waste my time in 
talking. Good-bye, little wife ! Of course old 
Kendall must defray all expenses for his niece,. 
and you, as long as you stay with her — he can 
afford it.'' And the Eev. Gordon smiled,. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 265 

kissed the tip of his wife's little nose, and was 
gone. 

His wife did not feel by any means broken- 
hearted at his departure. The selfish wear out 
the love of others, and rarely is it that those 
who think most of self hold the first place in 
any other human heart. 

So when John Dalton called during the 
morning to inquire after Maud, he found Mrs. 
Stivers in her usual calm frame of mind. She 
told him that Mr. Stivers was gone, and that 
she had arranged for the present to stay on 
where she was and nurse Miss Eliot. The 
young barrister was only too pleased to hear 
this, and during the week, as he was detained 
in Dereham by his professional engagements, 
he constantly found time to call on Mrs. Stivers 
and make more anxious iuquiries than he cared 
to admit even to himself about the conditon of 
Maud. 

He saw her once or twice before he left 
Dereham. The severe paroxysms of her illness 
were by this time over, and John Dalton felt 
strangely touched as he looked at the melan- 
choly, dark eyes, in which there was again the 
light of reason but not the light of hope. 



266 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

He spoke to her kindly and gently, and told 
her how he hoped soon to be in Dereham 
again. 

"But perhaps you will have returned to 
your uncle's house at Kedcote, before then ? " 
he asked. 

Maud's pale, wasted face suddenly flushed at 
this question. 

" I will never return to Kedcote," she 
answered quickly, "never." 

She said this last word with emphatic 
emphasis, and Mary Stivers, who was stand- 
ing by, looked at John Dalton in sympathetic 
silence. 

" She cannot get over her cousin's sad 
death," whispered Mary to the young barrister, 
as she bade him good-bye outside Maud's room. 
" Poor girl — you see she cannot even bear the 
name of Kedcote." 

" She can never return there under any 
circumstances," said John Dalton gravely ; and 
Mary could not help wondering, as she looked 
after him, at the cause of the deep interest with 
which this youno- man evidently regarded 
Maud. 

And this interest did not die away after John 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 267 

Dalton left Dereham. He wrote to Mary 
Stivers to enquire after Maud, and a fortnight 
later, to the surprise of that lady, one day 
unexpectedly returned to Dereham, making a 
somewhat lame apology for his reappearance. 

Maud by this time was able to be in the 
sitting-room downstairs, and old Kendall was 
urging her to return to Eedcote. But Maud 
would not hear of this. She was corresponding 
with her old friend, Mr. Henley Onslow, re- 
garding the position of her affairs, and she had 
told Mary Stivers that she meant to go back 
to London. 

And now she told this to John Dalton, and 
the two sat and talked gravely about the 
coming change. Then, one day, to John 
Dalton s surprise and consternation, when as 
usual he called to see Maud, he was told she 
was worse. 

"It is that girl Jenny Wren — the girl you 
defended," said Mrs. Stivers to John Dalton, 
with some anger in her voice ; " she called 
to-day when I was out, and insisted upon 
seeing Maud, and Maud has been very ill 



© 
since. 



" Why did she come here? " asked Dalton. 



268 croesus's widow. 

Mary could not tell him. Maud was too ill, 
and too much agitated to be questioned, she 
said, and the doctor had ordered that she was 
to be kept perfectly quiet. Jenny Wren, also, 
when asked by Mary, had denied saying any- 
thing to Maud so utterly to upset her. 

"I made bold to call to see Miss Maud, 
ma'am," she told Mary, wriggling and twisting 
about her comely form, " to ask her a bit favour 
for Jack Foster, poor fellow." 

"Jack Foster, the poacher?" asked Mary. 

" "Well, ma'am, some folks call him such; but 
he's got into trouble anyhow, again, through 
that old villain, Pye, the inspector ; and I made 
bold to call on Miss Maud to ask her to speak 
to that gentleman, Mr. Dalton, who spoke up 
for me at the 'ssizes, to see if he'd speak up for 
Jack, poor fellow ; and Jack thought if he sent 
Miss Maud a line, she would do this for him — 
and I just guv her Jack's line, and then, all of 
a suddent, she seemed to take most awful ill — 
and I'm sure Jack meant no harm, poor fellow I 
though he may have snared a hare or two — 
but what's that ? " 

This was all the explanation of Maud's sudden 
illness, that Jenny Wren apparently truthfully 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 269 

could give. But while Mary and Dalton were 
anxiously discussing the probable cause of her 
attack downstairs, let us for a moment enter 
the bedroom of the unhappy girl upstairs, and 
see why the sight of Jenny Wren's handsome 
face had once more almost upset her reason. 

Up and down the room Maud kept restlessly 
wandering, with pale face, and a look of fear, 
almost horror, in her large dark eyes. In her 
clenched hand she grasped a few soiled and 
crumpled lines — lines written in Dereham gaol 
— the lines that Jenny Wren had given her 
from Jack Foster, the poacher. They were as 
follows : — 

Miss , — One who held his tongue out of goodwill to 

you is in trouble now, and asks you to speak a word for him. 
I won't name day or date — you'll mind what I mean — and 
the bearer will tell you what I want, and I remain respect- 
fully what I always was — 

A Silent Watcher. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

"EAT, drink, and be merry." 

The very day after Jenny Wren's strange visit 
to Maud, Mary Stivers received a letter from 
her husband, to tell her that his hours of 
anxiety and watching by his dying relative's 
bedside were over. 

I own, my love (he wrote to Mary), that I feel my 
heart uplifted within me. Mr. Fielden, poor Mrs. Gordon's 
solicitor, called upon me last night, just an hour before the 
old lady's demise, and he gave me a pretty broad hint as to 
the contents of the will. In this will I am left the good 
round sum of ten thousand pounds. I hoped for five 
thousand — I expected five — but to get double that sum is a 
stroke of good fortune I did not reckon on. I mean to take 
things much easier in future. If I keep the living I shall 
get a resident curate to take entire charge during the winter 
and the bad weather in spring. No good fagging one's self 
to death now. In fact, I mean to enjoy myself, and I shall 
endeavour to spend the rest of my life as pleasantly as pos- 
sible. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 271 

Hon- is Miss Eliot ? I shall, of course, remain here until 
after the funeral, and until all arrangements about the 
money are completed ; but if Miss Eliot is not better by that 
time, old Rendall must get a nurse for his niece, and do as 
best he can, for I shall want you, my love, at home. And 
now, good-bye ! Take care of yourself, and be looking your 
best when I return. — Your affectionate husband, 

Gordon Stivers. 

Mary read this letter through, and then put 
her hand over her face, and gave a weary, heavy 
sigh. She knew money was a good thing, for she 
had felt the bitter want of it, and if she had 
possessed any of her own, she would never have 
married the Eev. Gordon Stivers. But she 
could not rejoice over its possession when the 
dead hand from whence it came was scarcely 
cold. The idea revolted her. A perhaps 
reluctant soul had just been torn from it s 
earthly tenement, and behold, the heir was 
making merry by the open grave ! Mary had 
never loved her husband less, had never felt 
the task of her life more hard, than when she 
was forced to sit down to write to her lord and 
master, and congratulate him on his good 
fortune. 

The world (their little world) also congratu- 
lated the Vicar of Norsely and his wife ; and 



272 crcesus's WIDOW. 

even John Dalton smiled and complimented 
Mary on her husband's good luck. Only Maud 
said nothing, and her strange, excited, restless 
manner continued to alarm both Mary and 
John Dalton. 

But in a few days Mary had very little time 
even to think of Maud. The Rev. Gordon returned 
to Dereham, after ordering Mary to engage 
rooms for him at the County Hotel ; and Mary, 
as in duty bound, went to the station to meet 
her husband, though her heart felt by no means 
elated at the prospect of his return. 

The Rev. Gordon was, however, quite satisfied 
with the Greeting that he received from his 
Mary. He was not indeed thinking of his 
Mary. He was thinking of a splendid salmon 
he had brought down from town, and wonder- 
ing whether the journey had injured its delicate 
flavour. He shook his Mary's hand, and then 
rushed along the platform to look after his 
salmon. He gazed with delight as it lay shining 
amid its delicate green packing, but he scarcely 
looked at his wife's face, or thought of the 
weary hours of watching that she had spent by 
Maud's bedside during his absence. 

And his Mary saw all this. But she took 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 273 

his arm quite meekly aDcl walked clown from 
the station with him, and smiled while he 
bragged and boasted of his new wealth. He 
looked flushed and somewhat bloated, and 
evidently he had not fasted, if he had prayed, 
by his dead relative. 

He staved at the hotel during the next few 
days, and did not seem in any hurry to leave 
Dereham. He was enjoying himself in fact, 
and his heart was merry within him. He was 
very cordial in his manner to John Dalton, and 
insisted upon him dining with him at the hotel. 
But he was almost unendurable to Dalton. The 
smooth, outward manner of the young barrister 
grew ruffled in the presence of the Vicar of 
Norseley, so strong was the antipathy with 
which he inspired him. 

But suddenly — in a moment — when the Bev. 
Gordon's heart was full of pride and mirth, a 
serious illness attacked him. He had lingered 
too late one cold evening by the side of the 
river, thinking of and planning out his future 
life, and a treacherous white mist had crept up 
from the water, and had stolen with its poison- 
ous breath down the throat of the elated 
parson. 



274 crcesus's WIDOW. 

He awoke in the night choking ; awoke, and 
grew terrified, pale and alarmed. His dead 
relation, Mrs. Gordon, from whom he had 
inherited his new wealth, had died of bron- 
chitis, and the Eev. Gordon had stood by and 
watched complacently her painful, gasping" 
breaths. He remembered them now ; re- 
membered them, and terror struck chill and 
cold into his heart. 

Mary was roused before the dawn by a 
message from the hotel, and instantly rose and 
dressed, and went out in the dark hours of the 
early morning to attend upon her husband. 
She found him walking up and down the floor 
of the room, apparently unable to breathe, and 
with fear stamped on every lineament of his 
face. 

" That fool, Dr. Bagshot, has not come yet," 
he gasped, " though it's half-an-hour at least 
since he was sent for. Go yourself, Mary, and 
insist upon him coming at once — I can't breathe 
— something dreadful is the matter with my 
throat." 

Mary tried some simple remedy, and then 
hurried out to go to the doctor's house to seek 
him. But she met him coming down the dark, 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 275 

quiet street, on his way to the hotel, and to- 
gether they went up to the bedroom of the 
terrified man. 

The doctor was quiet, consoling, and ap- 
parently not alarmed by the Kev. Gordon's 
condition . 

" You have caught a bad cold," he said, and 
he ordered and saw applied a severe blister, and 
took other very prompt measures with his 
patient. He stayed also some time, and seemed 
anxious about the effect of his remedies, and 
when he left he told the Eev. Gordon that he 
would look in again to see him, and then he 
gave Mary a little hint to follow him from the 
room. 

Mary did so, and when they were outside Dr« 
Bagskot's face assumed a different expression. 

" Keep up his spirits," he whispered, "he is 
very nervous — but, my dear Mrs. Stivers, I 
must not deceive you — it is a bad attack of 
acute bronchitis, and there is no doubt that the 
vicar is dangerously ill." 

And the sudden end of this dangerous illness 
came in a few brief days. Inflammation of the 
lungs set in, and Dr. Bagshot asked leave to 



276 crcesus's WIDOW. 

call in another doctor, and when the other 
doctor came, he took even a worse view of the 
case than Dr. Bagshot had done. 

It had come, in fact, to this, that the two 
doctors, after various consultations, came to 
the conclusion that it was the duty of someone 
to tell the Eev. Gordon Stivers that if he had 
any monetary arrangements to settle, that he 
had better make haste to do so. 

But the terrified man would not realise this ; 
he dare not realise it. All his life he had acted 
and sighed and prayed by death-beds, and 
spoken of our "clear departing brother" with 
perfect equanimity, but had never remembered 
that the day would come when his soul also 
would be required of him, and when all his 
shams would no longer avail him. 

He insisted to the very end that he felt 
better, and appealed to Mary to say he was 
better ; though, alas ! as the words passed his* 
lips, his pulses were sinking lower and lower, 
his eyes glazing, and his heart beating fainter 
and fainter beneath the hand of death. 

But let us close the door and go away. 
Leave the praying, weeping woman — the 
dying, wretched, miserable man. They were 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 277 

alone together for some time — alone when the 
Kev. Gordon's tongue could no longer dispute 
his Maker's will ; alone when the clock struck 
the hour at which he died, and when, just at 
the last, Mary began to hope that her prayers 
and tears were not unanswered, and that some 
peace came in the end to the departing soul. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE LITTLE HOUSE AT CHELSEA. 

Thus Mary became a widow, and after a while 
— after the first shock and grief was over — she 
asked Maud Eliot to live with her in London. 
She scarcely knew that John Dal ton had in- 
fluenced her to make this offer, and yet he, in 
truth, had done so. His interest in Maud was 
very great, and he was convinced that the 
farther she was parted from the scene of the 
dark tragedy at Redcote would be the better 
for her, and that change would be her best 
chance of restoration to health and happiness. 
So Mary asked her to go with her, and after 
a while the old farmer at Redcote grumblingly 
gave his consent. Nay, after shuffling and 
twisting his poor, lean, rheumatic hand for 
some time in the pocket of his drab knee- 
breeches, he at last produced a greasy purse. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 279 

" I've had great losses lately, my lass," lie 
said, " bad times, and Robert's but a poor hand 
at a bargain, and cash is very scarce — but ye'll 
want a trifle to pay thy train-fare, I warrant — 
and so if five pounds will do — " 

" Thank you, uncle," said Maud, more softly 
than she had ever before spoken to the old 
man, " but I have enough. Mrs. Stivers won't 
allow me to pay anything to her for board at 
present, and Mr. Henley Onslow was over here 
the other day, and the trifle my poor father 
left has done so well in something that he put 
it into, that I am quite rich at present." 

" Eh, that's well now, lass," answered the old 
farmer, hastily slipping back his purse, and 
buttoning up his breeches pocket. " Very 
well — and did he tell ye," he added cautiously, 
" what he had invested thy bit o' money in ? " 

" No, uncle," said Maud. 

" Get that out of him, lassie, then," urged 
the old man. " I've a bit money mysel', that 
if I knew of any real good thing I wouldn't 
mind laying it out — these lawyer chaps know 
what they're after. I've a bit money, not 
much, but I'd like to make it more." 

" Well, I'll ask, uncle." 



280 crcesus's WIDOW. 

" Aye do, and drop your cousin or me a line ; 
.and lass, you're welcome to come back when 
you like to Kedcote — the change to London 
will set thee up again after the bad bout ye've 
had, and all the trouble about poor George. 
That vile jade, Jenny Wren, who ought to have 
been hangit by this time, is barmaid, I am 
told, at a public in the town. Well, the devil 
will get his own yet. If I come across her, I'll 
tell her my mind. It was yon young lawyer's 
jaw, and nought else, that got her off." 

"Ill write, uncle," said Maud, interrupting 
his tirade. 

" Aye do, lass, and come back when ye like." 
And in the full belief that she was only going 
for a visit, and meant to return to Kedcote, the 
old man went away. 

But Maud never meant to return. She went 
to the house door with her uncle, and she knew 
that in this world she would see his face no 
more. 

She had told her old friend, Mr. Henley 
Onslow, of her resolution to leave her uncle, 
and the sagacious lawyer thought that she was 
right. 

"You are unsuited for the life," he said, 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 281 

looking at her. " Ah, my dear girl, you must 
forget all the past. I am not a prophet, but I 

can see a little ahead, sometimes, and I have 
seen lately — you must forgive an old friend — 
that a young friend of mine admires you 
greatly ; is sincerely interested in you, in fact ; 
and Dalton is a rising man, my dear Miss 
Maud — my old chum's daughter may be the 
wife of the Lord Chancellor yet." And Mr. 
Henley Onslow laughed heartily. 

Maud's pale face coloured, and she cast down 
her eyes. 

" You must not say this, Mr. Onslow, even 
in jest," she said, a moment later. " Mr. Dalton 
has been very kind to me — more than kind — 
but it is merely because he knows I am so 
friendless, so — so — unfortunate." And Maud's 
voice trembled as she pronounced the last word. 

" Well, we shall see," answered Mr. Onslow, 
still smiling ; and then he changed the conver- 
sation, and highly approved of Maud's present 
intention of living with Mrs. Stivers. 

And Maud herself was only too glad to go. 
Mary had been in very constant correspondence 
lately with Dalton, who was now in London, 
concerning a house which the barrister thought 



282 CIUESUSS WIDOW. 

would suit the young widow and her friend. It 
belonged to an artist friend of Dalton's, who 
had lately lost his wife, and wished to go to 
Italy for a year. He (the artist) did not want 
to make money of his house, but he wanted 
someone whom he could trust to live in it, and 
take care of his art treasures while he was away. 
He had mentioned this to Dalton, and Dalton 
had at once thought of the young widow at 
Dereham. 

He had accordingly written to Mary about 
it, and Mary thought it would suit her. It 
was at Chelsea — a pretty spot, with a garden in 
front, and a little garden and greenhouse at the 
back — and the rent would be, Dalton told Mary, 
absolutely nominal to a suitable tenant. 

Thus, when the train in which Mary and 
Maud travelled up to town reached King's 
Cross terminus, Mary rose eagerly, and bent 
out of the carriage window, and the next 
moment Maud heard Mary addressing someone, 
and looking hastily up she saw by the lights in 
the station the pale, grave face of John Dalton. 

" Here is Mr. Dalton, Maud," said Mary, with 
a £lad Tm<y in her voice, and the next minute the 
young barrister was shaking hands with them. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 283 

"Thank you for coming to meet us," said 
Mary, as she stepped out of the carriage. 

" Thank you for telling me the train you 
meant to travel by," answered John Dalton 
smiling, and Mary blushed softly as he said the 
words. 

" I did not tell Maud I had told you," she 
said, " for I thought most likely you would be 
too busy to come — or perhaps might be out of 
town — but when I was answering your kind 
letter, I thought I would just mention that we 
meant to travel to-day." 

Dalton agreed to call for them the next day 
at eleven o'clock, so that they might go over 
the little house at Chelsea together, and then 
Mary and Maud drove to a quiet family hotel 
in Manchester Street, where they meant to stay 
until they found a house. 

As good luck would have it, the next morning- 
was one of those bright spring ones, when every- 
thing seems so beautiful after the gloom of 
w 7 inter. The sun was shining on the river, on 
the trim flower-beds which only last spring the 
artist's young wife had tended so carefully. It 
was shining into the gracefully-draped windows 
of the house and on the artistic furniture within. 



284 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

Mary was quite charmed with the place, and 
the widowed artist was quite charmed with the 
handsome young widow who proposed to become 
his tenant. 

He showed Mary his pictures, his china, his 
choicest treasures. Kare bits of lace, hideous 
bits (to Mary's uneducated eyes) of dull-tinted 
fabrics, which he prized above gold or silver. 
And while Mary was gazing and listening, 
Dalton and Maud had wandered into the sun- 
lit garden. 

They were not talking of the past. Maud 
said nothing to Dalton of her visitor on the day 
when she had again taken so suddenly ill ; 
nothing of the strangely-written request that 
visitor had brought, nor of its weird signature, 
though she was thinking of these things as she 
stood talking there with him — though they lay 
like a black shadow between her and the sun ! 

She meant to forget, forget, she had told 
herself. She would never see Dereham more ; 
never the old grey farm-house at Eedcote ; 
never the faces of those who lived and died 
there. 

But she saw one dead face still in her dreams 
The comely face that had lain crushed on the 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 285 

unfinished love verses, the laughing, handsome 
eyes, the careless smile of her cousin George. 
She had seen that face last night, even with 
the hum and stir of the great city around her. 
She saw it now T in the sun-lit garden, with the 
grave, sweet eyes of John Dalton bent upon 
her. But she would forget — forget, she told 
herself again. She shut her eyes — the past 
was a shadow — it was done, it was gone, she 
would remember it no more. Then she looked 
in John Dalton's face and smiled, and talked 
of the shining river and the flowers ; but John 
Dalton knew, as he answered her, that the 
black, dark shadow still lay upon her heart. 



" We are forgetting our young friends," at 
last said Mary to the artist. 

" They look perfectly happy," answered the 
artist, glancing out of one of the windows at 
the pair below. u Ah, Mrs. Stivers, theirs is 
the one happy time of life — the dawn, the bud — 
happy because hope and expectation clothe the 
future with a beauty which in reality is so 
seldom fulfilled." And somehow the artists 
words jarred slightly on Mary's ears. 



286 crcesus's WIDOW. 

But the end of this interview was, that Mary- 
took the artist's pretty little house at Chelsea 
for a year. 

" You can come in when you like," said the 
artist ; " come to-morrow. 

Mary did not exactly accept this offer, but 
before the end of a week she and Maud were 
sitting on the art furniture, and gazing re- 
spectfully at the art treasures through the glass 
of the cabinets, in which, in spite of his 
admiration for Mary, the artist had carefully 
and wisely locked them away. 



CHAPTER X. 
maud's answer. 

John" Dalton came often, and sat on the art 
furniture too. He sat by the side of Mary, 
and he sat by the side of Maud. These two 
women knew no one at first in London, at least 
Mary literally knew no one, and the friends 
that Maud once had known lived mostly at the 
other end of London, and had probably utterly 
forgotten the existence of the late Dr. Frank 
Eliot's daughter. 

Mary, however, was a busy little woman, 
and easily found plenty to do. Perhaps it was 
the art furniture inspired her, but she took to 
drawing, went to a school of design, made 
friends with the clergyman of the parish and 
his wife, and had her little charitable missions, 
her gentle words of comfort and help for many 
a poor sick and suffering soul, before she had 
been two months in London. 



288 cecesus's WIDOW. 

Maud sometimes went with her when she 
visited among the poor, and sometimes she 
would not go. Maud had also taken to an 
occupation. The restless, passionate, impetuous 
heart was striving to satisfy its cravings by 
imagining the passions and struggles of others. 
She would be a writer, she thought ; she would 
grow rich, she would pay dear, kind Mary all 
she owed her, and then she would go further 
away still — away from England — to some wild 
country, perhaps, where there would be nothing 
to remind her of the shadowed past. 

So all through the bright summer days Maud 
sat writing, or thinking of what she would 
write ; going very little out, watching the 
river, trying to put on paper her vague 
dreams, her crude and unfinished sketches of 
the drama of life, in which she had already 
played so sad a part. 

But one day, when John Dalton found her 
alone, he smilingly asked her to put away her 
work. 

" And don't begin another book, Maud," he 
said presently. 

" I suppose you think it is no use?" answered 
Maud, sadly enough. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 289 

" I didn't say that — but I want you to begin 
to think of something else." 

" Of something else ? " repeated Maud. 

"Yes; of woman's best mission after all," 
said Dalton, bending down his head, and with 
almost a tender smile. " I want you to begin 
to think of marrying, Maud — to think of 
marrying we." 

Maud gave a slight start, and a burning 
colour in a moment dyed her usually pale face. 

" It is impossible," she said the next instant ; 
" quite impossible." 

"But why so?" said Dalton. "Think of 
what I said a few minutes ago, Maud — let the 
past lie buried." 

The girl did not speak. She, too, was 
thinking. "He is generous, he is noble," she 
thought. "If I had not been what I am, I 
could have been a happy woman as John 
Dalton's wife." 

"You will think it over," said Dalton 
presently. " Hush ! I do not want a positive 
answer to-night. I will ask for one some other 
day." 

But as weeks went on, John Dalton became 
impatient. This unsettled state of mind did 



VOL. III. 



290 CROESUS S WIDOW. 

not suit the young man's arduous work. He 
had learned to love Maud, but he had another 
mistress (as Mr. Henley Onslow had told her) 
to whom he had hitherto devoted all his days, 
and this was the law. 

He was ambitious, and he knew that to 
rise he must work. Amusement and pleasure 
he had put aside, and love, until he met the 
dark-eyed girl at Dereham ; but even the dark- 
eyed girl must not be permitted to come 
between him and his first passion. 

So he determined to settle it. Perhaps he 
had another motive also for this. He was a 
shrewd, though not a vain man, and Mary 
was not a very perfect actress. She meant to 
hide that she cared too much for John, but John, 
and perhaps Maud, noticed the change in her 
manner, and missed the true ring of genuine 
sweetness, which was one of its characteristics. 

After he had made up his mind to ask Maud 
for a decisive answer, John Dalton went twice 
to the little house at Chelsea without having 
an opportunity of doing so. But the third 
time he succeeded. A sudden and violent 
thunderstorm was ra^in^ when he arrived. 
This storm had detained Mary longer than she 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 291 

intended to be absent from home when she had 
started on one of her usual errands of kindness, 
and thus John Dalton found Maud alone. 

" This is a sharp storm," he said. " Why, 
Maud, are you afraid ? " And he took hold of 
one of her cold, chill hands. 

" Not exactly afraid," she answered, " but — 
but in a storm like this, you seem nearer the 
unseen, don't you ? There's something so mighty, 
so terrible, in those great peals — Ah ! — what a 
flash ! " And Maud shuddered and drew closer 
to Dalton. 

" You are nervous," he said quietly, and he 
still held her cold, chill hand in his. 

The storm raged round them for a few 
minutes longer, and then amid a fierce rain- 
pour, the thunder- clouds moved onward, but 
Dalton still stood there by the side of Maud. 

" It is passing away," he said presently. 
" Look up, Maud, now ; there is a gleam of 
sunshine breaking through the clouds." 

Maud looked up, gave a long quivering sigh, 
and would have drawn her hand from Dalton's. 

"No, let it stay," he said. "I am glad to 
find you alone to-day, Maud — for I want you 
to tell me that you will be my wife," 

l2 



292 crcesus's WIDOW. 

Maud did not speak for a moment, and her 
head fell down until it nearly touched the hand 
of Dalton. 

" "Well, have you no answer ? " he asked. 

" What can I say ? " she said, looking up and 
speaking with deep emotion. " But what I 
told you before — that it cannot, cannot be ! " 

" But why, Maud ? " 

" Do not ask me, John," answered Maud, 
rising hastily, and beginning to pace the little 
room. " There is a secret in my life — a dark, 
dark secret — I can never marry now." 

It was now Dalton's turn to be silent. He 
stood there watching the girl — pitying her with 
all his heart. 

" You will not confide in me, then ? " he said 
after a short pause. 

" It would do no good," said Maud. " If 
you heard this — this — miserable story — you 
would just say what I tell you now — that I 
could not marry you ; that you would not 
marry me." 

" Yet I wish to hear it." 

" I cannot, cannot tell you ! " said Maud, and 
she wrung her hands. 

" Is it," said John Dalton, his usual clear and 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 293 

distinct tones growing husky, " is it connected 
with your unfortunate cousin's death — with the 
tragedy at Eedcote Farm ? " 

Maud did not speak. She wrung her hands, 
she flung herself on her knees by a couch, 
and buried her face. 

" Tell rne, Maud," continued Dalton, advanc- 
ing to her side, and laying his hand on her 
shoulder. "Believe me, you w T ill not regret 
that you have trusted me — from the first, my 
poor, poor girl, I knew that sorrow for this 
young man's death was not alone the shadow 
that rested on your life." 

" What ! what ! did you guess ? " gasped 
Maud. 

" When you were very ill at Dereham," said 
Dalton, gently, " I stood by your bed one night, 
Maud, and I heard you murmur words which 
told me — or rather led me to guess — a sad, sad 
story." 

" And Mary heard this, too ? " said Maud, 
starting to her feet, while a terrified look came 
over her face. " Oh ! John, John ! " she went 
on, "I would that I were dead — Oh ! if I had 
only died before all this sin and shame came upon 
me. But," she added, "I did it innocently ! 



294 crcesus's WIDOW. 

I will tell you now — I will trust you — but — "" 

At this moment both Dalton and Maud saw 
from the windows Mary arrive at the door of 
the house. She had been detained by the 
storm, and now drove up in a cab, interrupt- 
ing the confession that was just about to be 
uttered by Maud. 

" Write what you were going to tell me,'' 
said Dalton, hastily. " Do this at once, dear 
Maud — go to your room now, and write it, and 
I will stay here and talk to Mrs. Stivers." 

Maud hesitated an instant, and then quickly 
left the room, just as Mary entered the hall. 
Mary saw the girl leave the little drawing-room, 
and she saw, too, the marks of emotion on her 
face — her swollen eyelids, her disordered hair. 

" You have been caught in the storm, I 
fear ? " said John Dalton the next moment, 
going into the hall and addressing Mary. 

" Yes," answered Mary, but not in her usual 
sweetness of tone. 

"Ave you afraid ?" continued Dalton. "Miss 
Eliot seems afraid." 

Mary made no reply. "He is acting to me," 
she thought, and the idea made her feel very 
angry. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 295 

" Have you been here long ? " she presently 
asked, when John Dalton had followed her into 
the drawing-room. 

" Perhaps half an hour," he said. 

" And you've had an interesting conversa- 
tion ? " said poor Mary, trying to hide her 
feelings. 

" We have had a very painful one," answered 
John Dalton, gravely. 

" A painful one ? " repeated Mary. 

" Yes — and let me ask you a favour, Mrs. 
Stivers. Please say nothing of this conversa- 
tion to Maud, for it has greatly upset her." 

" You have a strong interest in Maud," said 
Mary, in a trembling and hesitating voice. 

" Yes, a very strong interest," answered John 
Dalton, yet more gravely, and there was some- 
thing in his manner that implied more than 
his words. 

Mary's handsome face turned red, and then 
deadly pale. Yet she had no real reason to 
envy Maud. That unhappy girl was seated at 
her desk, weeping blinding tears of regret and 
shame. She was writing a letter to John 
Dalton — a letter which she believed would end 
his regard for her for ever. 



296 cikesus's WIDOW. 

This letter reached the young barrister at 
his chambers on the following morning. His 
pale face flushed as he read it, and his hands 
trembled — the confession of the woman he 
loved — of the woman he had asked to be his 
wife ! 

I write this, John (he read), because I promised you I 
would write it ; because nothing in this world can make much 
matter to me now ; and because it is better that you should 
know. After you have read it, it will be all over between 
us, and it is but right that it should be so. 

I will not tell you of my early girlhood ; why should I 
tell you of it 1 I will only tell you what happened last New 
Year's Day, and then you will understand the dreadful 
shadow which ever since has lain so dark and heavy upon my 
soul. 

On that day, then, after I had parted with George 
Kendall in the kitchen at Redcote, I went up to my own 
room. You remember I told this in my evidence at the 
trial, but I did not tell that when I got there I heard George 
laughing and talking outside. This made me feel very 
angry, and I went to one of the back rooms and looked out 
on the stable yard. At the door of the stable George was 
standing smoking and laughing, and half quarrelling with 
Jenny Wren. Their familiarity — their apparent utter for- 
getfulness of my presence in the house, almost maddened 
me, and with rage and jealousy (of which I was ashamed) 
burning in my heart, I stood and watched them nearly an 
hour. Then Jenny came into the house and went upstairs, 
and I heard her go into my uncle's bedroom to arrange it, 
and then up to George's room, which was in the front of the 
house, over mine. When I heard her there, a sudden 



THE SILENT WATCHEES. 297 

impulse — a passion I could not control — seized upon me, and 
I determined to go down to the stable and bitterly abuse 
George for his heartless conduct to me, and for his dis- 
graceful familiarity with the girl Jenny Wren. 

I ran downstairs, and I ran swiftly across the stable yard ; 
but George was not now in the stable, but in the loft above 
it, which he had fitted up as a workshop. He was sitting 
writing at the table by the window when I went up to the 
loft, and when he saw me he looked very angry. 

Bitter words burst like a torrent from my lips. To 
these he answered by half-taunting ones. Then, when I 
went behind him, I saw he was writing out some verses 
addressed "To Mary." Fury, madness, seized upon me 
when I saw this. In passionate words I upbraided him, and in 
vain and idle ones he replied. Then I became mad — mad, 
John — do you understand ? — mad I I felt a sudden rush of 
blood to my head, and I seized a heavy leaden-headed 
liauimer that was standing in the corner of the loft, and with 
all my force I flung it at him. I saw it strike him — I saw his 
head fall — but I never looked again. I fled out of the stable 
loft, fled to my own room ; and all the rest of the day — so 
God help me — I expected to hear George's voice — and I 
determined to run away — to go anywhere — to drown myself, 
perhaps — but not to stay at Redcote Farm. 

1 never thought I had killed him — never, never ! I knew 
the hammer had struck him, but I thought most likely he 
would come into the house and be very angry. Then, when he 
did not come in, I supposed he had gone to Fothergal's Farm. 
Jenny's awful cries first told me the truth. You know the 
rest ; only had the trial gone against Jenny — had the verdict 
been given against her, I was going to stand up in court and 
tell the jury and the judge the same story that I have now 
told you. 

Maud Eliot. 



298 crcesus's WIDOW. 

John Dalton read this confession to the end, 
and then began pacing backwards and forwards 
in the room, with knitted brows and bitten 
lips. 

Shall we look for a moment into his heart ? 
Into the heart of an ambitious, hard-working 
man, who meant to rise and win a great name, 
and who had hitherto put everything aside that 
could interfere with this purpose. 

" Can I many her V he was thinking. 
" Marry a woman with a blight upon her life — 
such a blight upon her heart ? And yet what 
was she but a victim — an innocent, impulsive 
victim — of a bad and heartless man ? Poor 
girl, poor child ! And she would have stood 
up in court, would she, and told her story ? 
Yes ; it is her nature — the warm, tender, pas- 
sionate nature that has been so bruised and 
broken in the world." 

Still he wavered. He loved her; but he had 
a purpose in his life before he had seen Maud, 
and he had that purpose still. If this ever 
leaked out — if men could even point with the 
finger of scorn to his wife — what use, then, 
would be his ambition ? what use the honours 
that he himself might win ? 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 299 

But no one knew, he remembered ; no one 
would ever know. The grave had closed over 
George Kendall, and Jenny had been tried and 
acquitted of his murder, and no shadow of 
suspicion had fallen on anyone else. He knew 
not of the weird warning Maud had received 
before she had quitted Dereham ; knew of no 
Silent Watchers but the stars, that the un- 
happy girl had babbled of in her fevered 
dreams. Maud had not told him of the 
strange words Jenny "Wren had placed in her 
hands, or perhaps this knowledge might have 
influenced John Dalton. 

For in the end, love, generosity, pity, were 
the victors in his mental struggle. He would 
take her to his breast, he decided. He would 
shield this bruised, half-broken heart — forget 
her blighted youth and the dark stain that 
almost without any real guilt had fallen upon 
her. 

Before the day was over Maud received the 
following words : — 

The story of the unhappy accident by which your unfortu- 
nate cousin met his death has not changed my love, Maud. 
Let the subject never be named again between us. No 



300 cecesus's WIDOW. 

human eye saw what took place on that miserable day at 

Redcote Farm ; then let no human tongue ever speak of it. 

I will call to see you to-morrow evening, and let us not think 

of the past, but of the bright future which I trust may still 

be before us. 

Yours faithfully, 

Johx Dalton. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE SILENT WATCHER. 

Bitter, miserable tears were shed over this 
letter — bitter, bitter tears. Maud knew not of 
the struggle which had passed through John 
Dalton's heart ; knew only that his love and 
his generosity were very great. But she had 
not told him all, she thonght. There was 
still a secret — that terrible letter in which she 
was warned that her cousin's death agony was 
not unseen. 

" I will tell him," she decided. But when 
John Dalton came, her courage failed her. He 
took her in his arms, he kissed her lips, and she 
felt she could not make their meeting miser- 
able. 

Yet she was nervous and ill at ease. When 
John Dalton spoke of their future, she only 
gave very vague and uncertain answers. They 



302 croesus's widow. 

were all alone, for Mary had started in the 
morning on a short visit to her sister-in-law, 
Miss Stivers. Mary felt that she was better 
away. She was sure now that Dalton cared for 
Maud, and she could not trust herself — could 
not be sure of her self-control if she saw them 
together. 

So she told Maud she was going away for a 
few days. She tried to be kind in her manner 
when she said this, and yet she knew she was 
not kind. But Maud scarcely noticed the differ- 
ence. She was thinking of her coming meeting 
with John Dalton — thinking of the letter of 
which it seemed so hard and difficult to tell. 

She tried twice to do this when he came in 
the evening. Once when he came into the 
room ; and again when they were about to 
part. 

" If — if — I could but forget," she faltered, 
and her head fell upon his breast. 

" Maud," answered John Dalton, almost 
sternly, " you must forget. Let the past be 
blotted out of your existence ; you are about 
to begin a new life — begin it to-day." 

" Yes," said Maud, and she had not courage 
to say more. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 303 

She went with him into the little garden in 
front of the house and stood talking with him 
there — talking almost as happy lovers talk. 
But the dark shadow still lay heavy upon her 
heart ; the shadow which at that moment was 
creeping closer and closer on her path. 

For scarcely had she parted with John 
Dalton — while his touch still lingered on her 
hand — before she was startled by hearing her 
name uttered, or rather whispered, by a man 
who seemed to her to be a passing stranger. 

She was leaning on the railing of the little 
garden. It was bright moonlight ; John Dal- 
ton's tall figure had just vanished in the silvered 
haze, when that hoarse whisper fell upon her 
ears — 

" Miss Eliot r 

Maud looked up with a startled gaze. 

By the moonlight she saw a man standing 
on the other side of the railing ; a man with a 
soft felt hat slouched over his face, and with 
kerchief tied so high on his chin that it seemed 
as if it were done for some purpose of disguise. 

Maud looked at this man, and then without 
speaking raised herself up from the garden 
railing and began to move towards the house. 



304 CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

But again her name came hissing to her ears 
through the misty night-haze. 

"Miss Eliot, I want to speak to ye." 

Maud turned cold with fear. But she moved 
a step backwards and faced the man. 

" What do you want ? " she asked. 

" D ye mind me ? " half- whispered the man, 
and he pulled the 'kerchief down from his face 
and pushed his felt hat back from his brow. 
Then Maud remembered the man ; remembered 
the straight features, the brown skin and the 
dark, gleaming eyes of Jack Foster, the 
poacher ! 

She turned sick and faint ; she grasped the 
railings for support. 

" I don't want to harm ye, Miss," went on 
the man. " Ye played me a shabby trick, and 
took no heed of the lines I sent ye from 
Dereham gaol, though I had held my tongue 
when I might maybe have had ye hanged if 
I'd spoken. But I held my tongue because 
George Eendall but got his due, when ye felled 
him that day wi' the hammer in the loft." 

" Hush, hush, for God's sake, hush !" cried 
Maud, and she fell against the railings utterly 
overcome. 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 305 

Jack Foster gave a low laugh. 

" Ay," he said, " and yet ye would not lift 
ye'r finger to get that gentleman who spoke up 
in the court for Jenny, to speak for me ! I got 
six months for shooting a bird or two, for 
there was naught else against me, and he would 
have got me off if ye had but said a word. 
However that's done and gone, and I've not 
come here to talk about it. I've come for 
something else — Jenny found out where you 
were, and — " 

" Well ? " said Maud, and she lifted her 
white, stony face, and looked at the man with 
some of the courage of despair. 

Still Jack Foster hesitated. 

" Ye see, Miss," he said, twisting and 
moving uneasily, " Jenny Wren didn't behave 
right to me once. Before she went to Kedcote 
she and I had sweet-hearted a bit ; but when 
she got there she took up wi' Mr. George. Ay, 
I know she did," continued the man, almost 
fiercely, " though now she says but idle talk 
passed between them. But she turned her 
back on me, anyhow — but that, too, is all come 
aud gone ! George is lying in his grave, and 
Jenny paid dear enough for what she'd done ; 



306 cbxesus's WIDOW. 

though Lad the trial orone against her I would 
have spoken up, though I knew I might get 
my own neck into trouble if I did. 

" Why ? Why have you come now, then ? " 
said Maud, still looking at the man. 

" It was Jenny thought of it first," answered 
Foster. " Ye see, miss, I was awful riled that 
ye would not try to help me after I sent ye 
the lines — and Jenny had stood by me in my 
trouble — and when I got out of quad we got 
together again, and the end of it is we want to 
try our luck together across the seas. Jenny 
got out what I knew about George's end, and 
she thought ye would be glad to give us a help- 
ing hand, and get us both clean out of the 
country, and so she got to know where ye were 
through some lass that had once lived wi' the 
parson's wife at Norseley, and she sent me here.' 

" And you want," faltered Maud, " money — 
money to go away." 

" That's just it, miss ! We want money 
enough to take us both to Australia, and set up 
in a bit of a place of our own there. Three 
hundred or so will do it ; and it's not much to 
pay a fellow for holding his tongue, when a 
word would land ye in a goal." 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 307 

" What do you know ? " asked Maud, almost 
sternly, for she was driven to bay. " Where 
were you when — when George Rendall died ? " 

" I was kneeling under the loft window, Miss,. 
at the back o' the stable. I'd been hanging 
about the place the best part of the day, and I'd 
watched George wi' Jenny most an hour talking 
in the stable-yard. Then ye came and ran 
across the yard wi' rage written on ye'r face, and 
went up to the loft after George. The window 
was open in the loft, and I heard what ye said 
— then ye felled him, and — " 

But a cry of such anguish here interrupted 
Foster, that the man paused. 

" Don't take on so, miss," he said a moment 
later, with a rough idea of consolation. " George 
only got his due, and Jenny says the same. If ye'll 
fork out the brass no one will ever be the wiser." 

" I will think," said Maud, and she put her 
hand to her head. " I will write — where shall 
I write ? " 

" Just drop a bit line to The Silent Watcher, 
care of the landlord o' the Seven Stars, in 
Lupus Street, where I'm putting up. He's a 
friend o' mine, and in the same line o' business 
on the quiet, and he'll take care o' the lines, 



308 crcesus's WIDOW. 

and the Silent Watcher will do as well as 
another name." 

" The Silent Watcher ! " repeated Maud, and 
again she put her hand to her head. She felt 
stunned ; everything seemed whirling round 
her, and it took all her strength to be able to 
stagger into the house. 

When she got there she sat down, and 
moaned aloud, as if in deadly pain. It was 
more than she could bear, she thought — more 
than she could bear ! 

Then she crept up to her own room, and lay 
all through the night moaning and waking. 
But in the morning hideous dreams came to 
her in snatches of sleep that was not rest. 
Presently she got up, and stared out of the 
windows at the rolling river, and her mind 
seemed to follow the water, and she began to 
forget, and to feel only in a dark maze, from 
which there was no escape. 

She tried to rouse herself ; tried to thiuk. 
What could she do ! Tell John Dalton — no, 
no, no — and she moaned again. What could 
she do? she kept repeating, but she did nothing, 
sitting all day without food, without settled 
thought, without hope. 



THE SILEKT WATCHERS. 309 

In the evening John Dalton came, and was 
shocked and startled by her appearance. 
There was a wildness in the gleam of her dark 
eyes that he had seen before, that struck a chill 
feeling of fear into his soul. He was very 
gentle to her, and spoke only soothing words ; 
but her answers were so vague, and her manner 
so uncertain, that he left her full of alarm. 

Then another dark night came, and during 
it the unhappy girl lost control over her reason, 
and she began singing at midnight in the voice 
of madness. The maid-servant in the house 
heard, and crept downstairs, and listened 
breathlessly to that wild melody, and in the 
early morning she sent for John Dalton. 

When he came, Maud did not know him. 
She was sitting up in bed, drawing her fingers 
through her long hair, and babbling ceaselessly. 
It was a pitiful sight ; pitiful even to strangers, 
but bitter, bitter pain to the man who loved 
her, who had been ready to sacrifice so much 
to call her his wife. 

There was a dismal burden to her song too. 
Ever and again she called out that she saw the 
Silent Watchers — that countless eyes were 
gleaming at her — a voice calling on her name. 



3 i CRCESUS'S WIDOW. 

John Dalton stood and listened, and grew 
pale at some of her wild words. He telegraphed 
for Mary, and before the evening that gentle 
woman was again watching by Maud's bedside. 
" She was very ill," the doctor told them ; " it 
was the brain," and he asked if any great 
trouble or anxiety had lately fallen upon her. 

Mary and Dalton looked at each other at 
the doctor's question. Then Dalton spoke. 

"She has had great trouble and anxiety," 
he said ; "a painful tragedy had happened in 
her family, and she had brain fever at the time, 
and had never quite recovered from its effects." 

The doctor looked very grave. 

" A second attack," he said, "is very serious; 
the poor young lady must be carefully watched." 

They watched her all that day, and for 
many days, but no change ever came. Always 
the same wild song, always the same wild 
words, but by-and-bye the voice grew weaker, 
and the bright glittering eyes more dull. 

Then one night, in the grey twilight, Maud 
Eliot died. John Dalton was sitting by her 
side ; he was holding her poor quivering hand, 
when quite suddenly she started up in her bed, 
and called out his name. 



THE SILEXT WATCHERS. 311 

" John ! John ! " she cried, " don't let them 
take me — don't let them take me ! " And she 
fell forward into Dalton's arms. 

He drew her to his breast, he lifted her head, 
but as he did so, with a long quivering sio-h, 
Maud's spirit passed, and her broken, miserable 
heart grew still. 

It was midnight before Dalton left the house 
where Maud's still form now lay. His head 
was bowed on his breast, and great bitter grief 
was in his heart. But he had made but little 
moan. He had stooped down and kissed her 
after they had straightened her poor limbs, and 
crossed her hands meekly on her breast, and 
Mary knew when she saw this, that had Maud 
lived, John Dalton would have made her his 
wife. 

As Dalton then left the house, where the 
poor dead girl lay, a man came up and addres- 
sed him, who had been lurking about for hours 
outside. 

" How is Miss Maud, sir ? " he said. " How 
is the young lady ? " 

Then John Dalton lifted his head, and looked 
at the man, and by the lamp-light he recog- 



312 CRCESUS's WIDOW. 

nised Jack Foster, the poacher, from Eedcote. 

" You here ? " exclaimed John Dalton. 
" Then — " And he began to understand 
Maud's sudden illness. 

" How is Miss Maud to-night, sir ? " re- 
peated Foster. 

" She is dead," answered John Dalton sternly. 
" What are you doing here ? " 

"Dead!" said Foster, and he staggered 
back. " Surely not dead, sir ? It can't be — 
it can't be what I said that killed her ? " 

" What did you say ? " said John Dalton. 
" Tell me the truth, for nothing can hurt her 
now." 

Then Foster told the same story to Dalton 
that he had told to Maud. He had overheard 
the quarrel between the cousins ; he had heard 
the thud of the fatal blow. But partly from 
fear of the consequences to himself, lest he 
should be suspected of the murder, he had kept 
silence on the subject. His motive for now 
seeking Maud was money, he said — money, so 
that he might marry Jenny Wren and begin a 
new life in another country. 

Dalton scarcely spoke till the man's tale was 
done. Then harshly and fiercely he said — 



THE SILENT WATCHERS. 313 

u You have killed her ! Fool — why did you 
not come to me ?" 

Foster was really repentant. 

u I would not have said a word, sir," he said, 
" if I had known what I was doing. But 
Jenny wanted me to come, so I just came." 

But after a few moments' reflection, Dalton 
thought of Maud's memory. 

" You want money to go out of the country?" 
he said to Foster. " If I give you a hundred 
pounds will you and this woman leave England 
for ever, and never name again — George 
Kendall's death ? " 

Foster was but too glad to accept this offer. 
He married Jenny, and went to Australia, and 
we must hope they are doing better in their 
new country than they did in the old one. 

They, however, kept their promise while in 
England, and spoke no more of the tragedy at 
Eedcote Farm. Nor did John Dalton ever 
speak of it. Maud was buried in one of the 
great city cemeteries, and lay there unknown 
and unnoticed. But she was not quite for- 
gotten. A busy and ambitious man sometimes 
turned out of his daily path to stand a few 
moments by Maud Eliot's grave. But he 



314 CRCESUSS WIDOW. 

never spoke of these visits — never to the young 
widow who still lived on in the little house at 
Chelsea, and to whom John Dalton talked of 
most things that occurred in his energetic life. 
Not even when time went on, and Mary grew 
nearer and dearer to him, did he ever speak of 
Maud ; not even when Mary bore his name, 
and cheered and lightened his labours. On 
this subject he was silent, for he was one of 
those who never speak of the deepest feelings 
of their hearts. 



The End. 



