DOKOTHY FIREBRACE 



 CHAPTER I. 



THE HOLIES OF ASTON HALL. 



^ 



It was on the usual Thursday Market Day in Birming- 

.r-liam, in the year of grace 1642 . if the term can be 

h* properly applied to the date of the commencement of 

<{^ the great Civil War of England. But, at all events, still 

at a time when market days were occasions of general 

gathering and movement in the towns and neighbour- 

t>j hoods where they were held . when Edward Holte, 

^Esquire . eldest, and, indeed, only surviving legitimate 

^ son and heir presumptive of the worshipful Knight and 

; Baronet, Sir Thomas Holte, of Aston Hall . rode into 

Q^e town from the direction of that then not very long 

^finished and magnificent specimen of English domestic 

,j architecture under the Stuarts. 

^ This cavalier was apparently still a young man, though 

past the earliest flush of youth . the first blythe and 

bounding exultation, rather than mere enjoyment of 

*^ existence, natural in the attainment of a healthy and^ 

^ VOL. I. B 

4^' 



2 THE AEMOUREHS DAUGKTER. 

higli-blooded maturity of manhood. And such had, for 
ages, been as much a part of the inheritance of Ed- 
ward Holte's race, as any of their numerous manors and 
other possessions scattered profusely in the neighbour- 
hood of Birmingham. Or else peculiar circumstances 
had cast a shade of depression and melancholy over the 
features of this young man of five-and-twenty summers 
only, that would better have become the wintry side of 
life. Otherwise, his countenance was exceedingly hand- 
some and engaging, from its expression of sentiment and 
intellect, mingled with an air of gentleness and refine- 
ment that spoke almost equally well for the qualities of 
mind and heart of their possessor. 

It must be admitted that the lineage whence the 
heir of Aston sprang, needed some such variety in its 
exhibition of the kind of fruit from which the tree 
was to be known. For, from the time when a sturdy 
blacksmith of Birmingham founded the family by the 
strokes of the anvil . so the tradition ran . the Holtes 
of Erdington, Duddeston, and, finally, now of Aston 
Hall, had been renowned in their country for a pecu- 
liarly haughty and masterful bearing, which was far 
from acquiring them the good will, or even respect, of 
their neighbours of the town. 

On the contrary, it served to keep alive the memory 
of their origin, in the indignation inspired by the con- 
trast of the sway and tyranny they assumed in their 
new position ; particularly with a people of such inde- 
pendent freedom of speech and action as the townsmen 
of Birmingham, who seemed to have acquired both from 
the ring and metal of their own forges. But the more 
ancient gentry and nobility of the country were long 
supposed, also, to regard with disfavour the forward pre- 



THE irOLTES OF ASTON HALL. 3. 

tensions and bustling arrogance of what was still looked 
upon as a new race, during a considerable portion of the 
two centuries and a half, in which it had been rising in 
wealth and possessions. 

It was not found easy, however, to withstand the in- 
fluence of these latter claims to distinction, backed as 
they mostly were, in the Holte generations, by personal 
qualities of an imposing and formidable description. 

In particular, the representative of the family at the 
period of the seventeenth century alluded to, was con- 
sidered, with some reason, to ' out-Herod ' all the 
previous Herods of his race. 

He had built a mansion which, in grandeur and 
expense of decoration, rivalled a princely palace, in the 
notions of the age. He had surrounded it by the en- 
closures of a park, w^hich hemmed in the town in the 
direction its natural extension would most conveniently 
have pursued, besides depriving it of a tract of common 
land that had long been of use and recreation to the 
inhabitants. And, no longer satisfied with the rank of 
a country squire, achieved with difficulty by his 
ancestry, nor even with the honour of knighthood from 
the hands of his sovereign. Sir Thomas Holte had 
bought for himself one of the new hereditary titles, 
which excited at once the ridicule and indignation of 
the possessors of the ancient degrees of nobility. He 
was a baronet by purchase . and at a cost which, in 
those days, was held to be of fabulous enormity. But, 
in addition to all these offences, the new baronet was 
personally a man who appeared to combine in his 
attributes all the least popular and commendable 
qualities of his progenitors. He was said to be of an 
extraordinarily violent and tyrannical character, and 

B 2 



4 THE ArvMOURELS DAUGHTER. 

report figured Lim as living in Lis stately seclusion at 
Aston Hall, more in the style of an Eastern despot than 
a modern English gentleman . with all his family and 
vassalage trembling around him. 

To be sure, the place where these reports were most 
believed in, and possibly invented, was very unfavourably 
disposed to the Holtes in general. Aston Hall and 
Birmingham had been at feud almost from the laying 
of the first stone of the building, so close upon it, till 
now, when it towered in all its pride and novel splen- 
dour, and seemed to rebuke the mechanical genius of 
the town by its displays of consequential gentility. 

Like a proper English country squire, besides, Sir 
Thomas Holte rigorously preserved the game on his 
lands, and on the Crown wastes of Sutton Coldfield, of 
v/hich he was Ranger. On the other hand, the bold 
and hungry commonalty of the town were irresistibly 
tempted by the joy of forbidden sport, and the sight of 
the fat bucks, pheasants, and wild ducks that were in 
such plenty over the whole territory in question, to acts 
of depredation and spoil. These were resented in the 
most vigorous manner by the Aston baronet; and as 
he was in the commission of the peace, and enjoyed 
numerous far more arbitrary privileges and powers as a 
royal officer of the chase, he was often enabled to visit 
chastisements on the aggressors, the severity of which 
secured him an amount of bitter ill-will seldom attained 
by any private individual. And now, to cro\yn all, the 
great division and quarrel of the English people, as 
a nation, found the baronet and his ingenious artificer 
neighbours at complete issue and variance on all the 
main points in the dispute. 

Possibly it would have been enough for the lower 



THE HOLIES OF ASTON HALL. 5 

orders of the townspeople of Birmingham to have known 
which side Sir Thomas Holte had embraced, to ranofe 
them on the opposite one. But, like nearly all the 
larger rising towns of England at the time, not depen- 
dent on the soil, but engaged in commerce or the 
mechanical arts, Birmingham had adopted with eager- 
ness and enthusiasm the new ideas, both in policy and 
religion, that had long been spreading in secret among 
the masses of the people. 

A sturdy love and maintenance of personal freedom 
had ever, indeed, been remarked as native-born and 
habitual in the feelings and habits of Birmingham men. 
And doctrines so congenial to their natural tastes and 
instincts, as were now universally diffused from the great 
centre of English public opinion, found a more than 
ready acceptance among them. Birmingham, in con- 
sequence, vehemently adhered to the cause of the Parlia- 
ment, when the time for declaration arrived, ao-ainst 
the vacillating and yet headstrong efforts of Charles the 
First to change the constitution of his kingdoms into a 
despotism . while equally, as a matter of course. Sir 
Thomas Holte took sides in the quarrel with a sovereign 
of so similar a character and views. 

Not to mention that Sir Thomas was under personal 
obligations and service to his Prince, it was highly 
necessary for a parvenu baronet, who aspired to com- 
plete his grandeur and elevation by a loftier title of 
nobility, to show a marked zeal and forwardness in the 
support he lent to his sovereign's cause, now that it was 
cast on the last arbitrament of the sword. For the Kino-, 
having retired . or, rather, having been driven . from 
London to York, had for some time been assembling an 
array, under whose protection he proposed to raise his 



6 THE armourer's LAUGHTER. 

royal standard, and advance to the overthrow and 
chastisement of the rebellious Parliament; while the 
Parliament, on its part, marshalled tiie Londoners and 
the rest of its partisans into a host likely to render the 
enterprise of great doubt and difficulty in the execution. 
A personage of such a character and demeanour in 
external relations, as those ascribed to Sir Thomas 
Holte, was not likely to prove a very kind or indulgent 
father and master of a family ; and domestic discomfort 
of this sort mio^ht have had somethinor to do with the 

CD O 

pensive and sorrowful cast of expression observable in 
the looks of the young heir of Aston. But reports were 
also afloat that Master Holte . as he was called . and 
his father differed considerably in their notions on 
public affairs. 

Both were, indeed, royalists, in the main stamp of 
opinion ; but they were not so well agreed in the quality 
and degrees of their adherence to the cause thus 
embraced. 

Despotic and overbearing in his personal tastes. Sir 
Thomas Holte was all for the high-handed exercise of 
power and authority, and talked of nothing but riding 
up to the saddle-bows in the blood of those plebeian 
traitors and contemners of lawful dominion who had 
exalted their horns in the London Parliament. His 
son. perhaps from practical experience of the effects 
of imcontrolled power . Vv\as an advocate for milder 
measures, and a reconciliation which should compose 
differences, without exalting or depressing either great 
balancing power in the State to the destruction of the 
other. 

Edward Holte had been the bosom friend of the 
accomplished and generous Falkland at the University, 



THE IIOLTES OF ASTON HALL. 7 

and, like him, had hoped on against hope to the last, 
that means miofht be found to reconcile the contendinof 
factions at a less price than a torrent of English blood, 
poured forth by English hands. But the hatred and 
exasperation of parties had now passed all such saving 
limits ; or the rash elation and conceit of the Royalists, 
at having the person and still venerated majesty of the 
royal name engaged on their side, no longer permitted 
a hearing to moderate counsels. 

The stern old man at Aston was not likely to be the 
last to share in the rising furor of determination on the 
part of his faction ; and, as the Holtes very seldom went 
into Birmingham for their pleasure, it was a probable 
supposition, now that the baronet had imposed his own 
energetic will and resolves upon the milder and more 
submissive genius of his heir, that Master Holte was 
in the town on business connected with the arming 
of the Aston tenantry on the side of the King. 

It was, at all events, very well known in Birmingham 
that King Charles's commission of array had arrived in 
AYarwickshire, and was being put into execution by the 
zeal of the principal country gentlemen ; though the 
Lord-Lieutenant, Lord Brooke, taking part with the 
Parliament, refused all assistance ; and that, among the 
leading spirits on the King's behalf. Sir Thomas Holte 
was exhibiting extraordinary zeal. According to the 
report, he was forming the chief of the able-bodied 
yeomen on his estates into a body of horse, under the 
command of his son. 

Only heir and lawful representative of the name, as 
young Edward Holte remained, his sire seemed not to 
grudge the exposure of his life in the bloody game 
about to be played. But, probably, like the greater part 



8 THE armourer's daughter. 

of the Eoyalist faction, at the time . elate with the pride 
and presumption of birth and territorial possession . 
Sir Thomas thought the struggle with the 'rascally 
mobs ' that backed the Parliament, would be brief, and 
dangerous only to the ' citizen and rabble routs,' which 
were believed to form its main dependence. Among 
these, pillage and massacre were speedily to do their 
worst, in the calculations of civil hatred and revenge, 
in which aristocratic contempt and notions of supe- 
riority, natural to the class that for so many ages alone 
wielded the sword, largely mingled. 

The Holtes, it is certain, would have sought in vain 
for recruits among the townsfolk of Birmingham ; but 
the agricultural population, as a rule, implicitly^ 
followed the will and pleasure of the landlords and 
other ancient masters and leaders of their class; and 
the large landed possessions of the family placed means 
of influence in this respect at his disposal, which it 
could not be doubted the Aston Baronet was very well 
inclined to exert. 



CHAPTER IL 

BIEMINGHAM 221 TEARS AGO. 

It was evident Edward Holte's business lay in no degree 
with the principal cause of that day's assemblage in the 
town. He scarcely bestowed a glance on the trains of 
market goods, and merchandise of various descriptions, 
slowly lumbering past him in carts, or on the backs of 
weary, spavined horses, which, tottering under piles of 
loaded sacks, performed such portion of the labour of the 
railway and canal of our day, as was needed by the much 
inferior demands of traffic and manufacture in that. 

Then, as now, the ' Black Country ' forwarded, as to 
a central unloading place, the products of its darksome 
industry, chiefly in small tumbril carts, to suit the nar- 
row, deeply-sunk roads, into Birmingham ; in several of 
which, up to a much later period, a load of straw, piled 
till it nearly overbalanced the carriage, scarcely showed 
above the edges of the way. And the leather-clad, 
sooty-faced attendants on this needful supply to the 
forges of Birmingham . already famous, time out of 
historic memory, for the productions it now furnishes 
to the entire world . it was plain, examined with no very 
friendly attention the general figure and appearance of 
the young cavalier. And, if his broad plumed hat . his 
flowing bright brown curls . his fine features and grace- 



10 THE armourer's daughter. 

fill bearing . his riding cloak of mulberry-coloured 
velvet . bis richly embroidered collar, high boots, and 
gold rowelled spurs . excited their admiration, as a 
display of the polish of civilised life . these gnomes 
of the coal mine seemed rather disposed to express the 
feelings awakened, in coarse and gibing remarks, not 
unfrequently akin to open insult and ribaldry. 

The latter form of salute was, it is true, chiefly 
directed against the two well-mounted and well-armed 
domestics of Aston. Their scarlet livery coats, as 
serving men, distinguished by the squirrel badge of the 
Holtes, seemed in particular to excite notice and ill-will, 
the more especially as they took every opportunity to 
return jeer for jeer, and rough practical joke for joke, 
as they dashed along in attendance on their master. 
Indeed, it required, more than once, a considerable 
display of patience and dexterity on the part of the 
young gentlenlan, to avoid some uncomfortable collision 
or dispute with these Black Country folk, whose vehicles 
had, in several places, almost complete possession of the 
road. And, though accustomed from his childhood to 
legends of the wild manners and hardy independence 
of these people, Edward acknowledged to himself, with 
a sigh, that the signs of an altered and democratic age 
appeared in the increased sturdiness and disdain of all 
former admitted pretensions to social superiority, he had 
now so ample occasion to remark. 

Birmingham was a very different town in its external 
aspects, in 1642, to what it presents at the present day. 

It was a manufacturing town, it is true, and had 
been so from the earliest ages of English history. It 
enjoyed almost a unique reputation in England for all 
the arts of Tubal Cain . all the products of the bellows 



BIRMINGHAM 221 YEARS AGO. 11 

and the forge. But its size was not in any proportion 
to its renown ; and, had not the whole mass of the 
inhabitants been engaged in the staple industry of 
the place, it would be difficult to imagine how it could 
have supplied the wants, even of scattered and unpo- 
pulous communities like those of England . and of 
Europe in general . at the time. 

Instead of a population of 290,000 living souls, 
Birmingham reckoned scarcely 6,000. 

Fifteen streets and nine hundred houses lodged this 
population, accordingto the lively, but, perhaps^ too imp.- 
ginative locpJ historian, Hutton. Equal to the demand, 
certainly, even if Birmingham had already acquired its 
sensible liking for space and separation into families 
that now distinguishes it. But the lofty chimneys, 
towering like the burning genii of the place, in an 
Arabian tale, did not yet exhibit their sombre majesty 
over a sea of murky smoke and cloud. The smithies, 
scarcely raised above the general run of two-storied 
houses, and chiefly confined to the lov/er portion of 
the town, sent forth their temperate volumes of sooty 
vapour, each from its separate range of open timber-work, 
to the streets. Everywhere else, Birmingham presented 
the aspect of a quiet country town, reposing in the 
midst of fields and woodlands, not yet stripped of vege- 
tation and verdure by the flaming breath of a thousand 
furnaces. 

From Aston Park, a succession of fi.elds and orchards 
occupied almost all the space now covered with a tangled 
maze of streets and habitations, to Grosta Grreen and 
Kewhall Street. As yet, St. Philip's w^as not ; and only 
a part of Bull Street. At the Welsh Cross, Edward 
Plolte mio^ht be said first to find himself in the town. 



12 THE AR:1I0UREK's DAUGnTER. 

Then, traversing the long, irregular High Street, he came 
upon that broad triangular space sloping downward to 
the Church of St. Martin, from time immemorial used 
as the market-place of Birmingham. 

The rider's glance caught, almost unconsciously, the 
summit of the beautiful spire of this edifice, rising in 
airy elegance over the mingled and bustling scene below, 
and yet sinking so singularly from all the lines of 
approach. Edward was absorbed in thought, and this 
was too customary an object to break his reverie. 

Neither might anything equally wonted in the market- 
day aspect of the enclosure he now traversed, have 
disturbed it. The lines of open booths all round 
the church3^ard walls, displaying most of the hardware 
products of Birmingham . each attended as salesman by 
the brawny artist himself, who troubled no middleman 
with the task ; the orderly ranges of carts, containing the 
vegetable produce of the surrounding districts, set back 
to back, like the chariots of a British encampment, 
down the centre of the space ; the bellowing herds of 
kine and oxen, penned in movable hurdles before the 
shambles for which they were destined; but allotted, by 
our humaner ancestors, in that respect, plentiful food 
and troughs of water, during the intermediate stages of 
bargain and sale ; the rows of ruddy farmers along the 
Corn Cheaping, as it was called, disdaining not to stand 
by their open sacks of barley, wheat, and rye; and 
presenting sample and bulk together to the purchaser . 
the steeds bestridden to market by these worthies, being 
tethered by the l)ridle before the doors of the numerous 
inns, which paraded the most curious ensigns . not 
merely names . without need of a licence, wherever the 



EIP.MINGirAM 221 YEARS AGO. 13 

eye glanced round the thick enclosure of low-roofed, 
carved, gable-end houses. 

All this had nothing striking or unusual in it for 
Edward Holte. 

Neither the Market Cross itself, which formed a 
conspicuous object in the scene to strangers, being an 
old Saxon sculpture of a crucifixion, elevated on a flight 
of granite steps, the whole worn almost to shapelessness 
by time and exposure . nor the well-accustomed appa- 
rition of the Bailiff of Birmingham (Birmingham being 
at the period only the appendage of a feudal lordship) 
sitting, as it were, enthroned in an old carved oak chair, 
just below the cross; garbed in a worm-eaten antique 
costume of coloured quarterings, resembling a herald's 
sleeveless coat or tabard. 

This functionary . a fat, jolly-looking man, with a 
corporation that might have supplied the town's lack 
of one . ^was undignified enough to be fast asleep at the 
moment, coram j^opulo, and even snoring aloud. But 
nobody heeded him. And yet he had a row of stocks 
behind him, and a banner waved over him from a gibbet, 
to denote the Lord's right (long disused) of inflicting 
capitcd xjiinishnent on offenders within the jurisdiction 
of the manor, the Justiciary besides being attended 
by four or five officials of inferior rank, with scales 
and measures, whose occupation was probably not so 
completely gone. 

Antique feudal customs of all kinds were still in too 
general vogue to excite any special wonder, even in a 
philosophical student of his age like Edward Holte. 
Yet . proceeding in deep thought, as he was . he could 
not avoid being struck, a little further on in his advance. 



14 THE AmiOURER's DAUGETER. 

by the aspect of a portion of the crowded resort he had 
now come upon. 

This was a part of the enclosure of dwelling-houses, 
on the eminence directly facing the Church of St. 
Martia, which, at a time w^hen the barbarous pastime of 
bull-baiting was a favourite amusement of the English 
populace everywhere, received a name from the practice 
. extended to the entire space, in the end. 

The tortured animal was chained for the ' sport ' to a 
massive iron ring, fixed by a staple in a block of stone 
in the rough pavement of cobble-stones. And this was 
universally known in Birmingham as the Bull Ring. 

But now, around the spot dedicated to this cruel 
recreation, a remarkable group was collected, evidently 
for a very different object. Indeed, this group might be 
said, at the moment, to take in the entire motley 
assemblage. 

It was chiefly composed of artisans, the country 
people in general standing aloof, though sharing in the 
general attention . skilful men in most of the manu- 
factures practised at the time in Birmingham . workers 
in iron and in brass, and in the more precious metals ; 
in leather and in steel . armourers of all kinds . 
defensive and offensive . makers of swords, daggers, 
pikes, pistols, and carbines, and fashioners of the plates 
of polished metal still used to cover the body from the 
assaults of these instruments, and adapted to its con- 
figuration with extraordinary skill . dyers, glassmen, 
bellows-makers, were here collected, together with 
representatives of all the innumerable varieties of 
ingenious craftsmen who at this day are said to work in 
the ' toy trade' of Birmingham. 

The business of marketing which had collected this 



BIRMIXGIIAM .121 TEARS AGO. 15 

throng was evidently, however, not the one at present 
commanding the general attention, directed in the 
quarter mentioned. The ordinary chaffering and clatter 
of a scene of activity of the kind was lulled, and on all 
sides notice seemed absorbed in a single speaker. 
Women and children were amono: the most eao'er and 
engaged listeners, where listening appeared to be the 
universal business. And, glancing forward with sur- 
prised attention, Edward Holte beheld a figure 
addressing this numerous audience, that certainly, and 
not lightly, aroused his own curiosity and interest. 

It was that of a man of middle age ; of low stature, 
and naturally of slender and delicate proportions in his 
limbs, whose fleshy covering had been so much further 
reduced, seemingly by privations, that he now pre- 
sented little more than the skeleton framework of a 
human being. His features were particularly fine and 
chiselled in the outline ; and the forehead, which was 
expansive, though a little too suddenly thrown back, 
Vv^ould have possessed a character of great benevolence 
and intellect, but for the frenzied glare of the expression 
overspreading the w^hole countenance. This was besides 
ghastly pale in the complexion, and deformed with 
strange, letter-shaped gashes, that gave him something 
of the appearance of a Feejee savage, decorated with 
the emblems of cannibal chieftaincy. But the terrible 
expression that shone over it was chiefly due to the 
eyes, which glowed with such a lustre of passion and 
distempered fervour of meaning, as to a calm looker-on 
appeared nigh akin to, if not quite, insanit}^ The lono^ 
shaggy grey hair seemed as if it had not been combed 
for years, and was tossed back like the mane of a horse, 
revealing also a pair of slit and mutilated ears. 



16 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

As for the garb of this wild figure, it was scarcely 
equal to the requirements of decency, the chief part of 
it consisting of a loose kilt of sack-cloth, scarcely reach- 
ing to his knees from the shoulders. The feet were 
naked and bleeding, and the crouched and distorted 
knees and ankles still visibly bore the marks of fetters, 
and attested great need of the long staff he held, 
curiously branched at the end so as to resemble an 
outstretched gigantic hand. 

From these signs, Edward Holte was not slow to form 
the conclusion that he beheld one of what had of late 
years become a very numerous wandering corps . a 
fanatic enthusiast, who had suffered from the persecu- 
tions of the established powers in Church and State. 
Traces of the pillory and of the pelting of a Eoyalist 
mob, were unmistakably visible in every line of the poor 
man's misused visage, but the letters stamped into it 
were the true handwriting of the merciless Archbishop 
Laud, and attested that the victim had been branded as 
a E. (ogue) and a S. (chismatic) by the hand of the 
executioner, all which decidedly graced the sufferer with 
the honours of martyrdom, and accounted for the half- 
maddened state of mind he exhibited both in looks and 
words. 

Aware that these representatives of persecution were 
among the most formidable signs of the time, Edward 
reined up his horse behind a group of the auditory, to 
take some note of what might be the subject of a dis- 
course that commanded so much attention. His own. 
arrival remained, for awhile, quite unmarked in the 
superior absorption of men's minds . and it is certain 
that, after listening for a few moments, he was no 
longer surprised at this centralisation of notice. 



BIRMIXGIIAM 221 YEARS AGO. 17 

* Wliy marvel ye at my words, gazing at me as at one 
Vv^tio hath no warrant or authority for the terrors of Grod's 
judgment, which I have thus declared among ye, unless 
ye, too, take warning in time, and '.' flee from the wrath 
to come ? " ' the enthusiast was shrieking forth, at the 
pitch of a shrill but piercing and powerful voice. ' Is it 
because that, of a truth, I have declared unto ye that of 
myself I am nothing . even as dust in the balance of the 
scales of the world ? For what am I by birth ? A 
wretched foundling, discovered wallowing in Fleet 
Ditch, in London city, where it had been flung by a 
murderous mother, as a loathsome and abhorred ofifscum 
of guilt and shame ! What by trade or occupation ? 
Even a poor tailor, who had no skill at his work, and was 
discharged of all bread and employment for not having 
wit sufficient to thread the eye of a needle or follow a 
chalking on cloth with the shears ! But He respecteth 
not persons, and out of the mouth of babes and sucklings 
He perfecteth praise ! Worthless worm of the earth as I 
am. He chose me forth as one that should turn on the 
heel of the oppressor, and witness to His truth before 
the scoffer and despiser of the Word, seated in the highest 
place ! See ye not the seal of the testimon}^ burned 
into the flesh of my face, because, having heard the call 
of the trumpet, even in my lowliest and most dismal 
estate, wandering afar in the desert . yea, standing 
shivering, in starvation and rags, on mighty London's 
bridge, and meditating whether or no to seek some way 
through the houses to overleap into the river, and end 
mine earthly miseries . I forthwith girded up my loins, 
and answering, " Yea, Lord, I am here ! " accepted the 
commission wherewith I was then and there char^^ed ! 

o 

. which was, to preach everywhere, throughout the 
VOL. I. c 



18 THE ArvMOUREPt's DAUGHTER. 

length and breadth of England, the coming of the true 
kingdom of Christ upon the earth, before which all 
other powers and dominations thereof shall pass away, 
even as the glory of the sun devours the blaze of torch 
and taper ! The reign of a thousand years of the 
Saints around the Lamb, where sin and pain and grief 
and death shall be unknown, and a joy of purity, even 
as a river of milk, shall encompass all the land ! 

*This did I, through good report and ill report; 
whether the people received me with bread or with 
stones : until such times as the fame of my testimony 
cominsr to the ears of that minor Beelzebub, of some 
styled Laud, Pope of London, I was had before him at 
Lambeth ; and, persisting in the truth, was given over to 
the tormentors ! But quailed my heart in the furnace ? 
Melted my soul within me at the gnashing of the teeth 
of the lions ? Of a surety, no ; though for awhile I 
shook the dust of London city off my feet, and wan- 
dered up and down the length and breadth of the land, 
declaring everywhere the breaking of the dawn! How 
came I else in Nottingham Castle Keep, where, for con- 
tumacy, as they called it, which was in truth obedience 
to God, rather than to man, I have groaned in captivity 
for eleven endless years of days and nights ? For so 
long a season hath the man Charles . the most hateful 
and accursed of all his hateful and accursed race . given 
his sceptre as a rod into the hands of the persecutors, 
and bidden them smite and spare not. 

*But what saw I there . even there . through the 
rusty bars of my dungeon, in the high tower of that 
strong-hold of mercilessness and desolation?' the haran- 
guer continued with yet heightened passion and vehe- 
mence. ' Lo, now ! I saw the upraising of the standard 



bibmingha:.! 221 years ago. 19 

of the tyrant on the loftiest battlemented summit above 
me, amidst the blare of trumpets, the thunder of cannon, 
and the shouts of triumph of the armed men of Satan 
and Belial, thronging all the heights below. But, 
behold ! hardly was it raised, when a blast of the 
fierce v/ind of God's indio-nation seized and rent into rao^s 
the ensign of blood, with all its pagan decorations of 
butchery, horned beasts, and usurped crowns! Yea, 
even tore up the pole it was planted upon . tall as the 
foremast of a mighty ship of war . and flung it head- 
long over the battlements from all its shrieking gear, 
even as a child of ten years tears up a hazel wand and 
tosses it laughing to the winds, stripped of all its flutter 
of leaf and twig ! 

'Myself, I saw it I' the excited speaker continued. 
'With these eyes I beheld the plain manifestation of the 
judgment of Heaven against the tyrant, who then and 
there set up his standard of war and destruction against 
the people of England. And I saw the dismay that 
pierced the hearts of the malignants when they beheld 
what had happened; and how even the stern proud 
man of blood and wrath himself grew pale . paler than 
the whiteness of his tossing plume ! I saw, and I yelled 
forth, Joy ! joy ! until the angry, clouded skies rang again 
with the utterance ; and the tjrrant himself asked what 
shriek that was . not human, and yet that seemed so . 
which ran up and down the castle steeps of Nottingham 
to his ears ? And they were fain to tell him, to comfort 
him, that I was a lunatic ; confined for the cause of 
lunacy, and that alone, in Nottingham Castle jail ! 

'But now that I am an angel, or messenger, well 
approved of Him that is at hand . listen, and believe !' 
The enthusiast went on to announce himself; and, in 

C2 



20 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

truth, drawing up his meagre and exhausted form into 
an attitude almost sublime in its energy of self-assertion. 
' Lo ! haughty Eehoboam's heart was molten within 
him with terror, and his knees slackened when he heard 
mine eagle-yelling of exultation night and day in the 
keep above his castled crags; and the Lord so wielded 
him as an instrument to his purpose that, although 
many about him . and chiefly the young man of blood 
whom they call Prince Palatine, and who thirsts as a 
hungry lion for the blood of the faithful people of Grod . 
would fain have had him put me to death without 
further trial or demand, as one guilty, of old, of unpar- 
donable felony and relapse, the man Charles would not 
have it so, but ordered simply that I should be taken 
from my captivity and cast forth of the town, to wend 
my way whither and how I might. 

^ And now, of a truth, I declare unto ye I was sorely 
minded, and pressed to take my way to London to 
enquire after my wife and children, whether they were 
dead or no : which, for eleven years, I know not, being 
secluded from all sight of them . of every living face of 
man, saving my gaolers, and almost of the glorious sun 
of day, which is the life of the flesh and of the world. 
Though why speak I of them, or that, since in recom- 
pense I was blessed with many great and beauteous 
visions and revelations of marvellous mercies and deli- 
verances in store for the Grod-fearing people of this land, 
and ever-memorable age of time ? But it might not be. 
For, moreover, a Voice spoke unto me, as I tottered 
forth into Nottingham woods to feed my hunger, even 
as the birds and wildlings of the air, on haws and berries, 
but knelt first for direction, saying, Gro not to London, 
go not to London. What are thy wife and children to 



BIRMINGHAM 221 YEARS AGO. 21 

thee in comparison with the work in hand ? And 3"et, 
tarry no longer in tliis country ; but hasten on to the 
good and godly town of Birmingham, where be the 
most potent workers and welders in iron and steel and 
brass of all the living men in the world, and bid them 
prepare the armour and weapons of carnal trust for the 
men of the sword, whom the Lord shall raise in his 
appointed time, to do him right on his adversaries ! 
' This shall you bid them do, as they would shun the 
wrath at hand I Not the wrath of the kings of the earth, 
who usurp the throne of Jesus ; nor of the blood-thirsty 
myrmidons of kings and prelates, who are assembling 
round the usurper at Nottingham ! Flee from the 
WRATH OF THE KiNG OF KINGS, I Say uuto you, w^hom, 
unless ye aid to raise up and place in the supremacy of 
the world, the Angel of the Seals shall break the last 
against you, and the vials of destruction be poured forth 
as a consuming torrent of liquid fire among ye ! Look 
at your furnaces, ye men of Birmingham, and consider 
what that shall be ! 

*As for me, I have spoken; I have delivered my soul. 
They who found me wallowing in Fleet Ditch mire 
called me, in memory of my deliverance, Flotsam. 
\Mien I preached the glory of the thousand years at 
hand, I was everywhere called Kingdom-Come Flotsam. 
But when I stood in the pillory before the palace of 
the tyrant, and w^as reviled and pelted of his soldiers, 
I determined to call myself, in perpetual memory 
thereof, until the horn of deliverance should sovmd, 
Wrath-of-God Whitehall ! So call me henceforth among 
ye, for I will abide here awhile unto the perfectness of 
the w^ork, when I will declare truly who and what I am. 
For I am not what I seem ; nor know I myself well yet 



22 THE armourer's daughter. 

WHO or "WHAT I am. But the beginning must be before 
the end, and the abomination of desolation sit first in 
the place. Only this I say unto ye without parable : 
the day and the hour are at hand, and the text must go 
forth as the breath of the desert consuming a path . 
" Without shedding of blood there is no remission." ' 
Heb. ix. 22. 

With this strangely perverted scriptural quotation 
the speaker paused, but evidently in exhaustion, rather 
of his physical powers, than of his wish to prolong the 
exhortation ; for he continued wildly grasping in the air 
with his disengaged right hand, and muttering and 
foaming at the lips for some time longer; while the 
multitude, gazing at him, evidently in astonishment and 
awe, broke also into a confused murmur, that sounded 
to Edward Holte like an accompaniment of prayer. 



23 



CHAPTER III. 

TUBAL Br.03IYCHA3I. 

Edward was aware, in common with other royalist 
gentlemen, whose immediate exertions had been called 
upon in the Midland Counties, tha.t it was the King's 
intention to raise his royal standard at Nottingham, 
and assemble his army around him there. But he had 
not yet heard of the actual completion of the design, 
so slowly did news travel in those days, unless when 
winged by the zeal of such partisanship as was exhibited 
by the released fanatic, who had witnessed the accident 
that had thereupon befallen. It grieved him much to 
hear tell of so disastrous an omen, as he was w^ell aware 
it w^ould be considered by even his own party; the 
effect on the opposite one needed no further interpre- 
tation. 

The heir of Aston had also long been aware that the 
inhabitants of Birmingham were suspected of some 
strong, though secret, adherence to the new doctrines in 
religion and civil policy which had become prevalent. 
But he was not prepared for so general and vehement a 
tendency of opinion as now became manifest in the 
excited throng. The country people attending the 
market, still, indeed, gaped aloof, with a mixture of 
ridicule and stolid wonder in their ruddy looks. But 



24 THE ahmourer's daughter. 

the townspeople . and especially those workers inmight}^ 
metals who were so emphatically addressed . seemed to 
respond with answering frenzy, * He is inspired of Grod I ' 
Many muttered, withdrawing their brawny arms from 
imder their seared leather aprons, ' Let him tell us what 
to do, and we will do it ! ' 

One young lad of the throng took Edward Holte's 
attention rather particvilarly. 

Perhaps he had no fair claim to be reckoned among 
the craftsmen of the town ; for, by his gait and general 
appearance, he was neither more nor less than a wander- 
ing tinker. His lithe and flowing limbs, his sparkling, 
audacious eyes, his dissipated and vagabond aspect, 
seemed, in truth, to speak of gipsy blood and habits. 
But even this wild youth was taken with the prevailing 
contasrion, and Edward remarked that he shook and 
trembled all over, as if taken with a convulsion fit, and 
finally burst into a passion of tears ; and, ia the language 
of his own immortal. vision at a subsequent period ffor 
it was the young John Bunyan of the future 'Pilgrim's 
Progress'), 'Not being able longer to contain, he broke 
out with a lamentable cry, saying, " AMiat shall I do ? 
What shall I do to save myself from this wrath that is 
coming upon us all ? " ' 

' Ay, master, tell us that ! ^Yhat shall we do ? ' 
enquired another spectator of the group just before 
Edward Holte, in a voice so strong and deep-toned that 
it resembled the bass notes of a church ororan. But it 

o 

was now hoarse and vibrating with emotion. 

Struck with the utterance, Edward glanced at the 
speaker. What he saw removed his surprise at such a 
power and volume of sound. The voice came from the 
broad chest of a figure which might best be described 



TUEAL BEOMYCHAM. 25 

as that of a stunted giant, it was so massive and 
developed in everything but stature ; in consequence, 
it seemed likely, of too early and severe labour in a 
compressed posture . possibly in a coal mine . though 
the brawny bare arms and grimy visage now betokened 
one who had chano^ed the toils of the mine for those of 
the forge. Nevertheless, he was still a young man, about 
the age of Edward Holte. In other respects, the square, 
strong-moulded head, clustered all over with wiry chest- 
nut curls, the well-cut features, the firm compressed lips, 
the ruddy complexion, indicated great energy of will 
and character, and marked unusual purity of Saxon 
descent. On the other hand, the emotion visible in the 
countenance, the tears quivering in the bright blue eyes, 
indicated a susceptibility to impressions and tenderness 
of nature hardly to be looked for in so virile and power- 
ful an outward conformation. 

' What shall we do, I say ? ' this artificer repeated, 
with a kind of musical roar in the vehemence of his 
accents. ^ I, for one, am ready . for anythiog ! ' 

Wrath-of-Grod Whitehall rolled his eyes with a still 
wilder glare over the excited multitude, whose excite- 
ment added fearfully to his own, for actual fire seemed 
to flash from them. 

' ^\Tiat sliall ye do ? ' he yelled, as if himself puzzled 
by the question for a moment . but only for a moment. 
* Will ye obey me ? and I will speak ; ' he resumed. 
' Begin by pulling down the images of Baal and Dagon 
throuo'hout the land I Down with this idolatrous Pa<xan 
fiorure of hewn stone, which Time has not been able to 
destroy ! But the patience of God is exhausted now 
at last, and He is a-weary of the slow teeth of that dog 
of the ccDtiuie^ to destroy! Down with this popish 



26 THE ar^aiourek's daughter. 

and idolatrous Crucifixion, I say, which usurps the 
living presence of the Lord ! Aye, and Vv'ith all that 
defend itl' 

The maddened zealot pointed, as he spoke, to the 
almost shapeless Market Cross, around which the Bailiff 
and his officers had now arisen, with evident marks of 
consternation. 

' By cock and pix ! I should like nothing better than 
a tussle with the Bailiff and his men, who sit for a lord 
of the manor who hath stolen from me mine inheri- 
tance ! ' exclaimed the dwarfed young giant, with a 
joyful shout and clapping of his nervy hands. 

But this zeal received a sudden rebuke. 

^ Peace, Tubal Bromycham I peace ! Hath not my 
father reproved you a thousand times for making your- 
self ever thus foremost in a fray ? And are you not now 
here solely to aid and assist me, his daughter, in m}^ 
marketing ? ' interposed a female voice, whose bright 
and vivacious accents formed a singular contrast to 
the solemn murmuring around. Something also of the 
coquettish and imperious, a^nnouncing the spoilt beauty, 
naturally drew male attention in the direction. Edward 
Holte looked, and saw what riveted his attention for 
awhile. 

There stood a young woman almost immediately 
before him, probably in her eighteenth year ; all the 
formality, and one might say quakeress-like simplicity, 
of whose garb could not disguise the perfect grace and 
swelling modulations of her j^outhful form. Nor did 
the close- drawn brown cloth hood she wore do more 
than cast into a pleasing shade the bright rosiness and 
beauty of her countenance, framed, as it were, in a 
glossy profusion of raven-black, flov;ing hair. Brilliant 



TUBAL bromycha:,!. 27 

hazel eyes, and a lovely dimpling of tlie plump peachy 
cheeks, further fascinated the cavalier's observation ; 
and the degree of bravery and challenge implied in 
this public speaking, so unusual among women ac 
that time, had a peculiarly piquant effect, in associa- 
tion with so much feminine charm and fascination of 
outward appearance. 

The curiosity and admiration expressed in the glance 
Edward Holte turned upon this rare young creature, was 
meanwhile not lost upon her. He perceived her colour 
rise ; but there was also a degree of startled quer}^ and 
recognition in the glance she flashed upon him, and 
then awa}^, which awakened his own reminiscences. 

But he had no time to consider much. The young 
fellow who had been reproved, exclaimed, in a vexed and 
discomfited tone, ^ Here I am, then. Mistress Firebrace, 
with my panniers ! But, if I mistake not, it was your- 
self, good- mistress, stopped first to witness how this 
wrestler with the devil would throw and trample the old 
blackamoor ! ' 

Speaking thus, Tubal Bromycham, as he seemed to 
be called . who, from what passed, appeared to be 
an artificer employed in the furge of some master smith 
of the town, whose housekeeping daughter he had been 
appointed to attend, probably in the capacity of porter, 
for which his evident extraordinary strength well 
qualified him . flourished aloft two large baskets on his 
arms, and moved as if to hustle his way after his young 
mistress through the crowd. But, of a sudden, the lean, 
long hand of the fanatic apostle was laid upon his 
shoulder ; and * Halt, I command thee ! ' he shouted, and 
indeed in an accent that might have arrested the march 
of an army. ' Is this a woman of Moab in the gra'b of 



28 THE aiimourer's daughter. 

one of the pure ones of Canaan ? Hast thou put thy 
hand to the plough, young man of sinew and brawn ! 
and wilt thou now draw back ? No, of a truth, no, 
thou shalt not ! I mark thee forth from this hour as a 
Groliath in the cause of Israel ! Or if thy name be Tubal 
. which is of a godly and scriptural sense . keep and 
deserve it by devoting all the skill and power wherewith 
Grod has endowed thee, to work out the great deliver- 
ance ! Lo ! I, speaking with authority, command thee 
at once to throw down the burdens with which thou art 
laden, even as Issachar, an ass between two masterful 
oppressions, and fall to the work for which thy might 
was given thee. Eend down, root up, cast away, I say 
. and let all who hear, hear ! . this pagan, popish 
image, set up for idolatry of old times among ye ! ' 

Apparently enthralled by the power and solemnity of 
this address, the young blacksmith, as he seemed to be, 
tossed his baskets frantically up in the air, like hoops 
from a girl's wands, though they were partly filled with 
market goods ; and, heedless where they fell, drew his 
leather girdle tight around his waist, and shouted to the 
people : ' Lend hands, then, men of Birmingham ; for, 
surely, it would shame ye to see one at the work alone ; 
though, on such encouragement, meseems I could lift 
St. Martin's Church ! ' 

An uproarious shout responded, and Tubal Bromy- 
cham, bursting his way with the strength and violence 
of an ox rushing from the goad, swept upwards towards 
the Market Cross, with a goodly retinue of the shouters 
in his train. 

'They are bent on mischief; but be not alarmed. 
Mistress Firebrace . as I learn is your name. I have 
business, precisely at this time, in the town with your 



TUBAL BROMYCHAF. 29 

respected father, the armourer, Zachariah Firebrace, 
and I shall feel proud and most happy to be permitted 
to be your escort in safety home,' said Edward Holte, 
alighting from his horse to be of more efficient coun- 
tenance and protection to the fair Puritan, who now 
looked evidently distressed, if not alarmed. 

' I thank you, sir ; even a thousand times I thank 
you. But that poor foolish youth, whom my father 
looks upon as his right hand at the forge, what is he 
about ?' replied the maiden, gazing after her deserting 
attendant. ^ Ah me ! he will get himself and the whole 
town into trouble and outlawry with the Crown, whose 
officers the Bailiff ai^d his men are ! And all the world 
knows what evil comes of that mostly, unless the world 
is turned upside down shortly ! And no one should 
understand that better than poor Tubal himself, who, 
but for the strong hand of unjust authority, instead of a 
working man for wage as he is in Birmingham, should 
be its lord paramount and chief I ' 

Edward Holte rapidly recalled to mind, as he listened 
to these words, a too well-known story of an act of 
perfidious tyranny which had disgraced the reign of 
Edward VI., with regard to a family of the name of 
Birmingham, belonging to that place, or rather to whom 
the place belonged ; for it was doubtful whether they 
had given a name, or derived one^ from Bromycham, as 
the town's was mostly pronounced at that time by the 
inhabitants. So ancient was the dominion, as lords of 
the manor, of the family of Birmingham, but who had 
been deprived of all their extensive estates and rights in 
it, by an act of mingled treachery and violence almost 
incredible, even in the most barbarous ages; by a 



30 THE armourer's daughter. 

feigned process of law and justice certainly, but which 
only added the baseness of hypocrisy and betrayal to the 
most cruel tyranny and spoliation. Unhappily, Edward 
Holte also called to mind at the instant, that one of his 
own ancestors . found a fitting instrument of unjust 
power . had figured with no light share in the perfidy 
and wickedness of the transaction. 

But it was not a time for much reflection on the 
subject. 

' There is no means of hindrance for their madness, 
that I can espy at hand, Mistress Firebrace,' he observed, 
after following, with a brief gaze, the tumultuous onset 
of the crowd : ' though, if you think it can be of any 
use for myself and servants to interfere in aid of the 
Bailiff and his officers, whose duty it is to preserve the 
peace of the town . ' 

' No, good troth, no ! I would not have you, of all 
madnesses, step between these wild people and their 
will ! ' the fair Puritan interrupted him to observe, her 
anxiety appearing suddenly to shift its object. ' The 
Bailiff himself is not the man, believe me, to run 
needless risk. See, he makes no r^istance . nor even 
show of it . but turns his face and flees, with his officers 
at his back. They will make, no doubt, for the moated 
manor-house of the lordship, where, if they have but 
courage left to raise the drawbridge, none can follow 
them. But yonder is Tubal, tearing and rending at the 
old statue with a mad giant's strength and recklessness, 
as if he could tear up an oak by the roots. But 'tis too 
well fixed in its base. Hark ! one calls for crowbars ; 
the tinker supplies his poker. And now, do but listen 
to the strokes of Tubal at the base of the statue ! Do 



TUBAL BROMTCnAJL 31 

but look and see hovf the fire flashes from every blow he 
gives the solid stone, as if it were from the strokes of 
the anvil ! Let us hence . let us hence, fair sir,' the 
young girl concluded, turning to the cavalier with an 
expression in which it was impossible to avoid discerning 
a lively interest, ' for if I am right in believing you are 
one of the honourable Holtes of Aston Hall, there is no 
knowing whither their frenzy may proceed under such 
guidance ! Perchance you know it not, but your house 
is little loved or cherished in our town ! ' 

' I am not afraid, gentle mistress, of a rascally mob 
like this, who are only valiant where they are not 
resisted. I and my servants are well armed ; but I do 
not desire to enter rashly into collision with your angry 
townspeople at this time ; I have quite another object 
in Birmingham. In good time these people will be 
punished, I nothing doubt, to the top of their deserts ; 
but, meanwhile,' Edward Holte concluded, with a smile, 
^I should be tempted rather to scramble a few coins 
among this rabble, as a reward for removing so unsightly 
an eyesore from the only goodly open space in the 
town.' 

' But you do not know . no one of your faction . no 
one at Aston, I would say . Master Holte, knows what 
manner of humour the townspeople of Birmingham are 
now possessed of; and they are not a people to be made 
a jest of in their wrath. Let us hence, if your kindness 
really would protect me safely to my home! ' the lovely 
Puritan replied, with increasing anxiety, amidst the 
groaning uproar of blows and shouts. Bat it was 
pleasingly evident to Edward himself that her solicitude 
was chiefly on his account. 



32 THE ABMOURErv's DAUGHTER. 

It could scarcely be otherwise. Mistress Firebrace 
had little reason for apprehension on her own account, 
from a mob led on by one of her father's principal 
artisans, and who was besides more than suspected of a 
devoted personal attachment to herself; not to mention 
that her father was one of the most wealthy and respect- 
able inhabitants of Birmingham, and of great influence 
in the place, on account of his known attachment to the 
popular and puritan opinions which had of latter times 
gained the complete ascendancy in it. 

*Let us leave them to their work, then : they will find 
it as tough a job as Birmingham has often mastered, 
for this statue seems fixed by the men who set up the 
Red Horse in the Vale of Edgehill,' observed Edward, 
affecting a gaiety which perhaps he did not altogether 
feel. Then, turning from the noisy and uproarious 
scene around the mutilated image, which, in spite of all 
the efforts directed at it, now under the yelling exhorta- 
tions of Y>Tath-of-God Whitehall himself, showed no 
signs of yielding, the cavalier offered his hand with 
graceful courtesy to Mistress Firebrace's acceptance. 

' We shall run the less risk of separation,' he said, with 
a smile that grew in warmth of admiration the nearer he 
surveyed the fair Puritan's charming countenance. * One 
of my knaves can lead my horse, and the other gather 
up your merchandise, and follow with the baskets. Hoi 
Joscelin and Humphrey, do you hear my words ? ' 

The two mounted serving men emulously responded. 
Rapid and implicit obedience to orders was certainly 
among the virtues very practically inculcated in the 
household of Sir Thomas Holte. And Mistress Fire- 
brace, colouring violently, but with a sun-burst of 



TUBAL BROMYCHAM. 33 

pleasure in her bright eyes, accepted the offered con- 
duct. 

This suddenly-assorted company proceeded then to 
take their departure from the scene of uproar; and, 
exclusive attention being now devoted, as usual, by 
the people to the most violent and exciting portion of 
the spectacle, no kind of obstruction was offered to their 
retreat from the market-place. 



VOL. I. 



34 THS AEMOURER's DAUGHTEr, 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE FIREBRACE SMITHS. 

Though not a frequent visitor in the tovrn, Edward 
Holte knew very well in what direction to proceed to 
the abode of a man who was held, at the time, the best 
maker of weapons and defensive armour in Birmingham; 
a man, indeed, who was much more generally known as 
The Smith of Beritend than by his christian and proper 
name of Zachariah Firebrace. Our ancestors had a 
tendency to give a man his trade as a distinguishing 
appellation, so that it would have been no great wonder 
if, like so many others which we may suppose to have 
been lost in that all but universal patronymic, the Fire- 
braces had merged into simple Smiths. But they were 
peculiarly proud of their name, and insisted on keeping 
it in all formal documents and signatures. 

Firebrace itself might seem, however, not remotely 
to refer to the occupation of the race, which had now 
been hereditary in it for three centuries ; and on the 
same spot. Such is the tenacity of family life- and 
residence in Birmingham, where there are numerous 
cases still to be found of a like lengthened association 
between a race and its dwelling-place. But a constant 
and religiously-preserved tradition assured the Fire- 
braces of Birmingham that their name had been origin- 



THE FIREBRACE SMITHS. 35 

ally Ferre-a-bras, or Iron Arm, and was of French and 
cLivalric origin . a fact the}?- were believed to cherish 
with great pride, in spite of their devotion for so long a 
period to a mechanical trade. In reality, there was a 
singular story connected wdth the origin of the Fire- 
braces in Birmingham, not without support in ^risible 
actualities. 

It was said that the founder of the family was one of 
those Knight Templars who, in the fourteenth century, 
fled from France and the persecution set on foot against 
the order by Philip the Fair. The enormous riches and 
power of this body of religious warriors, exciting the 
greed and dread of kings themselves, were probably the 
true causes of the severities of expulsion and punish- 
ment to which they were subjected in almost all the 
countries of Europe, where they had establishments. 
But they were accused of divers enormous crimes, 
including blasphemy, sorcery, and freemasonry ; this 
last* being represented by their enemies as a secret 
conspiracy for the spreading of the most horrible 
heretical, irreligious, and subversive doctrines in religion 
and the state. 

Andomar Ferre-a-bras was, accordingly, among the 
fugitives from the tortures and stakes so liberally pro- 
vided in his native country for the members of his order. 
But a similar persecution breaking out in England 
shortly after his arrival, he had found it necessary to 
hide his real quality and position in obscurity. 

Birmingham, in all times well-renowned for kindness 
and hospitality to strangers, seemed to have offered this 
wanderer some peculiar attraction; possibly a similar 
love for, and skill in, the mechanical arts: for the 
knightly fugitive was said to have betaken himself to 

D 2 



36 THE armourer's daughter. 

the exercise of the craft of a smith very shortly after his 
settlement in Birmingham, and to have raised himself 
and his family to wealth and consequence in the town, 
by the application of his ingenuity to various arts, the 
deeper secrets of which were supposed to be possessed 
by adepts in freemasonry. But, as might be expected, 
the Templar was particularly skilful in the manufacture 
of warlike implements. Hence, the first renown of the 
Old Crown House Forge. So it was styled, even in the 
seventeenth century, from the sign of the house, and to 
distinguish it from a number of more modern ^ Crowns,' 
stirred up by the success in business of the original 
starters of the designation, as applied to a manufacture 
of the kind. 

The Old Croiun House is, in fact, the most ancient 
dwelling-house now remaining in Birmingham, dating 
probably from about the middle of the fourteenth cen- 
tury. Its size and solidity are still in themselves worthy 
of wonder and admiration, considered in relation to the 
resources and general style of domestic architecture in 
the age that raised it ; even by ours, which has built the 
leviathan of the deep, and carried a railway over an arm 
of the sea in an iron tube ; marvels, no doubt, of 
mechanical contrivance, daring, and ingenuity, but 
which will not last five centuries so little impaired ! 

Unshaken in all its massive main timbers, chambers, 
and roofs, to this advanced period of the nineteenth 
century, the Old Crown House still testifies to the 
science and opulence of its original architect and pro- 
prietor, the alleged Templar fugitive. But, even in 
the seventeenth century, it was the case that the Fire- 
brace family was to be considered as having greatly 
shrunk from its original high estate, not in the fact that 



THE FIREBEACE SMITHS. 37 

a portion of the extensive premises belonging to them 
in Deritend was devoted, as a smithery, to carry on the 
labours of vulcanic art . according to the family tradi- 
tions alluded to, Ferre-a-bras had devoted his talents 
with great success in the department of mechanical art 
still pursued by his descendants . but a long course of 
intermarriage with the townsfolk must strongly have 
anglicised, and, truth to say, plebeianised, the blood of 
the illustrious and high-born Templar, when, in the 
seventeenth century, his representative was found to be, 
both as a religionist and politician, all that was most 
opposed to orthodoxy and privilege in either. 

To be sure, the traditions of the race pointed this 
way, from the 'ashes of the piles where the brethren of 
their ancestor had fallen victims to the cruelty and 
spoliation of kings and their abettors : but how com- 
pletely Zachariah Firebrace had yielded to the republican 
and fanatic influences of the age, he himself, it is very 
possible, was scarcely aware as yet. Only he had long 
been known in Birmingham for a man of the sternest 
puritan principles and manners, embittered, as it was 
believed, by certain family misfortunes and disappoint- 
ments ; among these being especially the early death of 
his wife, to whom he was devotedly attached ; and the 
circumstance that, after an uninterrupted descent from 
father to son of three centuries, the race of the famous 
Firebrace Smiths threatened to become extinct in the 
person of Zachariah's only child and heiress, Dorothy 
Firebrace. 

Meanwhile, these singular family legends were be- 
lieved to be supported by certain remarkable circum- 
stances, unless they were in reality the foundation for 
an imacrinative version of the whole. 



38 THE AHMOURER's DAUGIITEn. 

HuDg up in the Church of St. Martin, over the fiimily 
tomb of the Firebraces, was a full and very beautiful 
suit of armour, appropriate to a Knight of the Temple 
in the fourteenth century, and which had certainly 
remained there ever since a certain Andomar Ferre- 
a-bras, armour-smith of the town of Birmingham, 
flourished, died, and was buried in the town thereof. 
The house this skilful fugitive had built, saluted every 
eye that entered from the south, and attested to posterity 
his knowledge in the great art whose apron Solomon 
himself was said to have received at the hands of 
Adoniram, the master-builder of the temple of Jerusa- 
lem. The sign by which the building was distinguished, 
according to a custom not yet confined to houses of 
public entertainment, was reported to be a masonic 
emblem, of unknown, mysterious, and very formidable 
import ; to that degree, indeed, that it was confidently 
reported a carving of the same, on a great internal 
cross-beam of the house, was a kind of magic key-stone 
to support the structure, which had been raised by 
compact with the foul fiend, and would fall to pieces 
the moment the meaning was discovered ! 

In truth, the device in question was rather singular 
and suspicious ; being the likeness of a crown, formed of 
two fleur-de-lis or fioiver-de-hices, turned back to back, 
on either side of a central club or mace. On the right 
of this emblem was a six-sided star, pierced with a small 
circular hole in the middle. On the left, a figure re- 
sembling a double triangle, or mason's levelling plane ; 
no unlikely symbol of some republican hope and purpose 
of the Firebrace race ! 

Be the rest as it may, this device was the trade-mark 
of the productions of the ' Smiths of Deriiend,' and was 



THE fiheeracs SMixirs. 39 

stamped on their weapons and fiiagreed into the breast- 
plates of their suits of armour, and was accepted 
generally as a sure stamp of excellence ; though, 
again, it may only have been the fanciful emblem 
adopted by a Frenchman, from the usual ornaments of 
a ro3^al crown in his country, to denote the superiority 
of his manufacture. 



40 THE AHMOUREH'S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

To reach this famous armourer's, in Deritend, Edward 
Holte's direct way would have been to guide his fair 
companion from the tumult of the market-place along 
the comparatively quiet Corn Cheaping; the agricul- 
turists who frequented this continuing to take little 
other part in the disturbance than to stare at it in the 
distance, and exchange expressions of wonder and con- 
sternation. But he considered it better to avoid these 
crowded and gaping lines of rustic frequenters of the 
market-place; and, proceeding along a row of houses 
behind the churchyard, then called Mercers' Row, now 
Edgbaston Street, the retiring pair speedily passed along 
an unenclosed space around the ancient castellated 
mansion of the Lords of Birmingham. This residence 
was, at that time, and, indeed, until very late years, 
surrounded by a moat ; and thither the affrighted Bailiff 
and his officials could be observed flying for shelter. 
Thence a narrow lane, by a windmill, led into the 
spacious street called Digbeth, and they had nothing 
to do but to wend their way peaceably down it to the 
quarter of the smiths, chiefly at that time in Deritend. 

And now, if the age had been much given to such 
studies, young Edward Holte would not have failed to 



THE xiRMOUEER's DAUGHTER. 41 

remark the influence of race in Mistress Dorothy Fire- 
brace's character and demeanour. In spite of her puri- 
tan antecedents and surroundifigs, and her demure name, 
the gaiety and coquetry of her French blood appeared 
in her expressions and manners, much more than in the 
pretty-well certified account of her descent, or even in 
the sparkling of her vivacious eyes, and the changeful 
richness of the hues of her complexion. 

It was speedily plain that she was not ill-pleased to 
find herself under the escort of so handsome and cour- 
teous a gallant as the heir of Aston was in person, and 
knew well how to exhibit himself in act and word ; and 
whose appearance and demeanour probably contrasted 
advantageously in the imagination of a young woman 
so placed, and endowed with the kind of wit that is 
most sensible of the ridiculous and incongruous in the 
outward aspect of things. 

' My faith ! do but look how the worthy High Bailiff 
half waddles and half flies over hedge and ditch, like 
an affrighted gander back to the flock,' she exclaimed, 
laughing heartily at what was, in fact, rather a ludicrous 
spectacle, considering that the Bailiff was a very fat and 
pursy man, who would have made no bad representative 
of Sir John Falstaff, and was evidently running for sweet 
life. * And this is he who swore so hugeously the other 
day he would put in force the King's proclamation in 
our town, and compellate every man who holds suit and 
service of the manor to stand forth in the commission 
of array on his Majesty's behalf I Yet I am sorry for 
poor Johnny Cooper, too ; 'tis a merry old lad, who 
laughs and grows fat, and means no harm to any one, if 
his wife . who is more royalist than the King himself . 
did not set him on all manner of rancorous dealings, on 



42 THE armourer's daughter. 

that behalf, with the townspeople. And when one 
thinks how unfairly his own masters and setters on, or 
rather, Dame Cooper's, came by their authority, it 
makes the high-handed exercise of it harder to bear 
withal, you know. Master Holte.' 

' It is very like, fair Mistress Firebrace,' replied the 
young cavalier ; ' but, trust me, I am as much surprised 
as any one to find what a progress the new opinions 
have made in your town. It is true, I have not long 
been at home from my university, to make much stay, 
for information ; yet it seems to me a most wonderful 
change to have come over the entire face of things so 
suddenly. It is surely undreamed of at Aston. ^\y 
father must be quite unaware of what men are thinking 
and feeling in Birmingham, to send me here on mine 
errand. There is only one change. Mistress Firebrace,' 
the young cavalier continued, fixing his eyes, which 
kindled lustrously with admiration as he spoke, on the 
beautiful creature beside him, ' that seems to me to be 
for the better, and that is all in your fair self I I remember 
you a bloomy, rosy girl, of twelve or fourteen springs 
merely, whose blossoming promised a lovely flower ; but, 
by my faith, the promise is a thousand times more than 
fulfilled in the expanded beauty of the bud.' 

Dorothy coloured, but evidently with no unpleasant 
excitement in the flush that visited her complexion. 

' Ah, that is what my father and our preachers are 
always saying, and warning us against the sweet blan- 
dishments of speech you courtiers and King's men ever 
have at your command,' she said, laughingly averting 
her glance from Master Holte's warm and eager gaze. 
' But,' she added, in a more serious, almost a sad, tone ; 
* but you are right to consider that your father, and 



THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 43 

those of Ilis belief and consorting, are entirely ignorant 
. nigh neighbours as we are . of what is coming to 
pass among us. My father, I may say, has gone on in 
strides in his opinions of late, ever since a certain 
agent of the Parliament came to reside among us for 
a season, who is a man that speaks not well, or much 
to the purpose, one would say, yet hath a way of mas- 
tering and directing men's wills, in a rough, blunt 
fashion of his own, that is a marvel to me and all who 
witness his effects.' 

' An agent of the Parliament in Birmingham ? WTio 
is he ? For what purpose here ? ' said Edward ; a good 
deal surprised and interested by what he heard. 

'Nay, it is not for me to divulge what, perhaps, my 
father chooses rather to remain a secret . at all events^, 
at Aston Hall ; though the man himself makes no great 
concealment of his business and purposes in the town. 
But here, rs I have given you to understand, honourable 
sir, we of the honest and well-affected party have it 
chiefly our own way, and are not afraid one another 
should know in which quarter the wind puffs our 
chimney smoke ! ' Mistress Firebrace replied, with a 
somewhat satirical smile and emphasis on these words, 
which had become a party shibboleth in the application. 
But she went on to say, finding that Edward Holte looked 
annoyed at her so using them, ' Though I know not 
that there is any need to deny you the good man's name 
who is so busy amongst us ; and the less that he is a 
member of Parliament, who has taken up open and 
resolute testimony against the King's manner of rule 
so far, hitherto. And would to Heaven he had 
thousfht fittino- to chancre it before matters came to the 
extremity they are driving at, and while it yet seemed 



44 THE aemourer's daughtee. 

possible among us of the people to put faith in his royal 
grants and protestations towards the people's liberty I ' 

' I would say Amen to that prayer, Mistress Fire- 
brace ; only the word, I presume, is held for popish 
and obsolete among the new audacious sectaries of the 
age!' said Edward. 'But if this agent's name be no 
great secret in Birmingham, and so well known in 
the world elsewhere, as are mostly those that figure 
the most ungraciously against the ancient laws and 
government of this realm . what is it ? ' 

' The person is called one Master Oliver Cromwell, a 
brewer of Huntingdon, and, I think I have heard say, 
of some considerable interest among the people tjaere- 
abouts,' replied Mistress Fire brace, in an indifferent 
tone ; unconscious that in that name she had uttered 
the keystone of the immense revolution at hand for 
England ; and, through England, for the world. 

' Ay, truly ; one Master Oliver Cromw^ell ? ' replied 
Edward Holte, without appearing to attach much more 
importance to the name than the armourer's fair daughter 
herself. ' I have heard my Lord Falkland speak of him 
as of a harsh, confused, scatter-brained speaker in the 
House. Yet, as you say. Mistress Firebrace, of singu- 
lar ability and power to persuade men to follow him in 
action. A man of action, I take it, therefore, rather 
than of words; which the times certainly require the 
most. What can Master Oliver Cromwell, then, be 
a- wanting in Birmingham ? Oh, I have it now ! I have 
heard that several of the Parliament men are buspng 
themselves in these neighbouring counties to execute 
the ordinance to raise the militia, on the behalf of that 
usurping assembly. This will be his business in the 
town. 



45 

Mistress Firebrace merely replied, ' 'Tis like enough,' 
and was silent, as if fearing to betray some degree of 
implied confidence in her discretion. 

' Well ; but at least I may hope, I trust, there are 
exceptioDS, even in Birmingham town, to the general 
lack of loyalty and true allegiance that is to be feared, 
Mistress Firebrace,' said the cavalier, speaking with 
peculiar earnestness, as if he attached some great 
importance to the msh he expressed ; and at the same 
time he looked downward at his lovely companion with 
something almost of entreaty and prayer in his looks 
that perhaps surprised ; certaiuly, a little fluttered her. 

'It were hard else, honoured Master Holte,' she 
replied, with manifest confusion ; ' very hard else, that 
the townspeople of Birmingham should all stand to- 
gether . so closely knit together . against their King ! 
So royal a king, too, as he is in most of his seemings ! 
Not like his father, who was fitter, they say, for some poor 
Latin-accidenced schoolmaster, or a greedy vagabond 
pedlar, in his dealings. Why, if there be no man else 
loyal in the town, there is excellent Johnny Cooper, 
who is a ton of man in his flesh and merriment ! ' 
she concluded, with a light, showery laugh, that very 
possibly concealed a feeling by no means so mirthful. 

' But hath the King's Majesty no faithful subject 
among so many fair ones that he hath in Birmingham ? ' 
pursued Master Holte, with increased earnestness of 
query. 

Mistress Firebrace made an evident pause. Then, 
looking at the cavalier with a mixture of roguish gaiety 
and embarrassment, she answered, 'Truly, yes; the 
King has no more zealous and tinkle-tongued loyalist, in 
all the length and breadth of the land, than Mistress 



46 THE arhoueer's daughter. 

Cooper, the High Bailiff's wife, who is also the greatest 
termagant and raan-masterer among us. But she, and, 
perchance, one or two others that eat and drink daily at 
the Crown's expense, make about the sum total of the 
King's faction in Birmingham.' 

Edward Holte looked very grave, in spite of the 
lively tone assumed in this reply. He seemed deter- 
mined to ascertain clearly the point he was driving at. 

'I concern myself little about such official and 
officious persons, Mistress Firebrace,' he remarked, ' but 
I should be very content to know whether the King's 
fairest subject in Birmingham cherishes not also some 
loyal feeling towards his sacred person and cause ? There 
is no need to add, I ask you of yourself ! ' 

' Grreat need, I do assure you. Master Holte ; for I 
never should have known the bird by the description of 
tlie feathers,' the fair Puritan answered, with, however, 
something of the flash and pride of conscious beauty in 
her looks, as she disclaimed the compliment. 'But 
since I gather you speak of Dorothy Firebrace, though 
jestingly, I will answer you the very truth. I have not 
given my mind . which runs too much on idle thoughts 
and vanities . to great reflection in the matter. But, 
as is a child's and good townswoman's duty, I follow 
much as a gosling follows in the water-rings of the main 
flock. Only, if it be any satisfaction for you to know 
it, I do not of my own heart and impulse wdsh much 
success and exaltation to such sour and implacable 
minds as I have seen abounding among us of late, and 
trust my father will not be cajoled by them into taking 
some dangerous pre-eminence in the part adopted by 
the town, which I know" hath been urged upon him of 
late. For he is a man of infinite resolve and stubborn- 



THE armourer's DAUGnTEE. 47 

ness when the mood takes him ; and, should the King's 
faction prove the stronger in the struggle, we have a 
good deal to lose besides our will and way in state and 
religious affairs.' 

* Doubtless, Mistress Firebrace. Your father is the 
great armourer of Birmingham ; and, as such, it is to him 
my father, Sir Thomas Holte, has sent me on an errand 
that I trust may prove profitable to him, and of service 
to us of Aston. For I should say our money v/ill be 
considered as good as any other bidder's, in an article of 
merchandise,' said Edward Holte. 

' I cannot say, fair Master Holte,' replied the ar- 
mourer's daughter, casting down her eyes with evident 
embarrassment. ' My father will answer you best for 
himself, no doubt ; and here we are on the threshold of 
his house and smithery.' 



48 THE ARMOURER S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER YL 

THE OLD CROWN HOUSE. 

The armourer's daughter and her cavalier protector had 
now, for some time, been wending their way through 
Digbeth . which abounded in tanners and dyers . into 
the quarter of the smiths, as Deritend might very pro- 
perly have been styled, since nearly all those of Bir- 
mingham at this epoch resided in it ; a quarter by no 
means then meriting its unhandsome modern nickname 
of Dirty End, the true etymology of the term being 
probably The-Rea-Gate-End, from a toll-gate established 
at the bridge over the river Rea, where certain entry- 
dues of the Lords of Birmingham were levied. 

It was, in fact, one of the most substantial and wealthy 
districts of Birmingham at that time, the principal trade 
of the town being thus chiefly exercised in it . theEdg- 
baston of its day, in some respects, though not in the 
articles of external beauty and embellishment, in conse- 
quence of the nature of the business carried on in it. 
But here the masters of the Birmingham manufactures 
and principal men of the town resided, in the midst of 
their work and work-people. Our simple-mannered and 
congenial ancestors had not yet dreamed of the habits 
of seclusion and separation between the classes of societ}' 
which modern luxury and suiDcr-refinement have intro- 



THE OLD Cr^OWN HOUSE. 49 

duced. On all sides Deretend accordingly resounded 
with the music of hammer and anvi], although the 
general style of the buildings was that of the most sub- 
stantial resident citizenship. On all sides . from deep 
caverns of soot-hung timber-work . blazed the fires of 
unnumbered forges ; on all sides could be heard the 
laborious pantings of hundreds of pairs of bellows, like 
that of the lungs of giants engaged in some mountain- 
heaving taskwork. 

And so the young pair, whom chance had thus mated, 
paused two hundred years ago . as any of the myriad 
toilers of Birmingham may at this day . under the eaves 
and before the wide porch of the mansion and workshop 
of the Firebrace Smiths, known as the Old Crown 
House. And the careful restorations recently effected as 
a labour of love by the judicious antiquarian proprietor, 
probarbly leave the structure much as it appeared to 
Edward Hqlte when he raised his eyes upon the an- 
nouncement with which Dorothy Firebrace broke what 
was becoming an embarrassing and entangling conversa- 
tion, in spite of the secret feeling of satisfaction and plea- 
sure in each other's good looks and congenial society that 
certainly ran through their whole brief association hitherto. 

The extensive ground floor, front and side, presented 
by the corner position of the Old Crown House to the 
street, pierced with handsome lattice windows; the 
broad projecting cornice of the upper story ; the lofts 
above this, with their triangular gables ; the tiled roof 
and high twisted chimneys ; the ornamental striping in 
brown and white of the plastered walls that filled up 
the spaces of the massive timber-work . nothing is 
changed. To be sure, the showy gas lamp hung at the 
corner was then supplied by a dull-burning oil lantern ; 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE aemouker's daughtee. 

and the most esteemed prophet of that age of enthu- 
siasm and of interpreters of futurity, dreamed not of 
that arch of a railway viaduct where the locomotive, 
' winged v/ith red lightning and impetuous heat,' crosses 
the line of vision, high in mid air, in the gaze of living 
men, at the present background of the building. 

Nothing, indeed, was to be seen behind the mansion 
but the outbuildings appropriated to the labours of the 
forge. After which a succession of gardens, orchard- 
ground, and fields extended to the banks of the river 
Eea on one hand, and on the other an open, heathy 
common led to the village of Bordesley. 

A very different stream was the Eea of those days to 
the one now offered to the saddened eye of the specta- 
tor . dark with the pollutions of a great city; flowing 
sluggishly between haggard and half-tumbling piles of 
crowded tenements . answering perchance in yet 
gloomier respects to the poetical descriptions of 
* Acheron and Styx . rivers of death and hell 1 ' It was 
a clear, broad, shining stream in which trout and salmon 
sparkled and leaped ; wandering through deep flowery 
banks ?md pastures and woodland into a far reach of 
fair and fruitful country. 

Then, as now, the principal sitting-chamber of this 
extensive old house projected very considerably over 
the porch into the street. But it had a latticed vrindow 
in front as well as over the two sides of the projection, 
whence only light is admitted now-a-days to a chamber 
narrowed in other respects the greater part of its 
original size, and thus consigned to gloom and twilight, 
instead of being, as of old, the most cheerful and illu- 
minated apartment of the dwelling. 

The entrance -passage of the building was also more 



THE OLD CROWN HOUSE. . 51 

than twice as broad as it now remains, in consequence 
of two small chambers being parcelled off on each side. 
Wide enough, in fact, it was to admit carts laden with 
heavy materials into an extensive courtyard at the back 
of the house. This enclosure was formed on one side 
by the elevation of the dwelling-house ; on the three 
remaining sides of a very irregular square by the covered 
forges and other necessary outbuildings attached to an 
extensive smithery. 

Edward Holte, complying with his fair companion's 
evident wish, halted mth her at the porch, and for the 
first time looked round for his attendants. ' They have 
walked the horses very leisurely,' he remarked with a 
smile, ' or else thought we did not desire to be too soon 
overtaken ; and, in sooth, for my part I wish the way 
had been twice or thrice as long.' 

* It could not have been the weight of the basket,' 
replied Mistress Firebrace, blushing under the ardent 
gaze she felt fixed upon her ; ^ for I had but half con- 
cluded my marketing,' 

In reality the young cavalier was greatly taken with 
his unexpected fair acquaintance, and felt unwilling to 
part. There was something that singularly interested 
him, in the contrast between the gay and vivacious 
beauty and lively discourse, and the puritan plainness of 
garb and demure position of Mistress Dorothy Firebrace, 
as the daughter of one of the most noted and severe 
sectaries of the to^vn. The lovely colour that now suf- 
fused her complexion, the golden glow and consciousness 
of the fine eyes she now raised, full of archness and ex- 
pression, to meet his, though but for a moment, com- 
.pleted his fascination. The questioning meaning and 
bright doubt implied in the glance shot into the young 

E 2 

LIBRARY 



52 THE AEMOUREH'S DAUGHTER. 

man's very heart, and he was about to make some 
incoherent reply to the mute language of that look, 
when, luckily for the heir of Aston, the two grooms 
rode their horses up to the door ; one carrying Mistress 
Firebrace's market baskets, pannier-wise, across his 
steed's neck, the other leading his master's vacated 
mount. 

* I must wish you a fair good morning here, kind 
Master Holte,' said Dorothy Firebrace, also assuming 
an air of distance and maidei.3y gravity on this ap- 
proach. ' Your way lies across the court-yard, to my 
father's smithy . mine up the gallery stairs into the 
house.' 

* Truly, gentle mistress ; but I can carry your market- 
ing to the stairs within . my servants can remain here,' 
replied Edward, anxious to prolong the satisfaction he 
enjoyed, even by a few moments. And as the ar- 
mourer's daughter made no objection, he took the 
baskets from his surprised serving man, and again the 
pair wended their way through the open passage to the 
interior circuit of the enclosure beyond. 

All of a sudden Edward heard his fair companion 
break into a light, silvery laugh, like the fall of the 
spray of a summer fountain in a bright sunshine. 'For- 
give me, sir,' she said ; ' but I was thinking what your 
proud father would say, if he saw you thus helpful to 
a Birmingham artificer's marketing daughter ! Pray 
you have a care, as you set the baskets down . they are 
full of eggs.' 

^All I regret is, not to be allowed to carry them 
further for you, sweet Mistress Firebrace I' said Edward, 
putting down his burdens, with a sigh that certainly 
seemed to regret something, at a place indicated by a 



THE OLD CROWN HOUSE. 53 

gesture of the fair Dorothy. It was the foot of a flight 
of steep steps, which ascended to a gallery that ran all 
round the upper story of the house, with several similar 
descents, at intervals, and formed the only means of 
entering the chambers on the second story of the 
dwelling. 

' No, no further,' replied ' sweet Mistress Firebrace,' 
also with a sigh that seemed like a softer and fainter echo 
of the one that had heaved the breast of Edward Holte. 
^ My father has the strictest notions on these points, 
and for a strange man . and tenfold more, a strange 
gentleman . of your name, to be seen in our house- 
would amaze him utterly! I must bid you farewell 
now. Master Holte ; which, believe me, very truly and 
heartily I do.' 

It was evident her mind dwelt on the literal meaning 
of the word . Farewell. And she uttered it with so 
musical and sweet lingering on the accent, that Edward 
Holte felt as if his heart melted away within him to 
some exquisite glow of feeling that sped like a warmer 
blood throuo^h all his veins. Yieldino; to the vivid im- 
pulse of the moment, though scarcely aware of what he 
did, he snatched the young beauty's hand, and pressed 
it with strange fervour to his lips that evidently excited 
even her alarm. 

' For shame. Master Holte ! ' she exclaimed, hastily 
withdrawing it. ' What would my father say if he saw 
this ? What would the neighbours say, who all know 
that I am a betrothed maiden to one . of my own con- 
dition and degree ? ' 

' Betrothed ! said you betrothed. Mistress Firebrace ?' 
exclaimed Edward, and in a tone of surprise and dis- 
may truly singular, considering the shortness of the 



54 THE Armourer's daughter. 

acquaintance, and the little reason he apparently had to 
interest himself in the announcement. 

' Betrothed, sir : I said betrothed ! ' replied the 
armourer's daughter, but, it must be allowed, with a 
very similar accent of sadness and discomfiture. 

' To whom, then ? Who, in all this unbred, mechanic 
town, can have been deemed worthy of charms which 
would grace and add lustre to a royal court ? ' Edward 
ejaculated. ^ 

' Oh, sir, you do far overstate the matter ; but 'tis the 
courtier style,' replied Dorothy Firebrace, looking 
sufficiently pleased and proud at the eulogium, never- 
theless. ' I am but betrothed to my father's foreman . 
the armourer you saw with me in the market-place . 
Tubal Bromycham by name. No such high and stately 
personage as you assert should pretend to me ; but 
though now of poor estate, born of a most ancient and 
honoured lineage in this town: brave and good, and 
marvellously strong and skilful at his work, so that the 
proudest and wealthiest of the smiths' daughters in 
Deritend all envy me my good hap, and wish it wr^s 
their own ! ' 

' A coarse, horn -handed artisan to become the pos- 
sessor of beauty like this ! ' exclaimed Edward Holte, 
in a very spiteful and angry accent. 

' Not so. Tubal has a heart as gentle as the gentlest 
woman's, and open as day to all manner of kindliness 
and generosity . where he is fairly treated in return,' 
replied Dorothy Firebrace, with a warmth that still 
further annoyed and disturbed her listener. * I say not 
that he has the silken insinuation and winningf o-races 
of you high-bred courtiers, sir. But in his trade he is 
without a match for skill and power. And therefore 



THE OLD CROWN HOUSE. 55 

do all men in Birmingham honour and esteem him to 
the full, and my father chiefest of all. Not to forget 
that he saved my father's life once, almost at the losing 
of his own . an act of bravery and nobleness never to be 
forgotten by any that hold that father dear ! ' 

'I say not to the contrary. Mistress Firebrace,' 
Edward Holte now remarked, drawing himself up in 
an offended and pettish attitude, which there seemed 
no call for in wha,t he heard. ' I say only that beauty 
like yours was never, to my thought, fashioned for the 
rude embraces of a mechanic artisan. But if you deem 
otherwise, 'tis not for me to cavil at your choice.' 

' My choice ! my choice. Master Holte ! I said not it 
was my choice, replied Mistress Firebrace^ with evident 
hesitation, and yet with a strong touch of dissent and 
repugnance in her accent. * But it is my father's will, 
as I have said, which it is not allowed to a dutiful 
child to dispute. It may be I have as good a relish as 
another fo-r a prouder fortune and a brighter and gayer 
estate of life than is to be led in this dull and hard- 
working town. But what avails that ? My fate is set 
before me like a ploughman's supper, which he must 
eat or none. And it should be remembered, also, 
Master Holte,' she continued, in a haughtier and 
petted tone, ^that although unjustly deprived of his 
ancestral rights and honours, this poor Birmingham 
mechanic of yours is by fair claim and descent of an 
antiquity of greatness to which the Holtes of Aston Hall 
are but as the morning mushroom to the oak of a 
thousand years ! No record even professes to tell of 
the origin of the Birminghams, Lords of Birmingham ; 
no man knows whether they are named after the town, 
or the town after them ! Whereas, who knows not at 



56 THE armourer's daughter. 

what time and by what means your family became so 
glorious hereabouts ? ' 

' You say truly. Mistress Firebrace !' replied Edward, 
now visibly displeased. ' The Birmingham anvil is tied 
round the neck of the Holtes, and will sink us through 
all time in the estimation of the smiths of Birmingham I 
But it is an old saying : Birmingham makes gentlemen 
for every county but Warwickshire. And besides,' he 
added, with an extremely scornful and bitter expression, 
'it is very plain you love this stumpy 3'Oung giant, 
your betrothed ; and your happiness is therefore well 
assured in his society, whatever the rest of the world 
may think of a match as ill-assorted as ever was that 
of Venus and Vulcan, though your blacksmith be not 
lame I ' 

* Love him ! You say I love him. Master Holte I 
Alack, the question was never asked me I My father 
ordained that I should marry him, when I reached fully 
my eighteenth year, which lacks but a three-month yet. 
And I think he loves me. That is all,' was Mistress 
Dorothy Firebrace's somewhat broken and confused 
response to the cavalier's indignant comments on her 
confessed matrimonial arrangements ; ending, we are 
a little ashamed to declare, in a sudden and most 
uncalled-for gush of tears. 

'I thought it could not be, beautiful Mistress 
Dorothy, that such a mis-match was to your own taste 
and contentment ! ' Edward Holte now rejoined, evi- 
dently softened and yet distressed by this display of 
emotion. ' Fathers are surely madmen, to undertake 
thus to govern and dispose of their children's chances 
of happiness and contented bearing of so heavy a yoke, 
if born unevenly ? But 'tis the same with mine ; who 



THE OLD CROWN HOUSE. 57 

without SO mucti as once consulting me, or leaving 
anything to my option in so nice a disposal, has engaged 
me almost from my cradle to the daughter of his neigh- 
bour at Hagle}' , the Lord Keeper Lyttelton.' 

It was now Dorothy Firebrace's turn to flash up with 
a singularly annoyed and passionate movement of the 
blood in all her youthful but electrically-charged veins. 
* But you ! . you are a ')nan ! ' she exclaimed with vehe- 
mence. ' And do you mean to say that you suffer your- 
self to be marketed in this way, like a sheep or a sack 
of corn by their owner ? But you are like r)ie, perhaps,' 
she continued, with satirical vivacity. ' Your heart goes 
where a parent's command directs it ; and possibly with 
so much the better reason that my Lord Keeper's 
daughter being, as one may say, born to good fortune 
in every respect, clears her suitors of any mercenary 
suspicion, by her exceeding charms of person and 
mind ! ' 

This was" most maliciously spoken, of a truth ; for the 
Lord Keeper Lyttelton's daughter, alluded to by Ed- 
w^ard Holte, though likely to derive a large endowment 
of fortune's goods, was notoriously deficient in the 
species of attraction which might have rendered them 
the less necessary in a woman of birth and high position. 
On the contrary, a rumour was general in the county 
that she was of a masculine and somewhat deformed 
figure, and of an irascible and sullen temper; while it 
was quite certain that she was considerably older than 
her intended bridegroom. But the fathers of that age 
were like the fathers of most other ages of the world . 
with a good deal more power to enforce their wise 
opinions and behests than modern notions encourage 
them to exert. 



58 . THE AFoIOURER's DAUGnTEI*.. 

Edward Holte's face visibly clouded over. * But 
well,' he resumed, v/itb a brightening expression, after 
a slight pause, ' perhaps I resemble you in another re- 
spect. Mistress Firebrace. I may not see so clearly the 
wisdom of my parents' choice as to make it, altogether and 
without reservation, mine own. Nay, I think I could 
convince you of that if we had a little more time, and 
were not in a place so liable to observation.' 

' Truly I had forgott n,' replied the armourer's 
daughter with a start, and glancing anxiously at the 
resounding sheds on the other side of the yard ; ^ and 
you remind me well, Master Holte . but for this time I 
have indeed no further leisure to waste. Our old house- 
keeper will be asleep over her wheel, expecting me home 
with my marketings, and our housemaidens ready to 
gnaw their finger-ends for dinner. Let me go now, 
therefore, I pray you. Your way is straight on ; mine 
is up these steps.' 

' And am I never to see you again, fairest Mistress 
Firebrace ? ' exclaimed Edward, in a most lackadaisical 
and lovelorn voice, and far from budging out of the 
way, placing himself more in it. 

* That depends on your eyes, whether their sight be 
good or not . though by no means required to follow 
the whole flight of an arrow, shot upwards. It is my 
custom almost always at morningtide. Master Holte, to sit 
at the gallery chamber window above the porch we lately 
passed under, at work with my needle at the household 
stuff and such like ; for my father suffers no such vani- 
ties as embroideries or lacemaking in his sober sight,' 
Dorothy Firebrace replied, resuming now all her former 
coquetry and liveliness of manner. 

* Ay, indeed ; a thousand thanks, sweet Mistress Fire- 



THE OLD CEOWN HOUSE. 59 

brace ! One of my stature might almost kiss a fair 
hand at the lattice,' the cavalier remarked joyously, and 
blushing with pleasure at the warm colouring that sprung 
also in the lovely Puritan's complexion. ' But I must 
give you something to keep you in mind of your pro- 
mise,' he went on to say; and taking a small nosegay 
stuck in the mouth of a beautifully chased silver whistle 
hanging at a button-hole in his cloak, he handed it, 
with a graceful, beseeching bend, to the armourer's 
daughter. 

She hesitated, however, for a moment to accept the 
gift; but for a different reason than the suddenly- 
smitten young lover feared. 

'There are marigolds in them . French marigolds . 
the Queen's favourite flower,' she said, smilingly, but 
withdrawing her hand. ' My father would never away 
with these, if he saw them in my possession . or rather, 
he v^^ould at once.' 

Edward. remembered on the words the extreme un- 
popularity of the French Queen of Charles the First 
among the Puritans, and felt considerably annoyed at 
his own forgetfulness. But he speedily rallied. * T 
wear marigolds for that very reason. Mistress Fire- 
brace,' he said. ' My sister Arabella, who hath a strong 
touch of my father's defiance and pride, gathered it on 
purpose for me, that I might flaunt the BirDiingham 
folks with the display of Queen Henrietta's emblems. 
And my base-born brother Dick . who, on my soul, I 
think, wishes me no gTcat good . did so taunt me on 
my remonstrances with her, that I was fain to prove to 
him I was not ashamed to show my true colours any- 
where ! Will you be of my mind again, and wear these 
mari2,-olds for the o-iver's sake ? ' 



60 THE armourer's daughter. 

He offered the nosegay once more, and looked so 
handsome and tender in the expression with which he 
bent toward the young damsel of the Old Cro"^Ti 
House, that it was not in her woman's nature to refuse. 

' I will keep it . but in secret. You shall see how 
well when I sp}^ you beneath my window, making the 
enquiry,' she said, taking the flowers, and, yielding to a 
kind of impulse she could not resist, placing them in 
her own bosom. Edward Holt, as a matter of course, 
snatched her hand to his lips. But in a moment she 
had withdrawn it, and, gliding past, ascended the steps 
of the open gallery with a rapid, fawn-like trip. He 
looked after her, almost doubtful whether he should 
not venture to obtain a renewal of her pretty pledge 
and assurances. But, pausing at the landing place above, 
and probably guessing his intention, Mistress Firebrace 
waved her hand earnestly to warn him not. Then, with 
another relenting, and yet brilliantly gay and coquettish 
action, she kissed the marigolds on her bosom, and flew 
into an upper chamber of the house, carefully closing 
the door after her. 



61 



CHAPTER Vir. 

CAPTAIN CROMWELL. 

Edward Holte proceeded on his way with much the 
feeling of a man who has passed some bright sunny 
opening in a wood, and entered again under the dark- 
some woodland shade. 

Only a shadowing of the mind, however, for a ruddy 
glow poured from every chink and recess of the enclo- 
sures he threaded. The whole range of works appeared 
to be in full operation. A jingling thunder of hammer 
and anvil, sounding like the clattering hoofs of a thou- 
sand steeds, echoed on all sides. Edward, in fact, had 
never heard the like before, though he had been repeat- 
edly at Firebrace's smithy when a lad, in his father's 
company, who had long a good deal of business in it 
connected with the fittings of his new mansion at 
Aston. 

A woman, who was out in the yard engaged in raising 
water at a draw-well close behind the dwelling-house, 
directed the stranger where ' the master ' was to be 
found. Civilly enough, but with some marks of wonder 
and curiosity, which Edward was not aware there was 
anything in his appearance to warrant. But he re- 
membered with a smile how, when a boy, he had often 
heard this well described as the cause of the superior 



62 THE ArtMOURER'S DAUGHTER. 

excellence of the steel manufactured by the Old Crown 
Smiths. The water was said to be of a singularly icy 
coldness . colder even than that famous river of Spain 
to whose tempering the excellence of the Toledo blades 
was believed to be due. It was supplied from unknown 
springs, perfectly independent of the neighbouring river 
Eea, which might be almost dry in summer without 
affecting the flow of water in it by a bubble. Nay, some 
wild legend asserted that this silvered the iron plunged 
into it, in consequence of a great chest of that metal 
lying at the bottom, where it had been cast for security 
by the fugitive ancestor of the Firebraces ! It is true 
there was another, to the effect that the well was 
bottomless. 

What was certain is, that a very peculiar and nice con- 
struction was visible in the stonework of the well, all 
the pieces being fitted into each other in hewn seg- 
ments of a circle. Indeed, it was looked upon by the 
knowing in those pre- Artesian days as a perfect miracle 
of art, and went further than anything else to support 
belief in Andomar Ferre-a-Bras's freemason mastership. 

But to continue. The image of the fair Dorothy 
faded not away from Edward Holte's consideration with 
her actual disappearance. It seemed to accompany him 
with every step of his onward progress, and the music 
of her brilliant and coquettish laugh continued audible 
amidst all the puff and pant and clamour of beaten 
metals around. 

By no very unusual caprice of the human mind and 
heart, Edward Holte, wearied with the state and stiff 
decorum observed in high society at that time, and 
especially in his father's household, felt irresistibly de- 
lighted and attracted by the lively gaiety and freedom 



CAPTAIN CPvOMTVELL. 63 

of his late fair companion's manner and talk. It wa,s 
the more surprising and rousing, too, in so unexpected 
a quarter. Nevertheless, he tried to check the alluring 
recollection. He bethought himself, with a sigh, that 
this bright maiden could never be anything to him but 
a passing vision of loveliness and joy. It was impos- 
sible she could ever honestly be more to him, and 
Edward Holte was endued with a high and chivalric 
feeling towards women that forbade even the idea of 
tempting the good opinion he saw very clearly he had 
achieved with the armourer's daucfhter to lenofths 
honour and virtue could not sanction. Not to forget 
that Dorothy Firebrace w^as herself of a respectable and 
wealthy family, though engaged in a mechanical trade, 
and that her puritan education, and the severity of the 
principles inculcated by those sectaries, made it impro- 
bable that the usual allurements to women from virtue 
could have much influence with her. The heir of Aston 
had merely acted on an impulse he scarcel}^ understood, 
but could not control, when he asked her to see him 
again. He almost repented he had done so more than 
once as he crossed the yard, whither he was directed, to 
the principal forge. And yet he felt not unlike a man 
who projects some injury to another, when he found 
himself at last in the presence of Zachariah Firebrace. 

The armourer was at work in the deepest recess of a 
vast shed, formed of massive timber work, which crossed 
and recrossed in the roof and along the walls, like the 
web of some colossal spider of the pre-Adamite world. 
This shed was encumbered in all directions with massive 
productions of the forge of various kinds. furnaces, anvils, 
bellows, immense grindstones, vices, pincers, wooden 
horses . what not? All tlie means of modern vulcanic 



64 THE armourer's daughter. 

art ; with the exception that these were forced to be 
within the compass of human strength and power to 
wield, the gigantic energies of steam not being yet sub- 
jected to man's intelligence and direction. The prodi- 
gious pincers, whose massive jaws only steam power can 
lift and close . which snaps a bar of iron as uncon- 
cernedly as a crocodile might a cane stick . was of" 
course unknown. Still more the tremendous and yet 
more docile force of the steam hammer, which beats 
into shape inditferently the armour of a ship of war and 
the ornaments of a teapot. 

There were numerous forges in the shed, and work- 
men busy at them . all with the unwearying assiduity 
said to owe so much to the eye of the master. And con- 
sidering the business he came about, Master Holte's 
ought to have gladdened, oue would have thought, at 
the appearance of the results of this labour. The mas- 
sive wooden dressers all round the shed shone with the 
light reflected from many dozens of pieces of armour 
of polished steel . breast-plates, back-plates, cuisses, or 
armour for the front part of the thighs, steel-caps, hel- 
mets, swords, and the barrels of the short thick carbine 
in use by the ponderous cavalry of the age. 

But Edward was struck immediately with the notion 
that he was disastrously forestalled in the market for 
this invaluable warlike gear. He had hardly caught 
sight of Zachariah Firebrace standing at a forge, but 
evidently only pausing from personal exercise of his 
profession, when his glance was attracted from the 
familiar to a less known form . that of a man who was 
at a little distance opposite to the armourer, wdth the 
anvil, at which the latter was at work, between them ; 
and whose unusual and, to Edward Holte, portentous 



CAPTAIN CROMWELL. 65 

figure, was bronght into strong relief, alike by the fiery 
glow of the open forge and a dazzling beam of sunshine 
that descended from the roof . fissured to allow of the 
passage of the smoke above . over a portion of his 
upper person. 

A broad plain hat, with a steeple crown, such as was 
then adopted as a mark of distinction by the Puritans 
from the plumed head-gear of their showy cavalier anta- 
gonists, partly shaded the countenance of this stranger, 
even from the sun-glare thus cast on his head. But 
Edward, discerning at a glance the outlines of the 
rugged and massive visage below, close-shaven, and all 
a-glow with a species of dark and sombre power, which 
shone out as from an inner fire on the tarnished but 
sanguine and brassy-flushed complextion, was struck at 
once with the conviction that he beheld the formidable 
agent of the Parliament whom Dorothy Firebrace had 
described to him. 

Little doubt on the subject remained to him on a 
second and slightly more deliberate survey. The rest of 
the stranger's costume was evidently quite in the puritan 
taste, in points of plainness of stuffs, absence of deco- 
ration, and general clumsiness of cut and fashion. It 
was, in fact, chiefly of leather, and that greased and 
worn, in the parts most used, in a sufficiently unseemly 
wise. But, in addition, it was very negligently put on ; 
scarcely laced or tagged at the waist ; the high, broad- 
topped boots were liberally travel-stained ; the plain, 
flat linen collar quite dirty round the neck ; the short 
brown cloak looked as if it had not been brushed for 
weeks. Nothing was in good order in the accoutrements 
of the man but his polished spurs, and the pair of 
heavy pistols that garnished his belt. He wore no sword ; 
VOL. I. F 



66 

at least, no scabbard was visible at the usual loop. But, 
at the moment Edward arrived, he was leaning on a 
naked weapon of the kind, the bright polish of w^hich 
marked it as new, with the whole weight of his power- 
ful, though not unusually tall, figure on it, insomuch 
that the blade, which was very thick and two-edged, 
curved slightly under the burden. 

But although thus seemingly at pause, Edward, per- 
ceiving a whole sheaf of swords piled beside the stranger, 
and that one of his feet was set heavily on a much- 
hacked oak block before him, evidently used to essay 
the sound metal and edge of such weapons, felt satisfied 
that he had come upon the Parliamentary emissary 
engaged in the duty of proving the articles for which 
he had bargained. Yet, on the other hand, he could not 
think, when he looked across to the armourer, that the 
earnest attention and excitement visible in his lono\ 
deeply-carved, and habitually staid and severe . even 
morosely melancholy and austere . visage could be 
moved by anything relating to the mere matter of 
business in hand. 



67 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE BIRMINGHAMS, LORDS OF BIEMI>GIIA,m. 

Xeither was it so. And if Edward Holte could have 
known what occasioned this suspense of action, and 
earnestness of thought and speech, between the 
armourer and his customer, he would not have deemed 
his own errand in a very thriving way. 

The former was the result of a conversation involving 
subjects of momentous interest to both, and which 
seemed to require more privacy than the smithy could 
afford. But the uproar on every side was as good a 
cover for secret talking as stone walls, and perhaps the 
zealous and daring partisan of the Parliament, who com- 
mitted himself the most in the dialogue, was careless of 
who might overhear of those ' well-affected ' artisan 
townsmen of Birmingham. 

Captain Cromwell had paid his usual early forenoon 
visit to the Old Crown Forge, to ascertain what progress 
had been made the previous day in the execution of the 
order he had entrusted to its diligence. And he took 
the opportunity, as was also usual with him, to urge 
upon the master-armourer (so Zachariah Firebrace was 
styled) the reasonableness and propriety of his openly 
joining the cause of the Parliament. 

Oliver Cromwell . at the time altogether unknown 

F 2 



68 THE armoueee's daughtee. 

as a soldier, and working, much on his own account, to 
raise a troop of cavalry under his command . w^as also 
not much considered as a member of Parliament, ex- 
cepting in regard of his boldness and bull-dog obstinac}' 
against the Court and all its favourers. But, among the 
zealots of his own persuasion, he was held to possess 
considerable powers of expounding and holding forth on 
scriptural subjects, which he had influentially exerted 
in a more practical sense on his visit to Birmingham. 
In spite of the danger attached to such a proceeding, he 
had prevailed upon Zachariah Firebrace to agree to 
furnish him with arms for the troop of horse he had 
raised in his native county against the King ; but, well- 
inclined as the master-armourer w^as to the cause, there 
he had stuck. Zachariah was wealthy, and a man of 
a gloomy, unhopeful temperament ; had a daughter 
whom he fondly cherished, though with little external 
display of the feeling ; and was well aware of the 
penalties of high treason. 

* No, no. Master Cromwell,' he would say, ' I see not 
light enough yet in the wood. How are we poor citizens 
and townsfolk to set ourselves in arms against the nobles 
and gentry who flock around the King, and who are 
trained to them and to the management of the fiery 
war-horse, that snuffs the battle from afar, and neigheth 
to the spearmen, aha ! These weapons I furnish you 
withal, are in the way of my craft ; no man can challenge 
me thereupon, nor am I bound to know, by any evident 
proof, to what service you intend them. And the King 
is drawing towards these parts, and we are an open, un- 
walled town ; and such as have the lawful direction of 
us . to wit, the Bailiff and his constables . are firmly set 
the courtiers' way. And though, as you say, I am chief 



THE EI^vMI^'GIIAJ^:s, lords of Birmingham. 69 

of the Gruild superstitiously styled of the Holy Cross, 
of this town, that gives me but mastery and control 
in the overseeing of the trades and charities. ^Miat can 
I do?' 

It was, nevertheless, a very great object apparently 
with Captain Cromwell . and with good reason, con- 
sidering the warlike uses and central position of Bir- 
mingham . to win over some outward and visible tokens 
of adhesion on its part to the cause he served; and, 
even on this minor scale of action, he was destined to 
exhibit a good deal of that remarkable union of political 
foresight, fanaticism, cunning, and audacity which after- 
wards raised him to the supreme power in England. 

On the occasion alluded to, he had been peculiarly 
pressing upon Firebrace to declare himself. He an- 
nounced that, in consequence of the King's movement 
from York to Nottingham, he had that day received 
advices that the Parliament army, under the Earl of 
Essex, was to advance to Northampton . greatly superior, 
according to him, in numbers, discipline, and equipment 
to the Royalists. And while entreating the armourer 
to hasten in every way possible the garniture of his 
troop of cuirassiers, he took the opportunity to urge 
upon him the necessity of some decisive action on the 
part of the town of Birmingham. 

* I would say to you. Brother Zachariah,' Captain 
Cromwell remarked, in the favourite scriptural style of 
his party, and his own rambling one, ' even as John, by 
some called the Divine, writes in Eevelations to the 
Angel of the Church of Laodicea : I ivould that thou 
ivert either hot or cold. For the time is fully at hand 
when the servants of God must be sealed unto Him, if 
ever they are to be, that He may know His people in 



70 THE ARMOURER S DAUGHTER. 

the day of His wrath ! And how is that to be, unless 
A ou declare yourselves openly for one side or the ot^er ; 
and 'tis very plain which way your affections turn I And 
truly, Master Firebrace, I must needs tell you 'tis the 
common saying hereabouts that you hold the people in 
the hollow of your hand, and can tilt them either way 
. to a hearty zeal in the good cause, or to a lukewarm 
neutrality which will raise the gorge of both parties 
alike, to spue you forth as a derision and scorn unto the 
land I You tell me yourself that the Crown Bailiff of 
the town, who sets up for its chief ruler and ordainer, is 
but the representative of an usurped authority ; con- 
cerning which I have heard from other quarters, too, a 
very sad and dolorous tale, which truly stirs mine own 
blood to such an exasperate resentment and intolerance, 
that were the wrong done to one of my own kith dtid 
kin I could not more angrily conceive of it.' 

Captain Cromwell was likely to be well informed on 
the point alluded to. From the iSrst, Tubal Bromy- 
cham's extraordinary skill and strength in his work as 
a smith had attracted his attention, and the young man's 
master, who was much attached to him, had taken care 
to deliver full particulars of his history to the influential 
member of a body which, in the eyes of the people of 
England, was specially organised for the redress of 
grievances inflicted by the tyranny ^d exactions of the 
Crown and aristocracy. 

Briefly related, the story was that the last Birmingham, 
Lord of Birmingham, who enjoyed the title and its large 
appertaining estates and privileges, riding out one day 
from his manor-house, alone and unattended, was over- 
taken by three or four horsemen in a lonely part of the 
road to Aston . not yet converted into a magnificent 



THE BIRMINGHAMS, LORDS OF BIRMINGHAM. 71 

park, surrounding a palatial mansion. The tradition 
stated, that the reason why so distinguished a person 
ventured on the highways in a manner at that time so 
unusual with people of rank, was a love affair, which he 
was obliged to carry on privately, with the young heiress 
of the Grimsorwes, who were at that time owners of the 
property, in consequence of the young lady being a 
minor, in the custody of an uncle, who was anxious she 
should not marry at all. 

These horsemen . whose company the Lord of Bir- 
mingham speedily discovered he could not rid himself 
of, in spite of many efforts he made for the purpose . 
were strangers in Birmingham. They had resided at 
an inn there for a few days, under pretence of purchas- 
ing certain of the goods manufactured in the towTi for 
London. But they were in reality robbers and villains 
by profession, the sweepings of that city, who had been 
hired to play a part in a most detestable conspiracy, by 
no less a personage than John Dudley, Duke of Nor- 
thumberland, Protector of England in the minority of 
Edward VL 

This grasping and tyrannous minister, whose ambi- 
tion brought himself and almost his entire family, at 
a subsequent period, to the block, anxious in all ways 
to increase his wealth, had turned desiring eyes on the 
lands and hereditaments of the house of Birmingham ; 
part of which it had the misfortune to possess in the 
neighbourhood of Dudley Castle, and had refused to 
yield up to the convenience of the haughty lord 
thereof. 

Another villain, of some outward station and respec- 
tability, was yet to be found to complete the plot. One 
was discovered in the person of a member of the family 



72 THE xVrmoueer's daughter. 

of Holte, then of Duddeston ; a younger brother of it, 
quaHfied for any kind of baseness by long service with 
the unprincipled Northumberland. But, moreover, 
this unworthy gentleman was known to cherish a per- 
sonal spite and animosity against the Lord of Birming- 
ham, having been rejected for him in a suit of his own 
to the heiress of Aston. 

It was arranged that the malignant rival should 
meet with the favoured lover . accompanied so much 
against his will, but striving to quit himself civilly of 
the unwelcome society, that he might keep his secret 
love- tryst unmolested . as if by accident : but upon 
that, the robbers in the Lord of Birmingham's reluctant 
association were to set upon Holte, colourably maltreat 
him, and strip him of some money and valuables, pro- 
bably supplied by the Duke, their suborner, for the 
occasion. Holte was then to affect to make his escape 
with difficulty, after recognising the Lord of Birming- 
ham among his assailants, and to proceed at once to 
accuse him of being the chief in the robbery and 
felonious assault upon- his person. 

It is still a wonder that, even in so lawless and tyran- 
nous a time, when the high-handed exercise of power 
spared scarcely any rank or innocence, so transpa- 
rent and monstrous a conspiracy could have achieved 
the end desired. But so it fell out ; partly, doubtless, 
through a weakness of character on the part of the last 
Lord of Bu'mingham calculated upon all along by his 
enemies. 

He was apprehended, and assured that he would be 
brought to trial on the charge of felony, and condemned 
on the clear evidence that could be brought against him 
by Hialmar Holte and his ruffianly accomplices, who 



THE BIKMINGHAMS, LORDS OF BIRMINGHAM. to 

were alleged to be those of the unfortunate prisoner. 
He knew how universally the law was wrested at the 
pleasure of authority ; and that the whole power of the 
Crown was in the hands of his deadliest foe, whose in- 
fluence also was supreme in the county where his trial 
must take place, as the Lords of Birmingham were only 
Peers by tenure, and not by summons to Parliament. 
And so, driven to despair by a long imprisonment . 
subdued by the violence and tortures of mind and body 
to which he was subjected . perhaps hoping for better 
times to come, when his enemy's unjust power might 
be stripped from him . the unhappy prisoner agreed to 
purchase his pardon for an offence he had not com- 
mitted, and his liberty, by the surrender of all his 
property to the Crown as a criminal attainted and 
confessed guilty of felony, and thereby placed at its 
mercy. 

The Duke of Northumberland, of course, speedily 
transferred this forfeiture to his own profit and advan- 
tage ; but, although the oppressor did not long enjoy 
those ill-gotten goods, other court favourites succeeded 
in their turn to the Dudley forfeitures, and no appeals 
to the justice or mercy of the Crown ever availed to 
obtain the restoration of the smallest portion of their 
ravished inheritance to the family of Birmingham. 

The unfortunate head of it, whose want of fortitude 
was in some degree the cause of the ruin of his race, 
died of a broken heart, after years of vain appeal and 
litigation. And we know not whether it could be con- 
sidered a consolation of his woes, that the maiden of his 
love . adhering, with the lovely magnanimity of her 
sex, to his fallen fortunes . persisted in uniting her fate 
to his, and shared in consequence in his ruin. For the 



74 THE ARMOUEEH'S DAUGIITEE. 

merciless tyrants in power pronounced her inheritance 
also forfeit as that of the wife of a felon ; she having 
wedded her lover, with generous precipitancy, before his 
pardon passed the Grreat Seal. 

Another of the creatures of Northumberland, who was 
strongly suspected of a share in the conspiracy . the 
unfortunate heiress's unnatural uncle and guardian . 
obtained a portion of this spoil as his reward ; and it 
was from the last male representative of this base be- 
trayer of his * brother's blood' . who proved, by his ex- 
travagance and dissolute conduct, the destruction of his 
own family, and the truth of the proverb ' 111 got, ill 
gone' . that Sir Thomas Holte purchased the Aston 
estate. 

And now the unhappy pretended felon Lord of Bir- 
mingfham . accordinoj to master-armourer Firebrace's 
account, to the patient and attentive agent of the Par- 
liament for the Eedress of Grrievances . was great- 
grandfather, in a direct line, to that Tubal Bromycham 
whom he had chosen as a future son-in-law, and proudly 
avowed in the capacity. 

A disinterested selection, certainly, it would have 
appeared on the first blush ; from the circumstance that, 
however ancient and honourable the family, it had long 
been so reduced that (still according to Firebrace's 
account) its lineal representative w^as at one time a 
worker in an iron mine. 

The armourer took pains to give the exact parti- 
culars of how this had come to pass, and the manner of 
his own discovery of the fact, to Captain Cromwell, in 
the course of their many conversations on the disorders 
and tyrannies of the times. And the rather, perhaps, 
that the statement soothed his own pride, and accounted 



THE BIRMIXGilAMS, LOEDS OF BIEMI^'G^A3I. /O 

for SO singular a selection of a son-in-law by a wealthy 
citizen, in a way lionourpvble enough to that same 
wealthy citizen's feelings and superiority to vulgar pre- 
judice, and, at the same time, legitimate notions of 
good thrift and furtherance to his business affairs. 

The armourer traced his intended son-in-law's genea- 
logy very closely from the last wronged Lord of Bir- 
mingham, stating that in the next generation after 
him, the family, unable to endure its degradation on the 
scene of its prosperity, had migrated to Walsall, in 
Staffordshire. Sinking here deeper and deeper into the 
slough of despond and poverty, it came to pass that the 
latter descendant's of the race were compelled to earn 
their bread by the sweat of their brows. Then, as now, 
iron and coal mining was the staple industr}^ of the 
district, and Tubal Bromycham . himself the son of an 
unlettered labourer of this class, and left an orphan at 
a very early age . was abandoned, altogether untaught 
and untrained, to the same occupation, until chance 
brought him acquainted with the Birmingham ar- 
mourer. Not a very lucky chance at first, seemingly, 
for the latter. 

Master Firebrace, it appeared, was one of a number 
of the smiths of Birmingham . indeed the chief of them 
. who at a certain period, about seven or eight years 
previous to the commencement of this narrative, con- 
ceived that they were charged too much for the ore aad 
coals used in their forges and furnaces, chiefly brought 
from Walsall. They found some iron-masters who 
agreed to supply them at lower than the accustomed 
rates ; and, by way of compelling other proprietors to 
come down to their prices, agreed to deal exclusively 
with these until the latter submitted also to their terms. 



76 THE armourer's daughter. 

But the proprietors in question took care to stipulate 
that the Birmingham smiths should come to the pit's 
mouth to receive their purchases themselves, being 
doubtless very well aware of the excited and dangerous 
state of the population in consequence of the general 
closing of the undersold mines. 

Master-armourer Firebrace was appointed to the re- 
sponsible office of negotiating and bringing home the first 
deliveries under the new tariff; not only by the unani- 
mous deference of his fellow-craftsmen, but by his own 
sense of his joroper position as original promoter and 
organiser of the movement. He was himself a man of 
great pride and overbearing contempt for such half- 
savage and poverty-stricken people as the miners of 
Staffordshire were considered at the time. Very pos- 
sibly, too, he was not well aware of the state of exas- 
peration and defiance into which the Walsall district had 
passed, naturally enough, on finding itself, and its 
wives and children, cast foodless and without employ- 
ment out of the murky depths where, at best, men 
earned so hard a loaf. 

Accordingly, armourer Firebrace, arriving with a 
long train of carts and wagoners, and the very inade- 
quate civil support of the two regular constables of 
Walsall, at Longswirl Mines, only awakened to a sense 
of his danger, and inability to resist it, in the midst of a 
swarming, furious mob, who, with their begrimed 
visages, half-naked, haggard forms, madly flourishing 
pick-axes and spades, resembled, in the armourer's long 
subsequent dreams, nothing other than the fiends of a 
pandemonium broken loose. 

Constables and wagoners took to flight at once, and 
for the most part escaped in comparative safety, though 



THE BIRMIXGHAMS, LORDS OF BIRMINGHAM. 77 

with a mauling which aching bones kept in remem- 
brance with some of them to their dying day. But, 
though Firebrace himself, perceiving how completely 
overpowered he was, attempted no resistance, he was 
not permitted to follow the example of his company. 
The enraged miners seized upon him ; and, aware that 
he was the prime mover and agitator of the Birmingham 
smiths against them, determined to make him a memo- 
rable example of retribution. It was proposed, and 
unanimously agreed, to drag him to the mouth of an 
old disused pit, of unknown but believed unfathomable 
depth, destroyed ages previously by fire-damp, and 
cast him to the bottom. 

This resolution was in course of execution. In spite 
of a now maddened effort to extricate himself on the 
part of the armourer, he was hurled headlong on his 
way to the intended destruction by the furious multi- 
tude. But, luckily, the mine in question was at some 
little distance beyond Walsall ; and on the way another 
party of miners, belonging to the underselling owners, 
happened to be returning from their work. Principal 
among these was a 3^oung man of about nineteen, but 
of extraordinary personal strength and resolution of 
character ; very unlike his near ancestor, he of the 
forfeiture . for the young man was Tubal Bromycham. 

As he had been reared in as wild and primitive 
notions of justice and natural right as any other of the 
Black Country miners, it is very possible that it was 
rather a feeling of partisanship with his proper owner 
than a sense of the illegality and cruelty of the assault 
that determined Tubal to interfere in the rescue of his 
master's customer. But so he did ; and as his fellows 
of the Lonsrswirl mines were verv well wont to follow 



78 THE ahmourer's daugiitee. 

liis lead in most of their active diversions, and were 
irritated at the contumely they had been subject to 
on their owner's account, they readily joined him 
in a gallant onset to redeem the prisoner from his 
assailants. 

It needed, however, all the prodigious strength pos- 
sessed by Tuba], and its unsparing exercise in the way 
of knock-down blows and fisticuffs, to accomplish the 
result. Firebrace remembered very well that, for nearly 
twenty minutes, he became, as it were, the bone of con- 
tention, the foot-ball banded to and fro, the flying 
shuttlecock, of a battle, that seemed rather of maddened 
bulls and buffaloes than of men. Once he was even 
about to perish rather disgracefally . too bruised, 
beaten, and stunned to attempt anything at his own 
preservation . under the fire-shovel of a stalwart Ama- 
zon, of more than six feet high, with a baby at her 
breast, who hit mercilessly at his skull, with the ap- 
parent purpose of securing the honours of his braining 
to herself. Indeed, how he was saved, Firebrace him- 
self entertained no species of distinct recollection. But, 
on returning from a state of insensibility, to which one 
of these vigorous strokes had consigned him, he found 
himself lying at some distance from the scene of action, 
partly concealed behind a little mountain of cinder and 
ashes, with Tubal Bromycham bending over him, bath- 
ing his bleeding skull with sulphurous water from one 
of the neighbouring pools, and endeavouring thus to 
restore him to life. 

The humane young giant afterwards explained that 
he had carried the object of his solicitude off the field 
of battle on his back, butting himself a ivay ivith his 
head . a not uncommon Walsall fig ting feat . through 



THE BIEMINGHAMS, LORES OF EIRMTNGHA^tl. 79 

the thick of the opposing combatants. The fury and 
generalness of the melee afterwards gave some scope for 
the exercise of another of his physical accomplishments, 
in which he was quite a match for the swift-footed 
Achilles himself. But, at the juncture in question, Tubal 
lost no time to account for his rescue to the defeated 
rebater of the Walsall staples. He entreated him to 
resume his flight before a discovery could be made, as 
it was pretty well certain the much inferior Longswirl 
forces would be driven from the field by the insurgent 
crowd on the other side. 

To the best of his ability, Firebrace attempted to 
comply with this advice. But he was so disabled and 
demoralised by fear and the violence to which he had 
been subjected, that he was unable to move more than a 
few paces. And thus, as he ever afterwards gratefully 
confessed, must again have fallen into the power of his 
exasperated foes, but that Tubal, observing his condition, 
hoisted him once more on his shoulders, and fairly car- 
ried him on them over many miles of rough and all 
but impassable country, out of further danger of 
pursuit. 

Tubal himself, however, seemed not to think he had 
done any great matter in this. He was for returning at 
once, after setting down his burden near Birmingham, 
if need were, to take further part in the fray. But the 
grateful armourer would not suffer it. He perceived 
very plainly that the generous act the young man had 
performed would expose him to special animosity on 
the part of the main body of miners. He ascertained 
from himself that he had no relatives to be anxious for 
his safety ; and he insisted, upon these considerations, 
on Tubal's accompanying him quite into the town, to 



80 

receive some substantial mark of his gratitude. Yet 
sucli was the heroic simplicity and disinterestedness of 
Tubal Bromycham's nature, that he seemed literally 
unable to understand that he had acquired any title to 
the armourer's benevolence. It is even probable he 
would have persisted in the purpose he announced, if 
Firebrace had not continued to declare his inability to 
proceed without assistance. 

A few days' residence in Birmingham seemed, how- 
ever, to effect a revolution in the youthful giant's notions 
of things. Strange as it may appear, he had never been 
in a town before ; and the sight of the wonders of 
manufacture into which the rude material he had spent 
his life in casting on the surface of the earth was 
wrought, awakened in him w^hat might else have re- 
mained a hidden, but extraordinary and truly artistic, 
genius in that class of workmanship. Tubal was seized 
with a passion to become a smith, and readily yielded to 
the armourer's friendly request to him to acquire skill 
in the art as his apprentice. 

Perhaps if Edward Holte had heard the stor}^, he 
would have fancied the beauty of the armourer's 
daughter had something to do mth that acceptance, 
but Dorothy Firebrace was then a child of ten years 
old. 

In relating the story, Master Firebrace always, how- 
ever, asserted that it was quite by chance, and at a 
long subsequent period, that he discovered his mar- 
vellous apprentice's high descent and rightful preten- 
sions. Tubal had suffered his very name to sink from 
its proj^er syllables into the common country pronun- 
ciation of Bromycham. In truth, he seemed rather 
ashamed than proud of his pedigree from the weak- 



THE BIRMINGHAMS, LORDS OF BIRMINGHAM. 81 

hearted, alleged robber, Lord of BirmingharQ. Firebrace 
only discovered the facts of the case by accident, when 
Sir Thomas Holte, having heard of the fame of Tubal 
as an artificer in all kinds of iron-work, wished him to 
attend at Aston Hall, to assist in the casting of the orna- 
ments and fittings-up of his then externally-finished 
structm-e. Tubal confessed to his master the old feud, 
of which mention has been made, to excuse his com- 
pliance, but, with an artist's natural vanity, allowed 
himself to be soothed into submission by the admiration 
and praises his extant labours extorted from the good 
taste of Sir Thomas Holte and his family. 

Tubal's good nature in this respect, the master smith 
of Deritend thankfully admitted, was a pretty penny's- 
worth in the way of the firm; Sir Thomas Holte 
delighting amazingly in the decoration of his mansion 
with ornamental iron work : and in that piping time of 
peace, there was no great employment in the proper 
business of an armourer-smith in Birmingham. 

In particular. Sir Thomas had a fancy for chimney- 
piece and fire-place decoration, of a most costly and 
elaborate device. He even procured the assistance of 
a Dutch artist as a designer of these embellishments, 
which Tubal was at first employed to cast in furnaces 
set up for the purpose at Aston. But he speedily 
exhibited a natural genius in the task-work superior to 
the taught foreign artist's ; and the greater part of the 
magnificent fire-place, garden gates, fantastic mndow 
framework, roofs of the minaret towers, and other 
curious ornaments in bronze and iron, at Aston Hall, 
were alike of Tubal Bromycham's design and execu- 
tion. 

One day, nevertheless, a difference arose between the 
VOL. I. Qt 



82 THE aemourer's daughter. 

haughty Aston baronet and the no less proud and 
independent artist-artisan. 

Firebrace always declared himself unacquainted with 
the occasion of this breach of the good understanding so 
far existing, and which Tubal obstinately refused to 
communicate. The young man was even violently 
exasperated, for a long time afterwards, whenever any 
questioning on the subject was raised; and, indeed, 
sometimes declared his intention, if further teased on 
the matter, to depart, and pursue his occupation in 
some distant place. 

No doubt it was partly in dread of this possible 
abandonment, as well as the gratitude and admiration 
Firebrace felt towards his helpful pupil and foreman, 
that induced him at last to resolve to bestow upon him 
his daughter in marriage, and take him into direct 
partnership with himself. Yet, strange to say, for a 
considerable period, the reluctance and disinclination to 
this most advantageous arrangement for him, was on 
the side of Tubal Bromycham ; but the charms of the 
daughter, just rising into the perfection of early woman- 
hood and beauty, powerfully added to the generous 
entreaties of the father, it is to be presumed. At all 
events, at the time when Captain Cromwell arrived in 
Birmingham, a formal betrothing had taken place 
between the young pair, seemingly to their mutual 
contentment and satisfaction. 



83 



CHAPTER IX. 

FOEESHADOWS. 

The parliamentary commissioner had not failed to draw 
some inferences from the stories he heard on the subject 
of Tubal Bromycham, and to adapt them with singular 
dexterity, under his rough outward forms of speech, to 
the grand object he had himself in view. He repre- 
sented both to the armourer and his intended son-in- 
law that the unjust forfeiture which had stripped the 
latter of his true place in society, was the very kind of 
wrong to the subject which the glorious parliament 
then in being would be the most certain, as soon as it 
secured the power, to set to rights. They had even, there- 
fore, greatly more than the motives comm.on to all true 
Englishmen, who were resolved not to become in them- 
selves and their posterity a nation of crouching Asiatic 
slaves, and to maintain the purity of true religion 
against popish and prelatical invasions, to stand forth 
in the good cause. 

The commissioner found a very willing hearer in the 
younger man, in whom he discovered a vein of bitterness 
and animosity against the powers that were, and the 
state of things in general, hardly to be accounted for, 
even from his ancestral wrongs, and his own personal 
privation of his rights. 

g2 



84 THE armourer's daughter. 

At times, it crossed the subtle and penetrating mind 
of Cromwell that the quarrel between the iron artist and 
his patron at Aston Hall, must have been attended with 
peculiar and unknown circumstances of aggravation. 
Tubal never mentioned Sir Thomas Holte without some 
expression of scorn and indignation at the pride and 
tyranny of his character. Firebrace stated that he had 
frequently headed formidable poaching forays into the 
baronet's preserves, and those of the royal chase in his 
charge at Sutton Coldfield, purely, he believed, in annoy- 
ance and defiance, since he killed much but never 
brought away a single head of game of any sort. But 
still, the older and more prudent craftsman could not be 
won into any more open marks of adhesion to the Par- 
liament than engaging to furnish their ofiScer with the 
arms he needed. And Cromwell, as has been seen, 
was making a particularly earnest renewed appeal to the 
armourer at the very time of Edward Holte's arrival 
on the scene of action. 

*See you not that it lies chiefly with yourselves, 
Master Firebrace, to deserve the earliest handful of 
justice from the Parliament ? ' he was saying just pre- 
viously. ' Why should you hesitate ? I tell you, of a 
truth, I myself am placing in these weapons and armour 
of proof all that remains to me of two fair patrimonies, 
expended in promoting this good and great cause, and 
supporting the persecuted brethren for religion's sake. 
The tyrant would not let me betake myself thereupon 
even to our poor and desolate plantations in the New 
World, surrounded by cannibal Indians, in a godly com- 
pany of us that were at the time so minded; but I 
grudge not the sole inheritance of my children to this 
holy service; and I pray you take counsel by my 



FORESHADOWS. 85 

example, and hazard some little matter in the behalf 
of Christ, crucified again in these days by these enormous 
persecutors ! ' 

' Were the need so pressing ? Yet I cannot think 
the King would be so obstinate as not to take wiser 
couDsels in time, and shun his own or his people's 
destruction ! ' said the armourer, faithfully representing 
the well-to-do middle classes of his own and of every 
age, in reluctance to extremes. 

* You know not, then, his obstinacy and full-blo^vn 
madness of pride and prerogative, if you deem so,' the 
captain replied, vehemently ; but adding, with a sort of 
half melancholy, half satirical smile of recollection, ' I 
had cause to know it all of him right well, when he 
and I were boys together ! You look surprised. Master 
Firebrace ; but I must tell you I had a jolly old uncle 
once, who kept such state and wassail at a place called 
Hinchinbrook, in Huntingdonshire, that to this 
day there is" fame of it in that country, and little 
else left to the name. And what must this worshipful 
knight, for such he was, but take upon him to entertain 
the man's father who is now upon the throne . King 
James that was . upon one of his progresses. And, 
behold, there being none other of higher degree con- 
venient, I must be sent for to be whip-boy and play- 
thing to my young Prince Charles, of whom there was 
no thought at that time that he should inherit the crown, 
but was on the journey with his father and brother, the 
Prince of Wales, for a treat, to Scotland; though, Grod 
wot, by all we hear of that country, 'tis not the 
pleasantest direction for a native thereof to turn. But 
I interrupt your anvil ling, master armourer.' 

^ So be so ; my arms are not so limber as they once 



86 TiiE ahmourer's daughter. 

were; rest is good for them,' replied Firebrace, who 
listened to this courtly anecdote with the unusual mark 
of attention, on his part, indicated in a cessation from 
his toil at the forge. 

' I would not stop the work, howbeit ; especially as I 
see our famous foreman is absent, who doth the business 
of three when he is so minded,' Cromwell replied ; yet 
he proceeded, as if the story amused himself also. 
' Well, as I have said, they sent for me to my uncle, 
jolly Sir Oliver's, at Hinchinbrook, to be a playmate to 
the young prince, who now is King. And I, being a 
rude, hardy, country lad, of my ten years of age, 
disdained greatly at being forced to put myself in some 
fine stiff suit of brocade buckram, with the cruel chevaiix 
de frise frills they wore at times bristling like a wild 
boar's chine round my neck, and so was in a very 
uncourtly ill humour when they brought me to the prince's 
presence, and left me w^ith his Highness to entertain 
him to my best. And he, being the very perfection of 
high-bred gentility, and disdainful pride of his royal 
estate, though but a slender, pale, red-haired boy . he 
takes upon him at once to make sport of my awkward 
and ungainly appearance in my fine clothes . calls me 
ill-dressed ploughboy . hog in armour, as I think . or 
what should meao the same. So thereupon I answered 
his Highness . rudely enough, no doubt . that I was not 
then offending his sight by any pleasure of my own, and 
if I was a ploughboy, would indeed greatly prefer to be 
out in the good green fields, under the free sky, than in 
his Highness's railing presence. Upon which, his Scotch 
blood waxing suddenly choleric, the princeling rebuked 
me as wanting reverence to his high little person, for- 
sooth ; and, upon further rejoinder, thrashed me rather 



FORESHADOWS. 87 

smartly over the clieek with a riding switch he carried. 
There was still less reverence then, you may bethink 
you, shown on my part to the blood of my masters, for 
in an instant his Highness lay flat on the floor, mth his 
delicately carved royal nose spurting the blood of kings 
about him ! Yet, though he had felt so manifestly the 
force of my arm, and must have guessed thereby that 
he was no manner of match for me . a big, robust, 
surly boy, such as I was, some two years his elder . 
when he rose up, nothing would content Prince Charles 
Stuart but he must fight me. And so, believe me. Master 
Firebrace, he will fight his people now.' 

* You are a fit champion for him then, of a surety, 
Master Cromwell,' said the armourer, looking with 
astonishment at the man of such a boy. 

' I do so purpose to show myself, master armourer,' 
replied the captain, with a sedate and thoughtful 
expression. * But I had ill dreams on it, too . a very 
comfortless "nightmare to my couch that night . whither 
I was sent most famously rated and supperless.' 

' Tell me this also ; there is sometimes a foreseeing 
in dreams more than carnal men think for,' said Fire- 
brace, who, in spite of his advanced opinions in Church 
and State, partook as largely as any one in the super- 
stitions of his time. 

' Nay, but this was downright midsummer madness, 
though it was not midsummer at the time,' replied 
Cromwell, smiling ; and yet he, too, seemed strangely 
impressed with his own words, as he continued, ' Well 
then, sir, I had. fallen asleep sobbing over my uncle's 
most angry rebukes, and perchance some smarting of his 
displeasure elsewhere than in my mind . I think I must, 
I say, have fallen into a slumber of some sort, when 



88 THE armourer's DAU.HITEE. 

suddenly my room and counterpanes became all of a 
flutter like a flock of pigeons mounting. And, instead 
of my uncle's housekeeper, charitably bringing me some 
caudle for my hungry stomach, which I confess I ex- 
pected, and my nightcap, which I remember I lacked 
by her negligence, a giantess strode into the room, and 
up to my bed, and bade me be of good cheer, for all 
that had passed that day ; for that I should live yet to 
be the greatest man in England ! A likely story is 
not that, neighbour Firebrace, while there's a King in 
England? But, to make an end to my story, and to 
complete the joke, this giantess seemed to me to flourish 
a ro3^al crown in her hand . instead of a nightcap . 
such as was on all the King's liveries I had seen that 
day ; with which I know not what long space she tanta- 
lised me, trying to clutch it, to put upon my bare pate 
and keep it warm, until I woke with a yell of anger and 
rage. yet could never persuade myself, then nor since, 
that I had been asleep at all ! But, hist I what manner 
of a fine court gallant is this stepped out of one of Sir 
Peter Paul's shomest canvasses in the presence-chamber 
at Whitehall, when we carried up the Grrand Remon- 
strance to his Majesty?' 

It was in reality at this unpropitious moment that 
Edward Holte made his appearance on the scene. 



89 



CHAPTEE X. 

A MOVE IN THE GAME. 

^ It is even our ill neighbour at Aston, Sir Thomas 
Holte's only lawful son and heir. He hath but a devil's 
cub of a bastard, who is a lawyer in London, for another,' 
replied the armourer, in a vexed and surprised under- 
tone to Captain Cromwell. 

^ Ay, ay ; say you so ? ' remarked the latter, evidently 
with excited interest. ' In truth, he looks like a very 
Bang's man, with all those fine flowing womanish curls 
on the shoulders, nicely disparted on the smooth fore- 
head ; which I do never espy on a man than I hunger 
to twist my fingers among them to much such a like 
purpose as the oak branches tangled Absalom's on his 
restive mule. But, so, master armourer, are 3^our men 
about us to be depended upon in case we should need 
help against this fine sworder ? ' 

' Help, Master Cromwell ! help, against one man I ' 
exclaimed P'irebrace. 

*\Vhat know we how he maybe tailed outside? Ma}^ 
they not have heard at Aston of my presence and 
business in the town ? ' returned the captain, with a glare 
full of scrutiny and suspicion at the approaching cavalier. 
' And did you not tell me that the pride-mad baronet 
there was raising horse on the King's side ? ' 



90 THE ARMOUREH'S DAUGHTER. 

'But they are not armed, that I vv^ot of, Master 
Cromwell ; and most likely it is on a matter relative to 
that, the young gentleman comes here,' said Firebrace. 

' Ho, ho 1 unfanged adders, we will not fear I ' was the 
reply. 

By this time Edward was almost close at hand, and 
Cromwell was aware that his own dark searching 
glance was amply returned by the young cavalier, 
though with less of menace and scowl in the expression. 
Both felt, however, that they were hostile planets, 
traversing each other's orbits. On the other hand, the 
heir of Aston saluted the Deritend smith with more 
than customary politeness and deference, even raising 
his hat for a moment ; a very great condescension at 
that time on the part of a person of Edward Holte's 
rank to a person of Master Firebrace's. 

Firebrace himself certainly felt gratified by this mark 
of respect, but did not like to exhibit the feeling under 
the stern gaze of his parliamentary customer. He 
drew up his tall and grisly person to its height, and 
folding his bare arms, with the hammer he had been 
using still in hand, looked at the stranger without any 
response of civility, merely remarking, ' Master Holte, 
of Aston, . what may be your pleasure, sir ? ' 

* Why, Master Firebrace, you used not to look so like 
a stranger on my namesake once upon a time ; and have 
the few years since my schoolboy days so altered me 
that you seem scarcely to know me again, now that I 
am come to live among my father's friends and neigh- 
bours ?' said Edward Holte, auofurinor no crood from this 
manner of reception. 

* We of Birmingham are so, in a sense. Master Holte ; 
but times are changed, sir, times are much changed I ' 



A MOYE IN THE GAME. 91 

replied the armourer, very sulkily, and now upon some 
reminiscence of his own. 

^ Truly ; but not so ill for men of your craft, Master 
Firebrace,' said the young gentleman, desirous evidently 
to conciliate ; ' and the proof is, that I have come to you 
to order furnishing for a troop of horse, mustering some 
seven score good stalwart yeomen, fellows of my father's 
tenantry, which he is raising in compliance with the 
King's commission of array ; who has been pleased to 
name me their commander.' 

Captain Cromwell gave an uneasy shuffle in his 
position, but made no observation, looking intently at 
the armourer for his reply. 

Firebrace was evidently embarrassed, and there was a 
slight pause. But he met Cromwell's fixed regard, and 
seemed to feel the necessity of speech. 

* Truly, then, Master Holte,' he said, still with some 
hesitation, ^ I am sorry to have to disoblige you ; but all 
my forge hands are engaged in other work, and I 
cannot do your bidding in anywise.' 

' Wh}", how so, Master Firebrace ? ' said Edward, look- 
ing around him. ^ Here seems armour-gear ready to 
hand for as many and more than I have reckoned to you. 
Ah, and of a new and excellent shaping, to my eye ! 
What are these plates of steel else ?' 

He pointed to the symmetrical row of polished 
cuirasses, skilfully arched to the chest, which covered 
all one murky side of the apartment with a silvery glare. 

' These are coverings for some poor honest fellows' 
breasts, who will freely adventure them in a good cause 
in other respects, sir, but are bespoke,' said Captain 
Cromwell now, and not by any means in so civil a tone 
as the words he used were in themselves. 



92 THE aemoueer's daughteij. 

*'Tis true, sir; this armour is made to a London 
order,' said Firebrace, striving to speak as if he thought 
he was making an ordinary announcement of a business 
transaction. 

^Not so, master armourer,' the captain resumed, in 
a stern and uncompromising tone ; ' it is made to ni}^ 
order . to the order of Oliver Cromwell, burgess of 
parliament for the good town of Cambridge. I am not 
afraid to own Christ before man ! ' 

' And do you call it owning Christ, sir,' said Edward, 
turning angrily on the stranger who thus audaciously 
put himself in the front of the discussion, * arming the 
King's subjects against his lawful authority? ' 

* Quite the contrary, sir ; I and my fellows are in 
arms to maintccm the King's lawful authority, as sig- 
nified by his Majesty's faithful houses of Parliament, to 
this people and nation.' 

This was the style adopted by the Parliament in 
declaring their resolution to resist Charles by open force, 
m order to do as little violence as possible to the deeply- 
looted veneration and awe of the English people, in that 
age, toward the person and prerogatives of the royal 
power. 

* It is none the less . but rather all the more . high 
treason, not only in you who publish and project the 
same as your purposes, but in all who aid and abet you 
therein,' returned Edward Holte, passionately. * And so 
his Majesty has had it proclaimed at the market-cross 
of Nottingham, where. by a reporter even you would 
not dispute, Master Cromwell . he has now openly set 
up his royal standard of deliverance from the misleading 
and tyrannies of you and your fellows in the London 
Parliament.' 



A MOVE IN THE GAME. 93 

^ Is it even so ? The Lord be praised that has har- 
dened Pharaoh's heart to a greater redemption, against 
all the signs of the times and of His judgments ! ' 
exclaimed Captain Cromwell ; and probably with no 
feigned satisfaction in what he heard. ' Said I not truly. 
Master Firebrace,' he continued, addressing the ar- 
mourer with a vehemence that quite undid the effect of 
Edw^ard Holte's denouncing on the other side, ' that the 
time for the winnowing of the corn from the chaff has 
come, and for all men to ponder the text, "Noiv the just 
shall live by faith; hut if any man draws bade, my 
soul shall take no pleasure in him.''^ ' Heb. x. 38. 

' Who is for draiving back, good Master Cromwell ? * 
said the armourer, pettishly, yet evidently throvrn on 
his mettle. * Do not pick me up ere I fall.' 

' Oh, you, sir, and your party are well known for 
cappers of texts and gospel evidence; but this is a 
matter of statute law and customs of this realm,' 
retorted Edward. ' And I warn you, Master Firebrace, 
you are placing yourself in the deadliest shot and aim 
of the law thus to supply the King's rebels and pro- 
claimed enemies with weapons and munitions of war 
against him.' 

' It cannot be, sir ; I do but the wonted business of 
my craft in the matter,' returned Firebrace ; yet an 
evident paleness came over his bronzed and heated 
complexion. 

* Then, at the least, you should make no distinction 
of parties, master armourer,' replied Edward, eagerly ; 
' and this plea may perchance avail you at another day. 
Divide your present manufacture between us of Aston 
and this stranger. We will pay you as well, if not 
better, than any Parliament-mongers in the world. 



94 TnE armoueeb's DAuaniER. 

You cannot, sure, doubt my father's ability in that 
way ; and 'tis not the King, but Sir Thomas Holte, whom 
T offer you as paymaster.' 

' The more sufficient bondsman of the two, of a truth, 
unless the Oxford gownsmen have better luck in sending 
him their plate to melt than those of Cambridge, whom 
I stopped in the fact,' Cromwell replied, with a smile of 
some gloomy humour. * However, young gentleman, I 
must let you know that what you wish cannot be, unless 
you would have your father's yeomen ride to the King's 
battles with 0. C. on all their swords and armour 
buckles : for I purpose, I promise you, that Oliver 
Cromwell's troopers shall be known for whose they are, 
wherever they go.' 

' On their gibbets, I trust, chiefly, sir, if they show 
themselves as causelessly rude and offensive to others as 
their captain hath to me, from no reason that I know 
of,' returned Edward, sharply, much provoked at this 
intimation. ' Still, Master Firebrace, if you really 
purpose to observe a fair neutrality, you will give us the 
next spell of your handiwork, and equip me and my 
men in time to attend his Majesty on his certainly 
announced journey southward !' 

Firebrace looked puzzled. This assurance of the 
King's intention to come to direct collision with his 
mutinous Parliament, on a route which would bring 
him very near Birmingham, if not into it, evidently 
startled him. *WTiy, for that matter. Master Holte,' 
he began, in a wavering manner, * in respect of the 
esteem I bear your honourable self, rather than your 
house or father, worshipful Sir Thomas ' But Crom- 
well interrupted him at this point. 

'Neutrality!' he exclaimed in a voice of thunder. 



A MOTE IN THE GAME. 95 

' Neutrality ! who speaks of neutrality between Grod and 
the devil ? No, Master Firebrace, he who is not with 
us is against us, in this great contest between Satan 
and the Lord ! And the real traitors and enemies to 
the country are those whom the Parliament has declared 
so, any and all, the aiders and abettors of yon rash, 
misguided tyrant, in setting up this war against the 
people of England I And now, as this fair-spoken young 
man hath yet plainly declared such is also his intention, 
I call upon you. Master Firebrace, and all other true 
and honest citizens of this town who hear me, to assist 
in the execution of the Parliament ordinance, made 
especially to fit such cases, whereby imprisonment 
during the pleasure of the two houses is the least 
penalty denounced on such malignant incendiaries and 
upraisers of rebellion. Do you hear me, master ar- 
mourer, and will joii and your men be helpful to me 
in the enforcement of this wise and just decree ? ' 

Firebrace stared in great astonishment at the sudden 
outbreak; while Edward Holte burst into a derisive 
laugh. * Make me your prisoner, will you ? ' he ex- 
claimed; *why, the town has never a jail in it but such 
as is at the lord's manor house, which is held by a good 
friend of our family ; and I think I could spit all the 
force in constables likely to be brought against me on 
a skewer for roast larks. What do you mean, sir ? 
Are you mad ? ' 

' Good men and true ! ' said Cromwell, turning to the 
smiths around, who, startled by the noise of the alterca- 
tion, were now mostly resting from their labours and 
listening to what passed, 'you hear how this pervert 
and malignant from Aston scoffs at you and your town. 
Will you stand by me while I make him captive for his 



96 THE armocker's daughter. 

traitorous designs and speeches, and send liim to London 
as an assurance and earnest of your hearty zeal in the 
good cause for which all faithful Englishmen will soon 
be in arms ? Moreover, he will be the best of hostages 
for the security of your town from the blood-thirsty 
assaults and insolencies you will else be sure to receive 
from the tyrannous King's bashaw at Aston.' 

The brawny auditory gave a kind of murmur of assent, 
but looked evidently for more precise directions to their 
master. 

Firebrace, on his part, was visibly both amazed and 
agitated at these sudden proceedings. Yet Captain 
Cromwell had established an influence over his mind 
which he did nof. find it easy to withstand, and he tried 
to betake himself to the usual resource in such cases . 
a kind of middle way. 

'Nay, sir,' he said to Cromwell, 'you are surely too 
hasty. Yet I would not. Master Holte, that you wasted 
more time here on your entreaty, which I can by no 
means comply with, having other employment, as I 
have said, for all my forges, for months to come. I ad- 
vise and pray you rather to lose no time in leaving the 
town, for the people are not well disposed to those of 
your name at present, and .' 

' But I say he shall not leave the town, saving as a 
prisoner, to answer for his delinquencies, so openly 
avowed and enforced, before the committee of Parlia- 
ment in London,' said Captain Cromwell . who seemed 
determined to urge matters to extremity . and, more- 
over, actually stepping between young Holte and his 
proper line of exit in case he had adopted the friendly 
suo'orestion of the armourer. 

Edward was more provoked at this action, possibly, 



A MOYE IN THE GAME. 97 

than the words accompanying it. ' By the King's life,' 
he exclaimed, stepping back, with his hand on the hilt 
of his sword, * and who art thou to threaten me thus ? 
Stand out of the way, ruffian, or ' 

' Nay, if that be your game, we will try one of your 
weapons. Master Firebrace, on a cavalier costard (head- 
piece) instead of an oak block ! ' was the ready retort ; 
and as Captain Cromwell raised the weapon on which 
he had hitherto been leaning, with a threatening 
flourish, Edward Holte was compelled, in self-defence, 
immediately to draw his blade, and place himself on 
guard. This he did with the practised grace and dex- 
terity of an accomplished fencer, to which the bold but 
rough and apparently untutored attitude of Cromwell 
formed a singular contrast, and did not seem to augur 
altogether well for the parliamentary champion. And 
doubtless Edward Holte himself looked forward to a 
contest of skill and agility, to which his highly-trained 
experience promised him the victory in the quarrel 
thrust so unexpectedly and seemingly unreasonably 
upon him. And Firebrace in vain raised his voice in 
expostulation; and the smiths crowded towards the 
scene of action, in expectation of witnessing that most 
amusing of all spectacles to the popular eye, a hand- 
to-hand combat, when the whole affair came to as 
sudden a termination as the commencement. 

Far from meeting his antagonist in the manner he 
evidently calculated, with all the finer tricks of assault 
and fence. Captain Cromwell brought his massive broad- 
sword with so tremendous a force and clash upon the 
cavalier's bright but much slenderer blade, that, to the 
infinite astonishment and chagrin of Edward Holte, it 
was in a manner dashed to pieces in his hand; and 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE armouker's daughter. 

he found himself with little more than the hilt of his 
weapon left in his grasp, defenceless and unarmed, 
before his very slightly provoked but apparently 
strongly exasperated foe ! 

* Ho, so, even as I thought ; yonder foreign kickshaw 
is no match for a blade of Tubal Bromycham's temper- 
ing, when he is in earnest at his work,' said Cromwell, 
apparently in no wise elated at his success, but adding, 
in a very calm and business-like manner, ^ Do you yield 
you now. Master Holte, as my prisoner, or must I 
grapple with you for the mastery ? ' 

' How mean you, rude man ! speaking thus to an 
antagonist so foully and dishonestly taken at an advan- 
tage V exclaimed young Holte, exasperated to a degree 
that removed him far beyond the restraint of pru- 
dence. 

' Nay, then, it shall be man to man ; a fair up-and- 
down wrestle, until I bind you as fast as Samson in 
your own love-locks I ' returned Cromwell, suddenly 
casting aw^ay his own sword, and, yet more to the 
cavalier's astonishment, throwing himself with his 
whole weight upon him, and grappling him as if for 
a wrestling match. 

The elegant but slender and youthful figure of the 
heir of Aston was certainly not fitted for such an 
encounter with the powerfully muscular, heavy, and 
matured frame of the Parliament officer. Yet he met 
a strong resistance, as if he too were not altogether 
unaccustomed to the species of contest; and, although 
Cromwell several times lifted him with the force of a 
giant from his feet into the air, Edward contrived, with 
singular dexterity, always to alight again upon them ; 
and even at last, by an active manoeuvre, which the 



A MOVE IN THE GAME. 99 

captain seemed not to expect or understand, leaped 
fairly over his massive shoulder behind him. Reason- 
ably then, considering that he had had enough of this 
kind of sport in so unfair a field, Edward Holte deter- 
mined to make use of the opportunity to effect his 
escape. He therefore brushed through the group of 
staring Cyclopses . who, admiring his courage and 
dexterity, offered no hindrance . and rushed towards the 
exit of the smithy, where he expected to find his horses 
and armed servants. 

And so, indeed, they were there, but gazing with a 
consternation of their own in quite a different direction 
to the one their master arrived in. And Edward also 
discerned, with no light increase of alarm and surprise, 
the approach of a great mob from the Bull Ring, which 
came pouring down Deritend in a strangely confused 
and tumultuous way ; neither had he time to reach up 
to the holsters of his saddle for the pair of pistols in it> 
ere again the powerful clutch of Cromwell pinioned 
both his arms down to his sides. 

' Whither away, my master ? ' he exclaimed. ' Let us 
have it out fairly. But here come readier and rasher 
allies for me than our worthy master armourer and his 
beef-brained hammerers. There's a jolly, shouting 
mob, such as we frightened the King away from White- 
hall withal ! On their lives, bid your serving-men 
keep the peace, or I will set the rabble on you in a 
fashion that . Ho, my master ! What ho, Tubal Bro- 
mycham ! in God and the Parliament's names, aid me 
to make captives of these delinquent enemies to both.' 

It was indeed the very rabble raised in commotion 
by the eloquent ravings of the Nottingham refugee, 
still headed by him and Tubal Bromycham, which now 

H 2 



100 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

came pouring down Deritend in a shouting, laughing, 
yelling, limb-straining mass. For, having succeeded in 
effecting the overthrow of the supposed emblem of 
superstition, the rioters . so they might be called . had 
been further moved by some capricious impulse of the 
popular mind, to resolve upon consigning the massive 
image . which they had found it impossible to destroy 
. to the waters of the Kea. 



101 



CHAPTER XL 

A PRISONER OF LOYE AND WAR. 

True to their proper mechanical genius, or instructed 
by their leaders, the Birmingham mobsters came draw- 
ing the ponderous image . which, otherwise, might pos- 
sibly have offered a passive resistance of weight not 
easily to be overcome . on a set of iron rollers, placed and 
replaced in the way with emulous zeal, with ropes round 
its neck and the rest of the prostrate main mass. Men 
dragged at these over their shoulders, furiously urged on 
in the good work by Wrath-of-Grod Whitehall, whose 
flimsy skeleton could give no other assistance, while 
Tubal Bromycham did the work of three strong men . 
or, rather, of the strongest cart-horse . in his actual 
person. In this manner engaged, the whole rabble, 
unluckily for Edward Holte, came rolling towards the 
Crown Forge at the very moment when his former foe 
had again seized him in his unkind embrace. 

Tubal, hearing his name called in a voice which he 
very well knew, ceased his exertions, and as he was the 
main strength of the movement, the whole rabble came 
to a halt before Firebrace's house. And as the people 
followed their leader, again, in hurrying up to ascertain 
the meaning of the strange grouping at the gateway, 
Edward Holte foimd his line of retreat still more 



102 THE AKMOURER'S DAUGHTER. 

effectively cut off by their advance than his own seizure 
from behind. 

Meanwhile, but perhaps rather to the increase of the 
cavalier's annoyance, the uproar had summoned a fairer 
auditor to the window projecting over the porch of the 
Old Crown. The lattice on one side of the window flew 
open, and Mistress Dorothy Firebrace looked out of it, 
with an expression of very great alarm and surprise, 
passing through many deepening shades in a single 
.moment, as the aspect of things below more clearly 
struck her. 

« Hillo, Master Cromwell ! what is the matter here V 
exclaimed Tubal, approaching ; but, strangely enough, 
as his eye fell upon Edward Holte, his whole flushed and 
excited physiognomy lost its hues, and faded off into 
almost a deadly pallor ! 

Captain Cromwell lost no time in giving the required 
explanations, which he seasoned in a singularly artful 
manner, to win the adhesion and stir the exasperation of 
the already heated populace. But he addressed himself 
more particularly to Tubal. ' Now is the time, or never. 
Master Bromycham,' he said, with great eagerness, and 
with more significance to the person he spoke to than 
was exactly to be discerned in the sense of his words ; 
* if you would deserve well of the Parliament in that 
great matter whereof we have had conference, to stand 
forth in its behalf, and enlist your famous and most 
serviceable town openly in the good cause ! ' 

' Aye, aye, openly, openly!' yelled Whitehall. ^ Whoso 
denieth me before men, I will deny him before my 
Father ! What is the work in hand . the work in hand, 
I say, to glorify the Lord ? ' 

To Edward Holte's very considerable surprise, Tubal 



A PEISONER IN LOVE AND WAR. 103 

made no response at first to the emissary of the 
Parliament's appeal. He looked at him, indeed, with a 
singular kind of stedfastness, and a shudder passed over 
his powerful frame as their eyes met. All this was, 
however, succeeded by a dark and angry flush of blood 
to his brow, and he exclaimed, ' Will he not go prisoner 
quietly ? By Heaven, then, he shall feel my grip ! ' 

* Shame on you, Tubal ! . a thousand, thousand 
shames ! So many on one defenceless and disarmed 
man ! ' exclaimed a voice at this moment from the win- 
dow above . a female voice, but one full of the most 
eloquent fervour of emotion and appeal. It was the 
voice of Dorothy Firebrace ; and Edward, glancing up 
at the beautiful, but now passionately excited and in- 
dignant countenance, gave a mournful and yet involun- 
tarily pleased and tender smile. 

Tubal himself apparently shrunk from the rebuke. 
'Nay, 'tis none of my doing. Mistress Firebrace,' he 
said, in rather grumbling and surly tones. 

^ Whose doiug is it, then? Not my father's ! Is it 
this intrusive stranger's ? And what has he to do to 
meddle among us, to the breach of all manners and 
decency towards a visitor and worthy neighbour of 
the town ? ' continued Dorothy, still highly excited. 
'Where's my father? I see him not, or he would 
never suffer such insolencies to the son of his best and 
friendliest customer ! ' 

' Heard man ever such a peal as this young girl's 
tongue rings out ? Of a truth, ye of Birmingham 
must be the most henpecked husbands of all England, 
if the wives and matrons here keep the tune in their 
places ! ' exclaimed Cromwell. ' But, howbeit, these are 
not matters for women's meddling we are upon at 



104 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

present. Tubal, take the prisoner to the town limbo 
under the Welsh Cross, where I have myself ere now seen 
pickpockets and other malefactors bestowed. We will 
see to his proper looking after there. Come, sir, will 
you go like a man on two legs, or must you be dragged 
and hounded thither like a timorous calf into the 
slaughter-house ? ' 

Edward glanced around him with eyes full of a very 
different expression . fierce with indignation and dis- 
dain. But the great array of rough force against him, 
convinced him that further resistance on his own or 
his servants' part, would only provoke an overwhelming 
demonstration of the superior strength of his adver- 
saries. 

' Do no base harm to us, since you have us so unfairly 
at your mercy; and look for certain to receive such 
chastisement of your unlawful assault and detention of 
the King's subjects, as his Majesty will be at hand 
shortly, with an army at his back, to inflict,' said he, 
shaking himself loose from Cromwell's hold. ' I yield 
myself your prisoner, since I cannot help myself ; but 
not to you, sir, not to you ! ' he concluded, casting off 
Tubal Bromycham's grasp on his shoulder in turn, 
though it was gentle enough, with a violent gesture of 
anger and disdain. ^I will walk quietly, under my 
protest, to your prison.' 

It was very plain in Tubal's countenance that this 
action roused a corresponding feeling of anger, resent- 
ment, and retaliation in his bosom, he even clutched 
back his sinewy arm, with the fist doubled, as if 
prompted to return it, where it had been dashed from, 
with emphasis. But either some restraining impulse of 
his own better nature, or the arrival of Firebrace and his 



A PRISONER OF LOVE AND WAR. 105 

daughter, who made their appearance at this moment, 
together, from the porchway, arrested the first passion- 
ate movement . and a blow from Tubal Bromycham 
seldom required seconding. 

On this arrival, it was at once obvious that his 
daughter's expostulations, which she had hurried from 
the window above to bestow on her sire, had produced 
a notable effect upon the armourer. 

' Nay, Tubal, lad, be quiet, 'tis an unarmed man. 
Master Cromwell, what you do is without due warranty. 
The young gentleman has in no way infringed upon our 
rights, or the customs of the trades of Birmingham. I 
am the master of the guild, and you cannot take him to 
the town lock-up without my orders or sanction.' 

' Will you hold him yourself, then, prisoner in your 
house, Master Firebrace, and go with me to the town- 
hall, to ask your fellow-citizens their judgment in the 
matter? I do not wish you to take a single step but 
such as the whole town shall be ready and willing to 
stride a pace beyond with you in,' replied Cromwell, 
anxious above all things to implicate the master 
armourer in the trausaction ; and perceiving, in this 
suggestion, how to do so without startling the fears 
natural to all but the boldest and most determined spirits, 
in a solitary advance to danger. 

' Oh, yes, yes ; let Master Holte remain here, under 
my father's assurance and protection. He would not be 
safe in the hands of these savage rioters, and then shall 
my father have to stand forth and answer for all ! ' ex- 
claimed Dorothy Firebrace, who appeared to dread 
nothing so much as to see the person of the heir of 
Aston placed in the custody of the exasperated multi- 
tude, whose unmanliness and violence were already so 



106 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

formidably exhibited, and among whom, as she well 
knew, the entire Holte name was extremely in distaste 
and opprobrium. 

' I'm no jailer. Captain Cromwell. How can I take 
upon me this jailer's charge?' returned Firebrace, still 
not greatly relishing the part thrust upon him. 

'Let the young man give his parole he will not 
attempt to leave your precincts, or the town, until we 
determine what is fittest to be done with him, and he 
will need no locks and keys. Being of so honourable 
a degree of gentility, his word may doubtless be taken 
for a commoner's bond I ' said Cromwell with a slight 
sneer. But Dorothy, turning to the cavalier, entreated 
him with so much passion and earnestness to accept the 
proposition, that he himself . not seeing how otherwise 
he could better his unfortunate position, and perhaps 
secretly tempted by the prospect of remaining -within so 
pleasing a neighbourhood . lent some acquiescence to 
the arrangement. 

' I will give you my word to remain in Armourer 
Firebrace's enclosures, on release or rescue, until you 
shall inform me of the good town's resolution, whether 
it purposes to break all the natural laws of kind neigh- 
bourhoodship and hospitality, as well as the King's, 
against me, or not ; but nothing further. Do you take 
me into your charge on this footing. Master Firebrace ? 
Aye or no ? ' 

' Truly, Master Holte, since it is of your own proffer- 
ing, and you will bear me witness 'tis none of my doing 
or ordaining, but chiefly to save you from worse hands 
and treatment,' the armourer replied, still anxious to 
secure his retreat from his dangerous predicament be- 
tween the opposing parties. * Tubal, you also are as a 



A PKISONER OF LOVE AND WAE. 107 

testimony to me that I do nought in this as of my own 
free choice. Look not so wrathfuUy at the young man, 
but keep yourself clear in all respects of an outrageous- 
ness, which, perchance, Master Cromwell may sometime 
find it a hard matter to answer.' 

'I will take care Master Holte escapes not from 
whatever resolves the town may come to on his score, 
Father Zachariah ! that is all,' returned Tubal ; adding 
in a hoarse tone, within his teeth, 'And I wot well I owe 
none of his name a better turn I ' 

'\yhy, man, what harm has my name done to thee? 
Oh, I remember now ; and has such black blood come 
down in your veins through the four generations of 
mortal men that have elapsed since then?' said Edward, 
looking scornfully at the famous blacksmith, whose 
animosity, he had no doubt, dated from the feud of a 
(Jentury old, the origin of which has been explained. 

Tubal turned pale at the first part of this question, 
and Edward himself could not but feel that, although 
his eyes continued fixed fiercely upon him, the latter 
portion of his observation seemed scarcely to produce 
any effect upon him. 

' What has your name done to me ? What has it 
done to me ? ' Tubal muttered indistinctly to himself, 
while sparks of fire flashed from his blue eyes, as they 
might under his own vigorous strokes from the forge. 
^ Well, no matter, no matter ! The day of vengeance 
must and shall come ! But not now, nor on an unarmed 
and defenceless man ! ' 

' Come into the house, sir, from this rude and angry 
rabble. I will be your willing, and yet most unwilling 
hostess, in my father's name,' said Dorothy ; and it was 
not very clear whether her passionate glance did not 



108 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

single out her betrothed as the representative of the 
body of individuals to whom those unpolite epithets 
were applied. And she seconded her invitation even by 
so decisive a measure as to place her arm in Edward 
Holte's, and draw him gently from the throng towards 
the court-3^ard steps, ascending into the private resi- 
dence of Armourer Firebrace. 

^ Grood troth ! a lass who will take her own way like a 
spoilt only one as she is ! ' remarked Cromwell, looking 
discontentedly after the pair. ' Yet a lass of spirit, too, 
if she but showed it on the right side ! Good faith, 
Master Bromycham . which is no evil-minded, devil- 
obtesting cavalier oath, but a sober and godly calling 
to witness of the truth . Grood faith, your betrothed 
needs some careful looking after in such good company I 
And so we leave the young man, as you have said, in 
your earnest guardianship, while myself and Master 
Firebrace make known to the townsmen what is done in 
the affair, and ask their further coimsel and support. 
Ho, there, which among ye here is the town-crier ; for, 
sure, he will make one in such an onset of marrowbones 
and cleavers as is here ? ' 

'Yea, verily; I, though unworthy, am the man . 
Accepted Clavers by name ! ' ^ said a voice from the 
throng, which sounded like the notes of a cracked 
trumpet, it was at once so shrill, dissonant, and devoid 
of control ; and a long, lean figure on crutches, with two 
wooden legs from about the middle of the lower division 
of the human frame, hopped and thrust itself forward. 

' They did not choose thee, then, 'tis plain, when the 
town needed rapid intelligence. Accepted Clavers ! 
However, if the office be thine, do it mth all diligence, 
and go round Birmingham town, and summon a full 



A PRISONER OF LOYE AND WAR. 109 

meeting of the worthy people thereof at the G-uildhall, 
in the name of the Master Armourer Firebrace,' said 
Cromwell, in accents of command which no one seemed 
now to dispute. Accepted himself . who had probably 
been promoted to his office as a charitable provision 
after the loss of his limbs, in some of the dangerous 
manufactures of the town . instantly raised a large bell, 
and rang out a most formidable jangling peal, which he 
followed up by uttering the proclamation in proper 
official form, and hobbled off to spread it through the 
town. After this, Captain Cromwell paused merely to 
disarm the two astonished and panic-stricken domestics 
of Aston, whom he ordered to dismount, and directed 
Tubal to consign to the lock-up at the Welsh Cross. 
The horses themselves of these men, as well as that of 
Edward Holte, he seemed to seize upon as spoil of the 
Egyptians, for he ordered one of Firebrace's smiths to 
lead them to the inn where he lodged, behind St. 
Martin's, called the Black Boy and Woolpack. And 
the active agent of the Parliament completed his 
arrangements by walking off with the master armourer 
. almost evidently against his will . ^to the town hall. 

The mob, meanwhile, with characteristic inconstancy, 
hearing of what was up in that direction, abandoned the 
fallen statue in the roadway, and principally scudded off 
after the crier, leaving Wrath-of-Grod Whitehall vainly 
clamouring for assistance to complete the work of cast- 
ing the profane image into the Eea. However, one of 
the faithful few who remained, and who seemed, by his 
rainbow-hued arms and apron, a dyer, offered the poor 
apostle shelter and food in his dwelling in Digbeth ; 
which, in the relapse from his over-wrought feelings 
and disappointment, luckless Flotsam was glad to accept. 



110 THE AKMOURER's DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER XII. 

A PURITAN HOUSEHOLD. 

While the astute and daring parliamentarian thus 
alarmed the town, and summoned its principal citizens 
to a conference which he intended should produce 
momentous results, Dorothy Firebrace eagerly com- 
pleted the rescue of the object of his first violent 
demonstration. Yet she was scarcely satisfied that 
Edward Holte w^as safe from the insults of the mob, 
until some time after she had escorted him into the 
interior of the house, and all noise of the tumultuous 
gathering had died away from the immediate neigh- 
bourhood of the Crown Forge. Until then, she seemed 
determined to keep him company . doubtless with a 
view to watch over his safety . very unusually reversing 
the relation of the sexes. And Edward Holte, who 
perceived her motive, was at once piqued and gratified 
with its effects. The latter feeling, to say the truth, 
much predominating, and leaving him very little 
disposed to find fault with whatsoever might be the 
consequence of so agreeable a result. 

Armourer Firebrace's residence proved to be on -as 
substantial and roomy a scale inside as out. The 
apartment Dorothy showed him into was very irregular 
in shape, and low in the ceiling, but it was of an extent 



A PURITAN HOUSEHOLD. Ill 

that would be thought ample for half-a-dozen chambers 
in our day. It was the common sitting-room of the 
family, on the second story ; and the primitive state of 
manners was evinced by a considerable recess in it being 
used as a kitchen, while other divisions were evidently 
set apart as convenient store-rooms to supply the needfuls 
of the culinary art. About a third of the whole was as 
clearly assigned as a sort of parlour for the heads of the 
household, being paved with beautifully-flowered Dutch 
tiles, and very solidly furnished with table, settle, and 
chairs, of black oak, so heavy with material as almost 
to be immovable, and curiously carved with knots of 
oak leaves, oak apples, and acorns : the work, no 
doubt, of a remote period, from the look of the pieces, 
which were actually worn into sitting-places, like 
our modern Windsor chairs, by the simple pressure 
of the weighty generations that had successively oc- 
cupied them. 

The original appearance of the whole, to a modern 
eye, would have been completed by the sight of three or 
four distaffs set about the apartment, two of which were 
in actual use at the moment, under the nimble and 
dexterous managing of as many handmaidens of the 
armourer's establishment. 

An old woman, who probably united the offices of 
cook and housekeeper . the same that had spoken to 
Edward Holte at the draw-well . was busied in some 
department of her art at the kitchen fire. Three 
massive doors seemed to open into contiguous chambers, 
and there were windows on each side, high and narroAV, 
and cross-barred with iron, to form the lattice panes . 
so narrow, that when the fire-light glowed upon them, 
they looked little bigger, and quite as handsome, as 



112 THE armourer's daughter. 

good-sized rubies. Xor could they be opened from 
either inside or outside, sufficient air being supposed . 
and with reason . to be provided from the door 
communicating with the courtyard gallery, and the 
several wide open chimney-places of the chamber. 

The women, young and old, looked with surprise at 
the visitor, while Edward, with the natural uneasy 
feeling of a prisoner, walked to the windows to see what 
they gave out upon. 

One range, he found, overlooked the smithy yard ; 
the other a garden and orchard, of no great extent, and 
speedily bounded by the waters of the Eea. 

Dorothy's interest in her handsome protege had, 
meanwhile, not diminished with the cessation of any 
immediate danger to him. Perhaps, indeed, in the 
absorption of her mind, she thought so little of herself 
as not to reflect that she followed on Edward's steps 
with singular closeness, as if she had a right to be with 
him, and to guard him from any remaining possibility 
of harm. 

* No,' she said, answering the cavalier's look, though 
he said nothing, after inspecting the windows, * they will 
not open ; but, in recompense, if you close the door by 
Avhich we entered, I doubt if all my father's smiths 
together, armed with their best crow-bars, could force a 
way in for hours; and even then there is further 
retreat. The door yonder opens into our guest 
chamber, and is nearly as strong, with bolt and bar, as 
that to the open way.' 

'You apprehend, then, still for me. Mistress Fire- 
brace?' said Edward; adding, with a mingled expression 
of shame and indignation, 'But, in truth, I am deprived 
of all defence by yonder powerful swash-buckler taking 



PUKITAN HOUSEHOLD. 113 

me so unfairly vdth. his heavy metal against a common 
rapier.' 

'Grood troth, do I, Master Holte!' the fair damsel 
replied, speaking in a low tone, as if she did not wish 
to be overheard by the other women present. ' The 
desperate man of whom you speak, and who has placed 
his head on the traitor's block by half that he hath 
already done, has evidently taken my father imder his 
sway and urging ; and my father is as a ship with full- 
spread sails for the blustering breeze that is abroad to 
catch and send headlong through the tempest. He 
has great influence also with Tubal Bromycham, my 
betrothed husband (these latter words she pronounced 
with a degree of falter and hesitation that pleased 
Edward), and there are, I think, secret counsels and 
devices hatching between them. Then again, my father 
himself always suspects . I can gather, though he has 
never openly declared his thoughts to me . that TubrJ 
has suffered some special wrong or indignity at the 
hands of Sir Thomas Holte, likely to render him bitter 
and exasperate against his son. Nay, I think something 
more than that old grudge between your names, for he 
scarcely ever alluded to that of old times ; but since his 
dismissal from the works of Aston, I myself have heard 
Tubal give vent, as it were, in blurts of fire from a 
closed furnace, to a deep smouldering of hatred and 
revenge in his heart against that haughty gentleman, 
which it may well be he will not be sorry to find 
occasion to blaze forth upon the son.' 

' Let him give me fair play . let any man . and I fear 
not the worst that mortal hate can devise against me ! ' 
returned Edward, with an angry flush. ' But what you 
say, as regards the worthy blacksmith, may be true. 

VOL. I. I 



114 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

My father is a man of choleric temper and reckless 
impulses, and withal can hold to his feelings of revenge 
and bitterness as long as others of a calmer and slower 
implacability. But I should not speak this of a father, 
who, I know, will be driven to extremity by this outrage 
and insult in my person to his house.*' 

* And that is what I most fear,' said Dorothy, with 
sudden eagerness. ' Oh, master Holte I it would put 
everlasting ill blood between our names too . I mean, 
between the good town and Aston Hall, for ever . if 
Sir Thomas should attempt your rescue with a violent 
hand.' 

' So it would, dear Mistress Firebrace, since you so 
kindly interest yourself in my favour. It is the very 
course Sir Thomas is likely to throw himself upon. It 
is not likely he will suffer me to remain in the hands of 
a brutish and violent mob, or to be dragged a prisoner 
to London at the behest of a member of the traitorous 
Parliament, to be detained as a hostage, and submit to 
what other ill usage their unlawful tyranny may deter- 
mine upon.' 

' What a dreadful equality of mischief, and on all 
hands ! ' said Dorothy, the tears springing in her glowing 
eyes. ' But the worst of it is. Master Holte, that unless 
your father has a much greater and readier force at 
home than any we have heard of in Birmingham, he 
Avill but rush upon his own destruction if he comes 
among us, as you think probable. At least, if that 
happens, which I am well assured will happen, and 
Captain Cromwell induces our townsmen to take to the 
arms, which you have yourself seen are in readiness for 
deadly wielding, even in unpractised hands.' 

' It is very true,' said Edward, much struck by this 



A PURITAN HOUSEHOLD. 115 

view of things. * The yeoman riders whom I am to 
form into a troop are still scattered far and near in the 
farms and homesteads of our manors. No arms are as 
yet provided for them, and only plough horses and mi- 
broken colts collected at Sutton ; yet my father is full 
likely to place himself at the head of his household 
servants, with a few rusty pikes and pitchforks in their 
hands, and rush unknowingly upon some great shame 
and disaster in the to^vn I ' 

' But if Sir Thomas were warned of the danger, of 
the true state of things . think you he would persevere ? ' 
said Dorothy, with peculiar earnestness. 

' He were mad to do so . especially as he knows well 
the King will speedily march this way with a competent 
force to the rescue of his faithful subjects in jeopardy . 
if only he could be made to see I am in no pressing 
immediateness of danger to life or limb; for my liberty, 
fairest mistress,' Edward concluded, with a resumption 
of all the warmth and gallantry of his manner in their 
first interview, naturally rekindled by the beauty and 
devotion to his service evinced by the lovely young 
creature before him, * I shall not regret it in a captivity 
embellished by so fair a presence.' 

Dorothy blushed deeply, and replied, in an embar- 
rassed undertone, ' Oh, I am certain no ill of that kind 
will befal you while you are under the safeguard of my 
father's roof. And if any of his family should do you 
the good service to warn your father against the rash 
extremities that are to be feared on his part, you will 
surely be a pleader with the King. should he show 
himself the master soon . to forgive what my father 
may be set upon to do by craftier and desperate men !' 

' I should need no other reason for interference of the 

I 2 



116 

sort, than the remembrance that the master armourer 
is your father, gentle Dorothy I ' said the cavalier, in so 
sweet and languishing a tone that the fair Puritan 
lowered her eyes, while some sweetness seemed to flow, 
with a glide of honey, to her very heart. 

' But I will deserve the kindness. Master Holte,' she 
replied, in tones that were indeed an unconscious echo 
of those addressed to her, * for I will myself undertake 
the business of warning Sir Thomas Holte against any 
rash onset on our prepared and armed town.' 

' You, Mistress Firebrace ? ' 

* Hush ! speak low. Old Mahala has long been staring 
at us ; and though she be in a measure deaf, our hand- 
maidens around have ears as nimble as mice in a pantry,' 
said Dorothy, resuming. ^Yes, I, sir! I alone. There 
is no one else in the town whom I could ask or trust to 
go upon such an enterprise. I can easily devise an 
excuse for a two-hour's absence, and no more will be 
needed. I know the way well to Aston Hall, for I used 
often to ride there when a child, in my father's carts, 
from the forge with Tubal. Nay, you yourself erewhile 
seemed to remember me on one of those visits . as, in 
good troth, I do well remember to have espied your 
honourable self, busy at your horsemanship in the 
chestnut paddock. On so wild a steed, methought, you 
flew, rather than rode, around the course.' 

' Was it there ? I thought it was in Birmingham I 
first thought you the loveliest child, as I now deem you 
the completest woman . I mean, I thought I remem- 
bered you first when I came to Birmingham with my 
father concerning the suit of armour he sent us as a 
present and proof of the town's skill, and of his own 
gratitude for his baronetcy to my Lord of Buckingham. 



A PURITAN HOUSEHOLD. 117 

But he was slain by bloody Felt on or ever he put it on, 
poor Duke ! ' 

' Tt was at Aston, howbeit, I remember you first . to 
say Teinemibev ! ' replied Mistress Firebrace, with an 
emphasis on th^ word that certainly meant a great deal 
more than the vv^ord itself. ' Neither is it far thither 
for a light-footed maiden, unaccustomed to any other 
conveyance than her own. All that is necessary is that 
you should give me some credential to your father . a 
letter, perchance, since you best know how to influence 
bis mind, which I will most faithfully and assuredly 
deliver.' 

^ But if you should be found doing me this service, 
what will your townsmen judge of it?' 

' It matters little ; they cannot harm me while my 
father is chief man in it. Nay, what can they wish for 
more themselves than to avoid a passionate onset from 
Aston ? Then, who could suspect Zachariah Firebrace's 
daughter of such an errand ? Neither do I run much 
risk . an insignificant girl . of being missed, in the 
present giddiness and turmoil of the town.' 

Edward Holte was strongly moved and softened by 
this warmth of disinterested zeal on the part of a youth- 
ful woman towards one who, after all, was little other 
than a stranger to her a few hours previously. And 
this emotion quivered in all his utterance, as he said ; 
* But I know not how I can have merited so kind an 
interest in my Avelfare, or what I can do to show my 
gratitude. Only, indeed, my father's resentment of the 
outrage put upon me may well be mollified by so much 
goodness, and a happy reconciliation be brought about. 
It is very plain that this presumptous stranger, who has 
undertaken to rule the roost in Birmingham, desires 



118 THE armourer's DAUGnXER. 

nothing so much as to drive us all to open feud and 
hostilities. We will not play his game. I will write 
the letter, dear mistress, if you will furnish me with 
the means.' 

' But it must be done out of observation,' said Mistress 
Firebrace, all her beauty brightening into strong relief 
in the lustre of satisfaction with which she felt that she 
had inspired. ^ And now, in the great chamber yonder, 
you will find all that is needful to refresh a wayfarer, 
and moreover pen, paper, and sealing-wax, as they were 
left by Master Cromwell, when of late Tubal and he 
were buried there in drawing up some statement of 
rights and wrongs . I know not well which, on his part . 
to the parliament.' 

Better pleased than ever mth the careless, almost the 
scornful tone, in which this last allusion was made to her 
betrothed and his pretensions, Edward Holte gratefully 
accepted the proffer ; and, advancing as he was directed, 
speedily found himself in the best bedchamber of the 
house ; which, in those rude and barbarous times, was 
always dedic^-ted to the use of the guest and stranger. 

Dorothy remained for some minutes plunged in re- 
verie at the farthest window where this colloquy had taken 
place, chiefl}^ in too low a tone to be overheard even by 
the evidently curious female listeners. Then, almost 
starting back to consciousness, she desired old Mahala 
to hasten and serve the dinner ; and, murmuring some- 
thing about intending herself to go to the Cherry 
Orchards (a noted place of sportive resort in the fruit 
season for the young people of both sexes, at that time, 
in Birmingham), she seemed to think she had given 
reason enough for retiring to dress herself in a suit of 
bettermost out-of-doors apparel. 



119 



CHAPTER XIII. 



To the astonishment, and almost, indeed, alarm of the 
old housekeeper, Mistress Firebrace made no secret, on 
her return, of her intention to dine at once with the 
stranger guest, without awaiting her father's arrival 
home. 

' He will most likely be detained long by the town's 
riotous doings to-day at the Gruildhal], Mother Mahala,' 
the armourer's daughter observed, in her usual fami- 
liarly affectionate style to the old woman, who had been 
a servant in the famil}^ long before she was born, ' and 
I am sure he would not be pleased his guest should be 
kept so long waiting, for a sorry meal at best, since my 
marketing was so spoiled. And so, Mahala, I want to 
be away to the Cherry Orchard in time to have the sun 
about me when I come home. Tamar Mortlock and 
Thanks-be Middlemore are both to be there, and tell 
me 'tis the rarest junketing in nature to pluck the 
fresh fruit with one's own hands from the trees there.' 

Even this was not wonderful enough, in the way of 
departure from precedents. When Mahala was ready 
to serve dinner, the young cavalier, having re-entered, 
refreshed from his day of dust and unexpected contest, 
the housekeeper desired one of her handmaidens to 



120 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

summon Master Bromycham . evidently an unusual 
proceeding ; but Dorothy Firebrace again interfered, and 
with the firmness and mastery of one who meant to be 
obeyed. ' No, Eingan/ she said., ' go not. Tubal is of 
those who have violently and, belike, unlawfully, im- 
prisoned this gentleman. He will scarcely care to break 
bread with him.' 

By this time, of course, the meaning of the cavalier 
stranger's appearance and entertainment in the house 
had spread in the Firebrace establishment, and the 
observation ought not to have excited so much surprise. 
But things were very methodically conducted there, 
and so marked a departure from the set-down rule 
could not but make the folks wonder. 

Dorothy, however . who, as has been seen . was a 
girl of independent and resolute character . concerned 
herself litttle about opinions which could not be enforced. 
She seated herself at table with Master Holte, at his 
earnest solicitation, though she at first seemed as if she 
did not purpose to join him at the meal, but to see that 
he was well attended to. And the handsome pair were 
soon engaged over their viands in an earnest and close 
conversation. 

Edward informed his fair hostess that, agreeably to 
her desire, he had written a letter to his faiher, contain- 
ing the most favourable account he could deliver of his 
arrest and present condition, and pointing out the 
danger of any interference in his behalf, without an 
adequate force, in the mutinous and revolted state of 
Bmningham . accompanied mth a full recital of the 
exceeding kindness he had received at the hands of the 
young damsel, JNIaster Armourer Firebrace's daughter, 
who had generously consented to carry the warning he 



121 

proposed to give to his dear parent, at Aston Hall. He 
had then stated the reasons, including the presence of 
an active agent of the Parliament, which rendered it 
dangerous and hopeless to attempt a forcible rescue, and 
his earnest request that none such might be attempted, 
until the King's arrival, with his army in full force, 
might render resistance useless, and therefore not likely 
to be attempted. In conclusion, Edward Holte stated . 
and no doubt with perfect truth . that he recommended 
his fair, and most kindly and well-intentioned messen- 
ger to his father's highest respect and hospitable enter- 
tainment. 

All this greatly delighted the object of the recom- 
mendation; and she listened, without any weariness, 
to Edward Holte's further reiterated counsels in the 
matter. He speedil}^, however, ascertained that she was 
thoroughly conversant with the way to Aston Hall. All 
that he found it advisable to say to her on that score 
being reducible, at last, to two points . one being not to 
approach any herd of grazing deer, which at that season 
were dangerous, and to keep the lower pathway of the 
park. There was also a very savage bull, he said, kept 
company with the kine over a portion of the upper 
ground, but he had seen it safely enclosed in a paddock 
in the . morning. She could easily perceive it at a dis- 
tance, and avoid the spot. Dorothy smiled, and said 
that every one had heard of the Bv^ of Aston, from its 
having gored several tresspassers who had come upon it 
unawares; without, however, alluding to the strong- 
belief in the town that Sir Thomas, at times, permitted 
the savage creature the range of his park, to diffuse a 
salutary, indistinct awe of its presence, against the not 
unfrequent night-maraudings after his game. 



122 THE armourer's daughter. 

But the second branch of Edward Holte"s counsel 
concerned a different class of harmful creature ; so, at 
least . in spite of the guarded expressions he employed . 
it was pretty plain he considered his illegitimate brother, 
Richard, who, it appeared, was not graced with the 
family name, in addition, but bore his mother's dis- 
graced one of Grimsorwe. 

'My father's youth was full of wild distempered heats, 
which scarcely, even now, the, snow that hangs upon his 
beard has something cooled,' Edward Holte said, apolo- 
getically ; ' and Richard is his son, by a poor country 
wench, who came by an untimely end through her own 
imaptience and melancholy, when my father married 
my mother, a lady of his own degree. Richard is m}^ 
elder, so, and perchance owes me some grudge for the 
fitting legal preferences I enjoy, and it may be his 
mother's evil haps also ; for though Sir Thomas, in a 
sort, acknowledges him as his issue, and, taking com- 
passion on his orphaned estate, reared him partly with 
me at the Hall, almost as a gentleman of equal degree 
(scarcely to my lady-mother's satisfaction), still Richard 
never was much more to me than a sullen and unwilling 
schoolfellow with our masters ; never a pleasant play- 
fellow in our younger years, or companion in more 
advanced maturity. So that we were both well pleased 
when my father's appointment of our different conditions 
in life . he to be a j^wyer, I a soldier . finally separated 
us in our jutting-ribbed and unwilling yoking together. 
But, trust me, I do not think Richard's abode in Lon- 
don among the scriveners, and his courses there, have 
tended to make him a better man or a truer brother, 
though by a left-handed kinsmanship, as 'tis. I am 
sure he envies bitterly still at my undeniable heirship 



123 

and rights, as my father's eldest lawfull^^-born son. 
It was but this very morning I had a snarling with 
him at my setting forth, which induced my fair haughty 
sister to take up a sneering challenge on his part, and 
equip me with those Queen's marigolds, which have 
found so much worthier a possessor now. But, for these 
reasons, I advise you not to make so subtle and ill- 
disposed a gownsman, any party in this controversy with 
your angry town. And for another better, or rather 
worse, cause,' the young heir of Aston continued, with 
a vague but singularly strongly excited sentiment of 
jealousy kindling amid that first bright flame that bad 
invaded his bosom, ' I rede you, if possible, keep your 
fair self out of Dick Grrimsorwe's bold and greedy eye- 
shot; for I have heard tales of his doings in London . 
and not reported either by ill-wishers. Sir Thomas 
taking too much delight in such discourse . that show 
he is my father's true son in all that regards women, as 
I trust I am myself my own pure and high-born 
mother's. But Eichard takes a bastard's view, I mis- 
doubt, in every and all things I Of this no more at 
present, dear Mistress Firebrace, since I see it troubles 
you ; but, beholding how fair you are, and knowing 
what dis-esteem my brother merits, rather than Sir 
Thomas's boisterous applause, for his unbridled game- 
someness of the kind . which is not gamesomeness, 
either, for he even sins like a gownsman, with a certain 
gravity and solemnity of wickedness . I could not but 
utter some words of warning also in that respect.' 

' I thank you, sir,' said Dorothy, who had coloured 
violently during these latter observations, 'but can 
but think your favour discerns in me allures which will 
remain invisible to all other e3'es ; and hope that in 



124 THE armourer's daughter. 

anywise you speak less brotherly in this than even so 
disgraced a half-blood may fairly claim. But have you 
the letter ready ? ' she concluded, in a lower tone, 
though the younger handmaidens kept at a respectful 
distance, whirring at their wheels, during the repast, 
and Mahala had fallen asleep to the click-clack music 
of her unstopped smoke-jack. ' I would be afoot and 
away before my father's return.' 

Edward perceived the necessity of the case, and 
though very loth to part with his fair companion, pro- 
duced the rescript in question, on the demand, from be- 
neath his cloak. It was duly folded, and sealed with 
the family coat of arms and crest, which he carried in a 
signet ring . the squirrel munching a nut, surrounded 
by the Holte motto . certainly of a significance seldom 
more inappropriately bestowed . ' Exaltavit hurailes ' 
('The humble shall be exalted.') 

Dorothy then disappeared for a few moments into 
another of those principal doors which it was right to 
suppose admitted into her own private apartment ; and 
shortly after reappeared in a long mantle and hood, the 
usual going-out costume of the class she belonged to. 
Only, as the Puritans had set their faces against all 
lively colours and gaiety in apparel, the armourer's 
daughter had been obliged to content herself with a 
soft gray woollen stuff; which, however, she had so 
judiciously fitted and folded to her frame, that it became 
her like the changeable plumage of a wood-pigeon. 
Edward Holte, indeed, made some such gentle remark, 
in tones as soft and cooins^ as a loving mate of the kind 
might in a leafy covert, lending the maiden his hand 
the while to escort her to the gallery exit. Beyond that, 
she would not suffer his attendance ; not, certainly, for 



DOROTHY'S MISSION. 125 

lack of a goodwill to hear more sucli sweet words, 
warbled so tenderly ! 

But Dorothy need not have been so apprehensive of 
observation. On descending in the stithy-yard she wa^ 
surprised at the silence that reigned in a place usually 
so noisy, and which in the absorption of her own atten- 
tion upstairs she had not hitherto noticed. Most of the 
forge-fires were also at a very low fuelliDg, and some of 
them were burned out. A little hump-backed urchin, 
who usually officiated as a bellows-blower, remained the 
sole representative of perhaps a score of strong-boned 
smiths ; and he it was who informed the young mistress 
of the Old Crown that the master armourer had sent for 
Tubal and all the rest of his men to the market-place. 

These tidings confirmed Dorothy in her conviction 
that Captain Cromwell would retain and use his ascen- 
dency in the councils of the town, and hastened her 
own resolves. But, aware now of the movement in it, 
Dorothy only proceeded a short distance in her pretended 
direction to the Cherry Orchard to deceive any observa- 
tion that might follow her, and then turned aside into 
the fields along the winding course of the Eea, w^hich 
she knew would conduct her, though not so easily as by 
the highway through Birmingham, to Aston Hall. 

Dorothy Firebrace was not a girl of modern nerves, 
but a healthy, blooming, vigorous, generous-hearted 
young woman of her own times, who had no species of 
dread of anything but real and tangible danger, and 
not much of that. A girl of perhaps too sudden and 
passionate impulses, but of unquailing constancy and 
resolve in carrying out whatever her warmer feelings 
and energetic imagination suggested either as a duty of 
heart or honour. As an indulged only child, she was 



126 THE abmourer's daughter. 

also accustomed to follow the bent of her own will, 
and pursue more solitary and unsupported courses of 
action than the members of numerous families are wont. 
Consequently the knowledge that she was pursuing a 
purpose of her own, which she considered just and kind, 
was a sufficient incentive and encouragement to her, 
and the silence and solitude of the then unfrequented 
pathways from Deritend to Aston Park, had no alarms 
for her. 

The inclosure alluded to extended, at this period, 
almost to the present goods' station of the London and 
North-Western Railway, instead of forming a boundary 
a mile and a half, or more, beyond it. Consequently 
Dorothy Firebrace was not long before she reached an 
opening in the park palings, which was entered by a 
stile from Birmingham, and was the usual adit to a 
footpath conducting, for ordinary purposes of communi- 
cation, to the Hall. The way then became certainly 
exceedingly lonesome. Anon, even the companionship 
of the river deserted her ; and as Aston Park had not 
been inclosed from common-land during many years, this 
part of the journey assumed then a very dreary aspect. 
A hillocky waste, still covered chiefly with furze and 
stunted underwood, was before her, which was some 
time before it changed gradually into a flow of richer 
meadows and woodland, liberally planted, but with still 
young and scantily-grown wood. 

By-and-bye, however, the character of the scenery 
underwent a new mutation, as Dorothy's light and rapid 
step conducted her nearer to the ancient settlement of 
Aston, a manor and lordship that has been the seat and 
residence of several families of distinction so far back as 
the Anglo-Saxon era. Sir Thomas Holte had, in fact. 



Dorothy's mission. 127 

cleared away an ancient ruinous mansion, erected by- 
one Godmund, before the conquest, to make room for 
his span-new edifice. But, with better taste than has 
been evinced by its modern many-headed proprietary, 
left most of the towering ancient wood and scattered 
trees of his predecessors standing . a loss nothing can 
now repair, the axe having levelled, in a few day's 
strokes, the slow product of centuries. 

Dorothy had now to pass through a wood of such 
extent, before reaching the Hall, that it was almost 
entitled to the more dignified appellation of forest. 
And this stretched along a great reach of country, in a 
direction below the species of elevated platform on 
which the mansion stood, considerably into the neigh- 
bouring county of Stafi'ord ; besides thickly screening 
it on the side towards Birmingham. This lighter and 
more scattered part of the wood was to be traversed 
by Dorothy Firebrace, and then she considered more 
than three lengths of her journey would be happily 
over. It was closely in view ; but before arriving there, 
the armourer's daughter was destined to come upon an 
adventure not a little trying, even for mettle dauntless 
as was hers. 

She had left a mill some distance behind, turned by 
water-power, at a place where there is now an extensive 
manufactory known as the Aston Brook Works, when 
the girl's attention was suddenly caught by hearing an 
extraordinary trampling sound approaching her ; and 
she had hardly time to spring up a sandy hedging of 
the pathway, which at this point was broad and deeply 
plunged into the ground, ere she perceived a great 
number of deer rush clattering past, as if from the 
pursuit of some fiercer animal . either dog or man, 



128 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

Dorothy thought ; but had scarcely time to congratulate 
herself on her escape from so undistinguishing a flight 
and encounter, ere she was herself seized with a much 
keener kind of alarm than she would have felt from 
either class of pursuit, by the more portentous apparition 
of the ferocious Bull of Aston ! It came careering 
madly along the road, with its monstrous head and 
horns lowered for goring Avhatever it might encounter 
worth the trouble . the saliva flinging in great flakes 
of foam from its large tongue whenever it tossed its 
head up, which it did as often as it thought it 
advisable to keep up the terrors of the pursuit mth a 
dreadful bellowing. 

The creature's rage had probably been excited by too 
presumptuous an approach, on the part of the deer, to 
its private inclosures; and it had broken bounds to 
repel the invasion of its rights, as probably it considered 
the exclusive use of that pasture ; or perhaps the scent 
of the deer at this season offended the pure nostrils of 
a member of the ox tribe. Dorothy Firebrace paused 
not to reason on the why and the wherefore, but betook 
herself at once to flight. Whither, she scarcely heeded, 
and probably hardly knew, merely adopting the only 
turn on the rugged road she was aware of, and which 
she remembered to have passed about midway between 
this unlucky spot and the water-mill. 



129 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE WITCH OF ASTON. 

Dorothy's almost flying footsteps luckily gained the 
by-path considerably ahead of the dreadful animal, and 
it thundered past the turning, like a cannon ball on its 
errand of destruction. But such was the dismay the 
sight of the headlong mass of brown and horns excited 
even in her courageous nature, that when at last she 
ventured to pause for breath, the armourer's daughter 
could not make up her resolution to return and resume 
the beaten way across the park to Aston Hall. She 
dreaded . and it was likely enough . that wearied cf its 
chase, or stopped by the roaring waters of the mill brook, 
the beast would return, and retrace the road to its 
pastures or the herd of cows, which Dorothy had ob- 
served dotting the country before her to the skirts of 
Aston Wood. Imagining, therefore, that her safest 
progress would be to continue on the by-path, which 
evidently led to some outlet, until she could ascertain 
the position of the mansion, and make for it by some 
roundabout, she did so. But advancing over some very 
rough and deep-rutted ground, she observed that it 
began to descend rapidly, and by degrees to grow 
shaded and closed in with very lofty and ancient trees. 
Dorothy concluded, therefore, that she had actually 
VOL. I. K 



130 

entered Aston Wood by an indirect route, and that if 
she could only fall upon a path turning off in the 
direction of the one she had been driven from, she 
should be able to reach the hall along the bottom of 
the valley, as easily almost as if she had continued on 
the upland. 

With this idea, she again hastened her pace, and 
though the road began to get swampy and grass-over- 
grown under the shadow of the trees, the light-footed 
maiden thought very little of these difficulties. But 
trimly picking her way, proceeded at a pace that ought 
speedily to have conducted her to her destination, had 
she not been deceived in her notion of the probabilities 
of the gTound, for, instead of arriving at a cross path to 
ascend safely from the wood, she came at last, to her 
surprise and vexation, upon the margin of an extensive 
pool of water. 

The great circumference of this pool almost entitled 
it to be considered as a lake. Of artificial creation, it 
is true, as pretty |)lainly appeared from its accurate 
ovalling, and the smooth belt of verdure that ringed it 
in, and the regularly planted rows of chestnut and lime 
trees bordering its circuit. There were also elaborately 
twisted rustic seats placed under some of the leafier 
foresters, and a handsome boat-house was built on the 
edge . a sort of miniature in wood, in the style of the 
Aston Hall mansion house, with its minareted roof. 
Dorothy easily recognised this, and perceived at once 
that she was in a portion of the Pleasaunce (as it was 
called) known as the Fish Stews ; but on the wrong side 
of the water from the Hall, the variegated summits of 
which she now perceived, crowning an eminence above the 
tops of a thick intervening woodland on the other side. 



THE WITCH OF ASTON. 131 

As has been remarked, the pond was of an extent that 
greatly perplexed Dorothy Firebrace at the notion of 
having to make its round to reach Aston Hall ; but 
there seemed no better to be done at first, until pro- 
ceeding some distance she perceived something not 
quite at the further end, on her right, that resembled 
a bridge, over a narrowing neck of the water ; and she 
directed her steps, without further loss of time, thither. 

This whole scene was entirely new, in its present 
ornamental arrangement, to Dorothy Firebrace, being 
part of the improvements carried out by Sir Thomas 
Holte, after he had finished his mansion inside and out. 
There had been a swampy lake there always, but now 
the margin of the pool was level, well-drained into the 
water-bed, and as green as emerald. The August sun 
was still lustrous in the sky, though tending downward, 
and piercing the trunks of the trees with splendid 
transverse gleams of light. It was a pleasant, though 
a solitary scene ; and so continued for a good stretch of 
the broad silvery expanse, where the numerous finny 
inhabitants leaped and disported themselves in pursuit 
of their humming and gilded prey. 

But on a sudden, Dorothy Firebrace was aware she 
was coming on a very strongly opposed change of 
appearance in the scene. The bridge, as she had sup- 
posed what she saw at a distance, proved, on a nearer 
approach, to be a series of wooden piles, set in a descent 
of water from a higher and far gloomier upper pool. 
Of limited extent, indeed, bearing to the larger about 
the relation of the head to the body, but so hemmed in 
and blackly overshadowed by ancient wood and under- 
wood, that it seemed as if the confined water was in 
reality a huge blotch of ink ! Dorothy considered to 

X2 



132 THE armourer's daughter. 

herself they must be ven^ dismal fish indeed that abode 
in this receptacle ; but, perceiving that the timber heads 
of the weir were crossed by planks at convenient in- 
tervals for stepping, she had no doubt these were used 
as a bridge, and took heart to proceed. 

Approaching the weir, the path suddenly took a 
plunge into a very thick and tangled piece of brush- 
wood ; emerging from which, Dorothy found herself, 
not without some satisfaction, at the back of a cottage, 
close on the water, that she had not hitherto observed. 
To say truth, it was little better than a hut of the very 
poorest description, such as might, at some period, have 
furnished a game or fish watcher a vv retched shelter 
against wind and rain of a night. It was formed of 
branches of trees, wattled together and plastered with 
mud, with a thatched roof that sloped almost to the 
ground, and was covered with a beautiful, but damp 
and unv;holesome, coating of the brightest green moss. 

The sight of any species of human habitation was not, 
hov\^ever, without attraction for Dorothy at this moment, 
though she doubted Yery much whether this could be 
inhabited. Conceiving that if, nevertheless, it was, she 
might make inquiries that would enable to avoid fur- 
ther risk of mistaking her way, the astray armourer's 
daughter was about to cross round to what appeared 
to be the front of the hovel, when her attention was 
even startled by the sudden emergence of two figures 
before it. 

They were, in fact, a duality of very remarkable 
appositions, and one of them a sufficiently unlikely 
personage for the scene. 

This latter was still a young, but thoroughly matured 
man, as appeared from his firm and energetic stand and 



i 



THE WITCH OF ASTON. 133 

general gait ; tall and well-made, but with a remarkable 
slouch ant and skulking carriage of the head, that per- 
haps attracted more attention to it than a bold and 
upright bearing might. Then, when you looked at the 
face, you Avere struck with a yet stronger sense of 
puzzle and doubt, at perceiving a countenance, hand- 
somely featured in the main, but disfigured by the 
livid pallor of the complexion, and a dark, lurking, in- 
sidious glance. 

This person was garbed . as was then the constant 
custom among members of that learned profession . in 
a lawyer's robe, such as is now worn only in court. 
But underneath it, it was plain, he wore a sword and 
high boots, like a cavalier of the time. Yet the weapon 
stuck out awkwardly behind him ; and with the general 
sombre cast of his figures, suggested the idea of an evil 
intelligence disguised at all points, saving the ' irrepres- 
sible' tail. 

This notion flashed hurriedly on Dorothy Firebra'ce's 
mind, and arrested her advance b}^ a kind of instinctive 
forbidding, luckily before she had come out from the 
shadow of the trees and underwood massed at the 
turning to the weir-dam ; and it was greatl}^ heightened 
in her fancy by a recognition she made of the lawyer's 
companion, almost in the same glance. And, no wonder, 
since it was an old woman who enjoyed, far and near 
Aston, the then very dangerous reputation of a icitch I 

And, in truth, Maud Grimsorwe, such was her name, 
had all the outward appearance men's minds were wont, 
in those days, to associate with the kind of evil human- 
supernatural. She would have been tall, had she stood 
upright, but she was bent nearly to a bow with age and 
infirmity, and her strangely haggard, lean, and yet 



134 

infinitely wrinkled and puckered face, seemed to turn 
upward, almost from her waist, like a snake's from a 
darting curve. The old woman's singularly gleaming 
and lucid eyes greatly heightened this effect, coupled 
with the malicious and hateful expression of her coun- 
tenance, which seemed formed for that of envious and 
revengeful passions. Her costume was in keeping wdth 
these personal characteristics, consisting chiefly of a 
gown that appeared as if fashioned out of some worn-out 
old patch quilt, it hung in such motley tatters about her 
haggish frame. The cone-shaped hat, over a discoloured, 
loose linen cap, that revealed her matted white locks, 
and the stick on which she leaned her tottering weight, 
were precisely such as we see ascribed to Mother Hub- 
bard in the child's book. And, if not provided wdth a 
dog, like the heroine of that easy-rhymed legend, the 
Witch of Aston- . so she was universally styled . cherished 
the society of a large black tom-cat, that mewed fright- 
fulty after her, and seemed, like its mistress, of some 
unknown age, and withered and starved to a frightful 
bony and hide-bound feline anatomy. 

On her former visit to Aston, Dorothy Firebrace had 
more than once had this Warwickshire Sycorax pointed 
out to her as a dealer in forbidden and wicked arts and 
spells. She lived a solitary and shunned existence, 
saving, it was supposed, by such as needed her vicious 
aid in their exigencies. And the report may even be 
believed in our enlightened days (as they are stated to 
be), that, from her study and familiarity with herbs, the 
old woman was in possession of certain secrets, which 
she exercised to her own profit, and the dreadful depra- 
vation, morally and physically, of divers unhappy young 
creatures who resorted to her. for the means to obviate 



THE WITCH OF ASTON. 135 

and conceal the consequences of indulgence in un- 
licenced passion. 

So, at least, vague but horrible rumours ran all over 
the country-side concerning old Maud Grrimsorwe. It 
was a sneer well understood in Birmingham, when a 
girl, or unmarried woman, was told she ought to pay a 
visit to the Witch of Aston ! But nothing, of course, 
was ever clearly known or proved against the supposed 
abettor or contriver of the imputed enormities, or else 
the power and influence of Sir Thomas Holte himself 
might not have availed to shelter Maud from the due 
punishment of her offences ; and it might be supposed 
likely to be exerted in this terrible old lady's behalf, in 
consequence of her being the mother of the mother of 
his illegitimate son. 

And yet, on the other hand, there was a well-supported 
belief that Sir Thomas Holte, during one portion of his 
career, was at bitter feud and hostility with the Witch 
of Aston. 

She was said to be the last lineal descendant of those 
Grimsorwes who had usurped the inheritance of Aston 
from the wife of that deprived Lord of Birmingham 
who was ancestor of Tubal Bromycham. Her husband, 
who was also her cousin . it was he who had signed 
away the poor last vestiges of the family rights to Sir 
Thomas Holte ; all but a scanty piece of ground of which 
his extravagance and villany could not deprive his wife 
and co-heiress. Precisely, indeed, the upper one of the 
Aston fish pools . that dark secluded lakelet Dorothy 
had remarked . where the finny tribe were spawned and 
waxed large, to supply the lower preserve. Sir Thomas 
had tried to secure this also ; but a protracted lawsuit, 
resulting in the triumph and ruin of the weaker party. 



136 

had established old Maud Grimsorwe firmly in a posses- 
sion which nothing, it appeared, could induce her to 
relinquish. 

In reality, the old woman, with the recollection of the 
rights of her name, and the wrongs she had suffered in 
the person of her only child, her own bitter plainings of 
them, was much such an eyesore on Sir Thomas Holte's 
handsomely-rounded properties, as Mordecai presented 
at the exalted Haman's gates. Because he was there . 
poor, shivering, miserable representative of a down- 
crushed people . Haman had no joy of his hfe. Neither 
had Sir Thomas Holte, seemingly, for a long time, 
while this unhappy and injured hag persisted in retain- 
ing her position in the very midst and heart of his 
grand acquirements. 

But the result of two trials, the invincible obstinacy of 
his antagonist, and, possibl}^, the friendly interceding of 
her relative, Richard Grrimsorwe, as he advanced in life, 
with his father, had finally procured the Witch of Aston 
such peace as her own bitter memor3^-gnawed heart, her 
own implacable spirit, and the general suspicion and 
hatred of her neighbourhood allowed. 

These were the persons whom Dorothy Firebrace 
spied in colloquy together near that congenially dark 
and melancholy upper pool ; for after a single glance the 
conviction struck her, without the slightest pause of 
doubt, that the male party in it w^as the one described 
to her by Edward Holte as his unkindly-natured, base- 
born brother, Richard Grimsorwe, grandson of the 
Witch of Aston, by the mother's side. 



is; 



CHAPTER XV. 

A CALIBAN OF THE MIND. 

This fact soon became apparent. While Dorothy re- 
mained motionless, partly in surprise and partly under 
the influence of an unaccountable impulse of curiosit}^, 
behind the hut, the two persons in front of it appeared 
to resume a conversation interrupted for the moment 
by the action necessary, on one part at least, in passing 
from under its low roof. 

'Leave me now, grandmother. Your ceremony of 
attendance thus far is ample for the state and magnifi- 
cence of your abode, and I would not that any stray eyes 
should mark us in such friendly commune and kinsman- 
ship together. You know my father's jealous nature, 
and how he preserves his rancour against you still. 
He never forgives the crossing or thwarting of his will 
in any matter, and your obstinate holding of this 
upper w^ater almost balances his happiness in the pos- 
session of all the other inheritance of our name at 
Aston.' 

' I trust it doth . truly, I trust it doth,' returned 
the old woman, with inexpressible bitterness of accen- 
tuation, but not in the tone of a person of her apparent 
class, who had been born in it. ^ For what else deem 
you, Kichard, have I preserved it, tooth and nail, so 



138 

long from his avaricious clutch ? Think you it is made 
precious to me by being the darksome grave of my 
only child, your mother, driven to cast herself into 
its black depths by falsehood and desertion of the 
treacherous tyrant himself, who would now so fain 
wrest that last vestige from me, to turn, no doubt, 
like all the rest, into a gay pleasaunce for his haughty 
dame and her handmaidens to disport in, with their 
companies of gamesome lovers and servitors ? ' 

^ You do well, grandmother ; yet it is but a poor re- 
venge for so great an injury,' returned Eichard Grim- 
sorwe, with rather a sneer in his tone. 

' But 'tis not all . I have done what else lies in me ! 
How else have six goodly sons and daughters, born 
unto Sir Thomas Holte in his fine new palace, perished 
of no other known cause save the curse in my heart, or 
ere they left the cradle or the crib ? ' the old woman 
replied, and her eye lighted up with a glare that 
strangely combined the luridness of insanity with a 
malice and hatred that revealed a full rational con- 
sciousness of the meaning of her words. And Eichard 
Grimsorwe's reply, in its deadJy sneeringness and calm, 
betokened even a deeper and more malignant phase of 
the same feelingfs. 

' Tut, Mother ]\Iaud ! ' he said, ' cheat and affright 
the country loobies around you with stuff like this I . If 
your curses had power to kill, why have you left the 
main hindrance and prevention of my prospects of so 
vast and wealthy an inheritance . yon fine legitimate 
heir of ours . alive and well, and in flourishing years 
of manhood, to flaunt it over me, and shame me the 
more significantly by his excellences before all the 
world, with my bastardy ! ' 



A CALIBAN OF THE MIND. 139 

' Ay, Edward Holte lives ! But not in spite of curses. 
I have never cursed him yet ! ' returned the old woman. 

* And wherefore not, I pray you ? ' rejoined the base- 
born brother, but still baser-hearted man ; and in spite 
of his recent contemptuous repudiation of the popular 
feeling on the subject, one could hardly help think- 
ing, from the earnestness of his query, that Richard 
Grrimsorwe placed some superstitious faith of his own 
in the Witch of Aston's imputed powers to ban and 
destroy. ' And wherefore not ? One single lawful 
madam's issue is as much a total barring to my inheri- 
tance . of the restoration of the honour of my mother's 
name . as a thousand whelps of the brood ! Yea, all 
the manor and even allodial lands would fall to that 
haught princess and duchess in her own conceits, scorn- 
ful Arabella Holte . mere woman as she is . were Ed- 
ward gone, rather than to me. Nay, I have no part 
nor share in my father's inheritance but such as his 
good will may assign me as to a perfect stranger and 
alien in blood. And how far that may extend, what 
hopes may I form when . to humour his proud lady's 
jealous disdains . he denies me even so poor a privilege 
as to bear his name.' 

^ His name I his name ! ' repeated the old . woman, 
with scornful emphasis catching at the word. ' What is 
Thomas Holte's name to bear ? A Birmingham black- 
smith's of some hundred years' gentility! You should 
be prouder to retain your mother's, Richard Grimsorwe ! 
For we were lords of all these lands five centuries ago, 
and the Crusader who lies with his crossed knees in the 
church yonder (which I will never pray in while Grod 
lets men like that man give Him thanks in it for their 
triumphant wickedness !), is our direct ancestor . a 



140 THE ARMOUKER'S DAUGHTER. 

Grimsorwe, of Aston, who was with Richard the Lion 
Heart in the Holy Land.' 

' Had I come honestly by my name, good grand- 
mother ! But so foul a blotch of bastardy on it some- 
thing mars the splendour,' returned Richard Grrimsorwe, 
who seemed, from some undefined motive of his own, 
to dwell on this exasperating expression. So it evi- 
dently was to old Maud. 

' Ay, ay,' she muttered, with the indistinctness of age 
and intensely roused emotion. 'A bastard, a bastard! 
The blacksmith's descendant has brou^jht disgrace and 
infamy also on the name whose inheritance he has 
devoured ! You are right, Richard, my curses are 
powerless ! Or where would Thomas Holte be now, 
could curses kill men's bodies, and sink their souls to 
the abyss ! ' 

' It would profit me much, indeed, to have a father 
removed and a brother to lord and rule it over me in- 
stead, who I know hates and despises me,' said Richard, 
with his customary sneer, in reply to the old woman's 
raging outburst. 

^Doth Edward Holte so by you, Dickon, Dickon, 
my poor boy ? ' she replied, with a rather doubtful 
quaver in her aged voice. ' JMethought he was kind 
and well-wishing to all. It was his childish interference 
on mv behalf, when Cuthbert Bang^ster was stoning me 
for having bewitched his cattle, that moved me to spare 
him alone of all his race from the curses which I found 
could slay! Or else, was it that I was even m3^self 
weary of curses, when the sixth fair babe was put into 
the cold black earth, and I heard the mother's broken- 
hearted sobbings over the grave ? I remembered, then, 
mayhap, how I felt when they brought me home my 



A CALIBA.N OF THE MIND. 141 

only child . my pretty Maud . dead, drowned . her 
yellow hair streaming with weeds and darnel from the 
pool ! But not as was my wont, with a renewal of 
hatred and vengeance in my poor old withered heart ! 
And so it was 1 did not utter the spell when my imps 
brought me word, for the seventh time, that a man 
child was born lawful heir to Aston Hall.' 

'You wronged your own blood there then . most 
bitterly wronged it, grandmother ! ' said Richard G-rim- 
sorwe. ' But talk not of your imps, foolish old woman, 
which are but the dreams and fancies of your dotage ; 
for if these religious times, which I foresee at hand, 
should come to pass, they may bring your grey hairs to 
the stake. Or have you never heard the text, " Tliow 
slialt not suffer a vjitch to live ? " ' 

' But thou wilt not suffer them to harm thy grandam, 
now, Richard, Richard, my own cunning and law-bred 
lad, now, wilt thou ? ' the old woman answered wheed- 
lingly, as if confiding greatly in the powers evoked, but 
with manifest alarm. And, indeed, it was an age fraught 
with dangers of the most terrible kind to pretenders to 
supernatural influences, when, as mostly happened, they 
were poor and defenceless creatures in every external 
respect. 

' What refuge is there in me, mother ? What power 
have I either to save or harm any one as I am now ? ' 

' Nay, come, nay, now, you are as great with your 
father as I am mean and hateful in his sight. And no 
man dares harm one in this country whom Sir Thomas 
Holte in any sort abides by ! ' 

'And, say you so, Granny Grimsorwe?' returned 
Richard with a singular mixture of mockery and so- 
lemnity in his accents. 'But you wot not how the 



142 THE armourer's daughter. 

times are changing ! I have watched them well, and 
think not, as my father does, that one bloody overthrow 
in an open field, and mayhap some knocking at the 
gates of London with lance and culverin, will set the 
King there again, in prouder sway and supremacy than 
ever. Nay, from the seething of men's blood, and the 
infinite hoarding of fire in their breasts unto some great 
mindquake, I gather, rather, that quite new times are 
coming to pass in England, and that the old system of 
things will be clean swept away. Sir Thomas Holt will 
abide by the old and worn-out landmarks, doubtless, 
and full likely will be swept away with them in the 
great rising tide.' 

^ Let that destruction come, and 1 care not what else 
follows ! . the great deluge again, or the universal swal- 
lowing up into hellfire of this wicked and woful earth ! ' 
returned the beldame, with a truly ferocious, tigress- 
clattering of her still white and singularly sound teeth, 
testifying to the original goodness of a constitution that 
had survived so much that grief and poverty and age 
have of most grievous and hard to be borne. 

' Tush ! you talk like an old fool ! But there is a way, 
indeed, if your thoughts were not altogether taken up 
with the prospect of so savourless a feast of revenge, b}' 
which not only might I become as a tower of strength 
and refuge to my friends, but redeem your name and my 
o^vn, grandmother, from its ignominy, and inherit, 
without soiling my hands with kindred blood, the broad 
lands that should be mine ! ' 

' How so, son ? You speak to me now greater mar- 
vels than any witchcraft can work ! ' said jNIaud Grim- 
sorwe. But the eagerness with which she listened for 
the reply was not unmatched closely in her neighbour- 



A CALIBAN OF THE MIND. 143 

hood, though, witch as she pretended to be, or was 
supposed by superstition, little she dreamed how 
Dorothy Firebrace, almost imagining herself to have 
been brought by Providence to the spot, for the de- 
tection of an atrocious conspiracy, held her breath and 
listened too. Indeed, with the additional stealthiness 
of fear, for Dorothy felt she had already heard enough 
to excite the dread and rancour of the plotting pair to 
perhaps mortal extremities. 

' Marvels, granny ! What marvels are there which a 
resolute mind and will cannot bring to pass ? Specially 
in troubled times like these, when all things are turning 
topsy-turvy?' Grimsorwe resumed, and with a slow- 
ness and deliberation in his manner that seemed to 
indicate he was not uttering a mere impulsive thought 
of the moment, but one long planted and matured in 
his mind. ' Listen, grandmother ; am I not my father's 
eldest-born ? and, were I lawfully so, his heir ? And 
have I not heard you say many times that Sir Thomas 
Holte promised my mother marriage ere he led her 
astray ; aye, and in the presence of witnesses ? ' 

' Even so,' replied the old woman, in a surprised and 
anxious tone ; ' it is a common trick of the seducer. In 
the presence of one witness, at all events, for Adam 
Blackjack, the master-cook that now is at Aston, was 
called up into Sir Thomas's presence to bear witness to 
his oaths and promises when my poor girl was abiding 
with her worthless father at Sutton, where he was at the 
time under-keeper of the chase; and yet the rankest 
poacher on it, to supply himself with means of ceaseless 
drunkenness whereby to drown his conscience, when I 
would not live with him there, after he had sold the 
last shred of our inheritance but the few perches he 



144 THE armoueer's daughter. 

could not wrench from me, to part withal . this hut and 
pool.' 

' Listen again, grandam ! The new order of sectaries 
who are now arising in the body politic, where they have 
been fermenting for a hundred years, and who, in my 
opinion, will achieve the mastery in this coming struggle, 
hold it for a law of religion and morality, which they 
propose shall supersede all others, that a promise of 
marriage interchanged between a man and a woman in 
the presence of witnesses, with such sequences as fol- 
lowed in my hapless mother's case, do constitute a 
marriage ! And see you not . if in the meantime I can 
render myself of service and advantage to the cause of 
the Parliament and Presbytery . the moment they shall 
establish their discipline, and I produce my proofs, an 
adherent of the King's, like my brother Edward, wdll 
find but little favour in their sight to bar the conse- 
quences ! ' 

* Grreat Grod, if it might be1 If I might not close these 
aged eyes until I had seen this great retribution on the 
name of Holte ; had seen my daughter's and my father's 
name redeemed from shame and infam}^ ! ' exclaimed 
the old woman, with really frantic fervour, and clasping 
her hands, and looking upward in a species of ecstacy 
of revengeful passion and hope. 

' Peace, peace, old fool ! . What's that rustling in the 
thicket? You will bring some note upon us that mil 
mar the whole plot,' said Eichard, ver}^ angrily, not 
without more cause than he imagined; for Dorothy Fire- 
brace had given an involuntary movement of horror and 
surprise at what she overheard, that made the unusual 
stirring in the bushes where she was concealed behind 
the hut. 



A CALIBAN OF THE MIND. 145 

'Leave me then awhile to think over this blessed 
imagination of yours, dear grandson, and devise how I 
may best aid in its fulfilment,' returned Maud, still 
evidently almost delirious with excitement. ' What a 
brain for contrivance hast thou, my Eichard ! But even 
as a mere lad thou didst counsel me how to withstand 
all Sir Thomas's chicanery of advocates and the law^, to 
dispossess me of my little freehold. Go now, go now ; 
let us not hazard anything in so wonderful a plotting, if 
we can but bring it to pass. When I am alone I ^vi\\ 
counsel with my imps. Suck-cow and Weasel. You 
shall see they will give me rare inkling into the matter.' 

* Tut I I had best begone . she is at her dotage 
again ! ' muttered Eichard Grimsorw^e, aloud and yet to 
himself. ' Farewell, then, grandam, for aw^hile ; I shall 
need your advice and assistance, be sure, but not for 
some while again, until I see how matters are likel}^ to 
turn in this coming time of strife and struggle. Here 
are a few pence for your needments ; for indeed my 
father keeps me very bare, to supply his fine heir in 
playing the soldier in the King's service, w^hose triumph 
will be my ruin.' 

Richard seemed then to dole out some scanty assist- 
ance, in the way of a few silver coins, to his aged 
relative, who eagerly extended her withered and palsy- 
shaking palm to receive them, and with a sigh as if he 
begrudged the dole, scanty as it was. Then replacing a 
purse well stocked with much weightier metal in the 
breast of his law^yer's robe, he wished his grandmother 
sullenly ' Good even,' and, infinitely to Dorothy's relief, 
took his departure. 



VOL. I. 



146 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

A ROUGH WOOER. 

The armourer's daughter remained for some moments 
couched in her hiding-place, without daring to breathe, 
until the termination of the interview took place. 

Brave and fearless as she was by nature . as brave and 
fearless, perhaps, as a woman can be . the insidious 
treachery of the projects she had overheard appalled 
her even more than their audacity. She felt as the 
most courageous of men might, if conscious that, not 
himself, but another very dear to him, was in danger of 
being involved in the windings of a snake. Xor was 
the notion of personal peril altogether absent. Dorothy 
felt that, if detected in her involuntary espying, a man 
of so resolute a character as Eichard Grrimsorwe might 
probably hesitate little at the means of ridding himself 
of apprehension on the score of a solitary and unpro- 
tected girl. 

She continued carefully perdue in the bushes that 
sheltered her until some time after she imagined the 
ground clear. She saw Grrimsorwe, in fact, stepping 
over the weir dam, and apparently taking a path into 
the wood on the opposite side of the pool ; and, after a 
somewhat longer interval, she heard the old woman 
moving off, muttering and ejaculating to herself, in a 



A ROUGH WOOER. 147 

direction fronting from her hut. Dorothy, however, 
judiciously waited still a considerable further interval, 
to give time for both of these ominous gossips to be 
fairly out of the way ere she emerged from her covert. 

She had no doubt, from Grimsorwe's taking it, that 
her proper route to Aston Hall lay in the direction he 
had pursued. Thinking now that he must be out of 
risk of her overtaking him, she determined to follow in 
his traces ; and accordingly proceeded to the weir dam, 
keeping herself as nigh the trees and as much out of 
eye-shot in any other line of observation as possible. 

Arriving at the weir, Dorothy was, however, greatly 
annoyed at finding that the old woman was again within 
view. She had, indeed, proceeded some distance along 
the margin of the high black upper pool, and was en- 
gaged apparently in selecting and gathering herbs or 
cresses from amidst its rank close vegetation into an 
osier basket on her arm, muttering all the while to her- 
self what might well have seemed to a superstitious ear 
spells and fiendish sanctifications to her work. And all 
Dorothy Firebrace's brightness of wit, and vivacious 
sense of the unreasonable and ridiculous, could not pro- 
tect her from the influences of her age, and of the 
notions in which she had been reared, in this respect. 
Besides, had she not heard the wretched old woman 
herself confess that she had imps, whose counsels she 
placed great reliance on, and who doubtless aided her 
in her worst malefactions ? Dorothy believed old Maud 
to be a witch in reality, and of the most cruel and 
malignant description, since her curses, Herod-like, 
slaughtered innocent babes in the cradles, and menaced 
possibly the life of a young man who, in so strangely 

L 2 



148 THE armourer's daughter. 

brief a time, had become the great interest of the 
impassioned girl's existence. 

Luckily the witch's back was turned in her opera- 
tions ; and, hoping to get over the water ere she looked 
round from her unhallowed work, Dorothy Firebrace 
shrinkingly ventured on. 

There was more difficulty in effecting the passage of 
the weir dam, nevertheless, than she had anticipated 
from observing Eichard Grimsorwe's rapid transit. He 
was probably accustomed to make it. But the planks 
were set widely apart, loose, rotten, and in places alto- 
gether swept away, Dorothy found, when she attempted 
the crossing. The bridge was, in truth, part of the 
property disputed of old between Maud Grrimsorwe and 
Sir Thomas Holte, and might be considered in a species 
of local chancer}^ And, of course, as the hag took 
pleasure in injuring the effect of his improvements by 
the desolation and neglect in which she retained her 
own remnant of property, the bridge was left in dis- 
repair. Fortunately there was no current, and though 
the descent of the water from the upper pool was heavy 
and unintermitting, it was seldom of violence or sweep 
to dizzy the passenger. Dorothy, therefore, after a brief 
hesitation, believed she should manage the passage well 
enough ; and, in fact, she had reached about the middle 
of the weir in safety, attending chiefly to her footsteps, 
when the sound of a drea,dful cat-screeching, rather than 
mewing, came to her ears, and apparently startled the 
attention of the old woman also. Dorothy then . to her 
surprise no less than her consternation . heard a shrill 
scream in the direction of the herb-efatherincr witch. 

All this greatly startled her, and steadying herself, 
with an awkward quiver, on a plank she had now 



A ROUGH WOOER. 149 

reached, Dorothy paused, and glanced with no feigned 
alarm into the gloomy recesses of the upper pool. And 
there on the margin stood Maud G-rimsorwe, gazing 
towards her, and frantically tossing her arms, while the 
grotesque and fiendish-looking skeleton cat wauled and 
mewed around her. This was enough for Dorothy, who 
hastened her pace at a reckless rate across the weir, 
panic-stricken with the notion that the hag was about 
to put some spell of hideous witchcraft upon her too. 

It was not until she had fled at a really headlong 
pace a considerable distance along the lane she found on 
the other side, that Dorothy remembered having heard 
the old woman call to her such harmless words as, 
* Daughter, daughter! what do you there?' But the 
misery and imploring in the tones suggested to her that 
perhaps, after all, Maud Grimsorwe was partially lunatic, 
and had mistaken her for an apparition of her deceased 
daughter. That unhappy victim of lust and betrayal, 
it appeared, had committed suicide near the spot . 
very likely from the weir dam. It was true the mtch 
had alluded to her child as being fair-haired ; but the 
shine of the evening sun on Dorothy's dark locks, and 
the feebleness of aged eyes, might have diminished that 
means of disillusion. 

This accident produced another untoward result. 
Dorothy's more immediate alarm made her forget 
another danger, and her rapid pace brought her at a 
sudden turn in the wood upon a wayfarer whom she had 
the least desire imaginable to overtake. She came almost 
close upon Kichard Grrimsorwe, who, with his long robe 
tucked up, and held uneasily behind him on the pommel 
of his sword, presented a portentous and moodily 
thoughtful marching figure to her approach. 



150 THE ARMOURI-m'.S DAUGIITEIJ. 

Dorothy's progress was startlingly checked by this 
apparition. But she felt at once that retreat was out 
of the question . would only have roused suspicion, and 
probably pursuit. With very good nerve, therefore, she 
endeavoured to treat the junction as an accident of the 
road, that required no particular notice on either part. 
At first, indeed, she had some hope that, by dropping 
her o^vn pace, she could let the lawyer resume his start 
in advance, and follow unobserved. But she had arrived 
too abruptly, and with too much echo of footfalls, for 
this manoeuvre. Eichard glared round at once at the 
sound, and perceiving the new arrival, came to a sudden 
pause, and halted too. 

^ Save you, my fair maiden ! but what is the wonder- 
ful hurry with you on this road . and why do you stare 
at me so dismayed ? ' enquired Grrimsorwe, taking a 
surprised but clearly pleased and interested view of the 
lovely and panting young fugitive, whose rich com- 
plexion was heightened to an extraordinary glow of 
colour and beauty by excitement and rapid movement. 
' 'Tis not the road to Paradise that I wot of,' he con- 
tinued, finding she was too much out of breath to reply 
at once, * and though you look a very suitable wayfarer 
in that direction, I warn you, you will not come upon 
the angels with the fiery swords within a mile or two, 
to my certain knowledge.' 

' I only want to go to Aston Hall, sir ; I have lost 
my way . the bull drove me from it,' said Dorothy, 
shrinking mth visible alarm and secret horror from the 
bold and licentious gaze now fixed upon her. 

' You are right enough, then, for Aston Hall, fair 
maid, and as I am going that way too, we can bear each 
other company,' was Eichard Grimsorwe's reply. 



A EOUGH WOOER. 151 

' Nay, sir, I am spent, and cannot keep your pace,' 
said Dorothy, endeavouring to drop without further 
parley into the rear, by slackening her rate of advance. 

But Eichard Grrimsorwe immediately shortened his 
own step. ' P'aith, then, sweet one, I will keep yours,' 
he said, ' for such companionship is not to be lighted 
on in every lonesome lane in this dismal Feldon country- 
side.' 

Dorothy felt indignant, and also alarmed. But her 
own natural high spirit and policy alike suggested not 
to seem afraid, and, hoping they should soon arrive at 
some less deserted spot, she silently acquiesced in the 
arrangement, so far as neither to increase nor diminish 
her rate of progress. But she made no reply likely at 
all to encourage the free and easy style of accost Grrim- 
sorwe seemed to think it right to assume to an unpro- 
tected female on a solitary country pathway. 

The lawyer himself was probably more struck by this 
silence than he would have been b}^ an}^ form of speech. 
Possibly it not only surprised, but embarrassed him. 
Dorothy felt that he kept glancing at her earnestly and 
scrutinisingly, as they proceeded almost abreast along 
the narrow road. At last he spoke again. 

' You are going to Aston, you say, my blooming pearl 
of damsels errant. Can it be by some marvel of good 
fortune, which my Lady Holte has not deigned to allow 
a town visitor as yet to be aware of, you are of her 
ladyship's attendance there ? ' 

' No, sir,' replied Dorothy ; ' I am a Birmingham 
girl^ and I have only an errand to Aston, which will not, 
I trust, take me many minutes to despatch.' 

' I might have known that by your precisian garb, in 
truth,' said Grrimsorwe, looking still more perplexed. 



152 THE armourek's daughter. 

^ I will guess again, then. You are some relative and 
visitor of Adam Blackjack, our master-cook, who I 
know has kinsmen among the pure ones in yonder 
town, and is suspected of being himself more than half 
a convert from the good jolly notions of his trade and 
place ? ' 

* I am no cook's or other menial's kinswoman or 
visitor,' returned Dorothy, ofifendedly ; adding haughtily, 
without considering all the effects of her declaration, ' I 
.am Dorothy Firebrace, Armourer Firebrace's daughter, 
.-of Birmingham, who is known for a man of repute and 
..substance in our town.' 

^ Ay, troth, is he ; I nothing gainsay the affirmation 
.thereof,' replied Grimsorwe, with evidently increased 
curiosity. ' I have heard of the precious man, and for 
my own part hold him and his craft in high honour and 
esteem. But he and his are in no very sweet savour at 
Aston at present ; which something makes me curious 
to know what may be your purport at the Hall.' 

' My business is not with you, sir, whatever it may 
be, or whoever you may be : it is with Sir Thomas Holte 
himself alone ! ' returned Dorothy, not only greatly 
annoyed by the insulting tone of familiarity adopted by 
the stranger base-brother of Edward Holte, but aware 
that it was not to so bitter though secret a foe she 
ought to give any inkling of her object in visiting 
Aston. 

' Ah, indeed, that's sharply said ; there is a keen 
edge to the bright metal, then ?' resumed Richard Grim- 
isorwe, staring with still more audacity of query and ad- 
miration of an unpleasingkind at the wondering beauty. 
^ But you must know, fair damsel, I am one that, if you 
have any suit worth the obtaining to Sir Thomas Holte, 



A EOTJGH WOOER. 153 

am the likeliest, within any distance you can name of 
his hall steps, to make or mar your petition.' 

' I need no help, nor ask any ; my suit with Sir 
Thomas Holte concerns his own weal and service, not 
mine own,' said Dorothy, pettishly. 

' Then it is like to speed the better. What ! is it 
concerning this arming of the Aston tenantry, to ride 
behind my pretty brother Edward to the King's wars ? ' 
Richard Grrimsorwe replied, apparently greatly struck 
by the latter statement. And he added in a tone pur- 
posely provocative and sneering, ' By St. Michael's 
breast-plate and helm, then, which, being fashioned at 
Birmingham, the devil himself could not crack into vdth 
his mace . I did not think the smiths of that town were 
of so forgiving a temper ! ' 

' What say you, sir ? There is no quarrel between 
my father and the worshipful baronet of Aston Hall,' 
replied Dorothy, whose curiosity was now in turn some- 
what aroused. 

' Is there none ? Is there no clanship then, or fellow- 
feeling among tradesmen there, as among gentlefolks 
elsewhere ? ' said Grimsorwe, in whose mind a variety 
of reflections and conjectures had at last settled down 
into the true one. 

Dorothy remembered the circumstance of Tubal 
Bromycham's abrupt dismissal from Aston, and his 
labours as an artisan in embellishing that stately resi- 
dence. She had never heard the cause, or concerned 
herself much about it, concluding it was some difference 
of opinion in the works carried on there for Sir Thomas, 
under Tubal's superintendence; particularly as her 
father himself had ordered her to ask no questions on 
the subject, when once a vague impulse of curiosity had 



154 THE armourer's daughter. 

induced her to make some enquiry. She now therefore 
merely said: 'The smiths of Birmingham hold one 
another in very fair brotherhood and esteem, but they 
make no mortal quarrel of mayhap some slight misliking 
as to how work undertaken should be executed ; and I 
never heard of any deeper grudge between Deritend and 
Aston than so.' 

' Ha, well ; what happened was not likely to be 
boasted of either by the master armourer or the skilful 
iron-worker, who we hear is nov/ to become hLs son-in- 
law,' said Grrimsorwe, with a derisive laugh, and eyeing 
Dorothy with a still more penetrating and piercing gaze. 
' But are you aware, damsel, what manner of work it 
was Tubal Bromycham thrust himself upon at Aston, 
and was so bitterly rebuked therein ? I'll be sworn 
you would not guess it once in a thousand years ; but, 
according to a true report I think I have heard, Master 
Vulcan set himself up for my Lady Venns . who but 
he ! . and was in requital first solemnly tossed in a 
blanket by angry Jupiter for the presumption, and then 
squattM on his nether man a good long summer's day 
in Aston stocks, the gaze and laughter and pelting of a 
throng of miserable villagers, who thought to please 
their lord by out-aping his contumelious tyranny ! ' 

Dorothy did not quite understand what was said, 
wrapped in the mist of such fine playgoing, town ex- 
pressions. But she understood enough to awaken her 
surprise and curiosit}^, and, perhaps, some other more 
vehement feeling than either, to a very lively impulse. 
' What mean you, sir ? ' she exclaimed. ' Speak plainly, 
for you speak now of my betrothed husband ; and in 
truth I never heard or suspected such a tale as this of 
him before ? ' 



A ROUGTr WOOEE. 155 

' 'Tis not the kind of story men tell to their betrotheds. 
Whose chimney is the good-man the last to suspect 
on fire?' returned Eichard Grrimsorwe, with his insidious 
and exasperating sneer, and seeming as if what he heard 
only confirmed a previous conclusion of his own. ' But 
it is al] even as I say. An old granny, hereabouts, who 
reports to me all the news in my absences, told me that 
she herself saw Tubal Bromycham dragged out of the 
hall like a struggling ox, b}^ well nigh all my father's 
men-servants setting their strength in a knot, ere they 
could have him to the place of disgraced punishment, 
where he sat gnashing his teeth between well nigh two 
sunsets ere he fell into a fit, and was released ; not so 
much for pity as for dread that he might die on their 
hands. And the common report from there about Aston 
for months after was, that this absurd king-blacksmith of 
yours in Birmingham had shown himself so besotted in 
the conceit- of his artisan skill and supremacy as to 
think to woo and win the haughtiest lady of Warwick- 
shire, in the person of my fair half-sister (I must needs 
confess her so). Mistress Arabella Holte.' 

Dorothy heard this astounding statement at first with 
a feeling of utter incredulity. But a short pause of 
astonished reflection suggested to her so many confirma- 
tions of this explanation of what had always been a vague 
though unconsidered puzzle and enigma to her, that 
she was struck with the belief finally that all was as 
she heard it reported. 

Tubal Bromycham, she knew, had aright to consider 
himself by birth on more than an equality even with the 
' haughtiest lady in Warwickshire.' And if Arabella 
Holte was so fair, what likelier than that a feeling 
deeper than admiration, and that overlooked all other 



156 

inequalities, might have stirred the young blacksmith's 
robust and sturdy spirit even to so daring an assertion 
as a declaration of his passion ? Sir Thomas Holte's 
towering pride and tyranny accounted amply for the 
alleged consequences in all other respects. 

It cannot be denied that this conviction was bitterly 
mortifying to Dorothy Firebrace, who had so much 
reason to consider herself . famous beauty of her town 
as she was held . treated as a kind of fall-back, or 
pis-aller, in the affair. And yet, perhaps, she was not 
altogether displeased with the notion ; for within those 
last few hours a feeling had arisen in Dorothy's heart, 
half whose pleasantest impulse was deadened by the 
notion of wrong to another. A generous, faith-over- 
flowing, noble betrothed ! But did Tubal Bromycham 
seem so now ? 

The result of a brief but decisive reflection on this 
strange intelligence . which passed through windings in 
her mind altogether without a clue for Eichard Grim- 
sorwe . clearly surprised him. Dorothy answered in an 
almost unconcerned tone, ' It was a strange madness, if 
so, in Tubal Bromycham ; yet not so strange, since 
Mistress Arabella is, as you say, so fair ! But Sir 
Thomas has made an enemy who, I doubt me, \y\\\ look 
some day for his revenge.' 

* Do you precise, professing Christians of Birmingham 
hold revenge so sweet ? And, if so, should it be alto- 
gether the portion of a too ambitious blacksmith ? ' 
Eichard Grrimsorwe said, after a pause of consideration, 
and in a cajoling, insinuating voice, from whose oily 
glide Dorothy instinctively shrunk, as from the soft un- 
dulations of a serpent in the grass. ' Do you owe your 



A ROUGH WOOER. 157 

false betrothed no retaliation . deem you, I say, fairest 
Mistress Firebrace ? ' 

' Ketaliation ! How mean you by the word. Master 
Grrimsorwe ? ' she replied, for the first time calling him 
by the name, and with something of scorn and reproach 
in the sound. And she was startled, too, by the query ; 
though for a very different reason than her questioner 
imagined. 

' Tubal, your betrothed, made love to a lady of high 
estate . and if a gentleman of my degree made love to 
you, you should admit him a fair hearing. That is 
what I mean, fair townswoman,' he now replied. 

There was a pause. Dorothy shrunk still more from 
the now gleaming gaze of her unwished companion. But 
with a scorn and disdain she could not repress she 
answered, after a moment's weighing of the expression, 
* A gentleman of your degree I . I pray you, Master Grrim- 
sorwe, explain to me further, what is that? I have 
heard say your grandmother one way is a witch. Do 
you claim your gentility on the mother's side ? ' 

A black frown and scowl passed over Richard Grim- 
sorwe's brows. ' Ha, doth this Brummagem lane-haunter 
taunt me, too ? ' he muttered to himself. Then on a 
sudden, greatly to Dorothy's alarm, he stepped from 
his position walking beside her, right in the front, so as 
to stop her further way. 

' How know you that ? Where were you ere while ? 
The Aston bull was never in these woods . and me- 
thought I heard that same old grandam of whom you 
speak yelling with affright after me, soon after I had 
left her ! Had you affair with her, my bonny wench, 
on your own account, and stopped to listen while she 
and I discoursed ? ' 



158 THE aemoueer's daugiitee. 

The sudden questioning . the lonely situation in which 
she found herself with the menacing questioner . the 
truly terrible, the more than fiendish expression of 
Richard Grimsorwe's eyes, so many and contrary pas- 
sions glowed in them . so dismayed even the courageous 
armourer's daughter that she made no reply, but stood 
aghast and fear-stricken, looking at her fierce interro- 
gator without venturing the least reply. The brutal 
Grrimsorwe, on his part, seemed to accept this terror as 
a confirmation of his worst suspicions. 

' So, my fine wench ! ' he exclaimed, ' you shall give 
me hostages of your goodwill towards me and mine ere 
you advance another step to Aston. Hear you I And 

I will accept none but ,' and before Dorothy could 

even anticipate, much less shun the cowardly assault, 
Grrimsorwe had clutched the girl in his arms, and torn 
her to him with all his strength. Then stifling the 
screams she attempted to utter with his odious kisses, 
Dorothy found herself struggling frantically against 
much superior strength in the felon's arms. 

Heaven knows what Grrimsorwe's purposes might have 
been . whether merely to frighten a person whom he 
suspected of knowing too much from pursuing her 
journey to his father's presence, or some deadlier irre- 
parable mischief. Whatever his first intent, however, 
his brutish excited passions might easily have urged 
him beyond it; irritated by the resistance and struggles, 
and yet more, the exceeding beauty of the victim, which 
his unhallowed violence more and more discovered to 
himself in the course of their close-clasped contest ; 
when, on a sudden, by Heaven's mercy, a voice, whose 
thundering accents seemed to strike even Richard Grim- 



A ROUGH WOOER. 159 

sorwe motionless as by an actual bolt of fire, burst 
from some nigh though unseen post of observation. 
' Grod's life, son Eichard I what manner of law is this 
you administer in my domains? ' 



160 



CHAPTER XVII. 

SIR THOMAS HOLTE. 

Richard Grimsorwe, changing only his form of bru- 
tality, no sooner heard the voice than he flung his 
jDurposed victim from his unmanly embrace with such 
force and violence that Dorothy Firebrace was precipi- 
tated into a deep ditch on a side of the pathway. An 
action in the way of escaping detection, on the impulse 
of the moment, that showed of what the dastardly 
ravisher was capable, had he completed a crime that 
rendered necessary more elaborate contrivances for 
impunity. As it was, the armourer's daughter had 
great difficulty in saving herself from a severe fall, and 
consequent injury, by clutching at the bullrushes and 
nettles with which the ditch was choked, while the 
softness of the mud at the bottom broke the shock of 
her rudely propelled descent. 

Exclamations from more than one voice, but with 
the first speaker's startlingly predominant, accompanied 
the whole movement ; and if Dorothy had been in a 
condition to observe, she would have seen the figures of 
two men on horseback, who were enabled by that 
elevation to overlook the scene from above a line of 
park paling that skirted the ditch. One of these, ex- 
claiming ' Fie ! Master Richard, fie ! ' jumped from his 



SIR THOMAS HOLTE. 161 

horse, and with a singularly active scramble and bound, 
cleared the inclosure into the ditch, evidently to render 
assistance to the ill-treated girl. 

This kindly stranger was a young man, of the bright 
florid complexion generally communicated by an open- 
air life, and who, wearing a green livery, with a huntiDg- 
knife and horn at his girdle, seemed probably some 
official attached to the considerable sporting establish- 
ment at Aston Hall. He was, in fact, the chief falconer 
there, and took his name from his occupation. At 
least, he was known by no other than Eobin Falconer ; 
and exceedingly well liked throughout the country-side, 
as a cheery, honest, hearty lad of his calling under it. 

There was little reason to doubt who was the other 
spectator. The exceeding pride and imperiousness of 
command of his attitude . the rich brocades of the 
doublet and cloak he wore . his clean-cut, swarthy, 
almost Spanish features, instinct with haughtiness and 
towering sense of supremacy . the beauty and fire of 
the steed he bestrode . the two muffled hawks on his 
wrist . all betokened the presence of the despotic and 
showy master of and builder of Aston Hall. 

In other respects. Sir Thomas Holte's figure was 
clearly one of great strength of muscular development, 
particularly about the shoulders and arms, though the 
enormous stuffing and padding of all the parts of the 
male dress at that period, from the trunk hose upwards, 
seldom allowed the true proportions of the frame to be 
noted. His stature was certainly lofty, unless the 
upper portion of his person . all that could be discerced 
over the palings . was unusually long in comparison 
with the limbs. And this was in reality somewhat the 
case, as was visible when he was on foot. Sir Thomas 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

Holte bore also a resemblance to both his sons, that 
would have recognised him to any one who knew either ; 
but more particularly to the elder unlawfully -begotten 
one. The dark complexion and sharp-cut features were, 
however, the chief points. There was much that was 
domineering, fierce, and irascible in the worshipful 
knight and baronet's looks, but nothing of the stealthy 
and sinister ferocity that branded Eichard Grimsorwe 
dangerous with nature's own searing-irons. Cave quern 
Deus ipse notavit. 

A couple of instants sufficed for Eobin Falconer to 
assist Dorothy out of the ditch, weeping bitterly ; when 
the honest fellow, reiterating all kinds of assurances 
that no farther damage should accrue to her, knelt on 
both knees, and set to work assiduously on the spot to 
clean her mudded shoes with some dock leaves, gathered 
for the purpose. Meanwhile Grrimsorwe, perceiving 
clearly he was known, and that he had no chance of 
establishing an alibi, adopted the next best plan, and 
burst into a loud laugh. * Faith, sir,' he said to Sir 
Thomas, in this way, ' the wench had sharper eyes than 
I, and must have espied yoa coming, for she had pro- 
mised me a kiss for guiding her safely out of the way 
of jolly St. G-eorge, your great bull, which it seems hath 
broken bounds again. But observing you over the 
hedge, the minx grows shy, and claws at me as fine a 
resistance as ever Potiphar's wife in the Scripture tale.' 

« Oh, thou false ruffian ! But for your arrival, good 
gentlemen, the villain meant me the basest wrong, and 
I had scarcely 'scaped at a less forfeit than death ; 
which yet I would a myriad times have preferred to his 
brutish embrace ! ' half sobbed and half shrieked the 
armourer's daughter. ' In Grod's name, do not desert 



SIR THOMAS HOLTE. 163 

me now I He thrust his company on me all along, 
against my most earnest and expressed desire ; and I 
fled from nothing so harmless in comparison as your 
savage bull, but from his detestable grandmother, the 
witch, with whom I espied him in a conspiracy of death 
and ruin against his noble brother, at the hut below. 
And this I will go and witness at once to Sir Thomas 
Holte, good yeoman, if you will protect me to yom' 
master's house and presence.' 

^Sir Thomas Holte is here, overlooking, and hears 
all, fair maiden,' said the falconer, looking rather em- 
barrassed, but indicating his master by a gesture towards 
the palings. 

' Is here ? Is where ? I will let him know what a 
true bastard his base-born whelp is ! ' said Dorothy, 
righteously exasperated beyond studying her words, and 
who, besides, was reared in, a plain-speaking age and 
among a plain-spoken community. 

' Ay, there is nothing a woman will not say and do 
that would shift the blame of such a discovery partly 
from herself, wholly to another,' said Grimsorwe, dex- 
terously awakening a reminiscence in his father's mind 
which he knew would be of influence. 

In truth, Sir Thomas frowned darkly. ' A woman's 
tongue is no scandal, certes, that openeth a baying 
against a man in some matters,' he said. ' Still, this is 
something of a rough wooing, Eichard, even for you 
town gallants, who, we poor country folk are given to 
understand by your plays and discourses, carry for- 
tresses by a brisk assault, which we should besiege by 
slow approach, and sap for a whole campaign, and then, 
belike, fail in. But who is this fair wench ? Methinks 
I should recall something in her favour ; though I 

U2 



164 THE armourer's daughter. 

cannot well remember at this onward of time whether 
I am mistaken or not in my supposal.' 

' You are not, sir, if you take me to be the daughter 
of Zachariah Firebrace, master armourer of Birming- 
ham, who of a former time often frequented your noble 
dwelling and appurtenances,' said Dorothy, eagerly, 
though she had now her fears whether the statement 
presented any very strong claiDi on Sir Thomas Holte's 
consideration. 

*It is even so,' replied the baronet. ^And of a 
surety, Dickon, you have started the greyhound for the 
hare this time ! But what do you here, my good girl, 
so lonesomely in the fields with that tempting peachy 
face? Doth the worthy craftsman, your sire, doubt 
that my son hath my commission and assurance of 
payment for the artillery we need ? ' 

' Nay, sir ; but yet I have business worth the hearing 
with you, though I will not say it before a scowling 
night-bat, who hates his brother worse than Cain, for 
being, in the like manner as Abel, more acceptable to 
Grod and man, beyond reckoning ! ' returned Dorothy, 
somewhat recovering now, but continuing to survey 
Eichard Grrimsorwe with unspeakable indignation and 
loathing. 

^ This is another of those who are only straining their 
wits to find matter of invective against me to you, sir,' 
said G-rimsorwe, with crafty bitterness. ' Belike some 
leman of my brother's; who, in truth, envies me the 
fatherly countenance you show me, for my mother's 
.sake, in spite of all.' 

* It may be so, Richard ; but thou art not exactly the 
saint to call my son Edward a sinner . even so,' returned 
Sir Thomas, sharply. /But fie on this unbrotherly 



SIR THOMAS EOLTE. 165 

captiousness and carping ; and do not presume too much 
against thy better-born, though not elder, to make me 
rue the equal favour and indulgence I have ever shown 
thee. Know thy place, such as it hath been appointed 
thee, or I must teach it thee in another manner, and 
perhaps recall to my mind more than will please thee, 
that thou art also the grandson of the most hateful hag 
that ever . 'sdeath ! she is here ! ' 

This latter exclamation was occasioned by the sudden 
and totally, by all parties, unexpected appearance at 
this moment of the Witch of Aston ; who, hobbling as 
if for life and death, and still attended, dog-like, by her 
frightful cat, suddenly turned into sight at an angle in 
the road, close on the scene of action. So eager was 
her speed, indeed, and so fixed her attention on some 
unseen ulterior object, that she pelted almost close upon 
Dorothy and Eobin Falconer before she seemed to 
discern any obstacle on the road, while her cat appeared 
as if it skimmed along in her w^ake on the wind, with 
all its four legs rigidly set. 

Apart from any superstitious feeling, Robin had reason 
to apprehend a personal concussion. But he was most 
alarmed probably from reasons of the former descrip- 
tion, for he uttered an exclamation that expressed fear 
more than anything else, as he jumped out of the old 
woman's way. And, so rooted were old customs in the 
country parts of England still, he actually crossed him- 
self, as he exclaimed, ^ Forfend thee^ witch ! what 
mean ye now ? ' 

* Ho, ho ! are you there ? Are you there ? It is not 
my daughter ! It is not my daughter ! ' groaned the old 
woman, bringing herself as suddenly as she had arrived 
to a halt, but clearly without taking any notice of 



166 THE armourer's daughter. 

Eobin Falconer's interposition, glaring fixedly with 
her frightfully luminous eyes at Dorothy Firebrace. 

The latter shrunk from her look. ' Keep the witch 
off me ! ' she exclaimed. * She hath done me much 
harm already to-day by her wicked eyes, and will do 
me more.' 

^She bodes harm to whoever and whatever comes 
within her purview. I had rather three magpies had 
crossed me in a field; and there will never be good 
times at Aston until she has crackled with her old, dry, 
marrowless bones in a bonfire I ' muttered Sir Thomas, 
adding, in raised and exasperated accents, ' Hag I what 
do you here ? Was it not stipulated between us that 
you should never again cross my path ? ' 

^I was your bondsman, grandam. Why break you 
my faith for me ? ' said Eichard Grrimsorwe, in his turn, 
angrily enough. ' But what ails the old idiot ? She 
seems to stare with open eyes, and yet asleep, at the 
girl ! Do you know her, grandam ? Is she of your 
herb acquaintance ? ' 

Dorothy's glance flashed flakes of fire on the vile 
asperser, while the old woman, recovering herself, as it 
seemed, with a shock of consciousness, turned from her 
with a wild and horrible -stare at her grandson. *\\Tiat, 
gallows bird, you too belie a poor, wretched, miserable 
old woman, your mother's mother?' she 3"elled. ' Say 
you too that Maud Grrimsorwe brews hell-broth, and 
hath dealings with the foul one? Tell Sir Thomas 
that; he needs but a half-pretext to bring me to the 
faggot and tar-barrel I But I thought it was her ghost 
. my daughter's ghost . and would have craved her 
pardon for all my mercilessness to her, that she was 
glad to seek refuge from my curses in the black pool, 



SIR THOMAS HOLTE. 167 

yonder down ! But it is not Maud . my pretty, golden 
haired Maud, whom it made the very grave-digger 
weep to deny christian burial to, and drive the stake 
into her fair breast I Who is it then ? Be not afraid, 
fair girl ; for my daughter's sake, I will not curse any 
young thing that resembles her ever again ! ' 

'Bid the hag aroint, Eichard, or I shall lose all 
patience with her yet again ! ' said Sir Thomas, in 
passionate and yet strangely stifled and suppressed 
accents, as if he also felt some superstitious awe of the 
poor old wretch's imaginary powers. 

' Grrandmother, go ; I am in trouble already with my 
father, and you will lead me into worse : I will come by 
and by, and learn your meaning in what you now say,' 
half ejaculated and half muttered Grrimsorwe, drawing 
his sinister relative a,way from the scene of action, and 
setting her withered visage homeward to her hut. He 
added some yet more emphatic whispered words, which 
she seemed to understand ; for her head began to shake 
with a kind of palsy, and ejaculating, ^ Ay, ay ; it was a 
bargain, it was a bargain ! Mopkin, Mopkin ! my cat, 
my cat ! we are wanted at home ! A good day to all 
the fair compan}^ and a long night when it comes, for 
there are few of us who will rise very sweet and fresh- 
smelling from the grave ! Make the most of your time, 
then, on earth. Sir Thomas Holte, for it is short with 
the best of us ; and He that is the Judge of judges is 
no respecter of persons, and asks not whether a sinner 
wore purple and fine linen, or home-spun, on the earth. 
And so I leave my benison on the good company.' 

The witch then . perhaps a little rudely accelerated 
by a push from her grandson . hobbled off the scene, 
attended by her imp, as it might well be considered. 



168 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

with as strange and unwonted rapidity as she had 
entered upon it. But, for a considerable distance, those 
who remained could hear her muttering and laughing 
in a low self-satisfied chuckle to herself, as if well- 
pleased with having left an impression of vague menace 
and disaster behind her. 

And so she had ; particularly with Sir Thomas Holte. 
^ I'll warrant me,' he said to Dorothy Firebrace, ' what 
thou hast to say to me is of some evil betiding and mis- 
fortune, since that detested beldam has made me an 
encounter! What is it? Be speedy, for I shall be 
interrupted shortly into night-fall, and I wished to air 
me, after my hawk's flight, before sunset, and they grow 
restless in the jesses enough to break their fine sharp 
claws.' 

*Heed again how you listen to the spiteful she- 
creature. Sir Thomas; for I have gathered from her, 
now it reminds me, that she is the betrothed of yonder 
audacious blacksmith of Birmingham, Tubal Bromy- 
cham, who sets himself up as a wooer of your daughter, 
Arabella, and was fitly brought to his senses in your 
filthiest horsepond, which made me stand the less 
upon my manners with so free-spoken a coaster as 
madam,' said Grrimsorwe. The villain's suspicions were 
reasonably enough confirmed from what he had now 
heard . that Dorothy Firebrace had overheard some- 
thing of his recent conversation with his grandmother, 
and, perhaps, proposed to avenge her own mal-treatment 
by revealing the wicked suggestions and plots they had 
exchanged. 

The trick failed not of its effects. Sir Thomas's frown 
deepened in his already crumpled brows. * What ! hath 
the Avealthy armourer chosen a mere brawny slave like 



SIR THOMAS HOLTE. 169 

that for a son-in-law?' he exclaimed. 'But 'tis no 
great marvel that a blacksmith's foreman, who dared 
raise his eyes to the daughter of Sir Thomas Holte, 
should set himself to win his master's to wdfe.' 

Dorothy had scarcely known what degree of credit to 
attach to Eichard Grrimsorwe's malicious statements and 
insinuations on this point. But now that they were so 
amply confirmed, she could no longer refuse belief to 
the tale. And although it did not pain her at all in 
comparison with what she might have felt if she had 
herself been greatly attached to her plighted husband ; 
nay, perhaps, under the altered feelings of the last few 
hours, it rather pleased her to find she owed him so 
much less earnest fidelity than she had credited to him; 
still her pride as a woman, and an admired beauty, sus- 
tained a severe shock in the revelation. ' But I am not 
yet Tubal Bromycham's wife, mark you, sir,' she said, 
' and, mayhap, with this new knowledge I have gained, 
never shall be ! But, as I have said, my business with 
your worship is concerning no blacksmith or Tubal 
Bromycham in the w^orld, but your honourable son and 
heir, Master Edward Holte, who has given me a letter 
of credence and information to you of the last impor- 
tance, which I will deliver and explain as soon as I 
achieve your near and private ear.' 

' A letter ! . from my son . from Edward Holte ! ' 
exclaimed the baronet, now evidently greatly struck 
and surprised. ' Give it me over the palings then, and 
bear me company some furlong higher up the road, 
when we shall both come to an easy entrance across the 
moat, upon the garden terrace. Go before, Richard, 
and tell my Lady Holte and Arabella, whom you will 
find taking the air there^ that I am on a speedier return 



170 

to supper than I thought. Ho, Eobin Falconer I hand 
me the paper, and take your birds on your own jesses.' 

So saying, the impatient Lord of Aston spurred his 
horse close to the palings on his side of the demarcation, 
snatched rather than took the letter his servant for- 
warded, and tossed the hawks so suddenly from his 
wrist, that the poor sky-harriers, being blinded in their 
mufflers, fluttered wildly about until the falconer's well- 
known lure guided them to him by hearing. Still 
further surprised by the formal appearance and thick- 
ness of the letter. Sir Thomas hurriedly broke open the 
seal, and putting his horse in movement, began to read. 

As for Eichard Grrimsorwe, it did not seem that even 
he dared to remain against his sire's injunction ; but 
he moved off clearly with great slowness and reluctance. 
But at the first exclamation he overheard, and which 
Sir Thomas Holte could not suppress, he halted and 
looked eagerly back. 



171 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

ASTON HALL. 

Befose this utterance was made, however, Dorothy, 
keeping pace with the active but gallant falconer (whose 
horse, by-the-by, kept him equally implicit company 
on the park side of the palings), found herself in full 
view of the stately and beautiful edifice which was 
destined to testify so plainly to posterity the grandeur 
and wealth and princely tastes of its founder. 

Such, to the present day, it remains, in spite of some 
cavilling of taste that may exist as to the effect of the 
singular Saracenic minareted roofs of the three towers, 
central and flanking, that form the principal reliefs of 
the otherwise purely English and domestic architecture 
of the picturesque and imposing mass. In spite, too, 
of the disproportionate smallness and lack of decorative 
carrying out in the design of the entrance door of the 
mansion on its principal front, over which Sir Thomas 
Holte had placed a proudly humble memorial of his 
achievement in the erection of the building, surmounted 
by a richly emblazoned coat of arms, of many quarter- 
ings, and concluding with an emphatic Laus Deo (Praise 
be to Grod I) . an expression doubtless to be taken as a 
pious ascribiDg of all the glory and success in the great 
work to the supreme Planner and Executant of the 



172 

universe, but might be read almost like an ejaculation 
of weariness and impatience at the slow conclusion of a 
labour that had occupied seventeen years of the life of 
a mortal man . for the inscription recorded that Aston 
Hall was commenced building in the year 1618, and 
concluded Anno Domini 1635. 

The result, however, did not disgrace even so pro- 
tracted a task-work ; expecially at this period, when it 
was only in the second decade of its completed existence, 
and in all the glory and splendour of novel decoration. 

The rich red brickwork was as yet untarnished by the 
beating storms of two hundred winters, and exhibited 
the white stone copings and figured reliefs of the facade 
and its still nobler wings, and the aerial balustrades on 
the summits of all the chief masses of the pile, with the 
brightness and lightness of a fringing of lace. The 
innumerable diamond-paned lattices seemed to make 
the walls as pervious to light as if they had merely been 
thrown up to support them, and the architect had most 
skilfully disguised the moderate height of his building 
by the loftiness, and elegance, and variety of the ter- 
minations in pointed gable, and twisted chimney, and 
arabesque pinnacle, into which he had carried his 
general roofs, independently of the elevated crowning 
effect of his three ogive-shaped minarets, of which the 
centre nobly balanced the whole pile to the eye. It is 
now a little out of the perpendicular, and so produces 
rather a contrary effect. Still, the whole suggests and 
increases the regret of the spectator, that so fine a 
monument of the palatial architecture of our ancestors 
. almost the only old remains Birmingham can boast . 
should run the risk of sinking into decay, or of being 
abandoned to worse destroying influences than those of 



ASTON HALL. 173 

time . for want, not of means, but of the taste and will 
to preserve it to so wealthy and unadorned a town. 

But it is not for a stranger, however much it may be 
permitted to a romancer, to interfere in this strictly 
domestic affair of municipal Birmingham. And it is 
perhaps an uncalled-for episode in another respect, since 
Dorothy Firebrace did not approach the mansion on 
the side principally alluded to, but on the Grarden Front 
. worthy then of the name, and not altogether unworthy 
now . mth its noble terrace walk, bordered by a marble 
balustrade, overlooking extensive grounds laid out in a 
rich variety of flower-beds, orchards, clipped yew hedges, 
flights of steps, statues, fountains, and other ornamental 
appendages of the style introduced in the reigns of 
Elizabeth and James by certain of our 'travelled thanes ' 
from Italy. 

It was easy to see that a man of ambitious and 
haughty aspirations must have contrived, or assented 
to, the creation of such a residence for himself and his 
descendants. The great wealth of Sir Thomas Holte 
itself would scarcely have justified his building so proud 
a residence for a family that meant to remain contented 
in the highest rank of the gentry merely . unless a 
baronet is to be counted as in the lowest degree of no- 
bility. But, in truth. Sir Thomas Holte was well known 
to cherish the ambition of founding a race that should 
take deorree with the hiorhest in the land, and it was 
even said had for years nourished the design to give his 
grand mansion a suitable tenant in the person of a peer 
of the realm. It was this purpose that had peculiarly 
embittered to him the numerous deaths of the male 
children, born of his wedlock with a lady of noble de- 
scent. And this, besides the natural affection of a 



174 THE armourer's daughter. 

father, made Edward Holte's existence and welfare a 
subject of perhaps scarcely less anxiety and importance 
to him than those of the sole heir to some imperial 
dynasty. 

It may be imagined, therefore, with what emotions of 
alarm and exasperation a personage of passions so violent 
and unrestrained ascertained from the writing in his hand 
that this precious pledge was in the power of a seditious 
and excited mob. In the very clutches of two enemies, 
one of whom he knew he had mortally offended, and 
the other of whom he had every reason of alliance and 
friendship to perceive, now, was assured to share the 
sentiment. 

His exclamation, as has been said, stopped Grrim- 
sorwe's remoter advance, but also Dorothy's, with Eobin 
Falconer, just as they reached the narrow winding of 
water, rather than moat, between the precincts of the 
garden and Aston Park and Chace. In reality, such an 
explosion of fury as that into v/hich the choleric King 
of Aston, as he was sometimes called, now burst, had 
never before been conceived, much less witnessed, by 
the young girl, accustomed to the decorous and muffled 
tone of a society, deeply imbued at that period with 
religious gravity and control of the inner emotions. It 
was a volley of terrific oaths at first, poured forth with- 
out stint or measure ; and only after a protracted relief 
in the outburst, becoming at last a little articulate and 
intelligible. ' Gad's my life ! Thunder and lightning 
and death! My son . my only son . Edward Holte, 
my son, in the hands of the scoundrel rabble of Bir- 
mingham'.. in the hands of Tubal Bromycham and 
his canting father-in-law I He is lost, he is dead, he is 
slain, he is murdered ; and I have built my glorious 



ASTON HALL. 175 

house, and thrown twenty manors into a scale of battle 
and civil war, to become an heirless, miserable, de- 
spised old man ! ' 

' How say you, sir ! ' exclaimed Eichard Grrimsorwe, 
eagerly returning upon the word. 

^No, Sir Thomas Holte, you are much mistaken,' 
said Dorothy Firebrace, who, with her conductor, now 
also stopped close beside the excited baronet. ' The 
life of your son is as safe under the frank pledge of my 
father as I trust mine . a woman's . is in yours. Much 
safer than were it in this man's hand who calls himself 
Edward Holte's brother. Your son is in no danger of 
aught but a brief detention, if, as this letter remon- 
strates, you do not provoke the townsmen by any violent 
attempt at rescue.' 

' Grod's light ! how else shall I redeem my son ? Not 
a man that eats my bread, whether he be of the ablest 
body or blind and halt as an old beggar of the wars, 
but shall to arms, and follow me to Birmingham to the 
rescue ! ' 

^ Then is your son indeed lost, and only then,' said 
Dorothy. ' I left him safely housed and honourably en- 
treated in air respects ; but the townsmen thronging to 
their arms, under conduct of an esteemed and chosen 
captain of the Parliament ; and, when Birmingham so 
wiUs it, we can turn out twelve hundred fighting men, 
who will not readily turn back in a fray.' 

* WTiat is the matter, sir ? I heard your voice, but, 
as my duty is of late so misinterpreted, I knew not 
whether I might make bold to ask or no,' said Grim- 
sorwe. 

' Richard I your brother, whom I sent for arms for 
my tenantry into Birmingham, is seized and made the 



176 THE armourer's daughter. 

prisoner of a bloodthirsty, riotous mob ! ' exclaimed Sir 
Thomas Holte. 

' You say not so, sir ! ' said Richard Grrimsorwe ; and, 
alas ! with what a fratricidal brightening and sparkling 
up of the eyes ! 

^ She says so . this letter says so, Richard ; what 
shall be done ? ' And the fierce, overbearing, self-willed 
old man seemed for awhile to have lost all these quali- 
ties, and to gaze dependently and submissively on his 
craftier son for an oracle. 

' Let me see the letter, sir,' said G-rimsorwe, per- 
ceiving his advantage. Dorothy, dismayed and as- 
tonished, no longer entered her protest. There was, 
indeed, a general and, so to speak, subservient silence, 
as the lawyer read his brother's calm, noble, and quietly- 
couraged epistle. 

' Who is this agent of the Parliament of whom my 
brother speaks as directing you of Birmingham ? ' said 
Grimsorwe, as soon as he had deliberately, though with 
knitted brows, perused the whole missive. He spoke 
to Dorothy, who, without looking at him, answered, 
with knitting nostrils, ' His name is Oliver Cromwell.' 

' Oliver Cromwell ? ' Grrimsorwe appeared for a 
moment plunged in his reminiscences of to^^^l expe- 
rience. ' Oliver Cromwell I Be assured then, sir, that 
you have to deal with the worst on that side, with the 
sole exception of him who jerks all theb' wires down 
Lelow ! I have heard of the man when I was in Lon- 
don. Of few and ill-set words, but of the most deter- 
mined and resolute action among them all, and is of 
some suspected to have the most of a soldier in him of 
those who understand the part that must be played by 
the leaders of men in these times. Sir, you speak of 



ASTON HALL. 177 

rescuing my brother ; but against such a man it is im- 
possible, if he is seriously in earnest to stir the commons 
of Birmingham to a resistance. What force have we ? 
A few rusty old pikes and foolish serving-men, who will 
run the first push of point they feel against their 
jerkins.' 

Dorothy was surprised . certainly not well content . 
to find the kindless brother of Edward Holte of the 
opinion he desired to enforce upon his sire. 

' What would you have me do, then ? ' almost yel- 
led Sir Thomas Holte. ' Sit down under this mal- 
treatment, and stomach my wrongs as if they were my 
meat?' 

* Nay, sir, but speak the rogues of the town fair, for 
my brother's sake, awhile you despatch messengers to 
the King at Nottingham for succour. Such a town as 
Birmingham . so central on all his Majesty's ways 
against his rebels . the very garner and wheatfield of 
Mars . will instantly claim rescue at his hands.' 

' But the King himself is lying at Nottingham, with 
hardly men enough about him to ensure the safety of 
his own sacred person ! Know you not how he hath 
been compelled to send nigh all his horse into Worces- 
tershire, under his royal nephew, to cover our move- 
ments there, and check the Parliament's advance on 
the west ? . Out on me, and shame on my rash tongue ! ' 
Sir Thomas Holte interrupted himself to exclaim : ' I 
was to keep this a secret, almost from my own bosom, 
until the Prince burst upon them, when they sent me 
the rendezvous of my son . and now here is even a 
woman in it I ' 

* But one whose secrecy there are means to secure, 
sir,' replied Grimsorwe, significantly, ' and his High- 
VOL. r. N 



178 THE AEMOUKEE'S DAUGHTER. 

ness Prince Rupert is but the nearer for aid to us in 
Worcestershire. Take my counsel, sir . which I could 
give at more freedom were we alone. and let us pro- 
phesy smooth things unto these angry blacksmiths of 
Birmingham, while we send at all the speed of man 
and horse into Worcestershire. Let me have the charge 
into Birmingham. You know I have a lawyer's tongue 
now in my head, or you have been at charges to little 
purpose for my education in London.' 

Dorothy Firebrace, who heard all that was said, 
was struck with consternation at this overture. She 
remembered all that Edward Holte had observed on his 
brother's double-mindedness and villainy, so amply con- 
firmed by her own experience. She spoke up, there- 
fore, with vehement warmth to Sir Thomas. ' Trust 
him not in his brother's case, w^orshipful sir I ' she ex- 
claimed ; ' he hates his lawful brother, and would place 
himself in his seat. I overheard him muttering as 
much with the foul witch, his grandmother, and de- 
bating the means how, if you will give me leave to 
declare them ! ' 

' I trust I shall show differently in the proof ; 'tis a 
most malicious lie, invented by a wench who possibly is 
my brother's leman, to sow divisions between us . 
which was ever such creatures' common trick in families. 
But your worship knows what stress to put upon a 
woman's raving tongue, when she hath malice in her 
heart, to set the clappers a-run.' 

Sir Thomas frowned, as at some unpleasant recol- 
lection. ' You shall go to Birmingham in your 
brother's behalf, Richard,' he said ; * I could never 
abide three words ere I should tell them all my mind 
on theii* brutish breach of manners and hospitality 



ASTON HALL. 17^ 

And I must say it shows most brotherly in you to 
propose it ; for shall not your own person be also in 
manifest jeopardy?' 

' Not, sir, if you keep the master armourer's daugh- 
ter here as a hostage for my safe return ! ' returned 
G-rimsorwe. 

Sir Thomas burst into a hoarse laugh. ' Why so, in 
sooth, it shall be ! ' he exclaimed. ' Nay, I thought not 
of it before, but can we not bargain Edward's release 
against her's ? A fair swap ! ' 

' Sir ! your son's safe-conduct for me is in your hands. 
I am here unknown to my father and the whole to^vn, 
who would be angry with me nigh unto stoning if they 
knew I took part against their purposes. Therefore, in 
Heaven's name, keep true touch mth me, and since my 
errand is done, let me depart in peace.' 

' It seems reasonable what she says . Edward's safe- 
conduct and assurance should be respected,' said Sir 
Thomas, hesitatingly eyeing Grrimsorwe. ' And it were 
an ill-return for so generous a preference . ' 

' Sir, if you allow of her departure, not only is my 
brother Edward's danger from your retaliatory and 
offended enemies most manifest and inevitable, but the 
King's counsels and nakedness at Nottingham are all 
betrayed . to what advantages we know not, when there 
are men like Master Cromwell of Huntingdon to seize 
them ! ' replied the crafty lawyer. 

^ Nay, that will never do ; she must remain our pri- 
soner,' said Sir Thomas, ' but in an easy and well- 
purveyed captivity. Kobin, take her to the great 
kitchen, and be her guard over her while Adam Black- 
jack places the best in his pantry before her.' 

A captive, and in the kitchen, with menials for 

n2 



180 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

guardsmen and companions ! The degradation, almost 
as much as the peril of her detention, nigh maddened 
Dorothy Firebrace. 

It happened, too, that during a considerable portion 
of the dialogue Dorothy's glance had repeatedly fallen 
upon a group of persons parading up and down the 
terrace before the house, as if for evening exercise. 
Two of these were ladies ; both apparently of rank by 
the rich gleaming of their dresses in the sunset splen- 
dours that now flooded the mansion and grounds in this 
direction. One of them, by the stifFer magnificence of 
her apparel . her train being carried by a page, and 
herself leaning on the arm of a pale elderly man, in the 
garb of a chaplain . was clearly the elder of the two. 
The other was of more playful and youthful manners, 
amusing herself with flinging biscuits to four or five 
peacocks, that trailed after her with their long, gor- 
geous tails along the balustrade of the terrace, and in 
chit-chat with a motley-garbed lackadaisical looking 
fellow, who was doubtless the still common retainer in 
great houses, styled, without roundabout, a Fool. 

And now, seeing these persons, Dorothy had for some 
time concluded in her own mind that they must be the 
mother and sister of Edward Holte. And conceiving 
the possibility of women entertaining some compassion 
for a woman, she took a sudden resolution, and darting 
past Kobin Falconer, over a narrow rustic bridge, she 
crossed the moat, and sped like an antelope up several 
flights of steps to the terrace where she observed the 
ladies. Arriving breathlessly before my Lady Holte, 
just as she was about to turn again on her parade walk 
. followed, at almost as desperate speed, but retarded 
by his lawyer's robe, by Richard Grrimsorwe. 



181 



CHAPTER XIX. 

LADY AND MISS HOLTE. 

The wife of Sir Thomas Holte was daughter and co- 
heiress of one of the most distinguished county families 
of Warwickshire, and in her youth had been a lady of 
remarkable beauty, and, it was said, of great spirit and 
haughtiness. But all these advantages had not enabled 
her to bear up against the tyrannous supremacy of her 
husband's character ; and at the time we are now upon 
she had sunk for many years into a meek and utterly 
dependent vassalage on his will and pleasure, in what- 
ever sort declared. 

Part of this will and pleasure certainly was that my 
Lady Holte should figure in magnificent array at the 
head of his household, and be served with all the state 
and ceremony of a princess. But of the truest and 
real privileges of a wife and mother Lady Holte was as 
effectually deprived as if she had no claim to either 
distinction. She was allowed no voice or opinion in the 
education and disposal of her children in life. But, 
indeed, only two had ever so long preserved the gift of 
life bestowed upon them as to allow much scope for 
maternal anxieties or supervision. And the frequent 
calamities of her children's loss, due, probably, to the 
exhaustion of her own strength, consequent on unusual 



182 THE armourer's daughter. 

fecundity, had, doubtless, greatly contributed to the 
weakening and subduing of the poor lady's character. 
Particularly as superstition lent its dispiriting aid to 
sorrow ; and the discovery of her husband's immoralities 
and cruelty to another woman, though before their mar- 
riage, which had provoked, she deemed, the vengeance 
of a sorceress on her progeny, darkened existence for her 
in the midst of all the state and splendour accumulated 
by that husband's pride around her. 

Her son Edward was, in fact. Lady Holte's chief, if 
not her only, consolation. He alone inherited her fair 
complexion . her resigned and feeling temperament . 
her tenderness of heart . her high sense of honour and 
propriety. Arabella Holte greatly more resembled her 
father both in look and character. It is true that she 
claimed so much of her mother's almost perfect, angelic 
beauty as was compatible with a deep brunette com- 
plexion, raven-black hair, and eyes of the most extra- 
ordinary darkness and vivacity. But in the passion and 
power of her spirit, her pride, her ambition, her love of 
rule and despotism, she was her father's child every 
inch. To be sure all these characteristics had taken 
feminine forms in a woman, and Arabella Holte's striv- 
ings after dominion took not unfrequently the shapes of 
the most bewitching coquetry and allurement, or languor 
of submission, rather than of sway. But these were 
only spells of the sorceress, destined to be wrought into 
cruel fixed enchantments, that left the victims the more 
powerless and yet scorned in her hands. For, young 
as she was, Arabella Holte had hitherto seemed imper- 
vious herself to the passions she took a wicked delight 
in kindling and deriding in others. The whole country 
rang with tales of her pride and disdainful insolence to 



LADY AND MISS HOLTE. 183 

her wooers . the number of suits she had seemed to en- 
courage for awhile, but had concluded by scornfully 
rejecting . even on the part of persons confessedly her 
equals, or even superiors, in rank and fortune. And in 
these caprices she was so thoroughly backed and en- 
couraged by her father that it was derisively reported 
Sir Thomas Holte meant to marry his children to In- 
fants and Infantas of Spain . an opinion of the towering 
pride and arrogance of that nation, especially in family 
concerns, being a rooted portion of the public belief in 
England at that period. But of all his family, not even 
excepting his crafty and intriguing bastard son . Arabella 
Holte enjoyed the greatest influence with her despotic 
and headstrong sire. He had a respect for her abilities, 
which were certainly great ; and her ambitious and 
haughty character too closely resembled his own not to 
merit his approbation. And what father could fail to 
be proud of beauty so rare as to be almost matchless in 
its singular union of brilliancy and attractions of the 
softest and most voluptuous order ? . when it so pleased 
her that at times betrayed depth of real fire in her un- 
opened soul, whence all that flimsy flame and evanescent 
glow must needs proceed ? It was not a philosophical 
age, and Sir Thomas Holte was not the kind of reasoner 
to understand the dangers as well as tbe charm and 
power of such a temperament. 

These were the goddesses to whom Dorothy Fire- 
brace had now recourse in the untoward conjunction of 
her affairs. But little to her advantage, for although 
she succeeded in arresting the attention of both ladies, 
she had hardly commenced her incoherent demand on 
Lady Holte for protection, in her son Edward's name, 
ere Richard Grimsorwe arriving, terrified the unfortunate 



184 THE armourer's daughter. 

mother almost to death with the tidings of the young 
heir's seizure in Birmingham, coupled with the assu- 
rance that to retain the armourer's daughter was the 
only possible guarantee for his safety. Lady Holte 
nearly fainted away on the intelligence, and though her 
first exclamation of 'The witch, the witch I . the 
witch's curse has overtaken him too, now I ' could not 
have been very agreeable to Grrimsorwe, he reiterated 
his statement in a manner to overpower all poor Dorothj' 
Pirebrace's remonstrances. 

It was true that Miss Holte, who had as little liking 
or trust in Eichard as her brother, was at first inclined 
to take part against what he laid down as proper to be 
done in the case. But when Eichard malignantly ob- 
served to her, ' Deem you that any lesser pledge than 
Tubal Bromycham's betrothed will save your brother. 
Mistress Arabella, from Tubal Bromycham's vengeance?' 
she bit her proud pouting lip, and was silent. And yet 
she was, doubtless, as incredulous as Dorothy or Edward 
Holte of good meaning towards him on his unlawful 
brother's part. 

Dorothy even thought that the young lady, hearing 
her named as Tubal's betrothed, looked at her with 
something of disdainful and angry scrutiny. As if with 
all her own contempt for her blacksmith pretend ant, 
her pride suffered not even the shadow of rivalry in 
another there. Perhaps the high-bred, passion-pale 
beauty was struck for a moment with some yet more 
annoying diffidence when she remarked the exaltation 
produced by excitement in what she would otherwise 
have despised as plebeian and vulgar loveliness, in the 
glow and flush of the Birmingham girl's appearance. 
But Sir Thomas Holte's arrival, who now came up on 
foot in a state of high exasperatioQ, furiously rating 



LADY AND MISS HOLTE. 185 

poor Eobin Falconer at every step for allowing the 
evasion of his captive, was decisive on the whole 
question. 

In vain did Dorothy renew her entreaties, and declare 
the ruin that awaited her for the mere performance of 
a kind action, in case she was detained, and her absence 
discovered in the town. 

In vain did even the meek and melancholy looking 
chaplain, who continued to support Lady Holte's trem- 
bling frame, entreat Sir Thomas to more mildness and 
forbearance. The old man was inexorable. ' I will take 
charge of her myself henceforth,' he said, ' and lock 
her for safety as nigh the sky as we can get in this 
house . in the Dome-Chamber up there, yonder ! Have 
thou no fear, Eichard, but go at once on thy honey-talk 
in Birmingham, while I send the fleetest horse in my 
stable on a bloody spur to Prince Eupert, in the west, 
for aid. Come with me, girl ! or must I have some 
lackey's fingers clawing about you to enforce my 
will?' 

^ Gro with my father quietly, maiden, since it must 
be ; my brother's life were else in grievous peril,' said 
Arabella, whitening perhaps at some secret recollec- 
tion of her own. 

' My son, my only son ! Sir Thomas, save my 
Edward, cost what it will ! ' ejaculated Lady Holte. 

' I am my father's only child, madam ; but if you really 
think that young Master Holte's life can by my captivity 
be assured from some certain danger . I mean, sir, since 
I cannot resist, I yield myself implicitly your captive,' 
said Dorothy, upon these words. 

' It is well, girl ; you shall not fare the worse for it; 
and I will myself b*e your interceder with Master 



186 

Firebrace, at a fitting time. Wliat ! the old man and I 
have always been good friends before that foolish feud 
began. Come on ; perhaps your's may but prove some 
few short hours' detention, for I will return you with 
every respect in exchange for my son, the moment 
Richard brings me word he has negotiated the bargain.' 
The baronet then, with unwonted courtesy to an in- 
ferior, as doubtless he deemed Dorothy, offered her his 
arm, which she was forced to accept, and to keep pace 
with his sturdy tramp, that made the watch-dogs 
tremble and creep into their kennels as he passed, until 
they entered Aston Hall. 



18; 



CHAPTEE XX. 

THE DOME-CHAMBER. 

Sir Thomas and his grieving captive were now literally 
in the Grreat Hall of the mansion . a remarkably hand- 
some and stately apartment, brilliantly lighted, orna- 
mented with a ceiling in geometrical compartments, 
and an extraordinarily fine cornice, with mouldings of 
various curious and even fabulous animals, such as the 
elephant, unicorn, lion, griffin, stag, &c. The wainscot 
was at this period of finely polished oak, and ornamented 
over the panellings with numerous antlered heads of 
deer, preserved as trophies for their surprising size and 
extension in the branching. Beneath these were sus- 
pended several suits of richly wrought, but ancient 
armour; and over the immense fireplace, which was 
filled with holly, still ruby-specked with the previous 
winter's berries, was arranged a great circular ornament 
of pikes, around an heraldic shield, blazing with all the 
quarterings of the Holte family. 

Sir Thomas glanced towards this decoration at once, 
and even drew Dorothy herself towards it. 'We have 
arms now had we men to wield them,' he said, 'and 
whatever Dick says, I will summon my tenants, and the 
knave-yeoman who holds back need never show on 
again at a Manor Court of mine I ' The young girl 



188 THE armourer's daughter. 

herself, meanwhile, half unconsciously perused some lines 
conspicuously flourished and scrolled over the chimney- 
piece, intended, doubtless, for the edification of the 
menials whose place it was to dance attendance in this 
chamber. 

If service be thy means to thrive, 

Thou must therein remain 
Both silent, faithful, just, and true, 

Content to take some pain. 

If love of virtue may allure, 

Or hope of worldly gain, 
If fear of Grod may thee procure, 

To serve do not disdain. 

Sir Thomas seemed then struck by some other 
thought, and turned proudly and eagerly to ascertain 
what effect all this state and grandeur produced upon 
the daughter of the master armourer of Birmingham. 
Grreatly to the increase of his displeasure, however, he 
discerned that she was hardly taking any notice of w^hat 
she saw. He could not himself but remark, though, 
how w^an and colourless she had become on the relapse 
from her previous excitement, and he was, perhaps, a 
little touched at it. ' Cheer up, maiden,' he said ; * your 
detention, I trust, will not be for long ; and meanwhile, 
it is not my purpose to put you, at all events, on pri- 
soner's diet. I mean but to lodge you for safe custody 
in a high chamber above here, whence it will be impos- 
sible for you to evade ; but come first to Adam Black- 
jack's offices, where methinks I shall have interest to 
procure you a crust and a sop to stay hunger, which is 
one of the worst calamities to a young stomach.' 

Dorothy in vain protested she needed no refreshment 
. could partake of none. Despotic and obstinate in all 
his opinions and resolutions, the baronet inexorably led 



THE DOME-CHAMBEE. 189 

the way to a door in a corner of the hall, admitting into 
a long and well-lighted corridor, speedily terminating 
in a flight of broad low steps. These descended rapidly 
into a high vaulted chamber, paved with red tiles, and 
set round with dressers bright with a prodigious array of 
polished pewter plates, with two long oak tables furnished 
with benches, evidently for the use of the Aston domestics 
at meals. Passing through this, a handsome brick arch- 
way admitted into, a most extensive kitchen, fitted up 
with all the machinery for cooking on a grand scale, 
coppers, chopping-blocks, baking-kilns and ovens, and, 
above all, a fireplace of so extensive a range that it 
occupied one entire end of the chamber, and, indeed, 
rather resembled a black cavern separated from it by 
rows of iron bars. 

At present only a small portion of this great culinary 
facility was in actual use. This was separated off by an 
iron plate, \vith sufficient fuel to heat an oven, which, to 
judge from a savoury scent diffused all over the kitchen, 
contained some relishing viand in process of baking. 

Before the fire there sat a man whose appearance 
rather struck Dorothy Firebrace with a vaguely and yet 
strongly impressed feeling of mistrust and apprehension. 
He had a long, high, narrow head, set with closely 
cropped, nearly bolt upright, bristly black hair. His 
countenance was marked with an expression of profound 
gloom, and was by no means of a prepossessing cha- 
racter in other respects. But it was chiefly in the eyes, 
which had a peculiarly oblique and sinister glare in 
them when raised, that the unpleasant effect was to be 
remarked. 

When the master of Aston Hall and his captive 
entered the apartment, this person was seated, appa- 



190 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

rently lost in a sombre reverie, staring fixedly into the 
steady glow of the baking fire before him, and with his 
arms crossed moodily on his breast. Beside him there 
was a small, round, perfectly white deal table, on which 
was a squat, black, silver-hinged book, much dog-leaved 
and time-stained, he had seemingly been engaged in 
perusing. His garb was the usual one of a cook in a 
great family . of snow-white flannel, with a chamois- 
leather apron, a girdle hung with a knife and steel, like 
a modern butcher's, and a scarlet cap, and stockings up 
to his wide, baggy knee-breeches. He was not by any 
means a young man . probably about the age of his 
master ; but Sir Thomas's finer dark locks were threaded 
with a silvering of gray, while Adam Blackjack's beard 
and hair boasted all their primitive coarse dye. 

Strange to say, the cook continued so lost in contem- 
plation, that even the unusual apparition of his lord, 
and so accompanied, seemed not to excite his attention. 
To be sure, the invaders approached from behind, and 
the smooth-tiled floor gave little echo to footsteps. Nor 
was a personage to whom so much deference was due 
likely in the place at such an hour, if at all. Never- 
theless, Sir Thomas both felt annoyed and exhibited 
himself so, to find his presence produce so slight an 
effect. ' The fellow hath grown into a trick of late to 
fall asleep thus awake,' he muttered. ' He had best not 
neglect the duties of his service, albeit, or all his anti- 
quity in my house shall not hinder me from snatching 
his ladle-spoon from his hand ! What reads he here 
that hath such an efficacy for slumber ? ' 

So saying, he raised the squat black book and ex- 
amined it. ' The Bible ! ' he then said, with a slightly 
surprised and scornful accent. ^ What doth a master- 



THE DOME-CHAMBEE. 191 

cook setting his brains a-simmer with divinity matters ? 
'S'life, I trust the knave is not bitten with the madness 
of the times, and turning text-monger at Aston Hall ! 
" Many are called, but few are chosen," quotha ! Is he 
caught by his long ears in the thorny maze of Jack 
Calvin's doctrines of reprobation and grace, which, as I 
hear, are all the prate of late times in the sectarian 
pulpits? If so, I would hope Master Blackjack's name 
was writ beyond rubbing out originally in the book of 
life ; for, to my knowledge, he hath made many a back- 
slide and stumbling on his way to Paradise. Yet is he 
a namesake of the first lord thereof. Wake, Adam, man, 
wake 1 . what doltish owl-staring is this ? ' 

The cook started awake at these words, if he might 
be considered asleep, particularly as they were seconded 
by a vigorous slap on the shoulder. But his first utter- 
ance, as he glared round, betokened some continued 
disorder of the perceptive faculties. * What, Sir Thomas, 
my master, and Mistress Maud come back again ! ' 

' Idiot ! what babble you ? Are a score and ten years 
so easily jumped out of mind?' said Sir Thomas, 
angrily. 

^ I was thinking, sir . thinking of the old time over 
again ; and the devil with his forked tail was a-whis- 
pering in my ear that . crave pardon, worshipful sir ; 
but having nothing else to do but heed the bubbling of 
the game-pastry in the oven for your honourable 
supper ' 

' It matters not ; only keep awake now while you are 
so. Is my meat nigh in readiness ? ' Sir Thomas said, 
crossly interrupting the moody meditationist's exposi- 
tion. Adam Blackjack had by this time completely 
recovered his faculties, and flung open the oven door, 



192 THE armourer's daughter. 

revealing a noble standing pie in full steam and brown- 
ing in its recesses. ' It lacks scarcely another bubble/ 
he responded. 

' Then serve it at once to this young girl, with some 
observance of white diaper and the like ; and let one of 
the sewers produce us both a foaming tankard of the best 
October. I will be accompanier to her in that,' said 
Sir Thomas, while the cook surveyed the armourer's 
daughter with marked wonderment and curiosity in 
the erection of his black straight eyebrows. * So soon, 
so soon I ' Dorothy then heard him mutter to himself, 
though Sir Thomas did not. ' Am I called upon now, 
and thus, to take up my testimony in Israel, and go 
forth of the house of Ahab, and prophesy with the pure 
ones of Birmingham, even as Balaam's ass had its 
mouth opened with the spirit of wisdom and knowledge ? 
Of a verity, if the old man takes up again with the 
sins of his youth, and would plunge me deeper yet with 
him in the furnace of damnation, whereto of a former 
time he opened me the door.' He muttered these latter 
words in a fierce though indistinct undertone ; and then, 
wdth a glare of the eyes that made Dorothy start, he 
enquired of her, * Who and what art thou, woman so 
fair and young, and what do you here with my wor- 
shipful master alone . to be surfeited and feasted with 
his meats and strong drinks ? ' 

Sir Thomas burst into a huge, hoarse laugh. ' What, 
Adam, art thou, too, turned saint in thy elder time, and 
yet creditest me with so much of the remains of my 
youthful spirits and jollity ? No, man ; this is no lovely 
leman tumbled from heaven into Aston Hall to tempt 
threescore years to folly ; but a young maiden of Bir- 
mingham, who brings me such ill news thence that I 



THE DOME- CHAMBEE. 193 

am compelled, greatly against my will, to keep her in 
pawn, even for my son Edward's life ! ' 

Dorothy Firebrace had meanwhile been considering 
that she had frequently seen this moody and mad-eyed 
servitor in Birmingham, in attendance at the religious 
exercises of a certain new body of sectaries, who had 
been for some time growing there in number, and who 
were called Anabaptists. She knew little or nothing of 
their tenets, the upper classes of the town taking no 
part in them, having chiefly seceded to the Presbyterian 
and Independent forms of worship and doctrines. But 
it vaguely occurred to her that every kind of dissent 
implied some degree of friendly feeling among those 
who adopted a line of opposition to the estabhshed 
authorities, and she proceeded at once to lay her case, 
in a much clearer form than Sir Thomas Holte's state- 
ment, before the master-cook . greatly, as it seemed, to 
the discontent and anger of the former, whose pride, 
reasonably enough, revolted at the appeal from himself 
to his menial ; more especially as the latter, apparently 
regardless of his master's visible indignation, continued 
to lend a dark and frowning attention to all she said. 
The choleric baronet speedily lost patience, and, angril}^ 
seizing Dorothy by her arm, he exclaimed, ' Jade ! would 
you set my very menial up in revolt against me ? Come 
where I may see thee and thy witching tongue safely 
caged in stone walls ; ' and he literally drew her after 
him by force up another flight of steps to the one they 
had descended by, and that emerged by a door con- 
trived to communicate with the grand feasting-chambers 
of the house, by way of the principal staircase. 

This, not yet disfigured by the atrocious coating of 
coloured pigments which the tastelessness of a subse- 

YOL. I. 



194 THE armourer's daughter. 

quent century was to daub over the glorious massively- 
carved oak balustrades, was now before the unwilling 
captive and her captor. And up this the baronet 
dragged rather than led her, with real cruelty and 
violence in his irritated spirit of domination, alternately 
muttering threats of vengeance on his insolent servant, 
and ordering Doroth}'-, in startlingly fierce and Blue- 
beard-like accents, to follow on. ^ What is it Eichard 
means by forcing me still to entertain these mutinous 
slaves about me ? ' he said also, repeatedly. * Though 
this be a good man of his craft, but for his entreaty I 
had dismissed the rascal the moment I heard he had 
taken to frequenting the Birmingham conventicles ! He 
a spy, indeed, to tell us the counsels of the enemy ! He 
is one to carry ours to them.' 

Luckily the stairs, though arranged in numerous 
flights, were by a low step, and frequently reached good 
square landing-places in the ascent, so that the ar- 
mourer's daughter suffered less than might have been 
expected from her rude handling. 

In this manner they reached the top landing-place 
of the whole structure, where there was a strong high 
wicket gate, securely padlocked. Sir Thomas had the 
key and unlocked it, ordering Dorothy Firebrace, more 
like a lamb driven into the slaughter-house than any- 
thing else, within. She then perceived another short, 
narrow, and very steep flight of steps to the right, be- 
fore her, terminating apparently in darkness, like the 
ladder of a belfry. But up this also Sir Thomas Holte 
sternly commanded her to follow. Dorothy felt it was 
in vain to exhibit the extreme reluctance and miso-ivins: 
she felt; and was rejoiced to find that they stopped 
short of a T^eciiliarlv black and dunsreon-like lookino^ 



THE DOME-CHAMBEK. 195 

chamber on the very top of the stairs. And it certainly 
was a much preferable one into which Sir Thomas 
stepped, and, in somewhat less savage accents, invited 
Dorothy Firebrace to follow. 

This chamber was of a singular round configuration, 
dome-shaped in the roof, and of a wider diameter than 
would have been concluded by surveying its exterior 
from the ground-plan of Aston Hall. . For it was in 
reality the hollow of the minaret-shaped principal tower 
of the mansion. It was quite unfurnished, with the ex- 
ception of some old broken fragments, seemingl}^ 
deposited there as rubbish out of the way ; and there 
was nothing but an interweaving of massive timber 
supports between the eye and the lead of the roofing. 
And like the reverse of tapestry, though very fine with 
gilding and arabesque tracings . the skilful work of 
Tubal Bromycham . on the exterior, this looked very 
black and dull within. There was no deficiency of 
light, however, from several good-sized bull's-eye win- 
dows set at the points of the compass in the dome, and 
Dorothy had every opportunity to appreciate the cruel 
security of the imprisonment to which she was to be 
consigned. 

'And now,' said Sir Thomas, with a derisive and 
angry smile, ' if you can fly like a bird from above the 
tallest chimneys of Aston Hall, or force a lock whose 
key is of the purest steel, and of a pound weight, you 
are free to leave this place, and return to your father, 
the armourer, ere he sends me back my son, Edward 
Holte, whom he hath so unlawfully, and* unjustly, and 
masterfully made his prisoner. What is sauce for the 
fjoose is sauce for the gander! ' And with this homely 

o 2 



196 

expression of his sentiments the haughty jailer left the 
Dome-Chamber, locking it after him with three suc- 
cessive movements of a prodigious iron bolt, and leaving 
Dorothy Firebrace to meditations, the extremely un- 
pleasant nature of which it is unnecessary to declare. 



197 



CHAPTER XXI. 

BIRMINGHAM IN ARMS. 

Richard G-rimsorwe took good care not to start on his 
mission to Birmingham until he was satisfied that the 
hostage of his personal safety was securely lodged . not 
to mention the strong motives he had to disrelish the 
prospect of Dorothy's being at liberty and complaining 
of his misconduct towards her in a town where, she had 
so many and so powerful friends. 

With respect to his brother's relations with the ar- 
mourer's daughter, Grrimsorwe knew not what con- 
clusion to form, but the suspicions immediately raised 
in his own debauched and dishonest fancy, that they 
must be of a close and dishonourable nature, added to 
the other numerous motives of his animosity against 
the better-born though younger heir of Aston, a feeling 
of intensely jealous envy and rivalry at this new instance 
of his more fortunate hap. And as he had also little 
doubt that Dorothy had overheard his plottings with 
his grandmother, incentives in the conviction that his 
unbrotherly projects were likely to be revealed, were 
joined to stimulate him on his present course of action. 

Little did Sir Thomas Holte dream of his chosen 
agent's real intents and purposes, when he proceeded to 
give him his instructions. 



198 THE armourer's daughter. 

These were to proceed to Birmingham, seek an inter- 
view with the master armourer and his allies and abet- 
tors, and, in the King's name, make a demand for his 
brother's immediate and safe return to Aston, as the 
only condition of the restoration of Dorothy Firebrace 
to her friends, and avoiding a speedy application of 
armed force to the rescue of a prisoner so unlawfully 
seized upon and detained. But, meanwhile, the baronet 
declared that he would send an express, at the utmost 
speed of horse and man, into Worcestershire, to Prince 
Eupert, to ask for military aid against the sudden out- 
break of sedition in Birmingham. Eobin Falconer 
knew every inch of the country, he remarked, and was 
so familiar with all its details, that he would easily be 
enabled to give the go-by to any flying parties of the 
enemy's cavalry, which might have been thrown out 
by the Parliament army in the west, under Sir William 
Waller. 

Grimsorwe ascertained thus, to his great comfort, that 
Dorothy had not been enabled to secure any more trust- 
ful hearing to what she could reveal of his designs 
against his brother than when he was at hand to con- 
tradict her. But in truth he had established a very 
powerful influence over his father's mind ; no less by 
Sir Thomas's conviction of his possessing the qualities 
of coolness and persuasion he was himself most deficient 
in, than by mean adulation and subserviencj^ to the 
impetuous old man's humours and violence. 

He had little occasion, certainl}', to urge upon the 
baronet the extreme necessity of keeping the armourer's 
daughter in custody until both his sons were restored 
to him in safety. But he obtained a promise from his 
father, on learning where she was consigned, that he 



BIIiMDJaHAM IN ARMS. 199 

would not part with the key of the Dome-Chamber on 
any pretence, or for a single instant, to any person, un- 
less under his own close supervision. This important 
stipulation made, Eichard Grimsorwe got into one of 
his father's coaches, which he preferred to horseback, 
as a more peaceful and yet imposing announcement of 
his authorised position and business, and set off for 
Birmingham. 

The events that had taken place had consumed the 
time until it was close upon darkness and the end of 
the long August day, that had commenced so ominously 
in Birmino'ham with the arrival of the fanatic fuo^itive 
from Nottingham, when Grrimsorwe reached the town. 

No scientific magician had as yet dreamed of gas, and 
the frugal manners of the time, and early habits of our 
ancestors, made even a few oil-lamps be looked upon as 
a wasteful superfluity in all but capital cities. Usually, 
therefore, Birmingham shared the light and darkness of 
the heavens above it only. Neither was any regular 
system of police introduced even in capital towns, and 
not a solitary watchman guarded the peace and security 
of Birmingham by nights. So that Grrimsorwe perceived 
at once that a remarkable change had come over the 
spirit of the town when at the entrance from Aston, 
where the highway traversed a field called ' The Butts,' 
from its being the place where the townsmen of old 
kept np their cross-bovj lyractice, he found a great fire 
kindled in the very midst of the road, and heard his 
advance challenged in loud and sentinel-like accents by 
two men, furnished with musketoons (short hand-guns 
of a wide bore) to enforce theu- orders to halt. 

' Under protest, as not knowing what right these, or 
any men, can have to hinder a subject of the King, on 



200 

the King's highway, on his lawful business . draw rein, 
coachman ! ' said the Aston ambassador, looking from 
his roomy and grandly-bedizened vehicle with much 
satisfaction at the signs of resistance evident in the 
determined aspect of the two stout fellows who now 
advanced to parley. 

'The King hath no longer a highway into Birmingham, 
while he continues in breach of the laws and customs of 
the realm of England. We of the town have declared 
for the Parliament : leastwise, our masters and seniors 
have, whom we are bound in all true service to obey,' 
one of the men . seemingly, by his appearance, a smith 
. made haste to reply. 

' Be it so ; but they are 3^our own necks you are 
putting into nooses, my good fellows. And what is all 
this pother about the young gentleman, worshipful Sir 
Thomas Holte's worshipful heir, and my honourable 
brother, whom you have made your prisoner, we learn 
at Aston ? ' said Eichard Grrimsorwe. 

' You call your mother an ill name every time you so 
claim Master Holte, master lawyer,' replied the other 
sentinel, jeeringly, who doubtless recognised the speaker, 
and had no particular respect for him. ^ But it is as 
true as if a lawyer had not said it, that the town abides 
by what the master armourer has done, and is sworn in 
on the great Gruildhall Bible to stand by him unto every 
consequence.' 

Richard Grrimsorwe's dark visage flushed at the gibe, 
and the rancour in his heart deepened against its 
original innocent object. To the present interlocutor 
he answered in smooth and unstirred accents : ^ I wish, 
then, to speak with whoever among you usurps the 
principal sway and authority in Birmingham, for I have 



BIRMINGHAM IN ARMS. 201 

a most important message from Sir Thomas Holte to 
deliver, on his son's behalf, to the good and, methinks, 
needlessly angered town.' 

* Who should that be, William Moorcroft ? ' said the 
first challenger to his comrade. ' Our master, Armourer 
Firebrace, is appointed commissioner for the Parliament 
in Birmingham : leastwise, as soon as the committee in 
London shall know that he is williag to take on him 
the business and office. But Tubal Bromycham is 
named captain of the town, for all warlike concernment. 
And as for the prophet who hath escaped from the 
tyrant's dungeons at Nottingham, and brings us such 
comfortable tidings and assurances, he himself doth but 
announce him as a spiritual light and pillar of fire 
though the wilderness before us.' 

' With whether of these three would you have speech, 
master lawyer? Methinks the matter of your business 
will inform yourself the best,' replied William JMoor- 
croft. 

' But is there not one of greater power, for the nonce, 
among you than all these, seeing he is reported the 
prime mover and stirrer of the whole ? ' said Grrimsorwe, 
rather hesitatingly. 

^ Captain Cromwell, he means . the stranger officer of 
the Parliament . who skittered so to the people with 
his tongue from the Guildhall window, but hath ordered 
all things so soldierly among us against an onset from 
the old Nebuchadnezzar at Aston,' observed the former 
speaker. 

^ Yes, Captain Cromtvell . that is the man's name I 
am more specially directed to reason withal, as repre- 
senting London Parliament in this sorrowful outbreak 
and sedition, which I fear will bring upon the town a 



202 THE armourer's daughter, 

sudden and sharp reprisal from the cavaliers,' said Grim- 
sorwe, affecting to pronounce the name as if it was 
strange in his ears. ' Lead me to him.' 

' But was it so put to us as our duty ? Were we not 
to take the newsmen and prisoners to Tubal, as relating 
to the proper watch and ward of the town against its 
enemies?' deliberated William Moorcroft to his com- 
panion. 

' I am a civilian, come on civil business and ambas- 
sage merely ; and I do not desire to speak with Captain 
Cromwell in any military sense, but as the prime agent 
and answerer for the Parliament in these parts,' said 
Grrimsorwe. 

* Come then, but out of your coach ; there be chains 
and barriers erected farther on,' said Moorcroft, after a 
little aside with his mate. 'We shall find Master 
Cromwell at the Black Boy, for after he had appointed 
us all our posts, and left Tubal in command at the Old 
Cross, I did hear him sweetly entreat the gifted man, 
Wrath-of-Grod Whitehall, to accompany him thither 
home, and exchange some comforting soul-experiences, 
as well as discourse more fully of the strange miracle 
of the blowing down of the King's flag on Nottingham 
Castle towers, which, with his own prison-wearied eyes, 
the good man saw.' 

While this statement was being made, Eichard Grrim- 
sorwe had alighted from his equipage. But, with dis- 
creet attention to his own personal safety, before placing 
himself in the hands of the irritated townsmen of 
Birmingham, he remarked, 'I nothing doubt your 
safeguard, gentlemen ; but my father, Sir Thomas, has 
for hostage of it, in his hands at Aston, the fair soft 



BIRMINGHAM IN ARMS. 203 

person of your master armourer's daughter. Mistress 
Dorothy Firebrace.' 

* Good Grod ! what say you ? There have been seek- 
ers all over the town for her these two hours I Did you 
of Aston kidnap the maiden at the Cherry Orchard? 
for there old Mahala reported she had gone, and none 
could give further tidings of her after,' exclaimed Yni- 
liam Moorcroft. 

' Nay ; she placed herself willingl}^ in our hands,' 
returned the malicious messenger, ' for the sake of my 
brother's handsome face, and some pretty promises. I 
do not doubt he has whistled the fair wench from the 
hedge.' 

'This will be strange news for my master, the ar- 
mourer. I wall take in the messenger, and then hurry 
to him with it,' said William Moorcroft, evidently 
greatly dismayed and astonished with the intelligence. 
' He can scarce be in worse fears for her now ; but there 
will be no thanks for the messenger, I am thinkiDg. 
Where is the tinker boy, that promised to keep up the 
fire for us ? I will send him on that business.' 

The prudent sentinel called ' Jack I Jack Bunyan!' 
once or twice before he could awaken the lad in question, 
who was stretched on the grass, with his begrimmed 
visage turned up to the warm glow of the watchfire. 
^Mio knows ? perchance even then collecting experiences 
for the inspired vision of his future times, and feeling 
the remote glory of the Celestial City in the coarse but 
comforting glare of a coal fire, in an open field, under 
the canopy of heaven ! Moorcroft gave him his un- 
toward errand, and then announced to G-rimsorwe that 
he was ready to attend him to Captain Cromwell's 
quarters. 



204 THE armourer's daughter. 

As the Black Boy and Woolpack stood in those days 
exactly where it stands now, there is no occasion to say 
that these were behind the Church of St. Martin, in the 
centre of the town ; chosen by Cromwell chiefly on that 
account : for the landlady, who was a widow, a hand- 
some and jolly woman, and a great gossip of Dame 
Cooper, the loyal High Bailiff's wife . was not at all 
Avell affected to the Parliament captain's party. On 
the contrary, she took every opportunity she could to 
rail at and deride it, and had even exhibited herself so 
little complaisant and obliging to her guest that, but for 
the excellent reasons he had of his own to prefer her 
house, it is most probable Captain Cromwell would soon 
have ceased to bed and board at the Black Boy and 
Woolpack. 

In truth, G-rimsorwe, on his arrival under guard, 
found Mistress Mellons in close and apparently amazed 
and panic-stricken confabulation, before the doors, with 
the bailiff's wife, who had doubtless made her way to 
her gossip's from the Moat House, to ascertain the 
meaning and progress of the alarming events of which 
the town of Birmingham was now the scene. 

Simon Fairservice, the Black Boy ostler, was rubbing 
down a bespattered and exhausted steed, at a little dis- 
tance, which the Aston envo}^ instantly recognised as his 
brother's favourite and pampered riding-horse, which he 
had chosen from all his father's valuable stud. It was 
plain the poor beast had fallen now upon a harder service. 

'Heard mortal now ever the like?' Dame Cooper was 
saying, as Grimsorwe approached, in a higli tone, as if 
indignation had got the better of prudence on the 
sudden. ' I did not marvel so much to see my fat fool 
come pelting home to the Moat House, like an ox with 



BIRMINGHAM IN AEMS. 205 

a gadfly to water, on the first stir in the Market Place 
this morning. But I thought at first it was only 
some discontent on the people's part as to the lord's 
butter-dues ; which, indeed, are an old-standing grudge. 
Whereas now it is, say you, that the town is in arms 
against his most sacred Majesty's own dues and au- 
thority! But there w'ill be a reckoning for all, and 
that before we see the snow again, or I am as daft a 
babbler as mine old knave himself. But it troubles me, 
gossip, it troubles me mightily, 3'-ou should give such a 
villain and traitor harbourage in your house. It may 
twist yourself, my woman, in some turn of his rope ! ' 

^ What can I do, my good lady ? As I hope to be 
saved, I have done what in me lay to make the Black 
Boy no home for a Parliament rogue, save and except 
refusing the necessary offices of m}^ trade, which the 
town would not sufier,' replied the landlady, sorrowfully. 
' Deem you it is much of a pleasure to me to see my 
best and j oiliest customers discountenanced by a psalm- 
singing, canting Puritan of a knave like this pretended 
captain, forsooth, in his greasy old leather doublet and 
hose ? His nose itself is a lying hypocrite, or else he 
got it so well steeped of yore that it hath not yet had 
time to sober itself, for it shows at whiles as coppery as 
a new brass pan ; yet the man scarce stomachs a gallon 
of ale a week in my house. Even now, he is upstairs 
in his chamber, snivelling and weeping and praising 
God, in a snuffle and whine, like a pair of wheezy bel- 
lows, for his mercies, in bringing him to the acquaint- 
ance and companionship of a stray lunatic preacher, 
Tom-a-Bedlam, who hath escaped his chains and strayed 
hither, I know not how. Yea, but awhile ago, as I 
passed where they are liquouring each other with their 



206 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

overflowing eyes . but never a drop of anything cherish- 
ing to man, for the good of the house . I did overhear 
Master Cromwell entreat the precious soul, forsooth, to 
be even as a new Samuel to the Saul he hath set up 
among us ; who, if he is not by a head taller than 
all other Birmingham men (its his name, too), is as 
giant as Goliath in his strength and goodwill to the 
cause.' 

* What is that, I wonder ? ' 

' Grod 'a mercy ! what times we are come upon ! 'My 
poor husband will never have the heart to provide for 
all the hanging that will soon be to do in the town, 
when his Majesty marches this way,' lamented the 
bailiff's loyal spouse. 

'He! . he is good for nothing but love-days, and 
merry-makings, and fair-junketings ! Not but what 
that is much. Dame Cooper, and a real favour of Provi- 
dence to us poor tapster folk, to have set at the head of 
a well-guided town. Howbeit, God fits the back to the 
burden, else a poor widow like me had long since given 
way under mine, and rather than that some of these 

hypocritical rogues should miss their dues But 

whom have we here? A fair even to you, sirs; what 
do you lack ? ' 

The buxom mistress of the Black Boy seemed n^w, 
for the first time, to notice the arrival of Grimsorwe 
and his guard, who had been civilly waiting for some 
cessation in the gossip ; but, finding none likety to take 
place in any given time, now pushed somewhat rudel}- 
past. 

' We lack nothing but a sight of the worthy captain 
you have lodged above, mistress,' replied William 
Moorcroft; 'unless you will measure me a draught of 



BIRMINGHAM IN ARMS. 207 

ale, with a stroke of chalk for a tape-wand, for it is not 
wages night, you wot.' 

'Let him drink what he will at my expense,' said 
Grrimsorwe, graciously, and thinking it not unlikely 
that a talk over a flagon would spread his news and 
calumnies. 

The smith -sentinel . whose trade was as thirsty in 
the seventeenth as in the nineteenth century . seeDied 
well enough pleased with, the announcement, and ushered 
up the envoy with more marks of deference than he had 
hitherto deemed necessary or advisable. ' It is well seen 
in you, sir, that you have gentleman's blood in your 
veins, however you came by it,' he courteously remarked 
as they ascended a very narrow dark staircase. 'But 
what manner of caterwauling is this ? Nay, by the rood, 
'tis Master Cromwell and the persecuted man from 
Nottingham joining together in a thanksgiving song !' 



208 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

CROMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 

It was even so. Two voices, one of them deep and 
strong, but hoarse and broken as the sound of the sea 
on a rocky shore ; the other a wild, shrill piping, like 
the upper notes of an organ played out of tune, united 
in anything but harmony, came to Grrimsorwe's hearing 
as his conductor spoke. But in spite of the strange 
discordancy in pitch, it was plain the * thanksgiving 
song ' must have been one familiarly known among the 
enthusiastic religionists of the age, since they kept the 
words very well together in point of time, and when the 
door was opened appeared at their work without a 
book. 

God is our strengtli : in Him we trust ; 
Not in the arm of flesh and dust ; 
Not in the steel of shield or spear, 
Horseman or chariot's hot career. 
He only hath the power to save 

The creature of His breath, 
Who rose from out the wormy grave, 
And drew the sting of death ! 

Wash mo, oh, wash me with the Lamb ! . 
Though I be earth's most rancid ram, 
Jordan's sweet stream can make me nice 
For holy Abel's sacrifice. 

With liorbs of grace then deck my horns, 

And load me to the altar's foot, 
Where thankfully, amid men's scorns, 
My blood shall change to snow my soot ! 



CROMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 209 

So absorbed were the two praise-givers in their devout 
business, that, although both their countenances were 
towards the door, neither appeared to take any notice of 
the stranger's arrival. Grrimsorwe, whose cold and scep- 
tical nature made the exhibition a subject of secret con- 
tempt and mockery to him, nevertheless immediatelvtook 
off his hat, as if he had felt himself in some hallowed 
presence, and reverently waited the conclusion, while 
he furtively scrutinised the tear-blotched and yet enthu- 
siasm-lighted visages before him. Xor, keen, penetrat- 
ing, and incredulous as was his own intellect, could he 
determine to his satisfaction . any more than the acutest 
of subsequent historians . whether the wonderful man 
on whom he gazed, somewhat guessing of his future 
eminence, was in reality the impassioned fanatic he 
appeared, or one of those greatest of actors who make 
the world their stage, and the times in which they live 
their own, by their power to receive and give vitality to 
the master impulses and emotions of their epoch a. 

Even when the jarring harmony came to its ludi- 
crously protracted nasal close, on the word ^ soot,' 
neither of the singers seemed inclined to bestow any 
attention out of their own immediate range of ideas. 

' Of a verity and indeed^ good, sweet soul, Master 
Whitehall, these are times when all poor, worthy, 
harmless Christian people may and do, in a sort, as I 
say, consider themselves bound to the altar, and ready 
to have their throats cut, if it so pleases the Lord, unto 
His glory,' Captain Cromwell said, in a most sorrowful, 
whining tone, as if he were actually bleating in some 
such dilemma. ' I do hear from out the county of 
Stafford, how the silly, poor, well-affected, godly people 
there in the town, dare not so much as go to church on 

VOL. I. P 



210 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

the Sabbath-day but armed, for fear of the Popishers, 
and yet have had the good resolution and owning of the 
cause as to cast out the prelatical wolves, sent among 
them as shepherds by little Laud, even from his stopped 
earth-hole in^'the^^Tower of London . little in size, but 
mickle in mischief ! And for my own part, though I 
am of small account in so great a matter . less than a 
sand of thejshore, to keep out the whelm of waters . 
yet truly I may say I am as ready as another, and ^Yill 
show myself so, to seal my testimony with my blood. 
And truly, from what you say, there can be no manner 
of doubt the Philistines do now gather their arms to- 
gether for warfare to fight Israel ! And of a further 
surety I must say|I never heard anything more comfort- 
ing than your account of the blowing down of the 
standard . though there be some, I nothing doubt, who 
boast themselves of a more worldly wisdom and policy, 
would tell you its erection is the greater sign and por- 
tent to the world. And so it is, in a sort ; for now will 
be known the true temper of men's minds, and who are 
with us and who are against us. And in good faith, 
though I did purpose it all along, considering the infi- 
nite advantages of this place and town to all soldiering 
purposes, I am better pleased now than ever that Bir- 
mingham hath owned herself so heartily and honestly 
at one with us of the Parliament. And truly much is 
owing to you,''sweet-savoured Master Whitehall, for so 
towardly^a disposing of men's minds. And I do trust 
in you, I may say, speaking not so much of my own par- 
ticular as in the general, as representing in some sort 
the Committee of Parliament in these parts . to keep the 
plough in^i,the furrow, and the good town fixed and firm 
in the way it should go. And, truly, I must say the 



CROMWELL AND GEIMSORWE. 211 

work has gone on at a pace, and I do myself marvel 
imto myself how some weak instruments, otherwise in 
themselves incapable, are raised up to mighty works, 
even as with as slender a means as a little trowel the 
mason buildeth up great temples unto the Lord, and 
palaces unto kings. Though this be rather, 'tis to 
be thought, to a contrariw^ise effect in some matters ; 
for who knoweth, indeed, whether it be not as you de- 
clare, and that the reign c>f the saints of Grod is at 
hand?' 

* It is, it is ! Have I not declared unto you how after 
my conflict with the great Eed Dragon in my dungeon, 
just as I was sinking and choking in the blood thereof 
that mounted even unto the black bare granite ceiling, 
a voice as of one speaking through a silver trumpet pro- 
claimed to all the nations of the earth that the fulness 
of time was at hand, and that I must needs be saved from 
the destruction and captivity around me, that I might 
go forth and build up the throne for Him v/ho is to be 
seated upon it? And immediately the gore of blood 
o'erflooding me and choking up to my mouth and 
ears, fell like water from a bather's limbs from encom- 
passing me, and I found myself dry and clean and 
unscathed amidst my dungeon straw ! ' 

Such was the" fugitive of Nottingham's rejoinder to 
his military friend's rather long-winded address. 

Cromwell evidently mused for a few moments on the 
query ; during which pause his eye wandered, but with 
perfect absence of observation, on Kichard Grimsorwe's 
motionless form. 

' And you would begin the preparation in this ding- 
dong town of smiths and anvils, mean you ? ' the cap- 
tain continued thoughtfully. * Well, for my part, I see 

p 2 



212 THE armoueer's daughter. 

not that there is much to hinder you at this present ; 
and the more thoroughly the good town commits itself 
to the great cause, the less should any that favour it be 
disposed to thwart you in any suchlike tendency. As for 
the High Bailiff . or rather his wife . and their some 
half-score favourers in the town, I thiuk there is no 
great fear of them, though they do threat a meeting in 
the church, since even a window of the Gruildhall, which 
is well-furnished of such, is denied them. And for the 
mad, choleric knight at Aston . Tubal Bromycham, 
whom I have named, in the Committee's name, Captain- 
at-Arms among you . and ten of his sturdy anvilmen 
with their hammers, and the advantage of the closed 
causeways, can keep out all danger in that direction. 
And Tubal hath great wrongs to avenge, and such hopes 
to entice, that he is assured to us body and soul. The 
only danger is the King's approach ; but ere he is like 
to be much nigher, I do hope, by my humble represen- 
tations of the conveniences of this place for smiting the 
adversary on all hands, to move my cousin Hampden, 
and other Parliament gentlemen of more consideration 
than my poor ploughman-tongued self, to direct the 
godly army hithervvards. What I ye shall perchance 
owe to me, ye of Birmingham, the goodliest sight that 
may be . a battle of freemen for their liberty and reli- 
gion ! Howsoever the issue may be, which is also in 
God's hands, who chasteneth whom He loveth . and 
whether we have deserved as yet well of Him I know 
not, for there is much backsliding and a holding back 
of the hand from the plough visible now on all sides, 
which makes it the more necessary that some should 
step boldly forward, and urge on the team, that there 
sliould be no return until the edge of the field is reached ! 



CROMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 213 

And who can deny tliat a few hours' willing labour is 
better worth than as many days of statute contribution ? ' 

^ And are not labourers hired with you, too, sir, at all 
hours of the day ? ' Grrimsorwe now ventured to break in 
with, for he began to be tired of his part of listener to 
what sounded to him little better than the usual run of 
fanatic ravings, though perhaps a little wilder. 

^ And who art thou, friend, that ask the question ? I 
see not that you stand with a straw in your mouth to be 
hired.' Captain Cromwell replied, in a tone that 
seemed to indicate, however little he had shown signs 
that he had been considering the personal attributes ot 
the speaker before he thus obtruded on attention. 

' My name is Eichard Grrimsorwe ; and the outside of 
my business, honourable sir, with you, is to negotiate 
the release of my father's well-born son, Edward Holte. 
The kernel and inside requires a more private cracking 
and mastication,' returned Eichard, adopting, as well as 
he could, the metaphorical style in vogue among the 
Puritan party from admiration and imitation of the 
Biblical one. 

'Your name is Richard Grlmsonue? and your 
brother's Holte? I smell a fault there I' said Cromwell, 
wdth a quaint saturnine smile. ' Howbeit I have heard 
of the man at Aston, and of his lustful outrageous 
doings, which make him one of the crying sins of this 
country-side. And you wish to speak with me alone ? ' 

' On matter, sir, of concernment as high as it should 
be secret.' 

' Are you weaponed ? ' 

^I searched and took his sword from him at the 
barriers, captain, as you bade should be done with all 
incomers,' spoke up William Moorcroft. 



214 THE armourer's daughter. 

* Soldierly executed. Leave the man then with me, 
good friends ; I will hear what he hath to say.' 

'I also, for am I not also clothed with authority, 
albeit not yet even as a garment white and shining as 
the sun ? ' said Whitehall, making no gesture to imitate 
Moorcroft's ready retirement, who knew that a comfort- 
able ale-pot awaited him below. 

' In all spiritual matters, yea, brother ; and I would 
that you should note your limitations therein, or there 
will soon be discord and confusion among ye, to the 
laughter and hooting of the adversary. Go home, now, 
to the worthy elder of the town, whose skin is of as 
man}^ colours as ever Jacob's coat, but who hath given 
you a welcome to bed and board, and refresh your 
inward man, for you have need of rest and food, me- 
thinks.' And takino^ the still reluctant fuoritive of 
Nottingham by the shoulders. Captain Cromwell 
escorted him to the door with a degree of gentle vio- 
lence which was yet felt as resistless by his worn and 
attenuated frame. 

A\Tien he turned from this action, after carefully 
closing the door, Grrimsorwe was really startled by the 
sudden change in Cromwell's manner. He stood before 
him bolt upright, and with a masterful though sus- 
picious expression of countenance, and discarding 
apparently at will both the language and peculiar 
nasal whine of the Puritanism of the day, which 
has been transmitted to our own, said, with stern, 
uncompromising directness, ' So, sir I you are the bas- 
tard son of Sir Thomas Holte, of Aston Hall ; what 
want you with me ? ' 

Grrimsorwe was for the moment startled by so informal 
an address. But only for a moment. ' You guess me 



CROMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 215 

in some sort rightly, sir; but not altogether. I am the 
reputed bastard son of Sir Thomas Holte ; but were I 
not most bitterly wronged and deprived by an unjust 
ascendency, I am in truth his eldest, or rather only, 
lawfully-begotten son and heir,' he said. 

^ Why, how is that ? ' returned Cromwell, with a deep- 
furrowed frown. ^ You must not think to cozen me. I 
have shaken the very dust out of the meal of intelligence 
in these parts, and I know that Kichard Grimsorwe is 
Sir Thomas Holte's bastard elder son, a lawyer of 
Grray's Inn, London ; and that Edward Holte is his 
lawful heir, by a nobly-born lady.' 

' 'Tis so given out, I deny not,' returned Grrimsorwe, 
his lividly dark complexion deepening in hue. ' Never- 
theless, the true state of the case is this . that Sir 
Thomas Holte was secretly married to my mother, who, 
though poor and powerlessly friended, was of more 
honourable birth and descent than himself. And only 
when his passion cooled in possession, and his eye was 
caught elsewhere, bethought him to deny what was but 
witnessed by a serving man of his own, and a poor, 
since crazy, woman, m}^ grandmother, and a milk- 
livered, dependent chaplain of his house. And my 
poor mother, haviug been driven to despair and suicide 
. or else more basely cheated of her life . and mj^self 
but rescued by the merest chance from sharing her 
watery doom . thus, and thus only, it hath ensued that 
I am bastardised, and the young man in your custody 
struts the world as heir of Aston Hall ! ' 

Cromwell listened with great attention to this reve- 
lation, crimpling his brows together, and with the tips 
of his right-hand fingers drawing down his under lip. 



216 THE armourer's daughter. 

.until all the large, firm set, white teeth were visible 
from fanj][-tooth to fano-tooth. 

' Why, St. John sometimes sings to those who will 
listen some such a song as this,' he remarked. *I 
marvel whether all bastards deem themselves the lawful 
inheritors ? Howbeit. this one tells his story, lawyer- 
like, skilfully, and means surely something by it more 
than a grandame's ingleside gossip I Well, sir,' he 
concluded, with a resumption of the practical directness 
previously observed upon, ^ why do you tell me this 
tale ? In what concerns it me ? ' 

' I wish you to imderstand that you see before you a 
wronged and dispossessed man ; that you may the 
readier trust in my assurances that I desire to be of 
service to the Parliament, in the belief that only from 
its power and success can I, and such as I, look for 
redress of grievances.' 

' I do understand this much, truly, that you conceive 
your own interests to lie that way. But the proof of 
the pudding 'is in the eating, sir; I know not how this 
can induce me to serve you in the matter of this brother, 
whom you deny to be your father's heir. And I must 
fairly tell you, I have heard nothing so much to the 
advantage of the man whose name you give yourself, 
that I should trust my ears in any absolute manner to 
what you may say.' 

* I ask you only to believe me on my proofs, JNIaster 
Cromwell,' said Grimsorwe ; adding boldly, ^ But what- 
ever may have been the errors of my youth also, men 
in Lincoln's Inn still preserve some memory of the^mld 
roystering doings of a certain Oliver Cromwell, some 
time student there, and now a forward leader and 
expounder among the precisian and godly party . who 



CROMWELL AND GIUMSORWE. 217 

do purpose, I foregather, to make as great changes in 
all England as hath been wrought by Providence in 
themselves.' 

Grrimsorwe had calculated correctly. The Puritan 
leader looked neither scandalised nor annoyed at the 
sharp rejoinder. 

* You are right, young man,' he said, ' you are right. 
Id my youth I have been as little to be commended as 
any other sinner that can be named, but who hath 
persevered in his villainies and harlotries unto grey 
hairs, which, God be praised, is not my case. I have 
been a sinner . the chief of sinners I . and therefore I 
judge not, neither do I pronounce but that you also 
may now, or at some other time, prove a true convert 
from yourself. Methinks you spoke of proofs and 
you must allow it needs some of your good meaning to 
the cause, coming out of Nazareth, as you do.' 

* I do confess it ; but, first, you must pledge me your 
word and faith that never . so may Grod help you . you 
will betray my counsel and working in this matter, 
which would be to my manifest ruin and overthrow 
with my father and all his alliance,' said Eichard 
Grimsorwe. 

The earnestness of the demand evidently surprised 
Cromwell, and excited his attention. But it was with 
as evident reluctance, and on a strongly reiterated 
demand, that he complied ; murmuring to himself 
repeatedly, ' Swear not at all ; swear not at all.' Still, 
it may be imagined that it was in nowise with dis- 
appointed interest that he listened to the important 
communication with whicli Grimsorwe followed up his 
preliminary stipulations. 

He revealed to Cromwell the unguarded and almost 



218 THE armourer's daughter. 

defenceless position of the King at jSTottingliam. He 
informed him he was certainly aware that Charles's 
person was only protected in his quarters by about three 
hundred infantry, and the trained bands of the county. 
That his main force of foot, and all his artillery, re- 
mained behind in the neighbourhood of York, for want 
of the means of transport for the latter, and the former 
awaiting the protracted arrival of the purchases of arms 
and ammunition making by the Queen in Holland, 
before it could be of any service in the field ; while his 
entire cavalry . all but a few score gentlemen who 
mounted loyal guard on his person . liad been sent into 
the west, under Prince Eupert, to assist in and cover the 
great royalist rising there under the Marquis of Hert- 
ford. But the audacious inference Grimsorwe drew 
from all these circumstances, the suggestion he started, 
were in good truth addressed to a spirit whose 
executive daring and readiness of acceptance more than 
matched. He proposed to Cromwell to collect all the 
Parliament forces a,t his disposal, as Commissioner 
for the three associated counties of Cambridge, Hun- 
tingdon, and Bedfordshire ; his own troop of well-armed 
and well-mounted cavalry above all, at Birmingham ; 
and, by a sudden inroad into the King's quarters, seize 
on his Majesty's person, and conclude the war at a 
blow ! 

Cromwell's usually dull and inanimate eyes shone up 
with extraordinary lustre and vivacity as he listened. 

' In truth, in truth,' he exclaimed, * there is but one 
man in England to whom you could have wisely coun- 
selled this ; and it is he who told his recruits to stand 
on no nice ceremon}^, for that he would as soon fire his 
pistol in the King's face, in battle, as any other man's ! 



CKOMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 219 

And indeed, if things should fall out so, as you reason 
they ina}'^, you will have a good right to any man's 
birthdom . let alone an usurping brother's . for such a 
mess of indigestible porridge as you shall have mixed 
for our enemies. But how may a man believe such 
folly even of rash despisers as we have in the Cavaliei^, 
to leave the main prize of the war thus as it were under 
a swoop ? I have heard some whisperings of this 
before, 'tis true. The witty madman who was here ere- 
while, and who fights with Eed Dragons in his dungeons, 
could not multiply the armed men he espied at the 
standard-raising into anything like a host fit to guard 
a king : but I never believed it until now. Nay, do I 
believe it now ? Why should I ? ' 

^Here is evidence not to be denied, sir,' replied 
Grrimsorwe, producing a letter from his breast pocket. 
' But you must faithfully return it to me, since I have 
purloined.it from my father's secret desk, as he deems 
it. A letter from Sir Jacob Astley, Major-General of 
the King's forces, expounding to Sir Thomas Holte the 
full destitute condition of affairs at Nottingham, and 
earnestly putting it to him thereupon to equip and send 
his promised troop of horse under my brother at once 
to the town of Nottingham.' 

Cromwell eagerly took and perused the document. 
It was clear that it amply confirmed all the statements 
made. 

' I did know . I did surmise . it hath been revealed 
to me in many and divers forms,' he exclaimed, with an 
extraordinary brightness lighting up his wootedly sombre 
and staid visage, ' that I am chosen forth as a great 
instrument in the mighty and marvellous works of the 
Lord that shall be in these days. But, to imagine that 



220 THE armourer's daughter. 

it should be thrust upon me all at once, to save and 
redeem these unhappy kingdoms from a deluge of blood 
and misery ; that I should be the David in the cave of 
Saul, to cut off his garment, yet not to injure him . 
something takes my breath, I do confess, by the sudden- 
ness of it. I did not think it should have been thus, 
either ; but that, after the tyrant had dyed his purple 
so horribly in our blood that men's eyes in England 
would no more endure the hue. What am I saying ? 
I know not ! It is the Lord's will. I must seek the 
Lord in prayer ; I must ; I must. It was not given 
even unto him whose son&s most deliofhted the Lord of 
Hosts, always to lead right forward to the battle ; some- 
times he was to fetch a compass behind the mulberry 
trees at the enemy's back, and then there was to be as it 
>vere a rustling in the upper branches before he made 
the onset : a wind of Grod's just revenge and judgment 
on the Philistine. But what is this man ? Is he a rod 
of the Lord ? The breath of Cain is in his nostrils ; 
yet he speaks understandiagly, and as one sent, whether 
he knoweth or not the Sender ! I must seek the Lord ; 
I must seek the Lord ! ' 

And Cromwell was apparently about to quit the room 
on this religious business, though it was difficult to say 
whither he meant to resort for an oracle, when Richard 
Grimsorwe arrested his step. 

' You are going, Master Cromwell,' he said, ' and I 
know it, to despatch some swift horsemen for your 
command to assemble at once on my advised enterprise. 
But ere you go, I do desire you to begin to show some 
sense that I have deserved well at your hands b}^ ' 

* Yea, yea, you are free to depart, to return at once 
to Aston; but I cannot suffer you to do any harm to the 



CKOMWELL AND GRIMSORWE. 221 

prisoner in my charge,' said Cromwell, pausing, and 
evidently surprised at the skilful divination of his real 
secret intentions on the part of the other, and thinking 
he had himself as accurately inferred Grrimsorwe's. 

' On the contrary, I ask you, captain, to order me to 
be kept a prisoner also in Birmingham . but under 
your own solemn safeguard, and out of my brother's 
sight and way,' replied Grrimsorwe. 

Cromwell did now look rather puzzled. 'Do you 
want to drive the old man at Aston fairly mad ? ' he 
said ; ' or what is it ? ^Moreover, we have no cause of 
detention against you. You have not applied for arms 
for the King's faction, or otherwise flown in the teeth of 
any ordinance of the Parliament.' 

' I purpose now to do so,' grinned Grrimsorwe ; '. I am 
going to the Manor House to call upon the High Bailiff 
to proceed at once to an open and forcible rescue of my 
brother.' . 

' Cromwell burst into a huge, hearty cacchination. 
* Deserve my severity, then,' he remarked, ' and you 
shall experience it. But, in good truth, yours must 
needs be a spirit of some deepest sounding, since I can 
only see the fins of your sharks . not what their jaws are 
agape after. I could have divined now a reason if you 
had turned earnest conditioner with me for you brother's 
release.'' 

*His release !' Grrimsorwe exclaimed, and looked as- 
tonished in his turn. 

' Ay, for being of so forward and courageous a temper, 
you might have relished seeing him in the front lines of 
these coming warlike times of ours,' repHed Cromwell ; 
adding with a dark and troubled glance, * ]My God I 



222 THE armourer's daughter. 

where shall we end, since we begin with fratricidal long- 
ings in our hearts ? ' 

Grimsorwe was about to make, probably, some at- 
tempt to repudiate the feelings ascribed to him . for 
even the worst of villains do not like to hear their 
wickedness called by its true name. But precisely at 
the instant the door was throwTi unceremoniously open, 
and Master Armourer Firebrace made his unexpected 
appearance, closely followed by Bunyan, the tinker- 
boy. 



223 



CHAPTER xxrir. 

HTBIAN FEELING F, POLITICAL. 

The circumstance was, however, speedily explained. ' I 
come, Master Cromwell,' Firebrace exclaimed, wdtli a 
wild and haggard look, ' to have your immediate order 
for a release of the prisoner, Edward Holte . without 
which the men you have placed in guard of him will 
not suffer it . in exchange for my daughter, Dorothy, 
whom the cavaliers have seized at play in the town, and 
carried off to Aston Hall.' 

' Ay, ay, indeed ; they were trustworth}^ poor souls 
whom I have found in this towTi, whom I set in the 
business : poor, wearied Sisyphus Turnour, the bellows- 
blower, and one Come- What- Will-Faithfid JMoggs, a 
creature of a sweet savour in his soul, though but a 
stinking tanner of his trade . I did not think but what 
they would desire to have my freewill and judgment in 
anything to be done regarding the prisoner. What 
is it you would have then, say you. Master Fire- 
brace ? ' 

' Sir Thomas Holte hath imprisoned my daughter . 
so this young man reports from one who knoweth it 
with his eyes . until he hath his son in exchange. That 
is what I would have : let the young man go, and let 



224 

me redeem my child out of the furnace/ said Firebrace, 
with tears gushing, in spite of every effort to restrain 
them, from his hard and staringly fixed eyes. 

^ Tut, tut, man I call you this a persevering even unto 
the end ? We cannot surrender the prisoner but to our 
great loss and detriment. What is to keep the town 
well set on its desperation but this personal quarrel ? 
Were Edward Holte released, we should be all at sixes 
and sevens again. What risk does your daughter run 
in her captivity ? What ! we are not Barbary men, nor 
is Sir Thomas altogether the keeper of a sultan's retinue 
and seraglio. 'Tis an old man ; what fear you ? All 
is well, if but you have courage to abide by my declara- 
tion to you, without further questioning, that all is 
.well.' 

'I can truly aver, sir,' said Gfrimsorwe, ^that the 
maiden placed herself freely in my father's hands, as 
hostage for his son. What may be between my brother 
and your daughter to make her so kind to him, I know 
not ; but so it is.' 

' It is all a lie ; she hath been inveigled and trea- 
cherously seized,' returned Firebrace, passionately. 'My 
daughter is betrothed to a most worthy man of this 
town . to Tubal Bromycham ; and would you drive me 
on going to him with a tale like this at my heels, to 
win him to release Edward Holte by force from your 
bellows-blower and tanner, two as hateful Anabaptist 
villains as are in the town ? And is this what all your 
fine counsels, and our rash acceding unto the same, are 
to do for us of Birmingham ? ' 

'I mil pray God to bless my counsels to you : man 
is no further master of the event than he Avho lets out 
the waters can give them their bounds and demarcations 



HUMAN FEELING V. POLITICAL. 225 

too. What if thy vineyard be overflooded, friend? 
Shall the whole country perish of drought, rather ? ' 

' I will go to Tubal, I will go to Tubal at once ; he 
will not believe these lies. My fair child shall not 
remain another hour at Aston Hall ! ' And the armourer 
rushed frantically out. 

' Silly man, silly man. But these things must be, I 
fear, while we use human instruments,' said Cromwell, 
perhaps rather in his heart compassionating the father's 
emotion, for he also was one. ' Howbeit, were it my 
own . my pretty little Frances, even . what must be, 
must be. I must keep friends with the good man, too, 
for he hath a great sway in Birmingham, and I shall 
need some hastening now in my preparations for the 
field, though they be towardly enough. He will find 
Tubal meanwhile, I trust, very green wood to his crack- 
ling of harmless fire. But the Lord will guide me, I am 
sure. Who are you, young man, and why do you stare 
at me so wonderingly ? ' 

These latter words were addressed to the tinker-bo}^, 
who was in reahty gazing with simple but rapt intensity 
of contemplation at the personage whose own attention 
had been thus suddenly caught by it. 

Bunyan was startled ; even, as it seemed, for the 
moment alarmed. ' Nay, sir,' he said, ' it is but with a 
due reverence ; but the prophet hath been a-telling us 
all down below, while we waited your leisure, that you 
are the mighty strong angel, of whom- it is written i\i a 
book called Eevelations, that you should come down 
from heaven clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow on 
your head, and set your right foot upon the sea and 
your left foot upon the earth, and cry with a loud voice, 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE armourer's daughter. 

as when a Hon roareth, " By Him that liveth for ever and 
ever, time shall be no more ! " ' 

' Said he so ? ' returned Cromwell;, with an excited 
expression, which almost immediately faded into one of 
more common-place and worldly, perhaps almost ridi- 
culing import, ''Why, then, friend, the prophet hath 
greatly overstated me.' 



227 



CHAPTEE XXIV. 

THE CAPTAIN OF THE WATCH OF BIRMINGHAM. 

Meanwhile, Armourer Firebrace, driven by the im- 
patience and anguish of his spirit to disregard all but 
the main consequence he dreaded, proceeded to the 
appointed head-quarters of the Captain of the Watch of 
Birmingham. This, it appeared, was Tubal Bromy- 
cham's title as military commandant of the town, and 
his quarters had been established for him by Cromwell 
at a small building on Grosta Grreen, called the Welsh 
Cross, as the most likely point of attack from Aston 
Hall. Several roads, indeed, debouched into the town 
at this point, which it commanded. 

The structure itself was a low isolated elevation of 
one story, on open archways, surmounted by a lantern 
tower, pinnacled by a cross of fretted freestone, pierced 
to represent nail-holes. 

Under the archways, accommodated with benches and 
tables, and bread and cheese in abundance, were 
assembled about a score of stout youDg fellows, well 
armed, and chiefly in smiths' leather aprons. These 
were to be relieved at intervals by other parties of the 
townsmen, who had responded with readiness to the 
energetic impulse of Cromwell, acting in the first place 
on the master armourer and his fellow-chiefs of the 

Q2 



228 THE armourer's daughter. 

trades. And a laugliing, merry, excited company they 
were, evidently enjoying a novel sense of the dignity of 
danger, and proud of their position in the vanguard of 
defence. 

In the room above this open guardhouse, reached by 
a very narrow flight of steps, Firebrace knew he should 
find the Captain of the Watch, in company with seven 
or eight 3^oung men who had been hastily constituted his 
under-officers. Of course he had free access thither; 
and, mounting, the imhappy father distinguished as he 
.a^pproached the upper chamber frequent bursts of 
laughter mingled with shouts of the most uproarious 
applause. 

' Alack, alack-a-day I he is treating his new mates to 
a love-cup. Little wots he of the sorrow in store ! ' 
thought the armourer. And a strange sickness of heart 
induced him to pause as he reached the open entrance 
of the chamber. He then perceived with some surprise 
-the occasion of the demonstration. In fact he could 
scarcely at first believe that he really beheld what he 
saw. 

Standing at a table plentifully supplied with flagons 
of foaming ale, and surrounded by the jolly noisy com- 
pany whose uproar Firebrace had noticed below, was 
Tubal Bromycham. But he could scarcely have been 
recognised under his new aspect. He was clad from 
head to foot in a suit of most beautifully-wrought and 
filagreed armour, excepting at the head, which was 
bare ; and so great a change had this warlike panoply 
made in his appearance, that it was no wonder Fire- 
brace himself was puzzled at the identity in other 
respects. His massive head and strenuous limbs, could 
scarcely, however, be said to show to advantage under 



THE CAPTAIN OF THE WATCH OF BIRMINGHAM. 229 

the polished plates of metal that encased them, and the 
disproportion of his bulk to his height was greatly 
exaggerated, though the effect was in favour of the 
young man's power to wield the heavy weapons with 
which he was also furnished, in the shape of a sword 
and a ponderous double-headed axe. 

Tubal had evidently been addressing some harangue, 
very favourably received, though perhaps somewhat con- 
fusedly delivered, to his comrades. Firebrace distin- 
guished the latter words : ^ And thus, my mates . 
gentlemen, I would say . I trust I have shown unto 
you that I, and I alone, Tubal Bromycham, am the true 
Lord of the Manor and inheritor thereof, as soon as I 
shall have wrung from the tyrant representative of 
tyrants the rights of my birthdom; until when my 
proofs to you shall lie chiefly in the swing and power 
of my own right arm, in defence of this town of mine 
and of my ancestry I ' 

A thunder of applause followed this conclusion, and, 
as if with one accord, the young fellows all started up, 
replenished their flagons, and drank to the he?vlth of 
' Tubal the Smith, Lord of Birmingham.' 

By this time Firebrace was in the midst of the com- 
pany; and, interrupting the clamour of joyful excite- 
ment, suddenly recalled Tubal to the matter-of-fact 
world by informing him that his betrothed had been 
captured by some base stratagem, and was then a 
prisoner at Aston Hall; and that Sir Thomas Holte 
would by no means consent to her surrender, saving in 
exchange for his son, whom Master Cromwell, on the 
other hand, did most masterfully and cruelly refuse to 
yield up. 



230 THE armouker's daughter. 

Tubal came liastil}^ down from his high flight upon 
this statement. 

* Dorothy I . a prisoner! . at Aston Hall!' he ex- 
claimed. 

' Let us go there at once, and tear her from the old 
devil's claws ! ' yelled several of the excited young fellows. 

^ You will not find that so easy, gentlemen,' said an 
unknown voice at this moment, and Firebrace perceived 
with astonishment that he had been closely followed 
into the apartment by a stranger. 

The stranger was Eichard Grrimsorwe. 'Aston Hall.' 
Eichard resumed boldly, ' is barricaded at all points, 
and defended by my brother's troop of stout yeomen, 
albeit but rustily armed. The girl, Dorothy, is placed 
by her own free will and action in my father's hands, 
for the love, doubtless, she bears Edward Holte, whom 
you have unlawfully imprisoned among you ! She is 
under lock and key, and bolt and bar, in the top cham- 
ber there in the Grreat Dome. You can da no more 
than provoke Sir Thomas to worse violences towards 
her by any effort on your part, unless you had great 
guns, and men who know how to manage them. And 
I am come to propose to the chiefs of the town, whom 
I understand to be you. Smith Bromycham, and you. 
Master Armourer Firebrace, a fair exchange between 
our prisoners. And if the stranger, who has taken upon 
himself such mastery, will not suffer it, possess yoiu*- 
selves of Edward Holte b}^ force from his satellites. He 
may be a London Parliament man, but hath he, for that 
reason, a right to rule iu Birmingham ? ' 

' So say I, so say I,' exclaimed Firebrace. ' Take 
Master Holte from the hold of the Anabaptist villains 
placed on his guard, and yield him to Aston forthwith 



THE CAPTAIN OF THE WATCH OF BIRMINGHAM. 231 

in exchange for my child, of whom it is . it shall be . 
most false to say, she hath wilfully deserted her ovm 
alliance and friending for Aston Hall.' 

Tubal looked at the armourer at this moment with a 
singular expression. 'I know not that . I know not 
that, good father ! ' he muttered. * There are spells of 
strange magic belonging to the family there. They are 
cursed by a witch ; but perchance, with their evil fasci- 
nation, Dorothy also may have become the victim of 
the Holte sorcery ! And let us not stir too rashly in 
this matter,' he continued, gazing almost wildly around 
among his companions. ' Ye all know the two Anabap- 
tist men, Sisyphus the bellows-blower, and Faithful 
Moggs ; and I did hear them swear to Captain Cromvrell 
they would rather slay their prisoner than suffer him to 
escape their guard I ' 

' So will they do, if they die on it !' exclaimed one of 
the company. ' Sisyphus is a man wearied of Hfe, yet of 
a mad fanatic zeal to win what he deems the crown 
of martyrdom ; and Faithful Moggs doth so abhor the 
very name of gentleman, that for its sake alone ' 

' We cannot rescue Edward Holte by force ; 'tis not to 
be thought of; it would ruin all to quarrel now with 
the Parliament man. Nor Dorothy either, if it be true 
she is so imprisoned, as this bringer of bad tidings 
sayeth,' lamented Tubal Bromycham, in a desponding 
tone. 

' And have you so easily forgotten the base ignominy 
to which Sir Thomas Holte put you at Aston Hall, for 
some slight failure in your craft. Tubal ? Have you 
donned the armour of a knight and lord . of your own 
fashioning too, for more than a year . only to show 
yourself a craven and a submissive, beaten, huckster 



232 

hound in it ? ' shouted old Firebrace, in the most ex- 
asperated accents. It was plain to Grrimsorwe that he 
was not in the secret of the real affair at Aston, respect- 
ing Tubal Bromycham's quarrel with the haughty pro- 
prietor there. 

' But, father,' returned Tubal, with a deep flush, 
' Sir Thomas deemed me then but a poor, presumptuous 
mechanic of this town, whereof I am the lawful lord ! 
He will think differently of me soon, and repent him 
belike ; and so will others too, perchance I ' 

' Arabella Holte, to wit,' thought Grrimsorwe, but he 
did not venture to make the observation aloud. 

Firebrace gave a bitter laugh. ' Will you leave your 
betrothed bride . the fairest maiden in Birmingham . 
in the hands of such men as Sir Thomas Holte and his 
bastard Eichard are reported to be ? ' he exclaimed. 

^ Is it not said, Zachariah Firebrace, that the maiden 
is so placed in a sort by her o^\tl consent?' replied Tubal, 
inwardly ruminating, it was pretty evident, some deeper 
thought. 

' At worst, then, it was because my daughter was in- 
dignant, as all honest folk and fair neighbours should be, 
at the unhandsome detention of the young man Holte,' 
groaned Firebrace. 'And I think we were all bewitched 
indeed when we yielded to a stranger's rash ordering as 
we have ! ' 

* So deem not I, father,' returned Tubal. ' How else 
might I reclaim mine inheritance from the tyrannous 
usurpation of the Crown? And say you, sir, whoever 
you are, that Dorothy Firebrace is imprisoned in the 
Dome-Chamber of Aston Hall ? ' 

'Even so; and before noonday to-morrow, Eupert, 
the King's nephew, in Worcestershire, will despatch of 



THE CAPTAIN OF THE WATCH OF BIRMINGHAM. 233 

his cavalry to my father's assistance there, and the over- 
throw of your sedition here,' said Kichard Grrimsorwe, 
fiercely, evidently resolved to hasten action against his 
brother, at whatever risk to himself. 

It must be admitted that several of the noisiest of the 
recent revellers looked rather aghast at this announce- 
ment. More than one even shrunk away from the 
central group around Tubal, and gathered in separate 
knots to discuss the intelligence. Loud complaints were 
then audible as to the conduct of the Parliament officers. 
*\Ve were promised immediate help from London, be- 
fore any could reach the Cavaliers at Aston. It were 
madness further to engage in the brawl till we know 
more ! ' many muttered, in reply to Firebrace's eager 
exhortations that they should march at once to Aston 
Hall to rescue his daughter. And for a wench who is 
in danger from her o^vn wilfulness, seemed the general 
impression. 

Tubal, in the meanwhile, remained for a few moments 
in deep meditation. 

' Quit me of this cumbrous steel, friends,' he then 
observed, in a low voice, to some of his nearer com- 
rades, ' I can nothing in it ; methinks it seems to 
enchain my very mind with my muscles. Gro, father 
Firebrace,' he continued, while one or two of the 
young men began to unstrap the numerous buckles 
that fastened the pieces of armour together on his 
powerful frame, * G^o home, and expect good tidings 
from me shortly, if even Captain Cromwell will not be 
moved by my entreaties also. And you, sir, rid us of 
the presence of a traitorous spy!' he concluded, to 
Kichard Grrimsorwe, who, startled by the flash in those 
clear still-blue eyes, made an ironical bow, and took his 



234 THE armourer's daughter. 

departure somewhat hastily ; but not before Zachariah 
Firebrace, who, highly indignant at the seeming sang 
frold and indifference with which his intelligence had 
been received, flung hastily out of the apartment. 

Tubal was not satisfied until all his recent warlike 
panoply was removed from his stalwart limbs. He 
seemed then to breathe more freely : and his spirits 
also probably revived with the sense of freedom from 
physical restraint, for his companions noted a return 
of his accustomed energy of ideas and action- almost as 
the last heavy plate fell from his limbs. * I have been 
too long a smith in easy leathers to fit well into the 
lobster-coating of a knight and gentleman,' he remarked, 
with a singular kind of fierce playfulness in his smile 
and general expression. 'But the smith's craft shall 
perhaps serve me in better stead than the man-at-arms 
at this moment. I will resume my tools, even ; they 
are in the chamber above. What I have done in don- 
ning armour and the like is of Master Cromwell's 
prompting, and but ill done, I fear me ; but I ^vill 
manage the next matter of my own head more to the 
purpose, I trust.' 

He disappeared for a few moments in the lantern 
tower over head, and when he returned had a basket of 
tools, from which protruded the end of a crow-bar, on 
his brawny shoulders. He then desired one of his 
comrades to keep his place as Captain of the Watch 
until he returned, and took his departure from the 
Welsh Cross with little farther ceremony of leave-taking. 

All who remained held it for certain that their 
captain was going to remonstrate with the Parliament 
officers on the detention of his betrothed, and propose 
means for her rescue. And so they might have thought 



THE CAPTxVIN OF THE WATCH OF BIRMINGHAM. 235 

for some short distance after he had crossed what was 
then the open verdant space, now covered with hobblely 
pavements, misnamed Grosta Grreen.^ But once fairly 
out of eyeshot of the Welsh Cross Keepers, Tubal 
Bromycham suddenly changed the direction of his steps 
from the town, and took that of Aston Hall. 



236 THE armourer's DAUGHTEr. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE ARTIST SMITH. 

Tubal Bromycham was familiar with every step of the 
way to Aston Hall. A year, however, had elapsed, and 
more, since he had gone upon it, quitting it after his 
disgraceful maltreatment ])y Sir Thomas Holte with a 
vow of vengeance in his heart ; which, nevertheless, he 
had either not found opportunity or resolution to put in 
any telling form of execution. 

A passion more powerful than revenge, in the loving 
and generous heart of the disinherited Artisan-Lord of 
Birmingham, had hitherto, it is possible, restrained the 
promptings of the latter justly-excited feeling in his 
breast. Richard Grrimsorwe had betrayed a family 
secret of his house also, in informing Dorothy of the 
true motives of the severities that had been exercised 
by his foster-brother towards Tubal. Sir Thomas's 
pride was so great tha.t he scorned even to have it 
thought possible that a man whom he looked upon as a 
mere low-born mechanic, should have dared to dream 
of love towards his beautiful daughter ; and, therefore, 
the Aston villagers and people at Birmingham had 
been left to believe that the quarrel between the baronet 
and the smith was on a question of work and wage, or 
carrying out the conditions of a contract. A scene of 



THE ARTIST SMITH. 237 

great violence had passed between them, it was never- 
theless known, provoked by Sir Thomas's insolent fury 
in attempting to chastise Tubal with his horse-whip. 
But as the Birmingham smith's prodigious strength in 
the arms made him unable to measure his reprisals, and 
he was reported to have nearly strangled Sir Thomas in 
his pressure ere he flung him to an extraordinary 
distance, breathless and bleeding, on the ground, in 
sight of numerous menials and workpeople . the pun- 
ishment he was subjected to (in the stocks), and from 
the brutal violence used in overpowering him, seemed 
yet sufficiently provoked. Armourer Firebrace himself 
knew no otherwise, and had only concealed the facts 
from his daughter so carefully because he considered 
that . told as they might be . a girl of her spirit would 
be prone to regard a suitor who had suffered such an 
indignity with depreciating eyes ; and it had grown in 
time to be Firebrace's most earnest hope and purpose 
to marry His famous foreman to his daughter. 

Indeed it was a strange story altogether, and one 
whose passionate depths of romance and tenderness, 
on one part at least, were not likely to be fathomed 
by ordinary observation. 

It was not even surmised b}' his townsfolk in general 
that Tubal Bromycham was an artist of great genius, 
and possessed, in his powerful frame, all the acute 
sensibility, fervour of imagination, and vivid openness 
to external impressions that constitute the true artist 
whom Nature herself creates and fashions. 

The chances of life which enabled Tubal's famous 
fellow-countryman to become the world's arch-poet, had 
put him on venting the beauty and poetical flowering 
of his soul in the hardest material agencies. He was. 



238 THE armourer's daughter. 

therefore, merely looked upon as a most skilful worker 
in iron . nothing more. But, endowed with all the fine 
susceptibilities and faculties alluded to, what marvel 
was there in the fate that befel Tubal in his 3^oung' 
affections ? that the exalted and haughty beauty which 
blazed upon him in the person of Arabella Holte 
should first excite the iron artist's ecstatic admiration, 
and then his most passionate and soul-absorbing love? 

According to prevalent custom at that time, Arabella 
Holte had been placed, for the completion of her 
education and polish in courtly manners, in the house- 
hold of a great lady who was a relation of her mother's, 
and resided a good deal in London. This was the con- 
sort of the Lord Keeper Lyttelton, whose daughter was 
affianced from infancy, and without the least thought of 
asking the consent of either party, to Edward Holte. 
Arabella had thus enjoyed the requisite opportunities 
to acquire e^'ery external embellishment to her extra- 
ordinary beauty. The court of Charles L, presided 
over by a French Queen, full of gaiety and delight- 
ing in festivity and magnificence, and chastened by his 
own refined and .cultivated tastes, offered a perfect 
school for all that could add lustre to the possession ' 
of those choicer gifts of nature with which Arabella 
was endowed. And even Tubal's rapt and artistic 
imaginings had never shaped a brighter realisation of 
all that was charming and seductive in woman, than in 
this youthful lady, when, at the outbreak of the troubles 
between Charles and his Parliament, she returned to 
reside with her parents at Aston Hall, and he saw her 
first. 

This species of admiration might, however, never 
have passed the limits of a silent homage of appreciation 



THE ARTIST SMITH. 239 

in the soul and heart of the inspired artisan, but for 
some peculiai* circumstances of the case. 

Arabella was by nature, and the habits of the brilliant 
Frenchified atmosphere she had just quitted, a coquette 
of the first water. She had been accustomed to flattery 
and splendid courtly appreciation of her varied claims 
on the admiration of the opposite sex. She had ac- 
quii-ed considerable taste and judgment in artistic 
talent and effect, which were held in high esteem by 
Charles and his principal nobles. She was so proud of 
her own and of her father's position in society, that she 
perhaps thought it impossible any person in Tubal 
Bromycham's could ever dare to form hopes of a personal 
nature from any condescension she might exercise towards 
him. Anxious, then, to assure herself of the continued 
omnipotence of her charms . weary of lacking the accus- 
tomed ambergris fumes of compliment and devotion to 
their supremacy . discerning something of the extra- 
ordinary abilities of Tubal in his art . there can be 
little doubt that Mistress Holte had amused herself 
with exciting feelings in the young smith which she 
never dreamed for a moment of encouraging to any 
untoward exhibition, much less favourable result. 

But, on his part, the warmth and vehemence of 
Tubal Brom3^cham's organisation . the simplicity and 
tenderness of his heart . his ignorance of the deception 
and unmeaning allurements of coquettish and courtly 
manners, conspired with his knowledge of his true birth 
and rights, to persuade him that an honourable attach- 
ment on his part, even to the daughter of the haughty 
Baronet of Aston, was not to be considered altogether a 
piece of frenzy. 

In the lowliest debasement of their fortunes his family 



240 THE armourer's daughter. 

had cherished the tradition of their origin, and hopes of 
the restoration of their ravished inheritance. And now, 
when on all sides resounded indignant demands for the 
restitution of invaded rights and privileges, and every 
species of grievance was clamorous for redress, Tubal 
was surely justified in believing that a time was also 
coming when justice might be extorted for his deprived 
and shamefully cozened race. A Lord of Birmingham 
might well, then, consider himself no unmeet suitor for 
a daughter of the parvenu house of Holte of Astou. 

The brave smith, conscious of all manly qualities 
proper to win a w^oman's love . of devotion, skill, 
courage, and strength far surpassing other men's . did 
not form to himself any full notion of the distance 
placed, by education and manners, between him and a 
court-bred lady of his times. We fear, indeed, that 
Arabella must have diverted herself, and the tedious 
idleness now forced upon her, with kindling and playing 
with the fire in his breast to a much greater extent 
than she ever admitted. How else could the extra- 
ordinary delusion have arisen in his mind that the 
youthful beauty returned his affection, and would not 
disdain to listen to its avowal ? Was it sheer madness 
alone that possessed and drew Tubal Bromycham at 
last upon the irrevocable utterance ? 

Whether it was that Arabella Holte perceived now, 
for the first time, the mischief she had done, and the 
danger she had incurred, or whether her pride and 
insolence of supposed superior birth and rank were 
alone provoked to measures of retaliation, cannot be 
precisely known ; but she made a formal complaint 
to her father of the presumptuous overtures of the 
master mechanic he employed in tlie decoration of hi^ 



THE ARTIST SMITH. 241 

palace, and the scenes to which allusion has been made, 
followed as a matter of com-se. Tubal, standing up 
fiercely for the rights of his manhood, and retaliating on 
Sir Thomas's insults at his condition, by telling him 
that a gentleman who had become a blacksmith was at 
least the equal of a blacksmith who had become a 
gentleman, was assailed by him, and repulsed the 
attack in the manner described ; Sir Thomas remaining 
the victor only by force of the superior numbers that 
thronged to his aid. 

Tubal was, however, greatly to blame, and he had 
always felt so, in the acquiescence he afterwards lent 
to the armourer's scheme of marrying him to his 
daughter. 

He had ever, indeed, dearly cherished Dorothy Fire- 
brace, but it was rather as a lovely and lively child, as 
a younger sister, that he had so far caressed and 
consorted with her under his friendly master's roof. 
But the deep soreness of heart left by his cruel and 
mortifying failure with the proud daughter of Aston 
Hall ; the natural yearnings of the disappointed affec- 
tions for some new hold and clinging-to-gratitude to his 
generous patron; the growing and rapidly-developing 
beauties of his youthful companion ; perhaps some 
vagTie hope to inflict, in his turn, mortification and a 
sense of despised dominion . of a yoke cast off . on his 
beautiful oppressor . had all conspired to induce Tubal 
to fall into the plan. 

And now, even as he took his lonely way through the 
night toward Aston Hall, he tried to persuade himself 
that his objects in going there, and attemiDting the 
rescue of his betrothed, were to demonstrate his great 
and all -venturing affection for her to Sir Thomas Holte's 

VOL. I, R 



242 THE AKMOUREKS DAUGHTER. 

scornful daughter; and to Sir Thomas Holte himself, 
that it was not from any dread of him or of his power 
he had not hitherto taken effectual steps to revenge the 
insults and wrongs inflicted on him. 

To retain Edward Holte unconditionally in his power, 
and yet to spare him, seemed also a noble luxury of 
vengeance Tubal was willing, at every hazard, to pre- 
serve to himself. 



243 



CHAPTER XXYI. 

TrfE CLIMBING OF ASTON HALL. 

Tubal Beomycham was disquieted with none of tlie 
appi'ehensions whicli had visited Dorothy in her lonely 
walk through Aston Park. He feared no man, and 
scarcely any number of men. He would scarcely have 
turned aside to avoid the fidl onset of the ferocious 
animal, the mere sight of which had so much excited 
her dread. Nevertheless, aware that his enterprise 
required secrecy as a condition of success, he avoided 
all the open lines of approach to the Hall, moving 
chiefly along hedge sides, under the shadows of the 
chestnut sind elm trees of the great avenue, and finalty, 
the outside of the lofty garden walls on the south by 
which Aston is reached from Birmingham. 

Tubal, who knew every inch of the mansion and its 
grounds, knew that in this direction there were con- 
veniences for the operation he meditated possessed by 
no other. He apprehended observation least on this 
side, which would be supposed safe from the circum- 
stance that a terrace swept round the entire circuit of 
the house, excepting on the east front, divided from the 
park and the fields beyond by a sunken wall and a moat, 
which, though not very broad, was not easy to be passed 
without the help of the draw-bridges. These would now, 

R2 



244 THE armourer's daughter. 

of course, be raised ; and if watch and ward were kept 
at all, Tubal concluded it Avould be in the great hall of 
the entrance on tlie east front. 

Nor was he out in his calculation. Darkness and 
silence seemed to reign absolutely on the whole extent 
of the mansion he could discern on his approach, and it 
was fortunately a very cloudy night, though there was 
occasionally a burst of moonlight that brought out the 
broad landscape into sudden relief, and, in particular, 
into visions of ghostly loveliness the statuary with 
which Sir Thomas had surrounded his grounds. The 
funereal-looking yew trees, cut into all sorts of gro- 
tesque representations of animals, and a line of lofty 
sycamores bordering the moat, further screened the 
advance. And thus it happened that Tubal, clearing 
the watery boundary at a leap, easily made his way 
along the walk to a wall that divided the west from the 
south front. He scrambled over this, though it w^as of 
considerable height, apparently without exciting any 
attention ; and proceeding along the entire length of 
the west front, suddenly turned into a deep angle 
which it there forms with the northern division of the 
elevation. 

This west front . as any Birminghamer can ascertain 
on inspection . consists, and consisted then, of three 
storys : the ground-floor, comprising a series of apart- 
ments surmounted by the one grand chamber called 
the Long Gallery, over which were a projecting cornice 
and a parapet, and a flat roof covered with lead, whence 
a most extensive view of the whole surrounding country 
was afforded. Behind this lofty promenade arose the 
third stor}^, furnished with several gable windows, 
backed by the tiled and sharp-sloping roofs of the main 



THE CLIMEING OF ASTON HALL. 245 

mass of the central pile. And over these again were 
several stacks of octagonal chimneys ; the whole being 
surmounted by the tower of the Dome-Chamber, rising 
conspicuously from the midst. 

Marvellous as it may appear, it was Tubal Bromy- 
cham's purpose and resolve to reach that Dome-Chamber 
from the exterior of the mansion, without, of course, 
any of the usual assistance in the shape of ladders and 
scaffolding. 

In truth, a most daring and, on the face of it, impos- 
sible enterprise. But Tubal, whose opportunities had 
familiarised him with every detail both external and 
internal of the building, had formed his own conclusions 
on the point. At all events, he was determined to 
hazard much . life itself perhaps . not improbably li- 
berty . any malicious interpretation that might be put 
on it . on the audacious project to set his betrothed 
bride free, without paying the ransom so imperiously 
demanded. 

He remembered that in a corner of the junction 
between the west and north fronts lie had himself placed, 
and securely riveted, a thick ornamental waterspout 
from the flat roof to the basement : an iron waterspout, 
decorated at certain intervals by projecting gargols or 
spues of grotesque ironwork, whence the water was to 
be discharged from the roof, and the broad projection 
of the middle cornice or stringcourse, and its carved 
stonework designs, which ran all along the line of the 
building, about half-way in the elevation of the lofty 
walls. 

Tubal remembered this ; and confiding in the match- 
less strength of his arms and general muscular power, 
in his dauntless nerve and coolness, and knowledge of 



246 THE armourer's daughter. 

localities, had resolved upon the extraordinary plan of 
dragging himself up a wall sixty or seventy feet high 
by means only of this waterspout ! 

Once arrived on the flat roof of the Grreat Grallery, he 
knew there was a way, if he could avoid making any 
betraying noise, by which he could get into the top 
chambers of the house and reach the dome. Such fur- 
ther difficulties as he might then encounter in the way 
of bolt and bar, the skilful smith, who had fashioned 
them nearly all, came prepared to obviate with the 
basket of tools strapped on his shoulder. Something, no 
doubt, must then be confided to luck ; and Tubal was 
willing to abide the hazard of the die. In truth, he 
placed no great store on the life to be hazarded, in com- 
parison with the objects he had in ^dew. 

Having reached the corner of the building he had in 
view. Tubal paused and listened to ascertain if there 
was any fear of detective pursuit. As he did so the 
distant clock of St. Martin, in Birmingham, struck ten. 
There was no other sound audible save a faint rustling 
of the night wind among the neighbouring trees, and 
the splash and murmur of the moat as it descended by 
a pretty cascade into a pool at no great distance, con- 
trived to receive the surplus waters. 

Satisfied with the silence. Tubal turned to survey the 
work he had before him. It gave him encouragement 
to notice how, nearly to the height of the first coping, 
the walls were covered with a thick ivy, even then of 
many years' growth. This coping would offer him a 
resting-place, and was broad enough to furnish a secure 
stand. The most difficult portion of the task would 
certainly remain to be performed ; but, remembering 
how often in his early youth he had slung himself up 



THE CLIMBING OF ASTON HALL. 247 

the steep shafts and inclines of mines with only the aid 
of a loose rope. Tubal felt as if even a perpendicular 
ascent, with a firm grasp at iron piping, was not so 
much more difficult. But additional facilities were 
afforded by the regular jutting of the quoins of the 
edifice . great stones which formed the strength and 
ornament of the structure in all its angles and projec- 
tions and recesses. These he considered, though afford- 
ing only space for about the points of the feet, almost 
as good as the steps of a ladder. 

Come w^hat would. Tubal Bromycham determined to 
try the experiment. It might be that he muttered a 
short prayer, and slightly shuddered when he bethought 
him how the least awkwardness, the least faltering of 
resolution, the least failure in his strength, might pre- 
cipitate him in a few minutes a mangled and bleeding- 
corpse on the gravelled walk on which he stood. But 
he gave himself little time for reflection on the subject, 
drew the buckles of his baggy knee-breeches tight, 
put his cap into his pocket, made sure of the fastening 
of his basket of tools, set a foot on the first coping- 
stone, grasped the waterspout in both hands, and with 
a facility that surprised himself, putting his feet at 
hazard among the ivy, in a very few minutes accom- 
plished the first part of his perilous adventure. He 
landed on the coping-stone over the ground-floor cham- 
ber of the north-western front of Aston Hall. 

It should have been stated that, in consequence of the 
inequalities of the wall, the waterspout was only closely 
riveted to it in parts, and therefore afforded openings as 
holding-phices for the climber's strenuous grasp. Tubal, 
who had himself done the work, knew he could confide 
in the strength of these rivets. The pipe being also 



248 

ringed and embossed with ornamental ironwork, offered 
numerous stays both to hand and foot. Yet the spec- 
tacle of a man, and of a large frame, crawling up the 
side of a house like a fly, must have been one exceed- 
ingly strange and almost incredible even to a beholder. 
And Tubal himself, looking at w^hat he had done, w^as 
amazed ; looking at what he had to do, almost felt his 
bold heart sink in his breast. 

He was standing in a niche close beside a projecting 
carving which resembled a mermaid, being a figure with 
a w^oman's head and flowing curls, terminating in a fish- 
like lower figure, saving that it had griffin's feet at the 
end. He was at a height of about twenty feet : above 
him, still to be ascended, was a sheer wall of about 
twice as many before he could get to the projecting 
cornice which he must raise himself over to reach the 
balustrade of the leaden roof. Of course the hazards of 
a fall increased with the elevation gained ; and for a 
moment Tubal himself desponded as he gazed at the 
formidable perpendicular still to be surmounted. 

A thought w^hich had suggested itself to him pre- 
viously now^ recurred. He remembered that the lofty 
windows that gleamed behind the cornice on which he 
stood opened into the Grreat Gallery of Aston Hall. 
Should he attempt to remove a portion of the mullioned 
framework, and enter the house that way ? 

But Tubal also recollected, first, the great strength 
and intricacy of the iron framework he had himself 
wTOught for these lattices. It would take hours to file a 
wide enough entrance for a man of his size. The Great 
Gallery also opened on a landing of the Grand Stair- 
case, which there was reason to suppose would be care- 
fully watched, being the main communication of the 



THE CLIMBING OF ASTON HALL. 249 

maDsion from the entrance hall. It was not impro- 
bable but that the massive oak doors might be locked 
on the exterior; and though Tubal came prepared to 
contend with similar dijfficulties, he felt that a series of 
them would exhaust his time, and, very probably, be 
overheard removing. 

Nevertheless, to continue his present enterprise 
seemed fraught with the greatest danger. To increase 
his perplexity, Tubal could not, with every effort he 
made, call to mind whether the top of the waterspout 
coincided with the platform of the roof, or whether he 
should have a more perilous interval than all he might 
have surmounted to clamber without its assistance. 

His resolution faltered, certainly, at this idea. But 
on a sudden it was fully restored by what seemed a very 
unlikely circumstance. Tubal heard a sound of foot- 
steps and voices below, and glancing downwards per- 
ceived a group of persons turning from the west front 
with torches blazing in their hands. They w^ere mostly, 
he perceived, serving-men of the house from their 
livery, pretty well armed with pistols and pikes. But 
in their haughty and imperiously-striding leader he re- 
cognised the man who had treated him with so great 
indignity. Sir Thomas Holte himself. He was partly 
in armour, and had a sheathed sword in his hand. And 
Tubal heard him say as he passed . ' Make the rounds 
thus every hour, while I take me such poor slumber as 
I may. Eichard Grrimsorwe returns not ; and as I do 
not doubt these Brummagem rebels have detained him 
also, let but the Prince send me a force to rescue my 
sons, and I will return Armourer Firebrace his truant 
daughter whipped like a Bridewell wench at a cart- 
tail I ' 



250 THE AEMOUREIl'.S DAUGHTER. 

Tubal was, however, in part relieved by this speech 
from an apprehension he entertained that liis move- 
ments had excited suspicion ; and the indignant feelings 
which had all along- prompted him revived with inspirit- 
ing sparkles in his heart at the sight and words of the 
oppressor. He thought it likely enough aid would be 
despatched by the King's party that might enable Sir 
Thomas to gratify his insolent cruelty of disposition 
without peril to those who were dear to himself. And 
the idea of the degradation and insult proposed to the 
young girl whom at least lie cherished as a most dear 
sister, warmed Tubal's generous nature to a furnace- 
glow of wrath and contrary resolve. 

The watch had scarcely, therefore, continued its round 
out of sight, ere Tubal recommenced his enterprise with 
renewed determination and energy. 

In reality it was not accomplishing much more, up 
to a certain point, in the open, than what the unhappy 
little sweep of modern times was once condemned to do 
in a stifling inclosure. But even the wonderful strength 
and length of Tubal's arms, the prodigious muscular 
development of his frame, its shortness in comparison 
with its width, would not altogether have sufficed, un- 
backed by the utter insensibility to physical danger 
that marked his character, and his youthful experience 
in the coalpits, altogether destitute in those times of 
the ingenious facilities for entering and leaving in- 
vented by modern science and humanity. Yet so cool 
was his head, so firm his nerve and step, that in point 
of fact he only stumbled once in accomplishing what 
remained of that prodigious ascent, which it would 
terrify most persons but to dream they had attempted. 
To be sure that was very near the summit ; and even 



THE CLIMEi:XG OF ASTON KALL. 251 

the powerful hands and wrists of the Birmingham smith 
sustained a fearful wrench as he hung for a moment 
with the whole weight, of his body over a fearful abyss 
of sixty perpendicular feet. But he speedily regained 
his footing on the jut of the wall, and shutting his eyes 
and resolutely proceeding, on a sudden felt his head 
strike against the projecting eaves of the topmost 
coping. 

To Tubal's horror, however, he perceived, imme- 
diately on opening his eyes, that one of his worst anti- 
cipations Avas well founded. The waterspout projected 
in a curious, buffalo-head shaped gargol just over his 
head, but only mounted to a level with the leads of the 
aerial terrace above. After that there was a stone 
balustrade, ornamented at intervals with urn-like vases. 
Consequently there was a necessity of clambering to the 
top of the waterspout without any species of hold or 
support ; and it must be allowed that even the strong 
brain of Tubal Bromycham whirled for a moment, and 
his stout heart quivered like an affrighted Avoman s in 
his massive breast, as the conviction forced itself upon his 
mind. The sweat burst in large globules on his heated 
brows, his eyes dilated to double their proper size, as he 
glared down the frightful depth he ha.d ascended. But 
he felt in the glance that, spent as Ms strength now 
was, there would even be more danger to attempt re- 
trieving a footing on the ground below than to perse- 
vere in his present desperate effort. In Tubal's veins 
there flowed the purest streams of that energetic, 
imwearied, unconquerable Anglo-Saxon blood which, 
building, as it v/ere, sand by sand, has raised a mightier 
empire than the world ever before beheld, v/ith an in- 
significant island of the Atlantic for the ke3^stone of the 



252 THE aemodrer's daughteii. 

fabric. Tubal recommended his soul in one brief 
ejaculation to his Grod, and seizing the top of the 
waterspout in the strenuous clutch, one might almost 
say, of despair, set his feet resolutely nearly close 
to his hands, and slung himself by a single power- 
ful movement upright on the open top. A sudden 
giddiness then assailed him, and but for an instinctive 
effort whereby he threw himself over the balustrade on 
the leads, he must have fallen the other way, and been 
dashed to pieces below. 

A faintness and momentary forgetfulness doubtless 
then came over even the strong smith. But he revived 
after that brief unconsciousness, and springing on his 
feet, found himself safe and sound under a bright beam 
of moonlight that, piercing a mass of driving clouds, 
covered the wide expanse now beneath his gaze with a 
shadowy imitation of the glories of the day. 

The artist soul of Tubal, it may well be, was visited 
by a sense of soothing and satisfaction in the tranquil 
beauty of the spectacle thus illumined into view, as 
when a mother lifts the coverlets from the rosy limbs 
of the sleeping child. But he was aware he had no time 
to lose from the practical business of his enterprise, thus 
far almost miraculously accomplished. And finding 
himself, as he expected, with his back to the window of 
one of the three gable summits of the main central 
building on the west, he brought his tool-basket round 
(which, by the by, had hung rather heavily more than 
once on his neck in the ascent), and selecting a file and 
pincers from the contents, proceeded at once to remove 
the framework of a large square of lozenge panes. 

Familiar with every portion of the building. Tubal 
was aware that these windows admitted lisfht into an 



THE CLIMBING OF ASTON HALL. 253 

immense and otherwise totally dark garret chamber or 
loft, intended by the builder as a store and Imnber 
room for the use of the great household that was to be 
accommodated under the roofs. This has since been 
partially divided off into small dormitories for servants ; 
but at that time there were only the obstacles of two 
stronor doors at either hand to hinder the success of a 
manoeuvre necessary to the completion of Tubal's plans. 

Of course he was aware that it was out of the ques- 
tion, even for himself alone, to think of returning by the 
way he came ; worn and fatigued almost to powerless- 
ness as he felt in his general frame, as well as in his 
strained hands and arms. But he knew that at one end 
of this vast store-room there was a door, locked on the 
exterior it is true, but communicating by a narrow ser- 
vants' staircase with the kitchen and other house offices 
on the basement of the north-west tower, and whence 
another door at the foot, usually only bolted on the 
interior, allowed exit to the Terrace Walk. And that at 
the opposite end of the store-room there \ysls a door- 
secured within, that opened on the top landing of the 
Grrand Staircase, and consequently close upon the Dome- 
Chamber. 

Tubal's present business was therefore to obtain an 
entry into the store-room ; and under his skilful labour 
the fastening of the windows speedily gave way, and al- 
lowed him the requisite facility. He thrust himself feet 
foremost then into the dismal loft ; and the moon being- 
no w again thickly obscured, had to grope his passage 
amidst firkins and sacks, and lines of bacon-hooks, and 
hams, and hogsheads of various stores, to the door by 
which he purposed to proceed on his enterprise. 

Arriving at the point after several stumbles and severe 



254 THE armouree's daughter. 

raspings of the shins against obstacles, Tubal was never- 
theless destined to be surprised by finding one removed. 
The store-room door was unbolted and ajar. 

Eather alarmed than pleased with this facility, Tubal 
still did not hesitate on his way, but opening the door 
widely, stepped on. 

He was now on the top landing-place of the Grrand 
Staircase ; and though uncomfortably struck by the 
circumstance mentioned above, after listening for a 
moment and hearing no sound below, he turned to 
ascend the narrow flight of steps leading to the Dome- 
Chamber. But there on a sudden he was struck by a 
most unwelcome spectacle. 

Seated, reclining with his back against the door of 
that strong and lofty prison chamber was a man, ap- 
parently on guard. But very remissly so, for his eyes 
were closed, and he was snoring with a noise as if he 
was rather dravdng in water than air, and suffocating 
accordingly, with his mouth gaping v/ide open. He had, 
however, a long bare knife strongly clenched in his 
hand, and by the glare emitted from an opening in a 
dcirk lantern beside him, Tubal Bromycham recognised, 
after a moment's attention, Adam Blackjack, the prin- 
cipal cook at Aston Hall. 

The sight amazed him. Could this man be j)laced 
there on the guard to prevent the escape of a 3"oung 
girl from a strong-barred chamber at such an elevation ? 
Was Adam Blackjack a likely man for the office ? 

Tubal, as well as Dorothy Firebrace, was aware that 
the Aston cook had of latter times made a somewhat 
noticeable adhesion to an obscure but dreaded and de- 
famed sect in Birmingham, and might therefore be 
supposed to stand in some disfavour with his orthodox 



THE CLIMBINa OF ASTON HALL. 255 

master. He was not, at all events, a probable person 
to be chosen for the office of jailer or watchman on 
such an occasion. But otherwise, how to account for 
his presence there ? 

Tubal considered that it would be a considerable 
saving of labour if Adam was possessed of the key of 
the Dome-Chamber, and he could take it from him. - 
Of this latter he had no doubt ; his only apprehension 
lay in the chance of resistance provoking a struggle, 
which might be overheard. Still it was plain the hazard 
must be run : and forming his plan at a glance. Tubal 
mounted the intervening steps on tiptoe, seized the 
hand that held the knife in one vice-like clench, and 
with his other grasped and compressed the cook's 
yawning mouth. The yell he would have given in his 
first alarm was thus prevented, and Adam Blackjack 
glared wide awake, to find himself completely in the 
power of his adversary. 

' Peace I Do you kno^v me ? On your life, utter no 
sound ; you are in my hands for life or death ! "\Miat 
do you here, man ? ' said Tubal, in a low-breathed but 
stern and commanding utterance. 

' Tubal Bromycham I ' ejaculated the cook, relin- 
quishing his knife, and thrusting the hand from his 
mouth. ' Or is it a trick of the foul one ? Aroint you, 
fiend, if ye be Sir Thomas Holte under this form ! ' 

* I am even what I seem, man ; but again, what do 
you here? Are you appointed the fair prisoner's 
keeper ? ' said Tubal, more astonished at the wild and 
terrified look the master- cook cast at him than he could 
have been by any violence of defence. 

*Yea; but not in the sort you deem. Yea, I am 
appointed Dorothy Firebrace's keeper I Young Maud's 



256 

ghost, that has often haunted me on other occasions, 
appeared to me by my kitchen fire, all wet and streaming 
as they raised her from the Swan Pools down in the 
Pleasaimce, and bade me ascend even where you find 
me, and resist unto the death in case her betrayer and 
lustful master in the flesh meditated any wrong to her 
in the matters of her honour and chastity. But are 
you of Birmingham, then, in possession of the house ? ' 

' You have not the key, then, Adam ? ' said Tubal, 
eluding the question, and much perplexed by what he 
heard, but forming some not unlikely notion that the 
man's senses were disordered. 

* No, smith ; Sir Thomas hath ; he alone ! ' replied 
Adam ; adding eagerly, ' But if you come to redeem 
the jDOor stray lamb from the butchers, some slight of 
your mystery, Master Bromycham, will as easily do the 
turn.' 

' So it may, if I can calculate on your helpfulness, 
Adam. Will you hold me your lamp ? . resting assured 
that, on your least movement to thwart me, I plunge 
this knife with all the strength of my arm under your 
fifth rib ! ' said Tubal. 

' Ay will he, joyfully,' returned Adam ; ' for the young 
woman's presence and peril among us has so stirred up 
all the mire of old deeds in my soul, that I know not 
well what I think, or say, or do. Let us be quit of her 
at any price. I did think even to go to the witch w^ho 
curses this proud house of sin hereabouts, at fitting 
intervals, to beg her aid in the work.' 

' If it be so, I shall need none but yoiu's, good Adam,' 
responded Tubal, frankly restoring the Anabaptist his 
light; and, swinging his basket round from his shoulders, 
he took from it a ring of short hooked irons . skeleton 



THE CLIMBINa OF ASTON HALL. 257 

keys, in point of fact . to fit the wards he had designed 
and modelled in the numerous ingenious locks of Aston 
Hall ; for Tubal Bromycham was a smith at all modern 
divisions of the work. 

' The devil's claws, the devil's claws,' muttered Adam 
Blackjack, ruminating and stroking these instruments. 
' How they do stretch out and hook men down to flames 
and brimstone ! But you need light. Master Tubal. 
So do we all. What a plain text it is . " I am the light 
that shineth in darkness." Men's souls, like mine, are a 
darkness, verily I What light, though ? From whose 
lantern shall we take it ? I would there were a light 
like the sun's for men's minds as well as our bodies, for 
I am so exercised with torments groping for it, that 
whiles it seems to me much preferable to be all 
darkness, as I was in my days of unquickening. And, 
indeed, it appears to me often as if I should burst mine 
eye-balls yet, looking vainly through the mirk.' 

*Be silent,' said Tubal, at this juncture, relinquishing 
his first intention of proceeding at once to pick the lock. 
' We shall frighten her. I must speak to her first, to 
give notice we are friends that are at hand.' 

*Nay, for she is already in some sweet rest, under the 
assurance of my vigilance in her behalf. So I told her 
through the key-hole ; and she hath left off weeping and 
sobbing for a good time, since I myself have plainly 
been asleep,' said Adam, not appearing to find anything 
contrary in his assertion. 

Tubal nodded, once more applied his potent instru- 
ment, and with a mixture of dexterity and strength 
which probably surpassed in effect the handling of the 
proper key in other hands, almost immediately forced 
back the massive wards of the Dome-Cliamber lock. 

VOL. I. S 



258 THE armourer's daughter. 

It was plain the effort was not even overheard within; 
and, drawing the door of the j^rison room softly back, 
Tubal perceived, by Adam Blackjack's lantern, which he 
carefully shaded in the glare, Dorothy Firebrace lying 
tranquilly asleep on a truss of straw. 



259 



CHAPTEE XXVII. 

THE FLIGHT. 

Such was the provision Sir Thomas had caused to be 
made, imder his own eye, for his captive's sleeping 
accommodation. Creature comforts were a little better 
attended to ; not by the prisoner herself, however. A 
platter of game pasty remained apparently untasted ; 
a flagon of beer the same ; only a can of water ap- 
peared to Adam Blackjack's scrutiny diminished. 

' Poor soul ! yet I took care she had a whole partridge 
to her slice,' said Adam, compassionately surveying the 
beautiful slumberer. ' But, oh, when I think of the 
cruelties and threats I did exercise by my master's 
orders against the unhappy girl Maud, to compel her 
to marry me, and so shelter him from the evil report 
due to his villainies, what can I ever do to lighten my 
soul of the burden ? And to think when the poor girl 
fled with her child in her arms from her confinement 
under my cruel charge at Sutton Manor House, and was 
so flung away by Sir Thomas, and accursed by her hag- 
mother, that she must needs take refuge from us all in 
the deep, black, slimy pool among the eels ! Where is 
the redemption that can cleanse so black a murderer's 
breast as mine ? Baptism unto a new life, they say ; a 
baptism of blood, Come-What-Will Faithful Moggs 

S 2 



260 TEE armourer's daughter. 

will have it ! But, if so, whose blood ? What blood ? 
Where ? ' 

* Help me to save this dear child ; it shall count more 
than beads in your behalf, Adam,' said Tubal, now con- 
vinced that he might place trust in his unexpected ally. 

* Beads! I scorn the Popish mummery I ' exclaimed 
Adam, and in so loud a tone that he startled the sleeper 
awake, ere Tubal could interpose. 

* Grood heavens ! where am I ? What is this ? Be 
ye murderers ? ' exclaimed Dorothy, rising with an 
affrighted stare from her coarse couch, on which she lay 
in her clothes. 

' Do you not know me, Dorothy ? ' said Tubal, in a 
soothing tone, but which yet seemed to strike the 
armourer's daughter with some vague sense of dismay. 

* Tubal ! ' she exclaimed ; ' Tubal Bromycham ! But 
jou must not reproach me. Tubal. It was to my father's 
and the whole town's disgrace to so maltreat a guest and 
merchandiser. And I have heard things of you, Tubal, 
since I have been at Aston, that should make you as 
much . a good deal more . ashamed ! ' she concluded, 
evidently not having had time to retrieve her disordered 
faculties, or seeking, naturally enough, apologies for her 
own in the conduct of her betrothed. 

Tubal's excited countenance grew pale. But his was 
not a nature good at feigning in any guise. ' Let us 
not reproach each other, Dorothy,' he said, sadly. ' You 
also have passed, and at once, under the Holte sorcery ; 
but be content. The ill you know of me, as ypu think, 
sets you for ever free from a betrothal which I have 
often deemed was the first pressure of a yoke you 
would never have borne to put your neck wholly into. 
I come now to redeem you from your captivity only as 



THE FLIGHT. 261 

a friend, as a brother ! But there is no moment of time 
to be lost.' 

' It is true, then, you love the haughty daughter of 
this house, whose very glance seems as it would spurn 
princes ? ' returned Dorothy, with almost an expression 
of scorn, and it is very possible her feeling as a woman 
and rival beauty were somewhat painfully aroused, for 
she added the irretrievable words, ' A high-born lady, 
for whose sake you have uncomplainingly endured vile 
shames and indignities, such as they do report to me 
about Aston ? ' 

' Merciless words, but true,' groaned Tubal. ^ Yet it 
is not for my sake . it is for your father's . for this 
Edward Holte's sake even, if it so please you. I pray 
you to follow me at once, and escape from this den of 
proud and masterful vengeance and oppression.' 

' For Edivard Holte's sake I ' repeated Dorothy, per- 
haps rather .shocked herself at this plain apprehension 
of her inward feeling. ^ How do I know but that you 
desire merely to redeem the only hostage of his safety, 
from his father's hands, in my person ? Why are you 
here ? How ? Is there an exchange of ^Drisoners be- 
tween the town and Aston ? ' 

' No, nor will be,' returned Tubal, passionately. ' Sir 
Thomas has sent for aid from the King's nephew ; which 
when he receives . if he retains you as the pledge for 
his son's safety . he will immediately attack and destroy 
your native town, and bring your father to some harmful 
doom ! ' 

Dorothy briefly considered how probable all this was, 
and of the everlasting feud that would thence arise 
between her father's town and Aston Hall. Tubal 
followed up the argument by a rapid statement of the 



262 THE armoueeb's daughter. 

threats he had heard fall from Sir Thomas Holte against 
her personally, reminded her of his hard and implacable 
nature, and declared to her the agonising grief of her 
father, until she was nigh overcome. But the condition 
she nevertheless affixed to her compliance powerfully 
struck Tubal, and dwelt ever after on his memory. 
' Swear to me,' she said, ' that you take Edward Holte 
under your safeguard, if I leave his sire's custody thus ! 
I can trust you, Tubal, but no other of those who are 
sedition-stirrers now in Birmingham ! ' 

Strange, too, and momentous in its revelation, was 
Tubal Bromycham's reply : 

' I swear to you so, Dorothy, by my love for Arabella 
Holte . by my hope to retrieve, as a knight and noble, 
that place in her affection which she has disdained to 
allot to the mechanic artisan ! Come, come away I ' 

Aided by Adam Blackjack, who had the keys of the 
great store-loft, escape thenceforth was easy enough. 
The fugitives had but to cross that, to descend a long 
spiral staircase, to draw the inner bolts of a massive 
arched door, when they emerged on the circling terrace 
of Aston Hall, and, after exchanging a few words of 
parting good- will with the master- cook, betook them- 
selves to a rapid and unmolested return over the Park 
to Birmingham. 



263 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

MOENING DEVOTIONS AT ASTON HALL. 

It was early morning at Aston Hall. A bright sun shone 
over wood and glade, green-swelling upland and broad- 
sloping vale ; the purple-heathered wastes of Sutton 
Chase, thickly scattered with trees that became a forest 
on the skirts, sent a bright sweet-breathed breeze to the 
stately mansion gates ; the deer sprung from their dewy 
coverts, and boimded in frolicsome troops to the open 
wilds, as if inviting the hunter's eager pursuit . when 
the numerous household of Sir Thomas Holte, aroused 
at the customary daybreak hour, and having completed 
the first tasks of the day, assembled, according to wont, 
in the Hall Chapel. And there the haughty master of 
the mansion himself, escorting his lady and daughter, 
and treated on all sides with a ceremonial deference that 
would scarcely now be paid to a prince, deigned to pre- 
sent himself, cloaked, hat in hand, with trimmed beard 
and locks, to share the religious exercise considered in 
those times the due commencement of a Christian gen- 
tleman's day. 

But it is doubtful whether Sir Thomas would have 
preserved the proper patience and humility for the task 
. had he known from the fii-st what tidings were in store 
for him. 



264 THE armourer's daughter. 

Indeed, the fact of the case, as regarded this, appeared 
but too plainly when, in the midst of the meek chap- 
lain's (Mr. Lane's) brief exhortation after the morning 
prayer, a poor-looking fellow made his way into the 
loftily-lighted and stately apartment dedicated as a 
chapel at Aston Hall, and timorously crouching and 
cringing at every step, asked for his worship Sir Thomas 
Holte. Adam Blackjack, who was sitting with the 
other domestics on one of a range of wooden benches, 
in the rear of the chapel, but with' closed eyes, and with 
a soured, disgusted expression, almost as if he was par- 
taking, against his will, of some bitter medicine, glared, 
startled at once, at the enquirer, and recognised him 
instantly as Simon Fairservice, ostler at the Black Boy, 
in Birmingham. He then shook his head, as if to re- 
prehend the intrusion, and rigidly closed his eyes again ; 
but Sir Thomas Holte, observing what took place from 
a high damask-curtained pew, where he usually sat 
apart from the vulgar throng of worshippers, arose and 
beckoned to the stranger to approach. 

' You come from Birmingham, fellow, doubtless ? ' 
he exclaimed, indecorously interrupting the chaplain's 
gently-murmured utterance. ' Bring you me tidings 
from the sedition-mongers there, or from Master Grrim- 
sorwe, whom I sent last night with a message to them, 
from which he has not returned ? . only my coach and 
horses, that for some cause they did not think fit to 
steal, after a tedious tarriance at the unlawful barriers 
raised to bar entrance into the town.' 

Sir Thomas, be it remarked, never mentioned 
Eichard Grimsorwe in any personal relationship to him- 
self in the presence of Lady Holte. But the pale lady 
herself grew paler yet upon the words. ' Come you from 



MOKNING DEVOTIONS AT ASTON HALL. 265 

my son, Master Edward Holte, good fellow ? ' she also 
eagerly exclaimed. 

Simon, who stuttered exceedingly in his speech, and 
was, besides, alarmed at the stately presence in which 
he found himself, said something quite unintelligible in 
reply, bowing to his shoe leathers. But he presented a 
piece of paper, folded in the form of a letter, which was 
probably much more intelligible. Snatching it, break- 
ing the seal, and perusing the contents, the Master of 
Aston Hall broke into a torrent of exclamations of 
wonder and rage. 

There was reasons, certainly, for both emotions. 

The letter was from Eichard Grrimsorwe, indeed, and 
commenced by upbraiding his sire, in guarded but 
sufficiently wounding terms, for his forgetfulness of his 
promises to keep the armourer's daughter securely as 
a hostage at Aston, for the safety of his brother and 
himself from the exasperation of the townsfolk. The 
damse], he stated, it was universally known in Birming- 
ham, had returned to her father's house, under escort 
of her betrothed, the insolent smith, Tubal Bromycham, 
who boasted that he had set her free without an attempt 
of let or hindrance at Aston Hall ! 

Sir Thomas read only thus far, when, yelling out 
that the thing could not be so, that it was an utter im- 
possibility, he snatched up a ponderous key, which he 
had laid on the velvet cushion before him at his prayers, 
and strode out of the chapel, followed by several of his 
domestics ; perhaps more curious to ascertain the truth 
of the strange intelligence than in the expectation of 
being of assistance. 

Among these was Adam Blackjack, with a smile 
of sinister and occult significance gleaming over his 



266 THE armourek's daughter. 

sardonic visage. The messenger also conceived he had 
some right to attend, though with evident dismay and 
distance, as if he feared some likelihood of sharing the 
punishment of the announced want of vigilance at the 
Hall. 

On arriving at the Dome-Chamber, Sir Thomas, how- 
ever, found some reason to hope still that all was well. 
The door was as securely fastened as he had left it. 
Adam Blackjack had, indeed, made it his particular and 
rather singular request to Tubal that he would return 
the bolt to its proper place when Dorothy's escape was 
effected. But the moment Sir Thomas put in his key 
and had opened the door, the true state of things 
appeared in the complete emptiness of the lofty dun- 
geon I 

It may be imagined how this discovery affected the 
choleric lord of Aston Hall. No one dared to speak to 
him for some time while his fury vented itself. Yet 
even in him this passion was somewhat modified by the 
astonishment that took possession of him as he contem- 
plated the void. ^ But, my good heavens ! how has all 
this come to pass ? There must be connivance . treason 
among ye, rogues ! ' he yelled to the affrighted and 
shrinking servants. 

Adam Blackjack, the only guilty one, alone remained 
firm and unmoved. 

' 'Tis much like witchci^aft, worshipful sir,' he said, 
with a smile whose bitter causticity he could not quite 
suppress. ' There is a witch, you wot well, who is the 
sworn enemy of you and of all of us under your roof; 
and it is full time your worship saw better into it, for 
none other but a witch could have opened these doors 
and closed them again, unheard and unseen, or had the 



MOKNING DEYOTIONS AT ASTON HALL. 267 

malice to work you and your honourable sons so great 
damage as setting tlie fair wench loose must needs be at 
this time.' 

' The witch, Maud Grimsorwe ? Villain, I see thou 
dost flout at me I Would she so have imperilled her 
own grandson as to do this mischief to me, however 
much she might desire that ? 'Tis far likelier thy gloomy 
black-blooded self has conspired against thy master and 
feeder; which, if I should but once discover ' 

' Ay, what then, what then, Sir Thomas, my master 
and feeder ? ' returned Adam, with a sudden fierceness 
and challenge in his manner that arrested Sir Thomas's 
angry s^^eech, partly with astonishment. And it was 
strange the effect produced by the bold, almost the 
defying, tone of the master-cook to his angry lord. 

' Why, then,' the baronet only answered, in a much 
softened and retracting accent, 'why, then, man, I would 
but strip my apron from thy forelegs, and send thee to 
cant and snuffle psalms with thy friends, the Anabap- 
tists, in Birmingham, on much shorter commons than 
ever you fared in my house.' 

' I shall find listeners there, then. Sir Thomas, to 
many a curious tale ! ' the cook replied, still in very 
gloomy and menacing accents. ^But the hour of my 
deliverance,' he continued in muttering undertones, as 
to himself, ' has not yet sounded ! Or can it be that 
the fleshpots of Egypt detain me from heavenly manna 
in the wilderness ? Oh ! if I could but shake off at once, 
and at this moment, the spell of the witch, and of the 
apparition, and of her blue-skinned son, who some say 
was born while his mother was a-drowning I If she was 
burned, now, perhaps the apparition would cease ; and 
then, what power would the man Grimsorwe have to 



268 THE armourer's daughter. 

rule my will to so much worse wickedness, I say ? 
You ask why the witch should do you the harm we see. 
Sir Thomas?' the mind-unhinged fanatic continued, with 
a sudden start of recollection. ' Out upon it I can she 
not save her grandson by some impery, and leave your 
heir only in the hands of your enemies ? ' 

Sir Thomas eagerly returned to his letter upon this, 
and exhibited so much complaisance to the strange 
fancies of his cook as to read aloud to him what 
followed. 

Eichard Grrimsorwe went on to complain that he 
himself had fallen into still worse and more implacable 
hands than his beloved brother . into those of a direct 
agent and officer of the usurping Parliament ; charged 
with treason against the State, for no other reason than 
that he had made application to the lawful authorities 
of the town to effect that brother's release. That he 
was in momentary apprehension of being sent a prisoner 
to London . debarred all sight and speech with the ob- 
ject of their affectionate interest, and under close sur- 
veillance at the agent in question's head-quarters. That 
a forcible rescue was meanwhile more than ever out of 
the question, unless by a powerful force, the whole town 
being under arms, and in a state of open rebellion, 
under the leadership of Armourer Firebrace and Tubal 
Bromycham ; nay, of men much wilder and more un- 
governable in their notions, who appeared to project the 
overthrow of every form of lawful authority. Already 
the propriety was openly discussed of seizing upon the 
Moat House, and expelling the Crown-Bailiff. A noted 
fanatic preacher had full possession of the ear of the 
populace, and lu-ged upon them the necessity of turning 
the regular clergyman of Birmingham out of his bene- 



MOENING DEVOTIONS AT ASTON HALL. 269 

fice, and having himself exalted in the place. And to 
complete the wild and ruinous disorder of men's minds 
and events, Eichard Grrimsorwe concluded with the two 
most exasperating revelations he could contrive : on the 
one hand, the audacious smith, Tubal Bromycham, de- 
clared himself the lawful heir and re'presentative of the 
ancient lords of Birmingham ; while on the other, a 
portion of the lowest populace openly avowed their wish 
and resolution to level all ranks and deo-rees to their 
own. 

Grimsorwe well knew nothing could be more annoy- 
ing to his father than the bare notion of a pretendant to 
the stately territorial title he projected for himself, with 
a grant of the Crown rights in Birmingham, as a reward 
for the services he purposed rendering. It was Sir 
Thomas Holte's frequently avowed purpose to die Earl 
of his neighbouring towni. But that the rival to his 
high titular hopes should be the hated Tubal would, 
Grimsorwe believed and purposed, inflame his indigna- 
tion beyond all the restraints of prudence. 

The necessity of the traitor's deeper plans, however, 
required that he should mention that certain of the 
Parliament forces were immediately assembling for the 
defence of Birmingham. And this partially enforced 
upon Sir Thomas Holte a degree of patience and for- 
bearance he might not otherwise have exhibited. 

' It were madness . nothing but certain defeat and 
disgrace even,' he muttered, 'to march upon the prepared 
town with my unarmed rapscallions ! What must be 
done? what must be done? I must abide the Prince's 
answer. Meanwhile, honest fellow,' he said to the Black 
Boy ostler, who was looking on with knees crooked with 



270 THE armourer's daughter. 

meanness and fear, ' my son recommends you, on safe 
delivery of this letter, to a silver crown from my pocket. 
Here it is. Return as quietly as you came, and let 
them not know in Gath of our grief and desolation until 
we can better show our resentment of the same.' 



271 



CHAPTEE XXIX. 

PRINCE RUPERT. 

The haughty Lord of Aston was thus compelled to 
await, in a state of the most fretful and exasperated 
anxiety and alarm, the result of his entreaty for aid 
to the King's commanders in the neighbouring county 
of Worcester. 

And not only had he now the greatest reason to be 
apprehensive for the safety of his two sons in the hands 
of excited enemies, reports of whose strange and wild 
proceedings in their outbreak grew hourly in those 
qualities, until the inhabitants of Aston Hall almost 
passed into the belief that the townsmen of Birmingham 
were literally, and in all the forms, gone ^nad. Con- 
scious of his imprudence in betraying before Dorothy 
Firebrace the King's dangerous condition in his quarters, 
Sir Thomas was, besides, tormented with the reflec- 
tion that perhaps some harmful use might be made of 
the divulging. And yet he could not bring himself to 
disclose how unfit he was for trust, by sending Charles 
warning of what he had done. 

All his hope remained in the influence in the King's 
favour he could not but conceive his son, Edward 
Holte, must have Avith the armourer's daughter. Yet, 
on the other hand, might not his own unhandsome 



272 THE armourer's daughter. 

conduct towards her have destroyed that ? The possi- 
bility of speedy aid from Worcestershire remained the 
only consolation. 

Sir Thomas counted the hours and the moments 
necessary to elapse before he could receive a reply to 
his demands for aid. He could confide, he well knew, 
in the speed and goodwill of his messenger, Eobin Fal- 
coner. But difficulties might well intervene. The 
Marquis of Hertford, and other great western lords, 
had, indeed, under cover and support of the Eoyalist 
cavalry detached to their aid, raised very considerable 
forces in the counties where their interest chiefly lay. 
But, like most of the King's levies at the time, these 
were ill-provided with arms, and scarcely under any 
kind of martial discipline. The Parliament had, more- 
over, opposed a small but well-appointed army to these 
volunteers, under the Earl of Bedford, on whose advance 
there were very general reports ; the marquis and his 
principal gathering were retiring rapidly upon the bor- 
ders of Wales. The only chance was, therefore, that 
the King's horse might still remain in some position, 
covering the retreat, to allow of a portion being des- 
patched to suppress the new and menacing outbreak in 
the midland. 

Sir Thomas counted the hours ; and not a few were 
necessary, even in the quietest times, to traverse the 
distance between Birmingham and Worcester. The 
extreme badness, hilly, and devious character of the 
roads to be traversed, rather than the actual distance, 
made its five-and-thirty miles a many hours' journey, 
at the best speed of man and horse. But there was 
also to be taken into calculation the i^ossibility of 
enemies being encountered, or avoided by long detours, 



PRINCE RUPERT. 273 

and Sir Thomas could only hope to see his servant sent 
on the business again, about the end of the second day 
of his mission. 

It was the third, however, before Robin Falconer 
returned, and then on a lamed and all but exhausted 
steed. At another time, a severe rating would have 
awaited the domestic who had brought home a horse in 
such a condition ; but Sir Thomas was too eager to learn 
results to concern himself about means. ^ What news, 
what news, Eobin Falconer ? ' he exclaimed, as the man 
threw himself from his bespattered and sweating beast. 
' Grood or bad ? Speak it in a word, for my heart is 
sick with expectation.' 

'Here is a letter, your worship, from the Prince's 
Highness own hand!' panted Robin, producing a large 
folded parchment like a piece of paper from his doublet. 
'It will speak better than . I . can. My breath is 
gone with mere haste I ' 

Sir Thomas eagerly snatched the document. 
It was directed, in a large coarse scrawl, ' To the 
w^orthy Knight Baronet, Sir Thomas Halte; at his house 
at ^c to?!, nigh BromachamV And the curious mis- 
spelling of the words, in the first place, attracted 
some frowning attention on his part. Robin Falconer 
hastened to explain. ' 'Twas writ on a drum-head, sir, 
with a gauntleted hand that had been laying about it, 
but some half hour before, on rebels' costards (head- 
pieces) till the sword it held was like a bloody flail ; 
and his Highness speaks English but foreignly, much 
more writes it; and I had no horn-book skill to help 
him at the work.' 

' Truly,' said Sir Thomas, brightening up wonder- 
fully, ' if this be from the Prince's own hand, I marvel 

VOL. I. T 



274 THE armourer's daughter. 

not, for though his Highness's mother was an Enghsh 
princess, his father, the Palatine King of Bohemia, was 
a German ; and 'tis a great honour he doth me to indite 
to me with his own hand. Truly, a royal seal!' the 
aristocratic baronet concluded, turning the letter over, 
and surveying, with great satisfaction, the enormous 
piece of wax, deeply impressed with a magnificent coat 
of arms, the supporters being the lion and unicorn 
of England. These were surmounted by two crowns, 
which attested Prince Eupert's descent on both sides 
from kings ; though one was but that luckless pretender 
to the rank, the Palatine Frederic, who lost his o\^ti 
comfortable princedom in the attempt to achieve the 
exaltation. 

Sir Thomas's anxious features changed in expression 
to one of swelling importance and pompous self-appre- 
ciation, as, after a deliberate survey of this royal attes- 
tation, he desired a page, who happened at the moment 
to be crossing the space before the porch, to bring him 
his lady's silver scissors. ' We must not break and mar 
so picture-like a piece of die-work,' he said; and in spite 
of the momentous nature of the contents he had cause 
to expect, the builder of Aston Hall forbore to tamper 
with the stately 'closure until he had received the in- 
strument by which the letter could be opened without 
spoiling the seal. Nor was he much surprised, in the 
anxious state of mind among the relatives of Edward 
Holte, to find that his daughter Arabella brought the 
scissors. But even Arabella did not venture to hand 
them to him without a deep curtsey ; and then stood 
silently by, expecting what explanation might be 
deigned. 

Sir Thomas read the document at first to himself; 



rrjNCE KUPERT. 2Z5 

but the bright eyes fixed upon him easily discerned that 
the emotions roused by the perusal were of a proudly 
excited order. ' x\nd Grod be praised ! ' exclaimed Sir 
Thomas, at the conclusion, with a burst of triumphant 
satisfaction. 'The Prince's Highness advertises me 
that he will be at Aston Hall himself . even he himself 
. at the head of a strong party of horse, as fast on the 
heels of my messenger as an}^ commodity of his business 
near Worcester will permit ! : This very night, perchance ! 
But read our royal captain's words yourself, Arabella, 
and report to your mother the certain nigh deliverance 
of her son. Aloud, aloud I ' 

Miss Holte as eagerly complied with the impatient 
old man's order, and read as follows : . 

' Grood Sir Thomas Holte, . Your message has reached 
me, and sets my blood a-churning at the account of the 
singular injuries and insults offered to his Majesty's 
greatness and authority in the town you mention. The 
dangers and commodities of the place, for all martial 
uses and the service of his Majesty, I do also plainly 
perceive ; as well by your averrings, as the witnessing 
of the noblemen and officers of these western parts who 
are with me here. I have drawn the first blood in these 
wars, and given the enemy's cavalry a check and over- 
throw, which sets me free for operations wherever it 
may most concern his Majesty's service I should be. 
Meseems there is nothing more germane to that matter 
than to punish the rebellious artisans of your town, and 
restore them, with a bloody and swift punishment, to 
true obedience. And so important do I deem the office, 
that I will lead the score or two troopers I deem suffi- 
cient, on your report, for the purpose. Looke to see me 
at as early as I can be assured my Lord Hertford is in 

T 2 



276 

some safe shelter with the King's new levies, which I 
expect every hour. Eesting your friend . Rupert.' 

A species of postscript "was added : ' N'ota . the good 
villein you sent me did special service in the affray, 
and should receive some recompense at so loyal a 
master's hands. He will tell you what things chanced, 
and how.' 

' A gallant . a true soldier's letter ! ' exclaimed Ara- 
bella, with vivid admiration and delight in her looks. 
* Such a Prince as this will stand upon no parleying and 
shilley-shall eying with those iosolent smiths I I reckon 
my brother already restored to us. But his Highness 
speaks of some action lately ensued, Eobin Falconer. 
Were you in view of it ? What fell out, good fellow ? 
Tell my father, prithee, if he gives you leave.' 

' Speak, Eobin,' conjoined Sir Thomas. 

Eobin Falconer, who was looking rather puzzled to 
hear himself styled ' a good villein,' blushed up to the 
eyes upon the question, and hesitated a good deal at 
first in his reply. 

'It was but my chance, an't please you, young 
madam,' he said. ' Any other would have taken it, 
and done better on't, no doubt; though the Prince's 
Highness is pleased to make some special mention of 
my part ; and his Highness hath seen the wars abroad, 
which we in England have not, I have heard my grand- 
father say, since the grand Armada and the Spanish 
Inquisitors, with their thumb-screws aud racks, were 
wrecked and riven from our shores. And so, faith, then, 
lady-mistress, I scarce knew it w^as a battle I was in 
until it was all over and done ! But this was how it 
happened to me, if your honours please to hear it 
told.' 



PRINCE EUPERT. 277 

' Groing on your worship's errand,' Robin continued, 
on the impatient gesture of assent he received, ' you 
may believe Rouge-Dragon and I let no grass grow 
beneath our feet ; neither had we much other let or 
hindrance on the way, save the steepness of the hills 
and rottenness of the roads, where choice could not be 
made by reason of its being night, until about day- 
break, when we topped the Lickey; and so on, at a 
mended pace, down upon Upton Warren, where the 
rabbits be in such plent}^, you trample as much fur as 
grass and furze over the waste. By Droitwich Salt Pits, 
however, the mettle in us had a little wearied, and I 
was forced, much against my mind, to give poor Rouge- 
Dragon a taste or two of whip and spur ; but when we 
came upon Handlip Hill he was about dead-beaten, and 
had slipped a shoe, so I was fain to stop for a bait at 
Astwood village and look for a farrier, which lost me a 
couple of the hours I had gained. But " The more 
haste the less speed " is an old proverb, your honour ; 
and it turned out lucky after all, for Rouge-Dragon and 
I could never have done what we did but for the rest and 
inner comforting we took there. And Rouge-Dragon, 
my lady-mistress, drinks all manner of drinks as plea- 
santly as any Christian that ever bestrode him, and I 
must say we made little of a couple of gallons of perry 
between us at Astwood. But he had his oats, and I had 
my bread and cheese . which are both dry meats . to 
wash down.' 

* Prithee, less of thy horse and thyself, and more of 
the Prince and the battle,' interrupted Miss Holte ; but 
her sire overruled. ' Let him tell his story his own 
way, Arabella ; there are none shorter with this manner 
of men,' Sir Thomas replied. 'Go on, Robin, or let it 



278 THE akmouiier's daughter. 

be supposed thy horse has munched his bread and 
cheese and thou thy oats.' 

' Nay, sir, 'twas the other way,' Robin resumed, but 
evidently considerably thrown out of his track. ' Still 
its all one, as your honour says, in respect of the Prince 
and the battle. I am coming to them as fast as I can ; 
but it was needful to show why it was past high noon- 
day when Eouge-Dragon and I c^me in sight of Rainbon 
Hill, just over Worcester town, with the London Road 
from Evesham full in sight over Warndon Waste, when 
what should we come upon, all of a sudden, but the 
prettiest sight, sure, that eyes can see . had it been put 
on our side of the question, your worship. A whole little 
army of horse and foot, with banners displayed, march- 
ing as close and compact, with all its pikes bristling and 
sparkling in the sun, as the back of the procupine they 
had at Brummagem Fair, last that ever was, from the 
Injees. And a gTeat company of horse hanging on it as 
neat as fringe on a hammer-cloth, with others thrown 
out far in front and rear, on watch and ward over the 
main body. 

' By all which signs I misdoubted in my own mind at 
once what crop-eared knaves they were ; for all who have 
seen the London rebels say they move as slow and steady 
as a tortoise, while our jolly fellows go a-fighting as 
loose and gaily at their ease as to a football match. And 
sorry enough was I to see that, at the rate they and I 
were going at, they Avould speedily be in possession of 
all the ways and entrances into the town before me. 
And to make matters worse . though I had heard every- 
where that the King's horse was for certain in Worcester 
. no manner of suspicion or look-out seemed to be en- 
tertained on their part. And I made sure that nothing 



PRINCE RUPERT. 279 

was likelier than that the Parliament men had stolen a 
march or two upon ours, and would be pell-mell among 
them at unawares, with the river beliind to hamper 
escape. Whereupon I made up my mind at once what 
I would do.' 

*My good fellow, what didst thou?' Sir Thomas 
eagerly interrupted: 'I'll warrant, study rather our 
friends' safety than thy own ! ' 

' I told Eouge-Dragon how the case stood, and that 
we must gain Rainbow Hill before those villainous 
rebels, upon which he gave a snort and a shrill-out ; but 
as I live by bread, and your honour's too, never needed 
touch of spur or switch our whole gallop over the waste ! 
And he was not much to blame if the noise he so made 
attracted our enemies' attention on the further side ; he 
meant well, poor lad, and as much as to say, " Trust me 
for a winner ! " But so it befel, and I could espy that the 
Londoners' cavalr}^ took the alarm at once, and were 
thrown instantly forward with a score or so of troopers 
on the swiftest horses to cut off my advance. For your 
honour sees I was going down a line from the north-west 
and they coming at a cross upon it from due sou'-west to 
Rainbow Hill, and I had the longer stretch to get over. 
And didn't we do it a gallant pace, neither, since we 
won the raoe by a good five minutes, and dashed into 
the town time enough for trumpets to sound, and the 
Prince to gather a small number of his troopers to- 
gether ! At whose head he did nevertheless, without a 
moment's pause or delay, suddenly rush out of the town 
and fall upon the Roundheads just as they were coming 
to a halt, and steadying themselves for the arrival of 
their infantry, on the slope of the hill. Marry, I rode 
in their company ; but not so much for bravery as lack 



280 THE armourer's daughter. 

of good sense and guidance, for I had no weapon till I 
possessed myself of one of the enemy's carbines,. and 
fell a' braining with that I But it was the noble Prince 
himself killed their commander . one Colonel Sandys . 
with his own hand and sword, fairly beating him from 
his horse by fine force ! Then the rest turned tail and 
galloped in full rout back upon their main body, and we 
had the hewing and hacking of them at pleasure for 
upwards of a mile, and put the rogues on foot into such- 
like consternation and dismay that they drew away back 
again to such a distance that his Highness himself, 
w^earied of the pursuit, bade us all return. But Eouge- 
Dragon and I found ourselves then so spent that we were 
forced to rest a night upon it, or die.' 

* Aha I aha ! but this is good news indeed, and puts to 
rights the silly story out of Birmingham concerning the 
standard at Nottingham,' exclaimed Sir Thomas glee- 
fully. * Marr}^, this is the sort of leader and man for the 
times ! A few turns of Prince Kupert, and the villains 
will be all on their knees, with ropes round their necks. 
And to think that it should be his Majesty's royal 
nephew who is the first to tap the bad blood of the 
state ! But who hath a fairer right, being English by the 
mother's side ? Look for good preferment in my son's 
troop of horse, Eobin ! Faith, thou shalt carry the flag ! 
. the enemy will not easily take it from thee. But no, 
that may not be ; his Majesty's commands are strict 
that all officers must be of gentleman's degree. I'll 
find out some good to do thee, nevertheless: meanwhile, 
unstiffen yourselves, ye twain, in stable and pantry, and 
look that Kouge-Dragon lacks not his hoop of ale any 
more than thyself, good fellow I Hie in now, daughter, 
and tell your mother these great news. I must make 



PRINCE EUPEET. 281 

all in readiness to receive the royal Prince and his 
company.' 

' And so should my mother and myself, methinks, sir,' 
said Arabella, whose brilliant eyes sparkled like dia- 
monds, as she spoke, with some internal excitement. 
' Should I not, think you, put on my court suit of the 
gold jpaduasoy (a rich brocaded Italian silk), which you 
presented me when the queen-mother came from France, 
and her Majesty herself wondered at the art of the 
green lustre amid the threads ? ' 

' Ay, my girl . ay, my girl ; we cannot show too much 
honour to so brave and noble a Prince,' replied the fond 
though pride-consumed father; and as his glance fell on 
the bright beauty of the youthful woman who spoke, a 
vague but haughtily-ambitious notion crossed his mind, 
which, if put in words, might have run thus : . ' She is 
royal in her beauty as he can be in his birth. She is the 
daughter of the man who raised this sumptuous pile, 
and w^ho will soon achieve a peerage. He, though a 
prince, is a landless exile and fugitive. What if it is 
fated I should crown all my glories by mingling the 
blood of the Holtes with the blood-royal of England ! ' 

Arabella herself had her visions at the moment that 
might thus have kept pace with her father's. ' The 
King's nephew can be but young,' she mused. ^ So brave 
a soldier must be well inclined to love and courtesy. 
What a crown to all my conquests it would be . what a 
wonder and amaze to all my traducers and enviers . if I 
reckoned a Prince also among the hopeless servants and 
adorers of my charms ! I shall then have had the two 
extremes of men's conditions at my feet . a Prince and 
a town -mechanic . and I shall know that nothing can 
resist me where I will to conquer ! ' 



282 THE armourer's daughter. 

The beautiful coquette was about to return into the 
Hall with this ambitious fancy glimmering in her mind, 
when precisely at the moment a clattering of horse-feet 
was audible in the lane on the Aston village side of the 
lofty wall inclosing the domain in that direction. Cheer- 
ful blasts of trumpets followed; and while Sir Thomas 
and his fair daughter stood rooted to the spot with ex- 
pectation and surprise, a moving mass of plumed hats, 
glittering breast-plates, horses' heads, banners, lances, 
appeared above the level of the ornamental zigzag 
coping of the wall. 

'It is the Prince, or his vanguard. We are dis- 
covered: we must not now trick ourselves out more 
showily than we stand. Come with me, Arabella, to 
receive his Highness; you are more wont to courtl}' 
presences than I,' said Sir Thomas, looking, in fact, 
considerably flustered and alarmed, and drawing his 
daughter's arm into his own, somewhat against her will, 
for she rather hung back while the baronet strode for- 
ward, endeavouring to put a stout face on his inner 
failing of nerve. But he certainly did not expect to be 
greeted by a prince in such a trooper-like style as he 
was, when now a stern, commanding voice shouted from 
over the wall, ' Ho, good people here ; open your gates, 
in the King'^s name, to his soldiers ; or must I set a 
petard (a kind of explosive shell) to the work ? ' 

* What King's officer can this rude man be ? ' said Sir 
Thomas, not a little indignantly, to Kobin Falconer . 
who, he found, had his answer in readiness. 

* An't please your worship, 'tis the glorious Prince ! ' 

' Prince Rupert ! ' repeated Sir Thomas, in astonish- 
ment. 

Grlancing upward on the word, he perceived a dark 



PRINCE RrPERT. 283 

ofrim countenance crlarinsr at him from over the wall. 
Of noble features certainly, and strongly carved, with a 
considerable resemblance to the Stuart family in the 
long, saturnine lines, but with a fierceness and haughti- 
ness mingled with all the fire and energy of the expres- 
sion which the baronet was quite unwont to associate 
with the idea of royalty . the mildly melancholy and 
gracious visage of Charles I., presenting the beau ideal 
of a noble gentleman, born to an august but sorrowful 
doom . was the type of comparison in his mind, with 
which this savage, powder-blackened trooper's little 
harmonised. 

But there could no longer be a doubt on the subject; 
and his own natural pride and disdain of mastery rally- 
ing to his aid. Sir Thomas Holte stepped forward with 
answering imperiousness of tone and gesture. 

'Any man is welcome to Aston Hall, in the King's 
name ; but- by much more the King's nephew, sir, if you 
be such. The gates shall be freely opened ; and let me 
trust you keep your warlike munitions for the King's 
enemies, not his friends, whereof Sir Thomas Holte . 
which is myself . have proved me one, to my much loss 
and suffering.' 

' Pardon, worth}^ knight ! ' replied the commander, 
obviously struck by this style of reception, and showing 
a first sign of civility by raising his steel-lined hat. 
* But for aught I knew, your house might have passed 
over, with your heir, to rebel keeping. Henceforth, I 
trust, all will be well with both.' 

Satisfied with this apology. Sir Thomas directed the 
great gate to be opened by his domestics, and the Prince 
rode in first and alone. 

It was afterwards recalled, as an unlucky omen, that 



284 THE armourer's daughter. 

the Prince's powerful snow-white charger stumbled as it 
passed the threshold. Indeed, it nearly brought its 
shoulder to the ground, startled by the sudden and 
ferocious baying of the chained mastiffs on either side of 
the entrance. But the tall and powerful rider sat as if 
he had been an integral portion of the animal he be- 
strode, and almost instantly regaining the mastery by 
a fierce, strong check of the reins, horse and man became 
fixed and rigid as if suddenly changed into a statuary 
group in bronze. 



285 



CHAPTER XXX. 

THE ANABAPTISTS. 

Meanwhile the progress of events in Birmingham, up 
to the arrival of Prince Rupert at Aston Hall, requires 
to be detailed. 

On leaving his intended son-in-law at the Welsh 
Cross on the night of his daughter's imprisonment, 
highly indignant at Tubal's supposed want of proper 
feeling in the misfortune, Armourer Firebrace returned 
to his house in Deritend with a view to make sure of 
what he deemed the now sole remaining pledge of her 
safety and restoration. This was, of course, the person 
of Edward Holte, who w^as there detained a captive ; 
already certainly, one would have thought, under 
sufficiently close care and guardianship. The two men 
whom Cromwell, with intuitive sagacity, had chosen for 
the purpose were admirably well adapted to it, though 
by different qualities. 

Physical power could not be considered the attribute 
of the elder watchman . Sisyphus the bellows-blower, 
as he was generally styled in Birmingham. 

He was an old soldier of the wars in Grermany, in 
which James I. had timidly and underhandedly aided 
in the attempts to retrieve the unfortunate Palatine 



286 THE akmourer's daughter. 

Frederic's dominions, and support the cause of Pro- 
testantism against the tyranny of the House of Austria. 
The English people, almost in spite of their Grovern- 
ment, had joined with the enthusiasm of crusaders in 
these vain and ill-managed efforts ; and among other 
fanatic zealots of a warlike turn, Sisyphus had volun- 
teered in his youth in the regiment raised by Sir 
Horace Vere, and at the battle of Prague . where that 
valiant corps, maintaining the field to the last almost 
alone, w^as nearly cut to pieces . had the honour to lose 
his right arm by the shoulder, and his left hand by the 
wrist, under the hacking sabre of a pandour, who did 
not understand a cry for quarter in English. It is true 
that Sisyphus always persisted he had never asked for 
any, but was left for dead under a heap of other bleed- 
incr and mutilated carcases. 

How he returned to his native land and town was an 
unknown mystery. 

Many years had elapsed from the date of the decisive 
held in which he had so disastrously figured, when a 
maimed and miserable old beggar returned to Bir- 
mingham in place of the brave young zealot warrior 
who had quitted it. Very few remembered even the 
real name of the man, which was Gribeon Knippers. 
One that was conferred upon him accidentally stuck to 
him. 

Tubal Bromycham, taking compassion on his help- 
less condition, set his ingenuity to work, and fashioned 
him an iron hook, which served him in some sort in- 
stead of a hand. Particularly, it enabled him to grasp 
the handle of the great smith's bellows, in use at that 
at that time, and heave it so as to keep the furnaces 
aglow. The charity of the towTispeople backed Tubal's, 



THE ANABAPTISTS. 287 

and the maimed soldier was redeemed from absolute 
beggary by the wages of this occupation. 

Scanty enough, indeed, for his physical wants were, 
as reported, many and craving. And, doubtless, these 
unsatisfied corporeal desires reacted on his mind. It 
was the contrast of the devouring restlessness and fever 
of spirit visible in his countenance, with the patient 
monotony of his attitude and office, seated on a tree- 
trunk . for ever heaving at that for ever falling-back 
machine of wind, in Firebrace's factory, that had sug- 
gested to Edward Holte (then a mere schoolboy, fresh 
from his first dip into the classic poets) the name of 
Sisyphus for him . that, it is well known, of the un- 
fortunate, in Grecian mythology, who was condemned 
eternally to roll a stone up a hill in Tartarus, that as 
constantly rolled back. 

The singularity of the term, and its appropriateness 
when explained, fixed it in men's memories, and speedily 
effaced that of ' Grerman Gribby-Hook,' by which the 
maimed relic of the wars had at first been known in 
Birmingham. 

But this disfigured carcass speedily became noted in 
the town for even more remarkable characteristics of 
mind than body. 

In the general ferment of religious opinion and 
movement of ideas among the English people, it did 
not, indeed, at first seem strange that a person of the 
poorest, and apparently least qualified order of the 
populace, should set up for a theological teacher and 
guide. But amid all the extravagance and defiance of 
orthodox rules and restraint that prevailed, the doctrines 
and outward observances taught and enforced among 
the sect Sisyphus gradually formed around him in his 



288 THE armourer's daughter. 

native town, excited wonder and even dread and horror 
among its superior and well-to-do classes. 

The regular parson of Birmingham, Dr. Dugdale, who 
had been appointed for his high Arminian and, as they 
were deemed, papistical principles, by Archbishop Laud 
himself, declared that these were the pernicious and 
levelling doctrines of the furious Grerman fanatics who, 
under the name of Anabaptists, had infected that 
country with a blasphemous and devastating rebellion 
for many years after the dawn of the Reformation. 

Bloodily suppressed by the princes and nobles of 
Germany, the trampled embers were still believed to 
smoulder and glow in secret places, ready again to 
burst forth into destructive flames. And during his 
long sojourn in the country of Jack of Leyden, ^ Grer- 
man Gribby-Hook,' more known as '' Sisyphus the 
bellows-blower,' was believed to have picked up divers 
direful sparks, and to have set them now among the 
popular tow to blaze. 

The universal obliteration of all superiority in de- 
grees and rank . community of goods and wives . were 
reported to be among the least formidable, society- 
undermining principles advocated by this new and 
dreadful order of sectaries. The means by which they 
were to accomplish these results of combined Mormon- 
ism and Socialism were alleged to be of the most 
sanguinary and ferocious instilment. 

Not alone the destruction of the power and place of 
kings and nobles and priests, but of their persons, and 
by any means of assassination and violence, were inten- 
tions attributed in men's suspicions to the Anabaptist 
form of fanatic zeal. 

Moreover, their religious teachings were surmised to 



THE ANABAPTISTS. 289 

be some strange and appalling mixture of atheism and 
demon worship, and the rites and ceremonies observed 
in their secret meetings and initiations were declared 
of a hideously indecent and blasphemous description. 
In particular a form of baptism by adults in a state of 
nudity, in the presence of the congregation, had been 
denounced even to the Magistracy, and visited mth 
rigorous inquisition and punishment by a commission 
of the Star Chamber, in which Sir Thomas Holte had 
figured as a prosecutor, with all the vehemence and 
violence of his character. With the usual ineffec- 
tualness of religious persecution, it was currently 
believed ; novr, in latter times, becoming startling 
manifest. 

The propagator of this dangerous sect was, indeed, 
the very species of enthusiast to make it flourish among 
a populace like that which formed the lowest in Bir- 
mingham at the period. 

Ignorant and brutal to the last degree in their minds 
and manners . suffering under every species of physical 
discomfort and misery . toil-worn, crushed, and trampled 
on by all the superior classes of society;. and yet visited 
by the breath and impulse of the great master influ- 
ences of the age, in the desire for better things, 
spiritual and corporeal . no w^onder the discontent and 
turbid superstition of the times, stirred to their depths, 
gave a ready acceptance to the democratic and visually 
imaginative theories of the Anabaptists. The doctrines 
of Mahomet, clothed in pretendedly Christian forms . 
his paradise realised on earth . what could be more se- 
ductive to the popular fancy ? Mormonism in our days, 
which has built a city, and peopled a province, is 
nothing else, and has exhibited the influence of these 

VOL. I. u 



290 THE armourer's daughter. 

ideas on the ignorant and unhappy dregs of the Euro- 
pean communities, on a grand scale. 

And Sisyphus the bellows-blower was peculiarly well- 
adapted by nature and circumstances for the office he 
took upon himself. 

He had suffered in his proper person all the suffer- 
ings of his class . poverty, toil, mutilation . in their 
worst degrees. The latter calamity had almost dis- 
abled him from supplying the physical desires and 
longings that tormented his strong and ardent nature : 
to say nothing of the fanatic enthusiasm and ambition 
always remarkable in his character, and threw him as 
by a kind of necessity on the means of obtaining in- 
fluence for the purpose by swaying the minds of his 
fellows. 

His own was deeply impregnated with Grerman mys- 
ticism and visionariness ; and in the camps of the luck- 
less chief of the Protestant struggle in the provinces of 
the Austrian empire, doubtless it had become imbued 
with the darkest and wildest theories of Grerman fana- 
ticism. He possessed a species of eloquence always 
acceptable to the populace . disdainful of logic and 
sequence, but full of fire and passion, and a rude 
species of poetical inspiration in the language and tone. 
But, above all, Sisyphus was a man of doubtless 
courage, or rather of the most frantic audacity, when 
he chose ; savage and relentless in his moods, and ac- 
customed to scenes of violence and bloodshed. Little 
more was needed to make a dangerous sectarian leader 
in any age ; but in that,; when a civil war, inspired 
chiefly by religious fanaticism, had just burst forth, 
German Gibby-Hook was the very man to cut a great 
fi<yure on the stormy stage of events, had his lot cast 



THE ANABAPTISTS. 291 

him where they were prominent and decisive in the gaze 
of the world. 

We need say but little of his coadjutor in the guard 
of Edward Holte, and ardent disciple. Faithful Moggs ; 
although corporeally the main executive strength of the 
charge. 

Faithful Moggs was a young man, a butcher by 
trade . as was pretty apparent from his ferocious visage, 
his blood-stained arms, naked to the elbows, his no less 
horribly-hued garb of coarse blue baize, and the cleaver ' 
and steel at his girdle. 

He had the implicit reverence and devotion of a dog 
to its master towards his maimed teacher, and would as 
readily and recklessly have obeyed the impulse of his 
will. He it was who wielded the most reliable weapons 
of the party, in the shape of a pair of large pistols, 
ready loaded, and placed on a small table between them 
at the door," inside the prisoner's apartment. But their 
relative positions were yet more marked ia the fact that 
the tired slaughterman had been allowed to go to sleep 
on his arms, while Sisyphus, with his look of restless, 
wolfish vigilance, kept watch upon the prisoner's rest- 
lessness, ready to rouse his myrmidon to sudden action 
on the least appearance of occasion. 

Edward Holte had refused to retire to the bed pro- 
vided for him in the inner chamber of the Crown House, 
until the occasion of Mistress Dorothy Firebrace's pro- 
tracted absence was explained. 

The consternation diffused by this circumstance in 
the Firebrace family had not, in the first instance, it 
was likely, been shared by the captive Holte under its 
roof. Edward doubtless believed himself, at first, solely 
in possession of a sufficient and personally satisfactory 

U 2 



292 THE ARMOURERS DAUGHTER. 

explanation of what had now been for some time a sub- 
ject of the highest alarm and apprehension with him 
also. The interval necessary for the accomplishment 
of Dorothy's mission had long elapsed, and as the night 
had grown in lateness and darkness, so had his fears 
and perplexity. 

The beauty, the sprightliness, the generous self-de- 
votion and kindly feeling evinced towards himself by 
the armourer's daughter, had excited, as w^e have seen, 
the warmest corresponding sentiments in the breast of 
the young cavalier. And the notion that he had, per- 
haps, exposed her to some great disaster on his account 
. certainly to misconstruction and anger on the part of 
her friends and relatives . annoyed Edward a great deal 
more than his own evidently increasing peril, and the 
discomforts of his position. 

The grief and consternation of old Mahala herself 
had for some time yielded to the weariness and exhaus- 
tion of her years, and she sat asleep on a stool in a corner 
of the fire, in the great sitting-room of Firebrace's 
abode, with her apron over her withered and tear- 
blotched face, muttering yet uneasily in her repose. 
But Edward Holte was pacing the ample limits of his 
confinement with the restless movement of a native of 
the wilds caged for the first time ; absorbed in anxious 
rumination, in which the sinister and ill-omened aspects 
of his new custodians scarcely entered at all. If his eye 
encountered at times the implacable glitter of watchful- 
ness in the elder Anabaptist's steady glare, it was with 
scarcely a perception of its harmful meaning as re- 
garded himself personally. He only felt that this fierce 
and armed vigilance stood between him and the possi- 
bility of proceeding in any manner to the aid of the 



THE ANABAPTISTS. 293 

lovely and generous girl who had hazarded so much to 
serve him. 

What evil had befallen her? There was a wide 
choice of causes for distrustful apprehension to harass 
the luckless prisoner. The dark and little-traversed 
way . the wild deer . the furious bull . his easily irri- 
tated and recklessly passionate sire . the insidious 
counsels of his unlawful brother ; though Edward was 
far from divining all the Cain-like malignancy and 
villany of which Eichard Grrimsorwe had shown himself 
capable. Amid this fertility of possible calamities, 
which had really occured ? 

What rendered his state of mind still more distressing 
was that Edward dared not, in any manner, communi- 
cate his private grounds for apprehension. That would 
be to betray to her friends and townsfolk the assistance 
Dorothy was rendering to their supposed adversary. 

And yet his conscience stung him ever and anon most 
piercingly with the notion that he might thus be with- 
holding some needful aid and rescue to the fair girl. 
Several times he was on the point of stepping up to 
Sisyphus, for the last half-hour that had now elapsed, 
and begging him to inform some one who could follow 
in Mistress Firebrace's footsteps to Aston Hall, and 
ascertain her safety. But the fiercely fixed and menac- 
ing expression of the fanatic always checked and re- 
strained him. It seemed to Edward Holte that by 
putting Dorothy's secret in the possession of this man, 
he should be rather placing a weapon to her harm in a 
cruel grasp, than securing the assistance she might but 
too disastrously need. 

It may be imagined, therefore, that Edward distin- 



294 THE armourer's daughter. 

guished with a sudden throbbing of hopeful expectation 
the voice of Dorothy Firebrace's father demanding 
admission from the exterior of the chamber. But his 
heart sank almost as immediately in his breast, as the 
dismally excited tone of the request smote upon it. 



295 



CHAPTEK XXXI. 

YOUNG LOVE. 

Sisyphus grumbled sadly at having to rouse his execu- 
tive and comply with the summons, even of the assigned 
head of the great movement in the to'wn and master of 
the house. And Edward Holte was made rather start- 
lingly aware of the imminent danger of his position 
when Faithful Moggs, suddenly roused, sprung on his 
feet with both his pistols snatched and levelled at the 
captive I Had not Edward halted on his perturbed 
march, and sternly enquired what the fellow meant, it 
was even possible a discharge might have put all his 
perplexities at rest for ever. 

Sisyphus, however, stretched his iron hook before the 
muzzle of the weapons. 

' Quiet, Moggs ! do not hurt my young (jodfailier^ 
he said with a grim smile. ' It is only Old Firebrace 
returning to his hearth ; order arms, and I will admit 
him.' 

Moggs, understanding that he was to withdraw his 
menacing demonstration, crossed his arms, with the pis- 
tols in his hands, on his breast, turning his unshaven, 
blue-bristly, hog-like visage towards the door. The 
bellows-blower then opened it and admitted the master 



296 THE armourer's daughter. 

armourer, whose first words most unpleasantly explained 
the mystery of Dorothy's absence, and satisfied Edward 
Holte too certainly that there was no further occasion 
of any reserve on his own part. 

' So, Master Holte, Master Holte ! you have used 
some witchcraft on my daughter, to win her to do your 
errand to Aston Hall, against her duty to her town and 
kinsfolk ; and yet there your inhuman father has made 
the poor child a miserable, frightened captive in his 
high Dome-Chamber, and threatened her with all 
manner of worser cruelties, unless we surrender you I ' 
Firebrace exclaimed, almost sobbing as he spoke with 
mingled grief and rage. 

Edward was greatly grieved and shocked by the in- 
telligence. Yet it was in some sort a relief from still 
more disastrous apprehensions. Neither was it conso- 
nant with his proud and manly feelings to attempt any 
denial of the discovered facts of the case. His reply 
admitted the charge in some way. 

*Do not impute to me the merit of your daughter's 
resolution to endeavour to remove the disgrace of your 
inhospitable and unlawful conduct from her house; and 
to prevent any rash movement of my father's justly 
provoked indignation against your town, master ar- 
mourer,' he said ; adding apologetically, ' But I am sure 
my father, of his own prompting, is incapable of such 
oppression and slighting of my earnest commenda- 
tions as regards the virtuous maiden's safety. Grim- 
sorwe, my bastard brother, has put his mischievous 
counsel in the matter, we may be sure.' 

'He is in the town, putting himself to all manner of 
jeopardy on your behalf, ungrateful young man ! ' re- 
turned Firebrace, vehemently. *But when were not 



YOUNG LOVE. 297 

the Holtes bitter and rancorous against each other, as 
well as masterful oppressors to all the world beside ? ' 

Edward, however, continued to appear by no means 
pleasingly excited by the intelligence he received of the 
interference in his behalf. His brow darkened. ' You 
know not the man ; and I myself, perchance, suspect 
him but in part,' he Avent on to say. ' Yet, howsoe'er, 
Kichard is as dear to my father, in some sense . per- 
haps dearer as regards his likings personal . as myself. 
Keep him as a hostage in my room, and I swear to you 
I will return within an hour with your daughter safe 
and redeemed ; or alone, to suffer anything your anger 
can inflict for the failure.' 

"^ Why, so let it be ; Master Grimsorwe himself pro- 
poses a fair exchange,' said Firebrace, eagerly. ^My 
good men, I relieve you of your charge, and take upon 
me all the responsibility of the young gentleman's re- 
lease. He-re's money for your pains hitherto, and now 
go your ways in peace.' 

* Money ! ' replied Sisyphus, glancing contemptuously 
at the proffered coins, ' to whom do you offer so mean 
a bribe. Master Firebrace? Fill this chamber with 
gold, and you cannot purchase my fidelity ! I am a 
soldier, placed at a post by the captain to whom I have 
promised obedience; have you an order from the hand 
of the London man of war, Oliver Cromwell, for the 
prisoner's release? For if not ' 

^ Am I not declared ruler of the town for the Parlia- 
ment? Am I not your master and employer, man?' 
returned Firebrace, angrily, but eluding the main 
question. 

* I am a soldier of the wars. I own no master, no 
ruler, but my military officer, while a town is, as ours is 



298 THE AEMOURER'S DAUaHTER. 

now, under martial restraint and ordering,' replied 
Sisyphus ; adding, with every appearance of inflexible 
resolve, ' and sooner than suffer my prisoner to pass out 
of my hands without the said permit, I will hook him 
up to the bacon-beams of the chamber here with this 
wretched mockery of a hand of mine I ' 

' It shall not need, Sisyphus,' said the butcher lad, 
savagely ; * I can fell an ox at a blow ; and if even the 
captain's pistols fail us, I have my chopper at my side.' 

'How have I injured you, brutish fellow, that you 
threaten me thus?' said Edward, indignant at such 
uncalled-for ferocity of antipathy. 

' Shall I do anything, master ? Do you not say we 
are to begin with the gentlemen's throats, and so on 
upwards?' said Faithful Muggs. 

' You seem more like murderers than watchers ! ' the 
armourer exclaimed, in disgust. ' But be assured, 
Master Holte, harm shall only reach you through my 
body first. At present we must abide these rude 
men's pleasures; only, Sisyphus, be you well assured 
you shall never more blow" the bellows at any forge 
of mine ! ' 

' Amen to that, master armourer ; for never was flesh 
wearier of such service than mine ! I shall blow blasts 
henceforth to mightier flames ! ' returned the fanatic ; 
flames that shall wrap loftier heads than any I espy 
here, tower haughtily as ye both may to hear me speak ; 
heads loftier than the tallest steeples in the land 1 ' 

' Shall there be giants now again in these days in 
the land, Sisyphus?' said Moggs, gazing with stupid 
curiosity at his teacher. ' And shall I live to see 
them ? ' 

' Let us leave these madmen. Alreadv our town is 



YOUNG LOTE. 299 

given over to such,' groaned P^irebrace, turning from 
his allies to his prisoner with visible preference. 

' It is but a natural sequence that all authority 
should be contemned when the highest is assailed the 
first, and toppled over,' said the young cavalier ; but 
he followed Firebrace with some satisfaction to a distance 
from the ferocious twain, who were so well provided 
with the means to execute any suddenly veogeful 
caprice that might enter their wild fantasy. 

The guardsmen returned to their former position, 
whence both continued now to watch in grim silence 
the demeanour of their captive and of their master, 
whose authority they had so decisively refused. 

It can hardly be thought that Edward Holte, aware 
of this observation, and Jiow completely he was within 
the range of a bullet, felt very much at his ease in the 
confabulation that ensued. Nevertheless he speedily 
forgot all . that concerned himself personally in his 
efforts to console the bereaved father, and to comfort 
him as much as in him lay on the score of his daughter's 
imprisonment. And it was clear that Firebrace was 
somewhat consoled by the favourable view of circum- 
stances presented to him by Edward Holte, and his 
earnest assurances that, however provoked, his father 
was incapable of any personal insult or violence towards 
a woman. 

' Mistress Firebrace will be detained until he knows 
of my safety, no longer. What can you fear for your 
daughter while Sir Thomas's son is in your hands ? ' he 
remarked on one occasion, loudly ; and it was an un- 
lucky observation. 

* Hear you that, bellows-blower, what my fine gentle- 
man says?' muttered the disciple Anabaptist to his 



300 THE armourer's DAUaHTER. 

leader. 'Were it not good to rid the town of all 
danger of making it up with the tyrant at Aston, who 
had me prisoned and whipped three several times at the 
Market Cross for cutting up a deer carcass which I 
found rotting from Tubal Bromycham's cross-bow bolt, 
nigh Oscott Wood ? ' 

Sisyphus mused upon this. ' Troth/ he said, with a 
dark smile, 'look at them even now . the masters of 
the poor sweating commonalty here^ and the masters of 
the poor sweating commonalty there I We must put a 
river of blood between us and returning on our steps. 
Our blessed Jordan must flow redder than the sea that 
swallowed Pharaoh and all his host for that I Who 
knoweth by what lips Grod may speak in these latter 
days ? He hath spoken of old by the braying of the 
insensate ass ! This son of my bowels looks like a wild 
hog. But what then ? Was KnipperdoUing of Mimster 
an angel of light to look upon ? No, I trow me ! 
What did'st thou say, friend, concerning the young man 
Holte?' 

' I said that you have often told me we are to be 
baptized unto the new life, but not as by water ; by 
blood ! ' returned the fanatic young butcher, with such 
a glance at Edward Holte as perchance he gave the 
doomed ox when the luckless beast turned its mildly 
terrified eyes on the destroyer, entering, mace in hand, 
into the dreadful byre at early dawTi. 

' What if I should say unto thee . Smite and spare 
not! is the power given unto thee? Hast thou the 
heart to strike to the earth this unarmed man, our 
prisoner?' said Sisyphus. 

The younger fanatic was still an Englishman. This 
view of the case somewhat staggered him. ' An unarmed 



YOUNG LOVE. 301 

man and a prisoner I I tliought not of that ! ' he mut- 
tered. ' If you would have it done, why do you put 
such thoughts in my head ? ' 

* Well, for myself, I have been a soldier ! I have 
been a soldier in the camps of a brave though unfor- 
tunate prince and chief, and in the heat of battle who 
spareth ? Where are my arm and my hand ? And is 
not this the heat of battle ? Is not this the heat of the 
worst battle, calm as we sit here ; the battle between 
man and his own soul ? Arise, I say, and spare not ! 
Who talks of sparing ? Elvers begin with rivulets. Let 
us have the blood of the young man Holte to begin 
with ! What say you. Faithful Moggs ? ' 

' 1 am ready,' replied the latter, rising impetuously^ 
' Shall it be with the ball of lead or the edge of steel ? ' 

' What mean these fellows, speaking and looking at 
me thus?' said Edward, surprised at the movement. 
' Certainly they mean murder ! But I shall defend my 
life.' 

So saying, he snatched one of the heavy andirons 
from the grate, and Armourer Firebrace, casting old 
Mahala from her stool, clutched it up simultaneously, 
and exclaiming, ' And I A\dll defend your life, too, with 
mine, while under my roof, Master Holte,' evidently 
ranged himself on the weaker side. 

Some overruling fate seemed always to conduct 
Dorothy Firebrace to the preservation of Edward Holte. 
It was precisely at this instant that a loud rapping was 
heard at the door, and Tubal Bromycham's thundering 
accents were heard, ' Open at once, you within ! or I 
batter down the door ! It is Mistress Dorothy re- 
turned.' 

Sisyphus hesitated for a moment. He then gave a 



302 THE armourer's daughter. 

hoarse laugh. * Be quiet, Moggs,' he said ; ^ Tubal is a 
man (5f his word. Calm thy good thirst, man, for this 
time ; a fitter mil arrive.' 

He then, for the second time, unbarred and opened 
the door, and Dorothy Firebrace sprang into the cham- 
ber, closely followed by Tubal Bromycham. 

' My father ! my father ! ' 

'My child! my child!' 

The father and daughter folded each other at once in 
a delighted embrace, while Edward Holte himself, un- 
able to restrain the impulse of his feelings, seized one 
hand of the fair girl over Firebrace's shoulder, and 
covered it with kisses. 

We are far from sure, however, that he was exactly 
pleased when Dorothy's first exclamation informed her 
father and himself that she owed her deliverance to the 
heroic courage and goodness of Tubal Bromycham, her 
betrothed husband. She did not, indeed, call him so, 
but Edward Holte uncomfortably remembered such was 
the relation in which she stood to the valiant smith. 

Nor could he be spared a rapid and broken but full 
detail of the circumstances of Dorothy's escape from 
Aston Hall, which she breathlessly told . omitting, in 
fair consideration for the master-cook, his share in the 
evasion. But the story was intelligible enough wdthout 
that circumstance, and redounded in every respect to 
the credit and exaltation of the daring and fortitude of 
Tubal, Bromj^cham. 

The young smith himself, however, listened to the 
detail with a downcast and saddened look. It seemed 
almost as if he would have preferred to suppress all the 
particulars of his achievements, and that results alone 
he wished should be attended to. More than once he 



YOUNG LOYE. 303 

interrupted Dorothy Firebrace's lavish eulogium of his 
courage, kindness, and unfailing perseverance in effect- 
ing the entire departure and iflight. And as soon as 
ever he could, with any propriety, he begged the 
armourer to excuse him for the night, as he felt it now 
his duty to return to the guard of the town. 

* Gro then : but take these insolent fellows with you, 
whose looks are full of murder and menace to my guest 
and jorisoner,' said Firebrace, who himself uneasily felt 
the propriety of ending the scene. ^ I and my servants 
are sufficient to retain him so ; what do these strangers 
in my house against my will ? ' 

' Come, sirs, you hear,' said Tubal, surveying the 
Anabaptists with undisguised repugnance and com- 
mand. 

' That shall we not I ' returned Sisyphus, insolently ; 
' we are placed on duty here by Captain Cromwell, and 
shall not stir without his wn release.' 

' Tubal Bromycham sets up for a new lord in the 
land, bellows-blower ; and hast thou not said we will 
have none such, even of the old sort ? ' chimed in Faith- 
ful Moggs. 

' Ha, say you, butcher ! ' exclaimed Tubal, suddenly 
clutching the fellow by the nape of the neck, in a 
strangling grasp, that showed he had regained the 
power of his strenuous sinews. ' Shall I make thy 
tongue lollop like one of thine overdriven beasts, or 
wilt thou yield without further insolency to do the bid- 
ding of the Lord and Captain of the Watch of Bir- 
mingham ? There is no greater sway than mine, I will 
have all men know, in the town. So wilt thou take thy 
executioner's knave hence quietly, Sisyphus, or must I 
throw him down the gallery stairs, for thee to follow ? ' 



304 THE armourer's daughter. 

' I have only mine hook . you have the poor honest 
man at mercy : we will go and complain to the Parlia- 
ment gentleman/ replied Sisyphus, spitefully but sub- 
missively surveying the superior array of force against 
him and his. ^ Eelease my brother ; he grows black in 
the face.' 

' Hence with you then both, and I will myself return 
these pistols, with explanations, to the Captain,' said 
Tubal, disarming the butcher Anabaptist by a sudden and 
most dexterous movement; and opening the door, he com- 
pelled the worthy twain to complete the evacuation of 
the premises ere, with a gentle and kindly good night 
to the entire group, he followed forth. 

And a good night there was at the Old Crown Forge 
House. Firebrace forgot every other consideration in 
joy at the safe restoration of his daughter by the heroic 
efforts of her betrothed, which satisfied him that a 
notion, which had given himself some uneasiness, had 
taken no hold in that generous lover's mind. Edward 
Holte's jealous perturbation was lost in joy at the same 
event, and a faint consciousness that, however well 
another had deserved, he himself retained the first 
place in the fair fugitive's good liking and esteem. All 
were rejoiced to be rid of the uncomfortable and dan- 
gerous company of the Anabaptist. 

Firebrace vented his satisfaction in p.n approved 
English form. He ordered the awakened and rejoicing 
Mahal a to prepare a good supper, and produced some 
choice Canary wine to exhilarate the repast. And the 
prisoner and his friendly gaolers partook ydth great 
relish and satisfaction of this meal in each other's 
society, diversified by a renewed account of Dorothy's 
adventures at Aston Hall. At least so far as related 



YOUNG LOVE. 305 

to her imprisonment by Sir Thomas Holte. She let 
Edward know how much his father's proceedings were 
stirred on and excited by Eichard Grimsorwe in that 
matter ; but for reasons of her own, and not to excite 
her father's indignation too warmly, she suppressed all 
further elucidation of his villainy until she could find 
opportunity to confide it alone to the person most 
interested in hearing the whole truth. 

This did not occur until the following day ; but then 
ample occasion was afforded. Firebrace, lulled by 
Tubal's example against all suspicion, and summoned to 
the Gruildhall to confer on further measures of defence, 
left his daughter in the company of his captive for many 
subsequent hours. And as Dorothy had the rest of the 
household completely at her command, she speedily 
found means to be left with him without eaves-droppers, 
and then proceeded to divulge the amplest particulars 
of the events with which the reader is already ac- 
quainted. 

The sensible and spirited young girl j iidged it but a 
simple matter of right and duty to warn Edward Holte, 
as much as was in her power, of the traitorous designs 
and plans of his wicked brother ; so much at least of 
them as had come at all under her observation, be- 
lieving herself in a manner led by Providence to the 
discovery. 

Of course, this revelation included the plot she had 
overheard in concoction between Eichard Grrimsorwe 
and his witch-grandmother, to oust Edward Holte from 
his birthright and lawful position as heir of Aston ; 
matter enough to excite the cavalier's vehement in- 
dignation, though it was probable it was not for the 
first time that Edward had conjectured some such 

VOL. I. X 



306 

crafty atrocity of purpose, at least, on Grimsorwe's 
part. But Dorothy was obliged also, by her own justly 
excited feelings of resentment, to declare to him how 
well-founded his opinion of the lawyer's coarse licen- 
tiousness and brutal violence of disposition towards 
women had proved. And then, indeed, did Edward's 
emotions become almost too powerful to be restrained ; 
and he vowed to inflict signal personal chastisement on 
the unmanly wretch, the very first opportunity that 
presented itself. 

^ Brother, no ! I have never looked upon the livid- 
faced scoundrel as such, and now less than ever will I, 
while I breathe Grod's vital air!' he exclaimed. ^ Brother ! 
that name shall scarce stand between my sword's point 
and his traitorous heart.' And when Dorothy Firebrace, 
with the vivacious good sense and generosity which 
formed so large a portion of her character, entreated 
him to promise her that he would only use the infor- 
mation she afforded him to keep on his guard against 
his unnatural enemy, Edward Holte could no longer 
resist the impetuous feeling that took possession of 
him. 

' I consent . I consent, if only you . you, beautiful 
Dorothy ! will promise to continue my guardian angel. 
On that condition only ! fairest, dearest of women ! 
. on condition only that you allow me to repair, by my 
honest love and devotion, the injury and insult of that 
licentious villain's address. Do you, will you consent, 
loveliest Dorothy ? And do not deem this declaration 
sudden and unadvised. I felt the first moment I saw 
you again in the market square, on that eventful yes- 
terday, that I have loved you all my life . from my 
earliest youth to manhood ! It was that feeling, doubt- 



YOUNG LOVE. 307 

less, that made me resolve . although my father, from 
some secret reason of his own, would have had me seek 
another chapman . to purchase my weapons only at your 
father's stithy! Dearest Dorothy, I cannot live and 
fancy you in danger to become another's, and who, 
yourself have confessed, is all but indifferent to you, 
whatever the value of his services may have been on the 
recent occasion ! I would have hazarded my life as 
cheerfully . a thousand times more cheerfully, for the 
reward of your least regarded smile ! ' 

In short, the romantic circumstances and exigency 
of the position . the unparalleled devotion exhibited 
towards him by the beautiful and impassioned girl . his 
conviction that she regarded him with peculiar affection, 
and yet ran danger of a sacrifice to family arrangements 
like himself . the inborn warmth and enthusiasm of his 
character . transported Edward Holte into forget fulness 
of all but the great objects of his overpowering emotion ; 
while, on her part, Dorothy Firebrace, attracted by the 
noble and chivalrous realisation of her brightest and 
longest cherished visions of the high-born, courtly 
suitor at her feet, yielded in her turn to the delicious 
intoxication of a first and passionate love. And when 
the youthful pair awoke again to realities, they stood 
plighted and pledged each other's against all the malice 
of fortune and of fate. 



X 2 



308 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Rupert's raid. 

Love-making, though the most delightful of all occu- 
pations to those engaged in it, is seldom found to be so 
charming and fascinating in the description. Though 
who, indeed, can hope properly to describe that fairest 
flowering of the heart and soul in early 5^outh, styled 
by mortals Love ? What poet's pen has ever yet done 
justice even to so inferior a form of nature's develop- 
ment as the beauty and sweetness of a hedge of may- 
thorn, lured into full flush of scented snow by the warm 
freshness of spring? 

We are not about to add, therefore, to the numerous 
failures in this department, by attempting much detail 
of the few days . hours they appeared to them . of 
exquisite happiness granted to Dorothy Firebrace and 
her lover in the first dawn of their disaster-heralded 
and accompanied passion. Suffice it in general now to 
say, that nearly the entire interval so uncomfortably 
filled up by Sir Thomas Holte at Aston Hall, expecting 
the arrival of military aid against Birmingham, was 
devoted by the youthful pair to the fullest avowal and 
confirmation of their mutual attachment; and that in 
those three days the destinies of the two loving and 
generous hearts were irrevocably sealed to each other by 



Rupert's raid. 309 

all the most passionate plights and tokens of affection 
compatible with maiden delicacy and purity on one part, 
supported by the noble self-restraint and forbearance of 
a true gentleman and man of honour towards the woman 
whom he intends to make his wife. 

Such was the purpose which Edward Holte, in face 
of all the difficulties too visibly awaiting such a project 
on every hand, was not only obliged by Dorothy's 
spirited demand, but by his own manly and honourable 
nature, to avow towards her mth his first words of 
passionate overflow. And never were oaths and pro- 
mises made and renewed with more fervid sincerity than 
those which rose to the young lover's lips on that and 
many subsequent occasions. 

A rapturous delirium, in all sober consideration, 
doubtless, but attended, as usual, in the case of the 
armourer's daughter and her now plighted worshipper, 
with answerable bright lunacies of hope and expec- 
tation. 

Edward indeed knew^, and fairly avowed, that it was 
out of the question ever to dream of obtaining his 
father's consent to the union thus agreed upon. 

Sir Thomas Holte's towering pride and lofty views 
for his entire family, and most especially his heir and 
representative; the engagements he had entered into 
on his son's behalf \vith another . alike forbade the 
merest gleam of hope in that direction. But, besides 
those obstacles of position and station, there were 
now arisen still more formidable bars of political and 
even religious separation between the children of a 
high-church Koyalist and an adherent to the secta- 
rian Parliament of London . obstacles which every 
hour and every movement of the adverse factions 



310 THE AEMOURER'S DAUGHTER. 

threatened to increase rather than diminish, and 
which blood seemed likely soon to set into flow and 
collision. 

The strongest and most exasperating prejudices and 
enmities of the human mind were already enlisted, it 
was but too plain, against the hopes of our new Eomeo 
and Juliet of Birmingham. It was even certain that 
the Puritan Capulet himself. Armourer Firebrace, would 
be as opposed as his co-parent against their plans, and 
was as likely to cherish his own in the disposal of his 
child as the haughty and despotic lord of Aston himself. 

A brightness nevertheless shone through all this 
gloom, and arched the blackest clouds with rainbows, 
from founts in the human heart as little liable, appa- 
rently, to exhaustion as the light of the eternal sun 
itself; and Edward Holte drew his from so unlikely a 
source even as the progress of the dreadful species of 
war which was evidently commenced. 

He trusted to be able to distinguish himself in its 
course in such a manner as to establish an independent 
position in the favour and protection of his sovereign, 
that would enable him to assert the natural privileges 
of manhood, to choose the woman as his wife with whom 
he could best prefer to spend his days : and, in the 
lover's sanguine views, Dorothy's position, as the 
daughter of a man of influence and high respectability, 
in so important a place as Birmingham, though his 
power was exerted at present unfavourably to the king, 
gave her adhesion to the royal cause peculiar claims on 
Charles's attention. 

Firebrace, on his part, was evidently not one of the 
desperate antagonists of regal sway and orthodoxy 
which the times subsequently produced. 



311 

The word republic was still of unknown sound and 
meaning to the great body of the English middle 
classes, who opposed themselves, in the first place, to 
what they deemed the unconstitutional exactions and 
assumptions of sole mastery on the part of the King 
and his favourite advisers. And Dorothy took good 
care to impress upon her aristocratic lover the fact that 
her father prided himself on a descent from a noble 
French race, by a genealogy easily traced and proved ; 
meanwhile it was undoubted that her sire was wealthy, 
according to the estimate of wealth in those days, and 
that she was his only child and inheritrix ? Was not 
all this full of hopefulness ? 

To complete these grounds for confidence in futu- 
rity, Dorothy no longer made a secret to Edward Holte 
of the reasons that existed to free him from all anxiety 
on the score of Tubal Bromycham's rivalry. She 
frankly stated to the young cavalier what she had 
learned of her betrothed's luckless and devoted passion 
for Arabella, his sister, and the explanation that had 
passed between herself and him in the Dome-Chamber 
at Aston Hall. 

Edward had never heard an)rthing of this circum- 
stance before. It had all taken place during his absence 
at the University. And Sir Thomas Holte's pride was, 
in reality, too acutely stung by the whole event . there 
were such peculiar and not easily explicable incidents in 
connection with the subject . that he had suppressed 
the wounding details as much as possible to every one. 
But in particular he disliked confiding to his lawful 
son, whose high-toned sense of justice and clear 
understanding, he instinctively felt, could not have 
been misled by any disguise or artifice of allegation. 



312 THE armourer's daughter. 

Even Eichard Grirasorwe, whose congenial vvorldliness 
and indifference to any fine sense of right Sir Thomas 
appreciated, had only come into possession of the story 
by indirect means of his own. And it must be confessed 
that the family haughtiness of feeling in the Holtes 
revolted in Edward also, in the first instance, from the 
notion of a person in a mechanical occupation aspiring 
to the hand of a daughter of his house. But when 
Dorothy explained to him the well-founded pretension 
of Tubal the smith to the honours and possessions of 
the ancient lords of Birmingham, this petulant emotion 
greatly abated. 

Edward was familiar with the sad particulars of the 
fall of that ancient race, in which an ancestor of his own 
had disgracefully figured. He had often reflected on 
the injustice and barbarous t3rranny of the transaction, 
and to put so great a WTong right appeared to him in 
the highest degree agreeable to justice, and to the 
ideas of a legal and settled order of things, which he 
and other enlightened Royalists hoped to re-establish in 
England. 

Nor was he without some secret consolation in the 
notion that such an occurrence must partially have 
awakened Sir Thomas Holte to the fact that his children 
were looked upon as ordinary mortals, and by no means 
as set apart for destinies so lofty and peculiar as his 
towering pride suggested. And though he could 
scarcely yield any of his own to Dorothy's warm- 
hearted credulity of belief that at some period his 
sister must have encouraged, probably have shared, the 
feelings of her low-placed suitor, the notion flattered 
Edward with a hope that he should find a support and 
ally in her to his own projects, in what he knew w^ould 



Rupert's raid. 313 

be looked upon at Aston Hall as a miserably plebeian 
descent in alliance. He knew well that his sister was 
as attached to him as her volatile and usually selfishly 
engaged affections could permit. 

It must be added, also, that Dorothy had not the 
courage to reveal the whole disastrous tale, or the 
disgraceful circumstances of the personal encounter 
between Tubal and Sir Thomas, and the maltreatment 
of the former in consequence. She thought it might 
be allowed her to be supposed ignorant of these adjuncts, 
and that some happy change of fortune would dispose 
the main parties in the dispute to mutual pardon and 
oblivion. 

In short, Love is known to be a logician on his own 
side only, and these two young people, thrown almost 
completely into each other's society for so considerable 
an interval, were plunged in all the first most un- 
reasoning conceits and illusions of inexperienced 
acquirement. 

The lovers retained so much sense, however, as to be 
quite aware that any open declaration of their attach- 
ment and engagement was for the moment entirely out 
of the question. That would be merely to secure their 
immediate separation, and would place the strongest 
imaginable engine in the hands of the sordid and 
rancorous brother whose designs Dorothy Firebrace 
had been so providentially enabled to discover and 
disclose. 

Meanwhile the most unlikely circumstances seemed 
all to w^ork to throw them together, without danger of 
exciting suspicion by too anxious a seeking of oppor- 
tunities. Firebrace himself urged upon his daughter 
to remain constantly in the house, having ascertained 



314 THE armourer's daughter. 

that the townspeople were greatly offended at her taking 
part so evidently with their enemies. 

The active babbling of Eichard Grrimsorwe diffused 
the information everywhere. The populace, with whom 
Tubal Bromycham had become a sudden object of 
enthusiasm, were perplexed, but irritated at the danger 
to which his betrothed's rashness had exposed their idol, 
while, nevertheless, his exploit in her rescue excited 
their triumphant admiration. And now, as the ar- 
mourer himself was obliged to be constantly abroad, on 
the business of the office he had accepted in the in- 
surgent town, all very restraining supervision was 
withdrawn from Dorothy's doings. 

Old Mahala, charged specially with the duty, was 
subject to divers infirmities of age, or was not perhaps 
still so old a woman as to set herself resolutely against 
what she most likely considered the passing fanciful 
caprice of an indulged girl for a very handsome young 
man. 

As for Tubal, the betrothed husband himself, never 
was less opposition offered from rivalry than his. In- 
deed, he scarcely approached the Firebrace mansion at 
all during Edward's whole stay, excepting on forge 
business, connected with the defensive preparations of 
the town. 

Tubal had, in fact, made a new home for himself at 
some considerable distance from the Cro^vn House. 
Dorothy was glad to be enabled to relate to her lover, 
as confirmation of her previous story, that Tubal had 
taken possession of the old castellated residence of his 
ancestors, known as the Moat House, in the centre of 
Birmingham, in spite of some degree of resistance on 
the part of the high bailiff, or rather of the high 



Rupert's raid. 315 

bailiff's wife, who raised tlie drawbridges and stood a 
little siege, until hunger and fear made that functionary 
determine rather to brave his lady's wrath, and yield up 
his stronghold on the sly. And there Tubal had hoisted 
the long-disused banner of his family, and had openly 
taken upon himself all the privileges and rule of a lord 
of Birmingham . Cromwell, Firebrace, and a strong 
majority of the upper classes of the town, backing him 
in what he did, and only a small portion of the lowest 
fanatics and populace murmuring against the restora- 
tion. 

Yet all this was only part of the turmoil and tumult 
now raging in Birmingham. Defensive preparations 
were in constant activity, and almost the whole popu- 
lation engaged vigorously in them. 

Trenches were dug, earth-mounds and barricades 
erected at all the principal entrances of the town, chains 
stretched across the river and smaller inlets ; every 
military precaution taken _ which the rude, unfamiliar 
acquaintance, both of leaders and general combatants, 
with the resources of the military art allowed. 

Cromwell himself was obliged to give his directions 
from an old book of Eoman Castrametation, or camp- 
making, which formed part of his travelling library, 
by the gift . as was written in the title-page. of his 
loving cousin and fellow-truster in Christ, John Hamp- 
den. But his sagacious eye and apt military instinct 
supplied every deficiency. Moreover, with the faculty 
always observed in great men of discerning and directing 
the abilities and knowledge of others to the furtherance 
of their own ends, Cromwell selected Sisyphas the 
bellows-blower as a species of foreman in his opera- 
tions, for which his experience in the scientific and yet 



316 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

ferocious religious wars of G-ermany well qualified him. 
Aud the Parliament Captain's condescension to this 
maimed relic of old battles, meanwhile, greatly re- 
commended him to the populace, with whom the bellows- 
blower was in high esteem ; and his faculty of lending 
himself to the ideas and speaking the impassioned 
jargon of the obscurest and wildest fanaticism, secured 
him the respectful deference of the Anabaptists. 

Tubal Bromycham's example and strenuous personal 
activity carried forward the executive part of this work 
at an answerable rate. So, from all this it came to pass 
that, make what haste his impetuous spirit and quick 
resolve could urge upon him. Prince Rupert arrived 
considerably too late for the species of assault he doubt- 
less projected on Birmingham . a cowp de mam, as a 
sudden onslaught without artillery or other regular 
means of reduction was styled, being in his contem- 
plation ; as plainly appeared from the condition in which 
he presented himself, with a single overridden and 
exhausted troop of horse, at the fortified inclosures of 
the to^vn. 



317 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

THE TOCSIN. 

The lovers, absorbingly occupied in their own fears and 
hopes, delights and sufferings, took little notice of what 
was happening in the outward world. 

Dorothy perhaps, trembling always for the safety of 
her beloved prisoner, kept up some degree of obser- 
vation and vigilance. But her father's reports described 
a state of things which rather flattered the pair with 
the prospects of a speedily approaching deliverance than 
added to their apprehensions, now that the fair girl 
also had become so fervidly royalist. Yet still her 
dread of evil towards Edward Holte was fed by her 
knowledge that his traitorous brother continued in the 
town ; apparently, it is true, in the position of a cap- 
tive, under the observation of Cromwell. But she well 
remembered how Grimsorwe had avowed to his witch- 
grandmother his purpose to seek furtherance in his 
malicious project from the new powers in the state. 

And here it should be noticed that this circum- 
stance, in conjunction with another he ascertained in 
the same series of revelations, had almost more than 
anything else stirred Edward Holte's unceasing appre- 
hensions. 

Dorothy had mentioned, without herself attaching 



318 THE armourer's daughter. 

mucli stress to the fact, that one of the reasons alleged 
for her detention at Aston was the power put in her 
hands by Sir Thomas's imprudent revelations, of re- 
vealing the king's dangerous position in his quarters at 
Xottingham. She had alluded to it, only still more 
plainly to evince her loyal sentiments to her loyal lover, 
by declaring her own utter incapability of such mean 
betrayal. Edward was painfully impressed with the 
circumstance in quite another point of view. 

^ My father's rashness has then placed so momentous 
a secret on the tongue of my villainous brother, who 
tables and almost beds, from all that I hear, with this 
determined London officer I ' he remarked. 

He strove, however, to take as assuring a view of the 
unlucky fact as the cheerful-natured Dorothy urged 
upon him. 

' What matters it if even Grimsorwe reveals the state 
of things to Captain Cromwell ? What harm can 
happen of it ? ' she said, smilingly. ' Our townspeople 
evidently think only of their own defence. I heard 
that the captain should say he Avould not suffer a man 
out of the barricades till those within had got accus- 
tomed to the show and tramp of cavalry (nothing else 
is to be feared), and skilled in the set of the pike to 
keep them off. And such lubberly rogues as Mistress 
Mellons, of the Black Boy, tells our Mahala they look 
at work in the market-place, under Tubal's captaincy, 
who hardly himself knows the mere words of command I 
They show as if rather begging their lives on their 
knees than bent on so warlike an endeavour, and rise 
in such confusion that a butting ram could scatter them ! 
Be Kichard Grimsorwe's motive what it will, dearest 
Edward, he could find no means in Birmingham to 



THE TOCSIN. 319 

execute any such distant harm against his Majesty as 
your changed complexion hints.' 

Edward was soothed, if not altogether reassured, by 
this view of things. 

He, no more than the rest of their contemporaries, 
was aware of the matchless audacity and energy of 
Cromwell's character. So great an outrage as a direct 
assault of the royal person had as yet crossed no man's 
mind, the zealous Eoyalist succeeded in persuading him- 
self ; or, if the notion could be formed, what means of 
execution were there there in the power of an undis- 
ciplined rabble ? And the nearest of the Parliamentary 
forces were at such distances from Nottingham, as to 
render it unlikely any project requiring an extensive 
military movement could be put in execution without 
exciting such alarm as to render it abortive. 

On the occasion now to be mentioned, Dorothy's 
apprehensions were, in consequence of this reasoning, 
by no means turned upon the safety of the King ; but a 
general alarm was excited in the town by the ringing- 
backward of the great bell of St. ]Martin's. A look- 
out was stationed night and day in the steeple there, 
and the jangle of bells, rung out of tune, was a pre- 
viously agreed upon signal of any suspicious external 
approach. 

It was about noonday, and things were proceeding 
quietly enough in a busy way in the town, when this 
dissonant signal of danger became audible. In a mo- 
ment all Birmingham was in a ferment and uproar. 

The townspeople, emerging armed as well as might 
be with hastily snatched weapons from their different 
abodes, thronged into the streets, and hurried, also by 
previous arrangement, to the market-place. In parti- 



320 

cular, a considerable mob of smiths and hammermen of 
various kinds swarmed up Deritend, chiefly wielding 
the great weapon of their craft, and took their way 
with zealous rapidity to the Moat House, there to place 
themselves under the immediate command of Tubal 
Bromycham. 

Armourer Firebrace was disturbed in a nap he was 
taking after dinner in his chair ; and with some trepi- 
dation, though not of a personal kind, declared that he 
must proceed at once to the Guildhall to meet the 
other elders and councillors of the town, and devise the 
best means to aid in the defence and preserve internal 
order. The poor old man's emotion was altogether on 
account of his daughter ; and Edward Holte was 
affected and surprised to find that he recommended 
her to the care of his prisoner, in case things went ill 
for the defence. ' For we mean only our lawful defence, 
fair sir,' he said, ' and by no means any assault and 
battery of our own driving against his Majesty's peace 
and soldiery, if such they be that have come against 
our to"svn. I must not leave my fellows in any jeopardy 
I can share ; but if your friends make themselves a 
passage into the town, I trust you will remember towards 
my child that I have kindly, honourably, and safely 
entertained you under my roof.' 

Edward declared with peculiar warmth that he would 
lose his own life rather than that any ill should befall 
his generous young hostess. And Dorothy thereupon 
earnestly demanded of her father whether he left 
protection sufficient for his prisoner's safety during his 
absence ; upon which the armourer announced his in- 
tention to lock up and bar up the entire house and forge 
until he could return, the massive bolts and doors of 



THE TOCSIN. 321 

which would alone resist any violence but that of ar- 
tillery. 

Satisfied with this provision for the safety of her 
lover, and anxious to obtain the earliest intelligence of 
what might happen affecting his condition, Dorothy, 
however, now begged her father's leave to accompan}' 
him into the town. * At least to the market-place,' she 
said ; adding, truly enough, that her anxiety would be 
much greater at a distance from whatever might occur 
to decide results than if she was an eye-witness of them. 
If there were any appearances of danger, she promised 
at once to return to Deritend, a quarter of the town 
which, as any assault to be made was apprehended in 
the direction of Aston only at this time, was the 
farthest removed from actual peril. 

Edward Holte objected earnestly to this arrangement. 
But Dorothy persevered, perhaps with some slight 
mixture of coquetry in her expressions of unwillingness 
to remain. And the armourer himself, apparently for 
the first time noticing the smiles of mutual intelligence 
between the youthful pair, rather hurriedly and grimly 
declared to his daughter that she was in the right, and 
should accompany him wherever he went. ^ They do 
not ask of us greybeards to take any share in the actual 
battling,' he said, ' and you will be as safe with me at 
the Gruildhall . or safer . than here. Don your cloak 
and hood, and let us foot it at once.' 

So it was determined, and so acted upon. Dorothy 
took a laughingly kind adieu of her forlorn lover, whom 
she left in the care of old Mahala and the other female 
domestics, while his saddened eyes reproached her for 
depriving him of the hours of happiness that might else 
have followed in each other's company. Rut Dorothy 

VOL. I. Y 



322 THE aemofrer's daughter. 

herself superintended the labour of the workman who 
closed and locked all the entrances of the Crown Forge 
. a precaution scarcely necessary as regarded the pri- 
soner's secure keeping, for even if he could have made 
his way out of the house, the exits of the town were all 
too well guarded to allow of any further evasion. 

Firebrace gave his arm to his daughter on quitting 
their premises into Deritend ; and with a grave and 
solemnly-bearded aspect, with the handle of an alto- 
gether unused sword ostentatiously figuring above a lift 
in his long cloak, the master armourer proceeded up 
the causeway, amidst the continued discordant summons 
of the tocsin, which resembled more the palpitation of 
an affrighted human heart than the jangle of a bell. 

He took the direction of the church, in which the 
principal number of people were also speeding ; speedily 
joined as he advanced by other chief citizens of the 
district. Only such presumed to join the slow and 
poised advance of the master armourer. But everyone 
whom they passed, or mixed with in the progress, 
treated this head townsman -with great marks of respect 
and deference. Dorothy for herself could not but per- 
ceive that, though her father's presence protected her 
from much open signs of the popular disapproval, she 
obtained a novel and unpleasing species of notice when 
she came into public view. * Takes part with those of 
Aston ! What doth she abroad now in our midst ? To 
play the spy for them there?' harsh, though under- 
toned, voices more than once muttered in her wake. 

The pride and defiance of Doroth}" Firebrace's nature 
were, however, awakened, rather than her fears, under 
this rebuking reception. She held up her beautiful, 
fiery head, with the action of a high-mettled charger, in 



THE TOCSIN. 323 

disdain, and was only sorry when she felt her father's 
arm quiver in her hold, in a manner that denoted his 
keen sense of the species of public distaste exhibited 
towards his child. 

Until they quitted Deritend these symptoms con- 
tinued mild enough. But having once passed out of 
the quarter where the master armourer was all powerful, 
the aspect of things by no means improved. 

Dorothy, nevertheless, ceased to take much personal 
interest in what regarded herself in her anxiety to as- 
certain the position of affairs. No one they had hitherto 
met or joined in with knew what was the occasion of 
the alarm. But on reaching the market-place, with a 
view to cross it to the Gruildhall, the throng of people 
became very greatly increased, and evident marks of con- 
sternation appeared in the faces of the majority. ' The 
King's cavalry are upon us from Worcester ! ' was the 
general mutter and murmur. ^ They are about Edg- 
baston Row; William Moorcroft has espied them as well 
nigh into the town as the Parsonage House ; and 'tis 
well known which way old Dugdale's snout snuffs the 
wind ! He will admit them thereby.' 

Others replied that the doctor could not; that the 
London Captain had cleared out his Papistical den, and 
put it in the keeping of Gribby-Hook the bellows- 
blower, with men on whom he could depend. Then a 
score voices demanded, Where was the Captain ? Where 
was Tubal Bromycham ? And a number of women 
began screaming that all was lost ; that they and their 
children would all be destroyed and massacred by the 
bloodthirsty cavaliers, and a general lamentation arose 
over the folly of their townsmen for placing them all in 
so dangerous a position. 

Y 2 



324 THE armourer's daughter. 

Dorothy's appearance was consequently at no very 
propitious moment ; and she herself began to grow a 
little alarmed at the accumulating signs of her un- 
popularity. 

' I'll warrant me/ said a haggard, frightened-looking 
woman glaring at her from the mob, ' she knows better 
than any of us what downpour is coming upon us I To 
call herself so worthy a master tradesman's daughter, 
yet go a-gadding and eaves-dropping against us to the 
old tyrant of Aston ! Hiss her, I say; and an it were 
not for her worthy father's sake, I would put my ten- 
tacks in her peach face, forsooth, to some purpose ! ' 

And vigorously setting an example which was exten- 
sively followed among the members of the fair sex, the 
air became all of a whizz-fizz with the demonstration. 

Dorothy herself quailed a little, and the armourer 
turned very pale as he addressed the crowd in depre- 
cation. 

' Peace, good folks ; my daughter meant it all for the 
best,' he said. ^ You yourselves talk now of how better 
a thing it were to have kept peace with x\ston, if the 
assault comes thence.' 

*It is not so, armourer,' said a loud commanding 
voice at this moment. ' It is the King's nephew, with 
some score of wearied horse, sniflBng like a cat at 
a well-wired birdcage round the town. Let us keep 
steady on our perches, and Grimalkin cannot harm us. 
But, fie ! have we a flock of geese turned out among us, 
by this noise ? ' 

' They are angry at my daughter. Captain Cromwell,' 
said Firebrace, ^ though I wot not well what harm she 
can have done in the case. I will take her to Tubal at 
the Moat House.' 



THE TOCSIN. 325 

* You will not find him there ; the over-eager 
youngster has sent me word that he has led his men to 
the chains at the end of Worcester Street, where the 
King's men and they are angrily staring at each other, 
and would have my leave to make an onset out of the 
barriers, which I shall by no means yield to. Let the 
girl go to my quarters at the Black Boy. She will find 
her friend Dame Cooper there, and others of the like 
thinking, or prating at least, and who do so rail at me 
betimes as almost to put me past my patience.' 

' I will take her there.' 

' No ; you are needed at the Guildhall to hearten some 
of the white-livered cravens of your town-governors, 
who stammer already the traitor's word Surrender ! 
Whereto I answer. Never while I have breath to shout 
No ! All good people, shout with me No surrender ! no 
surrender I Do you hear ? They are talking of sur- 
render in the Town Hall ere we are even so much as 
asked to yield. No surrender, boys! If the boys yelp, 
the men will soon bark.' 

The courageous bearing and the determined accents 
of Cromwell produced their effect on the easily excited 
and directed emotions of the populace. ' No surrender ! 
no surrender ! ' passed immediately from a murmur of 
repetition to a real uproar of vehement resolve. 

' Go and tell the Town Council what the people say, 
armourer, and tnean I ' said Cromwell, evidently well 
pleased with this exhibition. ^ I will bring them be- 
neath the windows of the Guildhall, if it needs confir- 
mation; and meanwhile trust your maiden to m}^ care, 
and I will see her safely bestowed.' 

The armourer, agitated with the noise and confusion, 
assented to the order rather than request he received: 



326 THE armourer's daughter. 

and passing also with a strange implicitness under the 
dominion of this master-spirit of the stormy times, 
moved as if under the influence of a spell at once to- 
wards the Guildhall, in New Street, leaving his darling 
daughter under the stranger's protection without a 
word of unwillingness or dissatisfaction. 



327 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

EDGBASTON BARRIER. 

' This way with me, my bonny lass. Why do you pause 
a-tiptoe ? Methinks you are safer in than out of cus- 
tody. Hear you not what the people murmur ? ' said 
Captain Cromwell, thus left in charge. 

^ I heed them not,' returned Dorothy, disdainfully. ' I 
did never set much store by the utterances of such rank 
breaths. But I would rather go with you on and see 
the fight than be shut up with some old woman in 
a tobacco-smoking inn. Moreover, I like not a com- 
panion who lodges there . the Aston bastard fellow. Let 
me go with you, sir.' 

' I do not purpose there shall be any close encounter 
with the enemy, girl, where I go. But what misliking 
have you against worthy Master Grimsorwe, which, the 
Lord defend you, truly he so amply returns ? ' enquired 
Cromwell with some interest and more surprise in his 
accents. 

Dorothy reflected, and suppressed the answer that 
rose readily enough to her tongue. It would not do, 
she thought, to let the Parliament Captain know how 
thoroughly she was in the secret of his private under- 
standing with his pretended prisoner. 

' Let a woman's reason suffice you, sir captain, that I 



328 THE armourer's daughter. 

like not the man because I like him not,'' she answered, 
rather petulantly, * But if my betrothed is where you 
are going, I have the better right to follow ; more 
especially if you purpose to keep him from a fray.' 

' True enough,' said Cromwell ; and after a moment's 
further reflection, he motioned leave to Dorothy to ac- 
company him, and took the direct route to the now wide 
and commodious road to Edgbaston. In those days, 
though still one of the widest streets of the town, it was 
comparatively narrow, and only broadened to a space 
where it joined the Parsonage and Dudley Street, on 
the outer skirts of the Birmingham of 1642. Here par- 
ticular skill had accordingly been required and applied 
in the fortification of the town. A deep and broad ditch 
had been dug, and a complete network of chains fixed 
across the street on strong staples, to the height of ten 
or eleven feet, so as effectually to bar the entrance. 
The position was further secured by the Parsonage 
House, which, like the Moat House, had a wide ditch 
around it, and was occupied by some of the most deter- 
mined of the town rabble, under Sisyphus the bellows- 
blower. 

Within these chains Tubal and a select band of young 
fellows, nearly all well armed, were drawn up in a kind 
of battle array ; and beyond them appeared the gleam- 
ing cuirasses and snorting steeds of Prince Eupert's 
checked and amazed dragoons, the latter exchanging the 
most insulting ribaldry and defiances \vith the towns- 
people, goading and urging upon them not to sneak like 
rats behind a wainscot, but come out fairly into the 
open field and pit manhood against manhood in a fray I 

Tubal in particular appeared to be exasperated by 
these remarks, and the scornful urging and impre - 



EDGBASTON BARRIER. 329 

cations of the leader of the enemy . a tall and powerful 
young man in bright armour, with a yellow plume in 
his hat. 

' I thought you English had been men of better 
mettle than to skulk thus behind mounds of earth ! 
There is a better report of you in the Ehineland, where 
I was born and bred. Are ye deer parked in an inclo- 
sure, and dare not wager your horns against such lean, 
wearied hounds as we ? ' this officer was saying, doubt- 
less hoping to provoke what he considered a senseless 
rabble to the usual rash displays of such bodies of men. 
Tubal had indeed clearly some difficulty to restrain his 
men, and no sooner caught sight of Cromwell than he 
eagerly demanded leave to cast down the chains, and 
sally forth to punish the insulting foe. 

' But for what cause, think you, then, have we been 
at the pains to place them where they are?' returned 
the Parliament officer, drily. ' No ; your undisciplined 
fellows cannot fairly face this picked horse of the King's. 
Let them weary themselves with bawling, and so depart. 
Had I my own troopers in hand, now, whom I do so 
hourly expect, I should take a pleasure too in dusting 
yonder braggart young gentleman's lion's hide ! But 
as it is, I command you all, on the obedience you have 
promised me, in nowise to stir out of the defences.' 

And Cromwell remained fixed in this resolve, in 
spite of every entreaty on Tubal's part to the contrary ; 
laughing heartily at the numerous abortive attempts 
now made by the Prince and his cavaliers to leap the 
ditch to the barriers. Horse and rider rolled over re- 
peatedly in those efforts ; until at last, after a consul- 
tation among the officers, the Prince drew off his 
dragoons in futile wrath, and resumed his eager rounds 



330 THE armourer's daughter. 

of the well-secured town, like a dog at a rolled-up 
hedgehog. 

A report shortly after arrived that the cavaliers had 
drawn off altogether in the direction of Aston Hall ; 
and then, for the first time, Cromwell, whose mind had 
been entirely absorbed in the military proceedings, 
noticed that Dorothy Firebrace no longer appeared at 
the place in the rear where he had left her on his ad- 
vance to the point of attack. But Eichard Grimsorwe 
was at his side, with a dark and scowling face. 



end of the first V0LU3IE. 

CHAPTEE XXXV. 

THE BLACK BOY AND WOOLPACK. 

' How, master lawyer,' said Cromwell, attentively sur- 
veying Grimsorwe's glum visage, ^ your looks also are 
very secretly of our faction . all curds and whey ! And 
yet you have likely seen and heard how clearly the Lord 
has owned the work in hand, how well we are rid of the 
cavaliers this first brush, which is of infinite consequence 
to further good success.' 

' But I am glad of it, and of other good news I 
bring. And you must needs confess you owe some part 
of this to me, who assured you the King could send no 
great ordnance against you, which would speedily open 
a way through your chains and palisades,' replied Grrim- 
sorwe, striving to alter the expression of his countenance, 
with but slight success. 

' Nay, man, it was better as it was . all scowl and 
gloom. It twists your nature out of all resemblance to 
humanity to try and smile,' Cromwell observed, with 

VOL. II. B 



2 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

the grim humour in which he was not deficient. ' What 
ailed you, I say again, but now ? ' 

' The woman who stood at gaze with you ere you left 
her at the road-head,' returned Grimsorwe, seemingly 
anxious to remove the impression that his heart was not 
truly with the cause he clandestinely served, ' she passed 
me with an insolent flouting of contempt and misliking, 
and with her nose in the air as if a dung-cart were 
rumbling by her ; whereby I plainly perceived Mistress 
Firebrace owes me some deadly spite for causing her 
to be detained at Aston ; and as her fancy evidently 
runs altogether in the same strain wdth her paramour's, 
my brother, I marvel you ' 

' Peace there, peace there, good bastard Richard ! I 
will not suffer such a word to be used of the maiden 
without better or worser cause than any I have yet 
understood, saving your malice against your well-born 
brother and any of his favourers. Armourer Firebrace 
is a worthy stander-up, and as hearty in the cause as 
any man of substance can well expected to be, in one 
put to the edge of untried steel,' Cromwell sharply 
interrupted. 

' I will prove my words at some fitter season. Master 
Cromwell. Yet I must needs repeat, I do marvel you 
suffer one who has shown herself an adverse and intelli- 
gencer of your enemies, to spy about in the streets at 
pleasure, and report, most likely, the liberty that is 
accorded me.' 

' Well, I marvel yet more you should take it on so 
public an occasion. Master Grimsorwe,' returned Crom- 
well. 

* I was anxious of the event. Had matters gone 
adverse with you of the town, I purposed to speed to 



THE BLACK BOY AND TVOOLPACK. 3 

Deritend, and make my brotherly peace with Edward 
by guiding the cavaliers thither to his rescue,' returned 
Grimsorwe, with a smile of some darker internal con- 
sciousness than ridicule of the hypocrisy he declared. 

But Cromwell's sagacity was not so easily thrown at 
fault. ' Was it so, Master Bastard ? ' he remarked ; ' or 
to set the Anabaptists and the mob on your brother's 
destruction, as the cause of the ruin of theii- town ? 
What for else have you these several times haunted in 
at the Black Chapel, out Bordasley way, and showed 
yourself so mightily edified with the ravings of the 
man with the hook ? ' 

The Black Chapel was the designation of a miserable 
deserted barn, partially fallen into ruin, in the fields 
now covered with the haggard suburb of Bordesley, 
where the ^\-ildest fanatics of Birmino-ham assembled to 
discuss and expound the doctrines of their sect ; and 
being a wooden erection, patched over at some time 
with coal-tar against the weather, its outward aspect 
well vindicated the epithet it had received, to the eye, 
while the opinions broached and propagated in the 
in closure were supposed to merit it yet more in a 
moral sense. 

Grrimsorwe looked rather confused. ^ I had a reli- 
gious curiosity, mayhap, for the mind is much betossed 
on its first voyaging on the sea of faith ; and, besides, 
did half expect that one of my father's servants, who 
frequents that devil's synagogue, as they call it at Aston, 
would bring me some whispering thence,' he replied. 
* But it is all of little consequence now, since the great 
enterprise I pointed out to you fails,' he continued, in a 
grievously disappointed tone. ^ The King is surely safe 
at Nottingham, with his cavalry at Aston.' 

B2 



4 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

' Why, man, maD ! what could I possibly do more 
than I have done ? Have I not provided for the safety 
of the town until relief can come from the Earl of 
Essex ; to whom I have sent a full account of what is 
intended, and an earnest entreaty that he would forward, 
at utmost haste, support to us in the success of the 
design, which I myself will undertake the instant the 
troopers, whom I hourly expect, of my own command 
arrive ? ' Cromwell replied, with angry vehemence. 

' Well, then, sir, I am confident there are news for 
you from my Lord of Essex at the Black Boy ; for even 
as I sallied forth, a gentleman, who announced himself 
bearer of despatches from his Excellency, had touched 
there on a spent horse. And who should his Excellency 
be but the earl who commands the Parliament's army 
in chief ? ' 

* Aye, forsooth,' replied Captain Cromwell ; and he 
seemed struck by the intelligence ; for although it was 
not certain at that moment that the cavaliers would halt 
at Aston, and cease their useless rounding of the town, 
he declared his intention to return at once to his 
quarters, where the messenger was announced to be 
found. 

Grimsorwe accompanied him, apparently aware that 
dissimulation of his intimacy with the Parliament chief 
was not likely to deceive the eyes for which it had been 
assumed. And it was this circumstance that produced 
an exclamation to be recorded from one of the parties 
in a small group of guests assembled at the Black Boy 
Inn, in the hostess's private parlour. 

'What manner of doubt now, IVIistress Mellons, of 
my well-witted god-child's true report ? Here they come 
along, like Old Nick and his fiery shadow I ' said a 



THE BLACK BOY AND WOOLPACK. 5 

remarkably tall virago-visaged woman, who was sitting 
at a window whence she commanded a full view of the 
length of the outer street and back of St. Martin's 
Church. 

^ Troth, I have been all along suspecting as much ; 
for though I never lodged a prisoner before, I guessed 
there should be some restraint exercised towards them, 
Madam Cooper, and this was at none,' returned the 
landlady of the Black Boy to her distinguished inmate, 
who had become such since Tubal Bromycham had taken 
possession of the Moat House. ^ But for the young 
maiden to venture on such a hazard as she proposes, to 
learn what is really astir between them, and even to so 
good an intent as the King's service and Master Holte's, 
methinks is a tempting of Providence. The Lord only 
knows what they may mean by the law military, which 
we all heard bawled by Accepted Clavers, at the market 
cross, this blessed daybreak.' 

' The risk is altogether mine, good Mistress Mellons, 
and I am very willing to it : for all you say assures me 
there is some devilish plot working against the young 
gentleman placed under my father's safe charge, whose 
blood will doubtless be required at our hand chiefly,' 
replied the sweet, musical-ringing, but resolute accents 
of Dorothy Firebrace. ^ Grive me my way, good friends, 
for once, and let us lose no time in locking me in the 
pantry cupboard of the captain's living chamber, where 
I can hear all that shall pass between him and Grim- 
sorwe and this newly-arrived Londoner, until you call 
bim down to his dinner-mess. Xot a long hazard, by 
the savoury scent of the roast from the kitchen.' 

' Truly not,' said a personage, whose short, stout 
limbs, overweening paunch, and jolly rosy gills, trimmed 



6 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

all round mth white hair and beard, would have suited 
well for a Falstafif ; and he sniffed the air with visible 
relish, as he added, * Woe's my life, to think that it is 
come to this with the high bailiff of Birmingham town, 
that he must wait for broken victuals from a fanatic 
dragooner's table to make his meal.' 

' And scarce a full one then either, Master Cooper,' 
sympathised Mistress Mellons. ' The man eats with a 
live wolf in his stomach to go snacks ; and their good 
morning's work, with a wanion to it, will put them in 
better appetite than ever. But what is to be helped 
when the country-folks are so panick'd at the cavaliers? 
There was scarce a basket of eggs or butter at the 
market cross yesterday, and beeves and mutton were 
as things unknown before the flood. Faithful Moggs 
himself remarked on it as a judgment; there never 
was so clean a shambles in Birmingham since the world 
began. I saw it with my own eyes ; not a gutter red 
in it. Only I took the judgment my own way. But 
the captain is provident, and had me store him in his 
provender for weeks at once when the troubles began.' 

^But he leaves the key of his store-room with you, 
mistress, and mil not suspect an eaves-dropper in an}'- 
wise among his salt pork and loaf flour,' rejoined 
Dorothy, with earnest beseechingness in her tones. ' I 
shall incur little or no risk, and may do much good.' 

' Truly, there are air-holes at which a body may 
conveniently listen,' replied the landlady of the Black 
Boy. ' And he laughed merrily himself when he put 
in the two pickled geese for Sundays ; for, says he, 
"I mind not their listening, and they mind not the 
gallows ! " which I could not understand at the time, 
till I heard it cried that whoever fetched or carried any 



THE BLACK BOY AND WOOLPACK. 7 

tidings to the enemies out of the town, by the law 
martial, should dangle at a rope's end. How will you 
abide that risk, Mistress Dorothy ? ' 

^ That and any other I only we must lose no time ; 
they are at hand I ' exclaimed Dorothy, impatiently. 

' Troth are they, fair mistress ; but it goes against 
me, somehow, to risk it, though I am as true as another, 
I think, to the right cause,' humanely persisted Mistress 
Mellons. ' What say you. Madam Cooper ? she is your 
god-ehild ; would you have her run the risk ? ' 

' By G-eorge and Dragon, would I ; and run it myself 
a thousand times, stood I not too tall on my haunches, 
unless I could bend like a clasp-knife in the cupboard ; 
and, besides, am rather hard of my hearing to strange 
voices,' returned Dame Cooper ; adding, with a su- 
premely contemptuous glance at her husband, ' Were 
John Cooper here a man in his soul as he is in his body, 
we were not to seek for one to incur a worser risk I ' 

' "SMio . I, good wife ? ' said the high bailiff, waking 
from a depth of reverie that might almost have been 
reckoned a slumber. * What were you saying? Is it 
next Sunday ? Your pardons, fair w^omen ; I was 
thinking of those same salt geese, and what a rare 
savoury dish they will make, over-baking a good batter 
pudding, a foot deep in the pan ! But what talk you 
of me, wife, when you know as certair^ly as twice four 
I should fall asleep the moment they began buzzing and 
fuzzing their plots through the keyhole, and so betray 
all by my snoring ? for well ye wot I do snore like a 
grampus when I am much aweary with clapperclaw.' 

' Speak neith3r to him nor of him ; had it not been 
for his dastardice I had held the Moat House until 
rescue, as sure as my name is, to my disgrace. Cooper I * 



8 THE ARMOUKER's DAUGHTER. 

lamented the high bailiff's dispossessed lady. ' And to 
think that a rascal smith should now pretend to be lord 
of Birmingham ! Odd's my life ! and set up his apron, 
bedaubed with colours, for a banner ! Pardon, Dorothy, 
darling ; but I wot well you hold no more by any of 
these traitors than myself. Let her have her way, good 
Mistress Mellons; no great harm can fall of it to 
Armourer Firebrace's daughter and Tubal Bromycham's 
betrothed.' 

Thus authoritatively counselled, earnestly impor- 
tuned by Dorothy, and urged by a feeling of curiosity 
on her own part . by no means the weakest of her 
incentives . the landlady yielded assent ; and, selecting 
one from a mighty bunch of keys at her girdle, invited 
Mistress Firebrace to follow her up a flight of very 
narrow stairs, which conducted to the upper floors of 
the house. 

Bailiff Cooper stared after the courageous girl in 
amazement. 

' I would not run her risk for all Birmingham and 
Deritend to boot ; and you her godmother, dame, and 
counsel it ! ' was his commentary. 

' You are good for nothing but to drink wort or old 
ale, John Cooper ; but look that you talk not in your 
cups to-night, or I will let the King's men know, when 
they are masters again, what a faint heart you showed 
throughout in his gracious service ; and mayhap then 
the loss of your crown place will not be the worst that 
shall betide you thereupon.' 

Like other people in a passion. Dame Cooper did not 
consider she was likely to do herself quite as much 
mischief as the object of her indignation. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

MAJOR MOJ«K. 

Meanwhile the fearless armourer's daughter unfliach- 
ingly followed on Mistress Mellons's footsteps to a 
small, very low-roofed upper chamber, furnished as 
w^hat we should now call a sitting-room. At one end 
of this was a very narrow little bed-room, where Captain 
Cromwell slept, and on a side of that a projection, 
forming a jutting triangle with the wall, used as a cup- 
board, or wardrobe perhaps, at pleasure. 

There were two holes like eyes at the upper part of 
this door, to allow of some ventilation within. But the 
scope of the interior was so very limited, and occupied 
by provision stores, that slender as was the Deritend 
maiden's form, she found some difficulty in ensconcing 
herself in the recess. Such, however, was the purpose 
in which she persevered, assisted by Mistress Mellons, 
who thrust certain of the stores back, and contrived for 
her a not very uncomfortable standing place, on the 
whole, on the top of a firkin of flour. 

This elevation would enable Dorothy to put her ear 
to the air-holes ; and finding she would persist in the 
business. Mistress Mellons only farther cautioned her 
against the danger of oversetting anything, and exhorted 
her, * for her life, not to breathe,' and complied at last 



10 THE AEMOUEER's DAUGHTER. 

with her desire to be shut aod locked in the recess ; 
ably providing herself, also, with a measure of meal, to 
account for her presence, if need were, in the upper 
room, and muttering to herself that she could easily 
manage to lose the key, if any suspicion arose, the 
landlady of the Black Boy and Woolpack descended to 
her bar at the very moment when Cromwell and G-rim- 
sorwe, making their way slowly through the eager 
questioning throngs of the townspeople, re-entered the 
inn. 

It was doubtless a considerable hazard Dorothy now 
incurred, and perhaps not quite in accordance with very 
nice notions of above-board play in the game ; but so 
convinced was she of some deep, dark treachery at work 
against the safety of her lover, that Dorothy could not 
deem herself to blame in counteracting such by any 
needful underhand movement on her own part. She 
was convinced that everj^thing was to be dreaded, from 
observing the freedom of action enjo3^ed by the pre- 
tended prisoner, when he made his appearance at 
Edgbaston Barrier ; and the malice and fury flaming on 
his countenance when, having had the impudence to 
address her quite familiarly on their meeting, she turned 
away from him in scorn, struck the conviction deeper 
into her mind. 

Unwilling to abide any further display of his audacity, 
which might provoke personal reprisals, Dorothy then 
determined to v/ithdraw from the spot and return to 
Deritend. But a thought occurred to her on the way 
home, that Grimsorwe's absence allowed her a good 
opportunity to go and see her friend Dame Cooper, at 
the Black Boy ; if possible, to put her up to some 
watchfulness over the traitor's proceedings ; and accord- 



MAJOR MONK. 11 

ingly she had made her way to the inn^ and there not 
only diffused her own suspicions, but had them increased 
by other circumstances vvhich had come to the cogni- 
sance of the expelled royalist bailiff's lady and her 
entertainer. 

The chief of these was that a messenger had arrived 
from London, who demanded urgently to see Captain 
Cromwell, and not finding him there^had left the house 
to look for him at once. 

This person was apparently of the military profession, 
and probably of some rank, from his authoritative 
demeanour and gentlemanly attire, though he arrived 
in a plain travelling garb, and without attendance, in 
the town. His name was stated to be Monk. Dorothy 
was seized with dread, upon this intimation, that this 
stranger was the bearer of some decision on her lover's 
fate ; and she was determined, at every hazard, to 
ascertain what. 

JSTeither had she lonof to wait in her concealment ere 
light seemed likely to be thrown on her perplexity. 
With a rapid beating of the heart she distinguished the 
sound of approaching voices, and in a few moments 
Cromwell evidently tramped into the apartment, in the 
heavy jack-boots he had assumed, Vv'ith a full upper suit 
of armour, for the warlike action of the day ; and she 
knew that Grrimsorwe contiuued his accompaniment, 
from hearing his voice at the same time. ' They of the 
house have misdirected the gentleman . purposely, to 
my thinking . to the defences Aston way ; but he will 
soon find out his mistake and return,' he was remarking. 
' Know ye the man, sir ? ' 

* Not I, indeed ; but he leaves word, I hear, that he 
is a major in the Earl of Essex's own body-guard. 



12 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

which is, I take it, of superior rank to mine ; so, belike, 
the earl has taken it upon him to supersede me here, 
for, I misdoubt me, he is one of those lukewarm, half- 
hearted professors in the cause, which a great peer of 
large estate is likely to prove,' said Cromwell, evidently 
very peevishly. 

' In that case, what shall you do, captain ? Yield 
the fruits of your great courage and enterprise to 
another ? ' returned Grimsorwe, almost tauntingly in his 
accents. 

Cromwell made no reply at first to the observation ; 
but Dorothy had little doubt it produced some un- 
pleasing effect, for she heard the heavy boots crunch 
and crackle as the captain strode vexedly up and down 
the chamber. 

' What shall I do ? What can I do, ]\laster Grrim- 
sorwe ? ' he then answered gloomily enough ; but, after 
another brief interval, resuming with singular fervour 
and exultation, ' Yet what boots to ask counsel of a 
fellow -worm of the earth ? The Lord will open me a 
way, and guide me thereupon. He who took David 
from a-minding of silly sheep, to set him up as a leader 
of battle ; yea, as a king and ruler over all Israel ; the 
Lord's mil be done, whatever it be. The mightiest of 
us all are but as chaff before a strong wind when the 
Wilier willeth aught. And I do feel myself called upon, 
as by an inner voice, to kneel and ask of Him guidance 
over what is to follow. Truly, He hath been a gracious 
Lord to me this day, and removed all terror from my 
heart, which I looked to experience, of a surety, the 
first time I beheld the naked edge of the sword. Oft I 
have heard it said that the greatest and boldest of 
after-commanders have had their knees loosened with 



MAJOR MONK. 13 

dread, in their first experiences of blood and death ; 
though of a truth neither, through good precaution, 
hath befallen us to-day.' 

And, greatly to the unseen auditor's vexation, as 
interrupting more profitable discourse between the 
parties, she became aware that the Parliament Captain 
had fallen on his knees, and was pouring forth a series 
of devotional ejaculations and entreaties for enlighten- 
ment direct from above. Nor did Grrimsorwe himself 
venture to interrupt the paroxysm of prayer until 
Cromwell ceased of his own accord, and arose, appa- 
rently wiping his face, for he observed, ' This wrestling 
with the Lord in prayer is a hard though sweet exercise. 
Sooth, how the sweat pours from my skin, as an I were 
a reaper on a hot day I Much more of this will make 
me light enough for the saddle on my purposed midnight 
gallop to Nottingham.' 

The expression struck alarmingly on Dorothy's hear- 
ing. Meanwhile, Grrimsorwe's thoughts seemed to be 
running in another channel. ' They said below the 
messenger's name is Monk. Can it be the man of that 
name, a lieutenant-general in the King's army in Ireland, 
who was committed to the Tower just before I left 
London ? From all I heard of him, he was of a suffi- 
ciently time-serving disposition to change his politics 
rather than remain in disgrace and durance. May it 
not well be he ? ' 

Precisely as he spoke. Mistress Mellons entered, 
escorting a stranger ; presumably, from his soldierly 
. and commanding figure and manner, the officer from 
London. 

He was, apparently, in the prime of his years ; his 
countenance was handsomely featured and gentlemanly. 



14 THE AEMOUBER's DAUGHTER. 

and stamped by an expression of great though quiet 
reserve and gravity, not usually observable in men of 
his age and profession. His demeanour was that of a 
person accustomed to the good society of his time, 
full of calm self-possession and nerve ; his language and 
tones gentle and conciliatory, though not unmixed with 
a certain inflexibility and composure of resolve in the 
bland and affable accent that gi'eatly puzzled the 
hearer's judgment. 

Dorothy could see little of this, even if she had haz- 
arded putting her eye to the air-hole ; which she scarcely 
did, lest some betraying gleam should light to detection. 
But the first utterances of the stranger's voice gave 
some notion of these other personal belongings. He 
began to speak the moment Mistress Mellons had intro- 
duced him as ' 3Iajor Monk.' But, doubtless, as an 
encouraging hint to the hidden witness, the landlady 
interrupted by adding, ' Your honour's dinner wants 
but another turn or two of the spit, so I do trust no 
long delay needs be made to mar good meat I ' 

' So trust I also, good wife, for though my stomach 
be ready enough for my meat (I thank my good morn- 
ing's work for my appetite), cinders are, hard of diges- 
tion for an ostrich,' Cromwell replied, rather sharply. 
' But as this gentleman I hope will partake with me, he 
will hardly make his business, either, too tedious. From 
London you say, sir ? ' 

' I have not said so, sir, but it is not the less true, and 
from the Earl of Essex, his Excellency's head-quarters 
in the city, sir,' replied the stranger officer, politely. 

' Head-quarters in the Tower, did I hear you say ? ' 
returned Captain Cromwell. 

Major Moik was evidently a little disconcerted. But 



MAJOR MO>-K. 15 

he answered quietly, * You have heard, I see, of my in- 
carceration therein, Master Cromwell ; but like other no 
worse people I have espied the error of my ways, in the 
time and solitude so afforded me, and have offered my 
sword to the Parliament, which hath been graciously 
pleased to accept it ; whence it follows I am here with 
this letter from the noble Earl of Essex's own hand, in 
answer to one duly received and weighed from yourself. 
But the subject, both ways, is of a secret nature, unless 
this gentleman is as innermost as your o'wn bosom in 
the matter,' Monk concluded, with a visible expres- 
sion of warning and wonder in his look. 

' Far from it,' said Richard G-rimsorwe, though with 
inner reluctance, no doubt. ' I am the captain's pri- 
soner merely ; most kindly entreated, it is true, and as 
such withdraw myself.' 

He suited the action to the word, while Cromw^ell 
took the letter offered, and putting it in the hollow of 
his left hand broke the large and pompous seal into a 
hundred pieces with a stroke by the other. Major 
Monk raised his eyebrows, but made no remark. Xor 
did Cromwell make any apology for proceeding at once 
to read the contents : very slowly and deliberately, and 
evidently more than once to himself. 

During this perusal it would have been a singular 
study for any person acquainted with the future desti- 
nies of these two men . one the overthrower, and the 
other the restorer, of the English Monarchy . to have 
analysed their respective countenances. Singular but 
vain ; for neither of them betrayed a glimpse of the 
thoughts or emotions possessing them, under each 
other's scrutiny : of which each was vaguely conscious, 
without any direct encounter with their eyes. 



16 THE AEMOUEER's DAUGHTER. 

* Are you aware of the conteats of this letter, Major 
Monk ? ' said Cromwell at last, deliberately refolding 
the missive, and asking the question in a very common- 
place and ordinary tone. 

'My instructions are simply to deliver it, Captain 
Cromwell,' was the cautious reply. 

' Well, sir, you have executed your commission ; but 
as for my part, I purpose to make it no secret to the 
entire nation anon of the strange balk contrived for me 
in a great enterprise, whereby a torrent of blood might 
be spared this people and kingdom. I would have you 
take notice that by this writing I am peremptorily 
ordered to abandon my plan to surprise the person of the 
King ; leave this well-meaning but scarcely harnessed 
town at once, to whatever may befall it, in consequence 
of its brave adoption of my counsel ; and draw, with 
all my raised forces in the three confederate counties of 
Beds, Cambridge, and Huntingdon, to the new rendez- 
vous of the Parliament army at Northampton.' 

' Such are his Excellency's well-advised commands, I 
believe,' replied Major Monk, sedately. 'And I must 
add that, far from admiring the violence of your zeal in 
these affairs, Captain Cromwell, the Earl of Essex is 
sorely dismayed and horrified at tho bare notion of so 
disloyal and insolent a design upon the sacred person of 
the King, which his Excellency's own fullest commission 
merely authorises him to set free from the hands of the 
Papists and malignants surrounding him, and place at 
liberty to hear honest counsels, delivered with all reve- 
rence, from his loving people and Parliament.' 

' So 'tis worded in all the decrees and ordinances, 
sir,' replied Cromwell, with a laugh that clearly startled 
the cautious messenger. ' But deem you we shall be 



MAJOR MONK. 17 

arraigned for life and forfeiture of goods, in these silken 
terms, should it fall to his Majesty's behest to require 
the meaning of these acts of ours by judges and juries 
of his appointment ? It is a strange, it is a marvellous 
thing how this delusion of words possesses men's minds ! 
Well, but, sir, have you done your mission now, or is 
more to follow ? Do you come to take mihtary sway 
and office among the good people here when I depart 
to the rendezvous named, in obedience to m}^ orders ? ' 

^ Of a surety, no ; my Lord of Essex would never 
think to set an officer of my service and standing at the 
head of an undisciplined insurgent mob, though it has 
not been thoucrht fit to entrust me with so hi^h com- 
mand in the Parliament's service as I held in his 
Majesty's,' returned the major, with evident disgust. 

'Well, and in good truth, you are not the kind of 
instrument to the work : you have served too regularly, 
sir, 1 take it, for the business, which fits us poor half 
civilians better. But how forwardly and trustfully 
these worthy poor souls of Birmingham have put them- 
selves under the ploughshare ; or, rather, have suffered 
me to place them ! The King's cavalry already at Aston I 
It yearns my bowels to think that I must leave them 
to disasters I shall have been the main instrument to 
bring upon them I Northampton I Why Northampton ? 
It is infinitely too remote for what should be the grand 
purpose now, to fall upon the malignants, tooth and 
nail, before the}' can gather to any strength round the 
standard at Nottingham I ^^'hy Northampton, say I ? ' 

He paused in the indignant query, seemingly for a 
reply. But Major Monk only made the cold obser- 
vation, ' In the camps where I was bred, no soldier 
ever made questions of his general's will and decision, 

VOL. II. c 



18 THE AlOIOUIJEirrf DAUGIITLE. 

whatever bis subordination ; but above all, no officers, 
Captain Cromwell, of such subaltern degree as ours.' 

' May only a major-general, or lieutenant-colonel, 
hold his commander a traitor or an ass, Major ]\lonk ? 
If so, I did never so much long for preferment as at this 
moment ! ' returned Cromwell with startling suddenness 
and vehemence : though he burst into a laugh the 
moment after, and added, ^ But the Earl's Excellency 
naturally forgets not that he is a stream of the fountain 
of honour, which, if it be choked and dammed . what am 
I saying ? My dinner, sir, will smoke on the board 
anon, and I trust to see your ride has appetised you as 
well as our tramping to and fro in this town to-day 
hath ourselves, when you have had some space to dust 
yourself.' 

The major now politely complimented Captain Crom- 
well on the skilful manner in which he had rendered 
an unwalled town impervious to a cavalry attack ; but 
with something of sarcasm and reflection in his tones 
that did not escape Cromwell. 

* Nay, ours is but rough soldiery, sir ; yet it served 
the turn. You had the skilfullest of our trained mili- 
tary at Cadiz and at the Isle of Rhe with you, where I 
think I have heard you served ; but I know not that 
it fared so much better with you there I " 

' In truth did it not,' returned the major, with evi- 
dent vexation, ' but we were under ill captaincy . silk 
and velvet courtiers, who had never smelt powder, put 
to our rule ! ' 

' Were you of rank to form any judgment in such 
matters then ? ' returned Cromwell, demurely. ' I 
should say, by the reckoning of your present beard, you 
would but carry a pair of colours at the Isle of Rhe ! ' 



MAJOE MOSK. 19 

* But I have served since in the Low Countries, arrd 
in Ireland during the horrid, hellish massacre there by 
the Papists,' returned Monk, rather betrayed from his 
wonted equanimity by the retort. 

' In Ireland it was, then, no doubt, you acquired so 
profound a science in the salvation of the weaker num- 
bers by the virtues of spade and pickaxe, that you 
speak so critically . which is to say scornfully . of our 
achievements here with the same ? ' returned Cromwell. 
And satisfied with the snubs he had thus administered to 
the self-sufficiency of the regular officer, he added cheer- 
fully, ^ But we own oiurselves poor tp'os in the sport, 
and hope to show to more advantage in an assault on 
roast beef and batter pudding mine hostess has nigh in 
readiness for us. And I can also recommend her ale 
and her strong waters. I say nothing of her wines, 
which, perhaps, better consort with gentlemanly 
liking. ' 

' I am beholden to you for the invitation, Captain 
Cromwell. We can be good trencher-fellows, if nothing 
else,' replied the major, rather sarcastically, both in 
words and tone. ' But I have not quite done my mes- 
saging : there is an order from the Committee of Safety 
in London regarding the disposal of the prisoners you 
announce yourself to have made and hold in this town.' 

Dorothy's heart took a quick flutter at the words, and 
it was with difficulty she hindered the pant from being 
audible on the exterior of her place of concealment. It 
may be imagined if she listened with eagerness to what 
ensued. 

' The prisoners I ' exclaimed Cromwell, evidently 
taking the second paper with avidity. ' But I asked no 
instructions concerninir them I I had intentions of mv 



20 

own. What is said here? That I am to release 
Richard Grimsorwe forthwith, and despatch Edward 
Holte, under safe custody, to the Gatehouse Prison of 
Westminster, to abide trial for high treason and other 
his misdemeanours, in taking action against the high 
ordinances of Parliament ? ' 

' It is so determined, sir ; the committee is bent on 
making at once an early and terrible example, to deter 
other gentlemen from such audacity,' replied Major 
Monk, adding, with a suppressed sigh, ' They meant 
the like against me, for my refusal to yield Nantwich 
to the Parliament's summons, had I not made my peace 
by submission.' 

' That will never Edward Holte ! And so they will 
take the lad's comely head from his shoulders,' said 
Cromwell. ' Hard measure that, and never meant by 
me. Should it be? I did speak for the other, and 
forward his letters to St. John and Master Pym ; but 
this is a bloody way to make bastards lawful inheri- 
tors!' 

* I have obeyed my orders, it is for you to obey yours 
How, Captain Cromwell,' said Monk, calmly. 'But I 
know not why a simple gentleman's head should be so 
rooted to the stem, when the noble Strafford's has 
rolled on the block, and my Lord Archbishop Laud's is 
so loose it needs but a waft of the axe to sever it I ' 

' Truly, truly, sir, yet it mislikes me enough. The 
youth is a fair youth, and w^e have taken him at some 
unhandsome advantages. But what other men do is 
none of our doing. We w^ash our hands of the young 
man's blood, when once we are quit of him from our 
own restraint. Yet I could be sorry, too. But when 
no choice is left us ? What power have I, in either of 



MAJOR MONK. 21 

these matters, to withstand the decrees of my betters, 
were I so inclined ? WTiat power, I say ? ' 

By a strange coincidence, even as Cromwell uttered 
the exclamation, in which indignation seemed to con- 
tend with some other restraining influence, a trampling 
sound became audible in the street below the inn, lead- 
inor from the Bull Rinor. 

' Horsemen in Birmingham ! what means this ? ' ex- 
claimed the captain, evidently startled ; and as clearly 
by the clatter of his boots, he rushed to the window. 

What Dorothy Firebrace, helplessly imprisoned, 
would have given to have passed the deliberate and 
measured footstep of Major Monk, after the organiser 
of the defence of Birmingham ! 

She thrust her ear in strained anxiety to the hole in the 
store-cupboard ; but the reverse of a relief was it to her 
agonised attention when she heard Cromwell exclaim, 
' I was praying in my soul for an answer to my thought, 
and as the Lord liveth, they are here ! My troop of 
Ood-fearing, man-despising horse are here, and plenty 
of armour ready for their casing and wielding I The 
Grod of Sabaoth . the Lord God of Armies be praised ! 
Now can I speak with a straight back to any question- 

' What mean you. Captain Cromwell ? ' said Monk, 
stiffly enough now, indeed. 

' Captain Cromwell I I tell you I feel nigh a major- 
general, or a lieutenant-colonel at the least, when I look 
at these stout fellows, I mean. Did I not tell you, 
erewhile, we should have beef and custard to our 
dinner ? ' 

' I do not understand you, sir,' said Major Monk, and 
it is very likely he did not. 



22 THE ARJIOrEER'S DAUGHTER. 

' Captain, your troopers have arrived ! ' exclaimed an 
eagerly excited third voice at this moment, which 
Dorothy instantly recognised mth a shudder. 

' Are they so, Master Grimsorwe ? In good time ; but 
we are under sudden orders for Northampton, now,' 
said Cromwell, handing him the Earl of Essex's letter, 
and adding to Monk, ' I would have as many witnesses 
as I can that 'tis by no fault of mine this great oppor- 
tunity is lost,' 

''You are strangely communicative, captain,' said 
Monk, in a displeased tone, and Dorothy had little 
doubt he withdrew upon the word, from the tone in 
which the subsequent dialogue proceeded, without any 
intervention on his part. 



CHAPTEE XXXVII. 



THE IRONSIDES. 



* So then, at the very moment when .success seems to 
ask but the plucking, you abandon the enterprise in 
obedience to this wavering Earl's commands ? ' said 
Grimsorwe, with disappointment and vexation in every 
accent. 

' What can I else ? You see how peremptory they 
are? how all aid is refused to this believing, zdalous 
town, save information that Parliament commissioners 
mil be sent down at convenient speed ? ' said Cromwell ; 
and Grrimsorwe burst into such a raging of disappointed 
expressions as fally revealed to Dorothy Firebrace the 
purposes he had cherished. But she was unprepared 
for what followed on the first cessation of this outburst, 
when Cromwell, receiving back his commander's letter, 
suddenly tore it into a thousand shreds ! 

' I will not keep this evidence,' he said. ' If I fail, 
it will but further sink me ; if I succeed, who shall 
dare to question me on disobedience to such orders? 
My men have ten hours to rest and arm them till mid- 
night ; and at midnight we will commence our gallop 
to Nottingham.' 

An undertoned but perfectly distinct hurrah burst 
from Richard Grrimsorwe. 



24 THE ARMOUKEe's DArGirTER. 

' Hush, hush I ' said Cromwell, probably placing his 
hand on the imprudent lawyer's lips. ' Yon solemn 
prig below wdll hear us else ; and I know not yet 
whether my men would obey me against superior com- 
mand. But what is this you have been a-doing with 
St. John and Vane ? They have sent for your brother 
to London, to have off his head ! ' 

There was a slight pause, and then Crrimsorwe 
laughed a laugh which made all the blood in Dorothy 
Firebrace's warm veins run cold. 

^ You see, then, captain,' he jocosely observed, ' you 
were wrong to impute to me a clumsy design to have 
him taken off by the Anabaptist rabble ! ' 

That was all he said. Indeed, he had little oppor- 
tunity to say more, for a tramp of munerous heavy feet 
on the old staircase outside announced the approach, 
probably, of the inferior leaders of Cromwell's troop of 
horse, anxious to greet their commander. 

It plainly appeared so to the agitated armourer's 
daughter, whose brain whirled with excitement, but 
who discerned that the room filled with a multitude of 
persons, whom Cromwell appeared to welcome, man b}' 
man, with the most affectionate warmth and earnestness. 

' WTiat, Eichard Pride, Richard Pride I is it you, good 
brother, whose sweet humility reverses your name? 
Hewson, my brave colourman, as fresh and lively as a 
bridegroom at the church, after your long ride ! 
Harrison, my bedfellow, as prayerful, I trust, as when 
we last saw ! Ha ! Lambert, mine excellent lieutenant I 
what progress make you in book-learning for the wars ? 
Master Hugh Peters, whom I would call reverend 
chaplain, but that the name is popishly abused ; how 
fares it with ye all, dear friends ? ' 



THE IRONSIDES. 25 

' The better for your asking, worthy captain ; I do 
never hear your voice but I feel as if I had drunk wine 
. sweet, not heady wine,' replied Lieutenant Lambert, 
always obsequious and subservient, but secretly ani- 
mated by an ambition that rendered him subsequently 
the bitterest, though most insidious, rival of his 
chief. 

^I am well in body, dear captain; but my soul is 
sick with impatience to know what you purpose with 
us in this long cross ride. I know it is something of a 
most acceptable savour in the nostrils of the Lord ; and 
we heard far and near as we came how you have stirred 
up this sweaty, hard-worked people to a real stench of 
godliness I But what is it, our Joab, what is it, that 
our speed must wear out our own and saddle-leathers 
too ? ' another voice enquired. 

Cromwell seemed to make no direct answer to this 
question.- It could not be called one certainly, what 
Dorothy heard him rejoin, ' Is that your Bible, Master 
Peters, you have slung at your haversack ? ' 

' What should it be else. Brother Oliver ? Lo, it is 
my bilbo of the good fight . the best of all fights I but 
I have told you I have no stomach for actual blows,' 
returned Master Peters. 

' It was your namesake of old's fault, honest man ! 
He could own Christ everywhere but at the cross ; and 
yet Christ disowned him not for that trembling and 
weakness of the flesh, so good a Lord ours is ! But 
what I wanted of you is to open the book, at a chance 
place, and see if you can light on any word of promise 
. any comforting or rebuke . in the enterprise I have 
on hand, but must not communicate to any until the 
hour of its execution.' 



26 THE aidiourer's daughter. 

The cliaplain readily complied, it appeared, with this 
demand : a strange superstition, but one in almost uni- 
versal honour and vogue among those who professed the 
most to have cast ofif superstitions. For Dorothy heard 
a flutter of book-leaves, and then the harsh Puritanical 
recitation of the following very singularly apt quotation, 
certainly : . 

' 2 Samuel xvii. 1,2: " 3Ioreover Ahitophel said unto 
Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, 
and I will arise and pursue after David this night : 
and will come upon him while he is weary and weak 
handed, and will make him afraid : and all the people 
that are with him shall flee ; and I will smite the 
king only." ' 

' Says the Word that cannot lie even so ? ' exclaimed 
Cromwell, snatching the book evidently with vehement 
excitement. ' Why then, what care I for the ordinances 
of man ? So ye shall comfort your earthly Adam with 
the fruits and vintage of the earth, and clothe yourselves 
in't^e raiment which I have provided for you, while 
your horses rest a convenient season : and then I tell 
you all I will lead you forth on an enterprise whereto 
this oracle promises the blessedest success that ever 
vras ! ' 

' Against the King's troopers, who are besieging you 
in this town, we hear ? ' enquired Peters, not by any 
means in the cheerfully exultant accents of a willing 
martyr. 

' I am your commander ; you are to make no question, 
but follow me wheresoe'er I lead ! ' returned Cromwell. 
And the reproof was well received by the rest of the 
officers of the future indomitable ' Ironsides.' 

' I am willing to follow you, captain, through the 



THE IRONSIDES. 'I i 

flames of hell, to the restoration of the Throne of 
Jesus ! ' said the darkly-musing tones of Harrison. 

' I will follow you, captain, as implicitly as one born 
blind must follow him who leads him by the hand,' 
said Lambert. 

' You are the pillar of fire before us in the desert,' 
said another of the group, in fervid accents ; ^ lead on I ' 

^ Well ; but we are to dine first at least,' said Peters, 
smacking his thick lips. ' And by the scent that gTeeted 
us as we came in, should not have long to wait.' 

^ Go down to my landlady's great kitchen ; you will 
find the board spread. But, hark you all, no talk before 
the pragmatic officer of the Earl of Essex you vrill 
likely find there. I vfill be with you at the shortest. 
Master Grrimsorwe, I have a word with you.' 

Grrimsorwe had remained during this whole dialogue, 
it was evident ; and Dorothy perceived he had intended 
to retire with the rest, had he not been detained thus 
alone with Cromwell. 

' I had not time to tell you yet. Master Grrimse^we,' 
the captain now resumed, ' but the same order which 
transfers 3'Our brother Edward Holte a prisoner to 
London, directs your own immediate release. Here, 
therefore, is your passport out of Birmingham.' 

In the pause of conversation that ensued, Dorothy 
then distinguished the scratching of a pen upon parch- 
ment. 

Grrimsorwe, it was pretty plain, received the docu- 
ment, but lodged a demurrer. 

' I will thankfully use this, captain,' he said, ' to- 
morrow, when I have seen you sped on your journey, 
and my brother, as you call the unfeeling usurper of 
my birthrights, properly speeded on his way to London, 



28 THE armoueer's daughter. 

under Major Monk's convoy, and that of a sufficient 
guard.' 

' You thirst for your brother's blood then, man ? ' 
said Cromwell, in horrified and abhorrent accents. 

' My mother was of nearer kin to me, and she was 
drowned in a filthy eel-pond, to make Edward Holte's 
a lawful wife ! ' was the malice-burning reply. 

' Horrible, horrible ! ' ejaculated Cromwell. ' How- 
beit, we are all but as instruments in the hands of the 
AU-Overruler ! Perhaps this young man's sacrifice is 
needed to cement the integrity of the good town to the 
cause. Howbeit, I will plead for him what I may with 
those in authority ; my cousin Hampden's honey voice 
shall be heard in his favour. Meanwhile, avoid my 
sight and presence from this time and henceforth, 
fratricide I ' 

As the dreadful word was pronounced, from which 
even Grrimsorwe recoiled, so commonplace an interrup- 
tion as the entrance of the landlady of the Black Boy, 
with a renewed summons to the Parliament Captain to 
dinner, occurred. 

' My faith, worthy sir,' she exclaimed, ^ the roast is 
on the board, and if you make not the better haste your 
men-officers will fall foul of it, and leave you as small 
a share as the last hound in the kennel ; they look so 
keen and famished at the viands! Grood faith, your 
company needs rule ! There's Major Monk already 
smiling and making his signs over the way at Black- 
smith Clarges' rantipole wife, who shames the whole 
neighbourhood with her bold staring and audacity . 
more than her husband, who is the best singer in the 
town, can credit it I ' 

^ He ! . that grave and solemn gentleman ? ' said 



THE IRONSIDES. 29 

Cromwell, laughingly. ' You must be mistaken, good- 
wife ; but lead the way, mine hostess. I would lock 
the door after me, to show whoever knocks the owner's 
absent.' 

It is probable the captain had Master Grrimsorwe in 
his intent as he spoke, for the latter sullenly remarked, 
' I am going: forgive me if I show not so nice of my 
manners, hostess, but betake myself at once to my 
chamber, where you may send me such fragments as 
the hungry dogs leave I ' and so departed. For Crom- 
well assented, as it seemed, without reluctance to 
Mistress Mellon's ready-witted saying, ' Nay, I will 
follow with the key ; I lack something from the stores. 
Out on't, are they quarrelling below, by their clamour ? ' 

Thinking this no unlikely possibility, Cromwell nod- 
ded, and strode out of the apartment. 

Mistress Mellons then, indeed, turned the door-key 
. but within . and flew to the closet. She opened it, 
and Dorothy Firebrace fell forward senseless in her 
arms! 



3© 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

A FUTUKE DUCHESS SHOEING A HORSE. 

Luckily there was plenty to occupy CromweH's attention 
during the very considerable interval that elapsed ere 
Dorothy Firebrace was enabled to leave his dangerous 
neis'hbourhood. 

It was some time, indeed, before she recovered suffi- 
ciently to state the reasons of her being so overcome. 
An almost desperate plan of counteraction had then to 
be arranged between her and her sympathising Eoyalist 
friends before Dorothy stole out of the back door of the 
inn to return to Deritend. 

In the first place, Cromwell, taking no further notice 
for the time of his officers, turned into the street to 
inspect his newly arrived troopers. 

These were now dra^n up in a well-dressed line . 
scarcely a horse's head before another . in front of the 
Black Boy, numbering probably about eight score riders. 
For Cromwell had liberally interpreted the Parliament's 
commission to him to raise a troop of horse . his popu- 
larity in his county, and reputation as a gifted holder- 
forth, as well as a courageous leader, giving him the 
pick of its zeal and fanaticism. Indeed, he was the first 
to raise a body of men in the Parliament's service 
endowed with the proper qualities to withstand the 
dash and enthusiasm of the Royalist nobility and 



A FUTURE DUCHESS SHOEI^a A HORSE. 31 

gentry, at the head of their attached and hardy rural 
followers. 

The ' Ironsides,' under which name, derived from 
their good Birmingham armour, Cromwell's regiment 
was destined speedily to be known and feared, were 
nearly all men of mature age, of grave and determined 
aspect, and of what was styled ' sober and God-fearing 
demeanom- ; ' most of them, in truth, distinguished b}^ 
a strong cast of gloom and austerity, supposed in those 
days to indicate depth and sincerity of religious convic- 
tion. All wore buff jerkins and high jack-boots, r.nd 
were securely ensconced in what was called a clemi-jyique 
saddle, as if between the humps of a camel. 

Cromwell was received with a deep solemn murmer, 
such as might gTeet the entrance of some reverend 
preacher into the pulpit, rather than by any more 
military sign of greeting to a commander. But it was 
plainly meant for an expression of satisfaction, and as 
such he accepted it ; only, however, by raising his hat 
once as a general salute. But as he walked along the 
line he seemed to recognise each trooper individuall}', 
and by name, and to address to every one some friendly 
recognition. 

' Ah, brother Moses Eobson, ^^ith your beast as ever 
. clean and bright as new stacked barley, from your 
long ride I Francis Mallows, my good neighbour at 
Forelands, how left you the goodwife and the bairns at 
home? Fight-the-G-ood-Fight YvVilesa}^, is it you, 
worthy man ? and to what use hast thou put thy talent 
since we saw thee last ? Thou wilt hear in this witness- 
ing town that I have not buried mine in the earth ! 
What I the good brothers Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego ! ye will find yourselves anon at the gate of 



32 

the fiery furnace again ! Save-all Daniels, we are 
coming fast upon the times when the dark sayings of 
Grod you are so moiled to interpret shall he interpreted 
by events and fulfilments clear as the sun ! But I 
do joy to see how well treated your poor beasts are all, 
and what pains have been taken, as I desired, not to 
override them on the last stretch from Coventry. Well, 
there is yet some good rest in store for you awhile ; but 
we must be in readiness for the saddle any hour of the 
day or night, the enemy being so nigh at hand as he is 
to this poorly-fenced town. But when once ye have 
donned the new steel coats I have had fashioned for 
you, ye will be as tough in the hide as any of the King's 
dragoons, and we will let them see anon that we know 
how to play the men as well as they. How, Philip 
Bendle, is it you ? Are you not aweary, man, for the 
hour?' 

' Yes, captain, even as a hart panteth for the brooks 
long I for the battle against the foes of Christ and His 
covenant ! But I have changed my name since I saw 
your honoured face, and am now re-baptized unto 
Grod into Eemember-Christ-died-for-you-on-his-enemies 
Bendle ! ' returned the trooper, with a dismal turn up of 
a pair of gleaming eyes, that seemed meant by nature for 
a very different expression. 

' I am glad of it, good brother, very glad of it ; I trust 
thy heart is re-baptized, as well as thine outward frame- 
work of man. Well, thou wilt find many good brethren 
of thine inclining on the steeps of salvation in this 
town. In especial one Sisyphus, a bellows-blower . 
I wot not what his other name may be . who is in 
possession of all the illumining over yonder, among the 
German truth-seekers. What though in his person he 



A FUTURE DUCHESS SHOEING A HORSE. 33 

be as a broken and flawed pitcher ? He smells in all his 
pieces of the good wine he held when he was whole and 
sound, ere the Amalekite dashed him against the wall.' 

And with a word of this kind for almost every soldier 
he passed, Cromwell was some time ere he reached the 
last of his troopers. 

The inspection evidently satisfied him. ' Soh ! I 
know not but you are in marching order at this very 
moment, had you your arms well delivered. Yet, fair 
and softly goes far. Gro now, all of you, across to 
yonder sheds, which you see now fronting on the 
market-place. They are shambles at ordinary times, 
but I have had them well cleaned out, and abundantly 
furnished of forage for the refreshment of your steeds. 
I see you are all, as I desired, provided with full wallets 
of provisions. But there is a kilderkin or two of ale 
ready to be tapped and rationed out to you, to moisten 
the salt beef and biscuit . and the town fountain for 
your horses. Do not overwater them, nevertheless. We 
may have to ride sooner than some expect. Let us be 
in this town, which has so freely placed herself in our 
hands, even as the shepherds in the midst of the flock, 
with the wolves prowling around. And we will have 
our staffs raised too. But we must put on the iron 
prods first; which shall be as soon as I have myself 
broken my fast this day with 3-our officers ; when look 
that ye be all in readiness to march peaceably down to a 
great smithery there is in the place, where I have, all 
your new fighting gear in as good readiness to be fitted 
on as any Bucklersbury tailor's apparel.' 

Again the solemn hum of approval passed along the 
ranks of the soldiery ; and the officer who had been 
left in charge of the men, one Cornet Hacker. who 

TOL. II. D 



34 THE armourer's daughter. 

afterwards officiated, in the rank of colonel, at the 
execution of Charles I. . received some further private 
instruction from Cromwell, and gave a word of com- 
mand which set the entire body in motion. 

The manoeuvre ordered . wheeling into line and 
pacing to stables . was performed with a symmetry and 
regularity that delighted the captain, who had devoted 
infinite toil and study of his own to perfecting the dis- 
cipline of his volunteers. He was then returning into 
the inn when his attention was caught by the figure of 
the tinker lad, Bunyan, who was standing on tiptoe, 
gazing with intense interest at the military display . so 
earnestly, in fact, that he seemed to forget he carried a 
pot of glowing charcoal by an iron chain at his side ; 
suddenly now letting it fall, and giving a yell of pain as 
he felt a burning touch of the implement on the flesh 
of his naked legs. 

Cromwell laughed. ' Let it be a warning to you, my 
lad,' he said, ' lest by carelessness and remissness you 
touch a greater fire than this ! Do you take me, boy ? 
Do you understand the nature of an allegory ? ' 

' It is an a-leg-ory, sir, since it hath burned mine ; 
but I know not why you should so scoff at me ! ' re- 
turned the boy, passionately. ' And I did think to ask 
to become a trooper in your service ; but I ^vill go to 
the cavaliers now rather, at Aston ! ' 

'Simple child I Thou hast no gristle yet for the 
hard work in store for these men of mine. But the 
cavaliers, say you ? A soul must not be lost for a care- 
less word ! Come to me anon, and I vvill explain that 
I meant no jeer or jibe at you by my word "allegor}^" 
Yet, stay now ; thou art a wanderer in highways and 
byways by thy calling, and of a shrewd capacity, me- 



A FUTURE DUCHESS SHOEING A HORSE. 35 

seems. Know you much of the country out away north- 
wards from this, good lad? Let us say Leicester or 
Ashby-de-la-Zouche.' 

' Every step of it, even unto Nottingham, and be- 
yond ! ' returned the lad, with a significance that made 
Cromwell start. 

He even seemed alarmed by the observation; and 
after a pause of inner reflection said, ' Come in with me 
at once ; I will explain to thee my hard word. But if 
thou hast any meaning in thine, keep it concealed, upon 
thy life ! Nor care I for the rest, what the fine gentle- 
man-soldier from London may think of it. All men 
are equal before Christ, and these are the days of His 
manifestation, or the cause in which we contend is but 
a rotten one. Thou shalt meal with me, and with him, 
and all of us, begrimed and rag-clad as thou art ; and he 
who is too great for thy presence may remove his own.' 

Cromvv^ell returned with this stransfe invited gfuest 
into the principal apartment of the Black Boy, where 
he expected to find his officers and Major Monk. 

They were there in reality, but not, apparently, on 
very sociable terms. The officers were gathered in a 
group, draining ample potations of ale, at one end of 
the apartment, and Major Monk was sitting moodily 
alone in a window-sill at the other end. 

Cromwell, who was in hopes that the ' regular ' 
major must have seen and admired his troop's ma- 
noeuvres, was rather annoyed to find he had selected a 
window looking aslant into a dark back lane, without 
apparently having had the curiosity to spy out at all 
at the others opening on the main street leading to St.' 
Martin's. 

It was, then, rather in sarcastic rebuke for this 



36 THE armourer's daughter. 

inattention than as meaning what he said, that, on re- 
joining the grave and stately officer, Crom^Yell made the 
remark, ' How, Master Major, were you so taken up 
with ogling yonder slatternly young wench-wife shoe- 
ing the horse there, in Hog Lane, that you had no eyes 
for my picked yeoman riders ? ' 

But now ^lajor Monk himself, cold, polished, and 
impenetrable as marble as he usually was, blushed 
and started guiltily upon the word. 

It is true, he replied : ' What wench-wife, captain ? 
I see none. Nothino^ but a fresh-lookino: blacksmith 
boy, in a coally leather apron, grinning and hammering 
at a horse's heels, w^hile his rascally, lazy, sot of a brother 
(is it ?) sits drinking and roaring out all manner of 
senseless balladr}^ on a cold anvil I ' And he said this 
with such sedateness and settled composure of belief 
that Cromwell himself thought he was really mistaken, 
and laughed as if at the major's ignorance and lack of 
true observation. 

' Why, you should level your spyglass at the object, 
Master Monk I ' he returned. ' But, do you mean to 
tell me that, even ^yithout the affirmation of these 
petticoats under the grimy leathers . something of the 
shortest too, I grant ! . you could not assure yourself 
that yonder full-flushed, rounded-cheeked, long, black, 
curly-polled, wicked, roving-eyed slut ( I'll be sworn she 
knows we are looking at her, strike the iron rattlingly 
as she will ! ) with her teeth laughing like flakes of 
snow in her red, sooty lips . do you need me to tell you 
that yonder is Wild Moll, Blacksmith Clarges' wife, 
who doth the main work of the anvil, while he sings 
and drinks the Black Boy barrels here dry ? ' 

' I do not need the information, sir ; I concern my- 



A FUTURE DUCHESS SHOEING A HORSE. 37 

self nothing in the matter ! ' returned Major Monk, but 
with an air of aristocratic disdain and disgust, and 
turning away. 

And yet, and yet ! It is a sad story, but one that 
forms the secret inmost wheel of the great event in 
English history, styled the Restoration. For had not 
this Wild Moll proved a false Venus to her Birmingham 
Vulcan, and become in the course of time, and of her 
husband's frenzied dissipation in his abandonment, wife 
of General Greorge Monk, yet continued scorned and 
despised by the Puritans for her grave offence against 
morality . who knows whether she would have taken 
part with the congenially dissolute and gay Charles II. 
in his exile, and have used the influence of her impe- 
rious temper and beauty over her husband to enlist his 
powerful arm in the Stuart cause ? 

Wild Moll was scarcely sixteen years of age at this 
time, but the precocity of mechanic life, and her athletic 
bringing up, had matured her person even so early, and 
she might have been taken for a woman of three or four 
and twenty in her Sunday clothes. In her usual work- 
ing garments of black and greasy leather, wherein she 
exercised almost all the offices of her husband's trade . 
which his laziness and jovial drunkenness greatly dis- 
inclined himself to pursue . a stranger might pardonably 
have doubted her sex ; unless, indeed, he had taken 
into consideration the female coquetry and lively im- 
pudence visible under all the mirk that customarily 
veiled Moll Clarges' ruddy complexion and saucy fea- 
tures, but could not the laughing provocation in her 
brilliant eyes and smiles. Xor could the striking animal 
beauty of her frame, visible in the free and vigorous 
movements exacted by the manly tasks the young virago 



38 THE aemoueer's daughter. 

seemed set upon, have eluded a soldier's eye so com- 
pletely, one would think, as Major Monk would have 
had it inferred. 

The unfortunate though scarcely pitiable husband 
himself. Blackbird Blacksmith, as he was called, from 
his singing propensities . was a big, strapping fellow, 
with a broad, rosy, drunken, merry face, decorated with 
a profusion of shaggy black hair and beard ; good- 
natured enough in the main, but given to every species 
of low dissipation and excess, known to ancient as well 
as modern Birmingham. And his carelessness and 
drunkenness doubtless contributed to make an unhappy 
home, and facilitate the seducer's approaches. 

But this is a story, luckily, out of the range of our 
present narrative. It may turn away, with Major 
Monk, from the contemplation of the vigorous beauty 
and her tipsy blacksmith spouse, who sat swilling ale 
and rollicking out some jingling chorus to the strokes 
of his wife's hammer, and may follow Captain Cromwell 
to the dinner table, which now began to smoke with 
savoury viands. 

A new subject of discussion, was, however, destined 
yet to arise between the major and the captain. And 
the former had certainly some reason to look surprised 
when he found a tinker boy invited to join himself at 
the repast. Xay, the very next seat to himself was 
assigned to the shrinking and amazed lad, who evidently 
little desired the honour. 

' How is this ? ' said Monk, gazing at the dusky 
apparition with anything but satisfaction. ' Do you 
reckon tinkers among your cadets. Captain Cromwell ? ' 

^ This is only a visitor, but one of a many sweet soul- 
experiences and awakenings; whereupon I think to 



A FUTUEE DUCHESS SHOEING A HOESE. 39 

exchange some godly seasoning to our meat,' said 
Cromwell sedately ; but with a smile that was in truth 
mocking and derisive enough, he added, ' You must 
make up your mind not to sit altogether with gentle- 
men of born degree in heaven, major ; and why not 
also on earth ? ' 

' Not while there is another inn in the town where I 
may fare for my money, Captain Cromwell, out of 
the company of sweeps,' returned the major, indig- 
nantly; and slightly raising his hat to the Ironside 
officers, he left the chamber. 

' We are well rid of a tedious espial I ' said Cromwell, 
enjoying the success of his manoeuvre, and the company 
certainly seated themselves at much more freedom in 
the absence, than had seemed likely in the presence, of 
the aristocratic soldier. 

Yet there was yet another slight interruption, besides 
the lengthy grace which Hugh Peters now proceeded to 
deliver before meat. Armourer Firebrace entered the 
apartment with a perplexed and anxious look. ' Where 
is my daughter, captain ? ' he demanded, without his 
usual deference either of manner or tone. ' I left her 
in your charge, and she has not returned to her home ! ' 

Cromwell looked somewhat confused and amazed on 
this query. ' She gave me the slip at Edgbaston 
Barrier,' he replied, ' affrighted at the noise or the 
looks of a grim fellow upstairs, w^ho will persist to dog 
at my heels. But she is safe enough . she vaW not 
venture Aston way again! . perchance at the Moat 
House, with her betrothed.' 

Firebrace made some indignant though undertoned 
observation, quite unaware . as indeed were all present 
. that precisely at this moment Dorothy, perceiving 



40 

the coast clear into the back lane, had glided out of the 
house ; furnished, moreover, as some misdirection for 
the eyes of the populace, with a cloak and married 
woman's hood, belonging to Dame Cooper. 

The armourer was then about to withdraw, when 
Cromwell added, in no slightly imperious tone, 'But 
look you, master armourer, delay not long at the Moat 
House, and bring Tubal Bromycham home with you, as 
fast as may be, to the Forge ; for I am coming for the 
armour you have fashioned there of mine, which is 
fairly paid for, piece by piece ; with the two hundred 
brave fellows who are to wear it at my heels ! ' 



41 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

LOYE AND LOYALTY. 

Dorothy meanwhile sped home at all possible haste to 
Deritend. 

Joy-bells were now pealing from the steeple of St. 
Martin's, and the entire aspect of things had passed 
from gloom and despondency to the exaggeration of 
triumph and exultation. 

The whole population of the town appeared to have 
poured into the streets, exchanging all manner of cheer- 
ful gossip on the great events of the day. 

Every one had some wonder to relate concerning the 
repulse of the cavaliers, and the distinguished part 
which himself or his neighbours had played in it. But, 
above all, everybody overflowed with praises of the 
courageous bearing of Tubal Bromycham and his 
fellows. And there were not wanting some to express 
an opinion that nothing but the Parliament officer's 
over-caution had prevented the townsmen, under his 
leadership, from sallying forth and effecting a complete 
victory. Indeed, this notion was carried so far that the 
arrival of Cromwell's troopers being now universally 
known, opinions were freely declared he had unhand- 
somely reserved the honours of the crowning defeat. 

Dorothy Firebrace, no longer sympathising in any 



42 THE AEMOUREES DAUGHTER. 

degree with these feelings, lent no ear to their utter- 
ance. Her experience in the morning had besides 
awakened her to a sense of her disfavour with her 
townspeople, and she knew not whether success would 
add to or diminish the popular disgust. 

Edward Holte, on his part, awaited her return with 
extreme impatience, and, considering how much the 
safety of the young creature, who had become to him 
the dearest of womankind, as well as his own, were 
involved in all that passed, it was no wonder. Par- 
ticularly as he had no means of acquiring the slightest 
information on the momentous progress of events, shut 
up as he was in a thickly-walled inclosure, at a part of 
the town remote from the scene of action. 

Unfortunately, too, on Firebrace's return, he had 
overheard his anxious enquiries for his daughter, and 
witnessed his abrupt departure to seek for her. 

All this gave reasonable ground for renewed alarm ; 
and Dorothy's reappearance scarcely removed it. Her 
face was in reality too clear an index of the emotions 
she was suffering to reassure him. And when tlie 
young lover clasped his fair beloved to his breast, and 
besought her to reveal what occasioned her dismayed 
and horrified looks, Dorothy wept some time on his 
shoulder before she could reply. 

But the interval of her father's absence was too pre- 
cious to be wasted ; and she forced herself to find words 
to reveal to Edward Holte the repulse of the royalists, 
and the dreadful information she had acquired, and by 
what means. 

It was doubtful which astounded Edward most . the 
courage and devotion of the maiden in his service, the 
depths of perfidy and treason made manifest in his un- 



LOVE AND LOYALTY. 43 

natural brother, the dangers that threatened himself, or 
those assailing the person of the sovereign in whose 
cause his loyal zeal was so earnestly engaged. 

But from peculiar reasons this last idea speedily 
worked itself uppermost in the mind of the young 
.cavalier ; and he declared in tones of distraction, that 
in comparison with the threatened sacrilege, his own 
apparently assured doom scarcely deserved his attention. 
It was by his father's fault, by his father's worse than 
treasonable divulging, the noblest Prince of the earth 
would perhaps soon be placed in the hands of a rabble 
of black, designing traitors, who would not scruple, it 
was possible, even to bathe their accursed hands in his 
royal blood ! 

It was then that Dorothy exclaimed with a beautiful 
blush, * But if one could be found to venture all for the 
rescue of his Majesty from so great and heinous a 
danger, deem you not, dearest Edward, a generous 
Prince would think he owed to his preserver even so 
vast a recompense as our happiness in wedded love 
together, say our harsh fathers what they will ? ' 

' It cannot be doubted, my beloved Dorothy ; but do 
not think I will ever suffer you to hazard your dear 
safety again for any hope of advantage to myself . no 
not even for the preservation of my King I ' the young 
man replied. ' It would not matter much were I alone 
concerned ; my head is already plainly devoted to the 
axe I And there is no risk I would not gladly incur 
if ' he paused, with a full conviction of the hope- 
lessness of any attempt he could make to escape from 
the barricaded and well-guarded town. 

' Listen to me, nevertheless, dear Master Holte,' re- 
sumed Dorothy, with fervour. ' Be in the fu-st place 



44 THE armoueer's daughter. 

assured that were tlie danger such as I could take upon 
myself, and save your hazarding, I would never have 
communicated it to you, but have adventured on it 
at once. But it is not alone the King's captivity is 
threatened ; you also are to be sent to London . to the 
cruel, babe-murthering Tower . to the block ! who can- 
say ? and without hopeful pause of any sort I There- 
fore your safety must be first provided for . must be 
fearfully hazarded to secure ; and then the King's re- 
demption will depend upon your loyal diligence and 
resolve I Are you willing to hazard much, dearest, for 
results like these ? ' 

* I was thinking but now as you spoke, my Dorothy, 
of wrenching open the doors of this house, and making 
my way through all opposers, or perishing in the 
attempt, along the river behind your house into the 
open fields I ' 

' It would be an impossible enterprise ; the river is 
staked below the bridge, and guarded by musketeers : 
you may almost see them pacing at their posts from the 
windows here,' Dorothy replied, very sadly; and her 
voice faltered as she resumed, * But I have thought of 
a plan for your escape . with the assistance of some 
good and hearty loyalists, my friends, of the town . 
which, with Grod's blessing, can hardly fail of success.' 

' What is it, my soul's adored ? There is no risk, 
however desperate, I will not thankfully put to the 
venture ; and whatever ill betide of it, bless you with 
my dying breath for giving me the chance to embrace ! ' 
returned the loyal cavalier. 

Dorothy again visibly hesitated. 

« 'Tis very sad,' she then exclaimed, evidently much 
embarrassed, *that the treachery and wickedness of 



LOYE AND LOYALTY. 45 

others must put us also on indirect means for extrica- 
tion from the toils. This is of Mistress Mellons' 
device ; but I see not what else can be done.' 

' Keep me no longer in suspense, dearest, but declare 
your mind. There are few means, indeed, which such 
an end as the preservation of the anointed of the 
Lord cannot justify. For my own poor life, I put it 
not in the scale.' 

' Yet, my Edward I what are all the kings' lives of 
the earth to me compared in value ? But to proceed : 
I told you, did I not, of the dismissal given by Captain 
Cromwell to your traitorous brother, and of the pass- 
port which permits. nay, ordains him . to leave the 
town at the least possible delay ? ' 

* You did ; and of the well-merited rebuke that 
accompanied it. True it is, men love the treason, but 
they hate the traitor I ' 

^I suggested to Mistress Mellons that if we could 
but obtain possession of this passport ' 

' How, dearest Dorothy ? ' interrupted Edward, in 
tones of great disappointment. ' What would it avail ? 
I have light, flowing hair ; my traitor brother's is dark 
and soot-curled. We are much of a stature, it is true ; 
but I am a soldier, and wear the laced garb of one. He 
is a lawyer, and wears the plain devil's robe of one. 
His person is now notedly known by these signs in the 
town. Of what use could his passport be to me, if even 
I had it?' 

So I told Mistress Mellons ; but she had an answer to 
all my objections. She hath a black wig, she says, left 
in her house by a player-man, a long time ago, of the 
King of Bohemia's strolling company, as they called 
themselves, who had not wherewithal on groino: to dis- 



46 THE akmoueer's daughter. 

charge his meat, and so pawned it for the debt ; which, 
player-like, he hath never yet redeemed. But 'tis 
ample ; for the poor rogne played Holofernes the 
tyrant in it, and when the mock head, severed by 
Judith, was shown the gazers, the hair hung nigh the 
length of her sword. So, if besides the passport we 
can secure Grrimsorwe's wolf-skin, what for but that, 
favoured by the darkness and the general engagement 
of men's minds in other matters, you may evade the 
town ? ' 

'There were some likelihood, perchance,' Edward 
replied, not apparently much cheered by the prospect. 
' But you might as well hope to steal a real wolf's skin 
and tail from the creature's back unperceived, as this 
robe and passport from Dickon's vigilance.' 

' There lies our main difficulty, and the great hazard 
that has therefore to be run,' replied Dorothy, with an 
audible tremble in her bell-like accent, and blushing to 
the deepest crimson of the rose as she added ; ' for this 
is what Mistress Mellons put it to me to do, to win the 
means for your escape. She knows why I hate Grrim- 
sorwe so grievously, for I could not hide my agitation, 
nor the cause, when I made from meeting him for 
shelter to her house this morn ; yet will have me 
advised to let her declare to him that I have confessed 
my aversion is but a feigned coyness, -v^ith a view to win 
him to some declaration of honourable and honest 
meaning in his suit. Having learned such particulars 
at Aston to my betrothed's detriment, that I would do 
anything to spite him . but find you, for your part, too 
proud and cold ! I can fairly enough, however, sure, 
pretend to a bastard gentleman in the way of matri- 
mony! And so Mistress Mellons w^ould put it on 



LOVE AND LOYALTY. 47 

Grimsorwe, ere he leaves the town to-night, to visit me 
and offer his apologies for whatever so far may have 
been his misdoing towards me. Yea, this very night, 
she Avill let him understand, if he choose to accompany 
her as mediatrix, I shall expect them, in a friendly dis- 
position, to hear what fair excuses he can offer, in the 
orchard behind our house ! ' 

'You, Dorothy I meet that fellow in so solitary a 
place? But you mean me, doubtless, to be there and 
slay him first I ' exclaimed Edward, fierce sparkles of 
jealous and vengeful feeling lighting up in his usually 
roild and beaming eyes. 

' Not for the world I The man is still your brother, 
though the most detestable and treacherous of Caios ; 
and you shall not shed one drop of your father's blood 
in his veins I Hea-ven forbid,' Dorothy answered, ' and 
therefore it is 1 have provided no horrible temptation 
of the kind shall be put in your way. You shall in no 
Avise encounter with the ANTetch, Edward, be you right 
well assured I ' 

' And you will keep the rendezvous with him, then ? ' 
the lover returned, with an ireful doubt in his accents 
that was far from displeasing his hearer. But she put 
him as speedily as possible out of his alarm. 

' Still less than yourself, dearest. Unless it be for a 
few instants necessary to carry on the stratagem, and 
for me to unpack my heart of all the scorn and hatred 
in it towards the villain. Know that I have sent a 
message to Tubal Bromycham, which I know well he 
will respond to, informing him that your life and my 
honour are in danger, and that only he can rescue both. 
When he comes I will confide to him so much as con- 
cerns the intention to send you for trial to London, and 



48 THE aemoueer's daughter. 

Grimsorwe's visit ; and will implore his aid in the pro- 
ject formed for your deliverance, and in taking a just 
vengeance on the plotter of all these inhuman intrigues. 
As my betrothed, Tubal hath a fair right to be offended 
at a private interview between me and Eichard Grrim- 
sorwe, and he shall make a sudden appearance to dis- 
turb it. The traitor, alarmed, will produce his passport 
from Captain Cromwell, which Tubal will secure ; and 
then, upon my complaint of all his insolencies, will 
order him to strip off his disgraced gown, and will fling 
him, in wrath, into the river behind our orchard. It is 
at a low ebb this dry weather, and can drown no man ; 
but it will take Grimsorwe time enough to paddle out, 
and dry himself of the slush, and escape from the 
smiths' quarters, for you meanwhile to be far out of 
danger of recapture and the town, in his robe and like- 
ness. How like you this plot, dear Edward ? Dame 
Cooper, who in her youth saw Willie Shakespeare oft, 
and reads his plays with a truer relish, she doth confess, 
than her Bible, except Sundays, avers the Merry Wives 
themselves never devised a better to punish their fat 
luster in his carnal pursuit.' 

Edward could not forbear smiling at the recollection 
of his favourite poet's mirthful inventions in the comedy 
alluded to; but the project seemed still not to please 
him much, by the objections he continued to raise. 

'But Grimsorwe is no such fat, jovial Satyr of the 
woods ; he is the worse devil of the towns ! ' Edward 
Holt resumed, * He will become desperate, finding him- 
self so scorned and outwitted. And ought I to suffer 
another man, even this new Lord of Birmingham, to 
run my risk ? ' 

' The risk is little indeed. Tubal's strength were a 



LOYE AND LOYALTl'. 49 

match for any three Grimsorwes I He will be armed : 
Grimsorwe, as a prisoner, weaponless. Certain of my 
father's smiths can be within call if their services are 
needed. If you refuse, Edward, I shall think you 
value a small punctilio of your own pride more than 
your King's safety . or my life, for that depends on 
yours I ' 

' Dearest creature I what can I have done to merit 
such goodness, such favour from Heaven I But is it 
certain that Tubal will so far stand my friend ? ' 

' There is nothing he will not do to serve the brother 
oi Arabella Holte. And the rather, I think, that the 
way of it in some sort returns upon Sir Thomas Holte 
indignities I have not hitherto mentioned, put upon 
Tubal at Aston.' 

* For Grimsorwe, let him do his worst ; there is 
nothing the traitor has not deserved of scorn and 
chastisement I But how is it to be thought the fellow 
dares venture near you, even on your gossip's encourage 
ment, after so much aversion as you have shown him ? 

' Oh, he is infinitely conceited of himself, and has as 
low opinion of the fickleness and changefulness of women,' 
said Dorothy Firebrace. 'And see you not of what con- 
sequence it would be to him to win me over from your 
adherence, Edward ? Truly, he hath importuned 
Mistress Mellons several times, she tells me, to make 
what he calls peace between us, and bring him to speech 
with me. When he met me by chance this morning at 
the barrier, he had the impudence to fall talking even 
so, and to profess himself so greatly enamoured of my 
beauty and virtue^ forsooth, as to have made up his 
resolution to woo me as his honourable wife ! and there- 
by seemed to think he must needs have outbidden my 

VOL. 11. E 



50 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

noble Edward ! Anything whatsoever of falsehood he 
will do, and feign, to deprive you of friending and sup- 
port, I doubt not. He will come, be assured, and Tubal 
will do as I desire him. Happen the worst, we can but 
fail, and throw oui'selves directly on Tubal's benevo- 
lence ! ' 

' That were to ruin him with his townsfolk . a thing 
not to be thought of,' said Edward, gloomily. ' We must 
try your dangerous device, Dorothy. But grant I have 
the disguise and the passport, how can I leave the house 
under your father's eye ? ' 

^ I have, therefore, named a late hour, at which he is 
certain to be weary and gone to bed. Or, at the worst, 
the disguise being brought you to your chamber, when 
you sally thence my father will conclude it is your 
brother departing from a brotherly farewell of you.' 

' Suppose me then free out of Birmingham, what can 
I do afoot, when every moment will be precious, to 
hasten with the warning intelligence to Nottingham ? ' 

* That also is provided for : Mistress Mellons will feign 
orders from the captain to her ostler to restore your 
horse to Master Grrimsorwe, to return to Aston ; and I 
have heard you praise it for its unrivalled wind and 
speed.' 

' Ay, were I on fleet Dowsabelle's back, I would fear 
no overtaking. But the consequences to yourself, 
Dorothy ! Know you not, abetting my flight may be 
held equal to an intelligence with the enemy ; and has 
not martial law been proclaimed in the tcfwn ? ' 

' Who can discover my accomplicing ? And Cromwell 
and his men will be gone on their vain enterprise, and 
I will throw myself on Tubal's protection, who will re- 
main master of the town, should any question be raised.' 



LOVE AND LOYALTY. 51 

' I must yield, Dorothy ; but if danger threatens you, 
swear you will leave Birmingham at once, and throw 
yourself rather on the protection of one who will then 
constitute himself at once, at every hazard, your hus- 
band, openly, before all the world ! ' said the young 
lover, with passionate tenderness. ' But already we are 
plighted eternally one, and the Church can tie no band 
which is not already soldered round my heart by love 
and gratitude I ' 

It needs not to declare the renewed protestations of 
fidelity exchanged by the youthful pair, and their effu- 
sions of loving sorrow in the prospect of their approach- 
ing separation . in all which they were so earnestly 
engaged that Firebrace reentered in the dusk almost 
unobserved. Dorothy, in truth, having hardly time to 
disengage herself from her lover's fondly-clasping arms, 
and spring to a seat at some little distance, as the 
master armourer strode moodilv in. 



rvS^T.of.amo>s 



K "2 



52 



CHAPTER XL. 



COUNTERMINING. 



Eapidlt and dexterously as the separation between the 
lovers was effected, it could scarcely have been alto- 
gether successfully so. Firebrace's glance expressed 
anger and suspicion almost equally as it fell on the 
youthful pair. 

In truth, the natural bloom of Dorothy's complexion 
was singularly heightened, and could scarcely fail to 
excite observation. But perhaps the armourer was out 
of temper on other causes ; he expressed himself to that 
effect, at all events. ^ 

' So, daughter ! ' he exclaimed, very sternly, ' where 
have you been these three good hours, since I found 
you not at your betrothed's new home, and it seems 
you took upon you to leave the masterful stranger's 
protection in which I placed and left you ? Why did 
you so ? Are all things topsy-turvy now, and do our 
very female houselings set our will at nought ? ' 

Confused with these signs of anger and abrupt 
questioning, and anxious to turn her father's suspicions 
from Edward Holte, Dorothy answered, on her first 
impulse, rather imprudently : 

' The captain betook himself nearer the assault at 
Edgbaston than I thought a woman needed adventure ; 



COUNTERMINING. 53 

and was so altogether unheedful of me that the impu- 
dent fellow, his pretended prisoner, Eichard Grrimsorwe, 
overtook me, and was so insolent and forward in a kind 
of love-making he has undertaken towards me, and half 
the girls of Birmingham, that I fled from his affronts 
to my god-mother's refuge at the Black Boy; and 
there I found shelter all the time, till the just now of 
my return home.' 

Firebrace's ill-humour increased. ' The man meddles 
in all things, in truth, and mars a great deal more than 
he makes,' he said. ' I know not why strangers should 
take upon them the rule of our town, and even of our 
houses, and goings in and out of them I He will tell us 
next, will Master Cromwell, how to bake our cakes, and 
at what hour to cover the fire for bed I Even but now 
he told me . but no matter what ; we must obey, since 
he and his soldiers and his rabble have the whole town 
in their grasp.' 

'You will soon find yourselves, I misdoubt me, in 
the condition of |he horse who, to revenge himself on 
the stag, allowed the man to saddle and bit him, and 
mount with whip and spur ! ' Edward could not forbear 
saying. 

The armourer looked at him very pettishly. 'Job 
lacked not his comforters neither. Master Holte, I thank 
you ! ' he said with bitterness. ' But methinks the poor 
dull beast that allowed himself to be revenged to his 
own enslavement, was not altogether of our Birmingham 
mettle. We shall kick and plunge rarely first ! And, 
meanwhile, whom have we chiefly to blame, but you of 
Aston, for being driven on such ill-advised courses and 
alliance ? ' 

Dorothy looked significantly at her lover ; who sup- 



54 THE armourer's daughter. 

pressed the irritated retort that rose to his lips, and 
quivered for an instant on them. 

*Nay, mine honoured host, I will bandy no further 
useless reproach with you. You are weary, doubtless, of 
your day's toil and trouble ; and I will betake myself 
at once to my chamber, that you may not be kept from 
your needful rest to watch my restlessness.' 

So saying, Edward took a lamp which was usually set 
for him, and took a formal good night of the sii'e and 
daughter, and retired into the bedchamber he occupied 
in the Crown House. Not quite so guardedly, however, 
as he ought, in the farewell glance he exchanged with 
Dorothy as he closed the door, which, as previously 
mentioned, opened on the armourer's principal sitting 
chamber. 

' What strange e3^es the Holtes have ! How they do 
gleam, like hot metal ! Eight glad am I that we are 
about to be quit of this fine young gentleman, our pri- 
soner. And they say the country-side may hope for a 
sharp-edged deliverance from the racg altogether, at the 
Parliament's hands in London,' Firebrace savagely re- 
marked. 

' I trust not ! ... It were a pity so good and old a 
name should vanish from our hearing,' said Dorothy, 
striving to soften the first vivacious energy of her ex- 
pression, so contradictory to her angiy sire's. 

* You trust not ? How concerns it you, minx ? ' re- 
joined the armourer, still more irascibly. ^Have we 
not a much better and older one . the name of our town 
itself . set up again, to fill the place of a score of 
haughty Holtes, and such like upstart novelties ? And, 
well reminded, we must take the quicker care that the 
name of Birmingham fail not again in the land. This 



COUNTERMINING. 55 

marriage between you and Tubal hath been long enough 
talked about now. He is established in his lordship, 
and as you grow so fast beyond my mastery, minion, I 
will place you in a husband's at the soonest. Why not 
at once . this very night ? There is a good presbyter 
among these newly-arrived troopers, who will stand 
upon no ceremonies of church banns and proclamation, 
but will couple any two willing ones as man and wife 
for the asking. Tubal will be here anon on this busi- 
ness of arming the Cromwell fellows from our forges ; I 
will speak to him about it, and he will spy as good 
reasons as I do doubtless in these troublesome times of 
war and soldiering to assure himself of his promised 
wife!' 

Dorothy heard these words mth the less alarm, aware 
as she was of Tubal Bromycham's real feelings on the 
subject. But she thought it best to attempt to pacify 
her father with some outward sig-ns of submission. 'Xay, 
sir,' she said, ' leave it to me to bring all to pass more 
creditably to you than to turn suitor for a husband to 
your daughter. Tubal needs but a hiat from me ; a 
command from you would distaste him much, for, 
as you know, he never w^ell brooked being set under 
control.' 

Firebrace could not dispute the truth of this state- 
ment. He was, besides, soothed by the apparently 
ready compliance of his daughter. But he showed no 
intention of availing himself of Edward's retirement to 
seek rest also, though it was now quite the hour when 
hie usual early habits consigned him to repose. Dorothy 
in vain suggested it to him as plainly as she dared, 
remarking upon his fatigued appearance, and how a 
white wine posset brought to him in bed would be 



56 THE armourer's daughter. 

likeliest to give him refreshment and pleasant sleep after 
the day's stir and tumult. 

Firebrace at last peevishly told her that he must stay 
up till theii* Parliament blaster was served to his mind. 
And probably observing how her looks fell, added that 
he would not leave watching of the prisoner that night, 
lest, hearing of what was in store for him, he should 
attempt escape. ' To-morrow I shall deliver him to 
those who will give me a proper discharge, and then I 
will sleep a whole day to please you, Dorothy ! ' he 
said, sarcastically ; ' that is, unless the captain requires 
us all to turn out on his heels against Aston I ' 

It was plain to Dorothy from these words that her father 
supposed the newly arrived forces were to be directed 
at once against the cavaliers at Aston. But she was 
far from giving him any information to the contrary ; 
perceiving, moreover, that his suspicions were roused, 
she no longer attempted to persuade him to remove 
what she was well aware would be the great obstacle 
and hindrance of his presence in her project to set 
Edward Holte at liberty. 

She turned the conversation in another direction ; 
and little pleased would Cromwell have been had he 
been auditor of the skilful manner in which Mistress 
Firebrace continued to feed the visible dissatisfaction 
of the master armourer with the Parliament Captain's 
latter proceedings. 

It was clear that Firebrace was offended and annoyed 
at the control exercised by this headlong stranger over 
the government of the town ; and, moreover, that he 
felt himself and his fellows driven far beyond their 
original intentions, into some vague and unknown but 
stormily-working sea of change and revolution. 



COUNTERMINING. 57 

The conversation, nevertheless, speedily drooped be- 
tween the preoccupied father and child, and both were 
glad at the arrival of Tubal Bromycham, who now 
made his appearance. 

He brought with him the chief part of his young 
men smiths, who proceeded to open out the forges and 
prepare all things for the delivery of the armour and 
weapons over which they had been so long engaged. 

Tubal himself was in a strangely excited mood, and 
clearly shared the armourer's error that an attack was 
to be made on Aston. 

' I am goiog with them,' he announced to Firebrace, 
* to prevent their carrying the assault in too unneigh- 
bourly a fashion. We of Birmingham do not want a 
silence and a desolation at Aston ; but the uprooting of 
the cavaliers there, and of yonder haughty, threatening 
fellow who jeered so at us, and who they say is the 
King's nephew. That is all well enough. And I trust 
to show Sir Thomas Holte, and his family, I have as 
much of the gentleman in me as I pretend to, by my 
gentle return for their harsh treatment. Master Crom- 
well shall not hurt a hair of a Holte's head, or overturn 
a stone of their dwelling-place I ' 

Firebrace began to say something, to the effect that 
it was fitter Tubal should attend to his own affairs, 
regulate his own house, and drop other inuendoes, 
which Dorothy very reasonably feared would lead to the 
question of making her a bride out of hand. She there- 
fore prevented her father's progress by asking Tubal to 
give her his arm for a little airing in the orchard, feel- 
ing sick and faint at heart, as she said, with the day's 
anxiety and fatigue, and wishful to discourse with him 
on the future likelihoods of their affairs. 



58 THE .uimouber's daughter. 

Firebrace understood this demand his own way, and 
Tubal his. 

The former saw the pair go out together with evident 
satisfaction. The latter, the moment they had passed into 
the inclosed ground behind the Crown Forge, which was 
thickly planted with fruit trees, eagerly enquired what 
was the meaning of the message he had received from 
her by Mistress Mellons, of the Black Boy and Wool- 
pack, purporting, it appeared, that Edward Holte's 
life, and her honour, were in danger from the machina- 
tions of Eichard Grimsorwe. 

Dorothy declared to her betrothed, upon this, all 
that was necessary to induce him to act the part she 
desired in the rescue of her lover. 

She told him of the plan to remove Edward for trial, 
and probable destruction, to London, at the instigation 
of his bastard brother ; of the insults offered to her by 
the latter ; of the betrayal he had made of those Tubal 
had received in his w^ooing at Aston, and the pleasure 
he took in the detail : concluding by stating her belief 
that he hoped to cajole her, in the visit he would be 
induced to pay her that night, by false promises and 
love-making to join in the designs against Edward 
Holte. 

At Edward's earnest desire she said nothing respecting 
the conspiracy to seize upon the person of the ICing. 
He feared the prospect would be tempting to all the 
Birmingham revolutionists. He was mistaken, but it 
seemed probable enough. 

Sympathy for the brother of Arabella Holte . indig- 
nation against the unnatural half-brother . would have 
sufficed to make Tubal perfectly willing to afford 
the assistance in her projects requested by Dorothy. 



COUNTERMINLN'G. 59 

But Tubal Bromycham's generous manly nature also 
suggested to him that he owed her every reparation in his 
power for seeming to trifle with her girlish affections, 
in offering her a heart so unchangeably fixed another's. 

He agreed to all she required of him with the 
greatest alacrity ; and it was arranged that she was to 
remain in the orchard until- Grrimsorwe amved, when the 
proper moment for his interference was to be signified 
to him by Mistress Mellons, who was to seek him out in 
the forge. 

It should be stated that the Crown House Orchard 
bordered the river Eea in a wide triangular space, 
considerably remote at some parts from the forge 
buildings, at others close upon them, in the elbow-like 
bend of its flow towards Deritend Bridge. 

There was an approach to the orchard along a narrow 
path on the edge of the water, from the town ; and, if 
induced to come at all, Grrimsorwe was to make for the 
rendezvous by this access, which was least liable to 
observation, under Mistress Mellons' seemingly friendly 
guidance. A summer bower, formed of iv}^ and honey- 
suckle, the usual ornaments of an English garden at the 
time, was the appointed place of meeting ; and it was 
conveniently near the low paling that separated the 
orchard from the river. 

Our singular betrothed pair had scarcely time to 
complete their arrangement, when word was brought 
Tubal that Captain Cromwell had arrived with his 
troopers, and required his attendance. Accordingly he 
left Dorothy, and returned to the forge. 



60 



CHAPTER XLI. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 

FiREBRACE was already there, engaged in delivering the 
suits of massive armour, roped up in bundles of dozens, 
to Cromwell, partly by the glare of the numerous 
rekindled forge fires, but assisted also by a plentiful 
supply of pitch torches which the captain had brought 
with him. 

Both Tubal and his betrothed's father were surprised 
to find that the ceremony was not limited to the mere 
delivery of the armour. The troopers were directed to 
equip themselves at once in their panoply, in divisions 
of ten ; and as fast as they were fitted and strapped into 
their strong casings by the smiths, they were marched 
back to their quarters at the shambles. 

Tubal speedily gathered from these signs that imme- 
diate action was purposed . action in w^hich he was fully 
determined to take his share, though chiefly with a view 
to evince his still cherished tenderness for Arabella 
Holte, and consequent wish to preserve her and hers 
from injury. 

He was anxious, however, at the same time, to fulfil 
his agreement with Dorothy. When the last squad of 
the now fully accoutred Ironsides had left, he therefore 
requested Captain Cromwell to give him a little time to 



THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 61 

muster a picked body of the townsmen to accompany 
him in the attack on Aston ; but, greatly to his surprise 
and indignation, that leader demurely informed him 
that he should not need his services. 

' You are to remain on guard of the to\vn, my good 
lad,' he said, kindly enough, but imperatively enough 
also, to Tubal Bromycham. And he continued in his 
favourite Scriptural style, ' You can be of no assistance 
to me on my present enterprise : but if the Sj-rians are 
too strong for me, then ye shall help me ; as I trust I 
have not been found backward in the behalf of this godly 
city to-day as against the children of Ammon. But all 
I require of you at present is to keep the gates, while 
I go forward on the Lord's business this night. I tell 
you again, you of Birmingham are to remain as the 
female eagle in the nest, to guard the eyrie, while I 
swoop downward on an errand of destruction and 
salvation ! I shall return . look to see it . with my talons 
heavy with a mighty spoil. And then shall ye rejoice 
with me, and all the land in peace and safety, every 
man once more under his owti vine and fig tree. Yea, 
and throughout all the ages of time, your town shall 
share with Oliver Cromwell the renown and heaven- 
inspired salvation of the deed I ' 

Tubal was not at all satisfied with this cloudy 
eloquence. 

^ I shall go with you to Aston, sir,' he said resolutely, 
' or before you. The town desires no such plunder and 
vengeance as you seem to project against the place, 
which is our chief ornament and palace in these parts. 
Fight and expel the cavaliers if you will, but it is our 
purpose here to protect the Holtes in their lives and 
lawful possessions.' 



62 THE ARMOrrtER's DAUGHTER. 

He clung so obstinately to this statement and resolve, 
that Cromwell become greatly embarrassed and annoyed. 

' What I the old leaven stirs again mthin you,' he 
said pointedly to Tubal, Firebrace being present. ' And 
for the sake of Holte's fai)\ despising daughter ye 
mind not what ye put to the hazard ? Nay,' he con- 
tinued, perhaps a little shocked at his own imprudence, 
observing Firebrace's surprised look, ' come with me 
both ; and on 3^our sacred pledge to secresy I will reveal 
what I truly have in hand.' 

The two armourers accordingly, struck with the 
solemnity of the captain's manner, removed to some 
distance from the tired smiths and the forges at the 
back of the Crown premises, to a spot where Captain 
Cromwell, finding he could not otherwise secure the 
necessary aid and acquiescence, revealed to the two 
astonished Birmingham leaders his real intentions and 
plans. 

It is little indeed to say that they were astonished ; 
they were horrified and amazed to the last degree ! 

The impetuous genius of Cromwell, his audacity in 
action, and his purposes, had alike, at this period, far 
out-leaped the national movement and impulses. 

At no period, indeed, of the whole tremendous 
struggle and tragedy did the feelings of the great mass 
of the nation . least of all of the middle and opulent 
classes, or of those that aspired to elevation on the 
established ideas of what vjos elevated . run to the 
overthrow of the royal dignity and power. 

Firebrace, certainly a man of wealth and position as 
head of an influential trade, felt insulted at the total 
absence of recognition of the importance of these qua- 
lities under a feudal monarchy. But he desired their 



THE BEGI>'NrN'G OF THE END. 63 

acceptance, not the overthrow of the power which it 
was believed could alone confer due honour and recog:- 
nition to the claims of the new influences. 

Tubal Bromycham, on his part, though a man born 
among the people . who had lived its hardest life . 
undergone its heaviest toils . had sufifered its worst 
deprivations and insults . still knowing himself of the 
most anciently aristocratic blood of the land, thirsted 
only to resume the rights and distinctions of his high- 
born race. What wanted these men with effecting a 
seizure and delivery of the King of England, like some 
arrested malefactor, into the hands of the furious mobs 
and irreverend demaoroorues of London ? 

Tubal expressed hunself at once with appropriate 
vehemence on the subject. 

' Cross of Grod ! lay hands on the most sacred person 
of the King himself I which to preserve my ancestor, 
WilHarn de Birmingham, suffered himself rather to be 
hacked to pieces at the Battle of Cressy, whereof the 
picture-book at the Moat House plainly tells ! What 
treasonable sacrilege is this you talk. Master Cromwell ? ' 

Besides sharing to the fullest this strong revulsion 
of loyal feeling, Armourer Firebrace wa.s alarmed and 
irritated almost equally at the notion of the town being 
left with such dancrerous assailants so niorh at hand. 

o o 

' Mean you to say. Captain Cromwell,' he exclaimed, 
*that you will go on this distant, treasonable, sacri- 
legious, most rash enterprise, and leave the cavaliers at 
Aston to harry us ? Are you a madman, or are we all 
madmen that have trusted you ?' 

' I have shown you how you may keep your town 
against any imagination of danger in that direction ; at 
least until I return with so mighty a hostage in my 



64 THE armourer's daughter. 

hands that it shall be as a ransom not only for you, but 
for the entire people of England I What would you 
more ? The success of the enterprise depends altogether 
on its speed ! Should the lightning, launched against 
some towering oak, play around the leaves and branches, 
or strike the sturdy trunk at once ? All topples down 
with that . leaves, branches, acorns . all ! ' 

' Rather I do suspect ,it is a cowardly desertion of us ! 
And that having hurtled us on into a desperate jeopardy 
by your acts and exhortations, you are frightened away, 
with your spick and span new armour-men, by the mere 
sight of an equal enemy I' Firebrace furiously rejoined. 

' You are an old man, Father Armom*er,' Cromwell 
replied, sedately, but not without a momentary darken- 
ing of wrath ; ' and fie on you, that snow-white hairs 
should cover so hot a brain ! But the mere sight of 
the same cools me.' 

' Then I trust / shall not be held too young for 
something braver than threats to an old man, captain ! ' 
said Tubal, also greatly exasperated. ' And I tell you, 
of my own part, that what you propose enters in no way 
into our notions here, and that we mil not in anywise 
aid or abet you in the execution, but rather do what we 
can to thwart and prevent ! ' 

' That can be little,' Cromwell replied. ' My troopers 
are armed . every man read}^ with a foot in the stirrup. 
I shall but ask a blessing on my enterprise with my 
valiant fellows to start upon it. As for you of Bir- 
mingham, how can ye help yourselves ? Unless you 
would basely yield yourselves and all yours to the mer- 
cies of yonder haughty young Grerman savage and his 
riders at Aston, ye must maintain the town manfully 
till ray return with the King my prisoner ; whereupon 



THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 65 

you may look to have the whole Parliament army 
engaged in your defence.' 

*You shall never return into Birmingham with the 
King's sacred person disgraced and traitorously captiv'd ! ' 
returned Tubal, fiercely. ' I am Lord of Birmingham, 
and I tell you the true Lords of Birmingham have been 
and ever will be loyal to their Prince I ' 

'Lord of Birmingham, are you, and speak thus to 
him who hath made you so ? By the Lord, then, you 
shall find that vipers' eggs hatch by the score to the 
brood ! ' Cromwell exclaimed, evidently now violently 
exasperated with the resistance to his will. 'Look to 
it, I say, my fine Blacksmith Lord ! I will make half a 
dozen lords in Birmingham ere I depart, who will keep 
me a hole to creep in again when I return, be sure. 
" Sacred person of the King," quotha ! Blacksmiths, 
stick to your anvils. Ye shall have all the swords, 
bucklers, pistols, breast-plates, back-plates, stirrup irons, 
and leathers . what not I . to make and fashion for the 
mighty men of w^ar ; but for the principles, and purposes, 
and means by which this war is to be fought out, leave 
them to men of study and understanding in such 
matters. What, man I' he concluded, turning suddenly 
upon Firebrace ; ' you know not the meaaing of your 
own sisrn ! What should the crown and mason's level 

o 

side by side portend, but that all men shall become 
equal again, and a great and glorious Eepublic, like 
that of the Seven United Provinces, make us all . and 
no one! . kings and masters in England I' 

So saying, with a sternly imposing gesture, the Par- 
liament leader turned away, and left the two chiefs of 
Birmingham rooted where they stood with surprise. 

VOL. II. F 



66 I'HE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

THE ESCAPE. 

A LONG pause and silence of astonishment ensued with: 
the twain. But Tubal was even yet more amazed at 
the style in which Firebrace broke it. 

* Worse times than ever at hand for all men, it is 
plain,' he muttered ; ' and no man knows what may 
befall an hour before or after. Tubal, I would have my 
child placed in stronger protection than an infirm and 
wearied old man's ; I would be free in mind, I mean, to 
encounter the adversities in store. Let us have this 
long-talked-of wedding at once . at once ! not an hour's 
delay ! Take your bride home with you to the Moat 
House this very night I ' 

Tubal was greatly taken aback ; and no evasion occur- 
ing to him at the moment, he unintentionally increased 
the armourer's exasperation and suspicion to a high 
degree by his reply. 

' Nay, sir,' he said ; ' I will offer no restraint to Mistress 
Firebrace's free choice and will hitherto. And I must 
needs confess it has seemed to me of late to run strongly 
in another direction !' 

' And speak you so calmly and indifferently of the 
same?' returned the armourer, violently roused and 
indignant, as much at the tone of the remark, as the 
remark it-self, of his intended son-in-law. * Ho ! and 



THE ESCAPE. 67 

what was that I heard Cromwell say regarding your zeal 
for Sir Thomas Holte's proud cate of a daughter ? ' 

Tubal changed to a deadly pallor in his robust hues. 
Fortunately it was just then that Mistress Mellons maxie 
her appearance from the orchard, and advanced towards 
them, and Tubal took advantage of the circumstance to 
break off the conversation. 

*I \\dll abide in all things Mistress Dorothy's own 
wishes, father,' he said, hurriedly. ' I left her in the 
orchard . I will seek her there ao'ain. But here comes 

o 

a stranger, a very gossiping woman, of the market-place. 
Pray you go in, and I will send your daughter to you ; 
and what she decides shall be done without further 
wrano^linsf.' 

He retired abruptly as he spoke, and appeared to 
pass Mistress Mellons with the briefest interchange of 
courtesy between townsfolk and acquaintances. But the 
landlady of the Black Boy found time to whisper to 
him: 'Make haste; he is there . the villain is; but I 
would not the precious child were at the hazard of a five 
moments' alone with, him ! Quick I send me the other 
trappings to the great Bellows Forge. I have the tyrant's 
wig under my coats in readiness.' 

Firebrace, out of temper with everything and every- 
body, and taciturn by disposition, was withdrawing 
himself from Mistress Mellons' line of advances, dread- 
ing her gossiping propensities. But on reflection he 
wondered what the landlady of the Black Boy could 
want at his forge, and stopped to ask the question. 

The good woman, however, had her answer ready : 
' My lodger, the captain, has dropped his purse, as he 
s-upposes, somewhere in the smithies, and has sent me to 
look for it, good Master Armourer. And it needs no 

F 2 



68 THE armouker's daughter. 

cat's eyes for the task, with the fires so brightly alit that 
I did hear some should say they thought the Crown 
Forge itself was in a blaze. Most likeh^, in the great 
Bellows Forge, he told me. But how fares it with your 
fair dauQ:hter since her mornino-'s friorht, grood sir?' 

' Do not ask me ; you women know each other's 
secrets best,' returned Firebrace ; and, afraid of further 
palavering, he left the scene, and re-entered his house. 

As he slowly remounted to the general sitting-chamber, 
where he was determined to renew his vigilance on the 
prisoner, something like a distant, stifled yell came to 
the master armourer's hearing. It even seemed to come 
from the direction of his orchard ! and he listened for a 
moment with a deadly terror and anxiety at his heart. 
Could Tubal Bromycham's outward composure have 
concealed a secret exasperation against his betrothed? 
And was it within the range of possibility that anger had 
transported him to off&r some violence to Dorothy, on 
learning^ that her sentiments were chano-ed towards him ? 

No; it was impossible . and yet I . 

Struck with the deepest alarm, the armourer was 
about to retrace his steps, when he perceived his 
daughter herself passing rapidly out of the orchard gate 
into the inclosures of the forges below. 

She had a kind of bundle, he thought, under her arm ; 
but as all seemed well enough with her, and she made 
towards the shed where Mistress Mellons was ensconced, 
Firebrace considered there could be no occasion for his 
interference, and resumed his original purpose. 

The armourer seated himself with a gloomy and dis- 
consolate feeling, nevertheless, in his ample fire-place, 
keeping his eyes towards the door of his cavalier 
prisoner's sleeping-room. 



THE ESCArE. 69 

An ever-haimting, though vague suspicion, that all 
was not as he would have it between his dauorhter and 

o 

this young man, continued to disturb the armourer. 

Not alone Tubal's observation, much that he had him- 
self observed, contributed to annoy him. 

He felt no appetite, and declined old ^Nlahala's well- 
meaning exhortations to take some food into his stomach, 
'to lift up his poor heart,' as she said. 'Lackaday, 
and what ail'd at his worship to stare as wild as a 
baked herring in a dish ? The young gentleman was 
fast asleep . had been as quiet as a mouse, these hours, 
in his chamber.' 

Even with the zealous assistiince afforded her, Dorothy 
Firebrace would thus have found some difficulty in car- 
rying out her plans for her lover's escape, had not the 
old man's real exhaustion stood her friend also. The 
armourer had not seated himself very long in his chair 
ere he began to yield to the drowsy warmth and comfort 
of his hearth, after his day's fatigue ; and, finally, he 
sunk into a slumber. 

An uneasy and easily-disturbed one, however, since 
even so slight a tap as Dorothy Firebrace made at her 
lover's door, after crossing the chamber on breathless 
tip-toe, startled him. He resumed his senses, moreover, 
with a quickness that showed how slightly he had relin- 
quished them ; and having the presence of mind also to 
dissemble at once that he did so. 

He saw the door open slightly ajar, and a hand put 
out, which pressed his daughter's, and then took from 
hers a closely-folded bundle, apparently of some dark 
stuff. 

The door then closed again, and Dorothy, softly 
approaching her father, drew a chair, and seated herself 



70 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

directly between him and the line of view across the 
chamber. 

It should be mentioned that the apartment was only 
lighted by the fire-glow, which, as it was still warm 
August weather, was only kept up for culinary purposes, 
and was at this time very low on the hearth. Conse- 
quently Dorothy had good hopes she was not observed ; 
until, seating herself, her eye encountered the suspicion 
and anger gleaming in her sire's now opened orbs. 

*What did you at the young man's chamber door?' 
the armourer enquired, fiercely. ^ Are these maidenly 
manners, daughter Dorothy ? or have you laid yourself 
out purposely to confirm your betroth ed's suspicions ? 
He hinted such to me but now ; and if you have not 
consented at once to become his wife ' 

' Dear father,' interrupted Dorothy, suppressing her 
agitation by a strong effort of self-control, and driven 
most unwillingly on the equivocation, ' I have . as soon 
as ever he is willing to become my husband. I promise 
you so, on my fair faith I But I know not how it should 
impeach my maidenly bearing to forward Master Holte 
a provision of clean linen Mistress Mellons hath brought 
him from his brother at the Black Boy, and other neces- 
saries, for his journey to London; Master Grrimsorwe 
himself having leave to return to Aston, and no farther 
need of them.' 

' Ay, so I I knew not they were so brotherly together ; 
but I am glad of what you say concerning Tubal and your 
courtship, child. Methinks now I could eat a morsel,' 
said Firebrace, greatly soothed by those seeming good 
tidings, which were only true in sound. But how could 
it be helped ? 

This opening for delay was not in Dorothy's notions 



THE ESCAPE. 71 

at all. She was in hopes that her wearied sire would 
now at last have consented to go to repose, and leave 
the coast clear for Edward's retreat. 

Still there was no remedy but patience and watching 
opportunities. 

She therefore assisted Mahala to produce the contents 
of the pantry before the master armourer, protracting 
as long as she possibly could the lighting of the lamp 
necessary to guide him (however proverbially easy the 
operation) in the movements between plate and mouth. 
Firebrace had demanded light twice, and the second time 
with asperity and evidently reawakening suspicions, be- 
fore the young girl unwillingly complied. 

Still she had some reason to hope, in the disguise 
arranged, if only the presence in the house and de- 
parture of the supposititious Ofrimsorwe himself could 
be accounted for. 

But difficulties seemed to multiply. One of the maid- 
servants, who had been staring down in the smithies 
. and perhaps enjoying same slight interval of court- 
ship with one of the young fellows there . came in to 
announce that 'a fine London gentleman wanted to 
speak with the master;' and on her footsteps followed 
Major Monk. 

The major apologised for troubling the master ar- 
mourer at his meal, with his accustomed bland polite- 
ness ; and then producing a written paper, informed 
Firebrace that it was an order from Captain Cromwell 
for the delivery of the prisoner, Edward Holte, Esq., 
into his custody, and that of a couple of armed towns- 
men, assigned to his assistance, to convey the culprit to 
London. 

' I was in no such hurry myself, and am concerned' 



72 THE armourer's daughter. 

to be thrust upon the business at such uncivil hours; 
but Master Cromwell is a strangely peremptory and 
changeable personage,' said the major, who certainly 
looked a little puzzled. ' At first he did demur, me- 
thought, to any obedience at all to his Excellency the 
Lord Greneral's summons to a certain rendezvous I was 
appointed to assign him and his troopers, south. And 
now, nothino^ will serve him, but he will to horse and 
ride away at midnight on the fulfilment I And so 
hath sent for me, and rid himself by this writing of all 
further care and responsibility at once regarding the 
prisoner.' 

*You shall be very welcome indeed to the custody, 
howbeit, Major Monk, since that is your name ; for my 
eyes and heart are alike wearied out with the needful 
vigilance,' said Firebrace, eagerly, and preparing to rise 
at the very moment and summon the prisoner forth to 
his fate. 

Dorothy's wonderful courage and presence of mind 
did not, however, desert her in the emergency. 

* Give the %Lnliajppy gentleman and his brother a 
little farther time for their brotherly lamentations and 
adieux,' she said, forcibly arresting the attention of both 
her hearers on the words, and also speaking them as 
loudly as she could, in hopes to reach Edward's hear- 
ing. * I forgot to tell you, father,' she added, tru'ning 
to Firebrace, with an unquavering resolve in her accents 
only the mighty passion that animated her could have 
given, 'that a gentleman with black hair and in a 
lawyer's robe . you must oft have seen now in the town, 
and I to my sorrow this morning . but provided with a 
sufficient passport, is in Master Holte's chamber, taking 
his farewells there ; whom, rather than hold much 



THE ESCAPE. 73 

speech with, I admitted, without troubling to wake you 
for consent, so wearied as you were.' 

There were formidable discrepancies in this statement, 
if Firebrace had had time allowed him to consider them. 
But he w^as besides thrown into a great passion by w^hat 
he heard. 

'Pass a scoundrel through my chambers, before my 
closed eyes, to my prisoner, whom you yourself accused 
of great insolences not an hour SL^yone ! ' he exclaimed. 
' I am an old man, as I was told erewhile, but to chas- 
tise such an intruder will give me my youthful sinews 
yet again.' 

' Father I under your own roof . a man protected by 
Captain Cromwell's pass . on lawful, and even com- 
mendable business here now!* interposed Dorothy, 
while her parent tugged with but indifferent success to 
bring the handle of his sword round to his hand. 
' Major Monk, I pray you interfere to keep the peace, 
while I warn the worthless object of my father's wrath 
to depart at once.' 

Major Monk seemed willing to oblige in this respect, 
and addressed some soothinof observation to the irritated 
elder, while Dorothy stepped across the chamber to the 
prisoner's door. 

The armourer himself, on reflection, was perhaps not 
unwilling to be restrained ; not to mention that his 
weapon had become so entangled in his cloak that he 
was ashamed at the efforts necessary to extricate it. 
Dorothy bad therefore the necessary time to execute 
her own share in the manoeuvre. 

The door was now ajar, and she thrust it partly open, 
exclaiming, with a w^ell-assumed contemptuous and 
angry accent, ' Come forth. Master Grimsorwe ; now, 



74 THE armourer's daughter. 

as ever, you breed hate and contention wherever you 
go ; and you must put an end to your leavetaking, since 
here is an honourable messenger of our masters in Lon- 
don, sent on a hangman's office to convey the unhappy 
gentleman, your brother, thither at once.' 

' Coming, sweet Mistress Firebrace ; coming on the 
word ! ' replied a voice which did not badly counterfeit 
the oiled insidiousness of Grrimsorwe's tones. ' Good 
brother, so, farewell I I am sorry for you, but what must 
be, will be.' 

' Make haste in your own preparations, Master Holte ; 
but ]Major Monk will doubtless give you some half- 
hour's space for them. For you, Master Grrimsorwe, get 
at once to your horse, w^hich you will find well bestowed 
at our courtyard gate, and get you mth what speed you 
may from the town. You leave an ill name behind you, 
go when and where you will I ' 

' I am grieved to hear you say so, fair maid,' said 
the person who now stepped boldly forward into the 
little chamber, and who, in his lawyer's robes, with his 
long black hair, broad-brimed slouched hat, and ink- 
discoloured complexion, looked sufficiently like Eichard 
Grrimsorwe to deceive any ordinary and casual obser- 
vation. 

Unhappily, however, Edward Holte, stimulated by a 
natural longing to take a lover's farewell of his beloved, 
and icrnorant of the extremelv offensive ligrht in which 
the armourer was likely to take any species of liberty 
from a person of whose insults his daughter had already 
complained, thought it sufficiently in the character he 
had assumed to add, ' But I cannot leave you until I am 
assured ,my peace is made at least with one fair towns- 
woman of Birmingham, for whose sake I can despise 



THE ESCAPE. 75 

the ancrer of its men I ' And he had the extreme indis- 

o 

cretion to fold her suddenly in his arms, and press a kiss 
on her, sooth to say, now most unwilling lips. 

In fact, Dorothy uttered a kind of shriek of depreca- 
tion, but taken in a much stronger sense by her already 
irritated sire. Firebrace in a manner tore his sword 
from its tangles, and flung himself in headlong fury 
and rage in the way of the escaping prisoner, with it 
naked and raised gleaming in his hand. 

* Defend your insolent life, bastard ! ' he yelled. ' I 
am by descent a noble of France, and you are but a 
half-blooded knave-born of England, and I will teach 
you to dare to insult the blood of Audomar Fier-a-Bras 
in his last descendant's child.' 

Dorothy now indeed gave a cry of terror and grief, 
and threw herself between the enraged old man and 
her imprudent lover. Major [Monk also advanced, but 
seemed to hesitate v^hat to do. 

Edward did his best to retrieve the false step he liad 
taken. 

' I crave your pardon, blaster Firebrace . very humbly 
I crave your pardon . and the fair maiden's. I must 
needs have made too free with my landlady of the Black 
Boy's heady ale to-day I Do not threat me, sir, for I 
cannot stand upon my defence ; I am still but a prisoner 
on enlargement. Here is my passport, Major Monk; I 
pray you stand by me and it, to see me safely out of the 
house.' 

In his agitation he resumed, however, but too plainly 
his natural tones. Major Monk himself was struck by 
the change ; the armourer so confused and amazed, that 
he involuntarily dropped the point of his angry weapon 
to the floor. 



76 THE armourer's daughter. 

This gave the former an opportunit}- to interpose. He 
took the passport, examined its brief contents, and re- 
turned it to Edward Holte. ' It is in due form,' he said, 
' and recommends you to a free passage and assistance 
from all soldiers and others adhering to the Parliament. 
Proceed, sir; Master Armourer will make no further 
obstacle.' 

But a series of ideas were striking like the rapid 
tinkle of a repeater in the armourer's brain. ' Stop ! ' he 
suddenl}' exclaimed, ' Stop, Major Monk ! The passport 
concerns not this man ! Who ever saw light amber hair 
growing under black ? See yonder flowing love-lock I 
It is my . your prisoner, Edw^ard Holte, escaping in 
disguise ! ' 

' Indeed, but it seems strangely like ! ' said Major 
Monk, himself greatly struck with the phenomenon 
displayed. * I'm sorry, sir, but you must await investi- 
gation.' 

' That shall I not I Grive me way ! I am armed I I 
am desperate ! ' said Edward, and he now in reality 
produced a pair of pistols which Ofrimsorwe ahvays car- 
ried in a secret pocket of his robe. ' Stand out of the 
way, Master Armourer,' he continued. ' Your grandsire's 
sword can do nothing against these loaded weapons. 
I mean you no harm. You are the father of Dorothy 
Firebrace. But I will be no longer stayed by any 
hindrance I ' 

^ Your pardon again, sir,' said ^lajor Monk ; ' I have 
a competent guard at the door. It is not my way to 
thrust myself unprovided on enterprises. Come in, men, 
and level your carbines I ' 

The door of the chamber was, indeed, at once thrown 
open, and two tall young fellows, well armed, but whose 



THE ESCAPE. 77 

garb rather resembled the livery of serving-men than 
that of townspeople, entered. And they were furnished 
with muskets, and Edward now, in truth, seemed con- 
fronted by overwhelming odds. 

Dorothy herself, wild with dismay and grief, implored 
him to sun-ender. But on a sudden the young cavalier 
uttered a joyful exclamation . ^ AMiat, my servants, 
Humphrey and Hodge, restored to me armed thus ! Let 
no man stir from this chamber, good fellows, while your 
master's son escapes for his life ! Farewell, dearest 
Dorothy ! . fear nothing. My rescue must have been 
purposed by Master Cromwell himself, since he has 
chosen me such jailers !' 

And with a sudden movement, passing the armourer 
and Monk. who found two muskets levelled at once at 
his breast . Edward rushed to the door of the chamber, 
and passed out. 

Firebrace alone would have ventured pursuit, but as 
he turned with that purpose, Dorothy threw herself 
frantically into his arms, and exclaiming', ' Spare him, 
spare him ; he is my plighted husband ! ' so embarrassed 
her father by her clinging that he could not stir without 
violence to her. And to crown the success of the ma- 
noeuvre, old Mahala most kindly took the opportunity to 
overturn the lamp, hobble to the door, lock it, and hide 
the key in her vasty pockets. 

Not but that she then set to work to make a feeble 
noise for assistance. But luckily the forges were now 
quite abandoned by the smiths, who had returned with 
their captain to his head -quarters at the Moat House ; 
and as the windows of the chamber only opened on those 
premises, the armourer perceived it would be useless to 
summon aid in that direction. Major Monk, on his part, 



78 THE akmourer's daughter. 

yielded quietly enough to the necessity of the situation, 
finding himself a prisoner, instead of a prisoner-maker, 
close under the muzzles of two hostile carbines. 

* Master Firebrace, it is in vain,' he said, taking a 
seat ; Met us yield to the superior force put upon us ; 
but your unhappy daughter and these men may have 
dearly to abide what they have done. Let us patiently 
await what rescue may be appointed us ; and, anyhow, I 
shall remain in the town until I know the Parliament's 
pleasure in the matter ! ' 

Major Monk was not sorry, perhaps, for a pretence to 
remain in Birmingham, in the neighbourhood of luckless 
Blacksmith Clarges' handsome young virago of a wife. 
But he himself possibly imagined at the moment that 
the duty he owed his new masters in this singular affair 
alone influenced him. 



79 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

GREAT POLICY 0>' A SMALL SCALE. 

Cromwell, leaving Deritend in high dudgeon with what 
might be called the two loyal leaders of the revolution . 
in Birmingham, returned to the Black Boy. On the 
way he resolved upon a course of action, which illustrated 
on a small scale his skilful balancing of men and parties 
in the tremendous national anarchy that followed the 
destruction of rovaltv in Enoland. 

He sent word to the escaped fanatic preacher, Wrath- 
of-God Whitehall, and to Sisyphus the be] lows-blower, 
to join him in a thanksgiving he was desirous to offer at 
his quarters for the safety of the town, and to provide 
against further danger. Meanwhile, active arrangements 
were made for the secret midnight start he had in con- 
templation, 

Sisyphus arrived the first from his outpost at the 
Parsonage, which he had occupied all the day with 
soldierly implictness to orders, though at the head of a 
band of zealots of the very lowest and most headstrong 
populace of the town. It was upon this former circum- 
stance that Cromwell, who received him in his private 
chamber, complimented him dexterously, in the first 
instance. 

'Indeed,' he said, kindly embracing the maimed and 



80 THE ARMOUEER's DAUGHTER. 

desperate-looking figure before him, ' you and your 
men are not held of any such honourable estimation in 
the town, it seems ; but to me you appeared models for 
us all. Fie ! how steadily did ye keep the house yonder, 
as ye were bid, while the young man. Tubal, plunged 
like an unbroken steed in harness, and would, if he had 
had his way, have ruined all by bursting out on the 
cavaliers, which would but have let them in as easy as 
riding a herd of oxen with the goad ! But you remem- 
bered, no doubt, that scripture, " He makes Jiis people 
ivilling in the day of his poiver.^' ' 

' I have been trained to the wars, captain ; where for 
so much as stepping out of the ranks unbid a man 
should run the gauntlet of all his fellows, or come out, 
as red as a lobster in his own blood, from the provost- 
marshal's handling,' replied the Anabaptist, with a 
gloomy glare forward into vacancy, but as if his mind 
forcibly repictured to him some such scene of military 
infliction. 

' I'll warrant he has had a taste of discipline himself 
of the kind,' thought Cromwell ; but he continued aloud, 
' Aye, aye, but we are more citizens here than soldiers. 
But then again, I must say that if there be too little 
discretion in some of our valour, there is too little valour 
in some of our discretion. The elders of the town 
showed themselves but faint-heartedly in the dispute 
. Armourer Firebrace in especial. It almost seems to 
me as if it would be an over-trust in the worthiness of 
the cause to leave the disposal of things altogether in 
the town . should an}^ accident call me away awhile . 
in either his or this pretended new Lord of Birmingham's 
hands.' 

He looked enquiringly at Sisyphus, who distinctly 



GREAT POLICT 0^' A SMALL SCALE. 81 

ground his yellow wolf-like teeth, and repeated the 
expression in a tone of scornful mockery, ' Lord of 
Birmingham, forsooth ! ' 

' Truly, I had forgotten,' Cromwell rejoined, wdth a 
smile, * but you and yours do hold there should be an 
end of all kingship and lordship and knightship, and 
the like setting-up one above another of us poor earthly 
worms : is it not so?' 

'It w^as for holding and declaring that doctrine, in 
the camps of the father of the Grerman Wild-Eider who 
has come against us, that I suffered . I mean, it was 
Bohemia himself who ordered me to be stripped naked, 
and lashed from end to end of the camp near Prague, 
for so exhorting the soldiers, aft^r he had deserted us 
amidst the bitter ice and snow, and betaken himself 
to comfortable quarters with his wife, Elizabeth of 
England . who, however, mostly played the man better 
than he . while we were left to freeze and starve I ' the 
Anabaptist returned, with a vindictive kindling in his 
usually ferociously still expression. 

' Well, and it was enough to make you angry with 
such unthankful dignities, poor man !' Cromwell replied,, 
very feelingly ; even tears started in his eyes. ' And 
yet it seemed you fought afterwards for that same 
unworthy prince and leader, even to the loss of some 
precious pieces of your outward framework of mortality^ 
Was it not so ? ' 

' I was a soldier, hired for that,' replied the Ana- 
baptist, raising his hook hand, and contemplating it with 
a look, for a moment, of intense sadness. ' But for this 
mishap I should have been a something more than a 
bellows-blower in the world I I did always purpose it ; 
but who can resist his fate ? ' 

VOL. II. G 



82 THE armourer's daughter. 

' How I you believe also in the inevitableness of things 
as they happen ? . in a fixed and preordained destiny 
of man ?' said Cromwell, now regarding the fanatic T\^th 
a degree of interest in the question which seemed to 
express some fellow-feeling of his own on the subject. 

' Could I change mine, it should be seen I ' was the 
doubtful reply, but delivered with a passion and vehe- 
mence that startled the examiner. 

' You are not content, then, with the condition in 

which it has pleased Pro'ddence to place you*?' he said. 

* Content I ' returned the Anabaptist, in the roai' 

rather of a wild beast than of a man's accents on the 

word. 

'^How should I be content . to be styed in a filthy 
hole and corner of a dismal town . baked and choked 
in the summer heats . frozen in the winter chills . with 
an ugly hag for a wife, who has scarce preserved some 
fiendish mocking resemblance to the outward form of 
her beautiful sex^ . condemned to coDstant, endless, 
hopeless toil for the means to keep this mutilated car- 
cass and pining soul together . with no portion in the 
savoury meats and drinks, the fine raiment, the sports, 
the revels, the triumphs of the hard taskmasters, whose 
wealth I, and such as I, create ? You ask me if I am 
lower than beast, captain, when you ask me if I am 
content I' 

' I meant no such rudeness, dear man : churn not 
your teeth at me,' replied Cromwell, rather unpleasanth^ 
struck with this fierce rejoinder. 'Alack, alack, the 
Kingr and his advisers have much to answer for, in 
removing the old dams and landmarks, and setting the 
waters loose I Yet, who knows what Grod may pur- 
pose, even in our own days, in the resharing of Esau's 



GREAT POLICY ON A SMALL SCALE. 83 

defrauded birthright ? Even now, as I take it, you are 
a man willing to earn better wages and accommodation 
than any you now receive ; and I tell you, in the Parlia- 
ment's name, that so long as you keep and hold the Par- 
sonage with your fellows . which is a special inlet of the 
town . I give to you and them exemption from every 
other authority but my own, and pay equal to any by the 
footmen in the Earl of Essex's army received. Do you 
promise me to mpantain the post, on these conditions, 
against any, in or out of the town, who may offer to 
take it from you, until my return ? ' 

' Ay, will he I against all the devils of hell blasting- 
fire from their nostrils I ' returned the Anabaptist ; and 
Cromwell himself scarcely liked the tone in which he 
resumed, with a dark leer of intelligence in his savage 
eyes : ' Grive me but the time and opportunity, and I 
will make myself master and ruler of the whole town, 
so that you shall have no need to fear weak-hearted 
counsels henceforth ! Think you I love my master 
Firebrace, who spurns my livelihood to me worse than 
to a houseless cur ? . father though he be of the fairest 
woman-girl in Birmingham . what say I ? . in the 
world!' 

'Go, go; I purpose no such topsy-turvy mastery!' 
returned Cromwell, with considerable disgust and anger 
in his tones. ' And what ado has such a scum of man- 
hood as thou art to remark that the maiden is so fair ? 
Hast thou not a proper hag-wife, by thine own showing, 
of thy own ? I do but ask and authorise you to keep 
me this inlet of the town in readiness for my return, 
which will be in a few hours ; and never dream, then, 
that I and my soldiers will suffer any other mastery 
where we are than our own ! ' 



84 THE armourer's daughter. 

* You do only purpose an attack on Aston, then, 
captain,' the Anabaptist resumed, after a slight but 
seemingly ill-pleased pause, ' and would have your 
retreat assured ? ' 

* Why do you ask, now ? This meddling and poking 
in higher concerns than your bidding will never do!' 
said Cromwell, very severely, and inwardly sorry, no 
doubt, that the necessity of his affairs compelled him 
to take up with such an alliance. 

'Because . and I was coming to you with the news 
. a servant of the house there, who is under a spell to 
do obedience to a witch who favours the town for some 
cause, came whispering to me in the dark, that there 
are but some three-score wearied men and spent horses 
with the Palatine Prince there ; who may be easily fallen 
upon and put to the edge of the sword with such a force 
as is now unknown to them, at your command. And 
so Master Cxrimsorv.'e himself bade me tell you.' 

' Master Grrimsorwe I ' replied Cromwell, rather sur- 
prised ; ' I thought he meant not to depart till morning, 
and was in lodging overhead. Are you assured the advice 
comes from him ? ' 

*It was dark night when I encountered him at the 
Bull Ring ; but I could not be mistaken in the man's 
black hair and skin, and lawyer's robe, and tongue-tied, 
careful lawyer's speech I ' 

' Was he returning on foot and alone, so late at night, 
to his father's house, with his hateful eyes unsatisfied 
of his brother's ruin ? ' said Cromwell. 

' Not on foot, sir ; on as cleanly-limbed charger as 
ever I espied ; and I have seen, to my sorrow, the finest 
of the wild Tartar breed,' replied the Anabaptist. 

' Indeed ! why, where could he have hired it ? I 



GREAT POLICY ON A SMALL SCALE. 85 

had laid strict orders that nothing four-footed, raost of 
all, should leave the town I ' said Cromwell, the energetic 
lines of his brows knotting into deep furrows. 'How- 
ever, we will make no question now on these matters. 
I can, methinks, discern a reason why the traitor has 
changed his mind to return so suddenly . that he 
may feign his own danger in remaining, and pretend 
ignorance of our assault designed I Gro now, good 
brother; you shall have your commission in writing. 
Here it is.' 

The captain affected to let fall by accident, in these 
latter words, what he thought would mystify the Ana- 
bajDtist on his present military intentions. 

In reality he seemed so. ' I must go on first to the 
Black Chapel in the fields, that I may put my people 
aware of what is now toward. But Faithful Moggs 
meanwhile keeps my post,' he remarked, ' and you may 
depend on having your orders well observed, though I 
cannot read what you have written me here.' 

Sisyphus retired, and Cromwell was left alone for 
some minutes. 

He mused profoundly during the interval. 

' But, no, no I ' he said at the conclusion aloud, though 
but to himself. ' Turn not aside either to the right or 
to the left I Terrible judgments have ever befallen those 
who did not the Lord's will, even as He had willed it, 
and no otherwise. *' A Hon met him hy the ivay and 
rent him I " Xo, no ; or else it were a showy act to 
begin the doings of my troop with an overthrow of the 
King's nephew . attended, as he is, with but a third of 
our numbers, those wearied and disheartened, and never 
dreaming of so nigh a mischief ! ' 

Shunning this temptation resolutely, and not as the 



86 THE AIlMOrilER's DAUGiriEE. 

luckless prophet of old failed to shim his, Cromwell 
continued in thought until the fugitive apostle from 
Nottingham was announced. 

This poor man entered with a wildly excited and eager 
countenance. It may be imagined that the tumult and 
confusion of the events that had occurred in the town 
since his arrival had not contributed to steady his 
disordered intellect. 

'In good time,' said Cromwell, also embracing the 
maniac prophet as he had the fanatic leveller. * But how 
comes it you are not properly cleansed and brightened 
of your apparel, worthy master? Is it not written, 
"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in 
white raiment?" ' 

' So it is written ; but the godly poor man with whom 
I now sojourn, his clothes are rather of all the colours 
of the rainbow, being a dyer of his trade : and though 
he would have lent me of his raiment, is not that the 
Bow of the Promise ? And who says that the time of 
the fulfilment is at hand ?' replied Wrath-of-God. 

' Thyself hast said it, and did speak the same most 
clearly, with thy mouth full . cram full . of a good gos- 
pel, when thou didst here arrive,* replied Cromwell. 
' " Behold I come quickly," didst thou proclaim, as with 
the voice of one crying, not in the desert, but on the 
mountain top, to all Israel and Judah. '* Hold that fast 
which thy hast, that no man take from thee thy crown," 
I add. Dost apprehend me clearly, brother?' 

' What, no ! Thou speakest as if thou hadst heard the 
trumpet sound ; but it cannot be that all the nations of 
the earth are about to utter the amen at last, as with 
one voice ?' exclaimed the prophet, eyes and mouth alike 
gaping with expectation. 



GREAT POLICY ON A SMALL SCALE. 87 

' Not quite so ; but the way is to be prepared,' Crom- 
well answered. 'To speak as one of this world for 
awhile,' he went on to say, with a steadiness and cool- 
ness that seemed singularly to sober the imagination of 
his hearer, ' The minister of this town . a confirmed 
popisher, in all his practices, of the true Laudean breed 
. is to be turned out, as a wolf shepherd. I have ap- 
pointed, in the Parliament's name, that a new one shall 
be chosen: yea, and as the custom ever was till the 
late archbishop's usurpation, by common suffrage of the 
people. Will you, who have come as an angel or mes- 
senger among them, undertake the charge, and also the 
establishment in this place of a small heaven, as it were, 
of the saints . the reign of Christ upon a little bit of the 
earth . suffering none other rule in Birmingham, but 
'stablishing the Bible law in full power and dominion, 
and the way of holiness and righteousness in all things 
therein ? I know that the major part of the people will 
no sooner hear you declare such sweet things of peace 
and holiness and all good rest, as you can . poor, 
blessed-hearted, over- worked souls I . than they will 
follow you, and abide by you ; and your strength of 
charity and goodwill among men shall prevail, on the 
one hand, to keep down blood-thirsty and ill-designing 
creatures who are already a-brewing mischief among 
us ; and on the other, shall hinder any return of carnal- 
minded rich men and others to the fleshpots of Egypt.' 

Whitehall gazed with piercing earnestness at Crom- 
well as he spoke. 

' Nay, he knows not . he know^s not who and what I 
am : else would he stand and gaze thus unblenchingly, 
and would not rather fall down and worship ? ' the hapless 
lunatic murmured to himself. 'Nay, know I who or 



88 THE armourer's daughter. 

what, myself, I am? There is a dark cloud in my 
brain ; is it the sun or the lightning that shall break 
therefrom ? Meanwhile speaks he not as one having an 
assurance ? I will do even as thou sayest, man of war ! 
And if the people do choose me for their pastor, is not 
the voice of the people the voice of God ? And truly 
I will reign over them even as Samuel reigned in Israel, 
by peace and godliness alone.' ^ 

Accordingly Whitehall assented on his part to this 
division of impulse and power which Cromwell aimed at 
producing in the town ; and further agreed to remain 
awhile to join in the prayers for a blessing on a certain 
enterprise of the captain's, which he now declared his 
?.nt.ntion of starting upon forthwith. 



89 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

CUT-THROAT MEG. 

Meanwhile the dark-plotting bellows-blower, proceed- 
ing in the direction of Bordesley, seemed on a sudden 
to alter his mind. 

' I will go and warn her that she come not near me, 
as she says she will, where I am I What need I with 
the hateful has crlarint;^ at me there, now that so much 
happier times are at hand for me, and all the joys of 
life, so long withheld, but promised to the inheritors of 
the kingdom on earth ? ' 

The Anabaptist turned, as he thus bethought himself, 
into a very narrow lane, reeking with every species of 
filth and abomination that could offend all the senses 
alike, and which seemed, by a dull watery gleam at the 
end, to open upon the River Rea. 

It was a haunt of haggard profligacy and misery, 
familiar as it seemed to his steps. His home was in a 
house on the water at the lane-end, or rather a deplo- 
rable wooden hovel, that admitted almost every species 
of bad weather at its paneless ^dndows and gaping 
planks and rafters. It was built close on the edge of 
the water, and might possibly at some period have been 
decently tenanted, and used as a warehouse for goods 
capable of transportation on a stream generally shallow. 



90 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

though subject to violent floods. (Jn one side was a 
kind of open gallery, raised on piles that projected a 
little into the waterway, with the remains of steps to 
descend to it. But, like the rest of the building, these 
were fallen into ruin and decay. In fact, from the river 
it looked as if the Avhole hovel . v/alls, chimney, gallery, 
and supports . was all aslant, and about to tumble into it. 
The reputation of this abode was something on a par 
with its external appearance. 

It was dwelt in by a woman who called herself a 
washerwoman, but who was believed to have very little, 
if any, employment that way . a woman prematurely 
old with debauchery and drunkenness in appearance, and 
of a savagely ferocious and shrewish temper ; who, after 
a youth of the vileness that most disgraces her sex, was 
currently reported in her maturer years to have become 
the associate of thieves and profligates of the lowest 
description, male and female, which the inferior cor- 
ruption of tliat age could offer in a limited population 
such as Birmingham counted in tlie seventeenth century. 
There was not even wanting a report that deeds more 
direful than robbery and pillage liad occurred under this 
baleful roof. A pedlar, Avhose body was found stripped 
and covered with wounds on the river, and whose pack 
had disappeared, was strongly rumoured to have come 
by his ugly end beneath it. 

But it was not for this reason that Cut-throat Meg, 
as she was called, had acquired that horrid nickname. 
The wretched creature had attempted her own destruc- 
tion at some period of her desperate career, and the 
haggled scar that deformed her throat, and which she 
never took the trouble to conceal, remained to attest 
the dismal fact. 



CUT-mROAT MEG. 91 

CongeDiality of poverty, and rejection by their fellow 
humanity, probably, rather than other feeling, had led 
to the union that existed between this woman and the 
maimed Anabaptist soldier. It was strange but certain 
that they were lawfully man and wife. And still stranger 
that the terrible, almost unsexed fury of passion and 
debauchery, was known to cherish a fondness and 
admiration for her bargain approaching in themselves 
sufficiently nigh to insanity to be scarcely at times 
distinguishable from it in the signs. In particular, if 
jealousy be a proof of love, never v.TvS a man more loved 
than the battered ^lokanna of the Black Chapel of Bor- 
desley; and possibly, when he grew in power and in- 
fluence as a teacher of his pernicious tenets, and women, 
always forward in religious novelties, gathered around 
him, the feeling was not so unfounded as it is said 
sometimes to be. Yet what could it have been at this 
period but the very frenzy of the passion that preyed 
upon her vitals, which dictated the feeling of ill-will 
that certainly animated Cut-throat ]Meg against the 
fair daughter of her husband's principal employer ? For 
it was she who by her snarls had attempted to direct 
the anger and fears of the populace, on the news of 
Prince Kupert's arrival, upon Dorothy Firebrace. 

Sisyphus found no difficulty in entering the abode 
presided over by his fearful partner. There was no 
door to the lower portion of the house, which was nearly 
choked with the gravel and dried-up ooze of an old in- 
undation. The stairs that mounted to the dilapidated 
chambers above hung almost loose, and broken away in 
wide gaps from their supports. He had only to push back 
a piece of coarse tarpaulin nailed over a doorway at the 
top of these, to find himself amidst his household gods. 



92 THE armourer's daughter. 

Few signs of comfort appeared. The numerous broken 
panes of the narrow lattices were supplied with rags and 
clouts that could not quite exclude the gracious light 
of the now rising moon. In one corner there was a 
low truckle bed, covered with a mattress that revealed 
the straw it was stuffed with at various jags; with some 
bundles of black-looking coverlets, chiefly undressed 
sheep-skins. A few other miserable articles of house- 
hold furniture completed the poverty-stricken aspect of 
things. A scanty fire, aglow in a sort of tripod on the 
hearth, had, however, a pot suspended over it that gave 
some promise of supper in preparation. And before this, 
huddled in a heap like a toad, sat a woman whose gaunt 
frame, grim looks, and wildl3^-gleaming eyes, might well 
have furnished a painter with a study for the infernal 
goddess, Hecate. The bellows-blower might be forgiven 
for not doting to an}' excess upon such a consort. 

Cut -throat Meg seemed also considerably out of 
temper, and received him in no very winning style. 

* What do you here, man ?' she said, glaring haggardly 
at him. ' Did I not send you word I would bring you 
your supper to the Parsonage, and sleep for one night 
under a whole roof? I trow me, that is like to be the 
best of your day's wages at soldiering I ' 

'I come here because I would not have you come 
there : we want no women at an outpost, and that lies 
naked to the enemy on the fieldside. Where's my 
supper ? ' replied Sisyphus, in the tones of an ogre 
snubbing his ogress. 

^ Here's your supper ; help yourself from the pot : 
you are old enough to care not to scald your lips with a 
mess of oat porridge and onions. But deem you I am 
going to stay alone by myself in this darksome rat-hole. 



CUT-THROAT MEG. 93 

while you tumble in the parson's down beds ? What care 
I for the King's soldiers at Aston ? I never heard before 
you were so troubled to keep me safe.' 

'Nay; you and they would likely be good friends 
enough, soon enough,' returned Sisyphus, bitterly ; ^ and 
that is perhaps one reason why I will not have you 
so within hail-fellow-well-met of the jolly company ! 
You shall tarry where you are, I say ; at least until I 
know better where I shall myself remain for m}^ last- 
ingness.' 

' I can tell you pretty well, methinks, without asking 
the Witch of Aston I ' returned the kind consort, point- 
ing significantly downwards. 

' Xo ; the man who has been your husband on earth 
can never deserve to meet with you again below,' Sisy- 
phus responded. ' And, for my part, I know not how I 
can have merited, other than by wedding thee, a fall 
so utterly from grace, which I know was once granted 
to me. I never murdered a pedlar I ' 

* And who says / did ? Is it thou, liar and traitor ? ' 
the woman answered, with fury in her accents, but 
turning deadly pale in the complexion. 'And even 
were't so, is not the receiver as bad as the thief? and 
did not the very children screech to thee in the street 
on our wedding-day that I bought my husband with the 
pedlar's stocking-foot ? ' 

' Be that as it may, the pedlar or the pedlar's ghost 
may keep your company to-night, for I will not suffer you 
away with me ; even such ruffians as I have gathered 
about me would think scandal of your presence,' Sis3^phus 
replied. 

' And is this the queening and sitting on a throne you 
promised me when you courted me, wretched beggar 



94 THE armourer's daughter. 

and lousel as you returned a-mong ns from the wars ? ' 
said Cut-throat ^leg. 'Fie on your lying, cheating 
tongue ! nor am I the last or only one, I fear, it shall 
deceive. But you will not win the minourer''s fair 
f?ctK^/iifer by such witchery, old Devil's Claw I with the 
pick of all the handsome young fellows of town, and 
country too, offering themselves to her ! and with her 
father's noble prisoner . for whose sake she puts herself 
in any jeopardy . an angel of light in the comparison 
of a demon with thee, broken handled glue-pot ! And 
I'll take care, besides, that the people know enough of 
her goings on against them, some day, to tear her into 
calf's fritterlings I ' 

' Wilt thou hold peace, hag ; or have all the hot gruel 
on thy grizzly head ? Or, dost thou see, some say you 
killed the pedlar with this very chopping-knife : did 
he seem to like of it so well that you would have a 
relish of it in your turu ? ' Sisyphus replied, flaming 
with hatred and malice. 

' But where are thy hands to do murder even on a 
woman ? Will thy bellows-hook steady the cleaver for 
my skull ? ' Cut-throat Meg retorted jeeringly. ' Why, 
it were easier far for me to send thee tumbling over 
the water stairs after the pedlar, than for thou to do me 
the mischief that would likely content thy black heart's 
greed I What ails me, indeed, that I do not tear thy 
false, upbraiding, woman-cheating tongue from its roots, 
at least ? ' 

' Silence, mad-woman ! . hear your not that splash 
and struggling sound without in the gallery ? Oh, can it 
truly be that the dead . that murdered men long buried, 
but unavenged, in their graves, can thus return to 



CUT-THROAT MEG. 95 

flout their murderers with dismal repetition of the deed ? 
Hark I did ye drag him ^^ith that dripping spla.sh of 
gore, to heave him over ? Good Heaven I what means 
it else?' 

And the Anabaptist started up v/ith an expression of 
intense superstitious terror in his aghast countenance, 
staring in the direction of the sounds he thus described, 
which were certainly audible on the exterior of the crazy 
pile towards the river. 

But this excitement was as nothing compared with 
the horror of dread that took possession of every fibre 
of his guilty partner's frame. She shook and trembled, 
the powerful virago, in every limb of her gaunt frame ; 
and clinging with abject fear to her husband's knees, 
' Save me, oh, save me I ' she yelled in a scarcely hu- 
man outcry. ^Did'st not tell me thou had'st power 
given thee to pardon and absolve, as one endowed by 
Heaven with a special inward grace, that flowed out 
on whom thou willed'st to save ? I gave thee all the 
silver and the price of the goods that I could sell for 
the blood, to spend on thine o^ti luxuries ; and now 
keep the avenger off me I ' 

But Sisyphus's own consternation had culminated in 
the fact that a clout vras suddenly removed from a shat- 
tered pane, and a ghastly visage, seemingly hung with 
black weedy mud, presented itself thereat. 

^ Mercy of mercies on me, liar and cheat that I am ! 
It is there, it is there, it is there ! But I never 
harmed thee, poor slain fellow-creature! I never killed 
but in fair fight ! It was before my time ! This 
is the murderess, and take her with vou where you 
will I ' 



96 TJIE ARMOUKEk"s DACGHTEll. 

' Sisyphus ! Brother Sisyphus ! is it indeed you ? ' said 
a most doleful voice now at the opening. 

'Master Richard Grrimsorwe ! Am I dreaming, or 
mad?' 

' No, no ; it is I myself . none other . most vilely 
cozened, maltreated, stripped of my habiliments, thrown 
into this foul sewer rather than river, whence I have 
with such difficulty and slipperiness dragged myself, that 
I seem like a severed worm writhing to find its parts 
again I ' groaned the voice. ' In the name of Heaven, let 
me in, good friend, and cleanse me of this mud and filth, 
that I may make my escape with what speed is possible 
from this accursed town I ' 

' It is a living man's voice ; it is not Jacob Futvoye's ! ' 
exclaimed Cut -throat Meg, reviving in an instant from 
her fit of conscience and dread. ' Let us let him in ; 
perhaps he may make it worth our while, unless he be 
choused of all. And even then, if he be of the 
town . and you seem to know him, Sisyphus . he 
hath been belike at no good, and must pay us to keep 
counsel ! ' 

* Know him ? ay, in truth. But how /</?;.<?, and how 
there, at the same moment ? Come in, Master Grrim- 
sorwe, I pray you, come in: there is no way but by 
the lattice I And is it, indeed, you yourself, whom I 
met but half an hour ago in yoiu- fine black lawyer's 
robe, with your hair hanging like a mane to your girdle, 
on a steed that seemed to dance the air like the bonny 
bluebell ? ' 

Speaking thus, the bellows-blower thrust the crazy 
casement so violently back on its rusty hinges that it 
fell half off, but allowed a space at which the person 
addressed scrambled headlong in. Then, regaining his 



CUT-THROAT MEG. 97 

feet, presented such a streaming mass of mud, weeds, 
rotten sticks and straws, and other river-filth, clinging 
round the likeness of a man, that Cut -throat Meg her- 
self, albeit not given to the laughing mood, burst into a 
discordant clatter of the kind. 

Not so Richard Grrimsorwe. Xo sooner had he heard 
the words uttered by Sisyphus than he exclaimed, ^ Oh, 
then, I see the whole treason now ! By that malignant 
girl's contrivance Edward Holte has escaped the town, dis- 
guised in my garb ! All is lost for me at Aston . and my 
only redemption lies in the success of the Parliament 
captain's plan ! But what if they have discovered that 
too, and Edward hastens to reveal it ? Miserable wretch 
that I am ! the brutal giant that cast me into the river 
at the forge has so wrenched my limbs that I cannot 
stand, much less rush, as I ought, to set Cromwell in 
pursuit. What shall I do ? I may seem to you, Sisy- 
phus, to rave ; but if Holte has gone to Aston there 
may yet be time to pass his intelligence and secure 
the King I Hasten with my words to the captain, good 
fellow ! hasten, and the reward I promised you . for 
another service . shall be doubled. Hasten I I have not 
breath to explain, for my very soul is gorged with mud 
and slime, and my heart choked with them . and I can 
gasp no more ! ' 

Indeed Grimsorwe seemed all but suffocated, and the 
convulsive action of disgust that heaved his whole be- 
draggled frame attested the efforts of nature to be rid of, 
it is probable, divers very unpalatable and unwillingly 
swallowed substances. 

But Sisyphus waited not the result. He perceived 
too plainly himself the whole breathless imminence of 
the case. 

VOL. II. H 



98 THE armourer's daughter. 

' Attend to the misused, worthy gentleman, wife,' he 
exclaimed ; ' do him what service you can. But life and 
death hang on my speed now back to Captain Cromwell's 
quarters ! Fare you well, sir, for a space ! Meg, put the 
chopper by, and get your guest to bed I' 



99 



CHAPTER XLV. 

THE WITCH-MEETING. 

The comparison of notes among his enemies has certi- 
fied the success of Edward Holte's plan of escape ; so far, 
at least, as the then centre of Birmingham, at the Bull 
Einor. Thence let us now follow his flicrht. 

Hazardous as he left the position of affairs in the 
Crown House, Edward had, however, too much good 
sense to attract attention by using any wild speed in his 
departure from Deritend. He found the horse on which 
Grimsorwe had arrived at the street gate, mounted it 
deliberately, gave the man the like niggardly fee that 
Grimsorwe would have given, and rode deliberately ofif. 
He could not help thinking, at the same time, that the 
steed recognised its proper master, from the thrill that 
visited its frame, the pleased snort it gave, and the Uvely 
action it exhibited at once. 

Edward restrained this, however, as he passed up 
Digbeth ; and he was proceeding at a very quiet pace 
across the dark inclosure before St. Martin's Church, 
when he encountered with Sis}^hus, on his way to 
Cromwell's quarters. 

Up to this period Edward had internally resolved to 
proceed at once to Aston Hall, which lay not much 
out of his direct route north, with inteihgence of the 

h2 



100 THE armourer's daughter. 

danger impending. Something, he thought, might be 
effected by the cavalry posted there in delaying the 
calamitous project formed to surprise the person of the 
King. But what he now learned convinced him that 
direct action, and at the utmost speed of horse and 
man, could alone be useful in the conjuncture. 

Believing he spoke to Eichard Grrimsorwe, Sisyphus 
informed Edward Holte of the utterly exhausted condi- 
tion of Prince Eupert's party of horse. All the impetus 
of the fiery leader himself, and entreaties of Sir Thomas 
Holte, could not get the wearied troopers to renew the 
attempt to enter Birmingham that night. The other 
officers themselves remonstrated with his Highness. 
Yielding to necessity, therefore, he had quartered them 
around Aston Hall, where, for the most part, they were 
now buried in sleep, and heavy with the strong ales 
liberally provided for their use by the baronet. 

This intelligence could not be doubted, the Anabap- 
tist said, since it was brought to him by so faithful 
though secret a friend of the good cause as Adam 
Blackjack, and by the order and instruction of Maud 
Grimsorwe ! 

Edward learned with alarm and horror the treachery 
and betrayal rife even in his father's household. But he 
saw that nothing could be hoped from open resistance. 
He had little fear, or rather the reverse emotion, that 
Cromwell would be turned from his grand object by any 
aside bait. He knew not well how otherwise to sustain 
his brother's personation, and get rid of the bellows- 
blower. The safety of the King was, besides, now the 
all-in-all business. Happen what might to Prince Eupert 
and his company . to his own family even . the devoted 
cavalier conceived it proper to provide for that against 



THE WITCH-MEETING. 101 

all risks. He therefore desired Sisyphus to hasten at 
once with his news to Captain Cromwell, and point out 
to him how easily the destruction of this detached corps 
might be effected in an unexpected onslaught. 

Sisyphus proceeded on his wa}-, and Edward Holte 
on his; the former no doubt more convinced than ever 
of his ally's superiority to every feeling of kinship and 
natural duty in his eagerness to advance himself in his 
brother's place. 

Edward had yet to pass through some danger of 
detection when he reached the exit of the town towards 
Aston, at the Butts. But luckily the moon had not yet 
risen, and the men on guard there were very weary with 
their day's anxiety and vigilance. William Moorcroft 
imagined he perfectly recognised Master Grrirasorwe, 
carelessly examined his pass by the light of a lantern, 
bade his late treater a civil good night, and God speed, 
and a portion of the barriers was cleared away to allow 
him to pass out. 

Losing then no diligence, Edward rapidly skirted the 
long wall of Aston Park until it came to a sharp angle, 
where the inclosure turned off to the left. Directly 
fronting this lay Sutton Chace, the road through which 
formed a cross with the proper one for him to pursue, 
which lay to the right, into Leicestershire. 

Edward Holte was well acquainted with the country 
he had to traverse, being, like most persons of his age 
and class, a keen hunter, and accustomed to follow the 
hounds great distances over it. He had no hesitation, 
therefore, about the way he should take, when he 
reached this point. Xevertheless, he reined up his 
horse suddenly as he came in sight of the spot, with 
an emotion of the greatest astonishment and wonder. 



102 THE ARMOUEEE's DAUGHTER. 

Nay, perhaps . so universally diffused and rooted were 
the superstitions of the time . with no slight sensation 
of fear. 

Not without a cause ! Precisely in the centre of the 
cross-road, beyond which on all sides extended a dreary, 
heath-like open country, he beheld a great fire kindled. 
Over this was suspended an iron pot, or caldron, from 
three iron bars united in a triangular support. This pot, 
from its bubbling, contained some thick liquid, and as 
it was red hot externally, the astonished spectator could 
not but conclude it contained some metal in a state of 
fusion. 

And yet he was at full liberty to form the notion that 
some more horrible ins^redients minoied in the contents. 
A very old man, almost idiotic with age, whom he 
recognised as the gravedigger of Aston churchyard, 
stood with a mouldy basket in his hand, in which there 
seemed bones and soil and some horrid rags that looked 
like the stained swathings of a corpse ! And from it a 
most witch-like female figure . nay, the too well-known 
figure of the Witch of Aston herself . was busy ladling- 
stuff into the caldron. And as if all this had been 
little, and could leave much doubt of the dismal cer- 
tainties of the scene, all around, in the glow of the fire, 
sat some four or five horrible-looking old women, the 
terrors of their several districts, but mostly so infirm, 
rheumatic, and stricken with all the ailments of age and 
poverty, that it was a wonder, truly, how they had 
reached the place of the witch-meeting. Nothing but 
dotage, mingled with malice, curiosity, a vague belief 
in the dreadful powers ascribed to them by the folly and 
superstition of the age, and the influence of their grizzly 
chieftainess over them, could have given them the neces- 



THE WITCH-MEETIXG. 103 

sary energy . unless, perhaps, it was the temptation of 
the ardent spirit that, in all probability, circulated in 
certain transparent and singularly beautiful amber gob- 
lets emong them, and renewed for awhile the glow and 
life of youth in their time-drained veins. 

Edward Holte was learned in the learning of his times, 
of polished manners and superior intellect. But he 
belongfed to his times, and doubted not that he had 
come upon a sahhatli, or assemblage of witches in the 
devil's name. The appearance of the group, the business 
in which they seemed engaged, the midnight hour . such 
it now was . the unlucky and ill-omened place of meet- 
ing . all conspired to force the notion upon him. 

Unlucky and ill-omened to the Holte race certainly 
as well as to others which might be considered to have 
received injuries by their agency on this spot. 

There it was that the ancestor of Tubal Bromycham 
had been so basely trepanned by the robbers, who after- 
wards pretended he had committed a felony with them 
on the person of a Holte. There it was that the miser- 
able daughter of Maud Grimsorwe, and mother of 
Kichard, had been interred, with all the horrors of the 
old laws against a suicide . afelo de se, as the phrase 
ran . with a stake through her breast on a cross-road ! 

Her grave was plainly to be seen at the junction of 
the cross-road from Aston to Sutton, inasmuch as her 
mother's cares had now for nearly thirty years kept the 
ground in good order, and mostly at the flower seasons 
bright with violet and primrose or wallflower and rose. 
The poor old wretch had even at one time a custom to 
buy a lamb in the spring and employ its tender teeth 
to crop the grass. But as the lamb was invariably 
stolen and butchered, in spite of the terrors of the witch. 



104 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

the frugal Eichard had, of latter years, persuaded his 
grandmother not to indulge in so unrespected and costly 
a piece of sentiment. 

Yet here it was that the woe-begone hag had collected 
her friends and cummers at this midnight hour, evi- 
dently to keep her company and assist in some direful 
rites that shunned the light of day and' the observation 
of mankind ; how could Edward Holte doubt of what 
diabolical nature when only a few years had elapsed 
since an Act of Parliament had been passed expressly 
forbiddincr the assemblao'e of witches on their unhal- 
lowed operations, and when persons exactly resembling 
in aspect and condition those before him were con- 
^;tantly undergoing the most dreadful tortures and 
capital punishment for the crime of sorcery, in all its 
forms and degrees ? 

So thunderstruck with amazement and dread he was, 
that the momentous nature of his own business passed 
for awhile from his recollection. And it is doubtful how 
long he would have remained transfixed and gazing, had 
not his steed, alarmed at the glare and smoke before 
it, uttered the usual cry of a startled animal of its kind. 
In a moment a panic seemed to take nearly the entire 
assemblao-e. The srravedigoer fluns: down his basket of 
dreadful relics ; the old women who were squatting 
around jumped up and scudded off like frightened toads ; 
and only ]\Iaud Grrimsorwe seemed to have sufficient 
courage to remain. And she, turning her withered 
-countenance round, with her back to the glowing gipsy 
.fire, rather shrieked than said, ' The spell is of power . 
the spell is of power I My child has answered from her 
grave in this apparition, and her son shall be Lord of 
Aston Hall!' 



THE WITCH-MEETING. 105 

Edward comprehended immediately, from recollection 
of an example with which a play of the great Warwick- 
shire worthy had familiarised all England, that the 
dreadful old woman had been engaged in magical rites 
to ascertain the probabilities of her grandson's success 
in his criminal enterprises. The exclamation reminded 
him to continue his personation on an occasion when 
discovery would add so much to his risks. Even he 
fancied he spied some advantage in the circumstance. 

He spurred his horse on ; which unwillingly, and with 
restive action, approached the blaze. 

' I am no apparition, grandmother I ' he said, in 
muffled accents, fearful of his ability to deceive. ears so 
accustomed to the true tones of Grrimsorwe's voice, and 
passing his horse beyond the hideous glare. ' But your 
prayers, if even they be to the Evil One, have proved 
of great influence in my behalf. The Parliament has 
received me among its adherents, and released me. But 
intelligence of my doings has been carried to Aston be- 
fore me, and I am now flying from my father's anger 
and the cavaliers where best I may ! Be sure, then, 
whoever overtakes me, misinform them of the way I have 
taken. I mean to make for Erdington ; but say I have 
fled over Sutton Chace I ' 

Even as he spoke a distant trampling of horses' hoofs 
came to his ears, as well as to those of the witch, who 
listened with apparent bewilderment. 

' Ho, ho ! Black Tom, Black Tom I art thou deceiving 
me?' she muttered. *How shall my grandson be Lord 
of Aston, and flee thence for his life ? And the cavaliers 
following him on the wind, whom I myself saw so lately 
all but dead asleep with weariness and drink ? ' 

Edward had not, until now, noticed that the witch's 



106 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

favourite companion, her starveling cat, formed a portion 
of the company, and had not stirred from the comfortable 
glow of the fire, in the general consternation, but re- 
mained purling and singing contentedly before it. 

' Yes, yes, the cavaliers . a fresh party of them . you 
will know them by their bright armour . but with Prince 
Eupert still at their head,' Edward hurriedly rejoined. 
' Hark ! they come. He is the son of a crownless king- 
Strive and detain him with some fine promise that he 
shall be a king himself in good time ; hear you I any- 
thing to delay and misdirect.' 

The old v/oman brisking up at the prospect of mis- 
chief, Edward waved his hand in parting, and taking his 
proper right-hand road, bade her once again be sure and 
say he had taken the left, and might be speedily over- 
taken. But swift indeed must have been the rider who 
could have overtaken him, when upon that he jerked 
the rein towai'ds Erdington Woods. 



107 



CHAPTER XL VI. 

A PURITAN ' MACBETH ' AND ' BANQtO.' 

The sorceress herself, however, remained on the scene 
of action, considerably puzzled. 

' What can it all mean ? ' she muttered, tossing back 
her white tattered locks in the wind. ' It was Sir 
Thomas Holte himself, or Adam Blackjack lied, who 
desired me to summon my witch-friends here . poor 
dotard ! . under assurance of his protection, and cast a 
spell by which what is coming to pass in these strange 
times should be known. He may w^ell wish to learn, 
wealthy and endacgered as he is; and his dead children 
attest my power to him from their graves I My curses 
killed theni^ doubtless I Yet I never cursed young 
Edward, and he is going, they say, to lay his goodly 
head upon the block in London. My grandson must be 
endowed with an equal power to harm with his ill wishes. 
And yet he himself, it seems, is detected, and flying a 
banished wretch from his father's indignation. I know 
not if it will be of use now, if Sir Thomas comes to 
warn him, as I purpose that his house and name will 
never be built on any secure foundation, but shall pass 
away like a dream, unless he acknowledges my daughter's 
son for his true heir. No man, nor woman either, can 
dispute he is the e^cZ67'-born ! ' 



108 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

The old woman's perplexity now changed its course. 

* Strange, too/ she thought, '. flying at so breathless a 
speed from a company of worn-out men, who slept but 
shortly ago as if death had strewed the straw in the barns 
and outhouses they are lying in at iVston. So that, 
although some cursed me for a witch when I peeped 
in, not a horse-trooper of them all raised his tired arm 
to smite me. My troth ! if all speeds well with Eichard's 
contrivances in Birmingham, some of them will sleep the 
sounder to-night. No other male heir will remain when 
Edward's head is off, and so Sir Thomas must needs be 
reconciled to him. Yet was it Richard who passed just 
now, or some illusion of the Foul One ? Hath the 
Demon listened to me at last, after so often calling upon 
him in vain Avith my curses ? Or is he putting a cheat 
upon me, as they say is chiefly the Old Deceiver's wont, 
when he seems to grant prayers made to him ? The 
phantom showed most like my grandson Eichard, it is 
true ; the hair and tawny skin were his, but were the eyes 
and voice altogether so ? ' 

Perplexed with growing suspicion, the witch still felt 
she could not be mistaken in the rapidly nearing thud 
of horses' galloping that came to her hearing. 

This recalled her to the propriety of getting things in 
readiness for the new arrival ; and she called to her dis- 
persed companions to return. 

*Nan Crookshank . Malkin of the Dyke . Winny 
Crossbone ! WTiere are ye all ? Come, my bats ! come, 
my howlikins ! come^ my she-rats without tails ! good 
friends, come ! There is a jolly bake of offals from the 
Hall^ for 3'e to share when the work's done, of the meal 
Adam Blackjack served whole to a Eoyal Prince this 
eve! What's your fear, sisters? We meet to-night 



A PURITAN * MACBETH' AND ' BANQUO.' 109 

by full permission, with the great Dian of Aston him- 
self for a visitor.' 

Some of the old women answered, but in distant 
screech-owl notes : ' Faggots and fire ; Faggots and 
fire ! Come away, Maud, mother ! Come away I The 
devil himself cannot save us if once they get us into 
the flames I ' 

' Base-spirited hags I incapable of any good ven- 
geance ! Let them go . what care I ? ' muttered Maud 
Grimsorwe. ' Yet I gave them a bumper of aqua 
vitce to put some courage in their marrowless old 
bones, and in the very cups from Sir Thomas's most 
careful stores, which Adam Blackjack would have me 
show to convince him I have the secret to walk his house 
invisibly, and steal I Would I had ; neither silver nor 
gold should long deck his sideboard, unless my grand- 
son were declared the true inheritor. But what is all 
this clatter now" upon the wind ? The pursuers come I ' 

Even as the wretched old creature uttered the words, 
two horsemen, in new and brightly polished suits of 
armour, appeared in sight, riding at the stretch of their 
powerfully-limbed chargers' speed. There was also a 
third in their company, almost abreast ; but he was 
a ragged lad, and rode bareback, wdth nothing but a 
halter in the mouth of a shaggy-looking pony to guide 
its advance. 

These were Cromwell and Lambert, -vsdth their tinker 
guide, who, on the information of the bellows-blower, 
had started in pursuit of Edward Holte, and at a speed 
which it was evident had distanced the main body of 
newly equipped dragoons, though it was probable it 
was not far in the rear. 

The spectacle that had alarmed Edward Holte was 



110 THE AEMOURER's DAUGHTEE. 

somewhat diminished in effect by the absence of most 
of the other hags. But enough, it was plain, remained 
to challenge wonder and observation. 

The furnace fire still threw its crimson glare. The 
unhallowed mixture still bubbled in the pot, and the 
moon having risen over the dreary heath which formed 
a considerable portion of Sutton Chace, illumined with 
a ghastly pallor the wild and weird figure of the Witch 
of Aston, as she stood seemingly awaiting the approach. 

All this together produced a mingled exclamation 
of surprise and dismay on the part of the riders, and 
the three unanimously did as Edward had done . came 
to a sudden halt. 

' What's this ? ' exclaimed Lambert. '"WTiat strange 
woman have we here out on a desert place at midnight, 
who makes such signs of forbidding at us T\nth her 
outstretched skinny arms ? ' 

* It is a WITCH ! ' gasped the tinker boy, cowering as 
if to fall from his horse Avith dread. 

' Indeed, but things look very like it ; ver}^ like it, 
truly I ' said Cromwell, also in singularly panic-stricken 
accents. 'I do remember me, in my unregenerate 
days, such a wild wretch as this they showed us for a 
witch at the Blackfriars' Theatre, that the playerman, 
William Shakespeare . who, they say, knew the secrets 
of both worlds . did devise and place before men's eyes.' 

^ Yonder, also, are the blasted heath and the aghast 
moon ! Even in such a spot as this, truly, might he . 
being, as they say, a night poacher in woods and out- 
lands in his youth . have come upon creatures like 
this. And was he not of this Warwick county him- 
self? ' returned Lambert. 

' Let us go no further, sirs ! The witch will put 



A PUBITAN 'MACBETH* AKD 'BAKQrO.' Ill 

some black cross upon us, turn us into dogs and fami- 
liars, or ride us up and down the sky on broomsticks, 
mayhap ! ' said Bunyan, quite in earnest, and terrified, 
in the remark. 

' The Lord being with us, what should we fear ? Let 
us tax her with her unlawful dealings, for there are 
many statutes of most heavy charge, in the late King's 
reign, against all manner of witchcraft and incantations, 
upon which she seems now busy,' said Lambert, who 
had been a lawyer before he took to soldiering. 

' But let us be advised, brother, how we proceed,' 
Cromwell replied, with strange tremulousness. ' I tell 
you there was an ancestress of mine own, my Lady 
Cromwell, wife to Sir Samuel Cromwell of Huntingdon, 
who was done to death by charms and spells. But 
you must needs have heard of the witches of Warbors, 
some fifty years ago ? Let us speak her fair and pass, 
until such time as w^e have better leisure for judgment 
and fulfilment of the law on this woman of Belial. 
Come on, boy ; why do you shrink and tremble thus 
behind ? 

' It is my beast that will no further ; his shoes are 
clammed to the ground ; I cannot move him by a step!' 
returned the lad, who was holding his nag's head as 
tight in the halter as if he had meant to strangle it. 

' I believe thou liest,' said Cromwell, ' but we cannot 
do without thee; loosen the rope, or look to have it 
twisted as close round thine own neck. Come on, John 
Lambert; we must clear this vermin out of the road, 
or none of our following will dare to keep it ! ' 

And putting evidently a strong force on his own 
reluctance, the captain resumed his advance, clutching 
the halter of the tinker guide's horse to make it keep 



112 

pace. The boy writhed and trembled, but could not 
help submitting unless he had slipped from his seat, 
which once or twice seemed likely enough. 

Lambert himself, who had spoken most valiantly of 
the three at first, now held back, and was the last in 
the advance. 

*What manner of woman are you, out on this lone 
spot at midnight . if woman you be ? ' said Cromwell, 
when they were nigh enough to be distinctly heard ; 
but his voice quivered more than ever, strive to control 
the emotion as he might. 

Maud Grimsorwe hesitated in her reply. She was 
aware of the penalties attached to the possession of the 
privileges of a witch ; and tempted as the decrepit old 
wretch felt by the pride of diffusing fear, the con- 
sideration probably restained her. 

' I am a poor old woman, sir,' she accordingly an- 
swered, after a pause, * and time has so nigh done with 
me, neither do I take much note of time, if it be mid- 
night, as you say. I am boiling a mash for some 
calving cows that feed out on the Chace, the male folks 
being very busy now with the soldiers at Aston Hall.' 

'It is a strange-looking hodge-podge, howsoever, 
mistress,' said Lambert, peering into the caldron, and 
turning deadly pale. * The mess seems to me more like 
unto boiling and bubbling blood than aught else ; and 
if I am not much mistaken, that is a grinning human 
jawbone sharking at us from the hell-broth I ' 

* The colour is but the glare of the red flames, my 
master,' returned the old woman, scornfully ; ' and what 
you espy as grinning teeth are acorns, to make the 
mash bitterly medicinal.' 

' Peace, lieutenant,' resumed Cromwell ; ' it is likely 



A ru::iTAN .iiACBEni' and 'lanquo.' 113 

enough what the old woman says. I was a cattle- 
man myself once, and we gave our calving kiue warm 
mashes of the sort. But, now tell me, mother (we 
must speak the devil fair sometimes, I tell thee, John!) 
have 3'ou seen a man on horseback pass this way, in 
a lawyer's robe ? and if so, how went he ? ' 

* In a lawyer's robe ? Truly, yes,' the hag readily 
replied ; ' and yonder along the White Walk, over 
Sutton Chace, he took his way, galloping as if he were 
at race with the wind, and from the gallows I ' 

' Is yonder our turn outward to Xottingham, boy ? ' 
said Cromwell to the tinker. 

' The lad could hardly answer for the chattering of 
his teeth ; but he made shift to let it be known that 
the one indicated was the reverse of the ri^-ht turninof, 
until the witch's threatening glare fell upon him, when 
he broke off inarticulate with fear. 

* If it be not Nottingham wa}', our game shall not take 
us off on a across scent,' Cromwell observed on this. 
' Let him go his road as we will ours. Proceed in our 
guidance, boy; we may take it the more leisurely, 
that's all.' 

' Do so, and a dr}- canker shall wither up thy bones, 
boy, till they crack from thee like rotten twigs from a 
bush ! ' the witch now exclaimed, thrown off her guard 
by her own apprehensions for her supposed grandson's 
safety, in fierce and menacing accents. 

* Refuse, and I will hang thee up as firmly as the 
greenest oak branch in thine own fanc}- rope rein,' 
returned Cromwell, provoked out of his own fears with 
this interference, which seemed also to confess the 
attempted deception. ' And for you, foul witch, betake 
yourself out of all Christian presence at once, or I will 

TOL. II. I 



114 

overturn your mess, and try if you will not scald before 
you burn.' 

^ Proud fool ! you could not harm me ; and I bid 
you, in your turn, beware what you do ! Euin and 
overthrow await you on this road if you pursue it ; and 
mere harmless village dogs shall go wolvish to devour 
all of your company ! ' 

'I will believe heaven rather than hell, which hath 
promised me a good success,' returned Cromwell. 
* Avoid the way then, beldam, or I will override your 
shrivelled carcass to follow on't ! ' 

' You speak gTeatly, master. But I tell you " There 
is many a slip between the cup and the lip :" and though 
Charles Stuart and all his family shall perish from the 
land, and you shall sit on the throne of their desolation, 
you shall be but the mockery and shadow of a King, 
and the gibbet shall swing your rotten bones at last! 
But the blood is not yet shed which must flood you to 
that height ; and, though I wish you the devil's speed 
in your work, 'tis but a poor beginning you make now, 
to serve an old dotard's rage upon his son's life I ' 

' A king ! Captain, you shall be a king, she says,' 
Lambert repeated sneeringly. ' Prithee, then, good 
woman . since fair words trade so well with you . what 
fortune do you predict to me ? ' 

' To be your master^s ape ! What more for such as 
thou art ? ' the hag replied, with extreme bitterness. 

' Thank you, that 'tis nothing worse. You might 
have predicted a descent of kings from me, and so got 
me my throat cut some night in a ditch, on my master's 
coronation day ; for look how he muses over your raving 
lies,' said Lambert, mockingly; but he was plainly 
much annoyed with the retort. 



A PURITAN 'MACBETH' AND ^ BAN'QUO.' 115 

Cromwell, on his part, seemed ofifended "^ith liis 
lieutenant's allusion. 

' Your head runs on a rantipole play, methinks, Lam- 
bert, and you see not how far this poor old woman's 
wits are astray, talking on as if we were thief-takers 
riding in a pursuit,' he observed. ' But at present, 
Keutenant, I charge you place so much credence on her 
words as to follow the escaped prisoner in the direction 
she gives ; and if you overtake him, and he refuses to 
stay, kill him at once, without mercy I On my part, I 
will but wait till the troop comes up, to proceed on the 
main enterprise.' 

' Methinks, sir, I should have some others with me 
also; the man is desperate, and escaped well armed,' 
returned Lambert, sulkily. 

^ How, do you dispute my orders, lieutenant ? ' re- 
sumed Cromwell, angrily and imperiously. ' ^^J, man, 
if I bade you attack a score, you should do it ; and I 
send one armed man against but another now.' 

' You are my oflScer, truly, sir,' Lambert replied, 
doggedly, * and I must obey you. God be with you, 
captain, and do not listen to any temptings of the fiend 
from this weird woman's lips. Was Saul the wiser unto 
salvation of himself or his host, when he questioned her 
of Endor ? ' 

He was then about to turn on the cross-road to the 
left over Sutton Chace, when a strange voice was heard 
from the angle of the wall over where this lurid scene 
took place. It exclaimed, in accents of fierce satisfac- 
tion, . Ha, hag-witch ! have I detected you at last at 
your sorceries ? Look to broil at a stake for this, were 
you ten times Richard Grimsorwe's grandam I ' 

A strong-built man dragged himself up by the hands 

I 2' 



116 THE ARMOURERS DAUGHTER. 

to the top of the wall, as the words were uttered. But 
neither he nor another, who raised himself by the same 
means at the corresponding angle of the w^all, expected 
the spectacle that presented itself. 

The latter was yelling out, ' Now, witch, I cast off 
thy power and dominion for ever ! So Sir Thomas has 

seen thee at thy witchcrafts, and what armed men 

be these?' 

The two first persons who arrived were Sir Thomas 
Holte and Adam Blackjack, who had fallen, apparently, 
upon a trick to seduce the Witch of Aston into a be- 
trayal of her true qualities, and in a manner not to be 
mistaken ; an effort to throw off the yoke that cer- 
tainly partook of the disorder of the master-cook's 
mind, and very twilight sense of morality. 

Maud Grrimsorwe stared, in complete bewilderment, 
at the whole party. 

' Is not this man the Prince Palatine, whom you allow 
to pursue your son Eichard to destruction, Sir Thomas 
Holte?' she exclaimed. 

' She is surely a madwoman, if these are real Jiving 
men and soldiers. But how in nature can they be the 
Prince's troop, whom we left all fast asleep at Aston?' 
said Sir Thomas, almost equally astonished. 

While he spoke, a redoubled and numerous trampling 
announced the approach of the main body of Cromwell's 
troopers. 

In a few moments a long line, glittering in the new 
steel armour from Firebrace's forge, flashed past the 
astounded gaze of the baronet and his domestic. But 
just as they arrived, the witch threw something into the 
fire w^hich exploded, and sent .volumes of sulphureous 
smoke around, and for awhile darkened everything. 



A PURITAN * MACBETH' AND ' BANQUO.' 117 

Very considerable confusion, amounting indeed to 
panic, seized upon the entire body of Cromwell's troopers 
upon this alarming reception. 

In vain, shaking himself up from a kind of lethargy 
of brooding over what he had heard, the Parliament 
captain's voice rang out in loud and inspiriting words 
of rally and command. The horses, bestrid by those 
fear-struck riders, either became unmanageable, or fol- 
lowed the blind impulses of their riders' terror. When 
the smoke cleared away, the furnace was extinguished, 
the pot blown to atoms, the witch and the two detective 
observers over the wall had disappeared, and Cromwell 
found himself completely alone on the cross-road, with 
his troopers scattered in all directions, but chiefly over 
the open lands of Sutton Chace. 

Much time was, of course, lost in the effort to re- 
assemble the soldiery ; and when they collected in any 
number, it was at a considerable distance from the proper 
high road, near the ancient royal Manor-House of the 
district. Most of the paths and by-ways taken by the 
affrighted troopers converged on that. 

But even when his corps was reassembled, Cromwell 
perceived very plainly that all hopes of a successful 
prosecution of his enterprise were at an end. 

The superstition of the times and of his men war; 
equal to their fanaticism, and somehow or other the 
report had become universal among the Ironsides that a 
witch had crossed their captain's path, and had denounced 
the enterprise on which they were going as certain to 
lead to the destruction of all concerned. 

So far they had followed their leader implicitly, 
without knowing whither ; but now a general, a panic- 
stricken murmuring at the prosecution of the design . 



118 THE ARMOUREE'S DAUGHTER. 

equally unknown as it continued . reached Cromwell's 
cognisance ; and, with the true tact of a leader, he felt 
it would be in vain to urge a project of so much hazard 
and audacity upon men in such a state of reduced 
TTiorale. 

Lambert, perhaps, who was all along offended at not 
being trusted with the secret any more than the com- 
monest trooper, took pains to spread reasons for dis- 
trust and fear. AMiat much he guessed of the real 
object, rather stirred the secret env}^ and rivalry in his 
bosom against his chief, than any zeal to second him 
in an effort likely to lead to results so momentous, and 
which would thrust Cromwell on such sudden eminence. 

It could not have been Bunyan, the only other sharer 
in the Witch of Aston's denunciation. The lad had 
taken the earliest advantage of the confusion to effect 
his escape completely from what he doubtless now 
looked upon as an office under a fearful ban. 

The circumstance that he had no longer a guide, and 
was himself entirely ignorant of the country, had pro- 
bably as great an influence as anything else in Crom- 
well's relinquishing the attempt on Nottingham. But 
this failure also compelled him to take into considera- 
tion that he had no longer the chance of a brilliant 
success to excuse an open and undeniable breach of 
orders direct from his general. 

Nay, in the strangely disordered and affrighted state 
of his troopers' mind, he remembered with apprehen- 
sion the nigh neighbourhood of the reckless Eupert and 
his cavalry, whom intelligence must now have reached, 
and whom a night's rest would put in condition for 
action. 

To return to Birmingham without engaging and de- 



A PURITAN ^MACBETH' AND ' BANQUO.' 119 

feating tlie cavaliers, would be to place himself in a 
state of siege, in the midst of a town whose head- 
strong and divided counsels he felt he could not in such 
a case control any longer. Or which might, on the 
strength of his presence, rush upon some ruinous 
demonstration of its own against the enemy. 

On the other hand, his personal representations and 
influence might be exerted to induce the Earl of Essex 
and his officers to perceive the advantages of transfer- 
ring the war to the neighbourhood of Birmingham. Its 
condition would probably soon call for active measures 
of relief, and the forward zeal it had exhibited in the 
cause would compel the Parliament to forward his 
representations in its favour. Perhaps the Earl might 
even be induced by a true statement of the case to 
advance the masses of his army upon the King at once ; 
or his own friends in Parliament might be brought to 
urge the measure irresistibly on the public attention. 

Upon these reflections . it could not surely be that 
the witch's threats had any influence! . the sagacious 
and usually calm-blooded leader came to the conclusion 
that he would right his whole position in a single effort, 
by announcing that he meant to proceed at once to 
join the Earl of Essex, in obedience to his orders, at 
Northampton. 

He even gave it to be understood that such had all 
along been his intention, and that he had left Birming- 
ham so clandestinely only to prevent himself from being 
annoyed by importunities to remain ! 



120 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

CHARLES THE FIRST. 

If Edward Holte had known these facts, he need not 
have made such headlong haste as he did on his jour- 
ney to Nottingham. But he conceived himself antici- 
pating what might v/ell prove a fatal surprise for the 
King, and consequently his whole party. And the 
generous steed he bestrode seconding his impatience, 
horse and man arrived, all but exhausted, at the gates 
of Nottingham about noon on the day after his midnight 
flight. 

Every stage of the journey more than ever convinced 
Edward of the certainty of the danger incurred, and 
the great likelihood that success would have crowned 
Cromwell's audacious attempt. 

There was not a single garrison, or even outlying post 
of the King, south of Nottingham ; and most of the in- 
tervening country was known to be strongly disposed to 
the cause of the Parliament. 

So obstinately rooted, however, were the King's opi- 
nions of the inviolability and majesty of his person and 
office, that he even cherished a belief his subjects would 
never dare to meet hiuL openly in the field. The 
supposed distance of any possible assailing force con- 
tributed to lull the vigilance of his scanty military 



CHARLES THE FIRST. 121 

attendance, and the news of Prince Rupert's victorious 
commencement of hostilities in Worcestershire, had 
recently arrived to swell the pride and confidence of the 
Royalists. 

To complete the improvidence of the arrangements, 
the three or four hundred county militia who held the 
town for the King, and who were very slightly dis- 
ciplined and ill-armed, were separated from the dila- 
pidated old castle in which he resided by the rocky 
ravine surrounding it ; and yet the approaches to the 
castle itself were no otherwise guarded ; and the per- 
son of Charles I. was secured only by the swords of 
about sixty gentlemen, who had volunteered for the 
service, but whose high rank, and gay and careless 
habits, made them much fitter for courtiers than sol- 
diers. Not to mention that they were perpetually quarrel- 
ling among themselves for position and favour with the 
King, and scarcely deigned to yield obedience to the 
captain he had placed over them, though allied to the 
royal blood. 

Edward Holte distinctly perceived how easy it would 
have been for Cromwell to fall by surprise on the town, 
scatter the show of force collected in it, and thence have 
made his way into the castle. Inlet to that was easy ; 
and the noble guard could have made but slight resist- 
ance in a fortress so ancient and ruinous that it was a 
fact none of the principal gates could be closed, and 
not even the precaution of a barricade had been raised 
in their stead. 

Then again : strangely noticeable as was the whole 
exhausted and bespattered apparition of Edward on his 
arrival, in so troublous a time, it seemed to excite 
scarcely any attention. He was taken to be simply one 



122 THE armourer's daughter. 

of the numerous messengers who were arriving from 
various parts in the King's interest. He passed unchal- 
lenged through the town; and could hardly be said to be 
questioned even with a glance until he arrived in the 
principal court-yard of the ancient pile, built by an 
illegitimate son of William the Conqueror, and white 
and ghostly, even in the bright morning sun, with age. 

In truth, messengers had ceased for some time to 
excite any very favourable interest at the Court of 
Charles ] I. At this period they chiefly came with 
apologies for failures in promises, and craving for 
delay. 

Since the erection of his standard, Charles had every 
reason to be disatisfied with the results that had fol- 
lowed. Even the nobility and gentry most devoted to 
his cause seemed taken by surprise. 

Considerable portions of them had indeed no wish, 
by too early and overwhelming a triumph, to establish 
the King in the despotism his own inclinations were 
sufficiently known to point to, as the natural issue of a 
conflict. His fifteen years of absolute personal govern- 
ment and tyranny made his latter promises and assur- 
ances distrusted by the majority even of his own party ; 
and disinterested men still hoped to the last that some 
means less arbitrary than the sword might be found to 
compose differences. The Eoyalists especially, be- 
lieving they had the real power when they chose to 
exert it, were very backward in comparison with the 
adherents of the Parliament, which knew better what 
it was about,and was set on its purposes with inexorable 
clearness of resolution and design. 

Things, indeed, looked so untoward, that on the very 
morning of Edward Holte's arrival in Nottingham, a 



CHARLES THE FIRST. 123 

council had been held, in which some of the King's 
most trusted and faithftd advisers earnestly urged upon 
him the propriety . the necessity even . of renewing 
proposals of peace to the Parliament. 

This advice was, however, so distasteful to the proud 
and self-walled monarch, that he had broken up the 
assemblage in a disdainful and angry manner ; declaring 
that if deserted by all those who had promised him their 
fidelity and adherence, in the maintenance of his just 
rights as King of England, he would rather perish by 
the sword of the meanest rebel trooper than humiliate 
himself to sue for ' pardon and mercy ' to the insolent 
Parliament of Westminster ! 

So the King styled it, in distinction from the poor 
attempt at a rival one which he had lately assembled 
round himself at York. 

In fact the principal councillors were leaving the 
presence of their irritated sovereign, who announced 
himself insulted by the base proposition made, at the 
moment Edward Holte rode into the castle-yard. 

The King and his immediate attendants occupied the 
keep, or principal central pile of the building. Conse- 
quently, these grave personages . mostly with a rebuked 
and discontented look, and buzzing displeased remarks 
among themselves . were coming out to their respective 
lodgings in the fortress or the town. And it so hap- 
pened that Edward's horse, being completely spent 
with the length and rapidity of its tj-ansit, stumbling 
over a loose stone, fell, after a slight stagger, so nigh 
the feet of one of the chief of these officials, that it 
was only by a hasty retreat he escaped a rather rude 
shock. 

' Sain us I what manner of awkward rider is this, who 



124 THE ARMOURERS DAUGHTER. 

stables his steed on our toes?' exclaimed the personage 
thus assailed, but without asperity. 

' Not only the council, but the councillor, shall be 
overridden to-day, it seems, Sir Edward,' remarked 
another near him, with a facetious and good-humoured 
expression, which differed from that of most of his 
associates. 

^ It is no great wonder ; we see by his robe that he is 
only expected to ride a legal hobby to market. 'Tis a 
gentleman of your own profession. Master Chancellor,' 
said a third person. 

At this time Sir Edward Hyde . the future Lord Chan- 
cellor Clarendon . was only Chancellor of the Exchequer 
to Charles I. ; and one not overburdened with ways 
and means. 

' Not so, sir ; 'tis a diguise I have assumed to free 
myself from heavy thraldom and danger of my life, and 
to warn his Majesty of a most eminent approaching 
peril to his own, and the entire kingdom, so . I have 
scarcely breath . but for Grod's sake, let me see at once 
the gentleman who has the chief military command in 
his Majesty's quarters,' said Edward, and indeed in 
gasping pants for utterance. 

' Danger to his Majesty's person ! Have I not said 
so and warned so a thousand times ? But how, sir, how? ' 
said a deep, melancholy voice, from one who had not 
yet spoken, but whose noble person, fine though 
sorrowful features, and general air of neglect and care- 
lessness in his otherwise rich garb^ could not fail to 
command attention. 

But Edward Holte was struck with the appearance of 
this nobleman . for he seemed of rank . for another 
reason. 



CHARLES THE FIRST. 125 

' Lose no time to question me, dear Lord Falkland. 
You will conceive well I am no idle newsmonger, when 
I tell you that I am your old school and college-fellow, 
Edward Holte, come post hither with strange news 
out of Warwickshire. Xay, you know me not for this 
black wig. Xow, what say you ? Dear friend, no ; let 
us leave embracings for aftertime. Fly to Sir Jacob 
Astley, and tell him suddenly to close the gates of the 
town, call every man to arms, and stand on the defence 
of the castle and of the King's person for life or death, 
against a large party of Parliament horse coming at full 
pace from Birmingham.' 

' From Birmingham ! ' exclaimed several at once. 

' Surely it cannot be. We have heard of no force on 
the Parliament's part nigher than Worcester ; and that 
discouraged by a late defeat,' said Sir Edward Hyde. 

' All will be lost, then, through incredulity. Lead 
me to the King himself, and I will speedily convince 
him. Meanwhile, no harm can be done by sounding 
the alert to the citizens and trainbands in the town,' 
returned the messenger, with a passionate excitement 
that supplied him with strength. ' Do you think I have 
ridden my good horse nigh to death for nothing ? ' 

' In truth do not T, my dear schoolfellow. My lords 
and sirs, I can testify to you this is a gentleman in- 
capable alike of falsehood or unfounded fear. Come 
with me, Edward ; I will lead you myself at once to the 
King,' said the Lord Falkland. 

' Grood troth, then, I vdW see to the closing of the 
town on the word. Sii' Jacob Astley is out hawking in 
the meadows below wj^iile we councillors were supj^osed 
to debate affairs,' said the good-humoured-looking 
personage who had before spoken. 



126 THE armourer's DAUaHTER. 

' Do so, my lord Southampton ; and let some groom 
attend this poor beast with a bucket of water,' said the 
humane Falkland. And offering- his arm at the same 
time to Edward, he added kindly, ' Lean well on me, 
deax friend ; I will be your guide to the presence of his 
Majesty.' 

The help was very welcome and needful to Edward, 
who was stiff and faint with his long ride almost to an 
inability to move. He tottered, in fact, as if about to 
imitate his steed, for the first few steps. But luckily, a 
page passing with a ewer of water, Edward took a long 
drink from it, which greatly revived him, and then 
proceeded. 

Lord Falkland kindly and prudently forbore to press 
the exhausted visitor for particulars of his intelligence ; 
but he as considerately warned him that he should 
probably find the King in a very ungracious humour, 
and unmlling to be disturbed with any more disastrous 
news. ' Take your reception, whatever it may be, 
therefore, in good part, my dear friend, and answer his 
Majesty sharply and at once to the point. Indeed, 
your condition will suffer no otherwise. But here we 
are. Collect yourself for the effort. ; we are close upon 
the guard chamber ; and what guard, you see, they 
keep ! ' 

As he spoke, Falkland pushed open an unbarred door, 
black and worm-eaten with age, as if William Peverel 
himself had put it on the hinges ; and then a curious 
and unexpected scene presented itself. A number of 
men, in a uniform gorgeous with velvet and gold lace, 
but with armour laid aside in full security, sat in 
groups a;t different tables in a long gallery, drinking, 
smoking, throwing dice, playing at cards, laughing, 



CHARLES THE FIRST. 127 

talking, rollicking, in the noisy confusion and uproar of 
a barrack-room ; men nearly all of great quality and 
possessions, but who had even thus early adopted a tone 
of swaggering and debauchery as a distinguishing badge 
from the gravity and precision of their adversaries. 

These guardsmen did not even notice the stranger's 
passage, though it is true the presence of Lord Falkland 
was a sufficient oniarantee of his riorht to one. 

A corridor thence conducted to a chamber in a 
circular tower at the end, and as there was no further 
let or hindrance, in a few moments Edward found him- 
self introduced into the presence of the unfortunate 
sovereign, whose grandeur and fall present the most- 
extraordinary and momentous catastrophe of history. 

At the moment of Edward's entrance the King was 
seated in a deep recess of the round apartment in which 
they found him, writing by the full light which only in 
that part descended into its dark extent. 

It looked like a haunted chamber of romance. The 
walls were hung with tapestry faded in all its figures to 
a ghostly indistinctness. The flooring creaked and 
crumbled as it was walked over, and was quite bare. 
The only good or even passable piece of furniture in 
the chamber was the desk at which the King was en- 
gaged, and which was a rich and elaborately finished 
piece of cabinet work, furnished with secret drawers, 
and curiously finished and ornamented in every detaiL 
It is, in fact, the same preserved at Aston Hall, for the 
inspection of such of the ciuious as are allowed the 
privilege of a complete survey of the edifice and its 
contents. 

At this the uxorious spouse of Henrietta Maria of 
France was engaged in composing a long and elaborate 



l!>8 THE AIlMOUREIl's DAUGHTER. 

letter to his wife, accounting to her for the events of 
the day, and vaunting his own firmness and resolution 
in following up her ideas, in the rejection of peace on 
any terms but the full restoration of his abused power. 

The numerous portraits of Charles I., executed by 
the greatest artists of his time, or of any time, have 
familiarised the world with his features and general 
expression ; but almost all of these were executed before 
his period of trouble and tribulation, when his court was 
reckoned among the most stately and magnificent of 
Europe, and he himself was served in it with little less 
than the awe and majesty due to a being clothed with 
most of the attributes of a divinity. 

Even at this early stage of his reverse of fortune the 
naturally austere and melancholy countenance of the 
Kinof had become more than ever the mirror of his 
unluckily compounded character. It was still handsome 
and princely noble in the general features. But in spite 
of the pride and reserve that marked every line, some- 
thing of irresolution and infirmity of purpose flickered 
over the pale but easily excited complexion, and 
quivered in the corners of the unhappy and depressed, 
though well-cut and ruddy mouth. Nor could the cold 
and peremptory glance of the bright grey eyes, which 
in some lights became blue, disguise the anxiety and 
suspicion that lurked in their depths, and gave even 
their severest and haughtiest scrutiny a character of 
internal puzzle and weakness, which his craftier coun- 
sellors well understood, and worked to their own ends. 

The long curling chestnut-brown hair of Charles I. 
was already prematurely grizzled ; and being subject 
in his youth to fits of stammering and hesitation, which 
he only remedied by speaking with great slowness 



CHAELES THE FIRST. 129 

and deliberation, this had now become an imposing and 
stately fashion with him, that gave all he said an air of 
being profoundly weighed and considered. But these 
circumstances made him seem older than he was : and 
the sombre richness of his apparel, which was chiefly of 
maroon or mulberry-coloured velvet, overspread on the 
shoulders with a collai- of magnificent point lace, added 
to that effect. 

To Edward Holte, however, this Prince was the 
incarnation of all that was great and august in human 
character and destiny ; and if he saw him now shorn of 
some of his more glorious attributes, it was still the sun, 
though clouded by malignant vapours, which his wor- 
shipping gaze fell upon. Never knelt there a subject 
more loyal, heart and soul, than the heir of Aston Hall, 
when, the King turning sharply round on the noise of 
the entrance of his secretary with the unexpected 
visitor, Lord Falkland introduced him by name, and 
he sunk, utterly spent, on the floor, at the monarch's 
feet. 



YOL. n. 



130 THE AEMOURER's DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER XL VIII. 

THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 

Charles himself appeared to have his natural sternness 
and arbitrary disposition, rather than his sympathies, 
roused by this display of emotion in a subject who 
presented himself so seemingly out of condition to 
render him the sort of assistance his affairs most re- 
quired at the time. 

' More excuses, is it, Falkland, instead of good 
weapons and stout men-at-arms to wield them ? ' the 
King said. ' If so, we are weary and desire to hear no 
more, come from what quarter soever they may. Con- 
sider your errand as done, sir, then, when you have 
named your senders, and trouble not to card us the 
usual wind of words of loyalty and devotion in oiu: 
ears.' 

'My liege, the young gentleman is well nigh spent 
with his haste to do you a most substantial service,' 
interposed Lord Falkland. ^ And your Majesty will the 
readier believe so when I repeat he is the son of Sir 
Thomas Holte, of Warwickshire, who ' 

* We need no further reminding, my Lord Falkland,' 
interrupted Charles, with a flush of anger and disdain. 
' We remember very well Sir Thomas was of the for- 
wardest to send us offers of assistance, as he has since 



THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 131 

shown himself of the backwardest to keep any pace in 
performance of the same. Not only has he not sent us 
a single man or horse of a pretended troop of cavalry 
he was raising in our service, but, as we hear, the town 
of Birmingham, which is as it were directly under hand- 
stroke from his fine new palace at Aston . an unwalled 
and every way unsoldiered and unprovided town . has 
burst into open sedition and declared for the Parlia- 
ment, while he looks helplessly, or perhaps approv- 
ingly, on.' 

' Not so, sire, oh, not so I ' Edward Holte now ex- 
claimed, with rekindled energy. ^ My father has done 
all that lay in his power to fulfil his pledges to your 
Majesty : and no one knows so better than myself, his 
heir, who have barely escaped with my life from the 
fury of the misguided people there. But believe me, 
the townsmen of Birmingham are not in themselves so 
much to blame, as that they are in a manner driven on 
wild and desperate courses far beyond their inclinations 
by the wonderful zeal and industry in mischief of a 
noted Parliament man, who has lately taken to figuring 
among them in its name.' 

'Why, so we have already heard, though not the 
traitor's quality or degree in treason. But what con- 
cerns it to know, when the least plotting villain of them 
all is a very giant caitiff of mutiny and insolence?' 
Charles replied; yet he continued in a milder way, 
' Am I to understand, then, sir, you are the gentleman 
who was made prisoner on my behalf by those rebellious 
mechanics ? and am I now to believe they have seen so 
speedily into the wickedness and danger of their 
sedition, and released you to be a suitor with me for 
pardon ? ' 

K 2 



132 TnE armourer's daughter. 

Edward was obliged to reply that this was by no 
means the case ; that he had escaped with difficulty, 
and with danger of his own life, to warn his Majesty of 
a most flagitious and audacious project formed on his 
sacred person itself by his enemies. 

Charles looked at him now with visible alarm and 
anxiety. * Design on our person ! What, here in Not- 
tingham ? Is the taint spread among our very servants 
and followers then ? Staod up, man, and tell your 
story, instead of gasping like a stranded fish on the floor 
at our feet.' 

Edward complied with this ungracious command with 
a vivacity and spirit that perhaps rather startled the 
King. ' What now, my Lord Falkland ? Do you say 
you know the messenger ? ' he exclaimed. 

^And can answer for his fidelity, sire, and perfect 
trustworthiness, with my own life.' 

' Well, then, say on, sir ; I would trust Judas on my 
Lord Falkland's assurance, and am as attentive to you 
as a man should be who is said to have a life-deep stake 
in your utterances,' said Charles. 

Edward Holte felt both chilled and repelled by the 
kind of reception he experienced, but perhaps he derived 
more courag^e from it than he might from a kinder one. 
Accordingly he no longer hesitated, but revealed to the 
King the project formed to surprise his person by a 
party of cavalry secretly brought to Birmingham, and 
flung upon Nottingham thence, and which in all pro- 
bability he only anticipated by the briefest interval. 

Charles seemed incredulous for some moments that 
so audacious an act of treason and malice against his 
royal person could really enter the head of his hardiest 
opposer. But when he precipitately enquired who had 



THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 133 

dared to project putting such an unimaginable villainy 
in execution, and learned^ a very singular and powerful 
effect was produced upon him. 

' Cromicell! . Captain Cromwell I . one of the Crom- 
wells of Hinchinbroke, deem you ? Heard you ever the 
man's Christian name, if such a ruffian can be said to 
have one ? Was it Oliver . Oliver Cromwell ?' 

And the King's countenance changed as he pro- 
nounced the fated name, and a shadow seemed to pass 
over his spirit, as the ancient tradition affirms even the 
towering genius of Ccesar ever sunk rebuked in the 
presence of Brutus. 

' Oliver, doubtless, sire, is the man's name who has 
stirred up the artisans of Birmingham, in ignorance 
rather than malice, against your Koyal cause; for I am 
sure, at all events, the principal persons of the town 
have been made his instruments very unwillingly, and 
are shovsing evident signs how far beyond their own 
meaning and intents they are pushed by the man's des- 
peration and the mutinous spirit of the rabble, always 
desirous of changfes, and averse to lawful vokes and 
restraint.' 

Charles gave a deep sigh as he listened ; so deep that 
Lord Falkland looked at him with his own sorrowful 
countenance intensified in its characteristic expression. 

' It is even so, then,' the King remarked, evidently as 
if in explanation, ' and Oliver Crorravell has grown io 
be the man of a most audacious and unrespective boy. 
I marvel not that if any man in England should be 
found to project so towering a treason, this should be 
the man. I do remember me, when I was Prince, being 
on a certain occasion of one of my late father. King 
James'8, royal progresses, at this fellow's uncle's house 



134 THE armourer's daughter. 

near Huntingdon ; when, having the insolence to quar- 
rel me at some remark I made on his clownish gait and 
demeanour, on my offering to chastise him, the big 
varlet struck at me, and hurt me much. Yea, and that 
same night, woke up the whole house with some mad- 
brained vision of a giantess, that came to his bedside, 
and offered him . as he openly stuttered to all who V70uld 
hear . a royal crown ! My father was not angry until 
then, although I had complained with bitter tears of the 
indignity put upon me ; and still old Sir Oliver found 
a way to soothe him through his favourite theories, with 
assurances that the boy's family had been under ban of 
a witch for more than half a century, which set them, 
mostly against their wdlls, on all manner of mad defiances 
and risks.' 

'But these are times for'madmen to flourish in, sire,' 
Lord Falkland responded. 

' Ay, so it seems, dear Lucius,' Charles replied, in 
kinder and softened tones, ' and I do fear me now, more 
than ever, they can only be cured as madmen are, by 
letting of blood ; by whips and straw, and dark chaining 
to dungeon floors. And, oh ! but it contents me ill 
that I must be the harsh phlebotomist and flagellating 
keeper of my state. What says our own Willie Shake- 
speare, whom we both love so well ? 

' The times are out of joint ; oh, cursed spite, 
That ever I was bom to set them right. ' 

' Such a man of forward action, truly, is more dan- 
frerous than the most silver-tonooied talker of those 
against us, sire,' Lord Falkland rejoined ; 'and me- 
thinks your Highness owes much thanks to the zeal and 
prudence of this young gentleman in warning you 
betimes of his purposes.' 



THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 135 

* Well, and I thank him ; but I should owe a broad- 
landed lordship to him who had brought me the traitor's 
head,' Charles observed. ' Well, well, the time may 
come. Patience, patience ! True, it is a word that is 
growing a little wearisome in my vocabulary ; yet it is 
my great comfort and consolation against the injuries 
and insults of the times. Grod is patient also ; yet 
ever and anon He clears the skies with thunder or the 
earth with deluges of fire or water. My turn may 
come.' 

' But when it come, sire ' 

* Tut, tut ; I know thy chime now by heart, if ever I 
shall. " Pardon and peace ; peace and pardon ! " Is 
not this the everlasting ding-dong, my soft-souled 
Lucius, but not Junius or Brutus ? Ha ! you know not 
what it is to be a king, and feel the royal majesty of 
one so trodden upon in the dust as mine hath been ! 
My purple robes trampled by such a swinish hue and 
cry as drove at my heels when I left London last ! I 
must return thitlier on the wings of destruction, and 
sweep the way clear with a besom of fire, or never again 
shall I fee] a king, or my base rebels understand that 
such I am.' 

It was now Falkland's turn to sigh ; and sigh, indeed, 
he did. But he dared not discuss the matter further 
with the King, whose towering pride, rather than motives 
of policy, made him thus set and inveterate in the hope 
of vengeance. 

He only indirectly insinuated his opinion by ob- 
serving, 'But at present, sire, the question is rather 
how you may avoid the vengeance of your enemies.' 

* What mean you, sir ? Of a surety, now, all of my 
subjects who are not engaged neck-deep on the contrary 



136 THE ARMOUKEirS DAUailTER. 

part, will rally to me when they shall hear of so unpa- 
ralleled an atrocity devised against my person itself,' 
said Charles, as if astonishe the information had not 
struck his minister in this light. 

Edward Holte eagerly took the opportunity to declare 
how much the audacity of the projected treason had 
disgusted the very chiefs of the revolt in Birmingham. 
The master armourer, and head of the smiths' guild, 
in particular; the young man. Tubal Bromycham, who 
was appointed its military leader, and who claimed to 
be the representative of its ancient and unjustly dis- 
possessed lords ; but, above all, he dwelt upon the fact 
that it was only by the matchless loyalty and devotion 
to his Majesty's service of the master armourer's daugh- 
ter, Dorothy Firebrace, that he had himself been en- 
abled to effect his escape, and bring the timely warning 
he hoped he did. 

Charl es looked greatly pleased at this statement. ' Nay, 
if the women take to us, their men will soon follow,' he 
remarked. * I will make a note of this a'ood wench's 
name in my tablet, and it shall purchase her and her 
kindred, if it may be, some exemption from the heavy 
destruction which must fall anon on the devoted town ; 
for Birmingham is so, both in our thoughts and in our 
nephew's most inexorable resolve. Our latest posts 
from him brought word that he purposed a sudden on- 
slaught on the town, and that he would give it up to 
lire and sword from end to end, as an example to all 
others in the like rebellious mood.' 

' This inhumanity and impolicy have been tried and 
failed, sire ; the town is well prepared and resolute in 
its defence,' said Edward, secretly moved to indignation 
\with the bloodthirsty announcement. And on the sur- 



THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 137 

prised exclamation of the King and his secretary, he 
related the general facts of the repulse of Prince Eupert 
from Birmingham, which had come to his knowledge in 
his imprisonment. 

Lord Falkland was specially and very ominously 
struck with the tidings. 

* I like it less than ever, my liege,' he said, '^ this 
Oliver Cromwell fellow seems to have the makinofs of 
a great captain in him ; and the only way to mar his 
greatoess ' 

' Yes, yes, I know what thou would't say. Still thy 
never-failing burden to all songs, " Peace, peace ! " in- 
terrupted the King. 

Edward eagerly put in his word upon this, in behalf 
of his neighbour town. 

He assured Charles, with great warmth and eloquence, 
that he felt persuaded Birmingham might easily be 
brought back to its duty and true allegiance by mild 
treatment, and an assurance of pardon for what might 
hitherto be done amiss. Violent measures, he urged upon 
the King, would only throw both leaders and people 
resolutely on their defence, who were then bv no means 
confirmed in disloyalty, and hesitating in their course. 
Were Cromwell but once cleared out of the town, he 
felt certain the sudden explosion his fiery genius had 
produced would leave no further effects. Perseverance 
in attack would, on the other hand, absolutely compel 
the Parliament to interfere in protection, and probably 
open the eyes of its commanders to the immense ad- 
vantages of the general situation and country in the 
approaching struggle. * 

The amiable Falkland earnestly seconded this appeal. 



138 THE armourer's daughter. 

Blood, he said, never cemented any work ; it was so 
slippery a fluid. 

' Well, gentlemen,' the King said at last, rather pet- 
tishly at the contradiction, ' it will be time enough to 
speak of mercy to any of my disloyal cities and people 
when themselves deign to ask it of us.' 

' True, sire,' said Edward Holte, feeling the disguised 
bitterness of the remark, ' and the question is besides, 
at this moment, rather of the safe disposal of your own 
royal person. That, methinks, can never be in a 
crumbling ruin like this castle, even put on the alert as 
your Majesty's defence now is.' 

'Why not, Master Holt?' Charles hastily replied. 
' The chief danger in the purposed attack lay in a pos- 
sible surprise. Tliis (and I thank your zeal, and will 
to my best of kingly power recompense) is doubtless 
prevented.' 

'The attack by Captain Cromwell and his cavalry, 
possibly, sire,' Edward earnestly rejoined. 'But the 
general design is of such likelihood and policy, that it 
is reasonable to conclude the Parliament leaders will 
take the hint, and pour their whole army round you 
here from Coventry and Northampton, and I see not 
what means of resistance attend your Majesty against 
a formal siege by such a host as the Earl of Essex is 
assembling fast.' 

' The only refuge, sire, is e\ddently flight,' said Lord 
Falkland, using an indiscreet word ; a word which 
roused all the pride and ireful disdain of the Stuart's 
character. 

' Flight, Lord Falkland ! And do you dare to advise 
your Prince to so mean and cowardly a course as to fly 
before his rebels? Let them come. Men vrill then 



THE COUNCIL OF ^AR. 139 

believe in my danger, and in the threatening ruin that 
awaits all other chiefdom and preeminence in my per- 
son. I tell you, sirs, all England will rally round the 
steeps of Nottingham, vv'hen it is known the King of 
England is in hazard of life and royalty within its castle 
walls.' 

Lord Falkland, well acquainted with the obstinacy of 
the King's character when he once announced a resolu- 
tion, only ventured now to entreat that at least the 
Council might be reassembled to hear the tidings, and 
advise his Majesty upon them. 

But Charles was not to be reasoned with in his pre- 
sent mood. ' Xo, Falkland, no I ' he exclaimed ; ^ I know 
that it will only be to hear from them again base coun- 
sels of submission, and imploring peace at any cost from 
my insolent Westminster masters. It is much fitter 
that my soldiers should be called to counsel now with 
sharpened swords I ' 

And moved by one of those sudden and violent im- 
pulses which he seldom supported in their consequences, 
Charles strode to the door of the chamber, and opening 
it, called out at the pitch of his voice, * Ho I gentlemen 
of the guard, a moi, a moil (to me, to me).' 

The response to this appeal v>^as of a rather startling 
character. The apartment in which the King had 
hitherto given peaceful audience to the messenger of 
warning suddenly became flooded by a throng of half- 
drunken and excited men, who, pouring in with naked 
swords in their hands, seemed inclined to make a victim 
at once of the stranger. One of the foremost, at all 
events, a man of powerful and rather handsome person, 
though with a most debauched and ferocious expression 
of countenance, advanced, staggering, but evidently with 



140 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

overboiling zeal, on Edward Holte. * Has the rascal 
attempted some harm to your Majesty? jNIake mince- 
meat of him, gentlemen ! ' this personage roared out, 
flourishing his sword ; and the King himself was obliged 
to restrain his bloodthirsty violence. 

' Eetract that expression, Groring, and instantly, I 
command you ! ' Charles said, well knowing what the 
point of honour in such a case would require, even 
under a drunken mistake, and seizing the ruffianly 
upraised arm. ^ This gentleman, on the contrary, has 
put himself to great hazard to serve me. It is to com- 
municate his intelligence I have summoned you. A 
party of Eoundhead horse, gentlemen, is riding hither- 
ward to make your King their prisoner. May I trust 
for my protection to your swords ? ' 

' Against the whole world, sire, an't please your Ma- 
jesty! Where are the villains?' yelled the before- 
mentioned valiant personage, flourishing his sword now 
wildly in the air. 

'This is the man,' whispered Falkland to Edward, 
^who lost us Portsmouth without a blow; having em- 
bezzled the King's money for the defence so utterly, 
that he had not wherewithal left to buy the garrison a 
fortnight's salt.' 

Edward smiled scornfully. 

' The enemies are probably coming pretty fast into 
the windmill swinging of your sword, now, Lord Groring,' 
he remarked. ' But, before you destroy them utterly 
ofi" the face of the earth, I must ask of you truly to 
withdraw your insulting word, or face one close at 
hand.' 

' I obey the King's orders in all things, sire,' the brag- 
gadocio replied, in humbled accents ; and Edward, by a 



THE COr>'CIL OF WAR. 141 

contemptuous nod, accepted the apology as sufficient, 
just as a personage, in the fantastic costume of court 
fool, who had scudded in with the rest, quietly added, 
' Except in keeping of his towns, good coz ! ' 

There was a general peal of laughter, which seemed 
not to be restrained by the King's evident displeasure. 

^But where are these enemies, sire? Gentlemen, 
let us throw open the gates, and spare them what 
trouble we can in their approach,' said a splendidly - 
arrayed young cavalier of those noble guardsmen. 

' You are but sixty, my Lord Denbigh, and probably 
thrice your number to the attack,' rebuked Lord Falk- 
land. 

. ' No matter ; we will not count them ; and the more 
they are, shall but the better show the King that men 
can fight even with what you style golden sivords, Lord 
Falkland,' returned the impetuous youth. 

The secretary had possibly made some such allusion 
to the supposed restraining influences of great wealth 
on valour with relation to the noble guard, who were 
nearly all of them of extensive possessions, as well as 
of the highest rank. 

' Do not wrangle, gentlemen. Eest satisfied with this, 
that I shall place the life of your King in your hands, 
and will not stir from this place for any number of 
assailants likely to be brought against it,' said Charles ; 
and the announcement was received ^vith an uproar of 
triumph and joy. 

Only the captain of the troop. Lord Bernard Stuart, 
did not seem so well content ; and enquired if they were 
to take his Majesty's commands direct, or from the 
Major-General, Sir Jacob Astley, who was expected in 
every moment from a hawking-party in the fields. 



142 THE armourer's daughter. 

Lord Falkland took the opportunity to renew his 
entreaty that the Council might be reassembled round 
his Majesty. But Charles interrupted him with pas- 
sionate exasperation. 

' No, my Lord,' he exclaimed, ' these are the only 
proper councillors now for an English king ! The die 
is cast : this last immeasurable insult and treason has 
overflowed the measure of my so far exhaustless en- 
durance. War, nothing but war, henceforth. If I made 
peace on such terms as the Parliament might accede to 
me, in my supposed present desperate circumstances, 
gentlemen,' he continued to the guardsmen, ' I may, 
indeed, remain the shadow of a king ; I may be waited 
on bareheaded ; I may have my hand kissed ; the title 
of Majesty may be continued to me; and the Kings 
authority, signified by both Houses, may still be the 
style of their commands. I may have swords and maces 
carried before me, and please myself with the sight of a 
crown and sceptre, though even these twigs would not 
long flourish when the stock upon which they grew was 
dead. But as to true and real power, I should remain 
but the outside, but the picture, but the sign of a king. 
My towns are taken from me, my ships, my arms, my 
money; but there still remain to me a good cause, 
and the hearts of my loyal subjects, which, with G-od's 
blessing, will recover all the rest . among whom I truly 
hold this gentleman. Master Edward Holte, not among 
the least. And now, gentlemen, to your several duties, as . 
I must to mine ; and, my Lord Falkland, see that your 
friend be well lodged and attended in our own household 
here. And so, farewell.' 

He waved his hand, and bowed with a kingly grace 
and stateliness to the assemblage, who bent in ac- 



THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 143 

knowledgment almost to the ground, and all present 
retired. 

Lord Falkland resumed his hold of Edward's arm. 

' There's but one hope now of aught reasonable,' he 
whispered to his friend as they left the presence. ' I 
.will hasten and communicate all to Sir Edward Hyde, 
whose eloquence sometimes has influence over our master 
when no man else can more with him than the wind on 
a frozen sea. But, indeed, if the King continues in his 
obstinacy, all we can do is to make ready to die loyally 
by his side.' 



144 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTEE XLIX. 

grimsorwe's grand counter-move. 

After the excitement of this scene, Edward felt a very 
natural return of his fatigue. In fact he almost fell 
asleep in the midst of an attempt at giving some fur- 
ther explanations to Lord Falkland, who, observing his 
condition, humanely left him to repose in his own 
chamber, with the assurance that if the enemy appeared 
he would immediately call him. 

It was late in the evening before Edward awoke, 
much refreshed, and found Lord Falkland seated at his 
bedside. 

This kind friend had also provided restoratives of a 
more substantial kind, of which Edward was now well 
enough inclined to partake ; particularly when he heard 
that the day had passed off without any alarm, and that 
the most diligent scouring of the adjoining country and 
forest had failed to discover an enemy. 

He readily accounted for this by stating that his 
escape was known to Cromwell, who, finding his pur- 
suit fail, would probably despair of success without 
the advantage of a surprise, and relinquish the enter- 
prise. 

Falkland looked grave, and, though evidently un- 
willingly, did not conceal from his friend that the 



U5 

unpleasant result had followed that a degree of incre- 
dulity was thrown on the whole information. Tlie King, 
especially, had relapsed into one of his most rooted 
prejudices . that his subjects never would actually dare 
to raise their hands against their soyereign, when they 
should be called upon to face him in person. ' Such a 
divinitv doth hedge a king,' he belieyed with his 
favourite poet. 

One good result had, however, followed the restoration 
of this self-confidence. The King had listened more 
temperately to advice, and Sir Edward Hyde had pre- 
vailed upon him to consent to hold another council, to 
consider whether terms of peace should be proposed for 
the last time. But the virtuous and clear-soul ed Falk- 
land acknowledcred with a sio-h that the minister had 
been obliged to suggest this as a mere trick to gain 
time. He and the rest of the council, however, wished 
Edward to attend their sitting, to endeavour once more 
to bring conviction of the danger of his situation to the 
King. 

Aft-er this the conversation of the two friends became 
more general. 

Falkland was well acquainted with Edward Holte's 
family affairs and position, and the harsh species of 
domestic tyranny under which he laboured. Conver- 
sation on this point was, however, necessarily con- 
strained ; only Edward learned with little satisfaction 
that the Lord Keeper Lyttelton, father of the young 
lady to whom he had been betrothed from his childhood, 
without any reference whatever to his ov/n feelings or 
selection, was with the Court at Nottingham. 

Tbis nobleman was no favourite with Falkland or his 
friend ; and, indeed, he shared the general fate of selfish 

VOL. ir. L 



146 THE ARMOUREPi's DAUGHTER. 

time-servers, and was an object of contempt with both 
the parties between whom he strove to trim. 

He was, however, a lawyer of great abilities and 
position ; but having been raised to his dignity (corre- 
sponding to that of Lord Chancellor at the present day) 
to assist in saving the Earl of Strafford on his impeach- 
ment, he had craftily shunned performance of the 
conditions in a way that rather conduced to the catas- 
trophe of that ^ bold, bad ' minister. After subsequently 
wavering and hesitating between the contending parties, 
the violent proceedings of the Parliament, and his in- 
stincts as a lawyer, frightened him from their cause, 
and he had recently escaped from London with the 
Great Seal in his possession to secure a welcome with 
the Court. He had hitherto, however, received but a 
very cold one, for Charles cherished a life-long repug- 
nance to all who had been in any way instrumental to 
the destruction of the most skilful and courageous 
instrument of his arbitrary designs. 

But why Edward Holte least liked this amphibious 
politician lay in the fact that he was likely to prove one 
of the main obstacles to the success of his love affair 
Avith the armourer's daughter. 

This was an unknown circumstance io his friend's 
history to Falkland, until the warmth of his friend's 
expressions respecting the young girl in question excited 
his notice and curiosity. Edward Holte then, very de- 
sirous to secure an ally so near the king, and unaccus- 
tomed to keep secrets from his friend, avowed to him 
his passionate attachment, and wish and purpose to 
make his brave rescuer his wife. 

Lord Falkland received this statement in a manner 
Edward had calculated upon, from his knowledge of 



grimsorwe's grand counter-move. 147 

his pure and honourable and right-minded character. He 
confessed that nothing could be more unjust than con- 
straint on such a vital point, and highly approved of the 
intentions avowed by his friend, to observe every species 
of good faith and honourable dealing towards the woman 
of his choice. But, although he was himself above the 
ordinary prejudices of his age, Falkland was quite well 
aware of them. 

' Marry an artisan's daughter, a mechanic citizen's 
heiress ! prefer to the Lord Keeper's the daughter of a 
man w!io heads a sedition against the King I If we 
supposed even the impossibility of your father's consent, 
my dear Edward, the King would remain rooted to ob- 
jections ! There is no stronger prejudice in his mind, 
derived from his sky-flying Scottish ancestry, than 
utter disdain and repugnance to a mingling of gentle 
blood with what is called that of the commonalty. It 
is impossible ! ' 

^ But I have told you the Firebraces trace their 
descent . as clearly as the Stuarts themselves from 
their royal progenitors . from the prime nobility of 
France,' said Edward. 

* Still, nothing can efface the stain of their mechanic 
occupation in the equally vulgar eyes of kings and 
populaces ! ' said Falkland, with a mournful smile, for 
all philosophy is mournful. ' But if anything can, dear 
Edward, it will be the memorable service which con- 
jointly you and this brave Birmingham maiden have 
rendered to the King.' 

This was all the consolation Edward derived in his 
affairs of the heart from his friend. But in those of the 
LQtellect a rich fruitage awaited him in the society and 
conversation of the accomplished Falkland. A tender- 



148 THE ARMOUREH'S DAUGHTER. 

hearted and great-soiiled man, the famous secretary of 
Charles I. united the rarest distinctions of humanity. 
His comprehensive genius took in all that was exalted, 
refined, and august in the qualities of the mind ; 
his generous and feeling heart all that was kindly, 
faithful, affectionate, and heroic, in impulse and emo- 
tion. Happy, then, was he who died so young, before 
he had time to experience to the fullest extent how 
misplaced natures such as his ever, ever are in such a 
world as ours I 

Edward passed a much more restless night than 
might have been anticipated from his fatigue. But the 
council was held early on the following day, and Lord 
Falkland presented himself betimes to be his conductor 
before it. 

The raillery ^\dth which he was received in the guard 
chamber, even more than his friend's report, opened 
Edward's eyes to the fact that his tidings began to be 
discredited. 

The young Earl of Denbigh came yawning up to him, 
and smilingly reproached him with making him lose 
his night's sleep for nothing. ' Had it been in the 
expectation of some pretty damsel or dame, now,' the 
sprightly cavalier remarked, ' but, fie upon it, to stand 
stark in steel on a rampart from sunset to rise, looking 
out for a foe that never appears I ' 

Lord Groring, also, mindful of his late rebuke, made 
his reflections with characteristic swagger and insolence. 

' You must have been very heartily afraid for the 
King's safety, sir, so far to outpost pursuit. We hear 
there are witches in Warwickshire ; mayhap you rode 
hither on a discarded broomstick ? ' 

' Your remarks abound in salt ; it vvould have been 



gkimsorwe's grand counter-mote. 149 

for his Majesty's service had your stores for a siege, 
Lord Goring,' interposed Falkland^ checking his friend's 
visibly irritated rejoinder. 

Edward's reception by the King and his assembled 
councillors was equally cold, and apparently incredu- 
lous in tone. 

The Lord Keeper himself, though destined, as was 
supposed, to so near an alliance, fought extremely shy 
of him at first, as of a person under a cloud . a circum- 
stance Edward ^vas not grieved at. But it is astonish- 
ing how nigh men of vulgar natures are to the inferior 
animals, and how closely they resemble them in most of 
their procedures ; and is it not known how the four-foot 
sick or wounded are treated by the herd ? 

These grave personages fell to questioning Edw^ard 
with great minuteness upon the facts of his infor- 
mation. 

Very soon he could plainly perceive that it was con- 
sidered the right courtly vein to be unable to believe in 
the possibility of such an atrocity designed against the 
royal person and majesty as had been declared. The 
Lord Keeper frequently expressed his trust and con- 
viction that such a height of blasphemy had not been 
reached even by the w^orst of the traitors he had left 
behind him at London, Sir Edward Hyde cross- 
questioned him with all the dexterity of legal practice, 
as if he had been a lawyer employed to establish an 
opposite chain of conclusions. 

Especially was Edward annoyed by being called upon 
to explain exactly how he came in possession of the 
information he had conveyed. 

From a feeling which had certainly in no way been 
exhibited towards him by his base-bom and base- 



150 THE armourer's DAUGnXER. 

hearted brother, he had hitherto carefully refrained 
from divulging the share lie had taken in the whole 
transaction. But the object of the councillor's, and 
particularly of the King himself, seemed now to be to 
ascertain by what means the enemy had become 
acquainted with his slender provision against attack, 
and the general carelessness of the garrison of Notting- 
ham. 

It was pretty plain that Edward fenced in his replies 
to these questions, and as he also declined to state by 
what means he liad obtained tlie disguise in which he 
now appeared, and had fled from Birmingham, several 
of tlie councillors began to evince unmistakable signs 
of dissatisfaction. Charles himself, indeed, had more 
than once made the observation that, so far as he was 
aware, in all Warwickshire only Jr^ir Thomas Holte had 
been put in possession of these facts, by way of inducing 
him to hasten his promised levy. But, luckily, when 
Edward in turn was beginning to lose patience, urgent 
despatches were stated to arrive from Prince Eupert ; 
and the Kincr at once ordered them to be brouorht to him 
at the council-board. 

The messenger was accordingly introduced with his 
letters. 

He was announced as Cornet Titus, of the Prince's 
own regiment, and, on entrance, proved to be a young 
man of very confident and lively manners, which 
scarcely even the presence of the King restrained. 

Charles was no admirer of this species of individual, 
and the gravity and austerity of his own demeanour 
visibly increased when the jaunty officer of dragoons, 
presenting his documents on both knees, declared him- 
self perfectly able to explain anything that might seem 



grimsoewe's grand counter-move. 151 

to require more light, as he was employed by his High- 
ness in their composition as secretary. 

This Titus was, in truth, the same who afterwards, 
having reached the rank of colonel, composed the 
celebrated Eoyalist pamphlet, advocating the assassi- 
nation of Cromwell, entitled ' Killing no Murder.' 

King Charles read the letter at first to himself, the 
councillors looking on in silence, and immovably, with 
the exception of the Earl of Southampton, who quietly 
took the opportunity to pick his teeth, aside, with a 
straw he found on the floor at his feet. 

When the King at last raised his eyes from his perusal 
and looked at Edward Holte, it was with a very peculiar 
expression of surprise and blame. 

' Methinks a brother's merits in the affair need not 
have been so carefully concealed,' he then said, in a very 
displeased tone, ' and even to the hazard of your own 
story's somewhat discrediting ! My lords, my nephew 
writes to me that he had but just returned to Aston 
Hall from the observation and pursuit of a large party 
of rebel horse, secretly assembled in Birmingham ; 
which suddenly quitting the town in our direction, as- 
certained that surprise was hopeless, from Master Holte's 
escape, and turned off to join the Earl of Essex, at 
Northampton. These partisans were first observed by 
Sir Thomas Holte himself, and a faithful servant of 
his house ; but only explained by the arrival of a gentle- 
man of the Holte family (though but by a left-hand 
acknowledgment, it seems), who had also been made a 
prisoner in Birmingham : where, discovering the whole 
mystery of the iniquity devised against us, he revealed 
it to his brother . this Master Holte of yours, my Lord 
Falkland ! And rather than that any delay in the 



152 THE armourer's daughter. 

warninor to ns should ensue . knowinof himself to be no 
rider to compare with his well-bred brother (being but 
of the legal profession, which rather affects coaches and 
slow Flanders mares, my Lord Keeper !) . and having 
his passport to leave the. place, he most loyally and 
generously changed clothes, and gave it, to forward the 
necessary diligence. Which flight of Master Holte 
being then by him purposely declared and confessed, 
when it could run no risk of being stayed, has happily 
turned aside the whole stream of mischief. But I say 
again, Master Holte, you should not have been so eager 
to engross the whole merit of the service to yourself 
and I know not what traitor armourer's daughter of 
Birmingham, who does not appear, from anything 
written here, to have had any real share in the trans- 
action.' 

It must be imagined, not described, with what 
emotion Edward Holte listened to this statement. 

He saw at once into what a trap he had fallen by his 
own generous forbearance. Conviction appeared in the 
countenances of all who heard. 

The Lord Keeper himself clenched the fact by re- 
marking, 'Ay, ay, there was never any great love lost 
between Sir Thomas's lawful heir and his natural imp !' 

Edward felt that all he could say in explanation 
would now come too late : that the most conspicuous 
portion of the whole merit had been seized to himself 
by Grimsorwe's unparalleled daring and dexterity. 

Moreover, when he did begin to speak in some de- 
claration of the truth, the King imperiously interrupted 
him. 

' It matters not now, sir, we have other matters to 
attend to,' Charles said. *The Prince mentions that 



GraMSORWE S GRAND COUNTER-MOVE. 153 

this officer will expound to us the great conveniences 
and uses of Birmingham and its vicinity for all warlike 
business, and his Highness's consequent desire that we 
will incontinently forward to him some pieces of artil- 
lery, and what infantry can be spared, to force an entry 
into the town, and reduce it to a good subjection.' 

Cornet Titus began a very fluent and lengthened 
military exposition upon this ; but as the King listened 
to it with evident attention and interest, no one ven- 
tured to interrupt. And it appeared to carry conviction 
to the royal mind ; for at the first pause in the over- 
flow Charles turned to Lord Falkland, and desired him 
to write at once to York to expedite the sending of two 
large culverins (so 18-pounder cannons were then 
styled) with a competent guard of infantry, to his High- 
ness the Prince, at Aston Hall, in Warwickshire, to 
reduce the revolted town of Birmingham. 

Edward, however, could no longer submit in silence 
to this. 

.' Your Majesty will but thereby,' he exclaimed, 
' make irreconcilable enemies of a people who, by gentle 
means, may, I am sure, be easily reclaimed to your 
obedience ! ' 

' And you have fair intelligence in the town, sir, or 
you would not have taken so much pains to persuade us 
that the daughter of the principal leader in the sedition, 
this Master- Armourer Firebrace, is a secret loyalist and 
friend of our authority,' said Charles, with a sneer, 
though it was a form of rebuke he was mostly too proud 
to use to his inferiors. 

The Lord Keeper, who was sitting mopingly with his 
hands muffled in his crimson robes, now looked up, 
stared, and frowned. 



154 THE aemourek's daughter. 

Edward coloured, and felt it inexpedient to hazard 
any further reply. 

Lord Falkland, however, true to his ever-urged 
policy of conciliation, spoke up alone among the 
councillors on behalf of Edward's proposition. 'Let, 
at least, gentle means first be tried ! ' he earnestly 
entreated. 

Sir Edward Hyde and the Earl of Southampton also 
joined in an opinion to this effect. Upon all which a 
subterfuge extremely agreeable to King Charles's genius 
seemed to occur to him. 

' Why, sirs,' he said, ' make what diligence we may, 
some considerable interval must elapse before the guns 
can be carried from York, properly guarded, to where 
they are asked for. And so let Master Holte make all 
use of his secret agencies and influence in Birming- 
ham, to bring the people back to their duty in the 
meantime. On that condition I do offer them full 
pardon and remission of their offences hitherto. But 
if he fails, the guns will not arrive amiss, methinks ; 
and for our more immediate protection I will have the 
Prince recall his cavalry from the west, and throw it 
over the country between us and Aston Hall, where, as 
he writes, he purposes for a time to fix the head- 
quarters of his command. And now, in what concerns 
the article of this message, you would have me send to 
London yet again, sirs,' the King went on to say, as if 
entirely dismissing the former subjects. ' I do yield, in 
so far as I think it may tend to daze the Parliament 
with hopes of my submission, and put some slacking on 
their efforts till I can think myself safer, and see 
myself more partisan than I am at present in my 
quarters here. But let it be well known to all ye 



GEIMSORWE'S GRA5D COr>'TER-MOVE. 155 

who call yourselves my friends/ he continued, glan- 
cing at Edward, * that there is nothing really meant 
by this towards a peace : which can never be till the 
sword has shown who has to dictate the terms. I hope 
to see you as a soldier next, Master Holte ; and mean- 
while inform your father's other son that I will find 
some means also to repay him his faithfulness and 
hazard in our service ere long.' 

With these words it was evident the King dismissed 
Edward from his presence ; and, in fact, all but the 
Councillors of State seemed to feel their own dispensed 
with, and retired. 



156 THE akmourer's daughtee. 



CHAPTEE L. 
Edward's return to aston hall. 

Disgusted to the last degree with what had occurred to 
him in this memorable interview, Edward speedily 
shook off the company Cornet Titus seemed willing to 
confer upon him, and made for the solitude he hoped 
to find in Falkland's apartment. Nor was he at all 
turned from this object or flattered by the cornet's 
polite observation . ^ I should have known you at the 
bottom of a coalpit, sir, from your resemblance to your 
beautiful sister at Aston Hall ; who, I can assure you, 
the Prince Palatine himself declares the handsomest 
young lady he has set eyes upon in England as yet ! ' 

Edward scarcely responded to the compliment, or 
perhaps noticed it ; but if he did at all it rather added 
to the vexation he experienced at finding himself so 
wonderfully defeated and circumvented in all his most 
reasonable expectations by the infernal craft and 
artifice of his detestable and detested relative. 

A kind of agony of powerless indignation and aston- 
ishment came over Edward's whole mind and heart 
when once he found himself alone, and free to pursue 
the windings of uncomfortable thought and apprehen- 
sion which now appeared to hir, reflections. 

The traitor who had usurped so unaccountably the 



157 

superior merit in the foiling of his own wicked stra- 
tagems, of what more in the way of treachery and 
contrivance was he not capable ? 

Never before had Edward Holte dreaded his brother. 
He had long suspected his hidden rancour against him- 
self personally ; had despised his mean and calculating 
nature, and wondered at the baseness of artifice and adu- 
lation he exhibited in endeavouring to advance himself, 
as the lion's cub might wonder at the underground 
operations of a mole, whose progress is marked by the 
dirt it heaves. Xow he regarded him with a mixture of 
fear in his horror and contempt, which the same noble 
animal might entertain for the insidious snake. 

Then what would Dorothy Firebrace think of the 
great failure in all their plans, caused by his own sense- 
less forbearance ? 

If the wicked sometimes feel remorse for their ill 
deeds, it is never probably so acute as that white species 
of the same passion, when a good and generous nature 
finds its displays of those qualities turned against 
itself. 

Punishment seems a natural recompense for guilt, 
and is accepted as such by evil-doers, mostly with a 
kind of consolation in the assurance that they are 
reaping as they have sown. But to be afflicted for our 
very virtues, to sow good wheat grains and only hemlock 
to spring, seems unnatural and portentous even to those 
who have had the longest experience of life and the 
ways of men. 

This feeling, that he had done wrong in sparing the 
villain whom he felt he should have maimed for mis- 
chief by revealing his noxious qualities, tormented 
Edward long. In vain he recalled to mind Dorothy's 



158 THE armourer's daughter. 

exhortations to him not to forget that the wretch was 
his brother. The terror . we can call it by no other 
name . inspired by moral depravity so matched by 
cunning and audacity, deepened every moment in his 
breast -when he considered who, even more than him- 
self, had provoked the hatred and vengeance of so 
relentless a foe. 

In the consternation of this idea his fancy presented 
him a most alarming array of possible dangers awaiting 
the object of his youthful but devoted love. It seemed 
to Edward Holte as if his own presence and unslum- 
bering watchfulness could scarcely suffice to guard off 
the perils menacing his betrothed from his unnatui'al 
brother's resentment and craft. Moreover, he remem- 
bered the circumstances under which he had left her in 
Birmingham ; and, powerful as her friends were there, 
who could say what might be the consequences in the 
topsy-turvy state of things in the town ? True, Crom- 
well, whose vengeance might have been dreaded, was 
said to have withdrawn himself; but other and perhaps 
worse dangers might be apprehended from the excited 
passions of the populace, which there were so many evil 
agencies to set in action. 

Edward determined to lose not a moment in returning 
to face his unnatural enemy at Aston Hall, and take 
upon himself thence the necessary guardianship of his 
soul's beloved. 

Lord Falkland found him in this resolution, which, 
indeed, he did not oppose. He plainly intimated, in 
fact, that the great service he had performed was by no 
means properly appreciated by the King. His Majesty 
openly expressed an opinion that there was a singular 
want of straightforwardness and whole-heartedness in 



Edward's return to aston hall. 159 

Master Holte's proceedings. He remarked suspiciously 
on the evident good-will and intelligence that existed 
between the heir of Aston and the revolted town ; and 
Lord Falkland himself confessed he could not quite 
understand some points in his friend's conduct and 
explanations as regarded his brother. 

Edward, upon this, burst into a full declaration, to 
this true and faithful friend, of the real circumstances 
of the case ; but although Falkland personally was con- 
vinced and satisfied, however much amazed with the 
revelation, greatly to Edward's chagrin, he declared he 
thought it no longer feasible to bring the King to a true 
comprehension of the state of the affair. 

'All this will seem to his Majesty mere after-thought 
and contrivance. I say it in sadness and in shame, but 
the King is so accustomed to tortuous inventions and 
subterfuge to remedy his own mistakes and faults, that 
he would likely believe much worse of you than now, 
should you attempt to force a knowledge of the truth 
upon him,' Lord Falkland observed. ' He will deem 
that, to secure the rewards and honour due to your 
courageous interposition, you are no longer content with 
an unhandsome suppression of your brother's share in 
the adventure, but aim at his removal from your path 
by unfounded calumnies and imputations of treason. 
But such a villain will be sure, in the long run, to reveal 
himself unmistakably. Meanwhile, were I you, dearest 
friend, I would indeed lose no time in returning to 
endeavour to disabuse your father of his confidence in 
this traitor, and protect your friends from his further ill 
designs ; and if by any possibility you can, as you 
persuade yourself, recall Birmingham to the King's 
allegiance, it is impossible to do his cause and your own 



160 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

a greater service. Look, I have taken care to urge the 
point so earnestly upon the King, that I have procured 
you a full and gracious pardon for all of the town who 
submit to the King's mercy, ere force is applied. It 
lacks nothing but the great seal of England to it, which 
my Lord Keeper promises to bring from his lodgings 
hither and apply ; and his Majesty promises, moreover, 
to give you a letter in his own hand to the Prince Pala- 
tine, commanding him to abstain from all attack on 
Birmingham, or infliction of punishment in life or 
goods, so long as you can give assurance or hope of the 
townsmen's return to their allegiance. But his Majesty 
himself mil see you, and give you your instructions, or 
ere you depart.' 

Edw^ard expressed his earnest wish that no delay that 
could be spared him should be made, and Lord Falkland 
promised he would expedite the business as speedily as 
possible. He would take a proper time, he added, to 
put w^hat respected Grimsorwe in its true light before 
the King, when other circumstances would probably have 
occurred to strengthen such evidence as could now be 
adduced. 

In the midst of this conversation the Lord Keeper 
entered, with a small crimson velvet box in his hand, 
surmounted by a crown ; considerably to the increase of 
Edward's annoyance, who for private reasons of his own 
was not much desirous of the company. 

He apologised to the Lord Keeper for the trouble he 
was giving him; but the latter replied emphatically 
that he would rather trust the heart out of his breast, 
in another man's keeping, than the great seal of Eng- 
land out of his own. 

' And if you only knew, good son, the trouble and 



Edward's return to aston hall. 161 

danger I have incurred to escape with it out of the 
clutches of the Parliament men in London, you would 
know what to think of the matter. And I do expect 
daily to hear they have declared me a traitor for my 
loyalty ; but better so, at a distance, than clapped up 
in a dungeon of the Tower with my Lord of Canterbury, 
or some other faithful servant of the King's,' the Lord 
Keeper feelingly remarked ; and he entered into a long- 
narrative of the circumstances of his flight from 
London, and the infinite difficulties and dangers attend- 
ing the enterprise. 

' My house was watched night and day on the secret, 
by Master Pym's orders, and well I knew it was so, 
good cousin,' he went on to say ; ' and, good Lord ! 
imagine what my condition grew to be at last as they 
brought me treason after treason to stamp and certify 
with the magic in this little box. But the matter of 
raising the militia against the King did quite break me 
down in my compliances ; it was such open and manifest 
treason. Yet was I forced to put the seal to this also, 
and the Earl of Essex's commission, merely to shut their 
eyes to my true intentions. Yet had it not been for 
Sergeant Maynard's assistance, I should never have 
known how to compass it ; but he dressed up a figure in 
my wig and robes, that sat for a day hearing causes in 
Westminster Hall, while I took boat at the stairs, 
garbed like some mean citizen, and so on board a 
Newcastle collier, that conveyed me safe and sound, but 
with incredible anguishes of mind and dismays of 
pursuit, with the precious thing in my possession, to 
the garrison, and noble marquis of that place, holding- 
it for the King.' 

It thence appeared that the Lord Keeper, not having 

VOL. II. M 



162 THE armoueer's daughter. 

been lately in Warwickshire, had a thousand questions 
to ask of Edward Holte concerninor the state of thins^ 
there ; particularly how all was at Hagley, his family 
seat, where his wife and daughter now resided. 

Edward was a good deal embarrassed with these 
questions, having been, in truth, very remiss in his 
attentions to his betrothed bride for a considerable 
time before even he made the acquaintance of Dorothy 
Firebrace . facts which the Lord Keeper himself speedily 
discerned, and Edward, perhaps, took no great trouble 
to conceal. But his lordship was too politic to make 
any direct observation on the circumstance ; only when 
he affixed the seal to the pardon offered to Birmingham 
he expressed a civil hope that he should soon see his 
friend Sir Thomas Holte again, and make use of the 
first restoration of tranquillity to complete the happy 
union arranged between the families. 

'Amen' certainly stuck in Edward's throat to this ; 
but fortunately Lord Falkland, who had been for some 
time absent, now re-entered the room. 

This zealous friend brought good news for Edward. 
The King had consented to expedite him his letter, and 
permit him to kiss hands on his departure, immediately 
after he had dined. ' And his Majesty makes no long 
meals now,' said Falkland, ' and there is no need of a 
great flourish of trumpets to signify the changes of the 
courses ; for indeed, until the plate came to hand from 
Oxford, never was poor prince so moneyless for his 
occasions as ours, who but awhile ago thought Little of 
expending a couple of thousand pounds on a single 
night's masque, or other stage divertisement at court.* 

Edward, with a blush, declared that at all events 
his father had money at command, which he would 



EDWABD'S EETLKN to ASTON HALL. 163 

doubtless be proud to contribute to his Majesty's neces- 
sities ; and a page summoning them at this moment to 
what was emphatically styled 'the presence,' he was 
very glad to leave my Lord Keeper's scrutiny and follow 
thither. 

He found the King in rather a better humour than he 
had left him in the morning . one that might be called 
severely gracious . and surrounded by nearly all the 
principal persons of his little court. 

It was plain Charles thought to make what has been 
styled in modem times ' political capital ' out of Crom- 
well's foiled audpvcity. Thanking Edward coldly for his 
display of zeal, he expressed a hope that his father, and 
other loyal gentlemen of the county, would now perceive 
the necessity of immediately fulfilling the promises they 
had made to him. 

Edward respectfully renewed his statement that 
nothing but arms were wanting for his father's tenantry 
to form an excellent troop of horse ; to which Charles 
drily replied that if he succeeded, as he announced he 
hoped, in bringing back the revolted town of Birming- 
ham to its allegiance, the best possible sign of sub- 
mission would be for the smiths of that place to furnish 
the arms they were so well able. ' And you give us to 
understand,' the Kin^ added, with an austere smile, 
'that Venus is willing to use her influence with her 
husband, Vulcan, in the sooty town, to forward your 
designs in our favour.' 

' Xo such goddess, sire,' returned Edward, indignantly 
colouring, observing the titter and buzz that ran round 
among the assembled courtiers, ' but rather the chastest 
and noblest of them all, witty Minerva, mistress of all 
the arts ! The loyal daughter of the master-armourer 



164 THE armourek's daughtek. 

of Birmingham, sire, is a young- girl of spotless honour 
and repute ; and he who but smiles otherwise, saving 
your sole Majesty, must answer to me for the gibe with 
his sword.' 

' Let us not further risk to provoke this ireful young 
gentleman,' said Charles, hastity, and glancing re- 
bukingly round his circle. ' (jo, and speed with these 
blacksmiths and their goddess daughters in any manner 
you deem best . only speed. Here is a letter to the 
Prince our nephew, on whose delivery there shall be 
peace awhile between his swordsmen and Birmingham, 
if they also will have it so. Promise what else you will 
beside ; the keeping will be with us. Tell the Prince I 
will send further verbal explanations by Cornet Titus. 
And now a good farewell to you ; and when you next 
kneel to us, we trust it shall be to ask some suitable 
recompense for yet greater service than, we would all 
men note, we hold to have received already at your 
hands.' 

Edward thankfully received the document, knelt and 
kissed the King's hand, and retired : but, greatly to his 
concern. Lord Falkland, who followed him out, advised 
him to lose no time in returnino- to Aston, on a notion 
he seemed to have taken that some double policy was 
at work. 'It is the King's way but too much,' he said, 
sadly ; ' and these verbal explanations to be sent by 
Cornet Titus may very possibly be of a kind to thwart 
the whole meaning of the written word. To horse at 
once, my dear Edward ; and, besides, I see you are too 
honest and plain-spoken for a court as yet. Would to 
God that I had ever known so also of myself ! But it 
is too late now ; and if this unhappy king is to be saved 



Edward's return to aston kall. 165 

at all it can only now be by honest counsels, which least 
of all he heeds, but which ever shall be mine.' 

This suggestion was scarcely needed to hasten Edward's 
departure ; but he determined not to delay another hour 
in Nottingham, and begging Falkland to make his 
excuses in the hurry of his business to the Lord Keeper, 
the two friends embraced and parted. 



166 'the armoukek's dacgiiteb. 



CHAPTER LI. 

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 

Edwaed Holte's horse had not yet recovered sufficiently 
its express gallop of fifty miles from Birmingham to 
allow him to return at a similarly rapid pace. He was 
obliged to rest at night at Leicester on the way ; but he 
met with no other obstacle, nor anything indeed to call 
for particular remark, until he arrived, about an hour 
before noonday, in Aston Park. He was then making 
the best of his way on his jaded beast to the mansion, 
when he came upon an unexpected movement. 

He was about the middle of the great avenue, re- 
flecting deeply on the best means to forward the objects 
he had in view, when he perceived a confused crowd of 
people suddenly swarming into it at the extremity. 

For the most part these were on foot ; and Edward, 
who was of course familiar with his father's servants 
and neighbours, easily discerned that the throng was 
chiefly made up of the former, and a number of the 
villagers of Aston. 

Men, women, and children were intermingled ; many 
of them with reaping hooks in tlieir hands, as if 
suddenly called from harvest labours in the field by 
some unusual cause of excitement. He recognised 
Robert Falconer in particular, and the gravedigger of 



THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 167 

Aston, who united to that office the seemingly very 
dissimilar one of a fiddler. Almost idiotic with aore 

o 

as he was, moreover, he seemed to preserve a good 
mechanical skill on his instrument, and was now 
scrubbing away at a lively sort of jig, or march, which 
evidently contributed very much to the cheerful move- 
ment of the company. 

They came on at a rattHng pace . piking, laughing, 
shouting . sometimes running indeed, to keep along 
with what was clearly a central figure in the movement, 
and which being on horseback made the exertion occa- 
sionally necessary. And besides^ the poor animal, 
alarmed with the hubbub around it . perhaps slruck or 
goaded on the sly behind, or hit by some malicious 
stone from a distance . frequently plunged, or kicked 
out, or darted headlong forward . varieties that greatly 
pleased the rabble, who raised the most uproarious 
shouts and laughter, and urged each other on to repeat 
the diverting exhibition : the chief part of the fim, it 
must be remembered, consisting m the fact that there 
was a human creature fastened on the horse by cords, 
through his naked feet, beneath its belly, but a human 
creature stigmatised by wearing a lofty paper foolscap, 
with the words ' traitor and spy ' daubed in the largest 
red ochre letters on his bare back and breast, like a 
branded sheep. 

If any doubt of the specific meaning of what wa.s 
occurring could remain, the countenance, bloodless with 
terror, the shrieks and lamentable cries of the victim, 
and a thick rope round his neck, made things pretty 
plain. 

One end of this rope was held by a pedestrian, of a 
tall, gaunt, rigid figure, dressed in a black leather suit, 



168 THE AEMOURER's DAUOnTEH. 

wifh a singularly large pair of scissois stuck in bis 
girdle, and a sword of unusual and portentous length 
slung over his left shoulder. It was too long to be 
carried in the usual way at the belt. This was a man 
of a foreign appearance, with a long beard, but hair 
cut almost close to a strongly-developed, hard-boned, 
narrow, almost pointed cranium ; a man of a physi- 
ognomy unalter^ly sedate and unmoved, who seemed 
to take the whole affair with the greatest imaginable 
nonchalance, holding his head stiff and upright, without 
regarding either to the right or left, and evidently 
equally insensible to the outcries of the victim and the 
disorderly movement of the village rout. 

What was rather singular about this group was the 
fact that a personage who seemed an officer of rank, by 
his ornamented armour and waving plume, rode on the 
other side, also holding a rope, much thicker and 
stronger, and which was passed round the neck of the 
horse. 

This rider appeared to be greatly enjoying the whole 
affair, encouraging the mob in their demonstrations by 
gestures, words, and applausive bursts of laughter, and 
frequently making his own mount execute various 
fantastic gambades and caracoles that added to the 
excitement and restlessness of the victim. He was a 
man of gigantic figure, and with a big, coarse, flat 
face, not deficient, nevertheless, in humour and vivacity 
of expression. 

Edward was surprised and alarmed at what he saw. 
But it was not until he was close upon the whole party, 
which he pressed forward to meet, that he recognised in 
the horror-stricken wretch tied on the horse, the tinker- 
boy whom he had seen so busy aiding in pulling down 



THE VALLEY OF TlfE SHADOW OF DEATH. 169 

the old cross in Birmingham market-place on the 
unlucky day of his own late visit there. 

Doubtless the poor lad was now undergoing in his 
proper person the horrors and tribulation he at a later 
period depicted in his Pilgrim's passage through the 
Valley of the Shadow of Death. A more dreadful 
aspect of despair and frantic fear Edward had never 
beheld. It awakened immediate compassion in his 
breast, though it seemed only to excite derision and 
amusement in all but the impassive military executioner 
besides. Such Edward now supposed the tall man, 
with the huge sword and scissors, in the black leather 
garb, to be. 

As a foreigner, and one well accustomed to such 
scenes by his position in the camps of the ruthless 
leaders of the continental warfare of the times, this 
man's insensibility was perhaps natural enough. But 
Edward could scarcely account for the ferocious enjoy- 
ment in the other accompanier's manner, until he heard 
him speak. His accent then betokened him to be one 
of a class of assistants in the bloody work known to be 
at hand, whom Charles had most unadvisedly permitted 
to join his standards . a leader perhaps in the then 
recent horrible insurrection and massacres in Ireland, 
when the Celtic portion of the population and their 
chiefs had risen and nearly extirpated the English 
name from the island ; but doubtless, by his title and 
foreign uniform of black and yellow, one of those 
exiled soldiers of fortune of the Irish nation who had 
previously earned distinction in foreign warfare. He 
was called Count O'Taafe, and was Prince Rupert's 
favourite companion, being in truth as jolly and light- 
hearted a professional murderer (a mercenary soldier is 



170 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

nothing else) as ever carved his bread with his sword. 
A most gallant and devoted admirer of the fair sex 
also, though he had rather a rough way of showing 
it at times when he pla3^ed a part in the storming of 
a town, or was quartered at discretion in an enemy's 
country. 

* In the King's name, what is all this a-doing here ? ' 
said Edward, confronting the uproarious group in a 
manner that brought the whole to a halt, as he directly 
crossed the advance of the intended sacrifice. 

He was immediately recognised by the village people, 
most of whom took off their caps and hats, exclaiming, 
' His honour. Master Edward ! . while the culprit 
uttered a series of hysterical shrieks and exclamations 
that he was innocent, and that they were going to 
murder him, and implored mercy in such heart-rending 
accents that Count O'Taafe put his hand over his mouth, 
yelling, * It isn't hanging you we are, sure, but a sow 
and a whole farrow of squeakers we are ringing in the 
nose. Will ye never cease the bothering noise of you, 
now, until we can hear ourselves speak, and know what 
we are about ? Monsieur, I salute you,' he continued, 
raising his hat in a courtly and polished manner to 
Edward ; ' but as you are a civilian, whatever your name 
or rank hereabouts, you must be aware you have nothing 
to do with an execution of the provost-marshal's justice 
on a traitor and spy against the King.' 

' I am none, I am none I I knew not where I was 
going when I galloped upon the barn where the soldiers 
slept I I was flying for my life from a witch ! ' shrieked 
the affrighted lad. 

^ Well, my dear, you have run into the right sort of 
hands to take care of it. I promise ye, ye'll have very 



THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 171 

little further trouble with your life now,' replied the 
facetious count. 

' We are going, sir,' he continued, explanatorily to 
Edward, ' to make an example of this young fellow, for 
the amusement and entertainment of his fellow-traitors 
behind their barricades, in Birmingham town hereby, 
by hanging him, and his rebel hack of a horse too, 
under him, on the tallest gibbet we can find wood for 
near the place.' 

' To hanof the lad . and his horse I What stran^^e 
madness of cruelty is this ? ' exclaimed Edward. 

The count had not failed to observe that his challenger 
was a person of position and authority. Probably, 
indeed, he recognised him, as Comet Titus had, by his 
resemblance to his sister. He continued, therefore, to 
answer with an appearance of deference : ' Such are 
the Prince's orders, sir : they are knowTi to be equally 
traitors, man and beast, for the one was bestriding the 
other as guides to the unspeakable rebels who lately 
purposed to surprise his Majesty's own most sacred 
person at Nottingham. Sir Thomas Holte himself 
witnessed the fact, who saw him playing the link-boy at 
their head.' 

* Oh, the Lord preserve me I the Lord preserve me ! 
What shall I do ? The Parliament men threatened to 
hang me unless I did so ; but I meant to guide them 
all awry, and leave them in some marsh or desert place,' 
shrieked the affrighted lad. 

' Heed him not, sir : he set them right when an old 
woman would have misdirected them, of whom they 
made question. He has deserved the death ; the Prince 
hath condemned him to it at the drumhead, after 
hearing aU he couldn't utter in his defence, for the 



172 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

speech left him with fear. Only the trifle remains now 
of seeing the sentence carried out.' 

Bunyan again renewed his cries of despair and 
supplication so vociferously that Edward could hardly 
make his own voice heard. 

* Your pardon, sir,' he then observed to the officer, 
' but I bear the King's express commands that no man 
shall be injured in life or limb, for any of these recent 
occurrences, unless by his direct commands.' 

' Well but, anyhow, you don't call this spalpeen of a 
lad a 7710-71 ? ' returned O'Taafe, with a great laugh at 
his own wit. ' And besides, the Prince's commission 
from his Majesty will bear him out in any manner of 
way whatever towards the suppression of this most 
horrible and unnatural rebellion. Eobbery, murder, 
rape, fire-raising, all comes within our scope, and we 
mean to exercise our privileges, I can tell you, and like 
true soldiers and subjects of the King.' 

' There is no commission can override this,' said 
Edward, producing the precious document, endorsed 
Charles E. 

O'Taafe glanced at it rather surprised, but said care.- 
lessly, ' Oh, we gentlemen of Ireland have learned to go 
more by his Majesty's maning than his words. His 
Highness, I am. sure, will not allow of any interference. 
Provost-Marshal Storcks, on ! ' 

^ Do you then refuse obedience to the King's express 
commands?' enquired Edward, with indignant astonish- 
ment. ' Where is the Prince ? he will soon convince 
you better of your duty.' 

' The Prince is close at hand, at the head-quarters of 
his troops, parading them before the Hall,' replied 
O'Taafe, looking rather embarrassed. Then, as if he 



THE TALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 173 

suddenly espied a way out of his perplexity, he con- 
tinued, ' But come this way, sir ; I will soon show you 
that it is your duty to spare the Prince any trouble in 
the matter.' 

' Don't let them kill me, sir ; oh, don't let them kill 
me, and I will die for you most mllingly myself I ' 
shrieked Bunyan, wringing his hands. 

' That's their treason to the very marrow. They will 
do the same thing to please themselves ; but nothing to 
do the King a service ! ' said O'Taafe, good-humouredly; 
while Edward, much against his will, walked his horse 
aside with him to ascertain what was meant. The 
ghastly, yearning expression of the tinker-boy's coun- 
tenance painfully irked after him in the movement. 

' Well, sir ? ' he said, when they . the count and 
himself . had reached the shadow of some lofty syca- 
mores, at a distance from the crowd. 

*This is the case then. Monsieur,' said the count, 
evidently convinced that he had only to explain things 
to remove the obstacle. ' Nobody of course cares a snap 
of a pistol about this boy's haltering; but now the 
Parliament soldiers have gone from the town we are in 
hopes the Birmingham men will be so provoked to see 
a comrade swinging . nay, and his horse at his heels for 
a makeweight . they will make a sally, and so open a 
way for our cavalry to enter. The Prince and his 
troopers intend to be in ambuscade behind the woods 
here until we can see some signs of such a good result, 
when they will pour on to the assault ; and everybody 
says it is a town of a rich citizenship, and with plenty 
of pretty girls in, besides, to reward the soldier for his 
trouble in cutting throats.' 

* For this reason, most of all, I will suffer no further 



174 THE akmourer's daughtee. 

steps in so bloodthirsty and mischievous a plan,' ex- 
claimed Edward, scarcely able to refrain from some 
more distinct mark of indignatioD. ^ These country 
people will support their master's son ; and the Prince 
himself, when he shall know the truth, will doubtless 
lend a ready obedience to the King's commands. Eobin 
Falconer, turn that nag's head there^ and follow me 
home to Aston Hall with the prisoner.' 

Eobin, whose kindly nature had not hitherto gone 
very heartily with the work, stepped cheerfully forward 
and plucked the rope from the hands of the German 
provost-marshal. The latter stared and looked at 
O'Taafe, who muttered something to himself. But on 
reflection, perceiving the preponderance of force was at 
present with his opponent, he observed, * Let us know 
the Prince's own Avill in the matter, then,' and added 
some words in a hoarse guttural to the official, which he 
seemed to understand also in the sense of not offering 
any resistance. Eobin had meanwhile turned the tink- 
er's horse, and in a few moments the whole procession 
was retracing its steps to Aston Hall. 

When this emerged from the green shadows of the 
long avenue before Aston Hall, Edward riding behind, 
to see that no trick was played, he perceived rather a 
showy spectacle. 

A solid squadron of horse, glittering in armour, was 
drawn up in the great gravelled court-yard before the 
mansion, with its principal officers assembled, but dis- 
mounted, at the porch. Two personages, whom Edward 
recognised as his father and mother in their stateliest 
costumes, stood there in conversation with some of these ; 
while considerably at a distance, as if engaged in in- 
specting the elaborate iron-work of the gate leading 



THE YALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 175 

into the gardens on the right, were his sister and a tall, 
powerful, rough-looking figure of a* young man in 
armour, with a shaggy sort of a pelisse on his shoulders 
that looked like a bear-skin. This personage was leaning 
on his sheathed sword, occasionally using it to point out 
some feature in the design of the iron-work that appeared 
to strike him. But it occurred to Edward, painfully and 
at once, that his gaze was chiefly fixed upon the beauti- 
ful girl beside him, and with an intensity of admiration 
which had in it a good deal more of the trooper's bold- 
ness and licence than of the prince and gentleman's 
respect. And yet this he felt instinctivel}^ must be the 
Prince Palatine himself; and, without delaying to ap- 
proach the house, he turned thitherward, and the whole 
cortege with him. 

Rupert's falcon-glance was instantly caught by the 
arrival ; but he was plainly greatly surprised and con- 
founded by what he beheld. 

' Grod's life, what's this ? They cannot have passed 
the young cockatrice yet ? no, they are bringing him 
back ! What can be the meaning of it all ? What 
stranger is this heading the rabble? Do not disturb 
yourself, mademoiselle, I will soon learn,' he said, in his 
rough impatient way, stepping from the young lady's 
side. 

But she followed. ' It is my brother, Edward Holte, 
may it please your Highness,' she said, blushing deeply, 
with some strange secret consciousness, quite uncaused 
by anything apparent. 

' Your brother ! But nobody's brother under Grod's 
living sun has any right to interfere between my orders 
and their execution . the King alone. Well, gentlemen, 
what means all this we see ? ' the Prince enquired, in 



17G THE armourer's daughter. 

haughty and imperious tones, and stepping to meet 
Edward with so long and sudden a stride that the latter 
came against him with a degree of shock, as he alighted, 
out of respect, before he answered. 

Edward apologised; but the Prince sternly interrupted 
him. 

* A woman could not have struck lighter, sir ; you are 
no rock at your breast ; you have not bulged me I ' he 
said. 'But again, Count O'Taafe, why have you and 
these people come back with my errand unperformed ? ' 

' I have interposed, sir, by the King's Majesty's war- 
rantry, who has empowered me to grant every species of 
pardon and oblivion regarding these late transactions, 
unless the people of Birmingham persist in their sedi- 
tion,' replied Edward, with the gentle firmness which 
was a part of his character, but less to be overcome than 
the noisiest opposition of others. 

Eupert stared grimly at him. ' The King is always 
meddling and marring in this strange way. But I do 
marvel to hear you have so interposed, if, as I take 
it, you are the gentleman . son of my most worthy host 
here . who have been the happy agent to do his Majesty 
a great service, with the loyal and devoted aid of Master 
Eichard Grrimsorwe ! ' said the Prince. Nevertheless, he 
continued in an angr}^, almost an insulting tone : 

' But I have been warned of your weaker leanings and 
inclinings in the town ; and give me leave to tell you, 
Master Holte, my commission authorises me to receive 
no commands or instructions but directly from the King 
in person. So I shall make bold to proceed with his 
rebels in my own way, till I hear from him by his own 
lips or hand to the contrary.' 

*This letter is every word and line, sir, from his 



Edward's return to aston hall. 177 

Majesty's own pen,' replied Edward, producing a docu- 
ment which he handed over to the Prince. 

He read it with visible impatience and disdain, occa- 
sionally uttering a species of wild impatient snort, and 
tossing his head disdainfully, like an unbroken steed 
that first feels the snaffle. 

' It is most strange, but true ; but if my uncle means 
to thwart the best-intentioned actions for his service 
thus, all is vain,' he exclaimed, and gnawed his nether 
lip for a moment's pause. 

' You have a power granted you, it is true. Master 
Holte,' he then continued ; ' yet I do hope that you are 
not under so strong a delusion and enticement in that 
traitorous town as hath been reported to me, that you 
will not rather aid me to bring it to just punishment 
and submission, than go about to use the restraints 
unwittingly put by his Majesty on his officers in your 
rescript here : the opportunity may not easily return.' 

' I know not what has been represented to your High- 
ness of my motives or inducements,' replied Edward, 
coldly; 'but I purpose to exercise the powers confided 
to me, under the great seal of England itself, to endea- 
vour to conclude some happy peace and reconciliation 
with my father's neighbours here of Birmingham. And 
to begin, I do most peremptorily call upon your 
Highness and your officers to refrain from all further 
molestation of this poor lad, who, partly to my own 
knowledge, was an impressed and unwilling agent in 
Captain Cromwell's late design.' 

' I was, I was, dear sirs,' gasped Bunyan, crying and 
sobbing bitterly. 

* The boy's life is nothing to me, except for the service 
twisting his neck might have proved. Do with him what 

VOL. II. N 



178 THE aemourer's daughtee. 

you will ; I must await the explanations promised me 
from Nottingham. Mademoiselle, let us resume our 
inspection of the garden gate. 'Twas a rare artist, rather 
than smith, who has so devised it as we see,' said Rupert, 
disdainfully turning away. 

Eough and imperious soldier as he was, he had still 
something of a German's taste and sensibility in art. At 
a later period he was said to cultivate that of engraving, 
and even to be the inventor of mezzotint, from observing 
the effects produced in light and shade by a soldier 
scraping the rust off his musket-barrel in parts. 

'Eelease the boy,' said Edward; and Robin Falconer, 
drawing his hunting-knife, made short work with the 
thongs at Bunyan's feet. 

' Come then, now; said Count O'Taafe, during this 
operation, 'we won't have our morning's work altogether 
for nothing ; and the next best thing we can do to hang- 
ing this j^oung sniveller in his Majesty's service, will be 
to make a dragoon of him. He sits a horse as if he was 
born on the back. My good boy, will you put on breast 
and back-plates, and fight the King's enemies instead of 
mending their old kettles ? ' 

' Only release me, sir ; I will do anything and every- 
thing your honours are pleased to command,' exclaimed 
the bewildered tinker lad. 

*It's a bargain then, though I have not one of the 
King's shillings by me at the moment for earnest. 
Give him Randal Forster's suit, who had his neck 
broken, slipping from the ditches before the town the 
other day, and swear him iu. Provost Storcks,' said 
O'Taafe. 

Thus it happened that John Bunyan shared for a 
season in the violence and profanities which speedily 



Edward's return to aston hall. 179 

became rife in the camps of Charles I., and laid 
up good portion of that life-long enduring sense of 
remorse and guilt which appears in every line of his 
lowly but immortal work, but was possibly rather due 
to the delicacy of his awakened conscience and feelings 
afterwards than to any real occasion for so much spiritual 
anguish and doubt. 

Edward himself thought this the best possible con- 
clusion of the affair; and without heeding the some- 
what offensive and derisive manner of the Prince, he 
raised his hat as he retired with his sister, and quietly 
watched the operation of loosening the unlucky tinker 
boy, 

^^^len this was effected, Bun^-an made an attempt to 
rush to him, and throw himself at his benefactor's feet 
in thanks. But the poor lad's limbs were so paralysed 
with his lono* and cruel shacklino^ that he fell after 
staggering a little to the ground, to the great amuse- 
ment of O'Taafe, and some of the other officers, who 
had now gathered near. 

Edward Holte, on the contrary, humanely assisted 
him to rise, and as he did so suddenly discerned a too 
well-known figure hanging over the balustrade of the 
central tower of Aston Hall, and gazing earnestly to- 
wards the spectacle, as if endeavouring to discern its 
meanincr. 

The sight reminded Edward, and bidding the boy 
be of good cheer, and dispose of himself as he thought 
proper, he rid him of his effusions of gratitude, and 
hastened forward to greet Sir Thomas and Lady Holte. 

Almost at the same moment the Prince rejoined 
Arabella Holte, and her brother would have been little 
gratified if he could have heard his words on doing so. 

N 2 



180 THE ARMOUREIi'rf DAUGHTSU. 

^It is your brother, mademoiselle, and therefore I 
allow him his way I I shall soon have other in- 
structions, I nothing doubt, from his Majesty, and 
meanwhile what does one rascal life matter the more 
or the less . or anything in such society as I now 
enjoy ? ' 



181 



CHAPTER LII. 

THE BROTHEES. 

Edward made no further delay in approaching his 
parents, who he now found discerned him ; and was 
speedily locked in his mother's arms. Sir Thomas him- 
self made way to allow the meeting between the mother 
and her child. And Rupert's officers, who were mostly 
aware of the circumstances of the case, decently turned 
their heads away, or strolled off from the scene of over- 
powering emotion that ensued between the poor broken- 
spirited lady and her restored only son. 

' Oh, my child ! my dearest Edward ! to see you again 
after you have escaped from those barbarous rebels ! ' 
exclaimed Lady Holte. ' WTiat I have suffered in 
terror and apprehension for your sake I my travail 
when I bore you, my Edward, was less I ' 

' Dear mother, I was never in so much danger as you 
suppose from our neighbours of Birmingham ! Many 
of them rather remembered how neighbourly we had 
always been with them until these unhappy times,' said 
Edward. 

' The fair ones especially I Dear brother . dear 
Master Holte, I should say . most welcome home ! I 
trust the King is content with all our zeals in his ser- 
vice ; but, out and alas ! what have you done with my 



182 THE armourer's daughter. 

pleading robes? A poor bachelor of laws like me 
cannot replace them,' exclaimed a hateful voice at this 
moment, and Eichard Grrimsorwe emerged from the 
porch of Aston Hall, and threw his arms . yes, actually 
through his arms . round the unwilling, flesh-creeping 
frame of Edward Holte . in fond, fraternal greeting 
home ! 

Edward, abhorring what had enveloped such a traitor, 
had exchanged Grimsorwe's lawyer robe for a very plain 
cloak in Leicester. This was the cause of his impudent 
query and exclamation, which, however, was not ill- 
contrived to break the impetus of the reply he might 
expect. 

But it was neither a place nor a time to enter dis- 
cussions of a nature so involved and personal as Edward 
Holte felt those must be between his brother and him- 
self. Eupert's officers were now again gathered around, 
and the Prince himself was seen advancing with Ara- 
bella towards the porch, at the young lady's own sug- 
gestion, who herself perhaps began to discover too 
trooper-like a warmth and zeal in the Prince's pro- 
fessions of admiration. 

* I will explain what I have done with your dress 
by-and-by, Eichard,' said Edward, releasing himself 
nevertheless urgently enough from the embrace ; ' at 
present I am very weary with nigh three days on horse- 
back, circumventing the basest imaginable plans of 
traitors and deceivers. Let me, if it please you, enter 
my father's house again, and rest awhile.' 

' Of all loves, yea . pray you, sir, make none of your 
promised clearance of misapprehensions between Master 
Holte and myself at present. Leave it, indeed, all to 
me, who best knows on what his doubts may arise. 



THE BROTHERS. 183 

Brother, I will attend you in your chamber imme- 
diately,' said Eichard, eagerly preventing his father's 
evident intention of saying something, of a reconciling 
nature probably, but which would more certainly have 
brought about the public explosion he was anxious to 
avert. 

' Come, then ; I shall be prepared for your suitable 
reception. Master Grrimsorwe,' Edward replied, with 
every species of contempt and wrath in his accom- 
panying glance. But he also felt how desirable and 
necessary it was to shun a quarrel mth his traitor 
brother under so general an observation as now attended 
them. 

Sir Thomas, for a man of his violent and imperious 
temper, had a singular habit of submission to Grim- 
sorwe's wishes. He desisted, therefore, from any further 
interference between his sons, though pretty well aware 
of some exasperated state of feeling between them. 

Not that he in the least suspected the atrocious plots 
and treasons of Grimsorwe in Birmingham. The latter 
had given another and most artful gloss to the aliena- 
tion he knew must become apparent on his brother's 
return, and for which the scene Sir Thomas had wit- 
nessed, on Dorothy Firebrace's visit to Aston Hall, 
might alone have prepared him. But this new depth 
of treachery need not for the present be elucidated. 

In other respects Edward had very fair occasion to 
ask some respite from society and conversation, on his 
return from his fatiofuino; excursion. He therefore re- 
quested to be excused from his father's now uttered 
desire that he would lose no time to dress, to attend 
the Prince's Highness at dinner. It was become the 
custom, it appeared, to serve a meal of the description 



184 THE armourer's daughter. . 

in state every day at Aston Hall, where Prince Kupert 
had established his head-quarters ; at its wealthy 
owner's earnest entreaty, certainly. 

Sir Thomas, however, somewhat eagerly assented to 
the arrangement, while Edward remarked that his 
mother looked saddened and disappointed. But this 
was too much her usual state to set him on drawing 
any specially uncomfortable inferences ; and the im- 
portant business he had in view to transact was not, he 
deemed, to be postponed to minor considerations. 

In his secret anxiety to the effect hinted, Edward 
was even well satisfied to allow- the interview Richard 
Grimsorwe stated it was his purpose to seek with him. 
Whatever else came of it, it was possible he should 
glean some inklings of what might have occurred in 
Birmingham since his departure. And if even the ties 
of relationship, and force of circumstances, prohibited 
his taking a just vengeance on his traitorous kinsman, 
Edward had yet a kind of pleasure in the prospect 
of letting him know how fully he was aware of his 
treachery and plots, and how hopeless it must be hence- 
forth to hoodwink him to their workings. 

He retired, therefore, to his usual chamber in the 
mansion, and there awaited the result. 

The heir of Aston Hall, of course, occupied one of 
the best apartments in it. He had a suite on the first 
floor of the north wing of the house, the bed-chamber 
in which is now known as the State Room, from its 
being of latter times dedicated to the use of guests of 
distinction. Sir Thomas had declared his intention to 
dedicate this entire portion of the building to the use o-f 
a separate household for his son, as soon as his projected 
grand marriage with the Lord Keeper's daughter took 



THE BROTHERS. 185 

place. But until the arrival of Prince Kupert, the 
only otlier person of consequence inhabiting this wing 
was Mr. Lane, the family chaplain. Count O'Taafe and 
some of the other officers were now quartered in it. 
But Lady Holte had taken care that her son's apart- 
ment remained inviolate. 

Resuming possession, and refreshing himself from his 
dusty journey, Edward had nevertheless almost forgotten 
the expected visitation. When Grimsorwe arrived he 
was plunged in reflections how best to open the nego- 
tiations for a peaceful arrangement with the town of 
Birmingham. 

Grimsorwe made his appearance, following a domestic 
w^ho brought Edward a cover from his mother's dining- 
table. And to do him justice, steel-nerved and auda- 
cious as he was by nature, he looked pale, and clearly 
entered on the business he felt he must go through 
with very reluctantly. Xevertheless he had made up 
his mind what to do with characteristic boldness and 
decision. 

While the servant was in the apartment he poured 
out a series of voluble congratulations and assurances 
of his unbounded joy to see his dear brother safely once 
more at home ; taking care to make no pause for a reply 
that might reveal the real state of the affair. But the 
moment the man retired, he brought himself up at 
full check, and observed, with a bitter laugh, ' It is no 
longer necessary to keep up the farce ; loosen the tor- 
rent, brother Edward, which I see in your face is ready 
to burst upon me, and let us come as speedily after- 
wards to the best settlement circumstances now permit 
between us.' 

* You call me brother, and truly ; Cain w^as the first 



186 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

brother!' Edward now replied; but he went on not at 
all with the invective and violence Grimsorwe probably- 
expected. Contempt almost destroyed resentment in 
his breast. 

' Well, then, continue my brother, in that early sense 
of the word ; onl}^ understand that from this time forth 
I am well aware that I have a brother who is contriving 
by every means of forgery and false w^itnesses to oust 
me from my birthright, and bring disgrace and annul- 
ment on the lawful marriage of my mother with the 
father whose true inheritor I am . a brother who, in my 
late misfortune, left no stone unturned to procure my 
assassination or destruction at the hand of unjust power 
. a brother who, by fraud and the most audacious deceit 
and pretence, has robbed me, and another dearer to me 
than myself, of the proper rewards of our loyalty and 
devotion to our sovereign . a brother who, I doubt not, 
will continue in his villainous attempts, until I, too, 
forget the base mingling of our bloods, and crusli him 
with my heel in the dust . like the serpent that he is!' 

Grimsorwe looked a little astonished. He did not 
possibly know how much was known, but he answered 
with grim composure : 

' If you are aware of all this, Edward Holte,' he said, 
' still, on my part, I am assured you have no means of 
proof of your allegations, and I defy your utmost hatred 
and malice to produce any.' 

' Dorothy Firebrace can witness . ' began Edward ; 
then reflecting on the danger of bringing her name into 
the discussion, he suddenly paused. But Grimsorwe 
had heard. 

' Is it even so ? ' he said, with peculiar bitterness. ' I 
mean, is it this meddlesome girl who has pretended to 



THE BROTHERS. 187 

you all this strange catalogue of vacngs ? But who 
will believe her besides yourself? Will our father, fire- 
sputtering Sir Thomas, who believes her to be your 
mistress and paramour . lay not your hand upon your 
sword ; I have purposely brought none . and knows her 
to be ancrered aofainst me on some foolish trifle of 
womanish complaint, which she has exaggerated into a 
mountain of grievances to show off the brighter rain- 
bow with true love and fidelity to you ? Will the King, 
who knows her whole kindred and alliance for a pesti- 
lent nest of traitors and treason ? And will it even be 
to her safety with her own mutinous townspeople, that 
she should declare to the world how she has played the 
eaves-dropper on their councils for your sake, and ex- 
posed them to the imminent hazards and disasters that 
now threaten them, forsooth, in detecting me?' 

Edward was, at all events, greatly struck with this 
latter view of the case ; but he endeavoured to answer 
as unshakingly as he could. ' I shall soon put the Bir- 
mingham people out of all dread for themselves, Eichard 
Grimsorwe,' he retorted. ' I bear the King's assurance 
of pardon and peace, if they are willing for it ; and then 
how say you ? ' 

It was not a discreet revelation. Grrimsorwe's livid 
complexion deepened in its deadly hues. 

* And then how say I ? ' he repeated. ' Xo, Edward 
Holte ; I answer, how now I now that the suspicions and 
anger of the Birmingham rabble are thoroughly roused 
against your grimy Venus . now that they are well 
assured she has taken part in your escape, yet know not 
that was the sole means which thwarted a plan that 
would have concluded the war at a stroke . I answer, 
and I tell you, either you shall solemnly promise me 



188 THE ahmourer's daughter. 

never to reveal ought concerniDg me or my objects you 
may think you have learned by the agency of that artful 
girl, or, driven to despair, I will pass over openly to the 
Parliament, and reveal to it and the angry townspeople 
of ^Dorothy Firebrace all she has done to betray and 
injure them.' 

Edward was, no doubt, greatly startled at the prospect 
of the calamity denounced. 

He knew the tangible proofs that existed of Dorothy's 
aid to himself, and the penalties she had incurred under 
the martial law proclaimed in Birmingham on the day 
of his flight. All the goodwill and energy of her friends, 
he felt, could not protect against the rigour of the Par- 
liament, if it was directed so formidably against her. No 
man knew to what extent that body might carry its 
terrorism or vengeance after the mighty examples that 
had been made, and which caused even the Queen of 
Charles I. to tremble for her own safety in his palaces 
and castles. 

But his consternation was much increased when Grim- 
sorwe, perceiving the effect produced, informed him that 
before he left the town, Sisyphus the bellows-blower 
had raised a great tumult among the lower classes of 
the people of Birmingham who had thronged to Fire- 
brace's house, declaring they would have vengeance on 
the false towuswoman that had deprived them of their 
hostage against the vengeance of the cavaliers at Aston 
Hall ; a tumult which he stated had been with difficulty 
baffled in its objects by Tubal Bromycham, who, at the 
head of his young men, had violently dispersed the 
mob. But Major Monk still remained in the town, and 
had written an account of all he knew of the occur- 
rences to London. If proofs were then forthcoming of 



THE BROTHERS. 189 

Dorothy's full complicity, what might not be exj^ected 
in the way of vengeance and satisfaction to the exaspe- 
rated people on the Parliament's part? And Grim- 
sorwe's evidence would supply all that could be required 
in that direction. 

For the second time, of late, Edward Holte found 
himself totally overmatched and discomfited by the 
skilful combinations and remorseless use of means by 
his antagonistic brother. 

His apprehensions for the generous Dorothy's safety 
were, in fact, too great to allow him to reason very 
maturely on the subject. Eestrained also as he w^as 
from vengeance of a personal nature on the treacherous 
villain, little was to be gained by holding out as if he 
projected it; above all, it was necessary to gain time 
and opportunity for his plans of reconciliation between 
the town and its offended Prince. 

Accordingly, when Chaplain Lane, secretly sent on the 
errand by Lady Holte, presented himself shortly after- 
wards, as if to congratulate his favourite pupil and 
friend on his return . in reality to preserve the peace, if 
there was need . he found the two brothers quietly, 
though sternly, concluding upon the articles of their 
compact. 

Xo writing was of course employed. Nor did Edward 
in the least confide for observance of the conditions on 
Grimsorwe's part, in anything but his belief that it would 
seem in his interest to observe them. 

Edward was to make no further complaints to his 
father, or declare more fully what he conceived to be 
the designs entertained by Eichard Grimsorwe, and the 
means he was believed to have adopted to put them in 
execution. Grimsorwe was to keep concealed all that 



190 THE armourer's daughter. 

he supposed himself to know, or in his rancorous heart 
really knew, of Dorothy Firebrace's acts to achieve her 
lover's escape, and the King's deliverance from the great 
danger that had menaced him. 

Chaplain Lane was a man of the greatest simplicity 
of character and tenderness of heart; too guileless 
himself to suspect almost the possibility of such a ser- 
pentine nature as that of the bastard son of his patron ; 
too full of the milk of human kindness to doubt the 
easy forgiv'eness and reconciliation of two persons allied 
by blood, whose bitter reasons of animosity he was not 
aware of; he readily, therefore, mistook the calm and 
settled tone he observed between the 3^oung men on his 
arrival, as rendering his interposition unnecessary, and 
scarcely understood why Edward pressed him to remain, 
until Kichard Grrimsorwe, rising, took an apparently 
friendly though rather ceremonious leave. 

No sooner, however, had he passed out of the ' State 
Eoom,' ere Eichard muttered to himself, grinding his 
sharp white teeth . 

' Easy fool ! to dream that Eichard Grimsorwe is the 
slave to sit down contented in failure and defeat, and 
leave the man and the woman . nay, the woman and 
the man . he most detests on the face of the earth to 
triumph over him ! ' 



191 



CHAPTER LIII. 

A DEINKING BOUT TWO CENTURIES AGO. 

On the whole, Edward was not displeased to be rid at 
this moment of the necessity of carrying out the quarrel 
with his treacherous brother into all its harassinir con- 
sequences, and interruption of his more important busi- 
ness. He felt there was no time to be lost either in his 
affairs of love or policy. 

The discomfort, and perhaps danger, of his beloved 
Dorothy's position were pressing considerations. The 
King's changeableness of purpose, and unhappy habits 
of double dealing, rendered it very advisable to proceed 
at once to engagements which he could not decently 
annul or counteract, formed on the basis of his royal 
word. 

After much reflection Edward decided on his course 
of action, and on the proper agencies to be employed ; 
greatly annoyed, but perhaps hastened in his resolves, 
by some circumstances which added to his convictions 
that Aston Hall was not likely to remain very comfort- 
able quarters for himself in the objects he had in view. 

The mild spirit and timidity of old Mr. Lane clothed 
his statements in the most inoffensive words. But 
Edward could readily gather that the Prince, who was 
likely to prove his strongest opponent, was established 



192 THE armourer's daughter. 

in full sway and supremacy in the house; treated more, 
indeed, as if he had been a god than a man, and grati- 
fied in every whim and wish. Nay, the poor chaplain 
faintly hinted, .with a slight pinky flush on his pale lean 
cheeks, too conspicuously so as regarded the beautiful 
daughter of the house, for whom Kupert openly pro- 
fessed an outrageous dragoon-like kind of admiration, 
which he took rather extraordinary means to display. 

For example, he had possessed himself . how the 
chaplain knew not . of a breast-knot of scarlet and 
black ribbons worn by Miss Holte, and carried it now 
conspicuously stuck in his hat, in sign that he had 
dedicated himself as, what was then styled, one of the 
young lady's servants, or, as we should say in these 
times, suitors ; though perhaps that word expresses too 
much, as it did not follow that the ^ servant' aspired to 
the honour of his mistress's hand in marriage. It was 
merely a vestige of ancient chivalric custom, when a 
knight would assign the service of his puissant arm and 
obedience for a time to some princess or forlorn damsel 
in need of aid ; most probabh^ from the oppressions of 
a giant or enchanter. 

Edward liked not much of this, knowing, especially, 
as he did, his sister's character ; the vanity and coquetry 
which actuated her in her notions on such subjects. He 
was aware of her extreme beauty and unbounded powers 
of fascination ; but he was also much better aware than 
his father . having been in Germany, accompanying 
Lord Falkland on a secret mission connected with this 
very family . of the insuperable obstacles to any likeli- 
hood of a desirable termination of such an affair, in the 
pride of royal birth and position of the Prince Palatine 
of the Rhine. 



A DRINKING BOUT TWO CENTURIES AGO. 193 

It mattered little that, with the other personages of 
his family, Kupert was a landless exile and fugitive 
from his native country. It was well known that the 
descendants of the unfortunate Elector Frederic, who 
had lost their wealthy and beautiful inheritance in the 
attempt to grasp a crown, cherished always the hope 
and purpose to retrieve everything by the sword. 

Nothing was certainly to be hoped from the justice or 
mercy of the house of Austria, or of the Duke of Bavaria, 
to whom the exasperated Emperors of Grermany had 
transferred the dominion. But even in offering his 
sword to his uncle in the English commotions, it was 
believed that stipulations in favour of an attempt to 
wrest the Palatine back for its original owners were 
enforced upon Charles. And the King, on his own part, 
was sufficiently bound by the ties of blood and former 
treaties to be willing to hazard much on the behalf of 
his sister's family, in the event of his own triumph in 
England. 

All this made Edward greatly regret the circumstance 
of Prince Eupert's being so intimately domiciled at 
Aston Hall. 

The only remedy would seem to be to endeavour to 
withdraw his sister herself from the perilous neighbour- 
hood. And strangely infatuated, by his own pride and 
ambition, as he knew his father to be, Edward thought 
it impossible he could remain blind to the considerations 
he felt it would be his duty to urge upon him. 

And these feelings of irritation were not soothed by 
the discovery he made, in the course of the evening, of 
the kind of near neighbours he had himself acquired. 

Towards midnight Edward Holte was startled by a 
sudden laughing uproar and confusion on the oak stair- 

VOL. II. o 



194 THE AR3fOURER'S DAUGHTER. 



;, by which the north wing of Aston Hall is ascended ; 
and found, on listening, that Count O'Taafe was being 
escorted by a party of riotous officers, only not quite so 
drunk as himself, to the apartment assigned him in that 
division of the house now called the Chinese Eoom, 
from the frightful oriental paper with which its walls are 
disfigured. 

Among the voices- .evidently perfectly indifferent to 
any neighbour's rest being preserved, or ignorant they 
were breaking it . Edward distinguished that of Prince 
Rupert, hectoring and peremptory, even in what was as 
clearly his own personal vinous elation. But still more 
vexed, and even alarmed, was he to recognise the impu- 
dent vivacious accents of Cornet Titus ; since it showed 
with what rapidity he had been despatched after himself 
from Nottingham. 

The revel was, in fact, very possibly in celebration of 
this officer's return to his corps. 

Prince Eupert's dragoons were always glad of an 
occasion of the sort, or any other pretext, even when 
they feasted at their own expense, which would not now 
be the case. But it was likely enough the cornet brought 
acceptable tidings to military men, who must have felt 
themselves rather disgracefully foiled in their recent 
movement. 

But what annoyed Edward the most was to hear, by 
his father's voice amidst the tipsy tumult, that he was 
clearly as far gone as any other there ; or even worse, 
for he heard him bawling orders to some servants below 
to bring up a six-gallon cask of cider ' to drink off what 
they had drunk,' as he was pleased to express himself to 
his wild companions. 

Not but that Edward was well aware his father was 



A DRINKING BOUT TWO CENTURIES AGK). 195 

a Stout comrade at his cups; as was then generally 
the case, even among persons of the highest rank and 
gentility. King James I. had introduced the custom 
from his own hard-drinking land, and all the stately 
decorum and sobriety of his successor had failed to do 
more than check the passion somewhat among the new 
generation. But even that degree of good was likely to 
be neutralised by the habits of camps and warfare, on 
which the nobility and commons of England were 
henceforth for a long period to be cast. 

Discomfort of mind would have prevented Edward 
from sleeping now, but the noise of the revel alone suf- 
ficed ; and it was kept up for a very considerable interval, 
through most of the variations of a drunken debauch of 
the kind. 

It seemed to Edward as if his father's house was 
turned into a riotous barrack, imder his father's own 
leadership and prompting. 

Songs were sung, evidently of a camp and bacchanal 
description, since they were received with shouts of 
laughter, and ever and anon roared to in chorus by the 
whole company to a clattering of swords and spurs. 

Healths were as clearly given and as enthusiastically 
welcomed, but one in particular was received with 
thundering acclamations, and a curious noise that re- 
sembled the clash of a number of men-at-arms bringing 
their weapons and knees to hard ground to repel a 
charge of cavalry. And, to Edward Holte's extreme 
vexation, loudest above the deafening yell of military 
applause he distinguished his sister's name in the fierce 
accent of the Prince Palatine, and flourished with a 
German ' Hoch,^ hoch, ad coelum I ' (' Hurrah, hurrah, to 
the skies ! ' ) 

o 2 



196 THE armourer's daughter. 

To crown all, this wild glorincation suddenly passed 
into another, but by no means unusual variation, in the 
display of the effects of too much liquor on men of such 
make. Edward almost immediately after distinguished 
a burst of voices, in very changed accents of fury . of 
expostulation . of enquiry . and then an universal con- 
fusion and uproar. . 

Some sudden quarrel and outbreak had clearly taken 
place ; in which the heir of Aston would have interested 
himself very little had he not known that his father was 
one of the party, and remembered how choleric and 
passionate he was upon the least provocation. And, more- 
over, he discerned his father's in the rageful, though 
nearly inarticulate, tones that first reached his ears 
after the burst. Those of Cornet Titus next, shrieking 
almost with defiance and insult, as well as he could find 
utterance for drunkenness and rage. And lastly, the 
loud tempestuous thundering of the Prince, apparently 
endeavouring to enforce peace and order by dint of out- 
furying every other effort at exasperated expression. 
By this time Edward, throwing on his chamber-robe, 
and snatching up his sword, had made his way to his 
own door. And he arrived just in time to distinguish 
somebody hurled headlong out of the apartment oppo- 
site, and sent at a whirl, with very slight opportunity of 
resting his feet, down the oak staircase. The person, 
indeed, went past him with the heavy whirr of some 
missle dischargred from a cannon. 

Edward had no light to see who or what this object 
might be ; but, alarmed with the notion that it might 
possibly be his father, he hastened as fast as he could 
tread down the stairs after it ; and, to his unbounded 
alarm and consternation, found he set his foot, at the 



A UraNKING BOUT TWO CEIsTURIES AGO. 197 

bottom of the whole flight, on the body of a man, lying 
there insensible, possibly in a degree -svith drink, but 
also not improbably stunned by his descent into imcon- 
sciousness. 

At all events he made no answer to Edward's repeated 
demands to know who he was ; and terrified and excited 
by indignation almost equally, the young man flew up 
the stairs again to knock at O'Taafe* door, and require 
a light and an explanation. 

To his astonishment, however, not being personally 
much accustomed to such scenes, the previous joyous 
uproar had been alread}' resumed. And to such an ex- 
tent, that all the clamour he made for admittance either 
passed unheard, or only provoked peals of laughter from 
the revellers. 

Such were at least very audible after each more 
violent renewal of his attempts to make himself heard. 
And it was impossible to enter the room without help 
from within, as the door could be secured by a massive 
iron bar, which Edward found wa.s placed in the staples. 

Edward finally abandoned the attempt on distinguish- 
ing his father's voice, who was clearly safe and sound 
within, since he was yelling a part in some uproarious 
song ; at all events, joining in the wild militar}^ clash- 
ing of the time, for the song was in French . a language 
in which Sir Thomas Holte prided himself on having 
always found it impossible to acquire a single word. 

Count O'Taafe, apparently revived from a more torpid 
state of inebriation by the recent concussion, trolled the 
leading part in rich, jolly, unctuous tones, though in- 
terrupted by occasional hiccoughs. It was a lay, how- 
ever, of a kind which would scarcely bear Englishing, 
to a modern audience. 



198 THE armourer's daughter. 

Edward did not await the whole bacchanal ditty out, 
but retired from his useless application when once he 
had ascertained his father's safety. 

From motives of humanity, very undeserved if he had 
been aware of the fall facts of the case, he then returned 
to see if he could render any assistance to the expelled 
member of the riotous jollification. But on reaching 
the foot of the oak staircase the fallen carcass was no 
longer to be found there ; and grope about and feel 
with feet and hands as he might, and demand to know 
what had become of the victim as he did, all was in 
vain. No traces of him remained. 

Satisfied on this score also that the expellee could not 
have been so much injured as he had feared, since he 
was. enabled to take himself from the field of disastrous 
experience, Edward now again retired to his own apart- 
ment. 

In reality he felt it would be much the best for him to 
make no appearance in a drunken revel, whose mem- 
bers seemed so ready to take offence, and exhibit 
violence. He determined even, unless he found his 
duty as a son, or some point of honour in that punc- 
tilious age engaged, to take as little further notice as he 
could of an occurrence which he could not think would 
prove in any case to redound to his parent's credit. 

It would be necessary, however, for him, he knew, 
to ascertain, as quietly as he could, the occasion and 
circumstances of the quarrel. 

It was plain the sense of the company was against 
the person who had been expelled with, so much violence. 
But if Sir Thomas had resented some affront, real or 
imaginary, in his customary furious and headlong style, 
there was reason to apprehend a serious imbroglio. In 



A DRINKING EOUT TWO CENTURIES AGO. 199 

such a case his ag^e misfht be held to excuse him from 
granting the kind of satisfaction most likely to be de- 
manded. But his son must step forward in his place ; 
and Edward's real affection for his father, as well as his 
own high spirit, suggested to him that he ought to take 
the earliest opportunity to place himself, if necessary, 
between him and his antagonist. But this conviction 
added of course greatly to his anxieties and perplexities ; 
and with all the reason he knew he had to confide in 
his skill at his weapons, the idea that he might probably 
be called upon to put himself in jeopardy of being 
disabled from his pressing personal affairs, annoyed him 
extremely, and effectually banished sleep from his pillow 
nearly all the night. 

Sometime afterwards he had, however, the satisfaction 
to hear Count O'Taafe's apartment cleared, as he sup- 
posed, of all his visitors, who descended the oak stair- 
case in a quieter style than they had arrived, their 
heavier liquors having mostly fumed off, and the tart 
cider in reality assisting in the sobering. 

Perhaps, also, some of them had become alive to im- 
pressions of a painful and disastrous character from the 
events of the evening. Eupert himself spoke now in a 
low and rather dulled undertone, and Edward distinctly 
heard him . as if just for the first time made aware of 
the fact . tell his companions to make no noise, lest they 
should disturb young Master Holte, who slept, he was 
told, in the chamber nigh at hand. 



200 THE armourek's daughter. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

FATHER AND SON. 

Willing to have his uneasiness either confirmed or 
removed at the earliest possible opportunity, Edward 
accordingly only awaited the dawn ere he dressed and 
presented himself at Count O'Taafe's apartments for an 
explanation. 

Contrary to the fact of the night before, he found the 
entrance unbarred ; and desirous to excite no super- 
fluous attention to his proceedings, he pushed the door 
open at once, and entered. 

Greatly surprised, however, was Edward Holte . sur- 
prised and more shocked and alarmed . when the first 
object he discerned proved to be Sir Thomas Holte 
himself, lying fast asleep in an arm-chair. 

The early morning sun was beaming in through the 
latticed panes of the window full on the baronet's 
drowsy visage; and Edward Holte, who had scarcely 
ever before dared to make his father an object of direct 
scrutiny, now gazed with a singular mixture of emotions 
at the figure before him. 

He perceived with pain that, relaxed in slumber from 
their habitually haughty and domineering expression, 
his father's features betrayed very manifest tokens of a 
mind but ill at ease. 



FATHER AND SON. 201 

Unhappy remembrances seemed to cluster on all the 
sunken lines of his lips, and to give them almost a 
character of anguish. The marks furrowed on his 
brows by an habitual frown were distinct enough ; but 
the frown itself had vanished, and a gloomy, puzzled . 
one might almost say, dismayed and conscience- 
tortured aspect^ had succeeded, which was even yet 
more uncomfortable to his son's observation. 

With this exception Edward Holte's filial feelings 
were much gratified by noticing how little the progress 
of time had told upon his father's vigorous organisation. 
His black hair was rather grizzled, it is true, in the long 
clusters, but the noble though stern features kept all 
their lines unimpaired : the bare muscular throat was 
as firm and unpuckered in the flesh as a young man's 
of half his years in these degenerate days. His whole 
figure displayed power and vigour of nerve and muscle 
in all its yielding of repose, which obviously needed 
only to be startled to exhibit the most strenuous activity. 
To be sure Sir Thomas Holte was little more than sixty 
years of age at the time; and neither by himself, nor 
most of his contemporaries, was he considered at all an 
old man. At this acre an Ensrlishman of the old make 
began to reckon himself rather past his youth; that 
was all. 

Edward remarked with less satisfaction other circum- 
stances of the scene. 

A massive table in the centre of the apartment was 
covered with the remains of the previous night's debauch. 
Numerous pewter cans, out of which cider was mostly 
drunk ; an empty cask, stove in at the top, in which 
some flies were buzzing; a plentiful allowance of 
smashed tobacco pipes . attested the character of the 



202 

revel. Edward besides observed a dint in the wall, about 
the height of a man, much bespattered and streamy 
with the yellow liquor ; below which lay a bulged pot, 
which accounted for the whole appearance. A missile 
of this kind had probably parted from some irritated 
hand on the previous night, and occasioned the row. 

As for the proper tenant of the apartment, whom he 
came to seek, Edward's attention was speedily directed 
his way by a loud snoring. And he perceived the 
count at some distance, cast in his full regimentals . 
boots, sash, breastplate, and sword . on a bed con- 
trived in an alcove, which in modern times has been 
removed : or else a less miserable resting-place than a 
bare mahogany table might have been found, not long 
ago, for the body of the unhappy rope-dancer whom the 
misdirected taste of a populace, and unnatural greed, 
consigned to a dreadful death. The traces of blood are 
indeed not easily obliterated, since even that dark wood 
still retains a horrible outline of the massacred form 
deposited on it. 

Edward's object was now to arouse Count O'Taafe, 
without disturbing his father. A difficult operation, as 
he soon found it ; for he was obliged to use some degree 
of violence, even to shake the count out of his drunken 
torpor. And when he did succeed in the effort, the 
leader, accustomed to war's alarms, started bolt upright 
from the couch to his feet with a hideous clatter, and 
yelling ' Aux armes, camarades !^ with a noise that 
awakened his lighter fellow-slumberer at once, clapped 
a horse-pistol to Edward's head before he could dream 
of such an encounter. Nay, perhaps, in the first tumult 
of a soldier's ideas on such an occasion, migrht have dis- 
charged it, had not Edward stayed his hand by exclaim- 



FATHER AND SON. 203 

ing, ' My Grod, count I I am Edward Holte ; what mean 
you by this violence ? ' 

* Ventrebleu I I was dreaming I -was again at the 
sack of Magdeburg, when the father of those two poor 
girls sprang at my throat to throttle me, though we all 
thought we had given him enough for himself in the 
head I ' exclaimed O'Taafe, with rather a ghastly and 
bewildered stare. ' I am glad it is not the old mad- 
man again, however, for it was sickening work putting 
him out of his miser}^ ! Who, say you, you are ? A 
gentleman on behalf of Cornet Titus, to our good, 
though something choleric friend and host, Sir Thomas 
Holte?' 

This was light enough. 'No, sir,' replied Edward, 
sedately, ' I am Sir Thomas Holte's son, and I am come 
only to ask of you the causes for which it behoves me, 
as my father's representative, to demand satisfaction of 
so much vounorer a man.' 

O'Taafe stared, and looked puzzled for a moment ; 
but he w^as about to reply, probably with an expL'i- 
nation, when Sir Thomas peremptorily interrupted. 
And certainly in other respects he had started awake 
with a full restoration of his wonted despotism and 
control in his looks. But yet there was something 
closely resembling a blush of shame in all the fiery 
anger of the colour that mounted to his visage as he 
spoke. 

' Never answer a word on the subject, Count O'Taafe,' 
he said. ' I shall hold you for no friend or well-wisher 
to your host and entertainer, if you do. The quarrel is 
altogether mine ; and, as I informed the fellow himself, 
when the Prince flung him out of the room, he would 
find me here ready to answer in aught he may have to 



204 THE armourer's daughter. 

allege against me in the matter. Edward, I command 
you, ask no further questions in it. What I did was 
rightly done ; but I will suffer no man but myself to 
abide the consequences of an act which as father of . I 
mean, I repaid an insult with an insult ; and if the 
jackanapes, whose skull I laid open with a cider pot, 
needs any further satisfaction, ni}^ arm is as unwithered, 
and my courage as good, as any malapert boy's in the 
kingdom, to do me right to the fullest extent.' 

^ Malapert boy, my dearest father ? ' 

' Your father speaks not of you, sir, but of Cornet 
Titus, who is indeed the impudentest young saucebox 
rogue . I could slit his tongue myself, for a demi-stiver; 
it is always making mischief . yelping on a false scent, 

and spoiling the run for the whole pack, d him ! 

But the Prince himself, I think, will hardly suffer any 
interference but his own in the affair. It was he who 
assisted the cornet to make such a nimble exit out of 
Sir Thomas's w^ay, that I fancy he never lifted his feet 
but once from the top of the staircase to the bottom. 
Yet he seemed well and lively enough after the exercise, 
too, for he came back for admission in a few minutes ; 
but we only laughed at him while he made hammers of 
his knuckles on the good oak door.' 

Edward hastily explained that it was himself who had 
so applied, being alarmed with the noise and tumult, 
stating also that he had left the body of a man stretched 
at the foot of .the stairs seemingly insensible. 

' Oh then, ma foi ! he may be lying there still, for I 
do not remember any of us looked after him again, and 
his Highness gave him as handsome a fling as a stone 
from a wall in an escalade,' observed the count. ' Come, 
Sir Thomas,' he added, with a wink, * let us go and see 



FATHER AND SON. 205 

whether our young gentleman is still taking his ease at 
the hottom of the stairs or no.' 

' I will enquire meanwhile elsewhere,' said Edward, 
who very well knew the man was not to be found where 
it was proposed to seek him, and who now determined 
to anticipate his father's researches with the cornet : and 
unmindful of the laws of precedence, he had stepped 
before his father and his father's guest, when the door 
suddenly opened, and the person in question himself 
appeared. 

Xot alone either, for Princy Eupert was beside him. 

Edward faced the intruder, and by no means with 
any reflection in his own of the impudent smilingness 
of recognition in Cornet Titus's visage, otherwise 
slashed with a wound like a sabre-cut and considerably 
bruised. 

' I sought you, sii',' he exclaimed, fiercely. ' I hear 
you have insulted my father, and demand satisfaction.' 

' Well, then, I'm here to beg your father's pardon, if 
need be, on both knees, Master Holte, on my Prince's 
command. And I am besides at present rather liors de 
corabat, with a couple of sword-thrusts in the arm and 
hand, which his Highness did me the honour to inflict 
this morning, in full satisfaction for the affront he put 
upon me last night in escorting me headlong out of the 
company, which I deserved for my rude behaviour,' 
said the submissive loyalist, pointing emphatically to a 
ripped sleeve and bandaged arm, which Edward only 
noticed then. 

' Your business is altogether with Sir Thomas, cornet; 
lose no time on the way,' said Rupert, with a frowning 
glance at the obstruction ; and Titus immediately took 
the hint, in his own way, however. 



206 THE armourer's daughter. 

Approaching the angry and disdainful-looking baro- 
net, he said, very loudly and distinctly, ' I have to beg 
your worshipful forgiveness. Sir Thomas Holte, for my 
indiscreet allusion to the honourable young lady, your 
daughter, in relation to his Highness's well-phrased and 
most honourably meant toast. He is not Achilles ; you 
are not Priam ; and Miss Arabella Holte is not your 
youngest daughter, Polyxena ; and therefore I had no 
occasion to wish a better termination to the tale than 
for his Highness to lose his life from a birdbolt in the 
heel, by archer Paris shot. Do you grant your pardon, 
sir, or must I kneel for it too ? ' 

' Kneel to God, to ask Him to make you less of an 
impertinent jackanapes than you are ! But trouble me 
no more with your senseless buffoonery, man, which is 
yet as full of mischief as a barrel of working yeast. 
Put a bung in your mouth henceforth, and let us 
have done with the whole foolery ! ' said Sir Thomas, in 
great confusion and exasperation, evidently at the reve- 
lation of the cause of quarrel before his son. Then, 
turning with an air of laboured indifference to the 
Prince, he said, ^ But your Highness has in this hardly 
used me well ; the minion's punishment should have 
been mine office. Howbeit the hide is curried now, 
and there is nothing more to be said on the subject. 
Does your Highness's mind hold constant about our 
faring abroad to-day Vv^ith the hawks ? ' 

' Most certainly, Sir Thomas ; but we must all make 
it our study that nothing of our last night's foolish 
contention in our cups comes to Miss Holte's hearing ; 
and she promised to let me be her palfreyman in the 
sport tOTday,' the Prince replied, waving his hand to 
Cornet Titus, who made a deep bow and withdrew. 



FATHEK AND SOX. 207 

Sir Thomas also seemed anxious to finish ^vith the 
scene. 

* I will go and see Robin Falconer on the business, 
then, at once, and let us soon all meet at a jolly hunt- 
ing breakfast : 'tis a fair morn for the hawks' flight. 
Thanks for your night's hospitality, Count O'Taafe, and 
your goodwill for the morning, though it has not been 
needful to put it to the proof. Come, Edward,' he 
concluded, observing the yoimg man seemed to intend 
remaining, and yet with a pretty visible reluctance on 
his own part to taking him in his companv ; ^the 
Prince and his lieutenant doubtless have business 
together. Let us hence, so.' 

Not seeing what better could be done, Edward com- 
plied ; and he and his father accompanied each other in 
a dead sort of silence out of the chamber. 

As they did so a figure hastily disappeared round the 
first balustrade : hastily, but easily recognisable for that 
of Richard Grimsorwe. 

Neither Sir Thomas nor his son, however, made any 
remark on the circumstance, both of them being occu- 
pied in their minds with a very different subject. But 
stillthe baronet had no wish to enter even upon this ; 
and he adopted a judicious, though usually rather 
feminine policy, by entering, as quickly as possible, on 
an angry discussion on the one which was by no means 
uppermost in his mind. 

' You keep me company, Edward,' he said, ' and it 
is not amiss. I have not had any private talk with you 
since your return ; but what is it I hear of your strange 
interposition in behalf of those rebellious scullions of 
Birmingham, and prevention of the Prince's justice and 
vengeance on them, as the malignant seditioners and 



208 THE AEMOUREIl's DAUGHTER. 

muck-heap of treasons they are, and have proved them- 
selves ? ' 

To this speech Edward returned a temperate but firm 
reply. ' I wish to bring back an important town to his 
Majesty's allegiance; not by severities to cast in its 
portion irrevocably with our enemies,' he said. 

' Marry, fine talk, son Edward ! But, plainly Eng- 
lish'd, the story runs thus : You have a fair mistress in 
the town, for whose sake you will put aside all high 
considerations of policy, and hold back the sword from 
the necks of incorrigible traitors, whereby you will 
preserve a nest of hornets near us, when we might 
smoke it out now at a word for ever.' 

'A mistress, sir !' exclaimed Edward, with indignation. 
' I recognise my vile brother's suggestion in that word, 
whose dastardly violence towards a woman, and in- 
ducing \ou to break my safe-conduct, brought all the 
recent danger and trouble upon me. Mistress! If 
you speak, as I doubt not, of Mistress Dorothy Fire- 
brace, clearly understand, sir, that in any ill sense she 
is none to me ; that by her descent she is as good or a 
better gentlewoman than I can pretend to be a gentle- 
man, and in all personal worth and virtue infinitely 
my superior. Nor should I dare to entertain a thought 
concerning her unless in all honour, and with a view to 
offer her my hand with my heart in marriage.' 

It was a desperate venture. So Edward instantly 
after felt it to be, and would fain have recalled his word. 
But words are winged, and once from the perch cannot 
be whistled back. 

' In marriage I Marriage ? Did you say marriage ? ' 
the senior roared out. ' Pray you, carry me with you. 
Master Holte. Marriage ! Marriage with a blacksmith's 



FATHER AND SOX. 209 

Jaughter . an old mechanical traitor's brat of a pretty 
face ! If I did not think you were jesting . to use the 
word . But we vdW put the matter out of doubt shortly 
now. You can no longer feign the impropriety of 
wooing a young lady to a husband's arms, whose father 
is absent and in mortal peril and jeopardy. My Lord 
Keeper is safe now, and his invaluable bauble, with the 
King. So my Lady Lyttelton came yesterday, ^dth her 
good daughter, ^listress Penelope, to assure us. And 
as my soul lives, if ever you mean to inherit after me 
at Aston Hall, you shall wed the bride I have chosen 
you at the nearest conveniency I ' 

Edward perceived the necessity of withdrawal from 
so astounding a glimpse at his real feelings and pur- 
poses. 

He had needed little convincing on the subject, but 
the utter hopelessness of obtaining his father's consent 
to such an alliance struck him more than ever. And 
with such an ambitious and insidious enemy in ambush 
to seize every imaginable advantage against him ! He 
did his best to retrieve the slippery step he had made. 

. Well, sir,' he said, ' I have not yet, that I wot of, 
openly demurred to your pleasure. But it would ill 
become us to deal in weddings and rejoicings at such a 
momentous and untoward conjuncture in our Kino-'s 
afifairs, and when we have as j^et done nothing in fulfil- 
ment of our pledges to him ; with which his Majesty 
himself did feelingly upbraid me when I saw him of 
late at Nottingham.' 

' He chose an ill time for his reproaches, then, Ed- 
ward,' said Sir Thomas, rather soothed by the appearance 
of submission, 'just when your brother and yourself 
had hazarded your lives in his service.' 

VOL. II. P 



210 THE armourer's DAUGHTER, 

' My brother ! ' Edward exclaimed, but he recollected 
at the moment the terms of his truce with Grimsorwe, 
and did not follow on with the proper explanation f)f 
his surprised and irritated accent on the word. 

Sir Thomas remarked it sufficiently, however, to ob- 
serve, ' Pish ! what rancour is this about a foolish wench ; 
as if there were only one in the world ! I ti-ow me, 
Edward, you will live to see the day when you will deem 
yourself as much obliged to the rival who shall ease you 
of your spoil as you now snarl and grind your teeth over 
it to an otherwise conclusion. Yet, as the King says, 
and as you say, we ought to fulfil our promises to him. 
But how may that be, if we have no arms ; and how 
may we have arms except by lashing the Birmingham 
men like mutinous galley-slaves to their forges ? ' 

' It shall be part of the conditions of peace I purpose 
to make that they shall supply both parties indifferently ; 
there are smiths of both minds in the town; and, besides, 
they are all traders, and will not mislike an open mar- 
ket,' Edward replied; and, it must be confessed, Bir- 
mingham has generally preferred to be neutral in this 
way. 

'And is this noble blacksmith, forsooth, of Birmingham 
to be confirmed in his lordship and claimed inheritances, 
whereof part includes, as I have heard, the very land on 
which I have built so brave a palace that the Prince 
himself nothing disparages it in comparison with his 
own native electoral castle on the Khine, which is one 
of the glories of Grermany for magnificence and lustrous 
ornament?' Sir Thomas enquired, with scornful bitter- 
ness. 

It should be mentioned that Edward and his sire were 
now crossing the terrace, between the Hall and the Fal- 



FATHER AND SON. 211 

coner's Lodge and other domestic offices of the building, 
which yet afforded a very stately and imposing view of 
a portion of Aston Hall. Sir Thomas looked round as 
he spoke, and took a long and deep inhalation, as if his 
fine stonework were also like some rich flower impreg- 
nated with sweet odours to the breath. 

He cherished, indeed, a kind of passion of admiration 
and love for his noble masterpiece of art and expense. 
But Edward himself was glad of the pause ; it was, in 
truth, rather a puzzling suggestion, that made. 

' It would really appear, sir,' he at last timidly in- 
sinuated, * that the unfortimate young man in question 
has received some great wrong, ancestrally speaking; 
but it will be for tribimals of the King's justice, most 
probably at some quieter time, to right him, if it may 
be. But meanwhile, I dare well assure you. Tubal 
Bromycham will never seek or wish to trouble you in 
your possession of this land. But for the Prince's High- 
ness to compare it with the Castle of Heidelberg, it must 
be in a most unbecoming mock. For the castle, when 
it stood, was a fxtting residence for a mighty king, but 
is now little more than roofless wall and frontacre, which 
all the hatred of the most savage of conquerors and 
ravagers. the merciless Tilly . could not hurl down its 
mountain crags, with an army of plunderers' aid.' 

Sir Thomas reddened. 'It is you who mock and 
thwart me in everything, rather,' he said, angrily. ^ I 
know not that the Prince spoke of his castle as it is now, 
or as it has been. All the world knows of the misfor- 
tunes of his glorious family ; you tell us no news there, 
Edward. So then you promise me some manner of 
mercy and forbearance from the Blacksmith Lord of 
Birmingham, do you, whose title I propose to usurp, in 

p2 



212 THE ARMOUREIl's DAUGHTER. 

due course of events, as well as his lands, and whose feet 
have figured in my stocks as those of an impudent rogue 
and vagabond ? But some price will surely be demanded 
from me for so much goodness ; and so, instead of mar- 
rying my daughter to a descendant of the Emperor 
Charlemagne, I must, I suppose, gratefully accept for 
a son-in-law a Walsall collier.' 

Edward was now thoroughly stricken with alarm. 

^ Grood God I my dearest father, what is this you say? ' 
he exclaimed. ' I do trust you have no such perilous 
frenzy in your mind, for it is nothing more nor less, and 
puts to the hazard my sister's happiness, and all our 
honours, most preposterously.' 

^ Oh, to be sure, I am a foolish old dotard, in my 
second childhood . as weak in judgment as sinews, am I 
not ? Prithee, when was I put in tutelage ? Is there 
my Lord Keeper's seal to my superseding as well as your 
pardon for the traitors of Birmingham ? ' Sir Thomas 
answered, drawing up his towering figure to its haughtiest 
strength and majesty, and surveying . almost contempt- 
uously, and with visible suspicion and anger . his finer- 
limbed and visaoed son. * You are the onlv wiseacre out 
of Gotham among us, I presume. Master Holte ? and I, 
and even your scholarly brother Dick, must only go a 
moon-raking where you show us the fine cheese in the 
waters.' 

' My brother again ! And does he advise ? Oh, my 
dearest father, we are all made the 2:>laythings of a mon- 
ster of treason and duplicity, that are to beat each other 
to pieces jerked on his wires ! I say it is downright 
madness to suppose that the King's nephew can ever be 
anything to my sister but a peril and a dishonour in the 
association of their names. For God's own sake, then. 



FATHER AND SON. 213 

listen to me now ! You know you have allowed me long 
as your Deputy Ranger at Sutton Manor-House. This 
haughty foreigner and I can never agree together, nor 
shall I be able, even under our own roof, long to keep 
at peace with his cut-throat ruffianage. Let me retire, 
tl^erefore, to Sutton, and assemble there and quietly put 
in harness and preparation for the war . if war there 
must be . the young yeomen of your tenantry, who are 
to form my troop of horse. But more than all . oh, a 
thousand times more . let me take my sister away with 
me to Sutton, to keep house for me. The place may 
easily be made tenantable and comfortable enough; and 
she will be safe from any unhappy coupling of her name 
Avith that of this royal soldier of fortune, who has evi- 
dently taken her into his besmirching homage and 
admiration.' 

' Hear to all this whipping of waters ! what's to come 
of it, trow, but froth ? It must be indeed that I have 
been deprived for incompetency, and put in ward of this 
wise young gentleman, my younger son . at all events, 
in the counting of years. Hark you, Master Holte,' Sir 
Thomas now replied, with extraordinary vehemence; 
* silly old goodman as I am, I do yet think I discern my 
daughter's fair repute would run much greater danger 
of scandal, should I find it necessary to make proclama- 
tion to the world the way you propose, and declare that 
T find it impossible to trust her under my own roof in 
the company of a high-born gentleman and prince I Fie 
on you, for the mean, dishonest thought, which shows 
well what manner of consorting you have yourself of late 
enjoyed I But, for the rest, I am well content that you 
should carry on your truckling peacemaking with the 
Birmingham mobsters under any other roof than mine. 



214 THE armourer's daughter. 

And methinks I could as little as ever guarantee your 
safe-conduct to the crop-eared knaves among his High- 
nesses brave followers. Gro then to Sutton, and begin 
there your game at soldiering in his Majesty's service ; 
but for a housekeeper, if one is so needful for you, 
invite thither your fair-faced Puritan Eosamund, the 
armourer's daughter. Take my word for it, there is no 
better cure for a runaway horse than giving him the 
spur till he tires ; and a surfeit of sw^eet cake brings a 
man soon to see and acknowledge that plain bread is 
the staff of life. To Sutton Manor-House, I say then, 
with your fine mistress at once ; and you will be the 
sooner ready to betake yourself to a plain but well- 
endowed wife.' 

So saying, Sir Thomas strode indignantly forward, 
raising a silver w^histle at his girdle, -which he blew long 
and shrilly as he neared the Falconer's Lodge, while his 
son remained silent and sorrowful on the edge of the 
grass-plat behind. 



215 



CHAPTER LV. 

THE HAWKING-PARTY. 

Concerned as lie was at his father's dangerous infatua- 
tion, Edward could not at the moment devise any other 
means of counteraction than those he had thus tried 
and failed in. But he thought some hope might 
remain in his sister's own womanly sense and spirit, 
which he resolved to make an attempt to rouse before 
he took his departure. x\nd he had now fully made up 
his mind to retire to Sutton, feeling that his remain- 
ing at Aston Hall was powerless to prevent mischief, 
w^hile it exposed him to embarrassing supervision and 
thwarting. 

Moreover, he speedily foimd Sir Thomas was either 
really offended with his interference, or held him to his 
arrangement to be rid on his own part of what he pro- 
bably looked upon as an inconvenient and cross work 
meddling. 

Edward was, of course, but little in the mood for an 
excursion of the kind. But partly to promote his own 
objects, and partly conceiving it his duty, as one of 
the representatives of the house, he presented himself 
at the grand regal which preceded the hunting-party 
now in progress.' 

Breakfast it was called ; and a breakfast it was, in 



216 

the style of our hearty ancestors, who, as yet, dreamed 
not of such wishy-washy foundations as tea and coffee, 
but began their feeding for the day with as substantial 
a meal of meat and stronsf brewacres as the best of us 
can now hope to dispose of for dinner. 

The repast alluded to was served in the Great Hall . 
almost, one might say, in the open air, the doors and 
windows on all sides being thrown widely open. 

It was a gay and bustling scene. The Prince was to 
be attended on the excursion by nearh^ all his officers, 
saving only those required to remain in charge of the 
dragoons. About a score of cavaliers were therefore 
thronging in the chambers, divested of their heavier 
panoply, but still in their showy uniform, with white 
plumes waving to their girdles from their dashing!}' 
slouched broad-brimmed hats ; with flowing locks, and 
curled moustache, and pointed beard, well oiled ; high 
boots and gilded spurs, the rowels being as large as 
sunflowers : and graceful, short -riding cloaks, thrown 
carelessly over the shoulders, and fastened by an hussar- 
like lacing of tassel and silver cord. 

Among these fine personages Sir Thomas Kolte and 
his daughter were still conspicuous from the costly 
materials of their hunting garb, which in both was of 
light green velvet, profusely passemented, as it was 
called, with gold brocade, in the young lady's case, and 
further relieved by a cap of cloth-of-gold, and a bril- 
liant scarlet feather. But Arabella Holte was )^et 
greatly more distinguished by her beauty; and her 
brother's own saddening eye could not avoid appre- 
ciating the heightened dazzle and glow of his splendid 
sister's charms, under circumstances so excitins: and 
gratifying to her vanity and inordinate spirit of coquetry. 



THE IIAWKING-PARTr. 217 

Very few women then living in England could in 
reality have contended with the daughter of the founder 
of Aston Hall for the prize of beauty. But no other 
lady was present save her mother, whose v>eak and 
faded outlines scarcely at all arrested notice ; and the 
vivacity and grace of the court-bred younger lady con- 
tributed to produce her extraordinary loveliness with 
the most varied lustrous effects, and to render her, 
even more than by the natural gallantry of a military 
society, the centre of universal homage and admiration. 

Had that been all, it would not so much have an- 
noyed Edward Holte, who was very well accustomed to 
see his sister an object of gallant devotion on the 
part of persons of his sex. But he perceived at once 
that a most particular and special dedication of his 
attentions was made to her by Prince Eupert, who 
seemed to have neither eyes, ears, nor understanding 
for any other person or thing. 

The conversation was evidently chiefly between these 
two, and as clearly of a sprightly and interesting 
nature, since it even melted the saturnine reserve and 
hautem- of Rupert's usual manner, and lighted his 
harsh features, bending delightedly over his companion, 
as if by reflection from her laughing charms. And 
although Miss Holte had a remarkably fine falcon, 
hooded and chained by silver jesses on her wrist, to 
which frequent playful and fondling reference seemed 
made by the pair, it was plain to the merest novice 
that the bird was only a pretext and cover for the close 
and animated dialocrue in which thev indulored. Yet 
Sir Thomas appeared to take no notice, playing the 
courteous host in every other direction, with all manner 
of hospitable entreaties and recommendations of his 



218 THE armourer's daughter. 

viands ; little needed, for the most part, by his military 
fioiests. And this after so recent and demonstrative a 
discussion, witnessed by so many of the Prince's officers 
in person, and probably universally reported. 

* My father has gazed himself into a madman, at his 
fine house ! ' thought Edward. * Yet if even his am- 
bitious hopes could attain fruition, Avould my sister's 
lot be a happy one as the wife of a haughty insulting 
princeling foreigner like this, whose every look and 
glance betray the harshest pride and despotism of cha- 
racter ? I trow me not, since Arabella is at heart 
herself as self-willed and disdainful of control and 
supremacy as he I And then, poor Tubal Bromycham ! 
my mainstay and anchorage with him and the town 
would be gone indeed.' 

The company in the hall nearly all stood to their 
refection, as was usual at an occasion of the kind, when 
out-of-doors sport was in forwardness. But huge 
masses of corned beef, and brawn, and fried veuiaon, 
and mutton collops, disappeared under their exertions, 
at the long boards set with the hunting fare. As for 
the strong ale in the numerous hooped flagons, which 
two or three were expected to share . and the claret 
perpetually pouring from a massive silver centre-piece, 
representing a rock and waterfall, from which the guests 
helped themselves at discretion, in quaintly wrought 
goblets and beakers of the same metal . it was who 
should do the amplest justice to the liberality of Aston 
Hall. 

Meanwhile the wassail inside was not ill-matched 
with the lively stir and movement in the courtyard and 
terraces before the mansiou. 

Sir Thomas had determined to display his wealth 



THE HAWKING-PARTT. 219 

and magnificence to the utmost ; and all his choicest 
horses and hounds, well groomed and caparisoned, or 
straining in the leashes held by handsomely liveried 
pages and other retainers for hawking or hunting, 
crowded the inclosure ; men shouting, horses neighing, 
dogs barking, and the hawks flapping their wings and 
jingling their bells, in a bright confusion of colouring 
and sound, well canopied by a glorious azure sky, and 
the glow of a cloudless autumn sun. 

Into this cheerful company Edward Holte made his 
way, without feeling liimself much enlivened by the 
a.ssociation. 

Nor did he receive many marks of welcome. A 
brightening glance of recognition from his fond un- 
happy mother . a friendly squeeze of the hand from 
Chaplain Lane . were for some time the only signs that 
anyone observed his arrival. But while detained by 
the passing of a singular triumph of Adam Blackjack's 
skill in the shape of a besieged castle of gilt marchpane 
or gingerbread, thronged with figures and waving with, 
little flags, on so large a scale that it was rolled in on a 
wheelbarrow . Edward became aware of a pair of eyes 
fixed upon him from a distance. 

The eyes were those of Eichard Grimsorwe ; who sat 
in a recess of i\ window of the great inner chamber of 
the hall, known as the saloon. Completely alone, too ; 
in the congenial shadow of the branches of a stately 
cedar that grew on the outside terrace. 

He withdrew his gaze almost instantaneously, ap- 
pearing to be deeply engaged in the perusal of a volume 
in his hand. But in that brief interval Edward had 
discerned a real fiendish and malignant expression of 
mockery and enjoyment in them, that convinced him 



220 THE armourer's daughter. 

bis iinnatural enem}^ appreciated the anxiety and trouble 
with which he surveyed the scene before him. 

Edward's action was quickened by the species of 
echoing he found to his own fears in Grrimsorwe's satis- 
faction ; and under pretence of paying his respects to 
the Prince, he gladly interrupted his public and yet 
apart confabulation with Arabella. Nor would he allow 
himself to be repulsed by Eupert's cold and formal 
acknowledgment of the civility, and evident wish that 
nothing further should ensue. He remained where he 
was, and his presence exercised an immediate and 
striking check on both the parties. The Prince turned 
haughtily away, and Miss Holte bridled, bit her lip, 
and seemed to seek some occasion to remove. 

His annoyance much increased, Edward was about to 
speak to his sister and ask her for a few moments' 
private speech. But precisely then Sir Thomas joined 
the group, and pronounced the unkindly resolute words, 
' My son, sir, has come to bid your Highness and his 
sister farewell. He proposes to fix the head-quarters 
of his troop of horse, for which his Majesty has honoured 
him with a commission, at a nigh royal manor-house we 
have in these parts . that they may be less in the way 
of your cavaliers. And besides, in truth, negotiators 
from Birmingham . and he persists in negotiation . 
would have but a sorr}^ time of it among my tenantry ! ' 

The Prince coldly made the remark that he trusted 
his own presence at Aston Hall might not be found to 
inconvenience its proper inmates ; and a trumpet sound- 
ing at this moment for the hawking-party to form, he 
offered his hand to Miss Holte, and walked off with her 
at an unusually rapid rate through the company, which 
of course all made wav. 



THE HATVKING-PARTY. 221 

Edward followed them with his eyes for some mo- 
ments, and saw the Prince himself, as the manner 
then was, kneel to allow Arabella to mount the horse 
by springing from his knee. And he then most dis- 
tinctly perceived that as he placed the young lady's 
foot in the stirrup, he stooped and kissed it ! 

What effect so extravaorant a mark of homaofe from 
so haughty and exalted a personage would have on a 
vain, coquettish young woman like his sister, it was not 
hard to conjecture. And while the rest of the company 
trooped out after the pair, Edward turned with such an 
expression on his face to his mother . who did not go 
with it . that she almost cowered beneath his grlance, 
and said, ' I cannot help it, indeed, my dearest boy ; I 
can help nothing that happens in this house I But of 
a truth, either your father will plunge us all into misery 
and disgrace, or he will make his daughter a princess 
by a marriage with the blood royal of the land ! ' 

It w^as in vain that Edward, highly provoked at the 
intimation, implored his mother to make some use of 
her reasoning faculties, and remonstrate with his father 
on the perilous course he was pursuing. 

Lady Holte was a thoroughly spirit-brokeu woman 
now, and at no period of her career had ever coped with 
much courage or resolution against her husband's head- 
strong despotism. And when she found that Edward 
himself had dared to make remonstrances on the subject 
(which, by-the-by, neither of them again more plainly 
alluded to), which had failed, she declared that any 
attempt on her ow^n part would onl}- provoke Sir Thomas 
to a still rasher following up of his own ideas. All that 
Edward could obtain from the nerveless lady was an 
assurance that she would watch most zealously over her 



222 THE armourer's daughter. 

child ; and if the Prince continued his attentions, en- 
gage him to some open declaration of his meaning, 
either by her own or her daughter's agency. 

Meanwhile Edward's personal affairs and anxieties 
pressed heavily upon him, and he was obliged to ad- 
journ for a while the consideration of his sister's peiils 
in the efforts necessary to interfere with advantage in 
favour of the object of his own attachment. 



223 



CHAPTER LVI. 

THE BLACKSMITH LOED OF BIRMINGHAM. 

Edward Holte thus unexpectedly found himself sen- 
tenced to a species of exile from his father's house, and 
very few facilities remained in other respects at his 
disposal to effect the objects he had in view. 

A messenger into the town must in the first instance 
be found, who would faithfully perform his mission, 
and could not be supposed to incur much risk in it. 

These conditions he thought answered in the person 
of the Rev. Mr. Lane, whose mild and benevolent cha- 
racter secured him universal respect, and who was very 
well known in Birmingham. 

The only difficulty was to overcome the extreme 
natural timidity of his character. But Mr. Lane had a 
great affection for Edward personally, and he agreed to 
everything required, when he found that unless he under- 
took the office, the young gentleman would again place 
himself, with no security but the good faith of some 
individuals in whom he declared he could confide, in 
the hands of the leaders of the Birmingham sedition. 

Accordingly, shortly after the hawking-party set forth, 
Mr. Lane mounted a slow-paced ambling nag, and took 
his way to the town, the bearer of two letters, one 
directed to the Master Armourer Firebrace, and the 



224 THE aemourer's daughter. 

other to Tubal Bromycham. A servant in the Holte 
livery was sent before with a white flag, and Edward 
accompanied the gentle priest to the exit of the park, 
giving him his instructions in detail. 

Xot knowing what might now be the state of Bir- 
mingham, or what fate might await his communications, 
Edward was determined to proceed in them without 
presuming iipon any kind of goodwill or understanding 
with himself on the part of the two leaders. In both 
the epistles he merely asked for a safe-conduct, and 
assemblage of the Town Council, that he might lay 
before it the King's most gracious proposals to receive 
Birmingham back into his allegiance and protection. 
But Mr. Lane's private instructions were ample how to 
influence the two chiefs of the town, in case of any 
doubt or hesitation on their part. 

Edward himself was to follow, at a suitable interval, 
to the barriers, there to ascertain results. And in his 
indignant feeling at his father's uncivil and peremptor}^ 
proceedings, he determined not to return to Aston, but 
2:ave orders at once for a removal of his own more im- 
mediate personal appurtenances and servants to Sutton 
Manor-House. 

When these arrangements were effected, and he had 
bidden his mother farewell, promising to see her as 
frequently as possible, and earnestly renewing his cau- 
tions, Edward mounted his horse, and followed his 
missionary of peace to the town with his credentials. 

But he encountered quite a different sort of a per- 
sonage some time before he reached the spot where he 
had appointed to meet Mr. Lane, which w^as nigh the 
Butts Barrier, as it had grown to be called, where 
Grimsorwe had been stopped in his coach. A figure 



THE BLACKSMITH LORD OF BIRMINGHAM. 225 

presented itself in his way, in the ordinary leather garb 
of a blacksmith, in whose herculean though stunted 
proportions Edward Holte immediately recognised the 
person of Tubal Bromycham. 

A change had nevertheless come over the whole aspect 
of the Blacksmith Lord of Birmingham, as Sir Thomas 
Holte contemptuously styled him, which almost confused 
his now friendly rival's recognition. 

Tubal Bromycham's energetic and mind-stamped 
features seemed to have acquired a new character of de- 
veloped power and intellect, as if a sculptured lion had 
become animate with all the vital instincts and supre- 
macy which a lord of the forest in actual sinew and bone 
could claim. This character of power had even attained 
that highest evidence in man's moral organisation, 
when it becomes, as it were, humorous and playful, 
from a sense of the futility of the resistances opposed. 
Edward Holte was struck with the bright and hopeful 
expression of Tubal's countenance, which exalted the 
rugged lineaments into an effect that, if not exactly 
what is called handsome, was something more engaging 
and noble than mere beauty of lines and colouring 
could ever produce. And yet . he knew not well why . 
this, as it were, sun-bursting of the brave soul through 
its clouds, in the grand artisan, troubled the friendly 
gentleman. He coupled it with the scene he had 
recently left, and saddened to think to what cause 
Tubal probably owed his Promethean animation of hope 
and energy. 

The two young men saluted in the most friendly 
manner. Master Holte alighting for the purpose, as to 
an equal, which he was well enough inclined to admit 
Tubal Bromycham to be. There was no occasion for 

VOL. II. Q 



226 THE armourer's daughter. 

any explanations between the former supposed rivals 
now. Both felt and knew that Dorothy had rendered 
their present relations perfectly clear and satisfactory. 

But very important explanations were to be exchanged 
respecting the business of the present meeting. 

It was in answer to Edward's anxious enquiry as to 
what had become of his messenger, that Tubul com- 
menced his statements. 

' Truly, Master Holte,' he said laughingly, ' the din 
and uproar are so great in the town, and the rabble 
there growing so heady and tumultuous in its dealings, 
that the poor gentleman, as it were, lost his senses with 
fear. And though I assured him, and truly, mark you, 
that no man dares harm him under the safeguard of the 
Lord of Birmingham, did so implore me not to be forced 
to run the gauntlet of the crowded streets back again, 
that I thought it best to put him into cool and safe 
keeping in St. Martin's Church, as I have others threa- 
tened by the mob, and come myself to meet and tell 
you how things stand.' 

' But sure you do not mean to say. Tubal Bromy- 
cham, that the common sort are in the mastery in 
Birmingham?' Edward enquired, much alarmed at the 
intimation. 

* They are striving hard for it, at all events, and under 
the leadership of a desperate and determined fellow,' 
Tubal replied, still smiling. * Captain Cromwell . who 
has, it seems, left us to our own exertions for safety, 
after so committing us openly against the King . hath, 
besides, contrived us a legacy of tumults and all manner 
of refractory proceedings, by turning out our regular 
parson, and giving to the entire people the election of 
a new minister. And this is what the town is running 



THE BLACKSMITH LORD OF BIRMINGHAM. 227 

mad upon just now, who shall be appointed to the 
vacant office, its sway from the pulpit, and emoluments ; 
we of the Council, and most other upper substantial 
men, favouring a certain approved good preacher and 
martyr for the truth, who has lately fled hither among 
us, called Whitehall, and the rabble violently driving at 
placing a ragamuffin tub-ranter of their own . the Ana- 
baptist knave, Sisyphus the bellows-blower . in Dr, 
Dugdale's pulpit and cushion.' 

' Sisyphus the bellows-blower ! The villain who as- 
sailed Mistress Firebrace for favouring my retreat, and 
who instigated a base attempt at assassinating myself 
when a prisoner in his custody!' Edward exclaimed, 
who was still by no means aware of all the disobhgations 
he owed the man. 

' The same ; and who, in my opinion, projects even 
worse and wider fulfilments of evil in his rotten and 
rancorous soul, to judge by the strange blasphemous over- 
tures and promises he makes in his speeches, tow in the 
rabble over to bestow on him their votes,' replied Tubal. 
' Yea, for he will have it that there are no longer to be 
poor and rich, kings, gentlefolks, and commons ; but all 
men are to be equal, and to have all things in common. 
Beshrew my heart ! if the rancid rogue means not our 
women too I for that the reign of the saints has come 
to pass ; and he gives it out he knows by a vision and 
revelation he has received, that they have only to go in 
and take possession ; to inherit the earth and the fulness 
thereof for a thousand years of happiness and joy . 
under, no doubt, his blessed sway ! ' 

' Your women ! when the dastardly cripple has even 
endeavoured to hound the populace on to the destruction 

Q2 



228 THE armourer's daughter. 

of his master's daughter ! ' exclaimed Edward, flashing 
deeply with indignation. 

' And that is, indeed, still one of liis main cries,' 
Tubal replied. * He and his immediate gang are as 
clamorous as a field of cawing crows that Dorothy Fire- 
brace shall be surrendered to the people (as they call 
themselves), and tried with all solemnity by them for 
treason against the good town. I have beaten their heads 
about pretty sharply already on this, without beating the 
idea out of them ; and they grow the noisier because a 
Parliament man . one Major Monk . who is among us, 
declares, on the other hand, that she ought to be sent 
to London for calm judgment, and proper either acquit- 
tal or punishment. The howling curs are not to be con- 
tented without the rending of her in their own fangs I ' 

' But truly. Master Bromycham . if you be, as you 
say, true Lord of Birmingham . you will not suffer such 
atrocious mastery as this is likely to prove to exalt 
itself over your authority in the town ? ' exclaimed 
Edward. 

' It shall be seen I But why give you me not the 
name of Lord, then?' Tubal replied, the light quicken- 
ing in his blue Saxon eyes like the sparkles of a spear, 
and his strong hands knitting as if they grasped one. 
*" Howbeit, it matters not ; men will give the name ' 
where they find the thing,' he continued, with a stern 
smile. ' And believe me. Master Holte, I am very spe- 
cially glad you have come to witness . and report . how 
I bear myself in the rank and duties I derive from a 
thousand years of ancestry, and have resumed. They 
shall soon know in Birmingham who is lord thereof ! 
But I cannot, as perchance you would have me,' he 
added, after a slight pause, 'interfere to prevent the 



THE BLACKSMITH LOBD OF BIRMINGHAM. 229 

people of their free election, which they enjoy of as old 
right and privilege as any under which I myself claim 
and challenge the unlawful exercise of power that 
deprived me of my inheritance.' 

' Is it not certain, then,' said Edward, much disap- 
pointed, ' that,' the rabble being so much more nume- 
rous, the election will fall upon Sisyphus, whose means 
of mischief will thus be infinitely enlarged to the de- 
struction of all law and decency in the town, and certain 
rejection of the gracious pardon and terms I bring from 
the King ? For if once the mob are permitted so far 
to gain the upper hand, who will dare to do or say any- 
thing likely to be unacceptable to them and their 
leaders in their scandalous desio^ns ? ' 

* What are these terms ? ' said Tubal, suddenly as- 
suming an air of dignity that greatly strucJi Edward. 
' We will talk of the rest anon ; but at present, I trow 
me, there is no man fitter than the Captain and Lord of 
Birmingham to receive and weigh the same.' 

Edward briefly declared the advantageous conditions 
which he considered he had obtained from the King. 
An immediate cessation of hostilities on the part of the 
near and dangerously-posted Eo3''al troops, and a full 
pardon to all concerned in the recent outbreak, on con- 
dition that on its part the town returned to its alle- 
giance, and allowed its forges to be employed in the 
service of all purchasers willing to give a fair price in 
open market for the Birmingham manufactures. 

* This were an undoing of Master Cromwell's work, 
with a vengeance,' said Tubal, relaxing again into a 
smile that seemed to indicate he saw nothing personally 
objectionable in the notion. But a shadow darkened 
over his visage as he continued, * We must stipulate. 



230 THE armourer's daughter. 

however, on our part, ere we throw our barriers down, 
that the King's ruffians be removed from so nigh a 
neighbourhood to us as Aston Hall. And, by all that is 
wonderful and strange ! I do marvel that your father. 
Master Holte, should desire his mansion and . and 
family . to be given over to such rough occupancy and 
society as we all hear the Palatine's troopers exhibit in 
their demeanour at Aston Hall.' 

Edward endeavoured to conceal the effect which these 
words had upon him, but was not sufficiently practised 
in disguise to prove so successful as he wished. Even 
the eagerness with which he clutched at the escape from 
his own fears, he thought he could discern in Tubal's 
demand, was rather betraying. 

' I do trust you ^vill insist on that condition . my 
father has his frenzies on some points . that the soldiers 
shall be retired. I myself have found them such uncivil 
company, that I have resolved to withdraw to Sutton 
Manor-House. 

* You, Master Holte ! ' exclaimed Tubal, in spite, as it 
seemed, of a resolute effort to suppress his emotion, 
turning pale. * You to withdraw from Aston Hall to 
Sutton Manor-House ! There is, indeed, then, no time 
to be lost. But yet, no, no ; with all her pride and her 
ambition, her unjust betrayal of my love, I am certain 
that she loved me once . must love me still ! And when 
she hears that I have proved myself her equal in rank ; 
that I have restored myself with mine own strong right 
arm to my rights, she will no longer disavow the love she 
once more than suffered me to believe she shared I ' 

^ I cannot pretend to be ignorant that you allude to 
my father's daughter, Tubal Bromycham,' Edward now 
said, himself affected by the overpowering emotion which 



THE BLACK.SMITE LOED OF BIRMINGHAM. 231 

evidently dictated this outburst : ' and I am grieved 
indeed to be obliged to agree with you, that obstacles to 
your generous passion multiply in my father's insane 
spirit of pride and ambition, and, perchance, in Arabella 
Holte's recklessness of coquetry, and pleasure in the 
triumphs of her beauty and powers of fascination. Nay, 
for I must candidly add, that though I know not on what 
foundations you build, it seems to me scarcely possible 
that she can ever have seriously meant to encourage 
your devotion.' 

^ Ah, you know not, you know not ; how can you 
know ? ' the young man replied, with passionate warmth. 
' But 1 know. Oh, it is not in woman . in humanity . 
80 to feign I AMiat wanted she with the heart of a poor 
artisan to trample on, that she should have taken so 
much pains to win mine ? It was chiefly when I was 
making her the virginals in my Lady Holte's withdraw- 
ing-room, on which I know she still plays, for I have 
often stolen up since to Aston Hall, and heard the music 
bubbling from her bright fiagers forth upon the night 
from the notes. And wherefore should she so often 
keep my company, then, when she could not but see the 
love and adoration in my eyes . and praise my skill till 
I deemed myself some god of my grimy craft . and 
smile at and encourage all the plain tokens of my 
overmastering feelings, until, until that miserable hour 
indeed ' 

'When you declared yoirr affection ? But did not 
Arabella then most unkindly and repul singly expel you 
from her presence, and even carry her disdain and rejec- 
tion so far as to reveal all to my father, and expose you 
to the consequences of his well-known violence and 
revenge?' said Edward, who felt an extreme repugnance. 



232 THE armourer's daughter. 

on his own part, to work upon the noble-natured young 
man's feelings further . as he so easily might . to his 
own advantage. 

* It is true,' replied Tubal, with a deep sigh, and a 
dark shadow crossed his brows. ' But,' he continued, 
with suddenly revived animation of hope and the loving 
credulity of his nature, * must I not forgive her when 
I remember how beautiful she is . how proudly born 
and reared . how skilfully in all womanly and ladylike 
accomplishments . how worthy to be the wife of a 
crowned emperor ? Must it not have seemed to her an 
insult . an audacity beyond compare . a madness w^orthy, 
indeed, of whip and chains . for a mere artisan like me 
(as such only she knew me then) to dare to throw myself 
at the feet of one so exalted and so fair, and ask, as it 
were, an angel of heaven to become the wife of a poor 
smith of Birmingham ? But soon, now, shall she, and 
all men and womankind beside, know me for who I 
.am ! ' 

^ What purpose you to do ?' said Edward, thinking it 
uselessly honest to argue the matter further at this 
moment. 

^ To let my good townspeople, in the first place, know 
I am their lord, and by such a means as I hope will stir 
Master Sisyphus and his fellows into open contention 
-with me for the mastery!' replied Tubal, beaming joy- 
ously up again at the thought. ' But will you, on your 
part, run some portion of the risk. Master Holte ? For 
I will let it be universally known in the town that you 
are come to treat of peace between us and the King . 
and we will make it openly . and measure strength with 
all gainsayers I Nor is the risk so great as you may well 
think, and Sisyphus and his followers will hope ; for I 



THE BLACKSMITH LORD OF BIRMINGHAM. 233 

have lost no time to arm some score young fellows on 
whom I can depend, and who are ready to obey my orders 
for life or death ; for the Lords of Birmingham hold the 
right of both!' 

' It is no time to question of rights too nicely,' said 
Edward, much pleased at this revelation, ' and whatever 
the risk, I am willing to incur my share of it.' 

' You can speak to our burgesses then, and declare 
the King's favourable will ; and, if need be, perchance 
to the people. I have no skill in utterances by way of 
words, and you are scholar-bred. Master Holte,' Tubal 
replied ; and Edward cordially assenting to the arrange- 
ment, nothing more seemed necessary by way of pre- 
liminary, and the young men resumed the road into the 
town. 



234 THE AHMODRER'S DAUaHTER. 



CHAPTER LYIII. 



However well inclined to run any hazaixi in seconding 
Tubal in his resistance to mob law, Edward Holte was 
pleased to nnd bis own eloquence not exclusively de- 
pended upon in the task. On arriving at the bai-riers 
they found a number of young men in readiness, who 
obeyed Tubal's word of command, and formed them- 
selves at once into an escort to accompany them to the 
Guildhall. 

These men were nearly all of the smiths' craft, which 
at that time was by far the most powerful and well 
organised of the trades of Birmingham. And Tubal 
proudly explained that, as lord of the town, all its in- 
habitants were bound to do military service to his 
banner when called upon. But the master armourer's 
authority as chief of the smiths' guild, or company, 
placed it specially at his devotion. 

It is very possible, hovs^ever, that Tubal Bromycham's 
power was chiefly derived from the respect he was held 
in as the best artificer of the town, and his general 
courageous and popular character. 

It is certain his now declared pretensions to a noble 
descent and rank were very far from injuring him with 
any part of the populace, saving the republican fanatics- 



EDWARD HOLTe's MISSION. 235 

of the Anabaptist persuasion, wlio were at the time in a 
very low minority in the town. The smiths, indeed, 
were extremely proud of having for a leader a young 
man reared as an artisan at their forges, and in their 
midst, but who also claimed to be legitimate lord of 
their town. 

This civic force was armed with pikes set in long 
wooden shafts, and marched in attendance on its chief 
and his friend with some appearance of military order 
and discipline. Tubal laughingly explaining to his visitor 
that hitherto he had only found occasion to set his men 
on using the ' stick end ' of their weapons. ' Come the 
need,' he added, with peculiar significance, * and we will 
prod the rogues in the back with nine inches of as good 
steel as ever made a more honourable hole in a soldier's 
breast ! But meanwhile, I have a rod in pickle for them 
they little dream of.' 

With a special purpose, as it appeared, of spreading 
the news of the arrival in the town. Tubal directed the 
march of this body in the first instance to the market- 
place. The Gruildhall, which was in New Street, on the 
site of the present Free School, could easily have been 
reached without passing through the then centre of 
Birmingham at all. 

Almost as soon as the incomers passed the Butts 
Barrier, signs of popular movement and excitement 
became evident. 

The streets were thronged with an unusual number 
of persons, chiefly of the lower order of the populace: 
and of these it was to be remarked that by far the most 
ill-clad and dangerous-looking carried various weapons, 
and not altogether of the rough and rusty sort one 
would have expected to find in the hands of the inferior 



236 

classes of a town, on occasion of so sudden and ill- 
provided an outburst of warlike activity. There were 
to be seen muskets and pike-heads, set on long sticks, 
like cattle -goads, which their owners carried with con- 
siderable swagger and determination. Tubal remarked 
upon these men to Edward that Captain Cromwell had 
given them arms, during the late emergency, against 
both his own and the master armourer's advice ; and 
that having been posted to defend the entrance of the 
town at the Parsonage, they had now the impudence to 
pretend orders from him to retain the house for their 
own and their leader's use, even before he was elected 
to the office he now also pretended to. 

*But,' emphatically repeated Tubal, 'we of the leader- 
ship of the town prefer the honest man Wrath-of-Grod 
Whitehall. For though he be a little cracked in his 
rooffing, still the cracks let in God's wholesome light, 
and he speaks but of establishing Bible law to the fullest 
among us ; of sweeping the hearth, and making the 
house ready for the reception of the Master thereof, by 
an universal cleansing and beautifying. Not a pulling 
down and defacing and mixing all things in confusion, 
and stripping men of all that distinguishes each from 
his fellows. By the mass ! (though that's a popish oath) 
I almost think the Anabaptist villain would have us go 
naked in the streets; and for aught I know, by-and-by, on 
all fours ! And he hath had a filthy pond near the Black 
Chapel, that a duck, which would gobble at a swine's 
entrails, would not swatter in, consecrated . as he calls 
it . with some devilish ceremonies, and invites who will 
to come and wallow in it, and profess themselves thereby 
his fautors and allies. And there are not wanting a 
strange many more than ever ^before to take the sum- 



EDWARD HOLTE's MISSION. 237 

mons, because he goes about declaring that he is ap- 
pointed to the godly work of bringing us all to a level, 
and rescuing all things to the common, as they were, he 
says, in Adam's time. Which truly might be when there 
was but one man and one woman on the earth, but 
must not and shall not be in Tubal Bromycham's ; as 
the boldest and most headlong of the muddy rogues shall 
right speedily learn I For, howbeit, at present, there 
are not so many of them as to need any mighty sup- 
pressing, there is no knowing how they may gain ground, 
with such doctrines openly set forth and maintained.' 

Besides the information thus received, Edward thought 
he could readily distinguish the members of this sus- 
pected and violent sect by their gloomy, fanatic visages, 
and challenging, scowling movements among the rest of 
the population. And few as they were in numbers, it 
seemed likely enough that the leaven of their pernicious 
principles might now become infused into larger masses, 
by the zeal and audacity of such a leader as the maimed 
but popular-tongued bellows-blower had of late exhi- 
bited himself. 

So far, it was not easy to determine by what feeling 
the people hurrying along the streets were actuated ; 
perhaps chiefly by curiosity, and some vague prospect of 
amusement, in sharing the commotion of an election by 
general suffrage. 

The Presbyterian scheme of government in church 
affairs, which was then in the ascendency in the Long 
Parliament, would have made a regular doctrinal ex- 
amination and acceptance unto the clerical office neces- 
sary, in conjunction with the choice of a congregation. 
But Cromwell, who had passed into the more advanced 
stage of religious revolt and enfranchisement styled 



238 THE armourer's daughter. 

Independency, was glad of a pretext afforded by an old 
custom in Birmingham to declare that the place of the 
expelled High Church rector of the town should thus be 
filled. The custom related only to the minor incum- 
bency of Deritend, but he widened its application to the 
whole town ; and not, as we have seen, without some 
views of creating divisions and emulations in the place, 
which might increase the necessity and chances of his 
own arbitration. 

But he had certainly not gone so far, in his wildest 
calculations, as to suppose that the Anabaptist bellows- 
blower . whom he himself looked upon as the refuse and 
scum of humanity . would dare to aspire to the vacant 
spiritual office and dignity. 

On his part, Tubal Bromycham, wdth a natural in- 
stinct, supported the assertion of all popular rights, 
wherever they did not clash with what he conceived to 
be his own, as feudal chief of Birmingham. And he 
had, therefore, readily adopted the plan proposed, until 
he found what a dangerous candidature arose. Opposi- 
tion then became necessary, and his energetic genius 
suggested it to him in the openest and most determined 
courses. 

In the case of Deritend Chapel-of-ease the customary 
forms of a lay election were in use, in the exercise of 
this extraordinary, if not unique, privilege of the people 
of Birmingham to elect their spiritual guide. 

The candidates were presented by a proposer and 
seconder to the people, and were then appointed to 
preach, upon successive Sundays, to all who chose to be 
auditors. After this preliminary, a day was named for 
the election. Friends and supporters eagerly canvassed 
for votes ; opposition colours were displayed ; harangues. 



EDWARD HOLTE's MISSION. 239 

squibs, and angry lampoons distributed ; the taverns 
were thronged with bawling, contentious partisans; 
scufiBes and altercations took place in all directions. 
Finally, the votes were taken in the usual way, first by 
a show of hands, and if a scrutiny was demanded, by 
a regular poll, sometimes lasting for days, even in 
Deritend, where only householders had the right to 
vote. 

Tubal had thrown himself in the outset of this more 
general election into direct antagonism ^nth Sis^^phus 
and his supporters. He refused, and with the general 
concurrence of the upper classes of the town, to allow 
the church to be, as he considered it, profaned by the 
heathenish and unchristian doctrines avowed by the 
bellows-blower. 

Sisyphus was duly proposed and seconded as a candi- 
date before the townspeople, in front of the Church of 
St. Martin, with Whitehall ; but he was refused the 
right he pretended to of holding forth in the building 
in his turn. And thus the express resolve of the Ana- 
baptist and his partisans to enforce his claims to occupy 
the town pulpit and declare his principles, as a pre- 
liminary to the election, seemed likely to bring about a 
collision of the parties. For Tubal, continuing his 
explanations of the scene they were coming upon, 
informed Edward Holte that having locked up the 
church, and placed it under guard to prevent the in- 
trusion, he was in hourly expectation of some violent 
attempt to take possession of it. 

This was the stage of progress in the affair when 
Edward Holte found himself once more on the chief 
scene of action at the Bull King. 

This considerable space was now nearly filled by a 



240 

confused multitude, evidently gathered together in ex 
pectation of something remarkable coming to pass. 
Windows and doorways were also occupied by the 
owners of the surrounding dwellings, happy to enjoy 
the spectacle without being forced to partake of the 
bustle and buffetings. Women were there in unusual 
numbers, as if they had some peculiar interest in what 
was happening, though of a divided sort. 

Clarges, the drunken blacksmith's wife, who was 
amidst the crowd, standing with her arms a-kimbo, and 
rolling her large, bright, impudent eyes in search of 
some as 5^et unseen object, anxiously enquired of a neigh- 
bour, ^ Is it true the bellows-blower will prove out of the 
Scriptures we have all a right to be rid of our bad hus- 
bands and wives, and betake us to others we like better?' 
While Mistress Mellons^ standing in a jolly blaze of her 
autumnal charms at the door of her hostelry, with her 
hands set on her hip bones, sneered to a gossip of her 
own, ' Hear ye how the crippled beggar pretends to the 
pick and choice among us all, in the Lord's name, with 
never a plack to his purse, and scarce a hanging of rags 
to his tanned hide ! ' 

^ He shall find he has reckoned without his hostess . 
not meaning you, my fine madam . an' he do ! ' said a 
gaunt third woman, who happened to overhear the 
observation, in bitterly malign and railing accents. But 
she was too well known as the jealous and half-savage 
wife of Sisyphus the Anabaptist, to make it desirable to 
enter into a wrangle with her on the subject. 

Edward was further well satisfied to perceive that the 
narrow churchyard before St. Martin's, raised almost to 
a level on the inside with its walls by many centuries of 
graves, was occupied by another division of Tubal's 



241 

smiths. Their leather aprons, bare arms, hammers, and 
robust figures testified this, and seemed to promise very 
indifferent success to an attack, unless of the most over- 
whelming numbers. 

But in truth, when Edward looked around at the 
thronging and haggard masses of the populace here 
assembled, and remembered what likely materials want 
and discontent offered to the reported inflammable 
oratory of the Anabaptist, he scarcely, in his own 
mind, applauded Tubal's energetic plan, especially when 
he found that at all events Sisyphus intended to present 
himself at the church for the purpose of formally de- 
manding admission, at noon on that day, provided he 
received encouragement in a certain * seeking of the 
Lord,' in which he and his most determined supporters 
were at the time engaged at the Black Chapel in Bor- 
desley. 

In expectation thus of wonders at hand, the arrival of 
Edward Holte and his accompaniers did not excite so 
much notice as it otherwise well miofht. 

Very few of the townspeople, it is true, recognised 
the recent prisoner, who was little known in Birming- 
ham during his college days, and had been kept out of 
sight all the time of his captivity in Firebrace's house, 
whence he had escaped in disguise. Everyone, indeed, 
knew Tubal Bromycham, but, excepting in his relation 
as the opposite leader to the expected assailant, his 
advent could scarcely be looked upon as the signal for 
any particular event, and it was events the people were 
looking for. 

But Tubal proceeded to work out his plans of bring- 
ing to the most direct and clashing issue, as it would 
seem, the contest for the mastery in the town. 

VOL. IT. E 



242 THE armourer's daughter. 

' Come, Master Holte,' he said, ' well bethought .on. 
We will begin by letting the townspeople know our in- 
tentions, and his Majesty's goodness fully, before we set 
the grey-beards of the Council wagging over the news. 
Let us get up on the churchyard side, and I will intro- 
duce you to these scarecrow lookers-on, and you shall 
tell them all you have told me. They are of the lower 
sort of our commonalty ; but such, I have always so far 
seen, incline better to hear themselves spoken to by 
scholarly gentlemen of your degree than ill-phrased 
rascals of their own, like this Sisyphus.' 

Edward, w^ho was bred in sufficiently aristocratic 
notions of the superiority bestowed by birth and posi- 
tion, made no hesitation to comply with his ally's 
request. 

Together, accordingly, they entered the inclosure be- 
fore St. Martin's, which was strictly guarded against 
general intrusion, and Tubal's voice of thunder speedily 
demanded and obtained the universal attention of the 
multitude. 

He made no roundabouts of explanation. ' Hark ye, 
my masters ! ' he exclaimed ; ' lend your long ears 
awhile to this worthy gentleman, Master Holte, of Aston 
Hall, who newly comes to you from the King, with very 
gracious proposals towards a peace with us, which, 
methinks, as the Parliament has left us so unhand- 
somely to our own resources, we shall do well to lend 
attention to.' 

There w^as some considerable stir and movement 
among the crowd at this intimation, and several of the 
gloomy-visaged men alluded to as forming a portion of 
it, without mingling, glided out of the assembly. 

Edward Holte meanwhile . willing as much as in him 



EDWARD HOLTE's MISSION. 243 

lay to support his ally's object . baring his handsome 
head, addressed the assemblage in a very different style. 
With a graceful air of deference, a sweetness and har- 
mony of tones, a scholarly and elegant flow of language 
that became the friend and fellow-student of the ac- 
complished Falkland, he addressed the good townsfolk 
of Birmingham, as he styled them, and declared the 
occasion of his visit in the town. 

An English mob, even of the most determined de- 
mocracy of modern ideas, has a natural leaning to the 
aristocratic. We are chiefly democrats because we want 
to be aristocrats. Neither was it, as yet, the age of 
democratic opinion, among the masses of the people, 
so much in earthly as in heavenly things. Cromwell's 
sudden impulse had but stirred the face of the waters . 
not their depths . in Birmingham, as afterwards in the 
entire nation. For the most part the assemblage 
seemed to hear the announcement made with consider- 
able satisfaction, though not without surprise ; and when 
Edward had concluded his brief but exceeding appro- 
priate and happily-phrased address, they said every- 
where, ' It is Master Holte, of Aston Hall ; he says the 
King wants to make peace with us. Let us make peace 
with the King, provided he leaves us our rights and 
liberties ! ' 

Edward, catching these latter murmurs, earnestly as- 
sured his hearers there was nothing his Majesty had not 
promised to perform to give them every imaginable 
comfort and security ; whereupon Tubal observed, ' Par- 
ticularly the removal of the cavaliers from Aston,' which 
was re-echoed in a great variety of accents, and seemed 
to be accepted as a principle condition of the arrange- 
ment. 

R 2 



244 THE ARMOUEEirS DAUGHTER. 

But Tubal was evidently desirous of some more direct 
confirmation, for he now called out in his stentorian tones, 
'Shout then, mates, for Peace, the King, aijd Master 
Holte ! ' and the throng taking up the words, with the 
rapid vibrations of popular impulse, sent them in a 
rising and swelling wave of sound to its farthest skirts, 
where it rippled over in the voices of the more timid 
among the women and children, who had not ventured 
deeply in. 

At a moment so unfavourable to his purposes Sisy- 
phus the bellows-blower entered upon the scene. 

The Anabaptist presented himself in a somewhat 
singular fashion. 

He was scarcely garbed beyond the merest require- 
ments of decenc}^, and from his grizzly iron-grey locks 
to his naked, ill-shaped feet, he streamed with water 
and weeds, as if he had just been bathing in some 
muddy stream. Of course his maimed figure presented 
itself at its worst, and his virago spouse herself ex- 
claimed, ' It must have been his witchcraft tongue ! 
his witchcraft tongue ! ' To complete this strange 
apparition he carried a bucket of some black water, 
equally weedy and foul, by his hook hand. 

Sisyphus was accompanied by a considerable number 
of the members of his haggard congregation, who, in 
sign doubtless of brotherhood, walked arm-in-arm. The 
eyes of these men were chiefly cast down, and nearly all 
looked very pale ; but their brows were knit with sullen 
determination, and their tramp was solid and one as that 
of a herd of elephants. Their countenances were of the 
most vulgar and animal type chiefly, and contrasted in 
that respect with their leader's, whose fiercely fervid 
aspect testified to the possession of mental power in 



EDAYARD HOLTE's MISSION. 245 

unison with his powerful and exasperate passions. But 
for these very reasons, perhaps, the general effect of the 
advance was the more sinister and menacing : a blind 
material force, under the control and direction of an evil 
spiritual agency, seemed there. 

So at least it struck Edward Holte, observing the 
approach. 

But what rendered the spectacle still more singular 
and questionable was that the five men abreast, imme- 
diately behind Sisyphus, all carried lighted torches, 
which smoked and flamed red and murky in the white 
dayshine all around. 

The Anabaptist's favourite guard and henchman, 
Faithful Moggs, was in close attendance upon him as 
usual, his vividly-coloured hair looking as if it had re- 
cently been dipped in blood, and wielding his wonted 
weapon, a butcher's pole-axe. The gaping mouth and 
staring eyes of this bull-witted fellow did, nevertheless, 
not prevent the spectator from discerning an expression 
of fanatic trust and challenge in the zeal with which he 
kept his apostle's pace that promised no faint or half« 
hearted adherence to whatever obedience he miorht 

o 

enjoin. 

On the general assemblage the effect of this extraor- 
dinary arrival was doubtful and mixed. 

At first there was a universal murmur of wonder 
and enquiry, followed by an explosion of derisive mer- 
riment. Then again, as the group came nearer to be 
scanned, curiosity evidently mingled largely in the 
popular feeling. So potent is the eye with the mind 
of man ! The meaning of the show thereupon grew to 
be most eagerly canvassed before it came to a halt, 
which it did very soon after, on the place of the Bull 



246 THE armourer's daughter. 

f 

King. This gave an eleva,ted stand for the Anabaptist, 
facing the churchyard, and his people then formed 
around him there, breaking into a harsh and untuned, 
but solemn psalm-singing, like the clamour of the waves 
on a sea-beach. 

Edward Holte himself felt strangely impressed, while 
the populace became, as it were, hushed and awed to an 
expectant observation, insomuch that when the Ana- 
baptist, having reached his elevation and set down his 
pail, suddenly turned round to them and exclaimed, ' I 
come from bathing in Jordan ; but not to preach peace, 
but the sword of the Lord and of Grideon ! ^^^lo talks 
of i^eace ? ' There was a moment of universal shrinking 
and silence, as if those who had so shouted found them- 
selves rebuked and guilty of offence by one who had the 
power and the right to punish. 

Tubal, however, broke the spell by answering from 
his neighbouring elevation, * I did, and Master Holte, 
and all the good people of the town talked of peace, 
and do talk, bellows-blower ! And what have you got to 
say to the contrary ? Though, as for bathing in Jordan, 
you look more as if you had been dragged through a 
horse-pond, as would much better tally with your 
deserts.' 

There was a general laugh at this retort, and a stir 
among the crowd, as if people were shaking off some 
oppression and drowsiness in the air. Tongues were 
unloosed, and * What does the fellow mean b}^ coming 
such a naked muck-heap before us ? ' freely enquired. 

Until now it did not appear that Sisyphus, on his part, 
had taken any notice of the group in the churchyard. 

He was perhaps too earnestly engaged in arranging 
his ideas for the oratorical occasion before him. But at 



EDWARD HOLTE'S MISSION. 247 

the name of Holte he started ; his eyes glared up with 
a truly savage and wild-beast expression ; and Edward, 
encountering his glance, was struck with surprise at the 
blood-thirsty hate and fury in the flash of recognition. 
Of course he was entirely unsuspicious of the bellows- 
blower's secret motives for jealous indignation against 
the preferred lover of Dorothy Firebrace. 

Nevertheless, Sisyphus possessed one of the prime 
qualities of the leader of an ambitious minority . com- 
mand of temper, and patience not to dash himself 
against too powerful obstacles. He had been at a stern 
school forthat, as appeared from the deep-wealed traces 
of the Grerman provost-marshal's lash round his back 
and chest. 

' Oh, is it but you, Master Tubal, my newly self- 
dubbed lord, and so another usurper in the true Lord's 
inheritance, who longeth for the occasion to beat and 
slay His messengers ? ' he replied, calmly enough. ' Yet 
I scarce expected, I must say, to hear you are turned 
traitor even to your own treason, to cry Peace where 
there is no peace, and never can be till Antichrist be 
wholly subdued. And who is Antichrist ?' 

AVe are not about to inflict on our readers a fanatic 
sermon of the seventeenth century, though it is necessary 
to declare with what intents and issues this most re- 
markable one of the Anabaptist of Birmingham, Sisyphus 
the bellows-blower, now teemed. 

This man was, indeed, in most important respects, a 
Mormon blasphemer, two hundred years before the 
accursed sect of Joseph Smith planted itself upon the 
face of the earth . and flourishes apparently upon it in 
3. whole province and city, like Sodom and Oomorrah 
before the rain of fire. 



248 THE armourer' 

And now Antichrist, according to the levelling bellows- 
blower, was embodied in all the powers and dominations 
of the earth as then constituted . kings, lords, prelates, 
magistrates, and rulers of every sort and degree ; who 
must be utterly overthrown, abolished, and driven forth 
of the land, so as to remove every species of rivalry and 
contention from before them, ere the dominion of Christ 
could be manifested and openly declared in His actual 
presence to mankind. 

It is true, Sisyphus took not upon him to declare a 
new revelation. He had not the infernal audacity of the 
later false prophet ; or else probably the beliefs of his 
time seemed to him sufficient for his purpose. But with 
almost equal presumption and lack of authority, he 
announced the fulfilment of all the old oracles of the 
will of Grod, and that the time of the promised inherit- 
ance of the Lamb of the Earth had come, and had been 
communicated to himself in a stupendous vision. 

He averred that on that very morning, when he was 
engaged in wrestling with the Lord in prayer for the 
sake of the people of Birmingham, and enquiring what 
ought to be done for their redemption and security, in 
the continued absence of Captain Cromwell and the 
dangers that pressed upon them from Aston, he had sud- 
denly found himself lifted from the midst of his congre- 
gation in the Black Chapel and carried through the air 
thousands and thousands of leagues in the flash of a 
moment ; that to his great terror and apprehension of total 
destruction, being no swimmer, he had found himself cast 
into a deep running water, bordered on either side with 
palm trees and rocks blazing white with heat, and knew 
that he was in the River Jordan, hurling along with the 
flow of the current to the fathomless gulfing of the 



EDWARD IIOLTe's MISSION. 249 

Dead Sea ; that while thus proceeding, shrieking with 
terror and stretching his arms in all directions for help, 
he was suddenly caught in the garment by a Shining 
!Man, who descended from the skies in a ' flame of sun- 
beams/' and stopped at last and brought to shore, though 
his clothes were nearly all torn off his back in the efforts 
necessary to effect his salvation. 

According, then, to this profane wretch . for it did 
not at any time appear that Sisyphus was really mad . 
the Shining Man, in a long conference, informed him 
that he was the Christ who was crucified on Mount Cal- 
vary for the sins of the world, and who was now a-weary 
that for so many ages, the immense saciifice had been 
made in vain ; and who was therefore coming in person 
to restore the entire earth to peace and holiness, and 
give the dominion thereof to the saints and faithful ones. 
So far, he and the stranger prophet, as he called him, 
Master Whitehall, were as one. 

And the way . as Wrath-of-Grod, being partially in- 
spired, declared . was to be made straight, the throne of 
the Lord exalted, His enemies put to the rout, Anti- 
christ cast utterly in the dust. The King of Peace 
would then doubtless appear in all His glory, to reign 
a thousand 3^ears over the elect, who for that period 
would flourish without fear, without suffering or toil, 
or grief or death. 

But whereas his rival candidate announced his inten- 
tion merely to put the laws inscribed in the Mosaic 
dispensation into full execution, he, Sisyphus the bellows- 
blower, answered, * Ere ye build, a clear place from the 
ruins must be spread before the Lord.' 

Kings, nobles, prelates, and magistrates of every kind, 
being the visible form and outward limbs of Antichrist, 



250 THE AEMOURETt's DAUGHTER. 

must therefore at once be deprived of their usurping 
jurisdiction, and their powers thenceforth be exercised 
altogether by the messengers and prophets of Grod. 

Himself, Sisyphus went on to state, was appointed 
such in the town of Birmingham, if he could find there 
sufficient helpers and witnesses to the Lord to support 
him in his efforts 'to make plain the way.' Yea, plain 
even as the sandy desert before the heavy clod of the 
camel on its way ! 

In this kinofdom at hand there should be no more 
poverty, no more sorrow, no more hatred, malice, and 
uncharitableness ; no strivino- of men aorainst each other 
in the rivalry of love or bitterness of hate ; no lying, 
cozening, cheating in the market-place ; for all things 
were to belong to all in common, without distinction or 
distribution. 

And here it was that the bellows-blower's instinctive 
power to sway and direct the fanaticism of his times, 
and the blind impulses of all ages among the multitude, 
appeared in a most extraordinary manner. 

To Birmingham . which had, as it were in a leaping 
from slumber, shown the most zealous forwardness in 
the work . was adjudged the high honour of making a 
still more decisive advance in it. But still it remained 
a marvel, Sisyphus modestly declared, how or why it 
was that a poor and lowly man of the town, maimed of 
his frame and unendowed with any good persuasive 
power of any kind . though, he trusted, a resolved and 
seasoned soldier of the Lord . was chosen out to declare 
the great tidings to the good town, and also to carry out 
the pleasure of the Lord, on the preliminary arrange- 
ments for His advent. 

But with such a mission he declared himself graced. 



EDWARD HOLTE'S MISSION. 2-51 

by the special favour and selection of the Shining Mao, 
in the town of Birmingham. 

No wonder it is that, finding themselves in almost all 
ages oppressed and unhappy, the masses of the nations 
ever cherish a sense of unjust deprivation, and a longing 
for change, which compose the sure and exhaustless 
armoury of the demagogue. But, on the whole, the 
doctrine enunciated harmonised extremely well with the 
religious fancies and exaltation in mystical Biblical 
reveries of the time. To behold the completion of the 
great work of human redemption with their own eyes . 
the visible manifestation of the power and glory of Gfod 
to mortal vision . what a prospect was here to those 
weary and worn with scanning the obscure assurances of 
bygone prophecy! Nor can it be denied that to be 
called upon in the name of peace and all righteousness 
to help yourself to your neighbour's goods and chattels 
of every kind could never be a very distasteful doctrine 
to a needy and toil-worn populace. . 

Like the modern Socialists and Mormons, the Bir- 
mingham prophet took good care not to reveal the 
corruption of debauchery and materialism vvbich lurked 
in the depths of all his fine outward religionism and 
restoralion of equalit}^ and fraternity among mankind. 
The suspected secret immorality of his life . the accusa- 
tions of enemies . the instincts of sao-acious minds . 
alone drew the inferences, which he was artful and skil- 
ful enough to veil from the ruder apprehensions of the 
multitude by a really extraordinarily eloquent and 
powerful generality of imaginative description, in which 
he figured the original paradise of man's innocence and 
delighted enjoyment of existence restored upon this 
earth. 



252 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER LIX. 
tubal's grand argument. 

The results appeared in a significant manner. 

Aware of the power of outward symbols upon the 
popular feeling, the bellows-blower concluded his har- 
angue by demanding if the people were satisfied to 
forward the cause of the Lord by giving him their votes 
and interest in the election of a religious ruler for th^ 
town ? If so, they were to signify their consent to the 
passing away of all the old order of obstructions and 
usurpations to the glory of Grod, in a manner he should 
point out. Then, taking the largest of the five torches 
from one of the attendant Anabaptists, he presented it 
to the crowd, yelling, ' This is the usurpation of Charles 
Stuart, calling himself the King; are you w^illing it 
should be extinguished ? ' And numerous voices an- 
swering * Yea, yea,' he tossed and flourished it frantically 
in the air, scattering sparks and drops of fire in every 
direction, and then plunged it into the pool of dirty 
watej* at his feet. 

He did the like with a second torch, which he de- 
clared to represent a persecuting prelacy; with a third, 
which he styled an unbelieving, poor-man-trampling 
magistracy, amidst the triumphant yells and groans of 
Faithful Moggs ; with a fourth, which he denounced as 



253 

representing all the false college and book-learning and 
teaching, the law-giving and law-making of Kings and 
Parliament alike. And then he came to the la^^t of his 
five blazing symbols, which he seized with an evident 
increase of exasperation and ill-feeling towards what it 
it symbolised in his thoughts. 

* And this,' he yelled out, ^ represents all that is to be 
hated, dreaded, and extirpated in all the rest . the proud 
Holtes of Aston Hall, who have brought the cavaliers 
into the country to harry and destroy us all, and who 
have already made corn so dear that the poor man can 
hardly buy him a loaf with a day's wage. I say, let us 
destroy the whole accursed, tyrannical brood, wherever 
we can find them, and lay the house of their cruelties 
and pride as level with the dust as the towers of Baby- 
lon of old.' 

Strange to say, the very mob who but a few moments 
before had shouted for ' Peace, the King, and Master 
Holte,' now noisily clamoured vengeance and destruction 
on the whole, in their response to this appeal. 

Tubal looked greatly vexed and nonplussed. 

' We have done wrong to let those rogues fancy they 
have any right to a say in the town's affairs, the regu- 
lation whereof is altogether with the lord and sub- 
stantial burgesses,' he said. ' But let them yelp their 
hearts out ; if they attempt aught on you, I will make 
them con rather a hard lesson out of my hornbook. 
Let us go now to the Guildhall, and determine matters 
with the men of judgment and estate. Perhaps these 
barking dogs will go to biting, and I had as lief it 
came to the argument of blows now as at any other 
time.' 

' They are more likely to attack us where we are. 



254 THE akmouker's daughter. 

nevertheless,' said Edward ; ' or what is it they are 
shouting now ? ' 

A little attention speedily made this point clear. 

Sisyphus had dexterously availed himself of the 
emotion stirred in the populace. 

* Why, yonder, then,' he roared, ' is the heir and 
representative of the whole wicked and masterful race 
of the Holtes, who has come among us, as it is said, to 
seduce us into making a truce with the devil, and peace 
with the hinderer of the Holy Grhost I Those who are 
in earnest in what you have said, let them then follow 
me over his insolent carcass into the church, where you 
have promised to place me in the old dumb dog's 
place w^e had erewhile ; and whence I will declare to ye, 
at a much clearer length, all the will and purposes of 
the Lord ; and thereby also shall we obtain possession 
of the person of the traitress and espial of the enemy, 
Dorothy Firebrace, who we all know is refuged in it, 
with other enemies of Grod and the good town.' 

' Good heaven ! is this true. Tubal ? ' enquired 
Edward, with much more alarm than any apprehensions 
for his own safety could have aroused in him. 

' It is,' replied Tubal. ^ I knew no safer place, while 
I was bound to be absent from Deritend and the Moat 
House too, on this busiuess ; and so I have locked her 
safely in the church, with her friends the Coopers, and 
Mr. Lane. But she will be alarmed with this hurly- 
burly, which she must needs in pai't overhear, though 
not see. Take the keys, dear Master Holte, and go in 
and comfort her, while I deal with this clamorous 
rabblement.' 

* Certes, no, while I can be of some help with my 
sword by your side, Master Bromycham,' Edward re- 



tubal's grand argument. 255 

plied. ' Let us make ready for an onset, for I am sure 
they purpose it.' 

' Let them come then,' said Tubal, with a grim smile, 
' and taste the fiery breath of Bromycham's dragon. 
Ho, William Moorcroft and Philip Smalbroke I bring 
my cannon-piece out of the church I ' 

Tubal, as he spoke, handed a bunch of massive keys 
to one of his burly smiths, who, with a comrade, 
instantly made for the porch of St. Martin's; and 
almost as quickly as Edward could utter a remonstrance 
against opening the doors at all, to everybody's aston- 
ishment the doors opened, and a piece of artillery, of 
unusual size at that time, appeared in the entrance of 
the church, ready to be wheeled out. 

' It is the first ^\\n of the size ever cast in Birminsr- 
ham, and perchance may be the last, for our trade lies 
not in such heavy war goods ; but out of its mouth will 
I speak what shall satisfy all gainsayers its maker and 
melder is master here, as elsewhere,' said Tubal, with 
an expression full of the triumphant haughtiness of 
successful genius. ' Loaded to the muzzle, and all,' he 
continued, uncovering a tow rope round a portion of 
the deadly instrument, and tramping with so strenuous 
a gesture on the sulphured end that it lit instantly into 
flame. 

' Bring my dragon forward, mates,' he then said ; 
' let these good folks see well what they are about ; 
and if they need a second blasting of his fiery breath, 
keep them well ofi" the churchyard wall with your 
hammers and pikes while I reload. We shall see which 
will be weary first.' 

But the portentous appearance instantly produced its 
usual effect upon £in unmilitary multitude. 



256 THE armourer's daughter. 

Even trained soldiers are with difficulty brought to 
face artillery directly, and no sooner had the excited 
throng in the Bull King, ready enough for a hand-to- 
hand conflict with the defenders of St. Martin's, espied 
the ponderous instrument of destruction emerge from 
its porch, than a salutary awe was stricken into the 
whole movement, and it was brought to a sudden 
pause. 

In vain did Sisyphus, who, with all his faults, was a 
courageous soldier, endeavour to revive the ardour of 
his backers. 

* It is but to make a brave onset, and take the cul- 
verin from them. It must needs be awkward and badly 
fashioned by a toy-smith like Tubal Bromycham. Had 
I but my arm and hand, I would soon let you see my 
meaning. Fie on ye, cowards I are ye turning tail 
already, before we know whether it will even go off 
or no ? ' 

But the alarm had increased into panic in this brief 
interval, when Tubal, out-thundering every lesser sound, 
and holding the burning tow aloft with one hand, while 
with the other he pointed to the hour-hands on St. 
Martin's clock, shouted, ' Make the best of your next 
five minutes hence, my good friends, or you shall know 
to yonr costs whether Tubal Bromycham has spent all 
his leisure hours since these wars began for something 
or for much ! ' 

This assemblage certainly w^as not disposed to doubt 
the skill in any species of manufacture in the stubborn 
metals of the prime artisan of the town. In spite of 
all Sisyphus's raving exhortations and entreaties, not a 
single person offered to continue the attack. 

Even Faithful Moggs stared aghast at the preparation. 



tubal's grand argument. 257 

and rauttering, * Xay, master, for a man |"shall have his 
own head in a ditch a mile ofif ere he can lend the 
other's a crack,' would not stir a stump. 

In short, ere the five given minutes were elapsed . 
or, indeed, half of them . the entire Bull Ring had 
become, in some strange and almost miraculous manner, 
deserted, and quit of all its noisy and threatening 
throngs. 

Sisyphus himself, perceiving the danger he ran of 
being singled out as a sole mark for the indignation of 
his triumphant opposers, was reluctantly compelled at 
last to follow the general example. 

But not completely solitary. His loving helpmate 
overtook him as he was turning into an obscure street 
out of the market-place, and ironically congratulated 
him on the events of the day. 

' So you have saved what remains of you, Sissy, my 
dear,' she exclaimed. ' But you are not going to be 
King of Birmingham to-night; and the armourer's 
pretty daughter is safe in St. Martin's Church still.' 

* Begone, hag ! exclaimed the infuriate prophet, 
turning angrily upon her. * I repudiate and divorce 
you at once and for ever from my bed and board, and 
henceforth hold you no more a wife of mine than Lot 
his wife when she became even as a pillar of salt.' 

' Aye, aye. Sissy, dear. But your law is not yet law 
in Birmingham. And who will help you to your meals 
and stockings if you cast me off? Will the armourer's 
beauteous daughter, whose lover has come so bravely on 
a visit to her now, and who doubtless means to cany 
her away with him ? ' 

' Ha, say you so ? I will rend him first piecemeal 
with this hook,' returned Sisyphus, whitening with rage. 

VOL. II. s 



258 

Yet, perceiving the danger of further irritating his 
vicious consort, he said retractingly, ' But this is one of 
the maddest of your jealousies, Meg; and you would 
have acknowledged it so, if I could have made my way 
into the church. The traitress's head should have rolled 
upon a block, as comely as you deem it ; and you 
should have shown it yourself as such, an' it had pleased 
you, to the people. The people ! miserable dastards, 
to 'fly before the gleaming of a piece of metal in the 
sun. "WTiat would they have done had they been with 
me at the storming of Heidelberg, whence I so right- 
fully deserted to the enemy, and led them up the rocks 
to the assault ? '. 



259 



CHAPTER LX. 

ST. martin's church. 

Meai^while Edward Holte and Tubal exchanged a brief 
congratulation on their bloodless victory. 

' This is wonderful, but most exactly as it should be. 
dear Tubal ! The mob taught manners, anarchy effec- 
tually quelled, and yet no man hurt in his own person 
or his friends to stir up a lasting animosity I ' Edward 
exclaimed, warmly shaking the hero of the occasion by 
the hand. 

'I am glad of it, too; I would be as mild a neat- 
herd as the kind of cattle allows, in my rule ; and 
whatever the scholar's word you use. Master Holte, may 
mean, I am satisfied I have shown who is to be master 
in Birmingham awhile,' Tubal replied, adding, with a 
smile, though with a slight quiver in his tones, * You 
may tell the story in as choice language as it likes you, 
at Aston Hall ; and let Sii* Thomas moreover know that 
he owes it to one whom he has little reason to count his 
friend, that Aston Hall still stands whole and sound. 
For had Captain Cromwell been aware of my possession 
of this artillery, he would have taken it into his own 
manage, and without doubt have tried what distance it 
would carry from the Park to his walls. At least before 
yonder Prince fellow and his dragoons arrived.' 



260 THE armoueer's daughter. 

* It is likely enough, and you turn out in all respects 
very different from anything as yet apprehended in you, 
either by friends or foes, Master Bromycham,' said 
Edward. * Neither, in the long run, do I deem the 
commonalty will owe you any grudge for standing be- 
tween them and the pernicious counsels of the wretch 
who wants to establish himself as their leader. But be 
certain so determined a fellow as this bellows-blower 
will soon puff up a new flame of agitation ; perhaps 
against the peace we propose. I would have him ex- 
pelled the town at once.' 

' That is not so easy as crushing eggs, it fears me,' 
replied Tubal, * so to speak, for I know not fear in any 
real conjunction with the handless rogue. But he has 
established himself with a lot of his cut-purse renegades 
at the Parsonage House, several of them not ill-armed, 
.and vows he wt^II set it on fire and make the whole a 
desolation rather than surrender the post to any but 
the officer of the Parliament who he says gave it to his 
holding. We must see about that some other day ; but 
meanwhile it will be as well to lose no diligence in 
proceeding in your matter, Master Holte. Our town 
councillors can assemble and give their opinions now 
with no dread of a pelting, which some would allege 
as a pretence to keep away, and I will send a summons 
round among them to the Gruildhall without further loss 
of time. It is the bailiff^s business, but at present I 
Jiave none. John Cooper would thankfully take office 
under me, but his wife, who is his master, will not have 
it so.' 

' Meanwhik, then,' said Edward, eagerly, ' I may 
devote a few moments to seeing Mistress Firebrace, and 
assuring her of my unfailiug love and fidelity. Said 



ST. martin's church. 261 

you not she is in the church ? Though I did not espy 
her there when the gates opened.' 

' Have no fear,' said Tubal smiling, ' you will find 
Dorothy safe within. Make use then of a short half 
hour, which will suffice me to bring the master 
armourer and other chief men to the meeting. But I 
disguise not that Firebrace himself is possessed with 
strange, and assuredly most undeserved, suspicions of 
your intentions towards his fair daughter ; and is the 
worse content, very Hkely, that he cannot hint me into 
a jealously angry sharing of the same I ' 

Edward blushed with honest shame at the thought 
that he could mean anything but perfect good faith and 
honour towards his betrothed wife. 

' My actions will always justify your confidence, never 
the armourer's suspicions. Yet I blame him not for 
his anxious care to fend off the possibility of evil from 
his child,' he said. 'Farewell awhile now, , Master 
Bromycham, or rather Tubal, Lord of Birmingham, in 
all reality I I >vill strive not to exceed my leave, and 
will be "with you at the best speed I can make.' 

Edward now proceeded into the old church, hearing 
Tubal, as he did so, give general instructions to his men 
as to the watch and guard of the precincts, and a proper 
accompaniment of Master Holte to the intended as- 
semblage of the chief citizens in New Street. 

The mother church of Birmingham has little to 
boast of in the way of architecture. But in point of 
antiquity it rivals the oldest buildings in England, of 
which aught but ruins remains. 

It is said to have been founded upwards of a thou- 
sand years ago ; but the decay of so ancient a fabric 
rendering repairs necessary, the vandalism of the 



262 THE armourer's DAUaHTER. 

eighteenth century deprived St. Martin's of its great 
claim on veneration in most external respects. The 
crumbling stone walls were then encased in brickwork ; 
the stained glass windows removed ; the flooring, 
silently eloquent with records of the dead, repaved ; 
and numerous time-defaced but interesting and solemn 
memorials of the past, in the shape of monuments 
and tablets, were cast, like the sweepings of a statu- 
ary's studio, to moulder in the vaults below the 
church. 

In 1 642 St. Martin's still preserved the aspect of its 
already great antiquity. The black, worm-eaten oak of 
benches, pulpit, and altar-piece was an appropriate fur- 
niture to the time-grey walls, and the ghostly tenantry 
of the statuary on the tombs, yellow and black with 
extreme agre. 

These monuments were chiefly of the Birmingham 
family, ancestors of Tubal, as were the principal parts of 
the coats of arms emblazoned in the window panes, 
which attested a long course of illustrious alliances and 
intermarriages of the race. 

The most ancient county names figured among 
these: Astley, Someri, Seagrave, Peshall, Marmion, 
Wyrley, Freville, Fitzwarren, Montalt, Beauchamp, 
Latimer, Ferrers, and Townshend. The most ancient 
monument in the church, with a single exception . 
being the figure of a knight in complete armour, of the 
thirteenth century . was of a Birmingham who had 
figured in the wars of Edward I. And the excep- 
tion was one so much worn and battered in the lapse 
of ages as only to present the mutilated trunk of a 
warrior in mail armour, lying under a canopy, with 
armless hands crossed in devotion on the breast, and a 



ST. martin's church. 263 

Latin inscription below, ^Yhich had become illegible to 
any but antiquarian eyes. 

Little of all this attracted Edward Holte's attention, 

whose eager glance sought a living lovely object of its 

own. But to his surprise, and perhaps alarm, he only 

. perceived three persons present, all of whom he knew, 

and Dorothy Firebrace was not of the number. 

These were the ex-Bailiff Cooper and his wife, and 
Mr. Lane. 

The last was sitting on the pulpit stairs, propping his 
chin on his hands, and looking very pale and tremulous 
as if in apprehension of some great approaching disaster. 
And, indeed, his mud-bespattered clerical robe and 
general appearance denoted that he had already received 
rather unhandsome usage in his passage through the 
town on his embassy, doubtless from the Anabaptist 
mobsmen. 

Bailiff Cooper had ' accepted the situation ' in a very 
different manner. He had taken possession of the 
clerk's seat beneath the pulpit, where he had fallen 
asleep, and was suoring lustily ; while his consort stared, 
wakeful as an old but still eager and hungry hawk in its 
aerie, from the pulpit itself above. 

Hearing footsteps in the church, Mr. Lane craned his 
neck forward with evident anxiety, and no sooner per- 
ceived Edward tlian he quite sprang to meet him. 

And yet his first words expressed rather sorrow than 
welcome at the arrival : ' How grieved I am you have 
ventured into this trampling and goring watering-place 
of the bulls of Bashan, my dear Edward ! ' he exclaimed. 
*I was only waiting for nightfall to effect my own 
escape, and implored the young man who has set him- 
self up in the captaincy of the town . and who, I dx) 



264 THE armourer's daughter. 

confess, laid about him like a flailer in my behalf . to 
warn you not to come among such a lawless multitude.' 
' All is well, dear sir, and the rabble dispersed with 
the mere show of armed suppression. But where is 
Dorothy ; where is Mistress Firebrace, I mean, who I 
was told w^as refuged with you here ? ' said Edward. 

The agitation and eagerness of the query evidently 
communicated a somewhat similar emotion to the 
weakly-nerved and sympathetic old clergyman. Or else 
some feeling of his own, quieted awhile by personal ap- 
prehensions, revived to trouble him. Mr. Lane trembled 
all over as he answered, ' Nay, my dear Edward, never 
ask me ! What do you want, what can you want, what 
ought you to want with the poor girl ? ' 

' What has become of her, Mr. Lane ? You alarm 
me. Where is Dorothy Firebrace, I repeat ? ' Edward 
replied, with an increase rather than diminution of his 
excitement. 

' Dorothy Firebrace I He calls her Dorothy Firebrace 
thus familiarly I My fears are confirmed. Edward, 
Edward Holte ! dearest youth I this, then, is the un- 
happy girl whom your brother Kichard has declared to 
be the object of your unlawful attachment in Birming- 
ham, and for whose sake you run such hazards in the 
unruly town ! ' groaned Mr. Lane. * But, alas I need I 
any other information than her own tearful questioning* 
on 'your welfare, and her strange probings to ascertain 
how matters stood between you and the lady you have 
been so long betrothed to at Hagley ! ' 

' What is all this you say ? I ask you only where 
she is ? ' exclaimed Edward, now almost wild with im- 
patience and apprehension. 

* And I answer you . It must not, and it ought not 



.ST. MARTIJi'cs CHURCH. 265 

to concern you, Master Holte ! Consider who you are, 
and that Dorothy Firebrace never can be honourably 
yours ; and pause ere you resolve to pursue the guidance 
of a cruel passion, which, feigning to love and cherish, 
can but bring destruction and disgrace and utter misery 
on its hapless object I ' the good clerg}Tnan continued 
remonstrating. ' Consider, also, dear boy * it is no com- 
mon victim you projoose yourself: that Dorothy Fire- 
brace is the daughter of one of the wealthiest townsmen 
of Birmingham, although he has unhappily allowed 
himself to be hustled into treason and rebellion by the 
crowding madness of the times I That, although exer- 
cising now a mechanical trade, her family descends from 
a nobler race than j^ours, as the most ancient monument 
in this church . yonder it is, the tomb of Audomar 
Ferre-Bras, Knight of the most Holy Order of the 
Temple, an exile by tyranny, but descended from an 
illustrious ancestry in France . her ancestor, attests ! 
Aod that, to crown all, poor Dorothy is a girl as 
bravely-hearted as she is beautiful, who has saved your 
life, and who . who . who is the daughter of a woman 
whom I loved in my own youth ! Vainly, indeed, since 
she preferred (and justly) a famous armourer of Bir- 
mingham to a poor chaplain and dependent on a proud 
master! yet for w^hose memory's sake do I, and shall I 
ever, live wifeless and childless to my grave I ' 

In the earnestness of the plea thus made, Mr. Lane 
actually clasped his hands, and crouched his limbs 
almost as if kneeling to Edward Holte. 

The latter was moved by w^hat he heard, but still 
more irritated. 

' Grood heavens, Mr. Lane I ' he exclaimed, ' what has 
put it into your head that I design any harm to the 



266 THE armourer's daughter. 

maiden? Have I as foul a reputation with regard to 
women as the lying traitor who spreads his falsehoods 
everywhere concerning his brother and a young girl, who 
is as pure as snow newly fallen, and towards whom I 
declare to you, by all that is holy, I mean nothing but 
honour and . and . gratitude . if you will call it so I ' 

* In that case, Master Holte,' Dame Cooper now ob- 
served, with becoming solemnity, from her exalted seat, 
' I take upon me to inform you. Mistress Dorothy has 
gone up the belfry stairs, to spy from an opening there 
is in the steeple how things are going on at the Bull 
King. The moment she heard you were expected in 
the town, and distinguished the noise and swaying of 
the people outside awhile ago, she was no longer to be 
restrained, though she had on one of her bettermore 
kirtles, and it is as dusty and narrow as a chimney to 
the roof.' 

But ere this explanation was half concluded, Edward 
was searching round for the means of access to the upper 
regions alluded to ; and sppng a narrow door open in 
the wall, he darted towards it, and found indeed a wind- 
ing flight of stairs, almost as close and steep as a cork- 
screw, comparatively speaking, but which he did not a 
moment hesitate to ascend. 



26' 



CHAPTER LXI. 

THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 

The spiral passage terminated in a chamber in which 
hung a peal of twelve bells, celebrated in the town for 
their melodious cadences. And here Edward expected to 
find his Dorothy. But her non-appearance, and an open 
window in the front, satisfied him that in her eagerness 
to obtain a view of the proceedings in the market-place, 
she had ventured out on the shelving roof of the church. 

Now as this was only protected at the time by a low 
gutter without parapet at the edges, the notion greatly 
alarmed him. And not without reason ; for on looking 
out he perceived Dorothy lying on the sloping tiles, 
clutching fearfully at them, and seemingly afraid to 
make any movement to extricate herself from her 
dangerous and uncomfortable position I She had over- 
looked every personal consideration in her eagerness to 
observe what fortuned to her lover, in the angrily ex- 
cited scene below ; but found it by no means so easy to 
retrace her way, when the impulse of a more powerful 
actuating motive than even self-preservation ceased to 
exercise its influence on her mind. 

Edward was exceedingly alarmed lest his sudden ap- 
proach should startle her and produce some catastrophe. 
And yet he perceived that assistance was required without 



268 

delay. He therefore said not a word, but jumped from 
the window, and placing himself astraddle on the arch 
of the roof, clutched his too rashly devoted betrothed in 
a strenuous grasp, almost before she was aware of any- 
one's approach. 

* Fear not now, dearest I Draw yourself up ; Edward 
Holte's strong hand is upon you.' 

And Dorothy indeed feared no longer then. In a 
few moments she was safely beside her lover on the 
coping of the roof. In a few more moments safely 
supported by him into the belfry ; and then, falling into 
his embrace, she swooned away. 

'I saw you enter the church, dearest,' she mur- 
mured first, ' and only then felt on what a giddy shelv- 
ing I had placed myself, when I strove to return to 
welcome you. Alas, thus I ' 

Edward essayed the few remedies in his power, know- 
ing that it would be in vain to summon aid in their 
present elevation. 

He had luckily a hunting-flask of wine in his pocket, 
and applying this to Dorothy's pale lips, and chafing 
her temples and hands, he had soon the satisfaction of 
seeing her revive. But, doubtless, had this nervous 
crisis overtaken her in her recent perilous position, 
great risk of a fatal catastrophe would have been in- 
curred. 

We need not chronicle the first five minutes of the 
lovers' ecstasy, thus restored to each other. In fact, 
there would be little to be recorded save sighs, and tears, 
and kisses . numberless passionate pressings to each 
other's hearts . wild repetitions of each other's names, 
coupled with every imaginable endearing epithet ; and 
then the whole fond delirium over again. 



THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 269 

Dorothy was the first who recovered some degree of 
self-possession. 

* It is enough, dearest,' she said. ' We cannot doubt 
each other's love ; but, oh, if there were any witnesses, 
would not this meeting too much support the falsehoods 
of ray enemies ? Xay, what is harder still to be borne, 
the sad surmises of my poor father, in whose every word 
and look, since the night of our parting, I read sus- 
picions that trouble my inmost soul. But what have 
vou done for us at Nottinc^ham with the Kins"? Have 
we secured a royal patron there, at all events, to our 
persecuted love, at the cost of almost every other friend- 
liness ? ' 

Edward was a good deal embarrassed with this ques- 
tion. But it was necessary to confess and explain his 
failure, as it might well be considered, to the expec- 
tant maiden. 

He did so as briefly as he could, and endeavouring to 
put the most favourable gloss on the King's demeanour 
towards himself on the occasion compatible with the 
inevitable truth. . 

Dorothy listened with, an expression of intense dis- 
appointment. 

' An unkingly King,' she murmured, 'that measures 
out his gratitude as a pedlar his tapes, by the ell-wand 
for a penny I Those who serve such princes do so of 
their own loyalty alone. And the traitor Grimsorwe to 
have so completely circumvented you ! But who could 
be prepared for the glide and subtlety of the serpent in 
man's outward upright form ? I blame you not, my 
Edward ; it was a deceit past calculation. But the 
hopes you hold out in Charles's gratitude appear to me 



270 THE armourer's daughter. 

little more than the fleeting promise of a rainbow on 
the skirts of a tempest coming up fast on the wind.' 

' You are indeed in great danger, dearest, in this town, 
from much besides your father's silent disapproval,' 
said Edward, mournfully. * A portion of the mob 
demand your fair head as that of an enemy to their 
rebellious will and purposes. The Parliament's repre- 
sentative here, now Captain Cromwell is gone, requires 
that you should be sent a prisoner before prejudiced and 
merciless judges in London. Tubal Bromycham, who 
has so courageously protected you hitherto, may not 
always be on the alert, or have the means in readiness. 
Who can tell what may be the progress of the war, or 
which party may rise to complete ascendency in the 
town? For all these reasons, dearest Dorothy, I im- 
plore you do not hesitate to comply with the earnest 
entreaty I make you, and leave Birmingham at once for 
some place of safety and quiet, where my love may con- 
stantly watch over your comfort and security.' 

A blush, like a flame of fire, burst on Dorothy's 
cheeks as she listened to these words, and seemed to 
redden vt) even in her brilliantly excited eyes. 

' What mean you by this proposal. Master Holt« ? ' 
she exclaimed, with sudden passionate vivacity ; ' that I 
should do all that in me lies to establisli for truth your 
dastardly brother's perjuries, and bring my father's grey 
hairs with sorrow to the grave ? Na}^, to myself become 
the thing I most abhor, a shamed and shameful daughter 
of a name which, let me tell you, is emblazoned noble 
on tombs more ancient than any Holtes in Aston or 
Erdington. No; rather may the wild beast Sisyphus 
rend me with his single ta,lon,and fling me in shreds to 
the cannibals of his faction to devour ; or the. Londoners 



THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 271 

make a holiday to see my head roll on a scaffold on 
Tower Hill!' 

Edward gazed with admiring despair at the beautiful, 
excited speaker, as she thus uttered a resolve so noble 
and true to her pure, and generous, and heroic nature, 
but which so evidently increased the dangers of the 
position. 

He could perceive but one means of extrication, to 
which the passion which had taken possession of all the 
strongest energies of his being, also irresistably im- 
pelled. 

' Not so, not so, my own Dorothy, my dearest all I 
Whatever ruin may come of it ; whatever engine to my 
destruction it may put in the devilish Grimsorwe's 
grasp with my father; I ask you only to leave your 
father's house, and this raving town, as the known and 
declared wife of Edward Holte.' 

Dorothy's indignant expression vanished on the ut- 
terance of the beautiful and sacred word which alone 
consecrates and exalts the destiny of woman on the 
earth. More : it changed entirely into one of the most 
adoring and ecstatic tenderness; and snatching Edward's 
hand in both hers to her bosom, tears burst in showers 
of diamonds on her lovely cheeks. 

' Dearest, faithfiillest, most generous of men and 
lovers,' she exclaimed, ' forgive the doubt, the selfish- 
ness, the fears, my demands must seem to imply. But 
if I lose thee, dear, most dear Edward, I lose the ^vhole 
happiness of my existence; and what is existence with- 
out happiness ? To eat, to drink, to sleep . who cares 
to live for these alone ? And yonder kind and worthy, 
though too faintly-hearted chaplain of Aston Hall, who 
recognised me with tears as the child of a woman whom 



272 THE armourer's daughter. 

he had himself loved in long by-gone years, warned me 
of your betrothal to another . of your father's inflexible 
will . and of how immediately he had determined on 
the completion of the contract between you and the 
Lady Penelope Lyttelton.' 

^ So he denounces, dearest ; but I have always told 
you it is hopeless to think to obtain my father's con- 
sent to our union. In all probability he will be irritated 
even to the extent of totally disinheriting me. So he 
has threatened me, if I dared dream of disobedience to 
his will in this respect. Grrimsorwe, whose plots you 
have yourself discovered are all laid to supersede me, 
will be at hand to feed the flame. But what matters 
all this ? I shall have my sword still, and the woman 
I adore, and so guerdoned will accept, smilingly, what- 
ever the envy and malice of fate can do in all other 
forms to mischief me I ' 

Dorothy looked yearningly in her lover's noble and 
manly visage, instinct with the brightness of fidelity 
and love and honour towards herself and her whole sex, 
as it were, in the chivalrous candour of his devotion 
to one. And her tears fell faster yet as she resumed 
utterance, in reply to that outburst of generous as- 
surance. 

'Dear life I ' she sobbed, 'but can we not find some 
means to baffle the hatred and malice of our enemies . 
the cruel prejudices of these who yet love us well . 
without giving ourselves up for immolation, bound 
hand and foot ? A private marriage, my own Edward! 
. a private marriage between us meets every objection 
. removes every cause for dissatisfaction and fear . in 
iill respects save my poor father's headstrong wish to 
have me wedded to Tubal, and so removed out of the 



THE CLANDESTINE MARIIIAGE. 273 

peril he so much and so causelessly dreads for his 
child I ' 

'A private marriage! And you will accompany me 
then to Sutton, where for awhile I am banished from 
Aston to reside ? ' exclaimed Edward, with the eager 
assent and hopefulness of youthful passion to such a 
proposition. 

Dorothy's splendid blush again reappeared, but of a 
softer carnation, glowing all over her beauteous frame. 

' But how were it then, dear Edward,' she said, gently 
withdrawing from his clasping arms, ' with your wife's 
fair fame in men's eyes, and my father's dreads ? No 
future declaration could ever clear my renown from 
the blurts that would come upon it, or . if God should 
so bless us . secure our children's true birth and legi- 
timacy from cavil and sneer I My noblest Edward, no ! 
I would have you put all my doubts and fears to rest 
by marrying me. But I would remain in my father's 
house, uublamed by him and others, until . until cir- 
cumstances might enable . might compel us . to divulge 
our union. And meanwhile, dear husband of my soul 
and heart, do not fear but that . but that . we shall 
find place and occasion to meet and. and assure each 
other of our everlasting love and constancy.' 

There was a dove-like, billing intimation of tender- 
ness and bliss in these latter words, which would have 
overborne far stronger scruples of worldly interest and 
prudence than ever found an abiding in the breast of 
Edward Holte. But in truth, the scheme bore a great 
appearance of reconciling the whole contradiction of 
feelings and motives, that might have influenced 
soberer calculators than two young lovers in such a 
crisis of their passion's fate. 

VOL. n. T 



274 

If Edward could not make himself altogether blind 
to objections, he certainly uttered none. 

' All shall be as you have said, my sweetest ! ' he 
exclaimed, once more folding his bride-elect in his fond 
embrace. ' Come the worst, then, you can flee to a 
husband's protection at anytime at Sutton Manor-House. 
He will not shut the door upon you, depend, who would 
open his very heart to receive you, if need were. Thus 
shall we elude our fathers' suspicions and injustice, baffle 
the bastard traitor's intrigues and malice of suggestion 
in all shapes, and obtain time to improve what favour 
our duties may have acquired with the King, by some 
braver service of my sword in his cause. Nothing is 
necessary but an inviolate secrecy, which I know your 
love for me will well preserve. I have sworn to marry 
you, and an oath in heaven should be kept as speedily 
as possible on earth. Grrimsorwe's calumnies will thus 
but have worked to his own harming, and my perfect 
happiness, whom he ^vould so fain have consigned to 
misery and ruin. Here is my hand in solemn plight, 
Dorothy Firebrace. Accept it, and it is for ever 
yours ! ' 

' I do, dear love, I do ! Take all I am in return, and 
at the same time my promise to God of inviolable 
secrecy until you yourself shall resolve and ^vill to 
blazon our marriage to the world,' said Dorothy, pro- 
foundly affected at the generous devotion of her young 
lover. ' Neither to father, or family, or to friends . for 
love, or fear, or foolish vanity . will I ever forget that 
your ruin or prosperity hang on the faithful observance 
of my word. No extremity of whatsoever kind shall 
ever subdue me to the breach, though all the world 
were clamorous round me to divulge, and every form 



THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 275 

of grief and suffering circled me in with the true 
secrecy.' 

' It needs no such oathing, my beloved girl I WTiat 
more is needed now ? Only a clergyman to receive our 
vows. We are in an inclosure dedicated to such hal- 
lowed purposes,' said Edward Holte. 

' There is a clerg3niian provided also below, or was ere- 
while. The Eeverend Mr. Lane will bestow the Church's 
benediction on us, Edward, if he is still under this roof.' 

'The Eeverend Mr. Lane, my Dorothy I You are 
ignorant, then, how timorous he is by nature ; in what 
awe he stands of my father's displeasure,' sighed the 
purposed bridegroom, as if resigning any hope in the 
direction indicated. 

' I am not ignorant of aught of this, dearest,' Dorothy 
replied. 'But I know also . for his emotion was too 
sincere and overpowering on recognising me, not to 
reveal the fact . that this good clerg}-man loved my 
mother in his youth. Mr. Lane, believe me, has all the 
kindness and pitifulness of a woman, with the weak 
fears of one. Leave it to me: I will prevail upon him, 
doubt not, to utter the words which will for ever rescue 
the child of the woman he loved from the fate he dreads 
for her. The witness we should need is also provided 
in the person of Dame Alice Cooper, who is a woman 
whose secrecy may be depended upon, if any woman's 
may. She most certainly dislikes Tubal Bromycham 
for displacing her husband, and will think you out-rival 
him by marrying me. And, besides, she is about to 
retire in disgust from Birmingham to her native town 
of Stratford-on-Avon. 

. Be it so,' said Edward Holte. ' Let us descend into 



276 THE armourer's daughter. 

the church ; we will not care for the snorer in the clerk's 
pulpit.' 

We need not detail at length the consternation of Mr. 
Lane on the first divulging of the projected union to 
him . his first refusals to have anything to do in the 
matter . his affrighted representations of Sir Thomas 
Holte's certain wrath and chastisement of so great an 
act of disobedience on the part of his son, and abetting 
in the revolt on his own. Dorothy had calculated, with 
a true .womanly instinct, on her means of overcoming 
this repugnance of fear, when emotions of such strength 
could be looked to, to influence on the contrary side. 
Above all, when she could appeal to the memory of that 
' fond, foolish ' past, if the reader will so consider it, 
which attached Mr. Lane, by a shadowy and mournful, 
but very loving species of paternity to herself; a me- 
mory suddenly revived, as it were, from the grave, in 
her strong and now matured resemblance to her de- 
parted mother, the gentle clergyman's love of youth. 

Edward added his entreaties to his friend; his as- 
surances that only more risk of discovery would be 
incurred by their being obliged to have recourse to 
another clergyman, as he was resolved nothing should 
hinder him from fulfilling his agreement with his 
betrothed. 

Dame Cooper, who had been taken into the confi- 
dence, and who highly relished the whole romantic 
plan, which she declared (rather ominously) resembled 
to a nicety the stolen marriage of Romeo and Juliet, in 
her ' dear Willie Shakespeare's play,' joined her ex- 
hortations to Mr. I<ane to fulfill his duty as a clergy- 
man in making lawful the loves of two young creatures. 



THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 277 

whom Nature herself had so evidently marked out as a 
pair. 

The poor man yielded at last, though with infinite 
fear and trembling, vanquished by Dorothy's tears rather 
than any argument ; but not until he had made all 
the parties to the act join in a solemn oath, upon the 
Bible, never to reveal the secret to any other human 
being but by one another's consent and allowance. 

Mr. Lane hoped in this way to secure himself time 
for effecting a retreat from Sir Thomas Holte's resent- 
ment, should the discovery of his son's prodigious act of 
disobedience take place. He then finally consented to 
officiate in the rite, in his clerical capacity ; and in a 
very, very brief period the words were said that cannot 
be unsaid, the vows were exchanged which only death 
could release, the whole solemn consecration of one man 
to one woman in marriao^e was orone through between 
the armourer's daughter and the heir of Aston Hall I 

Dame Cooper's friendly zeal supplied the wedding 
ring from her own finger ; and, if this alone were not 
unlucky enough, it was certainly no happy omen that, 
being too large, it dropped from the bride's finger as 
she knelt beside her newly-made husband to receive the 
final benediction. And the chink of the falling symbol 
on the stones, slight as it was, after the day's turmoil 
which he had overslept, like the last straw which breaks 
the camel's back, woke up ex-Bailiff Cooper in his snug- 
gery. Bat before he could rub his eyes awake, and stare 
out astonishment, the rite was concluded; and the 
worthy could ever after acquiesce wdth a good con- 
science in his wife's assurances that he had not seen 
what he saw^, but had awakened from a debauch of perry 
and ale, in which he had indulged to drown care, to 



278 THE armourer's daughter. 

fancy he beheld Mistress Firebrace and Edward Holte 
kneeling as bride and bridegroom, with clasped hands, 
before a white-haired, quivering priest at the altar's 
rails I 

No argument, however, could ever persuade John 
Cooper that he did not perceive Edward Holte bestow 
a kiss on the fair forehead of Dorothy Firebrace as 
the}^ arose. But he vras left immediately after to his 
own conjectures, the whole gToup receding into the 
vestry of the church, where there was an ink-standish 
for the general purposes of the building ; and where 
Mr. Lane, with a great increase of trepidation, so that 
he could hardly write, delivered to Dorothy a full attes- 
tation of her marriage, which was duly signed by all 
concerned. 

Of course it was not ventured to make any formal 
entry in the parish books, though the keys of the chest 
which contained them hung up over the dispossessed 
rector's surplice plainly enough.. But it furnished a 
remarkable piece of future evidence, that having no 
other paper on which to write, a strip of parchment was 
torn by Edward for the purpose from a very ancient 
and, of course, disused mass-book of the Catholic times, 
which Dr. Dugdale had, nevertheless, taken considerable 
pains to refurbish and cleanse from its dust of centuries, 
and had left conspicuously visible on a side table of the 
office. 

Scarcely was this momentous business thus far con- 
cluded, when William Moorcroft, Tubal's most trusted 
subordinate, made his entrance into the vestry, with 
the announcement that Master Holte was waited for at 
the Guildhall. 

Moorcroft was not a man of very rapid or acute ob- 



THE CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE. 279 

servation, and probably he explained the scene before 
him to himself on some notion that the fugitives had 
taken refuge as remotely out of danger of observation 
as possible, and had there been found by their visitor. 
At all events he showed no signs of being struck by 
anything unusual in what he witnessed, and made no 
remark whatever in relation to it. 

Edward, however, thought it best to comply at once 
with the summons ; and only whispering some few 
words to Dorothy, which brightened her face with 
* celestial rosy red, love's proper hue,' he declared he 
would return as speedily as possible to escoH Mr. Lane 
out of the church and toicn, and withdrew with his 
guide. 



280 THE ARMOURER^j! DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER LXIl. 

OPPOSITES ALIKE. 

The Gruildhall of Birmingham was a structure of very 
different appearance and proportions from the stately 
imitation of classical architecture dedicated to the uses 
of a town-house in the modern Athens of Industry. It 
was a very ancient Grothic building, chiefly of woodwork, 
with two projecting wings, and a central chamber of 
considerable extent under a low lantern-tower, where 
the rulers of the town . .' the burgesses and worthy men 
thereof . met to decide on most matters of internal 
government. In what specially concerned the lord and 
his claims and dues, an annual court was held at the 
Moat House, now occupied in that capacity by Tubal 
Bromycham. 

To this ancient Gruildhall Edward directed his steps, 
under escort, though the latter precaution seemed 
scarcely any longer necessary. Sisyphus and his adhe- 
rents had in a manner drained themselves out of the 
streets, and were believed to have retired to hold one of 
their private conclaves in Bordesley. The rest of the 
population, either overawed by the recent display of 
determination and means of carrying out repression, or 
favourable to a return of peace and quiet, offered no 



OPPOSITES ALIKE. 281 

species of obstruction or insult to the progress of the 
messenger of peace. 

In the inclosure before the Guildhall, however, Ed- 
ward was suddenly overtaken and detained by Tubal, 
who came from the direction of Digbeth. He reached 
at the cavalier's taller shoulder with his long arm, and 
abruptly stopped him. 

Tumino:, Edward saw that he was lookinQ^ flushed and 
disconcerted in a very imusual degree with him. 

This was soon explained. 

' What obstinate fools old men become I ' Tubal pas- 
sionately exclaimed to his fellow young man. ' Here 
is Greybeard P^irebrace knotted himself up against all 
reason, and voAving to oppose every motion of peace in 
the council imless I will promise immediately, and 
without a day's further delay, to wed me to his daughter. 
In self-defence, and not to grate unkindly on the old 
man's pride, I have been obliged to tell him that it is 
Dorothy who refuses any longer to accept me as her 
husband, and to remind him that she has shown a most 
evident preference for you. Upon which he has worked 
himself into a ferment of discontent and upbraiding, 
reproaching me that I was wilfully throwing his child 
over to the licentious wooing of a stranger ; that my 
pride had risen, like a bubble in boiling lead, with my 
foolish pretensions to lordship and mastery in the tur- 
bulent town ; and accused me that I am mad enough to 
fancy myself a likely match for the proudest lady of her 
station in the world, and who disdained me most . 
Arabella Holte I He touched me there rather on the 
raw . how he knows it I know not ; and I answered him, 
perchance, too sharply and peevishly, for thereupon he 
grew angrier than ever, and declared that his daughter's 



282 THE armouber's daughter. 

honour and safety were, at all events, sufficiently dear 
to himself to make him resolve to persevere as much as 
in him lies aorainst any terms likely to restore the old 
free resort and association between Aston Hall and the 
town. And in this mood, and with these purposes, there 
is much reason to fear he is coming to oppose our plans 
with all the weight of his position and influence.* 

Edward was exceedingly annoyed at this statement, 
which seemed likely to act very injuriously to his poli- 
tical objects, and consequently his best private hopes. 
It struck him, however, that some prospect of evasion 
of the difficulty was offered in an idea that occurred to 
him. He asked Tubal accordingly to bring him, if 
possible, into an interview with the master armourer in 
private, before the business on which he came was dis- 
cussed. And although Tubal plainly expressed himself 
of opinion that no good results could follow, in conse- 
quence of the armourer's exasperated state of feeling 
towards him as a person who designed dishonourable 
dealings vdth his only child, he persisted in the wish 
until the younger chief of the town promised at all 
events to exert his endeavours to effect the desired 
meeting. 

WTiile they were yet speaking, passed by several grave 
and dubiously-staring personages into the council-room, 
and Firebrace himself then appeared, stalking gloomily 
across the cobble-stoned yard before the Gruildhall. 

The grim austerity of the Puritan citizen's habitual 
look and manner was certainly in nowise diminished by 
recent events. And though Edward Holte respectfully 
bared his head as he approached, and Tubal crossed his 
way with a request for attention, it seemed likely enough 
the master armourer intended to push on without notice. 



OPPOSITES ALIKE. 283 

He almost violently thrust tlie young smith aside, or else 
himself in the effort, and muttering ' I hold no private 
converse with the enemies of the town and Parliament ! ' 
was with difficulty brought to a stand by Edward Holte's 
directly facing him. 

The firm though very respectful address of the young 
cavalier, and some apprehension, possibly, that a public 
wrangle might contribute to spread the scandals against 
his daughter, compelled Firebrace, much against his 
will, to a pause. When finding it could not be avoided, 
he assented to the earnest request made to him b}^ 
Edward for a few moments' private heai'ing on a point 
of importance to be settled with the master armourer 
before the public proceedings took place. 

He stepped aside, sternly bidding Master Holte follow 
him, into a small and darksome chamber in a species of 
watch-room at the entrance of the great hall, the soli- 
tary tenant of which was the figure of a giant, in Eoman 
armour, cut in wood and garishly coloured, like the 
London Grog or Magog. This was supposed to represent 
St. Martin, the patron saint of Birmingham, and having 
fallen from an ancient niche over the entrance of the 
Guildhall, had been stovred aside as old lumber here. 

By no means with any conciliation in his tones the 
master armourer then turned to Edward, and, with 
averted eyes, demanded his pleasure in delaying him 
from the town's business, whereupon he was come. 

Edward had made up his miod what to do and say, 
to remove, as far as he should find it safe, the worst 
personal prejudices of the father of Dorothy Firebrace 
against him : at least, he fancied he was adopting the 
best means to this end. He replied, therefore, very 
gently to the armourer, by confessing that after recent 



284 THE armoueer's daughter. 

occurrences, unless properly explained, he had a right 
to be suspicious of his own presence and purposes in 
Birmingham. 

' But,' Edward continued, with kindly warmth, * your 
misgivings are altogether unfounded, Master Firebrace ; 
and it is as an honourable suitor for your daughter's 
hand in marriage that I presume now to ask you to 
change your angry looks at me, and know me for a true 
and honest friend, which I shall always prove. Your 
daughter's heart is already mine, and her faith plighted 
mine by links of love that bind firmer than adamant. 
All that is necessary is that we should keep this happ}^ 
arrangement and alliance a secret from my father awhile, 
as he is violently set on another match for me, and with 
whom I have bitter enemies, who may use his wrath 
against me in the disobedience to utter casting down 
and ruin.' 

While he thus spoke, Edward, who had expected that 
all obstacles would melt like snow before this genial 
sunshine, was dismayed to observe the deepening lower 
on the master armourer's brows. Neither was the tem- 
pest long in bursting. 

'What have I done, Lord, that I am become as a 
mockery and a derision among the Gentiles, and to my 
ov/n people likewise ? ' exclaimed old Firebrace, glaring 
reproachfully rather than imploringly upward, and toss- 
ing back his long grizzly locks. * Or am I some other 
fulsoii>e boy, licking up treacle poured forth to catch 
flies ? Or who do you think myself I am, my fair 
master, that I should seek to thrust my daughter by 
stealth into a family where I have no mind she should 
wed, and who scorn and repudiate the alliance ? I tell 
you, were your father and his house of the royallest in 



OPPOSITES ALIKE. 285 

Europe, emperors and kings . know, blaster Holte, I 
would not on such terms consent to let my daughter 
crawl up a throne ! And do you come to me to offer 
that on certain conditions of present dishonour, suspi- 
cion, and mislike among all my townsfolk and friends I 
am to put my daughter in the way some day to find 
herself the bride of a disinherited beggar, of birth not 
half so well-blooded, truly, as mine own ; but far likelier, 
with all this fair show, the shamed and cast-off leman 
and mistress of a father-scorning profligate ? Go to, sir, 
trouble yourself to urge the matter no further; fori 
swear to you on the faith of my living soul, were you to 
present yourself to me as a son-in-law . fully consented 
by your haughty sire and all of his adherency . loaded 
with the favours of your King . with the lands and place 
of Aston to put in dower on your bride . I would answer 
as I do now. Woe worth the hour I Judge, then, if I 
will suffer an address which must be offered in a robber- 
like pacing of concealment, and under penalties but 
little short of his branding-iron and every other felon- 
forfeiture.' 

The effect of this reply upon the newly-made husband 
of Dorothy Firebrace may be much easier imagined than 
described. 

He perceived at once that not only were the chances 
of conciliation and indulgence towards their loves utterly 
hopeless on his own proud father's part, but on that of 
the equally, though in different style, haughty Puritan 
sire of his bride. 

Every word was pronounced with the stern emphasis 
of the strokes of the hammer on metal, compelled into 
some irresistible form by the art so familiar to the 
master armourer. 



286 THE ArvMOURER'S DAUGHTER. 

Edward felt that further remonstrance would but in- 
crease suspicion and multiply difficulties. He therefore 
resolved to attempt none ; and, with certainly a pardon- 
able hypocrisy, replied, '^ I must then deem your consent 
impossible to be obtained, and submit myself accord- 
ingly ;' and he himself opened the door for Firebrace to 
retire. 

The master armourer would not, however, accept 
this mark of deference. 

' Age counts not against honour as yet in England, 
Master Holte,' he said, stepping himself rigidly back. 
* Take the way before me, which is the due of the heir 
of Aston Hall; but you will not be followed by a seconder 
of the proposal you come to entrap us withal from the 
King I ' 

* As you will, blaster Armourer,' returned Edward, 
really now feeling himself wax angrily indignant at the 
persevering repulse and hostility of the stern old man. 
' But I trust I shall find some out-numbering of 
reasonable men in your council, who will rather serve 
the interests of the town and themselves than the 
causeless animosities even of so chief a ruler in Bir- 
mingham as your office, I deny not, should make you, 
were it more evenly balanced by judgment and temper, 
to profitable issues for those ruled.' 

And he took the precedence so scornfully urged upon 
him with a very fairly provoked vehemence of gesture 
and glance. 



287 



CHAPTER LXIII. 

THE TOWN COU^'CIL. 

Irritated quite as much as discouraged by what had 
taken place between himself and his unconscious father- 
in-law, Edward proceeded into the Gruildhall Council 
Chamber without deigning once again to look back. 

It was a handsome apartment, particularly on account 
of its loftiness, the roof being open to the top of the 
lantern-tower. About a score of the principal bur- 
gesses, chiefs of the several trades, were present, for 
the most part looking considerably scared and puzzled, 
but wringing hands at every turn with Tubal Bromy- 
cham, and forming into little knots to hear what he 
said. And he seemed very busy saying something in 
his curt and straightforward way ; probably explaining 
the object of the meeting. 

Among these groups was specially noticeable a small, 
thin man, with a sharp and wizened, roguishly keen, 
indeed, and intelligent visage, and who seemed eagerly 
bent on acquiring all the information he could. 

This personage was known to the general body of his 
townspeople as Johny-the-Rogue, his proper name 
being John Sainsfoy ; and he was a master-smith, who 
could turn his craft to as various uses as Firebrace 
himself, Yv'itii the difference that he prided himself on 



288 

overreaching all who dealt with him, either in material 
or manufacture, and in this discreditable manner had 
acquired his by-name. 

Johny-the-Kogue was notoriously reputed to cherish 
a bitter ill-will against Firebrace and Tubal, whose 
handiwork so far exceeded his own in other qualities as 
well as honesty of metal and fidelity to contract in the 
fashioning. His son, who resembled him as a weasel 
does a fox, was said to have aspired to rival Tubal with 
the master armourer's daughter ; of course, with any- 
thing but good success. Rivals in trade the two forge- 
owners had ever been. But all this did not prevent 
Johny-the-Eogue from addressing Tubal in a very soft 
and cringing manner, as he came on with his explana- 
tions, congratulating him greatly on his success in 
putting down the mutinous movement of the populace 
in the forenoon. 

'These are troublous times, troublous times, Master 
Bromycham ; but you are the man born to sway them. 
For my part, I should never have ventured out of my 
smithy smoke to-day had I not heard with what a high 
hand you swung the rabble back into their holes again 
by their tails. Not a rat among them will squeak for a 
month again. And so also there are good tidings of a 
peace forward, are there, God be praised ? ' 

Tubal knew that this man would be sure to back 
terms of peace if they also promised profit, and he 
endeavoured to respond to Johny-the-Rogue's ques- 
tionings as conscientiously to the purpose as he could ; 
and he was thus engaged when Edward Holte entered 
the room, followed, at some interval, by the slow and 
brooding steps of the master armourer. 

Tubal, probably tired of the unaccustomed part he 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 289 

was playing, immediately took advantage of the arrival 
to break off his conference with the sly aad insidious 
old man, and begin the business of the meeting. 

' I am no speechifier,' he said, abruptly addressing 
the good company, but in those tones that always 
commanded the remotest attention, and made his 
whispering neighbour start. ' What I have to say, I 
mostly say it with my right hand and arm. But there 
is Master Edward Holte come to you, my masters, from 
the King, and he will tell you why himself.' 

Edward took the hint ; and animated now by so many- 
additional motives to complete the task he had assigned 
himself, addressed the burgesses, as they were then 
styled . not town councillors . of Birmingham, in a still 
apter and more earnestly persuasive harangue than had 
previously proved so effective, for a time, with the 
general assemblage of the townspeople. 

He began by giving the King much more credit than 
he deserved, for an anxious wish to prevent the seemingly 
now inevitable calamities of a civil war ; at all events, 
to narrow to as definite and few issues as possible the 
decisions put to the unreasoning arbitration of the 
sword, and to confine, as far as possible, the theatre of 
misery and bloodshed. 

The matters in dispute between the King and Par- 
liament, according to the young Eoyalist orator, were 
now in reality reduced to this one . which of them 
should wield the executive power of the state, which for 
all the known times of England had been confided to 
the sovereign. 

The King had granted every demand made upon him 
that could possibly tend to the security of the liberties 
and religion of his people. He had surrendered his 

VOL. II. u 



290 THE armoueer's daughter. 

dearest friends, and the faithfullest servants of his mil 
in his former way of government, to the utmost fury and 
vengeance of the factions opposed to it ; to public and 
national justice, if it so pleased them of Birmingham 
to consider it, as no doubt many wise and honourable 
men, and true subjects in their hearts, might hold it, 
and did. The noble Strafford had poured forth his 
loyal and generous blood . whose purple was richer than 
the robe of the empire he perished, as it were, by his 
own consent to preserve . on the scaffold. Laud, the 
archbishop, was in a dungeon of the Tower, expiating 
the severities and oppressions of a too harsh, however 
well meant, zeal in the establishment of church influence 
and domination, which he doubtless confounded in his 
own pure and virtuous mind and purposes with religion 
and the supreme sway and enhancement of morality. 
But not contented with all or anything of this, the 
Parliament insisted on sequestrating the whole kingly 
authority and rightful prerogatives of the crown into 
its own hands, and of thus establishing a worse than 
Venetian oligarchical tyranny, with a more phantom 
Dosre still at its head, in the realm and constitution of 
England, which of all time had been royal and free. 

The question of the militia, of the direction and 
control of the pubHc sword, was that upon which alone 
the King remained firmly and inexorably resolved never 
to yield to the tyrannous spoliation attempted to be 
made of his rights. And upon that it was, and which 
was relied upon as the supreme effort to reduce himself 
and his people to so miserable a slavery, that the Par- 
liament had prompted and abetted the most furious 
and insolent seditions and violences against his Majesty 
and his royal family, and had finally driven him away 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 291 

from the proper capital seat of his government and 
state. 

London, in fact, the well-spoken Royalist proceeded 
to declare, was the real and main offender in the whole 
affair, and the sole reliable support and abetment of the 
Parliament in its unjust and traitorous designs. It was 
on London, therefore, alone that the King's indignation 
would most reasonably and properly be directed. His 
Majesty deprecated nothing more than the multipli- 
cation of obstacles in his way, and the necessity of 
inflicting chastisement on to^vns and cities in their 
hearts faithful to him, though in some instances either 
shamefully coerced or led astray from their duties, as 
Birmingham had of late become. 

True representations had, however, been made to the 
King by some honest gentlemen, their friends, of the 
real state of affairs there ; how the good town had been 
for awhile transported and driven out of its accustomed 
moderation in opinion, and attention to its o^v^l in- 
dustrious pursuits, by the sudden outloosing of a 
tempest-blast of fanaticism, and the violent control of 
a military force. But now both had ceased of their 
tumultuous and unlawful influence, and though the 
surface of the popular wave was still something ruffled 
and tossed, it was only froth and foam that showed 
above the calming billows now. They were quit of the 
armed oppression lately exercised among them, and the 
proper authority of their lord and the worthy burgesses 
of Birmingham had been duly and most efficaciously 
restored. They were free then now . as they must all 
have heard, within so brief an interval . to exercise 
their own mil and judgment truly in the affair, and 
decide whether they would return to the quiet and 

u 2 



292 THE armoueer's daughter. 

peaceful exercise of their trades and occupations, which 
promised to become more profitable than ever, under 
his Majesty's full protection and pardon, or expose 
themselves to all the inconveniences and ravages of war, 
already close at their doors, in the hardly-restrained 
exasperation of the King's cavalry at Aston, and certain 
very speedily to present itself in overwhelming power 
and vengeance, in the shape of a royal army marching 
on London from the north and west, well provided, by 
the Queen's diligence, with artillery and other means of 
destruction, whereby their town might be l^id level 
with the dust at the least word of a bidding, whose 
utterance it might no longer be possible to entreat 
refraining. 

What could Birmingham, whatever her spirit and 
courage, an unwalled and unfortified town, do against 
so formidable an advance, supposing her citizens so 
niadly set against their owti interests and preservation 
as to persist in the seditious movement effected by the 
artifices and violence of an intriguing stranger ? And 
it was plain that Birmingham, having been led or drawn 
into so dangerous a strait, had been deserted to her fate 
by the Parliament, which had withdrawn its one scanty 
troop of horse, and need not look to their distant 
London army for assistance of any sort. 

Supposing even that a most unlikely chance of 
victory on the part of the London cockneys and 
frenzied fanatics over well-born gentlemen accustomed 
to arms, and their hardy tenantry, ensued, the royal 
army would first have marched through their county, 
and inflicted whatever justice or vengeance might be 
decreed. And Edward Holte very truly assured the 
meeting that there was a strong disposition among 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 293 

many of the trusted councillors and favourite advisers of 
the King to inflict some memorable chastisement on a 
town which, destituts of the means of defence, had 
cast itself with such fury and violence into rebellion, 
and set so bad an example to others in the like predica- 
ment. 

It was for them, therefore . the chief men and 
masters of the town of Birmingham . to resolve upon 
its fate, which the orator now committed, in the King's 
name, to their deliberation, on terms that, with their 
kind permission, he would proceed to disclose. 

The reader is already aware of the nature of the con- 
ditions which the King affixed to a ^ full and gracious 
pardon, and receiving back into his protection ' of his 
good town of Birmingham, and which indeed were 
most indulgent and ample, had they been sincerely 
meant. 

All that seemed required was that the town should 
professedly return to its allegiance, open itself to all 
lawful egress and regress, and engage to allow of the 
furnishing of the King's armies freely for their money, 
with the warlike implements and engines that formed 
an established portion of its manufacture. 

In confirmation of all which Edward produced his 
credentials, and the conditional formula of pardon, duly 
signed and sealed, and requiring only acceptance on the 
part of the people of Birmingham. 

This speech was listened to with great though, for 
the most part, silent attention, thus far ; not, however, 
without an occasional murmur of assent and approbation. 
But men seemed more intent on watching: the effect on 
their neighbours than in giving utterance to their o^vn 
conclusions. Yet it was plain enough the general result 



294 THE aemourer's daughter. 

was favourable, and particularly the last part of the 
stipulations seemed agreeable to the taste of Johny-the- 
Rogue. 

' I was always for a fair and open trade with all 
customers myself,' he remarked, ' and no questions 
asked, but that the payment should not be in King 
James's clipped money, come by whose hands it might. 
Yet I am but the deacon of our craft, and the master 
armourer decided otherwise.' 

' Still, of a surety, father, it something marvels me,' 
squeaked out the falsetto tones of the younger SaiiLsfoy, 
known as ' the Weasel,' ' how the town can return to its 
allegiance without receiving back into his authority the 
Crown Bailiff, Master Cooper, which methinks Master 
Bromycham here, who sets up for proper Lord of Bir- 
mingham, will by no means allow.' 

' My interests shall not stand in the way of the town's, 
Wynkyn Sainsfoy,' replied Tubal, cheerfully. ' If Cooper 
will accept the office again, he may hold it under me by 
what authority he pleases, until the King shall be put in 
full and true possession of the rights of my case by- 
Master Holte, when I shall as certainly expect justice 
from his royal hands as from any mob of tipsetters in 
the world. 

* Ay, ay ! kings are greatly changed in our time from 
what they were in your great grandfather's, when he 
was (so unjustly, as you say) condemned to gibbeting 
and forfeiture as a highway robber.' 

Tubal was about to make some angry reply to this 
sarcasm on the part of his despised rival, Wynkyn 
Sainsfoy, when he was cut short by the sharp and vin- 
dictive utterance of the master armourer, who suddenly 
exclaimed, * Say'st so ? How are kings changed ? Only 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 295 

by adding worse perjuries and beguilings, they and 
their satellites, to their old violence and tyranny, 
which well this bedazed young man will learn to know.' 
And, to the great surprise and unfixing of the opinion 
of the meeting, whose members always expected to see 
the master armour and his intended son-in-law of one 
mind, he rose, and pronounced what in its way was a 
most singularly virulent and passionate but effective 
counterpoise to most of the arguments towards the 
restoration of peace, and acceptance of the conditions 
proposed from Nottingham, brought forward by Edward 
Holte. 

Firebrace was very well known in his town for the 
Puritan tendency of his religious opinions, and the 
warmth and earnestness with which he had from the 
first supported the general movement of the Parliament 
and nation in that direction ; but no one suspected his 
political opinions had attained to so deep and violent a 
cast of republican repudiation and hatred for the estab- 
lished forms of government and authority which his 
present outburst betrayed. Nor had it hitherto ap- 
peared that he had been so convinced and zealous an 
agent in the late revolt as his now open profession of 
absolute and unswerving devotion to the cause of the 
Parliament implied. 

Indeed his considerably broken and confused forms of 
expression declared no slight internal dislocation and 
disarrangement of ideas, and greatly added to the 
puzzle of the auditory, among whom he had the repu- 
tation of a concise and unwinning, but clear-minded 
speaker, on the few subjects of a mundane nature he 
deemed worthy his attention. 

Above all, there was no mistaking the personal animu& 



296 THE armourer's daughter. 

and exasperation of the master armourer's tone ; and 
not alone against the terms of peace themselves, but 
their offerer. 

He adopted with the utmost virulence all the argu- 
ments in popular use against the possibility of placing 
any kind of confidence in the King's promises, and 
reluctant relinquishment of the tyrannical form of 
government he had maintained so long, until the neces- 
sities resulting from his maladministration compelled 
him to resort to a parliament for support. 

Nothing, he maintained, but Charles's surrender of 
the powder of the sword could furnish his unhappy 
people with any security against his grasping spirit of 
despotism, and visible reversion to most of the super- 
stitions and observances of Popery to please a Popish 
wife. 

The Londoners were most nobly and righteously 
engaged in this just cause, he declared, in support of 
the Parliament, and Birmingham had bravely and 
fittingly thrown in her weight on the side of the re- 
ligion and freedom of the people of England. And 
were they now about to exhibit themselves as a pack of 
headlong children, following the suggestion of any 
leader for the moment, and then running wild with 
fear, and rushing into exactly the contrary extreme 
the next ? 

What had they to dread which they had not abun- 
dantly ^hown their ability to withstand ? The cavaliers 
at Aston ? But had they not already repulsed with 
shame and open discomfiiture, aided only by a few 
chains and ditches, the worst these vaunting enemies 
could do or threat ? And for this success they had been 
indebted to none but themselves, for the Parliament 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 297 

officer had merely brought his men into the town for a 
few hours, to don their armour, after the attack had 
failed. And as for this wonderful army, which was to 
come over Warwickshire in' a cloud of destruction and 
overwhelm all opposition, where was it ? Master Edward 
Holte, he was certain, had not seen it at Nottingham. 
And on such childish threats and bugbears were they to 
take panic terror, and resolve to throw Birmingham 
open to the dissolute and debauched soldiery and sup- 
porters of the King, who would immediately use their 
opportunities to introduce every species of licence and 
profanation into their as yet honest and Grod-fearing 
town? 

What mattered the heady stirring up of the poorer 
sort of the place, which has been so much enlarged upon, 
but was chiefly on the side of gospel truth and the 
spreading of religion, in reality, compared with the 
contamination and ruin which thus awaited them ? 
Everyone knew what manner of man was Sir Thomas 
Kolte, of Aston Hall ; and what kind of better behaviour 
should be expected from his allies and guests ? ^^^lat 
safety would there be for the town from the most 
solemn assurances, from such perjurers, if they once 
relinquished its guard and close defence ? 

Therefore himself, the master armourer, declared he 
never would consent to any kind of pretended peace 
and making up of differences, which could not be, since 
those he spoke of were as between darkness and light 5 
but would faithfully adhere to the declaration made by 
the town in favour of the Parliament, with whatsoever 
strength of friends and adherence might remain to him. 
And as for the freedom of trade declared, it was verily 
a liberty granted to serve either God or Baal, at men's 



298 THE ARMOURErx's DAUGETEE. 

pleasure ; and only the idolaters of Baal, in their secret 
souls, would demand or accept the privilege. 

Johny-the-Rogue, who felt himself strongly glanced 
at in this latter remark^ contented himself, nevertheless, 
with retorting, ^Ah, my sir, but 3^ou had secured all 
*' Grod" first to yourself, with the Parliament Captain 5 
and poor under-craftsmen, like me, cannot make our 
wine-presses overflov/ by looking over hedges into our 
neighbours' flourishing vineyards.' And the force of 
the observation was evidently appreciated by a consider- 
able number in the assemblage. 

The master armourer's opposition did, nevertheless, 
as clearly produce a great effect. It visibly much 
troubled Tubal, who muttered, '^aj, if the town's 
councils be thus divided, we shall have nothing come of 
it all but ruin and misery I ' But his eye at this mo- 
ment falling upon Edward Holte's anxious and excited 
countenance, his ideas seemed to sustain an electric 
shock of change, and, with a sudden fierceness and 
masterfulness of look and manner and word, which 
diffused a new emotion through the audience, he ex- 
claimed, ' T must let you too, then, my masters, know 
who is Lord of Birmingham ; and how of old time and 
usages it was always the Lord of Birmingham that 
spoke for the town, and fought for it, and had the good 
ordering of it, and you burgessess had nothing to do in 
the matter except to obey, and carry out his will. So 
now, I say, I will accept the King's peace offered us, 
and I will see it enforced in all its points ; conditioning 
only, Master Holte, that the soldiers of the King are 
ordered to leave quarterage at Aston, and approach us 
no nearer than as we shall give fair permission to them 
under my hand and seal.' 



THE TOVrS COUNCIL. 299 

' Why, Tubal, can you write ? I thought not ; and it 
is not much the use of our craft,' said the audacious 
Wynkyn Sainsfoy, who was aware that, from the circum- 
stances of his early rearing. Tubal Bromycham's educa- 
tion in scholarly respects had been extremely deficient, 
even in that unschooled age. 

He looked rather alarmed, however, as to the effect 
of the taunt, and shrunk his spare little framework of 
mortality as far as might be out of reach. But some- 
what to his surprise. Tubal answered quite pleasantly, 
' Yes, Weasel, I can write now ; and I do purpose to 
make myself, at whatever toil of hand and brain, in all 
other respects what a gentleman of my degree by birth 
and descent should be.' And quietly turning to Edward 
Holte, he enquired if he consented, on the part of the 
King, to the conditions named. 

* I think . I am sure . there can be no objection to so 
reasonable a demand,' Edward replied. 

' When it is assured us, I will then open my town to 
all in-comers, and its trade shall be free again to all the 
world,' returned the Blacksmith Lord of Birmingham. 

' And truly herein we have a fair specimen of the 
kind of government, or rather masterful and unlawful 
tyranny, we may ever expect from kings and their pre- 
tended representatives,' exclaimed Firebrace, fiercely. 
' But since you take on you so. Tubal Bromycham, take 
also notice that from this moment I withdraw from you 
all leading and command over the smiths' guildsmen, 
which you only exercise by my leave and licence, and 
which I resume now in my proper hands.' 

' It must not be. Father Firebrace,' returned Tubal, 
with a firm but regretful expression. ' All men who 
draw the breath of life in Birmingham are bound to do 



300 THE armourer's daughter. 

suit and service in arms to the lord thereof whenever 
called upon. Deem you I have not made some use of 
my learning to look into the old books in the Moat House, 
and see what authority and right are truly mine ? ' 

' It shall be seen, however. Master Bromycham, 
whether the smiths of Birmingham will obey their old 
chief and master, or a Walsall collier lad preferably,' 
returned Firebrace, giving way to his indignant feelings. 
^ I will go and discharge my workpeople at once from 
attendance on you and your cannon at St. Martin's 
Church, and take my daughter home to my own safe 
keeping and custody ; for I am not one of those fools 
whom experience cannot make wise : and will leave to 
you solely and wholly the rew^ards of the confidence you 
profess in the goodwill and honourable dealing of the 
Holtes of Aston.' 

So saying, the passionate old man withdrew in an 
evident fury of disappointment and suspicion, leaving 
Edward Holte apparently victor, but no triumphant 
one, upon the field. 

In other respects, the acquiescence in Tubal's decree 
seemed general ; particularly after Johny-the-Rogue had 
observed, with his crafty smile, ^ \Miat our lord does is 
none of our doing, then, it would appear; and for my 
part, I am content both King and Parliament should 
remember it. But in the way of trade, Master Holte, 
if you be still so minded as to w^eapon your troop in the 
King's service in Birmingham, I think I can supply you 
at as reasonable a cost as the Crown Forge doth the 
Parliament, and am willing thereto.' 

Edward courteously acceded to this offer, anxious 
to conciliate a person who seemed of influence, and 
to secure himself a good pretext for future visitation 



THE TOWN COUNCIL. 301 

in Birmingham. Perceiving, moreover, the doubtful 
balance of opinion and authority in the assemblage, he 
determined to take Tubal's declaration as a sufficient 
acceptance of the proposal he had made on the part of 
the town. He therefore dexterously thanked the good 
burgesses of Birmingham for their loyal and reasonable 
demeanour on the occasion, promised that he would 
immediately procure from Nottingham a confirmation 
of all that had been done, took a graceful farewell of the 
meeting, and retired. 



302 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER LXIV. 

SUTTON CHACE. 

Tubal followed his Eoyalist friend out of the Gruildhall, 
and rejoined him in the street. Discussing what had 
occurred, the two young men then turned, by tacit con- 
sent, to retrace the way to St. Martin's Church. 

Both agreed it was a great disaster, Armourer Fire- 
brace having exliibited himself so openly hostile to all 
that was proposed. 

' Many of the precision elders of the to^vii will follow 
where he leads,' said Tubal. ' And it is true the most 
part of my young men look up to me chiefly as the re- 
presentative of the head of their craft. Saw you not I 
dared not put it to the vote, but was forced to take it 
all upon me, like this poor King, with his refractory 
Parliaments ? It is almost as well there are the Ana- 
baptists, swearing vengeance against Dorothy, to keep 
the greybeards and Firebrace in awe, and compel them 
to look to me always for safety and defence. How say 
you, Master Holte ? ' 

' It little likes me, howbeit, Dorothy should remain 
in a town so tossed with feuds and ready for mutiny,' 
replied the clandestine bridegroom. ' But when you 
can no longer rel}' on yourself and your friends for her 
protection, Tubal, I trust you will send due word to me 



SUTTON CHACE. 303 

at Sutton, where I shall soon have assembled a troop of 
horse at my devotion and yours, in that case.' 

' Nay, blaster Holte,' exclaimed Tubal, with warmth ; 
* never dream that I purpose or will suffer any such 
treason to my town as to admit armed men, come 
whence they may, to the control. But nothing shall 
injure Dorothy while these arms of mine can heave a 
hammer, nor will the Anabaptists soon again try con- 
clusions with me. You ma}^ depend, too, I fear me,' 
he continued, with a smile, ' on Master Firebrace's 
diligence in looking after his child, whom I doubt not 
he has already taken away home to his strong-barred 
house, from the church.' 

Edward had little doubt of this fact either, though he 
struggled to hope on against hope. 

' However it be. Tubal,' he said, after some final sug- 
gestion that they might yet find Dorothy in St. Martin's, 
' I owe to you much gratitude, and trust yet to owe you 
more, for your furtherance of my honest love.' 

' You know how to repay me. Master Holte,' said 
Tuba], with emotion. 

' I will not fail,' Edward replied sadly and evasively 
of what he knew was meant, ' to send due word to his 
Majesty how faithfully you have bestirred yourself in 
his afiairs here, and place before him in the same breath 
the unmerited wrongs of your ancestors, and your just 
claims on such rights and restitutio n as are yet in the 
power of the Crown to afford you in Birmingham.' 

Tubal, however, seemed highly satisfied with the pro- 
mise, for a reason Edward had overlooked, and knew 
not still what reliance could be placed on. 

^ 'Tis as I would have it, then, in all respects. For 
your glorious sister has only to know that Tubal the 



304 

blacksmith is a gentleman, and with some means as 
one, to forgive his former presumption, and restore him 
to the happiness else for ever lost ! ' 

Edward suppressed the deep sigh that rose in his 
breast ; and yet this confident reiteration infused some 
degree of hope into himself, not unmingled with 
curiosity to ascertain whether there was any better 
foundation than the delusive sorceries of passion for the 
young man's belief. 

What was apprehended was found to be the case at 
the church. Only the Coopers and Mr. Lane remained 
there . Dorothy w^as gone . when Edward re-entered 
St. Martin's, leaving Tubal, he knew not why at the 
moment, behind, outside. 

Dame Cooper readily explained. ' Within the short- 
est while after you were hence that we could expect to 
hear of any mischance, enters me the master armourer, 
looking so black and angrified that methought he had 
discovered all, and Avas as ill-content his daughter 
should become a gentlewoman as another would be to 
have her wed below her degree. But, by good mercy, 
he knew nothing at all of the matter, only was very 
peevish, and set on his daughter's leaving at a mo- 
ment's word, as if there were fire and powder in his 
' Come, minx, and look to keep close house awhile in 
Deritend ! ' And when she asked but leave, all weep- 
ingly and whimperingly, poor soul, for me to accom- 
pany her, he would not have it so by any means, but 
croaks me out that henceforth he had taken his part, 
and intended that all of his house should do the like, 
and so would suffer no royalist spies of whatsoever 
sort within his doors I And she was obliged to go 
at once.' 



SUTTON CHACE. 305 

Edward's intense disappointment showed plainly 
enough in his face. 

* Alas, Dame Cooper,' he said, ' now will the stern 
old man bar me of all access to my gentle bride, and I 
am as one who has looked into paradise only to have 
the grating dashed in my face.' 

* Nay, nay, good Master Holte, say not so, and with so 
lackadaisical a crossing of your arms on your poor 
breast. What ! the art of twisting rope-ladders is not 
yet quite lost among mankind, and where there's a will 
there's a way . nay, there are half-a-dozen ways, to my 
knowledge, into the old Crown House. Ay, and there 
are dark nights enow to be hoped for yet in Birming- 
ham, though it be the full harvest moon at present, to 
cloak a lover's secret steps. Nay, rather than so kindly 
a pair should be altogether disfurnished of a dovecote 
to bill in, I will, methinks, consent to remain av;hile in 
this mad town, and make you welcome to some poor 
home I yet may call my own.' 

Edward upon this eagerly explained to the wife of 
the ex-bailiff how, under present circumstances, she 
might conscientiously allow her husband to resume his 
duties and residence at the Moat House; and he was 
repeating what Tubal had said on the subject to the 
friendly woman, when the young smith rejoined him 
abruptly in the church. 

Tubal's aspect had so remarkably gloomed over, in 
the brief interval of their separation, that Edward 
noticed it at once, and enquired the reason. 

' 'Slife, sir, how came you not to miss the cannon- 
piece as I did when we first arrived ? And find now 
that Firebrace gave orders to a party of the smiths to 
wheel it back to Deritend ; and here is William Moor- 

VOL. II. X 



306 !tHE armourer's DAUGniER. 

croft come to tell me tlie armourer has secured his 
strong gates, and ordered the great furnace to be got in 
readiness to melt the cannon into a clump of iron 
again, lest, as he pretends, it should fall into the hands 
of your cavaliers.' 

' Can you not rescue it ? The artillery is yours, not 
Firebrace's,' exclaimed Edward. 

' And come to blows with a man whom for years I 
have looked upon as a father ? ' said Tubal, and Edward 
felt it was useless to say any more on the subject. 

Such was the state of disruption and confusion of 
policy and interests, private and public, in which Ed- 
ward Holte was obliged to leave Birmingham after that 
day of contention and strife, which had yet included 
the marriage of two lovers so tenderly and truly devoted 
to each other. 

One little satisfaction, however, he secured ere he 
went, Dame Cooper consenting to allow her husband to 
resume his office and residence at the Moat House, on 
the conditions previously assured by Tubal. 

' She had no animosity against Master Bromycham 
himself,' she said, 'who was as good an artisan of his 
trade as need be, put by his craze to fancy himself a 
lord, and there was room enough and to spare for Xoah 
and his ark in the Moat House ; and for any harm the 
blacksmith gentleman had done her and hers thus far, 
she was even'd with him, tit for tat, and might be more 
so yet I ' And Edward, who knew the significance of his 
secret ally's phrases, and that no real injury was meant 
Tubal by himself, was well content to find he had 
secured a tryst ing-place, easy of access from outside 
Birmingham, as soon as the vigilance of his unconscious 
father-in-law should abate. 



SUTTON CHACE. 307 

Tubal and he parted with mutual and sincerely felt 
expressions of friendship and good-will, Edward pro- 
mising to keep him well informed as to the further re- 
sults of the business they had just concluded. 

The comparatively quiet of the streets no longer 
called for alarm on the part of Mr. Lane, as he and 
Edward Holte rode together out of the town. Xot to 
mention that the poor clergyman's mind was now pos- 
sessed with a new and engrossing subject for anxiety. 
Edward indeed was quite wearied with the ceaseless 
cautions to preserve the recent event a secret ; if for no 
other reason, for the sake of his unfortunate friend and 
tutor, who had so madly consented to place his all at 
stake to pleasure him. And on this account he was 
glad when they reached the gates of Aston Park, where 
they separated ; the culpable chaplain to return to the 
Hall, Edward to pursue his arranged plan of retiring to 
Sutton Manor-House. 

But the former had yet another nerve-shaking duty 
imposed upon him ; which was to convey to Prince 
Kupert, and all else whom it might concern, the state- 
ment that terms of peace had been arranged with Bir- 
mingham, which would be duly certified to his Highness 
as soon as they had obtained the royal approval. 

This instruction given, Edward and the chaplain 
parted, and blaster Holte took the way quite alone 
over Sutton Chace, to the ancient manor-house known 
by the name. - 

At this period the extensive district, still dearest to 
the holiday-making Birmingham artisan, from its wild 
but picturesque freedom from limits and inclosure, was 
considerably more varied in characteristics than at 
present. Its wastes of broom and bog were relieved by 

X 2 



308 

deep masses of woodland, carefully pierced with paths 
for the convenience of the deer, in which the district 
abounded, as well as with various winged game. The 
Bowen Pool was almost entitled to take rank as a lake, 
and the extensive marshes, from which its sedgy bed at 
later periods could scarcely be distinguished, were 
covered with a forest growth of immemorial antiquity. 
William the Conqueror was said to have built the Royal 
Manor-House situated in the deepest part of this sylvan 
territory, and to have hunted in Sutton Chace six hun- 
dred years even before Edward Holte traversed it on 
this occasion two centuries ago. 

Indeed, so faithfully does popular tradition preserve 
the feeling of bygone ages, it was a current superstition 
all over the district at the time, that the stem Norman 
Nimrod's apparition still haunted the scene of his early 
delights in the flesh over Sutton Chace ; not in any 
pleasurable enjoyment, it is to be remarked, but as a 
kind of purgatorial punishment for the wrongs and 
cruelties he had been guilty of, in clearing the vast dis- 
tricts he dedicated to his favourite sports of their 
nobler original inhabitants, to leave the solitudes ne- 
cessary for deer and boa,r. In truth, the story ran, 
that whenever the apparition crossed the affrighted 
vi.-ion of peasant or keeper, always in the form of a 
gigantic knight mounted on a gigantic steed, horse and 
rider both seemed to glow red-hot with internal fire ! 
And the impre?sion vras confirmed by the fact that 
wherever encountered, the apparition seemed always 
urging its vvay, through forest and brake and tangled 
waste of every kind, towards the Pool; wherein it 
usually concluded -the spectacle by plunging with a 
hissing noise, and the usual splutter of fire and water 



SUTTON CHACE. 309 

encountering . doubtless down to its native hell, in the 
belief of the despoiled Saxon, who probably first beheld 
or fancied out so suitable a punishment for the 
oppressor. 

This was not a pleasant association to accompany even 
a brave young cavalier in a moonlight ride over the three 
or four miles of desolate and slradowy way which Edvcard 
Holte must traverse to his new home. But luckily his 
mind was too anxiously and absorbingly emploved on 
other thoughts, in which the deepest satisfaction was 
strongly intermingled v>-ith something of dismay and 
awe, when he reflected on the events of the day. He, 
Edward Holte . the husband of Dorothy Firebrace, the 
armourer's daughter of Birmingham . against his father's 
consent . unknown to him . plighted bv him to another 
wealth V and hi^h-born bride ! 

When Edward remembered his father's character . 
the adverse influences surrounding him . he was at 
times amazed at his own audacity : and nothing but the 
passionate attachment that glowed in his heart and 
every fibre of his youth ful being fur the fair woman he 
had made his own, gave him courage to sustain the 
reflection of the dangers and troubles so evidently 
attendant on the event. 

Yet it cannot be denied Edward was startled 
rather vividly brs.ck to the recollection of the dreary 
legend of the Waste, as the part of Sutton chiefly 
haimted by the red-hot apparition was called, by sud- 
denly catching the ring of the metal of a horse's hoof 
in the distance before him. 

He was approaching the Manor-House, but the view 
forward was obstructed by a remarkable eminence in 
the ground, called * Loac-hes Banks ' . long the puzzle 



310 THE ARMOUEER's DAUGHTER. 

of the antiquary, being surrounded evidently by arti- 
ficial excavations, like a moat, but with no sign of ever 
having been occupied by a building. 

Some supposed the spot to have been the site of a 
Roman camp; others of a Druidica] temple; others, 
again, declared for its having been an ancient place of 
interment, whose peculiar sacredness had accumulated 
the bodies of the dead into this mound. But no remains 
whatever attested the validity of any of these supposi- 
tions, unless the last may be considered as proven from 
the generally credited report, that on All Souls' Night 
the hillock flamed round with corpse-candles. The 
traditions of Sutton Cbace were, it must be confessed, 
not of a very lively order, but such as were naturally 
prompted by its characteristics of gloom and solitude, 
at most seasons of the year save in the early green and 
bloom of spring. 

But if Edward Holte's fancy dwelt with a moment's 
superstitious excitement on the recollection of the fiery 
Phantom of the Waste, it could scarcely be considered 
a relief when he recognised in the bright moonlight, 
turning from behind the banks, the figure of his detested 
brother, Ei chard Grimsorwe. 

What did he there ? 

Edward believed Grrimsorwe capable of every atrocity, 
and almost suspected him of some design of crafty assas- 
sination. As a precaution, therefore, he drew a pistol 
from his holsters, and by no means dissembled that he 
held it ready when they encountered face to face. 

Grrimsorwe, however, burst into a discordant, ringing 
laugh. 

* What, brother Edward ! do you take me for a high- 
wayman ? ' he exclaimed. ' And I have been to Sutton, 



SUTTON CHACE. 311 

by Sir Thomas's wish, making all manner of arrange- 
ments for your comfort there. For when our good 
father came to think of it, he grew of your lady mother's 
opinion, that more pains should be taken in arranging a 
household for you, than you were likely to take for your- 
self. So I have been with a rare convoy of all manner 
of household goods for your use, and instructions to the 
keeper and his wife at the Manor-House, which ^nll 
save you trouble in every way.' 

* I am beholden to my father, whom you also style 
yours. Master Eichard Grimsorwe,' replied Edward, yet 
not much in tones agreeable to the intimation. 'But 
believe me, after the complaints made to me by Gaspar 
Feldon of your conduct with his wife, and my forbid- 
ding you the Manor-House while I shall be deputy- 
ranger there, I am surprised that even your zeal in my 
service should have induced you to venture within 
range of Gaspar 's quarter-staff again.' 

* Xay, but I knew the good fellow was out on his 
duties in the Chace, which often enough betides with a 
keeper of Sutton,' returned Grimsorwe, still smilingly; 

* and Esther Feldon and I may have our little signs and 
signals from afar. Though I say not that it is so. It 
is, indeed, all the foolish forester's staring at antlers 
has put them in his head. And Sutton Manor-House 
is not a place the son of my mother,' he continued, 
with a suddenly changed and ferocious look in his eyes, 

* whether you deny me a father or not, IMaster Holte, 
would choose to make the scene of an unlawful amour ! 
Along this fair White Walk here, it must have been, 
my mother made her escape from Adam Blackjack and 
Lis persecutions, with her baby in her arms . to throw 



312 THE AEMOUKEES DAUGHTEK. 

herself for mercy at the feet of Sir Thomas Holte . and 
find it only at the bottom of Aston Swan Pool I ' 

' However all this may be, I am not your injurer, 
Eichard Grimsorwe,' Edward Holte replied. ' Only of 
this I am resolved . and I intended it all along . I will 
not have spies of yours posted where I am ; and I intend 
to find another housekeeper than Esther Feldon as 
speedily as may be for Sutton Manor-House.' 

' And that is precisely what my father will not suffer, 
and forbids your removal of any person whom he has 
retained in service at Sutton,' Grrimsorwe answered ; add- 
ing, in a jeering tone, * But what espial can so perfect 
a young gentleman in all the virtues as the heir of 
Aston Hall dread to see set upon his immaculate and 
loyal doings of every kind and sort?' 
Edward reflected. 

' It is true,' he then replied, as if satisfied by some 
quiet reasoning to himself. * Let your spy therefore 
remain, and carry what intelligence betw^een Sutton and 
Aston she likes, provided she keeps a little on this side 
perjury in the leasings and inventions you wnll put into 
her mouth. She wdll have little else awhile to come to 
report, but the words of discipline for a troop of horse ; 
and so, if it pleases you, let us meet as seldom as we 
can henceforth, and as goodnight to you as your kindness 
meant to me deserves ! ' 

Edward touched his horse with the spur, and passed 
Grimsorwe without relaxing his grasp on his weapon, 
and was speedily out of sight of his enemy. 

Richard gazed motionlessly after him for several 
minutes. 

'No!' he then ejaculated, 'never again shall I, by 
any artifice or persuasion, induce this man to trust in 



SUTTON CHACE. 313 

me. But not the less shall my vengeance follow perse- 
veringly in his steps, until I can stand equalled with 
him, if not in honour, in disgrace ! Yes, on the very 
scene of my hapless mother's shame and woful doom 
will I retaliate like with like, as rigidly as the old law 
exacted and denounced, " An eye for an eye ; a tooth 
for a tooth!"' 



314 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER LXY. 

SUTTON MANOR-HOUSE. 

Not greatly cheered on his own part by this interview, 
as may well be imagined, Edward Holte meanwhile 
pursued his way to Sutton Manor-House. 

This ancient hunting-seat of Norman kings was, at 
the period, in spite of its considerable elevation near the 
hilly little town of Sutton Coldfield, almost completely 
embosomed and lost to view in depths of coeval forest. 

The enormous height of the ancient trees which sur- 
rounded the old Eoyal Lodge gave it, in addition to its 
own tumble-down and ruinous aspect, a very gloomy 
and shadowy effect, excepting under the strongest beam 
of day. But, indeed, by far the greater portion of the 
original chateau had either wholly fallen into decay, 
or exhibited only what it had been in shattered and 
scattered bulks of masonry, glaring white amidst tufted 
mounds and hollows in the ground. 

No inconsiderable portion of the timber and lighter 
building materials had at various periods of neglect and 
disuse been plundered and removed by unlicenced 
spoliators or grantees of unthrifty sovereigns. What 
remained was chiefly a low stone house, battlemented 
on the top of the wall, which ran between the empty 
and dismantled remains of two towers, and had originally 



SUTTON MANOR-HOUSE. 315 

formed a square central mass, known still as the ' Don- 
jon/ or Keep. But the greater portion of the back 
premises having undergone the processes of dilapidation 
described, the Holtes, on becoming hereditary rangers 
of Sutton in the reign of Henry VI., had so far repaired 
and rebuilt the inclosure that it presented a comfortable 
lodgment for a hunting-party, even in considerable 
numbers, and had often been so used by Henry VIII. ; 
while there was abundant room for the head-keeper and 
his family (when he had one) on the ground-floor 
chambers of the tower to the east, which was nothing 
like so shattered and rent by time as the other remain- 
ing one. 

It is true the chief of these apartments were almost 
unfurnished, it being the custom of the kings of Eng- 
land, in the good old times, to remove their conve- 
niences about with them to their different temporary 
residences for amusement or business. And they were 
exceedingly low in the ceilings ; very gloomy and dark. 
And although Sir Thomas Holte, in his younger days 
being devoted to the chase, had fitted up a portion of 
Sutton Manor-House for his own use, with no incon- 
siderable display of the taste for decoration and enjoy- 
ment he afterwards exhibited on a gi-ander scale at 
Aston Hall, few vestiges remained to Edward's day. 

Report, indeed, would have it the baronet had made 
these improvements and embellishments with a view to 
contriving a secure and unmolested seclusion for the 
unfortunate mistress whose tragical fate has been so often 
alluded to in this narrative. But Sir Thomas never 
resided at Sutton after his marriage, and consequently 
the suite of chambers runninfj the lensfth of the oTound- 
floor building, of which Edward's hereditary taste for 



316 THE armourer's daughter. 

field sports had early induced him to take possession, 
were in a sad state of mouldering and decay. But his 
attention being otherwise devoted, he had concerned 
himself only to restore some of the chambers to decent 
habitable order. 

The entrance to the ^ Donjon ' was through the 
Keeper's Tower, as it was called, upon which numerous 
well-kept passages and clearings through the thick sur- 
rounding woodland conducted. Edward had, therefore, 
no difficulty in making his way to it, and the weary 
snorting of his steed might alone have announced his 
arrival, when he came to a halt ; but a horn hung over 
the gateway for the purpose. 

Edward expected the door to be opened by the keeper, 
Gaspar Feldon, but it was his wife who responded to his 
appeal. And then he remembered it was unlikely Richard 
G-rimsorwe would have visited the house, except in the 
absence of the keeper . a man of a sturdy and deter- 
mined character, of enormous size and strength, and 
with whom he knew himself to be an object of the 
bitterest suspicion and dislike, for reasons the most 
exasperating, even if not established on very clear and 
undeniable foundation. 

Esther Feldon, the wife, was, however, by no means 
what one would have supposed a likely person to figure 
as an occasion for strife in the prosecution of a wicked 
intrigue of the kind. She was a tall, thin. Puritanical- 
looking wgman, with a long melancholy countenance^ 
whose characteristic expression was singularly w^himper- 
ingandwoe-begone,in consonance with the apathetic sad- 
ness and monotony of her habitual tones and language. 

In truth, it was strange how reports could have arisen 
to the disadvantage of a personage seemingly of such 



SUTTON MANOR-HOUSE. 317 

starched and glum demeanour, and who, besides, had 
always enjoyed a reputation for unusual strictness and 
propriety of conduct, until Grimsorwe intruded himself 
. some time previously to the events we have related . 
upon his brother's society at the Manor-House. 

To be sure, Esther Feldon was not altogether in good 
odour in the neighbouring little township, in consequence 
of being reported a frequenter of the conventicles of the 
Birmingham Anabaptists ; but her personal appearance 
ought in other respects to have guaranteed her. Apart 
from her unpleasant and unhappy general expression, 
both her eyes were remarkable for an indirectness of 
vision . not exactly amounting to a squiut, but giving 
the face a screwed-up and sinister cast. Her complexion, 
however, though pallid, w^as very clear, and her hair of 
a bright raven-black, though plastered as closely to the 
head, under her plain linen cap, as the paint which 
represents that adornment of the sex on a Dutch doll. 
And .she was certainly a woman of a mind and education 
considerably above others of her class ; which might be 
accounted for by the fact of her being the daughter of 
a parish clerk at Sutton, who in his day had so great a 
reputation for learning that he was currently reported 
to be able to give the Psalms out in Hebrew if he 
thought proper. 

It was never very easy to guess at Esther Feldon's 
real sentiments from her words, or look, or manner. 
And Edward Holte could not at all divine whether his 
arrival displeased the woman or otherwise . was expected 
or not by her, from anything she said or looked. 
' blaster Holte,' she observed, without the slightest 
intonation of any sort, much as if she had been an 
automaton machine fashioned to sound the words. 



318 

Nevertheless, Edward had no reason to doubt Grrim- 
sorwe's statement that he had been beforehand in making 
arrangements for his comfort. He was in reality almost 
startled by the changes which in a few hours had been 
effected by the surprising zeal of his brother and his 
satellites. 

Under their labours, an unsuspected richness of hang- 
ing and gilded ornament had reappeared on the walls 
and cornices from the dust of a quarter of a century. 
The principal living-rooms were carpeted ; and some 
handsome pieces of furniture transported from Aston 
Hall gave the two principal apartments an air of com- 
fort and even stateliness. 

These opened one into the other, and consisted of a 
saloon, a bed-chamber, and a small cabinet stored with 
all the materials for hunting and fishing . there being 
some famous preserved sheets of water for the latter 
purpose within the extensive range of the Sutton terri- 
tory. And from the windows of these apartments, 
pleasant though shadowy views into the neighbouring 
forest were caught, and from the farthest one a -wide 
opening revealed an expanse of gorse-blooming heath 
and hillocky lowland and upland, terminating in the 
wild and picturesque elevations of the Beacon Barr. 

Esther Feldon led the way, with a dim taper in her 
hand, through these improvements without making any 
remark, or seeming to think that any was called for. 
But Edward's surprise certainlj" took a strong shade of 
anger and vexation when he observed that some of 
the alterations seemed specially adapted for feminine 
use. 

Above all, a toilette and press were arranged in the 
sleeping apartment of a showy and elaborate device, 



SUTTON MANOE-HOUSE. 319 

which he felt it was almost an insult to have fitted up 
for the accommodation of a solitary bachelor sportsman, 
who besides proposed to himself the training of a troop 
of newly-raised recruits. 

' Body o' me I did Eichard Grrimsorwe imagine his 
mother is coming back to her old habitation ? ' he ex- 
claimed in a passion, much excited by the notion that 
it was pretended he purposed following in his sire's 
unhappy steps, in his habitation of Sutton Manor- 
House. 

' I know not ; what is done is done by order,' the 
apathetic Esther replied. ' But I would fain hope not. 
Master Holte ; though Adam Blackjack ever asserts he 
has traced young Maud's ghost hundi'eds of hundreds 
of times, in the white night-clothes she escaped in, over 
the waste from Sutton to the Swan Pool in Aston 
pleasure-grounds.' 

'Adam Blackjack is a madman, and worse than a 
madman ; I will have my father admonished of his 
dealings with our worst enemies, and the frenzied 
calumnies he spreads ! ' Edward angrily responded. 
' But who else then, prithee ^listress Feldon, is ex- 
pected to take up her abode here of your sex ? ' 

* I know not, sir ; I made no questions . never do. I 
did what I was bid ; but, truly, I heard some talk that 
perchance your sister, Mistress Arabella.' 

'I trust it shall be so; and in that case let the 
trumpery remain,' said Edward, endeavouring to soothe 
himself into the belief that such might possibly be the 
true explanation. But, at all events, he determined to 
foil the intention if, as he now began to expect, it was 
supposed he would make some outbreak on the subject 
which would call attention to it, and admit of any 



320 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

variety of misinterpretation. Then declining the offer 
of the keeper's wife to furnish him with some supper, 
and only requesting her to desire her husband to attend 
to his horse on his return, she glided gloomily out, and 
he was left alone. 



321 



CHAPTER LXVI. 

love's labours. 

The first use Edward made of his retirement was to 
write a full account to Lord Falkland of the success of 
his negotiations with the town of Birmingham. 

It must be excused to the lover-husband of Dorothy 
Firebrace if he presented by far the best side out of all 
the circumstances of this affair. 

He almost totally suppressed the part taken in oppo- 
sition by the master armourer, ascribing the degree of 
repugnance he had experienced to his proposals to the 
natural unwillingness of men to own themselves practi- 
cally in the wrong, or to have been forced into actions 
against their own better judgment. 

It was not easy to exaggerate the courage and good- 
will exhibited by Tubal Bromycham in suppressing the 
revolutionary movement of the populace in Birmingham. 
But Edward certainly made the best of it, and took the 
opportunity to represent and urge the claims of the 
Blacksmith Lord on a restoration of his rank, and of the 
possessions of his family the Crown had it easily in its 
power to grant. His friendly zeal represented in shining 
lights the advantages of such an act of justice to the 
Crown itself, exhibiting as it would to all the world his 
Majesty's sincere desire to remedy all real abuses in 

VOT^ II. Y 



322 

administration, since he even repaired the wrongs of his 
predecessors. It would secure an adherent of dauntless 
courage and resolution, able almost alone to retain the 
important place in question faithfully in his sovereign's 
allegiance. 

It may be thought Edward Holte took still more 
special pains to declare the dangers encountered by 
Dorothy Firebrace in her faithful adhesion to the royal 
cause, and to dwell upon the heroic courage and resig- 
nation with which she had endured the consequences 
of the popular exasperation. Edward was too good a 
logician not to confine this ill-feeling to the lower classes 
of the town, where in reality it chiefly prevailed. 

On the other hand, he was enabled with truth to state 
that a large proportion of the masters and upper work- 
people of Birmingham desired nothing so much as to be 
left to pursue their trades in peace. Of course he con- 
cluded by stating that his Majesty's offers towards such 
had been most thankfully received by the persons of 
influence in the town ; and that they had agreed, on full 
consideration, to accept the terms proposed, on one only 
and very fail' condition, which the safety of the town 
certainly demanded : this was, we know, that before they 
threw down their barriers and opened their forges to the 
supply of the King's army his Majesty would be pleased 
to direct the removal of the cavalry force from Aston 
and any other near vicinity. And this condition, Edward 
went on to say, being so reasonable and just in itself, 
and the best means to prevent further danger of con- 
cussion and outbreak, he had taken upon himself to 
all but assure in his Majesty's name. 

Edward urged the immediate confirmation of this 
arrangement upon the friendly Secretary of State, with 



loye's labours. 323 

all possible warmth and earnestness . natural enough 
under his circumstances ; and, to add every weight to 
his entreaty, announced that he had himself retired to 
Sutton Manor-House in order not to annoy the towns- 
people with the neighbourhood of his own troop of horse, 
which he was now proceeding to assemble, arm, and 
discipline with all imaginable diligence. 

And to effect this object, Edward Holte most zealously 
bestirred himself at once, conscious of his increased bur- 
den of responsibility, and that every moment was of 
consequence in providing againt the dangers certain to 
follow on a discoverv of his secret enoaaements. 

Only the most powerful protection and patronage 
could be of use in this way ; and Edward knew no better 
means to secure the King, than to show himself forward 
and eager in arms on his side. Moreover, the bustle 
and activity of the movement were likely to divert the 
suspicion and espionage which he had so much reason to 
consider fixed upon him. 

The occupation also divested his mind from the 
tedious anxiety ^vith which he expected news from his 
clandestine bride in Birmingham, by the aid of the 
friendly services engaged there in his behalf. 

Sutton Woods and Manor-House accordingly . in a 
few hours, one might say . became the head-quarters of 
the Holte Dragoons, as Edward had determined to name 
his corps. And about six score hardy young yeomen, 
who had long been expecting the summons, joyfully 
joined the standard of their landlord's heir, for the 
most part as volunteers, well mounted on their otvh 
horses, and ready and willing, with a very Uttle in- 
struction, to form a dashing and enterprising corps in 
the service of their King. 

Y 2 



324 THE akmoueer's daughter. 

In reality, it happened as Charles had expected on 
the conjuncture. The tidings, which he took every 
pains to spread, of the audacious design . hardly frus- 
trated . on his person, aroused very greatly the zeal of 
his partisans, and awakened them to the conviction that 
the war was a real war, and must be met as such. In 
every part of England the loyal nobility and gentry 
were seized with alarm and indignation, and prepara- 
tions which might else have continued to languish took 
all the forms of movement and activity. But at the 
same time the undesired result followed, that the for- 
midable man whom it was most the interest of Charles, 
if he had known it, to keep in the background, was 
suddenly brought forward into a notice and publicity 
that sped him faster on his path of preeminence than 
almost anything else could. 

These military occupations, and softer and more en- 
grossing cares of the heart, filled up Edward's time so 
absorbingly, that day after day passed without his 
noticing the superfluous lapse of time that intervened 
before he received any reply from Lord Falkland. 
Neither had Mr. Lane communicated with him from 
Aston Hall. 

But matters continued apparently quieted in Bir- 
mingham, under the energetic handling of Tubal Bromy- 
cham ; insomuch that the Anabaptists apparently with- 
drew the claims of their champion, and Whitehall being 
elected minister of the town, the bellows-blower retired 
of his own accord, without awaiting an ejectment, from 
the Parsonage. Even Firebrace's exasperation and sus- 
picions appeared in some degree lulled, and somewhat 
more friendly relations were resumed between him and 
his long- intended son-in-law. Nay, on the latter pro- 



love's LA.BOURS. 325 

posing himself as an escort for Dorothy in taking some 
necessary air and exercise (for she began to look very 
ill in the confinement to which he at first subjected 
her), the armourer allowed her to leave his precincts 
in charge of her quondam betrothed. It was plain, 
in fact, that the old man's favourite hopes revived, 
ignorant as he was of Tubal's overmastering motives to 
lend aid in the progress of his supposed rival's happier 
fortune. 

But even ' Master Shakespeare, of the Grlobe,' indeed, 
has said nothing truer than in his famous lines on the 
always thwarted and perplexed course of ^ true love.' 
And Edward Holte was painfully disturbed in his en- 
chanted dreams of successful love and military glory, 
almost as soon as he had raised the brimming nectar . 
of the former draught of paradise, at all events . to his 
lips. 

A reply reached him from Lord Falkland, which, in 
parts favourable to his most earnest wishes, was wanting 
in some most important points, and visibly disastrous in 
others. 

He was informed that the King approved of all he 
had done in effecting the peace, with the exception that 
his Majesty insisted on the town of Birmingham laying 
itself open at once to the quartering or passage of his 
troops, instead of so undutifuUy demanding that they 
should be removed elsewhere. 

The principal reason in receiving the town so easily 
back again into pardon and grace, it was declared . after 
its seditious outbreak, with the means of punishment 
ready at hand . was its alleged great convenience for 
military use. 

In the opinion of its value in that respect Prince 



326 THE armourer's daughter. 

Rupert so entirely joined, that he had resolved as speedily 
as possible to fix his head-quarters in Birmingham ; and 
meanwhile, would not think for a moment of leaving 
Aston Hall, where he found himself very well situated 
for intelligence and communication with most of the 
other scattered gatherings of the King's forces. And 
would remain more needfully so, as his Majesty himself 
intended to retire on Shrewsbury, to place himself at 
the head of the now considerable army collected in the 
west, and from Wales and Ireland, in his behalf. And 
to Shrewsbury Edward Holte was ordered with all pos- 
sible speed to hasten with the mounted levy he an- 
nounced himself to have formed, his Majesty's forces in 
this direction being chiefly of infantry, and cavalry 
specially requisite and desirable for the guard of his 
royal person on his various extended movements among 
the loyal population of the west. 

In addition to the exceeding distastefulness for a 
young bridegroom, in the first bloom and glow of tri- 
umphant love, to be called upon to leave his adored, 
Edward Holte could not but vaguely surmise something 
of sinister and plotted in all this arrangement. 

It seemed strange that the only condition upon which 
Birmingham insisted, should be the only one denied. 
Strange and ungracious too, in the last degree, to add 
so much that was unsavoury and menacing in the de- 
mand that the town should be thrown open. Very 
strange that such importance should be attached to 
the attendance on the person of the King of a raw troop 
of volunteer horsemen, who had hardly yet received 
their arms, much less exercised them. Something 
pointed and confirmed in the summons to him and them 
to remove so far from the neighbourhood of a town 



love's laboubs. 32 7 

with which the young captain had evinced such kindly 
sympathy. 

But besides his own reflections, Edward Holte found 
a few lines affixed to Falkland's official communication 
which greatly added to their discomfort and suspicion. 

The amiable secretary expressed himself in a cautious 
way, as was natural, considering the disturbed times and 
the chances of interception. But he stated to Edward 
Holte that he apprehended persons and opinions that 
meant no good to the town, whose interests he desired 
to serve, had gained a great a.scendency with the King. 

A certain Count O'Taafe, an Irish soldier of fortune, 
who, under a great appearance of jollity and freedom of 
demeanour, concealed singular talents for intrigue and 
cajolery, had arrived at court from Prince Kupert. 
Charles had lent a ready ear to his statements and 
opinions on the subject of the town of Birmingham ; 
and he, Lord Falkland, had good reason to believe that 
all that had been resolved upon in relation to that place, 
was by the advice and insinuation of this Irishman. 
The Council had scarcely been consulted on the matter, 
the King insisting on the condition he named in the 
most peremptory and determined manner, and refusing, 
in fact, to hear any reasons to the contrary ; so possessed 
was his mind with the artful suggestions made to him. 

Not a single word was said about Tubal Bromycham ! 

Edward Holte knew enough of the character and 
double-minded procedures of Charles I. to feel that the 
information he received gave scope for the greatest 
anxiety that some ill turn in the whole transaction was 
to be dreaded. This uneasiness was, however, greatly 
heightened in more than these respects by a communi- 
cation he received shortly afterwards from Aston Hall. 



328 THE ARMOUEER's DAUaHTER. 

Having been expected in vain for several days, Mr. 
Lane arrived at last at Sutton, with a face more than 
customarily full of ill omen and disaster. 

Besides being so absorbingly engaged in personal 
affairs, Edward had refrained from sending to enquire 
the motives of this absence, from consideration for the 
panic alarm of the poor old man, and his dread of im- 
plication in any discovery of the recent transactions. 
And unwilling to subject himself to scrutiny, offended 
almost equally with his father's and brother's behaviour 
towards him, and having hardly a moment's time to 
spare, he had not himself made any visitation to Aston. 
He wished, besides, not to present himself before Prince 
Kupert, whose peremptory manner he so little relished, 
until the business with Birmingham was settled, 
and his Highness in fair course at least of removal 
thence. 

Now this hope was over. The Prince seemed rather 
confirmed in residence at Aston ; and from all Edward 
learned from Mr. Lane, seemed more than ever to regard 
his quarters as fixed. 

Far from removing them, the number of his troops 
was swelling constantly, so that Aston Park began to 
put on the appearance of an extensive cavalry encamp- 
ment. Trumpets and kettle-drums resounded in all 
directions, night and day. Artillery was expected from 
York. And not only had the Prince treated Mr. Lane's 
announcement of the ao^reement arranored with con- 
tempt and disdain, but he openly declared his conviction 
that as soon as his royal uncle was placed in possession 
of the real facts of the case, he would disavow the 
absurd bargaining which had assured the worst rebels 
in England exemption from the due penalty of their 



love's labours. 329 

misdeeds. Xor was it at all concealed that Count 
O'Taafe was despatched to couit with earnest advice to 
this effect. 

The kind old man had been alarmed from bringing 
this intelligence sooner, hoping to divert the suspicions 
he apprehended might have been excited by his at- 
tendance on his young patron into Birmingham. Yet, 
he confessed, he had been so closely questioned as to 
all that happened there, by Sir Thomas, and cross- 
questioned by his lawyer, that he frequently grew 
confused and alarmed, and scarcely knew what he had 
said. 

But the most disquieting part of the intelligence re- 
mained to be communicated, and Mr. Lane proceeded 
upon it with evident marks of discomposure and anxiety. 
But he could not in his conscience, he declared, with 
tears gushing to his kind simple eyes, but state that 
from what he had observed, Prince Rupert was likely to 
crown his influence with Sir Thomas Holte by marrying 
his fair daughter. All who saw them together re- 
marked what lovers they had become, and it was the 
general talk and expectation of the house and village at 
Aston, that the haughty young lady there would be fitly 
wedded at last to the nephew of a king. 

It seemed not to have entered the loving-hearted 
clergyman's head to doubt but that matrimony must be 
the end of. all this wooing and company-keeping he 
described between the royal dragoon and the beautiful 
daughter of his host. 

Mr. Lane had spent the greater portion of his life in 
dependence on the wealthy baronet, an admiring spec- 
tator of the development of his grandeur and greatness. 
Even 80 exalted an alliance seemed, therefore, by no 



330 

means out of the possible culmination of these glories ; 
especially as the Prince was so poor and Sir Thomas so 
rich, and the latter talked openly and very significantly 
now of doubling, and even trebling, the fortune he had 
originally intended for his daughter in case she married, 
as he thought she could not fail, to his mind. 

Mr. Lane was only concerned at the disastrous in- 
fluence these demands upon Sir Thomas's purse, and 
his increased pride in so illustrious an alliance, might 
have in reconciling him to the one contracted in secret 
by his son. 

But Edward was assailed by a deeper and less per- 
sonal apprehension. He was, besides, conscious that he 
was scarcely fairly reciprocating Tubal Bromycham's 
generous helpfulness in his own love affair. He deter- 
mined, therefore, to ride over to Aston Hall at once, 
and endeavour to obtain some decisive understanding in 
the affair. Above all, if possible, to discover his sister's 
real sentiments as regarded her devoted admirer in Bir- 
mingham, and to put her unmistakably on her guard 
in the perilous hallucination in which she seemed to 
consider herself safe and triumphant, dancing on the 
verge of a precipice. 

In deference to Mr. Lane's alarm, however, he deferred 
the visit till the following day, that it might not seem 
prompted by any report of his. And, moreover, while the 
good clergyman was partaking of some refreshment with 
him, Graspar Feldon, who had been for a portion of the 
contract with Johny-the-Eogue, and had his orders to 
call on Dame Cooper at the Moat House, brought also 
a billet, written in a tremulous hand, but which seemed 
to the enamoured young husband like a sunbeam shaped 
into letters. 



love's labours. 331 

' I have fair leave from the master you wot of to go 
with our good friend, whom also you wot of, to the 
Cherry Orchard this afternoon; yet, in good truth, 
shall be at the Moat House on a dearer visitation, if I 
may hope to encounter there with one to whom it shall 
seem rather a palace of love, built so that at least the 
windows may overlook Paradise I' 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME 
CHAPTER LXVII. 



A LOVE-SONG. 



Edward Holte was decidedly in a good humour with 
himself and all the world, on the morning he rode from 
Sutton Manor House to Aston Hall, on his promised 
visit. In spite of serious checks and drawbacks in other 
matters, he was now so perfectly happy and triumphant 
in his love, that everything moral and physical in nature 
and in humanity seemed to take the splendid rosy hues 
of his delightful reveries, which inundated, as it were, the 
universe in a sunshine coloured from the heart. 

The sombre depths of the ancient forest he traversed 
. the dark stagnant pools . the expanses of dreary, 
herbless bog . the tracts of barren uncultivated waste 
. the mystical mounds and trenches which had so pos- 
sibly once been a temple for the sanguinary rites of 
Druidism . all shone in his happy eyes with a light not 
their own, but bright as a dream of Paradise. 

He hoped the best of everything, even of his father^s 

VOL. III. B 



and sister's infatuation respecting Prince Kupert. It 
could not be but that in the end they would listen to 
reason and common sense. Especially his sister; for it 
must be, it should be . however misled she might be by 
ambitious fancies . that in her heart she preferred the 
generous Tubal. 

As regarded the latter, there was no occasion to be 
uneasy. Dorothy was to explain to him the King's obs- 
tinacy, and point out that he had only to persevere on 
his own part to bring his Majesty to reason. Any way, 
military necessities would most likely soon compel the 
Prince to remove his quarters from Warwickshire. 

For himself Edward considered he had ample excuses 
for delaying obedience to the orders he had received to 
attend the King in the west, in the unfurnished and un- 
disciplined state of his newly -levied corps. 

It was, besides, a really very fine day ; the sky of a 
lovely warm blue, with an atmosphere of that brilliant 
transparency which produces all the colouring of nature 
in the most vivid contrasts and effects. The rich, brew- 
like scent from gorse and broom came wafted constantly 
to Edward's sense on a playful breeze. Deer frolicked in 
all the glades, bees hummed on the yellow and purple 
bloom ; rabbits and hares showed their startled, globular 
eyes at every turn among the deep grass and fern. No, 
it was not a day . it was not a scene . for a youthful 
bridegroom to believe in misfortune. 

These pleasant impressions continued on Edward's 
first arrival at the Hall. His approach up the great 
avenue startled two rustic lovers who were met in fond 
tryste at a stile leading into the Park, and who proved 
on inspection to be Robin Falconer and Phoebe Dew- 
snap, a favourite and vivacious waiting- maid of his sister. 



A LOVE -SONG. 3 

From these two he learned that all was well at the Hall, 
and giving his horse to the former, continued his way 
thither on foot. 

Yet was it all so well ? 

Passing along the garden-front of the house, under 
the open windows of his mother's drawing-room . an 
apartment still known as Lady Holte's . Edward heard 
the melodious murmurs of a musical instrument, which 
he immediately discerned to be his sister's '' virginals/' 
as the original of the subsequent spinet, harpsichord, and 
piano, was styled in its earliest invention ; . the very in- 
strument on which Tubal Bromycham, inspired by love, 
had exhausted his mechanical genius. And pausing for 
a moment to listen who the player might be, Edward 
heard a rough male voice . which yet he instinctively 
felt the owner made an effort to soften to an amorous 
wooingness . request that Mistress Holte would charm 
him with some ' lovesome ditty ' to the notes. And im- 
mediate compliance followed, in accents full of a species 
of passionate cajolement and allurement, that, coupled 
with the earnest meaning of the words themselves, struck 
Edward with foreboding and dismay ! 

Of course the verses displayed the usual qualities of 
quaintness and stiffness in the style to be noted in nearly 
all the poetry of the time of Charles the First, of which, 
luckily, no great quantity remains. It is perhaps, how- 
ever, necessary in the present instance, to ask attention 
to 

ARABELLA HOLTE'S LOVE-SO]S^G. 

To my heart, I said, ' Faint Heart ! 

Why, like the wind-sti'uck lute. 
Dost thou sweet utterances begin 

That die then, and remain for ever mute ? 
For ever mute. 
B 2 



Dost thou fear disdain, Proud Heart, 

Scorn of thy love's display ? 
Bather than rue some unkind mock, 

Wouldst all thy treasured sweets keep stowed away ? 
Keep stowed away. 

Or, the worse mischance, Poor Heart ! 

Fondled awliile to be . high pinn'd . 
Worn like a flower in the hat . 

A moment after cast on any wind ? 
On any wind. 

Tet, what worse can hap. Worn Heart, 

Than to consume as now ? . 
Die, if thou must, of uttered pain ; 

Not show it only on a death-pale brow ! 
A death-pale brow. 

Hope return, and speak, Fond Heart ! 

All thy choked sighs ensconce ; 
All that thy languid eye's veiled fire 

Conceals . and all belike may find response ! 
May find response. 

' Could I believe it possible ' Edward heard still 

rougb but enraptured accents exclaim as the song ceased. 

' Could I believe it possible, I . I I would speak ! 

Siren-lady ! I would speak . and more V 

Edward heard a sound as if a hand were clasped and 
kissed. But struck with wonder and dismay at the 
thought that the pair were left alone to their dangerous 
association in music, he hastened on into the Hall. 

Inquiring there for Sir Thomas and his mother, he 
was informed that they had gone out in state in their 
coach and four to return the visit of the Lady Lyttelton 
and her daughter, at Hagley, and were not expected 
home till the afternoon ! Miss Holte . Edward learned 
from the housekeeper . had remained at home to do the 
honours of the mansion to her father's Royal guest. 



A LOVE-SONG. 5 

The rest of the officers were absent on various duties 
and excursions to out-lying posts. 

Still more annoyed and perplexed, Edward murmured 
to himself, ^A brother's presence cannot be deemed an 
intrusion/ and made his way to the apartment where he 
was aware he should find the songstress of the virginals 
and her auditor. For it plainly appeared the Prince and 
Arabella Holte were alone together. 

Neither^ it must be stated, did Edward take any pre- 
cautions to have his arrival announced; but stepping 
abruptly into ' Lady Holte's Withdrawing Room/ he 
came upon a not altogether unexpected but extremely 
ill-pleasing spectacle to himself. Arabella Holte seated 
before her instrument, but turned from it with eager 
excitement visible all over her vivid countenance, and 
Prince Rupert kneeling at her feet, with both her hands 
clasped in his, and pouring forth some but partially in- 
telHgible but most vehement gibberish, in a mixed rhap- 
sody of English, German, and French. 

Of course Edward's arrival produced an instantaneous 
change of position. Both parties sprang on their feet, 
Miss Holte withdrawing her hands from the Royal Dra- 
goon's strenuous grasp, and ejaculating, with a mixture 
of confusion and an attempt to pass off the affair, ' My 
brother Edward ! I thought it had been Master Grim- 
sorwe, who remained to help me entertain his Highness.' 
And her complexion lighting with a fiery glow, made 
shift to add some words of welcoming, which died away 
when she remarked how coldly and severely Edward re- 
ceived them. 

' Yes^ sister,^ was the brother's reply. ' I have made 
a special visitation to Aston to speak with you on some 
matters of family importance^ which should be in private. 



His Highness will^ therefore, pardon your retirement 
awhile/ 

Rupert laughed his hoarse trooper-laugh. ' It is time 
I were in the saddle myself on the business of my de- 
tachment^ which is fast swelling into a little army. 
Master Holte !' he said ; then, ' But your adorable sister 
sang so like an angel awhile ago, that I mistook her for 
one, and was rendering homage to her in the proper at- 
titude of mankind to divinities !' 

' Were you not the King's nephew, sir,' replied Ed- 
ward, in by no means a similar tone of compliment, ' I 
should ask the meaning of so high-flown a speech. But 
your birth places you too far above questioning on such 
points, which it shall not be my fault if my sister and 
sire do not speedily better comprehend ! Come, Ara- 
bella, I must have speech with you alone.' 

' You need not drag your sister hence then, sir, for 
the purpose,' returned the Prince, disdainfully ; ' I did 
not think to ride to-day, but my horse I deem better 
company at any time than a churlish host, and I shall 
seek mine at once.' 

So saying he strode haughtily out of the apartment, 
beginning to hum some camp tune before he reached the 
door, and markedly saluted Arabella Holte alone thence 
as he retired. 



CHAPTER LXVIII. 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 



Edward looked after the discourteous Prince with a bent 
and lowering brow, and then he turned to his sister. 

' What is the meaning of all this, Arabella?^ he de- 
manded. ' What strange scene is this I have inter- 
rupted ? I have the right to ask. I am your brother, 
and your honour and fair repute are no less mine than 
your own to guard.^ 

' Is not my father, then, my father, and so a properer 
judge if either be in danger, good brother mine V rejoined 
Arabella, striving to adopt a light and somewhat defying 
tone in her rejoinder. 'And that he thinks not so, 
plainly appears from his leaving us in the sole charge 
of such a bookworm as Richard Grimsorwe often shows 
himself of late ! Alas, we poor women ! It should suf- 
fice, methinks, if we follow the behests and fancies of one 
tyrant at a time . father, brother, husband, son, by turns 
. but not in pairs, or all together, sure ! ^ 

' My father is besotted by his pride and vanity. Do 
not show yourself his daughter most in those qualities, 
Arabella !' returned the brother, severely. ' But you 
have yourself too much good sense and experience of the 
pretended godship of Royalty, in your Court days, ever 
to believe that this Royal German trooper can mean you 



8 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

aught but disgrace and contumely in men's eyes by his 
attentions/ 

^ Oh, but, brother Edward, things fall not always out 
as by their original planners are devised ! The stone 
does not always roll where it is cast ; and none knows 
better . if all we hear be true . than Edward Holte . 
that love obeys no laws but his own, and studies no de- 
grees ; but levels even the gods to poor humanity when 
so it pleases hira V 

Edward coloured. But he cleverly parried the mean- 
ing of the remark, and introduced a new element into 
the discussion. 

^ Not always levels, Arabella ! At times exalts' he 
said. ^ For what but love and devotion to you has made 
the young man. Tubal Birmingham . lawful heir as he is 
of a noble race . to stand so bravely forward and reclaim 
the rights of his ancestry ; content as he was to exercise 
his matchless genius and skill in an art to which* the old 
Greeks, indeed, gave a god, and married to the fairest of 
the goddesses. But, doubtless, some one of Ben Jonson's 
Court Masques must have made you familiar with the 
pretty tale of Yenus and Vulcan, since the other matters 
of mythology occur so patly to your memory !' 

He spoke these latter words rapidly and yet waver- 
ingly . surprised and even alarmed at the powerful effect 
which the name of Tubal Bromycham, introduced into 
the discussion, produced upon his sister. She grew 
deadly pale, and looked at him with singularly strained 
and aghast eyes. 

' Tubal Bromycham . Tubal Birmingham /' she mur- 
mured to herself principally ; adding with a forced and 
quivering smile, 'My brother Edward, too, infected with 
that man's foolish rhapsodies !' 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 9 

'But is it all rhapsody, Arabella?^ rppeated Edward 
Holte, gazing earnestly at his sister's wan complexion, 
that yet changed rapidly in degrees of paleness. ' Xo one 
would say so that hears him speak ! ^^'ho believes his 
own falsehood? But Tubal speaks so that no man can 
doubt he believes himself, and, if what he says be true, 
you must . you must . have loved him once !^ 

There was a considerable pause, during which Ara- 
bella turned her superb head away : doubtfully whether 
in disdain and indignation, or to hide the overpowering 
emotion which certainly writhed along her brows. 

' He told you so? The Birmingham blacksmith fellow 
told my brother so ?^ she then ejaculated, turning with 
hidden fierceness and vivacity on Edward. 

' The Blacksmith Lord of Birmingham has not told 
me so, Arabella ! . Has but told me so, at worst, as his 
own belief . his own hope . the purpose and triumph of 
his brave and honest life . of all his thoughts and actions 
. to achieve ! But if he said so, was it false ? Arabella 
Holte ! have you not loved Tubal Birmingham V 

Again a pause. A peculiarly long and significant 
pause. 

'No!' Arabella Holte then faintly repeated. 'Xo! 
I have not loved Tubal Birmingham. Never, never, 
never . have I loved . Tubal Birmingham /' 

' Sister ! Do not take refuge . do not deceive your- 
self and me by a sound ! Tubal Bromychanij then, if 
you will ! Have you not loved that nobleman and prince 
of nature's own making . even you who now debase the 
glorious and fit supremacy of true loving womanhood at 
the feet of a coarse, contemptuous man . butcher by 
trade and heart . because forsooth his sire and dam 
are blazoned ''royal'' in the tawdry daubings of the 



10 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

madman in colouring and sprawling animals^ called 
heralds V 

' Is Edward Holte, then, turned Dutch republican, or 
soraethiug less attuned to aught that is honourable and 
glorious among the distinctions of humanity? What 
raises one above his fellows, or sets him off sunlike in the 
eye and observances of the world, but this same gaudy 
blazonry?' returned the haughty former maid-of-honour 
of the haughty Queen of Charles the First. Yet, Ed- 
ward, with true intuition of the natural action of the 
passions, noticed with satisfaction that it was only in the 
second place she resented the personal attack on her 
royal admirer. ' But is this proper language to be used 
by a gentleman who purposes to be a soldier, of a Prince, 
and already famous Captain of the wars?' she continued. 
' A man butcher ! Prithee, Captain Holte, shall you 
sweat in armour to other pui*pose than to lay low^ as any 
slaughtered oxen in the world the foes and rebels of your 
king? . "Men, at all events, in shape and the reckoning 
of those who will lead them to the edge of your sword ?' 

^ I call a mercenary soldier so. What business has 
this German horse-soldier killing Englishmen, in a quar- 
rel that concerns but Englishmen V returned Edward, 
passionately. 

' Cry you mercy, Master Holte, but our enemies say 
the quarrel concerns all mankind, and all time, not 
merely England and the men of this generation ! More- 
over, Prince Ftupert is at least half an Englishman by 
blood and birth . the grandson of an English king ! 
Methinks his sword has some fair say in an English 
quarrel, so ! ' Arabella replied wdth equally angry vi- 
vacity. 

' The grandson of a Scotch King, if you will. What 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 11 

.was James the First, in all truth else, though he sat on 
the English throne to disgrace it, and wasted English 
treasures on his hateful minions? The ^?'efif^-grandson, 
it may well be, of an Italian fiddler V Edward Holte 
could not forbear retaliating. 

Of course he alluded to the old scandals concerning 
Mary Queen of Scots, and the Italian musician, David 
Rizzio. 

Arabella coloured indignantly, as if her own pride 
were hurt by the insinuation. 

' What, Edward Holte ! you pass in insult even the 
basest reviler Republican of the Parliament . for such, 
in their secret souls, are Yane, and Pym, and St. John, 
and all the rest of the talking traitors, whose heads I 
hope yet to see rotting on pike-staves on London Bridge 
and Temple Bar ! Xay, I doubt if even the prodigious 
rapscallion, whose plans on the most sacred person of 
the King you take so much credit to yourself and your 
Birmingham mistress for foiling . ' 

' 'My Birmingham mistress, Arabella Holte !^ Edward 
vehemently interrupted; and was about to rebuke his 
sister's scornful expression with that one all-refuting, 

but most dangerous word, that rushed to his lips . 

But he reflected in time. AVas not Arabella become, 
and likelier to become yet more so, the friend and ally 
of his enemies ? 

' It is a word no honest and honourable woman . no 
lady . should apply, in the ill sense doubtless you mean, 
of another no less than her equal in all such respects,' 
he contented himself with replying. ' Nay,' he added, 
with passion, but in all sincerity, ^ if things are suffered 
to proceed as now they seem to be set, it is rather Ara- 
bella Holte than Dorothy Firebrace . rather the proud 



12 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

Baronet's than the stern Armourer's Daughter . that is 
likely to forfeit her title to the iiomage due to virtue^ 
and virtuous repute, in her sex !' 

Edward was perhaps a little alarmed, and yet not ill- 
pleased, at the vehemence of indignation aroused in his 
haughty sister at this remark. 

* Great God !' she exclaimed, ' what have I done to 
justify such insult . such atrocious insult? . from a 
brother, too ! I will complain to ray father . to Rupert 
himself! . to the Prince, whose illustrious birth hinders 
him not to be a gentleman of honour and spirit also, 
and who has already drawn his sword on an insolent 
knave in my behalf.' 

' Good heavens ! how know you that ? in my turn, I 
exclaim.^ 

So Edward did indeed. 

' My father ! can he have been foolish enough?' 

Edward knew full well that nothing could be likelier 
to interest a woman in favour of a man than an act 
of protection, mingled with homage and devotion, so 
marked as those certainly displayed by Prince Rupert 
towards his sister in his whole demeanour in the affair of 
the quarrel with Cornet Titus. He was in proportion 
vexed and alarmed accordingly. Nor were these feelings 
diminished when Arabella answered shortly, ' No ; it 
was your brother, Richard Grimsorwe, sir, imparted the 
wonderful secret to me.' 

Edward was silent for a moment. ^ Mischievous com- 
plotter !' he then muttered. 

* Richard Grimsorwe is no brother of mine,' he re- 
sumed bitterly, ' and if he has become yours, Arabella, 
it is very recently indeed. On the contrary, I warn 
you, he is in his felon's heart the blackest of enemies, 



BROTHER AND SISTER. ]3 

and contrives evil against all the children of our mother, 
and would rejoice to witness our utter ruin and dis- 
grace. But let that pass now . only let us not become 
his fools and instruments in the work. And what else_, 
what else, dearest sister, my only sister, my dearest 
Arabella, can you expect to issue from this disastrous 
intimacy you have formed V 

' You begin whimpering now, Edward ; it was ever 
your wont. I should have been the man of the family, 
you its kind, soft-hearted maiden ! And yet you can 
insult with tears, as it would seem, of love and pity 
in your eyes ! For what issue, say you, can I expect 
from this . this intimacy, I have formxcd? AYhat issue 
should my father's daughter, think you, expect?' Ara- 
bella rejoined, in tones of exasperated excitement at 
last, though at first she was evidently moved with her 
brother's emotion of sorrow and tenderness. 

' And do you really dream that the proudest and 
stateliest of Monarclis . that a King of England . that 
King Charles the First . who has rushed upon a civil 
war rather than have his grandeur and supremacy in any 
manner curbed or disputed; do you possibly imagine, 
Arabella, he will ever consent to a lawful union between 
his nephew and the daughter of a country squire, whose 
genealogy traces back through a couple of centuries to 
a blacksmith's anvil, scorn blacksmiths as you may ?' 
Edward vehemently inquired. 

'Ay, that is what our brother Grimsorwe . for he is 
our brother in some sort, repudiate him as we may . oft 
complains of you, Edward ! . complained to the Prince 
himself but the other day; that since you have taken 
so strange an idolatry for a smith's daughter of Bir- 
mingham, you will never let the clank of the anvil 



14 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

cease to sound in your own genealogy !' Arabella replied, 
evidently endeavouring to elude the force of the pre- 
vious interrogatory. But after a moment she seemed 
to be aware this would not do, and she added with a 
smile, * But who thinks to ask our most puissant King 
and Lord's consent in any such matter, prithee V 

^ Mean you, then, sister, to say that this proper Prince 
woos you openly and plainly, in so many words, to dis- 
honour?' Edward fiercely rejoined, and his hand quivered 
as if involuntarily down to the hilt of his sword. 

The gesture perhaps rather alarmed Miss Holte. 
' Foolish, anf][ry boy !' she said, but soothingly. ^ What 
talk is this of wooing me at all ? Your head runs of 
nothing else, methiuks, but love-making and such simple 
vanities, of late ! And yet you have but just thrust it 
in a soldier's helmet, and should think chiefly awhile, I 
should say, of how best to keep it there.' 

' Did I not find the man at your feet, stuttering in 
his bad broken horse-gibberish, a declaration of some 
sort?' Edward demanded. 

Arabella coloured again deeply, and evidently paused 
and hesitated in her reply. But it was too plainly of no 
use to deny the fact so unmistakably witnessed. 

^ Well, sir, you did then ! Gallantry and homage to 
ladies have not yet altogether ceased to be of a soldierly 
and princely usage ! What more ?' 

' He insulted you, then, by using the language only of 
gallantry? In a passion of utterance . an attitude . 
with a look . that indicated the very frenzy of the emo- 
tion, which, in men . Arabella Holte, your brother tells 
you . is either love or lust !' Edward almost shouted, 
now. 

' You wish mv father, doubtless, to overhear vour re- 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 15 

marks at Hagley V Arabella exclaimed, greatly alarmed 
and annoyed at this excitement. ' Or will it content 
you merely to let our whole neighbourhood and menial 
service into the secret ? You have startled the rats in 
the highest bacon-loft of Aston Hall, I am certain, bro- 
ther ! And yet, if you would hear me out . Ridicu- 
lous boy ! how can I say or know what the Prince's 
true meaning and inference from the passion he avowed 
would have been, since you so rudely and inopportunely 
stepped in to stop him in mid career V 

' But had he confessed love, and not spoken of mar- 
riage to you, Arabella ! What then V 

'T would have spoken of marriage to him V 

'But what theny .if the condition was not found 
palateable V 

'\\e would have disjoined society for ever, Edward 
Holte . the Prince Electoral and I . that's all ! ' the 
young lady replied ; adding, with a smile of triumphant 
pride and self-confidence, that certainly lighted up her 
beauty into a kind of natural queenliness of power and 
supremacy, ' But deem you, simple boy, that I should 
ever put the decision to the hazard until I have this 
high-born wooer so enthralled and subdued to my will, 
that no condition shall seem to him hard or impossible 
that wins the woman of his love to it ?' 

Edward could not but admit to himself a kind of irre- 
sistibility in beauty and arts of feminine cajolery so per- 
fect as those possessed by this splendid pupil of courts, 
and born inheritrix of the highest fascinations of female 
loveliness. But though for a moment he rested from 
one venomous fang of suspicion, another twined a softer 
but still deadly fold on his breast. 

' If it be even so, my poor beauteous sister,' he re- 



16 

sumed, in sorrowful tones^ ' and granting you the most 
triumphant success to be hoped in the afiair with this 
royal personage; still, do you no wrong to your own 
heart by straining at the achievement? Do you love 
the Man, or the Prince only ? Nay, have you not loved 
. do you not still love . another? I return to the ques- 
tion, to which you have not jet given me any construable 
reply/ 

Once more Arabella's deep pallor of profound but as 
strongly suppressed emotion revisited her cheek. She 
contrived, however, to rally in a very brief interval. 

'Any construable reply!' she exclaimed, . ^any con- 
struable reply ! Have not my actions long ago, as well 
as now, replied sufficiently for me ? On the discovery of 
the mad mechanic's presumption, whose cause you seem 
to advocate, did I not hasten at once with my complaints 
to my father, whose wrath, have we not all of us all our 
lives seen, knows scarcely any other limit than his power 
to follow out its dictates? Disgraceful maltreatment 
was the very least I had reason to believe my father 
would inflict on such a suitor. And did I hesitate ?' 

Edward was staggered in his secret opinions perhaps . 
certainly in his secret hopes and wishes, by this ques- 
tion. Nay, he was all but convinced of the fallacy of 
poor Tubal's clinging credulities as to the real senti- 
ments of the proud and ambitious daughter of Sir 
Thomas Holte. 

' It was a great cruelty then, surely, in you, Arabella, 
so to recompense the love and devotion of any man . of 
any human heart. Love and devotion are not such com- 
mon merchandise that people can afford to throw them 
amid the garbage of the market-place, and trample them 
like cabbage-stalks and rotten gooseberries.' 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 17 

'Love and devotion/ repeated Arabella scornfully. 
' How know we what excited all this same devotion and 
love ill the blacksmiths breast? Love and devotion to 
Arabella Holte, or to the wealthy and exalted co-heiress 
of Aston ? For such my father thinks almost to make 
me if I content him by this glorious marriage ; though 
I ask it not of him, but hope some day, rather, my hus- 
band will redeem his princely heritage with his own right 
band.' 

' AYhat, and disgraced with his oidy powerful patron 
and likely supporter, the King, for the very reason that 
shall most content your own family !' said Edward; and 
to confess the truth, the notion, besides being so impro- 
bable in that respect, was not by any means pleasing to 
him. He was a husband now; and certainly, if children 
were granted him, he could not look forward with much 
satisfaction to the prospect of their being in part de- 
prived of their inheritance, in a manner, to purchase a 
husband for his sister, too great and high in all proba- 
bility to acknowledge the relationship. 

Hitherto Arabella had only been assured of the mo- 
derate portion usually bestowed at that time even in 
wealthy English families on the female members, and 
this was probably one reason why, with her views of 
personal exaltation, she had felt obliged to cultivate arts 
of coquetry and cajolery so perfect as those she pos- 
sessed. 

Her brother^s remark, however, seemed to produce a 
different effect from what he intended. 

' I begin to be of Grimsorwe's opinion/ she observed, 
disdainfully smiling, ' that apprehension of my father's 
liberality in such a case would set you much against the 
match ; though he chiefly spoke it laughingly as of him- 

YOL. III. C 



18 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

self; standing, as his fortunes do, in such mere depen- 
dence upon my father's will/ 

' Well/ Edward replied, mournfully, ' I can no more 
against this ambitious insanity. Heaven only grant that 
your denial of a preference for another is truly founded ! 
For the curse of God is upon all creatures that disobey 
the commandments He has more plainly chiselled on 
the human heart than those of old on the stone of 
Horeb. If you err so completely against all the best im- 
pulses of natural womanhood, as to seek to marry a man 
because he is a Prince, instead of the one you truly love, 
of lowlier destinies, evil must come of it, Arabella Holte. 
If not the unpardoned sin against the Holy Ghost, surely 
it stands next to it among sins against the light !' 

Arabella certainly looked shaken and perturbed in her 
own consciousness at this denunciation. It was with an 
effort that she replied, though with a species of lured 
gaiety of defiance and denial . 

' I take my own sins upon my head ; I ask no woman 
else . nor man either . to bear for me the penalties of 
my misdeeds. Look ! I say, let the angels make record 
of my words, and keep them against me for the day of 
account and balancing ! Need you more, dear Edward, 
brother mine ? Or has your abode among the Birming- 
ham fanatics soured you into their belief, that all must 
be atheists and contemners of God's laws who do not make 
earth itself a beforehand place of outerdarknessand gnash- 
ing of teeth ? Why, you are much worse of bodement and 
mischance to befall than the old Witch of Aston herself,' 
she concluded, almost playfully, observing that Edward 
could not refrain from a smile at the former allusion, 
which brought very unlike associations in full tide back 
upon his heart. 'You know Maud Grimsorwe is said 



BROTHER AND SISTER. 39 

never to have wished well or kindly to our house. Yet, 
wheu she chanced upon the Prince and myself return- 
ing together on our wearied steeds from the hawking 
the day you left, she smiled all over her withered face 
and wrinkled eyes, and held up her skinny claws en- 
clasped, and blessed us for the noblest youthful pair 
those weary eyes of hers had lighted on for thirty years/ 

^ For thirty years ! . since her daughtei'^s doom ! Such 
blessings are curses. Long may I and mine remain un- 
blessed by the detestable hag !' Edward ejaculated; and 
indeed the circumstance seemed, strangely enough, to 
revive his apprehensions. Or else he wished to do what 
might yet be possible to satisfy Tubal of his own good- 
will in the affair. ' But well, my dearest sister,' he re- 
sumed, '1 am grieved for it, but no longer disbelieve 
but that your heart nmy go the way our father's ambi- 
tion marshals you. The Prince may seek you in alL 
honour and honesty, as you resolve he shall. But yet 
ease a brother, who has always loved you better than 
any proud, self-absorbed Prince in the world ever can, 
of his worst fears. Come and be awhile your brother's 
companion and bright embellishment of home at Sutton 
!Manor House, and all may yet be well. If the Prince 
loves you, he will assuredly follow you there, and I shall 
have the right to ask him plainly his objects and inten- 
tions in the fact.' 

' Nay, nay, brother Edward ! you are yourself too fire- 
quick and choleric to use a proper temperance in the 
matter. So far his Highness and you have never met 
but to dissent and spar. I shall remain at Aston, under 
a father's care, who falls in so agreeably in all things 
with the Prince's humours and tastes, that to cross them 
for once can scarcely chafe him much. Moreover/ she 

c 2 



20 

concluded, "witli a smile that meant a good deal more 
than the words, 'there are not wanting those who in- 
form me Sutton Manor House is decked for at all events 
21. fairer, and, I somewhat misdoubt me, welcomer visi- 
tant, than ever the dearest sister was, or can, or ought 
to be/ 

Edward was excessively annoyed at this intimation, 
which satisfied him his suspicions of the decorations at 
Sutton were well founded; and was probably on the point 
of giving expression to the feeling, when a tap was audible 
at the door, and with infinitely more of polite precaution 
in the way of announcement than Edward Holte had 
observed, Richard Grimsorwe made his entree, book in 
hand, as if he had suddenly bethought himself that his 
presence was needful where he had now for so consider- 
able an interval withdrawn it. 



21 



CHAPTER LXIX. 

THE DAY MOOX. 

Grimsoryte -was visibly surprised, and even startled, on 
perceidng Edward. 

'Now, is it you, brother Edward?^ he yet said, with 
affected carelessness. ' His Highness was here just now 
and wanted to look in this book of the Holte pedigree, 
which my father has lately had carried back to I know 
not what kings and grandees in the old chronicle-books. 
His Highness takes a vast interest in pedigree matters, 
and Sir Thomas is absent, as most likely you know. So 
we were glad of anything to amuse the Prince's leisure 
from horseback to-day. Of the two, methinks I would 
rather undertake the diversion of his steed ; but my 
sister is a capital hostess, and supplies all defects.' 

' I have always forbidden you, Master Grimsorwe, to 
speak to me as your sister,' said Arabella, with great 
coldness and hauteur. She, as well as her brother 
Edward, whom she greatly loved and admired in general, 
had always shared a mingled feeling of contempt and 
dislike towards the bastard intruder, which every circum- 
stance had latterly tended to increase. His mean and 
creeping artifices in winning favour with Sir Thomas 
Holte were necessarily excitements to the former feeling 
with so lofty-spirited a woman, while the now frequent 



22 

developments of his dangerous and vicious character as 
naturally promoted the latter. 

*' I will not henceforth presume against your wishes 
in this respect, either in word or deed, Miss Holte/ 
Grimsorwe replied, seemingly in no wise concerned at 
the snub. ' But where has the Prince's Highness be- 
taken him without seeing this pretty book? The old 
monks never illuminated a legend-book of their mass 
with brighter enamelling than all these shields and cross- 
quarterings of the worshipful arms of the Holtes. Only, 
I would have my father put King Arthur into the pedi- 
gree-root, to match the Emperor Charlemagne's in his 
Highnesses. Or Charles MartePs should it be, as an 
imperial set-off against our own old Hammerer ?' 

^ My father will believe how ridiculous he makes him- 
self by his pretensions, when I tell him how even you 
make him his mock behind the back, who cringe so lowly 
to his face. Master Grimsorwe,' said Edward, who now 
scarcely took any pains to disguise his indignation against 
his insidious enemy. ' Come, sister, let us walk in the 
park, until my father and mother return.' 

' But we have a good dinner found and ready to be 
served his Highness even now. I am a first-rate pur- 
veyor and major of the kitchen when the humour takes 
me. Will Miss Holte please to give her orders for the 
service?' Grimsorwe replied; ^ or must we wait until 
the master of the house returns, and gives orders to slay 
the fatted calf in addition to our roasted peacocks and 
swans?' 

Arabella was obliged to state that the Prince had 
gone unexpectedly from the house, and to give directions 
that the dinner should be put off as long as possible, or 
.until his return. Yet, considering the manner in which 



THE DAY MOON. 23 

he had left the Hall on his excursion, very reasonable 
doubts might be entertained if the Prince had not taken 
the huff altogether, and would not grace the meal at all 
with his presence. 

In reality, the brother and sister had taken a long 
promenade in the grounds and park of Aston Hall . had 
reviewed and re-discussed at length the recent subject. 
Arabella had listened with impatience to a yet fuller ex- 
position of all the brave and noble things Tubal Bromy- 
cham had of late performed, with a view to retrieve her 
favour; and yet the offended great personage had not re- 
turned. 

In fact, the dinner provided was quite spoilt, in spite 
of Adam Blackjack^ s diligent cares, who was apprehen- 
sive that whoever deserved the blame he should get it, 
and was mostly in his senses in the exercise of his pro- 
fession. And Sir Thomas and Lady Holte themselves 
arrived home from their solemn return visit to Hagley 
House without the Prince having deigned to re-appear. 

It would be in vain to pretend that Edward himself 
was not rendered considerably uneasy by the circum- 
stance, though, in spite of his sister's entreaties, he de- 
termined to await explanations with his father. 

And he speedily found that such would be required of 
him, and by no means in the pleasantest and most con- 
ciliatory style. Partly due, no doubt, to the fact that 
Richard Grimsorwe had met Sir Thomas at the gates, 
and given his own impressions of what had occurred in 
the first place. 

Sir Thomas Holte presented himself suddenly in the 
garden, where Edward and his sister were walking, as 
in a place remote from espial, and still exchanging their 
opposed ideas on the recent subject of discussion, with 



24 

the vehemently excited look he usually wore, even on 
much less occasions of irritation. 

' So, Master Holte !' he exclaimed, with no other form 
of parental salute, ' you have taken upon yourself, it 
seems, a good deal more than even the mastery of my 
house, and have behaved yourself with such disrespect to 
my royal guest, that he has left word with one of his 
officers he shall not enter Aston Hall again as long as he 
is not guaranteed against your rude intrusions and un- 
called-for reflections on his actions and orders in his 
Majesty's service in these parts/ 

' Go in, Arabella, and offer my duty to my mother, 
while I speak with my father on this matter,' said Ed- 
ward, unwilling to enter upon the explanations which he 
yet considered needful, and was firmly determined not 
to be driven from by his father's violent and overbearing 
demeanjor. 

!Miss Holte, though unwillingly, complied, feeling 
how much more unpleasant and compromising her pre- 
sence must render the scene certain to issue. 

' Is it not enough that you have Sutton Manor House 
entirely at your own disposal, to tenant it as you may 
think proper, but you must come to lord it also here at 
Aston Hall ? Do you fancy I am dead and in my grave, 
and no one but your weak, foolish mother to counteract 
and check your domineering assumptions ?' Sir Thomas 
resumed, anxious to overbear his son's opposition with- 
out entering into explanations on its motives. 

But Edward was resolved it should not be so. He 
therefore answered in a respectful but unintimidated 
manner, ' You are deceived, sir, if you fancy I have 
taken upon my hands any unbecoming sway in your 
house. But your daughter's honour, sir, is also her 



THE DAY MOON. 25 

brother's; and if the Prince has gone off in dudgeon 
because I looked disapproval of his offering clandestine 
love, or at least the outward signs of it, in your absence, 
and that of all others who should and would protect a 
young maiden from such unlicensed importunity, I can- 
not even say that I am sorry for it/ 

He then described to Sir Thomas Holte, as briefly 
and as little disparagingly for his sister as possible, the 
scene he had interrupted. 

To his amazement and extreme vexation, however, far 
from seeming amazed or brought to a sense of the im- 
prudence he had fostered. Sir Thomas Holte looked 
highly pleased and gratified by what he heard. 

' Odd's bodikins, man !' he exclaimed, ' what manner 
of a pragmatical knave are you turned, to find fault 
with a little iove-making between a young soldier and 
the most beautiful girl in England, in an August month? 
I begin no longer to believe in the stories about your 
own sweet doings in Birmingham, though you have 
turned half Roundhead for the sake of a pair of bright 
eyes in a giglot's head. Prithee, is it not what we all 
expect and look for hourly, to hear that his Highness 
has declared him the enamoured swain which, in all 
men's observation as well as your wondrous wisdom- 
ship's, he has become?' 

' If so much has been observed, sir, it is full time 
you took upon you a father's duty, and inquired with 
what views all this love-making proceeds,' said Edward, 
with warmth. 

' So ! you will teach me my duty as a father, will you. 
Master Holte, after the long apprenticeship I have served 
to the mystery ?' returned Sir Thomas fiercely, though 
mockingly. ' Or rather, as Richard said but this morn- 



26 

ing, you would have me rush in like a madman and 
prevent the bees settling down just as they are humming 
down, and play your senseless game to despite his High- 
ness without any the like excuse ?' 

' Well, sir, but hear me. Nay, sir, I will be heard, 
if I am forced to call out my words as I would to a man 
both deaf and blind making for the edge of a precipice V 
the son now resolutely rejoined. ' I warn you most 
solemnly of the danger of all you do in this matter; and 
that in my own mind and heart I do not for one moment 
believe this arrogant foreign princeling has so much as 
formed the notion of the possibility of the alliance you 
look upon as assured.^ 

' Good heavens ! if this man should remain here_, to 
put such a notion in the head of my royal guest, who, no 
doubt, will have enough misgiving and counter-sugges- 
tion to overcome of his own fancy and the prompting of 
those around him,^ exclaimed the baronet. Decidedly, 
Sir Thomas had not studied logic to great advantage in 
his college days. ' Come,^ he continued, with rising 
exasperation, ' if I am in reality master of Aston Hall, 
thus I prove it, by forbidding you to return to it under 
pretence. Master Holte, until I summon you either to 
your own or your sister's still more exalted bridalty. 
And I have been to Hagley to-day and had speech on 
the business with my Lady Keeper Lyttelton, and we 
have all but settled the wedding shall take place before 
the further opening of the campaign, if it be delayed 
much after my Lord's arrival, who is also daily expected 
at home.' 

Edward was dismayed at once into silence and with- 
drawal at this intimation. 

' Well, sir,' he said, ' I shall not then infringe further 



THE DAY MOON. 27 

on your hospitality to-day^ or stand in the way of your 
illustrious guest^s return. I take my leave, therefore, 
.with only this word, . unless the Prince declares at once 
to you that his intents are honourable, it behoves you to 
place in my hands the right and duty to rebuke the pre- 
tensions he has advanced, which will then be proven 
insults, and you will always find me ready and willing to 
the task.-* 

Sir Thomas folded his arms contemptuously, and 
looked up at the faint outline of the harvest moon, 
which appeared in the still glorious sky. 

' You talk, son Edward,^ he said, with a most thoroughly 
self-satisfied look, ' and so does yonder moon shine ; but 
neither of you much to the purpose.^ 

' Heaven forefend the darkness should come which 
will show my meaning forth, like yonder pale orb's, with 
a brighter glare V said Edward, with a deep sigh, for his 
heart strangely misgave him, as he turned to take the 
departure so unparentally enforced upon him ; accepting 
the command however literally, quite well aware that 
nothing was to be hoped from his mother's interposition, 
and that his abrupt leaving would be more likely to 
fix her attention on the causes than the most earnest 
entreaties he could address to her. 



28 



CHAPTER LXX. 

HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 

A FEW days after the ill-received visit of tlie heir of 
Aston Hall to that stately parental home, Maud Grim- 
sorwe sat in her miserable cottage on the Fish Stews 
Pool . alone. 

At least, as much alone as the aged woraan^s haunted 
imagination ever suffered her to be. For in truth it 
might be said of this unfortunate old creature, as was 
said, in a far different sense, of the ancient philosopher, 
she was never less alone than when alone. 

Then came back . at times, it is possible, with an 
hallucination of actual vision . the few but tragical 
figures of the past, which had stamped their images, by 
intensity of grief and horror, indelibly in her otherwise 
faded mind . images that revived amidst its general 
feebleness and confusion (excepting when electrified into 
strong vitality by the energy of her powerful passions), 
through every half-effaced shaping of subsequent change, 
like ciphers scratched into a slate, do what you may 
with sponge and new figuring to obliterate them. 

The few who ever approached her darksome and se- 
cluded dwelling would at such times hear the old woman 
engaged, as it seemed, in a dialogue with several visitors. 
And if they ventured to peep in, would perceive old 



.HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 20 

Maud muttering and gibbering, and using many ges- 
tures to her unseen company; mostly seated on the 
ed^e of her miserable bed of crazv timber-work, black 
blankets, and patched quilt, or rocking herself backward 
and forward on a stool before a thriftily- fed wood-fire 
in her windy chimney, which was only formed by an 
opening in the low, moss-grown roof. 

The latter was the position she occupied on the occa- 
sion we allude to . seated on an old, roughly-made milk- 
ing, stool gazing fixedly into the dying glow on her 
hearth. 

' It is not very like her face, neither,^ she was also 
muttering; ^ and, whatever Adam Grimsorwe may say, I 
will never believe my child is in hell-fire now, for her 
offence in perishing by her own act and deed. How, was 
she not driven to it ? No, no, no ! we are her mur- 
derers. Sir Thomas Holte, I, her mother, and Adam 
Blackjack, the master cook ; we three are my poor 
child's murderers. 

' How strange, too, that after treating her the way I 
did . after overwhelming her with scorn, and hatred, and 
reproaches, after driving her and her infant shame with 
yells of reproach and curses from my doors, how strange 
that I should hear that splash . that screech . and yet 
not take to my understanding what had really occurred. 
Or was it . no, it could not be ; it shall not be ! I was 
not so steeled with my own supposed wrongs and in- 
juries, and the disgrace the poor girl thus had brought 
upon me and my father's name, that knowing she was 
gurgling in the deep water for her life, I yet would not 
stretch forth my hand to save her . till too late !' 

* But could I have saved her ?' the unhappy creature 
went on musing. ^ Marry, I think not; although she 



30 

gave that cry, slie was bent on dying ! And you can- 
not prevent people from dying that are bent upon it ; 
you cannot, I say ! Adam Blackjack only pretends I 
could have saved her, because the undying worm is at 
his own heart, too, in that, and he would ease some 
blame off himself on me. It was he drove her mad by 
his pretensions to become her husband ; by his reveal- 
ing that Sir Thomas desired it. Cowardly slave ! It 
is his only comfort to feign now that after he had driven 
her frantic, her mother could have saved her merely by 
stretching out her hand, and . and would not ! 

'And they talk of the day of judgment as to be mil- 
lions of ages hence, perchance, do they ? No, no ; judg- 
ment day is now . here ! Judgment day is over for me 
now for nigh these thirty years. And hell ! Is it not 
hell enough to remember that hour ? And my poor 
child's white drenched face as they drew her from the 
pool, and her last cry, "Mother, my child ! my child V' 
They say she plunged with it in her arms; but how 
could that be, since I know very well she called out 
those very dying words, and he, Hichard Grimsorwe, 
was found safe and sound among the osiers on the bank ? 
And for Adam to torment me on, by saying that her 
ghost is only troubled because her child was not allowed 
to be drowned with her, as she intended, but is left to 
do so much mischief and wickedness on the earth. For 
had he less cause for bitterness of heart, my grandson 
truly is a devilish man in his revenges and hates. Hillo, 
talk of the devil, and doth he really sometimes appear ? 
Who's there ? Grandson, is it you ?' 

At this moment Maud Grimsorwe's latch was clicked 
up, but, as she had secured the low door with a broad 
wooden bolt, the visitor could not enter. 



HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 31 

Some interval of no reply ensued, and the old woman's 
* extravagant and erring spirit ' thus pursued its cogita- 
tions . 

' Or is it the Old One himself, then ? The Old One 
whom, they say, I serve, and who, for that, should do me 
favours in return. But what hath he ever done that I 
have begged of him? Some of the children, it is true, 
perished ; but two goodly heirs survive to Thomas Holte, 
flourishing like the young pine and lady-birch of the 
woods. Hath he not a noble, youthful son, who obeys 
his will in all respects, who is to be married to a noble 
and wealthy wife ? A daughter, whose beauty has at- 
tracted the admiration of a Prince, and whom, they say, 
she is to marry? Myself, I blessed them when I met 
them in the Waste, they looked so stately and proud a 
pair; and yet a curse was in my heart. 

' So happy and fortunate is the man to whom I owe 
the misery of so many years. What folly, then, to talk 
. as the strange old scholar who was father of Esther 
Feldon, and parish clerk of Sutton so many years, often 
would . of familiars and demons that might, by proper 
devil's prayers and incantations, be brought to do our 
will on others ! Yet he was a wise man, and taught me 
nigh all I know of my witchcraft, forsooth, in herbs and 
unguents. What, the bolt moves again. Who's there 
without ? What want ye ? I am making bedward, and 
it is time an old woman should when the owls begin 
their hooting.' 

* Open the door, good Dame Grimsorwe ; I am a Bir- 
mingham lass, come of an errand it shall do you no 
harm to hear, but put a piece of fine large white money 
in the palm of your hand,' replied a voice from the ex- 
terior, which sounded indeed like that of a female, but 



32 

scarcely of the rank indicated by the expression and the 
lonely style of the visitation. 

' What voice is that ?' said the old woman to herself, 
considerably startled. ' But, no ; it is not at all like 
Maudes ; hers was always sweet, and sad, and low-toned 
as the warble of a water in the woods. What says it 
about money? Can some bold slut of the town have 
heard of what I am saving up, with so much toil and 
pains, to bury me, t?hat in the very last I may owe no 
one on earth a kindness, and come to rob me? Go 
hence, I tell you ; be you who you may be, Maud Grim- 
sorwe is too weary to listen to women's long plaint^ to- 
night.' 

' I have come too tiresome a trudge, and my business 
is too pressed, to go back without speech with you, old 
dame,' the voice replied, in impatient and even impe- 
rious accents. ' I will take your cat away from you if 
you will not let me in; and hark, do you not hear him 
mewing at the door?' 

The witch's skeleton favourite in reality gave what 
probably sounded in her ears a very pathetic and mov- 
ing appeal, in the form of a fearful waul, at this mo- 
ment. 

' Hussy, to dare to harm my cat ! I'll let you know !' 
the old woman exclaimed, and, forgetful of her personal 
apprehensions, she arose and hobbled in high exaspera- 
tion to the door. 

Opening in a mingled quiver of anxiety and rage, 
Dame Grimsorwe found herself facing a female figure, 
in a long grey cloak and hood drawn nearly over her 
features, such as were worn in reality by women of in- 
ferior rank both iu town and country, at the time, as a 
going-out dress. What was remarkable only was that 



HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 33 

besides this concealment_, the visitant wore a vizard . a 
species of black canvas mask, used by females of much 
higher pretensions than those assumed to preserve their 
complexions on journeys, or conceal their features in 
places of public assemblage where they did not choose 
to be known. Yet Maud Grimsorwe was not a little 
struck by the distinguished appearance of her visitor in 
other respects, and the tone of command and superiority 
that seemed natural to her. 

' Phoebe Dewsnap ! You are not Phoebe Dewsnap, 
either !^ the old woman exclaimed, strangely puzzled by 
what she saw. 

' No, indeed. I am of Birmingham, I tell you. But, 
prithee, let an honest Christian woman in as well as your 
cat. See, good dame ! I have not come to challenge 
a proof of your skill unprovided with a sufficient fee ; 
and there are more where this comes from,^ the visitor 
rejoined, displaying a silver coin of about the ^ size and 
value of a crown-piece, called a noble. 

Avarice was not one of the infirmities of age from 
which the Witch of Aston was exempt. The sight of 
the money proved a most potent smooth ener of obstacles. 

' Come in, my young madam, then,^ she said, ' for so 
I am sure you are by your voice. But there are so many 
foolish wenches come to me from the town, who think I 
can and will cure them of all their troubles and ail- 
ments for nothing. Whereas I am a poor old woman 
myself, and want to save up all I can get to buy me a 
shroud and a coffin.^ 

' You seem not very rich indeed, good dame ; and I 
marvel the more at that, since they report you, far and 
near, so very skilful and knowing in things, that some 
people report you have dealings with the other world ; . 

VOL. III. D 



34 

say you are a witch, in short/ replied the visitor, but 
not by any means as if she meant to use the term re- 
proachfully. 

Maud Grimsorwe, however, seemed not greatly to 
relish it. 

' They say so, "who would fain make a bonfire of a 
poor old woman^s dry bones, and they lie. I know the 
virtues of some common herbs and simples, which I 
learned in a lawful Christian way of an old mediciner 
that once abode in these parts, and had all Sutton 
Chase for his apothecary^ s shop,^ she replied, snappishly 
enough. 

' Hush, hush. Dame Grimsorwe ; do not think to hide 
the truth from me. I have heard of you almost all my 
life as a woman who had real power and dealings with 
supernatural agencies; I ask not of what sort . but, 
hark, your cat mews as if he, too, liked not your denial.^ 

The stranger said this in a rather playful manner, but 
yet with evident earnestness and belief at bottom ; and 
Maud, whose eye was strongly attracted by the coin, 
perhaps thought it unadvisable to discredit her own ca- 
pabilities of deserving recompense any further. She 
therefore contented herself with a doubtful mutter, con- 
cludiug with a request to the ' Birmingham lass ' to enter, 
take a seat at the fire, and state her wishes, as briefly 
as might be. 

The stranger seemed to comply very willingly, and 
meanwhile, the cat continuing to mew and circulate 
rapidly round the old woman^s feet, her attention was 
attracted to it. 

Suddenly she uttered a doleful cry, ' Smilikin, Smili- 
kin, Smilikin ! what has done this to my bonny Smili- 
kin V she exclaimed, lifting the frightful animal in her 



HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 35 

arms. ' Some dog has bitten it, has torn its poor skin 
with its beastly fangs. My curse go with it, and its 
owners too, over the edge of the Beacon Barr!^ 

'Nay, do not say so; the creature cannot be much 
hurt; it ran before me nearly all the way,^ said the 
stranger, evidently a good deal alarmed and pertubed 
by this manifestation. 

' Its shoulder-blade is nigh bitten out by the sharp, 
narrow, cruel bite of a greyhound. There is but one 
runs at large hereabouts, and it belongs to the proud 
minx of Aston Hall,^ the old woman now quite yelled. 

' And do vou curse her, old woman ? You blessed 
her not many days ago,^ the stranger-damsel replied, 
with angry vivacity. 

' How know you that, young woman?' the Witch now 
fiercely rejoined, her grey eyes flashing fire on the 
speaker, and instinct with vengefuUy suspicious scrutiny. 

' I am a great acquaintance of the young lady of 
Aston's maiden, Phoebe Dewsnap, and she told me so, 
good dame,' the visitor now rather sharply replied. 
'But, boasting the skill you do, why not apply your 
sanative ointments to the mangled vermin's wound? 
And what better can either you or it expect, if it goes 
prowling like a wild ounce or tiger in the woods ?' 

'And would you have it stay at home with me always 
here, and famish? What food have I to give it, that 
have scarcely withal to satisfy my own toothless munch- 
ings? Oh, Smilikin, Smilikin, Smilikin ! gnawed like 
a rat by the over-fed, pampered lady's hound, merely in 
sport and cruelty. When will the Holtes cease to do 
wrong on me and mine ?' 

' Even now, old woman, if you study to deserve it, 
and will swear secresy to me on my business/ the 

D 3 

« 



stranger- visitant abruptly replied. 'I do confess that 
my hound . for I am Arabella Holte . which I could not 
rate from accompanying me, startled and chased your 
cat. But I saved it from his jaws, and severely repri- 
manded Prince home ; a hound I like of as well as you 
can of your animal, certainly, for it is the gift of a 
King's son and nephew to me. But, why such a pother 
about the matter, and a working on of old grudges, 
when I tell you I have come to you with the best of 
feelings and purposes, to inquire out my fortune of you_, 
and repay to the fullest the exercise of your skill V - 

'You ! You are Mistress Arabella Holte ! Come to 
ask your fortune of . of ^laud Grimsorwe, of a poor, 
wretched old woman like me?' exclaimed the Witch of 
Aston; and truly, in her astonishment, relinquishing 
even the examining and piecing np of her grimalkin's 
torn side. 

'Yes, Dame Maud, and methinks it is time that I 
should know it now,' replied Arabella Holte, resuming 
her naturally haughty and commanding tones, though 
wdth an effort to seem lively and jesting. ' But no 
doubt you have heard of me, as I have of you, and are 
aware that I have refused numerous not unsuitable offers 
of marriage, as people deem them, that have been made 
to me. Indeed, I cannot well fix my mind on any, and 
would find out wiiat fate inevitably has in store for me, 
to put my tossed and vacillating mind to some rest. 
Moreover_, I make some kind folks, who perchance de- 
serve a better fate (this she said with a sigh), very un- 
happy by my undecidedness, and would end the trouble 
and contention in my own soul and theirs, by knowing 
.what is written down in fate for me. And now, Phoebe 
Dewsnap, my handmaiden, tells me you predicted to 



HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 37 

her most truly that she should be wooed and won in 
wedded love by Robin Falconer/ 

' What else was to be expected between a peasant and 
a waiting-raaid^ Mistress Holte?^ the Witch replied, 
after an interval of astonished silence ; ' and I saw them 
at their love-making as the blithe falconer made for 
home over these plantations, or when your mother^s 
maidens came down to a linen-wash in the pool. But 
for your father's daughter to seek to know herself in 
such a matter, of my daughter's mother, passes belief.' 

' Not at all. Dame Grimsorwe ; why should I inherit 
those senseless old grievances ? And I am well assured 
of your skill, for even my father himself espied you but 
very lately engaged in some magical divination, at a 
cross-road, with a dozen other of your kind, that all 
dispersed in lightning and thunder when he spake. 
Nay, but for your grandson's entreaties, and Adam 
Blackjack's fearful refusing to stand to his witnessing, 
he would have given out his warrant that very night for 
your apprehension as a witch.' 

^ So my grandson told me. And for these kindnesses 
and courtesies, to say nothing on old scores . but what 
do you ask of me. Mistress Holte? I am old, young 
lady, very old, and scarcely took note what you have 
said.' 

Miss Holte now repeated, in still clearer and more 
peremptory declaration, that she desired the Witch of 
Aston to show by some certain charm or spell what 
husband she was to wed. 

Maud Grirnsorwe was probably herself for some mo- 
ments amazed at the credulity and craving desire to piy 
into the secrets of futurity that must have dictated this 
research. But the pride and sense of raised importance 



38 

natural to a poor, old, half-witted, grief-worn creature 
of the kind, took possession of her mind upon it, and 
dictated the reply she made. 

' I can show you atIio your future husband is to be^ 
Mistress Holte, if husband your pride and vanity ever 
suffer you to take among mortal men. Who your hus- 
band ought to be I leave to your own heart.^ 

'What mean you?^ exclaimed Miss Holte, with a 
sudden pettishness that did not conceal the fact that she 
was struck with a kind of dismay on the words. 

' I have eyes for blacksmiths as well as for game- 
keepers, high-born ladies as well as their handmaidens, 
and I have seen w^hat I have seen,^ returned the Witch, 
as peevishly. 'Nay, I have my thoughts that it was 
because you spied my withered head over the yew tree 
in Aston churchyard that day when Tubal Bromycham 
implored of you to give him some definite answer to an 
oft-urged suit before, that you hastened with your own 
version of the tale to Sir Thomas Holte. As if I would 
have betrayed a love-making so much to my mind and 
so little to his !' 

'You are not far wrong, perchance, in your conjec- 
ture, Maud ; it was a madness, a frenzy, from which fear 
of my father's displeasure could alone so wonderfully 
have saved me. But it is long over all, now,' Miss Holte 
replied, and in tones of deeper emotion than she seemed 
willing to admit. ' How is it, then, that you will enable 
me to ascertain my real destiny in a husband, if, as you 
say, I ever am to wed ?' 

It is probable Maud herself only projected a humilia- 
tion and blow to the pride and hopes of the haughty 
beauty, her enemy's daughter. But she answered 
boldly, 'Cross my hand with silver thrice, lend me your 



HOW TO KNOW WHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 39 

best laced smock, and the first night the moon is at the 
full come hither to me, and I will have everything pre- 
pared for the experiment ; which consists in this, that 
the fair garment is hung before a fire, magically pre- 
pared, over a shroud (which I have of mine own, conve- 
nient, for they would not let my girl wear the shroud 
I wrought her), and thereupon she that would know 
her fortune must watch till midnight. And when it 
strikes . be he far or near, east or west, at bed or ban- 
quet, or on battle-field . he that is destined for her hus- 
band must leave wherever else he is, and stalk, as it 
were in a dream, into the chamber, and turn the smock 
over the shroud, to show that he is hers for life and 
death, as married folks should be/ 

Miss Holte listened with a singularly earnest anxiety, 
and yet belief, in this strange statement, which only the 
extreme superstition of the times and her own over- 
wrought thirst for information on the point, influenced 
by recent occurrences, could at all have rendered rea- 
sonable. This was nevertheless one of the most esta- 
blished and favourite forms of marriage divination, in 
practice for many previous ages among the northern 
nations, especially in Scotland; and it still lingers, it 
is said, in divers outlying provinces of Germany and the 
Scandinavian peninsula. 

^ I will begin, then, at once, with the silver-crossing 
of the palm,^ she said, eagerly taking out purse, and 
chinking coin after coin, to the number indicated, into 
the skinny, outstretched hand of the beldam. ' It will 
not be so easy, indeed, for me to be out of the Hall so 
late at night ; but Phoebe and I, and perchance Robin 
Falconer, who is a good, faithful fellow, and as brave 
as a lion, will contrive it among us. And now, good 



40 

even, good old dame, for it is growing very dark as we 
speak, and I may be missed. When will be the first 
full moon at midnight for our spell ?^ 

^ I must draw the lines, and I will send you word, fair 
mistress ! But did I bless you, say you then, the other 
day ? I bless you again now,^ the Witch exclaimed, 
delightedly clutching the money. 'What beautiful, 
beautiful broad pieces they are! But I must attend to 
poor Tomikin now; hear how he mews again !^ 

'No doubt the imp is in pain with his rent skin/ 
said Miss Holte, while the cat indeed renewed its ex- 
cited wailings and movement around its mistress. 

Unhappily, no one noticed the whining and snuffling 
of a dog at the door at the same moment, amid the 
cries and restlessness of the Witches favourite. And 
Miss Holte, bestowing a renewed condescending and 
friendly farewell on Maud Grimsorwe, stepped heedlessly 
to the door of the cottage, opened it, and before the 
young lady could even discern how necessary her inter- 
position was. Prince had darted in, and reseized his es- 
caped victim, whose lamed limb and the narrowness of 
the chamber prevented it from flight. And while the old 
woman rushed shrieking to the fireplace for a broom - 
handle which served her for a poker, to be used in de- 
fence of her favourite, a catastrophe took place, and 
Smilikin, or Tomikin . he had a variety of witch pet- 
names . lay with his head bitten almost from the neck 
on the floor. 

Most extraordinary it was to witness the really deli- 
rious rage and despair of the poor old wretch at this 
tragical ending of her sole companion and friend. Maud 
flew at the greyhound with such fury that, age-worn and 
feeble as she had seemed the moment before, it did not 



HOW TO KNOW VrHAT HUSBAND YOU SHALL HAVE. 41 

appear impossible but that she might take ample ven- 
geance in the way of laming and braining it. But the 
dog flew, howling with pain and terror, from the cottage, 
and its mistress, little less dismayed, followed it out, ut- 
tering apologies entirely unheeded by the excited and 
raving beldam. 

Probably Arabella would have returned to endeavour 
to soothe the injured mistress of the unfortunate S milikin ; 
but when she reached the door, she almost stumbled 
upon the entering figure of Richard Grimsorwe, who said 
smilingly, as he passed, as if he really mistook the per- 
sonage, * What, pretty Phoebe Dewsnap here so after 
dark V 



4iil THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER LXXI. 



CONSPIRACY, 



*I THINK the moon will be at the full to-night^ by the 
almanack, Cornet Titus/ said Richard Grimsorwe to that 
officer, whom he found stalking sulkily up and down the 
terrace between the garden and the falconer's lodge, 
with his arm still in a sling. 

It was about a week after the visit of Miss Holte to 
the cottage of his grandmother. 

* Why do you make this remark to me, sir? Do you 
suppose that my intellects follow the ebb and flow of the 
moon, like some milkmaid's crazy for love ?' Cornet Titus 
replied, with his characteristic sharpness and acrimony. 
' Or do you presume upon making me your jest, on ac- 
count of my being still disabled with the wound so hardly 
inflicted upon me by my royal captain for a drunken 
jest?' 

' Not I, in good faith ; I wear the garment of a man 
of peace, and not of war, and do not feel myself in the 
least encouraged to your provocation by the success of 
so perfect a master of his weapons as his Highness the 
Prince in your demolition. You would still, I think, prove 
too many for a poor lawyer with only your left arm,' re- 
plied Grimsorwe, jocosely. ^I made the remark with 
quite another intent, I do assure you, Cornet Titus, and 



CONSPIRACY. 43 

not merely, either, as a puzzle to pass the time while his 
Highness dines ; for it seems that neither you nor I are 
held good enough company at meals for such great per- 
sonages as sit down daily now in Aston Hall/ 

' Your birth disqualifies you for the placing of a gen- 
tleman, Master Grimsorwe, I am sorry to say. There 
is not a haughtier Prince in the world than his Highness, 
as regards the pedigree of persons admitted to his society. 
And you are aware Miss Holte took occasion openly to 
declare on what reasons she disclaimed your calling her 
sister before him, while speaking of a grandmother you 
have, some poor old rubbishing cottager, who might 
almost thence have been inferred to be hers also, in some 
sort. As for me, I am too completely out of favour with 
that haughty girl herself, to expect the Prince to take me 
easily back into his,^ Cornet Titus said. 

^Indeed, his Highness seems fairly besotted with Mis- 
tress Holte, who is not my sister. But I marvel the 
less at it, being a lady of beauty so extraordinary, cer- 
tainly, that nothing matches it but her pride and her 
ambition,' Grimsorwe replied, with singular virulence 
of insinuation. ^ Or perhaps I ought to add also, the 
unrelenting character of her resentments ; which T dare 
promise you. Cornet, will wear out your hopes of pro- 
motion in the service of this Prince of yours, if ever she 
becomes his wife.' 

' His wife ! Miss Holte the wife of Prince Rupert ! 
. of the King's nephew !' exclaimed the Cornet, whose 
breath seemed almost taken at the bare idea. 

^Why, what else deem you is aimed at here, among 
folks so proud and aspiring as the masters of Aston Hall 
are known to be ?' replied Grimsorwe,, affecting himself 
to look surprised. 



' Why, you are all mad together, then, but to dream 
such madness ! Or if I thought there was any real fear 
in the matter, I would mount my horse at once, and 
ride with or without leave, and at any further risk of dis- 
pleasure, to his Majesty with the intelligence,^ Cornet 
Titus now ejaculated, alid in tones of the greatest indig- 
nation and alarm. 

^And so ruin yourself, indeed, irrevocably with the 
Prince, and perhaps bring about the very catastrophe you 
would avoid,' exclaimed Grimsorwe. 

^ No, sir, I cannot deem so ; it is not possible ! You 
do not know the towering pride and exalted self-opinion 
of the Prince, if you deem it possible that he should think 
of marriage with the daughter of a mere English com- 
moner. I know that he aspires to the hand of the 
King's daughter, the Princess Mary, when she shall be 
old enough to be espoused, and his services in this war 
shall seem to deserve the prize. And Count O'Taafe 
has told me that his mother, the ex-Queen of Bohemia, 
has a thousand engines at work to try and patch up a 
reconciliation between the empire and him, which may 
probably require of him, on the other hand, to marry the 
Duke of Bavaria's daughter and turn Catholic, to secure 
a restoration of his Palatinate of the Rhine.' 

^ All these fine projects may, however, speedily come 
to nothing, and the fortunes of all who depend upon the 
Prince's rising, unless things are looked to in time,' 
Grimsorwe replied. ^ Or, if not so, it becomes more than 
ever my duty to endeavour to save this rash and obsti- 
nate girl . sister though she will not let us style her . 
from a most dangerous entanglement. Moreover, I 
could be glad, methinks, to relieve his Highness from 
the exceedingly uncomfortable position in which he will 



CONSPIRACY. 45 

speedily find himself with so choleric a gentleman as my 
father, though he very properly refuses to relax his rules 
respecting persons of my unhappy birth. All this may 
be done without exciting any reasonable offence, and, by 
your assistance^ Cornet, in a way which shall restore you 
to more than your forfeited favour, and by a very sim- 
ple means.^ 

' Pray you, make me master of the talisman ; I will 
let no grass grow under my heels in bringing about so 
notable a combination of desirable things/ said Cornet 
Titus, very eagerly. 

' Communicate, then, to his Highness . and it was 
therefore I alluded just now to the quartering of the 
moon . that Miss Holte is going to consult a witch to- 
night as to who is to be her future husband, by a most 
peculiar process of divination, which I will describe to 
you anon, in hopes that it may prove his Plighness, 
and so encourage her in her plans to his enthralment. 
It is all, of course, a foolish country superstition, but 
may be used as the means of disabusing my sister (if for 
once again I may call her so) of her high-reaching in- 
fatuation. I would have you, therefore, mention the 
affair to his Highness, and suggest that he should go to 
the scene of enchantment, as if under some phantom 
spell of the old silly mumbling hag, who is to perform 
the incantation, and plainly indicate, by a refusal to exe- 
cute what they desire of him, that he has no such inten- 
tions as folks are growing fast to ascribe to him at Aston 
Hall.' 

' A witch ! a spell ! an enchantment ! Marry, what 
manner of a good old song is this you are singing me ?' 
exclaimed Cornet Titus, who belonged to a then rare but 
existent school of illuminati, which rejected the super- 



46 

natural altogether as either old wives' tales, or artfully- 
contrived stuff to deceive and terrify the masses of the 
people into subjection. 

Grimsorwe explained that he had accidentally become 
acquainted with Miss Holte's arrangement with the old 
witch-woman of Aston, through the latter being exas- 
perated into betraying the secret by a favourite cat of hers 
being worried by a dog of the young lady's, which she 
had taken with her on her visit. Moreover, the pretended 
sorceress was the doating old cottager, his relative, whom 
his owning of such had been so rudely and unreasonably 
taken up by Arabella Holte. And having a very proper 
dread of falling under the condemnation of the laws for 
anything savouring of actual witchcraft, this ancient 
kinswoman mostly consulted him upon what she might 
do to turn an honest penny in that way, without in- 
curring the grievous penalties of witchcraft. But, alarmed 
at a transaction which might easily be construed to fall 
under that description of felony, Grimsorwe desired, he 
stated, to let the whole affair pass into the harmless 
domain of practical joking, in case any discovery should 
be made. 

But that, he added, was not much to be feared, as the 
appointed scene was in a very lonely hut, at a long dis- 
tance from the Hall : the hour midnight. And stipu- 
lations might easily be made to prevent Miss Holte being 
encumbered by any close attendance of servants, or others^ 
to the place of meeting. 

These latter statements seemed most particularly to 
strike Cornet Titus, especially as their significance lay 
a great deal more in the peculiar accent and glances of 
the betrayer than his words, which only we are enabled 
to convey to the reader. Titus's pert and malicious 



CONSPIRACY. 47 

physiognomy also lighted up with some reflection^ if not 
of the fiendish malignancy, of the evil intuition, mingled 
.with libertine gaiety, of the thought that occurred to 
him. 

Revenge, and the prospect of retrieving the Princess 
favour by procuring him a form of extrication from what 
his own excited passions were probably fast rendering a 
most dangerous complication . all to be suggested and 
achieved in the guise of a jest on a young girPs folly of 
credulity, which yet revealed the earnestness and eager 
advancement of her hopes, and an old witch beldames 
knavery. These were rich materials for the audacious 
and unscrupulous Cornet's wit and contrivance to bring 
to the catastrophe contemplated, without remorse or a 
shadow of relenting on the part of the arch-conspirator 
Grimsorwe. 

Before they parted, Grimsorwe was thoroughly con- 
vinced he could not have put the working of his plot 
against the honour and ambitious hopes of the woman 
who had refused to be called his sister, in better . that 
is, in worse . hands than those of this heartless and 
revengeful libertine youth, the future author of the 
atrocious incentive to Cromwell's assassination, styled 
' Killing no Murder.' 



48 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER LXXIT. 



TENDER AND TRUE. 



During the interval tlms spent at Aston Hall^, things in 
Birmingham seemed, in most external aspects, relapsing 
into their former quiet state. 

The disturbance caused by Cromwell's stormy passage 
appeared to pass away like the agitated movement of a 
deep water when a stone is cast into it, that speedily 
sinks to the bottom. 

The artisan population of the town, as a general fact, 
moved only by the impulse of its chiefs, who appeared 
to be satisfied with the kind of peace patched up between 
Birmingham and the King. And this feeling continued, 
although it was known that the main condition of the 
arrangement made on the part of the town, had not been 
complied with. 

Armourer Firebrace, it is true, made an earnest at- 
tempt at the Guildhall to induce his fellow-rulers to re- 
pudiate the whole agreement, in consequence. But he 
was unsuccessful, from various causes; among which 
must be reckoned the violent and domineering tone he 
adopted, that in itself strongly indisposed his hearers to 
acquiesce, and this was no longer backed by any visible 
force or flow of popular feeling. The really energetic and 
determined fanatic minority in the town held itself aloof 



TENDER AND TRUE. 49 

from all share in what was happening now. And mean- 
while, the restoration of trade, and the cheerful blazing 
of their forges, restored both masters and workpeople to 
good humour. While if the gathering strength of the 
Cavaliers at Aston excited remark and alarm, these were 
rather reasons with most folks to shun a revival of pro- 
vocation towards an enemy growing so capable of making 
his resentment felt. 

Perhaps, however, the true reasons of this quieting 
down must be sought in the lack of agencies to sustain 
the impulse Birmingham had received from without. 

Firebrace^s authority, unbacked by personal qualities 
of the fierce activity required, exercised no great influ- 
ence. Major Monk declined all interference ; and thougli 
he still remained in the town, and sent up to the Par- 
liament a full account of what had happened, requesting 
instructions, he had not the power, if even he had the 
will, to hinder anything that was done. The enthusiast 
newly-elected pastor of Birmingham was, indeed, en- 
gaged in certain mysterious preparations to celebrate his 
induction to his office, but nothing had as yet happened 
in consequence. But, above all, the great stirring spirit 
of the town, Tubal Bromycham, seemed to have sunk 
into a singular lull of apathy and indifference. 

Tubal resided at the Moat House, but in a remark- 
able condition of isolation and gloom, only forcing him- 
self from his seclusion at intervals to countenance Do- 
rothy Firebrace^s evasions from her father's suspicious 
supervision. 

But this also, it began to appear, was becoming irk- 
some and dissatisfactory to Tubal Bromycham. He did 
not, of course, comprehend the true position of his former 
betrothed and Edward Holte, all the parties to the trana- 

VOL. III. E 



50 

action considering it due to one another, and tlie pre- 
servation of the secret, not to confide it even to him. 
His impulsive nature was known; and Edward, who 
had felt obliged to warn him of the little hope there 
was of removing in his favour the obstacles to his love 
which existed in the pride and ambition of its object, 
dared not venture on letting him perceive how com- 
pletely even a Holte could yield to the influence of the 
passion. 

There might well, therefore, have been much which, 
in all his absolute and heroic simplicity of brotherly trust 
in Edward^s honour and integrity, troubled Tubal in the 
kind efforts he yet continued, to make other lovers hap- 
pier than there seemed any possibility he should ever be 
himself. It came to his heart sometimes with a vivid 
pang, that unless Edward Holte possessed all the chi- 
valry and generosity of sentiment he ascribed to him, 
he was aiding in a terrible deception, fraught with dis- 
grace and ruin to the persons most dear to him, and ho- 
noured of man and womankind, saving only one dearer 
than all, more honoured than all, in the impassioned 
idolatry of his poet and artist nature. 

Yet here, too, in all that concerned his own hopes 
and affections. Tubal was condemned by the combination 
of circumstances to the most unhappy condition the fa- 
culties of the human mind and heart can be subjected 
to ; when we feel that a fate of intolerable calamity, as 
regards the most vital and suffering principles of both, 
is falling upon us, without our having the smallest ima- 
ginable power of prevention or cure. 

From the very ffrst the arrival of Prince Rupert at 
Aston Hall, and his abode there, had filled Tubal with 
the most poignant apprehensions, awakened the most 



TENDER AND TRUE. 51 

venomous ^awings of the cruel passion which darts its 
poison most into its victim^s entrails^ and too often coils 
there in a more thickly-rankling nest Tvith every hour^s 
sojourn. 

Jealousy is perhaps only a master- passion in natures 
which are at the same time the most powerfully organized 
and the most modest and diffident of their own powers. 
Tubal's glorifying and yet profoundly venerating ima- 
gination, which had conferred the most splendid lustre 
of idealism on the object of his passion, deprived himself 
of any confidence in his merits and abilities to deserve 
so transcendent a prize. 

It heightened to him all the supremacy of attraction 
Arabella Holte in reality possessed, to make him certain 
that the Prince, rude soldier as he was described to be, 
could not possibly escape the fascination. And then, what 
was to come of that? 

Tubal, who would joyfully have laid the crown of an 
emperor at the feet of Arabella Holte, never in the least 
doubted that, however haughty by birth and prejudice, 
the exiled Palatine could have no hesitation to prostrate 
himself, with his sword of a soldier of fortune, at the 
feet of the glorious daughter of Sir Thomas Holte. And 
that she would accept so high a destiny, in some respects, 
TubaFs own melancholy experience of her vanity, and 
aspiring scorn of all beneath her, independently of Edward 
Holte's sorrowful admissions of the probability, now tor- 
mentingly suggested the certainty. 

No wonder, then, that the Blacksmith Lord of Bir- 
mingham remained most miserable and hopelessly inac- 
tive in the midst of his vainly-recovered inheritance. 

What is success, even if great and assured? what are 
povrcr and wealth, and the homage of the world, always 

E 2 

S,T.onamo,s 



52 

paid to these, wheu the heart looks into itself, and finds 
all empty, voiceless, unsatisfied there ? Ah ! me . 

' What is the costliest banquet 
To one sick at heart with death ?' 

But even the calm of utter hopelessness, of despair, 
which some will have it must needs be the death of love, 
was denied to Tubal Bromycham. 

When he reflected on the past, he could not force him- 
self to believe that he had been all along mistaken, all 
along an object of the utter indifiference, even aversion, 
Arabella Holte now certainly exhibited towards him. 

The tenderness and compassion which had so often 
shone through all the brilliant gaiety and coquetry of 
her glance, the admiration she had evinced for his talents, 
the brief but intoxicating intervals in which she had 
seemed to yield to some overmastering sentiment on her 
own part, however restrained by caution and pride, . every 
minute recollection of these moments of delight and hope, 
however scantily spread over a considerable lapse of time, 
forbad Tubal to take refuge in that death of complete 
hopelessness, which, after all, is a conscious one, and as 
little to be sought and desired as the advantage of being 
buried alive. 

Even Dame Cooper took into compassion at last this 
unhappy tenant, as she considered him still, of the IMoat 
House, though she took care not to trouble the bliss of 
her lovers by any dreary allusions to what was happen- 
ing elsewhere, in their presence. 

Perhaps she had a notion that, however curiously he 
lent himself to be deceived, Tubal Bromycham was not 
quite satisfied to resign his betrothed, on the suspicions 
of her afiiections being engaged to another. So Dorothy 



TENDER AND TRUE. 53 

thought it enough to assure her. And the good dame, 
who had several soft corners in her heart, as became a 
townsworaan of gentle Willie, began at last to make the 
supposed discarded suitor an object of compassionate at- 
tention and looking after. 

This, however, did not seem to improve the situation 
for Tubal, who speedily found Mistress Cooper^s kind- 
ness irksome, and desired to escape from it. Or else the 
deadly stillness and silence became too insupportable to 
him, of the species of suspense to which he was con- 
demned when Edward Holt admitted to him, that in con- 
sequence of an angry discussion on the subject of his 
sister and the Prince, he had been discharged from learn- 
ing the news at Aston Hall. 

He grew, accordingly, to addict himself to long ab- 
sences from home. And yet he very rarely now appeared 
in the streets of Birmingham ; never at the forges where 
he had spent so many laborious but happy days of his 
still young existence. 

Neither was he ever reported to have been at Sutton, 
though Edward Holte frequently invited and pressed him 
to make a visit there. And to heighten the mystery, 
these absences were often prolonged deeply into the 
night ; insomuch that Dame Cooper took it at last into 
her head Tubal Bromycham must have betaken himself 
for consolation to some remote sweethearting . perhaps 
in some part of his native collier wilds about Walsall 
or Wolverhampton. 

Very few people, even in an age still so remote from the 
unromantic materialism of our own, would have conjec- 
tured the real objects and localities of TubaFs wander- 
ings. Who would have dreamed that, instigated by the 
earnest desire that possessed him to behold again, how- 



54 

ever distantly, under whatever disastrous accompani- 
ments, the object of his passion, the chief of the Bir- 
mingham sedition ventured by night and stealth into 
the very midst of his armed and exasperated enemies, 
whose outposts stretched all around Aston Hall. 

There was little reason to expect that the species of 
unratified truce between the people of Birmingham and 
the King's troopers would have availed to protect Tubal, 
had he been discovered in these wild wanderings. The 
impetuous and savage determination of Prince Rupert's 
style of making w ar, imported from continental practice, 
was beginning to be well appreciated in England; and 
under the circumstances it would be perfectly easy to 
suppose a spy in Tubal, who ought to be made to suffer 
the penalties of one. 

Nevertheless he defied this formidable danger, on the 
mere hope of being enabled to catch the most remote 
glimpse of the slighting and apparently alienated goddess- 
illusion of his own love and genius, but which to his eyes 
seemed a reality . a celestial of beauty and superiority ; 
persuading himself perhaps, at the same time, that he 
only desired to discover some fact upon which his tor- 
mented mind might rest, however fatal to its peace. 

TubaPs intimate acquaintance with the whole district 
around Aston certainly stood him in good stead on these 
occasions, and secured him against the worst part of the 
dangers to be apprehended. 

He knew every line of approach to Aston Hall ; what 
shelter and hiding-places in wood and dell, behind hedge 
or in ditch; on the summits of lofty trees, or in the 
sedgy skirts of hidden pools there were around. Former 
restless love-wanderings had made him familiar with 
these, and in great measure had obtained him his repu- 



TENDER AXD TRUE. 55 

tation of a poacher on Sir Thomas's grounds, clue mainly 
to the exploits of others. 

From one of those higher observatories alluded to he 
watched where the lines of sentries were drawn, and 
avoided them by skilful windings. 

The dogs in the villages and outlying farmhouses 
mostly recognised him as a friend, and seldom barked as 
he passed near their points of vigilance. The ferocious 
bull of Aston itself, had they met, bore in recollection 
a terrible cudgelling it had received at the strong black- 
smithes hands, and would probably have shunned an 
encounter. Yet the reward of all this perilous adven- 
turing was little indeed to any calm and rational con- 
sideration. 

Tubal had grown familiar with the powerful figure of 
his rival, his stern rough manners in command, and had 
espied him once or twice, from the leafy summit of an 
oak, putting his squadrons through their evolutions in 
the midst of the Park, with a fair spectatress looking on, 
whose smiles and wreathing affabilities set every fibre in 
his hardy and yet sensitive frame palpitating with rage 
and agony. At nightfall, when the household at Aston 
Hall retired to rest, he was at liberty to watch one par- 
ticular window at his leisure, and figure to himself the 
fair occupant, until the glowing lamp was extinguished, 
and he was left to the desolation of the silent woods and 
midnight stars. 

But still the fever that preyed on TubaFs heart seemed 
somewhat allayed and comforted by the restlessness of 
these movements, and the occasional glimpses of better 
hopes, which would at times . he knew not why . seem 
to visit him on some air that blew from Aston Hall. 

On a particular occasion, we are now to mention, this 



56 THE armourer's daughter. 

Tague but over-mastering spirit of wandering research 
came with unusual force upon Tubal Bromycham, in his 
home at the Moat House, in Birmingham. 

There he occupied a chamber which resembled that of 
Don Quixote as much as anything else, since it was full 
of old books and pieces of armour, with the exception 
that the latter were very modern (then) and bright. 

Here Tubal laboured, when he could bring himself to 
attend to anything, at what he considered the proper 
accomplishments of a gentleman of his lineage. He 
strove hard to master the contents of divers antique 
tomes he found in the worm-eaten library of the place, 
and practised the tricks and feints of broadsword exer- 
cise which Cromwell, who hardly knew them himself 
at the time, had taken considerable pains to instruct 
him in. 

It is not said that the moon has much influence over 
the minds or physical powers of the male 'sex, though 
astrologers are pleased to ascribe the greatest to that 
planet over the moods and inclinations of women. Men 
have placed themselves, in their calculations of the kind, 
under the nobler and steadier solar sway. Nevertheless, 
it was the full moon this night when Tubal Bromycham 
was visited by a not unusual longing with him certainly, 
to quit the town and wander in the open lands round 
Aston Hall, undeterred by the fact that the rounded 
effulgence was all the likelier to betray his daring to 
eyes he could least desire to discern it. 

It may be indeed, the case being so, more irresistibly 
worked on the desperation of the feelings that mostly 
urged him forth on these excursions. There was some- 
thing tempting to the fate-defying mood of a hopeless 
lover in the very certainty of added danger and possibili- 



TENDER AND TRUE. 57 

ties of an ending for life and misery together. Something 
perhapSj even of a strange joy, sucTi as a subtle but strong 
denizen of the wilds might feel at braving the dangers of 
a near approach to the habitations of man, in quest of 
forbidden luxuries of prey. 

Or could it have been that some divine instinct of the 
heart summoned Tubal Bromycham forth into Aston 
plantations that full-moon night and hour? 



58 



CHAPTER LXXin. 

"any form but his own." 

Cornet Titus had meanwliile executed, and more than 
executed, his appointed part iu the work. 

It was usual for Prince Rupert^ s officers to attend him 
the last thing at night in his chamber, when he retired 
from the plentiful joys of the table, and the homage that 
surrounded him at Aston Hall, to deliver their reports 
for the day and receive orders for the morning ; and this 
was often, as on a former recorded occasion, made the 
pretence for a renewed conviviality, ending, in the rude 
fashion of the day, in a regular drinking bout. 

There was no need of any addition to the bacchanal 
enjoyments of the evening in question. The Prince was 
a German campaigner in all his habits at this period, 
whatever future refining influences the progress of age 
and reflection, the sorrows and poverty of exile, might 
afterwards render him. He was the pupil, in more than 
military respects, of the ferociously jolly and licentious 
soldier of Tilly and Wallenstein, Count O'Taafe. He 
had, therefore, done his full duty to the rich wines Sir 
Thomas Holte's profuse hospitality had placed before 
him, and in the consumption of which the latter was as 
well qualified to play second to no man as any other ro- 
bust English squire of his time. 



d9 

Perhaps even the two inen_, scarcely consciously to 
themselves, made extremely uneasy by a similar cause, 
strove to dispel or drown an idea that annoyed both, by 
the profuse libations they urged upon each other. 

Sir Thomas Holte began to be aware that he could 
scarcely pretend much longer to ignore the fervour and in- 
tention of the Prince's demeanour towards his daughter. 
The Prince himself, unused to the analysis of his feelings 
or motives, and followingly mostly with little considera- 
tion the impulses of his coarse and vehement passions, 
nevertheless began to be annoyed and startled into the 
perception of the realities of the position in which he 
was involving himself, from various enlightening cir- 
cumstances. 

Among these must be reckoned the Baronet's grow- 
ing plainness of insinuation, though consisting chiefly in 
vaunting details of his own wealth and grandeur . the 
services he intended to render the Crown . the honours 
he expected in return . the splendid genealogy he could 
prove, if need were, and alliances, past and at hand, with 
the most distinguished families of the country; includ- 
ing, of course, his son Edward's fine approaching match 
.with the heiress of the Lord- Keeper Lyttelton. 

Rupert heard these statements for the most part with 
impatience, or a species of acquiescence which is said to 
be more dispiriting to our missionaries in India, and 
other idol-ridden nations, than any amount of counter- 
argument. 

When the former deduce arguments in favour of .the 
Christian religion from the miracles which attended its 
manifestation, the intended converts, calm in the posses- 
sion of their own prodigious mythology, admit every- 
thing, bu* ask. Is that all ? So with Rupert, who be- 



60 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

lieved himself descended through we know not what all 
of dukes, and counts, and margraves, and kings, from 
Charlemagne ? What could there be imposing or attrac- 
tive in the fact to him that his host was connected by- 
blood or marriage with some two or three English earls 
or squires of great possession in the county of Warwick- 
shire ? 

If Sir Thomas Hoite's drift could have eluded so blunt 
and pride-possessed a Prince Palatine^ s perception, still 
he might have read something in the silent melancholy 
of disapprobation with which my Lady Holte watched 
her daughter's manoeuvres on the occasion. For, cer- 
tainly, Arabella Holte seemed bent on displaying all her 
powers of fascination on her admirer now, and succeeded 
plainly but too well. However much his suspicions, 
and, probably, inner convictions of the danger he was 
rushing into, might w^ork on the Prince's mind, he was 
of too early and genuine a type of rude warrior manhood 
not to yield easily to displays of female cajolery, which 
he was so little accustomed to understand or withstand. 

In these various moods the company at Aston Hall 
at last broke up, and with such an extravagant mark of 
homage on the Prince's part, who knelt to kiss Ara- 
bella's hand, that Sir Thomas Holte calculated almost 
with certainty his Highness was about to make the de- 
sired declaration of his feelings and purposes. 

The baronet usually conducted his royal guest from 
the table to his suite of chambers, and he did so on this 
occasion. Yet, still to his great disappointment, not a 
word of the kind he expected was uttered, and Rupert 
more than once yawned when his host detained him be- 
fore an emblazoned window in the hall, to explain the 
quarterings by the aid of the strong moonlight stream- 



61 

ing on the panes. In truth, Richard Grimsorwe had 
already spoilt the effect of the exhibition, by smilingly 
declaring that they ought to have an anvil and hammer 
in every lozenge, if they did proper justice to the family 
motto, Exaltavit humiles. As for the squirrel cracking 
nutSj it did not^ in his opinion, at all express the idea; 
' for though the creature climbed high, it was on/y to 
crack nuts/ 

On the whole, the Palatine was in no very agreeable 
humour for an unwelcome suitor, when Cornet Titus 
stepped from the circle of his officers and asked leave to 
speak with his Highness for a few minutes in private, on 
an important observation he stated he had made on a 
recent round of his guard at the Hall, which ought to be 
at present reserved from general communication. 

' Military intelligence can matter little, sir/ the Prince 
replied, testily, 'as long as Count O'Taafe continues 
absent at Court, and the civilian wrongheads around 
his ^Majesty withhold him from following my advice 
respecting these mechanical rebels, and his own better 
judgment in the case. Besides, I am so weary to-night, 
methinks I could contentedly sleep in my boots ; but 
whether with the good Sir Thomas's wine or talk the 
most, I scarce can tell.' 

Titus, however, very earnestly and significantly re- 
newed his request, with a statement that the granting of 
it nearly concerned his Highnesses personal comfort and 
safety. 

The Prince smiled scornfully. 

' My personal comfort is even too well attended to 
here. Cornet Titus,' he remarked; 'and for my safety, 
I hold that pretty amply provided for against a town 
rabble, even of gunsmiths and sword-makers, by night 



63 

or by day. Cry you mercy^ and leave me to my night- 
cap/ 

But Cornet Titus, who had decided on his course of 
action with characteristic contrivance and craft, rejoined 
in a manner that excited the Royal Dragoon^s attention. 

^ Such foes as I purpose to warn your Highness 
against do indeed rather work by night than by day, but 
by no such tangible weapons of warfare as may be guarded 
against with the like. I do request your Highness's in- 
dulgence, as I have said.^' 

'Does Cornet Titus, then, begin to believe in super- 
natural wan:\ings T returned Rupert, who was as well 
aware of his officer^s incredulity as his officer was of the 
tendency of his own mind to the mysticism and exalta- 
tion of fancy which in almost all ages have been charac- 
teristic of the German mind. Natural products, it may 
be, of the stormy and gloomy latitudes in which the 
German mind has chiefly displayed any marked activity. 

Titus was quite well aware that it Avould never do for 
him to make his suggestions in the manner doubtless 
intended by Grimsorwe, who did not so well understand 
the personage dealt with. He had adopted a different 
route to the same object. 

' I have began to do so, sir, on your behalf,^ said the 
Cornet, gravely ; and his unusual tone, and a well-acted 
semblance of disquiet and alarm sent over his wontedly 
impudently jeering physiognomy, produced some effect 
on the Prince. 

'We shall hear just now that Cornet Titus has seen 
this same Wehrwolf, or rather Wild Man of the Woods, 
which Provost- Marshal Storcks pretends to have spied 
when he went the other morning to St. Thomases plan- 
tations for the materials of his new gallows. Or have 



63 

you also seen the grimly ghost of the Duke of Friedlaucl, 
which, they say, sometimes haunts poor O'Taafe for 
the share he took in leaving Prague citadel gates open 
to the Emperor's assassins? But any way, you say 
the communication is to myself alone ? Leave us so, 
gentlemen ; I dare confide in the Cornet's broken arm 
as well as his good intents, that he means me no un- 
handsome retaliation, or Wailenstein maltreatment, in 
the affair !' 

The Prince expressing himself to this effect, the rest 
of his officers retired, and Titus was left to use his op- 
portunity . not, certainly, unstimulated by resentment 
at this last unflattering hint. 

Of course he dissembled his real emotion, and started 
with a preamble to a very different effect, and yet one 
that at first greatly roused Rupert's easily kindled in- 
dignation. 

The Cornet boldly affirmed that the wound he had so 
deservedly received at his Plighness's hands had only 
quickened his zeal in his service, since it was an un- 
exampled honour to receive such in a fair man-to-man 
encounter with a Royal Prince, . an honour, for his own 
part, he should never have dreamed of accepting, had it 
not been thrust upon him at such hard alternatives 
as were offered him, and, moreover, being at the time 
scarcely restored to a true sense of things from the liquor 
which had been the occasion of the whole. But, what- 
ever malice might be imputed to him in the affair, in- 
stead of the love and duty he professed, he could not 
stand by and see his Highness made the victim of witch- 
craft, and all manner of devilish spells and incantations, 
without endeavouring, at all events, to put him on his 
guard. 



64 

The general credulity of the age, scarcely conceivable 
in our own by persons of education and enlightenment, 
but still to be found among large classes of the people, 
must be taken into account in estimating the efifect of 
this observation on Prince Rupert. It was but a score 
years removed from the time when his grandfather, 
James the First, penned his great book on Demonology, 
and passed his severe laws against the practice of magical 
arts and sorceries of unnumbered species; and at the 
very time Hopkins the witchfinder was beginning his 
career of extra-judicial murder, under the same imagi- 
nary convictions, and the authority of the Puritan 
Parliament and the most celebrated divines of the per- 
suasion. 

The Prince looked at Titus with startled surprise, and 
even . dauntless soldier as he always showed himself on 
the field . alarm at the words ; then demanded explana- 
tion, in a style that truly left no room for hesitation. On 
the other hand. Cornet Titus, with a gravity that was 
very unusual with him, but served him similarly to lago's 
settled habits of sober enunciation, stated to the Prince 
in reply, that in the course of his military rounds on the 
previous day, in Aston Park, a withered old beldam had 
presented herself before him, and offered to tell him his 
fortune for the smallest possible crossing of silver. And 
on his refusal of the offer, on the score of his disbelief 
in her power, had burst forth into an angry declaration 
that her skill gave her the means, not only to foretell, 
but to bring events to pass, in the fortunes of the 
greatest princes and lords, as she had proved by be- 
witching the royal soldier staying then at Aston Hall, 
whom she had enthralled and subdued into such love for 
the fair daughter of Sir Thomas Holte, that he was in- 



65 

cUned to give up all his prospects of glorious elevation and 
retrieval of his ancestors' rank, as sovereign princes on 
the Rhine J for the sake of her love ! 

This was a desperate venture, a deep dive into the 
secrets of the haughty Palatine^s soul, which nothing but 
the mingled impudence and audacious spirit of research 
of Cornet Titus could have dictated. 

Yet it succeeded. Rupert himself . the man of blows 
and violence . shuddered like one stricken with a truly 
awful conviction of the reality of what he heard, as he 
ejaculated, ' That is true enough, indeed ! There have 
been moments when I have dreamed it possible ; for it 
is not possible to think that on any other terms the 
daughter of Sir Thomas Holte, who seems to fancy him- 
self fully the equal of princes, on the strength of some 
poor half-dozen quartering of arms, ^tis true. I have 
often of late been driven to the belief there was some 
spell upon me . some wicked witchcraft spell ! Else, why 
should I desire to remain here when I know that either 
my own ruin or that of this most beautiful and stately 
irirl and her proud father . But how dare they . why 
should they use witchcraft on me?^ 

' Xay, I say not who uses it ; I shall never again stiy 
half a word anything to the disparagement of Sir Thomas 
Holte,^ replied Cornet Titus, shrugging his wounded 
arm with a gesture of pain. ' Still, were T your High- 
ness, I would not be made the joke and practice of these 
people, if it be so as I learn. If the young lady had 
won you by magic of her charms, that would have been 
fair play ev3n for a Princess enslavement . quite anotlier 
matter. But that they should, make you the fool and 
delusion of a hori'ible piece of witchery, methought it 
did consist in no wise witii my unchanged duty to your 

VOL, IT I. F 



6G 

Highness to suffer. And it is most certain ; for when, 
as you will think likely of me, I showed the old Circe 
that I put no belief whatever in her words, she offered 
me the proof, . that on this very night, at the full of the 
moon, she would compel you . compel was her word . 
to leave your comfortable chamber and retirement, and 
make resort to her miserable hut, there to perform a 
ceremony quite as irreparable, quite as fatal to your re- 
turn to your proper princely, even kingly rank . to your 
favour with your Uoyal uncle . to the good-will and 
blessing of your illustrious mother, who is trying so 
many devices to restore you to your exalted rights in the 
empire, as if }ou had in reality married yourself with this 
artful descendant of a fortunate smith of Birmingham ?' 

Rupert actually grew deadly pale, and his strong, 
brassy tones quivered as he inquired what devils sacra- 
ment this could be, which he should thus be drawn 
against his will to take, of so binding an efficacy. 

Titus thought it now the proper place and time to ile- 
clare to the superstitious German the particulars of the 
magic rite proposed to be celebrated, as Richard Grim- 
sorwe had stated them to him. But, willing to keep all 
the merit of the disclosure to himself, and for other 
reasons, he suppressed that worthy^s share in the matter 
throughout. And it was true that he had what the 
Americans call prospected the ground, and had an in- 
terview with the old woman in her cottage. But no 
such communication as he announced had passed be- 
tween them. On the contrary, Maud had exhibited 
herself singularly sullenly and unwelcomely towards the 
impertinent military stranger, and had continued her 
occupation . which was the strange one of stuffing a 
dead cat . for the most part as if unconscious of his pre- 



Q7 

sence, or replying to his questions only witb mutterings 
of dotage. 

Nevertheless, in answer to the Prince's inquiry how 
he had acquired his information from a person who had 
so many motives to conceal it, Titus did not scruple to 
declare that he extorted the secret from the old woman 
by threats, on the one hand, of having her seized and 
put to the torture to confess, and promising, on the other, 
not to divulge the secret to her harm. 

Eupert's panic alarm continued, but it was accom- 
panied also by the most violent indignation. 

' If their spells really have the power upon me the 
Holtes opine, know they not the only remedy for those 
who are drawn into any such horrible Sabbath is to 
draw their swords in the name of God, and hack and 
hew at the devils and sorcerers without stint or mercy, 
till of themselves they gladJy release the inveigled one?' 
he exclaimed. ' It was thus that the good knight 
Conrad of Stolzenfells, who was carried off by a witch 
who loved him to the Blockula, disguised as a coal-black 
mare, struck off it& head midway, and the same moment 
and hour the wife of his chief huntsman was found in 
her bed with her head severed from the shoulders, as 
with the stroke of an executioner's axe.' 

Titus ventured a sly smile at this legend, which he pro- 
bably thought admitted of interpretation without credit- 
ing the supernatural part of the tale too much. 

And such a tragical effect was by no means the one 
he wished the affair to result in. ' Were I your Highness,' 
he remarked, ^ I would take another guise revenge than 
so . a much pleasanter one than sabreing the skull from 
an old witch's backbone, where 'tis titn to one it would 
only drop down again as ugly as ever.' 



' How say you ? What would you do, Cornet ? I would 
O'Taafe were here to counsel me !' said the Prince, in 
vexed perplexity, starinoj at his truly base and mocking 
Mephistophelan adviser with a mixture of anger and ex- 
pectation. 

It was now the crafty Titus^s turn to give a new turn 
to the whole wicked instilment. 

He burst into a laugh. 'My Prince/ he said, 'not- 
withstanding the gravity with which I have related the 
whole affair, your Highness is aware I attach no manner 
of belief to such old wives^ leasiugs and inventions. ^Tis 
but in truth a worthless old woman thinking to cheat a 
young one out of a few pieces of silver. But your High- 
ness is none the less injured by the likelihood that the 
wrong purposed is out of human power and agency. And 
yet, methinks, the punishment were ample if you morti- 
fied the pride of Mistress Holte by stalking in, as in obe- 
dience to the spell, and solemnly shaking your head in 
refusal of the ceremonial by which she would think to 
bind you sacredly her own. Then, should she be very 
cross and pettish, your Highness might ask her pardon 
in the manner you lovers best know how. And which you 
well may, without dread of interruption or discovery^ for 
the WitcVs cottage is in a very desolate place, remote 
from the Hall. A string of our sentries surround the 
spot ; the hour will be midnight. And, of a surety, 
Mademoiselle has shown such forwardness and passion to 
win your notice, that it may well and fairly be permitted 
to your Highness to believe she loves you enough to par- 
don what loving offence you might be led by circumstances 
to offer .^ 

This last view of the affair seemed greatly to tranquil- 
lize as well as please the Prince. 



69 

' Deem you this may be so, Titus ?' he said, with a sigh 
of great relief. ' Why, in very truth, I should owe ^lis- 
tress Holte some chastisement for dragging me by spells 
and evocations from my quiet sleep. And if, when she 
sees that I in nowise project destroying all my own hopes 
to gratify her pride, she does not yet drive me from her 
presence with scorn and indignation, the presumptions 
will be fairly as you raise them, nor can any honourable 
man then rate me for breach of the laws of hospitality, 
and the good faith due to the roof that shelters us. Yet I 
would O'Taafe were here to counsel me, so experienced as 
he is in all points of honour and observances among sol- 
diers and men. of degree!^ 

' O^Taafe would counsel no otherwise in this instance, 
sir. I have espied him out already making love to Mis- 
tress Holt^s waiting wench ; and when I laughed with 
him upon a box of the ear he received for his pains, he 
would have it he was only trying to win the girl over to 
serve your interests with her young lady,' the Cornet re- 
plied. 

'Ay, and to deal in witchcraft against me ! But I 
would fain discover whether there be magic in it, by mak- 
ing my resolve not to go to the place, if I can hinder me,' 
said the Prince. 

' Why, then, you will be taken on the whirl of a wind 
through the air, instead of safely guided on the good solid 
eartb by your poor servant, to the rendezvous; and 
those who go against their will to a witch-meeting, 'tis 
but reasonable to suppose they can exercise none there, 
and heaven knows what follies your Highness may be led 
to commit.' 

Rupert reasoned within himself for some moments, 
not very clearly or logically, it is probable, after all the 



70 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

wine he had drunk, and the confusion of mind into 
which he was purposely tlirown. No doubt, also, the in- 
fluence of the real enchantress's recent spells worked 
powerfully in conjunction with the other motives urged 
upon hinf. 

The ill result of his meditations appeared in the words, 
' I will go, then, of my own will, under your guidance, 
Comet, well armed against either fiends or men. And 
do you take your trumpet to summon further assistance, 
if wc should be in need.' 

Titus, smilingly, assured his Prince of his devotion in 
this respect to his interests. 

' I can waken the dead with my blast on the bugle, 
although unhappily itiy sword-arm still continues too 
painful and disabled for much use. But it will still be 
some time ere we need be afoot, for the moon lacks yet 
more than an hour of the full,' 



CHAPTER LXXIV, 

GOOD SPIRITS AND BAD. 

In reality, any one who coald have looked into the in- 
terior of Maud Grimsorwe's cottage, during the rery 
time of this conference, might well have believed that 
something diabolically mysterious and fateful was in pro- 
gress. 

An enormous fire, heaped almost as high as the chim- 
ney would bear, but burning without flame or smoke . 
in reality a charcoal fire . glowed on the hearth, and dif- 
fused a lurid glow over the entire chamber. You would 
have thought everything in it was red-hot; even the 
tattered furniture of the crazy bedstead seemed to flutter 
in flames, in the strong draught that entered at a half-open 
door. The rafters and thatched roof were so illuminated 
into relief, that you could espy the innumerable spider- 
webs that overhung them, with their swollen hunch- 
backed tenants, magnified by the glaring relief into crea- 
tures of an enormous toad-like size and squat. 

Before this fire there was placed a large iron triangle, 
on its apex, though it was not easy to discern by what 
means the instrument was kept upright and fixed. Pro- 
bably by an iron rod, forming part of it, driven well into 
the earthern floor. 

This triangle cast a shadow of nearly double its size, 



large enough for a man on horseback to have stood 
in it. 

On one side of the shadow, apparently basking with 
enjoyment in the intense heat, and crouching as near to 
it as possible, sat Maud Grimsorwe on her stool, with 
her lean, veiny hands raised a little to shade her withered 
visage from the glare. 

On the other, as deeply as he could get into the shade 
of the low ingle- corner, stood a figure that might well 
have been taken for an infernal presence already, . the 
figure of Richard Grimsorwe in his black lawyer's 
robes, and with his evil countenance resembling a mask 
of red-hot bronze, in the distortion produced by the 
mingled effects of his own malignant passions and the 
reflection of the fiery heap before him. 

He had apparently but just arrived. 

' It is wearing into a very wild and windy night, 
granny,^ he*vvas obsernng. ' But all is going well with 
us in other respects. It is even better that the moon 
should be clouded over so frequently as she is. And 
von seem to have everything here in a good readiness.' 

' Everything,^ repeated the old woman mechanically, 
and as if she scarcely heard either her own answer or 
what was said to her. 

^Nicely swept and littered,' he resumed, looking 
round with satisfaction; ^you have not spared the sweet 
essences I gave you, as I desired, and the fumigating- 
pot for the Devil's Mass you are to celebrate, grandam, 
is well stored with intoxicating and bewildering drugs of 
the East, which will not fail to produce their effect. But 
why have you placed yonder frightful object so much in 
sight ? I would not have that ! I would have the 
whole hovel glow in their enchanted sight like a bower 



GOOD SPIRITS AND BAD. (6 

of roses . and that frightful, grinning, stufied beast 
set there ! ' 

^ How, Dickon, Dickon, what say you ? Would you 
deprive me even of poor Smilikin^s stuffed skin I ' ex- 
claimed the witch, glaring up now with both light and 
intelligence in her eyes, and clutching the lawyer back 
by his robe, from a reach he was making, with un- 
expected strength. ^Fool ! I placed it there to give me 
heart to go through with the vile wickedness you have 
thrust me upon; for if I forgive the Holtes all else, 
how could I my Tomikin^s cruel death ? ' 

' Oh, in that case ! ^ said Richard, turning vrith looks 
of disgust from the really horrible object he had ob- 
served set on the mantelpiece above. 

It was the outward presentment of the lacerated cat, 
with its head steadied on the backbone by a skewer. 
In other respects the work was skilfully executed, 
stuffing: dead animals havin^i^ alwavs been a favourite 
amusement of the aged solitary, who had acquired the 
art, with most of her other harmful science, from the 
strange naturalist, Esther Feldon's father. 

VBut he is to be better avenged, soon, poor fellow !' 
the old woman resumed, grinning almost as frightfully 
as her favourite. ^I have told her I cannot perform 
the spell, now my imp^s gone, unless she consents to 
make him friendly and helpful again by killing his 
killer. And I have the axe ready, and Prince, for- 
sooth, though she loves him so well, is to come with her 
to me !' 

^What will she not consent to, then, in her frenzy? 
For she is very fond of the sprightly animal,^ exclaimed 
Grimsorwe, really now surprised ; ' and I no longer 
wonder that we find it recorded parents would offer up 



74 

their cliildren to the demon-gods, in the ancient times, 
to make themselves rich and prosperous. And I am 
glad of it, too, on another score, for the creature hates 
me/ 

' You will live to hate yourself, Richard/ replied the 
old woman, with extreme asperity. 

'It may be. Perchance there are times when . no 
matter, I will still sting all round me ere, like the 
scorpion, I plunge my dart in my own vitals ! No one 
loves himself more at present, however, than I do, 
grandam. Only I must not be espied out by others 
who love me less, and might so connect me by chance 
with what may be ill done to-night. Since all is well 
with you, and all prepared, therefore, I will take my 
departure. But if any accident should arise, I shall 
not be too remote, at all events, for your shrill-tongued 
summons to reach me.' 

The old woman nodded wearily. ' Go, go,' she said ; 
'the sound of your voice grates somehow horribly on 
my ears. I could almost think you are the Evil One, 
and I in bondage of my own sin in raising you !' 

' And for my own part, I do begin to believe some- 
thing in your witchcraft. Mother Grimsorwe, since, after 
so many years of vain cursing, you are like to bring so 
much to pass in the way of vengeance on Sir Thomas 
Holte to-night. How were it possible more completely 
to avenge my unhappy and dishonoured mother? At 
the same time, see how you advance my prospects, which 
else would run the greatest risks of vanishing altogether, 
to supply the needy grandeur of such a son-in-law as 
the banished Palatine. But proud princes, still less 
than other men, rarely indeed marry their mistresses ! 
There will be no more talk of royal sons-in-law hence- 
forth in Aston Hall!' 



GOOD SPIRITS AND BAD. 7o 

The traitor gave a dark, undertoned chuckle of bar- 
barous triumph, and retired towards the door. 

He drew it open and looked out. 

' The moon wants but another quarter of an hour to 
be at the fuU,^ he then remarked with significance to 
the beldam. * Arabella w ill now be upon the way ; and 
even her proud heai-t will quake when she finds she has 
to leave her two attendants at yonder vast old withered 
oak. A marked object, Granny Grimsorwe ; and there- 
fore I chose it. Or else, methinks it is in itself too 
dismal and portentous a guide-post.^ 

* For a thousand years it has cast forth green leaves 
there, Esther Feldon's father would say!^ the old 
woman muttered, aloud, and yet, as it seemed, chiefly 
to herself. 

^ Hist ! they are coming. I must begone ; or . gra- 
cious heaven ! what is yonder unearthly -looking creature 
stalking there? No, it has vanished . into the oak, 
almost, it meseemed ! ^ 

Grimsorwe exclaimed these latter observations rather 
than merely uttered them. 

' The oak ! What see you there ? The oak is known 
to be haunted by the fairies,' returned the witch, whose 
own superstition was immediately aroused. 

' This was no fairy : it seemed more like a black 
bear pawing upright ! I saw its eyes gleam as it looked 
up at the moon. I could almost think that the tale 
reported by the German provost-marshal is true, and 
that a wild man of the woods haunts hereabouts ! ' 

The old woman laughed sardonically. 'Well, I 
thought I saw something on the top of one of the 
tallest beech-trees in the lower wood myself last night ; 
but when I got there, it was only a harmless squirrel 
pulling a crow's nest to pieces.^ 



76 THE armourer's daughter. 

' Howbeit, I am glad I have not to go that way of 
the old oak. Yet it may well be only an owl, or a cow 
feeding there/ said Grimsorwe, aware that it would not 
do to excite his aged relative's alarms. 'Ah, grandam, 
to think that you should have the laugh at me for such 
silly beliefs, after all ! I leave you, then ; prosper, and 
show that, if you have a witch's dangerous reputation, 
you will not have it for nothing.' 



// 



CHAPTER LXXV. 



THE FAIRY OAK. ' 



Arabella Holte had meanwhile certainly left Aston 
Hall upon her perilous and, truth to say, wicked and 
unmaidenly nocturnal enterprise. 

The only excuse for this unhappy young woman must, 
in fact, be drawn from an aggravation of her worst fault. 
Had she not felt in the depths of her heart the lament- 
ing appeal of a real passion for another, she would not 
have been so set on striving to discover some reason why 
she must hold herself irrevocably fastened to her father's 
will and purposes in the designs on Prince Rupert. She 
imagined that if she could only ascertain a fatality in 
this, her mind would be thoroughly reconciled to it, and 
she could devote all its power to the realization. 

It may be stated to her credit, however, on the other 
hand, that she felt so deep a secret repugnance to the 
task of ambitious enthralling she had set herself upon, 
felt so strongly the unwomanly and undignified conduct 
it compelled, since her brother had forced the considera- 
tion upon her, that she hoped to discover some reason to 
abandon the whole comfortless enterprise. If it was 
found that the Prince was not to wed her, this powerful 
reason would exist, and the regrets that might else have 
tormented her, to lose so glorious a prize, would cease 
to have inilaence. 



78 THE armourer's daughter. 

But it is often scarcely possible to distinguish what 
are the governing motives of the human mind in some 
conjunctures of destiny. The current which ripples over 
the surface may not truly show the deep impelling move- 
ment of the tide below. Often indeed where we ourselves 
least intended^ in setting out^ we arrive. 

But whatever the strength or nature of her actuating 
motives, Arabella Holte could not but experience a deep 
sensation of dread on stealing out of her father's stately 
mansion at nigh the midnight hour, unknown to nearly 
all its inmates, on such an errand. Phoebe Dewsnap, 
however, some of whose waiting- woman's upper garments 
she wore, attended her from her chamber ; and Robin 
Falconer was to meet them in the pleasure grounds, and 
be their convoy to an appointed spot in the park below ; 
not to mention that Arabella Holte's greyhound was 
allowed by her . nay, coaxed with divers kind cajoleries, 
and yet with the most deadly reluctance on his mistress's 
part . to accompany them. 

Robin Falconer was easily induced by his damsel to 
believe that a fellow- servant of her own desired to have 
her fortune in wedlock shown her by the Witch of Aston, 
and the good-natured fellow readily lent his countenance 
and protection on the excursion. Robin had, in fact, 
taken quite a good will towards the old woman and such 
inquiries, since his own loves had been so forwarded by 
Maud Grimsorwe's prediction that he was to be Phoebe's 
bridegroom. Moreover, the tete-a-tete he was promised 
with his betrothed at the Fairy Oak, as it was called, 
had had charms for him sufficient to blind him to every 
other consideration. 

It may be Robin allowed himself to be deceived, with- 
out beiug actually so much so as he pretended. The 



THE FAIKY OAK. 79 

whole appearance of Phcebe^s pretended fellow-servitrix, 
her voice, her stately manners, the accompaniment of 
the dog, must have left him in little doubt as to who the 
third party really was ; but Robin easily accounted, in 
his own simple fancy, for Miss Holte^s desire also to pry 
into the secrets of futurity. Every one about Aston 
formed their conjectures from seeing the Prince and the 
young lady there so much together ; and Robin, who 
vastly admired Rupert^ s prowess, of which he had been 
an eyewitness and sharer, had no doubt that inquiries 
would result as fortunately for his young mistress as for 
himself and his betrothed. 

The falconer was in punctual attendance at the draw- 
bridge, just over the moat beyond the terrace towards 
the pools, and after a fondly, friendly gi^eetiug of his 
betrothed, which resulted in divers half-angry, half- 
delighted, ' Prithee, Robin, forbear. Marry, good soul, 
too much of this !' . the party set forward on their as 
yet not unfavourably-omened enterprise. 

Arabella Holte had made up her resolve, and she was 
at no time lacking in couraige and determination. What- 
ever came of it, she was now bent on executing the ex- 
traordinary plan she had formed. 

She easily closed her mind to the apprehension of 
observation of following from the Hall. Most of its in- 
mates had been asleep for hours, and she had reason to 
know that her father had singularly exceeded that night 
in a solitary potation after the Prince retired, and would 
consequently be disposed for heavy slumber. As for the 
Prince himself, her notion was, that if compelled by 
magic art to attend where his presence was desired, it 
would be in a kind of supernatural trance and insensi- 
bility, such as somnambulists of modem times are sup- 



80 THE ARMOURER^S DAL'GHTER. 

posed to exhibit in submiting to mesmeric or magnetic 
influences. 

And truly it might have been thought Arabella Holte 
herself was in some such state as this by the manner 
she proceeded to the appointed scene of divination. 
Her two companions went before by several steps, at 
her whispered desire to Phoebe, and she seemed rather 
to drag herself after them than to follow with the alert 
step of a person Avho obeys the impulse of his own 
mind. Some external but invisible agency appeared to 
impel her movements. More than once she hesitated, 
and looked fearfully back ; but, as a general fact, kept 
her eyes fixed on the ground, and a silence which had 
in it something of spectral and darkly rapt, like the 
thought of a condemned criminal moving to the place 
of execution. 

It had been arranged that as little was to be said as 
possible, to avoid the dangers of discovery of various 
kinds. But Phoebe Dewsuap herself felt singularly awk- 
ward and uncomfortable at her mistress's strange manner 
of movement, while Robert Falconer more than once in- 
timated to her, with an effort at a lively tone, that ^ her 
friend' already seemed under some witchcraft spell. 

Still more remarkably, a similar feeling of reluctant 
submission to necessity appeared to have possession of 
Arabella's greyhound. The swift creature walked 
laggingly on at its mistress's heels, never once darting 
off on its usual excursions and circlings of delighted 
fleetness, in which it chased the very wind for a prey, 
wantoning in its own splendid powers of pace. Its 
usually curled tail drooped straight; its ears were flatted 
to its head ; and any one aware of what was intended 
would have thought the creature conscious of its doom. 



THE FAIRY OAK. 81 

But perhaps, in reality_, poor ' Prince' only remembered 
the sharp chidings on the way, and rough reception he 
had found, on his recent visit to the Witch of Aston's 
hut, and was dismayed to find his lady's steps tended 
thitherward again. 

In this strange way the whole group arrived, after a 
considerable transit, at the Fairy Oak. 

This tree was one of great antiquity. If the weird 
naturalist, Esther Feldon's father, exaggerated in rating 
its age at a thousand years, stiU authentic records of 
Aston Manor verified its existence for nearly half that 
period. In old times it had marked a boundary be- 
tween the counties of Warwick and Stafford, and was 
thus a well-known object in the district. But its mys- 
terious antiquity, and the natural tendency of the rustic 
mind, associated it with various superstitions, and espe- 
cially with the belief that it was haunted by fairies. A 
singular circle formed completely round on the mossy 
turf below the bare, gnarled roots of the forest-monarch, 
was supposed to be formed by the dancing of these 
festive sprites, with whom such disport was believed 
to be a favourite midnight recreation. Nor was the 
fancy at all diminished by the decay into which the 
Fairy Oak had fallen, and which left of it little more 
standing than a prodigious hollow trunk, seamed and 
scarred and bossed over with enormous wens, and only 
decorated in one or two branches with foliage of its 
own. What else there might be was furnished by the 
friendly zeal of an ivy, which covered the stately ruin 
wherever it could reach with a green matting, and 
hung loose tattered tresses of the same, in various direc- 
tions, almost to the ground, . the probable cause, by its 
shade, of the circle visible on the grass below. 

VOL. III. G 



82 

The conspirators against Arabella's honour had pur- 
posely chosen this tree for her to part with such hin- 
drance to their nefarious designs as "was furnished by the 
company of her two attendants. Maud Grimsorwe, in 
obedience to her instructions, conditioned that no nearer 
approach should be made to her dwelling by persons 
who might betray her dealings in a forbidden art. And 
Arabella herself was extremely unwilling to place her 
full secret in the possession of her servants. And now 
the Fairy Oak, though within sight of the Witch's 
cottage, was too remote for prying, or overhearing any 
sound less piercing and powerful than such an outcry as 
it was not apprehended Miss Holte would venture or 
resolve to make under the circumstances. 

The three midnight rangers arrived at the Oak within 
a very few minutes after Richard Grimsorwe had been 
alarmed by the glimpse of a shaggy apparition passing 
into the tree while he gazed, and which he had had some 
difficulty in explaining to his own mind. 

It is scarcely needful to inform the reader that this 
phantom was none other than Tubal Bromycham, out 
on one of his love-lorn wanderings in Aston Park. 

Alarmed on iiis own part by the sudden appearance 
of a man at the door of Maud's hut, revealed by the 
furnace-like glow behind him. Tubal had retired into 
the concealment nearest at hand in the hollow of the 
Oak. And considering it was very liable to suspicion 
as such, to any one acquainted with the internal decay 
of the tree, and apprehending he had come upon some 
unexpected outpost of soldiery, he availed himself of 
his great muscular power to thrust upward some height, 
and keep himself there by mere force of pressure be- 
tween the nape of his neck and his feet, for there was 
hardly any internal remains in the tree for a support. 



THE FAIRY OAK. 83 

Tubal had but just accomplished this manoeuvre when 
footsteps, halting below the Avithered but still gigantic 
branches, convinced him of its necessity, however un- 
easy the position proved. And yet he nearly relaxed 
all tension of his frame, and dropped to the roots of the 
Fairy Oak, when, instead of a coarse trooper challenge, 
a commanding but sweet-toned voice, whose accents he 
had never forgotten, sounded in his astonished ears. 

' You are to await here my return, my good Phoebe, 
and friendly Robert Falconer. You need not be alarmed 
to do so, however; the fairies love faithful lovers, and 
often do them a good turn ; but the old fortune-telling 
woman has made it a condition with me that I should 
go alone to her hut. Yonder it stands : if I should need 
you, I can easily summon you thence.' 

So those still all-powerful accents declared. Such 
were the words whose echoes remained ringing in the 
sense of the unseen auditor. 

Robin Falconer, however, very respectfully demurred, 
'Nay, fair mistress,' he said, 'the Witch's hovel is a 
much longer flight from the Fairy Oak than you think. 
I could scarcely make my bird-whistle sound so far, 
though I can bring a falcon down from nigh the sky 
with it. It were well we went with you much nearer 
than this.' 

' It must be here that you remain. I must keep the 
condition enjoined me exactly, and if you would have 
the wise woman (why do you call her ivitch ? she likes 
not the word !) as exactly observe hers. You are not 
afraid to remain alone with your sweetheart, my friend 
Robin, are you, who played so stout a part at Worcester 
Fight?' the young lady replied, with an effort at playful 
unconcern, but it was obvious that something also of 

G 3 



84 THE armourer's daughter. 

ur prise and irresolution quavered in her tones. She 
was doubtless surveying the length of intervening coun- 
try to the Fish Stews Pool, which a bright burst of the 
now nearly full moon made plainly manifest. 

' Nay, madam, in all love and honesty, I durst abide 
by Mistress Phcebe a whole year at the bottom of a coal- 
mine ! ' Robin Falconer replied, doubtless rather nettled 
at a faint saucy giggle which came from the damsel, at 
her lady's observation. 

^You shall need to abide but the half-hour which, 
after the full of the moon, will likely be required for 
the old woman to mumble her sorceries in, if, in reality, 
she possesses any such powers as she pretends to, which 
I own it something misdoubts me she does not ; espe- 
cially as she will have it she uses only an innocent white 
magic, and by pure fire agencies, to show people what 
of their coming fates they may well wish to know. And 
yet, if it be fate, what avails it to know ! ' Miss Holte 
said, but rather as if she were reasoning with herself 
than her companions. 

^ Pray you, dear mistress, leave us no longer trembling 
here than you can help it ; for although Robin and T be 
as firmly plighted to each other almost as if the parson 
had spoken it, I would not that any one should spy us out, 
and have cause to report that I met my sweetheart of a 
midnight so far from home ! ' said Phoebe, forgetting in 
her anxiety that her mistress did not desire to be recog- 
nised as such on the occasion. 

' Who can spy you out, Phoebe, if you keep well in 
the shadow of the oak ? We are certainly unobserved 
at the Hall, there are no near watchrounds in this part, 
I am well assured, and nobody will be at the cottage 
excepting the poor old purblind fortune-teller herself, or 



THE FAIRY OAK. 85 

such flimsy shadowy creatures as are all she pretends 
even likely to answer to her spell, if her evocations have 
indeed any power. But perhaps I have not your luck, 
Phoebe, and the man is unborn who is destined for a 
husband for rae !* said Miss Holte. 

'You, my lady ! No husband for you, so beautiful, 
young, and rich as you are ! ' exclaimed Phoebe, con- 
temptuously. ' I only -wish, however, it may prove the 
right one when the apparition comes, if it is the smock 
and the shroud spell the old woman is at. And then I 
am sure it will be none other than a Royal Prince ; and 
none other could deserve you, Miss. I wish you joy of 
it beforehand, or the witch is no witch. A good de- 
liverance from the danger of it too, for I have always 
heard say that little good ever comes of such a tempting 
of Providence ; and that's why I never dared to try it 
myself. Truly, my dear young lady, my granny often 
told me a story how a fellow-maiden of hers, in her 
youth, would try the trick, and saw a skeleton come in 
and turn the white linen to the red blaze, and sickened 
that hour, and lay in her shroud in the churchyard, in 
good truth, by a skeleton that turned up as they were 
digging her grave, within another full of the moon.* 

' Well, and if it were so, she understood the worst, 
Phoebe, at once, and that is better than to be the prey 
of doubts and suspense !' returned Arabella ; adding, 
with a rather dismal pleasantry, ' My worst, I fear, will 
be no skeleton, but some stalwart brute of flesh and 
sinew whom I can never love. Tush ! what are we 
prating now and time wasting so fast ? T must be gone. 
Prince, Prince ! Alas, poor fellow, you must needs go 
with me ! ' 

'Why, say you so, so sadly, Mistress Arabella? 



86 THE armourer's daughter. 

Whom should he be better pleased to go withal than 
the kind mistress who has collared his neck with silver V 
said Robin, caressing the elegant animal, which, how- 
ever, stood still, and snuflfed the air in the direction of 
the witch's cottage with a trembling all over its limbs, 
and a faint, terrified whine. 

"He seems to dread going. Let him stay with Kobin, 
good mistress, who will take care he turns not tail for 
the Hall till you return,' interceded Phoebe, who perhaps 
had her vague suspicions on the subject, for the sacrifice 
of living animals was a known portion of certain magic 
rites ; nay, there were unpleasant rumours current that 
in some cases the infernal agencies were not satisfied 
without an oblation of human blood, and children were 
supposed to be inveigled and murdered by the terrible 
old wretches whose exploits formed so large a portion of 
the popular faith. 

'Prince must go with me; he must, he shall; the 
old woman will not proceed else !' returned Miss Holte, 
in a sharp, angry accent ; and nevertheless she audibly 
burst into tears as she seized the hound by its silver 
collar, and dragging it reluctantly on with her, set off 
at a rapid pace for the Witch's hut. 



87 



CHAPTER LXXVI. 



IN AND OUT OF THE OAK. 



Of all this Tubal Bromycham had been perforce an au- 
ditor; and was so stricken and absorbed by what he 
heard that he lost all recollection, even of the painful 
and constrained position in which he remained during 
the whole time. 

Arabella Holte out of her father^s house at midnight, 
in the midst of the solitary fields, with two of her father's 
servants for companions ! Arabella Holte seeking to 
learn her destiny in marriage from a horrible old hag, 
and by means forbidden alike by the laws of God and 
man ! 

Tubal was petrified with amazement as he listened. 
It is scarcely a metaphor to say so. And for some mo- 
ments amazement was his master-feeling, and kept him 
fixed in breathless attention in his comfortless elevation. 
A fissure in the trunk of the oak close behind his head 
gave facilities for overhearing, in other respects. 

This emotion predominated for several moments after 
Arabella's departure. It was then succeeded by some- 
thing that closely resembled fear, if it was not quite 
fear, in that strong-nerved man. 

The Blacksmith Lord of Birmingham was endued 
with all the superstitions of his age, and the rank oj 



88 

society in which he had been reared. Scarcely any 
rank was indeed at that time exempt from those rela- 
ting to witchcraft and sorcery. Moreover^ a childhood 
spent among mines and colliers, whose gloomy under- 
ground work disposes them for dark and melancholy 
fancies, could not fail to prepare his mind for the appre- 
hensions that now invaded it. 

But more than apprehensions. He was thoroughly 
convinced of the reaUty of all he heard, and that the 
Witch of Aston truly possessed the powers she was 
stated to intend to use on Arabella Holte's behalf. 

And now for a brief while a sentiment of the most 
violent indignation, mingled with ravening jealousy, as- 
sailed his heart, and quickened its beating into cruel 
throbs. 

If Arabella Holte were not utterly faithless to the 
memory of that old clandestine, unavowed but passion- 
ate attachment of theirs, what needed she to inquire of 
a sorceress who was to be her husband ? Her fate was 
at her own disposal, if she dared make it so ! And with 
a rage of despair that fairly made him grind his teeth, 
in spite of the closeness of the clench compelled by his 
position in the oak. Tubal rushed to the conclusion that 
she desired and hoped to assure herself that her allure- 
ments would not be spent in vain upon the nephew of 
the King. 

With this idea lighting up like fire in his brain, Tubal' s 
first thought was of prevention, of darting out of his con- 
cealment, and preventing the completion of the unhal- 
lowed rite, which he did not doubt would offer Arabella 
every encouragement to proceed in her plans. And he 
allowed himself to drop, with scarcely any precaution, 
to his feet. 



IN AND OUT OF THE OAK. 89 

Engaged as were Phoebe and Robin, who had seated 
themselves at the foot of the oak, in their own interest- 
ing conversation, so portentous a cicumstance as that 
the tree gave a hollow rumble and shook behind them, 
naturally startled them. But the falconer explained the 
matter after a pause, to soothe the apprehensions of his 
fair companion. ' It is the fairies, Phoebe dear, getting 
on their little horses for a revel ; for it is known they all 
live in the oak by day, and come out by night to take 
their pleasure and exercise. AVe shall see such a pretty 
sight just now in the moonlight, when the Fairy King 
comes out with all his knio^hts and veomen in screen and 
gold. But nothing can be so pretty as my Phoebe's 
own self, when she smiles her Robin leave, as she does 
now, to take a kiss.' 

And so saying the good yeoman snatched himself the 
favour he partly announced conceded ; but apparently 
by the difficulty he experienced before he obtained it, 
with only one yes to the bargain. And the honest- 
hearted English yeoman was quite content with this in- 
dulgence, when at length it was accorded, and never 
dreamed of abusing the opportunities of the midnight 
scene with the object of his manly and uncorrupt affec- 
tion. 

Meanwhile a singular variation had come over TubaFs 
distracted thoughts, and which wonderfully soothed 
them. 

While steadying himself in the consciousness that it 
would be harmful to any purpose he might form, to be 
discovered by the pair who were so near, an idea sud- 
denly occurred to him that the strange, the irresistible 
longing he had felt that night to venture where he was, was 
caused by the spell of the witch. That he. Tubal Bromy- 



90 

cham^ once the secretly-loved lover, was destined to be- 
come the husband of Arabella Holte also^ and was com- 
pelled thither by the spell to show that the fact should 
be so. Was it an hallucination of love and superstition, 
or a suggestion of passion and desperation, in themselves 
so ingenious and so courageous ? 

Tubal' s historian can scarcely say, since Tubal himself 
would have been at an utter loss to declare how the case 
really stood. But be the truth how it might be, what- 
ever the impelling motives, Tubal determined to brave 
every obstacle, every danger, to answer the witcVs spell, 
and present himself in her hut as the destined future 

HUSBAND OF ARABELLA HoLTE ! 

This resolution sobered him on other points. He per- 
ceived how advisable it was not to let Robin or Phoebe 
understand his unseen presence, which a moment before 
he had determined to proclaim in the most openly auda- 
cious and defying manner. 

Luckily the rifted portion of the oak, by which it could 
be entered almost as conveniently as by a doorway, was 
on the further side of the tree from the billing lovers. 
But the open slope of meadows and scattered young plan- 
tation down to the witch's abode lay open and bright 
before them in the moonlight. It was therefore neces- 
sary for Tubal to take a rather extensive winding from 
the Fairy Oak to the skirts of the water, so that he 
might approach and enter on the scene of operations un- 
observed by persons who would not fail to interfere in his 
design. 

His project was favoured by Robin^s beginning to 
warble, in a very low tone, like a bird to its mate, a 
rustic love-song of the time, very different from Arabella 
Holte's stiff court invention in that description of min- 
strelsy . 



IN AND OUT OF THE OAK. 91 

" Sweet ! can you love me, 
Sweet, sweet, sweet ? 
Say if you lore me, 

Sweet, answer sweet ! 
To a true love lite mine, 
Like true love is meet ; 
Say, that you truly love me, 
As I truly love you, sweet ! 

Sweet, sweet, sweet !" 

Taking advantage of the nndertoned but earnest mur- 
muring of this rustic melody, Tubal glided out of the 
oak, and betaking himself to a distant line of trees, re- 
mote from the margin of the pools, only doubled under 
their shadow to retrace the way to the Witch of Aston^s 
hut. 



92- THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER LXXVII. 

RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 

Arabella Holte had meanwhile arrived at the appointed 
place, delayed by the efforts made by the greyhound not 
to be led on the track its mistress seemed determined to 
force it to pursue. No doubt the poor animal had a very 
distinct recollection of the withered tenant's displays of 
fury and violence towards it, though probably unable to 
conceive that the destruction of the vermin it had pur- 
sued to death was the occasion of the demonstration. 

The lady and her hound arrived, however, at last, and 
Miss Holte pushing open the ajar-door of the hovel, felt 
almost as well inclined as her shrinking animal to effect 
a retreat from the spectacle that presented itself. 

It is only necessary to say that it was scarcely at all 
changed from the description of the scene during Richard 
Grimsorwe's consultation with his grandmother. He was 
gone, but the other portents of the spectacle remained ; 
perhaps a little heightened by the circumstance that the 
old woman had begun to exhibit an ill-omened species of 
wakefulness and activity. 

She was squatting on the floor, writing a name in sin- 
gular characters within the shadow of the triangle, in 
charcoal. 

The letters composing this were of large size, and in 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 93 

reality of Hebrew conformation, an accomplishment 
which it is difiScult to know how Maud Grimsorwe had 
acquired, unless one takes into account her former asso- 
ciation with the learned parish clerk of Sutton. Though 
it is still hard to say why she should have devoted any 
time to the acquisition of the Biblical language, unless 
it may be true what is reported by adepts of the demon 
world, that they best understand and obey the original 
language of man; which the Hebrew is supposed to be. 
' You are busy, dame ! ^ said Arabella, entering the 
cottage. 

* Have you brought the dog V returned the malignant 
old wretch, startling up with haggard eagerness at once 
from her occupation. 

' It is here !^ replied Arabella, dejectedly. ' But again, 
I implore of you. Mother Grimsorwe ! if it be possible 
to proceed without so cruel a sacrifice, spare the poor 
animal. Prince but followed his natural instincts when 
he chased and killed your prowling cat. Why should you 
be so rancorous against him?^ 

' So do but the cut-purse and the cut-throat ? What 
more natural than to thirst for another's gold, and to 
quiet resistance by the thrust of a knife ? Yet the thief 
and the assassin mount the scaflfold to the hangman's 
clutch !' returned the old woman, vindictively eyeing the 
trembling and crouching hound, as she added, ' And here 
is Tomikin's murderer now !' 

* Peace awhile, you will make him break from me and 
his chain, and tell me what name is written here !' said 
Miss Holte, gazing at the inscription on the floor ; per- 
haps chiefly to gain a little time for the victim. 

' The word is Astorath, who is a Grand Duke of Hell \' 
the hag answered, with a vivid smile, in which the as- 



94 

sumption of power and a conviction of her own impos- 
ture were singularly mingled. ' He is one of the ugliest 
of the fiends, but very powerful. Satan himself goes in 
dread of him sometimes when they quarrel for a prey. 
But he has a wonderful dominion and influence with great 
Lords and Princes, and, I take it, our affair is with such 
to-night. Those who invoke him properly, and go so far 
as to adore him as a god, them he makes very powerful 
and mighty conquerors ! He knows the past, the present, 
and the future, and when he is in a good humour with 
the sacrifices offered him, will answer almost any ques- 
tion you can put to him relating to any of these. He 
alone of all the fallen angels still maintains that he was 
condemned unjustly, and is therefore the more rancor- 
ous and inexorable never to cease from troubling the 
creatures of God, and wages rebellion against His de- 
crees throughout the world. All this is very well, is 
it not V 

' Do you mean to raise this fiend to-night,' said Ara- 
bella, looking and feeling, reasonably enough, considerably 
alarmed at this description of so horribly powerful an in- 
fernal. 

' Nay, I hope we shall have no need. His stench is as 
the stench of a ploughed churchyard, or of a slaughtered 
army festering in the sun !^ the hag replied. ^ I do but 
place Astorath's name there because it is so potent ; no 
chance fiend will dare to take what he will suppose to be 
his place in the triangle. The power we are to invoke is 
that of the pure Demon of Fire, Baal ; a king in hell. 
But even Baal I shall do my best not to require you to 
see, for he is very frightfid. He has three heads ; one 
of a man, another of a toad, the third a cat's. And that 
reminds me . Hold your dog firmly by the collar while 
I get the axe.' 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 95 

The vengeful hag strode to a corner of her hut^ and 
produced a long-handled_, but very blunt-looking and 
rusty weapon, of the kind indicated,, worn, in fact, to a 
mere stump of hack-edged iron. But she seemed to 
think it sufficient for her purpose, and returning with 
her sunken eyes shining in their wrinkled cavities like 
corpse -lights, aimed a blow at the unlucky animal. But 
whether age and passion had disabled her, or whether 
Arabella's feelings deprived her of the requisite energy 
to perform her part in the tragedy, the hound eluded 
the stroke, and, with a truly wonderful spring, broke 
from its mistresses hold, and fled with a dreadful howl 
from the hut. 

Maud flung her disappointed axe after it, and then 
burst into a horrible screechowl lamentation over the 
failure, mingled with sharp reproaches to the young 
lady. 

'You have done it on purpose, and spoilt the whole 
spell ! ' she grumbled viciously. ' But when were the 
Holtes other than false and treacherous ? Go, go, you 
may as well return to your warm bed at once, unless you 
can bring the vile beast back ! Call him, whistle him, 
bring him back V 

' I cannot, I will not, but neither shall you deceive me 
with your poor excuses ! Fulfil your promise, hag, or I 
will make such representations to my father, who already 
believes you very fit for the tar-barrel.^ 

^ Quiet, quiet, my fine young woman, then ! You shall 
have your own way, you shall have your own way. Yet 
I did half repent me ; and might, perhaps, but for the 
treacherous abetment of the hound in his escape. But 
we will find a time for him too ; when the name of Prince 
will no longer sound perhaps so sweet in your ears ! Tut, 



tut ; I am only joking ; you must excuse a poor, simple, 
doating, daft old woman, hag you call me ! no matter ! 
I was once held as good-looking a body as yourself, my 
fine mistress, or any other in Aston parish. But that 
was before I was a grandmother, no doubt, no doubt. 
For I had a daughter once, and she a son ! daughter, 
daughter. My cat, my cat. Be not afraid. Mistress 
Holte ; I have regained my mind now, and will proceed 
in the business we are upon presently, as you would have 
me.' 

Arabella was so much alarmed at the old woman's in- 
coherent paroxysm that she was on the point of follow- 
ing her hound in its judicious exit. But these latter 
words allayed her panic, and she paused in her departure. 
' Proceed, then. Mother Grimsorwe,' she said, ' and earn 
your promised reward. Nay, I shall be better than my 
word in that, if you will be but as good as yours.' 

* I will be better, I will be better, too,' muttered the 
hag, ^ though I do not well know how we shall proceed 
without a heart taken alive and palpitating from some 
creature's breast ! Tomikin was a rare helpful one at that; 
I had only to look at him, and he would make for the 
woods, and bring me a pigeon or a dove back, with its 
wings beating all alive, and taking such pains not to kill 
it till it was wanted. \There is the garment I bade 
you?' 

' It is here,' replied Miss Holte, producing one of the 
finest white linen, beautifully trimmed with lace. ' The 
Queen herself gave me this when I had last charge of her 
wardrobe, in my rotation among her maids-of-honour, as 
a reward for my diligence in the office, and bade me keep 
it for my wedding-day.' 

' And it Avas a present for a queen to make, indeed !' 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 97 

Maud answered, taking the fine woof in her withered 
brown paws, and surveying it, witch as she was, with 
much of the curious interest women of no such superna- 
tural pretensions mostly take in examining each other's 
finery. ' And the Queen herself must have thought it 
likely enough you should marry a Prince, to make you 
such a present for wedding wear. "We must hang it on 
the triangle, but it shall not scorch, for I will place my 
shroud over it, which is of good thick white woollen 
stuflf.' 

So saying, !Maud hobbled to a corner of the glaring 
apartment, and opened a cupboard, whence she produced 
a long fiat box. Opening that, a strong smell of cam- 
phor diffused itself all over the chamber, and the old 
woman drew forth a long garment resembling a night- 
gown, but the uses of which could not be doubted from 
the peculiar folds and crimping at the breast and wrists. 

She returned with this to Miss Holte, and, in cour- 
teous interchange of the recent inspection, handed over 
the shroud to the young lady. 

' 'Tis a pretty work, all of my own spinning and yarn ; 
and smell how sweet it savours of the camphor drug. 
Yet, 'tis not so much for the pleasant savour either, as to 
keep the moths out, that I embalm it thus. They eat 
everything, moths do ; moths and rust eat everything.' 

Arabella took the ominous robe with evident reluc- 
tance, and spent but little time in the examination. 

Maud, receiving it back, flung it over the richly-laced 
' smock,' observing, with a chuckle, ' I am as proud of it 
as ever you can be of yours ; and I may well doubt which 
will need her dress the sooner. We must be quick, 
however, now, for the moon is nigh the full, as I look at 
her. Mark, then, what I say to you. Mistress Holte ! 

VOL. III. H 



98 THE armourer's daughter. 

Get into the bed and draw the clothes and curtains so 
close to you that you can only see what is happening on 
the hearth, and no one thence see you. Keep your 
gaze fixed then on the triangle ; and when I have uttered 
the spell, I will open the further casement yonder, and 
take myself off into the open air; for not even the 
Witch must remain when the phantom comes. And if 
you would escape all danger of breaking the charm^ and 
the magic sleep of the summoned one (in which case 
they often wax madly furious and wrathful, and after- 
wards remember things to your prejudice), you must 
not utter a word, nor breathe a sigh, through the whole 
course of the Appearance's arrival and departure.' 

'Do not fear me for that; I can keep my silence as if 
death had sealed it, when need is,' replied Arabella. 
' But,' and she surveyed the mouldering old couch and 
its decorations with visible disdain and repugnance, 
' must I get into this unsavoury heap ?' 

' Or run the risk of being perceived by the Apparition ; 
and I have known that on a sudden recollection, at a 
future time, of what had happened him thus, a man 
would take an titter loathing and abhorrence of his 
bride, that nothing could ever afterwards remove,' re- 
plied the Witch; and, indeed, popular legends related 
cases of the possessed person being seized with such a 
violent resentment at the remembrance of the magnetic 
tortures inflicted upon him by the magic rite, as to kill 
the unhappy bride in the very nuptial chamber. 

Arabella no longer made objections upon receiving 
this warning ; but no one could have mistaken the dis- 
gust and repugnance with which she betook herself to 
the old woman's wretched crazy pallet, which looked as 
if it was fitter for a colony of rats to find covert in. 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 99 

Having agreed, however, to what was required, Ara- 
bella made no half measures of it, and soon only her 
beautiful, excited face appeared out of the coarse blankets, 
while the curtains were so drawn as even to shade that 
nearly out of sight from any removed observation. 
Only the anxious gleam of her fine eyes could have 
drawn attention thitherward, for the clothes were heaped 
about her in such a manner as nearly to conceal her 
figure completely. 

Maud gave a balefully sardonic glance at these prepa- 
rations, and then turned to pursue her own unholy share 
in the rite. 

It is needless, and might be wearisome, to detail the 
numerous ceremonials enacted by the nefarious old wo- 
man in carrying out her grandson^s base and barbarous 
project. 

Something like a profane and horrible imitation of a 
Roman Catholic mass was enacted by this priestess of 
the Devil of Revenge, if no other. 

Kneeling before the now lessening pile of glowing 
charcoal in the triangle, the hag muttered a series of 
strange and fiendish-sounding names, in the form of a 
devilish litany, but chiefly in languages Arabella Holte 
could not understand; perhaps she did not understand 
them herself, and they were mere fragments of the 
teachings of the wizard clerk of Sutton, who had so mis- 
applied his extraordinary learning and ingenuity as to 
devote himself by their aid to the study of the imaginary, 
but not less detestably wicked and profane art now pre- 
tended to be practised by his former disciple. 

Xo doubt this formula was to be taken as an evoca- 
tion of the spirits whose names were called upon to as- 
sist in the unholy work, which might not in reality have 

H 2 



100 

been unworthy of demon assistance, if the villanous men 
who were engaged in it were not of themselves alone 
sufficient for any wickedness. And to complete the 
whole hideous mockery, Maud kept up a constant cens- 
ing of the fire-glow from a silver pot, held by a trian- 
gular chain, which diffused clouds of aromatic and sin- 
gularly languid and enervating perfumes all over the 
chamber. 

In this fumigation Arabella Holte began to feel her- 
self becoming strangely and yet voluptuously entranced 
into a kind of pleasant lethargy and repose. 

Her head swam, but with no uncomfortable giddi- 
ness ; rather with the first symptoms of intoxication 
from fine wines, when ideas full of brilliancy and gaiety 
rush in a splendid sort of kaleidoscope delirium through 
the brain. 

It almost seemed as if she no longer feared what might 
happen on account of its supernatural character, but 
rather felt the awe of the approach and enhancement of 
its delight and satisfaction. 

In the midst of all this, the witches utterance gradually 
grew fainter, and seemingly exhausting into pauses and 
breaks. At last it ceased altogether ; and dimly through 
the clouds of incense Arabella watched her retire to the 
solitary casement, which she opened with some difficulty, 
as if the shutters were little in the habit of being moved. 

There was no glass in the panes, and the moon shone 
in from its full rounded efi'ulgence in the sky. And then 
it certainly appeared to Arabella as if the Witch raised 
herself and sloped out of the chamber, on a strong breeze 
that blew in at the door, by the casement. 

Thus she was left alone, to await the results of all this 
extraordinary preparation. And certainly everything 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 101 

concurred to heighten into credulity and tremendous 
expectation the emotion with which the proud beauty 
awaited the sohition of the great perplexity produced by 
the struggles of a purer and nobler passion, with its 
ambitious aspirings, and her father's senseless urgency, 
in her heart. 

There was a deep silence of several moments. 

Then a step was audible on the exterior of the cottage; 
and we do not pretend that even the haughty and reso- 
lute young woman^s heart did not throb wildly and 
quickly at the sound. And yet it somehow indefinitely 
struck her as a very un spiritual and substantial sign of 
approach on the part of an apparition. 

But there was little time for consideration on this 
point ; a shadow darkened the low threshold of the hut, 
and a figure bent its head and entered the chamber. 

Great heaven! it was no Eupert . no Prince Pala- 
tine ! His towering, but shambling and ill-knit stature 
little resembled this, which seemed rather of a giant 
shortened in the lower limbs, but moving with all the 
power and active unity of proportion in muscular deve- 
lopment. 

Arabella looked with eyes nearly starting from their 
orbits with intensity of expectation, and a heart that 
literally stood still with dread. And she beheld . was it 
himself, indeed, or his apparition ? . the form and linea- 
ments of Tubal Bromycham, as he staggered in with £ 
singular dizziness and uncertainty of movement that 
seemed to affect him the moment he entered the witch's 
hut. And yet he made towards that fateful triangle. 
And it was the scorned and shamefully repulsed and 
maltreated Blacksmith Lord of Birmingham who turned 
the shroud below the laced wedding garment it nearly 
concealed there ! 



103 

Tubal appeared then to pause, to examine the robe ; 
he seemed to perceive the cypliers of the beloved name 
wrought upon the bosom, and knelt and kissed them, 
with a tenderness . with a respect . with an adoring lin- 
gering of the lips, that vibrated even to that haughty 
lady^s inmost heart, and almost constrained her to some 
reciprocating sigh. 

In truth, Arabella Holte's emotions, on witnessing 
what she now did, were singularly at variance with what 
might have been expected. The phantom^s homage cer- 
tainly did not excite her irritation ; on the contrary, 
she seemed relieved of a great burden and anxiety, and 
if she had ventured on any utterance at all, it would 
probably have been an ejaculation of happiness and 
release. 

The apparition arose from its knees, turned one search- 
ing glance around the apartment, and, doubtless attracted 
by the magnetism of the human eye, started to recognize 
those star-like orbs a-gaze from the witches bed. The 
figure, in fact, stood as if struck by sudden immovability 
on the glaring hearth, striving to fathom the meaning of 
the mysterious and tremendous dream which it may be 
supposed to conceive it was passing through. 

A thought seemed then to strike it. The eyes shone 
up with a much fiercer and wilder light than the glow 
in the charcoal fire ; and with an audible groan of the 
deepest anguish, the supposed phantom pursued its way 
towards the open window. 

Then it stepped out and drew the shutters to . not 
wholly, as Arabella believed she could clearly discern. 

An instant's pause followed, during \vhich she felt her- 
self reviving from the species of stupor of amazement and 
expectation in which she had doubtless been held. Then 



RESCUE OR NO RESCUE. 103 

believing the whole phantasmagoria to be expected had 
been exhibited, Arabella was about to rise and leave her 
musty couch, when again a tramp of footsteps came to 
her ear. And, with a sensation of wonder and terror, 
to which no language could do justice, she beheld Prince 
Rupert enter the hut, stooping from the low roof, but 
with (for a phantom) a strangely abrupt, angry_, and de- 
fying gesture of advance, as his glance fell upon the 
whole extraordinary scene in the Witch of Aston^s abode. 



104 



CHAPTER LXXVIII. 

THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. 

Rupert had thoroughly learned his evil lesson. After 
effecting this inauspicious entrance, he moved deliberately 
to the fire, deliberately raised and looked at the gar- 
ments suspended before it, and then, with a gesture full 
of disdain and repulse, rumpled them up together . laced 
smock and crimped shroud . and threw them into the 
furnace pile of glowing charcoal in the chimney-place. 

Arabella Holte^s first emotions of alarm and wonder 
now changed their character, and the haughty young 
lady could not forbear uttering an exclamation of indig- 
nant amazement at so flagrant and obvious a sign of con- 
tempt and rejection ; though, as she imagined, on the 
part only of a spectral representative of the real doer of 
the deed. But this slight utterance, Rupert well knew 
from his own country ^s beliefs, entitled him to consider 
the spell broken, and justified him in awakening from 
his supposed magic slumber. 

' Ha !^ he exclaimed, suddenly starting round, and 
staring wildly about ; ' where am I ? What voice speaks 
there ? Beautiful sorceress ! is it you have summoned 
me, with so strange and deadly a swooning torture, from 
my quiet sleep to this witchcraft hut ? But you shall 
pay the penalty . in your adoring lover's arms V 



THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. 105 

And pretending for the first time to catch Miss Holte^s 
fear- rapt gaze from the Witches couch, the Prince rushed 
towards it. 

Ere he reached it, however, she had sprung from it 
with a shriek of terror, and made a dart towards the 
door of the hut. 

This only, however, placed her the sooner in his power- 
ful grasp. 

' Arabella ! Miss Holte '/ he then exclaimed, forgetful 
of his mystic part, ' whither are you going ? There is 
nothing to alarm you. I am no spectre, no delusion. 
I am your faithful Rupert . your Prince . who adores 
you, though he cannot wed you, and whose affection you 
have seemed to repay V 

^ Release me, sir ; unhand me, if you be a Prince, as 
you say . if you be a gentleman of whatsoever degree ! 
But you are some dreadful phantom, raised by the foul 
Witch of this hut, or you would never have had the base 
insolence and cruelty.' 

* This, then, to convince my dearest Arabella I am no 
phantom but her own adoring Rupert/ exclaimed the 
coarse-minded royal trooper, detaining the young lady 
with no little violence, and endeavouring to stifle her ex- 
clamations of rage and indignation with his winey kisses. 
But on a sudden he felt himself seized behind by his long, 
mane-like hair, and torn away back with such force and 
fury, that when the powerful grasp which had seized him 
left its hold, the impulse yet sent him reeling headlong 
into a corner of the hut. 

The rescuer's figure then emerged in the glow of the 
fire, distinct in its unusual proportions, before the gaze 
of Arabella Holte, who cowered at the sight, overwhelmed 
with shame and dread, with her hands over her face, to 
its very feet. 



106 

' Tubal, Tubal !' she exclaimed, ' spare me . spare me! 
I have been betrayed into this miserable place. Spare 
me, and save me !' 

'Betrayed, Arabella Holte!' a sad and quivering, 
though deep-toned voice replied, ' betrayed by your own 
pride . by your own ambition . by your own faithless- 
ness. I have heard all in the gossip of your servants at 
the Fairy Tree, and you can deceive me no more now. 
I have but saved you, perchance, from the least harmful 
consequences of your treason to nature and your own 
heart ; the worst are in your soul.' 

' They are . they are ! But I repent. Tubal. I feel 
.within that inmost soul how falsely. how foolishly . 
how madly . I have followed the ambitious dictates of 
vanity and the aspiring fancies of my father. But be 
merciful now in your hour of triumph. Remember how 
you loved me once, and do not expose, do not ruin me 
now. Protect me from this heartless man . this Prince. 
^Merciful heaven, protect yourself !' 

This latter exclamation was occasioned by her observ- 
ing Rupert's approach, returning savagely on his strangely 
hastened steps, after a moment's stupefaction of surprise 
and rallying in the corner where he was flung. 

Tubal's back being that way, of course he did not so 
immediately discern the probable assault. But he whirled 
round at once to face his antagonist, and, strange to say, 
when Rupert's glance fell upon him, bold and impetuous 
and furiously excited as he was, he seemed struck with 
dismay, and stepped back involuntarily, quite yelling out 
the words . ' The Provost-Marshal's Wild Man of the 
Woods !' 

'No, Prince . as you call yourself; no, unmanly and 
false wooer of Arabella Holte ! I am Tubal Bromychara, 



THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. 107 

Lord of Birmingham, and leader of the good town against 
you and all your tyrannous masters. And I have loved 
this lady with all my heart and soul, and therefore with 
both do abhor and detest so false and treacherously de- 
signing a rival as you must be, after what I have seen 
and heard. And I challenge and defy you to dare even 
to cast upon Arabella Holte a profane glance while 
Tubal Bromycham is here to defend her honour with his 
life.' 

^ Madman ! what is this you rave ?' said Rupert, glar- 
ing -with eyes in which a new and ferocious passion, in 
blood so untamed and hot as his, shot up its fire. ^ You ! 
some base mechanic slave as you seem, to set yourself up 
as the champion of Arabella Holte . against me V 

^ Try else,' was Tubal's unshaken response. 

' Miss Holte, do you sanction this extraordinary in- 
solence !' exclaimed the Prince, wild with indignation 
at a species of opposition of all others the most sur- 
prising and exasperating in a person bred in the German 
superstitions of the rights and supremacies conferred by 
birth and rank. 

^ I place myself under the protection of this man, 
against your insulting treatment. Prince ! ' was Arabella 
Holte's reply. 

' Indeed ! is it so ? Ha ! and what man is this, madam ? 
Tubal Bromycham ! Tubal Bromycham ! Insolent rebel ! 
truly, I have been informed of you by the name. And 
you are here, here in the midst of the quarters of the 
King's soldiers, by night, by stealth, avowing yourself, 
.with this audacity, head and leader of the atrocious and 
unprovoked sedition of Birmingham. Spy, traitor, dearly 
shall you abide the discovery ! I arrest you as such. Sur- 
render, or I cleave you to the chine,' cried the ferocious 



108 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

royal soldier of fortune, drawing his sword, and flourish- 
ing it in menace over the head of the leader of the revolt 
of Birmingham, who thus audaciously announced himself 
his rival. 

Arabella shrieked aloud, in the expectation of witness- 
ing her unarmed rescuer^s immediate immolation. But 
Tubal, by a sudden movement, stretching his long arms, 
rushing in and grappling with his foe, effectually frus- 
trated his action, no scope remaining for the stroke of 
the weapon. Indeed, Kupert was even forced to abandon 
his sword to avoid being absolutely stifled in the power- 
ful seizure to which he found himself subjected, which 
resembled that of the boa constrictor round the rhi- 
noceros, and apply all his efforts to free himself from the 
pressure. 

A violent struggle ensued, though only of brief dura- 
tion, the antagonists being locked in so close an embrace 
of contention that it could hardly have been possible to 
tell, as it progressed, whose muscular powers were yield- 
ing to the other's. But Tubal Bromycham's extraor- 
dinary strength availed him against all the superior sta- 
ture and dexterous efforts of the trained soldier, in whose 
education, at that time, wrestling formed an important 
branch of qualification. And the contest ended by his 
raising the whole stalwart and strenuously resisting figure 
of the Prince high in the air in his mighty arms, and 
dashing him backward down, with such violence to the 
earthen floor of the hut that he lay there stunned, bleed- 
ing, and insensible. 

' Saints of mercy ! What have you done. Tubal Bromy- 
cham V gasped Arabella, ceasing at the spectacle from the 
shrieks she had not ceased to utter during the encounter. 
* You have slain the nephew of the King ! ' 



THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. 109 

. I have avenged an insult offered to Arabella Holte. I 
care not on whom. Moreover, the man threatened my 
life unfairly, I being weaponless/ Tubal replied, with 
gloomy composure. ' But I trust he is not dead, if you 
desire his life, Arabella. I have inflicted no mortal wound 
upon him, and have cast others as heavily ere now who 
were none the worse of it in life or limb a week after 
. unless he bleeds at the mouth ; let me see.' 

And Tubal knelt beside his fallen rival, and raising his 
head in his hand, remarked, ^ No, he is only stunned for 
awhile. But is he not totally at my mercy, were Tubal 
Bromycham the man to take the unfair advantage he fain 
would have taken of me ?' 

' He is, he is, Tubal ! But at least use the advantage 
of the time that may remain ere he revives to vengeance, 
or to the renewal of a conflict which at all events must 
end in my exposure and disgrace. Save yourself now, 
most generous man ! I am safe, nothing requires your 
further delay here,' exclaimed Arabella. 

^ And leave you to revive him, to watch over him, to 
soothe, to comfort, to console with your caresses his de- 
feat ?' Tubal replied, with fierceness ; ^ rather will I perish 
here.' 

^ Xo, no ; such is not my intention. I will leave him 
here to his fate . to the care of his friend the Witch . 
the detestable hag will be sure to return anon ; and will 
make my own way home to the Hall, and will protest 
henceforth so total an ignorance of all that has occurred 
here that he shall himself believe he has been fooled by 
some magic delusion of my presence. Only place your- 
self at once in safety, for were you discovered now, 
here . powers divine ! you are already discovered, are 
lost ! Look there, there . at the window, look !' 



110 

The unglazed opening by which Tubal had entered on 
the scene, after observing what happened on the exterior 
through the half-closed shutters, now let in a full glare 
of moonlight, and exhibited the figure of a dark man in 
a lawyer's robe. Tubal turned at the exclamation. 

' It is either the devil or Richard Grimsorwe ! ' he ex- 
claimed, after a moment^s attentive survey. 

' Tubal Bromycham here ! . the Prince stretched on 
the floor ! . Help, murder_, help ! . the Prince is mur- 
dered ! ' 

Such outcry the figure made at the highest pitch of 
its ill-omened voice, and disappeared from the opening. 

' Fly, Tubal, I tell you, fly. This wretch. ah ! he 
has doubtless been in the treason of it all . will speedily 
summon assistance. There is an outpost of soldiers at 
no great distance, and . oh, if Grimsorwe gives the 
alarm, and I am discovered here, my honour too is 
gone ! Otherwise, I can outface the world I never was 
here ! ' Arabella wildly implored. 

' If you bid me, dearest Arabella ; if you concern your- 
self for me so far as to wish me to place myself out of 
danger . ^ 

a do ! I do ! ' 

' And you will depart also ? ' 

' I will, I will ! Come this way . this way ! I will go 
at the same moment. For my sake, dear, dear Tubal ! 
if ever you have loved me, save your own life now, at 
once.^ 

' Oh, Arabella ! dearest of women . most honoured 
of ladies, these words would raise me from, the dead to 
do your will. I would die a thousand deaths for you, 
and you bid me live. Only leave at the same time ; per- 
mit me only to see you in some place of safety nigh your 
father's hou«:e through the park . 



THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. Ill 

^ No, Tubal, no ! there is no need ; I have ample pro- 
tection at the Fairy Oak; you know, two of my servants 
await me there; but every moment may be of conse- 
quence to secure your flight, -which must surely not be 
that way. All is lost else ; but what do I say ? All is 
lost already ! Hark, yonder, that bugle blast ! ' 

A bugle, sounding the alarm note for cavalry, now 
indeed came to the hearing of the agitated interlocutors, 
and apparently from no great distance. 

Tubal listened for a moment. ^What can be the 
meaning of this ? ^ he exclaimed, stepping to the door 
of the hut, whither also Ai'abella aflrightedly accom- 
panied him. 

The meaning of it was that Cornet Titus, who had 
guided Prince Eupert to the witchcraft scene, and was 
sauntering away at some considerable remoteness on 
the margin of the Fish Pools, but near enough to hear 
Miss Holte's outcry, without making any manner of 
response, or even affecting to hear it, no sooner distin- 
guished Grimsorwe's yelled appeal than he returned in 
the greatest hurry and consternation towards the hut. 
And on the way, finding the terrifying exclamations 
repeated, raised the bugle with which he came furnished 
to his lips, and blew a blast, which was instantly answered 
by the appearance of a number of soldiers from an out- 
post on the skirts of a neighbouring wood. The alarm 
continuing, several of these men discharged their mus- 
kets, and were seen running breathlessly over the moon- 
lit meadows towards the noise. 

Seen by Arabella Holt and Tubal Bromycham the 
moment they reached the door of the hut. 

The former seemed to abandon all hope at once, on 
discerning this approach. ' Oh, I am lost, I am lost ! ' 



112 

slie exclaimed. ' These men will find me here, and the 
whole dreadful scene will have to be explained to my 
destruction. This man . this prince . lying wounded, 
perhaps dead^ out in such a spot, in my company ! 
Shame and unutterable disgrace await me; and my 
father will kill me in his rage ! ^ 

'Be not afraid, dearest lady. Remember me some- 
times with kindness, whatever befalls. Hie home at 
once at every speed you can make from this place, and I 
will liazard all to save you. Perhaps I shall myself es- 
cape also ; but if not . if not . remember always that I 
died for you ! ' 

So Tubal said ; and snatching Miss Holte's hand to 
his lips for a single moment of delirious tenderness, he 
darted forward ere she could do anything to prevent 
him, or even inquire his meaning, and presented himself 
plainly to the approaching force. Then raising both his 
clenched fists, he shook them aloft in defiance, and with 
a shout of contemptuous challenge, like an Indian war- 
whoop, to his coming foes, moved off as if to betake 
himself for shelter among the scattered plantations in 
the rear of Maud Grimsorwe's wretched abode. 

Arabella discovered at once the meaning of the ma- 
noeuvre, that he purposed to be observed, and to direct 
the pursuit on his traces, at whatever personal hazard, 
so as to allow her time to effect her own escape from 
the disastrous and inexplicable scene. 

For a moment a sensation of gratitude, love, pity . 
scarcely could it be said how many overpowering feel- 
ings of the kind . rushed in full tide through Arabella's 
heart, and almost she resolved to rush forth side by 
side with her heroic lover and share his fate, whatever 
it might be. 



THE RIVAL PRINCE AND BLACKSMITH. 113 

A moment^s reflection assured her how useless the 
effort would prove; how much more likely to act harm- 
fully for Tubal, and perhaps fatally hamper and delay 
his flight. She knew how famous he was for his feats 
of activity and speed ; how thoroughly acquainted he was 
with the ground to be traversed ; the short distance that 
would suflSce to place him in safety in Birmingham ; 
and hope for him revived in her heart. And with this 
hope the instinct of self-preservation . above all, of the 
preservation of that honour and repute which were so 
dear to the proud daughter of Sir Thomas Holte . reani- 
mated her to the efforts necessary on her own part to 
render the generous sacrifice made to her of avail. 

To lose fair fame and placing in the world for a man 
who despised, who contemned her in the only light in 
which he should have sought her, in which ambition 
only prompted herself to desire success, the very thought 
stimulated Arabella to any effort to avoid so deplorable 
an exposure and disgrace. Moreover, she had now no 
slight perception that she was the subject of an organized 
conspiracy of her enemies ; to foil whose base plans were 
alone sufficient motive to exertion. 

With this latter conviction in her mind, Arabella 
concluded hastily that her retreat would be anticipated 
in the direction she had come, by the Fairy Oak, pro- 
bably watched for there by the villanous Grimsorwe. 
Very unluckily therefore she determined to take flight 
in another direction, without attempting to apprise 
Phoebe and Robin Falconer of the facts of the case, 
hoping that they, too, would take the alarm and retire 
unharmed. Indeed, it had been arranged, if any dis- 
covery was made, all parties were to betake them home 
to the Hall the best and speediest way they could. 

VOL. III. I 



114 

Arabella gave a single glance back to the hut, now 
thoroughly lighted by the moonlight, and perceived with 
a new quickening of terror that Rupert was moving 
and stirring himself up from his stupefaction. What 
might not be his feelings of revenge and exasperation 
against herself also, after the injury and indignity he 
had suffered ! 

Arabella paused not to calculate, but with the af- 
frighted speed of a hind that sees the jungle stimng 
for the unseen tiger's spring, rushed out of the hut and 
fled. 



115 



CHAPTER LXXIX. 



THE CROSSBOW-SHOT. 



Unluckily, meanwhile, for all parties, Robin Falconer's 
attention had been at once attracted by the summons of 
the bugle. 

His young mistress's terrified exclamations, as had 
been anticipated by the atrocious planners of the affair, 
had not reached his ears. But he started at once upon 
his feet from his loving chitchat with his betrothed, upon 
that dismal blast. 

Phoebe Dewsnap jumped up beside him, greatly 
alarmed. ' What can it be?' she exclaimed. 

' Do you see yonder creature, Phoebe ?' the falconer 
replied, with his hair bristling upright. 

Tubal Bromycham at the moment emerged, on his act 
of devotion, in the open before the Witch's hut. 

It should be remembered that some allusion had al- 
ready been made in the conversation of the pair to the 
dreadful phantom Provost- Marshal Storcks reported he 
had recently come upon in Aston Woods, and which was 
now a common story among the servants and other im- 
plicit trusters of the marvellous at Aston Hall. 

* Oh, me, yes !' responded Phoebe ; ^ it is the Wild Man 
of the Woods the German hangman gentleman has been 
telling us all of late he has seen about ours at Aston. 

I 2 



116 

And the Witch has brought it here on purpose^ and it 
has torn my poor young lady to pieces/ 

^ Deem you so, Phoebe ? It w^s our young lady, 
then. Oh, it is like enough then my lass ! The hor- 
rible old -woman has always hated my master's house 
and name. But I will avenge her. Provost Storcks, 
who knew I was often out in the woods by night, taught 
me how to cope with a wehr-wolf. I have a bolt here 
for my crossbow which would bring down the fiend's 
self; for it is twisted with a silver sixpence, with the 
Grace of God outside-. Of course, I have my bow slung 
on my shoulders, and here is moonlight clear enough to 
hit a sparrow on a top bough, much more a bulky thing 
like this.' 

While the falconer spoke he was bringing round his 
weapon into his hold, . a weapon which was still con- 
sidered appropriate for all rural field-sports, though al- 
ready long superseded by the gun in man's destruction 
of his own species. 

Those who have only seen the child's plaything of 
modern times have no notion of the power of this 
weapon, in skilful hands, in its ancient form of con- 
struction. With this, rather than the longbow, the Eng- 
lish of Crecy and Poictiers thinned the overwhelming 
legions of their enemies ere they charged with axe and 
bill and pike, and cleared the field. The greater dis- 
tance the musket would carry, and its easier manage- 
ment, were, in fact, the chief advantages of that instru- 
ment of destruction over the crossbow, until modern im- 
provements gave it so deadly a precision and power. 

Robin was famed for his skill with this arm, and 
Tubal Bromycham's rash generosity exposed him so 
completely to an aim, that it was no wonder when the 



THE CROSSBOW-SHOT. 117 

skilful falconer, acting upon the impulse of his own 
and of Phoebe's excited imagination, snatched his cross- 
bow and launched the charmed bolt, that it reached the 
mark. 

The unfortunate ^Wild Man^ was evidently struck 
just as he betook himself to a more rapid flight, having, 
as he considered, accomplished the object of drawing at- 
tention to his movements. 

It was clear, for after staggering for a moment he 
fell. 

' It is hit in the leg, I think, and falls just like a 
raan,^ said Robin, suddenly coming to a pause of con- 
sideration. ^ I wonder whether it is a human creature, 
after all, and if I have shot it by mistake.^ 

^ Let us go to the hut, and see after my poor mistress. 
There are plenty of people running the way of the horrid 
thing now,' said Phoebe ; and in reality numerous figures 
of men and soldiers were seen scudding across the moon- 
lit meadows in the direction of the fallen Wild Man. 
And to complete the certainty of detection, a greyhound 
emerged from some stealthy covert and joined with its 
unerring organs in the general chase and halloo. 

In some degree fortunately, however, Robin declared 
to the trembling Phoebe that she had better stay where 
she was, while he proceeded to ascertain the real nature 
of the fugitive he had brought to a stop. If her lady 
was torn to pieces, she could do no good, and might be 
uncomfortably involved in the transaction. And Phoebe 
was prevailed upon to hide herself in the oak until her 
sweetheart's return from what had now become the main 
point of attraction in the pursuit. 

On arriving, Robin found a number of soldiers and 
Cornet Titus engaged in tracking, with the aid of the 



118 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

hound, the course which the unfortunate fugitive had 
taken after being severely wounded, for it appeared as 
if he had dragged himself along the ground to a con- 
siderable distance, as no immediate traces could be found 
of him. 



119 



CHAPTER LXXX. 

LOVE FOR LOVE. 

Arabella accomplished her flight in safety to the Hall, 
though obliged to lose some time in the detour she made, 
to avoid the danger she apprehended on her proper line 
of retreat. 

All was still and silent there. Even the alarm of 
the distant musketry appeared not to have reached the 
drowsy inhabitants of Aston, and the young lady unob- 
servedly re-entered by a postern door belonging to the 
servants' hall, and by which, under Phoebe Dewsnap's 
guidance, she had left the mansion. 

To what an agony of doubt and misery was she not 
however consigned, when, sinking breathlessly exhausted 
on her couch, Arabella Holte felt herself once more in 
personal safety, but abandoned to every species of horror 
in reflection. 

Would Tubal Bromycham escape? Was there not 
likelihood the Prince was so seriously injured that what 
bad happened to him must necessarily call for the se- 
verest and most betraying scrutiny. 

On this latter point Arabella recalled with some hope- 
fulness that she had left Rupert exhibiting signs of re- 
vival from the stunning effect of the violence to which 
his own violence had subjected him from his stronger 



120 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

antagonist. But even so, would not revenge and a spirit 
of retaliation, very likely even of a jealous character, 
prompt him to deliver her over to ridicule and disgrace? 

And if Tubal had found it impossible to evade the 
danger by which he was circled in, what would be the 
result ? 

Arabella knew she could depend to the death on the 
fidelity and silence of her heroic smith-lover, were he 
even captured and at the disposal of his enemies. But 
what would that disposal be under circumstances so 
strangely mixed and aggravating? 

Moreover, who could say to what extent other parties 
were engaged in and cognisant of the true meaning of 
the strange discoveries probably inevitable ? 

Had she so nigh fallen a victim to a concocted plot ; 
or was Richard Grimsorwe's presence at his grand- 
mother's cottag^ an accident ? 

Had the witch in reality exercised a potency of art in 
bringing her two lovers . the true and honourable, the 
disdainful and wrongfully-purposing one . on the scene 
where they had figured ? Or was the whole a cunning 
contrivance of Richard Grimsorwe's to bring her to dis- 
grace and ruin? 

How came Tubal to appear so strangely on the scene ? 

Nothing but Arabella's confidence in the sincere love 
and generous feeling of Tubal Bromycham towards her 
prevented her from entertaining this latter supposition. 
But well she knew nothing could have induced or cajoled 
him into any design that might by possibility be harmful 
to her. But, unless by magic compelled, how came he 
on such a scene at such a time ? 

These ideas added all the horrors of remorse and re- 
gret to her dread for the safety of the brave blacksmith. 



LOVE FOR LOVE. 121 

And there were times, during the interval of suspense 
that ensued, when Arabella Holte felt as if she could 
scarcely restrain herself from rushing forth once more, 
and at every hazard ascertaining the fate of the noble- 
hearted man who had devoted himself with such gene- 
rosity to her preservation. 

What a contrast was he to the insulting royal lover, 
who had so plainly exhibited his notions of his superi- 
ority, and the unfair and dishonourable designs he enter- 
tained in all his pretended homage and courtship. 

If Arabella Holte had not already experienced in the 
depths of her heart the strongest emotions of tenderness 
towards the chivalric and high-souled rival of that selfish 
and overbearing Prince, doubtless they would now have 
awakened in it. But it is certain which way the real 
affections and promptings of unbiassed female nature iu 
her soul flowed, had not the strange perversities of opi- 
nion and of her father^s will turned the true current 
aside. 

Tubal Bromycham was surely in the ascendant now, 
since Arabella's principal support and consolation during 
the trying interval that ensued lay in recalling the faet 
that the Witch's experiments assigned him to her as a 
husband. If he was now to perish, that could not be, 
and the decrees of fate would come to nought. 

Meanwhile, if only she could be assured Tubal was safe, 
an evasion from her other main difficulty suggested itself 
to her mind. 

She had already established an alibi by her unobserved 
flight and return. But, in addition, she now undressed 
and transferred herself to her couch, lay down on it, and 
put on as much semblance of slumber, in preparation for 
the alarm she expected, as might perhaps have deceived 
an ordinary observation. 



122 THE armourer's daughter. 

Accordiugly, when about an hour after her return a 
loud knocking came at her chamber door, and the af- 
frighted tones of her mother demanded admission, she 
feigned all the process of awaking from a sound sleep 
with singular address, and opened it at length with only 
the degree of panic fairly attributable to a night-rousing 
of the kind. 

Lady Holte appeared in a dressing- robe, hastily thrown 
on, and exhibited every mark of consternation natural 
in a person of her weak nerves and present disorder of 
mind. 

^\rabella, my child ! my dear daughter ! ' she ex- 
claimed, 'prepare yourself for bad news. Ah me, ah 
me ! the Prince, the Prince ! All is lost, all is lost ! ' 

'I am prepared, dear mother, for the very worst !^ 
Miss Holte replied, and truly in accents as if she meant 
what she said. And she did believe that all was dis- 
covered. 

' Cornet Titus has just arrived at the Hall for the 
Prince's surgeon, and as many of his officers besides as 
can be at once assembled for a court-martial. You may 
well start, child. His Highness was taking his rounds 
by night, as his custom often is, alone, or with a single 
attendant officer, to make certain his men are at their 
posts, and watchful to perform their duties ; and Cornet 
Titus had but left him a few minutes, on orders to \*isit 
a party lying out towards Oscott Woods, when a spy of 
the Birmingham people came upon his Highness, quite 
by surprise. But yet, with his natural courage and 
determination, the Prince resolved upon his arrest, and 
in a struggle that ensued is nearly killed. The fellow 
almost strangled, and then dashed him with such force 
to the ground, that he was stunned for several minutes, 



LOVE FOR LOVE. 123 

and his Highness is now lying at the cottage of old 
!Maud Grimsorwe, the wicked old witch who hates us all 
so, only just sufficiently recovered in his faculties to be 
aware of what has happened, and give immediate orders 
for the trial and execution of the offender. So Cornet 
Titus reports, who, by great good fortune, happened to 
overhear the noise of the struggle, and summoned help 
to save the Prince from actual murder ; for the villain is 
dreadfully strong, and had quite overpowered him. 

Lady Holte said all this, but not by any means in so 
regular and connected a form of narration. 

' The trial and execution of the offender ! Immediate ! 
Tubal Bromycham a prisoner ! Tubal Bromycham to be 
executed ! ^ exclaimed Arabella, now fairly aghast. 

Every spark of hope, almost of vitality, seemed extin- 
guished in her heart by these words. 

' Tubal Bromycham ! How know you it is he, daughter? 
Yet Tubal Bromycham it is, according to the report of 
Robin Falconer, who was a main instrument in his cap- 
ture. Good heavens, my dear child ! ' Lady Holte con- 
tinued, observing, though but in the moonlight, the 
deepening pallor and wild stare with which Arabella lis- 
tened, *you are not concerned for this villanous rebel 
whom your father hates so much, and who has already 
done so much, by his presumption and mad attachment, 
to cause us all uneasiness. Nothing could be better than 
the opportunity that occurs to be rid for ever of such a 
troublesome knave, were it at a less price than this injury 
done the Prince, whom yet I could be well content we 
had never seen at Aston.^ 

' To be rid for ever of such a troublesome knave ! . for 
ever ! What mean you, mother? Surely if the man is 
a prisoner, it is not intended to assassinate him ! ' gasped 
Arabella. 



124 

^ It is plain that he has come among us a spy, so Cornet 
Titus says ; and accordingly the Prince has determined 
to make an immediate example of him as such ; but in 
all due form, to show that he presumes on no infraction 
of his Majesty^s alleged truce with the town of Birming- 
ham, which, nevertheless, not having been fairly accepted 
on their side, is of no force to protect an espial who ven- 
tures into his enemy^s quarters without leave and safe- 
guard. So, at least, I heard the Cornet declare to Sir 
Thomas and some of the officers, who hastily assembled 
to accompany him back to Maud's hut/ 

It was now little or no consolation to Arabella Holte 
that she plainly discerned the Prince himself, and the 
other parties to the transaction, had determined to give 
it the best public gloss they could, and altogether to omit 
the witchcraft occurrences. 

In truth, all parties had nearly equal interest to avoid 
exposing their shares in the wicked intrigue. And it 
was plain, if Richard Grimsorwe and Titus were involved 
in it . which Arabella had grown strongly to suspect . 
they had found it advisable to assist in putting the 
varnish indicated on the catastrophe. Of course, they 
expected that Miss Holte would readily take her cue, and 
be glad to extricate herself from the unpleasant position 
at so trifling a cost . as no doubt it seemed to most of 
those concerned . as the life of Tubal Bromycham. 

Very probably indeed the revengeful nature of Richard 
Grimsorwe exulted in bringing a person who had inflicted 
on himself a disgraceful chastisement to so ignominious 
and sudden a doom. And perhaps, if he imagined Ara- 
bella had a species of secret liking towards her outwardly 
scorned woer, the pain she must sufl'er in consequence 
only added a zest to the gratification of his other ran- 
corous animosity. 



LOVE FOR LOTE. 125 

It is certain that it was he who urged upon Prince 
Rupert, the moment he was sufficiently recovered to 
attend to his suggestions, the propriety of losing not a 
moment in the chastisement of so insolent and outrageous 
an offender. And the more immediate the better, he 
urged, to prevent danger of a general collision with the 
Birmingham people, which the King might not approve, 
but which the prospect of saving their chief might pro- 
voke. 

On the other hand, he easily convinced Cornet Titus 
how expedient, how necessary for all parties it was to 
conceal the disgraceful facts attending the scene of witch- 
craft. And the Cornet readily led the Prince over to his 
opinion, who felt that his own behaviour in the transac- 
tion was very little to his credit, and who saw his ven- 
geance assured in another manner. 

To conceal the deadly emotion she experienced on her 
mother's statement, and gain time for a few moments' 
internal reflection, Arabella inquired of Lady Holte, after 
a short pause, how the person accused as a spy had been 
taken. 

AVhat did it matter, in reality, if taken he was ? 

Nevertheless, Lady Holte's reply deepened what had 
previously seemed the complete desperation of the tidings 
she communicated. 

' By the greatest good luck in the world,' she said, 
' Robin Falconer happened to be out in the woods with 
his crossbow, seeking by the moonlight for an escaped 
heron-hawk of our mews. And hearing the wonderful 
alarm, and seeing a creature scud past, which, from its 
strange appearance, he concluded to be the ^Yild "Man of 
the Woods that has of late been seen so much about here, 
he sent a bolt after him that hit him in the kneecap. 



126 

and lamed him so that he could no longer run. But 
even then he crawled himself into the sedges on the 
bank of the great Swan Pool, and might perhaps have 
escaped, but that a greyhound . your greyhound, Ara- 
bella . how strange, is it not ? . which you called after 
the Prince, darted out of some covert, joined in the 
chase, and discovered him bleeding and helpless there/ 

New causes for bitter self-reproach and anguish on the 
part of Arabella Holte. Had she returned to the Fairy 
Tree, instead of preferring her own safety to everything 
else, Robin Falconer would not have remained on the 
theatre of events to perpetrate this crowning mischief. 
But for her cruel submission to the witches decrees, the 
greyhound-detective would not have been there either. 

' What have they done with the prisoner ?' Arabella 
inquired, in a faint tone. 

' Robin Falconer, who brings this part of the news, 
says that Provost Storcks, who happened to be at the 
outpost, has ])ound him so that it is impossible he should 
break loose, strong as he is as Samson, and he is cast 
into the hollow of the Fairy Oak, with a guard of mus- 
keteers, with their pieces loaded and levelled, all round 
it. And Robin was ordered by Richard Grimsorwe him- 
self, who made at once to the spot on the first alarm of 
firing, which no one else at the Hall heard, to bring this 
portion of the intelligence here.^ 

' Richard Grimsorwe is in the whole treason, then,' 
thought Arabella, ' since he takes such pains to assist in 
giving a plausible varnish to the affairs.' 

She was silent for some moments, lost in miserable 
and anxious reflections. 

* Where is my father?' she then said to I^ady Holte, 
with a sudden brightening and eagerness in her tones. 



LOVE FOR LOVE. 127 

^ Gone at once to Maud's cottage with a number of 
the Prince's officers, and every assistance that could be 
thought of at the moment/ her mother replied. 

' Well, then, dear mother, we must not seem behind- 
hand in our attentions/ said Arabella ; ^ let us hasten 
there also, with some of your damsels, to render any 
female help in our power. The unhappy prisoner may 
need some also ; and surely common humanity . ' 

' My dearest child, you do not surely propose to drive 
your father furious by any display of interest in the fate 
of this unfortunate young man !' exclaimed Lady Holte, 
in great consternation. ' He will visit it upon us all, if 
you do.' 

Arabella shuddered ; but she replied, with a singular 
kind of dignity and fixity of resolve that in a manner 
awed Lady Holte into silence and submission, ' What- 
ever comes of it, mother, I must . and I will do . what 
God and the truth, and my own heart, alike point out to 
me to do ; and if you will not accompany me yourself to 
the scene of this pretended court-martial on a spy . who 
is none . I go alone.' 

* Then you needs must, Arabella,' said the nerveless 
mother, sinking into a chair in a flood of tears. ' I dare 
not go with you, if you go in any manner to contravene 
your father's will.' 

' Be that as it may, mother ; I will never lie down 
with the blood of the noblest of men, and one who is 
altogether innocent of the offence imputed to him, on 
my head !' 

And while yet speaking, Arabella proceeded hastily to 
dress herself for an out-door excursion, while the day- 
break suddenly illumining the chamber, lit up her toi- 
lette for the operation, but seemed chiefly to warn her 
'"f the necessitv of losinsr no time. 



128 THE 

'Tubal Bromycham wounded . bleeding . bound! 
condemned to the gallows for my sake ! Tt ought not . 
it shall not . it must not be !^ she exclaimed ; and said 
no more until she was ready to start on her expedition, 
attended by Phoebe Dewsnap . who now re-appeared . 
and several elder female servants. 



129 



CHAPTER LXXXI. 

TUBAL, A PRISONER. 

Phcebe Dewsxap^s eyes looked very red on rejoining 
her young mistress ; but she did not venture to declare 
why, in the presence of Lady Holte. 

On the way, however, to the scene of disastrous action 
she crept up to Miss Holte, and whispered that she had a 
few words to say in private. It was a message from Tubal 
Bromycham, who had been brought by his captors, grie- 
vously wounded, to the Fairy Oak, while Phoebe was 
still in hiding there, and flung in before they were aware 
it had another tenant. Miserably hurt and suffering as 
he was, no attention being paid to his injuries other than 
to carry him, as he was unable to walk, the gallant 
blacksmith had hastily availed himself of the opportunity 
to bid her assure her lady that no extremity could move 
his fidelity, and that he died happy since he died for her. 

It may be thought if this affecting additional proof of 
her lover's heroic attachment slackened Arabella's move- 
ment to what she intended should be to his relief from 
the terrible position in which he stood. 

"With what a different step she now advanced to that 
she had forced upon herself a few hours previously, in 
going to the witch's assignation ! 

Nothing could show more clearly how powerfully the 

VOL. III. K 



130 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

moral nature of man works upon his physical one, than 
the now rapid and resolved gait of Arabella Holte, when 
her mind was conscious of a good and loving and exalted 
purpose. 

Still, her strength of will and power alike almost 
yielded to the anguish of the spectacle that awaited her 
at the Fairy Oak. by which she purposely directed her 
way to Maud Griuisorwe's hut. 

As the lady and her attendants approached, they dis- 
tinguished a complete circle of dismounted troopers 
standing at marked intervals around the tree, with their 
loaded carbines levelled at it, and their horses feeding, 
bridled and bitted, beside them. 

Cornet Titus was in command of these men ; and as 
the visitors approached, they plainly distinguished he was 
laughing and bandying jokes with a sinister-looking man, 
in a black leather uniform, who was at the same time 
engaged in watching the operations of another, up among 
the few remaining branches of the tree. On his part, 
this latter was engaged in strongly securing a rope to a 
projection, which dangling down, showed that it finished 
in a hangman^s slip-uoose. 

These two latter persons were Provost-Marshal Storcks 
and Robin Falconer, who was assisting in the prepara- 
tions to finish off a victim whom he doubtless looked 
upon from his own point of view . of a loyalist vassal of 
the house of Holte, and gamekeeper . as a most per- 
nicious criminal. 

Yet all these dreadful and significant adjuncts of the 
scene were, perhaps, of less horror than what was dis- 
cerned on a nearer approach. A stream of bright red 
blood was flowing from the oak, as from a slaughter- 
house ; and though no sound of complaint or suffering 



TUBAL, A PRISONER. 131 

came from the interior, it could be little doubted but 
that the emptying veins of the captive supplied the source. 

Arabella perceived this the moment she arrived at the 
cordon placed round the tree, and although Titus, ob- 
serving the approach, advanced to intercept it, a few 
steps beyond his carbineers. 

' What do you ^vant, madam ?' he said, puzzled and 
even alarmed at her extraordinary expression ; ' it is only 
a Birmingham villain, who assailed the Prince's High- 
ness, that is confined within there.' 

Arabella pointed, with a ghastly and really terrible 
glare, from the Cornet to the crimson soaking of the 
grass before the opening into the hollow old oak. 

' I wish to bandage the poor m.an's wounds,' she re- 
plied. ' Surely, ye are not quite wolves to desire his 
blood to lap !' 

'AVhat is the use, madam? The court-martial must 
nigh have fini:«hed its proceedings, and there can be no 
doubt what will be the result to so notorious a seditioner 
and spy. The fellow's gallows is already slung/ returned 
the officer, indicating the halter and its noose with a ma- 
licious smile. 

' The court-martial ! Tubal Bromycham a spy ! No, 
no; but at least he is not condemned to bleed to death 
now and at once. Give me way, sir !' 

^ Take it, madam. But I warn you, Miss Holte,' 
Titus continued, in a low tone, accompanying the lady 
to the tree; 'Richard Grimsorwe has informed the Prince 
of your old affair with this Birmingham smith, and what 
is suspected in the matter. Do not by your conduct 
support his malignant insinuations.'' 

' Nest of serpent betrayers and perjurers. I care 
nothing for anything you can all do now. O Tubal, 

K 2 



132 

Tubal ! dear, faithful lover of mine ! speak, if you yet 
live !' 

The exclamation was very naturally occasioned when, 
entering the species of narrow-circular chamber formed 
by the hollow trunk of the ancient tree, Arabella per- 
ceived the unfortunate object of her search. Tubal lay 
crouched in a most uncomfortable position, his arras 
being pinioned behind him to his heels by strong ropes, 
paUid as death itself, with the gore oozing from his 
wounded knee, both his eyes closed, and a cold sweat of 
agony bathing his excruciated features. Silent, never- 
theless, as an Indian at the stake. 

The sound of Arabella's voice acted like a charm. 
TubaPs clenched brows relaxed, he opened his faint and 
swimming eyes, and a bright effulgence broke over all 
his visage as he slowly recognised the beloved form. 

Yet still he remembered what was confided, he deemed, 
to his faithful secresy. 

' Gentle Mistress Holte here !' he said, in a tone of 
respectful gratitude; ' this indeed sweetens death ! And 
if you come to announce it, lady, my sentence itself will 
still sound like music in my ears/ 

' Dearest Tubal ! you are wounded grievously. I hope 
yet to save you, but if you bleed to death meanwhile . 
let me bandage your wound,' said Arabella, brokenly ; 
and flinging herself in a passion of grief and remorse 
beside the wounded man, she tremulously but resolutely 
produced a pair of scissors, with which she commenced 
cutting away the covering of the injured limb. 

But Tubal endeavoured, as well as his fettered condi- 
tion allowed him, to decline this service. 

' Nay, dear lady,' he said, while his whole countenance 
grew in its lustrous intensity of love and strange expres- 



TUBAL, A PRISONER. 133 

sioD of delight, ' trouble not yourself, and me, for the 
little space that remains. My destruction is certain, at 
the hands of ray enraged enemies ; and if I can die of 
this welling of my life-blood forth, it were best for me, 
and will spare the last Lord of Birmingham's perishing 
by a felon's doom. Best for me in other ways, dearest 
Arabella,' he continued, in deeply moved and tenderly- 
consoling tones, doubtless observing the young lady's 
look of anguished dissent ; ' for since you can never be 
mine, my suffering in that knowledge and belief have 
reconciled me very heartily to die !' 

' But I will be yours. Tubal, if you will only live to 
make me so ! I swear it I At least, I will never be 
another's. No temptation, no force, shall ever alter my 
resolve ; and so I will proclaim to all the world at once, 
if only you will live to recompense my devotion by your 
love ! And now will you let your plighted wife. Tubal, 
tent your wound V Arabella exclaimed. 

' Heavenly powers ! but this is a cruel happiness V 
Tubal replied. ' Yes, I could live for ever on such a 
promise, but my foes will not suffer it. And, besides, 
beloved Arabella ! only a surgeon's, or a blacksmith's, 
pincers could relieve me of my main hurt. The cross- 
bow-bolt is sticking in the joint of my knee, which dis- 
abled me in my flight, and even by its overmastering 
agony subdued me into a swoon, from the purpose I en- 
tertained, of rather drowning in the pool near which I 
fell, than falling alive into the hands of my enemies.' 

' T will draw it out, if need be, with my teeth alone ! 
But perchance some grasp may remain to the bolt,' 
Arabella eagerly replied, proceeding in her humane 
task. 

Phoebe Dewsnap was by this time by her mistress's 



134 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

side, with a sponge and various other articles, hastily 
provided with a view to the use they were now turned 
to, though ostensibly to be of service in the Prince's in- 
juries. And she now lent her handy assistance, cla- 
mouring at the same time to Robin Falconer to leave 
off playing hangman's 'prentice, and bring some water. 

The falconer, who began confusedly to comprehend he 
was somehow in the wrong in the zealous assistance he 
was rendering, slid down from the oak at once, and 
hastily obeyed the orders he received. 

It was a piece of singular good hap, in the midst of 
so much disaster, that on Tubal's wound being washed 
the head of the crossbow-bolt plainly appeared. It was^ 
however, so deeply and strongly embedded in the knee- 
bone, that all Arabella Holte's efforts to remove it must 
have been futile but for Robin Falconer's aid, in the 
absence of the usual surgical instruments for an extrac- 
tion of the kind. After trying his own strength for 
some minutes in vain, in consequence of the slight hold 
remaining above the bone to the bolt, he disappeared 
from the hut for a moment. Then, reappearing with a 
pair of forceps, he quaintly remarked, ' I saw where the 
Prince's surgeon put his tools, when he found they were 
not wanting for him ;' and applying the instrument 
with considerable dexterity . under Arabella's direc- 
tions . he proceeded to wrench out the cause of suffering, 
bv the exertion of all his strength, in unison with the 
mechanical power. 

We will not speak of the superhuman agony under- 
gone by Tubal Bromycham during this rough operation. 
Some groans were wrung even from his strong breast, 
while his countenance writhed all over with the severity 
of the sufferings inflicted. But he fixed his straining 



TUBAL, A PRISONER. 135 

eyes on Arabella, and seemed to derive power to endure 
every extremity of pain from the intense and absorpt 
expression of love and agonized sympathy in hers. But 
when the bolt yielded at last, and was in a manner torn 
out of the bone it was fixed in, even TubaVs mighty 
power of endurance gave way, and with a shriek of 
agony he swooned away. He revived to find Arabella 
tenderly bathing his visage with fresh cold water, and 
that his wounded limb was carefully bandaged in linen 
and twisted tow. But it seemed to him that the hot 
tears which rained from her eyes over him did more to 
revive him than the cooler fluid, or the sense of relief 
from the excessive pain that had previously tormented 
him. He could only, however, look his gratitude; 
speech was denied him. 

Precisely at this moment also the figure of Cornet 
Titus appeared at the entrance of the hollow tree, in- 
dicating the scene within to a person whom Arabella re- 
cognised, with a vague and indifierent sense of surprise, 
as Count O^Taafe ; probably returned, by a remarkable 
coincidence at so strange a conjuncture of events, from 
his mission to the King. 

' Is it not all as I tell you, Count ? And will the 
Prince need any other remedy for his silly passion but a 
true report of this scene ?' Titus said, without any effort 
to conceal his malignant satisfaction. 

' I should say not ! The whole thing puzzles me 
amazingly ! . I would not stand between his Highness 
and his just vengeance. And yet the King's orders are 
strangely peremptory, and I come upon a hot spur, I 
can tell you ! But let me see the Prince at once ; the 
circumstances may justify rigour, since the ruffian is also 
a notorious traitor and spy V Count O'Taafe replied. 



136 

raising his hat to Miss Holte ; who, however, took no 
manner of notice of the politeness, continuing absorbed 
in her loving task. 

The Count and the Cornet exchanged some further 
whispered observations ; and then the former, murmur- 
ing, ' Let her do what she likes. By all means let her 
expose herself as much as possible ; only keep the 
prisoner safe,^ moved onward from the tree in the direc- 
tion pointed out to him as Prince Rupert^s quarters, for 
the time, at Maud's hut. 



137 



CHAPTER LXXXII. 

THE COURT-MARTIAL. 

On arrival^ and entering at the open door, Count 
O'Taafe found a very unusual company assembled under 
that lowly roof. Nearly all the officers of the royal 
cavalry stationed at Aston Hall were present, engaged 
in a noisy and excited confabulation round their chief. 

Prince Rupert himself sat on the witch's unsavory- 
couch, looking very pale, for he had not long been bled 
by his surgeon, who was engaged in binding his arm ; 
while Sir Thomas Holte, officiously assisting, held the 
bright steel basin which had much more reverently re- 
ceived that royal fluid than the earth had drunk^the 
heroic blood of Tuba] Bromycham. 

Perhaps the remedy was proper enough in this case, 
in the state of ferocious excitement to which Rupert 
revived from his overthrow by the Birmingham smith. 
But it was at that period almost the invariable first 
move of the mediciner's art to bleed a patient. No 
matter what his malady, exhaustion or otherwise . 
bleed, bleed, bleed ! 

In this instance the remedy had certainly produced 
but little effect to moderate the exasperation and violence 
of the impatient patient's passions. The moment his 
glance fell upon O'Taafe, though he had not seen him 



138 THE armourer's daughter. 

for now several weeks, and his return was unexpected, 
the Prince exclaimed, ' Ha, Count ! do you bring rae 
the King's permission to let myself loose on this whole 
perfidious and audacious people in their town ?' 

O'Taafe was about to commence his reply by some 
expressions of condolence at the sad condition in which 
he found his Prince, when the latter fiercely interrupted 
him. 

' I do not ask for pity, man ! I hate it . I abhor it ! 
I want vengeance ! Not on one alone, but on all these 
traitors ! Does the King consent V 

' We are all friends here, I think ?' said O'Taafe, 
glancing round the assembly, and only pausing with a 
moment's hesitation as his eye fell on the countenance 
of Richard Grimsorwe, lit with a fiendish expression of 
triumph even in the darkness of the recess where he had 
stationed himself. 

' All, Count ! Speak with every imaginable freedom,' 
returned Rupert, impetuously. 

'I will then, sir; and I grieve to say that his Majesty 
has most strictly forbidden any violation of his protec- 
tion granted Birmingham until . until he has re-esta- 
blished his royal authority by the overthrow of his open 
rebels in the field/ replied O'Taafe, evidently to his own 
distaste; but adding, in a cheerfuller tone, ' and to this 
intent, his Majesty being now most wonderfully thronged 
to by his loyal subjects of all degrees, and set up in an 
army amply sufficient for the purpose, proposes to march 
at once by way of these cities and provinces upon Lon- 
don. It is no wonder, therefore, that his civilian 
prompters and counsellors have persuaded him how 
needful it is not to add to the obstacles on his march, or 
to the vexations on his rear, by provoking the people of 



THE COURT-MARTTAL. 139 

these parts into open hostility and rebellion. But I 
bring you, Pnnce, his Majesty^s appointment to the 
supreme command of his cavalry, and instructions to 
advance with all the force you have, or can gather in, 
to cover his projected movement from the Avest. And 
by way of further consolation, his royal plight and word 
that, as soon as ever his authority is re-established in 
London, you shall have an altogether free and unfettered 
commission to reduce these counties to the utterest sub- 
mission, and visit npon all concerned in the recent se- 
ditions in Birmingham the utmost punishment of their 
offences/ 

Rupert seemed but little mollified by the statement, 
though an object of ambition was thus assured him he 
had been for some time passionately striving after, but 
which the King, his uncle, had not at first dared to 
confer upon so young a leader. 

'What! the Birmingham knaves go scot-free until 
their London aiders and abettors meet their deserts,^ 
he exclaimed. ' AVell ! for the mass of them, if it must 
be so, let it be so. But this traitorous spy . this 
audacious boute-feu (incendiary), who is in our hands, 
he shall die the death, if the King stood here in person 
to say no. The law-martial over- rides every other. 
Gentlemen, what say you? I have explained to you 
how I found the rascal prowling about in my camp as 
a spy ; Master Grimsorwe has told you how he is the 
very heart and hand of the whole revolt of the town of 
Birmingham : needs there any more witnesses to send 
the rogue to the gallows?' 

'And lose not a moment about it, gentlemen, I do 
advise you, or you will have a swarm of. those madmen 
out to the rescue, and a general pell-mell and massacre, 



140 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

which will be of great injury to his Majesty's affairs/ 
chimed in the nialicious Grimsorwe. 

' So say I, gentlemen. You will rid the whole neigh- 
bourhood here of a most pestilent disturber and ill- 
conditioned fellow, as well as deprive the Birming- 
hamers of their only leader that is truly to be dreaded 
in that capacity. A mechanic rogue,, too, forsooth, who 
sets himself up for Lord of Birmingham/ subjoined Sir 
Thomas Holte, with perhaps a still more inhuman and 
rancorous eagerness, considering how heavily the balance 
of wrong inclined against himself to Tubal Bromycham. 
But his pride and self-will, and probably no slight 
consciousness of danger to be apprehended in that direc- 
tion, urged him to assist in the destruction. 

And yet, as plainly appeared, Sir Thomas was un- 
aware of the abundant increase of reasons for his fears 
which had arisen within so brief a time. He looked 
completely startled and bewildered when Count O'Taafe 
exclaimed, ' I am glad to hear you say so, Sir Thomas, 
for not a minute ago I left your daughter. Miss Holte, 
attending and succouring this rebel, with much more 
devotion and zeal than methinks it is likely she would 
bestow on any of us, the King's most faithful soldiers, 
or even on his royal nephew himself, whom she seems 
to have postponed to visit until the occasions of the 
wounded renegade in question are fully served.' 

' You are raving, of a surety. Count O'Taafe,' replied 
Sir Thomas vehemently ; ' and I have already shown to 
you all, I will permit no idle tampering in anything 
that concerns my daughter's name.' 

' You have only told me half the truth, then. Master 
Grimsorwe/ Rupert said, with similar passion. 'And 
this insolent blacksmith's pretensions to your father's 



THE COURT-MARTIAL. 141 

daughter have met with her approval and acceptance 
too/ 

' Impossible, Prince ! Your Highness knows not 
what you say. It was my daughter herself revealed 
the knave's presumption to me, and thereby justified 
the disgraceful punishment to which I subjected him 
in the village stocks/ exclaimed Sir Thomas. 

' Here she comes . here my poor sister comes . to 
answer for herself. She will soon disprove this absurd 
notion your Highness has taken, so far as regards her,' 
said Grimsorwe, much agitated, catching a view from 
where he stood of the approach of the young lady, now 
quite alone. He knew not what to think of the singular 
revolution the affair had undergone ; but aware of his 
own villanous proceedings, trembled at any possibility 
of exposure. 

^Let us get rid of the seditious scoundrel then, in 
the first instance,' Rupert upon this exclaimed, with 
his usual impetuosity. ^What say you, gentlemen? 
You are a regularly enow constituted court-martial for 
the trial of so notorious an offender, whom I myself 
detected in these enclosures, and who resisted me to the 
hazard of my life, which he attempted with a brutish 
peasant violence. Do you not find this Tubal Bromy- 
cham came as a spy into our quarters, and as such is 
worthy of the gibbet ? ' 

'. There can be no doubt in such a case, your High- 
ness; but the King's commands are so positive. Let 
us put it formally to the vote,' said Count O'Taafe, 
anxious to relieve himself from a responsibility he felt 
rather likely to be cast upon him. ' Do you condemn 
this Tubal Bromycham, then, for a spy in the quarters 
of his Highness the Prince?' 



142 THE armourer's daughter. 

' Say no, sirs ! for ye cannot so condemn Tubal Bro- 
mycham with any right or justice/ said the bright, 
fierce, resolved accents of Arabella Holte, who at this 
moment stepped into the hut, with the majesty of a 
goddess descending to the rescue of some favourite 
champion of pagan romance, and with much of some 
such celestial's absence of mortal dreads and considera- 
tions. So fixed, indeed, in her resolves and utterances, 
that Destiny herself could scarcely have seemed more 
so. Pale, it is true, as marble, but as impenetrable and 
settled in her expression of determination. 
. A general silence was struck into all present by this 
arrival, and the words that accompanied it. 

Her father appeared to be the first who- recovered 
from the surprise. MYhat say you, foolish girl?^ he 
exclaimed, and yet very confusedly. ' How concerns it 
you what happens to this man? He is justly con- 
demned as a s[:y, wandering, as he did, within these for- 
bidden precincts.' 

'^No, sir; Tubal Broraycham is not in Aston as a 
spy. He came here last midnight, as I myself came 
here last midnight, as the Prince came here last mid- 
night . by the enforcement of a magic spell set in action 
by the witch-grandmother of your traitorous bastard 
yonder, Richard Grimsorwe. The Prince cannot deny 
what I say, on his faith and honour as a true man and 
gentleman; but I have other witnesses. And I say 
that at my request, and to win the reward I promised 
her, Maud Grimsorwe undertook to show me, by her 
sorcerer's craft, who must be my husband by the de- 
crees of fate. And it proved not to be this Royal 
Prince, but the brave blacksmith, leader of the people 
of Birmingham, whom, for my own part, and with all 
my heart and soul, I do accept as such!' 



THE COURT-MARTIAL. 14.3 

There was another still more astonished pause of utter 
silence; and again it was Sir Thomas Holte who broke 
it. 'Good Lord!' he exclaimed; 'one thing at least is 
plain, is certain . my child is, and must be bewitched, to 
utter such madness as this. Where is the hellish sorce- 
ress, that I may fling her myself into the flames.' 

' I am not mad, father. No; nor now bewitched ! I 
was bewitched when I subjected myself to the meanness 
and disgrace of endeavouring to win a man who consi- 
ders me fit enough to be his mistress, but not his wife ; 
who has openly shown so. Prince, can you deny it?' 

Rupert looked at the lady with a most extraordinary 
change and brightening up of expression. His proud and 
fierce nature was stirred by the whole surprising act of 
courage and self-assertion, in a very difl'crent manner than 
might have been expected. It is true, besides, that Ara- 
bella Holte never appeared more supremely beautiful, 
more royal by nature, fitter to mate with the loftiest and 
most leonine, than on this momentous occasion. No 
doubt, also, Rupert had conceived a stronger passion for 
the lovely and brilliant companion of so many pleasures 
and leisure hours as he had shared during his visit at 
Aston, than he himself was aware, and which burst into 
an extraordinary flame in his impetuous temperament, 
thus contraried by events. Love, pride, jealousy, re- 
venge . shame at the prospect of a fuller exposure of the 
violence he had attempted against the honour of his host 
and of an unprotected woman, in the presence of such 
vM audience, all conspired to drive the Prince upon 
the singular resolution he adopted at once. Moreover, 
the royal trooper's passions, violent as they were, were 
extremely devoid of delicacy and sentiment. 

To the astonishment of all who listened, he replied. 



144 

' No, Miss Holte ; I do not, I cannot deny your accusa- 
tion ; but I trust I shall make ample amends for what- 
ever has hitherto been amiss in my conduct towards you 
and your family, and falsify the pretension of witchcraft 
which, I suppose, this spy fellow also relies upon, by de- 
claring that I am willing at this very moment to give you 
my hand in marriage, under your father^s sanction, pro- 
vided you will prove to me it is not true you have a pre- 
ference for yonder vile rebel, by withdrawing your plea 
for him, and consigning him freely to the gallows/ 

There was indeed now a more awful pause of astonish- 
ment and suspense than had yet taken place. Sir Thomas 
himself could not speak for eagerness, and turned to his 
daughter with his mouth wide open for utterance, but 
unable to articulate a single word of entreaty. 

No words, however, could have been more eloquent ; 
and it is probable that the strongest emotion that strug- 
gled in Arabella's breast after the avowal, was prompted 
by her sorrow at the disappointment she was obliged to 
give her father in reply. Possibly, she even hesitated for 
a brief instant on her own account, on so unexpected an 
opportunity of gratifying what had hitherto been the 
master-impulses of her nature. But, to the credit of all 
womanhood, and of her own noble, though so long per- 
verted heart, Arabella Holte vanquished the temptation. 
The image of the generous Tubal, sacrificing all for her . 
bound, wounded, bleeding, suffering . to be consigned 
upon her word to a death of ignominy, that she might wed 
with a cruel and relentless rival, arose almost actually 
before her gaze, and she shrunk back from the Prince's 
extended hand. 

'You are generous. Prince,' she yet strove to say. 
* You have achieved a noble triumph over yourself. But 



THE COURT-MARTIAL. 145 

it is too late ; my affections and my most sacred pledge 
are Tubal Broraycham^s. Exhibit yourself, then, still 
more princely and heroic in another form. Acknow- 
ledge the justice of my appeal; release your cruelly 
maltreated and all but dying antagonist ; who, in his 
turn, spared you when you were still more completely at 
his mercy, and win my everlasting applause and grati- 
tude. Or let me share whatever doom you inflict on 
Tubal, on my lover; the only husband ever I shall wed, 
happen what will !' 

' ^f adwoman ! I tell you all, sirs ; I assure your High- 
ness, all this that she is saying is because she is bewitched. 
The hag of this hovel's devils are speaking in her. 
"Where is she? I will make her confess as much, if there 
be any skill in thumbikins and fire/ roared Sir Thomas 
Holte. 

' Faith, I think you are all bewitched together!' shouted 
O'Taafe, quite bewildered by his royal patron's last 
strange outburst. ' And so I will inform the King, if a 
stop is not put to all this nonsense at once.' 

Rupert had been silent since his impetuous movement, 
swallowing to the dregs the bitter cup of mortification 
forced on his unaccustomed lips. 

He now spoke up, in as unusual a tone, for him, of sa- 
tirical and suppressed rage. 

' A stop shall be put, Count O'Taafe, on so much as 
regards myself, the nephew of the King !' he said. ' Gen- 
tlemen, our court-martial is dissolved, and the prisoner 
dismissed unharmed upon this reasonable plea raised for 
him by Mistress Holte. For there can be no doubt we 
are all labouring under some witchcraft, delusion, and 
temptation . the man of Birmingham as well as we at 
Aston. Moreover, I cannot but feel it would be most 

VOL. III. L 



146 

ungenerous of me to deprive ]\Iiss Holte of so distin- 
guished a husband, and Sir Thomas Holte of so distin- 
guished a son-in-law, whose descent, I am told, is of 
little less antiquity, and scarcely more impoverishment 
than mine own, and who, if not a soldier, is of the next 
honourable craft in some nations' reckoning ! And so I 
advise you to join your daughter's hand with this brawny 
blacksmith's forthwith, Sir Thomas, and send the bride 
and bridegroom home at once to housekeeping in Bir- 
mingham. For me, I will to horse as instantly, and be 
halfway on my road to Shrewsbury ere sunset of this 
foolish day ! ' 

^ Miserable girl ! madwoman ! And as a madwoman 
I will keep you henceforth a captive on bread and water, 
in chains, and straw, and a dark room, until you ac- 
knowledge yourself as such . from this husband of yours, 
forsooth ! ' yelled Sir Thomas Holte, now in reality him- 
self fairly frantic with rage; and seizing his daughter 
by the arm, he tore her furiously away. ^ Come, if you 
would avoid my curse in addition, I say ! ' he continued, 
dragging her with a cruelly violent precipitation after 
him, perceiving that she turned as if again to address 
the Prince. But still Arabella, with a truly admirable 
sustaining of resolution, called out to Rupert, ' Keep 
good faith with me. Prince ; or the hand of a madwoman, 
indeed, shall avenge Tubal Bromycham ! ' resigned her- 
self to her father's violent will. 

It may be thought that Sir Thomas did not suffer his 
unhappy child to return to Aston Hall by the way of the 
Fairy Oak ! 



147 



CHAPTER LXXXIII. 



A REAL SPY. 



As a first consequence of the events described^ Aston 
Hall and its neighbourhood were almost immediately 
afterwards relieved of the presence of Prince Rupert and 
his Cavaliers. 

Very seasonably^ it vras thought in Birmingham, when 
the principal leader and champion of the town was 
brought back to it in so maimed and disconsolate a con- 
dition as Tubal Bromycham appeared in^ when a flag of 
truce announced the approach, and half-a-dozen troopers 
carried him on a hurdle to the barriers of the town, and 
there left him. 

He was found to be grievously wounded in the knee, 
though carefully bandaged, and insensible with loss of 
blood. Nor was he able for a considerable period after 
to give any account how he came in his deplorable con- 
dition, a fever and delirium ensuing. But it could 
pretty well be guessed, since he was returned from 
Aston by the enemy. 

Tubal was conveyed home to the Moat House, where 
he was immediately attended by a crowd of sympathising 
friends. 

Firebrace and his daughter were earnestly conspicuous 
among these; but even Dame Cooper, who had quite 

L 2 



148 THE armourer's daughter. 

taken a liking for her former dispossessor, devoted her- 
self now with almost as kindly zeal to nurse and restore 
him, as if she had been his mother. As for the towns- 
people of Birmingham, to whom TubaPs popular and 
heroic qualities had so long endeared him, nothing could 
exceed their grief and indignation when they heard what 
had befallen him. 

Sisyphus and his dark alliance made some efforts to 
take advantage of this feeling to stir up a renewal of 
tumult and violence. But the departure of Rupert and 
his troops removed the principal objects of dislike and 
vengeance. Moreover, the other chiefs and elders of 
the town grew more than ever disinclined to hazard 
furiher exhibitions of hostility to the royal cause ; and 
for the very good reason, that reports were now rife of a 
great army collecting round the King, which it was 
natural to suppose would speedily be on the march, and 
in a condition to execute any kind of vengeance he might 
ordain. 

Pretexts were also wanting ; for if Tubal Bromycham's 
injuries enabled one side to call for vengeance, on the 
other the King's favourers could declare that his being 
restored to his friends alive was a most convincing proof 
of his Majesty's and his officers' goodwill to preserve 
the truce, or peace, agreed upon. It was plain he had 
venturad into the enemy's quarters, for whatever reason, 
and might fairly have been treated as a spy. And when 
Tubal himself revived to a sense of things, he gave a 
most favourable \ersion of his treatment, and forbade 
any attempt whatever at reprisal on the inhabitants of 
Aston, who were left now comparatively without defence. 

Even Edward Holte and his troopers were destined 
shortly after to be withdrawn from Sutton. 



A REAL SPY. 149 

He received orders, couched in a friendly style, but no 
longer to be evaded without open disobedience, from 
Prince Rupert, as General of the King's Horse, to join 
hira at Shrewsbury. And the sadness of this parting for 
the husband-lover, so he continued, was at once heigh- 
tened and soothed in an extraordinary degree by the re- 
velation which Dorothy then felt it necessary to make, 
that there was every probability of his becoming in some 
few months a father. 

The circumstance, both felt, must soon render it inevi- 
table, for the preservation of the fair fame of the wife of 
Edward Holte, to avow their marriage. But the dangers 
and perplexities of such a revelation were sufficiently 
clear, and seemed even increased by the state of affairs at 
Aston Hall. Sir Thomas Holte appeared to his family 
and servants, accustomed as they were to his tyrannies, 
to have become a real madman, in the extraordinary way 
he was going on. 

When, atTubal's entreaties, the moment he could ex- 
plain his motives, Edward made a visit to Aston Hall to 
inquire after his sister. Sir Thomas refused to allow him 
to see her. He bitterly reproached his son with being 
capable of strengthening her obstinacy against the 
splendid alliance which, he haughtily declared, he had 
brouglit about for her, and which he was determined she 
should consent to. But Edward learned from his mother's 
terrified hints that Arabella was consigned to a captivity 
of strange severity in some of the upper apartments of 
the house, to hinder her, according to Sir Thomas, from 
running away from an offer of marriage with a Prince, 
to the arms of a beggarly mechanic. The poor lady her- 
self was denied to see her child, who was subjected to 
much other surprising harshness in the way of diet and 
deprivation of society. 



150 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

Edward Holte was not only sincerely grieved on his 
sister^s account at this state of things, but his own diffi- 
culties and perils were eTidentl\*ncreased byall he learned 
concerning the reason of her maltreatment. 

Tubal, of course, knew only what happened between 
himself and her, and was ignorant of the means by which 
his release had been brought about. But Sir Thomas's 
gorgeous boasts, and his furious demeanour on finding 
his will thwarted in the exaltation of his family, showed 
Edward plainly what he had himself to expect in a dis- 
covery of his secret marriage. And, moreover, he was at 
liberty to apprehend Arabella's resistance to the royal 
offer made her, if made it was, would not last long under 
such pressure. And he could scarcely doubt it was the 
case; for the haughty old man answered the remon- 
strances he ventured with a fierce declaration that the 
Prince had actually made it, and in the hearing of 
Richard Grimsorwe and the chief part of his officers. 
The exact circumstances, however, he would not detail, 
and Edward disdained to question his sullen bastard 
brother. But now, if the event should really come to 
pass, the baronet's pride would swell beyond all limits, 
and he would look upon Edward's misalliance with a 
thousand times more exasperated eyes. 

Tubal's emotions on receiving so much intelligence as 
could thus be gathered were curiously mixed. 

Jov and triumph, unbounded love, contended in his 
heart with grief and indignation at the maltreatment of 
Arabella Holte on his account. Amazement that she 
should in reality have so far vanquished her ruling pas- 
sions ; that her love of him should have achieved so mag- 
nificent a triumph over her ambition, struggled conti- 
nually in his reflections, with dread that it could not 



A REAL SPY. 151 

really be, or that she could not resist continued tempta- 
tion. All this kept up the fever in his veins, caused at 
first by loss of blood and the anguish of his wound. And 
this last was of such a nature as condemned him to phy- 
sical powerlessness, keeping him confined to a couch, with 
a mind thus cruelly preyed upon by hope and fear. 

And now, to crown all, TubaFs sole chances of intelli- 
gence from Aston were taken from him by the departure 
of Edward Holte. This could certainly no longer be de- 
layed, unless the lovers were prepared to lose their last 
hope of aid in the favour of the King. But before he de- 
parted Dorothy requested and obtained of her young 
husband a full written acknowledgment of her as his 
wife, and his unborn offspring as legitimately so. 

Dorothy wished for this, besides her marriage certifi- 
cate, to satisfy her father and friends in case her situa- 
tion should become apparent before an open declaration 
became prudent. It was impossible to say how long 
Edward might be forced to remain absent, or whether 
the war would in reality be directed into those parts so 
immediately as was believed, and hoped, by some. And 
strange to say, though Dorothy concealed the fact, to 
avoid as much as possible annoying her husband, there 
were already some Mhisperings on the subject of their in- 
timate communion in the town. 

How arisen it is difficult to say. Dame Cooper 
certainly kept the secret very well of the meetings of 
the wedded lovers, at the Moat House, by her friendly 
connivance. 

Perhaps her babbling husband might have hinted in 
his cups at certain wonders he could reveal, ^ as if he 
would.^ And there have always been plenty of ears to 
hear, and tongues to report and glose upon anything of 
scandalous import, in towns. 



152 THE armourer's daughter. 

Then again the housekeeper at Sutton, being of the 
following of Sisyphus the bellows-blower, might have 
allowed herself to be pumped by him of statements con- 
cerning JEdward Holte's frequent nocturnal absences from 
his home. And truly the Anabaptist had not ceased to 
take an interest in the affairs of the Firebrace family, 
although he had been dismissed entirely from their 
service, and, since his defeat in the attempt to excite an 
insurrection, had been rejected from all the workshops, 
and compelled to eke out a starving livelihood how he 
best might. 

Richard Grimsorwe's scanty and begrudging purse 
very possibly supplied some portion of these means. 
And yet this worthy himself purchased chiefly his own 
discomfort and exasperation. 

From all he heard, and the collected reports of his 
spies, Grimsorwe could not doubt the success of his 
brother's love with the Armourer's fair daughter. 

This pained him on divers scores. Not that he had 
any real passion for her himself. But he was a debauchee 
of the worst order, almost indiscriminate in his animal 
attachments, and his own brutal insolence had made him 
aware of the surpassing physical beauty of Dorothy 
Firebrace. He regretted thus, severely, that Edward 
should have carried off so fine a prize. He had always 
hated and envied his handsome brother for all the ad- 
vantages he possessed over himself, and now this was 
added to all. Then Dorothy's great contempt and 
hatred of him stimulated Grimsorwe to revenge. But, 
so far as we have now spoken, his objects in keeping up 
an espial on his brother, in tliis respect, were chiefly 
prompted by a hope and expectation to expose Dorothy 
to shame and chastisement in her Puritan town, confirm 



A REAL SPY. 153 

his calumnies of her to his father, and give his brother 
a kind of mortification, to Avhich he thought him very 
susceptible. It had not entered Grimsorwe's selfish and 
base heart to conceive that even Edward Holte, chivalric 
fool as he deemed him, would hazard so great an injury 
to himself as to eflfect an honourable union with the 
object of his love. 

Bat a revelation on this score awaited the traitor also. 
Not alone the fruit of bribery. Sisyphus's own malignant 
nature and insane passion for Dorothy Firebracs made 
the work of betrayal pleasant to him, and prompted a 
subtlety and daring no other causes could. 

On the day assigned for Edward Holte^s departure 
with his troop to join the King's array in the West, the 
youthful wedded pair ventured for almost the first time 
to prolong their parting interview till daybreak. This, 
however, seemed of the less consequence, as Firebrace 
had given permission to his daughter to remain at the 
Moat House with Dame Cooper, in attendance on Tubal 
during the worst of his illness, and the window of her 
apartment wns purposely low to the ground, and opened 
on a drawbridge ovei; the Moat ; which passed, the open 
country was before a person leaving by it. 

After exchanging every imaginable vow of constancy, 
after weeping in each other's arms for hours, and parting 
half-a-dozen times ere they could resolve upon the final 
one, the fond young husband and wife did, however, at 
length tear themselves asunder. But unhappily Edward, 
on reaching the drawbridge, could not forbear from a 
yearning backward gaze, and Dorothy^ persuading herself 
that he had something of importance yet to say, stepped 
out of her apartment and hastened to him there. 

A renewed, protracted, and tender adieu ensued, until 



154 THE armourer's daughter. 

the appearance of people on the public road beyond 
.compelled Dorothy to withdraw. Then, returning to 
her chamber, she was so oppressed with grief and sad 
forebodings that for a long time after she did not notice 
the important circumstance that the paper of acknow- 
ledgment Edward had written no longer remained on 
the table, where he had duly- signed and sealed it. 

Dorothy was convinced she had last seen it there ; yet 
the most diligent search failed to recover the document. 
She then concluded Edward must accidentally, or in for- 
getfulness, have taken it with him, and she despatched 
Dame Cooper, her diligent ally, to Sutton, to ascertain. 
But the young captain of horse had already set out on 
his march several hours. All that could be done was to 
await till she could know where to write to Edward, to 
inquire the safety of the papers. 

Of this, however, Dorothy had little doubt. It was 
true she had left the window by which she quitted her 
chamber open to facilitate her return. But it seemed 
impossible that any one could have the means or the 
inclination to enter the apartment, and carry off a piece 
of paper as sole trophy of his audacity. From the ex- 
terior, the house was effectually guarded by its circle of 
w^ater, excepting at the drawbridge, on which she had 
stood. As regarded the interior, her door was strongly 
secured by bolts and a lock within. 

And so Dorothy comforted herself; never for a moment 
entertaining any possible suspicion that her Edward could 
have purposely withdrawn the document, on consideration 
of the embarrassments to himself its production might 
entail. 

And in this trust she was well justified ; not in her 
hopeful explanations to herself. 



A REAL SPY. 155 

Somewhere about this very hour when Dame Cooper 
returned from her fruitless errand to Sutton^ Sisyphus 
the bellows-blower met Richard Grimsorwe^ as was often 
their custom, in a secluded by-path between Birmingham 
and Aston Hall. 

It was agreed that if they were observed the latter 
should pretend to beg. On this occasion he rather 
seemed to offer something very acceptable, to judge 
from the sudden voracity with which Richard Grimsorwe 
snatched at a parcel handed to him by the bellows-blower. 

' You watched him into the Moat House, into her 
chambers?' said Grimsorwe. ^You waded the Avater 
and saw him writing this paper at her dictation? You 
watched him out again at daybreak, concealed in the 
muddy ditch ; saw her hasten yet again in amorous lin- 
gering after him, and, at the hazard of your life hooked 
me it from the open window forth ? If it is a pi'omise of 
marriage, as you suspect, good friend, though you cannot 
read, you have, indeed, earned better than a silver tester 
by your night's work, this lime ! All the fiends of hell ! 
"What is here? Edward married ! Edward the probable 
father of a legitimate heir to Aston Hall ! ' 

The paper fell from the almost paralysed hand of the 
bastard pretender to the Holte inheritance, and he stood 
for some minutes even, gazing in a blank astonishment 
of dismay and horror at his accomplice. 

On his part, Sisyphus's ill-omened visage blackened as 
if he was strangling with the violence of his internal 
emotion. 



156 THE ARMOUREtl's DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER LXXXIV. 

THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 

Certainly the feelings of neither of these wicked men 
were to be envied at the moment of their interchange of 
tidings. 

^ ^Married ! Edward Holt married to the girl whom 
I intended to . whom I . whom, if ever I attained the 
mastery in Birmingham . she a wife ! Dorothy Fire- 
brace likely to become the mother of the children of my 
hated enemy ; poor, powerless, maimed wretch that I 
am ! ^ ejaculated Sisyphus ; not so incoherently, how- 
ever, but that Richard Grimsorwe's active intellect 
pieced to him a new and extraordinary meaning in what 
he heard. 

' You too, then, you love . you love my brother^s 
wife, bellows-blower ! My brother's wife, I tell you ! 
It is most plainly written down here. The when, the 
where, the how, the very priest's name ! And sleek- 
and-sly Master Lane, you must meddle and make in it, 
must you ? I never thought my brother such an idiot 
before, or this wench so wondrous artful. Yet here it 
stands on record, in his own handwriting, with his o\vn 
signature, his own seal, tliat he is the lawful husband of 
Dorothy Firebrace, and father of her unborn child ! ' 

' Vengeance, vengeance on. the wretch, with his flow- 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 157 

lug curls ! ' said Sisyphus, grinding his teeth with fury. 
' Hasten at once with this paper to Sir Thomas, Master 
Grimsorwe, and let him disinherit our fine bridegroom, 
and separate them for ever.' 

' But would that so surely follow ? And even so, were 
it vengeance worth the name? But it would not. I 
know my brother's good faith and loving constancy of 
nature ; he would never prove false to his wife, or desert 
her for any favour or fear. And who can say that my 
father may not relent when he finds the matter cannot 
be helped, and that the only lawful heirs of his name 
must be born of this daughter of a Birmingham smith?' 
said Grimsorwe. ' Xo ! ' he resumed with fury, as his 
rapid invention in mischief suggested a plan to him, ^Xo ; 
Edward's wife must first be disgraced and dishonoured 
before my father is informed of the event ; and to such 
extent that he, and even Edward himself, perchance, 
shall deem the alliance infamy, and her children be 
scandalised too doubtfully in their parentage ever to lay 
claims to the inheritance of Aston Hall. Yes, Sisyphus, 
if there be any remains of sense and contrivance in my 
brain, this insolent beauty . this wife . this mother . 
shall be reduced to a vileness and scorn that will make 
her the loathing of the basest populace of Birmingham ; 
worthy even of the destiny you have projected for her 
in your arms. Your arms ! you have only one.' 

' It is true,' Sisyphus replied ; ' but I have a hook by 
which I could drag a Spanish treasure-ship from the 
depths of the sea. But cunning, however, will serve us 
better than strength in such a turn as you advise, and 
which would be revenge indeed. Nor am I a stiff fool, 
of pampered diet, to reject my food for a little swinish 
handling. How purpose you to effect so notable a reta- 
liation ? ' 



158 THE armourer's daughter. 

It was wonderful how rapidly Grimsorwe had devised 
his villanous scheme of counteraction. He poured forth 
a statement at once of his plans, in which everything 
seemed contrived and arranged down to the most trifling 
minutise^ and the parts assigned to all the intended 
players in the tragic interlude. But the reader will find 
it hest explained in the action. 

Sisyphus readily promised his concurrence, though 
the share assigned him was not altogether to his 
taste. Yet there were reconciling portions in it ; not 
the least being that Tubal Bromycham, his recent over- 
thrower, was to come in for a portion of the harmful 
results, and that it was not improbable these would 
include the placing of Dorothy Firebrace's person in 
his power. 

The state of affairs in Birmingham at this time ren- 
dered the extraordinary plans of those two devilish men 
possible, which under almost any other circumstances 
could scarce have been so. Grimsorwe was kept very 
well informed by his Anabaptist spies of all that occurred 
there, and on this information based his plot. 

Tubal Bromy champs wound and confinement to a 
fevered couch rendered it unnecessary to take resistance 
on his part into consideration. Already, since his active 
interference was over, and the dangers vanished that 
compelled men to place their reliance in his courage and 
qualities as a leader, his power in Birmingham was sin- 
gularly shrunk; moreover, the fanaticism of the times 
had taken a curious form of development there, opposed 
to any other supremacy, under the guidance of the three- 
parts insane enthusiast, Wrath-of-God Whitehall. 

Resuming his old name of Kingdom-Come, Whitehall 
had set himself up as what he styled a Judge and Ruler 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 159 

in Israel; and professing to restore a Scriptural purity 
and simplicity of discipline in all things, civil as well as 
religious, actually administered justice and oracles of 
faith alike^ directly out of the Bible, in open and daily 
assemblages of the people, in the Market Place of Bir- 
mingham. 

All other rules of law and government were contemp- 
tuously set aside, and declared null and of no authority. 

The King^s name was no longer used, nor any re- 
ference made to Acts of Parliament, in the decisions 
pronounced. The only sovereign was announced to be 
the heavenly one, whose personal advent on earth was 
hourly expected, and passionately prayed for. And, 
meanwhile, the people were to be governed in the name 
of King Jesus, by his Yicegerent, AYhitehall, and a body 
of twenty-four Eiders_, whom he associated with himself 
in the ofi&ce. 

Such was the humour of the times that the extraor- 
dinary severities of discipline introduced by this mad- 
man and his coadjutors, from the laws of the Mosaic 
dispensation, found a ready allowance among by far the 
majority of the people of Birmingham. 

Men's minds were on the strain for novelties and sur- 
prises equally in religion and politics, and found exercise 
and relief in a form of development which was besides 
promised to end in an amazing revelation of heaven to 
earth. Whitehall confidently announced that as soon 
as Birmingham was sufficiently purified, by his processes, 
and brought back to such holiness, and sobriety, and 
chastity of life, as to deserve glory so great, the Lamb 
of God would grant an open manifestation of his pre- 
sence, and commence his reign of a thousand years, as 
King of the World, in that honoured town ! 



160 

Hitherto Sisyphus, thoiij^^h devoured by chagrin and 
envy, and working darkly at organising the resistance 
of his partisans to what he looked upon as an usurpa- 
tion, had not ventured to assail the new order of things, 
except with gibes, and sneers, and vague mutterings of 
menace and discontent. But now, on a certain given 
day, shortly after the interview described with Grim- 
sorwe, the bellows-blower presented himself in the usual 
assemblage of the people around their judge and spiritual 
instructor in the market-place, apparently in a much 
changed mood. 

It may be thought that these daily religious meetings 
. for, after all, there was not much to be decided upon 
in material interests . spread an extraordinary spirit of 
enthusiasm and controversy among all orders of the 
townsfolk of Birmingham. From being a mere place 
of bargaining and chaffering, the whole area before the 
Church of St. Martinis had of latter times changed into 
a species of open-air debating club, where the strangest 
and wildest opinions, both in religion and politics, were 
expounded and ventilated, and all manner of visionary 
notions and delusions canvassed and argued with a zeal 
that occasionally bordered upon frenzy. 

When, however, it is considered that the president 
and great oracle of these debates was himself in secret a 
madman, though one endowed with extraordinary powers 
of language and eloquence, it is not wonderful that the 
state of the public mind in Birmingham was becoming 
strangely disordered and heated, and the elements of a 
volcanic outbreak fast collecting. 

It was not, therefore, deemed surprising or suspicious 
when Sisyphus, the Anabaptist, made his way through 
numbers of people, frothing at the mouth, with vehe- 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 161 

tnent argument on the question of the day . namely, 
what were the signs that must precede the Visible Mani- 
festation . presented himself before the judgment-seat 
of Whitehall, his former rival candidate, and announced 
that he had received a revelation, directing him to sub- 
mit himself and his brethren of the Black Chapel as a 
militia, or soldiery, to the absolute orders of the holy 
and inspired minister of Birmingham. 

This judgment-seat was established at the Bull-Ring, 
and consisted of an elevated chair for the Angel, as 
Whitehall was now styled, and a row of benches for his 
subordinate elders. 

Agreeably to certain passages in Revelations, prescrib- 
ing that the Company of the Elect, who are to herald 
the Great Approach, should be ' clothed in white, with 
crowns of gold upon their heads, ^ Whitehall and his 
elders were all arrayed in long linen robes^ though they 
were obliged to supply the precious metal for the deco- 
ration of their heads by coronals of brass lacquer ; but 
the splendid polish communicated by Birmingham skill 
left little to be desired, except in the actual value of the 
ornament. In addition, Kingdom-Come rejoiced in a 
species of sceptre, though it was simply a long rod of 
iron, in accordance with the text, 'And he shall rule 
them with a rod of iron.' 

Strange to say, among these singularly travestied per- 
sonages sat Zachariah Firebrace, the Armourer ! 

The influence of the fanatic ajje had always been strong 
upon the Armourer's brooding and melancholy tempera- 
ment. But of late his exasperation against the Holte 
family . feelings of disappointment in his most cherished 
plans, and dread of worse . had thrown Firebrace alto- 
gether into the party most opposed to any revival of 

VOL. III. M 



162 

cavalier influence in Birmingham. The frenzied zeal 
and eloquence of the new enthusiastic ruler found in his, 
moreover, a mind well prepared for those seeds of fire 
that sparkled from the mad but eloquent lips. Accord- 
ingly, he sat nearest the right hand of the Angel, and 
w^s graced with the title of Chief Apostle. 

It was before this august array that Sisyphus pre- 
sented himself. 

The Anabaptist^s followers, though not numerous, 
were believed to be of great determination and ferocity 
in their principles. Their flight from TubaFs cannon 
and menaces had, perhaps, a little shaken this opinion. 
But still their maimed leader could point as he spoke to 
the sturdy apparition of Faithful Moggs, gaping at him 
for commands, at the head of a chosen cohort of gloomy- 
looking men, armed with cudgels and pikes. 

His own submission was dramatically sudden and 
surprising, and doubtless flattering to the vanity and 
secret fancies of the exalted visionary to whom it was 
made. Firebrace himself, the Angel's principal adviser 
in the actual business of ruling the town, desired by all 
means to strengthen the parties opposed to a Royalist 
reconciliation, and the unblushing bellows-blower applied 
his blasphemous invention most dexterously to impress 
the reality of the ' call ' he pretended to have received to 
his present act of submission, on his hearers. 

For three nights and three days, he stated, he had been 
tormented by a Voice incessantly repeating to him the 
words ^ They who are not with me are against me ! ' 
which he interpreted to mean that Minister Whitehall 
was truly chosen by the Lord, as well as the people, to 
do His will in Birmingham, and that it was the duty of 
all men, but specially all religious men, laying aside 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 163 

envy and pride, to devote themselves to aid him humbly 
in the work. 

The result of a consultation between the Angel and 
his council, accordingly, was an acceptance of the services 
offered by the bellows-blower, whenever they should be 
needed against the enemies of salvation and of the town 
of Birmingham; a decision which Whitehall propounded 
with the addition that the young man, Tubal, who had 
been raised, even as Saul, the son of Kish, to the service 
of the Lord, having visibly faltered in it, and received a 
severe disabling judgment on the same, he was truly of 
opinion that this new succour and support of armed men 
was granted by heaven to supply the temporary loss. 
And on Sisyphus's further zealous demand, he conferred 
upon him and his Anabaptists the title of the Guard of 
THE Amen ! . an expression that seemed to possess some 
mystic and extraordinary meaning, both with him who 
asked and him who granted the designation. 

Immediately this decree was uttered, Sisyphus burst 
as it were into an irresistible torrent of thanksgiving, 
and ordered his men to take up a position at once around 
the judgment-seat . a proceeding that rather startled 
and annoyed Firebrace, but gave apparently the highest 
satisfaction to Kingdom-Come. The frenzied eyes of the 
latter glared up with the peculiar light of madness, and 
the smile and nod of assent he gave to Sisyphus testified 
how the terrific delusion under which he laboured per- 
suaded him that all was well, and the whole proceeding 
the result of an inspired recognition on the part of the 
bellows-blower of his own true nature and predestined 
exaltation. 

Hardly was this arrangement effected when an aged 
woman hobbled through the crowd to the judgment-seat, 



164 

a crowd which nevertheless yielded and gave way in all 
directions to her approach, as soon as she was discerned 
to be the ill-famed Maud Grimsorwe, more generally 
known as the Witch of Aston. 

Much curiosity had been excited by the Anabaptist^s 
unexpected demonstration. But a great deal more was 
stirred by the apparition of this lonesome and disaster- 
boding old woman, who was so seldom known to leave 
her solitudes for the haunts of men. 

The strangely antiquated fashion of Maud Grimsorwe's 
garb . her wild and haggard looks . the fear-driven and 
bewildered aspect she at first presented . might have 
justified any amount of wonder. And, in fact, the hag 
approached the tribunal with as noisy a skirling and 
tumult around her as an owl startled from her hollow 
tree and scudding before the clamour and pursuit of the 
birds of day, blinded herself with the light. 

Sisyphus exercised his new duties for the first time by 
interfering to prevent the flooding of the mob quite up 
to the seats of the Angel and his elders, and also to pro- 
tect Maud in her efforts to reach them without further 
interference. 

The witch of Aston accomplished this, and then breath- 
less with age, fear, and a consciousness of the atrocious 
wickedness thrust upon her execution, shrieked and 
sobbed for some time in a frantically hysterical manner 
before she could at last be induced to state her business 
there in some intelligible form. 

The miserable old wretch had, however, been tho- 
roughly persuaded by her still more detestable grandson 
that what she was about to do was the only means to 
preserve from an unborn intruder the so long-coveted 
Holte inheritance; to give him a final chance to oust 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 165 

his hated brother, and, above all, to preserve herself from 
the tremendous penalties of witchcraft. Sir Thomas, 
Grimsorwe informed her, was resolved upon subjecting 
her to them ; and if she refused compliance with his 
own wishes he himself must remain powerless to aid her, 
and would withdraw at once from the spectacle cf the 
triumph and happiness of his and her enemies. 

Only the cruelty and subtlety of a man and a lawyer 
could, however, have suggested the dreadful calumnies 
and falsehoods the unhappy old woman now proceeded 
to utter. 

She declared, in the first place, that she was currently 
but most causelessly reported to be a witch, and to deal 
in charms and incantations, to bring about various un- 
lawful and forbidden results in the way of making people 
in love with each other ; avenging them on their ene- 
mies; and efifecting divers mischief to life and limb 
cattle and corn ; raising tempests, and pining folks with 
sickness in the bones. 

All this was of false report, and she was entirely guilt- 
less of the same. And still more of the vile practices 
imputed to her, in relieving women likely to become 
mothers, and who had the wickedness to desire it, un- 
naturally, of their burdens, and at the cost of the de- 
struction of the unborn, but not the less murdered, in- 
nocents, offspring of lust and shame ! 

How she had acquired so evil a reputation, Maud 
avouched, she knew not, except from the scandal of pra- 
ting tongues, and some small skill she possessed and had 
exhibited in herbs and medicines. 

Nevertheless, as they of Birmingham must be aware, 
she had fallen under the imputation, which, to her great 
sorrow, had forced upon her many revelations of the 



166 THE armouker's daughter. 

wickedness of the times, and of certain women of the 
town of Birmingham, who in the desperation of their 
shame, scrupled not to offer her great recompenses to 
destroy its evidences. 

Nay, the cases were not few, or confined to young 
creatures, whose poverty and dread of exposure was 
sharpened by inability to maintain the hapless fruit of 
guilt ! And the horrible hag proceeded to declare, that 
after forbearing long to reveal the wickedness prevalent 
in that town of Birmingham, and dismissing her appli- 
cants with rebukes and threats that prevented their re- 
turn, she had at last lost all patience at the suspicions 
and dangers accumulating against her on account of the 
numerous visits she received of the kind. And hearing 
that there was an angel of wisdom and holiness recently 
raised to authority in the town, she had come before 
him to declare her own guiltlessness, and denounce the 
villanous purposes against the laws of God and nature 
entertained even by women of a principal rank and sta- 
tion among them ! Specially, and by name, a certain 
Mistress Dorothy Firebrace, daughter of a chief ar- 
mourer of the town ; who being with child by Tubal 
Bromycham, her betrothed, and he having refused to 
perform his promise of marriage, in consequence of de- 
tecting her in an intrigue with blaster Edward Holte, 
of Aston Hall, thereupon had applied to her for the 
means to remove the proof of her infamy, that so she 
might persuade one or other of her lovers to believe lier 
innocent, and marry her still ! 

This vile accusation was expressed in far plainer lan- 
guage than the decency . not by any means the inno- 
cence . of our times, permits to be repeated. But to 
declare the wonder, the fear, the horror, the indignation 



THE REIGX OF THE SAINTS. 167 

of Firebrace at the amazing statement Tronic] exceed the 
powers of language^ however freely given in its full force 
and swing. 

Of course the father^s first emotions were of utter 
incredulity, mingled with overboiling fury and rage at 
so shameful and public an accusation of his child. 

He arose and yelled forth a denial of the charge, 
with passionate demands for immediate justice on the 
felonious witch-hag who had dared to defame an 
honest man's daughter, and chief armourer of Bir- 
mingham. 

But the aged perjuress persisted in her statement, 
stimulated to greater virulence doubtless by the terms 
of opprobrium, and demands for vengeance, lavished on 
her by the unhappy sire. She challenged the proof. 
Let them only place the woman accused in proper cus- 
tody, and under watch for a short time, and they would 
be furnished with every reasonable ground for conviction 
of the truth of her accusation, prevent the commission 
of a great crime, and the triumph of a wicked project 
on either of two men, honest and honourable, but for 
their unhappy connexion with so worthless a creature, 
an infanticide in purpose, if not in deed ! 

The confusion and uproar that ensued upon all this 
made the very stones of the market-place of Birming- 
ham vibrate. But, to crown the whole calamitous oc- 
currence, the noise and discussion were at their very 
height when Dorothy Firebrace herself appeared in the 
midst of the surging populace, quietly making her way 
to the Angel's seat of judgment. 

Quite unconscious that she herself could be concerned 
in the terrific demonstration, but alarmed for her father, 
whom she perceived speaking, with the foam tossing 



168 THE armourer's daughter. 

from his mouth with excitement, and furiously gesticu- 
lating, Dorothy pressed through the excited throng 
with some difficulty, until she reached him. 

'What is the matter, father? Why have you sent 
for me?' she said, with her characteristic self-possession 
and dignity. Indeed the new relations of life into which 
she had entered, if they had rather sobered the sparkle 
and petulance of Dorothy Firebrace's vivacity, had added 
something of matronly majesty to her naturally proud 
and courageous demeanour. 

But even her courage failed . even her heroic heart 
lost power and almost life, . when the exasperated and 
affrighted hag turned fiercely upon her, and exclaiming 
' This is the woman that tempted me to abet in child- 
murder !' shrieked forth a repetition of her accusations. 

Dorothy Firebrace stood paralysed with horror and 
surprise. 

She perceived at once how difficult, how impossible, it 
would be to refute the degrading and terrible suspicions 
raised against her unless by the violation of her promises 
to Edward Holte, by a revelation which would expose 
him to all his father's wrath and malediction, before he 
had acquired any means of shelter for himself or her in 
the storm certain to arise. 

She had the means in her power, it is true ; of which 
she satisfied herself at the very moment, by a convulsive 
clutch at her bosom, where her marriage certificate was 
deposited, sewn into the silk of her corset. 

But at what destruction to her beloved husband, who 
had sacrificed so much to her ! And evidently on the 
instigation of his fratricidal enemy; for was not the 
Witch of Aston Richard Grimsorwe's grandmother and 
fellow- conspirator to deprive him of his birthright? 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 169 

Poor old Mr. Lane, too, the Coopers, all her faithful 
friends, at the same time to be given over to persecution 
and ruin ! 

Moreover, Dorothy considered to herself that she had 
defence enough in the infamous character of her accuser, 
and was not aware of the certainty Maud possessed of 
confirmation existing to her atrocious version of the 
reality. 

As soon, therefore, as she could find speech to answer, 
Dorothy limited herself to indignantly denying the whole 
horrible calumny, and retorting upon her denouncer as 
a notorious witch, an agent and ally of the devil. 

Unhappily Dorothy in her passion of self-defence, by 
this denunciation, disclosed that she had herself seen 
the witch in conference with her imp, in the shape of a 
cat in her hut. And it was in vain for her afterwards 
to mention that this was several months previously, and 
that she had never had any kind of private speech with 
her of any sort. The grandmother of Kichard Grim- 
sorwe, worthy of the relationship, dexterously seized 
upon the statement at once as an admission of Dorothy's 
alleged visit and criminal request ; and the clamours of 
the auditory on all sides showed they considered it a 
strong support to the hag's accusations. 

It has been seen that Dorothy Firebrace was in no 
great favour with her townsfolk ; partly from her some- 
what haughty manners, her sharp, sarcastic wit, and, 
with the female portion of the community, her supre- 
macy of beauty. ^loreover, the Birminghamers believed 
her to have taken hearty part against them with their 
Cavalier enemies. All these circumstances united to 
render her humiliation and disgrace satisfactory to a 
considerable number in the assemblage, while it disposed 



170 

a majority to lend^ at all events^ attention and credulity 
to what was said with those tendencies. 

Still more unfortunately, the pride and disdain of the 
high-hearted girPs temperament suddenly returned upon 
her, in her conviction of the injustice and senselessness 
of the popular emotion. She turned oti the noisy rab- 
ble, thronging around and yelling and hooting at her, 
and with indignant scorn declared she would not attempt 
any refutation of calumnies so odious, before such a 
tribunal of howling wolves, and made a movement as if 
to leave the market-place. But on a sudden the hideous 
hook of Sisyphus grappled her shoulder. 

' Master !' he said, turning to \Yhitehall, who was 
staring bewilderedly on, ' must it not be, in mere justice, 
as the ancient woman hath demanded ? Must not this 
accused girl be retained in captivity, even as the accuser 
has demauded, until the truth or falsehood of her charge 
can be essayed ?^ 

'Let her remain in my custody, then V shouted Fire- 
brace, evidently almost frantic with excitement, ' I sent 
not for her here, though she says so ; but, as my soul 
lives, I, her father, will surrender her to be stoned to 
death by the people, if it shall appear she is guilty in 
the sort denounced against her by this lying paramour- 
hag of the fiend.' 

'A likely case!' the bellows-blower retorted inso; 
lently on his former master, 'You want only the op- 
portunity, blaster Firebrace, to set her free for her 
Cavalier lover's entertainment, on his return with the 
King's ravagers, or to secure her time and opportunity 
still to perform the devilry we have all heard affirmed, 
murders already in her intent. No, Rabbi, or rather 
King Kingdom-come Whitehall ! Let her be safely 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 171 

lodged at the Black Chapel^ and guarded by us, your 
faithful and sworn servants of the right, until such time 
as a discreet and wise company of the matrons of the 
town may declare her guilt or innocence, to all men's 
knowledge and satisfaction/ 

^The Black Chapel! Oh, thou villain! But, sirs, 
ye will not trust the fair woman in the power of my 
traitor husband, whose multiplied sins of adultery ought 
to make the earth open to swallow him. I know he 
seeks but to have her in his clutches to work some 
ruffian villany to her harm/ yelled Cut-throat Meg at 
tliis moment, battling her way through the mob as if 
with the purpose of setting her long nails in her crafty 
consort's visage. 

Hitherto she had yelled against Dorothy. 

There was a singular murmur, nevertheless, upon the 
words. The bellows- blower's real character was not un- 
known among the dregs of the populace associating with 
him in his recreations. But he himself turned with 
fury upon her, and shouting, ' Thou liest, torment of 
my existence,' would have struck her with his iron claw 
if Faithful ^loggs had not interposed. ' Nay, good 
Sissy, 'tis a woman still,' he said, ^ and look ye now, 
what is it the Teacher is about to say V 

Whitehall had continued, during this latter discussion, 
gazing with a strange fixity at Dorothy Firebrace. Those 
who were nearest him heard him mutter repeatedly, 
'And I WILL GIVE to him the morning star! . the 
Morning Star ! the Morning Star ! . what is your name, 
maiden, if wrongfully accused, as you avouch ?' 

' Dorothy' . she dared not add . Holte ; she would not 
. Firebrace ! 

' Dorothy ! . it is even so, then; the very name so pro- 



172 

phesies it !' exclaimed the Angel, rising with an air of 
insane inspiration ; ' Dorothy ! . Dorothea . in its ori- 
ginal Greek . signifieth truly, Divine Gift ! It is even 
so, it is even so, unless the devil, by some artful gloss, 
commends a cup of impurity to our lips ! It shall be 
known and declared as soon as may be ! Dorothea, I 
will myself take the charge and custody of you in my 
own house, until such time as a true judgment can be 
formed and declared on your estate, when either you 
shall shine forth as the Morning Star, on the right hand 
of . but the time has not yet come ! . or be exposed for 
what you truly are, on the pillory, to all men^s horror 
and detestation, from noonday unto the setting of the 
sun ; when, for your sin of fornication, you shall be 
stoned to death, by the people, even as your own sire has 
pronounced !' 

Anything seemed better to the defenceless wife of the 
absent Edward Holte than to be consigned to the keep- 
ing of such a vile and revengeful wretch as Sisyphus, the 
bellows-blower, whose licentiousness his own wife had 
openly denounced. She had great belief and confidence 
in the benevolence and goodwill of the new Minister of 
Birmingham, wherever his fanaticism was not engaged, 
and by no means suspected the dangerous phase to her- 
self into which his internal delirium had passed. It was 
better even for her, she thought, as regarded the preser- 
vation of her secret, to be placed in his than in the cus- 
tody of her father. She could not well conceal the truth 
from him, and he would be sure to insist on its open de- 
claration. Meanwhile time would certainly be gained 
to make Edward acquainted with her uncomfortable 
situation, and obtain his sanction for the necessary means 
of extrication. 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 173 

The result of a brief meditation^ therefore, induced 
Dorothy to stretch her hand cordially to Whitehall, and 
say, ^ I place myself thankfully nnder your protection, 
father, from this unjust rabblement's abuse/ 

' No, not father, not father! T am Omega . not Alpha 
. the completion, not the beginning ! Can she be the 
true Morning Star, yet not know this ?^ murmured the 
dread lunatic to himself, rather than to those who yet 
overheard. 

Nevertheless, he took the proffered hand^ surveyed its 
blue-veined whiteness for some moments with profound 
attention, and said to Sisyphus with a commanding air, 
' Take her to the Parsonage before me, and let certain 
wife-women be summoned to pronounce on the accusa- 
tion of the Witch/ 

The bellows-blower looked extremely disappointed. 
But his consort's fierce scowl was upon him, and there 
was that also in Kingdom-comers manner that indicated 
he meant to be obeyed. 

Firebrace alone attempted any further remonstrance. 
' If the man. Tubal, confesses the seduction of this 
wretched girl, and consents to marry her, will not that 
suffice, Master ?' he groaned. 

' On the contrary/ returned the insane Puritan, with 
relentless energy, ^if he confesseth so, he sliall share her 
punishment, were he ten times Tubal Saul, and son of 
mine own blood '/ 

Dorothy essayed a few words of consolation to her 
father ; but what could she say to the purpose without 
compromising her adored husband ? 

She could only entreat him to patience for a little while, 
and assure him emphatically that all would be well, what- 
ever ill he feared. And then turning from the spectacle 



I74i THE armourer's daughter. 

of the old man's visibly overwhelming anguish and shame, 
with an intensity of almost mortal sorrow in her own 
heart, she disdainfully bade Sisyphus obey his orders, 
and escort her with his club-men to the minister's house. 

There was a universal and singular silence as this 
manoeuvre was effected. But as Dorotliy disappeared 
under her villanous convoy, the people broke again into 
busy mutterings and discourse, and the assemblage pre- 
pared in general to disperse. 

' Merciful Lord !' Firebrace internally ejaculated, ' is 
this the explanation of TubaFs sudden change of feeling 
towards her, and avoidance of the question of their mar- 
riage ? I will go and learn, whether the truth slays me 
as with a sharp sword cleaving the heart, or no !' 

He receded from the company in which he sat, on this 
resolve. 

Maud Grimsorwe, who had remained awhile leaning 
on her stick, and watching him, groaned to herself, ' He 
feels the serpent's tooth, too, now, in his heart, of a 
child's disgrace. Yet, why should I rejoice ? He never 
injured me !' And she was about also to hobble off on 
her return, when a voice hissed in her ear, 'AVitch ! hast 
thou any spell to bring back a truant husband to a fond 
wife's love ? If so, I can pay thee well; I have still some 
hidden gold, of a kind to suit a witch's touch, for it is 
steeped in the blood of a murdered man !' 

It was Sisyphus's wife who thus spoke. 

Maud Grimsorwe paused, looked around, and recog- 
nising the whisperer, observed, in an extremely malicious 
and exasperated tone, ' I have already told thee, thrice, 
NO, unless thou resolvest to obey thy husband's will, and 
humbly to serve his vileness in all things evil. When, 
if so, follow him now, and aid him in his wicked designs 
upon this hapless girl P 



THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS. 175 

'I aid him !' exclaimed the virago. ^^I'll follow and 
tear his eyes out if he but dares but to look upon her so!' 

Whitehall, on his part, had risen from his judgment- 
seat. ' I will follow at once/ he muttered, ' and show 
her the name written on the white stone, to see if there 
is still no understanding of the great mystery in her V 

He was about to follow up his idea in action, when a 
new application detained him. 

' Master,^ said a tall lean man, wrapped in a cloak, with 
a hat slouched almost down to the end of his nose, 
' I come to consult you for an oracle of the Lord. Lo, 
I serve in a pagan house, in the midst of all manner of 
sorceries and iniquities, as master-cook ; and now Bel- 
shazzar is coming to a feast therein, and I am bidden to 
exhaust my skill in banqueting him ! But my soul is 
sick with reprobation, and I now ask of you, who are 
exalted even above my Teacher, whom I came to consult, 
is it lawful for me to remain in the pagan house, and do 
as I am bidden, or no V 

' Good friend,' replied Whitehall, not in the least sur- 
prised by so singular a demand, ' the book of the law is 
as open to thee as to me ; but since thou wilt have it so, 
I will search in it for thee.' 

As he spoke, the ^ Angel' opened a massive Bible, 
which lay beside him for his judgments on the species of 
throne he usually occupied ; and the text he lighted upon 
proved, indeed, of singular aptness to the occasion. 

' Thus sayeth the law,' he declared, in lofty accents, 
' Hovr long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord 
be God, follow him : but if Baal, then follow him,' (1 
Kings, chap, xviii.) 



176 



CHAPTER LXXXV. 

HISTORICAL. 

Shortly after these events in Birmingham, all War- 
Avickshire resounded with intelligence of the approach of 
King Charles the First with a large and royally appointed 
army, on his way through the county, and march towards 
London ; whereby he thought to compel the Parliament 
army to throw itself in his way, from Northampton, and 
put the decision of the great contention to the arbitra- 
ment of battle. 

The emotion caused by these tidings was speedily 
greatly heightened by certain intelligence that it was the 
King's intention to pass through Birmingham on his 
route southward. 

Whether this latter movement would be executed with 
the assent of the townspeople continued for an interval 
doubtful. They kept up their chains and barriers some 
time after it was known that the king had accepted Sir 
Thomas Holte's earnest loyal invitation, and would halt 
and lodge at Aston Hall until he was joined by a portion 
of his adherents from Yorkshire, who were on the march 
thence to join his standard, under the leadership of the 
Marquis of Newcastle. But it then appeared so mani- 
festly impossible on the part of the town, to offer any 
effectual resistance to such overwhelming forces as were 



HISTORICAL. 177 

now concentrated upon it, in the absence of all assistance 
from the Parliament, that the loyalist or timorous por- 
tion of the people prevailed to have it declared they con- 
tinued at peace with their Sovereign, and, confiding in 
his protection, would open their barriers for the passage 
of his army. 

John-the-Rogue and his son were particularly active 
in submission, and they were now in the supremacy in 
the town and its councils, owing chiefly to the fact that 
on the receipt of some additional ill news which reached 
him. Tubal Bromycham^s fever and delirium had re- 
turned, and his life was long considered in danger. Of 
course, in so disabled a condition, mentally and bodily, 
he could have no influence on the course of events. 
Armourer Firebrace, also, overwhelmed with private 
griefs, of a kind truly to absorb all the faculties of an 
average man, took no notice of anything that occurred 
out of the pale of his domestic miseries. 

Oliver CromwelFs labours and intrigues in Birming- 
ham, therefore, came to nought. It was resolved to re- 
move his hastily raised defences, and that a deputation, 
headed by John-the- Rogue, should wait upon the King 
immediately on his arrival at Aston Hall, and assure his 
Majesty of the loyal obedience of the town. 

The Right AVorshipful Knight-Baronet, Sir Thomas 
Holte, on his part, determined to show his sense of the 
high honour vouchsafed him, in a manner that should far 
outdo all his former displays of grandeur and profusion 
in the entertainment of a royal guest, . should, in fact, 
justify his pretensions to a high rank of nobility, and 
possibly forward the notions to which he still clung . of 
an alliance with royalty itself. 

On very slender grounds apparently, excepting that 

VOL. III. N 



178 THE armourer's daughter. 

he heard from his son, who continued with the cavalrjr 
under Prince Rupert^s command^ that he was treated 
with marked kindness and friendship by his Highness. 
A conduct much in contrast to his former demonstra- 
tions, and for which Sir Thomas could only account to 
himself on the supposition that the Prince still cherished 
an attachment for his daughter. 

But with regard to Arabella herself . in spite of all 
the extreme but judicious severity he imagined he ex- 
ercised . it could scarcely be thought Sir Thomas was 
proving a very successful manager. For although the 
prime Royalist nobility and gentry of the entire county 
were expected to assemble at Aston Hall, to receive the 
King, including the ladies of Hagley, it did not appear 
that Sir Thomas intended to release his daughter from 
the extraordinary species of close and solitary imprison- 
ment to which he had consigned her. 

So Richard Grimsorwe ascertained on the very morn- 
ing of the day when the King was expected, with the 
vanguard of his army . chiefly of cavalry. Sir Thomas 
and the distinguished gathering alluded to were to pro- 
ceed on horseback to the borders of the county of 
Warwickshire, at Sutton Coidfield, to escort his Majesty, 
with due honours, to Aston Hall. 

The entire extensive residence was thronged with 
guests and their attendants. The entire household of 
Aston Hall, powerfully reinforced, was in one universal 
bustle of preparation. But the superb beauty, whose 
presence would have been one of the greatest embellish- 
ments of the intended displays, nowhere appeared. 

Grimsorwe ventured to make the observation, in some 
such palavering form, to Sir Thomas, watching his oppor- 
tunitv to encounter him as he returned from a last visit 



HISTORICAL. 179 

to his terrified and nerve-shaken consort, upon whom he 
had heen heaping commands for her enforcement during 
his absence in the cavalcade to Sutton. 

The question was evidently not agreeable, from the 
fierce and irritated tone of the reply. 

' Would you have me let a madwoman loose among 
the guests, and to the very presence of the King ? And 
the girl persists, the only notice she will take of the 
Prince who has honoured her with so much undeserved 
favour, will be to reiterate all she said at your witch- 
grand mother^s hovel, Richard ! And all she asks of me, 
in the midst of her own straw and chains, and narrow, 
grave-like lodgment in the Dark Chamber, is to know 
whether Tubal Bromycham was spared and lives ! I 
shall be obliged, 1 fear, to conceal her obstinate infatua- 
tion, by pretending that I have sent her away in dread 
of our ill neighbouring at Aston, awhile.' 

' But my dear father,^ began Grimsorwe, when Sir 
Thomas pettishly interrupted him. 

* Look that you call me none such, in the presence of 
the King, Dickon ! ' he exclaimed. ' We all know how 
strait-laced his Majesty is in matters of morality ; and 
neither must you, nor can you, take upon yourself my 
sonship without betrayal of the facts, being Edward's 
elder, yet he the inheritor. Nor see I why I should be 
made to blush before my prudish King, to own you as 
the bastard-born you are, of such a mother's race ! ' 

This was hard to swallow, but Grimsorwe made no 
retch at it. He had a revenge in store that sweetened 
all the intermediate gulps of bitterness. 

' I shall claim neither father nor brotherhood, sir, 
without both your good allowances,' he replied. ^ If 
you present me at all to his Majesty's benevolent notice, 

N 2 



180 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

it needs only be as one of your servants that aided in 
warning him of his danger at Nottingham to the best 
of a poor ability. But I know not, Sir Thomas, why 
you should deem it so desperate to bring my sister . 
Miss Holte, I would say . to some reasonableness : 
especially after what I have this day heard/ 

' What have you heard this day ? ^ said Sir Thomas. 
He had a great respect for his crafty son's intelligence^, 
in all mischievous respects. 

' I have heard that on this very day, . being Sunday . 
but the better day the better deed . as you yourself seem 
to think, sir, since you have ordered a bull-baiting in 
Birmingham, to celebrate his Majesty's arrival, and the 
hearty submission of the good people there, . the Angel 
of Birmingham, as he calls himself, and his favourite 
followers, have decreed to set a woman creature on the 
pillory, who is convicted of incontinence with this same 
blacksmith lover of your daughter . for whose sake she 
refused the addresses of a royal prince, and endures such 
grievous extremities^ for one so delicately bred, at your 
unwilling hands ! ' 

' How ! What say you ? Of all good pleasingness, 
say it again ! What woman is this ? ' exclaimed Sir 
Thomas, with the most delighted interest. 

' Even that very wench in contention for whose good 
graces I had the worst part of my recent wrangle with 
your son, sir . whom I must not call my brother any 
more, to get out of the wont of it when the King's 
Majesty may hear ! . even Dorothy Firebrace, the 
Armourer's daughter; an altogether worthless and most 
discreditable slut, who, although plighted in marriage, 
and anticipating its lawful satisfactions with Tubal, her 
betrothed^ has been detected by him in her intrigue with 



HISTORICAL. 181 

Edward (I blame him not, the chance was as wellnigh 
mine), and cast oif by him to the rigour of the Birming- 
ham Puritans. Nor is that all the worst of it ! ' 

And the infamous calumniator proceeded to repeat 
his grandmother's perjuries, instigated by himself, re- 
specting Dorothy's pretended criminal projects to preserve 
herself from the consequence of her misdemeanour. 

From Grimsorwe's now more precise statements to Sir 
Thomas, it appeared that, faithful to her word through 
every extremity, the wife of Edward Holte was in reality 
in danger of being exposed to the scorn and resentment 
of the populace of Birmingham, in the most disgraceful 
form of punishment, on the infamous charges of which 
she was entirely innocent. Nay, there was even reason 
to expect that, according to the extraordinary rules of 
discipline put in force by the fanatic party in the town, 
her life might probably be sacrificed. 

Minister Whitehall had solemnly adjudged her guilty, 
and condemned her to death. Her father himself, Grim- 
sorwe stated, had abandoned all hope or intention of 
succouring her, on its being ascertained that she was in 
reality likely at no distant period to become a mother; 
while, equally disgusted with her infamy and infidelity. 
Tubal Bromycham feigned to continue too ill to leave 
his couch or make any effort on her behalf. 

Sir Thomas Holte was most extraordinarily delighted 
with these tidings of what was represented to him as the 
full exposure of the vileness of a woman whom he him- 
self had long regarded, in vague but formidable lights, 
as a hindrance to a portion of his own most favourite 
projects, though he had no suspicion as yet how com- 
pletely so. Full information on this point was reserved 
for a most decisive and overwhelming revelation. 



182 THE armourer's daughter. 

On the contrary, Grimsorwe affected to speak of the 
.whole disastrous affair with regret, in consequence of 
his aged grandmother having been compelled, in her 
own vindication, to figure in so unpleasant an affair, and 
which was certain to bring so much needlessly additional 
illwill upon her. 

The only satisfaction he admitted himself to derive 
from it all was that his brother (he called him so again) 
would now be convinced of the truly infamous character 
and conduct of the woman, for whose sake chiefly he 
had quarrelled with Grimsorwe himself; not knowing 
how justified the boldness of his attempts had been by 
the bad repute of the girl, and the impudent encourage- 
ment she had extended to him on their very first en- 
counter in Aston Park, until she learned whose relation 
he was, and the likelihood of exposure in consequence. 

The deceived old man, wickedly and cruelly rejoicing 
in the whole grievous revelation, hastened, as Grimsorwe 
had expected he would, at once with it to the truly bar- 
barous and unjustifiable confinement in which he had 
placed his unfortunate daughter . under the unfounded 
and tyrannous pretence that she required restraining as 
madwoman. 

To this day the Dark Chamber at Aston Hall, situated 
high in its roof, near the central dome, and worthy of 
its name from its being absolutely lightless and window- 
less, retains the sad tradition of Arabella Holte^s in- 
human seclusion there. 

It may be seen by any explorer who ventures up a 
final steep, ladder-like flight of stairs, and stoops to 
enter a black and noisome cell, formed by a slope of a 
portion of the roofing of Aston Hall. Such a cell, in- 
deed, as even the most unfortunate real victims of in- 



HISTORICAL. 183 

sanity in that age were but rarely consigned to, and 
alone of itself capable of injuring the mental faculties of 
a human being given over to its gloom and solitude, . 
not to mention the physical miseries and inconvenience 
of an abode in a chamber scarcely high enough to allow 
a child of twelve years to stand upright in any part. 

In spite, however, of all the astounding information 
to Tubal Bromycham's disadvantage. Sir Thomas had it 
now in his power to divulge, and his commands to the 
captive to leave her dungeon and shine forth once more 
to recall a royal lover to her feet, he descended in a still 
.more exasperated mood than he had mounted. And he 
informed the expectant Grimsorwe, that ^'the mad- 
woman " only persisted more obstinately than ever in 
her trust in the blacksmith^s fidelity, and declared she 
.would only believe her own senses to the contrary. ' As 
if, said Sir Thomas, ' I would trust her in Birmingham, 
in the midst of its rabblement, to see the wench in her 
pillory.' 

' There is consolation, however/ said Grimsorwe, ' in 
the certainty that on receipt of the intelligence we can 
communicate concerning his paramour, my brother Ed- 
ward will be no longer unwilling to complete his marriage 
with the Lord Keeper's heiress ; and as she will be op- 
portunely at the Hall here, I would advise no further 
delay to be made in it. 'Tis scarcely possible to con- 
ceive how far his infatuation for the Birmingham wench 
may else carry him.' 

' It shall be so,' said Sir Thomas, grimly ; ^ my Lord 
Keeper will be with the King, and will propose it to 
him at once, for the sake of the heirship of my lands 
and name, as well as his, before these wars fairly begin. 
I shall not be disappointed there at least. But now for 



184 THE armourer's daughter. 

some brief final conference with the master-cook, on his 
dainties to be prepared for the royal table, and then to 
horse with my noble company, and to Sutton away.' 

Grimsorwe willingly summoned the master-cook to 
attend his father, and so expedite his departure. 

Adam Blackjack came. Sir Thomas, who was great 
in such matters, reiterated to him a variety of injunc- 
tions and commands on the preparation of the magnifi- 
cent banquet he had determined to give the King and 
his chief retinue on his arrival. Above all, he recom- 
mended the utmost punctuality to the hour at which he 
had ascertained it would please his Majesty to dine, and 
at which it would be practicable to have everything in 
readiness. But on this latter point Sir Thomas some- 
what good-humouredly remarked he was satisfied his 
master-cook would not fail. He had never kjiown him 
to do so, he said, and it was not likely he would do so 
in this instance; without concern he would wager his 
very life on Adam Blackjack's fidelity to arrangement. 

Daring this harangue, Grimsorwe noted with curiosity 
the inexplicable smile that kept quivering over the 
countenance of the chief cook of Aston Hall, and the 
expression of stubborn will and resolve, rather than of 
obedience, with which he listened to his master's orders. 

It was a purpose of his own, however, that induced 
Grimsorwe to detain Adam Blackjack after Sir Thomas 
had at last taken his departure. 

A purpose which it seemed required extraordinary 
secrecy and privacy from the precautions he took, but 
which need not yet be elucidated. But it should be 
stated, Adam Blackjack listened with the same mysteri- 
ous smile and gloomy inattention he had bestowed on 
Sir Thomas Holte's directions. And having heard all 



HISTORICAL. 185 

that it was wished he should hear, replied that he would 
rather Master Grimsorwe should bring the papers he 
wished him to sign after the banquet was served, as his 
fingers trembled so with anxiety at the time that he 
thought he could hardly write legibly. 

'At best, I am a poor scholar, Master Grimsorwe/ he 
said, with a strange laugh ; ' and in signing one's soul 
over to the devil, one should be particular to be plainly 
legible ! Howbeit, you offer me a fair price for the 
merchandise ! And though your grandmother, the witch, 
cursed me this very morn for exhorting her to turn from 
her damnable ways, and take example from what she 
should see and hear of me henceforth, I freely forgive 
her, and own that five hundred pounds, secured on your 
inheritance of Aston Hall, is an ample recompense for 
scrawling my name to an old yellow marriage certificate 
. where you are right to say it ought to have been placed 
thirty years ago ! ' 



186 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER LXXXVI. 

KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 

Never since Aston Hall was a structure had so bustling 
a day fallen to the lot of its inmates as this of the ex- 
pected arrival of King Charles the First within its walls. 

All was hurry^ and bustle^ and confusion. Servants 
rushed about, overthrowing one another and what they 
carried, in their extreme diligence. Important guests 
arrived from all quarters, scarcely noticed. The depu- 
tation of the townsfolk of Birmingham, headed by John- 
the-Rogue and the Chief Bailiff Cooper, were literally 
not asked into the house, but quietly submitted to the 
indignity of awaiting his Majesty^s arrival in the open 
space before it. True, it was not numerous, everybody 
excusing himself that by any means could. Perhaps even 
Cooper would not have cared to present himself, had not 
his wife insisted he should ; and to enforce her decrees, 
and prompt his utterances, accompanied him in person 
. the only lady of the town who was of the party. But 
Dame Cooper had another motive for this, besides the 
necessity of showing her duty to the Sovereign, and that 
she and her husband were no participators in the disloyal 
doings of Birmingham. 

Richard Grimsorwe was perhaps the only inhabitant 
of Aston Hall, with the exception of the unhappy im- 



KING CBARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 187 

prisoned young lady of it, who took no concern in the 
general movement. He remained secluded in his own 
chamber the whole morning, engaged in a somewhat 
lawyer-like occupation, which, however, suspiciously re- 
Bembled that of a forger ! . imitating from certain old 
documents before him another handwriting, on scraps 
of tobacco-steeped parchment, that seemed prepared for 
the purpose of also looking old. 

It was long before Grimsorwe succeeded in this object 
completely to his satisfaction. He then most dexterously 
transferred a seal from one of the old documents to the 
new imitation . and proceeded to make a deliberate and 
careful toilette. 

Time had, however, passed unconsciously during the 
absorbing task he had been engaged in, and Grimsorwe 
was startled into haste by hearing the bells of Aston 
Church ring out a merry peal of welcome for the expected 
great arrival. He managed, nevertheless, to get down 
to the hall front in time to witness it ; which it was an 
object of some importance for him to effect, that he 
might draw conclusions as to the position of persons and 
events. He took good care to carry the documents, so 
laboriously prepared, secreted in the breast of his doublet. 

He found Lady Holte in the hall, with a number of 
other ladies, risitors of the chief families of the county, 
whose husbands and sons formed part of the cavalcade 
gone to meet the King. Two facts struck Grimsorwe 
then at once. Neither the Lord Keeper Lyttelton^s 
wife nor his daughter, Edward Holte^s betrothed, was 
present ; and that the eyes of the unhappy lady were red 
as if with weeping . magnificently arrayed in her quality 
of hostess of Aston Hall though she was, . doubtless, 
for her daughter's sake, whose prison-door she had pro- 



188 

bably visited during the tyrannical father's absence. She 
could not enter it, Sir Thomas having conveyed away 
with him the key of the strong lock. 

Meanwhile the esplanade before the mansion presented 
a sufficiently gay and crowded appearance, Sir Thomas's 
tenantry and the villagers of Aston being all assembled 
there in their Sunday smarts ; not to mention the depu- 
tation from Birmingham, which stood huddled together, 
with humbled and even alarmed looks, along the garden- 
wall enclosure. 

A discharge of musketry announced the entrance of 
the royal cavalcade into Aston Park ; and very shortly 
afterwards the glittering cuirasses and waving banners of 
Prince Rupert's cuirassiers appeared in sight. 

In the midst of these Richard Grimsorwe speedily dis- 
cerned his father and the royal commander named, riding 
side by side, in company with Count O'Taafe, and seem- 
ingly on the best possible terms with each other. Grim- 
sorwe augured from this that his Highness persisted in 
his liking for Miss Holte, and had probably been renew- 
ing his proposals for an alliance to the ambitious sire of 
Arabella. 

Arrived at the esplanade, Rupert's cuirassiers faced 
about, as did Sir Thomas and the Prince, . the former, 
however, alighting to receive his Sovereign with a suit- 
able mark of homage. 

King Charles and his immediate retinue followed on 
this advance. 

The King himself was in a plain dress of black velvet, 
with the broad blue ribbon of the Garter over his breast, 
and a wide-brimmed hat, with a plume of feathers waving 
from a brooch, or agraffe, of sparkling diamonds. He 
was mounted on a magnificent white charger, of the 



KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 189 

towering size and strength still familiar to modern eyes 
iu the portraits of the monarch by Rubens. 

His Majesty was surrounded by a brilliant retinue of 
noblemen and gentlemen, among whom figured his newly- 
appointed geueral-in-chief, a Scotchman, and veteran 
leader of the wars of Gustavus Adqlphus, recently created 
Earl of Lindesay. Lord Falkland was among this re- 
tinue, wearing his characteristic expression of melan- 
choly thoughtfulness greatly deepened, while, on the con- 
trary, the King's gravity appeared much diminished, and 
he was talking cheerfully, and even laughing, with the 
flighty young Earl of Denbigh, who rode, as Master of 
the Horse, close by his side. But Grimsorwe^s devour- 
ing envy and hatred left him only eyes for the fact that 
Edward Holte rode at the other bridle, seemingly in 
great favour and notice with Charles, who had honoured 
his entertainers at Aston Hall, so far as to command 
that the guard on his visit there should be the troop 
commanded by its loyal young heir. 

Yet Grimsorwe could easily discern that, in spite of 
these marks of distinction Edward looked singularly ab- 
sent and brooding in mind ; not sufiSciently so, however, 
the unnatural brother thought, to have learned the dis- 
astrous news of Birmingham. Probably he was only 
surprised and disquieted at receiving no intelligence from 
his wife from the town of late, ample precautions having 
been taken to prevent all communication between Do- 
rothy and her friends, of every kind and degree, since 
she had been immured a captive at the Parsonage, and 
guarded by the myrmidons of Sisyphus, the bellows- 
blower. Edward's appointment to attend the King per- 
sonally would equally likely have prevented explanations 
between the father and son, not to mention that Grim- 



190 

sorwe had strongly recommended Sir Thomas not to let 
fall any intelligence on the subject till the day was over, 
and the ^ vile wench's^ disgrace and punishment (so the 
villain called her) assured. 

In this manner escorted, King Charles the First ar- 
rived at x\ston Hall, amidst the joyful shouts of the 
loyalist rustics, timidly echoed by the Birmingham de- 
putation, who seemed afraid even to give offence by 
proffering homage ; the beating of drums, the blasts of 
trumpets, the clamour of the village joy-bells, and a re- 
newed discharge of musketry. 

The King seemed to take little notice of the demon- 
stration until he reached Sir Thomases standing-place. 
He then slightly raised his plumed hat, and bowed once 
or twice to the shouting throngs, but with a coldness and 
severity of manner that rather resembled repulse than 
acceptance, and strangely quelled the effusion. 

Sir Thomas bade his Sovereign welcome to his ' poor 
house of Aston ^ in a somewhat too long and elaborate 
speech ; but to which Charles, a great stickler for form, 
listened with unruffled patience, if not attention, and Sir 
Thomas was further delighted at the conclusion of his 
harangue by the monarch's emphatic observation . 'Good 
wine needs no bush, Sir Thomas Holte, and, despite your 
humble phrasing of its merits, your fine new house praises 
itself to any judging eye. I am right glad to see such a 
taste for noble architecture, and handsome appointments 
of all sorts to life, arising among my nobility and gentry, 
now that the old castle day is so wellnigh over. But, 
indeed, those served to little other purpose than as hiding- 
holes and fortresses of rebellion, to which palaces like 
these, open on all sides to the honest sunshine, cannot 
easily be turned. I see my nephew is in the right in his 



KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 191 

reports of the beauty and stateliness of Aston Hall, and 
that it would make a fair mansion to lodge an Earl . 
the which your own and your son^s services will, I trust, 
enforce upon us to present to this neighbourhood. For 
certain, the air is very bright and fresh hereabout, and 
it was a wise carpenter who said to you. Build here. It 
has given me a joyful and eager appetite for my dinner, 
and I hope your cook is one who studies his hours punc- 
tually, and that we may depend on exactness to the noon- 
day for our meal. There is a Spanish proverb, " A good 
stomach should be fed when His a dog, not when His a 
wolf!"' 

' V\\ wager on my cook to a half-minute quartered, 
sire, if he hath no other merit ! Will it please you now 
to alight, and enter the house, which is more ray King's 
than mine henceforth ?' Sir Thomas replied, reverently 
placing himself on one knee, and taking the royal stirrup 
to assist in the process indicated. Nor was this humility 
considered in those days an unfitting degradation on the 
part of a well-born host to his Prince. 

Edward Holte had meanwhile taken the King's bridle, 
with a deep bend, almost to his own stirrup, as he did so, 
and Charles alighted rather heavily as if tired of his long 
ride. All the noblemen and gentlemen in the retinue 
immediately did the same, baring their heads to the 
royal glance. 

Slightly acknowledging the homage, Charles cour- 
teously requested his host to rise and be his escort into 
the house ; where, after some refreshments in a private 
chamber, he said he should be very willing to receive the 
duteous homage and respects of Sir Thomas Holte's 
friends and neighbours of the county of Warwick, agree- 
able to his request, who had assembled to assure his 
Maiesty of their devotion to his person and cause. 



192 THE armourer's daughter. 

' But we will be brief as may be in the ceremony^ Sir 
Thomas ; for as I have told you, I have a hunter's appe- 
tite for my dinner, so that they who can remember my 
father's onsets at Theobald's after a day's stag-hunt, will 
think his jovial time come back again !' said Charles, 
good-humouredly ; and placing his hand, in its em- 
broidered gauntlet glove, affably on the baronet's tall 
shoulder, he added, ' Let us lose no further time here, 
at all events. Lead on, Sir Thomas, and let me make the 
acquaintance of my Lady Countess of Birmingham, that 
is to be ; and of your fair daughter, of whom such fine 
reports have reached us that we have a curiosity as to 
contemplate one of nature's masterpieces, in her beauty 
and grace/ 

Charles nevertheless pronounced the latter compli- 
mentary words with a slight frown and rather disturbed 
and inquiring glance at Prince Rupert, who coloured 
deeply, and, to careful observation, glanced with angry 
suspicion at Count O'Taafe. The last pretended to look 
quite unconscious of the meaning flashed at him. 

Sir Thomas himself was considerably embarrassed in 
his reply, though probably arranged before in his mind. 
'I trust and fully believe my daughter will be able to 
present herself to your ^Majesty's most gracious, notice 
during some portion of your sojourn here. But I left 
her in the morning sick in her chamber of some woman- 
ish ailment, which the mere mention of your royal wish 
to see her will cure.' 

' Perchance not so. ^'omen's complaints are some- 
times obstinate, and we must let no grass grow under 
White Buckingham's hoofs between here and London, 
Sir Thomas,' the King replied, seemingly not dissatisfied 
with the excuse. ' But who are these fellows craning 



KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 193 

their necks so eagerly towards us, as if they meant to 
pickaxe up the ground with their noses on our way?^ 

' They are fellows, sir/ replied the vindictive baronet, 
' who should have ropes at full stretch round those same 
stiff necks of theirs. being a deputation from seditious 
Birmingham, sent to tell you that finding they cannot 
help themselves otherwise, they have opened the town 
to the passage of your troops, after doing all that trea- 
son and traitors could to your ^lajesty's disparagement 
and harm/ 

Charles knit his brows. 

' I have heard much of the misdoings of the Birming- 
hamers in these respects. Sir Thomas,^ he answered drily. 
' But how is it your son speaks up rather for them, and 
with so much earnestness that he has won from me a 
promise of pardon and remission of all offence offered by 
the rebellious town ? And at present,' he added, with 
marked significance on the words, ' it behoves us to show 
ourselves a king of our word. A time may come for 
these as well as all other traitors and traitor- abettors 
in our realms. But I must speak them fair awhile ; 
hearken, Falkland, if I have not caught some touch of 
those silvery notes of yours of peace.' 

So saying, the King, in a most gracious and seemingly 
free and willing manner, stepped forward towards the 
quivering and shrinking Birminghamers, who imme- 
diately cast themselves most reverently on their knees 
before him. And John-the-Rcgue, as chief of the de- 
putation, was about to make some striking commence- 
ment of a speech, when Charles courteously interrupted 
him. 

' There is no need to profess your duties, sirs,' he said, 
very affably ; ^ your presence and humility sufficiently 

VOL. III. O 



194 THE armourer's daughter. 

guarantee them, and we can well believe what your town 
has done amiss was at the instigation and by the mad- 
ness of a few. But we have no leisure now to make 
inquiries, and separate the black sheep from the white, 
or even the piebald. This in general only. You may 
confirm to your town all our assurances of favour and 
protection, while it continues to show itself so worthy of 
both ; insomuch that we declare, and bid all who hear 
us note the fact, we will punish with death any soldier, 
or even any officer of our army, who shall dare to offer 
the slightest injury or insult in Birmingham, while we 
abide hereabouts, or pass onward through it.' 

The deputation burst into a complete cackle of thanks- 
giving ejaculations; during which Charles bowed, and 
with a smile full of gracious insincerity, withdrew, and 
resumed his walk beside Sir Thomas Holte to the en- 
trance of the mansion. 

Edward was following in the crowding attendance 
that then also resumed its march, when, on a sudden, 
he felt his sleeve plucked. He looked round, and there 
stood Dame Cooper, looking as red as a peony with ex- 
citement and agitation. ' Oh, Master Edward ! Master 
Holte ! mercy on us all !' she exclaimed. ^My last hope 
in you and your soldiers and the King's goodness is 
gone ! Oh, that poor unhappy girl ! Oh, poor Dorothy 
Firebrace, all is lost for her and you and the unborn 
innocent, your child ! ' 

Turning deadly pale, Edward demanded an explana- 
tion of these extraordinary ejaculations; and the good 
dame, drawing the luckless husband of Dorothy Fire- 
brace aside, overwhelmed him with the shocking revela- 
tions of her pressing and dreadful danger, and the ap- 
parent hopelessness of all redemption from it since the 



KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 195 

King had guaranteed so completely the town from any 
interference in its cruel and unlawful doings. 

Meanwhile Charles proceeded to the entrance of Aston 
Hall, where a new and still more imposing ceremonial 
of reception awaited him on the part of the lady of the 
mansion and her female company. Nothing could be 
seen for some time on all sides but descending and 
puflSng sacques of the richest stuffs, curtseying to the 
ground with their fair owners' homage; fluttering fans, 
and waving plumes. 

Bestowing the great honour of a salute from the royal 
lips of Lady Holte, whom he greeted as his most kind 
and courteous hostess, Charles brought the tears in a 
full gush to the poor woman's eyes by declaring how 
grieved he was to hear of her daughter's indisposition. 
But luckily or unluckily, we scarce can say which, for 
the Holtes, Grimsorwe now thrust himself so promi- 
nently forward that the King's attention was removed 
from a somewhat suspicious consideration of his hostess's 
display of emotion towards the intruder. 

'Who is this gentleman, Sir Thomas?' he inquired, 
with visible surprise and distaste. ' Or perhaps we 
ought rather to ask of my Lord Keeper, as he seems a 
graduate of the long robe/ 

' May it please your Majesty, I am that Elder brother 
of Edward Holte who had the happiness and honour to 
share his risks in the hint conveyed to you at Notting- 
ham, which so nigh concerned the safety of your royal 
person,' Grimsorwe replied, with wonderful forwardness 
and audacity, and in obvious defiance of Sir Thomas's 
commands on the subject of their untoward relation- 
ship. 

But he scarcely reaped the fruit he designed. Sir 
o 2 



196 

Thomas blushed scarlet, and looked fiercely and me- 
nacingly at him, -while the King sternly and shortly 
remarked, 'I have heard a dififerent account of that 
matter, Master Grimsorwe,^ and passed him with a visi- 
ble expression of disdain and resentment. 

'Ha! my sweet brother has been poisoning me with 
the King, also, in the honey-droppings of his lips, no 
doubt ; but he will find business of his own as well worth 
attention, by-and-by,^ Grimsorwe internally ejaculated ; 
and after a moment^s pause of reflection, boldly followed 
in the general movement accompanying the King. 

Charles offered his arm to Lady Holte, who, trembling 
all over with nervous excitement, and hardly knowing 
what she answered to the monarch's gracious compli- 
ments on the well-ordering and stateliness of her hus- 
band's residence, guided him to the suite of chambers 
intended for his abode in Aston Hall, and which still 
bears his ill-starred royal name. 

The fine proportions and gorgeous decorations of the 
apartments assigned to the King were indeed deserving 
of all commendation ; but Sir Thomas was too much 
exasperated with the recent occurrence to take that plea- 
sure he otherwise might in his Sovereign's praises and 
thanks for the magnificent accommodation provided him. 
And he, too, was glad when, the duty of escorting the 
King thither in state being performed, he was at liberty 
to withdraw his attendance, and seek an opportunity to 
vent some portion of his angry feeling on the presump- 
tuous and disobedient bastard. 

' Come with me, Dick Grimsorwe,' he said, as he 
passed him, in no conciliatory tones; 'I have a crow to 
pick with you, my lad. And you must not think I will 
suffer an unlawful brat like you to plague and beard me 
like my lady's heir.' 



KING CHARLES THE FIRST AT ASTON HALL. 197 

'Whither are we going, then, sir^ for these explana- 
tions?' Grimsorwe replied, in gloomy but resolute ac- 
cents. 

*To the kitchens. The King is hungry, and I must 
see if Adam Blackjack has all in good readiness; and I 
promise you, Master Grimsorwe, I mean to waste no 
more time than I need, on so busy a day, to rebuke 
your insolence,' Sir Thomas briefly replied; and in truth 
he opened the side door which conducts from the hall of 
Aston Hall to the underground offices of the mansion. 

Grimsorwe followed his vexed sire in, who closed the 
door instantly after them. 

'And now, sir,' continued the baronet, pale with 
anger, 'tell me who you think you are, so audaciously 
to violate my orders to my teeth?' 

' "What I said I am . Edward Holte's elder brother ; 
and if T had my true claims recognized, Sir Thomas 
Holte's only lawful son and heir.' 

' Are you a madman ?' returned Sir Thomas, gazing 
at this novel pretendant with some actual suspicion that 
the case was even so. 

' I am no madman,' Grimsorwe sternly replied ; ' I 
have discovered within these few hours the proofs of my 
lawful birth, and of your marriage with my mother. Sir 
Thomas Holte, . consequently, the bastardy of all others 
who bear your name by your pretended marriage with 
the lady you now call your wife. Your wicked agent 
and accomplice, Adam Blackjack, stung by remorse, has 
confessed all, and placed the marriage certificate of Maud 
Grimsorwe and Sir Thomas Holte, Knight-baronet, duly 
witnessed, but surreptitiously removed from the parish 
books of Sutton Church, in my hands. And before the 
King leaves Aston Hall I will demand justice, and the 



198 THE armourer's daughter. 

restoration of my rights, and submit the proofs to his 
royal judgment and decision/ 

' Mad, then, thou art, bastard-liar ! ' almost shouted 
Sir Thomas Holte. ' Or, rather, thou art even as black 
a villain as Prince Rupert declares you in the witchcraft 
affair, and my only objection is removed to the process 
necessary, he himself tells me, to remove the spell from 
Arabella. The witch herself must be compelled by tor- 
ments and flames to undo her work, and your beldam 
granny shall lie in close custody within an hour V 

' I care not ; I can easily show you have but done it 
to invalidate, as much as in you lies, her signature to 
the long-lost marriage lines, found in my murdered 
mother's bosom, and secreted by your villainous accom- 
plice, Sir Thomas Holte. Come to him . hear if he 
will deny it ! And let me tell you, Sir Thomas, you 
will find it more to your honour and renown to admit 
my claims than to cling to Edward Holte as your heir, 
of whom I have certain proof that he is positively 
married to the infamous mechanic woman of Birming- 
ham, Armourer Firebrace's daughter . who is this day 
set in the pillory for incontinence with many others, 
and crimes projected more abhorrent still ! ' 

' Married ! ]My son Edward married to a mechanic 
of Birmingham's daughter ! ' exclaimed Sir Thomas, 
aghast at the words. 

' Know you Edward's handwriting ? And what says 
he here ? ' returned Grimsorwe, producing the stolen 
document, of which Sisyphus, the bellows-blower, had 
possessed himself. 

Sir Thomas Holte could not prevent himself from 
taking the papers, and running his dismayed glance over 
its contents. 



KING CHARLES THE TIRST AT ASTON HALL. 199 

' It is false ! It is another piece of witchcraft ! It 
is a forgery ! ' he yelled ; maddening, nevertheless, with 
the conviction that what he saw and read was real. 

'Ask Edward himself; he will not deny the fact, 
in hopes to indnce you to take his seduceress into com- 
passion and relief from the dangers that encompass her !' 
jsneered the fiendish grandson of Maud Grimsorwe. 

' I ! ^lay she perish in them, as she has so fully 
deserved ! But, good heavens ! all this is impossible ; 
or it has been penned simply to quiet a clamorous 
woman's entreaties . meaning nothing, meaning no- 
thing ! It must . it shall be impossible ! Great 
heaven ! just when the Prince has made a formal de- 
mand for my daughter's hand, and hopes to win his 
royal uncle's consent to their union, if only she can be 
recovered from the delusion of a sorceress ! But T will 
put the matter to the proof at once. My Lord Keeper 
and I have indeed already agreed upon it, who was so 
offended with Edward's backwardness that he avows it 
is by his order his lady and daughter are not at Aston 
Hall, and shall not come until Edward brings Mistress 
Penelope himself from Hagley as his bride. He shall 
go thither at once on the errand, or . or . what shall 
I do if all my children turn out such cancers in my 
flesh ? ' 

'You will find I have spoken the truth, and less 
than the truth,' Grimsorwe replied with fierce compo- 
sure. ' Meanwhile, Sir Thomas Holte, I would advise 
you to compose your angry spirit, and consider wiselier 
to do myself, your true and eldest son, and my mother's 
memory, the scant justice in your power now.' 

^ Ha ! is it the madman, Adam Blackjack, say you, 
has put this frenzy in your head ?' returned Sir Thomas, 



200 

ragingly. ' By the King's life ! I will know the why 
and wherefore, and beat it out of his own narrow skull, 
if need be ! . only that we have so much need of his 
skill to-day, and the King desires his dinner to be punc- 
tually served. But I will speak with the Anabaptist 
lunatic (so I know he has become) quietly, until I make 
him own his frenzy. Come with me, crazed witch's 
grandson, and you shall see if Adam Blackjack dares 
maintain this false invention to my face.' 

Grimsorwe was extremely undesirous this interview 
should take place before he had assured himself of Adam 
Blackjack's signature to his forged certificate. But still 
more apprehensive of what might be revealed in a pri- 
vate interview between his father and the changeably- 
excited master-cook, he followed on Sir Thomas's ex- 
asperated advance. 



201 



CHAPTER LXXXVII. 



MURDER. 



Rather to the surprise of both parties in this aUerca- 
tion, no steaming odours of the intended magnificent 
banquet came to their olfactories as they descended to 
the kitchen offices. Perhaps they did not notice the 
circumstance much in the absorption of their minds at 
first, but it could not be avoided when, opening the 
massive doors upon the immense cooking ranges of 
Aston Hall, everytliing appeared silent, cold, and deso- 
late. 

No great fires, no smoking roasts, no bubbling boils, 
no busy kitchen-men and kitchen-maids. All silent, 
cold, and desolate ! The only person, in fact, that ap- 
peared was Adam Blackjack himself, seated on one of 
the dressers, with crossed arms and closed eyes, mutter- 
ing unintelligibly to himself, and with a Bible open 
widely on his knee. 

Sir Thomas imagined himself under the influence 
of some delirious dream, and it was rather in the hope 
to rouse himself than the cook that he strode up 
to him, and shook him violently until he opened his 
eyes. 

' God o' mercy, what is the meaning of all this. 



202 

villain ? Where are the preparations for the King's 
banquet, . the game, the stews, the comfitures? The 
stag roasted ^Yhole, the . the . where are all the 
kitchen-menials gone ? Why are you glaring thus at 
me?' 

^ Hands off, uncircumcised of heart and soul ! Hands 
off. Sir Thomas Holte ! Unbelieving Ahab ! touch me 
not, but receive the testimony unto the Lord, which, 
behold ! I have this day taken up against thee, and thy 
.wicked house, and Belshazzar the King, who comes to 
defile and shatter the sacred vessels and utensils of 
Israel, for his ungodly appetites,' the madman replied, 
springing down from his seat and violently shaking off 
his master's astonished grasp. ^ Yea !' he continued, in 
a tone of frenzied excitement and exultation, ' I have 
this day cast off for ever the yoke of Babylon from 
about my neck, and I have received the oracle of the 
Lord, and done even as He hath bidden me by the 
mouth of His inspired servant and angel in Birmingham, 
Wrath-of-God Whitehall that was, but is now openly 
proclaimed Kingdom-Come ! And I have sent all the 
men and maidens of my service, with all the viands 
gathered for the banquet . yea, all the fat oxen, the 
luscious venisons, the sleek muttons, the hares, the 
fowls, the golden carp, the glittering trout, the rich 
pies, and confectioneries, and jellies . in carts into Bir- 
mingham town, pretending unto the witnesses that it 
was by your orders, and that the King's Majesty would 
dine with the townsfolk in their Guild. I have done 
my worst, humanly speaking, and now, Sir Thomas 
Holte, do yours ! ' 

'Abominable madman!' roared out Sir Thomas, frantic 
with rage, and collaring the cook as if he meant to 



MURDER. 203 

strangle him. ' And it is yon also -who pretend to wit- 
ness that I was married to the daughter of a vile witch, 
and that Richard Grimsorwe is my first-born true and 
lawful inheritor ! ' 

' No, unbeliever; no !' yelled the cook, in return. ' I 
take up my testimony also against the witch and her 
devil offspring, and all their works, and I tell you the 
man Richard has been long conspiring the death of your 
son Edward ; is in league with the Anabaptists of Bir- 
mingham ; conspired the destruction of your King Bel- 
shazzar himself! At this very moment I witness, he 
has in his pocket a forged certificate of his mother^s 
marriage, to which he wants me perjuriously to afiix my 
signature, having also forged that of the parish clerk of 
Sutton . dead Feldon's . to the lying document ! Search 
him for it ! But, as to me, I go this instant to the full 
presence of Belshazzar, and all his wicked nobles and 
servants, openly to denounce Richard Grimsorwe^s trea- 
sons and malefactions aud Avitch bastardy, and so com- 
plete the confusion of the whole Babylonian whoredom 
assembled under these roofs, and then . take whatever 
martyrdom the Lord God of Israel may please to assign 
me in his cause ! ' 

' That shall you never ! Or, by heaven, take your 
martyrdom at once, then . and thus ! ' Richard Grim- 
sorwe yelled ; and either yielding to an uncontrollable 
impulse of the furious passions he inherited, though 
usually under the control of hypocrisy and artifice, or 
driven to frenzy by dread of the exposure threatened, 
he snatched up a cleaver from the dresser, where it had 
remained by chance after the general clearance made 
by the insane cook, and struck with such remorseless 
butcher rage at Adam Blackjack's skull, that he ac- 



204 THE armourer's daughter. 

tually clove the unfortunate man's head in halves on his 
shoulders. 

Sir Thomas Holte's horror must be imagined, not 
described. No pen could do the slightest justice to 
such a concussion of mind. 



205 



CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 

THE GREAT GALLERY AT ASTON HALL. 

Meanwhile the member of this disastrous race, against 
whom the now murderer's artifices had been so specially 
directed, drank full of the bitter chalice forced on his 
lips. Dame Cooper held it up ; and, truth to say, the 
good woman . little occasion as she had to exaggerate . 
at all events spared nothing in the way of woeful revealing 
to him. 

Edward Holte thus acquired the full knowledge of the 
overwhelming calamity threatening him. His beauteous 
Dorothy . his loving bride, his adored wife, the mother 
of his unborn child . was condemned to be exposed 
during the whole day on the pillory, upon charges the 
most infamous and groundless, and had accepted her 
doom of disgrace and suffering rather than betray her 
plighted promises and faith to him. But, indeed, as 
Dame Cooper represented it, Dorothy dared not pro- 
duce the evidence of her marriage, which must render 
impossible the detestable accusation of the "Witch of 
Aston, while in the custody of Grimsorwe's atrocious 
agents, who would infallibly seize upon and destroy it 
before it could reach the public cognizance. 

And this danger was so imminent, so pressing . at 
hand, in point of fact . for at noonday, to which it 



206 THE armourer's daughter. 

\v anted scarcely a quartei" of an hour, Dorothy Fire- 
brace was to be led forth to her degrading and unjust 
punishment. 

Yet, what hope of salvation or rescue could there be ? 

Not only was Tubal Bromycham disabled, according 
to Dame Cooper's report, by his wound and weakness 
from rendering any active assistance ; he was so ex- 
asperated and grief-struck by the intelligence of Doro- 
thy's supposed disgrace and betrayal by the friend in 
whom he had trusted, that he refused to make any 
attempt to rescue his supposed paramour from the penal- 
ties of her folly and wickedness. And besides, he had 
been almost frenzied by indignation at the vile part im- 
puted to himself in the affair, and fancied that to labour 
at Dorothy's rescue would be to confess the villany he 
was accused of, and ruin him for ever in the opinion of 
the lady who was now enduring so much in his behalf. 
But even to him, Dame Cooper declared, she had not 
dared to confide the truth, knowing that the fanatic 
party were now completely in the ascendancy in the 
town, and that any attempt at rescue with such means 
as Tubal possessed, would but send him to his own 
destruction. 

As for Firebrace, the old man thoroughly believed in 
his daughter's guilt, and was so infuriated by the con- 
viction that he declared he himself would be the execu- 
tioner to lead her up to the pillory. And when Dame 
Cooper had left Birmingham, availing herself of the 
opportunity of accompanying the loyalist deputation, the 
hateful instrument was in course of erection in the 
market-place, at the same time with the preparations 
for a bull-baiting, proclaimed in honour of the King's 
arrival. 



THE GREAT GALLERY AT ASTOX HALL. 207 

No help could therefore be looked for in Birmingham. 
But out of it, what ? When the King had so openly, on 
his royal faith, taken the town under his protection, and 
had prohibited his troops, under penalties so severe, to 
offer the people there the least obstruction or assault. 

But for this Edward Holte would have assembled his 
troop at once, and have galloped into Birmingham to 
the rescue, since the barriers were now thrown down. 
But, under the circumstances, the only hope was to in- 
duce the King to take another view of the present un- 
lawful proceedings of the Birmingham fanatics, and give 
such orders as would restrain their malice against the 
brave woman who had so materially aided in his own 
preservation. 

Dame Cooper herself could suggest no other resource, 
voluble as her sorrow and sympathies exhibited them- 
selves. Edward accordingly proceeded at once to seek 
an audience of the King. 

Unluckily Charles, who was really in very royal appe- 
tite, and desired to get over the ceremonials of the day 
necessary before dinner, had made but a brief toilette, 
and was already in the Great Gallery of Aston Hall, en- 
gaged in the reception of the concourse of loyal nobility 
and gentry assembled to do him honour in its walls. 

Entering by a side door known only to the inmates 
of the house, Edward found this extensive and noble 
apartment, still held to be one of the finest in England, 
crowded almost stemfuU by the throngs eager to catch 
a glimpse of their sovereign, in whose cause they were 
prepared to hazard so much ; those who deemed them- 
selves of rank and eminence to justify their desiriug the 
honour, pressing on to kiss his hand, where he sat throned 
in a recess at the end of the gallery. 



208 

Throned it might well be called. The part in question 
.was raised by several steps above the floor of the long 
and lofty chamber, and being richly carpeted with crim- 
son velvet, it was furnished with an arm-chair and 
canopy of perforated brass- work, on columns . a miracle 
of Tubal Bromychara's skill in the metal . and which 
shone like burnished gold. Sir Thomas Holte had 
always projected himself a visit from his sovereign, or 
perhaps thought the elevation would not be too grand 
and gorgeous for an Earl of Birmingham to occupy on 
solemn festivities ; and while he was friendly with the 
town and its mechanic representative, thought he did 
but right to encourage its peculiar arts, and exhibit tlie 
perfection of its workmanship. 

The King, artistically inclined himself, had at once 
taken the most admiring notice of the beautiful and 
splendid work, and declared, to the equally tasteful 
Marquis of Newcastle, who led him to it, and explained 
the fact that it was native art, that he had not thought 
he had subjects who could rival Italians in working the 
hard metals into patterns as light and elegant as lace. 

Sir Thomas Holte, rather singularly, had not reap- 
peared at the proper moment to do the honours of his 
mansion. Edward was, however, glad at the time to 
miss his presence in the gallery. 

It might have been thought that the heir of Aston 
was anxious to supply the deficiency, from the eagerness 
with which he elbowed his way through the gorgeously 
arrayed Cavalier crowd to the sovereign's closer presence. 
Indeed, he seemed to some even rudely and violently 
progressive. The savage Goring, who was gazing up at 
the curiously arabesque ceiling, with folded arms, and 
yawning, found himself brusquely pushed aside, but had 



THE nilEAT GALLERY AT ASTON HALL. 209 

hardly time to shape a scowl and utter an oath, ere 
Edward Holte had hurtled past him in his haste. 

Lord Falkland's office always placed him near the 
King's person ; and he also noticed, to his ^Majesty him- 
self, the hurried approach. 

'What is the matter with Captain Holte?' he said in 
a low tone to the King. ' He looks as if he comes to 
tell us that the ^lan of Nottingham is coming at speed 
to renew his attempt upon your Majesty's person.' 

' He would find us better provided than then, Lucius/ 
replied Charles, with a proud smile and glance at the 
crowding multitude before him. ' And yet I should 
not like to hear Hwas so. That man's very name sounds 
always of an ill omen to my ear.' 

By this time Edward had reached the dais, and had 
flung himself . deadly pale, indeed, and almost breath- 
less . on his knees before the King. 

Charles's attention, already startled, was fixed by this 
appearance of agitation, and he made a slight movement 
as if to rise, in some alarm. But considerations of dig- 
nity retained him in his chair. Only he looked with 
great surprise and inquiry at the young officer, and then 
said, with forced composure, ' Is it your pretended good 
folks of Birmingham, Master Holte, turned out en masse 
to assault us?' 

' Xo, sire. "Would to God it were so, that their 
fanatic cruelty and insolences might meet with just 
chastisement!' exclaimed Edward Holte. 'I come to 
complain to your Majesty now of their barbarous and 
masterful proceedings, not to defend them ; nay, to 
implore of you leave to put a stop by force of arms to 
their unlawful violences against the youthful woman who 
figured so heroically . as your Majesty has occasion to 

VOL. III. p 



210 THE ARMOURER^S DAUGHTER. 

remember . in enabling me to give you notice of the 
designs of your enemies on your royal person, in time to 
baffle them, at Nottingham/ 

'How so, sir?' replied Charles, coldly. 'Are we 
never to hear the last of this great adventure? In 
which, besides, another forward gentleman of this house 
claims the greatest part/ 

' But falsely, sire ! Richard Grimsorwe is a traitor, 
and in league with your fanatic rebels everywhere ! 
There is no time, however, at present to expound all his 
villanies to your Majesty. It is enough to say that the 
man is doubtless at the bottom of all the atrocious plot 
which has consigned Dorothy Firebrace to public expo- 
sure, and probably to death itself, from the cruelty of a 
misguided mob, on the pillory in Birmingham. But 
your Majesty will not suffer your loyal and courageous 
deliveress to meet with such treatment from a vile fana- 
tic rabble, instigated by all manner of lies and wicked 
scandals, and her devotion to your royal service, to her 
ruin ! ' 

'As how is all this, sir?' Charles inquired, sedately 
crossing one leg over the other, glittering with the dia- 
monded badge of the Garter. He preserved the orna- 
ments of this order through all his extremities, even to 
the foot of the scaffold. 

Thus required, Edward was compelled to declare, 
though in rapid and disordered strain, the nature of the 
infamous accusations brought against Dorothy Firebrace, 
and the unlawful trial and condemnation she had under- 
gone at the hands of the self-constituted tribunal of the 
fanatics of Birmingham ; defending her, however, as yet, 
simply by asserting her innocence and the unfairness 
and illegality of the proceedings against her. 



THE GREAT GALLERY AT ASTON HALL. 211 

To his utter amazement and indignation, nevertheless, 
this was the King^s reply ! 

^ Well, sir, if this girl be as you say she is, and affirm 
on your own honour, pure and innocent of all the charges 
against her as an angel of light, it only the more com- 
pletely appears how totally justice and right are con- 
cerned in the due maintenance of our power and au- 
thority in the State. As it is, you yourself are the main 
cause why we cannot in any way interfere in the affair. 
You have assured us, against every information to the 
contrary, of the well-meaning and sobriety of action in 
all things of the people of our good town of Birming- 
ham ; and thereupon we have solemnly guaranteed them 
full liberty and exemption from all control and inter- 
ference of our present superior power. And that thence 
all men may know how well and fully we are resolved to 
observe every plight and promise we make, however 
completely in our power or not, I tell you the Birming- 
ham folks must have their way, without let or hindrance 
on our part, on the penalties already by us denounced 
against all who presume to molest them.' 

Edward was thunderstruck by the decision, which was 
pronounced in those inflexible tones he had learned to 
know could not be altered by reason or entreaty. 

' But an innocent woman ! A woman who saved your 
Majesty's life at the risk of her own ! ' was all he could 
utter. 

' How know we she is so innocent ? ' returned Charles 
sharply. ' Her townsfolk have, certes, better means to 
appreciate her character than a rash, enamoured boy, 
her lover/ 

^ Her lover, sir! I am her husband!' shouted 
Edward, in tones that echoed over the whole vast apart- 

p 1 



212 

raent, and made all start that heard the word. All but 
one ; andj amazingly, that one was Sir Thomas Holte ! 

He entered the gallery precisely as the word was pro- 
nounced ; and^ it is true, with a strangely aghast and 
spectral look and action, hut still most clearly in no con- 
nection with anything he heard. 

He advanced, in a singularly dizzy and staggering 
manner, to the dais occupied by Charles, and, to every- 
body's surprise, ejaculated merely, 'Your pardon, sire; I 
made a vain boast, and have lost my wager, if I made one ! 
My villanous master-cook turns out to be . to be one of 
the Birmingham fanatic madmen in secret ; and rather 
than cook a dinner for your royal Majesty, he has . has 
disappeared . and left all the preparations in such dis- 
order, that although my son Richard . who has some 
skill in culinary art . he . he says . has set to work to 
repair the disaster, I . I fear dinner cannot be ready . 
for more than an hour from this ! ' 

Certainly the King, though no special trencherman, 
looked more discomposed and annoyed by this announce- 
ment than at Edward's really tragical and exciting state- 
ments. But the rest of the audience, struck with the 
singular concussion of ideas produced within their minds 
by a knowledge of previous circumstances, burst into an 
outrageous peal of laughter. 

Irascible as he was by nature, nevertheless Sir 
Thomas's only notice of this demonstration was the ex- 
traordinary and unexpected one of bursting into an hys- 
teric passion of tears and sobs. 

Charles himself was greatly surprised and, somewhat 
touched with pity at so strange an outburst of feeling. 
But the consolation he offered was a singular one. 'The 
fanatics of Birmingham are not, however, so altogether 



THE GREAT GALLERY AT ASTON HALL. 213 

harmful to you, Sir Thomas. Your son, Edward, con- 
fesses that he has made a blacksmith^s daughter there 
his wife, and they are engaged probably at this moment 
in ridding you of the relationship by stoning her to 
death for offences of which he declares her altogether 
innocent: ' 

Inexpressibly to Edward's astonishment, his father re- 
plied, in broken accents still, ^ I do believe her so ! Let 
Edward rescue her from their clutches, and bring back 
your Majesty's dinner, which the traitor cook has sent 
to Birmingham, under pretence you were to dine in the 
Guildhall with the townsfolk, in token of a true recon- 
ciliation, and, if possible . if possible . the man.' 

'Say you so !' replied Charles, flushing angrily. '^ Truly 
such a trick as this was not set down in the bill of in- 
demnity for these Birminghamers. Take your own troop 
of horse, Captain Holte, and bring me back my dinner 
and the master-cook ; and the last shall hang before I 
eat the first. Whatever else you do, young sir, is on 
your own responsibility.' 

^ Then, sire, I shall bring home My Wife to Aston 
Hall, who truly, by descent, is worthy to mate with the 
noblest here ! ' and without waiting further comment on 
his extraordinary speech, Edward hastened still more 
rapidly out of the Presence Chamber than he had entered 
it, with a glance at his friend Lord Falkland, that 
seemed to beg of him to undertake all advisable further 
explanation. 



214 



CHAPTER LXXXIX. 

FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 

Seldom since Birmingham was a town had so strange a 
scene been witnessed in it as was presented at noonday 
on that memorable Sunday, October IGth^ 1642^ in the 
enclosed space before St. Martinis Church. 

Directly in front of the building, but outside the 
graveyard, a wooden building of two stages had been 
erected, somewhat resembling a gallows. But its real 
dedication as a pillory was apparent in the balanced 
plank with holes for the head, on the top of a central 
tourniquet wheel. On this plank was usually painted 
in very large letters the particular offences for which the 
criminal was to undergo his degrading punishment, the 
mob in general proportioning their insults and pelting 
pretty fairly to the occasion, when it could read, which 
was not always the case. Poor Dorothy^s pretended 
crimes were by no means softened in the expressions de- 
voted to their setting forth on the engine of punishment, 
in this instance, and were certainly well calculated to 
rouse the indignation of a populace among which there 
would be many women and mothers. 

The executioner, who had already taken his station on 
the engine, was a very suitable one to have shared the 
punishment, if his wife^s account of his doings might be 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 215 

credited. It was Sisyphus^ the bellows-blower ; at- 
tended, however, by Faithful Moggs, doubtless to per- 
form such part of the duty as might require the use of 
hands. And never had the wretch exhibited the fiendish 
passions and cruelty of his nature more conspicuously in 
his evil countenance than on this occasion. If one could 
conceive the expression of a wolf athirst for blood trans- 
ferred to human features, such would have been that of 
this man. And yet he looked agitated ; very pallid, 
with constant bursts of a dark sweat on his forehead, 
like a criminal listening to the pleadings against him be- 
fore his judge. 

The instrument of disgrace and suflering was sur- 
rounded by a guard of the Anabaptists, whose gloomy 
craving visages were turned towards Sisyphus as a leader 
with a peculiar degree of significance. And it was re- 
marked that they were specially well armed and pre- 
pared as if for active violence, though only supposed to 
attend to prevent any efforts at a rescue on the part of 
the friends of the person condemned. Though that need 
scarcely have been feared, since Dorothy's father himself 
was to give her up to what he considered her just chas- 
tisement. 

Around these bitter factionists clustered the rest of 
the most zealous and fanatic portion of the populace of 
Birmingham, while, separated only by some twenty or 
thirty yards, was an extremely different assemblage, and 
central object. The royalists of the town, not numerous 
in themselves, but mightily strengthened now by the 
neighbourhood of their King and his powerful army, 
were gathered there, with a host of yelping dogs of 
various degrees of fierceness and size, held in by the 
collar, awaiting the signal to be let slip at a vast and por- 



216 

tentous-looking animal of the bovine species, which was 
raging, roaring, champing, within the limits of a massive 
chain that fastened it round the ueck to the Bull Ring 
in the midst of the market-place. The vast bulk and 
strength of tliis creature, its eyes rolling fire its side- 
lashiiig tail, its foam-slavering mouth, its mixture of 
terror with ferocity, under the usual circumstances in 
which it was placed, rendered it a spectacle of dread even 
to those who expected to derive sport from its fury and 
agonies of resistance. In reality this was the terrible 
and far-famed Bull of Aston, of whose ravages Sir 
Thomas Holte had at last himself grown weary, or else 
desired more signally to testify his satisfaction at the 
King's arrival, and affront the aversion entertained by 
the Puritans for all kinds of diversions, by offering it as 
a sacrifice on the occasion. Moreover, a proclamation 
had been made that, on the conclusion of the " baiting ^^ 
the bull was to be slaughtered, and his carcass handed 
over to all who chose to go in for a share, while there 
was anything to divide. Socialism in beef ! 

If to these two main, and in strong respects opposed, 
groups, we add that all the rest of the enclosure before 
St. JMartin's was crowded with a nearly complete as- 
semblage of the townsfolk, . the amusements provided 
being adapted to every taste and shade of religious and 
political opinion, . we have a notion of the kind of spec- 
tacle to which Dorothy Firebrace was led from the Par- 
sonage by '^ Angel ^' Whitehall and his Elders, on the 
day, and at the hour named, for punishment. 

To complete the degradation, as it was intended, of the 
unfortunate daughter of Armourer Firebrace, she was 
compelled to make her appearance in the streets wrapped 
in a long white linen sheet, and with a lighted torch in 



FOR TEATII OR LIFE. 217 

her hand, . emblems of purity, which were to be taken 
from her on being fixed in the pillory ; before which the 
victim was usually stripped of all upper clothing, to be 
more freely exposed to the derision and missiles of the 
lookers on. But there are some figures and countenances 
which it is impossible to bring down to the level, even of 
the most degrading situations. Death himself is at 
times powerless to desti-oy the ensigns of natural noljility, 
or efface the stamp of heroic spirits from their deserted 
material tenements. And it was thus with Dorothy 
Firebrace. Extremely pale as she was, all her fine fea- 
tures expressed as noble a haughtiness and resolut'on as 
ever, and her step and carriage were stately and erect as 
a queen's, as if with the consciousness rather of an ap- 
proaching triumph and glorious exaltation than of 
punishment and shame. 

In truth, Dorothy felt that the moment she could 
safely produce the evidence of her innocence, she should 
have endured as much as she ought, in love and duty to 
her husband, and that his honour, as well as her own and 
her unborn child's, required that everything should be 
risked in declaring the truth. Accordingly, extrication 
appeared easy enough, when once she should find herself 
under a public presence, which in her case she believed 
would immediately prove a public protection. 

It is true that the wife of Sisyphus, whose constant 
attendance she had not only accepted, but earnestly re- 
quested in her captivity, . half savage as she was, she was 
still a woman ! . had not failed to infuse her own jealous 
suspicions of the bellows-blower and his designs. But 
the contempt and loathing of Dorothy for the villanous 
fellow were such that she could not bring herself to con- 
sider the statements as aught but the effusions of the very 



218 

madness of the passion that possessed Cut-throat Meg. 
Far less could she bring herself to fear so vile an enemy. 
The terrible woman herself was meanwhile a great pro- 
tection against the traitorous Anabaptist's designs. No- 
thing could exceed her watchfulness and determination 
in guarding the prisoner, but chiefly against what she 
conceived to 1)e the insidiously amorous designs of her 
husband, . not without reason. Nevertheless, she had 
strangely abandoned her post on the morning of the exe- 
cution of the sentence of pillorying the victim, as if, her 
jealousy being satisfied, she thought vengeance might be 
better gratified from amidst the spectators. 

Whitehall and his Elders entered the market-place in 
their strange costume, with the intended victim in the 
midst of them, chanting dolefal hymns, as if at a funeral; 
and among these, to the wonder of every one and appro- 
bation only of the most violent fanatics, came Armourer 
Firebrace. But no one who contemplated , the grief- 
worn and shame-struck visage of the old man could 
avoid perceiving what agonies he endured under his 
forced outward stoicism and stubbornly resolved manner. 

With all his determination, however, it was observed 
that the unhappy parent's resolution nearly gave way 
when, arriving at the foot of the hateftd erection, it be- 
came his self-imposed task, to lead or compel his child 
to mount it. He turned and clutched her hand convul- 
sively, as if for one of these purposes, pointing with his 
unengaged finger to the inscription on the pillory, but 
suddenly paused, staggered, and might perhaps have 
fallen, had not Dorothy herself sprung forward and 
caught him in her arms, 

'Courage, dear father !' she then exclaimed, for the 
first time melting into a passion of tears and sobs. ' Lead 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 219 

on. All will be well presently ! I can explain all. Only 
let me know that the people hear and see what shall 
occur.' 

Firebrace, dizzily rallying, gave a vacant, uncompre- 
hending stare, and renewed his effort; but, in good 
truth, it was rather Dorothy that led and supported 
her unhappy sire up the ladder-like ascent of tlie pillory, 
than he who urged her on to her appointed scene of 
punishment. 

A loud yell, mingled with murmurs from the royalists_, 
greeted the appearance of the heroic girl on the platform 
of the pillory. But it was rather from the detestable 
glare in Sisyphus's lustful eyes that the wife of Edward 
Holte shrank, for a moment, back, than this uproar. 

On the contrary, rejecting with scorn his offered hook- 
hand in mounting the last step, which was higher than 
the rest, she seemed to regard with satisfaction the great 
assemblage, clamour against her how it might. 

^Meanwhile, as the bull roared more lustily than ever, 
startled by the rival noise, making the most violent 
efforts to break from his rope, and as the Elders had not 
ceased their funeral chanting, the frightful mixture of 
sounds may be conceived. 

There was a general lull, however, when Whitehall, 
the Angel of Birmingham, as he styled himself, followed 
up the victim on the pillory, and plainly, by his gestures, 
announced an intention to harangue the auditory. His 
speeches . composed, as for the most part they were, of 
lunatic ravings and prophecies . were yet of a kind that 
fell aptly in with the religious humour of the times and 
of the excited populace of Birmingham. 

Contrary to expectation, however, instead of com- 
mencing with what seemed the immediate subject of 



220 THE armourer's DAUGHTER. 

Dorothy Firebrace*? offences, Whitehall, screaming out 
as a text, ' They have encompassed me as loith bulls of 
BashaHj' burst into a vehement denunciation of the in- 
tended bull-baiting. 

The Cavaliers, he said, had purposely contrived the ex- 
hibition with a view to involve the town in the sin and 
desecration of the Sabbath-day, and also to introduce the 
systematic violation set forth, and ordered on penalties 
to be observed, in what was called ' the Book of Sports ' 
of the late tyrant, James Stuart, which the devil him- 
self must have edited. But the Angel announced his 
resolve, on the other hand, to permit no such blasphemy 
and affront to the Lord, in the town placed under his 
charge and government in Christ ; and that, therefore, 
he had ordered the ^ Guard of the Amen ^ to disperse 
its ungodly accompaniers and rabble, and keep the crea- 
ture quietly for slaughter on the following day, for the 
benefit of the poor of the town. 

But u[X)n this statement, Robin Falconer, who, with 
some other retainers of Aston, and the aid of two large 
mastiffs, had driven the animal to the Bull Ring, roared 
out, at the top of his voice, that if the least attempt of the 
kind was made, he would cut the rope, and let it loose 
among the Roundhead rascals that should dare such an 
insolency against his master and the King's ^lajesty ! 

Whitehall turned with some perplexity to the captain 
of his guardsmen upon this, but was rather surprised at 
the singular change of tone exhilnted by Sisyphus. 

^ What the foul fiend are you prating here, minister/ 
lie said, ' about bulls and baiting and such like matters, . 
nothing concerning the real business in hand? But the 
town has been too long already in a government of raving 
lunatics ; and you cannot now call upon your pretended 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 221 

Tubal Saul for assistance, uho is liiiuself all but dead, 
and as bereft of understanding as the rest of you! More- 
over, the Lord has sent me a vision to inform me that 
He is not content witli your way of doing things, and 
allowing Antichrist and his legions a free passage through 
it, and has therefore ordered me to take upon myself 
the absolute rule and governance of this place of Bir- 
mingham ! Take your celestial paradise m here else you 
will ! But as proof that the Lord is with me, and is 
Milling that the peo[)le here shall inherit the Kingdom 
on Earth ; lo, I expect every moment the arrival from 
Aston Hall, of a great banquet, prepared for the King 
and his nobles' own gluttony, but which by prayer I 
have enforced should leave Sir Thomas 1 loiters kitchen, 
and be brought by his own scullions and servitors for us 
of Birmingham to feast upon ! And it sliall be as a 
coronation feast for a King ! For by that name and 
title, but not of an earthly grant or confirmation, do I 
take upon me henceforth the rule of the town ! And 
yonder, yonder the glorious banquet comes/ 

In reality several waggons and carts, which seemed 
laden with hampers of provisions, now lumbered slowly 
into the market place, under convoy of certain of the 
servitors of the kitchen at Aston Hall, whom the master- 
cook had deceived into escorting the materials of the 
royal banquet to the Guildhall of Birmingham. Adam 
Blackjack's confidential intercourse with the Anabaptist 
leader sufficiently explained his knowledge and profane 
use of the fact. 

Whitehall was singularly taken aback by this bold 
self-assertion of the rival prophet, but after a moment's 
staring at him with great bewilderment, exclaimed, 'No, 
no, no ! you are a villanous liar and impostor ! Where 



222 THE armourer's daughter. 

is it anywhere written that the King of the Word should 
be maimed of his limbs, and with an iron hook for a 
hand ? Moreover, it cannot be, for i am he ! Good 
people all, hear me. The time for the manifestation 
must needs have arrived when a traitorous impostor like 
this . and, moreover, have I not seen and overcome 
that other monstrous delusion and temptation of the 
fiend, under the likeness of the Morning Star? There- 
fore do I now openly avow and proclaim . ' 

But at this moment the unfortunate ^ Angel' felt a 
hook passed round his neck, which drew him back with 
nearly strangling violence. Then Sisyphus thrust him- 
self in front, fall in the view of his adherents, yelling 
out, ' Stone him ! stone him ! He has spoken blas- 
phemy. Yet this woman is in reality the predicted 
Star of the ^lorning, who is to beam at the right-hand 
of the throne of glory on earth ! Wherefore T claim 
her as my wife and empress, and as such she shall reign 
with me among ye. Speak, Dorothy Firebrace !' he 
concluded, turning to the amazed daughter of Armourer 
Firebrace, with his diabolical expressions of all kinds 
fearfully heightened, yet speaking in an undertone which 
she only could overhear. ' Speak to the people, ac- 
knowledge me as your husband and king, or I will give 
you up to every shame and contumely the worst mob 
can inflict upon you; and if you survive their injuries, 
will rend you to pieces with this iron claw myself ! Nay, 
never glare among them for the hag to assist you who 
pretended you so much kindness ! Neither dread her 
any more, for she is where even her savagery must be 
out-devilled and quelled!' 

'You have murdered your wife, then, monster!' re- 
plied Dorothy, in a loud voice; but although every particle 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 223 

of hope deserted her, her brave nature was not yet sub- 
dued, or the resources of her courage and resolution at 
an end. ' Well, as you say, I -will speak to the people,' 
she continued. ' Hear me, ye men of Birmingham !' 

Universal attention and curiosity were now fixed upon 
the pillory platform ; and bewildered by all they heard, 
but evidently expecting, from Sisyphus^s own statement, 
some clearer explanation, a unanimous shout of ' Hear 
her ! hear the Armourer's Daughter ! ' and a hustling 
up to the scene of action, testified the general interest. 

' In the first place, then,' pursued Dorothy, in bright, 
ringing accents, that reached the furthest in the crowd, 
'^I do avouch myself most innocent of the infamous 
crimes imputed to me by the malignant calumnies of a 
witch and other my enemies, and engraven on yonder 
hideous cross-beam ; in the proof of which I now declare 
to you, women and men of Birmingham, that I am the 
lawfully wedded wife of Edward Holte, wedded here, in 
your church of St. Martin's, and the mother of an un- 
born but most lawful heir to Aston Hall ! The proof of 
which I will speedily place before you. And who will 
then deem it possible I could be guilty, as I have been 
accused ? Sirs ! I stood solemnly pledged to my hus- 
band, and certain of my friends, true witnesses of the 
truth I announce to you, not to reveal our marriage 
without his consent. But in this extremity I know he 
would approve the public declaration I now make . nay, 
would himself be here to make it, did not some unknown 
l)ut forcible circumstances, I am certain, hinder his pre- 
sence by my side ! Moreover, I have had no possibility 
of communicating with him until this morning, when 
Dame Cooper undertook the task, but perchance has 
not sped upon it. Nay, villain ! you shall not hinder 



224 THE armourer's daughter. 

me!' concluded tlie heroic woman, eluding the fling of 
the bellows-blower's hook by rushing to the very verge 
of the platform, and suddenly flinging down the torch 
she still bore, she rent open the bodice of her gown, 
and produced a paper, which she flourished aloft, calling 
aloud, ' Behold ! here is the certificate of the marriage 
of Dorothy Firebrace, of Birmingham, with Edward 
Holte, Esq., of Aston Hall, in the Church of St. Martiu, 
by the Rev. !Mr. Lane, witnessed by the High Bailiff 
Cooper and his wife.' 

' My daughter ! my dearest, wronged child, is this 
so?' exclaimed the Armourer, who had pushed fiercely 
between his child and Sisyphus, on observing the bellows- 
blower's brutal attempt. 

'It is, my father! Here are the lines; I place in 
your hands henceforth the assurance of your daughter's 
purity and honour as the wife of the Heir of Aston !' 
returned Dorothy, placing the important document in 
her father's quivering grasp. 

* God be praised ! It is all as she has said. ]\Iy 
daughter is a most true and pure and honourable ivife! 
And true it is, and I witness it, the young man himself 
asked her of me, her father, in lawful though secret 
marriage, which I refused to allow !' the Armourer now- 
ejaculated, in a transport of joy. ' !My child, my child ! 
I thought to lead you to a doom of shame and anguish 
for your guilt ! But you are innocent, God be praised ! 
God be praised ! Good people, after what you have 
heard, are you not well content I should lead my daugh- 
ter in peace and honour home?' 

And the people of Birmingham indeed . all but the 
ferocious Anabaptist minority . moved, as the masses 
almost always are, by generous and enthusiastic im- 



FOK DEATH OR LIFE. 225 

pulses ; surprised and elevated by the extraordinary 
exhibition of courage, and skilful ref'utatioti of her 
enemies on the part of the youthful woman before 
them, burst into a perfect uproar of applause and 
assent. 

An uproar which seemed rather to grow than diminish 
for several minutes, while Sisyphus continued to gesti- 
culate frantically to the crowd, unheard amidst the noise. 
But on a sudden, losing all patience, he pointed to the 
torch which still remained burning on the platform, and 
yelled to Faithful Moggs, ' Set her on fire in her sheet, 
and burn the paper, too, if you are any follower of 
mine.' 

Moggs raised the torch, though with evident slowness 
and reluctance, and muttered in reply, ' Nay, master ; 
let us rather do as you said before, and carry her ofl' to 
the Black Chapel, to be made your queen and wife for a 
thousand years. Only, to be sure. Cut-throat Meg is 
there.' 

' No, she is not ! All will be well enough for her. 
She drowned herself while I was attempting to immerse 
her for baptism in the Pool of Life, in order that I 
might restore her to be my wife, after divorcing her,' 
Sisyphus stammered forth. 

^ Then I denounce this wretch as a murderer ! The 
poor woman herself told me, gnashing her teeth with 
causeless hatred, that her husband had grown to detest 
me for my scorn, and that if she would consent to be 
brought into his pale of belief, he would receive her 
again as his wife. He has doubtless drowned her under 
this pretence V cried Dorothy. 

' How long must I endure the slandering lies of this 
accursed harlot?' stormed Sisyphus, appealing with his 

VOL. III. Q 



226 THE armourer's daughter. 

frightful claw to his satellites closely surrouuding the 
pillory. ' Good men ! Guards of the throne, who shall 
share in all my perquisites and exaltations, come up to 
me here, and do as I shall tell you to the flagitious 
slutr 

A movement and clambering on all sides of a variety 
of grim and haggard figures, up the poles and timbers 
of the scaffolding, followed upon this appeal ; and for 
the first time Dorothy's courage failed her in the ex- 
tremity of the horror and disaster of the fate that seemed 
inevitably to await her. 

Not completely, however; for perceiving that her 
father was seized by two of the ruffianly followers of the 
bellows- blower, she snatched the marriage certificate 
from his hand as he was extending it from their clutches, 
and flung it into the air over the scrambling wretches' 
heads below. 

^If there be any human creature here, let him pre- 
serve this paper ! ' Dorothy shrieked. ' As for me, I will 
rather leap from this scaffolding and perish than . 
Great heaven ! what is here ? It is Edward . Edward 
Holte . it is my husband . comes !' 

By a most fortunate turn and conjunction of good 
hap, at this moment the precious document fluttered 
away in the wind to the very ring of the chain in the 
market-place that confined the bull ; and the clatter of 
the hoofs of a body of cavalry, approaching at a gallop, 
was distinctly and closely audible. 

The practised ear of the maimed soldier readily di- 
vined the meaning of the sound. 

' The Cavaliers are upon us ; the King, as usual, breaks 
his word. But vengeance at least is mine V and he 
broke from the feeble restraint Whitehall attempted to 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 227 

put upon him, doubtless with a view to effect some mur- 
derous seizure of Dorothy Firebrace. 

In reality, the poor girl had only one resource to avoid 
the blow aimed at her neck, and which would probably 
have broken it, by the wretch with his barbarous hook. 
And yet redemption and happiness seemed close at 
hand, for her words, as she flung herself over the plat- 
form of the pillory^ were, ' Edward, Edward . my hus- 
band ! save me !^ 

Ay, and in truth, by some miracle of good fortune, 
Edward, distancing all who followed him, at the sight 
of the scaffold and its victim, surrounded by enemies, 
arrived just in time to save her ! . to catch his young 
wife in his arms as she fell from the considerable height 
she had leaped, in his faithful arms. And being on 
horseback, at no great descent ; so that although Do- 
rothy swooned and lay in them for several minutes af- 
terwards insensible, she received no really dangerous 
hurt. 

Sisyphus perceived that his victim had escaped his 
vengeance. But the mischievous activity of his mind 
suggested still some means of harm to her, and slinging 
himself down the poles of the scaffolding, on the oppo- 
site side from the approaching cavalry, he made his way 
through the crowd towards the Bull Ring: doubtless 
with a view to possess himself of the document flown 
thither, and forgetful, in the absorption of his hatred and 
cupidity, of the terrific guard upon it. 

'. ^Master Grimsorwe will yet make this scrap worth 
the trouble of picking up,' he muttered to himself, giv- 
ing a dive at the paper, which lay below the chained 
bull's hind-quarters. But almost at the same instant it 
turned, and with an astounding roar set its monstrous 

Q 2 



228 

head almost close to the ground, and goring at Sisyphus 
with its horns, his very attempt at saving himself proved 
his destruction, for his hook got entangled in the wea- 
pons of the awful brute, and he was caught and tossed 
aloft into the air ! 

A spectacle of indescribable horror, though a brief 
one, followed; . so horrible, that Edward Holte himself, 
the moment his attention was attracted to it by the 
screams and confusion of the immediate spectators, di- 
rected his troopers to discharge their carbines at the 
ferocious animal, as the only chance of a rescue. And 
it was a bullet from his own pistol that finally entered 
the bull of Aston's spine and laid it a mass of slaver 
and blood beside the breathless figure of a maimed man, 
so mangled, gored, and trampled, that it seemed as if 
scarcely a limb or a lineament remained whole. 

Singularly enough, the document which occasioned the 
tragedy remained entirely uninjured and untrampled, 
and Robin Falconer picked it up from nigh the palpita- 
ting carcase of the bull, and carried it to his young 
master. And as soon as Dorothy was sufficiently reco- 
vered to be left in the arms of her father, Edward him- 
self mounted the erection which had been prepared for 
her disgrace and ignominy, and read the certificate 
aloud to all the people, and called upon them all to wit- 
ness that he acknowledged the Armourer^s Daughter for 
his true and lawful wife, and the mother of his legiti- 
mate heirs. 

The Anabaptists in general, after the death of their 
leader, ventured on no further measures of resistance ; 
and some of them, perhaps, thought he was not un- 
worthy of his fate, when about a week after a frightfully 
mutilated corpse, with a heavy stone tied round its neck. 



FOR DEATH OR LIFE. 229 

floated up in the pond where he had instituted a horri- 
bly profane imitation of a baptism into his new religion, 
and which was recognised by most people as the body of 
his wretched wife, Cut-throat Meg, . murdered herself, 
undoubtedly, in turn ! 



230 



CHAPTER XC. 

THE PARDON. 

After these surprising events Edward Holte determined 
on his course of action with a promptness of decision 
and resolution which formed part, in reality, of his ap- 
parently gentle and modest character. 

He intruded no further on the proceedings of the 
Birminghamers than to order back to Aston Hall the 
entire provisions for the royal banquet, and then resolved 
to return thither at once with his wife, and acknowledge 
her as such to his father and all the assembled magnates 
there. This great recompense he believed himself to 
owe to her wonderful love and fidelity. 

Firebrace himself, in his anxiety to retrieve the good 
name of his daughter, made no objection to the pro- 
posal. But Dorothy, as soon as she revived sufficiently 
to understand its purport, at first evinced reluctance to 
the idea of thrusting herself upon a family which re- 
fused to entertain her willingly in the capacity of the 
wife of its representative. 

Edward, nevertheless, overruled the legitimately proud 
feeling of his wife by the necessity of re-establishing her 
reputation clearly to all the world, and the right of his 
future offspring. 

Accordingly, after a scene of the most affecting re- 



THE PARDON. 231 

conciliation and parting with her father, Dorothy Holie 
accompanied her husband on his return to Aston Hall 
at the head of his troop of horse. 

The events that had passed,^ and the interval required 
for Dorothy's complete restoration, had occupied much 
time. Nevertheless the royal banquet ordered for noon- 
day had only just been served, at sunset, when the youth- 
ful pair arrived at the mansion. 

Having ascertained that the King had just sat down 
to dinner, in the grand dining-room of the Hall, Edward 
took his post at once, and, with his young wife leaning 
on his arm, entered the apartment. And in this manner 
he advanced with the Armourer's Daughter to the head 
of the table, where Charles sat under a canopy, with the 
principal guests on either hand, and craved leave to 
present her, under that designation, to the monarch, 
both falling on their knees as he did so. 

Charles seemed now in a singularly changed mood of 
good spirit and urbanity. Not, however, caused by so 
unkingly a reason as the restoration of his dinner, but 
by the news that had now been for some time circulated, 
that his beloved Queen had landed in safety, with arms 
and ammunition from Holland, in Burlington Bay. He 
was well disposed therefore to a favourable entertain- 
ment of the young pair, whose well-matched beauty and 
grace probably also struck his artistic eye. 

' You and your fair bride arc very welcome, Master 
Holte. Let room be made for them at our table, 
and we will hear the story of the rescue. Why, Falk- 
land, does not this read like a chapter of old romance? 
Or, methinks I am myself the banished Duke in gen- 
tle Willie's play, sanctifying the espousals of Orlando 
and the madcap, merry Rosalind ! At least, if our 



232 THE 

host's good sanction runs before, as in all reason it 
should.' 

The Kins: glanced over on these words to Sir Thomas 
Holte, who sat at the apposite end of the board, but 
with a singulnrly excited, and, as it seemed to Edward, 
inebriated look. And this unhappy supposition was 
rendered still more certain by the extraordinary nature 
of Sir Thomas's reply. 

* Ay, my good liege, and if you will let your royal 
nephew marry as far beneath himself as my son, and 
will not look too nicely in the Hiding Hole of my hall!' 

'Your father has drunk my health too loyally to-day, 
Master Holte,' said Charles, with a look of grave dis- 
pleasure. 

' No, by the Three Kings, my liege ! I adore "Miss 
Holte, and will never marry any other woman while T 
live !' exclaimed Prince Rupert, who, to say the truth, 
looked as if he had joined in his intended father-in-law's 
potations almost as liberally. 

' Ay, ay, Prince ; but first we must remove the spell . 
the witch's spell, you know. I have had old Maud 
seized and lodged in the church steeple to-night, and 
have sent for a man called the Witch- Finder, somewhere 
out of Bedford, to put her to tortures, and confess, and 
take off the spell,' Sir Thomas replied, wagging his head 
curiously at Kupert. ' But meanwhile we must have 
pardon for any little offence which we, or our friends, 
may have exceeded in the rigid performance of our duty, 
from the King's majesty, and then all will be well. 
But I cannot forget, the fellow's mother was an injured 
fool to die as she did V 

Edward felt now convinced of his father's condition ; 
but fearful to direct further attention to it, he quietly 



THE PARDON. 233 

procurwl a seat at the banquet for Dorothy. Neverthe- 
less, on the Kinj^s inquiry, ' Well, Master Holte, and 
heard you aught in Birmingham of this traitor cook?' 
Sir Thomas suddenly uttered an exclamation^ and started 
up, gasping and clutching at the air. 

Edward was immediately by his side, and earriestly 
entreated him to withdraw to his private chamber. 

' Why yes, son Edward, I believe it will be best ; I 
am not my own perfect man jast now,^ said Sir Thomas, 
allowing himself to be led staggeringly out of the apart- 
ment. 

But on reaching the vestibule he turned to Elward 
with a most singularly aghast and horrified look, and 
exclaiming, ' Ask Richard Grimsorwe the reason V fell 
down, apparently in a state of insensibility, which his 
son began to suspect was caused by something more than 
excess in liquor. 

Horrified by the supposition that entered his mind, 
he sent for his mother to attend the baronet on his 
couch, whither he had him conveyed, and then deter- 
mined to seek an explanation with h; .jerny- 
brother. He conceived it even ac let him 
know how fully all his villainy was : . . . and the 
punishments justly in store, as the best means to con- 
vince him that all future operations of his malice would 
be strictly w^atched and guarded against. Still, as being 
now the only representative of the family left to enter- 
tain the King, he found it necessary to return to the 
banquet until its conclusion. 

To his surprise, however, on making for the dining- 
room, he found Richard Grimsorwe apparently in wait- 
ing for him in the hall. 

No other person was there. The servants of the house 



234 THE armourer's daughter. 

and of the royal guests -were engaged in the inner cham- 
ber, in attendance at the banquet. And as it was now 
growing dark, Edward, aware of the diabolical acts of 
which his bastard brother was capable, almost imagined 
he had posted himself in this deserted spot to assassinate 
him. Grimsorwe, besides, carried a dark lantern, no 
ray of which he suffered to escape so as to throw any 
inconvenient light on his own person as he presented 
himself full in Edward's way. But still it was clear that 
he desired to be seen and recognized at once, and that 
therefore it was not likely (other probabilities apart) that 
he meant anything personally harmful. 

His voice was also strangely agitated, and yet under- 
toned and quiet. ' Edward,' he said, ' I sought you.' 

' For what purpose, ruthless villain V 

' Hush, foolish gentleman ! Let our senseless rivalry 
be over ! A suspicion, a look, a word, may deprive both 
of us of the object of contention, which alone has ren- 
dered us enemies. The Aston inheritance depends on 
a word, a breath, a suspicion, to be dispersed to the 
winds V 

' What mean you, madman ? Madman, I call you, 
as the best excuse for your atrocities, and for my not at 
once throwing myself upon you, for death or life.' 

'My enmity with you, Edward Holte, finished this 
morning, when my father's mad fury placed in scarcely 
redeemable peril the inheritance for which we contend.' 

' Unnatural ruffian ! what mean you?' 

' Look there ! Take this lantern, and throw its light 
on the object you will behold within yonder contrived 
secret place, which only my father, the mason who 
fashioned it, and yourself, as heir, should be aware of.' 

So Richard Grimsorwe replied, leading the way to- 



THE PARDON. 235 

wards what seemed a large porter's chair, of some ruddy 
wood, set in a recess on the left hand of the great hall 
staircase. 

Edward, aware of the secret concealed by this external 
appearance, and in a manner fascinated and enthralled, 
followed. 

Grimsorwe took the large wooden armchair, seem- 
ingly contrived only for a porter's sitting, by the arm, 
and giving it a peculiar touch and swing, it turned, and 
revealed a dark inner chamber, of no great size, and only 
high enough to allow of a man of ordinary stature to 
enter it stoopingly. 

' Take the lantern, and tell me what you see in there,' 
said Grimsorwe, handing his lamp to Edward. 

Strongly controlled by his manner, the latter took it, 
and paced into the chamber, keeping his eye at first glan- 
cing backward; which Grimsorwe observing, retired to 
some distance. 

What then did Edward's horrified glance light upon? 

The bleeding corpse of a man. Of a man whose skull 
appeared to be cloven in halves; and, nevertheless, the 
two sides of whose face, if rejoined, it appeared to his 
horror-stricken conviction, must be that of Adam Black- 
jack, the master-cook of Aston Hall. 

Edward gazed for several minutes, without being able 
to realise this terrible vision to himself. But Grim- 
sorwe's voice recalled him to sense. 

' For heaven's sake, Edward, make no further delay. 
You see what my father has done ? In his fury at the 
discovery of what 1 confess I did not conceal from him, 
your disastrous marriage, and Adam Blackjack's insane 
taking up with the fanatics of Birmingham, and sending 
the King's dinner off there, he snatched at the nearest 



236 THE armourer's daughter. 

weapon, and killed the wretclied man with his own 
cleaver/ 

^ Merciful Jesus ! . but this accounts for my father's 
terrible state of excitement and gloom. ' 

* It does ; T, who alone witnessed the deed, only by 
the help of wine and strong drinks, have succeeded in 
bringing Sir Thomas to sufficient calm not to betray his 
own rashness to all our destruction. You remember 
what befell the family of Birmingham. We should have 
been betrayed to the same ; we are in no great favour 
with the King, do what we will, though you can plead 
great services, Edward. We should have been exposed, 
you chiefly, and the wife and unborn child you falsely 
suppose I have meant mischief against, to all the penal- 
ties of felons. Forfeiture of goods is the least among 
these, and there are hundreds of courtiers ready to grasp 
at our destruction. Of course, scanty as are the hopes 
I may yet cherish of our father's treating me as his son, 
may be, I yet know that for the family to lose all could 
be no advantage to any member of it ; and I have there- 
fore aided him so far to the best of my ability in con- 
cealing the dreadful crime.' 

Edward, who knew the violence and furv of his father's 
temper, and of the provocations to its display, listened 
in aghast horror, but full belief, to what he heard. 

' Great God ! what is to be done?' he gasped. 

' This,' replied Richard Grirasorwe. ' We must ob- 
tain the King's pardon in general for my father for every 
imaginable offence, under pretence of shielding him from 
the consequences of his energetic exertions on behalf of 
the King, before any begging courtier is aware how rich 
a prize is thus placed within grasp. This very night you 
must ask of the King his signature to a pardon, which 



THE PARDON. 237 

I will draw up in the fullest imaginable, and yet vaguest 
terms of the law, as if our father might by possibility 
have incurred such inferences in the exercise of his en- 
deavours to keep this country for his Majesty; and you 
must obtain the signature to greet Sir Thomas's waking, 
or it is my belief he will commit suicide in his despair. 
Nor do I pretend, Edward Holte,' the bastard brother 
concluded, ^ that here our enmity and rivalry will cease ; 
but we must care to keep something to struggle for, 
which otherwise cannot be/ 

^ Oh, my unhappy father ! and I was probably the 
cause why his passions so completely mastered his judg- 
ment ! Richard Grimsorwe, do what thou hast said, 
and, although from thy felonious hand, I will present the 
pardon to the King for signature, and obtain it in full 
satisfaction for all myself and my wife have ventured in 
his behalf, as the only favour I will ever ask of him 
during my miserable existence.' 

Edward Holte returned to the banquet, and assumed 
his father's place at the foot of the table. 

He found that his wife had already established herself 
in the royal and general favour by her manners, at once 
full of dignity and vivacity, and her simple yet eloquent 
description of the recent events in Birmingham. The 
King found himself sufficiently interested to question 
her further, and with great minuteness, concerning the 
attempt upon his person at Nottingham, which she had 
assisted in foiling, and expressed himself highly satisfied 
at the conclusion. 

' This woman is one of Shakespeare's women,' he re- 
marked, with unusual warmth for him, to the listening 
courtiers ; ' and I doubt if even the women of Sparta or 
Rome equalled those noble creatures he has drawn from 



238 

the pure and high-hearted women of England, though 
he has placed them in so many diflferent countries and 
scenes. I am glad, I say, to have seen a woman who 
realises to me the noblest ideas of that greatest of poets. 
Mistress Holte, your King thankfully drinks to your 
health and happiness/ 

Edward played as well as he could the part of cour- 
teous host and representative of his family throughout 
the evening, yet he thought the King would never re- 
tire; and indeed he sat unusually late, listening with 
constantly revived interest to Dorothy^s account of the 
circumstances of her rescue, and of the state of things 
and parties in Birmingham. 

Very shortly before his Majesty did at last retire to 
rest, a paper was put in Edward's hands by a person 
in a lawyer's costume, who glided in, and then imme- 
diately glided out. 

Charles, however, in the end, professed himself tired, 
and anxious for a night's repose. Edward was at once 
in readiness to escort his Majesty to his chamber, with 
an immense candelabrum in hand, which had been pre- 
pared for the occasion. 

The great majority of the banqueters accompanied the 
King to his bed-chamber door ; but only Edward Holte, 
Lord Falkland, and his Majesty's immediate body-ser- 
vants, entered it with him. 

King Charles, pleased with the evident efforts made to 
treat him royally, in the magnificent furniture of the 
apartment and the velvet hangings of the alcove in which 
his bed was placed, assured Edward that, although 
grieved at his father's indisposition, he ascribed it alto- 
gether to its true causes, fatigue and over-loyalty in his 
potations. When the young man tremulously informed 



THE PARDON. 239 

his Majesty that Sir Thomas was in reality tormented by 
fears that he had exceeded the law in various ways, in 
vindication of his royal legitimate authority against the 
Birminghamers, and other rebels and fanatics, like the 
late Earl Strafford, and could only be restored from his 
apprehensions by a general pardon for any of the offences 
he might have committed, signed by the Sign-manual, . 
a document, Edward concluded by stating, with great agi- 
tation, he had regularly drawn up, and which required 
only his royal hand to it. 

So saying, he produced the form of pardon engrossed 
by Grimsorwe, which he himself had scarcely had any 
time to glance at. 

Charles laughingly remarked, ' Give it me. I pre- 
sume this pardon is required for such offences chiefly as 
you have committed yourself to-day, Master Holte, in 
suppressing the violence and insolence of your townsmen 
of Birmingham.^ And scarcely looking, either, at the 
document, he took up a pen that was placed in a silver 
inkstand for his use, and affixed his royal signature. 
'Put yours also, Falkland,' he said. 'It is the new 
form, the Parliament requires so much, and you will be 
glad to do anything to oblige your friend.' 

Lord Falkland took the pen in turn, but with charac- 
teristic consideration glanced down the paper. 

'Sweet Lord ! what is all here?' he then exclaimed. 
' Sir Thomas's pardon for murder and bigamy ! Murder 
and bigamy . and fire-raising, and masterful oppression, 
and I wot not well all beside ! What can be the mean- 
ing of this V 

' Sign it, Falkland, sign it, dear friend ; 'tis but a 
form of the lawyers, to include every imaginable offence 
in a general pardon, that no cavil may ever after be 
raised upon the instrument.' 



240 THE armourer's daughter. 

Grimsorwe had, in fact, informed Edward that he 
should put in several offences besides the real one, that 
no special attention might be drawn to it until circum- 
stances should compel the explanation of the mystery. 
The body, he declared, could be very well kept hidden 
until the King's departure, when Sir Thomas Holte's 
rash but not unjustifiable act must be explained, and to 
any objections the King's full pardon pleaded. 

Charles was to proceed on his warlike advance to 
London on the following day. 

On his friend's remonstrance, Falkland countersigned 
the document, and once in possession of it, Edward took 
reverential leave and good-night, and resolved to hasten 
to his father's apartment, and relieve him from the hor- 
rible anxiety under which he believed him to labour. 

On the way, however, Grimsorw^e met him. 

'Sir Thomas is in a deep sleep . I havejust come from 
him . do not awaken him to a wretchedness that may 
perhaps madden him !' he observed in an agitated tone. 
' Morever, Edward, he begged that throughout this mi- 
serable affair, he might not be exposed to stand degraded 
before you . before his most virtuous son . in your actual 
presence, I mean ! He begged me to do all that w^as 
necessary between you, him, and the King. Give me 
the pardon, if you have obtained it ; and though I will 
not attempt to hide your merits in the affair, our father 
needs not stand utterly degraded beneath your observa- 
tion, whom he most respects !' 

Deceived by this moving appeal, Edward was about to 
hand the paper over to his false-hearted brother, when 
Dorothy suddenly appeared on the scene, escorted by 
some of the females of the household. 

' Do nothing this traitorous wretch, your pretended 



THE PARDON. 241 

brother, bids you, Edward !' she exclaimed. ' Nothing . 
nothing whatever ! I have just made my way to the 
prison door of your unhappy sister, which no one can 
open, and who accuses the wretch of all that has hap- 
pened most unhappily for herself, as we may for ourselves. 
Do nothing he asks, bids, prays, implores of you !' 

This vehement expostulation was the cause why Ed- 
ward Holte refused to deliver the signed pardon into the 
hands of Richard Grimsorwe, who had his uses to make 
of it; who even at last, in his rage, partly avowed 
them. ^ Keep it, then !' he exclaimed. ^ It is but the 
clearer proof of Sir Thomas Holte's offences, whose law- 
ful heir I am, and will prove myself . before the Parlia- 
ment OF England !' 

And in reality, on the following day, when Edward 
entered into explanations with his father, and heard from 
the enraged and exasperated old man who was the real 
murderer of Adam Blackjack, the real murderer was no- 
where to be found at Aston Hall. 



VOL. III. 



242 



CHAPTER XCI. 

THE WITCH OF ASTON's END. 

It appeared that Sir Thomas Holte had been induced by 
Grimsorwe's entreaties and appeals to the memory of 
his unhappy mother^ and the natural shrinking of a 
parent from consigning his offspring to destruction, to 
assist in hiding the body of the murdered cook, and con- 
senting to conceal the dreadful fact until a pardon could 
be obtained for the perpetrator of the deed. He was to 
use his own influence, and gain Edward^s assistance for 
his bastard-brother^s redemption, if possible. And cer- 
tainly the King could scarcely refuse condonation for an 
offence which could be represented so completely in his 
service, and almost authorised by his own threats of ven- 
geance. But the wicked wretch, working on his own 
secret plans, proffered also to avert all risk from him- 
self by throwing the guilt on his father. With this in- 
tention he had doubtless stimulated Sir Thomas to drown 
his horror and apprehensions in too copious libations ; 
or . as was still more probable . had infused some power- 
ful narcotic in his drink, that had deprived him of his 
reasonable senses long enough to enable him to complete 
his manoeuvres in the atrocious manner described. 

Nevertheless, Sir Thomas perceived that he was en- 
tangled beyond hope of extrication in the artful mesh 
thus looped together. 



243 

He felt it would be impossible for hira to prove his in- 
nocence. His wager on his cook's punctuality, his own 
well-known violent temper, his agitation and other sin- 
gular behaviour after the tragical occurrence, his conceal- 
ment of it, his lack of all witnesses, save one that would 
certainly be against him, his legitimate son's obtaining 
him a pardon, . every tittle of proof and evidence seemed 
turned irreversibly against him. 

Even Grimsorwe's flight afforded the victim no support 
to any declaration of the truth. The artful villain left 
a letter directed to the King himself, containing a long 
recital of his alleged wrongs, in being deprived of his 
birthright, and complaints that his father's and brother's 
favour Avith his Majesty, and violent demeanour towards 
the persons who offei'cd to give evidence in favour of his 
mother's lawful marriage, obliged him to retire from 
Aston, and demand redress of his grievances from the 
Parliament. 

Under these certainly most annoying circumstances. 
Sir Thomas behaved with more than even his accustomed 
irrational fury and violence. He turned the whole tem- 
pest of his wrath on Edward for having dared to believe 
him guilty of the crime imputed to him, and proceeding 
without obtaining his consent, or seeming to hesitate 
for a moment in his conclusions. He refused to hear 
any apology, or find any in the manner he had incapa- 
citated himself from giving or receiving explanations. 
And not knowing how to vent his exasperation more to 
his son's annoyance, declared he had no doubt what he 
had done was at the instigation of his low-born Puritan 
wife, who wanted to have himself attainted of a deed of 
murder and violence, in order that if her Parliament 
friends got the upper hand, she might manage to have 

R 2 



244 

his property transferred to the foolish husband she had 
secured. 

Sir Thomas went on ragingly to declare that he was 
very well informed she had also had the impertinence to 
go prying upstairs to the apartment where he had confined 
his ' bewitched daughter/ who could not else have dis- 
covered . as he found she had . that her 'blacksmith' 
was still alive, and was guiltless of the imputations fas- 
tened on his character. But the Baronet vowed, with 
strangely terrible oaths, that Arabella should marry 
Prince Rupert, or finish her days in a madwoman^s cell, 
which a continued refusal of so great an offer, when the 
witch-spell was removed, would certainly prove her to be. 
He concluded by ordering Edward to remove his pre- 
tended wife instantly from Aston Hall, and to bring him 
the pardon, that he might proceed at once to the presence 
of the King, and tear it to pieces then and there. 

On all this bad news being announced to Dorothy, 
she, however, was not willing the instrument should be 
thus destroyed. 

It is probable she suspected, from the violence of Sir 
Thomases temper, that in reality he had committed the 
deed, which was a good deal more in his style of action 
than the serpentine Kichard Grimsorwe's. Any way, the 
latter would be certain to make it appear so. She re- 
membered the fate of the Birmingham family, and 
dreaded the possibility of a similar exercise of tyrannical 
power in the case of her hushand^s family. She there- 
fore strongly advised that they should retain the pardon, 
although never to be produced unless the necessity should 
arise. And she recommended Edward to seek an audience 
of the King at once, explain the circumstances, and ask 
leave to join the vanguard of the army, which was already 



THE WITCH OF ASTON's END. 243 

setting forward, to escape from the old man's unjust 
anger and violence, and remove her, as he ordered, from 
beneath his roof. 

Dorothy also begged her husband to remonstrate to his 
Majesty the extraordinary ill-treatment suffered by his 
sister, under the pretence of her being mad or bewitched. 
And Dorothy, avowing that she had in reality made her 
way to Miss Holte's dismal confinement without being 
able to get in to see her, declared she thought it ex- 
tremely probable, from her wild tone of reply, that her in- 
tellects were giving way, unless speedy rescue should 
arrive. Arabella, it seemed, would have it that her com- 
forter was an angel, sent from heaven for the purpose. 

Edward, justly indignant at his own and his wife's 
and his sister's maltreatment, complied in full with Do- 
rothy's requests ; seeking his father again, in the first in- 
stance, to urge upon him the propriety and prudence of re- 
taining the pardon. But Sir Thomas became in a manner 
frantic with fury, vowed that Edward and his wife were 
in conspiracy with his unnatural bastard to bring his 
name into utter disgrace and ruin, in order to disgust 
the Prince Palatine with the alliance he nowso generously 
and nobly proposed to conclude, . but that he would foil 
the whole plot ! And he rushed off to the presence of 
the King at once, with Grimsorwe's letter in his hand, . 
Edward concluded, to give his version of the entire trans- 
action. 

Edward, sadly perplexed and vexed at the certain ex- 
posure and concussion that must follow, proceeded also 
to the King's apartment, who was engaged in giving 
orders to the principal ofificers of his army regarding the 
renewal of his march on London. 

Nothing could, therefore, be more public than the 



246 

revelations to be expected would certainly have been. 
But greatly to Ed\^.ard's surprise, and at first to his 
relief, Sir Thomas made his appearance in a much 
calmer and tranquil manner, in company with Count 
O'Taafe. 

But a harmful reason speedily appeared. Sir Thomas 
handed over the paper left by Grimsorwe open, though 
directed to the King, and informing his Majesty that the 
allegations contained were all utterly false, but that the 
writer having really gone over to the Parliament, in the 
hope to obtain his objects by its interposition, he dis- 
carded him for ever from any alliance and consanguinity 
with himself, equally with the lawful son, who should 
have been his heir, but for his unexampled disobedience, 
and degradation of the family name by marrying the 
daughter of a mechanic of Birmingham. Sir Thomas 
concluding this astounding declaration by stating that 
he had, in consequence, resolved to make his daughter the 
sole heiress of all he possessed . every rood of his land, 
his house of Aston Hall, and the entire revenues at- 
tached of seven goodly manors . on condition only that 
she accepted the glorious alliance which his Highness 
the Prince Palatine Rupert had been pleased to offer to 
conclude with her. 

Charles looked extremely surprised at this address; 
but it was amply, and impetuously confirmed by Kupert, 
who, throwing himself on his knees, asked his royal 
uncle's consent to a marriage which he declared was es- 
sential to the happiness of his life ! 

Edward interposed, as soon as he could speak for 
amazement, by a passionate appeal to the King against 
the projected injustice and irrational severity of his 
father's proceedings towards himself and his good and 



247 

loyal wife, who, he further irritated Sir Thomas by de- 
claring, was of nobler descent than the Holtes themselves 
could pretend to be. 

Charles could not but perceive how much the right of 
the case was with Edward Holte; but all his maxims of 
public and domestic government supported the exercise of 
authority, however tyrannically directed. It may even 
be that he was not insensible to the advantages of such 
an establishment for his landless and exiled nephew. Sir 
Thomas Holte's wealth,great as itwas really considered in 
that age, hanng been even greatly exaggerated to the King 
by those who desired to forward their master's present 
eager wishes and determination. Still, the ingratitude 
and unfairness of such a procedure struck even the Stuart 
Prince, and he himself remonstrated with Sir Thomas on 
the resolution announced, with apparent warmth and 
concern. Only, however, obtaining passionate reitera- 
tions of the fixity of his purpose from the Baronet, until 
Edward put the climax on his misdemeanors by assuring 
the King that he was certain his sister herself would 
never consent to become the usurper of her brother^s 
rights, or the wife of Prince Rupert . whom she had re- 
jected with scorn . unless she was driven to madness by 
the barbarous imprisonment and ill-usage she was sub- 
jected to, from which unlawful durance he implored the 
King to order her immediate release, and hear the 
truth from the young lady^s own lips, with his own ears. 

In making this appeal, Edward, however, unconsci- 
ously jarred on a powerful feeling with the King. 

'Refuses a Prince ! . refuses my nephew ! Miss Holte 
refuses the Prince Palatine for a husband ! She must 
be mad indeed ; and I do not take upon me to interfere 
in the treatment of lunatics, saving by regular course of 



248 

law in my Courts of Chancery ! ' Charles said, with evi- 
dent irritation. 

' My daughter is not lunatic, sir ; but she is pos- 
sessed by a witch with an extraordinary hallucination, 
which we shall speedily dissipate. There are means . 
there are means V vociferated Sir Thomas. 

' Use them, then ; we shall not interfere,' the King 
reiterated. ' Master Holte, if what you say be true, you 
cannot leave your redemption from disinheritance in 
better charge than a woman's obstinacy on such points. 
I myself am content to leave the preservation of my 
nephew from an alliance, which is too much beneath 
him in some respects, to the same. But you would not, 
sure, attaint your father of an unnatural cruelty and 
tyranny towards a woman, his own child ?' 

' There is little of which my son would not accuse me, 
had he any chance to be believed, sire ! My mad cook 
of yesterday, for example, hath been discovered to have 
committed suicide in a privy chamber of my house, last 
night; and it wants little, perchance, that Edward 
Holte should accuse me of the rogue's murder to your 
Majesty.' 

Sir Thomas Holte said this . and with extraordinary 
composure and credibility of manner . doubtless at the 
instigation of cooler and craftier heads than his own. 
But although Edward never dreamed for a moment of 
contradiction, he was horrified to think how completely 
the appearance of the body must refute to all beholders 
the possibility of suicide. 

The King himself seemed uneasily struck by the cir- 
cumstance, though he only remarked, smilingly, ' Well, 
Sir Thomas, you hold our pardon for that and for much 
more, if your loyal zeal had in reality ridded us of such 



249 

a felon fanatic/ And he appeared finally to sum up his 
whole decision in favour of Sir Thomases despotism by- 
turning to Edward, and remarking, ^ But we will care, 
in any case, Captain Holte, to see that your own ser- 
vices, past and future, are so amply rewarded as to in- 
demnify you for any lost inheritance. There will be 
traitors' spoils enow to divide anon; for numbers of 
good estate have openly joined our enemies now in the 
field ; ' and calling to the Earl of Lindesay to resume 
his observations, his Majesty plainly intimated that 
further discussion on the subject of his host's private 
affairs was not to be allowed. 

Utterly discomfited, and reduced to silence and de- 
spair, the only favour Edward requested was leave to set 
forward at once in the vanguard of the army. This per- 
mission was graciously accorded ; and, in a mood of the 
deepest sadness and dejection of spirits, Edward Holte 
rejoined his wife ; and, somewhat comforted by her un- 
shaken courage and hopefulness, rode forth with her 
from his paternal mansion, on the march which the 
royal army resumed about mid-day on Monday, the 
17th of October. 

There was nothing else for it. Dorothy could not 
possibly remain at Aston Hall, under the circumstances. 
Birmingham, where she had suffered so much, and 
which was again in the hands of the frenzied Whitehall, 
could be no suitable residence for her. Whatever the 
dangers and discomforts of the campaigning life before 
her, there remained no resource. And, moreover, after 
the perils they had undergone apart, neither Edward 
nor his young wife could bear the notion of being again 
separated. 

King Charles left Aston Hall very far from pleased 



250 THE armourer's DArGHTER. 

.with, the main incidents that had befallen him in it, but 
renewing his expressions of approbation of the beauty 
of the situation and the magnificence of the building 
itself. 

^ ^Tis a regretful inheritance, truly, to lose, Falkland, 
as you say,' he remarked to that nobleman; 'but dis- 
obedience in children to a father's will is almost as 
heinous an offence as treason in a subject, and exposes 
to the like penalties and forfeiture ! And it were in- 
deed no ill endowment for a landless Prince like our 
obstinate nephew, who, if he set his head on anything, 
could not be rebutted from his career by a mountain 
tilting at him. However, all may end better than we 
think, and I will make your friend's advancement, in 
other ways, most specially the object of my care. They 
have yet to unbewitch this girl : and say you not some 
preference is alleged by her brother for another?' 

This observation was made as the King rode out of 
Aston Hall, duteously preceded by Sir Thomas Holte, 
on foot, to the limits of his domains. 

Lord Falkland, Avho always spoke up for his friend 
when he could, was about to reply, when a catastrophe 
took place which attracted attention, and marked the 
era of the commencement of the Civil War still more 
tragically at Aston Hall. And whatever expectations 
were formed of the Witch of Aston being persuaded or 
compelled to undo her supposed sorceries against Ara- 
bella Holte, it appeared, in consequence, were destined 
to be disappointed. 

After her capture . accomplished with circumstances 
of great brutality by a number of the Aston rustics, who 
had long believed her a diabolical mischief-maker in 
various ways . Maud Grimsorwe was placed for security 



THE WITCH OF ASTOn's END. 251 

in the steeple of Aston church. This was a favourite 
prison-cage for persons accused of sorcery, it being 
thought the devil had no power to enter a church, even 
to the rescue of his most devoted votaries. But driven 
finally to despair by the consciousness of total desertion, 
since her grandson himself did not interfere in her 
favour . by remorse, and the dread of the terrible doom 
of persons convicted of the offences imputed to her . the 
wretched old woman crawled out at an opening in the 
belfry, believed to be too narrow for tLe possibility of 
escape. And at the very moment when the royal proces- 
sion commenced its stately progress through the grand 
court-yard gate, and Sir Thomas Holte appeared head- 
ing it, Maud Grimsorwe threw herself headlong from 
the summit of the roof of Aston church to the ground. 
The idiotic old sexton, who was intended to be one of 
the main witnesses against her, and who was standing 
in the churchyard, declared afterwards that he saw the 
devil, in the likeness of a great black serpent, with 
wings_, allow her to mount on his back, and then sud- 
denly make himself as straight in the air as a stick, and 
let her down to the ground. Whence it was concluded 
that he kept some form of compact with the witch, to 
the letter, but broke it to the sense, as is well known to 
be the faithless custom of the Father of Lies. And 
certainly there was nothing of religious hope or trust in 
two strange lines which the unfortunate old woman had 
written with a piece of coal on the whitewashed wall of 
her place of captivity : . 

* I am going to my rest through the air, 
In a way that will make the folks stare ; 
When the bones of myriads fly up in a riot, 
May those of Maud Grimsorvve's mother He quiet.* 



252 

This delirious doggrel, nevertheless, supplied a piece 
of evidence . that the Witch of Aston, when out of the 
influence of her wicked grandson, did not claim for her 
daughter the name and status of wife to Sir Thomas 
Holte. 



253 



CHAPTER XCII. 

CHARLES THE FIRST IN BIRMINGHAM. 

A FURTHER remarkable circumstance diversified the 
King's progress through Birmingham^ and which was 
attended with results of no little importance to the 
town. 

Following on the advance of the principal masses of 
his army, Charles the First rode in a kind of triumphal 
state through the streets of Birmingham, surrounded by 
a brilliant escort of his principal officers. He was now 
arrayed, as became a king going to battle, in a complete 
suit of armour, with the exception that he wore a hat 
and feathers, the Earl of Denbigh carrying a helmet 
before him, decorated with the spikes of a crown. And 
as the entire population had swarmed out to witness the 
spectacle, the Birminghamers had ample opportunity to 
remark the displeased severity of their Sovereign's aspect, 
in finding himself, for the first time, amidst subjects so 
little disposed to render him the kind of obedience and 
submission he desired from all. 

In fact, Charles doubtless nourished in his heart pur- 
poses of retaliation and vengeance by no means unsus- 
pected ; and, moreover, the sturdy independence of the 
people's character indisposed them to feign what they 
did not feel on the occasion. Accordingly, the King 



254 THE armourer's daughter. 

was received iu almost total silence in answer to his own 
surly looks, or if a scanty cheer was anywhere raised, it 
only served the more depressingly to mark the fewness 
in numbers of the loyalists who thus expressed their 
sense. 

Before the Guildhall it had, however, been arranged 
the King was to receive a congratulation from the autho- 
rities of the town, there being no keys, nor any other 
emblems of submission, to be offered, belonging to it. 

John-the-Rogue had proposed this, and that he him- 
self should be the haranguer, in the expectation of re- 
ceiving some special token of royal approbation for his 
forward zeal. But just before the arrival of Charles, he 
found himself unexpectedly displaced by Tubal Bromy- 
cham, who, with the now eagerly-proffered assistance of 
Armourer Firebrace, caused himself to be carried on a 
litter before the Guildhall, and informed the company 
assembled there that, as Lord of the Town of Birming- 
ham, it was his duty and intention to offer the' King all 
the proper ceremonial of reception on its part. 

Tubal was still disabled from active movement by the 
injury to his limb, though it was now regaining power, 
and he continued frightfully pale with the exhaustion 
of the pain and fever he had suffered. But, as he was 
again surrounded by a strong body of the smiths, and 
backed by the blaster Armourer, and the energy of his 
resolves was appreciated, John-the-Rogue and his adhe- 
rents prudently waited events, and made no opposition. 
Whitehall nowhere appeared. 

And thus it befell that, on reining up his powerful 
charger, King Charles found himself faced by a spectrally 
pale sick man, on a couch, who, raising himself with 
dilficulty^ supported by Firebrace, bade his jMajesty wel- 



CHARLES THE FIRST IN BIRMINGHAM. 255 

come, in low, enfeebled tones, but with an eagerly ex- 
cited aspect, in the name of the town of Birmingham, 
as Lord thereof; and requested him to receive from his 
hands, as such, the customary acquittance for the manor, 
by touching the handle of the sword with which his 
ancestor. Sir William of Birmingham, had rescued Ed- 
ward I. at Crecy. 

And saying this. Tubal extended, with the Armourer's 
aid, a long, rusty, two-handled weapon, by the point, 
with the hilt to the monarch. 

It is probable that Charles would have complied at 
once with what he at first took to be some mere formula 
of feudalism, had not Prince Rupert suddenly exclaimed, 
^ ^Yhat ! the seditious smith of Birmingham, the impu- 
dent pretender to your Majesty's dues and rights in this 
town, and my own assassin assailant ! Dares he to ask 
of your Majesty a confirming of his usurpation, and ap- 
proval of his rebellion and mutiny -stirring among his 
townsfolk here? 'Tis he, chiefly, sire, who did deny 
your Majesty arms for your soldiers in Birmingham, 
and supplied the Parliament officers with the best its 
forges can produce/ 

' Is this so ? ' inquired Charles, with a deadly frown. 

/ Nay, but it cannot be denied ! ' squeaked Wynkyn- 
the- Weasel from far behind in the shade of the Guild- 
hall portico. 

Indignation seemed suddenly to restore all his ener- 
gies to Tubal. 

' No, sire ! ' he exclaimed, in a voice that rang now 
very loudly and clearly forth. 'I am no usurper, but 
lawful heir and descendant of my ancestors. Lords of 
Birmingham, who were unjustly deprived of their inhe- 
ritance by your predecessor, Edward VI. 5 which injuiy 



256 

it is now in your royal power to repair, by acknowledg- 
ing me for who I am. And traitor and assassin am I 
none, as I will prove body to body, and man to man, 
against this proud Prince, on any fair field your Majesty 
and all England can grant us for the trial in arms ! ' 

'Your Majesty has heard some particulars of this 
case, by my transmission from Master Holte,' inter- 
posed Lord Falkland, with his usual moderation and 
generous feeling; 'and truly it is one which calls for 
some righting at your hands, to undo the wrong of your 
predecessor ; nor could there be a fitter opportunity for 
exertion of your royal prerogative on the side of justice 
and mercy. 

' My liege, the man pretends to half the lands of Sir 
Thomas Holte among his forfeitures ; and to my certain 
knowledge has treasonably appealed from your courts 
of justice to the Parliament; besides showing himself 
on all occasions an aider and abettor of Oliver Cromwell 
in his criminal late designs, and stirring up of insurrec- 
tion in the town ! ' exclaimed Count O'Taafe. 

Nothing more was requisite than that name to exas- 
perate Charles the First. 

' Look to the Parliament then only, traitor ! for re- 
dress of your pretended grievances. From me you shall 
only receive, at the earliest convenience of my laws and 
judges, a well-deserved halter. Forward, gentlemen.^ 
And without deigning to listen to a word of further 
remonstrance, or even of the congratulatory speech which 
John-the-Rogue now conceived himself at liberty to 
deliver, King Charles the First proceeded on his way. 



257 



CHAPTER XCIII. 



THE BATTLE OF EDGHILL. 



It was speedily known in Birmingham, that on retiring 
from Aston Hall the King had left no inconsiderable 
garrison of some forty or fifty soldiers behind him^ under 
the command of Cornet Titus, who was promoted by 
Prince Rupert^s interest to a captaincy on the occasion. 

To the townsfolk in general this precaution was a 
standing menace, knowing on what terms of ill-neigh- 
bourhood they stood with the Hall. But to Tubal 
Bromycham it seemed as if specially arranged to the 
completion of his disaster in this unhappy love affair, 
and contrived to render hopeless any projects of relief he 
might form for the captive object of his affection. 

Dorothy had not failed to report to him the barbarous 
maltreatment to which she had discovered Arabella Holte 
was subjected, from the perverse tyranny of her father, 
to coerce her into abandoning the man she loved for the 
man she disliked, and who had treated her in several 
respects so ill. Of course, it .was no object with the 
wife of Edward Holte to promote Sir Thomas's object 
in securing himself his royal son-in-law. And now, it 
plainly appeared, the unhappy young lady was to re- 
main encompassed by the myrmidons of her rough royal 
suitor; and it seemed doubtful whether even her high 

VOL. III. S 



258 

and firm nature must not yield finally to persecutions 
and temptations so great, or her reason itself give way. 

All that could he learnt in sequence from Aston Hall 
justified the worst apprehensions. 

Every one in Birmingham concluded, from the ac- 
counts of the state of the body, that Sir Thomas was 
really the murderer of his cook; and further details of 
his insane violence and fury came constantly to know- 
ledge, and kept alive both indignation and dread of fur- 
ther ill- consequences to every one concerned. 

On the other hand, Tubal's interview with the King 
had satisfied him that there was no hope of justice or 
restoration at his hands. Under all these circumstances 
it was not wonderful that, as he regained his wonted 
powers of body and mind, Tubal should form and cherish 
the projects which at last he plainly avowed to the sym- 
pathising Master- Armourer Firebrace. 

Firebrace, it may be imagined, was as little pleased as 
any one with the tidings he received of his daughter's 
reception into her new family. 

'We will restore the town to the Parliament, and 
clear the country of this den of military jailors and as- 
sassins, while the main body of them are elsewhere en- 
gaged,' Tubal at last openly declared; and upon that 
both he and his once-intended father-in-law set earnestly 
to work to re-organise the Parliamentary party in the 
town, and form the people into a militia capable of 
defending it, and even of proceeding to external action. 
The death of Sisyphus removed one great source of 
faction and turbulence in Birmingham, and the mass of 
the townsfolks being already well inclined the way their 
leaders wished, began now to find themselves vexed and 
harassed by the royal garrison in their neighbourhood 



THE BATTLE OF EDGHILL. 259 

in a manner to irritate the most patient. Captain Titus, 
under pretence that the forges of Birmingham were 
devoted to the Parliamentary supplies, set his dragoons 
on cutting off the necessary materials of iron and coal 
from the Black Country. 

The news which arrived shortly after of the results of 
the first great battle of the Civil War, contributed rather 
to feed the flame than slacken it. 

It was on a Sunday, exactly one week after King 
Charles the First's visit to Aston Hall . October 23, 
1642 . that the armies of the King and Parliament for 
the first time came into conflict, in the famous valley of 
the Red Horse, near Keynton, in Warwickshire, and 
under the sharp ridges of the heights which have given 
their names of Edghill to the battle. 

The tidings which reached Birmingham faithfully fol- 
lowed the variations of the conflict itself. 

It was reported, in the first place, that the Kiug^s 
right wing, composed of cavalry under the command of 
Prince Rupert, had charged the Parliament horse with 
such fury and impetuosity that it was utterly driven 
from the field, and pursued in complete disorder and 
rout to a distance from it. Much too far, indeed, since 
both victors and vanquished were thus equally removed 
from influencing the general decision of the field, and 
the Earl of Essex was enabled to advance his infantry 
and attack the King's, which was much inferior in 
number and resolution. Indeed, the principal nobility 
and gentry disdained to serve, except on horseback, and 
consequently the Royalist infantry was formed of the 
riff-raff of the array. The King's foot was in its turn 
broken, and a terrible slaughter made among it. His 
own royal person, and those of the two boy-Princes, his 

s 2 



260 

sons, were for a time even in great danger, almost sur- 
rounded, as they were, by the enemy. And the Bir- 
minghamers might have been proud, had not their feel- 
ings been enlisted with the opposite party, to learn that 
a townswoman of their own . the wife of Edward Holte, 
who had fearlessly ventured to the very front of the 
battle to watch over its issue to her husband . was in- 
strumental in withdrawing the two young Princes safely 
from the disastrous scene, intrepidly undertaking the 
charge, and moving off with one in each hand to the 
neighbouring heights, where comparative safety was en- 
sured. 

At one time, in fact, the battle was supposed to be 
entirely lost by the Royalists, and earnest endeavours 
were made to induce the King to quit the field. But 
his obstinacy stood him in good stead on this occasion ; 
and Prince Rupert returning with a portion of his vainly 
victorious Cavaliers, restored the balance of strength. 
But darkness coming on, both sides desisted by a kind 
of consent from the conflict, and passed a dreary night 
under arms, scattered and intermingled along the entire 
valley, in expectation of its renewal in the morning. 

In the account of this latter portion of the action, 
again the people of Birmingham had cause to be proud 
of their Armourer^s Daughter. 

The story ran that Captain Edward Holte's horsemen 
returned from this successful charge under Rupert with- 
out their leader, reporting that he had fallen mortally 
wounded in a single combat in which he had engaged 
with one of the fugitive officers, almost close upon Keyn- 
ton. But Dorothy, distracted with grief as she was, 
attended by only one or two of her husband's soldiers, 
and furnished with a dark lantern, made her way over 



THE BATTLE OF EDGHILL. 261 

the entire scene of sanguinary conflict, and found Edward 
at length bleeding and insensible on the ground, with 
' several fearful swordcuts, but not dead ; and contrived 
to bind up his wounds, and bring him back to the royal 
quarters in time to preserve his life. 

Edward Holte continued for many months after en- 
tirely disabled for action, at Oxford, where the King 
ultimately fixed his head-quarters; an object of parti- 
cular solicitude and attention on the part of Charles, as 
also was his heroic wife, though the special reasons for 
the royal consideration that existed as regarded Edward 
were not divulged until long after. 

Dorothy herself was ignorant of w hat took place when, 
on the morning of the battle, the King had directed 
Edward Holte to be summoned to his presence. 

The young captain found Charles halted on horse- 
back, with a group of his principal superior officers, on 
the verge of a range of steep crags, just above the colos- 
sal sculpture in the red sandstone rocks which gives its 
name to the valley. But when he perceived Edward 
approach, he moved his horse along the cliflfs, making a 
sign to him only to follow, until they were out of hear- 
ing of the group of officers. 

These were all much surprised; but Edward himself 
was still more so, at the eager and excited expression of 
countenance with which the usually sedate and reserved 
King turned to him. 

^ Captain Holte,^ Charles then said, in tones of like 
emotion, ' would you know that man again, deem you . 
that Captain Oliver Cromwell . who attempted upon my 
person at Nottingham.' 

' Most certainly, sire ; if by nothing else, by his Bir- 
mingham-made armour.' 



262 

'Look out for him, then, when you charge in the 
Prince's squadrons. Make him mine, alive or dead . 
but dead rather than alive . and there is no recompense 
you can ask of me, I will refuse. And your father 
shall sooner disinherit our Crown ! ' 

Edward, who had such heavy grievances of his own to 
requite on Cromwell, answered as a loyal cavalier should 
. ' In truth, sire, I have no cause to love the man, and 
will do what in me lies to pleasure you on him.' 

' Swear it ! ' said the King, who seemed most pecu- 
liarly bent on his wishes in this respect, 'and I will 
give Rupert orders to leave you and your men entirely 
at your own discretion in the choice of antagonists ! ' 

Edward did so ; and it was in consequence of this 
oath that he became involved in the disaster previously 
mentioned, in the following manner. 

The two hosts began moving towards each other about 
noonday, with a great rumble and rattle of artillery and 
musketry on both sides, which did little execution, but 
frequently halting to steady their lines, and keep well 
together. It was thus nearly a couple of hours before 
they came sufficiently near to engage in the hand-to- 
hand conflict whereby battles were in that age chiefly 
decided. 

Prince Eupert, observing that the Parliament cavalry 
was principally massed on the right wing of Essex's 
army, had taken the left of the iting's advance with his 
own . intensely eager for the fray. Edward Holte was 
among these, earnestly searching for the enemy against 
whom he was specifically to direct his energies ; and as 
he rode in the front with the Prince, he had every 
opportunity. 

Nowhere, however, could he discern any sign of the 



THE BATTLE OF EDGHILL. 263 

bright armour of the Ironsides; and in reality, Crom- 
well, whose qualities were early disrelished by his supe- 
riors, and who was already on bad terms with the Parlia- 
ment general, had been stationed by him remote from 
the probable conspicuous scenes of action, . a circum- 
stance afterwards absurdly misrepresented by the royal- 
ists as really occasioned by a cowardly remissness and 
hanging back by Cromwell, at the commencement of the 
campaigns he made so fatal for them. 

On a sudden, Rupert gave the signal for the onset, 
shouting, the words, ' The King's right, and charge, 
gentlemen ! ' and Edward's troop being mixed in the 
van, of course he no longer deliberated on what share 
to take in the movement, but dashed on with the rest. 

Such was the violence and fury of Rupert's attack, 
that the entire left wing of the Parliament army was in 
a manner swept from the field in a moment, and the 
Prince's dragoons had the unresisted pursuit of the 
whole flying and scattered squadrons far and near. 

It is well known how Rupert's impetuosity and in- 
satiable ardour for slaughter and destruction transported 
him always, on the field of battle, into losing the advan- 
tages he gained, by following them up too far. But, of 
course, it was not for any subordinate officer to attempt 
to check the fury of the pursuit, even if Edward Holte 
had not shared as wildly and enthusiastically as any one 
in the company in the vehement sense of victory and 
mastery achieved. 

' Kill, kill ! ' was Rupert's only word of command. 
But Edward himself was well pleased with the notion 
that every flourish of his sword increased the distance 
between his beloved wife and danger. And he was fol- 
lowing on as recklessly as the rest in pursuit of the 



264 THE armourer's daughter. 

flying foe, when passing a farmhouse on the roadside, 
he suddenly caught tones which he recognized, from a 
yard within a gate, exclaiming, ' Keep still, I say, son 
Oliver, yet awhile, till these mad Rupert's men are 
fairly ridden past ; when, by the Lord ! in spite of 
Essex's grizzled beard, I will try if we have not a good 
Lord still, and one who will keep his promise to us, by 
pushing between them and their King, and rending him 
from the midst of their sorry foot.' < 

It was the voice of Captain Cromwell. 

Edward remembered its peculiar tones instantly, and 
reined up his horse at once, shouting a halt to his men ; 
but, on looking over the palings enclosing the farmyard, 
he perceived only barns and out-buildings crowded with 
stacks of corn and hay from the recent harvest. Nothing 
living appeared at the moment but a number of ducks 
paddling in a dirty pond. 

Edward was, however, convinced, from what he had 
heard, that troops were lurking concealed within, under 
cover, and he shouted the discovery as loudly as he 
could to the galloping throngs engaged in the pursuit, 
forgetting in his eagerness that he was now himself left 
almost alone ; but this seemed too much for the patience 
of the young soldier, who had probably been addressed 
in those remembered accents, for a horseman in the 
Firebrace steel suddenly spurred from behind a stack, 
and dashed with uplifted sword at Edward Holte. 

'Nay, father! 'tis but one man, and of my own 
inches. Let me flesh my maiden sword ! ' exclaimed 
the strange rider, and joined in a hand-to-hand conflict 
with Edward Holte. 

It was, however, but of brief duration. Edward, per- 
fect master of his weapon, and alarmed with the convic- 



THE BATTLE OF EDGHILL. 265 

tion that he had fallen into an ambush, struck a blow 
which inflicted a mortal wound on his antagonist. 

He would then have retired for support, but was 
almost instantly overtaken by a taller and stouter man, 
in similar array to the one he had overthrown, and in 
whose raging features he recognized . Oliver Cromwell ! 

^ Yillanous cavalier, ray boy is killed by you, and I 
will have your life in turn . Edward Holte ! * 

Cromwell recognized his antagonist as their s^Yords 
came together. But John-the-Rogue proved of inferior 
temper to the Firebrace steel, and once more Edward 
was at the mercy of his adversary ; but this time found 
none. Edward's troop, however, had now made back 
to his assistance, and a sharp conflict ensued, in the 
course of which the farmstead and all its stacks were 
set on fire, and Edward received the wound under which 
he so long after languished. Doubtless, as he himself 
believed, from the hand of Cromwell, though he could 
never distinctly remember what followed in the furious 
melee, till he found himself stretched on a heap of bloody 
straw, in the King's quarters, with his wife and one of 
the royal surgeons busily engaged in recalling him to 
life from a deadly swoon. 

But although Cromwell himself escaped from the 
vengeance aimed at him, his eldest son Oliver, a youth 
of the most promising martial qualities, was slain in 
the conflict. And who knows what great effects were 
not thus produced by the chance stroke of Edward 
Holte's sword that day ? This youth might not have 
proved, like his younger brother Richard, unequal to 
the weight of empire that fell upon him from his father's 
shoulders, and a Cromwell dynasty might even now be 
seated on the throne of England, or presiding, like the 
Princes of Orange, over its commonwealth. 



266 

On the other hand, the bitterness of a bereft father^s 
feelings might not have mingled in the politician's calcu- 
lations, and the comely head of Charles the First might 
never have rolled upon the block by the behest of Oliver 
Cromwell. 



267 



CHAPTER XCIV. 

ATTACK ON ASTON HALL. 

The general result of the battle of Edghill was unde- 
cisive. Both parties withdrew from the field on the 
following day^ severely mauled, without attempting to 
renew the conflict. But the universal exasperation and 
violence of men's feelings and partisanship were neces- 
sarily roused into fiercer and wilder outbreaks ; and Bir- 
mingham, above all, already profoundly agitated and stir- 
ring beneath the surface, found itself drawn into sudden 
action by the determination of its chiefs. 

Tubal Bromycham was himself urged to more decisive 
and rapid movement than he had at first designed, by 
tidings which now for the first time reached him direct 
from Aston Hall. Phoebe Maythorn presented herself 
one morning at the Moat House, in Birmingham, 
weeping, and laden with disastrous tidings of the state 
of things at the Hall ; as may be guessed, since Lady 
Holte herself, vanquishing the excessive timidity of her 
nature, and her dread of her tyrannous husband, had 
sent her to declare . even to Tubal Bromycham . that 
unless some rescue arrived speedily for her daughter, 
her reason, or her life, would be sacrificed to her father's 
obstinate cruelty. 

Regardless of the realities of the case, and more 



268 THE armouker's daughter. 

excited than ever against both his sons, Sir Thomas 
chose to declare that the Witch of Aston's death must 
have broken all her spells, and consequently, that his 
daughter must be, and should be, willing to marry 
Prince Rupert at once. And he had actually expedited 
a message to that effect to the Prince, and had ordered 
bis wife to make every preparation for the nuptials, as 
if they were certain to take place. And yet Arabella 
Holte continued a solitary captive in a dismal hole in 
the roof of the Hall, her father assuring her constantly 
that she should never quit it except to marry the Prince. 
And to complete the strange barbarity and certainty of 
what was intended, the Reverend Mr. Lane had been 
induced by threats, and as the only means to avoid Sir 
Thomas's indignation for the part he had taken in his 
son's secret union, to promise to perform the marriage 
ceremony whenever called upon, and whatever reluctance 
might be exhibited on the bride's part. Such was the 
infirmity of the old clergyman's character, and his sub- 
jection to the will of his violent patron. 

Matters were evidently drawing to a formidable crisis. 

With regard to his sons . on the one hand, there wa3 
long reason to suppose that Edward Holte's wounds at 
Edghill would prove mortal, and the baronet was so 
fiendishly set against his daughter-in-law that he was 
resolved her child, if she had one, should never inherit 
Aston Hall ; while, on the other, he had conceived a still 
bitterer hatred against Richard Grimsorwe, and with still 
more reason ; for the villafh had actually presented the 
Parliament with a petition for the redress of his pre- 
tended injuries in being deprived of what he alleged to 
be his rights, as legitimate eldest son of Sir Thomas 
Holte, and had produced as a proof the forged certifi- 



ATTACK ON ASTOX HALL. 269 

cate of his mother's marriage, to which he had now 
daringly appended a forged signature for Adam Black- 
jack. And he so plausibly supported his case by decla- 
rations that Sir Thomas had caused the destruction of 
the two living witnesses of the document_, for no other 
reason but that they were so. He contrived so artfully 
to enlist the sympathies of the chief leaders of the Par- 
liament against their declared and violent foe_, that an 
ordinance of the House actually assented to the prayer 
of the petition, and a select committee was appointed 
to examine and report upon the proofs that might be 
laid before it by the petitioner. 

Among these figured the murder of the cook by Sir 
Thomas Holte, though Grimsorwe affected only to urge 
it as a manslaughter on sudden provocation, caused by 
Blackjack's declaring the truth, and revealing where the 
certificate had been so long concealed. And he prayed 
that the pardon granted by the King might be produced 
as a confession of his father's main delinquencies, and a 
completion of the validity of the document he urged on 
consideration. And as this latter act of grace, accorded 
almost as a matter of course, could be quoted as a new 
sign of the King's indifference to public justice and 
monstrous system of favouritism, the Parliament readily 
endorsed the demand ; and, although the pardon had 
never certainly passed the Great Seal, made the grant a 
portion of the charges presented against the fugitive 
Lord Keeper Lyttelton. 

Putting all these circumstances together, Tubal had 
no doubt but that Sir Thomas was in a state of mind 
that rendered him capable of any violence to carry out 
the sole favourite plan that remained to him, and from 
which he could best hope support in his difficulties. And 



270 

as after the battle of EdgMl, and the King^s retirement 
to Oxford, it seemed not nnlikely that Prince Rupert 
would have leisure upon his hands shortly, to figure in 
his part in the vindictive and tyrannous transaction, 
Tubal, and his ally the Armourer, perceived that no time 
was to be lost. 

Accordingly, they resolved upon an immediate attack 
on Aston Hall, to dislodge the royalist garrison there, and 
set Arabella Holte at liberty. 

This garrison, under the malicious Titus's command, 
and by Sir Thomas's wishes and abetment, had for some 
time been exhibiting still worse tendencies to mischief and 
violence towards the inhabitants of Birmingham, besides 
the injury done to the staple industry of the town. And 
probably it would not have been found very difficult to 
persuade the townsfolk of the propriety of endeavouring 
to rid themselves of the nuisance as speedily as possible. 
But Tubal Bromycham now exhibited very unexpected 
qualities of popular oratory, and assembling the people 
in the market-place, he set before them so moving and 
impassioned a statement of the cruelties and tyranny 
exercised by Sir Thomas Holte, and of the perpetual 
misery and danger awaiting them in the presence of a 
Cavalier garrison at Aston Hall, that the crowded assem- 
blage unanimously demanded to be led at once to rout 
out their insolent oppressors from the place. 

Moreover, Whitehall, who ever since Sisyphus so auda- 
ciously contended with him, had seemed confused and 
strangely moping in his conduct, and had refrained from 
all his old vagaries, now emerged again in his old charac- 
ter of prophet and denouncer of woes to the royalists and 
their favourers. He declared that Aston Hall was doomed 
to be laid level with the dust, and that the toad and 



ATTACK ON ASTON HALL. 271 

serpent sLould ere long spawn their venomous brood in 
its stateliest chambers. 

A better assurance, however, of this perhaps lay in the 
fact that Firebrace produced Tubal Bromycham's famous 
cannon, confessing that he had found himself loath to 
destroy a noble work of art of the kind, and so had 
merely concealed the instrument of destruction in a dis- 
used forge-house. 

Without this formidable aid, the efforts even of a 
greatly out-numbering multitude against the disciplined 
force at Aston Hall, might have proved of doubtful re- 
sult. And indeed, when the Birmingham men mustered 
to the number of about twelve hundred, advanced in good 
order to the entrance of the Park, and thence dispatched 
a messenger to require the immediate evacuation of the 
mansion, and its surrender to the people of Birming- 
ham, the frivolous and time-serving Titus seemed rather 
amused than otherwise by the demand. 

Sir Thomas Holte and he were now very special friends, 
he having persuaded the baronet that he earnestly de- 
sired to promote his royal patron's union with his daugh- 
ter. And he supported the old man in his irrational plans 
of subduing his daughter's obstinacy, as he phrased it, 
with the zeal of malice and revenge. 

In spite of the strange and horrifying symptoms 
which had begun to be exhibited by the unfortunate 
captive, he persisted in assuring Sir Thomas that the 
delirious cries and raving entreaties which were now 
frequently audible from the pretended madwoman's cell, 
were artful attempts on her part to enlist the sympa- 
thies of servants, and stupid people of that kind, and 
persuade a release, which would destroy all the good 
hitherto done. 



272 THE armourer's daughter. 

Titus was also a great bottle companion, and lie kept 
Sir Thomas from much interval of lone reflection by 
daily and nightly com potations. 

They were in the midst of a revel of this kind when 
the person sent to summon Aston Hall . Bailiff Cooper, 
much against his will, but it was thought a royalist would 
be safe on the errand . arrived. 

It was a gloomy, overhanging autumn, or winter day 
rather, perhaps it should be called, being pretty far ad- 
vanced in November, not very cold, though a faint pow- 
dering of snow had occasionally fallen that morning, and 
Sir Thomas and his military convivialist were seated to- 
gether, at a rousing fire, in the chamber the King had 
occupied as the sitting-room of his suite ; now in part 
filled by noble beginnings of a grand museum, if carried 
out with the spirit and goodwill evinced by the original 
projectors. 

Sir Thomas and his friend were engaged in a strangely 
senseless amusement, endeavouring to out-grimace the 
extraordinary masks in ironwork that decorate the vast 
fireplace of this chamber, and occasionally toasting one 
another in brimming flagons of mulled sack, with bob- 
bing crab- apples, to make the flavour pungent, in the 
midst. 

It so happened that Titus, perhaps purposely, had 
peculiarly jarred on Sir Thomas's recollections by in- 
quiring . 'What wondrously skilful, comic fellow had fan- 
cied those rare laughing visages, that looked like the 
figures you see in dreams, with their very souls bursting 
with laughter?' And Sir Thomas, gloomily pausing, 
had just said, ^ The lamed rascal who, they tell me, is 
again lording it in Birmingham ; and who, why the 
Prince hanged him not that witchcraft-night, I never 



ATTACK ON ASTON HALL. 273 

could well understand !' and had fallen into a sombre 
rumination, when a domestic ran in, with a scared 
look, and announced . ^A mob coming from Birming- 
ham, your honour. And one before them to say what 
they mean/ 



Vol. hi. 



274 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XCV. 

THE siege of ASTON HALL. 

'The good folks of Birmingham have bidden adieu to 
what little possession of their senses they have shown 
these latter times/ said Captain Titus, after listening 
pleasantly enough to the High Bailifif^s confused and 
apologetic account of his errand. ' Are they madmen, 
to think that a garrison of the King's soldiers will sur- 
render a place of any strength, and this fine palace may 
be made of much, on the demand of a higglepiggledy 
mob?* 

^ I am only a mouthpiece, and one unwilling as the 
tortured twist of brass on the lips of a trumpeter, that, 
if left to its own utterances, would but bray or bleat ; not 
discourse all manner of valiance and assault,' replied 
the Bailiff. ' My wife bade me do none of it ; but how 
can you refuse when they have you by the throait ? But 
never was creature more choked^ as it were with dust, by 
his own words. I would I had as much water as I could 
hold in a sieve to take away the thirst.' 

The Bailiff desiringly eyed the drink between the two 
captains of Aston Hall, but neither offered him any. 

' Who leads the rogues ?' said Sir Thomas, after an in- 
terval of gloomy reflection. ' But there is no need to 
ask, . Tubal Bromycham, of course.' 



THE SIEGE OF ASTON HALL. 275 

' The same, worshipful sir ; and more bent than ever to 
be lord of Birmingham/ replied the Bailiflf. 

' AVhat he shall never be, however/ Sir Thomas replied, 
with a fierce smile, ' is . husband of my daughter. I know 
how to remedy that.' 

' Tut, we are good as long as our provisions hold out 
against all Birmingham can do against us,' said Captain 
Titus, scornfully. ^ It is scarcely worth while to close 
the doors or the stout oak shutters. Sir Thomas; but 
do so, while I ride out to look at these audacious fel- 
lowsj and give them a taste of what is further in store 
for them.' 

Sir Thomas nodded, but rather absently. He roused 
himself, however, by a seeming effort^ to execute the por- 
tion of the taskwork put upon him. 

In a few moments Aston Hall resounded with a clatter 
of warlike movement and preparation. The lower win- 
dows were hastily secured with their iron bolts and mas- 
sive shutters, the doors locked, and the house servants, 
collecting by pre-arranged order in the hall, armed them- 
selves as best they might from the store of weapons over 
the grand mantelpiece. An alarum beU was at the same 
time rung from the steeple of Aston church, to summon 
the neighbouring farmers and villagers to render what as- 
sistance they might. But seemingly with very little effect. 
A deep prejudice had been excited against Sir Thomas 
by reports of the strangely cruel manner in which he was 
behaving to his children, as well as the verified facts of 
his career, and the belief that Adam Blackjack had fallen 
a victim to his violence and passion. 

The greater portion of Titus's garrison was of mus- 
keteers, of a regiment commanded by Count O'Taafe. 
But he had also about a score of Prince Rupert's dra- 

T 2 



276 

goons, whom he directed to mount, and placing himself 
at their head, while Sir Thomas busied himself with the 
internal arrangements, he rode forth, apparently to re- 
connoitre the enemy. But the owner of Aston Hall would 
have been little pleased if he could have seen the expres- 
sion of countenance, and heard the muttered words, with 
which his late boon companion looked back at the stately 
abode as he did so. 

' We will defend it long enough to get it destroyed, 
my good old fiinger of pewter pots !^ he said, stroking the 
scar on his forehead with the back of his hand ; ' and not 
long enough to hinder you from becoming the grandfather 
of a race of Birmingham smiths, ambitious old tyrant ! 
I have no cause to wish it otherwise/ 

On arriving at the palings of Aston Park, within which 
the Birminghamers had not entered until an answer to 
their summons came, Titus was, however, rather surprised 
at the number of enemies he espied outside. Chiefly armed, 
it is true, with pikes and bars of iron, but drawn up in 
very steady and solid lines on each side of the road to the 
town, with a fine piece of artillery on wheels conspicuous 
in the rear. Tubal rode upon this, which was drawn by 
about a dozen of his comrades, to rest his still weak limb ; 
and the entire array seemed governed in its movements 
by his directions. For though Armourer Firebrace was 
present, he contented himself with carrying Tubal's 
standard of a smith's leather apron, gaudily painted with 
the arms of the Birmingham family. 

It is probable, nevertheless, that Titus was rather 
pleased than otherwise at the strength his assailant pre- 
sented, as affording him a better excuse for the conduct 
he meditated in the affair, in the gratification of the bit- 
terly revengeful feelings that possessed him. 



THE SIEGE OF ASTON HALL. 277 

^ Hillo, rascally rabblement V he shouted over the 
palings ; ' where's the impudent captain of housebreakers 
and mechanic slaves among you who has dared to sum- 
mon an officer of the King to a surfender V 

'I am the leader of the Men of Birmingham, and I 
am here !' Tubal replied, recognising with strong distaste 
one of his worst assailants in his recent capture. ' But 
you give us the names you deserve for yourselves alone/ 

' I answer your summons, then, thus, men of Birming- 
ham, if so you call yourselves,^ Titus replied. 'AA'hile 
two stones of its walls stand upon each other, Aston 
Hall shall never be yours, so begin destroying when 
you will !' 

And with a curiously significant gesture of invitation 
towards the piece of artillery, Titus retired ; remarking 
to his horsemen as he did it, ' They are too many for an 
attack . it were a madness the Prince himself would not 
venture on. Let us return to the Hall.* 

And return they did, losing thereby all the advantage 
of their position in the park, in the probably disorderly 
and interrupted advance of so undisciplined an assailing 
force. 

But Tubal himself seemed not inclined to take the hint 
thrown out for his adoption. Firebrace proposed that 
they should unmuzzle the gun, and try its capabilities at 
once on Aston Hall, but he dissented. 

' Aston Hall is the work chiefly of our own hands, 
Armourer J and a goodly one, that should become the 
inheritance of your descendants. We want to rid us of 
its ill tenantry, not to destroy the place itself,' he re- 
marked; ' moreover, who knows when the ball is launched 
where it may light ? And there is a head under yonder 
roofs which to preserve from injury methinks I could 



278 

prop the skies with ray shoulders ! And shall I loosen 
stones and timbers on it ?' 

He ^ave directions instead that the park palings 
should be levelled, 'and the advance continued of the 
entire assailing force. 

No resistance being offered, the townsfolk swarmed up 
the stately avenue leading from Birmingham to Aston 
Hall. But on approaching, they were'received with a 
considerable change in the tune. 

Sir Thomas Holte witnessed the rapid return of the 
dragoons with very great surprise, which he took no 
pains whatever to conceal. 

^ Never a sword . nothing but spurs . red V he ex- 
claimed. ' What means this. Captain Titus ?' 

' You will see in a moment. Sir Thomas. There is an 
army marching against us,^ said Titus, with an appear- 
ance of consternation not altogether feigned. 

' Whatever may be their number, my own servants 
and myself will at least make some effort to diminish 
them !^ Sir Thomas Holte scornfully replied ; and Titus 
. apprehensive that he was working his game too openly, 
or anxious to give himself an appearance of earnestness, 
or, in fine, willing to do what injury he could without 
spoiling his main views . very efficiently arranged his 
force for resistance. 

It is on record that the first assault on Aston Hall 
was repulsed with considerable slaughter, though made 
with great courage and obstinacy. 

The moment the Birrainghamers, scrambling headlong 
over hedges and ditches, and making for the doors and 
windows to break them in, appeared within musket range, 
a murderous fire was opened upon them, and in a few 
moments many were severely wounded, and several killed. 



THE SIEGE OF ASTON HALL. 279 

A cry of alarm arose, and all Tubals efforts could not 
prevent the greater portion of the crowd from taking to 
flight. But such was his excitement and exasperation, 
that he leaped from his gun, and, forgetful altogether of 
his lamed condition, rushed about in all directions, at- 
tempting to stop the fugitives, and hindering the aban- 
donment of the cannon, which he forced a number of 
the men to assist in dragging off. 

He managed at last, by the most strenuous exertions, 
to rally the main body at the point whence they had 
started, on the boundaries of Aston Park. And when 
the first panic Avas over, he had nearly succeeded in in- 
ducing a portion of the fugitives to return to the assault, 
when on a sudden Whitehall . who had been foremost in 
the advance, and equally so in the retreat . yelled out, 
' Stay, stay ! the Lord is not willing for an attack to- 
day ! I have wrestled with Him in prayer, and can 
obtain no answer, your sins are so heavy and numerous ! 
But until l"do so, the victory cannot be to us, and your 
blood might deluge the whole earth in vain ! So let us 
spend the rest of the day in fasting, and humiliation, and 
prayer, until a sign is granted us V 

The singular influence acquired by this frenzied en- 
thusiast appeared most strikingly in the immediate irre- 
solution and final desisting of the people from their more 
courageous resolution. Tubal himself had no sway against 
the ' Angel's' inspired wishes; and, greatly to his indig- 
nation and concern, the Birminghamers, gathering around 
the prophet, assented at once to his instructions to encamp 
whereon they stood, and fast and pray until the Lord was 
induced to turn His face their way once more, and to 
manifest the same by some plain sign, which those who 
ran might read. 



280 THE armourer's daughter. 

This circumstance afforded time for divers unlucky 
incidents. 

After barricading his house, and witnessing the return 
of Titus with his dragoons, Sir Thomas had proposed 
that an immediate messenger should be sent to the royal 
head- quarters, in Oxford, for assistance, since the town- 
folk of Birmingham were attacking them in such force. 
But after the repulse, his vanity and confidence rose so 
high that Titus easily persuaded him there was no occa- 
sion for such an appeal. Still, he declared, it was cer- 
tainly advisable to send his Highness the Prince word 
to come at once and remove his bride from the midst of 
such a hurlyburly. And if Sir Thomas exerted his pa- 
ternal authority at last in a decisive manner, and com- 
pelled ]\Iistress Holte to yield obedience, bride she must 
be, for there could be no doubt that the Prince would be 
alarmed at the approach of his rival, and willing to over- 
look any trifling outward signs of reluctance that might 
remain on the lady's part. 

Titus thus secured a renewed outbreak of the stern 
old man's tyranny against his unfortunate daughter, while 
he guaranteed himself, as he imagined, safe from his pa- 
tron's displeasure, by seeming thus entirely unapprehen- 
sive of danger from his assailants, and desirous to promote 
his wishes. While he was aware that the Prince being 
at Lichfield, ample time was afforded him to continue a 
proper show of resistance, and yet bring about the other 
ill-consequences to the Holte family his mean malice in- 
duced him to plan. 

Several other untoward results followed on the delay 
occasioned by the repulse of the assailants of Aston 
Hall. 

Among the rest, the very next morning, when the Bir- 



THE SIEGE OF ASTON HALL. 281 

minghamers, still unable to obtain any answer to their 
prayers by the medium of their crazy intercessor, were 
still hesitating and unwilling to proceed to the attack, 
two most unexpected assistants arrived in their camp. 
These were no other than Captain Cromwell and Richard 
Grirasorwe, who presented themselves with an order of 
the Parliament appointing them conjointly Commis- 
sioners for the town and district of Birmingham, with 
the amplest military and civil authority. 

Croraweirs merits had forced themselves into conspi- 
cuous notice at the battle of Edghill, in which his troop 
of dragoons was the only one that remained unbroken, 
and distinguished itself in covering the rout of the rest; 
and his opinions had acquired much weight. Conse- 
quently he was considered fittest to manage for the Par- 
liament in Warwickshire, and his troop was quartered 
for the purpose at Coventry. Grimsorwe, on the other 
hand, from his pretended wrongs and legal education, 
was deemed very suitable for the duties confided to 
him at Birmingham. And, moreover, in compassion 
for them, or in revenp^e asrainst so devoted a rovalist as 
Sir Thomas Holte had exhibited himself, powers were 
given to him to sequestrate the whole Aston Hall pro- 
perty, and take charge of it in the name of the Par- 
liament, until such further redress could be granted 
him as he could show due, to the satisfaction of that 
assembly. 

Neither the soldier nor the civilian, it is, however, pro- 
bable, had calculated on finding the people of Birming- 
ham already engaged in a task which was likely to render 
the assistance of Cromwell's dragoons necessary. He 
had not brought them with him then, but had merely 
arrived with his fellow-commissioner, toinstal themselves, 



282 

and consider the best means of accomplishing their other 
objects. 

Cromwell seemed, and really was, greatly surprised at 
the numbers and efficient appearance of the improvised 
little army. But he found its general in a different mood 
from what he expected, when he proceeded to offer him 
his congratulations. 

' Not much of soldiers yet, say what you will. Captain 
Cromwell,' said Tubal, gloomily. ^ Every moment's 
delay is perilous to us in various ways, yet my men will 
not stir a foot again against Aston until I know not what 
miraculous encouragement is afforded us, in answer to 
our minister's prayers. And he has been praying as use- 
lessly as hammering cold iron, all yesterday, and part to- 
day, for a sign !' 

^Hath he so?' replied Cromwell thoughtfully. ' But 
is it quite certain a sign ought to be granted us? Know 
you what force is assembled at Aston Hall ?' 

Tubal replied, 'About forty soldiers, under Captain 
Titus, and some score servingmen, gamekeepers and the 
like, with Sir Thomas Holte.' 

* Is this well assured ?' Cromwell rejoined. 

' Most certain. There is a man here from the place . 
one Caspar Feldon . who had either been enforced 
against his will to serve, or has some secret grudge of 
his own, and came over to us last night, and reckons 
them at so many, and no more,' Tubal replied. 

' Why, then, of a surety we are in numbers enough 
for the work, and to spare, if we could depend better to- 
day than yesterday upon such unseasoned soldiery !' re- 
plied Cromwell ; but on a sudden his eye fell upon the 
piece of artillery, and brightened up like a flash of steel 
in the sun. ' What is yonder?' he exclaimed. 'A cul- 



THE SIEGE OF ASTON HALL. 283 

verin ? Will it discharge ? Good Lord ! what further 
sign can men require than such a first-rate piece of 
deadly workmanship as this V 

And he examined the instrument with great delight, 
while Tubal, with a maker^s natural pride, exhibited the 
power and finish of his manufacture. 

Grimsorwe, whose reception in his new and influential 
quality had not been very brilliant on the part of Tubal 
or Firebrace, nevertheless followed his coadjutor closely 
about, and now made the saturnine observation, ^ Ex- 
pound so much at once to the good folks, and let us 
proceed to work, Master Cromwell,^ when on a sudden 
he started and turned pale. 

' What ails you, blaster Grimsorwe ? Does the mere 
yawn of the empty mouth of destruction affright you V 
said Cromwell, who was pretty well aware of his coad- 
jutor's lack of physical courage. 

'Not so! But how came my brother Edward's 
Sutton gamekeeper among you here? What, honest 
Gaspar ! have you also turned to the other side V 
Richard said, looking at a sturdily-built man, who stood, 
gun in hand, apparently on guard over the artillery. 

' I knew not that it was yours, sir, or likely to be,' 
the man replied, with gloomy discomfiture, and averting 
his eyes. 

'You should make much of this man. Captain Crom- 
well,' said Grimsorwe, in a patronising tone, and evi- 
dently trying to conciliate the speaker ; ' he is the best 
marksman in the Midland, and was always esteemed so 
on Sutton Chase. Has Edward Holte turned you from 
his service, my good Gaspar? And will you now believe 
that he scandalled me to you in warning you concerning 
your good housewife and me ?' 



284 THE armourer's daughter. 

' I believe now, as always, Master Grimsorwe,' replied 
the Sutton keeper, in tones of even deepened gloom, 
and still keeping his ej^es oflf the impudent seducer, ' in 
my own eyes/ 

^Believe what you will, then; but were I Master 
Bromycham, or the captain here, I would have no such 
traitors and renegades in my camp V returned Grim- 
sorwe, with spiteful vehemence. 

' What are you yourself, Master Grimsorwe, if it be 
true you are of Sir Thomas Holte's begetting?' the 
same stern, unaltered tones rejoined. 

Grimsorwe turned scornfully away, while Cromwell 
burst into a hoarse laugh. 'Fairly answered, Master 
Grimsorwe !' he said. ' But new let us to our main 
business. We will assault Aston, and at once, with this 
well-made tube. But first, to satisfy these honest, 
prayerful creatures how fitting it is we should. Where 
is Master Whitehall? I have some say with him, I 
know.' 

He moved on with the other parties to this dialogue 
towards a group of people collected round the ^ Angel,' 
who, from the top of a barrel, was vehemently uttering 
the words, followed in chorus by the crowd, * O Lord ! 
good Lord ! best Lord ! heavenly Lord ! give us a sign, 
a sign, a sign, whereby to know if we shall proceed in 
this business or not ! A sign, a sign, a sign, good 
Lord!' 

' Here is one,' said Cromwell, stepping forward, and 
bringing Grimsorwe with him. ' Lo, the end is at 
hand, when the son is armed against the father ; and it 
is Master Grimsorwe who proposes we should all march 
at once to take Aston Hall from the Cavaliers !' 

' I have fall authority, sirs . positive instructions . to 



THE SIEGE OP ASTON HALL. 285 

receive Aston Hall and its belongings into my own 
keeping, in the Parliament's name/ said Grimsorwe, 
unabashed at the wondering, and by no means approv- 
ing, gaze people directed on him. 

Whitehall would not, however, accept this sign. 

' It is nothing,' he said. ' Lo, I myself have re- 
fused to acknowledge my wife and children, who have 
trudged painfully hither, on foot, to see me, from Lon- 
don, after being denied their presence and comforting 
for eleven mortal years of captivity! But this is much . 
this is all ! I know and believe thou, Oliver, art the 
man appointed by God to do this work, and under your 
leadership 1 bid the people march to victory !' 

The shouts of the assembly ratified the declaration of 
their minister; and Cromwell took upon himself the 
position at once which his rank and new commission in 
the Parliament's service entitled him to assume. And, 
indeed, the singular ascendancy he exercised indisposed 
Tubal himself to any opposition to his rule. 

Preparations were accordingly at once resumed for 
action, and the Birminghamers once more invaded Aston 
Park, stimulated by a hope of vengeance also, now. 

Meanwhile Gaspar Feldon had deserted his place by 
the cannon, after a short but profoundly sombre interval 
of reflection. 

^ He witnesses that I am a good marksman !' he then 
muttered to himself; ' and traitor and renegade will I 
no longer continue where he also is one ! It is not 
murder to slay an enemy in open warfare ; and cowardly 
as he is, I may have some chance at his heart while he 
watches how his errand speeds in the assault on Aston 
Hall ! No one knows yet there where I have been. I 
will return!' 



286 THE armourer's daughter. 

And shouldering his gun, with a dark smile, the in- 
jured husband of Esther Peldon stole from his guard, 
and creeping unobservedly along the park palings, soon 
re-entered the enclosure, and made the best of his way 
back to whence he had come. 



287 



CHAPTER XCVI. 

. THE SURRENDER OF ASTON HALL. 

Sir Thomas, we know, had not concealed his surprise 
at the easy manner in which the commanding officer of 
his garrison abandoned the outer limits of his charge. 
But as nothing unfavourable seemed to happen in con- 
sequence, greatly to the surprise of both himself and 
Titus, he made no further commentary. 

Next day, however, the case was altered, when Gaspar 
Feldon returned, and declaring that he had accidentally 
been made prisoner, and had afterwards effected his 
escape from the slight guard kept upon him, astounded 
Sir Thomas by the information of the presence of 
Richard Grimsorwe, and his pretensions, in the assailing 
force, which he declared was on the way to resume the 
attack on the Hall. 

In his exasperation. Sir Thomas actually cursed his 
wicked son. ' God requite him/ he said, ' and fulfil 
the curse I utter on him ! God visit on him the anguish 
he has planted in my heart, and all his wickedness ! 
The murderous villain ! for he, and he only, killed Adam 
Blackjack the cook V 

* Was it really so. Sir Thomas Holte ?' inquired Gas- 
par Feldon, with a strange earnestness. 

There was something in the man^s manner that power- 
fullv arrested Sir Thomas's attention. 



288 THE armourer's daughter. 

^ As my soul lives, it was so V he exclaimed. ' You 
may believe as much, good fellow, of a man who has 
boasted in open companies a thousand times, how wel- 
come your demure wife ever made him at Sutton Manor 
House !' 

' I do believe that Richard Grimsorwe is the mur- 
derer of Adam Blackjack, Sir Thomas Holte ! And, 
blood for blood ! . it is written in the law !' 

And Feldon, who was an Anabaptist of the school of 
Sisyphus the bellows-blower_, ground his teeth audibly 
together, and retired. 

The renewal of an attack, previously repulsed with so 
little difficulty, did not alarm Sir Thomas, who was 
ignorant of the Birminghamers' possession of a piece of 
heavy artillery, and that the assailing force was now 
under the direction of the great military genius of the 
times. But he began to be impatient for the arrival of 
Prince Rupert, having at last, as he considered, over- 
come his unfortunate daughter's reluctance to the glorious 
match he was bent on forcing upon her. 

Titus's truly diabolical ingenuity had suggested a 
means which, after every other excess of coercion and 
cruelty had failed, seemed to succeed. 

Under his inspirations Sir Thomas explained the noise 
of musketry, and of the assault on Aston Hall, which 
necessarily reached up even to the solitary chamber in 
its roof where Arabella Holte was a captive, as an at- 
tempt on the part of her lover. Tubal, and his townfolk 
to effect her rescue. The subsequent silence, he declared, 
probably enough, confessed their defeat and dispersion. 
But he coupled this with a false statement . that the 
pretended Lord of Birmingham was made prisoner in 
the assault, and that the next discharge of musketry she 



THE SURRENDER OF ASTON HALL. 289 

liearfl would announce he had met a nobler death than 
any ti-aitor rebel could deserve ! 

Arabella's terrible anguish . her wild outcries for 
mercy on her unfortunate hero-lover . would have moved 
the compassion of the most ruthless hearts, not domi- 
nated by the relentlessly exasperated feelings that pos- 
sessed Sir Thomas. His own calamities had made him 
utterly insensible, instead of softening him, to the mi- 
series of others ! The barbarous old man having lent 
ear to Titus's suggestions that he had only to remove 
the object of preference to dispose his daughter to obedi- 
ence to his will in favour of the Prince . in the midst of 
Arabella's entreaties, a rattle of musketry from the 
court j^ard below reached her ears, purposely discharged 
by the captain, and which Sir Thomas exultingly de- 
clared to annouce the slaughter of the insolent mechanic 
pretender to her hand ! 

Sir Thomas himself descended from the Dark Cham- 
ber shortly afterwards, with a scared and troubled look. 

Nevertheless the news he signified, as the result of 
their manoeuvre, to Titus, seemed all well enough. 

After a brief explosion, to be naturally expected, of 
the wildest agony and despair, his daughter lent atten- 
tion to his renewed arguments to induce her to accept 
the royal husband he was resolved she should, since his 
rival was now for ever removed. 

'And you were right, Titus,' Sir Thomas concluded 
with but a dismal smile, nevertheless, ' no woman pushes 
her folly so far as to persist in her constancy to a dead 
man! And Arabella has consented at last to receive the 
Prince as her husband, as soon as he arrives for the pur- 
pose, in order to secure her own withdrawal from a situ- 
ation of so much gloom and terror.' 

VOL. III. U 



290 

Titus gave a long -whistle, vulgarly enougli . but also 
stared astoundedly at Sir Thomas. 

RecoveriDg himself, however, with some effort, he 
took uiiboun.ded credit for the cleverness of the move 
which had effected this desirable result, demanded of 
Sir Thomas if he did not now believe and confess that 
he understood women ; yet concluded by advising that 
no relaxation of the young lady^s captivity should take 
place until the arrival of the Prince, and the effecting of 
the marriage should prevent the possibility of any re- 
treat or evasion from the extorted consent. 

The former event might speedily be expected. Sir 
Thomas having despatched a confidential message to 
Prince Rupert, at Lichfield, with an invitation to that 
effect. He allowed himself again to be governed by his 
artful counsellor, who, on his own part, was not less an- 
noyed than surprised at the result of his vengeful advice, 
Sir Thomas admitting that his daughter had implored him 
in the most pathetic manner to be suffered to leavei^fer 
darksome and narrow chamber, now that she could not 
by possibility be retained there on any motive for her 
good. 

Titus conceived himself again most thoroughly foiled 
by his own contrivances; but luckily, as he deemed it, 
the Birmingham people renewed the siege of Aston Hall; 
and he still imagined he saw a way to the execution of 
his secret plans. 

This idea was strengthened when it was found that 
heavy artillery was brought against the house; to the 
amazement of the garrison, and more especially of Sir 
Thom.as Holte. 

The destruction of the baronet's noble palace seemed 
menaced, and went more heavily to his heart than any 



SURRENDER OF ASTON HALL. 291 

other calamity bad power. But Captain Titus, on his 
part, was not prepared for tlie form wliicli his passion- 
ate affection for the work of so long a period of his life 
took in Sir Thomas Holte. The old Cavalier declared 
that he would no longer remain shut up in the walls of 
Aston Hall by a dastardly mob, that kept at a distance 
from all reprisals, but whether the Captain lent his assist- 
ance or not, would sally forth, at the head of his own 
domestics, and take the destructive weapon they had in 
some unknown manner obtained, from them. 

Nevertheless, on reflection Titus probably considered 
that he could make use of this violent resolution to effect 
his own objects, under colourable pretexts. He therefore 
seemed to agree to the demand ; and a muster for a sally 
was held, of the entire strength of the garrison, in the 
courtyard of the mansion. 

Fighting under cover, the numbers of the garrison of 
Aston Hall had as yet only been diminished by a few 
wounded men. But it must be confessed that when they 
assembled in the open air, the seventy or eighty soldiers 
and servants, comprising the garrison, presented but a 
very disproportionate figure to attack the little army of 
upwards of twelve hundred, which Cromwell and Tubal 
Bromycham had drawn up, in a most advantageous posi- 
tion, along the edge of a range of uplands, towards the 
town. 

Titus calculated on the effect of this visible dispropor- 
tion in numbers, and he also purposely divided off Sir 
Thomases domestics for a flank attack while he charged 
the Birminghamers in front. 

His soldiers from the first showed evident symptoms 
of feeling themselves overmatched; and when the attack 
was made Titus speedily took occasion to withdraw from 

U 2 



292 

it, leaving Sir Thomas Holte exposed to a general as- 
sault. 

In fact, observing the soldiers retire, Cromwell or- 
dered an advance from his own lines, under the leader- 
ship of Tubal Bromycham. The hot-blooded baronet, 
rushing to the attack with his usual fury and impetu- 
osity, suddenly found himself and his men surrounded by 
a swarm of assailants. 

In a few moments Sir Thomas was completely enve- 
loped, nearly a dozen of his people knocked down or 
killed, and he himself was speedily overpowered and 
crushed to the ground by a flooding in of his enemies, 
resembling the downpour of a cataract. 

No sooner was Sir Thomases much-disliked person 
recognized than half a score of pikes seemed set all at 
once at his breast. But a powerful figure suddenly in- 
terposed, and in a manner gathering the weapons into 
shining sheaves, pushed them back. 

' Ijet no man harm Sir Thomas Holte. He is my 
prisoner, and as such is safe. On your lives, none touch 
him." 

It was Tubal Bromycham, who, speaking thus, be- 
strode the fallen body of his oppressor, and protected 
him thus, at no little hazard to himself personally, in 
the fury and whirl of the onset. But TubaFs authority, 
in action, was always paramount, and no one dared to 
offer it any disobedience. 

Sir Thomas himself was too stunned and injured to 
offer any further resistance. He was raised and carried, 
rather than led, into the rear of the Birmingham posi- 
tion, where Cromwell sat on the stump of an old tree, 
watching the progress of the skirmish, attended, much 
against his mind, by Richard Grimsorwe. 



THE SUllRENDER OF ASTON HALL. 293 

Firebrace was also at baud, standing leaning on TubaFs 
standard, wbich be insisted always on bearing, tbough 
he consented not to expose his age and exhausted strength 
in any personal effort, 

* Who is this white-bearded prisoner?' said Cromwell 
to Giiiusorwe, ' And why does he glare so fiercely at 
you?' 

^ He is my father, though he has seldom behaved to 
rae as one; the choleric old man who killed his cook 
because dinner was not ready at one o'clock,' Grimsorwe 
replied. 

^ You lie, bastard ! It was your own treacherous hand 
only !' Sir Thomas mustered spirit enough to reply, ex- 
hausted as he was. *And I have this day received a 
mercy from my belligerent foe, which the man who pro- 
fesses to be my son would never have shown me.' 

' Why did you not as I advised. Captain Cromwell, 
and order no quarter should be given?' Grimsorwe ex- 
claimed, livid with fury at his father's words. 

' Because, my good fellow, I wished to spare you the 
guilt of a parricide. A fratricide you are alneady in your 
heart,' Cromwell replied, unable to conceal his disgust. 

^ Whatever else I am, I trust in a. few moment -» more 
to sit master and lord in Aston Hall, if the Parliament 
decrees have any force,' Grimsorwe rejoined, with a 
fiendish laugh. 

' Of a truth, you have writings with you to that efiect. 
Master Grimsorwe; yet there's many a slip 'tween the 
cup and the lip, you wot well,' Cromwell replied, though 
probably without affixing any very specific meaning to 
his own words. 

'Nay, Captain Cromwell,' Grimsorwe sharply answered 
him, ' for I should say you have had enough of contra- 



294 

vening the orders of your superiors. And for my own 
part I am a civilian, and shall not put myself in the way 
of the calamities to which your swordsmen are liable.' 

' My curse will yet, however, I hope, overtake you, un- 
natural calumniator and betrayer,' Sir Thomas said ; and 
precisely indeed as he uttered the words a bullet, sped 
from some distant but unerring aim, struck Grimsorwe 
in the very middle of the forehead, and scattered his 
brains in all directions around him as he fell. 

Sir Thomas Holte's own ruthless pride and ambition 
were destined to receive also a fitting chastisement. 

Continuing to head his victorious townsfolk, Tubal 
Eromycham arrived almost as soon as Titus and his fly- 
ing soldiers, at Aston Hall. The Captain had time, how- 
ever, to retreat into the house, and bar the doors. A 
few minutes after, a drum beat for a surrender, and a 
white flag was displayed at one of the windows of the 
Great Gallery over the hall. 

Tubal desired nothing better than a pretence to spare 
the work, chiefly of his own genius and toil, and he en- 
tered into terms for a surrender at once. 

These were of the easiest description, Titus stipulating 
only that he and his men should be allowed to retire in 
peace and safety from their stronghold. 

By this time Cromwell had come up, holding a great 
key in his hand. 

He gave it to Tubal. 

' Sir Thomas has implored me to interfere to save his 
daughter, whom he has left locked in an upper chamber 
of the mansion. But I cannot, methinks, appoint a milder 
deputy V he exclaimed, with a significant smile. ' It is 
true he will have it Miss Holte has consented to marry 
her savage Prince ; in which case, master Bromycham, 



THE SURRENDER OF ASTOV HALL 295 

have nothing more to say to so worthless a coquette, but 
let her take the chance of Sir Thomases other goods, 
which I have given up to plunder to Faithful Mobbs 
and the whole rabblement of the town/ 

Tubal glanced at the key, recognised it, uttered not 
another word, but rushed into the house ; sped up flight 
after flight of the grand staircase, until at last he reached 
the darksome summit of the principal dome tower. An- 
other instant and his key was in the door of the Dark 
Chamber. He called a name . he shouted it . ' Arabella ! 
dearest, dearest Arabella !^ 

No voice responded. 

He burst rather than opened the door. 

For a moment the thick gloom prevented any object 
from being visible. Then he groped forward, widely 
extending his arms. Only a moment. Suddenly Tubal 
then espied a gleam of terrible eyes, resembling those 
of a tigress. A spring resembling that of a tigress, also, 
from a couchant position, was made at him ; and it was 
Arabella's clutch, resembling the clawing of a tigress, 
that circled his neck, while Arabella's accents yelled 
forth the mad but fearful words, ' You have killed my 
Tubal, devilish Prince ; but I have only consented to bo 
yours to kill you . and . and . thus !' 



296 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XCVII. 

THE MARRIAGE OF TUBAL AND ARABELLA. 

It cannot be said that Tubal Bromycham was altoojether 
grieved, horrified as he was by his maniacal reception, to 
find how completely his royal rival was now detested by 
Arabella Holte; since it was clear, from the dreadful 
clutch she fixed upon him_, that she purposed Rupert^s 
destruction to avenge his own supposed doom. 

Had her strength been equal to her will, she would 
probably have accomplished it. As it was, it was only 
with great difficulty Tubal could remove the strangling 
grasp from his throat, and recover breath to repeat his 
exclamation, in accents which at last Arabella seemed to 
recognise. Then, uttering a fearful shriek, she sank life> 
less in his .-irms, in a deadly swoon. 

Tubal i umediately bore her down a flight of stairs into 
the light, encountering Cromwell and Captain Titus on 
the way, who, engaged below on the terms of surrender, 
were alarmed by the outcry and rushed up. 

But, alas ! when the unfortunate young lady was re- 
stored to her physical senses her intellectual faculties 
seemed for ever to have deserted her. 

It is true she recognised Tubal, but only as the ghost 
of himself. Nothing could disabuse her fancy from the 
certainty that he had been killed by her father's orders ; 



THE MARllIAGE OF TUBAL AND ARABELLA. 297 

and she continued to address to him the most moving 
and passionate supplications for pardon for the injuries 
she had done to him^ and for being the cause of his 
woful fate. 

In vain Tubal almost raved in his assurance that he 
vras living and well ; it seemed impossible to restore her 
to any species of sane perception on this point. 

^Yhat to do with her under these deplorable circum- 
stances became the difficulty. 

Her mother, Lady Holte_, had disappeared. It was 
ascertained that Sir Thomas, having discovered his wife's 
attempts to bring some rescue for her unhappy chil 1. had 
sent her away to Hagley, on a pretended purpose of apo- 
logising for the misconduct of his son, Edward. Phoebe 
^laythorn, v, ho had been obliged to conceal herself from 
Sir Thomas's wrath . Heaven and Robin the Falconer 
only knew where . emerged from her hiding-place with 
the intelligence. The faithful girl hazarded the dangers 
of the rifled mansion to hasten to the assistance of her 
young mistress. 

Neither the unhappy young lady herself nor Tubal 
Bromycham could bear the notion of her being restored 
to her tyrant father's care. Cromwell proposed this, 
after announcing his intention of sending Sir Thomas 
immediately a prisoner to London. ^ Her mind is in all 
probability for ever crushed,' he exclaimed, with more 
emotion than was usual with him ; ' and it is fitting that 
the grim destroyer thereof should be condemned to the 
contemplation of his ow n work. But for you, Tubal, I 
should have given no quarter to the father of the slayer 
of my own best issue. But he must not altogether 
escape punishment.' 

* There is little fear of that,' said Titus, with malicious 



298 

exultation quivering on his features. ' Yet Heaven for- 
bid/ he continued in a way that in reality suggested 
what he seemed to deprecate, 'that Master Bromycham 
should revenge himself so signally on the Prince . my 
kind master . who once purposed to hang him like a 
common felon on a tree . as to use the rights of war and 
possess himself, at all events, of the person of this 
beauteous madwoman, for good and aye. 

' Wretched scoundrel ! ' Tubal replied, eyeing the 
treacherous captain with scorching scorn in his glance, 
'these words prove of what you are yourself capable, and 
but that terms of surrender have been granted, you 
should, more certainly than I escaped it, have disgraced 
a gibbet with your worthless weight. The only alter- 
native that remains. Master Cromwell,' he concluded, 
addressing that commander with marks of the strongest 
emotion, ' the only favourable means that remain to me 
of dedicating my existence to the restoration of my un- 
happy lady to love and reason . if it exists in possibility 
. will be to make her 7ny wife, and remove her at once 
from this scene of disaster and confusion to a more quiet 
abode in Birmingham, and the careful attendance of good 
Dame Cooper, who is always willing to aid faithful love. 
Where is Chaplain Lane, who did the like sanctifying 
office between Dorothy Firebrace and Edward Holte? 
Let him be sought, and make, at least, this beauteous 
ruin mine, if ruin it must remain.' 

' There could not be a more substantial way of proving 
yourself no apparition, certainly,' sneered Titus, ' though 
I do not suppose Mistress Holte will hesitate to accept 
so beloved a spirit as a husband. But I warn you, the 
Prince's indignation will be kindled to a fury that will 
involve all concerned in peril, and the severest chastise- 
ments in his power to inflict. 



THE MARRIAGE OF TUBAL AND ARABELLA. 299 

This warning was accepted as it was doubtless intended 
it should be, as a new inducement to proceed in what it 
was pretended to deprecate. And Chaplain Lane having 
at this moment opportunely turned up from a place of 
concealment in which he had been discovered, and 
dragged in a prisoner by Faithful Moggs, was glad to 
purchase protection and an assurance of release, by con- 
senting to what was required of him. 

As for Arabella herself, she assented with delirious 
joy to a ceremonial which was to unite her inseparably 
and for evermore to the society of her beloved and 
wronged Angel of Redemption . so she now styled and 
evidently considered Tubal Bromycham. 

This second surprising and unlooked-for marriage was 
therefore solemnized without further delay . or at least 
with as much solemnity as the circumstances of the 
times allowed. And while the noise and uproar of the 
triumphant invasion filled every chamber and cellar of 
Aston Hall, the unfortunate and yet not altogether un- 
happy lovers were made man and wife. 

Tubal immediately after removed his bride from the 
scene of tumult and agitation to quieter quarters in his 
own residence at the Moat House in Birmingham. 

Here she was received with the greatest kindness by 
Dame Cooper; and medical assistance having been pro- 
cured, a powerful sedative was administered, under whose 
action Arabella sank into a deep slumber, which seemed 
to promise good results for her over-wrought and an- 
guish-stricken brain. 



300 



CHAPTER XCVIII. 

THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 

From that time Tubal appeared to take no further 
interest or concern in aught tliat occurred away from 
the couch of the beautiful invalid, M'hose slumber deep- 
ened into a stupor that iasted for several days. 

The apothecary (there were hardly any mediciners of 
higher standing, in provincial towns, in those days) 
assured him that a crisis was maturing under this out- 
ward insensibility, which would either be entirely de- 
structive, or as completely restorative, to the health and 
reason of the patient. And Tubal watched in indescri- 
bable anxiety and dread for the awakening . for the 
decisive moment which would either seal him for ever 
the melancholy keeper of a lunatic, or the happy hus- 
band of an adored and beautiful bride. 

Meanwhile there was a sorrowful satisfaction in the con- 
viction that, whether for good or evil, that peerless idol 
of his young love .that wonder of beauty and excelling 
symmetry, which had fascinated his artist imagination 
from earliest years . was now his, and his alone. 

No insolent rival, no overbearing Prince, would exult 
in the possession of that divine loveliness, and revel not 
less in the misery and deprivation of her cheated true 
love than in his own success. Arabella Holte was hence- 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 301 

forth aucl for ever his. His wife ! No calamity seemed 
altogether unendurable with this sweetness of consolation 
in the draught. 

And thus absorbed in his self-imposed taskwork of 
love and devotion^ Tubal took no heed of external events^ 
until the consideration was forced upon him. And while 
Cromwellj untrammelled either by colleagues or oppo- 
sition, displayed his singular administrative qualities, 
with extraordinary vigour and success^ in reducing Bir- 
mingham to the government of the Parliament, he who 
was its proper lord and ruler interfered in no way in the 
matter. But Tubal was aroused suddenly and fearfully 
from his lethargy of expectant love. 

Aston Hall had been sacked of nearly all its furniture 
and valuables ; little more than the outside structure 
remained after it had been plundered by the victorious 
mob of Birmingham. Totally unpitied, and with not 
an effort made in any quarter on his behalf, Sir Thomas 
Holte had been forwarded as a prisoner of state to 
London ! Cromwell's troop of Ironsides had arrived 
and established themselves as a garrison in the town ; 
when, on the third day after the surrender of the hal]_, 
that leader presented himself at the ^Toat House, evi- 
dently somewhat shaken in his own perpendicular. 

Threatening intelligence had arrived. 

The tidings of the outbreak of the Birminghamers, 
uniting with his private mortification, seemed to have 
provoked Prince Rupert to an extraordinary effort at 
vengeance; and if the reports could be credited, he was 
now marching on the town with a regular little army 
of two thousand men and artillery, vowing to lay it 
level with the ground if any resistance was offered to 
the fulfilment of his Majesty's orders. And these orders 



302 THE armourer's daughter. 

were to take possession of Birminglmm^ and put all the 
leaders of the revolt to an ignominious death on the 
gallows ! 

So at least a lad, who had escaped from their ranks, 
touched with horror at the profane and licentious courses 
he witnessed among the Royal troops . one Jack Bunyan 
. had brought word to Birmingham. And it was be- 
lieved this reporter had only got the start by a very few 
hours of the assailing force. 

Under these circumstances, the Parliament Captain 
and Commissioner came to consult with Tubal on what 
could be done to encounter or avoid the perils menacing 
the whole town and themselves. 

^ I have not yet taken counsel with the Lord in prayer, 
for I love first to know what human means may be in 
the hands of men, as touching whatever can be effected 
by human agencies; which is no great matter, unless 
the Lord shows his hand in the work,' said Cromwell, 
with his usual cloudiness and ambiguity of expression. 
' But, as regarding the good people of this town, I am 
myself of opinion the onset threatened is more than we 
can withstand ; being altogether of seasoned and accus- 
tomed soldiers, well provided of military means. And 
for my own part, I would have all such as have any 
reason to apprehend the violence threatened to retire 
with me and my troop on Coventry, which is a town of 
defence, and which I have taken some poor pains, under 
the Lord, to make, as it were, a stronghold and rock for 
his people in all these parts to flee unto and find shelter. 
But the good man, Whitehall, who hath been received 
as a prophet and messenger of good tidings in this town 
(and indeed the poor soul preaches very comforting and 
savoury doctrine, whiles, when we have time to attend to 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 303 

him), he will have it that we shall not give back hut one 
step from our enemies, but rather that a tremendous 
manifestation is at hand which shall utterly confound 
and abash them. So that, although by mere human 
reckoning, we are not in any potency to meet and baffle 
the designs of our enemies, yet, truly, if we show a 
becoming confidence in the Lord, He will show himself 
as good a God as ever he did to his people Israel, even 
on that day when he commanded the sun to stand still 
over the valley of Jehoshaphat ! ^ 

'Whitehall is right !^ replied Tubal, passionately. 'It 
were death and final overthrow of her once so bright 
and lovely wit, to awaken my hapless wife and drag her 
in a wild hurryscurry from her quiet couch to Coventry. 
God will stand by us, if we stand by ourselves ! More- 
over, did I not say to the proud Prince that I would 
prove myself no traitor, no assassin, my body against 
his, wherever w^e could meet ? I will not budge a step 
from amid my people ; but if they will rally around my 
apron and defend the town, so will I to the last drainings 
of my blood ! ' 

'^Tis manfully spoken, but I know your acts will 
outdo your words. Tubal Bromycham ! ^ said Cromwell; 
with evidently kindled enthusiasm on his own part. 
' Neither know I of a surety but that the man, White- 
hall, speaks of some superior ordination. At times he 
appears to me as a madman ; at others, as if the will of 
God spake in his utterances. He it was the first who 
knew and believed in me ; yea, and declared it to the 
people . what I have long known and felt in myself . 
that I am a man marked out for the accomplishment of 
great matters of the Lord, by the way, as one may say, 
of the strong arm of the flesh. Also, so noble a standing 



304 

forth and defiance of the superior force and fury of the 
enemy will greatly hearten men everywhere to brave 
resistances, and the tidings thereof will resound through 
the land, and put the people in a good way to show 
themselves men for the cities of their God, and the chief 
resting-places of the ark at this present time. He who 
defends Birmingham well may earn himself a call to do 
the like for London ; where whoever shows himself the 
most skilled in any trade or mystery may command the 
markets of the realm. And I shall see to it, moreover, 
that in the case of the worst, my men and I have a 
good retreat assured to us to Coventry or Warwick 
town ; which therefore knowing, it is for you of Bir- 
mingham, who cannot readily escape if once you bide 
the fray, to determine whether you will enter upon it 
or no/ 

Tubal reflected for some minutes profoundly. 

' This is the end of it ! ^ he then exclaimed. ' Let 
those who are afraid of the issue avoid the town forth- 
with ; we who are determined on a brave defence of the 
same will offer them no obstruction. Let us assemble 
an open meeting of the townsfolk in the market-place 
for this declaration ; and meanwhile do you. Master 
Cromwell, lay out the plans of our defence as masterly 
as you did erewhile when first the bloodthirsty German 
came to our assault.' 

It was done as Tubal had said. 

The alarm-bells of St. ^Martin and the summons of 
the Town Crier speedily assembled a crowd of nearly all 
the inhabitants of Birmingham at the Bull King, in- 
cluding every shade and variety of political and religious 
opinion and feeling prevalent among them. Pirebrace, 
Whitehall, John-the-Bogue, Faithful Moggs, Bailiff 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 305 

Cooper, Mistress Mellons of the Black Boy and Wool- 
pack, workmen at all the trades, Anabaptists, what not ? 
swarmed out into the streets, and made for this common 
rendezvous. 

Tubal was in readiness, and in a few brief but power- 
ful sentences expounded to the people of Birmingham 
their position, the near approach of a Cavalier army, 
bent on slaughter and destruction, the means of defence 
at their disposal, and the probability that God himself 
would interfere on behalf of an injured and oppressed 
community of men who feared and honoured his name; 
and he concluded by stating, as he had stated to Crom- 
well, that, for his own part, he was determined to remain 
in the town, and live or die in a brave attempt to deliver 
it from the furious malice of its enemies. 

The greater portion of the assemblage received this 
announcement with uproarious signs of adhesion and 
acceptance. The idea of retiring en masse from their 
homes and homesteads, comfortless as many of them 
might be, was exceedingly distasteful to the populace 
in general, and that was the only means of safety which 
seemed assured them from the overwhelming advance of 
their enemies. But the Royalist opposition had also 
gathered courage from the rumoured approach of their 
allies, and John-the-Bogue, for almost the first time, 
ventured to present himself openly in opposition to the 
wishes of the democratic leaders of the town. 

' Hear me, good people ! ^ he called out, at the pitch 
of his shrill treble voice. 'It is very fine indeed for 
those who have ropes around their necks, to require of 
us to put ourselves into a similar ill condition. But I 
would have you know that the most part of us may be 
quit of any danger from this pretended raging Cavalier 

VOL. III. X 



306 

army^ by merely giving up our own tyrants and oppres- 
sors as the traitors and perturbers of the public peace 
they are. I promise you, on the faith of my body, which 
is in your hands, that you have only to yield up some 
half-a-score turbulent fellows of this community, to 
purchase exemption and pardon for all the rest. Any- 
wise, it is madness to talk of resisting the powerful army 
marching against us, under the fierce Prince Rupert; 
and I, for one, if my counsel is not taken, will leave the 
town with all my goods, to shun the destruction which, 
most certain it is, otherwise awaits it/ 

It is not unlikely that these observations might have 
produced some considerable effect, but that 'W'hitehall 
now presented himself to the public attention, in one of 
his most inspired moods of frenzied excitement. 

" Hearken, men of Birmingham ! ^ he shouted. ^ No 
man whatsoever shall be suffered to leave this town until 
he has witnessed the full manifestation of the mercy of 
the Lord, and chosen bis part with Him or against Him. 
For the Hour of the Kingdom is closely at hand, and 
within a brief time all who look upon me here shall 
witness the stupendous miracles by which it shall be 
revealed truly who and what I am, to the belief of the 
most worldly-blinded and incredulous ! ' 

' O Flotsam, Flotsam ! Jacob Flotsam ! will you still 
refuse to own yourself your poor wife^s husband and 
your poor children's father?' cried a female voice, in 
sobbing accents, from the crowd . the original of the 
sorrowful Pilgrimess Christiana, of the future immortal 
writer, who at the moment stood at her side, a fugitive 
deserter, known to a few, and unhonoured by all. 

For a moment the prophet looked in some degree 
affected by the appeal. But his terrific lunacy speedily 



THE STORMING OP BIRMINGHAM. 307 

regained its empire in his mind, and he burst into an 
harangue, in which he strenuously disavowed all human 
connections and copartnery, and all but announced him- 
self to be the predicted Divine Ruler of the world for a 
thousand years. 

But whether Whitehall's own insane imagination was 
affrighted by the tremendous nature of the pretension, 
and needed support ; or that, with the instinct of his dis- 
ease, he strove to conceal the very core and essence of 
its internal workings, he contented himself by declaring 
that if their enemies outnumbered the sands on the sea- 
shore, they should be scattered before them like chaff 
before the wind ; and the visible doer and performer of 
this mightiness could no longer be doubted, or mistaken, 
to be the announced Restorer and Reigner over the 
faithful of Christ until the end of time and the Millen- 
nium. 

The curiosity, the fanaticism, the hopes of the people 
were universally and vehemently excited by this appeal 
and these promises ; and not only was it now determined 
to defend the town against its enemies, but that no one 
should be suffered to retire from it, or shirk his share in 
the common efforts necessary for its preservation. 

Such was the resolution of an overwhelming majority, 
and preparations were immediately set on foot. Once 
more Cromwell appeared as the intrepid and sagacious 
leader, who was ultimately destined to attain the military 
supremacy of the entire nation, and a very brief period 
sufficed to place Birmingham in no despicable condition 
of fortified defence. The majority of the people worked 
with a will ; but the entire body of the townsfolk were 
compelled to engage in the task, whether with or against 
their inclinations, 

X 2 



308 THE armourer's daughter. 

Accordingly_, when Prince Rupert, burning for revenge 
of the various accumulated wrongs of which he conceived 
himself to be the victim, arrived, at his most rapid and 
reckless rate of marching, early on the following day, 
he found the old barricades and ditches ready for his 
reception in the circuit of the town, and Cromwell with 
his Ironsides, and the principal part of the inhabitants 
capable of bearing arms, assembled on a spot still called 
Camp Hill, at the foot of Deritend, . ready, as it ap- 
peared, to give him open battle. 

Surprising as it may seem, the greatest and most 
general faith was placed in the assurances of miraculous 
aid constantly proffered by the insane Kingdom -Come 
Apostle. And though it was impossible for the defenders 
of the position not to perceive that they were frightfully 
out-numbered, and by a military array of a most formi- 
dable and imposing aspect, no signs of dismay or diffi- 
dence appeared in their ranks. 

Count O'Taafe presented himself with a white flag, 
and found the Birminghamers engaged in chanting the 
favourite hymn of the puritan religionists, formerly placed 
on record in these chapters : . 

' God is oxir strength,' etc. etc. 

The message the Count brought amounted in the 
sum to what has been previously declared. He bore a 
summons to command the town of Birmingham imme- 
diately to surrender to the forces of the King, upon 
promise of his Majesty's pardon and protection to all 
but the leaders in the revolt and infamous attack on, 
and dispersion of, the royal garrison at Aston Hall, 
under penalties of being given up to fire and pillage, and 
general slaughter, from end to end. 

It was Tubal Bromycham who, by universal assent 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 309 

and approbation^ answered himself as the representative 
of the town, and in its name refused all submission or 
treaty. 

' For yourself, audacious mechanic, I marvel little, for 
your fate is well assured, if we can find a gibbet strong 
enough ! ' Count O'Taafe replied ; and spitefully raising 
his voice to the highest pitch he called out, ' But on the 
other hand, good people, if you will give up this one 
traitor alone, and the unhappy young lady he has basely 
ravished from her home and friends, I do believe the 
Prince may be induced to show mercy to all the rest.' 

An uproar of refusal responded to the demand ; and 
O^Taafe, willing enough to take an answer which en- 
titled the town to the severities such commanders as 
himself most desired to inflict, bowed scornfully, and 
retired to his own array. 

But now, unhappily, there commenced no slight dif- 
ference of opinion among the leaders of the defenders of 
Birmingham. 

Whitehall insisted that the whole body of them should 
rush forth from their defences, and overwhelm the Egyp- 
tians, even as the Lord overwhelmed Pharaoh and his 
host, of old times, with the waters of the Red Sea. But 
Cromwell, on a wiser calculation of probabilities, declared 
that they should await an assault from their enemies 
where they were, posted on the side of a hill, which, 
sloping off sharply in all directions, and enclosed by a 
strong stockade he had caused to be erected, offered 
great resources for defence. 

' 'Tis a hot-headed fellow this Rupert, who calls him- 
self Prince Palatine, and is wild with anger, too. He 
will make one of his mad- bull rushes at us anon, and we 
shall be sure to spy some vantage. Moreover, simple 



310 

man ! see you not that being chiefly horsemen, they will 
break in upon us in spite of my few troopers, if once we 
leave the shelter of our palings and ditches ? Let them 
attack us, and we may baffle the onset. I will not be a 
sharer in any other design.' 

' Is the Lord a mighty Lord only when the spearmen 
and the chariots outnumber on his side ! ^ returned 
Whitehall. ' Generation of unbelievers still ! Come 
with me, and ye shall see that I will wither them off the 
face of the land with the very breath of my nostrils ! ' 

'You can do it as well, then, from this place of van- 
tage, Master Whitehall,' replied the more matter-of-fact 
commander. 'A miracle is one equally at hand or at 
a distance ; yea, and we should have the more leisure for 
observation and certainty if we never stir our stumps. 
Destroy the enemy from before our faces, then, but ask 
not me and my five-score riders to run amuck against 
these thousands advancing on us . for advance they do.' 

In fact, during this conversation, the attack had com- 
menced, and it was necessary to reply to the heavy firing 
now opened upon the defenders of Camp Hill. 

TubaPs cannon took an important part in the trans- 
action, and for a long time nothing was audible but the 
deep boom of its discharges, and the constant rattle of 
the smaller pieces, in every direction surrounding the 
enclosure of the hill where Cromwell had so judiciously 
stationed his main defence. 

In truth, the people of Birmingham, now pretty well 
seasoned in arms, might possibly have sustained the 
attack with success had they continued to observe the 
judicious plans of their leader ; but the treachery of 
John-the-Rogue, and the madness of Whitehall, com- 
bined to defeat his efforts. 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 311 

Sudden but rapidly diffused intelligence arrived that 
the former personage had thrown open one of the main 
entrances of the town, in the direction of Long Bridge, 
and that the Prince's cavalry was pouring into it from 
that quarter. Upon this, AVhitehall declared that the 
hour of salvation and complete redemption had arrived 
for all who would follow him, and that the Lord had 
only deserted them because they showed no confidence 
in his promises. The fanaticism of a considerable por- 
tion of the defenders then became ungovernable, and 
they rushed like a Bedlam let loose from their entrench- 
ments, in a headlong charge on the baffled, portion of 
the enemy still facing them. 

Tubal himself, recognising Prince Uupert before him, 
could not resist the impetus of his own feelings, and 
headed the disorderly onset ; Cromwell, however, would 
not be hurried or seduced from his calmer and matured 
resolves. ' If a miracle is to be wrought, they are enow, 
for a thistledown blown by the breath of the Lord would 
suffice !' he remarked, with sarcastic anger. ' But no, I 
must do what in me lies to cover the retreat, and save 
the faithful handful confided to my charge, and such 
others as will answer to check and spur still.' 

The result was what might reasonably have been ex- 
pected. In a few minutes the entire mass of the assail- 
ing townsfolk of Birmingham, at least those who survived 
the reception that awaited them, came scudding back in 
the wildest confusion and disorder, pursued by the Cava- 
liers, who were flourishing their swords, yelling and 
shouting all manner of derisive defiances and summonses 
to the fugitives to make their bold words good and stand 
to the fight. 

Cromwell, perceiving he should be entangled in the 



312 

general rout, directed a retreat of his own troopers into 
the town. But as this retreat was severely pressed on 
by the multitude as well as their pursuers, it speedily 
partook not a little also of the character of a flight. 

Cromwell himself was personally in great danger ; 
having put his horse to the gallop in the rear of his 
Ironsides, ordering them to pass through the town, and 
leave it to its now decided fate, he was nearly overtaken 
by a dashing cavalier, who headed the Royalist charge, 
at a spot in Shirland Lane. But Cromwell, with charac- 
teristic audacity and suddenness of resolve, turned upon 
him, pistol in hand, fired it, and rid himself of his pur- 
surer. None other than William Fielding, Earl of Den- 
bigh, whom we have seen so gay and high-spirited in 
attendance on the King, at Nottingham and Aston Hall. 

The fates of the other leaders of the onset were various. 

Tubal Bromycham was for some time reported to be a 
prisoner. He was last seen in the conflict penetrating 
the thickest ranks of the Cavaliers, laying about him 
with a massive pole-axe. But on the general rout and 
confusion of his party, he also seemed to share the 
panic, though in reality actuated by a motive altogether 
apart from anything personal, and fled into the town 
along the still open passage preserved until the Ironsides 
also took flight. 

As for Whitehall, an authentic account declared that, 
sharing the general downbreak, he fled as far as the Old 
Crown House, and took refuge with a crowd of other 
fugitives in the forge-yard. Here Firebrace, however, 
vehemently reproaching him with cowardice and impos- 
ture, the unhappy lunatic ravingly announced that he 
had only made the experiment of men's faith so far, by 
suffering the disaster incurred, but that he was in reality 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 313 

himself the Messias returned, and would now at once 
proceed to exhibit his divine powers. 

And by this outburst of frenzy he prevailed upon a 
number of the people to stand by him, and close the 
gates of the yard, which he declared should be even 
stronger than adamant against all assault, until he was 
throned, crowned, and robed as King, when he would 
issue forth and destroy all unbelievers, whether friends 
or foes, by actual lightning from his eyes. In the midst 
of which mad discourse Count O^Taafe arrived at the 
head of a body of pursuers, and having speedily caused 
the gates to be burst open, ordered all within to be put 
indiscriminately to the sword. The lunatic prophet 
dashing forward, with doubtless a terrific glare in his 
eyes, but not the destructive flames that were to issue 
thence, in defence of his people, was immediately cut 
down and killed, after a frightful mangling ; while his 
companions partly shared his fate, and partly escaped 
by the most desperate efforts, a good number being 
drowned in the Rea behind the Old Crown buildings. 

Among the rest, it was afterwards known. Armourer 
Firebrace was preserved, though special search was made 
for him, by letting himself down his own well in the 
bucket, which descended with his weight at a frightful 
speed, but where he was not suspected to have taken 
refuge, and so escaped the general slaughter. 

But our concern is chiefly now with Tubal Bromy- 
cham, who, separating himself with difficulty from the 
stream of yelling fugitives, hastened at his utmost speed 
to the Moat House. 

'There may yet be time to save her!' he muttered 
frequently to himself. ' And the barbarian who would 
have forced himself into her arms will shortly have every 



314 THE armourer's daughter. 

atrocity in his power. Tn vain I laboured to reach him. 
Even her total destruction would be better than to suffer 
her to fall into his hands/ 

To Tubal's surprise and great increase of alarm, he 
found the old building entirely deserted by those he had 
left in charge of the beloved invalid. The Coopers, with 
a very natural regard for their own safety, had hurried 
away, to endeavour, by an exhibition of their loyal prin- 
ciples, to avoid being involved in the general calamities 
of their townsfolk. 

Consequently, Arabella had been left alone, apparently 
in the last stage of her stupor, on her sick couch. 

Mounting to her apartment, however. Tubal found her 
sitting upright, and listening with an expression of won- 
der, which was yet of a rational terror and questioning, 
on her still beautiful, though now most singularly pallid 
and wasted countenance. 

^ Tubal ! ' she exclaimed, as the heroic lover rushed to 
her side, ' Tubal, is it indeed you ? What uproar is all 
this ? Have I not dreamed the amazing fancy that 
returns now so vividly upon me . that I am married to 
you . ray only true and faithful love ! and even by my 
father's chaplain, worthy Master Lane?' 

' It is all true, my beloved wife, though without your 
cruel father's consent, who kept you captive as a mad 
woman, because he was himself mad. You are mine and 
I am yours, henceforth and for ever ! You have suffered 
greatly, but, thank God, your reason seems restored ! 
You are in Birmingham, in my house ! But it is no 
longer possible we can remain here. Rupert has attacked 
us with an overwhelming force; but we may yet have 
time to fly from his vengeance and lust, if you will 
make an effort to rise, and let me carry you forth.' 



THE STORMING OF BTRMIXGHAM. 315 

'Nay, I am exhausted, I am too weak, dearest Tubal. 
Death is assured to me, in any case. But save yourself, 
and leave me to my fate, whatever it must needs be. I 
have deserved the worst by my inconstancy and ingrati- 
tude to the bravest and best of men.^ 

^ Leave you in the midst of a town taken by assault, by 
the savage Rupert all whose worst passions are leagued 
to inflict the most unimaginable injuries and cruelty on 
the wife of Tubal Bromycham ? No, dearest Arabella ! 
rather will I die a thousand deaths. But Bull Street is 
yet unoccupied by the enemy. I feel a giant's strength 
in such a cause, and I can bear you in my arms through 
the midst of every danger to some exit from the town.^ 

' T^'hat ! with that maimed and wounded limb ! . 
maimed through my wickedness and folly,' Arabella ex- 
claimed. ' And look, besides, dearest Tubal, look ! Bull 
Street is in flames.' 

It was even so. Rupert, exasperated with the resistance 
he had encountered, and wilHng to allow himself every 
licence in the pursuit of vengeance, abandoned the town 
entirely to the violence and brutality of his soldiery, 
with restraint or remorse. 

A horrid slaughter was made among the unresisting 
inhabitants, most part of those saved only escaping by 
flight from the town, and covering the highways in all 
directions with lamenting throngs. 

Quite an indiscriminate destruction of persons and 
things followed, John-the-Rogue's house and work-pre- 
mises being amongst the first given to the flames ; while 
he and his son Wynkyn, and Bailiff" Cooper and his wife, 
and other royalists found their claims as such completely 
ignored, and themselves exposed as much as anyone else 
to the maltreatment experienced by the rest of the towns- 
folk of Birmingham. 



316 THE armourer's daughter. 

It was through the flaming ruins of a considerable 
part of the town that Count O^Taafe, especially commis- 
sioned for the purpose, rode with a select body of dra- 
goons to the Moat House of Birmingham, and formed a 
complete investment of its watery rampart. Terrified for 
his own safety. Bailiff Cooper had. betrayed all the cir- 
cumstances of Arabella's position there, and instructed 
O'Taafe in the means to secure her capture. 

And now to return. Startled by his unhappy bride's 
exclamation, and the ruddy glow of flames which glared 
over the chamber, Tubal sprang forward, drew open the 
lattice casement, and looked forth. He was instantly 
welcomed with a rattle of musketry, and perceived that 
the house and its moat were completely surrounded. 

At the same time a voice, whose infuriated accents he 
recognized to be those of Prince Rupert, yelled from a 
body of calvalry massed near one of the raised draw- 
bridges, ^ Vile mechanic ! surrender your treacherous 
siren, and submit yourself to the rope, before I lay this 
house level about both your ears with your own cannon.' 

In reality, Tubal's masterpiece in arms had been cap- 
tured, and now figured in array with the rest of his over- 
whelming of enemies, on the further side of the draw- 
bridge in front of the house. 

He turned. Supernatural love struggled with superna- 
tural anguish and despair in his expression. 

' You hear, my loved, my lost one !' he exclaimed. ' All 
is over for me; it is impossible I can escape the venge- 
ance of my merciless rival. But ray destruction frees 
you for ever from all bonds, all engagements, all suspi- 
cion of preference for another . and you may yet become 
the bride of a Prince. One farewell embrace . one last 
embrace, sole hope and happiness of an existence that 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 317 

but for you had been all blank ! and I will offer my- 
self without further struggle as the target of these thou- 
sand levelled carbines that circle me in/ 

' And can you believe . even after all I have done to 
betray the ambition and vanity of my Holte blood . that 
I can prove so mean and worthless a creature still?' 
Arabella replied. ' No, dearest Tubal ! my lover and my 
husband ! dearer to me than ever were either before to 
woman ! it is impossible I could outlive the doom to 
which I have brought you, and therefore I will die with 
you ! Yes, my husband !' she concluded with a glorious 
smile, lustrous at once with the passion and power of her 
exalted though awhile erring spirit, ' we will cheat death 
of all his bitterness by perishing together, and in each 
other's arms. No other means remains for the wife of 
the last Lord of Birmingham to pass undishonoured 
to her grave by his side. Let us die together ! Sup- 
port my steps, or I will crawl after you, to the moat- 
side, and hand-in-hand we will plunge into its depths, 
and thenceforth defy the malice and power of our ene- 
mies to separate us any more.' 

Every argument and entreaty were vainly exhausted 
by Tubal, in his love and sorrow, to prevail upon Arabella 
to venture on her chances of preservation after his own 
destruction had glutted the rage of their enemies. To 
meaner minds and hearts, incapable of great emotions, it 
may appear that the delirium induced by her long solitary 
confinement and sufferings still worked in the heroic 
woman's brain, and prompted her resolve. Spirits more 
akin will better comprehend that it was the only decision 
that remained for such a one to take compatible with 
its heroic impulses and purposes. And they will even 
understand how at last, unable to refuse himself so 



318 THE ARMOdREK^S DAUGHTER. 

supreme a triumph and release from the most terrible of 
his sorrows and fears in yielding to the fate that com- 
passed him, Tubal Bromycham consented to his beloved 
bride's decree. 

Yet no power of language could do justice to the 
unutterable anguish mingled with the unutterable joy . 
with which finally Tubal clasped the idol of his brave 
and loving heart in a last embrace, and with his own 
arm still wreathed around her, supported her forth with 
himself to their doom. 

Strangely enough, however, Arabella seemed to have 
regained all the strength and stately grace of her accus- 
tomed manner as she stepped forth with her husband 
from the Moat House, right in front of the cannon, 
which was now in full preparation to be discharged, . 
doubtless with the determination on the part of the bar- 
barous assailants, either to compel a surrender on the 
part of Tubal to a more ignominious fate, or batter 
down the old mansion of his ancestors over his head. 

Rupert and his slaughtering host, now concentrated 
thickly round the edge of the moat, and attentively 
watching for the result, beheld two figures emerge from 
the ancient manor-house of the lords of Birmingham, 
closely linked arm-in-arm. 

Immediately recognising in the glare of the burning 
town around, that one of these was the lame hero-smith, 
whom he so much detested, the Prince would have given 
orders to destroy him at once by a discharge of mus- 
ketry, had he not also discerned that his closely linked 
companion was Arabella Holte. 

' The dastard !' he yelled ; ' does he think to save him- 
self from my just vengeance thus? He but spares him- 
self for the gallows !' 



THE STORMING OF BIRMINGHAM. 319 

To the life-long horror and saddening of this ferocious 
soldier, however, the pair, reaching the verge of the 
moat, waved him a species of scornful greeting and fare- 
well, and then turning, clasped each other in their arms, 
and flung themselves together into the deep, dark water 
of the moat ! 

So willingly did both these unfortunate lovers consent 
to death, that neither rose for several minutes, and when 
they did it was as corpses, still closely clasped in each 
other^s arms. 

And thus perished the last Lord of Birmingham and 
his bride of Aston Hall; emblems, let us hope, of a 
happier future indissoluble union between the town of 
Tubal Bromycham and the noble palace which his genius 
chiefly had adorned. 



320 THE armourer's daughter. 



CHAPTER XCIX. 



CONCLUSION. 



There is not mucli to be said of a more cheering 
character concerning the subsequent fortunes of the 
Holte family, for a long interval of time. 

Sir Thomas continued a prisoner, and his estate in 
sequestration, by order of the Parliament, for a very 
considerable period : until, in fact, the complete tri- 
umph of the Parliament cause being assured by the de- 
struction of the monarchy, and beheading of Charles 
the First, he was admitted to what was called a compo- 
sition for his property, by the influence of his son^s wife 
and family with Oliver Cromwell. But such was the 
relentless stubbornness of his animosities, that he still 
constantly refused to be reconciled to her or Edward 
Holte during the remainder of his life. He would, in- 
deed, have disinherited his son, but that he found him- 
self childless and heirless of all issue besides; and 
Charles the First most positively prohibited this act of 
vengeance, and refused to sanction any transfer of his 
faithful adherent's birthright. While, on her part, Do- 
rothy Firebrace blessed her husband with a numerous 
and flourishing progeny, which promised a long continu- 
ance to the race. 

Twice afterwards did the influence of the Firebrace 



CONCLUSION. 321 

family preserve the Holte property from total confisca- 
tion, in consequence of the reckless obstinacy with which 
Sir Thomas joined in various royalist plots and insurrec- 
tions. Heavy fines and forfeitures were, however, im- 
posed, that greatly limited his powers of mischief against 
the new Government, and which he made the pretence 
of refusing all but the scantiest means of subsistence to 
his son and his family. 

Luckily Firebrace^s resources, ungrudgingly dedicated 
to the purpose, preserved his daughter and son-in-law 
from the severer straits to which they might otherwise 
have been reduced. 

There is an obscure tradition that Sir Thomas Holte 
survived his son, dying himself a very aged man towards 
the close of the Protectorate. But we have ascertained 
that this report is unfounded, and merely based on the 
facts that Edward Holte retired abroad with his family, 
on the destruction of royalty in England, rather than 
expose himself to the resentment of the father of the 
young soldier he had slain at Edghill, when he became 
supreme in the State. And abroad he resided for seve- 
ral years, amusing his exile with various literary and 
scientific pursuits, and also devoting much time and re- 
search to tracing and verifying the proofs of his wife's 
descent from an ancient and noble French family ; the 
results afterwards figuring memorably in the statement 
of the Holte perdigree. 

But though we do not allege that Edward Holte at- 
tained anything like the years of his violent but stronger- 
constitutioned progenitor, there can be no doubt that he 
lived to be restored to the Aston Hall estates, and tore- 
side there for a long period in peace and prosperity, and 
to see his children properly acknowledged as his heirs. 

VOL. III. Y 



322 

A manuscript journal, undeniably in the small, timid 
handwriting of Chaplain Lane, still more tremulous with 
age, attests the fact. 

An entry in it declares that on the 25th of June, in 
the year of his blessed Majesty King Charles the Second's 
restoration, Sir Edward Holte and my Lady Dorothy, 
his fair wife, and their three .sons, specially naming 
' Master Charles,' the eldest, did return to their house 
of Aston Hall, from a long and painful exile abroad, and 
were received Avith unbounded joy and wassail by all the 
tenantry thereof. And, moreover, a great number of the 
townsfolk of Birmingham, being most willing, after the 
long troubles and disturbances, to live in good peace and 
neighbourhood with the Holte family, did accompany the 
Master Armourer, Firebrace, of Deritend, (verily, then, 
a most aged and wrinkled, but very happy man,) on the 
occasion, to welcome Sir Edward home. And there was 
a great feast and revel made and kept on the occasion, 
with all the old merry sports and junketings disused of 
a long time, under the direction of the Master Falconer, 
Robin, and his jolly wife, Phoebe. And that the only 
sadness he. Master Chaplain Lane, heard or remarked 
on any one's part, was when my Lady Dorothy inquired 
of her father whether he was careful to keep the tomb 
he had erected to the memories of her dear unhappy 
foster-brother. Tubal Bromycham, and his noble wife, 
her husband's sister, in the Church of St. Martin, always 
in good refreshment and repair. "Whereupon there was 
scarcely a dry eye among all who overheard the question, 
it was put so lovingly and sorrowfully. 

There are a few subsequent entries, referring to minor 
vexations endured bv Sir Edward Holte and his brave 



CONCLUSION. 323 

wife in their subsequent career. Prominent among which 
was the harassment they sustained from the rapacious 
designs of one of the mistresses of the restored King, 
who wanted to have it shown that Sir Thomas Holte had 
incurred forfeiture of his goods by felony^ as the mur- 
derer of his cook, which at that distance of time it might 
have been very difficult to disprove ; the woman herself 
having a greedy eye to a fine on a release from the 'ex- 
treme penalties' of the same. And then was seen the 
benefit of my Lady Dorothy's former wise resolve to re- 
tain the pardon granted by King Charles the First ; for 
it was produced, and put an effectual stop to the whole 
nefarious proceeding. Not to mention that, for almost 
the only time in his life, Charles the Second recalled an 
obligation with gratitude, in the fact that in his boyhood 
he had been indebted to Lady Holte's courage and pre- 
sence of mind for withdrawing himself and his younger 
brother from the dangers of the field at Edghill, and 
forbade that any further scrutiny should be made into 
the circumstances. 

It is, perhaps, scarcely necessary to dwell on such trifles 
at the close of the recital of so many serious misfortunes 
and calamities. For, on the whole, indeed, many cloud- 
less years of love and happiness were in store for the 
union of Sir Edward Holte of Aston Hall, with the 
Armourer's Daughter of Birmingham. 



THE END. 
