MAULEVEEEE'S DIVOECE. 



CHAPTER I. 

A PROTEST. 

A peotest ?. Yes ! to protest isall that is left to tlie victims 
of an injustice organized, merciless, irresistible, as is this 
colossus of legal oppression, whose tramp has bruised niy heart 
into the dust : where, if it yet quivers, it is only with the life 
of agony ! 

I do not deceive myself. Vox clamantis . the voice of one 
crying in the desert . mine may well be. Judgment has been 
given. sentence pronounced. Opinion has spoken from her 
most solemn tripods, and her oracles are decisive on my guilt. 
My good name is doubtless for ever gone. I am an exile in a 
remote land : my best hope to mingle speedily with its alien, 
earth ; shame-blasted, friendless ; deserted by all but the con- 
sciousness of my innocence, and belief in the justice of God. 
At times even, in the extremity of my sufferings, seeing so few 
signs of its visible action among men, yielding to the blasphemy 
of doubt in that sole eternal refuge and appeal ! 

I do not deceive myself. I am aware that even this cry from 
the depths, this utterance of anguish through the bars of the 
dungeon ; this true and dispassionate statement which I desire 
to lay before the world, will only, in the opinion of many, be 
esteemed au aggravation of my declared offences against its 
laws. 

Not for my own sake, indeed, do I break the silence of despair 
into which I sank in the presence of that overwhelming wrong : 
when gazing incredulously at its snowy robes and balanced 
scales, I learned that the true name of Law, when it confronts 
woman, is Oppression ! 

Not for my own sake ! What could even the reversal of the 
decree do for me now ? Could it restore me my dreams in the 
fool's paradise of love and trust : from which I woke to find 



2 MATTLEYEnER S BITOEOE. 

myself wrapped through every limb in the folds of that unim- 
aginable serpent whose deadly breath had, imtil then, seemed 
to me like the tannings of a sunny breeze from neighbouring 
thickets of roses and balm ? . If, indeed, my honour could be 
cleared of those foul stains that besmirch it ! . Yet what were 
now even the full recognition of my innocence ? . only the pre- 
sentation of a whiter shroud. 

Wot for my own sake. If I speak now, it is but in the hope 
that my words may reach the notice of some more impartial 
and clear-syed spirits, and _ chiefly among those least inclined 
to pardon offences of the kind I am charged withal ; who will 
yet calmly review the circumstances I present to their judg- 
ment. And then perchance, seeing cause to doubt the justice 
of a condemnation passed without the possibility of defence, or 
explanation on the part of the sufferer, such may interpose to 
save others of my unfortunate sex from the_ gripe of those 
barbarous laws whose tangling writhe has but just released me 
to perish, mangled and crushed in every nerve and fibre of my 
being ! 

Better it were, indeed, could I allow some longer pause for 
the ferment of feeling to subside, that 1 might speak with more 
of the calm and sobriety of a judicial deposition, almost the 
solemnity of which I claim for these papers. But what I have 
to say I must say speedily, The seal of an eternal silence will 
soon be placed on my lips. I feel very surely how vain are all the 
well-meant consolations and assurances held out to me by medical 
humanity. It could not be but that the strain of so much and 
such varied anguish, on merely mortal heartstrings, must at last 
rend the wondrous organ itself, where the mystical union of flesh 
and spirit has established its most intimate relations. My heart 
is broken, not merely in a moral . almost in a physical sense. 
There is a name, I know, for my malady in books of medical 
science, which will suffice to declare a cause for the catastrophe 
at hand. There is no occasion to search farther. No coroner's 
inquest needs be held on one who perishes so much in the esta- 
blished order of things. There is no murderer in the case. no 
murderess ! Requiescat in pace. She is gone. We are innocent 
of her blood : it flowed over no knives of ours . from no wound 
that you can indicate ! Bury her quietly, and all is well. 
What is the meaning of that pale face glaring from amid the 
darkness of death at us ? We slew her not ! You may see in 
the books of record, that she died of a disease fatal to many : 
hers is no peculiar case : not at all ! 

So be it. But at least let the imprimatur of the dread licenser, 
which must be stamped on these pages before they meet the eyes 
of any stranger, be some guarantee for the integrity of purpose 
and feeling with which they are penned. 

What, indeed, have I to gain, standing in my desolation on 
the verge of this dark promontory of existence, over which an 
invisible, but irresistible hand is urging me into the boundless 



A PROTEST. 3 

void beyond . by attempting to silence a few clamorous voices 
in the midst of the countless throngs that follow me, fate- 
driven, to the same all-unfathomed depths ? 

And yet, so rooted is the awe of opinion in which mankind, 
and chiefly the hapless division of it, women, are reared and 
perish, that doubtless my actuating motive is to endeavour to 
set myself, in some degree, right, before its incensed tribunal. 
Doubtless it would mitigate the cruelty of my fate. somewhat 
assuage the bitterness of the tears in which I weep away the 
powers of my existence, if I could think it possible . yet 
possible . Oh, surely, surely, it cannot be altogether impossible 
. being innocent as I am . to convince the world of my inno» 
cence ! "Will men lend ear only to the echoes of falsehood and 
calumny, and turn deafly or deridingly away from the sobbing 
appeal of truth's own accents, be mocked and confused in that 
artful maze of sounds ? 

Mine may be made in vain. But I shall have done what in 
me lies to clear the memory of the mother of my dear and 
only child of the dark stains injustice, and worse than Judas 
treachery, have cast upon my fame in life. And it will some- 
what soothe the anguish of my darkening hours perchance to 
think that, believe what they may of me still, some hearts 
more generous and compassionate than those of the fell 
majority whose ban is upon me, may learn to pity the doom 
they would not have aided to inflict. 

I will speak the truth. But the whole truth. Nought in 
malice ! Is mine a condition in which to harbour even the 
just indignation of the wrongs I have suffered ? But only the 
whole truth can answer the purpose of my vindication. 

And if this full utterance seems to assail ; if it strikes, if it 
blasts, like heavenly fire descending on guilty heads . they 
alone are to blame, who have raised theirs unblenchingly, before 
God and man, in attestation of the blackest perjuries ! 

I will speak the whole truth, and, I trust, nothing but the 
truth ! Admitted, that I may deceive myself ; form erroneous 
estimates ; see through distorting glasses of passion and pre- 
judice. Well ! I do not offer what I have to allege as the 
decisions of a judge, but as the pleadings of one accused, who 
has been allowed no other tribunal, and who kisses the marble 
tome of death in attestation of all she shall aver. Let them 
contradict me who can ! The most criminal of those whom I 
must accuse, will doubtless be my survivors. Let them refute 
me, and fear no further replication. 

Not only of my enemies ; of myself also, in all the sincerity 
of my soul, will I strive to utter the full reality. Of some 
whom I love. Ah, rather whom I have loved. so infinitely 
dearer than myself; I will not hide facts which it will yet 
wring my inmost heart to divulge. And let the fidelity with 
which I shall speak of persons most dear to me . of my own 
conduct . not extenuating wherein it was blamable, (for in much 

.r 9. 



4 mattleyerer's diyorce. 

it might be . it was ! ) an additional security that I do not ex- 
aggerate when I speak of my injurers and betrayers. 

Perhaps, also, I may find some alleviation to the loneliness 
and despair that environ me, even in recalling the strife and 
struggle of my long, strange agony ? 

I feel now that I was to blame, to interpret so literally the 
advice of my friendly physicians, when they urged upon me 
the necessity of seeking change of climate and removal from 
the scene of my calamities . transporting myself to this distant 
and foreign solitude. 

And yet, what joy did it not give me, at first, to know that I 
had escaped from the gaze of every eye that could glance with 
a recognizing ken upon me ! Sharpened, dagger-like, in the 
kindest and most merciful, by the involuntary associations of 
shame and misery and degradation stirred in their minds ! Ay, 
and most cruelly, most piercingly of all, where pardon, where 
even a relenting tenderness, would seem to dull the point . to 
turn the edge of the stroke ! These I found more difficult to 
sustain than the harshest condemnation. Against that I could 
oppose patience or defiance, as the mood of my troubled spirit 
swelled in storm, or sunk in impotent resignation : infinite 
scorn, or as boundless a sadness . all but the refutation, my 
betrayers had placed out of my power ! But how was I to 
endure it, when women notoriously guilty of the criminality 
falsely imputed to me . but unbranded by any public decree . . 
turned from me, snuffing the higher air in disdain ? Or, worst 
of all, when the abandoned of my sex hailed me as a fitting asso- 
ciate, and welcomed me with a terrible cordiality into their 
ignominious society ? I fled . and I am here. 

Here, in this far island of the Atlantic Main, whose genial air 
is said to restore health to the invalid, or at least to stay for 
awhile the progress of those vulture-maladies that feed their 
devouring beaks in the breasts of their victims. The name of 
Madeira satisfied my medical advisers. And I, too, poor worn- 
out wretch ! strove to believe in their persuasions, that a total 
change of external circumstances might produce some inner 
renovation. And yet, I scarcely desired to live, and it is not a 
disappointment to me to find how day by day I grow weaker 
and weaker, and take a foretaste, in continually deepening and 
lengthening swoons, of the eternal repose and quietude to 
which a mournfully-beautiful angel has summoned me under 
the white shadow of his wings. The mind mirrors all changes, 
it is true ; but darkened by calamities like mine, it reflects 
the sun itself beamlessly ! Scenery, as profuse and luxuriant, 
but of a milder and unburning Africa, is around me. And 
yet what have I forgotten ? what effaced, of anguished recollec- 
tion from those sharp-etched tablets of my brain ? 

I have chosen my brief abode near the shore of that ever- 
murmuring sea, which, to my stricken heart, seems to echo the 
universal wailing of afflicted humanity. I am almost the soli- 



I 



A PROTEST. 5 

tary tenant of a half-ruinous old Portuguese villa, whose owners 
perished in the pestilence that desolated the island shortly 
before my arrival. Perished all, save only an orphan heiress, 
to whose benefit, I am pleased to think, I inhabit this else 
deserted property. 

There is little resemblance between my blue-eyed, golden- 
locked Evelyn, and this dark-brown, sultry-gazing; child of 
the south, the young Rosaura d'Oliveira. Yet inexpressibly 
oignant, though tender emotions, swell in my heart, when on 
er occasional visits to her former home, from her convent, 
Rosaura fills the house with the airy spirit and gaiety of child- 
hood. Evelyn was of a stilly, timid nature : sensitive and shy 
as a woodland fawn. This young girl flutters about like 
a bird ; as free and careless of restraint : yet her very 
laugh brings tears into my eyes ! She has forgotten her dead 
mother, I feel, when I listen to that laugh . light, quick, bril- 
liant as the flapping of a sail in a bright sudden breeze that 
makes the sunshine shudder from the woof ! And can my child 
still remember her mother, living, but dead to her ? 

Yet, this joyous-hearted young thing have I too seen weep, 
when the strange Senhora from beyond the blue, unknown 
waters, yields to the dark sway of the spirit that possesses her, 
and indulges perforce in the overflow of a grief as infinite and 
unexplorable to her girlish apprehension. 

And while this foreign child has learned to compassioDate 
sorrows that have no claim to project their shadows on her 
path, my own is taught to despise, to contemn, perhaps to exe- 
crate the very name, of the mother to whom she might have 
proved the only healing consolation ! 

But let me not dw r ell on this. I came to this land . was it not 
so ? . to forget. And surely if the oblivion I was taught to hope 
for in change of external objects, is to be found, it should be here. 

Yonder background of black volcanic mountains, towering 
to the skies, and pallid on their summits with eternal snow, 
bears but little resemblance to the soft, purple-green swell of 
the hills that bound the prospect where my saddest recollections 
so continually revert. The precipitous landscape beneath my 
gaze, where the palm-tree flourishes in the midst of vineyards 
that cover every steep and elevation of a chaotic confusion of 
rock and ravine that seems hurling headlong downward to the 
sea, as if madness could work in material nature also . how 
should this contrasted scene compel my memory to return to 
those tranquilly verdant vales where I spent all the few happy 
years of my life ? 

What a daybreak is this that comes rosying like a Titanio 
Venus, from the bosom of the wide sweep of ocean, below the 
windows of my rock-perched Madeira home. from amid waves 
coloured like vasty gleams of mother-of-pearl, to a golden- 
sanded shore ! How little recalling to the mind the humid 
sunshine and narrow mountain streams of my native province ! 



6 MAULEVEBEE S DIVOECE. 

And yet, even now, gazing on this gorgeous vision, how does 
it fade away in the mist of tears from before my eyes, and the 
dun tranquillity of the lowland landscapes of Glamorganshire 
fills the whole scene instead, and seems to invite me to return, 
to find a more congenial grave under its dark green sod ! 

"Were I in a dungeon I might hope to escape ; hut from the 
prison of these recollections how can I steal or force my way ? 

Nightly in dreams am I borne from this fantastic Moorish- 
looking ruin I inhabit . or at least that my body inhabits. 
home to those stately halls of my ancestors, which imlicensed 
strangers have now assigned to themselves as an inheritance ; 
and wandering through every familiar chamber I encounter 
the icy- glaring eyes of those spectres of the past, tbat for me 
haunt them all ! Those of the living are the most fearful of all 
these apparitions ; shed the most charnel gloom around them . 
for they have died, to me, a death more utter and hopeless 
than that of the external clay ! Do I affright them as they do 
me when my shadow crosses theirs ? For they have only suc- 
ceeded, by form of law, in banishing me from that ancient 
abode which my ancestors had dwelt in for five hundred years ! 
No Law of the Land decree can bar the gates to my accusing 
memory ! 

Yet all my reminiscences need not, shall not be, of gloom and 
misery only. Bright gleams of happiness have at times crossed 
my path. Reverting my gaze, that tangled forest maze of 
existence I have traversed, seems pierced with oases of 
splendid sunshine. A verdure, as of Eden, clothes the dark 
turf. Fountains sparkle from the barren rocks. Birds sing 
in the woodland recesses, a thousand times more sweetly and 
multitudinously than the innumerable wild canaries that pour 
their dazzling, zigzag melodies so unceasingly even now on my 
ear, from their thickets of the myrtle and arbutus. I was not 
born for misfortune only ! God had endowed me with a spring 
of loving and happy emotions in the depths of my being. run 
to waste and ruin, or stayed in choked and noisome cisterns, as 
the living streams have been ! I lacked not altogether some 
wit and an understanding spirit, however little I may seem to 
have displayed of the worldly acumen and energies of self- 
preservation, these are supposed to bestow, in the practical 
conduct of my life. I had once a keen and relishing sense of 
the humorous. _ Do I grow boastful when I say, that the faculty 
of communicating my feelings and thoughts with vivacity and 
strengthwas even too fully granted me ? 

Shall it be said that my intelligence was defective because, 
dazzled by the radiant simulation of the virtues and affections 
that surrounded me, nothing warned me to rend those shining 
robes away, and make espial of the fiendish forms beneath ? 
What wisdom would it have_ been that should have exhorted 
me to pluck aside what I imagined were true and smiling 
visages, to discover that they were only marvellously welf 



A rEOXJEST. 7 

fitted masks ? Was the beginning of life to inherit at once the 
sorrowful legacy of the close . the lamp at the stem to illumi- 
nate the waves as they severed beneath the prow ? 

As it is, I seem to have turned a gaze at once microscopic and 
all-embracing on my past career. I contemplate the fearful 
drama from so many points of view, that at last I comprehend 
it in its entirety ! The secrets of character stand revealed 
before me ; the hidden springs of action are made apparent. 
Discoveries crowd upon me with every new retrospection. At 
times I pause, amazed to behold through what a shifting phan- 
tasmagoria, events, persons, things pass, ere they assume their 
real forms and consistency ! It is a landscape involved in 
mists and fogs, that gradually lift ; and with every change of 
vapour, every dart of sunlight, reveal some unexpected com- 
bination of terrible and precipitous scenery, until the whole 
aghast and hideous landscape glares forth ! 

My main difficulty will indeed be to preserve unmixed the 
double consciousness I now possess, of the false shows, and of 
the actualities, that presented themselves to me in that changeful 
masquerade of life. 

Up to the moments when circumstances, or their own weariness 
and defiance, revealed to me all the terror of the smiling seemings 
by which I was surrounded, does it behove me still to conceal 
my knowledge of facts and persons, so tardily, so wofully 
acquired ? Must I still gather flowers on the edges of the 
precipices, as if still unconscious of the fate awaiting me? 
Must I fail to recognise, in the trusted friend, the sacrificer ; in 
the fondly loved husband, the most merciless of foes ; in that 
glory of bright and chivalrous youth and love, so black and 
impenetrable a core of treason and betrayal ? 

I know not how it will befall. I have formed no plan. What 
my memory suggests, that will I put on record. The writing 
on the wall may glare and menace awhile, uninterpreted, though 
the prophets of fulfilment, the most assured of all, stand by ! 
I may yet again, perchance, put on, with a joyous air, those 
festival robes in which I know now that I marched o destruction ! 

I cannot preserve this composure, I am aware, throughout the 
recital I have undertaken. 1 am not yet subdued to the quality 
of the earth with which I am soon to mingle. The anguish of 
pity and regret with which at times I lament over the ruins I 
find in my own heart, and so lavishly strewed over the waste 
of my recollections, will change, on some occasions, its heart- 
broken moan to a cry of indignation, or of wild appeal. 
Moments there are when my soul howls, like the famished 
panther, amidst the shattered columns and defaced capitals of 
that fallen temple of existence, which the immeasurable desert 
hastens to swallow wholly up in its sandy hurricanes ! 

If, however, at times I shall be thought to speak with passion 
and distemperature, I trust that, before the close, it will be 
given me to eater into the calm befitting the end of all mortal 



8 MATJLEVEBEIi'S DIVOKCE. 

turmoil and vexation, into which the wildest tempests subside 
at last, on the very bosom of those waves they have so long and 
cruelly tossed ! 

Let me hope that the divine power to forgive may yet be 
accorded me, as a consequence even of the vivid renewal of the 
remembrance of all that needs forgiveness from me ! Would I 
use that of vengeance indeed, were every species of retaliation 
placed at my command ? And yet it is bitter, very bitter, to 
swallow this draught to the dregs, and patiently . -almost as it 
were thankfully . set down the cup ! 

But is it not possible that he who has most injured, may learn 
in these pages the value of the heart he has cast from him as a 
worthless gift ? Yet is it in his own nature ever to appreciate 
mine ? Will the exposure of that vile woman's artifices, whom 

he has preferred to all my lore and fidelity But let me not 

think of this, or the words of pardon that even now flowed to 
my lips, will change to curses ! Yet if, indeed, I shall at last 
subdue my soul to their Christian utterance, will it not in 
recompense be granted to me, by the mercy of heaven, to drop 
some few unblamed tears over that other mournful destiny 
associated with mine so disastrously ? 

Yes ! if it may be, enjoy your evil triumph, still more un- 
happy pair than the twain whose names you have united in 
that dark serpent convolution of shame and misery ! Already 
the supreme consolation is granted me to prefer my own sorrow 
and degradation to your cruel and perfidious prosperity and 
success ! Ay, though it may be that in the worldly cynicism 
and scorn of your depraved hearts, your triumph seems to you 
verily triumph . your success, success ! My misery is indeed 
great : but it is not so great as to have done evil and to exult 
in it! 



CHAPTER II 

EARLY YEAES. 

My first impressions of existence do not present to me that 
beautiful and alluring rising of the curtain which the years of 
childhood offer to so many, however stormy and tragical the 
drama to ensue. 

And yet the elements of good fortune seemed accumulated in 
my favour. My father was the representative of an ancient 
and illustrious race, descended from the earliest Anglo-Norman 
conquerors of Wales. He was one of the largest landed pro- 
prietors in Glamorganshire : and from an early period of my 
existence I was looked upon as the heiress of the extensive 
possessions of the House of Pomeroy-Manleverer, in consequence 



EARLY YEAKS. 9 

of the failure of any farther issue to an union in other respects 
not a very happy one. 

The cause of this unhappiness existed essentially in the 
characters of my parents, and in some untoward circumstances 
attending their conjunction. 

My father was, perhaps, one of the most irascible men that 
ever lived ; and having been trained from his childhood to 
prefer his own will and satisfaction to those of all others with 
whom he came in contact, he had acquired a despotism and a 
high-handed tyranny of authority in every relation of life 
which the gentle spirit of my mother was ill-calculated to 
withstand ; still less to take a satisfactory part in its wearing 
and impetuous action. The consequence was, that after a short 
period of passionate adoration and semi-deification of his wife, 
my father suddenly discovered that he had chosen his com- 
panion for life very ill ; that she was a woman without suffi- 
cient impulse, spirit, or capacity, for the world of fashion and 
politics, in which he himself purposed to play a forward part, 
and had, indeed, already made a brilliant debut : in brief, that 
she was unworthy of the position to which he had raised her, 
from the mediocrity of a country squire's daughter, to the 
peerage. The neglect and depression of a whole life was the 
penalty fate exacted from my mother for the temporary exalta- 
tion of a mortal to the rank of a goddess. 

She was not, however, what she was supposed to be. She 
was a woman of quiet but deeply tender sensibilities ; resigned 
and tearless, but not for that reason insensible to the bitterness 
of the draught commended by ill-fortune to her lips ; golden 
and wrought and richly arabesqued as the chalice might be, 
whence she was thus compelled to drain to the dregs. 

And more than to suffer patiently : my poor mother, I fear . . 
nay, I know but too well . had to reproach herself with the 
ruin of the destiny of another, who truly had not deserved it at 
her hands ; unless enduring love and generosity and self- 
abnegation, almost without example, could deserve sorrow 
and humiliation at the hands of any woman their object. 

Before my father paid his addresses to her, Helena Ossulston 
had plighted her faith to a young clergyman of the most amiable 
manners, and of a gentleness of disposition infinitely more 
suitable to her own than the strong and imposing characteristics 
of the man to whom she was finally induced to give her hand. 
But deceived by the false and cruel maxims, instilled at every 
pore, in the systems of modern female education, and the 
rapacious, rank- and-money- worshipping theories of modern 
society, my poor mother yielded to the seductions of the dazzling 
illusions offered to her choice, and assumed her crown of thorns 
in the shape of a baron's coronet. 

At the time of my birth, my grandfather, the eighteenth 
Lord Mauleverer (counting from the restoration of our peerage 
after the wars of the Koses, in which we took part with the 



10 JIAULEVERElt 3 DIVOI'cCE. 

unfortunate House of Lancaster), was still in the enjoyment of 
the title and estates. He survived, indeed, until I was nearly 
fifteen years of age . when he might fairly be said to have out- 
lived himself by two or three. During that period he was a 
bedridden paralytic ; towards the latter end of it reduced 
almost to a state of fatuity and utter helplessness, of mind as 
well as body. 

My grandfather had been one of the handsomest and wittiest 
men of his time, but also . it cannot be denied . one of its 
most conspicuous rakes and profligates. He preserved to the 
last an unnatural and fixed dislike against his eldest son, 
whose character and habits were directly the reverse of his 
own. After the death of a younger and favourite son of his 
own, and of my two little elder brothers, who all died in suc- 
cession, he transferred a good portion of this strange antipathy 
to me, though I was a child at the time, and one who could not 
have done anything to justify or excite his aversion. But the 
wrong-hearted old man never forgave me for being what he 
was wont contemptuously to style "merely a girl." His 
lamentation and exasperation on the subject of my sex formed 
a marked feature iu the gloomy and fearful phasis of dotage 
and decay he passed through to the tomb. And I believe he 
died owing me an irrational grudge on this account ; for I 
remember that his last look at me, as he lay ashy, pale and 
withered on his pillow, with all the aspect of an aged vulture, 
worn, to mere beak and bone, was accompanied by one of those 
hideous twists and contortions, with which he was in the habit 
of amusing himself, and frightening me, on the occasions when 
he was pleased to order me into his presence. Willingly I 
never came ; and on this I was carried out of the fantastic 
moribund's chamber, screaming with terror in my grand- 
mother's arms. For years after, indeed, that ghastly, sneering, 
cruel, dying leer, haunted me as a vision of horror and dismay 
incalculable ! 

But I fear that even to my own father my sex long continued 
a cause of the deepest regret and dissatisfaction. He was 
exceedingly proud of the antiquity of his descent, and earnestly 
desirous of a direct transmission of the family honours to a 
remoter posterity. But when my grandfather died, he remained 
the last surviving male of the great house of the Glamorgan 
Pomeroys. And the extinction of that proud name, in the 
person of a female representative, seemed assured, when so many 
years after my birth and the death of my brothers had elapsed, 
and left me the only issue of the union. Or was the neglect I 
experienced from my father, during my early childhood, one of 
the consequences of the coldness and contempt he took so little 
pains to dissemble towards my unhappy mother ? 

There was another potent element of dissension constantly at 
work in our household." an Ate breathing strife." My grand- 
mother.! say it iu all the charity my own and my mother's 



EARLY YEARS. 11 

needless sufferings from her agency can be supposed to leave . 
was determined that peace should not dwell under the roof of 
the son she affected to idolize. Her own temper and happiness 
had been destroyed by the shameless irregularities and infidelity 
of her husband ; and it seemed impossible for her to contemplate 
with satisfaction, or, indeed, to permit, where she had power to 
hinder it, a happier state of things in the matrimonial arrange- 
ments of any couple in the world. Now my father, though he 
appreciated little else in his wife, was aware of her exceeding 
personal beauty ; and while treating her with harshness and 
disdain on every other score, regarded all other women, 

Ehysically, with indifference. My grandmother, who was 
erself very far from being remarkable for personal attraction, 
at the same time that she would have been merciless in condem- 
nation of any divarication from his duties on the part even of 
her cherished son, could not complacently allow him to continue 
to look upon his wife as, at all_ events, the finest moulded 
statue into which the life of ambition and passion had not been 
breathed ! 

To these occasions of discomfort and disunion existing within 
the walls of the proud castle of Mauleverer, a very enduring 
cause for dissatisfaction, and the souring of a disposition not 
naturally inclined to amenity and tenderness, added the 
invisible but continual shadow of its presence to the gloom and 
discontent which even strangers unaccountably felt to pervade 
that entire stately residence, during most of those early years 
whose recollections are now returning upon me. 

For ages our family had possessed a predominant political 
interest in the county where our possessions were chiefly 
situated; and my father had represented it during a series of 
years ; indeed from the very day when he became of age to 
take a seat in parliament. He had made a most flattering 
appearance on the great stage of politics, and had risen with 
unusual rapidity to an influence and position in his party that 
seemed to assure him of the most gorgeous rewards his ambition 
. which was towering . could aspire to. But the Reform agita- 
tion was reaching its climax about the same time. My father 
was a Tory of the old school . a very Coriolanus of aristocratic 
disdain an d unyieldingness. On the other hand, the moving 
spirit of theage had breathed powerfully through the depths of 
social organization even in our remote and secluded province. 
New interests and new influences pervaded the mass ; and after 
the passing of what we looked upon at Mauleverer as the most 
shamelessly revolutionary measure of the age since the 
beheading of Louis XVI., my father was defeated in a contest 
for the county itself, by a person whom he looked upon with 
the greatest contempt as a low-born adventurer and interloper, 
and who had in fact raised himself from indigence to the 
possession of great wealth and influence in Glamorganshire, by 
successful mining speculations in the mountains neighbouring 
on. our extensive territorial ownership. 



12 NATTLEYEEEB S DITOECE. 

The effect of so mortifying a disappointment on a man of my 
father's haughty spirit can hardly be estimated at the present 
day, when class ideas and feelings have been so infinitely 
modified. He found himself cast out of the noble arena where 
he had been accustomed to exert all the athletic powers of his 
intellect, all the commanding qualities of his high and over- 
swaying spirit, amidst the admiration and applause of that 
immense audience of the entire civilized world which the 
protagonists of modern British parliamentary struggle feel they 
command. Condemned to perpetual exclusion from this scene 
of excitement and display (for the death of his father could 
only transfer him to a drowsy Olympus, whence the stir and 
animation of the scene of real contest and supremacy must be 
contemplated as a spectacle merely) there were perhaps, after 
all, some great excuses for those apparently unreasonable, and 
sometimes even irrational, exhibitions of irritation and canker- 
ing discontent, which consumed the activity of a really 
powerful and leading nature, until nothing remained but the 
dust and ashes of a wasted and unhappy existence. 

I was born, however, before the mutual love, or at least 
excessive bridegroom fondness of my father for his ill-matched 
consort, had entirely wasted its strength ; before the rapid ebb, 
which was to leave the reversed Propontis of his passion barren 
sands, had subsided from all its affluence of waves ! He 
insisted on calling me both by his own name and hers, united 
in a designation in reality sufficiently novel and musical. 
Hugh and Helena formed a not inharmonious conjunction. 
and IIugh-Hclcna I was named. 

But even in the earliest years of my childhood I do not 
remember that I was allowed much resort or familiarity with 
my nearest and best-loved parent. I was not permitted to 
draw my first nourishment at the sweet fountains nature pro- 
vides. A robust "Welsh wet-nurse was found for me, who, my 
grandmother declared, would save me from the inheritance of 
an hysterical and melancholy temperament, created to be the 
misery of itself, and of all that came within its dull and moping 
influence ! At the same time the cold sneer was added, my 
mother could preserve all that wondrous beauty of form which 
old Lady Mauleverer plainly indicated as the principal or sole 
recommendation of her daughter-in-law to the continued regard 
of her noble husband. 

If ever there had been any energy of resistance and revolt 
from the domestic tyranny she had fallen under, in my mother's 
disposition, it was speedily crushed out. But I have neverthe- 
less heard that she made a long and impassioned stand on this 
point. She was beaten from it, however, in the issue of the 
contest ; and the defeat she sustained in this (to her) 
momentous struggle, dispirited her from all future effort to 
escape from the cold and level but overwhelming advance of 
her deplorable destiny ; slow waves of mud, but the more 
certainly engulfing and suffocating in their dull, lifeless flow. 



EAKLY YEAKS. 13 

She was allowed as little interference in the management of 
my early education. My grandmother arrogated the disposal 
of everything relating to it, in the most despotic and imperious 
manner, to herself, though she certainly went through the form 
of issuing her decrees through the lips of her son. My father 
was chiefly anxious to escape trouble and thought on the subject, 
and considering that his wife had no capacity to fulfil even the 
commonest duties of maternity, remitted the decision of every- 
thing concerning it to the old baroness. Thus supported, my 
grandmother carried her own stern caprices into effect, on every 
occasion ; and often, I cannot now but think, purposely, in 
direct and unfeeling contradiction to my mother's most earnest 
wishes and intentions. 

Among other circumstances relating to this subject, and 
which had some effect on my career, I recall certain facts in 
connection with the residence at Mauleverer of my first regular 
governess, Mademoiselle Feldspar- Wellenhausen, whom it hap- 
pened, for tbe poor woman's misfortune, that my mother was 
the means of introducing into the family. 

For some years after the loss of his political position, my 
father had professed himself, and probably really found himself, 
unable to endure the mortification of his exclusion from public 
life, on the scene of its continued animation and absorption for 
others. He resided therefore a good deal abroad on the con- 
tinent, during my grandfather's remaining long life ; and under 
pretence of my being an inconvenience, at so early an age, iu 
his restless habits of movement, I was left at home, altogether 
under the harsh and repressive sway of my grandmother. 

I grew at last, however, old enough to require more particular 
instruction, after having passed through the ordinary rudiments 
of an English education. In some rare moment of confidence 
and indulgence on the part of her husband, my mother pre- 
vailed to be allowed her selection of a governess for me in the 
person of a German lady iu whom she had found and cultivated 
a friendly and congenial spirit. 

Mademoiselle Feldspar accompanied my father and mother 
home on one of their periodical returns, and was installed, with 
some considerable signs of doubt and repugnance, on the part 
of the old baroness, in her office. I became speedily very much 
attached to her ; and so inoffensive and kindly were the manners 
and whole demeanour of the poor German, that even my grand- 
mother found it very difficult for some time to exhibit any signs 
of the unreasonable antipathy she nevertheless took to her 
from the first hour of her arrival. 

Mademoiselle Feldspar was not possessed of any of those 
personal attractions which her jealous experiences rendered so 
peculiarly obnoxious to my grandmother. She was past the 
prime of woman's age ; was of a darkly sallow complexion, and 
had somewhat too large a head, suspended in a very ungraceful 
manner on the spine . almost like a pumpkin on the stem. 



14 MAVI.KTrKKK'S DIVORCE. 

If, r ri>-'\ and perhaps all lier features, were too bonily defined 
and protuberant. Coarse, old Lord Mauleverer called them 
(ac-c;-* ni''d ti> admire the plump, rounded outlines of the 
U anties ot the Court of the Regent). But there was something 
very rood and kind, and even lively and attractive, in those 
small " pig 1 eye.;," as he did not disdain to qualify them, with 
womanish pettiness of criticism; and in the smile that often 
played or. that certainly too wide and irregular mouth. I was 
liaqueiitly pressed with genuine fetidness to that pair of "bran 
pincu^iieiis." as the same authority characterised the German's 
rather hard and angular configuration; but to me it was as 
soft as the down on the swan's breast to the cygnet. 

I have lain for hems cradled in those kind arms very happily ; 
sometimes indulging in reveries which my governess had not 
the heart to di.-eouratre, king subject to the same, after her 
own dreamy country fashion ; but oftener listening to her 
curious stores of children's tales and legends, imported, racy of 
the soil, from the ingenious wonder-land of her native Mother 
J lunches and Gaffer Greybeard storytellers. 

She told these tales as if sho believed in them herself. and 
perhaps was not altogether so incredulous in some departments 
(the ghost one particularly), as she laboured, at certain philo- 
sophical intervals, to persuade mo wo ought both to be. 

Mademoiselle Feldspar- Wellenhausen was a gentlewoman by 
birth ; and one would have thought that this circumstanoe 
would have been a claim on more than ordinary civility in so 
aristocratic a household as ours. But it was not so. My grand- 
father found, in all German pretensions to dignity of descent 
and connection, an inexhaustible source of sarcastie merriment 
and allusion. He lost at first only his physical powers of 
annoyance and distress to the feelings of others ; but those of 
his sharp and unrestrained wit remained long in full activity of 
mischief and infliction. Old Lady Mauleverer's system of mal- 
treatment was much less demonstrative, but perhaps the more 
effectual on that account ; all too skilfully managed, however, 
to allow the luckless foreigner any tangible ground of complaint. 
And thus, for my sake. for she was very much attached to me 
.Mademoiselle Feldspar suffered a gentle simmering of mar- 
tyrdom during more than two years, in every form of ladylike 
insolence and unkindness, that the malignancy of a most 
polished and inveterate old woman could possibly condense 
into the period. 

But the poor German was vanquished at last, and returned 
in despair into her own country, . for she did not venture to 
take another situation in England. I had then a succession of 
governesses, of my grandmother's own selection, but who, it 
appeared, were all as little satisfactory to her as they certainly 
were to me. One, I remember, had rather red and clumsv 
fingers, which it displeased old Lord Mauleverer to behold at 
work on the piano, though she was otherwise a very fine and 



EAELY TEAKS. 15 

tasteful performer on the instrument. At last, my grand- 
father's fearful closing malady occurred ; and as we happened 
at the time to have just dismissed this latter-mentioned official, 
it was not thought of for a lengthened period to replace her : 
during 1 which I enjoyed the sweets of a very considerable por- 
tion of liberty, and of natural, unchecked development, bodily 
and mental. 

I was fond of books and of solitude, . preferences that could 
be readily indulged at Mauleverer Castle, which possessed a 
large and well-chosen library, and was encircled by an exten- 
sive domain most sedulously protected from intrusion. The 
castle itself . inhabited chiefly by a retinue of domestics who 
were kept secluded in a remote portion of it . though not one of 
the greater buildings of its class was, for the principal part of 
its time, a desert congeries of silent and untrodden chambers, 
where one might wander for hours together without much 
chance of meeting with a breathing soul. 

My grandmother continued for many months absolutely 
absorbed in her attentions to the afflictions of a man who had 
never at all reciprocated her love, and in the days of his 
strength and beauty had treated her with neglect and even 
ostentatious cruelty. During this period I was supposed to be 
under the vigilant superintendence and restraint of certain 
persons appointed to the office, but who indulged me in all 
my whims and caprices, to as great an excess as I had been 
previously deprived of every harmless natural freedom and 
recreation. 
_ In fact, I was left, at a very important period in the forma- 
tion of a female child's character, almost completely to the 
sway of my own wayward and eccentric fancies. "When the 
supervision of my grandmother, and of a particularly ill- 
favoured, elderly waiting-woman, who was her principal 
attendant and indefatigable spy, was withdrawn almost ex- 
clusively into the chamber of suffering, there remained only 
persons about me who were anxious to gratify my humours in 
every particular, reasonable and unreasonable. 

Neglected as I was, it_ was well known that I was destined, 
some day, to be the heiress of great possessions. I believe I 
was not, at all events, an unamiable child. No doubt the 
honest-hearted, natural-feeling commonalty around Mauleverer, 
were aware of something harsh and unusual in the treatment 
of an only child, who seemed to be the orphan of still living 
parents. It was known, indeed, that my father's disagreements 
with the old lord made it not easy for them to live together, 
even under a roof so extensive as that of Mauleverer Castle. 
But why was his only child and heiress to be abandoned to the 
melancholy society of two aged, and tyrannous, and unhappy 
persons, like the couple who presided over the gloomy state of 
that abode, during the long absences of those to whom my 
charge legitimately belonged ? 



16 mauleveeee's divoece. 

The servants in general were devoted to me. My nurse 
studied my caprices in everything. Our good old housekeeper, 
Mrs. Yellowley, positively doated on me! And now, my 
favourite amusement was rambling ; and in a most unusual 
degree, I imagine, in a female child. But I was a very fearless 
one. Brave, I ought not to style myself, for I apprehended no 
danger anywhere, or from any one. In truth, in the midst of 
that simple and virtuous peasantry, who loved and honoured 
my race almost too implicitly, and of those solitudes rarely 
visited by any but the genteel tourist or sight- seer, there was 
little or none to be apprehended. 

It is probable, however, that the extent of my wanderings 
was not suspected. I would not allow myself to be trammelled 
by the attendance of male servants. My nurse, Megan Jen- 
kins, who was growing- old and blind, had no objection to rest 
at certain appointed spots for me, while I plunged at my 
pleasure amid the sunny glades and woods and beautifully 
ornamented grounds of Mauleverer Castle. 

With the book of nature open before me, and some choice 
volume of my favourite authors in my hand, (and these were 
of a very different class from what would be expected in the 
selection of a child of my sex and years,) I spent the happiest 
hours of my life, at the period. 

But I must not forget to mention that, on my excursions of 
this sort, I was always accompanied by one faithful and for- 
midable protector. We had a mastiff dog at Mauleverer, of a 
prodigious size, called Trusty Gelert by me, after the famous 
though unlucky hound of Llewellyn ; and he and I were the 
best of company to each other, on the wildest and farthest of 
my wanderings. 

At a later period, when this passion of my youth for solitude 
and communion with nature revisited me as a consolation, 
surely it was a barbarous cruelty of misrepresentation to wrest 
my habit of frequenting it to the purposes of the atrocious 
calumnies and conspiracies set to work against me, with a 
zeal and craft so incalculable ! 

But this freedom and happiness were to last but a brief 
period. My grandfather died, and my father and mother 
returned to Wales, as was fondly hoped and expected by the 
tenantry and peasants on our estates, to reside. 

I never knew the exact particulars of the quarrel that took 
place shortly afterwards, between old Lady Mauleverer and her 
favourite son. I believe I was somehow concerned in it. I 
was unluckily engaged in a particularly long excursion from 
the castle on the day my parents returned to it. The addi- 
tional gloom of the presence of a dead body in the person of its 
late lord, lying in state of crimson pall and plume and es- 
cutcheon as it might be, drove and kept me forth to a much 
later hour than usual. It was moonrise, indeed, when I 
returned to the castle, ignorant that my father was already 



EAELT XEAES. 17 

there, and had sent out for me in every direction for some time 
in vain. I had now an appearance of rude health, and a 
rusticity of manner that shocked Lord Mauleverer : a man of 
formally aristocratic taste in all things. And, I must confess, 
that my great straw-hat, fantastically decorated, Ophelia-wise, 
with a wreath of woodland flowers, marked hy no means a 
proper sense of the bienseances, while that fearful old man's 
skeleton lay yet ungiven to the dusty jaws of the vaults open- 
ing to receive it. 

There were probably other matters of discussion between my 
father and his mother. However, they had an extremely lively 
one, on the very day of the funeral, . though strictly in private, 
of course, . concerning the wild and undisciplined state in which 
it seemed I was discovered. My grandmother imputed it all to 
the obstinacy and rebellious impatience of proper governance, 
by which I was characterized on all occasions ! It was I who 
had compelled her constantly to part with the most estimable 
persons whom she had selected to conduct my education ! 

A few days after the interment of my grandfather, I learned 
that I was to have a new governess. "And one that would 
keep me in order, and not allow me to run wild about the country 
like a savage young ' Injun !' " said my friend, Mrs. Whortell, 
old Lady Mauleverer's truly detestable favourite maid, with 
that peculiar screwed-up smile of hers that always gave her the 
appearance of a broken-mouthed teapot. 

She was to be a French lady also, I heard from another 
quarter ; one of my father's selection this time ! Meanwhile, 
my nurse, Megan Jenkins, was dismissed from her attendance, 
to my extreme grief, for her supposed dereliction of duty in 
permitting my unauthorized rambles. And the only piece of 
qualifying good news that was added to all this evil was, that 
my grandmother herself had determined to leave the castle, and 
go and reside in a house of her own in London. 

She had done all the mischief she could, doubtless, at Maule- 
verer ; and now that her son, on his new accession of power and 
supremacy, began to exhibit towards herself the despotism and 
disdain of all opinions but his own, which she had so constantly 
fostered in him towards others, the imperious old woman would 
not for a moment endure it. 

A little circumstance that occurred at the time, however, 
showed that it was too late to hope for any amelioration of my 
mother's destiny, from the removal of her who had been so long 
its evil genius. 



18 HAULEYEREK'S DIVORCE. 



CHAPTEll III. 

SOPHIA. STTTCLIFEE. 



The circumstance I allude to presented no feature marking 
importance more than any other casual event of the period. 
But it was fraught with momentous consequences to me. 

It was shortly after my grandfather's funeral. I had stolen 
one day into my mother's private apartment . for my visits to 
her had really very much of the character of some forbidden 
and unhallowed frequentation. I was sitting at her feet, on 
a little stool, well pleased, reading to her from a German 
Mahrohen-Buch, which she had brought me from the continent. 
She. was herself an excellent German scholar, loved and culti- 
vated German literature, and wished to aid me in keeping up 
the acquaintance in it to which I had been introduced by 
Mademoiselle Feldspar. For my own part, it was sufficient for 
me to do anything that pleased my sweet, patient, and angeli- 
cally beautiful mother, whose uncomplaining serenity of resig- 
nation, the instinct of the heart, enabled me, child as I was, to 
penetrate . or, at least, sorrowfully to suspect, how dark a core 
of suffering and corrosion was at work in the hidden recesses of 
her gentle being. 

"We were thus engaged, when my mother's woman announced 
that a young lady, of the name of Sutcliffe, had arrived at 
the castle in a conveyance from Llandaff; who stated that she 
had come from a much greater distance, from some place in 
England, with a letter of recommendation to her ladyship from 
a particular friend . unhappily, since deceased . which she beg- 
ged the honour of being allowed to deliver in person. 

I was always an observant child, and particularly so of my 
mother. I saw that her usually pearly pure and delicate com- 
plexion grew of a more deadly pale at the mention of the name. 
She repeated the word " deceased ! " with a visible start and 
shudder ! But after_ a moment's interval, recovering herself 
with an effort of a kind she was but too accustomed to make 
on her often rudely -jarred and sensitive nature, she ordered the 
servant to inform the stranger that she should be happy to see 
her, and to request her to take the trouble to come to her in the 
apartment where we were now sitting. 

My mother arose immediately after the servant was gone, and 
took a drink of water from a goblet on her dressing-table, trem- 
bling in every limb, and with lips so white and quivering, 
that I feared something dreadful was about to befall her. I 
ran to her in terror, and throwing my arms round her neck, 



SOPHIA SUTCLIFFE. 19 

kissed her with a passion of love and pity I seldom ventured to 
exhibit. She returned my caress, hurriedly declaring that 
nothing was the matter with her to excite alarm. Meanwhile, 
the person announced, and now, by the additional name of Miss 
Sophia Sutcliffe, entered the apartment. 

Sophia Sutcliffe ! . -But let me endeavour to be just. Let me 
describe this woman, to whom I owe all the great misfortunes 
of my life, if possible without bitterness. I would fain speak 
of her in all charity . nothing exaggerating ! Does Sophia 
Sutcliffe indeed admit of exaggeration, in any of her attributes? 

At this period she was probably not quite twenty-two . about 
seven years older than I was ; but her manners were already 
perfectly formed, and betokened either extraordinary natural 
self-possession, or a strange familiarity with the world, with- 
out," however, the slightest tinge of forwardness or of unbecom- 
ing obtrusion. On the contrary, there was an air of respectful 
deference, almost approaching to humility, in her address on 
this occasion. But she could always assume any style that 
suited best with her purposes of the moment ! 

Or am I committing the error I apprehended I might be led 
into at the outset of my narrative ? Was this strangely com- 
pounded and inexplicable being, of her own nature, and always 
from the very first, one of the worst of women ? Was what she 
became the faithful development of her radical essence, as the 
berries of the plants that yield death, are of theirs ? Or did 
the evil constitutions of the world, and an irresistible course of 
events, seize upon her, also, and compel her into that fatal circle 
of causes and effects from which there is no retreat ? Is she, 
too, to be reckoned as one of the victims to whom the sphinx of 
modern society proposes problems only to be solved by the 
destruction of the soul ? For when a soul that has once pos- 
sessed honour, and purity, and tenderness, and fidelity, has lost 
them all, is not the life of that soul extinct, if even an immortal 
essence yet retain the capacity of penal suffering ? But the 
immense, the insatiable enigma, remains : did Sophia ever 
possess any of these qualities, which are the real living 
principles of a spiritual existence ; or was she all simulation 
. even from that expression, full of pathos and appeal, that 
shadowed her countenance so irresistibly the first time I 
beheld it ? 

Certainly, there was much that was most amiable and 
winning : nothing that was treacherous, craving, dissatisfied, 
envy-gnawed, on the surface of that peculiar visage then. It 
was one on which, in spite of considerable irregularity of 
feature, the eye rested with satisfaction ; at times, even with 
admiration and delight, when casting aside her habitual mask 
of guarded immobility, she permitted the play of the variable 
and bright-witted mind to coruscate freely over it. Something 
stealthy and" withheld might perhaps be detected, by a very 
close observation, in the eye . leopard-like, veiled, soft, but 

C2 



20 MATJXEVEKEB, S DIVORCE. 

irradiating at times with a strange, inexplicable glow . the 
look of a caged wild animal, perchance, that has not yet ranged 
for slaughter. 

In person, Sophia was rather above than below the middle 
stature, and save, for a slight stoop at theneck, her form was 
doubtless all that the eye of the sensualist seeks in its pre- 
liminary rovings. The hands were perhaps a little too large, 
though well shaped ; and I know not how it was, but in Sophia 
Sutcliffe a considerable elevation of the nostrils, amounting to 
almost what is popularly termed " a cocked nose," failed to give 
her countenance anything of the vulgarity and sanciness it 
usually communicates to the physiognomies it is attached to. 

This figure was garbed in a very simple and decorous travel- 
ling dress ; effects certainly rather the result of the skill and 
care bestowed on the arrangement of the costume than of the 
fineness of the fabrics composing it. Its owner had a letter in 
her hand, sealed with black, which she presented, after the 
usual formalities of reception, to my mother. 

" My father, madam," she said, with a pathos in her tones 
that touched some fine vibrations in my young heart, too ; "my 
father has been 'dead for more than two years ; but until now I 
have had no opportunity of presenting to you this letter, which 
he commissioned me, in his dying moments, to convey safely to 
your own hands." 

" More than two years ! " repeated my mother, with a low, 
suffocating sob ; and taking the letter mechanically, she looked 
at the direction for several minutes fixedly. " The Honorable 
Mrs. Pomeroy ! " she then repeated, evidently to herself. 
" The honorahle ! . Poor, poor Edmund ! . Excuse me, Miss 
Sutcliffe," she added, faintly, " I will read your poor father's 
letter in my private cabinet, where some business will engage 
me for a few minutes. My daughter, the young lady whom 
you see, will meanwhile make the daughter of one of her 
mother's dear . dearest . friends, welcome to Mauleverer Castle. 
Do you hear me, Hugh-Helena, darling ? " 
And she left the room with an uneven step. 
I was very shy and diffident of strangers in those early davs. 
But it was not easy to continue one for any length of time with 
a young person possessed of manners so insinuating and 
fascinating as those of Sophia Sutcliffe. 

A polite but evidently surprised and interested repetition of 
the peculiar sound of my name, broke the ice between us ; and 
in a few moments I had not only explained how I came in 
possession of my unusual designation, but found myself engaged, 
I could not well have told how, in an amusing conversation on 
the peculiarities of the county we inhabited. Sophia told me 
she had come on the mail from London, travelling all night ; 
and the freshness and accuracy of the impressions she had 
caught up on so rapid a transit, testified to her extraordinary 
habits of observation. 



SOPHIA STJTCI.IITE. 21 

1 liked the very tones of her voice ; there was something 
sweet and strangely affecting' and penetrating in their vihration. 
Her name . at least, of Sophia . pleased me. We were speedily 
quite confidential in our chat ; she had a way of drawing out 
all she desired to know, without in the least seeming to 
endeavour to extract intelligence. No doubt she speedily 
noticed the fact that I made no mention of such an official 
attached to my person, for she inquired at last, with imdis- 
guised interest in her tones, if I had not a governess ? 

" No," I replied, with vivacity ; " but papa expects one very 
soon . a nasty Frenchwoman ! I hate governesses." 

" A French governess, I should say, you will find disagree- 
able enough, Miss Pomeroy," replied my new friend, smiling. 
" They are horrid formal, senseless creatures, who will crib, 
cabin, and confine you, mind and body, if you let them ! 
But I don't see why governesses in general should be such 
nuisances : I am one ! " 

" Oh, if papa would but let me have you, and you would 
promise not to hinder me from doing anything I like, I should 
be so glad ! " I answered, naively enough. " I think I should 
like you very much indeed ; " I exclaimed, joyfully, until the 
reflection checked me. "But papa never lets me have any- 
thing I like." 

" But does he refuse anything to your mother ? . to that 
dear, beautiful lady ? She is the most beautiful person I ever 
saw, excepting only her daughter ! " said Sophia, with earnest 
inquiry in her tones. 

" Oh, papa never lets mamma have her own way, either ! " 

"It is not to be done by beauty, then?" Sophia observed, 
musingly. " And, besides, you say Lord Mauleverer has entered 
into an arrangement with a French lady . or else, as I am 
myself out of a situation at this moment, I should be very 
happy to find myself placed near a young lady whom I could so 
much love and admire." 

Flattery was one of the master-keys of Sophia SutclifFe to the 
human heart. Not merely the vulgar flattery of external or 
prominent advantages ; her adulation was often a response to 
the most inscrutable and refined heart-longings, and vague, 
unuttered desires of the soul. 

Love and admiration !. To kindle feelings of this kind in any 
human hearty seemed to me so beautiful and triumphant a ful- 
filment of existence, that an aim and object which I had not 
yet, in my joyless and deserted childhood, been able to assign 
to it, arose at once to allure me on, like an enchanted landscape 
before some weary pilgrim in a desert. 

I had engaged myself quite warmly to do all that I possibly 
could to secure the services and society of this most desirable 
aouvernante, when my mother re-entered the apartment. She 
had evidently been bathing her eyes, but they were still red 
round the edges with weeping. 



22 MAULEVEREH S DITOECE. 

"Your father, Miss Sutcliffe," she said to the visitor, in 
faltering tones, " your father, it appears, addressed this 
letter to me only a few hours "before he departed ; but that is 
two years ago. How came it I never heard of the sad event, 
and of your pitiable orphanage, before ? " 

" We were too poor to put it in the papers. ;My father died, 
madam, almost literally of starvation, after he was turned out 
of his little curacy in Dorsetshire, near your father's seat. 
He differed, unfortunately, hut very conscientiously, in his 
opinions on certain innovations which his rector and the patron 
of the parish introduced . Puseyite notions, I believe they are 
called . from them ; and, of course, they got another person in 
his stead, whose views coincided with their own. I was very 
desirous to execute his dying wish ; which was, that I should 
deliver this paper into your own hands, and with my own. But 
I was a mere school-girl at the time, and not at liberty to 
dispose of my time, if I had been possessed of other needful 
facilities for making my way to your ladyship's presence. 
Even when I managed to get myself placed on the continent, 
with a view to complete my education as a governess, I had 
never the good fortune to bo in any of the cities visited by 
yourself and Mr. Pomeroy." 

"Of starvation ! " murmured Lady Mauleverer. 

" 0, madam ! there is nothing surprising in the starvation 
of a curate of the Establishment, who teaches Latin and 
Greek for a subsistence, and is in bad health ! " replied Miss 
Sutcliffe, adding, with strange hilarity : " and his daughter is 
not unlikely to follow his example in that respect ; it would 
not be easy in any other. " 

" You were brought up at a school for the destitute children of 
the clergy, I believe?" faltered my mother, glancing waver- 
in gly at her letter. 

" Yes, madam ; and I can produce the best testimonials to 
my diligence and good behaviour while in the asylum." 

" And you went on the continent after " 

" After my father's death, Lady Mauleverer ; at my own earnest 
desire, the society procured me a situation as nursery governess 
in a family of high distinction going abroad. _ I can produce 
also the kindest certificates from that noble family. But I was 
compelled, in order to acquire the necessary accomplishments, 
to withdraw from their service when they returned to England : 
and now. now I find it difficult to procure a situation in 
this country without more powerful recommendations than I 
retain." 

It seems to me that I remember a kind of blush . and yet it 
was a paleness, too, like that of wind-fanned red embers . steal 
over Sophia Sutcliffe's visage, as she made this explanation. 

" Nothing that is in my power shall be wanting to forward 
your views. I have not forgotten that your father was the 
faithfullest, the most noble-hearted of friends," my mother 



SOPHIA STJTCLTFFE. 23 

replied. " My daughter, indeed, requires a governess at this 
very moment," she continued, with hesitation; "and if you 
possess the accomplishments you state. but I fear I have not 
sufficient influence . I mean my lord is, I am afraid, irrevocably 
engaged to a French lady before your arrival." 

Sophia gave her peculiar glance at my mother. " I am very 
willing to submit to his lordship's judgment as to my acquire- 
ments ; but is it really possible that your ladyship has not the 
absolute disposal in all that relates to the education of this very 
young lady?" 

" Miss Sutcliffe, " said my mother, eluding the question, but 
colouring as she did so, " I am afraid your name would be 
against you here !" 

" My name !. pardon the repetition," exclaimed the candi- 
date for my governess- ship, with an appearance of great interest 
and surprise. "But what can my name have to do in the 
matter ? I am aware that Lord Mauleverer is stated to be a 
nobleman of the highest aristocracy of feeling, as well as of 
rank ; but he would not surely require a patent of nobility with 
the testimonials of talent in a governess for his daughter ? Be- 
sides, " she added, with increasing eagerness, " my name is no 
essential part of me : you can give me any other you think more 
suitable, madam ! " 

" It is your recommendation to me . but to my lord it has, 
perhaps, some unpleasing associations ; once, at all events, it 
had ! But it would be impossible for me to be a party in any 
species of deception of the kind," my mother said, rather coldly; 
for her nature was absolutely incapable of any sort of guile, 
and abhorred it in others. 

"Mamma! I will have no other governess than Miss Sut- 
cliffe ! " I exclaimed with the warmth I usually put into matters 
of feeling. 

" We will do all we can, my child, " replied my mother ; " but 
you know that is not much ! At any rate, Miss Sutcliffe, you 
may depend on me for a reference, or anything of that sort you 
may require. I have very little, " she added, melting into one 
of those showers that so often fell from her gentle eyes, "but 
sympathy to offer to the necessities of my best-loved friends, or 
your father would not . should not . have died. as you say . 
almost of starvation ! " 

And she wept long and dismally on the word. 

But it turned out as my poor, slighted, powerless mother 
expected. Though Sophia Sutcliffe, on being questioned. one 
might say examined . by her, was ascertained to possess very 
unusual acquirements to fit her for the office she aspired to 
fill, my father would not hear of his plans, with regard to the 
French governess, being put aside. He had accepted her from 
the recommendation of a princess of the exiled elder Bourbon 
branch. Was he to add the indignity of declining such a mark 
of interest on her part, to her Royal Highness's discomforts J 



21 mattleveu'er's diyoece. 

And for the sake of a stray " charity brat of a governess," 
whom my mother's utter want of judgment had, doubtless, 
purposely raised up in opposition to his own declared inten- 
tions and wishes ? My father chose to seem entirely ignorant 
or forgetful of any particular reason my mother might have to 
extend her protection to the orphan of the Reverend Edmund 
Sutcliffe. And not satisfied with this plain declaration of his 
will, he desired Lady Mauleverer to lose no time in providing 
elsewhere for her protegee. 

Equally in vain did my mother and I strive to call Lord 
Mauleverer's favourable notice to the many valuable talents of 
our candidate. He would not deign to form any judgment on 
the subject . even to see or hear her. No one but a Parisian 
could teach a pure French accent ! He was about to return to 
the continent . my father was quite infatuated with Baden at 
this time . and could not leave such an ungovernable, head- 
strong girl as his daughter in the charge of a person only a few 
years older than herself. In short, the decree had gone forth, 
and nothing could alter it. 

Finding all our entreaties in vain . for even I presumed to 
join in them, and achieved a sharp rebuke in consequence . and 
having, indeed, as I afterwards learned, received peremptory 
orders to that effect . my mother proceeded to do the best she 
could for her defeated candidate in another direction. She 
inserted an advertisement for her in a London fashionable 
paper, as a governess, allowing references to be made to herself. 

Curiously enough, a family in the county we resided in 
were at the time in want of a governess ; and, as they were 
wealthy, oifered a very handsome salary, and expressed them- 
selves perfectly satisfied with my mother's guarantee for the 
respectability and attainments of Miss Sutcliffe, an arrange- 
ment was concluded. 

Meanwhile, Sophia had resided several weeks at Mauleverer ; 
and whether it was the natural suddenness and warmth of my 
feelings, or the pains she took to ingratiate herself with me, I 
conceived an attachment for her which all her subsequent in- 
gratitude and wickedness have scarcely yet obliterated from my 
heart. Nevertheless, she was compelled to depart, and under 
circumstances that allowed us very little hope of meeting again. 
The Suetts . that was the name of the family with whom she 
had engaged herself . resided at a considerable distance from 
Mauleverer. They did not move in my father's very exclu- 
sive circle of society in the county, and were, besides, persons 
whom, for peculiar reasons, he held in dislike. My mother 
herself, I remember, was surprised that Mrs. Suett should 
desire to receive an inmate from her recommendation, and 
the whole affair was transacted by letter. 

Sophia and I parted with seemingly mutual regret ; and I did 
not see her again for a period of more than a year. In this 
interval, my father and mother returned to the continent . my 



'iitE BLACK lUIttEOAV. 25 

£vanc1mother having already removed, very discontentedly, to 
London. I was left, as it appeared, for the purpose of my 
education at Mauleverer. The French governess, to whom the 
task was to be confided, cluly made her appearance, and was 
formally installed at the castle. 



\ 
CHAPTER IV 

THE MACS RAINBOW. 

Madame Le Crampon' was not a person likely to conciliate the 
affection of a child of my character. Not that she was dis- 
agreeable to the eye. Her face, it is true, was a very flat oval, 
there being little forehead over her eyebrows . and though she 
assured me this was a characteristic of the Grecian beau ideal, 
I never admired it. Her complexion was perfectly clear, but 
of a red brick hue, and absolutely unchangeable. She had 
hard, bullaee eyes, that could look at you for hours without 
any variation of expression, or rather of cxpressionlessness. 
She was of good figure, though of rather inferior stature, and 
she dressed admirably. Yet on the whole she impressed me 
with a thorough sense of dislike and repugnance from the very 
first. 

I was left in the custody of this lady, under decree that I was to 
obey her as implicitly as my grandmamma herself, whose orders 
all my supposed wilfulness had certainly very rarely given me 
courage to disobey. It was not a pleasing association of ideas. 
Madame proceeded too abruptly also in assuming those reins of 
authority which had been fluttering for so many months loose 
as ribands on my neck. She scarcely examined me five minutes 
before she pronounced that I was inconceivably ignorant, and 
that I must make up for lost time by a veritable imprisonment 
of application. That was her expression. 

When I confessed that I could read and even speak German, 
but did not know a word of French, her astonishment was ap- 
parently boundless ! She spoke English herself wonderfully ill, 
but was not at all aware of the fact. I own I laughed to her 
face when she exclaimed: "MonDieu, what madness! Even 
your prononciation insulaire vitiates herself by the accent of 
this terrible langue, which can only intonate itself properly by 
a horse when he is to cough over a manger of beanstraw, or a 
cochon chewing himself uncooked pommes de terre !" 

It was decided that I was to unlearn all that I knew. Par- 
ticularly, I was to cast into oblivion the little inkling I had 
acquired in German literature. It was totalement without value 
in all respect ! of the most declared mauvais gout : no one ever 



26 MAULEVEIlEIi'S EI\ r OIlCI\ 

thought to learn it in the time of the Grand Monarque ! On 
the other hand, I was to learn to become a person of this world ; 
to cease to cherish the most romantic notions ; to study the 
obedience I owed to the best of fathers. Above all, I was to 
abandon a ridiculous attachment to solitude, and to books and 
studies altogether unfitted to the female capacity and business 
in existence. Finally. I was to study the laws of morality in 
theivvrais principes, ir\.th.e admirable Telemaque of Monseigneur 
l'Archeveque de Fenelon . and acquire a perfect knowledge of 
the French language ! The French language contained the 
models of taste ; all the classiques worthy of perusal. Monsieur 
Racine and the Grand Corneille to wit ! Nothing, Madame 
admitted, in French literature was possible to be perused by a 
young girl . was worth the perusal of any age or class . after 
the exile of the best and most unfortunate of kings, Charles Dix. 
Good heaven! if, as was avowedly the object, I was to be 
educated up to the mark of Parisian civilization, as understood 
in the Faubourg St. Germain, what a Chinese system of bandages 
it must be ! 

I was not to have a natural idea, a natural movement. I was 
to consider myself a being entirely destitute of feelings, passions, 
even of inclinations . until I was married! This happy event 
would come to pass as soon as I should show myself worthy of 
liberty . I was now, a girl of fifteen years scarcely, continually 
assured ; but entirely at the discretion and pleasure of my 
parents, and most absolutely of my distinguished and illustre 
pere. It was continually reiterated that he alone had sufficient 
lumieres and experience to choose for me rightly in the grand 
event of my life. Madame ma mere was the best of women, 
Madame Le Crampon was informed and believed ; mats apres 
tout, had not the necessary renseignemens and science of the 
world possessed by my father ! She was perhaps something of 
an ideologiste . apt to be led away by fancies and theories ex- 
ceedingly beautiful and Arcadian in themselves. but ridiculous 
for practical use, a f aire pleurer de rire. 
_ A good deal of this gibberish was unintelligible to me at the 
time. But, Madame Le Crampon, your pupil had tasted the 
joys of liberty, and was freeborn in every impatient fibre of her 
being ! From the very first interview a nerve-straining struggle 
was set on foot between me and my Parisian tamer. 

This Frenchwoman did me incalculable mischief. She gave 
me a good Parisian accent, it is true ; but what besides ? If in 
my character there has been remarked a degree of obstinacy 
and mistaken adherence to my own notions ; if my impatience 
of restraint has at times amounted to a rash and perilous defiance 
of opinion ; if my sensibilities and their natural displays have 
at the same time been taught more habitually to confine and 
choke themselves in my heart, until the accumulated soul-darnp 
could only burst in explosions that were catastrophes ; if, in 
short, I am the wayward, headstrong, brooding, uncertain crea- 



THE BLACK EAIXBOW. 27 

ture I have been represented by some ; I owe it in most part to 
the pernicious system this Frenchwoman put in force against 
me during 1 the months of that harmful year of her sway. 

She could not conquer me. But she could pervert all that 
was most excellent in my disposition . bring into exercise the 
wily and combative energies of a nature originally possessing 
little of either evil quality ; and mature them by constant 
requisition in struggle. Contempt, impatient revolt, were 
fostered in my soul, and combined in a baneful league, though 
under guidance of a good instinct that urged me to repel to the 
last the Frenchwoman's efforts to bring me under the yoke of 
her obsolete and truly immoral maxims of education. 

Madame Le Crampon thought herself in the right, I have no 
doubt, as an inquisitor might in former days, or a Thug in our 
own, strangling on religious principles. 

Madame Le Crampon did not in the least comprehend me, or 
wish to comprehend me. I was so much marble placed in her 
hands, to be hewn to a particular form . and that form, in her 
opinion, the ideal of perfection. My resistance . the counter- 
grain I opposed. were only what was to be expected from the 
material : hard, but admitting of a fine polish, she often 
graciously encouraged me to believe. Furnished with full 
powers of the chisel and hammer, she worked away at me, I 
suppose, with much of the tranquil enjoyment of a statuary in 
the strokes that disperse the obstructing mass from his precon- 
ceived idea. 

I believe she found me rather difficult to chisel out, never- 
theless. But I was left to my own unaided resources in the 
struggle. My father paid only one flying visit to Mauleverer 
that year . alone . for though I was not informed of it, my 
mother was suffering under a serious and lasting attack of 
illness, which compelled my father to remove from his beloved 
Baden to winter at Nice. I found, however, he paid no atten- 
tion to the detail of grievances I made to him. He was satisfied 
with my progress in French and deportment . my governess 
having taught me to glide in and out of a room, and curtsey, 
like a statue moved by invisible springs . and my grandmother 
had _ long persuaded him that I was a girl of an audacious, 
mutinous disposition, who required the strongest coercive mea- 
sures to bring her into any kind of decent subordination. 
Measures of severity nevertheless always had a directly con- 
trary effect to that of obtaining submission from me. 

My father, I must say, had strictly forbidden that any kind 
of personal chastisement should ever be inflicted on me. But 
my French governess herself, though of the ancien regime in so 
many other respects, had no notion of inflicting corporeal 
severities . of a kind to come under observation. Her plan was 
solitary confinement. Whenever my tasks were not done to 
her satisfaction, or, which I own, happened not so very unfre- 
quently, when I refused to do them at all (sometimes my dislike 



28 MATJXEVERER S DIVORCE. 

of the teacher vented itself in an absolute resolution not to 
study her language), she used to lock me up in our schoolroom, 
on a regimen of bread and water, until I submitted. 

This I confess to have occasionally held out against for whole 
days together. Once indeed I protracted my resistance to 
learning by head (for I never put any heart in the matter) a 
long speech in the " Polyeucte" of Corneille, which Madame Le 
Crampon declared to be a miracle of eloquence . and which 
proved our pretended "William Shakespeare the most barbarous 
of Goths . for an entire week. 

The truth is, I had discovered a means of consolation in my 
chastisement itself; and whenever I desired to give myself a 
holiday, it was thus I took it. I selected from the library such 
books as I desired to read, concealed them in some portion of 
the chamber devoted to our instructions, announced my revolt, 
received my sentence . and the moment I was left alone, com- 
menced the delicious perusal of the Arabian Nights, or of some 
wild fanciful ballad of Schiller, or romance of Ludwig Tieck ! 

The windows of my chamber of captivity, moreover, com- 
manded a glorious spectacle. They opened on some low turreted 
leads that formed the roof of a circular tower in the castle. It 
was easy for me, a strong, resolute girl of my age, to drop 
myself from an opened casement on these leads. Once there, 
wherever I turned, nature spread a volume of endless pages of 
unwritten romance before me. The tossing green manes of the 
woods, the white rushing of the rapid, rocky river below my 
gaze, the ever-changing realms of the clouds and sunbeams, 
over my head . presented to me untravelled worlds of bright 
conjecture. Above all, a vague unutterable longing ever drew 
my eyes towards the recesses of those shadowy nills, on which 
the rainbows often seemed to rest their resplendent feet ! 

I was endowed with an ardent and shaping imagination. My 
German governess's legends, and my own course of romantic 
perusals, had furnished it with captivating materials. How 
could I pass the time more to my liking, which I was deter- 
mined at seasons should elapse, than in peopling the realm 
beneath my gaze with the fantastic mythology thus placed at 
my disposal ? 

My body might remain in captivity ; but that which was 
infinitely more me was dancing with the fairies deep down in 
those green valleys, or winding itself upward with the skylark 
into the clear blue, where we both became as diamond specks 
in the firmament, and where certainly Madame Le Crampon 
could not follow us ! 

Moreover, those haunted hills had a fascination for me apart 
from romantic fancies, and the more stirring associations of the 
times of struggle and warfare between the two races which now 
peacefully possessed the land together. My nurse, Megan 
Jenkins, had taken care that I should not be left in ignorance 
on points of legendary history ; and though, confessedly, the 



SUB BLACK KAI^'BOW. 29 

good old "Welshwoman and her Anglo-Norman nurseling should 
have been on opposite sides of the question, we certainly very 
rarely were, when deeds of heroism, love, or sorrow, formed the 
subject of the ballad. For though obliged to translate her 
mountain poetry for my use, prose-ballads at all events they 
remained. But I have said that the Glamorgan Highlands had 
still another attraction for me besides all that these associations 
could present. I knew, though I had no precise notion of the 
locality, that the family Sophia Sutcliffe had gone governess in, 
resided among the hills. They were mining proprietors. 

I cannot, however, account for the attraction this young 
person continued to exercise over my mind and heart, even 
after so considerable a period as a year and two or three months. 
Had she cast a spell upon me from the very first? TTe had 
been but the acquaintances of a very few weeks, and yet I 
missed her, for so long a time after her departure, in a thousand 
different ways. She had indeed a power of fascination when 
she chose to exert it. She suited me, I may say, magnetically. 
The very touch of her fingers when she smoothed my often 
wildly flowing hair, laughing at its disordered freedom, 
traversed my frame with a thrill of pleasure. Her lively talk 
. the vivid glimpses of unknown worlds of thought and feeling 
and existence it afforded me . gave an indescribable movement 
and vague but marching gaiety to my ideas . like the distant 
music of a military band. She suited me in every form . and 
in every form I missed her. 

I think, however, she could have had but little influence on 
the strange outbreak my long fermenting indignation and 
spirit of self-assertion at last vented themselves in. The im- 
pression, however marked, she had left, must have been well 
nigh worn out. I should say I had almost forgotten Sophia 
Sutcliffe, at the time when it was destined my own act should 
again place me under her singular influence. 

Matters continued as I have described, for a very consi- 
derable period, externally unchanged. My tyrantess con- 
demned me to solitude, and the moment she left me to it, I 
found myself in a gorgeous palace of the fancy, where, as in 
the story of the Third Blind Calender, were an infinitude of doors 
opening into the most magnificent apartments ; gardens of 
musk and ambergris ; orchards of unknown, but dazzling fruit ; 
and where, above all, there was one chamber in which the 
winged and silver-shod mysterious steed stood ready saddled 
and bridled for an excursion, however giddy and wild, into the 
boundless empyrean of imagination. Supported by this secret 
power of delightful abstraction, I not unfrequently achieved 
the brilliant emotion of victory by the very perseverance of my 
sedition ! My jailoress herself would grow weary and alarmed 
at its length. She would release me unconditionally, and I 
came forth a conqueror ! 

Often a very faint and exhausted one, certainly. I generally 



30 mauleverer's divorce. 

made it a point of honour not to touch the unrelishing food 
placed in my reach. I wished to prove. scarcely understanding 
my own drift . that I was not to be subdued by physical neces- 
sities, however craving. 

I must confess, however, that my maid . Marianne Lloyd . 
found out a very unmagnanimous means of bringing me occa- 
sionally to submission. She persuaded me that these long 
recesses pleased Madame Le Crampon instead of disconcerting 
her ; and that she enjoyed her leisure exceedingly, dedicating 
it to the manufacture of a new head-dress, or otherwise to the 
adornment of her person. At times, I was in the mood . dearly 
as I loved my own private dedication . to deprive my controller 
of the satisfactory interval my imprisonment allowed her. 

But I must declare that not unfrequently my chief objection 
to a surrender lay in the fact . that I should be compelled to 
undergo one of Madame Le Crampon's kisses of reconciliation 
as a consequence. There was nothing I hated more than a kiss 
from my Parisienne. Her thin but humid lips seemed always 
to leave a sliminess on my cheek . I never suffered her to touch 
my lips if I was at all aware of the operation intended. 
Reversely, she had a great fancy to kiss me. 

I could do nothing decently well, or reasonably obedient, for 
which she would not kiss me. I heard her once inform a 
countryman of her own, who strayed by some unaccountable 
chance into Wales, was called a Count, and seemed to me a 
withered monkey . that to kiss me refreshed her ! It did not 
me at all. 

Yet I am far from pretending that all this mixture of romance 
and reality furnishes a justification for the extraordinary result 
it at last produced. An act of madness indeed, had I not been 
brought up so profoundly ignorant of what was reasonable. 

The tyranny of Madame Le Crampon grew daily more insup- 
portable to me. I was a steed of fiery race, whose rider goads 
it with the spur while he holds it in at the mouth, till blood and 
foam mingle on the curb. 

Madame Le Crampon's system (for she had a system : nothing 
absolutely hard, senseless, and bowelless can be carried out 
without a system !) united the goad and martingale in the most 
remorseless perfection. Was I inclined to advance, on any 
road, even of her own selection, she checked me. To learn 
quickly was to learn superficially. To take a delight in any 
thing I was doing was a certain sign it ought not to be done ! 
My hours were parcelled out to me in the most tedious and 
minute subdivision. No impulse, no movement, out of certain 
narrowly chalked limits, was to be allowed . while at the same 
time there mostly seemed no other reason for her own ossifica- 
tions of routine but a senseless adherence to certain laid-down 
formulas she had herself received without question, and put 
in execution as oracles of divine wisdom. _ 

Whereas my respect for my teacher diminished through the 



THE BLACK KAINBOW. 31 

very instruction she thrust upon me. The most stereotyped of 
French ideas and expressions yet contain in them the elements 
of a sarcastic enlightenment, which I was not long in applying 
to Madame Le Crampon's own character and ideas. I perceived 
that she was a mere unintelligent machine of educational 
theories, whose letter she administered, but whose spirit had 
long since departed. I understood her finally to be a woman 
of the narrowest understanding, as well as worldly-heartedness, 
and paltry views of self-elevation : and wo betide that tyranny 
which is despised as well as hated ! 

My dislike and contempt for my governess stood at last 
nearly balanced : a longing to throw off a yoke I contemned, 
and even a desire of revenge, took possession of my once sweet- 
blooded and gentle nature. Add to these, my childish love of 
freedom, fostered by some indulgence, and that vague but 
powerful hope for happiness in change, which humanity has 
ever cherished since its exile upon the earth ! 

And now this latter illusion took hold of my wild fancy in 
the shape of a visible promise, if only I could penetrate into the 
recesses of those nigh, but unexplored and secret hills, that lay 
ever gleaming with their golden-purple summits along the 
bright lines of the sunset, and seemed to offer an attainable 
goal of refuge and realised romance. 

These notions worked together, fermented, finally took definite 
aim and significance. What was it to me to be the child of a 
great house . an heiress ? Nothing ! The meaning of these 
fine .words, practically interpreted, was to me only neglect, 
solitude, a wearisome routine of worthless labours, tending 
apparently to no result. In my rambles I had observed the 
way of life among the cottagers' children of the simple and 
contented peasantry around Mauleverer. They seemed to enjoy 
perpetual air and sunshine. Their cheeks were ruddy. I had 
often partaken of their fare of rye-bread and buttermilk, and 
relished it better than my own formal repasts. They played 
about the doors of their homes, one with another, and acquired 
a language that seemed more difficult than French or German, 
under the tutorage of the rustling trees and warbling brooks 
alone. 

Nobody cared for me for whom I needed to care. So I 
thought. My mother had been now so long absent that she 
seemed to have deserted me too . The old housekeeper, the older 
bailiff, the woodmen, the gamekeepers, the dairy-maids, had all 
once cherished me, it is true. But they now rarely saw me. 
I was not suffered to resort to such low company ! Besides, I 
thought they would rejoice in so much good fortune happening 
to me, as an escape effected from the oppression of the foreign 
intruder, whom I knew they likewise secretly disliked. 

I cannot deny I anticipated an ample measure of revenge on 
my tyrantess in the evasion from her authority I now seriously 
planned. I knew that in the absence of my parents, the French 



32 MAULEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

governess was held responsible in every respect for my safety 
and -well-being. I had myself heard my father declare so to 
her, with a ring of menace in his stern tones. 

I came to the conclusion that I should certainly find refuge 
and security in those solitary hills, whither my fancy had so 
often wandered. Did not the shy and fugitive rainbows seem 
to rest on them in delight ? And a remarkable one that was 
visible about the time I now allude to, carried my feverish 
exaltation to the highest pitch. 

Not of a very tempting sort to some, perhaps. _ It was one of 
those rare and curious phenomena sometimes visible in moun- 
tainous elevations . a Black Eainbow. So the peasants of my 
native province style such in their picturesque dialect. But it 
ought rather to be called a white rainbow. On nights of mist 
and moonlight a semicircle of milky radiance expands from hill 
to hill, deepening from an inner arch of pale brightness, some- 
times through wan and ghastly shades of colour, into the 
darkness of the sky. The spectacle of a phenomenon of this 
sort late one autumn evening, recalled the old childish longings 
and impulses to my heart. But it dismayed and amazed 
Madame Le Crampon, and rendered her more than usually 
fretful and exacting. She did not approve of departures from 
routine in anything. I believed she would have liked all the 
pinks in the world to be streaked after one pattern, and that 
pattern taken from the bandbox of a Parisian modiste ! 

She retired from the unnatural spectacle, very much disposed 
to call nature to account for her vagaries. And, in spite of my 
entreaties, _ and even tears of vexation, she compelled me to 
follow her into an apartment where the shutters were carefully 
closed, to exclude the annoying wonder. 

It vexed . it humbled me even inexpressibly to be obliged 
to share the foolish fears of my governess. or, at least, to 
seclude myself with her from that splendid show, so freely 
oitered by the great manageress, on the stage of heaven itself ! 

1 sat silent all the rest of the evening, and was reproached with 
sullenness. I answered, no doubt, petulantly, and, as a punish- 
ment, was assigned a double portion of one of those boasted 
h rench classiques, to be learned by heart. a series of petrified 
commonplaces entitled " Spring ! " I at once declared that, 
happen what might, I never would destroy ray own recollec- 
tions of the real and beautiful printemps of nature by stuffing 
my head with a French Sevres- ware imitation ! There was no 
such goddess as Flora, I told madame fiercely, remaining in the 
world ; and that shepherds and shepherdesses did not go about 
with ribands on their crooks declaring what sacrifices they 
intended to oiler to ran and the nymphs, or singing at one 
another for prizes of carved beechen bowls ! It was the revolt 
of romanticism against classicism, commencing, as in the 
original case, in utter weariness ; and I conducted mine with 
as little temper and discretion as the argument has been else' 
where insisted on. 



1'IIE BtACK KAIN£0\V. 33 

Madame Le Crampon was fairly horrified. An evil spirit 
had entered into me, she declared. But she would exorcise it. 
1 was to be confined until I had signified my recantation of 
such- absurd, such revolutionary notions, by writing an eulo- 
gium, in the sincerest and best spirit of the printemps of . 
Monsieur Lunettes' des Anciens, let us style the bard, to avoid 
offence. Confined, but not in any agreeable, airy apartment of 
study, where, perhaps, I amused myself like the Baron Trenck, 
of whose adventures I was so fond, in cultivating an intimacy 
with spiders and mice ! I should be shut up in my governess's 
own room, where, she informed me, with a malicious smile, she 
should be very glad of my company while she turned an old 
silk gown into a new one good enough to wear in that pays 
clesoli des Galles. 

Madame Le Crampon had chosen, of her own motion, an 
apartment exactly suited to the narrow and stifling charac- 
teristics of her mind. Numerous chambers of handsome size 
had been placed at her disposal ; but she preferred a very little 
suite, looking on the principal castle walk. She hardly ever 
permitted her windows to be opened ; so that the prospect of a 
tete-a-tete with her, in her bedchamber, for the whole day (I 
knew it would take me a whole day to accomplish my task), 
occurred to mo as more insupportable than to spend one in a 
dungeon with a spider, or even a toad . an animal more parti- 
cularly my aversion. 

I had seemingly ,_ however, no resource but submission. To 
adopt my usual policy of passive resistance, under the circum- 
stances, would only be to prolong my own misery. I took a 
resolve in silence, while I was eating my bread and milk that 
night under my governess's bleak, malicious eyes, that confessed 
her enjoyment and triumph in the power she abused. In the 
fashion of Sancho's physician, she had ordered away, as dele- 
terious to my health, but in reality to show her despotism of au- 
thority, a comb of new honey Mrs. Yellowley had ventured to 
insinuate on my little supper- tray. I was very fond of honey . 
and this drop of bitterness made the cup overflow. 

I went to bed. To judge from my external composure, not 
mutinously at war with the decree pronounced. I took my 
evening kiss de rigueur from Madame with some little extra 
shrinking perhaps ; but what a master teacher of dissimulation 
is tyranny ! I allowed myself to be undressed by my maid ; 
carefully, though with no obvious needfulness, watching where 
the different articles of my raiment were bestowed. I lay down, 
and even feigned to fall very soon and soundly asleep ; so that 
when my governess looked in at me, as she always did before 
going to rest herself, as if to make sure of her captive, she 
should be satisfied all was right. She usually shaded her lamp, 
not to waken me, and took but a careless and perfunctory survey. 
And it was well for me on this occasion that it was so, or my 
agitation might have awakened suspicion. 

D 



31 MATJI/T^VEK'EK.'S DIVORCE. 

I did not sleep a single wink that night ; and the first glimpse 
of daybreak saw me completely attired, in readiness for my 
projected flight into the world. 

Marianne Lloyd slept in the anteroom to mine ; but she was 
a heavy sleeper ; and I went through her chamber on tiptoe 
without disturbing her. 

I knew that as soon as it was daylight, our milkers and dairy- 
men went a-rleld. I knew how to reach unobservedly the back- 
stairs by which they passed from their apartment, in the general 
offices, into the stableyards. Thence it was easy to reach the 
open country. at least to one not liable to be brought to question 
and halt on the way. 

I was; and therefore I had decided to take rather a liberty 
with the upper garments of one of the girls belonging to the 
menial part of my father's establishment, whose figure I knew 
resembled my own. I was very well aware where Sukey Jenkins, 
my foster-sister, kept her scarlet Sunday cloak, and smart 
round Welsh hat, the favourite garb of our Glamorgan female 
peasantry. But I made my way to her little chamber, and 
possessed myself of the articles. I had the honesty to leave her 
all the little pocket-money I owned, with a written promise that 
I would send enough to replace the value of the dress completely, 
as soon as I could earn it by work at some farmer's ! 

I arrayed myself with indescribable satisfaction in these ap- 
propriated garments. I even recollect surveying the result, with 
a flattering estimate of my own good looks, in a little cracked 
mirror Sukey kept over her washstand. no doubt for the same 
purpose. 

It was so early that only our dairy-women and some grooms, 
busied in the stables at their work, were astir. I passed quite 
unobserved out of the immediate enclosures of the house ; and 
with a sensation of bounding joy and triumph no wine but 
liberty ever intoxicated the human heart withal, I found myself 
in the open domain of Mauleverer Park. 

It was one of the finest mornings that ever dawned. The 
rising sun filled the whole sky with a lovely rosy flush. The 
atmosphere was deliriously fresh and serene. The birds sang 
on every bough. It was thebeginning of the world with me, 
when God looked over his entire creation, and all was good ! 

I bent my steps at once in the direction of the hills. I had 
formed my notable plan decisively. Up among those high bar- 
riers, I had often heard my nurse say, the people were far better, 
kinder, more hospitable than in the valleys we lived among. 
They were shepherds and cowherds ; and sheep and cows I was 
yery fond of. They inhabited pretty, moss-covered huts, 
whence those blue plumes of smoke were so often visible, curling 
gracefully on the wind as the feathers on the helm of a knight 
of the olden time. My nurse was herself a hill woman ; and 
with all the comforts of her position at Mauleyerer, always 
looked back to her youthful habits with regret. 



Plas newydd. 35 

Among tliese good people I felt assured I should be happy. 
The distance of their abodes was a strong recommendation, . 
it would secure me from recapture. Who would suspect tho 
daughter of the owner of a castle in the disguise of a shepherd- 
girl ? Thus I reasoned. Madame Le Crampon, who was always 
vaunting the advantages of wealth and position to which I was 
born, would never dream of my purpose.. Will the reader ? It 
certainly was to offer myself as a servant-girl to attend on 
those same friendly and tranquil-looking cows and sheep, 
whose composed demeanour had always suggested to me a 
pleasing contrast with my own disturbed and fretful existence. 

In particular, I was allured with the prospect of becoming 
one, as it were, of a contented family of the latter fleecy inno- 
cents. It seemed to me so delightful a way of passing the 
time, browsing among the sweet heather, or reclining on the 
sunny slopes of the hills, listening, in all comfort and repose, 
to the musical tinkle of our chieftain's bell ! Tempest or butcher 
never cast their menacing shadows on my pastoral landscapes. 



CHAPTER V- 

PLAS NEWYDD. 

I kept on the lower bank of the great avenue that traverses 
Mauleverer Park, as soon as I found myself fairly out of the 
castle enclosures. This is a very steep one. to the left as you 
leave the mansion. A rapid stream flows at the bottom, where 
passers-along are screened from observation by clumps of 
ancient and extraordinarily lofty trees. On I went . but I had 
not gone far on this covered way, before I suddenly bethought 
me how I had left Trusty Grelert behind ! 

Trusty Gelert, who, by far the greater portion of his time, 
was also a moody captive ; chained near a comfortable hutch, it 
is true, but one which he detested, as I did the apartment of 
Madame, and which he never entered without a growl of 
protest. 

And besides his claims as an old friend and fellow- sufferer, 
what a most desirable companion and counsellor would he not 
be on such an adventure as that I was bound on ! It never 
occurred to my inexperience what a strange figure a little 
serving-wench would cut, who offered her drudgery in con- 
junction with the services of a mastiff of the largest size, whose 
very appearance struck terror . fit only to ornament the court- 
yard of a stately mansion. 

After a short demur, I resolved to return and set my four- 
footed friend at liberty with myself, at all risks. If I was 

d 2 



36 HAPLEVEEER S DIVOECE. 

recognized, it was not so unusual with mo to set Gelert loose 
from his chain, though he was never permitted by Madame Lo 
Crampon to accompany us on our walks. He dirtied my 
dresses with his clumsy paws, she would say . aud was besides 
a very dangerous, ungovernable monstre ! Indeed, once it was 
as much as I could do to prevent him from leaping upon her, 
and doing her some memorable mischief, on an occasion when 
she presumed to give me rather a rough haul, to my customary 
imprisonment at her side, for running myself out of breath with 
him. 

Trusty Gel erf s residence was a few yards from the lodge at 
the gate into the park from the castle yard, under a group of 
glittering green birches that shaded it. It was so early that 
even the active inmates of the lodge were not yet astir. _ And, 
though the faithful creature hailed my approach by springing 
the whole length of his chain, and uttering his deep_ bay of 
welcome, no one appeared to be disturbed. After skulking and 
listening for a few minutes under the trees, I ventured to 
emerge. A moment rid Gelert, not only of his chain, but of his 
collar ; it might recal unpleasant associations, I thought, and 
had, besides, my father's name upon it. 

The joy of Trusty Gelert fully equalled my own when, setting 
forth at a rapid pace, he found we were making our way into 
Mauleverer woods. Well remembered he our happy days in 
their green solitudes, before either of us saw the ill-omened 
visage of her from whom we were now fleeing, as if a- trip on the 
breezy morning air ! 

It was perhaps a good inspiration of my guardian angel that 
prompted me to seek the escort of this powerful and attached 
friend. Several times that eventful day we passed wild 
strollers, in out-of-the-way places, whose rencontre might other- 
wise have been perilous for the wandering heiress of Mauleverer. 
In particular, I remember, a black sailor came upon us in a 
desert, heathy place, who glared strangely at us as we passed, 
and after us. But Gelert also turned his formidable muzzle at 
the same moment, and the fellow kept on his way. On that 
same day a black tramp of this very description committed a 
brutal robbery and murder in a lonely farmhouse near Chapel 
Martin. Farther on we passed an encampment of gipsy tinkers, 
who turned out unanimously to stare at us. A gleaming-eyed 
old hag detached herself from the group, and insisted on telling 
me my fortune. But Gelert growled, and she and her allies 
retired, as if Una and her faithful lion had crossed their thievish 
settlement. 

Thanks, Trusty Gelert ! for thy unfee'd loyalty and protec- 
tion on that wild journey ! my rough but most gentle chevalier, 
" tender and true " as the ancient Douglas of the Heart ! But 
for one sorrowful association, thy memory would be among my 
few unalloyed reminiscences. 

We had a joyous journey of it for the first few hours that 



PXAS NEWYDD. 37 

day, Trusty Gelert ! Neither of us knew well whither we were 
going, but both were satisfied that it was all right with us since 
wo were together, and abroad under the open blue and sunshine, 
enjoying the full use of our limbs and faculties, freed from all 
collars and chains . trending our way the while vaguely towards 
some unknown, but, we nothing doubted, pleasant bourne. 

We reached the brow of a hill in a gradual ascent from the 
watercourse, and I remember looking back with a feeling of 
inexpressible exultation at my deserted home. 

Mauleverer Castle was a building of great antiquity, and, in 
the days of lance and crossbow, was probably rated one of con- 
siderable strength. Like most of the border castles of Wales, 
built to repress the incursions of semi-barbarous tribes, it had 
been of great extent and solidity, though not equal in mag- 
nificence to the midland and southern fortified mansions of 
England. It now consisted chiefly of the original central mass, 
crowned by a battlement, and flanked by five or six semicircular 
towers adhering to the main pile. The rest had been destroyed 
in the Civil Wars, but the ruins had been carefully cleared 
away. Formerly a moat surrounded the castle ; now this had 
been filled up and planted in terraces as a garden. We dis- 
played our wealth and state chiefly in the very beautiful 
ornamental grounds of the residence, and in the extent of the 
walled park and chase beyond them. 

In the direction I now looked spread accordingly a most rich 
and diversified expanse of park scenery, including some fine 
woods,_ and a broad, winding, rocky river. Beyond was an 
extensive landscape of flat, but cultivated and smiling- pastoral 
country stretching to the shore of the sea. Its blue, dazzling 
line was clearly visible to my young eyes ; and the white glare 
of sails in the sunshine gliding along it in a soundless panorama. 
But what interested me chiefly in the survey was the oppor- 
tunity it gave me to seek out the narrow windows Madame Le 
Crampon so seldom suffered to be opened, and amuse myself by 
figuring her lying purred up, fast asleep, with her nonsensically- 
coquettish lace cap and blue ribbons on, undreaming of my 
escape. Then I turned away with light and bounding steps 
towards the many -coloured undulations of that mountain range 
where I supposed I should find a secure refuge from the re- 
searches of my educational Ceres. 

Ceres ! . Yes : the Parisienne's classiques had made my poor 
young head a perfect pantheon of all those dusty, mutilated 
gods and goddesses ! 

Yet even Trusty Gelert, I am bound to admit, looked at me 
with surprise and inquiry in his eyes when, after traversing- the 
park, we emerged on a desolate grass-grown highway, with our 
faces still turned towards the distant hills. 

We had seldom extended our rambles beyond the seven- 
barred, moss-overgrown gate over which I now scrambled. It 
Was one hardly ever opened, being a very by-exit to the domain 



33 MArLEVERER 'S D1Y0KCE. 

I had purposely selected. Gelert, however, pushed his way 
through a gap in the hedge without hesitation when he saw me 
climb the gate, startling scores of rabbits among the yellow fern 
in the wood we left behind. 

I had sufficient knowledge of things to be aware that I should 
be easily traced if I kept the high roads . lonesome as for many 
a mile of thinly-inhabited country they spread. I therefore 
diverged as often as possible from my direct route, among 
plantations and fields, . my only guide the constant presence of 
the swelling line of hills I desired to reach. 

This circuitous progress, of course, greatly lengthened the 
journey. Both Gelert and myself began to feel fatigued before 
the continuous rise in the ground, the descent and rapidity of 
the streams we passed, gave notice that we had entered on the 
mountain region we had been so long approaching. Perhaps 
we had not gone ten miles of direct road. Finally, Gelert began 
to turn his head wistfully, from time to time, in the direction of 
his chain and hutch. But I was determined not to turn to 
mine ! I knew that I had already offended beyond forgiveness ; 
and even forgiveness would be accompanied by that rank, 
unwholesome, Parisian kiss ! 

"We wended on. By-and-by, a new misfortune assailed us. 
We both grew very hungry ; and Trusty Gelert, by his frequent 
yawnings and dissatisfied lappings at the streamlets we crossed, 
seemed, as I thought, to reproach me with the lack of his 
accustomed meal. 

I had not calculated on this animal necessity, common to 
myself and my four-footed fellow-traveller. I had even, in my 
ignorance, deprived myself of the best and most tangible means 
of supplying our wants, when I left my small stock of money 
behind. I had calculated on always meeting with people like 
the kindly cottagers of our valleys, who considered themselves 
honoured when the rambling little heiress of Mauleverer shared 
their frugal! repasts. 

I had hitherto carefully avoided approach to any human 
habitation ; but now, when I imagined I might with safety ask 
for what I needed in one, I found myself apparently isolated, 
winding my fatigued and stumbling way up a narrow flinty 
road that seemed fast penetrating into the dark bowels of the 
mountains before me.. Dark, indeed ! for. strangely enough, I 
thought. all the beautiful play of colours I had so often ad- 
mired at a distance, vanished from the dun and melancholy 
sides of the hills as I approached. It began also to grow sha- 
dowy : sunset was at hand ; and it seemed, even to my inex- 
perience, that it would be accompanied by a storm. 

And now, in addition to the uneasy sensations caused by the 
gnawings of the wolf that makes his lair in mortal stomachs, I 
was assailed by a new and hitherto unknown feeling. The 
utter solitariness of the way, the awful glimpses into gorges and 
glens on either hand, began to affect me with a degree of fear, 



WAS NEWYDD. 39 

I disliked to look at Gelert, whose usually staunch and erect 
carriage was also cowed. He carried his large, tawny, lion 
head droopingly ; his tongue lolled . his tail was strictly clasped 
to his haunches. 

For the first time I began to experience the uneasy and irk- 
some sense of responsibility. I had taken Gelert from his 
home, where he was, at all events, carefully housed and fed. 
Perhaps to consign him with myself to a bed under the cold 
stars . to hunger. even to absolute starvation ! It was worse 
with him, indeed, than with me, in this latter respect : I 
reflected remorsefully that I had refreshed myself with a good 
number of brambleberries . delicacies which Gelert refused to 
share, with many rueful waggings of the tail, and a well- 
founded suspicion gaining upon him, I daresay, poor fellow, 
that he had entrusted his destiny to a very inefficient ruler. 

Nothing in general, indeed, can exceed the solitude of the 
Glamorgan highlands. On market-days, or other occasions 
of repair to the towns in the valleys, it is of course different. 

Under these circumstances, I must confess I began to lose 
heart, and even at times to consider whether I had not done 
rather a rash thing ! I reflected, with some regret, that this 
time I should have got through the task assigned me, and be 
entitled to a plentiful meal, served in silver, on a fine damask 
cloth. My hateful governess, indeed, before me, with her 
glazed Chinese visage, and fixed, gimblet-working eyes, watch- 
ing every morsel I took, and prescribing the etiquette of the 
table to me at every turn ! 

_ Remembering this, I resumed my resolution, and boldly con- 
tinued my ascending journey. 

At last I came to a level between what then appeared to me 
two vast mountains, which, gradually contracting, formed, at 
the extremity of the valley, a narrow pass. I could perceive 
the white rush of a rapid stream, apparently from the mon- 
strous jaws of the chasm, traversing a deep ravine along the 
sides of one of these mountains. The bright purple tops of 
some still loftier elevations, visible above the pass, only deepened 
by contrast the black gloom and frown of the foreground. At 
the same time it marked, to an eye from infancy observant of 
nature, the nigh departure of the sun. The mountains them- 
selves, forming this dark valley, were bare and bleak, broken 
with rock and furze, but with scarcely a vestige of herbage, and 
without a tree. 

The idea of wandering in this solitude all night, exposed to 
the risk of falling over some of the precipitous verges I dis- 
cerned the route passed along, struck me with dismay. 

In other respects, the road itself was a remarkably good one ; 
smoothly macadamised, and apparently intended for the car- 
riage of heavy goods. I noticed the trace of broad wheels, and 
then of a sudden I was struck by discerning that a kind of black 
(lust was strewed lavishly along the tracks, and that large 



40 MATTLEYERER'S DIVORCE. 

ebony fragments were scattered about. I examined one of 
these pieces, and found it to be coal. And now was I seized 
with a dread suspicion that I was approaching the neighbour- 
hood of some mines of this mineral ! 

Dread, because about Mauleverer the Glamorgan miners were 
held in anything but favour and esteem. They were stated to 
be of a wild and untr actable character, even towards their own 
employers. On all occasions of political turmoil, they figured 
dangerously, and had especially evinced very great animosity 
and violence against my father, as a nobleman of Conservative 
principles, during the then recent Chartist demonstrations. 
There were no mines at work in these mountains in Megan 
Jenkins's time, consequently I had no apprehensions of such a 
misadventure as I seemed now likely to come upon. 

I had been walking on, though with faint and dubious steps, 
when this conviction, after glowering long, suddenly leaped upon 
me ! I stopped iu panic. It would never do for me to proceed 
among a people who I remembered had attempted to stone my 
father as he rode on a market-day through Llandaff. If they 
should discover who I was, would they not treat me even worse, 
being less able to protect myself ? and, unprovided with the fleet 
steed that was thought to have saved the life of my father, 
driven from that unfair field ? 

I sat down, quite spent and frightened, on one of some large 
masses of stones that strewed the wayside, to reflect. I had 
scarcely done so, when I heard a faint mutter of thunder, and 
looking up, I perceived the tops of the hills curling over with 
black, lurid-edged clouds. I had now no doubt that a storm was 
about to burst, and the conviction overcame my remaining 
courage. I began to sob aloud, while Gelert, seating himself 
mournfully at my feet, contemplated me with wondering com- 
passion in his large sagacious eyes. 

It was at this moment that I heard a voice say: " Will your 
dog bite, little girl, or can you make him keep quiet while I 
come down and see what is the matter with you ?" 

I looked up in surprise, and then, for the first time, I noticed 
that I was sitting on one of the stones of a very large circle of 
similar ones. They were arranged seemingly by art, in the 
hollow formed by a rapid dip in the hills towards the pass; 
and besides this outer circumference, there was a centre piece 
resembling an immense square table of hewn granite, supported 
by seven separate masses of the same-material. This table was 
broken nearly in two halves, which it must certainly have re- 
quired the strokes of ages to effect, and was partially covered 
with moss and lichen. It was from the top of one of these 
divisions that the voice addressing me proceeded. 

" Little girl ! " The style did not please me, much as I felt 
in need of human speech and counsel. I was then upwards of 
fifteen years of age, and was a tall agile-limbed girl. I fancied 
I ought to impress beholders with the notion of a young woman, 
and not of a girl at all. And " little girl, " too ! 



PLAS NEWYDD. 41 

Moreover, when I glanced up at the speaker, what did I be- 
hold ? A little fellow himself, truly ! a boy who seemed scarcely 
half my age or size, I thought, as he stood now upright on the 
rocky table, where previously he had been lying, possibly asleep, 
possibly merely in reverie. He had a boy's crossbow, however, 
in hand, with which he might have been aiming at small birds. 

I noticed at once what a small, pallid, saturnine visage the 
boy had. It was a very sickly aspect too . which effect was in- 
creased by his singularly profuse masses of long, thick, raven- 
black hair, and large, melancholy, sunken eyes, of a remarkably 
clear and languid blue. 

On the whole, the young stranger did not strike me very 
favourably. I liked more showy externals. Moreover, I was 
vexed to see that he was not dressed like a common peasant 
lad. in whom I could have, put trust. His slender figure 
was garbed in fine broadcloath, black, as if he was in mourning. 
His straw hat had also a black ribbon round it. His linen, 
where it appeared at the cuffs and collar of his jacket and trou- 
sers, was beautifully white. He had a very small delicate hand. 
He spoke pure English. In short, I perceived that he was a 
person probably much of my own rank . and I desired to make 
the acquaintance of none such. 

" If you are afraid of the dog," I answered, disdainfully, 
" you need not come down. I don't want anybody to see what 
is the matter with me. I only want to know my way to a place 
where I am going to." 

" I am not afraid of anything !" returned the boy, with 
sudden and fiery vivacity, and his eye shone up like a young 
vulture's as he spoke. " I am a Welsh gentleman ! So it' your 
dog worries me . (I only spoke on his account) . I'll worry him . 
and with this !" 

I saw the gleam of a large clasp-knife opening, as he spoke ; 
and setting it firmly clenched in his teeth, the boy scrambled 
down one of the rough pillars of his Simeon Stylites elevation to 
the ground. 

Gelert was certainly not awed either by the personal appear- 
ance or menace of his young defier. But he seemed very far 
from forming any project of attack, even had I not withheld 
him, as I did, by his shaggy lion mane. On the contrary, he 
looked in a friendly manner at the lad as he approached us. 
in a fearless, determined style, rather in contrast with his 
diminutive and withered little frame. 

" Ah !" he said with a smile, as he came close to us, shutting 
up his knife again with a sharp click ; " there is no occasion for 
it. Your dog, I'll warrant, is of a good "Welsh breed, and knows 
a gentleman of mine to be a trustworthy fellow wherever he 
meets him '..And now," he continued, pausing and regarding 
me with evidently growing curiosity and surprise, " where di J. 
you say you wanted to go to ?" . , 

" I want to go somewhere. somewhere in the mountains h' re, 



42 MAOXEVJSBEIi'S BITOKCE. 

where there are cottages and cows and sheep, sir : I am going to 
be a servant-maid at a sheep farm. Do you know of any that 
I could easily walk to . before it is quite dark ?" I said in con- 
siderable confusion ; for I saw that those large eyes continued to 
expand with ah incredulous and perhaps rather alarmed stare. 

" A servant at a sheep farm ! . JSow you tell the truth," the 
boy returned, with strange eagerness. " You are a. fairy! Are 
you not:" 

This question was put to me with such earnestness and 
seeming credulity that I could not help breaking into a laugh. 

" I wish I were, little boy .'" I said, amply reciprocating his 
adjective. " I should not then long be in want of a supper and 
a night's lodging . and I wo aid have a great piece of beef here 
immediately for my dog." 

I could easily discern that the young gentleman did not seem 
pleased with the retort. A slight flush visited his pale coun- 
tenance. " But you lowlanders know nothing of fairies . and 
indeed they are almost banished from their homes in the 
mountains too !" he said, in an affronted tone; but it changed 
immediately to one of great softness and tenderness as he con- 
tinued : " You are a human orphan then !" 

" I am worse than that .my father and mother are alive, but 
care nothing for me and so and so I have left them, 

and am going to try and earn my own living !" I concluded, 

Eassionately ; but I must admit. with a renewed and very un- 
eroic burst of weeping. 

" Don't cry !" the little fellow observed, with evident sym- 
pathy. " I hate to see women cry always ! . But do you really 
not know where you are, that you talk of cows and sheep- 
farming on the Howel Myndd Dhu r" 

I remembered immediately to have heard of this district, and 
under the hostile associations of Chartism and rioters I have 
mentioned above. " Is it a place where there are mines ?" I 
inquired, quite wo-begone. 

" If you go through the pass yonder, a sparrow's flight, you 
need only ask yoiir own senses ! The whole mountain on the 
other side is as hollow as a honeycomb with their works ; and 
you can see their furnaces raging like a hell, night and day, in 
the valleys below, for they are at it constantly tearing out its 
bowels for coal and ore !" replied my informant, with evident 
bitterness. 

" Are there any houses there . or places where one could get 
something to eat ?" resumed poor hungry I. 

" There are houses . at least there are lots of dismal black 
huts where the miners live. But it would never do for you to 
go among them, you know !" 

" "Why not? I must . the dog is very hungry as well ! And 
besides, don't you think, sir, there is going to be a storm r" 

" Yes. a thunderstorm ; or else it will go off in a mist, where 
you would be sure to lose yourself, and most likely get dashed 



PLAS NEWI'DD. 43 

to pieces down some precipice," said the young mountaineer, 
looking around him. " I came out indeed purposely, to hear it 
bellow among the crags and rocks. But as to your taking 
shelter with the colliers and smelters at Howel lead-ore works . 
don't you know what a set they are ? Have you never heard 
down in the valleys there ? The roughest devils in the world ! 
Why, old Suett himself can hardly keep them in order ; and he 
was made to rule them, I think ! And such a beautiful girl as 
you are ! If you were my sister, I would as soon let you, in 
reality, walk into hell lire !" 

Energetic as this expression was, what struck me, to the ex- 
clusion of every other idea, was the name of Suett. Not for its 
vulgarity, and strangeness in Jhat part of the country, either. 
My mother had incidentally informed me of a fact which I now 
adduced in the manner of question, in order to ascertain if I 
had reasons for the vivid hope that suddenly visited me. " Is 
it a Mr. Suett, sir, that got made member of parliament for the 
county, and turned out a gentleman that ought to have sat for 
it. years ago, an Honourable Mr. Pomeroy. when old Lord 
Mauleverer was alive ?" 

" Old Suett is a member of parliament . represents what I 
think they call the coal-and-metal interest : I know that ! . . 
Oh, yes, it was he that beat the Mauleverers . on their own 
dunghills . I have often heard him laugh and boast ! " 

" Well, has he not got a house about here, where he lives ? " 
I exclaimed, eagerly. 

"Yes, he has a house where he has no right to have one," 
returned the boy, gloomilv. 

" Called Plas Newydd ?'" 

" Yes, Plas JNewydd. You don't suppose he would have the 
impudence to call it after anything about here, while a single 
stone of the old Castell Ap Howel stands on the other ? " 

The lad's eyes flashed with the blue lustre of polished steel, 
as he uttered these words. 

" I don't know . I don't care ! " I replied, quite wild with 
joy. " But I am sure I have a friend then at Plas Newydd 
who will make me welcome, and for whose sake the people 
there will, perhaps, be kind to me and my poor Gelert ! Is 
there not a Miss Sophia Sutcliffe, a governess, at Plas Newydd r" 

"Oh, do you know her?" returned my young interlocutor, 
with an evident expression of surprise and disapprobation in 
his tone. " But no, she can't be any friend of yours, I am 
sure ! And besides, she is going to leave Plas Newydd very 
soon, and is not at all in favour there at present, I can 
tell you ! " 

" Why, what has she done to offend them ? " inquired I, in 
surprise and indignation, but struck nevertheless with some- 
thing peculiar in the lad's manner. 

" Oh, it is not so much what she has done as what she has 
tried to do ! She is a regular flirt, and tries it on every one, 



44 MAULEVEEEE S DIYOBCE. 

you know ! . Don't you know what I mean ? She was after the 
Suetts' eldest son and heir, in particular . Mr. Scarlatt, the 
sublime and beautiful of the family ! But the mother Suett 
has a pair of sharp eyes of her own, too, and saw through my 
lady's tricks, I have no doubt, though she only pretends Sophia 
is too much of a, finishing governess for her little girl, Bronwen 
Suett, and that is why she is going to change ! Sophy is a 
deuced cunning one, too, I own ! She wanted it to be thought 
she was making love with Luxmoor, the tutor ; but I shouldn't 
in the least wonder . for he's a rascally, sneaking fellow in my 
opinion . that he found her out, and put the mother Suett on 
her guard, just from spite and jealousy, you know ! " 

I stared astounded at this revelation ! Yet I could scarcely 
comprehend at all the movement of intrigue indicated to my 
inexperience by the keen-sighted and prematurely-developed 
boy. Nevertheless, I understood in general that blame and 
accusation were directed against my favourite, and that she 
was in disgrace at Plas Newydd. A recollection flashed^ upon 
me simultaneously. " Ah, it is just as she said," I exclaimed ; 
" she knew she should not suit long in a vulgar, plebeian family 
that had risen from nothing to be . nothing very particular, 
after all ! only people that get iron and coal out of deep, black, 
nasty holes . and sell it ! That is why you dislike Miss Sut- 
cliffe about here, I suppose ? You are one of the little Suetts I 
dare say ? " 

" You are mistaken, then, young lady. mistaken more than 
ever you were in your life before ! " returned the boy, angrily. 
" I am an Ap Howel . the Ap Howcl, now my grandfather and 
uncle are dead ! And I am no partisan even of the Suetts . nor 
do I like them . hardly at all, though old Suett is my guardian, 
and his wife is kind enough to me . perhaps kinder than I 
deserve. But I hate Scarlatt Suett," he continued, with extra- 
ordinary vehemence, " and I have cause. He mocks at me 
because I am lame, and because I am a gentleman, and because 
I had Welsh princes for ancestors, and because I am poor ! 
Whereas, who has made me so ? . Old Suett, who fooled my 
stupid, doting grandfather, and my uncle Llywarch, into 
parting with all their property in these hills to him and his 
company, forsooth ! persuading them that they were of next to 
no value, because they had no money to work the mines ; and 
they were two such extravagant, mad, rackety fellows, they 
parted with all they could part with for a song ! But they 
could not part with the old ruin of Ap Howel, and the land it 
stands on, until I came of age, to be beggared too, and give my 
consent to relinquishing the few acres that remain to a name 
that once possessed the whole range of these highlands merely 
as a deer forest ! But that I never will ! And if I live, I will 
force that Scarlatt fellow, at all events, to show me by what 
right he and his upstart race have taken my mountains 
from me, and pitched their detestable new house right under 



l-LAS KEWTDD. 45 

the ruins of my castle of Howel. which I mean some day 
to rebuild ! " 

" Oh, clear me ! what will become of me ? _ Such people, I am 
sure, would not give me the slightest protection or refreshment, 
or my poor dog either !" I sobbed. 

" Don't do that ! " the boy resumed, in an altered and feeling 
tone. " They are not so bad as that . they are not bad at all . 
at least, my guardian and his wife are Dot ! If you don't mind 
going as a beggar to Plas Newycld, and asking what you want 
for charity, you can have as much as you can eat and drink for 
a week, at a meal." 
" But I am not a beggar ! " I said, with huge disdain. 
"I did not think you were, " returned the boy, with a sin- 
gular glance of his deep-set, considerate eyes. " But I think I 
know what you are ! " 
" What am I ? " . in great alarm. 

" You are a girl that has run away from school, because you 
are tired of doing samplers, and that sort of thing . perhaps 
where that Sophia was a teacher ! . and so you have been fasci- 
nated into running on a wildgoose chase after her ! I quite 
understand that ! I liked her myself at first, until I found her 
out." 

"You tell falsehoods of her, I know, you wicked boy !" I 
exclaimed,. my weariness and fear yielding to indignation at 
this continued assault on my favourite. 

"Oh, you would not understand it, of course ! but Jdon't like to 
see the women after the men, and laying themselves out like . 
like. I won't say what, but I know . to cateh fellows ! And 
besides, what a fool she must be, with all her cunning, not 
to see that Scarlatt would as soon think of marrying her as I 
should of marrjing a wandering gipsy, . my ancestors having 
been kings of these hills ! " returned the young gentleman, 
with a smile writhing over his thin, curled upper lip, but not 
so much, apparently, in ridicule of his own as of poor Sophia's 
lofty aspirations. 

" Well, at least, " I said, mournfully looking round, " I sup- 
pose I can go and burrow, like a fox, under these great stones, 
for the night ; and if I am starved to death among the savages 
up in these mountains, in a day or two, it don't matter . nobody 
will care ! " 

" Under these stones ! " repeated the boy, in a dismayed tone. 
" You must not even think of it ! Do you know what they are ? 
It is the Kerig y Drudion . the Druids' Altar, . upon which 
they used to offer human sacrifices thousands of years ago ! It 
is the worse luck in the world even to walk under these stones, 
to this day ! The Ap Howels have never prospered since my 
great grandfather. like a madman as he was, too. gave a ball 
in the Circle of Destiny, and a feast under the altar ! Not one 
of those who sat at it, I have heard say, died a natural death ! 
.But, come, " he continued, eagerly, " if you really don't mind 



46 MA.ULEVEREK S DIVORCE. 

taking \ip your lodging in a ruin, I can show you through the 
pass to Castell Ap Howel, where the ravens, and crows, and its 
master, will make you very welcome ! And don't be afraid but 
I will manage to get you something to eat. Dame Ruddles, the 
housekeeper at Plas Newydd, is very fond of me, and will let 
me have anything I want from the larder. She knows I often 
lodge all kinds of tramps . poor old blind Caradoc, the harper, 
especially . in my ruin, though they are not allowed at the 
New Place ! " 

" If you will promise to bring Sophia Sutcliffe to see me at 
once, I will go with you, sir, since you say you are a gentle- 
man ! " I replied, with some hesitation ; for though so mere a 
boy, Madame Le Crampon had taught me suspicion and reserve 
towards the whole sex. But I had considered also that it would 
not be proper for me to go under the roof of persons for whom 
I knew my father had so much dislike and contempt as the 
Suetts, and who had been the means of inflicting on him what I 
very well understood to be the great mortification and over- 
throw of his life. 

"A gentleman? I am a chieftain!" returned my young 
host ; and his small form seemed to dilate and grow taller as he 
drew it up with pride on the word. " But perhaps, " he added, 
" you Saxons and lowlanders think more of a man if he has an 
English title tacked to his name ? Well, my grandfather was 
stupid enough to allow them to make a paltry baronet of him in 
London ; and as he is dead, and my uncle, and my father, I 
believe I am called now Sir Vivian Ap Howel ! The Suetts 
always call me so : but I don't care to be a thing that is 
neither bird nor beast ; so please always call me by my name 
without the Sir. . "Who would be a Sir, when even old Suett 
expects to be made one some day for being a rich coal-owner ! " 

" I shall call you Vivian," I said, frankly, " as if you were a 
brother : but both my brothers are dead now." 
_ "And what shall I call you?. not sister ;. I won't call you 
sister, mind ! " replied the boy. 

While I was hesitating what answer to make, two large 
splashes of thunder-rain fell upon my cheeks. 

" I will tell you when you bring Sophia to me, if she thinks I 
ought," was my elusive observation. " But do take me in 
somewhere out of the storm ! " 

"Come along," said young Vivian, extending his delicate 
hand. "But you must let me lead you. I see now that it is going 
to be a white mist ; and we may lose one another if I do not. 
Don't you see how the clouds are rolling down the hills ? We 
must try and get through the pass of the Bhaiadr Dhu. the 
Black Torrent there. before they are upon us, or we may chance 
to slip into it ! " 

While the boy was yet speaking, I was dismayed to observe 
what volumes of slatey-grey clouds were crowding down into 
the valley of the ravine from all the hill sides. I did not hesi- 



FIAS NEWYBD. 47 

tate to give lain my hand, and I felt that it was clasped tightly 
in his, but with a degree of nervous tremor. Perhaps he thought 
that this latter fact required some explanation. "My heart 
never trembles," he said, apologetically, "but my hand often 
does. I was born too soon, they tell me, because my mother was 
frightened with the news of my father being killed in battle in 
India. She died herself in a few months after, . and I inherit 
her weak constitution, I suppose ! But do you know that you 
are very like her, in the miniature they found on my father's 
dead body ?. I can show it you. The riband is stained with his 
heart's blood quite plainly, though it was red to begin with ! 
However, the doctor says I shall grow to be a strong man yet, 
if I take care : and even my lame foot can be cured in London, 
when I grow strong enough to stand the hacking and cutting 
necessary ! " 

"Oh, are you lame?" I observed. "I did not notice that ; 
you go on quite fast . as fast as I and Gelert can well keep pace 
with you." 

He looked intensely gratified. " I don't allow people to see 
that I am lame if I can help it," he said, sturdily ; and went 
on at even an increased rate, so that I was obliged at last to 
say, " But I am so tired, I cannot go so fast !" 

" What a brute I am. I forgot ! " said the boy, with emotion. 
" But we shall soon be through the Mynydd Howel, and it will 
be well if we can manage it before the mist thickens. It's a 
very dangerous water, and an unlucky one for us Ap Howels . 
though it would be a lucky one for the Suetts if I were to lose 
my footing on the bridge, and the last Ap Howel go the road 
of our luckless ancestress, Bronwen the Yv'hite-Necked ! Only 
think, the Suetts actually called their little girl after her, 
because they thought our names must be stylish !" 

" Who was Bronwen the White-Necked, and where did she 
go ?" I asked. 

We were skirting the edge of the ravine as I made the 
inquiry. To my surprise, I found that the path ascended 
rapidly, while the yawning fissure below continued to deepen 
into precipices of black rock of a prodigious altitude. 

"I'll tell you," replied my young guide. " The], White- 
Necked Bronwen was the most beautiful lady that ever lived ; 
and unless you should grow up to be a woman as handsome as 
you are now . that ever will live ! " he continued, with extra- 
ordinary gallantry in one so young. But all he said and did 
was far in advance of his years ! " And Bronwen was the wife 
of the chieftain of our name in the time of Llywelyn the Great. 
And we were good friends, as it happened in those'days, with 
the Lord Marchers of Mauleverer, for a wonder ! as in general 
it was our favourite occupation to burn one another's houses 
down, harry one another's lands, and kill and maim one 
another's vassals, without stint or mercy! And so Baron 
Reginald of Mauleverer came on a visit to the Lord of Howel, 



48 MATJLEVEREE S DIVOBCE. 

and spent some very pleasant weeks with him, I imagine ; for 
after he had gone back to his own castle, it appeared, he must 
keep up a correspondence with ours ! And a secret one, too . 
with the Lady of Howel ! Do you know what was the meaning 
of that ? "Well, no matter ; it did not please the Lord of Howel 
when he found it out ; so what do you think he did ?. Pro- 
claimed a new feast . a grand hunt of the wolf and deer ; we 
had plenty of them both then on_ the Myndd Howel . and 
invited his friend to join him again in the banquet and chase. 
My Lord of Mauleverer was very glad, of course, of the oppor- 
tunity to see Bronwen of the White Neck at his ease once 
more . and accepted joyfully. Up the mountain came he, . I 
dare say, in his very handsomest suit for gala occasions, not 
suspecting that he had more use for armour. But it would 
have done the treacherous villain little good either, for no 
sooner was he in Castell Howel, than they destroyed the 
bridge of a single tree across the torrent, by rolling it over, so 
that his retainers might not follow him in ; and then hung him 
above it, by a branch of an oak, whose blasted trunk still 
remains to this day, rooted in the rocks, in defiance of the 
storms of five hundred years. And then the Lord of Howel 
went in to his lady, who was sitting in her bower, busked in 
her finest robe of white samite, expecting the arrival of the 
Norman lord . and invited her to come to her window and see 
with what goodly fruit the trees were hung . the ballad says . 
to regale their guest withal ! At that time the castle walls of 
Howel ran right along the edge of the precipice, whose shadow 
we are now passing under . over the first fall here of the 
torrent . don't you see it ? and it was to a room in the tower 
right above where we now stand, that the Lady of Howel was 
conducted, and where she was made to look out on what her 
jealous lord had been doing. And as soon as ever she saw it, 
she screamed out the words we took afterwards as our motto of 
vengeance : beth y wnaf fi ? . what shall I do ? and threw 
herself headlong out of the window, with her open arms, on the 
hanging carcase of her lover. They say their weight together 
broke off the branch of the oak, and down they both went, 
she clasping the body still, all the three falls of the torrent 
into the lake at the foot of the mountain. What makes you 
tremble so ? " 

" You must have been a treacherous, revengeful, cruel people 
always, yon Ap Howels, to do such deeds, and to approve of 
them still ! " I exclaimed, tearing my hand away from my 
young guide's grasp. 

" We always took vengeance where we were wronged, and 
will_, and that I shall let the Suetts know some day," returned 
Vivian, grinding his small teeth like a young tiger cub, when 
first the instinct of slaughter kindles in its blood. 

The noise of falling 'water had been for some time gaining on 
our hearing, but it was now absolutely deafening as we entered 



MAS KLWrDD. 49 

the chasm that separates at this point the two ranges of moun- 
tain elevations forming the Mynydd Howel. But we could not 
see the torrent. "We were involved in so thick, though white 
and steam-like a mist, that it seemed as though we were at the 
bottom of an immense inverted funnel of seething brewage, 
through which it was not possible to discern objects even at the 
distance of a few feet. 

I was obliged to give my hand again to the young moun- 
taineer baronet to guide me along. And after all, I confided 
myself to his care with a strange implicitness. I was so trained 
to estimate persons by their rank in society, that no doubt I 
considered myself the safer with my guide for being a baronet, 
even on an occasion when rank could be of so little practical 
value. 

After a short but perhaps, with one less familiar with the 
way, a perilous walk, we emerged on an irregular rocky 
plateau, elevated above a vast mountainous valley on the 
farther side of the Rhaiadr Dhu pass. 

Singularly enough, there was no mist at all on this side of 
the mountain. It was still illumined by a dun red sunset, that 
spread the glow of an expiring furnace over the entire scene . 
a magnificent one ! "We stood on a proud pinnacle, as_it were, 
above it. The rocks around us were strewed with the shattered 
remains of a tower and of some walls of massive masonry, all 
overgrown with white lichen and moss. The first cataract of 
the Rhaiadr Dhu thundered out of the still loftier elevation of 
precipices of the pass behind us ; thence it descended the sides 
of the_ mountain at a headlong_ rate, and in three separate 
gigantic leaps over as many piles of precipices. Its course 
could be plainly tracked through the thick woods that clothed 
the steeps below, by a line of white foam, until it subsided in a 
small lake among the rocks at the base of the mountain. Half 
way down this, bosomed in the woods, I discerned the glim- 
mering of the roof and walls of a large and stately house, 
entitled, perhaps, to the appellation of a mansion, built of a 
grey stone. _ And at the foot of the mountain extended a dark- 
coloured plain, intersected by numerous tramroads, and lighted 
with the occasional gleam of furnaces. 

"This is Ap Howel Castle, and yonder is Plas Newydd," 
said Yivian, with a bitterness in the contrast I have never 
forgotten. 



50 MAuXEYEBElt'S BIVOKCE, 

CHAPTER VI. 

AP HOWEL TO WEB. 

In the remains of the tower, however, it speedily appeared 
that there was at least shelter to be had. Vivian groped under 
a pile of fallen masonry, before an old oak door that opened 
into it ; found a massive rusty key . and a dark, cell-like 
chamber was thrown open to my inspection. 

I followed him in. It was not without traces of having been 
recently inhabited. Some half-consumed peat remained on the 
hearth ; there were a couple of stools and a table, formed of an 
empty cask set on end. In a corner, two or three trusses of 
straw, thrown together, were the probable substitute for a bed. 

" Harper Caradoc is a very orderly, clean old fellow, and he 
lives here when he is in this part of the country. He is on his 
circuit at present," said my young host, apologetically, per- 
ceiving how I was struck with the aspect of these accommo- 
dations. " And now do you think you dare remain here alone, 
while I go to the Plas and get you something to eat ?" 

" Only tell Miss Suteliffe to come to me. I don't want any- 
thingto eat !" sighed I ; and indeed my appetite was quite gone. 

" But do you think she will come ? Such a timorous, selfish 
creature as she i3 !" 

" She is neither !" I answered pettishly, offended at this 
constancy in the negation of my idol's perfections. " Still . as 
she might not like to come to a perfect stranger . such a dreary 
way as it must be up here from Plas Newydd. you may tell 
Miss Suteliffe, if you please, that I am a person who have 
brought her a message from Mauleverer Castle, and that my 
name is Hugh-Helena ! But promise me on your word of 
honour, that you will let no one else know anything about me." 

" Prom Mauleverer Castle !. Hugh-Helena?" repeated young 
Ap Howel, with an expression of strongly excited interest . and 
then a shudder and dark shadowing of the visage. "Why, 
who can you be ? Don't the lord and the lady live abroad ? 
They have a daughter, I have heard; but you cannot. you 
shall not, be. a Pomeroy of Mauleverer !" he concluded, with 
singular vehemence. 

" Do you think a poor stray creature like me could be one, 
sir ?" I answered, forcing a laugh, for I really felt afraid of him 
after what he had told me of the feud between our ancestors. 
" But I was brought up at Mauleverer Castle, and the lord and 
the lady there allowed my parents to give me their names of 
Hugh and Helena !" 



AP HOWEL TOWER. 51 

The boy murmured something to himself which I did not 
catch. But, much against my wish, he prolonged the delay by 
setting to work to kindle a lire. He managed this very dex- 
terously, by striking two flints together. Meanwhile Gelert, 
observing signs of abode, took, as it seemed, formal possession 
of the straw bed, by turning three or four times in it until he 
had arranged it to bis satisfaction. 

" Now I have done all I can for you at present," said Yivian, 
as soon as he had lighted the peat into a cheerful glow by 
fanning it with his straw hat. " I have no candles, nor rushes 
even, which old Caradoc generally burns. But I shall not be 
gone long, whether that woman will come or not. Most likely 
she will not ! She has a fancy that I am often up to playing 
her tricks, though they are all that crafty fool Luxmoor's 
doings, to annoy her, because I believe he has found her out 
jilting him. You schoolgirls do not know what jilting is, 
though, perhaps ? But, whether Sophia comes or not, you will 
have me back as faithfully as a bird tp its nest. Make yourself 
comfortable, meanwhile, and don't pay any attention to the 
noise of the cataract ! Else, perhaps, you will be thinking you 
bear a woman's scream on it . and that is very unlucky !" 

And with this singular piece of advice, hut with evident 
slowness and reluctance, my young entertainer took his de- 
parture. 

I confess that I felt very strangely as soon as I found myself 
alone in this dismal ruin. More especially as a very few minutes 
after Vivian had gone, I perceived all around the tower became 
involved in a mist like that I thought I had left behind in the 
valley of the Kerig y Drudion. This had a white, shroud-like 
appearance, infinitely more appalling to me than the thickest 
darkness could have been ! I nestled closer to the peat fire, and 
for the first time repented thoroughly of my rash adventure. 

Yery shortly afterwards, a tempest of prodigious fury and 
violence burst among the hills. Such thunder I had never 
heard before ; it was reverberated in a thousand giants' voices 
from the numerous echoes in the mountains. Mountain seemed 
indeed calling to mountain ! The rain descended in torrents ; 
it beat against the stony sides of the hills as if its errand 
were of a certainty to wash them to a level with- the plains 
below. 

I acknowledge that I was stricken with a deep and, for a 
girl of my natural courage, an inexplicable panic. And the 
impression made on my imagination by the tragical tale that 
associated my ancestors with those of the race under whose 
ruined roof I rested, must have been singularly powerful ! I 
know not how otherwise to account for the fact I am about to 
relate, and which, I am aware, may lay me open, in the opinion 
of some who know me not, to a charge either of superstitious 
credulity or of romantic invention. 

After remaining for a time where I had been left. terrified as 

12 



52 mattleteeek's divorce. 

I was with the uproar of the elements without. I was seized 
with an extreme restlessness, insomuch that I found it quite 
impossible to attempt remaining still over the dark, flameless 
fire. I made my way at last to the door of the tower, hoping 
to espy the approach of my friend, Sophia, or at all events the 
return of young Yivian. This door, which he had closed firmly 
to exclude the weather, opened with some difficulty. And, just 
as I had succeeded in pushing it back on its large rusty hinges, 
one of the most fearful though indistinct cries that ever came 
to mortal hearing, broke upon mine ! It was not the howl of a 
dog, though it resembled it. Human anguish was plainly 
mingled in the unearthly utterance ! Simultaneously my gaze 
had fallen on the black, hurrying mass of waters, which I now 
perceived swept immediately below the tower where I stood, to 
form the Rhaiadr Dhu. And unless, indeed, it was as remark- 
able a case of visual hallucination as any on record, I saw a 
woman's form, in a long white robe tangled with some other 
gleaming mass, flurry past, as if on a stream of lightning, 
down the rushing waters ! At the same time. though possibly 
this was only an additional deception of my excited senses acted 
on by the memory . I thought I distinctly heard shrieked, as the 
phantoms vanished over the fall, those Welsh words, which 
under ordinary circumstances it would have been very difficult 
forme to remember . the cry of the despairing Bronwen . "0 
beth y wnaf li?" 

The terror I experienced at that moment in some degree 
returns upon me even now ! I tried to believe that the howl was 
Gelert's. But though the poor animal had followed me to the 
door, as soon as he saw my steps bent that way, he stood 
there by my side, silently and droopingly, glaring forth upon 
the furious storm. I put my hand down to him, and felt his 
powerful frame and nerves all of a quake ! Was he also aware 
of a presence of the supernatural, or merely dismayed at the 
novelty of his own and his mistress's situation ? 

I remained trembling and gazing bewilderedly forth on the 
tempestuous spectacle : how long I can hardly conjecture. 
But, on a sudden I heard voices . and one in particular which 
I well remembered, exclaimed: " Good heavens ! it is she! . 
But what is the matter with her ? She seems petrified ! My 
dearest, dearest child ! do jou not remember me, your own 
poor Sophia SutclifFe !" 

"She has seen the Spirit of the Fall . look, how she still 
stares down the stream !" ejaculated Vivian, who was Sophia's 
only companion. " Bring her in, Miss SutclifFe, at once ! . I am 
sure she has either seen or heard the Lady of the Rhaiadr 
Dhu !" 

" You foolish boy !. But there is nothing you will not 
say or do to annoy and frighten people," returned Sophia, 
irritated and agitated almost equally. " Remember, this young 
lady is not a poor governess, on whom you can put off your 



AP IIOVi:L TOWER. 53 

mischievous jests without fear of being called to account! 
You will have to answer to the Lord of a Castle, for fright- 
ening- his child perhaps into an idiot!. My darling, darling 
3Iis.i Pomeroy ! will you not recollect me :" 

" I do, I do, Sophia ! . Only the storm is so dreadful. and T 
am half-blinded by the lightning. Let us go in, and I will 
tell you all ! " 

I had thrown myself into Sophia's arms. She almost carried 
me into the tower;. and it was a considerable time after 
before either of us noticed that Yivian remained on the ex- 
terior. 

The fatigue and terror I had suffered brought on a nervous 
climax. I yielded to an hysterical paroxysm of joy and grief. 
which Sophia herself appeared in some measure to share. Kay, 
I will not doubt that she did. She could not always have been 
playing a part with me. She had no reason at that time to 
fancy herself j ustified in hating me! I even think that she 
must at one time have loved me as much as it was in her nature 
to love any one but herself. The confidence and affection I 
showed for her must have moved her. I am sure she joined 
her tears with mine, and she exhausted herself in efforts to 
soothe and compose me. 

In my first agitation I told her of the portent I considered I 
had seen and heard, which she dismissed at once as a creation 
of the imagination acting on the foolish story I confessed my 
young guide had told me, as a veracious legend, of the torrent. 
"These supernatural tales are all lies together !" she exclaimed ; 
" and that boy invents all kinds of wonderful things of the sort, 
and palms them off as authentic legends of the district. It is 
surprising what wicked, horrible ideas he has, child as he is ! 
You must not believe a word he says about any one, ghost or 
living being . he is so fond of speaking evil of everybody and 
everything ! Forget all about this trash, my dearest child, and 
tell me what strange fortune can have put you up here in the 
mountains. I have been a thousand times for coming to see 
you, but your father's rejection of me made me fancy that I 
should no longer be welcome at Mauleverer, under any pretext. 
And, besides, I have some degree of .pride and human feeling ! 
and I imagined myself in a manner expelled from his lordship's 
roof." 

After a while I grew sufficiently composed to enter into the 
required explanation. Sophia listened to me with undisguised 
amazement. "Are you Welsh all mad together?" she ex- 
claimed, when I had related what I considered the justification 
of my flight from Mauleverer. " Excuse me, darling ! I 
own your Frenchwoman must have been an intolerable and 
detestable old nightmare, squatted on a free, young, buoyant 
heart like yours ; but, my dearest young lady ! to what 
frightful dangers have you exposed yourself! In what 
ignorance of the world and of the brutality and cruelty of 



.54 ^ATJEEVEEEIt S DIVOECft. 

mankind, must they have brought you up ' To venture as 
you have done ! A poor, beggarly wretch like n^self . I could 
not have dared what you have dared . perhaps even for the 
prospect of all the advantages you have made up your young, 
inexperienced mind, you say, to forfeit for ever ! Child as you 
are, your reputation might be endangered by so extraordinary 
a step . and you cannot dream what our miserable sex has to 
suffer when once that is breathed on ! " 

" I hated my governess so, Sophia ! " I whimpered. "And 
people who know how I love you, will think I ran away to you ; 
and, indeed, if I had known where you were to be found, I 
would have gone nowhere else in all the world ! " 

"Poor child! how strangely and cruelly they must have 
neglected you, to make the little sympathy and tenderness I 
could offer you so precious!" Sophia said, feelingly. "But, 
dear Miss Pomeroy, unless you want to destroy me completely 
.to bring down on my head the indignation and revenge of 
your influential family . 3'ou will not allege that I have any- 
thing to do in this extraordinary freak ! Well, but," she con- 
tinued, and a smile of triumph, mingled with some more 
painful feelings, played for a moment on her quivering lips . 
" Well, but my Lord Mauleverer will perhaps be sorry, when 
he hears the news, that he would not suffer his daughter to 
follow her own inclination in the choice of poor, starved 
Edmund Sutcliffe's orphan for a governess ! Still, my dear 
child, it is only quite by a merciful accident that you find me 
still among these detestable mountains. Mrs. Suett has given 
me notice to quit, and I am to quit in a few days." 

"Why, what have you done, dear Sophia, to vex her?" I 
answered, quite forgetful or incredulous of all Vivian had told 
me on the subject ; "or are you discontented with the situation 
yourself, as you seem to dislike mountains so ? " 

"Discontented with the situation!. I beg pardon for re- 
peating your words, but how could that possibly be, dear Miss 
Pomeroy?" replied Sophia, smiling bitterly, as she continued 
chafing my cold hands in her own. " What, I should like to 
know, could any rational being, endowed with the commonest 
faculties of appreciation, require more than the advantages that 
surround me at Plas Newydd ? Don't I live in a fine mansion ? 
Do I not enjoy the perpetual society of a most amiable little 
lady, of ten years old, whose improvement is my sole business 
and pleasure, _ apparently, on this fine earth of ours ? To be 
sure,_ it is a little like treadmill work. which they say is so 
wearisome, because _ you cannot see signs of much progress 
made. Of course,_ in so young a scholar ! Still, you cannot 
tell how diverting it is to have it in commission to manufacture 
a grown-up mind for an infant . for Mrs. Suett insists that her 
children shall have no childhood, and that little Bronwen is to 
be cultivated at once into a prodigy ! Oh, no, you cannot think, 
dearest Miss Pomeroy, that I am going to leave Plas Newydd 
because I wish to leave it ? 



AP HCnTEL TOV.'ER. 55 

" Why, then, is it true that you have received your discharge, 
because . because- " I hesitated. 

"Has young Ap Howel already been telling his lies against 
me to you, too ? " she inquired, glancing at me with a ravening 
suspicion in her eyes. 

" He told me about . about the young gentleman at the house 
and you ! " I said frankly. 

"The young gentleman ! . Mr. Scaiiatt Suett, of course ! 
Believe me, dear child, if you know what he means by it, there 
is not the slightest foundation for anything that bad boy says ! 
He wants, I suppose, to deprive me of the chance of earning my 
existence even in the miserable way I am forced to earn it, 
Miss Pomeroy . subject to all the caprices and insolence of the 
foolish women who are chiefly at the heads of families where 
governesses are required . condemned to the perpetual society 
of children, without a stimulating word or object from day to 
clay, or year to year ! You cannot tell what a malicious 
mannikin that Sir Vivian Ap Howel is ! The most discon- 
tented, restless little wretch under the face of the sun, too ! 
Every one hates and fears him, though Mrs. Suett pretends to 
make a great deal of him, because she adores rank as a Chinese 
adores his gilded trumpery of a joss ; and he is some beggarly 
Welsh baronet or other ! And besides, the people about here 
say the Suetts have cheated him and his family out of their 
property ; and they want to make sure he will not bring them 
some day to account, by marrying him to their daughter, my 
little wax-doll pupil, Bronwen. Oh, no ; the motive assigned 
for my dismissal is not the true one ; but Mrs. Suett is not in 
the least afraid that her selfish, aspiring parvenu of a son would 
ever think of a poor governess . a starved curate's daughter . . 
as anything but a defenceless creature, whom he can try the 
effect of his wonderful beauties, mental and corporeal, upon, 
without fear of consequences ! In short, my dear, Scarlatt 
Suett is a coxcomb, and a very naughty fellow ; but his mother 
is no fool, and has not the slightest apprehension of his ever 
committing himself in any rashly-generous proceeding ! " 

" Why then are you to leave Plas Newydd, Sophia? " 

" Well ! . because she is aware I have treated her son's 
improper advances with the contempt they deserved. She is 
so besotted in him. she, perhaps, thinks I am playing some 
deeper game," replied my friend, in evident embarrassment. 
" I can give you Mrs. Suett' s reasons, as she deigned to commu- 
nicate them to myself, however. She has discovered, after some 
experience now, that I am too far advanced in * literature and 
the sciences in general ' . to vise her own words . too accom- 
plished . too a great number of fine, talented things, to be a 
proper governess for such a very little girl as Bronwen Suett is 
found out to be at present., Not but what, when I first came, 
it struck me that excellent mother would not have considered 
the goddess Minerva herself too much of a wiseacress for the 



56 MAULEVEELIl's DIVOftCE. 

office. In short, I am too good for my post, and so I am, very 
properly, to be turned out of it ! And yet I have always kept 
carefully under cover all that is really worth attention in my 
talents or acquirements, not to offend the mediocrities of Plas 
Newydd." 

" We will go away from this stupid place, then, somewhere 
together, dear Sophia ! " I exclaimed, with a feeling of indig- 
nant tenderness. "You shall be my friend, and companion, 
and sister, but never a governess again." 

" I should like to be them all to you, dear Miss Pomeroy ! 
And perhaps we may manage it now . and Mrs. Suett may not 
be able to banish me so completely out of the sphere of her 
son's irresistibility, as she humanely desires," returned Sophia, 
with her caustic and rather melancholy smile. " No doubt she 
thinks she will be enabled to make the county . perhaps the 
country . an unsuitable residence for me, witli the help of that 
young wolfcub's falsehoods ! Ah ! she thinks she has him 
beautifully tamed and domesticated on her hearth now. But 
I am much mistaken if he don't turn out to have sharp claws 
like his ancestors some day, and tear the hand that has reared 
him, as may be imagined, to lap milk !" 

" I thought young Sir Vivian was rather a good little chap ! 
He has been kind to me," I observed. 

" Oh, that sort of wild beast have all velvety paws enough 
.when they like ! But," continued Sophia, with an expression 
of intense dislike, " does not his very name sound like the 
howling of the wolves, which they say used to inhabit this part 
of t the country, and which, it seemed, nearly all belonged 
once to the Powels, or Ap Ifowels, or whatever they call 
themselves ?" 

" I like Ap Howel a great deal better than such nasty, smooth, 
greasy names as Suett ! " I replied, rather vexed at this inces- 
sant depreciation of my young friend-in-need, with whom, 
besides, my aristocratic instincts made common cause. 

" So do I. But then you must consider again, the Suetts are 
rich, and riches cover more sins than charity, we may depend, 
now-a-days ; whereas that stealthy- footed, spiteful little Welsh 
catamountain has only got his senseless pride of birth for a 
patrimony, and he will starve on it some day, I hope ! " 

" 0, Miss Sutcliffe ! " 

" If you only knew what a tormenter he has been to me, ever 
since I came to these horrid mountains !" said Sophia, perceiv- 
ing it necessary to interest my feelings against the object of her 
own dislike. "I have been treated badly enough in other 
places, but never so badly as at Plas Wewydd. We of the 
middle classes, you know, Miss Pomeroy, never forgive one 
another any kind of superiorities ; and I don't so much wonder 
at the Suetts trying to mortify me in every possible way, for 
having some natural talents of my own, that only people in a 
good position ought to possess. But that boy is not a snob by 



At 1 HOYVEL TCWEB. 57 

birth ; why needs he, I wonder, have disliked me always so 
much ? " 

" Thev must be a wretched set these Suetts, not to like you, 
Sophia ! " 

"Well, but I think I see "a means of happy extrication 
opening before me now," she replied, tenderly taking my hand. 

" Except that I will never return to Mauleverer Castle, 
Sophia, I will do everything in the whole world I can to make 
you happy, and take you out of the way of such low, cruel 
people ! " I exclaimed in the warmth of my girlish enthusiasm 
of friendship. 

" But it is only by returning to Mauleverer Castle that you 
can do me aught of the good you intend, dearest Hugh-Helena. 
And do you really not know how impossible it would be for 
you, the daughter of a peer of the realm, and heiress of a great 
estate . a mere child in years yet, too, though not in mind and 
heart . to refuse to dwell where your parents and natural guar- 
dians may choose you should ? To remain concealed is equally 
out of the question ; that malicious boy alone would ferret out 
who you are in a few hours, and betray you to all the world. 
And besides, the whole country will soon be up and a-foot to 
recapture the fugitive little lady of Mauleverer. Neither, if I 
understand you right, have you fled from your parents . your 
poor, patient, angelic martyr of a mother especially, whose 
heart it would break . but from your stupid, varnished-savage 
of a French governess. But now, if you will take my ad- 
vice, we are in a position to make terms with your father, 
and you can include Sophia Sutcliffe among your articles of 
capitulation." 

" Do you think it will be easily found out where I have 
gone i" I said, in great agitation. 

" It will be impossible to keep you concealed for more than 
a few days, . but that would be sufficient for our purpose," 
said Sophia, cheerfully. "I have thought already of a plan. 
It will annoy Mrs. Suett still more, perhaps, but I don't care 
for that. I will give out that you are my sister . and, indeed, 
I love you better than I should ever have loved a real one, I 
think !. and say that as she finds me too far advanced for 
Miss Suett's present capacity, I have taken the liberty of 
sending for you before I left Plas Newydd, in the hope that 
you would suit so excellent and desirable a mistress as nursery 
governess. She will not, at all events, think of turning you 
out until I go too, which is to be in another fortnight, for she 
did not like to seem in too particular a hurry to get rid of me. 
And meanwhile, we can write to Lord Mauleverer on the Con- 
tinent, to propose terms of surrender to him, in the most sub- 
missive manner . compatible with a resolute maintenance of 
one's own will, of course ! He will be too heartily frightened 
to refuse any by that time, I imagine. And in reward for my 
care of you in the interval, I have no doubt we shall manage to 



68 jIA.t r Ij;VEREJl's DIVORCE. 

got me placed in Madame Le Crampon's strangely-abused 
office with the darling child, whose brilliant faculties it will 
henceforth become the duty and happiness of my life to 
unfold." 

Only the latter part of this project pleased me altogether. 
But my short experience of the world had satisfied me that I 
was much mistaken in my estimate of the happiness of a free 
and wandering life in it. Sophia's reflections had irresistibly 
enlightened me to the folly and even impossibility of the 
pastoral designs I had formed. I was affected by the allusion 
to my mother ; and then I was so much attached_ to Sophia, 
that the prospect of securing her society, coupled with emanci- 
pation from that of my French governess, sufficed to draw me 
into these views. 

Sophia, in fact, laughed me out of my childish and visionary 
fancy. " How would you tend your sheep on the mountains in 
such a tempest as this ? What would you do when your herd- 
master requested your assistance in the selection of the fattest 
of your fleecy innocents for market ?" she said, making the old 
tower ring again with her merriment. "And then have you 
reflected how often you would be a good deal hungrier than 
even, I have no doubt, you are at present ? Are you not very 
hungry, my poor child? I have been hungry myself," she 
added, with a gloom of reminiscence overspreading her lighted 
features; "and I know what hunger does for people, in 
more ways than making that craving stomach of ours pine. 
Why, do you know," laughing, " I would have brought you 
something to eat, only I wanted you to submit to go home with 
me to Plas Newydd ? Nay, my dear proud child, I am only 
jesting. I feared it would excite suspiek n, for I could only 
account for your arrival and my own venturing out in such 
stormy weather, by declaring that I expected my sister by ' the 
cars,' as they call the tramroad waggons at the mines below, 
and must go out to meet you. It was only the governess, you 
know, going to welcome a visitor whom she had no right to 
invite (people who take the wages of others, you are aware, are 
not entitled to any natural feelings of their own), so no one 
troubled themselves to render me any assistance. And yet, I 
am sure, no one at Plas Newydd guessed that I was to have a 
guide and companion in that peevish boy in my excursion on 
the Howel Mynydd. Well, but now we will get to the house as 
fast as we can, and give you something to revive your dear, 
exhausted frame." 

" But I do not like to go into a house belonging to the 
Suetts," I said. 

" I know why you say so, for they are always crowing at 
their famous victory over your father," replied Sophia; "but 
it is quite impossible we can stay in this dreadful ruin," she 
added, looking round with a shiver. "I am no believer in 
ghosts in general or in particular ; but if there could be such 



AP HOWEL TOWETl. 59 

dismal entities in the world, I should certainly think it might 
be here. Besides, you do not go as a visitor to the Suetts . 
you go to Plas Newydd as my visitor . as Helena Sutcliffe ; and 
you need scarcely see the family at all, I imagine, unless you 
please." 

I was exhausted, terrified ; and I could not conceive anything 
more satisfactory than to place myself under the care and in the 
constant society of Sophia Sutcliffe. I resigned myself, therefore, 
implicitly to obey her; after, however, she had given me a 
solemn pledge that, under no circumstances, would she sur- 
render me to the custody of Madame Le Crampon. With this 
stipulation I agreed to accompany her to Plas Newydd. 

¥e had concluded on the arrangement, when young Ap 
Howel reappeared at the entrance of the tower. 

" Is your sister ready now, Miss Sutcliffe ? " he inquired, with 
a smile on his thin, pale lips, and an emphasis on the word, 
that denoted how little he was deceived by the assumed relation- 
ship. " The storm is quite over ; and there is even a bright 
moonlight breaking from among the clouds. You would say 
you were among the snowy Alps to see them piled overhead ! 
But I find it impossible to reinstate your umbrella, Miss 
Sutcliffe," he continued, gravely producing one turned abso- 
lutely inside out. " I told you how it would be, you re- 
member." 

" I shall never get thoroughly out of my cockney credulities, 
you know, Sir Vivian ! " replied Sophia, with evident causticity 
in all the playfulness of her manner. "And now umbrellas 
are of some use in the worst rain that ever falls in London, I 
am convinced. However, I will take your advice in matters 
of more importance, in future ! and it is a very manly thing, I 
can tell you, to be thought competent to give advice to a young 
woman of twenty-two or three, . especially by the young woman 
of twenty-two or three herself. So now, after that sugarplum, 
will you guide us back to Plas JMewydd ? . I can't say home to 
Plas Newydd any longer, if ever I could ! But I so seldom 
visit this ' picturesque adornment of the landscape/ as Mr. 
Scarlatt's tutor calls your ancestral ruin here, that I might 
easily miss the way . else we would not trouble you certainly 
to show it." 

"Seldom alone!" replied young Ap Howel. "But you 
might have called me sooner had you wanted me, Miss Sut- 
cliffe ! You must have known . on this occasion at all events 
. that I was outside ! Or had you both forgotten me ? Don't 
apologize, young lady. I was too thoroughly drenched before, 
to make the pelting of the storm of any consequence." 

"But so delicate as you are in the chest, Sir Yivian," said 
Sophia. "lam not so fond of the Suetts, I assure you, as to 
wish you the very bad cold you are likely to catch." 

" Thank you ; but my chest will never be my coffin .' I have 
a ghost's word for that. But you are not credulous in the 



60 aiAL'LloVjaiEK's DIVOECE. 

spiritual world, -Miss Sutcliffe," lie answered, in a slightly 
sneering tone. " You ought to be more apprehensive about your 
sister," he added; "she is not acclimatized as we are to the 
humours of the Glamorgan hills. And since she is to goto Plas 
Xewydd at all, let us get her as fast as we can to a warm room 
and bed in it." 

"You are quite right, Sir Yivian. But baronets must be 
very poor indeed to be often wrong at Parvenu Manor House," 
said Sophia, laughing. " Lead on; we follow. . But this great 
dog i" she concluded with a look of dismay ; singularly enough, 
for the first time, noticing Gelert, who, quite as singularly, had 
slunk out of sight from the moment of her arrival, but now 
rustled out of his straw to accompany us. 

" He must go with me, Sophia," I said ; " I must not desert 
him now that he has conveyed me safely to the care of my 
dearest friend." 

" I will take charge of the dog ; he will come with me, I 
know," said Vivian ; " you may consider Gelert's welfare 
confided to me from this time forward, at Plas Newydd, Miss 
Hugh-Helena." 

" My sister's name is Helena ! " said Sophia. 

"Your sister's name icas Helena; but Troy was taken so 
long ago, one forgets ! " returned the boy, with a laughing, 
scornful flash of the eye on Sophia. " Well, is it decided ? 
Come along, Gelert, you belong to a mistress for whose sake 
you shall be welcome to as decent a kennel as the chief of Ap 
Howel's bedroom to-night. Gelert do you call him? " he added, 
as if rather startled. " What a very unlucky name for a dog ! 
But you lowlanders are so ignorant of omens. Follow me 
fearlessly, ladies," he concluded, with a slight but very satirical 
laugh. _ " Believe me, I do not intend to play any will-o'-th'. 
wisp tricks to-night." 

Sophia coloured deeply . I could not conjecture why ; and off 
we set on our way down the mountain to Plas Newydd. 



CHAP TEE VII. 

SCAItLATI STJETT. 

I sham, never forget that night, and I have reason to remem- 
ber it. 

The storm-clouds were now all dispersed, and the sky pre- 
sented one immense concave of star-strewn, diamond-pure azure 
over our heads. The air was indescribably fresh, clear, and 
bright ; it exhilarated like a draught of champagne. Hungry 
and faint as I was, I felt the influence of this mountain-atmo- 



SCARLATT SUETT. 61 

sphere in every reviving fibre of my frame. It was not long 
before I began to trip and bound in the reanimation of my 
spirits as we wound down the rocky paths that led to the woods 
in which Plas Newydd lies bosomed. 

On the contrary, young Vivian's manner became singularly 
depressed ; and sometimes I thought he looked at me with a 
cast of sadness and misgiving on his prematurely-worn and 
expressive countenance. 

The path through the wood which we had now entered, though 
very steep, was as smoothly kept and gravelled as the carriage- 
way before a house. There was nothing to hinder us from jog- 
ging on at a merry pace, save the incessant splash and dripple 
of the saturated boughs. We were proceeding at a good step, 
and had turned into a broad avenue of the finest beech and 
larch trees I have ever seen, when suddenly, a tramp of feet in 
a neighbouring copse, and Gelert's warning growl, induced us 
all to look in the direction of the sound. 

Three or four figures were immediately visible, clambering 
with agility up a precipitous bank in the wood. The fore- 
most were two gentlemen ; one in black cloth, the other in a 
brown velvet shooting-jacket, with large mother-of-pearl but- 
tons : both had guns in 'their hands, and were attended by a 
gamekeeper and boy with three or four setters. 

" Stop ! let us stop a moment or two, and allow them to pass," 
said Vivian, suddenly halting, and laying his small, nervous 
hand on my arm. " It is Scarlatt Suett and his tutor, that 
rascally Reverend Carolus Luxmoor ! They have been out 
shooting all day, for of the two, the tutor is the idler and the 
fonder of all manner of racketing. So they are not always 
good company for ladies, after a day's sport, are they, Miss 
Sutcliffe ? " 

" I do not know ; but I do not care for their company at any 
time," replied Sophia, pettishly. " So let us stop till they 
swagger on before us." 

But the little baronet's plan was not destined to be carried 
out. Quietly as we stood, Gelert would not cease his growling ; 
perhaps at the sight of the setters, which, on their part, contem- 
plated him in evident surprise and fear. 

" Hollo, what's that ? " we heard one of the gentlemen ex- 
claim, peering towards us in the gloom. "Poachers, by Jove, 
Luxmoor ! Do you know, that arrogant little Ap Howel pre- 
tends to give all the lazy, skulking rascals in the country side 
leave to come loafing about our grounds, as if he and his old 
kings of Glamorgan were lords of the ascendant still ! I'm tired 
of the game, and will put a stop to it at once and for all. Who's 

there ? Stand and say who you are, or " and we heard the 

click of the gun, as it was cocked in the dark, " at least, my 
fine fellows, I will put your dog out of serviceable condition." 

" Put down your gun, Mr. Scarlatt ! For shame ! Don't 
you see the petticoats ? What the dickens are you at ? Ware 



62 MAULEVEKEK'S DIVOliCE. 

lien, I say ! I can see them through my spectacles, green 
though they be. A pretty sportsman you'll turn out, "after all 
my pains,!' interposed the young gentleman's companion. 

" A cockney one, Mr. Luxmoor, of course. And you are little 
better yourself, I should say ; your bags seem quite empty. . 
But no one, who is not born to it, is ever a good sportsman on 
the Welsh hills !" said our young guide, in tones in which the 
sneer was very distinct. " Why, Mr. Scarlatt," he continued, 
thus gibingly, " are you going to shoot your particular friend 
and acquaintance, Miss Sophia Sutcliffe ? Well, do as you like, 
but mind what I say, I'll indict you at the next quarter ses- 
sions, for I have given no one leave, I am sure, to snoot women 
on my manors." 

" Beg pardon, Sir Vivian, I'm afraid I forgot to ask leave even 
to shoot grouse on the Howel Mynydd, though I recollect now 
you are still lord of all the barren upper crust," returned the 
first speaker. " But is that really you, Miss Sutcliffe ? Sir 
Yivian is always so much on his stilts, that one can never tell 
whether his objects are distant or near." 

"Yes, Mr. Suett, it is I," said Sophia, with . considering the 
hints she had thrown out . some justifiable hastiness and pee- 
vishness, I thought, in her manner. 

" I'll walk with you, then, to the house, shall I ? or are you 
still in your charming tantrums ? " said the 3 r oung gentleman. 

" Or, what is more likely, afraid mamma will be on the look- 
out, as usual, from one of her hazum-gazums," subjoined his 
fellow-sportsman. 

" You and your pupil have been making merry at some of the 
mountain cabarets, I presume, Mr. Luxmoor," said Sophia, 
turning, with an air of displeasure, from Scarlatt Suctt to his 
companion. 

This companion was a man probably verging on forty years 
of age ; prematurely bald on the forehead, marked a good deal 
with the smallpox, and wearing a pair of green spectacles. 
He was not perhaps otherwise of a very advantageous counte- 
nance : there was too much of the leering levity of the satyr in 
it. Yet you would have said, a man of great natural abilities, 
and one accustomed to good society ; and, indeed, when he 
chose . though the degrading vices that enslaved him some- 
times, certainly, put discretionary action out of his power. Mr. 
Luxmoor was of gentlemanly and even fascinating demeanour 
and conversation. His figure was, however, too short-set and 
plebeian ; his strongly-chiselled, powerful head and massy 
shoulders, having rather a disproportionate effect in connection 
with this inferior stature. When I saw him, on this first occa- 
sion, he was dressed in a suit of clerical black and white, in all 
respects but his equipment as a sportsman ; to complete which, 
he had unceremoniously tucked up his trousers to the top of 
big muddy boots. 

"No, Miss Sutcliffe, upon my honour ! And that you know 



SUA.ELATT SUETT. 63 

is my Styx, when I attest it ! " replied this person, but in 
rather admissive and laughing accents, to Sophia's observation. 

" That was an oath that bound the gods, I believe ; but do 
you really think there is any that would bind you, Mr. Lux- 
moor?" said Sophia, tartly. 

" Try me, Miss Sutcliffe, that's all, and invent it yourself," 
returned the Reverend Carolus, in an unruffled, bantering tone. 

" Meanwhile, I would thank"" you, Luxmoor," interposed 
young Mr. Suett, very sharply and authoritatively, " not to 
seem to give an affirmative . on my account, at least . to Miss 
Sutcliffe's bacchanalian insinuations ! As if it was impossible 
to admire her without suspicion of being out of one's senses ! 
whereas, truth to say !" he added, in a manner that combined 
cajolery with a degree of insulting and ironical challenge, 
" one ought to have one's wits pretty keenly about one, to do 
justice to Miss Sutcliffe's many charms without playing moth in 
their brilliant attraction ! But who is this young damsel whom 
we are keeping shivering while we gabble, under the dripping 
boughs ? Whom have you there, smuggled, you artful little 
Welshman ? Why, Luxmoor, here is one of your youngest 
nymphs of Diana . if anything relating to that goddess ought 
to be mentioned in the same breath with your reverence !" 

" I shall not look, Mr. Scarlatt. I have played Actaaon once 
before to my great disadvantage," replied the Reverend Carolus, 
humorously covering his spectacles with his disengaged hand. 

" Was not Actseon a married man? and are you not a bachelor, 
and fellow of a college, Mr. Luxmoor?" said Vivian, drily. 
" But, really, Mr. Suett, your tutor, at all events, is not in a 
condition to talk much with ladies to-night . and as this younger 
one is under my protection, I should thank you to let us pass." 

" What a game chicken it is, isn't it, Mr Scarlatt?" laughed 
Luxmoor. 

" Oh, he's older than he looks ! Fifteen or sixteen, aren't 
you, Sir Vivian ? though you look like a little shrivelled shrimp 
of ten or eleven," jeered Scarlatt. 

" I shall take care that you know when I am twenty-one, 
Mr. Suett ! You need not trouble yourself about my age until 
then !" replied young Ap Howel, with a significance not lost 
upon his opponent. 

" When, I suppose, I shall have to ask your leave to shoot 
carrion-crows on the Howel Mynydd ? 'So, my dear Sir Vivian, 
I hope by that time to have secured enough out of the Howel 
Mynydd to purchase myself a better-stocked property in some 
place where the loutish peasants will not imagine that because 
a fellow takes his name from a mountain, the mountain itself 
belongs to him for perpetuity !" 

" We_ Howels gave our name to the mountain ! Not the 
mountain its name to us !" returned the haughty lad. 

" Telamonian Ajax ! I think you are fairly outblustered, 
Mr. Suett !" said the tutor. 



64 3IAITLEVEEERS DITOKCE. 

" Upon my faith, Mr. Luxmoor," returned the pupil offendedly, 
" I think the old woman's metheglin must have been very- 
strong, after all." 

" Then I am much mistaken," replied that unexcitable per- 
sonage, "for I felt as if I could have drunk a barrel of it with- 
out its affording me the slightest glimpse of the beatitude of 
intoxication." 

" This is my sister, Mr. Suett. Pray don't talk any more 
of your nonsense before these children !" interposed Sophia, 
evidently annoyed. 

" Your sister? I thought you bad no sister ! No near rela- 
tions !" said Searlatt, glancing at me with more attention than 
he had hitherto bestowed. 

" ^so father, no brother, Mr. Searlatt ! And I thought it un- 
necessary to mention that I had a sister whom I was bringing 
up, at my own expense, to the same desirable profession." 

" She is a devilish pretty girl, then, Sophia, your sister. By 
Jove ! a thousand times handsomer than, you are yourself !" 
returned the young man, as if anxious to pique Miss Sutcliffe, 
in return for something he did not relish in her last speech. 
Yet he fixed his eyes upon me with a sudden animation of 
expression ; and Mr. Luxmoor also turned a pair of startled 
spectacles upon me. 

" Pray, Sir Yivian ap Howel," Searlatt resumed, after a brief 
survey of my personal characteristics, in a very choleric and 
pick-quarrel manner, " what do you mean by saying that Jam 
not in a fit Condition to pay my respects to ladies ?" 

" I spoke of your tutor, Mr. Searlatt, whose very boots bear 
testimony to the propriety of my remark. But if you take the 
observation to yourself, it will be a sign, no doubt, that I ought 
to have extended it !" was the boy'sundaunted reply. 

" Then mark my words, Sir Yivian ! . If you go on at this 
rate, I shall really be obliged some clay to forget that you are a 
descendant of Prince Billy-Goat the Great, and give you a sound 
thrashing to teach you manners." 

" You must make up your mind then for rather a sharp prick 
under the fifth rib, Mr. Suett, junior !" returned the boy. "I 
am not a match for you yet, in fair fight, I admit ; but we 
mountaineers have managed to hold our own, nevertheless, 
under like disadvantages^ for some few centuries ! And if your 
father has taken the beehive for his emblem, my ancestors have 
been hornets to men of your blood for ages before he set it down 
on the Mynydd Howel !" 

" Yes, you "Welshmen can stab ! So when I take you into 
correction, I sha'n't forget to draw your sting first !" returned 
Mr. Searlatt, disdainfully. "But I think I can prove to this 
young lady herself, at all events, that I am very respectable 
society for the sex, when they are as deserving of homage, in 
every sense, as I have no doubt Miss Sutcliffe's sister must be ! 
Will you accept my arm to Plas Newydd, young lady ; where I 



SCARLATT SUETT. 65 

think I have more influence than your present escort, to procure 
you a favourable welcome ?" 

"I don't want to be welcomed to Plas Newydd!" was my 
rather churlish and pettish reply . 

" And take care, Mr. Scaiiatt ! the dog is not too well pleased 
with you !" said Sir Vivian, hearing- this reply with evident 
satisfaction. And indeed Gelert had been for some time circu- 
lating round and round me, keeping up a menacing growl, and 
assuredly awaiting but the slightest gesture from me to have 
rushed into battle with any or all of the strangers before him. 

" What on earth does this huge beast mean by glaring so at 
me ." said Scarlatt, in a tone of some real alarm. " Is it some new 
ungovernable importation of yours, Sir Vivian ? Some true 
decendant, like yourself, from the savage old British blood ? If 
so, I advise you to make the fellow keep the peace, tongue and 
tail, and at once, or you will find that whether Mr. Luxmoor's 
aim be unsteadied by a wash of fermented broom-water, or no, 
I am quite able to put a bullet through an object of this 
growling gentleman's size . though it is pretty dark, too !" 

And the irritated young man levelled bis piece at Gelert. 

" Don't, sir ! Pray don't kill my dog ! You shall not, unless 
you shoot me first !" were the words with which I now inter- 
posed, alarmed by this threat, and advancing boldly before my 
faithful attendant. 

This movement brought me within a few steps of the young 
sportsman ; and we stood face to face, surveying one another 
for some moments, with excited and eager attention. My first 
direct confrontation with Scarlatt Suett might thus be said to 
be a hostile one . the true instinct doubtless of our opposed 
natures ! Would it had been the emblem in all things of our 
destiny ! 

At that period Scarlatt was a very young man ; probably in 
his twenty-first or second year. And though it be a poor excuse 
to allege for an infatuation so complete and overmastering as 
mine was destined to be, certainly it may be said in my apology, 
that he whom I was destined to love so passionately, and so 
undeservedly, was in all outward respects one of the handsomest 
men of his time. Not indeed in the style of personal comeliness 
usually denominated aristocratic ; but in the very perfection of 
the powerful and probably finally supreme over all other, 
Anglo-Saxon type. 

Scarlatt Suett was tall ; of a form eminently manly, energetic, 
and commanding ; and, at that period, with nothing of a vulgar 
massiveness in the muscular and compact build of his vigorous 
frame. There was a spring in his tread at once self-eonfident 
and expressive of an alert and eager character. His face was 
cast in a full, well-defined, and very handsome mould, as 
regarded the features, though there certainly was always some- 
thing of a challenging and supercilious expression on them, 
that rather roused, while it defied hostility, on the first survey. 
His lips, indeed, were a little too widely cut, and the upper one 



G6 MATTIETEEEE S DIVORCE. 

was long in proportion to the rest of his features. But they 
revealed two rows of extraordinarily white and shapely teeth ; 
while the Dright rosy fairness of his complexion, the hue of his 
light chestnut brown hair, golden at the beard and whiskers . 
which latter hirsute ornament he already cultivated in pro- 
fusion : the smiling audacity of his clear, steel-blue eyes . 
attested the purity of that energetic blood in his veins, from 
which have sprung the principal achievers of the miracles of 
modern civilization. 

Who could have believed in the remorseless egotism, the all- 
grasping selfishness, the littleness, the vanity, the credulity, 
the baseness of a being thus nobly endowed with all the ex- 
ternal attributes of an elevated and imperial nature ? One 
also gifted with no common share of the mental qualities that 
form men, at all event 5 :, for the conquest and subjugation of 
their fellows, by superiority in the powers of will, and in a 
determined exertion of the faculties towards particular objects 
and ends ? 

For my part, looking at him fixedly, in mingled dread and 
defiance . even to my girlish notions, this young man appeared 
as an embodiment of his strenuous and active sex, before which 
all that was feminine and admirative in my own stood rebuked. 
My eyes sunk as his keen gaze perused me, half-laughingly, yet 
with. a mixture of hostility and doubt in it ; which faded away 
the moment he perceived in my faltering looks the signs of vic- 
tory and ascendancy on his own part. 

He put the muzzle of his gun to the ground. 

" Oh, if the dog is a young lady's pet !" he said, relaxing 
from his menacing attitude, "and such a pretty young lady's, 
too. for she don't seem at all like a female pedagogue, nursery 
or adult, my dear Miss Sutcliffe, . it is quite a different matter, 
of course. This big fellow don't look much like one, certainly 
. though I ought not to depreciate muscle and thew ! Rather 
a strange attendant for your sister, on a visit to the mountains, 
is it not, Miss Sutcliffe ?" he concluded, glancing good-humour- 
edly, though evidently perplexed, from her to me, and from me 
to her again. 

" 'Tis a stray dog from some neighbouring gentleman's, that 
has taken a singular fancy to follow my sister from the cars. 
It will be claimed, I suppose, in a few days ; and, meanwhile, 
any one may see it is a very valuable animal . and Sir Vivian 
has taken charge of it !" said Sophia, quite coolly. 

It struck me unpleasantly, even at that time, to hear with 
what perfect indifference and composure she could invent and 
utter falsehoods like this. But then, and for long afterwards, 
Sophia could not do wrong in my eyes ! All this ingenuity and 
effrontery of misstatement appeared to me only spots in the 
ermine's, not the leopard's, skin. 

" Do you expect a reward to be offered for the dog, Sir 
Vivian ?" resumed Scarlatt, turning then with a smiling sneer, 
as if desirous to provoke, on young Ap Howel. 



SCABLATT SUETT. 6/ 

" When one is offered, I know where it will be most accept- 
able, Mr. Suett ! The Ap Howels have always extended a free 
hospitality where they gave it at all ! It is for tradesmen and 
hucksters in wool and iron, to barter the shelter they afford . 
since everything is to be bought and sold with them !" was the 
boy's sharp retort. 

" I have heard, however, that one of your wild ancestors did 
rather worse than charge his guest for a night's lodging, in the 
old ruin up yonder !" replied Scarlatt. 

" Wrong is the father of wrong ; and their grandchildren are 
a thousand !" said young Vivian, translating a Welsh proverb, 
for the benefit of his English hearers. 

" Well ! we will not bring very heavy expenses against Miss 
Sutcliffe's sister at Plas Newydd," returned Scarlatt, carelessly. 
" Come, Luxmoor," he continued, in a sprightly manner, "you 
used to be proud to display your gallantry to Miss Sutcliffe. 
Brush it up for use again this evening, tired and wet, inside 
and outside, as you are said to be ! Give your arm to the fasci- 
nating Sophia, Mr. Luxmoor, while I offer mine to her very 
charming young sister, who, perhaps, does not place such a high, 
price on the smallest indulgence of the sort . and who is wel- 
come to Plas Newydd, for her own sake, as well as for her fair 
relative's." 

And with an easy, but imperious action, which I could not 
readily avoid, Scarlatt Suett drew my hand in his disengaged 
arm, gave his gun to the servant, and turned away to head the 
party with me, apparently conscious of a most indisputable 
right to follow his own will and pleasure^ in the arrangement. 
But, at this moment, my eye fell upon Vivian, and I perceived 
that he was looking at me with a tremor pervading his whole 
sensitive frame, and an earnestness of deprecation in his look that 
immediately induced me to attempt to withdraw my hand. The 
effort failed. I felt it at once seized and retained in Scarlatt's 
well-knit grasp, with an exultant " No, indeed !" I looked 
appealingly at Sophia . who at first seemed inclined to interfere. 
But, after a moment's pause of reflection . which perhaps 
decided the destiny of my life . " You are honoured, Helena, 
dear," she said ; " pray go on with Mr. Scarlatt now, for I feel 
we are both, in all likelihood, catching a severe cold, standing 
in the wind and weather here." 

On we went. At some slight interval the Reverend Carolus 
and Sophia followed in our wake, but not arm-in-arm. Vivian 
seemed to linger much more remotely . stopping apparently to 
knot his handkerchief round Grelert's throat, and sternly re- 
straining him from hastening in my steps. It was amazing how 
docile already the powerful creature had become under his 
influence. 

All the rest of the way to the house . and it was some minutes 
yet before we entered the pleasure domain round Plas Newydd . 
my companion amused himself in stringing together a succes- 

f 2 



68 mauieveeee's divoece. 

sion of compliments and fine speeches, . not altogether common- 
places of admiration, from one of his sex towards one of mine, 
so much his junior . for he had evidently made language his 
study, and had a flow of poetically- coloured expressions at his 
command that might have dazzled any novice. But I was, on 
my part, pretty well read in a superior class of literature to that 
whence Scarlatt drew these flourishes, and had in fact acquired 
a taste for a more exalted and rational style of conversation. 
Then he seemed to think no restraint was necessary with a 
female of my rank ; that the inferiority of my condition ren- 
dered every impertinence allowable . and that he might say, 
without scruple, whatever nonsense came into his head. 

Instead of being flattered, I was irritated. I speedily let him 
understand his mistake in the matter. I was a very young girl 
indeed ; but I was full of a native fire and spirit. The habit of 
reading, in which I had indulged, had given an unusual energy 
and vivacity of expression to my language. I answered Scarlatt 
Suett's condescending gallantries with a sparkle of disdain and 
petulance, that evidently both suprised and diverted him. 

" You are by no means such a sweet, submissive temper as 
your sister . who is not merely honey but treacle . in which 
one's legs are very liable to get clagged.as my father would say, 
in his Lancashire dialect, which he has not even yet managed 
to wean himself from," he said, evidently with some asperity ; 
but after glancing over his shoulder, and perceiving that we had 
left Sophia and his tutor at a considerable distance behind . 
" Frankly speaking, however, I like you the better for it. I 
lore to force things to do my will against their own. That is 
why I tease that untameable young hyena, Ap Howel, so. He 
is a real representative of the Celtic race, and I of the Anglo- 
Saxon . and you know we are improving him and his off the 
face of the earth. But you don't seem of the conquering blood 
quite, either : I suppose you must be said to look too thorough- 
bred to be one of us ! . I am sure you can only be Sophia 
Suteliffe's half-sister, any way r" 

" We had not the same mother," I thought it best to answer. 

" I thought not ! . and I suppose yours came of a more aristo- 
cratic set, as they call it ? Superfine, worn-out blood that ends 
in females, or in little starveling mannikins like that Ap Howel. 
But you are a very beautiful creature yourself . and I think, 
after all, I prefer that clear, glowing, Spanish donna-looking 
brunette complexion of yours, to any of the lighter ones ! Your 
sister's is pretty good in its way : but what a cunning, wily, 
able creature she is ! How ever came you to be so frank and 
open-hearted, and she such a sphinx of craft and delusion !" 

" I don't know what you mean, sir," I answered, angrily. 
" But I believe you all talk against Sophia here because you are 
incapable of appreciating her as she deserves to be appreciated . 
and I am very glad that she is going to leave you soon." 

" And so am I. I am tired of her cantrips. But I hope she 



SCA.ELATT STTETT. 69 

has not had you over merely to help her cord her trunks ?. For 
do j T ou know," my companion said, with animation, " that I 
never saw any young creature I liked so well before ? I begin 
to believe in love at first sight . as your sister, I am sure, does ! . 
for even that ugly man-goat, Luxmoor . would you believe it," 
he broke off, laughing, " that before Luxmoor came to be my 
tutor, I had reason to flatter myself, I was making quite progress 
in Miss Sutcliffe's good graces . all in the most innocent way in 
the world, of course, . when she took quite a sudden fancy to 
him instead ? But, still, perhaps, she is only playing him off 
against me, thinking to force me to . to turn my nonsense into 
earnest, and sit down to a humdrum, contented life, with a 
commonplace wife and children, and a counting-house . a model 
member of the ' middle classes !' " 

" I am sure my sister does not want any one to admire her, 
who thinks her beneath him, in any respect," I said, indignantly. 

" Well, and I want a wife to raise me . not a wife whom I 
must raise. That is, one with birth and connections, to give 
me a fair start in the aristocratic and political world : I will do 
the rest myself," replied the young man, in a singularly con- 
fidential style ; but perhaps he wished me to report what I 
heard to my sister ! " A little amusement meanwhile is all 
very well . and I own your sister has understanding enough to 
push a man very fast up the hill in> any other country than 
England. But here . whatever my father may say . a man 
must be at least allied to the aristocracy, in one way or other, 
to hope to rise to any high political elevation. How is it with 
my father himself ? Clever, bustling, courageous, indomitable, 
as he is ? Why, he cannot even obtain a beggarly knighthood 
from the Whigs, whom he has served with his vote ever since 
he entered parliament, because, forsooth, they give themselves 
out to be the liberal party ! And now the very mob that raised 
him, out of sheer defiance and hatred of the insolent domination 
of the Pomeroys, think they have done too much for him . 
elevated him too high above themselves, from whom he sprang, 
and whose level he ought consequently to keep. Then there's 
my mother . an excellent woman, a very sharp-witted, clever, 
bustling woman. but she is one of the weights that keep him 
to the ground ! No : wherever a man marries nowadays . 
it used to be the case only with women . he fixes his level. 
And the only excuse," he concluded, abruptly, " for a fellow to 
do such an act of madness with his eyes open . which mine are 
. as to marry a person in his own rank in life, when he means 
to soar to the clouds above it, would be . beauty such as I see 
before me ! " 

It was the first time I had listened to accents of admiration . 
the first time I had encountered its glance . from any one of 
the sex privileged to take the initiative in such demonstrations. 
I glanced at tScarlatt as he spoke these words. Girl as I was, I 
could not but bend somewhat to the sway of haughty and 



70 MAULEVEBER'S DIVOKCE. 

energetic aspirations in that knit and powerful frame. Even 
the self-confidence, amounting to superciliousness for others, in 
his expressions, had in it much that was attractive to a girl of 
a proud, unmastered temperament like mine. A confused, but 
intoxicating and bewildering sentiment entered my heart. It 
seemed to me that I was no longer tired. spent ; that I could 
have endured to walk much farther than there was likely to be 
occasion, listening to these strange, masculine revelations of 
feelings and purposes so unlike all I had been accustomed to. 

But we were now arrived in the gardens of Plas Newydd, 
immediately surrounding the house. They were formed in a 
succession of terraces along the side of the mountain, sheltered 
from the visitation of its bitter winds by high hedges of thorn 
and hornbeam, and in parts traversing the brink of the pre- 
cipices down which rolled the headlong course of the Rhaiadr 
Dku. The mansion itself now appeared ; dense woods behind, 
and a glorious flower-garden before it. It was a sensible- 
looking structure, but not at all remarkable for architectural 
beauty. It was of no particular style of architecture, in fact, 
at all, I should imagine ; but it had an air of solidity and 
comfort that adapted it both to its exposed situation and uses. 
It consisted principally of a large, square mass of grey or light- 
blue stone, with receding semicircular wings that concealed the 
domestic offices and stables, and enclosed extensive kitchen 
gardens and orchards. But it was finished at all points with 
the most substantial care ; and the windows, in particular, 
were large, and glazed with panes of a size and brilliant trans- 
parency to which we were little accustomed in the antique and 
gloomy pile of Maulcverer Castle. 

" This is Plas Ncwydd," said my conductor, pausing . adding 
playfully, " and I am its heir apparent. though, unluckily for 
me, wc miners and manufacturers own no law of primogeniture ; 
and I have two little humpty-dumpty twin brothers, besides a 
sister, whom they must call after a woman of the Ap Howel 
ancestry, . that if all tales be true, was not in the least better than 
she should be ! But my father and the Ap Howels were 
wonderful friends, in the time of the last extravagant fellows 
of the name, who verily sold their birthright for a mess of 
pottage. However, it was quite useless to them ; they had 
neither sense nor money to make their mines productive again, 
after the great explosion and falling in of the mountain, half a 
century ago. This is Plas Newydd ; for we cannot get the 
obstinate clodpates about here to call it by any other name. 
Yet now I own I would part with half its worth to be able to 
call it . and get others to call it, which is the difficulty . any- 
thing that would have half the power over the imagination of 
the name yonder proud little beggar's heap of ruin enjoys, in 
spite of almost complete decay ! . Castell Ap Howel, forsooth, I 
suppose, it will be as long as a stone of the foundation, over- 
grown with weeds, remains to say that there it stood." 



SCA11LATT STTETT. 71 

" Oh, I like this nice, clean, new house much better than any- 
old castle ; old castles are so full of dark, dismal rooms and 
passages," I said, with reminiscences of Mauleverer returning 
by no means pleasantly upon me. 

" "Well, now," Scarlatt resumed, but speaking evidently rather 
to himself than to me, " I wonder whether, after all, it would 
not be the wiser and happier plan for me to sit down contented 
with destiny ? If even I could thrust my nasty tallow-chandler 
name into the peerage, would it not seem ridiculous there r And 
what a world of toil and trouble would one have to go through 
to attain to be ' My Lord ' at last, with grey hairs and rheumy 
eyes . and perhaps be obliged to solace myself as one of the 
penalties with the society of some eldest and ugliest Lady Mary 
of a political aristocrat's brood of daughters." 

I do not know what foolish, girlish impulse prompted me . 
what inexplicable mixture of romantic, childish coquetry and 
secret consciousness of power ; but I replied, with a girlish sim- 
plicity of gaiety, to this diatribe, " Would you not be glad, 
then, if I were some fairy, some Cinderella, who had stolen 
her aunt's wand that turned pumpkins into coaches with a 
stroke, that I might make you a highborn, princely gentleman 
at once?" 

" That would be impossible, my bright young loveliness ! 
But if I were not a craving, unsubstantial fool, you might per- 
haps make me a very happy man !" replied Scarlatt, joyously; 
and pausing, he turned to me with an expression which I do 
not like to recall, though it was fraught with the liveliest admi- 
ration, and even with something nigh akin to passion . not of an 
elevated order, however, and continued: "And you, I should 
say, are not such a selfish, engrossing creature as your sister, 
who would pretend to love a man to distraction, and yet require 
of him the sacrifice of all his prospects and "hopes to her own 
ambitious fancies ? You are yourself, I am sure, of too proud 
and superior a character to put any stress on becoming a Mrs. 
Suett, junior, before you would deign to share the existence, 
and whatever else he has besides to call his own, of the man 
whom you might honour with a preference ? Tell me, my sweet 
creature, is it not so ? and Sophia and Luxmoor may make it 
up as soon as they like, and. go to the devil together, hand in 
hand!" 

I was so surprised and confused at what I heard, that I made 
no reply. But continuing to look at him in surprise and ques- 
tion, on a sudden, the young man, yielding, as it seemed, to an 
irresistible impulse, folded me in his arms, and the first kiss I 
had received from any of his sex but my father, glowed with 
strange_ passion on my lips. 

Nothing could exceed my indignation on finding myself the 
subject of a familiarity so completely unlicensed and audacious 
as I had every reason to consider this ! I am afraid, however, 
that my demeanour was but little more dignified and awe- 



72 MAULETEBEE'S DIYOECE. 

striking, than if I had been in reality the country lass whose 
habiliments I wore. I slapped Scarlatt' s bright-complexioned 
cheek till it grew of a still more brilliant hue, and calling 
"Gelert, Gelert!" in my indignation and alarm, I attempted 
to break away from him and run to Sophia, whom I now per- 
ceived at the end of the walk we had traversed . unconsciously 
to me . at a pace that left her and Luxmoor pretty far behind. 

He held me, however, pretty firmly, with both my hands in 
his own, and was laughingly apologising and attempting to 
soothe me, when this loitering pair arrived. 

The Reverend Carolus leered at us with the comprehension 
and enjoyment of his forest prototype, peering through the 
green leaves on a nymph of Diana, astray with some mortal 
love. 

But Sophia seemed considerably disturbed, indeed, irritated, 
at the spectacle that afforded her companion so much satisfac- 
tion. "I was right after all, and you have been joining your 
worthy tutor in a pottle-deep potation, Mr. Scarlatt," she said, 
snatching me away from him with some violence. "But at 
best, of all the young men whom it has been my fortune to 
encounter, you are the one that has the least idea of the respect 
due to your mother's sex ! Do you wish to do my sister as 
much harm as your folly has already done to me, and destroy 
all chance of her pleasing Mrs. Suett as a nursery governess to 
your little sister ? So badly off as we both are, too !. And you 
know that malicious boy is coming on after us, who will be sure 
to carry word of all he sees, and hears, and can imagine, in his 
crafty little brain ! " 

Luxmoor gave one of his disgusting,' sneering grins, while 
Scarlatt Suett's eye ranged past our group, with a very vindic- 
tive expression, as if in search of the person alluded to. But 
Vivian nowhere appeared. 

" I will wring his little bantam neck if he dares to carry 
tales about me._ But, after all, what can he say? It is not 
the first time since the creation that a pretty girl has been 
kissed . and by a pretty fellow, too ! Though it is not usual 
for them to be so angry and cry so, darling little soul ! " he con- 
tinued, seeming astonished at my unabated fret of indignation. 
"Well, Miss Sutcliffe, do excuse me, and get this sweet young 
creature, your sister, to forgive me. I own that either the 
metheglin has got into my head, or else I am drunk with 
something infinitely more intoxicating than the richest wines. 
And do you really hold out such a delightful prospect, as that 
this young Hebe, newly alighted from a rainbow, will remain 
among us ? " 

" If you are pleased to exert your influence with your mother 
in her favour, Mr. Scarlatt," said Sophia, smilingly. 

" Oh, if it depends on that, we shall see ! " 



A FEMALE ASMODEUS. 73 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A FEMALE ASM0DET7S 

Such was my first interview with Scarlatt Suett; and such 
were probably, for many a day, the only glimpses into the 
realities of his character I was permitted to take. 

These left on my mind a strong, and, on the whole, unfa- 
vourable and resentful impression. My dignity had received 
a shock. 1 felt humbled by what I considered, making no 
allowances for the metamorphosis I had myself effected in my 
external environments, a grievous insult to a young lady of my 
rank and position. Had not the night become so fearfully dark 
. had not the locality abounded in such varied dangers and 
terrors . not even Sophia's influence could have availed to 
prevent me from continuing my flight from Plas Newydd 
altogether. As it was, I took no further part in the conver- 
sation, but observed a disdainful silence, until we reached a 
point where she and my new acquaintances seemed to think it 
advisable to part company. This was before a finely-wrought 
iron gate, admitting into a shrubbery a little below the house. 
Scarlatt Suett, apparently rather amused than otherwise, at my 
continued pettishness, renewed his efforts to conciliate me before 
we parted, but without success. Sophia said he looked long after 
us as we proceeded to one of the back entrances of the bouse. 

On our way she inquired . with real anxiety, no doubt . 
whether Mr. Suett had asked me any questions that might 
have compromised the secrecy we had resolved on endeavour- 
ing, if possible, to preserve. I could answer truly in the 
negative. Scarlatt's motive in making a seizure of me, in the 
first instance, was probably the mere impulse of his strong self- 
will and assertion of supremacy over all that approached Plas 
JSTewydd. But his interest in me grew apace ; and he had 
apparently remained so absorbed in personal impressions, that 
he had not thought of questioning me on any of the particulars 
of my arrival, except to ask if I had been out in the storm, in 
which he declared he himself and his tutor had been nearly 
drowned on dry land ! Perhaps he took it for granted that, 
as Sophia's sister, my antecedents resembled hers . which he 
doubtless imagined were fully known to him. 

"Well, then, dearest Miss Pomeroy," said Sophia, then, with 
a subtle smile, " you enjoy what very few women . (women, I 
say, though you are little more than a child in years) . of your 
rank and splendid expectations, however beautiful and en- 



74 hauleveeek's divorce. 

gaging themselves, can ever pretend to, . the certainty of having 
effected a disinterested and really personal conquest ! I never 
saw any creature of his species so suddenly captivated and 
enthralled as this young man ; and the actual delirium in 
which he seemed plunged, is the only excuse for his very im- 
pertinent conduct. Unless to be poor and needy, as the sister 
of Sophia Sutcliffe must, of course, be supposed, authorises 
every form of insult, either of superfluous attention or neglect. 
Well, seeing what a changeable, libertine creature the man is, 
I own I am rather gratified to think what a rebuff he will 
experience in his turn when the discovery of your name and 
station shows him that any hopes he might then form, of a 
legitimate character, are as far above his reach as he probably 
now thinks_ any such would be below his own magnificently 
exalted aspirations." 

There was more in this speech calculated to sway and direct 
my opinions, than perhaps appears on the surface. It infused 
into me, for the first time, the painful notion that, wherever my 
birth and connections were known, I ran the risk of becoming 
an object of mercenary and interested views, and of them only. 
It gave me the first thrilling sensation that reacts in the hearts 
of women from the consciousness of having inspired a passionate 
emotion in a person of the opposite sex ; one so handsome and 
highly endowed in all personal respects as Scarlatt Suett seemed 
too ! It furnished a flattering apology for an act that had 
wounded my proud self-estimate! while, finally, the satisfaction 
with which Sophia anticipated my new admirer's mortification, 
in the discovery of the hopelessness of all this sudden and 
sincere attachment, could scarcely be expected to find an echo 
in my bosom. It might be that I even felt some imperceptible, 
secret movement of revolt against my friend's vindictive feeling, 
and a vague, not altogether unpleasant conviction, that my 
triumph inspired her with a sentiment of jealousy. It is in 
vain to deny it. The youngest girl has in her all the germs of 
the woman ; and Scarlatt Suett's attentions had already 
awakened in me some consciousness of the subtle spirit of 
rivalry pervading our sex in their general relation to the 
opposite one. 

Nothing more was said at the time. We made our way to 
the house, and entered at a back door. I remember Sophia was 
scarcely treated with civility by the housekeeper, whom we 
met. a Mrs. Ruddles . a great, fat, fair Cheshire woman, whom 
she requested, in a very subdued manner, to allow herself and 
sister some refreshment in her apartment. Mrs. Ruddles, I 
afterwards found, shared the suspicions and ill-will of her 
mistress, against a person who was believed to have a design on 
the eldest son and hope of Plas Newydd. She stared in very 
visible surprise and curiosity at me, but only gave me a dry 
and unwelcome assent. 

We had hardly, however, sat down in our tireless room, 



A FEMALE ASMODEUS. 75 

somewhat dubiously expecting- the arrival of the tea and bread 
and butter we had requested, . I, on my part, laughing- at 
Sophia's rueful apologies, . when a tap was heard at the door. 
She opened it, and there stood Mr. Searlatt Suett's private page, 
with a silver tray, on which was a decanter of one of the best 
wines in the Plas Newydd cellars, and a selection of the 
choicest biscuits from his mother's stores. The page had also 
instructions to light us a fire ; and these attentions were followed 
up by a profuse supper tray of the most appetizing contents of 
the larder, direct from the table of the young gentleman and 
his tutor at their late dinner. 

Searlatt took this plan in order not to excite his mother or 
the housekeeper's notice. So said Sophia, rather peevishly 
complimenting me on what she declared must be the effects of 
my charms ! I was hungry and faint ; and I own I appreciated 
the cordial influence of the rich canary, and partook of the 
excellent viands with a satisfaction not alloyed by the inference. 
I even felt, perhaps, .superfluously grateful for these material 
attentions, and rather vain of the superiority of my sudden 
ascendancy, when Mrs. Paiddle's grudging and reluctant tray 
of weak hyson, and plain, thick-sliced bread and butter, arrived, 
as a mere complement to our previous repast. 

All the time our meal lasted, Sophia kept me very well 
entertained. She gave me a sketch of the interior economy of 
the Plas Newydd household, and of the persons composing it 
that interested me. 

I was pleased to find that, although she had reason, according 
to what she stated in the first instance, to complain of her own 
personal treatment at Plas Newydd, she spoke in the most 
forbearing and even kindly terms of its principal occupants. 
I ought to have noticed the change in her tone, under the 
influence of the new idea she had suddenly conceived, or which 
had been instilled into her. But I had no habits of meta- 
physical observation or analysis to suggest the scrutiny or 
guide it. 

She did not blame Mrs. Suett, she now indulgently declared, 
for endeavouring to get rid of her, even rather unceremoniously, 
since she had taken the notion that her son's attentions were 
directed towards her. 

" It is a mere caprice, however ; a young man's fancy for the 
first tolerable-looking young woman that is thrown much in his 
way . since the prospect of losing me for ever afflicts him so 
very little, and he can so readily transfer his favour," said 
Sophia ; but I thought, not quite as if she relished the fact. 
" Still, one must allow, the bare possibility of anything serious 
in the matter was enough to irritate an ambitious mother like 
Mrs. Suett. . How I shall enjoy her dismay, if she accepts you 
in the belief that your extreme youth is a security, to see 
Searlatt going off really on a passion she will consider quite as 
infra dig,, of course, as one for me, and infinitely more formid- 



76 MAT/IE VEBEH S DIVOECE. 

able, considering how beautiful you are. It is no wonder," 
Sophia continued, with a warmth of appreciation that somehow 
did not quite please me ; "Mr. Scarlatt is certainly one of the 
handsomest young men in England, and he is possessed of great 
. of extraordinary . abilities. There is nothing to prevent him 
from becoming one of the foremost men of the age. He has 
ambition to aspire to the loftiest position as a politician, and 
talents to achieve whatever he aspires to. Not only has he the 
soaring ken, but the broad, sustaining pinions of the eagle, you 
know, dear. Luxmoor, who is himself a man of first-rate intel- 
lect and knowledge of the world . a senior wrangler of his 
university . though a very worthless character in other respects, 
I think, . declares that his pupil will some day be Prime 
Minister of England, if he has but the commonest fortune to 
back his talents and industry. He has already, to my know- 
ledge, displayed the most remarkable courage and resolution in 
dispersing a mob of the miners in the strike last winter . though 
young Ap Ho wel pretends, because he can speak Welsh to them, 
that he induced them to go quietly back to their homes . when 
they came up to Plas Newydd, bent, certainly, on all kinds of 
mischief. Then he has carefully trained himself in every 
accomplishment that befits a gentleman. He is a noble horse- 
man ; he dances to admiration ; fences and shoots like a prince 
. and, above all, scorns to play on any musical instrument. 
That little Ap Howel thinks himself the gentleman par excel- 
lence, yet is always at work in his ruined tower, twanging at a 
"Welsh harp, with two or three strings, that makes such a dole- 
ful, wild, banshee-like wailing, I daresay it was the wind 
stirring it made you fancy you heard his stupid torrent ghostess 
at her yelling." 

Sophia evidently wished to dispel any superstitious inferences 
I might have been disposed to draw from such a reception 
among the spiritual denizens of the Howel Mynydd. 

She told me further, that young Suett possessed in a remark- 
able degree that high, intuitive sense of a lofty destiny often 
observed in the youth of men whose genius marks them out for 
ascendancy over their fellows. It was this that gave him, with 
such as were not acquainted with his peculiarities, a first 
effect of pride and domineering assumption in the tone of his 
manners, very alien to his natural character. His father him- 
self understood him no more than the cock scratching on the 
dunghill, that found a pearl, understood its prize. He was a 
man of exclusively mercantile talent . a very kind, good man 
certainly, in his way . but one who placed stress on the pos- 
session of no gifts that had not a money-making and practical 
tendency. He wished his son to take up with his own business 
as an ore master and proprietor of coal mines. But, however 
tempting in a pecuniary sense his father's offers of partnership 
must be, Scarlatt steadily refused all such overtures, and was 
now completing his education at Cambridge, with an exclu-. 



A FEMALE ASMODEUS, 77 

sive view to a career of political elevation. And though at 
present the father continued somewhat opposed to the plan, he 
would finally be brought over to support him in all his views ; 
though a necessary preliminary was the transfer of his own seat 
in parliament to his son. 

The young man's influence, Sophia said, was already para- 
mount in the house by the mere force of his energetic character 
and will ; but he was, besides, supported in everything by his 
mother, who adored her son, and possessed more than a wife's 
fair share of sway over her busy and goodnatured spouse. 

Mrs. Suett, herself, was not a woman of first-rate education, 
certainly ; but she was endowed with remarkably good natural 
abilities, and was as convinced as her son of the proud destinies 
in store for one who was as much the favourite of nature as of 
her own fond mother's heart ! 

Moreover, her husband's political career was confessedly a 
failure : a political failure Sophia defining to me to mean an 
inability to procure a title from a minister. On this the elder 
Suett . though no doubt thought, at Mauleverer, a person of 
absurdly strong democratic opinions . had set his heart for a 
long period without being able to attain his object. He had 
aspired to a baronetcy, which was not granted at his request ; 
so that, of late, he had become exceedingly disgusted with the 
niggardly behaviour of the party he had always served ; and 
Sophia thought it needed very little to change the elder Suett 
himself into almost as good a Tory as my father. As to Scarlatt 
Suett, since the agitation on the Corn Laws had commenced, 
though his family possessed scarcely an acre of land, he had 
openly avowed himself of Conservative principles on the 
subject. 

Neither, it appeared, did the elder Suett show much ambition 
to shine in the more elevated spheres of political action. He 
spoke very rarely in the House, and then only on questions 
closely connected with his own pursuits. But on such occa- 
sions his opinions . a little wordy, perhaps, and un grammatical 
in expression, but results of the soundest experience . were 
always listened to with great respect. He was himself quite 
conscious of certain defects of early position, which it was too 
late in the day for him to remedy. Though he was a man of 
the most vigorous independence and boldness of mind, he 
admitted that the mysterious awe of that great assemblage of 
the British Commons had proved too much even for him. His 
constituents latterly complained a good deal of his silence in 
the House, and thus suggested, less offensively, but more em- 
phatically than a son could have dared, the propriety of yield- 
ing the channel offered by their representation for the onward 
movement of the younger man's career. The elder Suett had 
sufficient employment, moreover, and one in fact that absorbed 
all his best energies, in the care of the immense wealth he had 
already accumulated, and in endeavours still to increase it. 



78 MAUXEVEEEfi's DIVORCE. 

In all other respects the father was a man of the plainest and 
most unpretending manners and ideas. He took rather an 
unreasonable delight, certainly, in humbling 1 and thwarting 
what he considered aristocratic pride and overbearingness in 
every form ; but it was a spirit of John Bull self-assertion and 
bravery, rather than any personal pique against my father, that 
had induced him to offer himself in the memorable contest end- 
ing in the defeat of the latter. For Sophia had often heard 
him, in an indirect way, lament that he should be on such bad 
terms with his noble neighbour, and confess regret at having 
deprived the country of the abilities of a man so much better 
able than himself to serve it in the higher walks of political 
action. It was this feeling, more than shared by Mrs. Suett, 
that induced her to receive my mother's recommendation of a 
governess into her family so implicitly. And she was deeply 
mortified to find the exchange of intercourse was limited to the 
epistolary form. Moreover, Sophia declared she thought Mrs. 
Suett had volunteered so handsome a salary for her services, 
chiefly with a view to impress Lady Mauleverer with a notion 
of the family wealth and liberality. 

So far was the older Suett, however, from any kind of par- 
venu affectation, that he openly proclaimed himself the son of 
his own works, and took pleasure in exaggerating the lowli- 
ness of his descent. His father had been a commercial repre- 
sentative of some great mining establishment in the north of 
England, and it was a favourite diversion with him to horrify 
his family by declaring that he had been a collier ! Because 
he had been brought up at a foundation school, he made a 
public boast that he was originally a charity boy. He had 
even the true democratic spirit to introduce these circumstances 
as claims on popular regard on the hustings, at the time he 
defeated my father ; but Sophia said, with a satirical smile, she 
had no doubt this seeming excess of democratic feeling was 
really stirred by the difficulty the Suetts found in instating 
themselves on any terms of equality in the ranks of the aristo- 
cracy. And the father of the race was not satisfied even with 
the high consideration his successful speculations procured for 
him among all sensible people. 

" He would not mind what he did, or gave," Sophia observed 
with rather bitter emphasis, "if he could contrive the means 
to introduce his family by marriage into the families of the 
ancient gentry and proprietors of the county. He could easily 
achieve this with his money ; but he was generous at the same 
time in his views. He was training up the impoverished heir 
of the Ap Howels, expressly on the notion of an alliance be- 
tween him and his daughter, Bronwen. And he would confer 
a fortune with the latter, ample to restore that ancient name to 
much of its former consideration." 

Reverting to Mrs. Suett, Sophia again expressed her regret 
that her sharp wit and excellent understanding had not re- 



A Female asiuobeits. 79 

ceived the advantages of early discipline. I do not now doubt 
that she was preparing me not to receive too sudden and dis- 
tasteful impressions from the peculiar style of conversation and 
demeanour of a personage whom she already destined as my 
future mother-in-law. And, in reality, though Mrs. Suett was 
(I speak of those whom I have known in the past, not because 
they are so themselves, but becouse I am so to them) . though 
Mrs. Suett was a woman of remarkable vivacity of understand- 
ing, to guide her very energetic selfishness, it was not difficult 
for any one of my training to perceive she was of very inferior 
breeding, which had not corrected the plebeian vein of inso- 
lence and coarseness running through all the brighter inlay of 
her aspiring and active character. 

Such were the Suetts. father, mother, and eldest son, accord- 
ing to the candid and seemingly disinterested report of my 
friend, Sophia Sutcliffe. The rest of the family consisted of 
two little boys, twins, still almost ia a state of infancy, and of 
her pupil, Bronwen. 

Sophia seemed to like this child very much ; perhaps, aware 
of my peculiar temperament, with a view to stimulate my own 
affection for her by a species of rivalry there, too. She was a 
sweet-tempered, docile, extremely pretty child, she said; per- 
haps a little too quiet and reserved for her age. But unfortu- 
nately Mrs. Suett had her own notions of aristocratic education, 
and wanted her daughter, above all things, to be brought up as 
a fine lady. Now her ideal of a fine lady coincided very much 
with my father's . and was, that the victim should be little 
better than a statue, endowed with some locomotive power, 
and capable of going through a series of automaton manoeuvres, 
dignified by the name of accomplishments ! 

.Poor little Bronwen was disciplined on this model, in spite of 
Sophia's more rational remonstrances. "And Mrs. Suett is 
taking hereby the most mistaken way possible to bring about 
one of her grand objects . the union of her child with that 
young beggar chieftain of the Ap Howels. There _is nothing 
that little catamountain hates more than the artificial in every 
form. And he has a wonderful talent, for such a mere boy, of 
detecting the unreal in all its most elaborate efforts of putting 
the change on the world." 

Sophia flushed angrily as she uttered these words ; she 
scarcely ever indeed spoke of Vivian Ap liowel, without some 
expression of dislike. His scrutiny had been to her from the 
first the touch of Ithuriel's spear. 

Yet it was always as evident that she had a considerable 
degree of respect for him and even fear of him. Boy as he was, 
it was plain that she looked upon Ap Howel as a power at Bias 
JSiewydd, and one in a state of hostility, or at best, of negation 
to her own. Tor she also . apart as her position in that house- 
hold might seem. had become a power in it, by the force of 
her dangerous qualities of mind and even of person. Of person. 



80 lUTJLEVEBER's DIVORCE. 

I was destined yet to learn that Sophia possessed a faculty nigh 
akin to the powers of transformation of the witches of old, and 
could at pleasure change almost the character of her physiog- 
nomy and the effect of her general appearance, by an indescrib- 
able infusion of charm and fascination she had at command, in 
the infinite resources of her wit and cajolery. Surely, she 
possessed in herself the secret of the maddening oriental drug 
which bestows on its votaries all the charms of the most volup- 
tuous existence, in exchange for reason and actuality. 

Vivian, according to her, was of the most obstinate and way- 
ward disposition in the world . possibly even touched with a 
little insanity. " All your fine, noble, rich old blood is, you 
know," she said, with her smile. Feeble as his constitution 
was, much as he suffered in health in consequence, he persisted 
in habituating himself to every species of strenuous physical 
action and exposure. He had taken a fancy to make a soldier 
of himself, in spite of an acute nervous sensibility that, in 
Sophia's opinion, rendered him almost like a person without a 
skin. His father was slain in battle . yet this seemed one 
principal inducement for the preference he had formed. His 
late grandfather and his guardian, the elder Mr. Suett, wished 
to bring him up to the church. Ample provision was assured 
him in it. Almost the last vestige of the ancient family wealth 
of the Ap Howels consisted in the advowson of a considerable 
living in the county, which had almost always been enjoyed by 
some member of the family. There were probabilities that the 
gift would fall in about the time when Vivian might have 
qualified himself to accept it. But he would not hear of the 
project ; and as the Suetts made it a point to soothe his irascible 
disposition as much as possible, he was now educating at Eton, 
with a view to the purchase of a commission, which would 
probably exhaust his little patrimony. 

" And the strange boy persists he will only go into one of the 
working regiments. among the fighting fellows, as he calls 
them. No mere "Waterloo chances of getting his brains knocked 
out, in the Guards, for him. And yet he has been obliged to 
come home from Eton before the vacation, by order of the 
doctors, for having nearly got himself prematurely killed in a 
mere boxing-match with a boy . two or three times his own 
size, though, I believe." 

The least Sophia's favourite among all the denizens of Plas 
Newydd, her opinions on whom she communicated to me during 
our long talk that night, was the Eeverend Carolus Luxmoor. 
For this gentleman (whom I myself from the first took into 
antipathy) she gave now some reasons of her own dislike. If 
Scarlatt Suett had any really dangerous faults. if he had been 
stimulated in the formation of profligate designs on herself, by 
aught but the natural movement of his age or ardent passions, 
it was by that wicked tutor ! Luxmoor was undeniably, she 
said, a man of very first-rate intellect. His position at his 



A FEMALE ASMODETJS. 81 

university attested his attainments as a scholar. " But he was 
one of the most worthless," Sophia pronounced, with vehemence, 
" of his whole worthless sex ! " His talents would never be of 
the slightest service in advancing him in the world, she said ; 
they were so neutralized by his habits of pleasure and of excess ! 
He was a sworn sensualist, indeed, in every form ; looked upon 
women as mere objects of emotions shared by man with the 
lowest brutes ; and, to crown all . whenever not restrained by 
absolute physical impossibility, as among those sober and remote 
hills . was a drunkard of the most insatiable order ! lie had 
no more religion than a polecat ! in Sophia's own words ; and 
yet had insisted, against the advice of the few sincere friends 
he possessed, on entering the Church. To secure enjoyment of 
the comforts and luxuries of a worldly existence, Sophia be- 
lieved he would willingly pledge his immortal soul, if he had 
one, to the devil; yet he gave out he should infallibly die a 
bishop ! Less, however, he declared, in the excess of his adula- 
tion, through his own deservings than the kind patronage of his 
pupil, the destined Prime Minister ! Meanwhile, as a nearer 
and more tangible preliminary, he had set his hopes on obtain- 
ing the benefice young Ap Howel was as equally bent not to 
receive. And it was possible he might manage this through the 
Suetts. Sir Yivian himself disliked him very much. 

" Still I ought not to be so severe on the old wretch either . 
old in wickedness, at all events ! He has favoured me more 
than once with so much assurance of regard as an offer of 
marriage from a person of his character may amount to ! " said 
Sophia, with a peculiarly despondent sinking in her tones and 
look. " But I don't know how it is . it gives me pleasure to 
tell the honest truth of him at times . it is a kind of relief! 
And yet I cannot say but that Mr. Scarlatt is right in one of his 
fancies ; and that I really do like Luxmoor a great deal more 
than I shall ever admit to himself ! I have noticed the same 
characteristic in you, Miss Pomeroy ! I too have always had 
a great admiration for intellectual power ! A stupid, blind 
idolatry, in fact, it has ever been in me. And now there can be 
no doubt Mr. Luxmoor's shamefully perverted abilities are of 
the very highest order; and, do you know, it is my belief 
Lucifer himself is only an allegory of Intellect devoted to 
Evil ! What am I saying ? Well, of course, those who wor- 
ship the devil get their due ! So I shan't venture on making 
Mr. Luxmoor an object of my particular culte .'" 

She became buried for a moment in a depth of thought that 
surprised me, and induced me to observe: "Why, what has 
Mr. Luxmoor done so much to annoy you, Sophia?" 

" To annoy me ! " she repeated, starting from her reverie. 
" Oh, I don't pretend he has done anything to annoy me ! 
What could Mr. Luxmoor do to annoy me ? except, certainly, 
that he gives out that I have jilted him. that I gave him 
encouragement once. meaning it to be inferred, I suppose, that 

(J 



82 MArLEVEKEli S DIVOKCE. 

I afterwards declined the offer he made me, because I had formed 
more ambitious views on the Hope of Plas Newydd ! " 
She smiled bitterly. 

"And why did you decline him, Sophia, since you seem to 
admire him so much?" I inquired. with a slight. could it 
possibly already be ?. a slight tinge of jealousy in the curiosity 
that prompted me to the question ! 

"Well, for half a score of reasons; but one or two will 
suffice, darling," Sophia answered, with an unusual depth of 
sadness in her tones. "He drinks, for one thing, when he 
dares ; and a fellow like Luxmoor, drunk, is simply a brute 
with ten thousand times the skill for mischief and cruelty 
possessed by the most savage of wild beasts! Then as to 
his prospects, I don't think he is at all the kind of wood they 
make bishops of. And, besides being monstrously extravagant, 
and spending his salary long before he gets it, he is already, I 
have no doubt, head over ears in debt." 

" What makes you think so ?" 

" I knew him abroad ; and he was obliged to live abroad for 
his debts, people said. He may have paid them off since, to be 
sure, as he has ventured home again. But he has contracted 
what your ex-governess might call the douce habitude of running 
into debt . and I don't think hewill often be out of it !. How- 
ever, I interested myself in getting him a situation here, at the 
time old Dr. Stilleoke and Mr. Scarlatt quarrelled, being then 
in a good deal of favour with the whole family. His fellow- 
ship, though of two hundred a-year, I knew, hardly kept him 
from starvation. such an extravagant, reckless creature as he 
is ! So I took compassion on him, and this is all the gratitude he 
has shown me ! To accuse me of jilting him ! As if a woman 
could not possibly do one of these encroaching wretches a good 
turn without intending to make herself his slave for life !" 

" His slave, Sophia ! " 

" His wife, if you like it better, dear child ! It is all the 
same thing, according to the interpretation of English law ! At 
best, whoever marries Luxmoor, I should say, would have to 
keep him. He is just the kind of man to live upon a woman's 
earnings; or take them from her by force even, if it were 
necessary to supply his own heartless luxuriousness !" 

" You don't mean to say, Sophia, Mr. Luxmoor would be 
likely to turn highway robber ?" 

" Oh, no ; husbands, you know, who have industrious or 
clever wives have no occasion to turn highway robbers, to the 
peril of their own precious necks, too, Miss Pomeroy, in England ! 
Or, most likely, you do not know. People who have not had 
bitter experience of the positive laws on the subject, never 
could imagine injustice so monstrous to he legally organized 
and enforced as almost essential to the existence of a civilized 
community," replied Sophia, with a laugh by no means mirthful. 
" But even yourself Miss Pomeroy, if you were to marry without 



A ifjaiALi; ASMODJjLTS. 83 

taking precautions to secure your property to yourself, by a 
cumbrous piece of humbug machinery, the sole object of which 
is to preserve the darling notion of Englishmen, that English- 
women (it is not the case among any other but savage or Asiatic 
nations, you know) are incapable of acting as rational beings 
on their own account . I tell you . and pray, darling, remember 
what I say . it would be in the power of any worthless scamp 
you might marry to make a beggar even of the heiress of Maule- 
verer, and then to live on your toil and suffering all the rest of 
your life, if he chose ! And that kind of man ahvays chooses." 

" 0, Sophia, you must be jesting now !" 

" Not at all, If I have known one case, I have known a 
hundred, and heard of ten thousand ! You seem astonished ; 
but that is because you do not know that we women are merely 
animals, distinguished from the majority of four-footed ones by 
the circumstance that we have rather finer and more powerfully 
developed instincts ; and that in form we bear a nearer resem- 
blance than our compeers in general to the lords of the creation. 
"Why, we even go upright ; the female of the ape does not ! 
That is our principal distinction. . Now Luxmoor probably 
fancies he discerns some talents in me that might constitute me 
a valuable property ; and that I believe to be his main reason 
for desiring to marry me, and of his disappointment in finding 
I wont marry him." 

" What a wretch !" I could not help exclaiming. 

" No," said Sophia, in the peculiar tone of jesting sadness not 
unusual with her. " What a man ! that is all one need say. 
But do you still think now, my dear, that my refusal of Mr. 
Luxmoor can only be accounted for on the principle that I have 
a design on somebody else ? No ! let him find out a person all 
goodness and devotion, who will thankfully sacrifice existence 
to his pleasure and service, and not be thanked for it in the end. 
That is not quite my sort, I own ; and I told Mr. Luxmoor so 
in substance,. more politely, of course, iu form. Perhaps I am 
a little selfish myself; and cheese to cheese, as Mrs. Ruddles 
would say, is no kitchen ! But indeed, I don't want to marry 
at all, or ever, my dear, sweet pupil ! If I could only be sure 
of an asylum with you for the whole of my life, first as an aid 
in the development of your fine mind and brilliant talents, and 
then as a tender and devoted friend and servant for the rest of 
my days !" 

I kissed Sophia, with a full revival of all the warmth and 
unsuspecting enthusiasm of my early affection for her. This 
explanation . why was it ?. seemed to restore my whole heart 
and confidence to her. " But at the rate you talk, dear Sophia," 
I said, " I do not think I shall ever marry either! It would 
be dreadful to suspect a man of being one of the shabbiest of 
robbers, so as to see a necessity of binding him over not to 
deprive one of one's own property. by any shirking means in 
one's power. and yet go to the altar, and promise a life's love, 

62 



84 mauleverer's divorce. 

obedience, and honour to him ! Why can't they let women's 
property be their property until they choose expressly to part 
with it, like men's, I wonder ?" 

I spoke in my ignorance. Sophia enlightened me. 

" Men make the laws, and, of course, they make them as best 
suits their own selfishness and arrogance !" was her most true 
rejoinder. " But you are tired, dear young love ; and all this 
cannot concern you for years to come. Let me see . how old are 
you ? . not sixteen yet, is it? . I thought not. Well, after all, I 
cannot help pitying most you poor, poor heiresses ! You can never 
know the only true happiness of existence. that of being assured 
that one is truly and sincerely loved, and for one's self alone !" 



CHAPTEE IX. 

AN INFLUENTIAL INTRODUCTION. 

Never did I rest more soundly and sweetly than on that night, 
folded in what I fondly believed were Sophia Sutcliffe's kind 
and sisterly arms. Splendid dreams haunted my repose, and 
Scarlatt Suett, in some strange manner, figured through them 
all, in an infinite variety of heroic and imposing characters, 
and in robes as gorgeous and changeable as the hues of the 
autumn woods I had that day traversed, under the crimson 
and gold of sunset. 

When I woke from my long slumber of fatigue, a bright, full 
sun illuminated the large windows, and filled the apartment 
with a cheerful splendour to which I was little accustomed 
at Mauleverer Castle. Looking through the brilliant trans- 
parency, the Plas Newydd landscape glimmered and glowed 
before 'me in the morning beams, like those the artistic Italian 
binders amused themselves in painting on the gilded edges of 
their books. 

Sophia had been long_ risen, but was still busied in writing 
when I completed my toilette and joined her at her table. 

I found she had already prepared a letter to my father, 
though on the previous night she seemingly decided I should 
pen my own excuses. 

I was now myself in a humour to acknowledge that what I 
had done required some. Sophia's ridicule, and my own short 
experience, had almost equally convinced me of the folly and 
impracticability of my pastoral schemes. They could only in 
reality have entered the fancy of a dreamy and ill-used girl, 
excited by the peculiar temperament and irritability of my age, 
to an irrational outbreak. 

But Sophia represented to me that signs of panic and too 



AN INFLUENTIAL INTRODUCTION. 85 

eager submission on my part would not answer the objects we 
had in view. "We must not preface our conditioning by an 
abject relinquishment of the advantages of the position my 
venture had secured. All its evils were incurred. Doubtless 
Madame Le Crampon was bellowing for me in every direction. 
"VVe must try and silence her. But at worst, if I made myself 
friends at Plas Newydd, my hated governess would not find it 
easy to retrieve possession of me by force. Meanwhile, it was 
above all things necessary that Sophia herself should conciliate 
my father's favour. 

Consequently, in the letter she had written to Lord Hau- 
leverer, I found she assumed . and with some reason . the 
whole credit of making the discovery of my place of refuge 
known to him. But from the style of the communication, you 
would have thought she had become possessed of the know- 
ledge, against my will, through her former acquaintance with 
my person at Mauleverer, enabling her to recognise me in the 
disguise of a country girl, in which I arrived at Plas Newydd. 
How the truth can be made to lie ! After this chance discovery, 
it appeared I had extorted from her promises of secrecy until 
certain childish conditions were granted, without which I 
announced a determination not to return to Mauleverer. But 
Sophia declared she knew too well the greatness of the interests 
involved in the fortunes of Lord Mauleverer's only child and 
heiress, to lose a moment in informing him of my safety ; while 
at the same time, aware of his deep and well-founded aversion to 
the family in whose residence I had taken refuge, she had only 
promised to observe this secrecy, she confessed, in a very 
Jesuitical sense, from them ; and yet, if possible, she should 
persevere in the concealment until his lordship's pleasure was 
known, and should, for that purpose, take the liberty of repre- 
senting me at Plas Newydd as a younger sister of her own. 

She vindicated herself, and still very truly, from having any 
share whatever in my elopement from my French governess. 
But she took occasion, as I thought, to insinuate the fact of my 
attachment to herself being the probable motive, by modestly 
stating that the "childish conditions" I stood out for were 
principally the dismissal of Madame Le Crampon, and her own 
installation in the place of the rejected instructress. 

She gave, in my heated opinion, a very undertoned recital of 
my complaints against that detested Frenchwoman; but a 
very strenuous one of my determination never again to submit 
to her rule. She even hinted pretty plainly that an attempt to 
force me back under it might be the occasion of some extra- 
ordinary and terrible catastrophe. I was silly enough to 
imagine that Sophia hinted an idea of suicide, and to take an 
absurd pride in the notion of being thought capable of such an 
act of resolute desperation. 

More was added, which Sophia explained to be necessary to 
conciliate the pride and despotism of my father's temper, and 



SO MAULEVEKEIt'S DIVORCE. 

prevent him from being too much, exasperated at my selecting 
Plas Xewydd as a place of refuge. I still considered it was 
intended to impress upon him that she played an important 
part in my redemption, and to point out to him better than 
any formal petition or demand, the advisableness of securing 
her services in the prevention of any future escapade on my 
part. To betray me gave her claims on my father's confidence. 
At worst these statements were only extensions of the truth, 
Sophia said. She had always excellent phrases for her doings. 

In conclusion, she informed Lord Mauleverer, with expres- 
sions of what I could not but consider a very slavish and 
degrading humility. but she told me, laughingly, that in spite 
of Mirabeau, words were but words, and that to win men we 
must be what they would have us to be . that she was prepared 
to render the most exact obedience to whatever his lordship 
should command. But a mysterious and emphatic hint . which 
she explained to allude to her own uncomfortable position in 
the Plas Xewydd family . followed, that the sooner arrange- 
ments for my removal thence were made, the better it would 
be for all parties concerned. _ And she added that, desirous to 
be in readiness to execute his lordship's instructions, she had 
given notice of her intention to leave her present situation. 
Flattering my father's vindictive feelings at the same time, by 
declaring that she found little regret in leaving that underbred 
and parvenu family, but the considerable pecuniary remunera- 
tion they afforded her. 

How strange ! I remember that, although the general tone 
of the letter, its indirectness, not to say falsification, in points, 
did not please me much, I chiefly objected to what I con- 
sidered the needless fling at the Suetts. But Sophia assured 
me so earnestly it would have the best effect with my father in 
her favour that I could not persist in desiring her to expunge 
the phrase. 

It was determined, finally, that the letter should go as 
originally written. I had luckily often observed my French 
governess's style of directing to my father at Nice, though, 
when I wrote to him myself, my letters were always enclosed, 
open, in hers. The only difficulty that remained was to find 
some means of conveying this epistle to the nearest post. It 
was six miles distant. We decided it would never do to put 
it in the common letter-bag of the house, with which a servant 
rode over daily, because Mrs. Suett always locked that herself, 
after examining, with minute curiosity, all the correspondence 
in it. The direction to Lord Mauleverer would excite her 
curiosity, and she would form her conclusions at once. 

For Sophia herself to go, or to employ a messenger, was 
equally difficult, without exciting suspicion. And to preserve 
my incognito had now become an object of greater solicitude 
than ever with myself. The possibility of a discovery con- 
stituting me a subject of interested attentions in the Suett 



AH iiSTFUJENTlAI, INTRODUCTION. 87 

family, was inexpressibly painful to me. There was no re- 
source, it was thought, finally, except to make application to 
young' Ap Howel, who, Sophia recollected, often rode out alone 
on his pony. It would be necessary to confide the truth to him, 
but when trusted, it now appeared, he could be implicitly 
depended on. And thus this matter was decided. 

Our next consideration was what to do with Madame Le 
Crampon, so as to prevent her clamours from arriving at Plas 
Kewydd. Sophia had a plan to meet this difficulty also 
matured. She had some difficulty, however, to persuade me 
into it. Nothing but an extreme dislike of that woman, and 
desire for a longer stay where I was, at last induced me to 
yield consent to what my new counsellor advised. 

"We were to attempt to throw her on a false scent. I was to 
write a letter, informing my ex-governess that I was under the 
protection of friends who had engaged to take me to my 
mother's care from her cruel misgovernment, and that I was 
already on the way to London. And this letter was to be 
posted by a relation of her own, who, Sophia said, bitterly, 
would not hesitate to do her a trifling service, in Bristol. It 
was true in effect, she argued, though not literally. And though 
I had a natural and almost constitutional abhorrence of all the 
forms of falsehood, I was finally persuaded into the course she 
recommended. 

Sophia left me with the letter . that to the Frenchwoman 
enclosed in one to a Bristol tradesman . to find out suitable 
messengers. I remained in our apartment, awaiting her 
return. 

As I have said, it commanded a fine view of the Mynydd 
Howel, and of the extensive range of valleys beyond. I was 
dressed, and had nothing else to do, so I threw the window 
open, and stood at it for a few moments listening to the songs 
of the birds in the shrubberies of the lawn below. On a sudden, 
however, I became aware of the presence of some human 
apparition on the scene. I glanced down, and immediately 
discerned Scarlatt Suett. 

He had a nosegay in his hand of very fine hothouse flowers, 
apparently just cut ; he was tying them together with a piece 
of sash grass. I thought he would not notice me, and a peculiar 
kind of fascination kept me observing him. He was certainly 
very handsome ! His step was stately, and yet very elastic. 
One of the proudest forms of manly beauty and strength it could 
have been possible for the eye to light on, I involuntarily pro- 
nounced him. All, perhaps, but that too-confident and self- 
satisfied smil e . Yet if he was all that was represented, what wonder 
that a young man of so dominant a genius looked as if he thought 
himself the lord of the ascendant wherever he appeared ? 

I had just formed this conclusion in my girlish mind when 
Scarlatt stopped abruptly under the window, looked up, and 
with a light laugh of joy and triumph, kissed the flowers and 
threw them dexterously over the sill to my feet. 



88 MAUIEVEEEK S DIVOSOE. 

I retreated from the window, infinitely confused and vexed. 
But after a few moments' reflection, I grew so provoked at the 
recollection of the Grand Turk manner this act of homage. 
which I did not doubt was intended for myself. had been 
performed in, that I determined to express my sense on the 
subject by throwing the flowers back to the donor. 

With this purpose I crouched along below the wainscot and 
raised the bouquet. But pausing to aim the more effectually, 
I suddenly perceived that Sophia had joined the object of my 
retaliation in the walk below. Nay, they had linked arms, and 
were walking rapidly away towards one of the covered alleys 
on the terraces below, as it' for the purpose of enjoying a more 
private conversation. 

A strange pang shot through my heart ; and a strangely pain- 
ful conviction flashed upon me, that this nosegay was intended 
not for me but for Sophia . that it was a customary morning 
tribute of Scarlatt Suett's admiration to her. All the line 
compliments and professions he had addressed to me the night 
before were mere persiflage, played off upon a child. Perhaps 
they were both, at that very moment, contriving how they 
might use me as a means to prolong Sophia's stay at Plas 
Newydd. 

I watched till they disappeared in the covered walk. Scarlatt 
never once looked back. 

Every moment Sophia delayedin that removed and secret 
confabulation increased my disdainful conviction that she had 
deceived me in pretending there was no foundation but Scarlatt 
Suett's passing caprice, for his mother's suspicions. 

I confess. mere girl as I still was, and until that hour almost 
indifferent to any personal advantages I possessed . all the 
emulation and pettishness of a spoiled beauty, rivalled in her 
most desirable sphere of conquest, came upon me. Miss Sut- 
cliffe was indeed very welcome to her plebeian lover. It was 
plain all she had told me of his haughty character and aspira- 
tions was part of her system of delusion. It was plain she 
sought only the advantage of remaining in the neighbourhood 
of Plas Newydd, in all her pretended affection and devotion to 
me. But was I to allow myself to be become the dupe of these 
artifices, or should I let her understand that I was not to be so 
easily fooled ? that it was possible for me to inspire interest, 
deprived of all the advantages she seemed to think were my 
sole claims on the notice of the opposite sex ? That even this 
Scarlatt Suett of hers . who presumed to treat me as a silly 
child. should be taught to understand that I was at least too 
much a woman to be made the plaything of his designs to pique 
another, to excite the jealousy of Sophia Sutcliffe ! Who was 
this Sophia Sutcliffe ? What was she, to presume thus to make 
me the instrument of her purposes ? a poor governess, the 
orphan of a poverty-stricken curate ! With the exception of a 
few frivolous accomplishments, which my bookish turn taught 



AN INFLUENTIAL INTRODUCTION. 89 

5ue to despise, what else was she, to compete with the heiress of 
Mauleverer, the daughter of a celebrated beauty, who was said 
to inherit all her mother's charms. 

After so many elaborate contrivances, seemingly to preserve 
my secret, how could I dream that at this very moment Sophia 
was confiding to the flushed and gasping aspirant of Plas 
Newydd my name and rank, and the advantages chance and 
her artifices confirmed in his favour, if he dared venture for 
the prize ? How could I form the mere notion that this beloved 
and trusted friend was completing as regular a bargain and 
sale for me as ever grazier and butcher arranged for any uncon- 
scious animal of the species I had been so desirous to super- 
intend? 

I was in the midst of my irritated cogitations when Sophia 
re-entered. She did not, however, as I instinctively expected, 
look flushed and joyous from her stolen love interview. On the 
contrary, she was pale, and her eye fell upon me as she arrived 
with an anxious and probing expression. 

" Have you thought me long r" she said ; "I have been delayed 
with young Ap Howel. I am almost sorry now I took him 
into confidence ; he seemed so panic-stricken and amazed when 
I told him plainly who you are. And yet the foolish boy 
said he guessed all from the moment when he knew you had 
seen the Spirit of the Fall. Trumpery nonsense ! He heard 
me drop your name in my first agitation . that is the truth. 
However, as soon as he could speak, he declared his willingness 
to go on the errand, only he don't know what to do withGelert ; 
the dog has been howling all night, and will not be pacified." 

" Oh, come now, Sophia," I said, pettishly enough, " you 
have not been all this time with that boy ! I saw you from 
the window taking your usual morning walk, I suppose, with 
young Mr. Suett." 

Sophia's complexion flushed up instantly, and she looked 
veritably guilty, as I thought, of all imputed to her in my 
mind at the moment. And guilty, alas ! she was, hut in guilt 
of a far other hue and dye than I surmised. 

" Yes," she said, rallying after a slight pause, " I was re- 
questing Mr. Scarlatt to intercede with his mother to obtain 
you the nursery governess's place, the better to throw dust in 
all their eyes. And I must say I found him wonderfully ready. 
I would not for the world the people here found out who you are. 
Should he catch the least inkling, this ambitious young parvenu 
would turn heaven and earth topsy-turvy to obtain such a prize 
and starting-point for a still higher elevation as an alliance 
with the heiress of Mauleverer would present." 

"You think, then, it is quite impossible, Sophia, that any 
one should take notice of me on my own personal account 5" 
I said, excessively piqued. 

"Nay, for every one must," she replied, readily. "But I 
would not have you insulted, as I have been, by Mr. Scarlatt's 



90 MAUIEVEKEIl's DIVORCE. 

notice, so long as he thinks you are but what I have represented 
you." 

"And yet you seem to like solitary promenades with him. 
And here is a fine bunch of flowers which, I suppose, you are 
in the habit of receiving: from him every morning." 

"No, indeed!" said Sophia, receiving the bouquet from me, 
and surveying it with a genuine expression of mortification. 
"Why, these are of the finest flowers in the conservatory. A 
camellia japonica in the middle. He must be mad! What will 
Mrs. Suett say, when she misses them ? But she forgives that 
magnificent son of hers everything." 

At this moment I heard the howl of a dog. of my Gelert. 

"Ah, I forgot to mention . Sir Vivian said he should be 
obliged to fasten Gelert up in tbe stables. Gelert will not go 
with him . ho will not leave Plas Newydd, where he seems 
convinced you still remain." 

I proposed that we should go immediately, and reassure my 
faithful companion of my welfare. Sophia complied ; and I 
was in the midst of an ecstasy of reunion with my four-footed 
friend, when young Ap Howel came into the yard, leading 
his little shaggy mountain pony by the mane, ready saddled 
and bridled. 

There was something strangely sad and solemn in the boy's 
manner. He looked very ill, too, and almost tottered in his 
gait ; but he held out his hand to me, and said, with all the 
earnestness in the world, "But you do not owe me a grudge 
for our barbarous ancestors' feuds, do you, dear Miss Pomeroy ? ' ' 

"No, dear Sir Vivian, indeed, if you will promise not to 
imitate yours when he betrayed mine ! " I replied, laughing at 
the singular notion. 

His whole visage lighted up. " My hope, on the contrary, is 
to do you all the service in my power," he replied. " But take 
care that you do not betray yourself, or you will be disgusted 
with human nature for years to come, when you see what a 
difference the Suetts would make between Helena Sutcliffe and 
the Honourable Miss Pomeroy." 

We saw him mount and ride off, kissing his hand repeatedly 
in the distance, Sophia's missive safely ensconced in his breast- 
pocket. We were then turning to go in the house again, when 
suddenly we perceived a stranger hurrying out of it, with a 
bundle of papers in his hand. It was a tall, burly man, with a 
very carking, eager, and yet dissatisfied countenance, bald on 
the head, but with immense whiskers. He was dressed in a 
very plain and even slovenly manner, in an old suit of brown 
cloth, corduroy breeches, and top-boots. 

" Robert, where' s the carriage?" this personage cried, at the 
pitch of a morose and imperious voice. " Stand out of my way, 
women ! What are you doing in the stables, Miss Sutcliffe ? " 
he continued, in a peculiarly rude, scornful tone. " Have you 
seen those cursed fellows with my horses r" 



AN INFLUENTIAL INTRODUCTION. 91 

" Here, sir," returned a voice ; and a carriage dashed so 
tunmltuously out of a neighbouring shed into the yard, that 
Sophia and I had to jump nimbly " out of the way," indeed, to 
avoid being trampled on. The stranger, however, did not wait 
until the vehicle steadied. He himself tore a door open, leaped 
in, and, without waiting any reply to his question from Sophia, 
yelled, " Leadworks ! " took out a pocket-book, and began a 
reckoning in it in pencil, as the carriage dashed out of the yard 
at the same headlong speed as it had entered it. 

" That is Mr. Suett, senior . worth a quarter of a million of 
money ; but he has no time, you see, to enjoy it," said Sophia. 
" I wonder," she added, with her sarcastic smile, " whether he 
would have been so brusque and short with a peer's daughter, 
as he has been with the two Miss Sutcliffes, dear Helena ? 
Well, now we have only to see Mrs. Suett, and my Bronwen, 
and the fat little gravestone-cherub twins, and Ave have seen 
the whole family." 

We returned into the house and breakfasted with little 
Bronwen, in an apartment which was called a nursery, but 
ought more properly to have been styled a "forcing-bed." 
Here the poor child was kept almost constantly confined, 
engaged in a routine of studies far beyond her age and capacity. 

She was a very pretty child nevertheless. Her face was per- 
fectly round ; but her features were small and delicate, and as 
if modelled in was, in the transparent fairness of the com- 
plexion. Her hair, almost white, shone with a silvery gloss in 
the curls ; and it was curled all over, evidently not naturally. 
Her eye had the blue, clear shine . of a doll's, it cannot be 
denied. 

She seemed softly pleased to see her governess . smiled affably 
when I was presented, but received my advances with a degree 
of dignified reserve. "Who is this young person?" I heard 
her graciously inquire of Sophia. 

After breakfast my interview was to take place with Mrs. 
Suett. Miss Sutcliffe usually waited on her at that time, to 
receive her instructions concerning her daughter for the day. 
And, accordingly, all three of us proceeded to the chamber of 
audience, which, I was surprised to find, was the principal 
drawing-room of the house. 

We passed through several suites of richly-furnished apart- 
ments. Everything was so modern, so gilt, so splendid, that 
I confess I was quite dazzled and delighted with the change, 
from the antique and dusty stateliness of Mauleverer Castle. 

Accustomed to a simple toilette in the morning, I was the 
more impressed to find Mrs. Suett dressed in a superb crimson 
velvet, with a fine opera toque on her head, sitting in pomp, 
like some crowned empress, in an apartment that was one blaze 
of decoration and gorgeous furniture. 

Sophia looked at all this splendour with some expression of 
dissatisfaction, I thought. even of contempt. But we arrived 



92 irAULEVEEEK S DIVOECE. 

in the presence, and Mrs. Suett arose, as if involuntarily, to 
receive us, with a degree of fussiness and agitation in her 
manner . looking 1 back on which explains much ! .but at the 
time I suspected nothing. 

Mrs. Suett was very short and stout. not to say corpulent. 
But her face had considerable pretensions to beauty, in the 
style of her eldest son's. The features were excellent. more 
aquiline than his in the east. The eyes, of a lively hazel brown, 
full of waggery and keen sense, gave an active and vivacious 
expression to the whole countenance. 

Everything befell in this interview, no doubt, on an arranged 
plan. Mrs. Suett speedily recovered from her first nervous 
trepidation, and though her naturally fresh, peachy complexion 
continued as Hushed as a peony, she played her part out admi- 
rably. 

Sophia begged leave, in a very deferential manner, to intro- 
duce to her her sister Helena ; stating, at the same time, with 
what object she had taken the liberty to bring me to Plas 
Newydd, from a school where I had acquired, she humbly 
thought, all that was necessary to fit me for the post of 
governess to so very young a lady as Miss Suett undoubtedly 
was ! 

We awaited the reply for several moments after Sophia had 
finished her harangue. I own I had some wish to find favour 
in the sight of the mother of Scarlatt Suett. 

"Why, my good Miss Sutcliffe," was the response at last, in 
evident embarrassment, " you are aware I have an objection to 
very pretty young girls in my establishment ; and you make 
me an offer of the most beautiful young creature I have ever 
set my eyes on in all my days ! " 

" But she is a mere child, Mrs. Suett; only just fifteen," 
pleaded my kind sister. 

" She looks seventeen ; and a fine-grown young woman of 
the age too. Scarlatt is too naughty a boy to be trusted near 
so charming a creature as this : even without beauty, if people 
give themselves enticing airs enough, the foolish lad loses his 
head. No ; to tell you the truth, Miss Sutcliffe," she continued, 
with a rudeness a little in excess of her part, " I think I have 
about had enough of the family. And I must say I take it as 
rather an extraordinary liberty, after your own tricks upon 
travellers, you know, for you to bring your sister to Plas 
Newydd, with any such view, without asking my consent in 
the first place." 

" Why,_ my dear mamma, what are you talking about ? " 
said a voice at this moment, of one entering the apartment ; 
and Scarlatt appeared, with a countenance all alight with 
feverish excitement. " Good heavens ! can you not believe yet 
what Miss Sutcliffe and myself have assured you, almost upon 
oath ? Well, I think you may trust in my sincerity now, when 
I really beg of you to lose no time in allowing Miss Sutcliffe to 



G1AM0TTRIE. 93 

go, and retain this perfect stranger, if you please, in her place. 
Surely you cannot be afraid of one so young that she may well 
he a playmate, as well as instructress, for little Bronwen, 
which is the very thing you want ; is it not? " 

What a fool I must have been ! This open preference of 
myself, this discarding of Sophia on the part of the well- 
tutored giver of the apple, sent a thrill of joy and triumph 
through my whole frame. But perhaps the dark writhing of 
scorn and mortified feeling that crimpled Sophia's visage, as 
the words were uttered, was not altogether feigned ! Mrs. Suett's 
satisfaction in what she heard certainly was not. 

" Well, after all, Scarlatt, such a clever fellow as you are, I 
thought you were not to be coaxed into a trap with a smell of 
toasted cheese-rind. But I had my warning from good autho- 
rity, too. Well, any way, one nail drives out another. The 
giri's a million times better-looking than you, Miss SutclifFe. 
And one would wonder, so different as you are in complexion 
and all, how you came to be sisters. So let us see what Miss 
Helena can do in the governess line ; and we'll make up our 
minds whether she goes or stays. If she suits, I shall be most 
'appy (Mrs. Suett had a very cockney pronunciation) to let you 
go at once. Come, Scarlatt, you know more about these illy- 
qisms and ollygisms than I do ; so put the young lass through 
her paces, and let us see if she knows enough, and not too much, 
to be a proper governess for your little sister ! " 

It may be imagined if with such an examiner I was con- 
sidered competent for the post I offered myself to fill. 



CHAPTER X 

GLAMOtTEIE ! 

My father arrived, with all possible speed, from Mce, to claim 
me ; but too late to prevent the success of the plans organized 
against me. 

He did not hesitate, at a subsequent period, to qualify the 
circumstances of my residence at Plas Newydd, as a deliberate 
and elaborate conspiracy of all the parties concerned. 

Was it so ? . I can at least relate the external history. 

I remained nearly five weeks at Plas Newydd. Fifteen years 
ago, a fortnight only could have been calculated on between 
Glamorgan and Nice, going and coming. But chance was in 
the league with my ensnarers. My father happened to have 
gone on an excursion, in a friend's yacht, to the coast of Africa, 
leaving my mother at Mce. And such was the want of confi- 
dence between that long-wedded pair. such the awe in which 



91 MAULEVEUEK S DIVOECE. 

my mother held her husband . that although she perceived our 
county postmark on the letter, she dared not open it in his 
absence. It awaited his return ; and when my father, almost 
frantic with rage_ and apprehension, set off to reclaim his lost 
child, events of incalculable importance in my fate had oc- 
curred. 

It was, indeed, a passion of a sudden and rapid growth ; 
verily of the kind unhappy and too well-experienced Byron 
sang : . 

Alas ! our young affections run to waste, 

Or water but the desert; whence arise 
But weeds of dark luxuriance, tares of haste, 

Rank at the core, though tempting to the eyes, 

Flowers whose wild odours breathe but agonies, 
And trees whose gums are poison : such the plants 

Which spring beneath her steps as Passion flies 
O'er the world's wilderness, and vainly pants 
For some celestial fruit, forbidden to oar wants. 

But surely there was an evil magic in it too, akin to those 
spells of the Oriental magicians, who were said to cast the seed, 
and then, with a few muttered words, the plant shot up into 
life, and leaf, and gorgeous flower at once ! 

I believed that the declaration of honourable love . the im- 
passioned assurances of a lifelong devotion . the vehement 
proffer of marriage I received from Scarlatt Suett . were, in 
reality, made by him in utter ignorance that I was anything 
but the fortuneless and lowly-born governess of his little sister. 

I had not the slightest suspicion but that my incognito was 
perfectly well preserved. I remained at Plas Newydd quite 
unmolested. I have now little doubt that Madame Le 
Crampon was induced by other motives than the credulity 
she feigned, to follow in the false scent indicated in my letter. 
She went to Bristol, where she wasted a great deal of time 
"invoking the magistracy," and searching for me under the 
supposition that I remained concealed in that city. Thence 
she proceeded to London, apparently in a state little short of 
distraction, and communicated the fact of my evasion to my 
grandmother. Old Lady Mauleverer herself came down at once 
to Glamorgan to prosecute a search for me, while Madame Le 
Crampon proceeded to the Continent to carry the news per- 
sonally to Nice. But the idea of my taking refuge among the 
Suetts never crossed the haughty old baroness's imagination. 
And the extreme isolationof the mountain districts I had fied 
to, the ignorance of its inhabitants, the precautions of the 
Suetts, and the unlikely disguise I had assumed, effectually 
protected me from so ill-directed a scrutiny. 

Meanwhile, all the subtlety of the most artful . all the energy 
of a most determined will. were at work to bring about the 
result I have indicated. The object was, of course, to entangle 
my affections irretrievably before my father's authority could 
be interposed, by persuading me that Scarlatt Suett entertained 



GLAMOUEIE. 95 

for me a sincere, honourable, and, above all, entirely disin- 
terested passion. Sophia had penetrated the inmost secret of 
my character, and knew that an intense thirst for love and 
sympathy, mingled with a profound jealously of all their 
simulated forms, were the animating principles of my being. _ 

"Whether it is to be styled a conspiracy or not, certain it is 
the whole Suett family joined heart and soul in promoting 
Scarlatt's objects, and none more devotedly than the supposed 
ultra-democrat, the father of the race. 

How changed was the whole manner of the gruff and churlish 
millionaire of Plas Newydd, when I next saw him ! He con- 
templated me with a suddenly awakened intensity of curiosity 
and wonder, as if I had actually been some marvellous creature 
of another species . some fairy princess, strayed out of my 
enchanted realm into his. 

The elder Suett affected a plain, rugged honesty in all his 
doings. He at once, and openly, announced that he had taken 
a great fancy for his daughter's new young governess, and pro- 
ceeded to load me with marks of favour and attention. Above 
all, he kept continually reiterating the praises of his wonderful 
eldest son in my hearing. He made no secret of the large 
fortune he intended to bestow upon him, to enable him to 
pursue the splendid career he had chalked out for himself. He 
talked of resigning his seat in Parliament to Scarlatt, on the 
first opportunity ; and there is, in fact, no doubt, that to secure 
so aristocratic an alliance in his family, the elder Suett, almost 
a republican to his democratic constituents, would have thought 
hardly any sacrifice too great. 

But, in general . to my charmed eyes . never before had so 
united and universally amiable a family existed ! I knew the 
secret of this long afterwards ! . Accustomed to, at best, the 
sullen tranquillity of Mauleverer Castle, the life we led at Plas 
Newydd appeared to me the gayest and cheerfullest imaginable. 
The associations of vulgarity and plebeian assumption I could 
not help at first uniting with all the elder Suett said and did, 
speedily changed in my mind. He became quite a different 
personage to me when I had once seen him, presiding like some 
master-Titan over the mighty machinery and numerous work- 
men that served his behests. He was in his element in the 
midst of the prodigious industrial development he had himself 
organized at the foot of the Mynydd Howel. I was taken there 
by Mrs. Suett, under show of accompanying my little pupil, 
Bronwen, on a holiday visit to the mines. Scarlatt happened 
to be there, and offered himself as our cicerone. But on this 
occasion he was abruptly superseded by his father, who, hurried 
as he perpetually was with business, spared the time necessary 
to exhibit to us the principal wonders of the spectacle. And 
perhaps some portion of my satisfaction was due to the extreme 
vexation and discomfiture visible on Scarlatt's handsome visage 
when he found himself condemned to lug his mother and 



96 MATTLEVERER S DIVORCE. 

Bronwen about, while the elder Suett kept fast hold of my 
hand ! But I listened with unfeigned admiration to the great 
adventurer's account of the colossal labours of his undertaking 
before success crowned it ; and my respect for him rose with 
every new sign of his active and nature-vanquishing genius ! 

I could scarcely imagine how young Ap Howel could hold 
himself wronged by the appropriation of his ancestral moun- 
tains, when I heard the account . almost epic in its alternations 
of disasters and triumphs . Mr. Suett gave me of the formation 
and progress of the great company working the Ap Howel 
mines, of which he was the acknowledged principal. It was a 
romance of the earth. of the giants' war with the gods, in 
which they used the elements as their arms ! The story had to 
me all the attraction of the most marvellous tale of high em- 
prise, and was the more fascinating from its extreme novelty. 
The vasty caverns into which the base of the Howel Mynydd 
was honeycombed ; the immense blazing furnaces ; the streams 
of molten metal ; the cindery plains strewed with its prepared 
masses ; the half-naked gnomes, and salamanders in human 
form, at work in the midst of the flames and smoke ; the pro- 
digious machinery, obedient to the touch of a little finger, yet 
performing the mightiest tasks with ceaseless and unwearying 
diligence ; even, I must confess, the boastful and probably 
exaggerated account Mr. Suett favoured me with of the golden 
results of all this ingenuity and perseverance, . everything I 
saw and heard amused and enthralled my attention, and finally 
raised my admiration to a very high degree for the wonderful 
contriver and master-spirit of the scene. 

I began to suspect that I had been reared in a bygone world, 
and amidst exploded ideas and musty prejudices which it 
behoved me to rid myself of as speedily as possible. 

Mr. Suett, I ought not to have styled the master of Plas 
Newydd. He delighted in calling himself, with republican 
simplicity, John Thomas Suett, only ! And now the frequent 
rudeness of John Thomas's assaults and sarcasms on the dis- 
tinctions of birth and aristocratic position convinced me that 
no suspicion was entertained of mine. While it constantly 
diminished the value of those accidents, in my eyes, to find 
them contemned by a person of so much general sagacity, and 
intelligence in the true wants of mankind. What was my five 
hundred years' genealogy worth in the presence of a man who 
protested he would not give a bad sixpence to be first cousin to 
the House of Hapsburg ? 

John Thomas in reality possessed an infinite fund of levelling 
sneers and arguments, which he knew well how to season with 
a good, biting, demagogic wit of his own. I think it must be 
called wit. There was certainly more of the edge of the axe 
in it than of the razor ; perhaps of the guillotine, only that, 
after all, there was a good deal of rusty old English iron in the 
metal ! 



GIAMOURIP;. 97 

He could be humorous at seasons. I remember, lie particu- 
larly delighted iu railing at the gloom of old residences . of 
castles in particular. in contrast with his own light-inundated, 
modern abode. I lent ear to this. it agreed very well with my 
experiences. Everything was new, glistening, splendid, at 
Has Newydd. Everything old, dull, worn out, at Mauleverer. 
And John Thomas avouched that all old castles were haunted 
by musty and comfortless ghosts, who enjoyed no peace them- 
selves, and would suffer no one else ! Every kind of crime had 
been committed in them : the very shadows of the walls gave 
people miserable dreams ! You dined above vaults filled with 
skeletons of folks that had been starved to death ! He himself, 
he declared, had not been able to build his place far enough 
from the influence of the old ruin on the top of the hill ! He 
had gone half-way down it on purpose ; but a horrid, screeching 
ghost followed him on the torrent, and brought bad luck to all 
who heard her making her Welsh yelp ! 

But to resume the facts of my enthralment. Mrs. Suett lent 
a very powerful agency in it ; but I do not pretend to blame 
her greatly for the part she took in the affair. She had at all 
events kindlier motives than the mere mania for rank and aris- 
tocratic connection animating the rest of the family. It was 
intense enough in her, to be sure ; but she was besides a doting 
mother, who imagined that her son's happiness and exaltation 
were to be secured by the means she took, without dreaming, 
in her partiality, that mine could be endangered by the success 
of the project. On the contrary, no doubt, she thought she was 
assisting to make me the enviable wife of one of the handsomest 
and cleverest young men in England. 

She was herself a very able woman, though her education by 
no means equalled her natural talents. Her aspirations to 
aristocratic elevation were not unfrequently Aaspirations, and 
her pretensions to learning and literary acquirement were 
ludicrous enough. She had not patience at her command to do 
more to remedy the defects of early training, than what, in fact, 
rendered them more glaring. Still her extreme kindness and 
indulgence to me, her genuine admiration, her flow of natural 
humour and pleasantry, allied though it certainly was to too 
much freedom, and even vulgarity in expression, recommended 
her to me at a time when all that was original and diverting 
had irresistible charms for me. I really liked Mrs. Suett very 
much once. Enough still to forgive her the injustice I know 
she perseveres to this hour in . imputing to me all the disastrous 
consequences of my union with her son. 

I was installed, as I have stated, in this novel and agreeable 
household, as nursery governess to the little Bronwen. No 
time was to be lost. The Suetts were well aware . or, if they 
were not, Sophia, of course, took care to enlighten them on the 
subject . that Lord Mauleverer's character rendered the possi- 
bility of a willing consent on his part, to the project formed, 

H 



98 itauleveree's divorce. 

entirely out of the question. And they were thus further piqued 
in their efforts to secure the prize by resentment. 

Sophia's crafty genius directed all. Even the hard and 
opinionative John Thomas allowed himself to be guided by her 
in this intrigue. I recall, even now, the effect upon him of 
some peculiar glances she gave him on several occasions, when 
she probably considered his democratic raillery was going too 
far. Once, especially, when he began directly jeering at 
Mauleverer Castle, under the name of Stand-Still Dustbin. 
But all her skill, and the assistance of those colleagued in the 
attempt, would doubtless have been in vain, if my own want of 
judgment, my own sudden and irrational passion for Scarlatt 
Suett, had not come to the aid of the complot._ 

I took to my office, as Bronwen Suett's instructress, with 
delight. I really pitied the poor child, subjected to so similar 
a bondage to that from which I had myself escaped. And my 
first lesson was a game at romps. Bronwen was of the most 
simple and implicit ductility of character, in any direction. I 
soon learned to like her almost as a little sister . at times, per- 
haps, too much as an animate doll, formed for my diversion. 
On her part, poor child, she regarded me as altogether out of 
the bounds of nature. as some fairy impersonation of all that 
was gay and brilliant in ideas, and animated in physical 
existence. 

Sophia obtained leave, with some pretended difficulty, to stay 
with me for a short time, until I got accustomed to my new 
duties. But she interfered very little in them. And for this 
alleged reason, that Scarlatt had taken a particular fancy, on 
the ground that time hung heavy on his hands, during this long 
country vacation, to lend his superintendence in his sister's 
studies. She did not wish, she said, to natter his vanity by 
seeming to court his society, or to give renewed umbrage to his 
mother. 

The dilettante professor and governess were thus thrown at 
once and constantly together. What miracle was it, then, if a 
totally inexperienced and susceptible girl, almost exclusively 
given over to the society of a very engaging and artful young 
man, was speedily drawn into reciprocating a passion displayed 
with every possible variety of winning allurement, and apparent 
sincerity ? 

Apparent ! was it not real ? Could so young a man, even 
under the guidance of the most astute and unprincipled of 
women, have feigned emotions so fraught with the living fire 
of passion as Scarlatt seemed ? So instinct with all the 
manifestations of a _ powerful and absorbing vitality ? Was 
I incapable of inspiring a real passion, surrounded by that 
brilliant aurora of youth, when at so much later a period, after 
so many sorrows . No, it has not been impossible for me to 
kindle the deepest, the most disinterested attachment ! I 
cannot, I will not deem, but that Scarlatt Suett loved me once 



GIAMOUEIE. 99 

. loved me passionately ! . with all the strength and sincerity 
of which his nature was capable ! Possibly . very possibly . 
he owed to Sophia Sutcliffe his first promptings to an enter- 
prise on the heart of the heiress of Maulevever. But I do 
believe yet in those strong protestations of his, that from the 
instant he beheld me first, his sensual caprice for her . why she 
has herself assured me of the same a thousand times when she 
had no motive to deceive me . entirely vanished ! Was not 
that conviction the animating principle of the retaliation she 
afterwards declared herself to exercise in accomplishing my 
destruction ? Ay, and I will believe, that independent of the 
brilliant hopes he associated with me, a nobler and purer 
passion than ever Sophia's meretricious sorceries evoked, 
animated the young man's vehement pursuit of me ! It may 
well be, nevertheless, that it was Sophia's subtlety suggested 
to him the means to win me. The high-toned romance of 
tenderness and devotion my nature craved ; the delicate spells 
to attract all the finest and most generous sensibilities of my 
character : in these, perchance, she instructed him too well ! 
It was not in Scarlatt Suett. I fear I must acknowledge . 
unprompted, to fall in so exquisitely with all that was most 
spiritual, exalted, hallowed, I may say, in my young notions 
of the passion he strove to inspire. 

~No doubt, he succeeded. Wot all the crafty spells cast around 
me can otherwise account for the completeness of my hallu- 
cination. I must have loved Scarlatt Suett once, with all the 
powers of my being, most fondly, most exclusively . for I love 
him still. It is a shameful avowal, yet it falls like a natural 
language from my lips. It was not all an hallucination either. 
I had some excuse. In his person and attributes he was so 
well fitted to be the hero of a girl's romance In character, a 
young man of so intrepid and mounting an ambition, so reso- 
lute, so indefatigable ! Young as he was, not unpractised in 
the most specious wiles and artifices of his sex. And besides 
Sophia, he had another most crafty counsellor in the devilish 
Luxmoor. The prize offered was the realization of his own 
most ardent hopes . a match with an heiress of illustrious 
descent . an immediate lifting to the highest ranks of that 
proud aristocracy ; to mate with which, on some terms of 
equality, was the absorbing day-dream of his existence. 

I was just at the age when the deepest susceptibilities of the 
female heart began to develop themselves. And the first spring 
of the opened fount is ever the most vehement, though it may 
descend only in showers of drizzle and foam. My soul had 
been so long and vainly athirst for the merest human sym- 
pathy, that the language of youthful love and devotion now 
incessantly poured into my ears, melted into it as the sweet 
falling showers of spring into a droughty soil ! 

In himself a noble and fascinating figure, _ Scarlatt was 
presented to me under the most captivating lights my chief 

.B 2 



100 JIATTLEVEEEE S DIVOECE. 

betrayer's vivid and creative imagination could array it in. 
Sophia taught me to behold in this ardent lover the future 
statesman and lawgiver of a mighty land : one in whose 
person the great principle of modern society, she told me. 
the supremacy of an enlightened democracy . stood practically 
asserted. -So finer impersonation of the spirit of the age, 
she easily convinced me, could be imagined, than this noble 
youth, sprung from the people, and destined to achieve all but 
the highest position in the State : a visible refutation of the 
worn-out theories and prejudices of the past, in which I had 
been bred. This woman must certainly have brought me 
under mesmeric sway; under the dominion of a charm. 
"When I recall the circumstances of her influence, I grow a 
believer in the magic fascination of the ancients ; in the 
irresistible animal magnetism of the moderns. She was my 
operator; I was her clairvoyante. I had a supernatural 
faculty accorded me, only that I might follow out the impulses 
of her will. 

Or was mine, perchance, but the too common and yet beau- 
tiful and holy error, of the trustfulness of youth, the radiant 
delusions of a too warm and enthusiastic imagination. Had I 
collected the materials for a glorious vision in my mind and 
heart, and conferred its attributes on a deification of wood and 
clay ? Certainly all that was generous, loving, defying even, in 
my nature . for, though born and reared in the most narrow 
trammels of opinion, my nature always revolted against what- 
ever was mean, restricted, unjust . took part, finally and irre- 
sistibly, with one who soon managed to persuade me he himself 
purposed the most generous sacrifices on my behalf. 

It would avail but little to live over in faint recollection those 
few enchanting weeks of kindling love and fiery response. To 
trace the gradual rosying into light of that passion which 
coloured the universe at last for me. All who have loved have 
retrieved for awhile the paradise our first ancestors lost. All 
who have not, what avails it to speak to them of the flowers of 
Eden? 

Yes, I loved Scarlatt Suett with all the tenderness of which 
the heart of woman is capable ; with all the implicit devotion 
and credulity of a girl ! I believed in the vehement, almost 
frantic, signs of passion he exhibited ; and, above all, in what I 
imagined to be a proof of the most generous, disinterested, and 
honourable attachment he gave me at last. to the apparent 
sacrifice of all his own ambitious and soaring views. in making 
me the offer of marriage I have alluded to. 

It was thus that Scarlatt seemed practically to refute the 
notions of his libertine ideas with regard to women, which both 
Sophia and he plainly discerned me to entertain, in consequence 
of the revelations hinted to me by young Ap Howel, on my first 
arrival at Has Newydd. At the same time the umbrage I 
might have preserved, at the relations alleged to exist between 



GIAMOUKIE. 101 

them, was carefully removed by a series of skilfully graduated 
obliterations. 

In the first place, Sophia made me, as I thought, the unre- 
served confidante of her position with reward to Scarlatt Suett. 
She avowed to me that he had for some time professed an 
attachment towards her, which she had always discouraged, and 
was, therefore, the more entitled to feel and express her indigna- 
tion when his base tutor, Luxmoor, made himself the officious 
medium of a dishonourable proposal to her ! and the insult was 
rendered the more galling by the fact that this man pretended 
she had encouraged himself for a long time before rejecting 
him, as a cover for her designs on his pupil ; whom he accused 
her now of a project of cajoling into a matrimonial engagement 
certain to be the ruin of all the_ high expectations formed of 
him, and with reason, by his family. 

Since this event, Sophia declared a feeling of alienation 
rather than any other had been manifested towards her by the 
young man, whose vanity, if no better sentiment, had been 
roused against her by the repulse. I might have observed 
the tone of pique in their intercourse, she said, on the first night 
of my arrival, which I certainly had. His malicious tutor con- 
tinued to foment the feeling in every possible manner, so that 
at last a residence at Plas Newydd had become thoroughly dis- 
tasteful to her, and it was herself, Sophia now declared, who 
had given intimation of her son's demeanour to Mrs. Suett, 
which secured her dismissal on the transparent pretext she had 
mentioned to me. But. and 'she pretended to own it with a 
degree of laughing ingenuousness . perhaps she had had some 
expectation that the prospect of losing her would have brought 
Scarlatt into other and less discreditable views. She was, how- 
ever, obliged to confess it produced no alteration in him, and 
that he seemed already to have made up his mind to desist from 
his suit altogether when I arrived to complete the overthrow of 
her slightly-pedestaled ascendancy. 

_ And yet so long as a girlish sentiment of rivalry and emula- 
tion were useful to be kept stirred in me, Sophia suffered me to 
think I discerned in her a secret but profound exasperation at 
the sudden transfer of Scarlatt's admiration from herself to me. 
Perhaps, indeed, she really experienced some bitter feeling of 
the sort. And the pique she seemed unavoidably to divulge on 
this account, gave her task in persuading me of the merits of 
my lover a yet more resistless power over my judgment. She 
contrived for some time to enforce the notion that her praises 
were extorted . unwillingly accorded to qualities too splendidly 
obvious to be gainsayed even by the resentment of a slighted 
partiality. And thus her exaggerated eulogiums at the same 
time served to increase my admiration of their subject, and 
stirred a natural jealousy and spirit of coquetry in me, to main- 
tain the supremacy I had so rapidly acquired. 

I do not pretend absolutely to defend this episode in my early 



102 mattlevekek's mvobce. 

relations with Sophia Sutcliffe. But far, very far, was I from 
any project of supplanting her . which must in reality have 
been founded in ignorance of their true position . in the com- 
mencement of my acquaintance with Scarlatt Suett. She her- 
self constantly assured me she had gained no stable place in his 
affections,_ and desired none ; and I believe she spoke truly, and 
as she believed at that period. Utterly unfounded, therefore, 
are the charges she afterwards brought against me, as a set-off 
to her own barbarous conduct. It was not in the mere wan- 
tonness of the personal and social superiorities she ascribed to 
me, and some of which I certainly possessed, that I entered into 
the contest in which I was doomed to be at once victress and 
victim ; but if that infatuated spirit ascribed to me really had 
entered me, it was Sophia herself who called it into existence, 
and fed it constantly with subtle stimulants, as the sorceresses 
of the Middle Ages were said to keep in activity the malignant 
energies of their favourite imps. 

And when, in fact, Scarlatt's preference for me became too 
obvious to admit of doubt, she was the first to urge it upon me 
as an irresistible fait accompli, and to draw consequences from 
it that reconciled me to a success which at first alarmed and 
infinitely disquieted myself. She affected to feel great satisfac- 
tion in my triumph over the young man's degrading sensual 
caprice for herself, as "a means of visiting upon him a full con- 
dign chastisement for the offence. She had no doubt that his 
designs on me were equally discreditable ; that I should be 
insulted by similar proffers ; and her consolation now was to 
look forward to the shame and confusion that would overwhelm 
him when he should be made aware, too late, that he had 
revealed the facts of his variable character and dissolute views 
with regard to our sex, to one whom he might else have regarded 
as the most glorious prize of ambition and love. I was thus 
at liberty to fancy myself the avenger of my beloved friend, 
and even to encourage . so she instilled into me . the full 
revelation of a depravity which I could visit with a retribution 
so signal. 

In the midst of all these elaborate artifices and cajoleries 
there was but one whose voice was raised to me in warning or 
dissuasion ; and circumstances unhappily gave him rather an 
influence in precipitating than retarding my fate. 



YOUNG LOVE, 103 

CHAPTER XL 

YOUNG IOVE. 

I speak of young Sir Vivian Ap Howel. 

After my introduction and installation at Plas Newydd, we 
became a good deal separated, of course. The boy baronet bad 
not the same pretexts for joining my society as Scarlatt so 
ingeniously contrived for himself ; yet he made much more 
resort than ever he had previously done . so I heard,. under 
various excuses, to Bronwen's school-room. Above all, he 
appeared to take particular interest in a portrait of Scarlatt 
Suett, which, having some little skill in water colours, I had 
ambitiously, but at Scarlatt's earnest request, undertaken. He 
seemed restless, however, and, often causelessly dissatisfied 
on these visits, usually left the apartment abruptly ; and was 
in general so peevish and irritable in his manner, answered 
Scarlatt's gibes with such cutting sarcasms, that I was often in 
great though silent dread that they would come to some open 
and violent collision. 

Vivian, too, I should imagine, looked on for a considerable 
time without fathoming the designs in secret activity about 
me. Grown up as he was in most of his ideas, and keenly 
observant, he could not bring himself, for a space, to the com- 
prehension of what was happening. He believed that my secret 
was kept, misconceiving Sophia's true motives, and did not give 
any of the Suetts credit for a generous appreciation of personal 
merits in a nursery governess. His suspicions were, however, 
at last awakened ; and he certainly lost little time in commu- 
nicating them to me. 

The romantic delicacy of Vivian's ideas had probably induced 
him to slacken in his expressions of friendship and interest 
towards me, after he discovered my real name and rank. But 
I noticed that he grew at last almost rudely reserved in his de- 
meanour with me. It seemed to me strange, and annoyed me a 
good deal, until my mind became absorbed in other subjects, to 
find that I lost in the favour of my earliest friend and pro- 
tector, at Plas Newydd, almost in proportion as I gained with 
every one else. 

Vivian was not much in the habit of joining in the diversions 
of in-door life at the mansion. His whole attention, Sophia 
told me, was absorbed, with exclusive selfishness, in the resto- 
ration of his own health and strength, by constant exercise in 
the open air. He avoided study and every species of sedentary 
occupation or amusement. It was no wonder, therefore, that 



104 jiatjieveiiek's divorce. 

on the occasion of a great dinner-party given at Plas Newydd, 
about the time I allude to, he declined to make one at it, though 
earnestly pressed by Mrs. Suett. Indeed, he very rarely could 
be induced to join in any of the family festivities. 

This dinner-party annoyed me. Of course, my position in 
the family did not authorize my presence at it, even had there 
been no apprehension (there was not much) of my being recog- 
nized by some of the guests. But that was not the reason of 
annoyance. Sophia had laughingly informed me that a most 
formidable rival "to both of us" was to be present, . a Miss 
Trevanion. This Miss Trevanion was a very beautiful young 
lady, of good family and fortune, and Scarlatt Suett was said, 
in Luxmoor's phrase, to be " very sweet upon her ! " and his 
mother was doing all she possibly could to bring about a match 
between the young people. 

I assured Sophia, rather disdainfully, that it was not of the 
slightest consequence to me ; that neither she nor I, so far as I 
knew, were pretendants to so prodigious an honour as the hand 
of Mr. Scarlatt Suett, and could not, consequently, rival the 

Eretensions of any lady whom he might think worthy of it. I left 
er rather in a huff. took a volume of a poet she had lately in- 
troduced me to, and which admitted me into the lurid passion- 
world of Byron, and strolled to a distance from the house. 
Consequently, I did not see Miss Trevanion, and was at liberty 
to form the most extravagant notions of her irresistible beauty 
and attractions. I had the vanity to feel quite safe on these scores 
with regard to Sophia . and she knew it! But this unknown 
enchantress filled me with the most carking dread and jealousy. 

I made my way to an arbour at the end of one of the terrace 
walks, in a very pettish and discontented humour. And I am 
afraid my countenance showed few signs of satisfaction when 
glancing from my book, a shadow fell upon it, and I perceived 
the lean, dark, sorrowful-looking boy gazing at me with his 
large, luminous eyes, so earnestly that I was startled. 

I thought he came by chance ; but he quickly undeceived me 
on the point. " I have been wanting to speak to you these several 
days, Miss Pomeroy ; but you seem really haunted by . by all the 
Suetts ! There is never the least chance of speaking to you but 
under their surveillance !" he said, after some abrupt words of 
greeting in a vexed and impetuous accent. 

" You can speak what you like now, then, I am sure ! They 
are quite wrapped up, I suppose, in their fine Miss Trevanion !" 

" Trevanion ! Did you say Trevanion ? . I don't think any 
Trevanion would visit at Plas Newydd !" Vivian replied. 

" Yes ; a Miss Trevanion ! a beautiful young heiress, that 
Mr. Scarlatt Suett is to marry !" I said ; and I felt the blood 
rush to my cheeks under the keen, excited glance Vivian cast 
upon me. 

" I hope he may . and soon ! but I don't think any Trevanion. 
any rich Trevatiion, at all events. would marry a Suett !" he 



YOUNG LOVE. 105 

returned, peevishly; and there was a short silence. "Your 
father must soon be at Pias Newydd," he then continued, with 
a slight, eager tremble in his voice. But are you not afraid 
he may be more angry with you than he might otherwise, for 
remaining among people he dislikes so ? What I wanted to tell 
you is, that only your grandmother is now at Mauleverer ; and 
if you went back to her protection at once, everything would be 
made so much easier and pleasanter for adjustment !" 

" Why, my grandmother is the worst old woman in the world ; 
annoyed my mother almost constantly ever since I have knowu 
anything. I will not go to her ! And I don't care if even my 
father casts me off altogether ! He has never cared much for 
me, I know !" 

" You would not be quite abandoned, Hugh-Helena, were it 
even so !" the poor lad said to me, in accents whose chivalrous 
fervour yet glows on my recollection. 

But I was too much out of humour at the time to admit my 
consciousness of his true meaning. "I am sure," I said, "I 
have no claims on the Suetts ; they have been kind to me as a 
perfect stranger, certainly ; but I don't think I should like to 
stay here always, although they really do seem to make me very 
welcome at times." 

"Ah, Miss Pomeroy," Vivian answered, sadly and thought- 
fully, "don't you think the Suetts have in reality found out 
who you are ?" 

"I am sure, I am quite sure," I returned, with vehemence, 
" they have not, one of them, the slightest suspicion of the 
kind ! Do you think they would let me go strolling about the 
grounds, in this deserted way, if they had?" 

And a solitary tear, which I dared not wipe away, started 
under my eyelid. 

" Why, then, that fellow Scarlatt means you no good, you 
may depend upon it, dearest Miss Pomeroy ! " returned the boy, 
with flashing eyes. 

I coloured involuntarily. " What do you mean, Sir Vivian ? " 
I said, angrily. " I think it is 3'ou who are of opinion that I 
am a fit subject for insult, or you would never have dared to 
make such an observation ! " 

" Does he not haunt you everywhere ? . in little Bronwen's 
room, in your walks, up and down the house ? Wherever you 
are, there he is ! Why did he want you to paint his red whiskers 
and smiling, lying face, I wonder ? .I tell you I know Scarlatt 
Suett very well ; and I pledge you my existence it is impossible 
for him to mean you anything but wicked insult, unless he is 
aware of your pretensions to superior rank and wealth." 

" You are a scandalous, cruel boy to say so ! It is impossible 
to be more polite, more respectful, more reverential, than young 
Mr. Suett is to me." 

And I spoke the truth. Sophia knew well my ideas on the 
subject, and she had enforced upon Scarlatt the necessity of 



106 haulevekek's divoece. 

observing the most chivalrous delicacy of personal respect to- 
wards me. 

The expression I had used always offended young' Ap Howel. 
" I am not a boy ! " he exclaimed, firing- up. " I never was a 
boy ! I am as old as you are, Miss Pomeroy ; and do you allow 
them to call you a girl still ? " 

" I only mean you look so young ; besides, girls are always 
considered older than boys of the same age," I answered, un- 
willing, on reflection, to hurt my young protector's feelings. 

" Oh, what nonsense !" he exclaimed, impatiently. "I am 
twice as old as you are, Hugh-Helena, in everything that in 
reality makes age ! Why, I have actually been in love ! and I 
don't suppose you have ever, have you?" 

He put the question with such abruptness and point, that, 
for a moment, I was too confused to answer. When I did make 
some sort of reply, it was very little to the point. . " Do you 
suppose that being in love is one of the things to make a per- 
son old r" 

"Well, if so, I am already a very old fellow, indeed !" he 
replied, laughingly. " Yet I never thought I should live to be 
old ! No one that has seen the Lady of the Rhaiadr Dhu ever 
lives to be old," he continued, looking at me with a singular 
expression of compassion and tenderness ; not for himself at all, 
as it appeared, for he added, "But I don't want to live to be 
old . I should like even to die young ! I should like to be 
remembered always by you, at least, Hugh-Helena (a tear 
glittered in his dark, deep eyes), as young Ap Howel ! I never 
shall . I never will be old ! But I won't die like a Suett, of 
some wretched, commonplace disease ! I mean to die in battle, 
like my father ! " 

" Do you tell me," I replied, with a very unpleasant throb at 
the heart, " that you have really seen that dreadful banshee of 
yours ? " 

" It don't matter ! But I know I shall not live to be old in 
any other way than loving, as if I had been loving for millions 
of years before I saw the person I was to love at all ! " was the 
poor boy's fervid reply. 

My mind was absorbed in another thought : I scarcely noticed 
him. " What makes you think that of Scarlatt Suett ? Unless 
you have yourself betrayed who I am, there is no one else to 
tell the Suetts." _ 

" Sophia Sutcliffe is just such a woman as Scarlatt Suett is a 
man . selfish to the backbone ! She would sell you for half-a- 
crown, or smaller change, if she wanted it for any little pur- 
pose of her own," he replied. 

"Sell me! " I exclaimed . "what can you mean? Now 
come, Sir Vivian, would Sophia be at all likely to reveal any- 
thing she thought would turn Scarlatt Suett's attention towards 
me, when you yourself assured me she was discharged here for 
setting her own cap at him. trying to cajole him into marry- 
ing her, you know ? " 



YOUNG LOVE. 107 

"So I told you, and so it really seemed," replied Vivian, 
himself in a puzzled tone. " At least she played a terribly 
strong; game of coquetry with him ! No doubt she wanted to 
coax Scarlatt into some dangerous trap of her own. But I 
think she must soon have found out he was full match even for 
herself iu egotism and craft, and one not at all likely to be led 
into any rash matrimonial speculation. But then, again, it is 
my belief she prefers that horrid Luxmoor to Scarlatt, in secret, 
a thousand times ! I dare stake my word of honour they are 
perfectly good friends at heart, though they are always abusing 
one another before people ! I knoic they used often to take the 
same evening walk . quite by chance, of course. up to my tower 
on the hill, until I resolved to shame them for their hypocrisy, 
and played them some hobgoblin tricks that quite frightened 
them both, though they pretend not to believe in ghosts ; nor 
in anything else spiritual, I dare say ; do they in reality. After 
that there was the row about the jilting, when Luxmoor made 
his offer, and Mrs. Suett got to hear about Scarlatt and Miss 
Sutcliffe, and sent her packing. And that is why Sophia hates 
me so much, and is always speaking against me, I know, behind 
my back, though I should not care much if she did not do it to 
you too." 

I was profoundly and very unpleasantly struck by this reve- 
lation. Sophia had so often spoken with intense bitterness, 
and almost every possible term of contempt and dislike, of Lux- 
moor, that this accusation of her secret understanding with 
him filled me with dread that her pretended indignation against 
Scarlatt Suett might also only be feigned to enable her to 
carry on her system of coquetry more effectually under the 
cover. 

" But do you mean to say, then," I inquired, quite panic- 
stricken, " in spite of all you tell me about Sophia and Mr. 
Luxmoor . do you mean to say that you suspect her of carrying 
on a flirtation with Scarlatt still ?" 

" Ko, I think not ; they have quite left that off at present. 
And that is what puzzles me, and makes me suspect some worse 
trick still. Why is she hardly ever with you when you are 
giving your lessons to Bronwen, and he is always ? Perhaps, 
after all, as I have said just now . you women have such queer 
fancies sometimes . she may like that ogling ogre, Luxmoor, 
the better of the two, and be trying to make up a match be- 
tween you and Scarlatt, on conditions to his and her advantage, 
in conjunction." 

I was completely horrified at this surmise, which had some 
appearances of probability that struck me instantly with a 
sickening sense of doubt. 

" They will find themselves very much mistaken then. all of 
them," I said, with an inexpressible pang at heart. " I even 
hope now that my father may be too angry with me to take me 
back. I hope he will disinherit me, and then no one can 
imagine these horrible greedy things about me." 



108 HAULEVEEEE'S C1VOECE. 

" Would to heaven. it is a strange wish for a friend to form 
. hut would to heaven that you were deserted by all the world, 
Miss Pomeroy, that I might have an opportunity to show you 
what disinterested affection really means ! " the boy returned, 
with sudden but vehement earnestness. 

"jS'o," replied I bitterly; "no one can ever care for me, 
apart from my having a title and fortune to inherit." 

" Do not say that ; Miss Pomeroy. oh, pray don't say that !" 
returned Vivian, his whole slender figure quivering with emo- 
tion ; " I know it is useless for me to say anything to you on 
the subject . so mere a boy as I am, or rather as I am looked 
upon by you, I am aware. But poor, feeble in constitution, 
worthless as I am in all respects compared with you, I feel I 
could so joyfully devote my whole existence to make yours 
happy, that I cannot but think I could succeed a thousand, 
thousand times better than this great fleshy fellow, who, I know, 
I see, I am sure, has undertaken to secure you as his prey ! 
Oh, were you, indeed, abandoned by your father and all your 
relatives . penniless, destitute, everything but tarnished in the 
bright purity of your brave and loving spirit . with what joy, 
what triumph, what happiness, beyond all utterance, would I 
not ask you, if I had it in my gift, to share the empire of the 
world with me !" 

1 remember I took this strangely passionate speech from a 
boy, almost precisely my own very juvenile age, quite seriously; 
but not in the way the poor lad wished me, indeed. "Oh, now 
I see !" I exclaimed, with a joy I could not dissemble . ." I see 
why you invent such odious things against poor Scarlatt Suett . 
you are jealous of him !" 

Vivian's sallow complexion flushed brightly up at these words. 
"Well!" he replied, after a pause, " I cannot deny it . lam 
jealous of him, for I love you . and I see plainly there is a 
conspiracy on foot to sacrifice you to him ! I tell you, you have 
formed no coneoption what a cold, sellish, mercilessly egotistical 
fellow that Scarlatt is ! If you could hear the quarrels he has 
with his father, though all is so smooth and delightful before 
you ! He is terribly extravagant, too ; there are the most 
dreadful rows every now and then over his college bills ! And 
he is the pupil of that hateful Luxmoor, who is fitter to form a 
devil than a man ! Then, again, whatever Sophia may be, 
w hat right had he to insult her under his father's roof in the 
way I have not the least doubt he has ?" 

" I wish my father would come and take me home from you 
all!" I said, half sobbingly, "for I never heard of such bad 
people as you are, one and all." 

" Amen to that prayer ! And you may trust, if your father 
knew what is happening, he would annihilate distance to rescue 
you," said Vivian; and he added, falteringly, "no one should 
know better than I do how much he dislikes the Suetts, since 
he eyen prefers a person of my name to them so far as to have 



rOtTNfl IOVE. 109 

made me private offers of any possible assistance I will accept, 
in money or otherwise, to commence a suit in Chancery with the 
Suetts for the restoration of the property they cajoled my 
grandfather and uncle out of. Then, if they are besides com- 
pelled to disgorge their plunder so far, Searlatt Suett will no 
longer have even money to recommend him. And I must 
make up my mind shortly, too, on the subject, or they will have 
their one-and-twenty years ofpossession to bar my rights." 

A feeling quite contrary to that he doubtless intended to 
awaken, stirred in my heart at these words. "And do you 
think," I said, indignantly, " that if I liked Searlatt Suett well 
enough to marry him, I should care whether he was poor or not .-. 
And you accuse him, poor fellow, of designs on mere possibilities, 
which may never be mine, if my father refuses his approbation, 
while you yourself, already, it seems, in favour with him, and 
quite well aware who and what I am, have just made me what 
1 suppose I am to consider a declaration from . from . a school- 
boy !" and I burst into a rather hysterical laugh ; but the words 
produced a much stronger effect than I had intended. A deadly 
pallor gave Yivian the look of a marble bust of himself for a 
moment. 

" Just as I thought ! I knew she must think so ! What a 
wretched idiot I am to fancy that because I spoke the truth, I 
should be believed ! And a schoolboy ! . Yes, a mean, shrunken, 
withered imp of a schoolboy !" he muttered to himself, but 
audibly ; then turning to me with a look that remains indelibly 
impressed on my memory . a look that verily transfigured, 
glorified, the meagre, sorrowful-looking young face,_ with its 
burst of light from every portal and exit of expression. " A 
schoolboy ! yes ! . but one that has the makings in him of a 
man. of a great man, Hugh-Helena ! I do not mean a big one, 
mind ! Only give me time to become a man, and you will see if 
I have not heart and soul in me, little as I am, and may 
remain, to lead an army of giants ! I shall be a great general, 
I know, if I live ! I shall conquer, perhaps, a kingdom : there 
are kingdoms still to conquer, in the East ! You are but a mere 
girl yourself now, Hugh-Helena ! Oh, if you would promise me 
to wait a few years only, I will make my name . disinherited 
orphan as I am . such a one as any woman would be proud to 
share ! As for this Searlatt Suett, I tell you, he will never be 
anything ! He has no real abilities . no power to sway the 
minds or hearts of men! No man can be great in anything 
without heart ! It is impossible . and this man has none J" 

The tone of rapt earnestness and belief in which Yivian spoke, 
exercised a singular influence upon me. I was at once affected 
with a vehement feeling of indignation against himself . and a 
vaguely terrible conviction that his revelations were founded 
in truth. " Leave me," I said, " I hate you. and I hate every 
one here. But I will not go back to Mauleverer. My father 



110 maitleteeee's divorce. 

may kill me if he likes, but I will know the truth of all you 
have said to me before I leave Plas Newydd." 

He was about to reply, when we both heard the warble of a 
lively little French air, and Sophia Sutcliffe entered the arbour. 

Had she been listening to a considerable portion . perhaps 
to the whole. of our conversation ? Was she thus put upon the 
means of counteracting the effects of this warning divination of 
the fine sagacity or instincts oFtrue love and fidelity that in 
those early years glowed with such intensity in the heart of 
Vivian Ap flowel ? I know now she was capable of any mean- 
ness, but I did not then in the least suspect her of this. But if 
even the entire programme of the performances was to be changed 
at a moment's notice, what did that cost to such a mistress of 
invention and artifice? Reader, if I wrong this woman by 
imputing so much contrivance and subtlety to her, she herself 
is alone to blame ; she has openly, and with an unblushing 
front, taken, as it were, credit to herself in it all. But with 
what exquisite tact was the denouement brought about!. with 
such rapidity, and yet seemingly only by the natural impulse 
of the most powerful and impetuous of the passions. 

It was easy, at all events, for Sophia to see that something 
had occurred to disturb our usually affectionate and confidential 
relations. I interrupted her when she was about to describe 
Miss Trevanion's person and attire . whom she said she had 
accidentally seen . by dryly professing to take no interest in the 
subject, and proposing a walk through the grounds to Sir 
Vivian, almost in a manner to exclude her from the party. 
She appeared to be surprised and disconcerted, but she con- 
tinued in our company, and thus prevented any further private 
communication between us. The coldness did not change when 
we were by ourselves in our apartment. In the night, as I lay 
awake, annoyed with my own reflections, I thought I heard her 
sob. But I remained obdurate. 

The next morning, however, when I attended Mrs. Suett at 
her breakfast with my little pupil, I was struck with dismay by 
hearing, as if quite accidentally, the elder Suett reprimand his 
son for overstaying his long university vacation, and give him 
orders to make himself ready for a departure the next day with 
his tutor. He should make a clear house of it, John Thomas 
said. Miss Sutcliffe might go to her new situation, if she had 
one ; they were quite satisfied with me, and I wanted no further 
instruction in my duties. Young Ap Howel also must return 
to Eton ; he seemed quite well enough of his drubbing now. 

Among this threatened deportation, I could very well have 
spared Luxmoor, though his crafty, glozing tongue, before me, 
resounded only with the praises I best liked to listen to. I 
remember he often called his pupil his Alcibiades, till Vivian 
one day said to him, in my presence, " You are Socrates then 
yourself, Mr. Luxmoor ! But Socrates was married to his 
Xantippe, was he not ? You will not be complete till then ! " 



THE KERTG T BETTDION". Ill 

A singular silence fell on the usually gay and rattling tutor 
for some time after this, and Sophia, who was also present, bit 
her lips till the blood started. 

But the prospect of parting with Scarlatt Suett was one of 
inconceivable affliction to mo. I comprehended on a sudden 
how much I loved him ! I was too proud to exhibit much sign 
of weakness, I hope ; yet when he proposed to me that we 
should take a stroll together for the last time through some of 
his little sister's and our own favourite haunts on the mountain, 
I could make no audible reply. 

The ostensible purpose, in most of the long excursions I was 
in the habit of taking with Bronwen, was to make sketches in 
water colours from nature. I think I have mentioned it had 
been discovered I had some talent in this art. Scarlatt accom- 

fianied us almost invariably as a guide and protector, in which 
atter capacity Gelert frequently showed some considerable 
signs of dissatisfaction at finding himself superseded. I must 
add, that on several occasions, before my singular explanation 
with young Ap Howel, I had become uneasily conscious that he 
seemed to keep us under a general and remote, but careful sur- 
veillance. He often appeared at unexpected points in our 
strolls, though he very rarely joined us. I did not like to 
mention my observations to Scarlatt, who was already suffi- 
ciently irritated against the scornful boy. But I was glad not 
to discern Ap Howel in any direction when we left Plas Newydd 
this clay. I had a conviction that the suspicions he bad 
announced to me were soon now to be confirmed or dispelled, 
and I needed no additional circumstance to add to my secret 
but almost overwhelming agitation. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE EEEIG Y DRUDION. 

Even little Bronwen, I imagine, had her instructions. She 
took a particular fancy to make a sketch of the Druid's Altar, 
though in general she disliked and shunned scenes of mysterious 
and solitary grandeur, like that in which those stones of destiny 
stood ranged in their inexplicable but wonder-fraught group. 
Thither, accordingly, we proceeded. I set Bronwen properly 
to work ; and very shortly afterwards, Scarlatt, affecting to grow 
tired with watching her, proposed that we should take a nearer 
survey of the details of this extraordinary monument. He had 
seen it often, he said, but had never had his curiosity awakened 
before. I had the art to communicate a strange attraction and 
interest to everything that excited my own ! 



112 mauleveeee's DIVOECE, 

Vivian was right. I trembled, and ought to have trembled, 
as I stepped with Scarlatt Suett into the mystic circle. Still 
more when, under pretext of examining the singular effect of 
the whale-toothed jagged light through the cleft in the upper 
rock, he led me under the altar of sacrifice itself. 

It would give me too much pain to repeat in detail the cir- 
cumstances of that eventful interview. Oh, surely, surely, 
Scarlatt must have loved me once ! Deceitful as he might be, 
and schooled in deceit, ambition and self-interest only could 
not have given his tongue all that persuasion, that irresistible 
eloquence of passion ! It was not, it could not be, a mere 
rhetorical effusion, as carefully arranged in its effects as the 
harangue of a professed orator or pleader ! And whatever that 
darkly subtle woman may have said, with a view to destroy the 
last lingering verdure of hope in my heart, I will still believe 
that when Scarlatt Suett told that he loved me . loved me solely, 
and ail-absorbingly . that he spoke what he himself believed at 
the time, and which really was then the truth. Yt r hat else he 
added may admit of doubt ; when he told me that his purpose 
had been to say farewell for ever, but that he found himself 
irresistibly compelled to avow to me that existence itself would 
be insupportable unless I shared it with him . that he was 
determined to defy every consideration to make me his. that 
he was aware that in marrying me . and no other idea but 
marriage, he solemnly avouched, had for a moment sullied the 
purity of his thoughts towards me . he must forfeit all the proud 
and ambitious hopes he had cherished from his boyhood to that 
hour . hopes which he believed in his soul he might have lived 
to realize. to more than realize ! When he declared that every 
other consideration must yield to the one overmastering 
certainty, that he felt the happiness of his whole life was 
involved in the answer I might give to the offer he was 
irresistibly impelled to make me of his heart and hand ! But 
surely he could not have feigned that pallor, lurid as the dusky 
light that streamed in upon us from the fissure above, when he 
knelt before" me, and ardently implored me to pronounce his 
sentence for life or death ! . for that life or death hung in the 
scales for him on my words ! Surely, surely, all could not have 
been false, baseless, simulated, in those tones that trembled 
through my soul like the very echoes of a truth delightful as 
the assurances of eternal life and bliss ! 

The suspicions that had been instilled into me, or that I 
myself entertained, for a moment vanished entirely from my 
recollection. A feeling of gratitude, of responsive tenderness, 
swelled in a full tide in my souL I answered as I might have 
been expected to answer. trembling, confused, overwhelmed. 
I know not what; I rallied only when I suddenly recalled 
Vivian's warning. And_ Sophia herself had- jestingly given 
me notice of the probability of such a scene as this coming to 
pass. Scarlatt had found his tutor too unsuccessful a deputy to 



TUE KEEIG Y BETJDION. 113 

call his services into requisition again, she said. He would 
make his new attempt personally, and doubtless with the 
hackneyed preliminary of an offer of marriage. With herself 
he had not thought it necessary or advisable to use so shallow 
a deception ; but with a girl of my simple age nothing was 
more probable. 

I withdrew my hands, both of which Scarlatt had seized, and 
was pressing, in a kind of delirious ecstacy, to his lips ; and I 
broke forth indignantly, accusing him of his previous disgraceful 
proffers to my sister ; and demanding did he think I was to be 
deceived by a specious variety in the form of his faithless artifices ? 

I certify that I do not in the least exaggerate ! It is no 
coinage of revenge. I am not recklessly casting the wildfire 
back among my enemies. Scarlatt assured me in reply, and 
with protestations that might have shaken the stones of that 
antique temple which had withstood the storms of three thousand 
years, that he had never had any feeling for Sophia Sutcliffe 
in the least worthy of the beautiful and holy name of love ! 
He knew that from the moment he had experienced the noble 
and elevating passion I had inspired. Moreover, that all the 
first overtures and allurement were on Sophia's part ! and that 
if his senses had yielded for a brief period to the most despicable 
species of fascination, the first glance he caught of me com- 
pleted the ruin of all her artifices, and left him no thought, no 
possible sentiment for any other being of my sex in the world 
but myself. 

I thought then . and I think so still . that this accusing 
revelation could not possibly have been concerted between 
Scarlatt Suett and Sophia. He sacrificed her, as he has always 
sacrificed whatever stood in the way of his devouring passions 
and egotism. 

I was confused with the variety of contending thoughts that 
thronged in upon me on this avowal. I could not well make up 
my mind to believe so discreditable a fact of a person whom I 
loved so well. Pressed to avow that I believed in Searlatt's 
statements . that if I had no other objection I would plight him 
my troth in return for that which he offered me in all the 
sincerity of a first and only real passion . I could only falter 
forth a refusal on the score of my extreme youth, and the 
certain reluctance of his family to an alliance so much below 
the expectations they had a right to form for him. This 
answer rekindled all my suspicions. He told me his father was a 
man of principles altogether opposed to any species of harsh control 
'and discipline in his family arrangements. That he had always 
discouraged his own and his mother's ambitious speculations, 
as no true securities for human happiness, and had urged upon 
him in preference to accept the solid and assured advantage ot 
a share in his own really useful labours. His father's regard 
for me was obvious to every one. He would make the right oi 
pleasing himself in marriage a condition of his yielding to his 



114 mauxevekek's divohce. 

wishes on this subject. His father too was truly ingrained in 
his democratic principles . of too liberal a character . too 
enormously wealthy himself . to make objection on any of the 
scores I had suggested. Scarlatt had overcome his own life- 
long impulses : there was only his mother's disappointment to 
be dreaded ; but she loved him too well to desire him to sacri- 
fice the realities of happiness to a glittering illusion, when he 
should assure her he had placed that of his existence in possess- 
ing me as his wife. 

I answered with a resumption, no doubt, of what I acknow- 
ledge to be the natural pride and hauteur of my character. 
The vanity of the high-soaring plebeian at my feet probably 
never pardoned me it. I slighted every restraining motive ; and 
now, with sufficient coldness and stateliness, no doubt, I informed 
Scarlatt, that if his father was likely t» be so obligingly 
obsequious to his will, I, on the other hand, had one whose 
consent to a union with him I should be hopeless to attain. 
That I was not the sister of Sophia Sutcliffe, but the only 
daughter of Lord Mauleverer ; the head of that family which 
his own so unhappily irritated to the last degree. 

Scarlatt played his part of astonishment, incredulity, over- 
whelming belief, despair, all to admiration. The exigency had 
been provided for . the frank rashness of my temperament 
calculated on. 

But it may be believed I was not in the least prepared for 
the result of all this ecstatic display. In tones of the most 
utter hopelessness and submission, Scarlatt acknowledged now 
that it was impossible for him any longer to entertain the 
shadow of expectation that his passion could ever be crowned 
with success ; and declared, with a humility and earnestness 
that almost compelled me to belief, that he withdrew the proffer 
he had ventured to make to me, and would take himself for 
ever from my presence, and at once. 

"I know how it is. I see now too well how it is!" he 
exclaimed, no doubt observing the change in my looks. " It is 
that execrable Sophia who has contrived all this, to secure the 
agony of my whole life, in revenge for what she may consider 
her own personal slight. You have been a cruel, a merciless 
accomplice in the work. Miss Pomeroy. Henceforth my whole 
existence must be lost in a maze of vain recollections and use- 
less aspirations. God is not so relentless to the very fiends ! 
He does not show them paradise before he hurls them into the 
abyss ! But at least," he exclaimed, passionately seizing my 
hands and pressing them to his lips in a seeming paroxysm of 
emotion . but, no doubt, he felt his destinies tremble in the 
scale . "at least I will extort from you pardon for the presump- 
tuous wishes and hopes which only my ignorance of your more 
exalted pretensions, of your real position, which renders all hope 
on my part vain, could have prompted. Forgive me . forgive me, 
dearest Miss Pomeroy ! for the offer of the only love whose sin. 



THE XEKIG Y D1UTDI0N. 115 

cerity you can ever possibly know when placed on that pedestal, 
before which never could I have knelt with such implicit devo- 
tion, as a few moments ago, at the feet of her whom I deemed 
an orphan of a birth scarcely equal to my own. of fortune infi- 
nitely inferior! " 

He threw himself again at my feet, in ardent and apparently 
grief-struck supplication. 

I was bewildered . almost overpowered . by various emotions, 
in the midst of which, doubtless, reigned supreme the passionate 
tenderness I could not but feel, in the depths of my soul, I 
cherished for the pleader at my feet. 

Could I refuse him the pardon he demanded, for the offence 
of loving one whose whole existence had been a long thirst for 
love ? I could not . did not ! Some words even trembled to my 
lips which, incoherent as they were, seemed to inspire him with 
a sudden wildness of hope. " You pardon, for you share my 
fault ! " he exclaimed. " My Grod ! you do not then dismiss 
me to a life of despair, after having tasted of the most glorious 
hope that can be offered to humanity ? The nectar of the gods 
commended to a mortal's lips, and then as suddenly withdrawn, 
could not have bestowed a more cruel glimpse of a rapturous 
immortality, if you withdraw that word. Nay, we are all alone, 
dearest ; only heaven has heard, or can hear, what answer you 
may make me. We are alone, under that Supreme eye, in 
which all the frenzies of opinion that would separate us are 
but the filaments of self- tangling insects ; when the observance 
of His simple laws would render us free and happy as the birds 
that sing around us now. No, no ; do not ask it. I will never 
leave you until you pronounce the word that gives my whole 
existence to misery, or the prospect of a happiness it dazzles 
my soul to think may yet, even in the remotest possibility, be 
mine. Dearest Miss Pomeroy, since that is your fatal name 
. but by any I feel, I have shown, I must have always 
worshipped you . speak but one word ! It is my life's feat ! 
Do you suffer me yet to hope, or bid me endlessly despair ? " 

I was deeply moved by this pleading ; but still the shadow of 
Vivian's surmises brooded over me. I was by nature frank ; 
perhaps too abrupt and rash in the expression of my thoughts. 
I hesitated for an instant, and then replied, " If I could indeed 
trust that you have loved me only for myself, entirely ignorant 
that I am the daughter and heiress of a wealthy peer ; but I 
have been warned that in reality Sophia prefers Luxmoor to you, 
and that she has betrayed who I am to you, to secure for him a 
recompense, which she is to share." 

Scarlatt burst into a laugh of mingled rage and execration at 
these words. " Prefers Luxmoor to me ! I trust I am not 
much of a coxcomb ; but pardon me if I say that I do not think 
that probable, Miss Pomeroy. But I know how it is. That 
little imp of an Ap Howel has told you this, to depreciate the 
slight personal advantages I may possess below the level even 

12 



116 MAUXEVEKEK S BIVOHCE. 

of a Luxmoor ! I watched him with you in the terraee-arbour 
for an hour together, when I suppose every one in the drawing- 
room . I know Miss Trevanion, my mother's favourite, did. 
thought I was staring like a vacant fool at the landscape ! But 
will it not convince you to the contrary, my dearest Miss 
Pomeroy, when I tell you that Sophia hates Luxmoor so much, 
that, although she is his wife, she has renounced him . fled hither 
to conceal herself from him, . and was engaged in her crafty 
plans at my entanglement, in the hope of freeing herself, under 
my protection, for ever from him, when he arrived among lis in 
pursuit of her. He himself confessed it all to me when I had 
the folly to imagine myself caught in her snares, and to make 
him the confidant of my senseless possession. She was obliged, 
it seems, to make terms with him when he came upon her, and 
she contrived to introduce him into our family as my tutor. 
But there is nothing she is more desirous of than to escape from 
him altogether. I am certain of it, and so is he ; but since I 
have made the discovery, you may well imagine I have never 
looked upon her but with contempt and dread." 

How amazed was I at this revelation ! But it inundated my 
whole heart with the joyful conviction that I had been misin- 
formed by Vivian ; that Sophia must in reality have kept my 
secret, since she had views of her own so opposed to my recog- 
nition in my true character at Plas Newydd. And if so, what 
generous devotion, what perfect integrity of affection, had 
Scarlatt Suett exhibited towards me ! I found it, I own, im- 
possible soon to deny that among all men he was the only one 
that had ever been. that ever could be . more than indifferent 
to me. This coy admission was not long before it was compelled 
to take a warmer and more specific hue, until, finally. not to 
dwell on particulars seldom interesting to any but the parties 
concerned,. Scarlatt Suett and I returned to Plas Newydd a 
plighted pair. 

We had both entirely forgotten Bronwen ; but she had been 
at home hours before us. 

We returned to Plas Newydd plighted to each other by the 
most solemn assurances that ever bound youthful fidelity, and 
by the first ecstatic embrace of acknowledged mutual and all- 
confiding love. And more than so : I had been compelled to 
admit the hopelessness of our ever obtaining my father's con- 
sent to our union, unless he should perceive that to refuse it 
would be in vain ; and I had consented to accompany Scarlatt 
Suett on a flight into Scotland, where only the marriage of a 
minor, against or without the parental consent, could be legally 
solemnized. He convinced me that any further delay would be 
the ruin of our hopes ; that I should be taken at once to the 
Continent, and never again be permitted to see him. All that 
was strange and unaccountable in my wandering from Maule- 
verer, he tenderly told me. which he now believed to be the 
impulse of his happy destiny . would thus be explained, and no 



THE KF/RTGi T TjUCTBION'. 117 

precipitation appear on the face of things to the eye of the 
world. 

I have no excuse to offer for this blindly hasty credulity and 
yielding-, saving- that I was not yet sixteen years of age, and 
perfectly besotted with the excess of my love and admiration 
for the man whom I had chosen as my husband ; I fondly 
deemed, yet more, in the face of heaven, because it was in 
defiance of the unnatural prejudices of man. 

I have disburdened my heart so far, as I understand it my- 
self, of the whole truth of this affair, which at the time occa- 
sioned so much speculation and wonder. It would have been 
easy for me to conceal the real facts, and not to give to chance 
that undignified share which it doubtless will appear to have 
had in the disposal of my fate. I might have given all the air 
of a Romeo-and-Juliet attachment to the circumstances of my 
union with Scarlatt Suett, agreeably to the popular notions on 
the subject, instead of representing it as it was, . the result of 
a schoolgirl's rash adventure, and of a crafty elaboration of 
apparent accidents. Here is the plain truth ; stranger than 
fiction, certainly, but by no means so probable. 

It is singular how vividly impressed upon my memory are the 
most minute circumstances connected with that great event of 
my young existence. 

In particular when we returned to Plas Newydd. It was the 
most glorious autumn evening, I thought, that had ever wan- 
dered out of heaven, with its shining robes still scented with 
all the odours of Paradise. There was, indeed something of a 
visible and incarnate presence in the glowing splendours of that 
memorable evening. I saw it ascend the skies in its crimson 
and dark-green and golden-tissued garments, a single star 
burning on its august Titanic brow ! and I dreamed in my folly 
that Nature herself, like some tender and sympathetic mother, 
bent from the radiant skies to cast a blessing on this unautho- 
rized betrothal. 

But how can the rich, the glorious emotions that pervaded 
my whole being be described ? 

A new existence had burst upon me ! or rather from that 
hour it seemed to me that I began to live ! My whole frame 
thrilled in every fibre with some unknown vitality ! My whole 
soul_ quivered with an infinite, vague, wandering, ecstatic 
music. like that harp of the winds that seems to echo some 
impassioned delirium of harmony under the touch of their 
supernatural fingers ! 

I remember even that I beheld a sight that ought to have 
affected me with a strange implacable hardness. One part of 
our road commanded a view 01 the ruins of Ap Howel Castle, 
on the summit of the hill. Amidst the sunset-crimsoned towers 
of this decayed fortalice, hanging over the torrent in the eager- 
ness of his observation of our distant forms, I plainly discerned 
the outlines of young Vivian's slender figure. But I felt so 



118 M.VTrtEVERER's DIVORCK. 

happy in ray own deep love and thankfulness, that I scarcely 
thought of what might be the effects of what had happened, or 
was to happen, upon him. I had grown so much a woman in a 
few short hours, as to look upon the ardent boy's avowal of. 
attachment as a mere child's caprice, proper only to excite a 
smile. 

I had stipulated with Scarlatt that he should not yet avow to 
the elder Suetts who or what I was. I was anxious that my 
father should perceive, in their astonishment at the disclosure, 
an assurance that they had taken no unworthy part in the 
affair. 

But, strange as it may appear, it was my intention to com- 
municate all that had happened to Sophia. Scarlatt, indeed, 
hinted it would be much more advisable we should conceal our 
purposes . which she might, he insinuated, betray . from her. 
But he saw how readily my suspicions revived, and how deter- 
mined I was to ascertain the reality of the statements on which 
I based my confidence in himself. Accordingly as soon as I re- 
entered the house, I inquired for her ; and ascertaining that 
she was in her own apartment, thither I hastened at once to 
her. 

I am afraid I cannot doubt that the exultation with which I 
told my story of the legitimate proposals made to me by Scarlatt 
Suett, dwelt long and poignantly in the memory of Sophia, and 
was no light stimulant, subsequently, to her vindictive feelings. 
She affected, however, to listen to the account with an air of 
smiling incredulity, as who should say, "A trick, no doubt !" 
which I have since concluded to have been assumed for the pur- 
pose of urging me on some decisive proof of the sincerity _ of 
Scarlatt's offers. I grew irritated at this, in conjunction with 
the suspicions working in my mind, and told her, too plainly 
and abruptly, certainly, that I was glad it was not at least a 
trick of the kind her young enemy, Sir Vivian ap Howel, had 
suggested to me as possible for her to play me. And she could 
easily infer the information I must have received in addition, 
in the avowal I made of the means by which the suspicions in- 
fused in my mind by young Ap Howel had been removed, 
namely, . Scarlatt's revelation of the fact of her secret marriage 
with the Rev. Carolus Luxmoor, and her extreme dislike of 
him that had induced her to grasp at any means of escape from 
his control. 

Never, at any period of my existence, have I witnessed . it is, 
indeed, impossible to imagine . any more complete and painful 
picture of humiliation, shame, and consternation, than Sophia 
Sutcliffe presented on this disclosure. She crimsoned . she 
turned of the most deadly pale ! she gazed at me fixedly and 
glaringly, as if she scarcely comprehended what I said. I saw 
her hands clinch, and raising her eyes upwards, all but the 
white disappeared in a species of convulsive appeal, the agony 
of which I could then but half comprehend. Nevertheless, I 



1'HE KEJlia T DKTJDIOJw 119 

was overcome instantly. I threw my arms round her neck, and 
bursting into an effusion of sobs and tears, I called her my 
sister. my dearest sister ; and declared I was convinced only 
the most barbarous and wicked conduct on the part of the bad 
man I was sure Luxmoor was, could have driven her to act as 
she had acted ! 

She did not speak for some minutes ; then, with a strong 
shudder, she seemed to return to her habitually powerful con- 
trol over herself. 

" You are right, Miss Pomeroy ! " she then said, a little gasp- 
ingly ; " but, bad as he is, this betrayal of the poor wretch 
whom he has driven to such extremities, is the one of his mis- 
deeds I should find it the most difficult to pardon. Good 
heavens ! after he had himself, in a manner, forced. compelled 
me . by the dread of the tyrannous control the law has given 
him over my person . to affect an interest in Scarlatt Suett 
which I never felt . to play off really disgraceful cajoleries upon 
him, as he, too, must doubtless now believe. in order to obtain 
an influence over him, and secure for the wretch a chance of 
the excellent living which it is probable will soon be in the gift 
of young Ap Howel's guardian ! On these terms only would he 
consent to suffer me to exist at a distance from his polluting 
possession, with the unmolested power of earning my own 
existence, which I had hoped to effect in your service, dearest 
Miss Pomeroy. And now he has broken the secrecy I purchased 
from him, at the price of nearly all I could acquire by the 
joyless labours of my position . possibly in mere tipsy wanton- 
ness ; or, still more probably, with a view to provide himself a 
means of extortion from the Suetts . not taking into calcula- 
tion Mr. Scarlatt's exceeding sense of what is due to his own 
prospects and advancement in the world, on your arrival ; but 
knowing that to constitute the crime he would have made the 
machinery of his rapine, it was necessary his pupil should know 
I was a wife !" 

She removed me very gently from her bosom, but with a sense 
of repulse that to this hour I retain, and covering her face with 
her hands, concealed from me the wrench of that anguish in her 
heart which doubtless assailed it at that moment. Still it now 
appeared to me so plainly proved that there could be no possible 
concert between my lover's statements and hers, that I yielded 
myself unreservedly to a painful and yet happy conviction, that 
I could rely absolutely on Scarlatt's generous truth. 

Thenceforth I felt only compassion, and an anxious desire to 
alleviate the sufferings of my friend. 

"You are right in detesting this wicked man, Sophia," I 
said, "but do not give way to grief. We will find a means of 
freeing you from his cruel dominion much more certain and 
satisfactory than that you had adopted." 

" There is none !" she replied, mournfully, but without 
raising her head from the attitude of powerless dejection into 



120 MATTLEV£EEK'S DITOECE. 

which it had sunk. " The law of England gives the woman to 
the man as a fond slave. I am Luxmoor's. I cannot extricate 
myself from his inexorable coil but by rushing into the arms of 
death. I had obtained myself the promise of a short interreg- 
num, under condition of supplying him with all the proceeds of 
the office I had imagined I had secured for myself at Mauleverer 
Castle. Before you came, I could only resolve upon a desperate 
flight from the designs I saw thickening around me, and the 
discomfort I experienced from the consequences of the villain's 
own suggestions. And now I am all hopeless again; and, in 
addition, branded with the disgrace of a detected hypocrisy, 
organised apparently with a view to deceive the only true and 
trusting friend I have in the world." 

"But I am_ entirely satisfied now that you could not help 
yourself in this, vSophia," I said, in all my old tones of affection. 
" Only tell me, how could you bear to do the behests of a man 
like Luxmoor ? Why did you not rather expose him to the 
world as the cruel, unconscionable wretch he must be ; surely 
some protection from law or right must be found in it for you." 

"I\one whatever!" she replied, with a singular calmness of 
desperation. " JN T one whatever ! If I had even the money to 
purchase it, the law gives no divorce to women who cannot 
prove crimes more horrible than ever Luxmoor has committed 
against me, to justify the demand for a release from a bad hus- 
band's thraldom. But worse than this legal impossibility," 
she added, with a lurid smile, " another exists in my own heart. 
Far from hating Luxmoor . as your happy lover seems to 
believe . I love him ! The curse pronounced on man was only 
labour ; on woman, it was to love the tyrant lords appointed- 
over us. I love this wretch, my husband, Miss Pomeroy ; and 
the love I have entertained for him, and must still entertain to 
the last hour of my existence, is the destined curse and miser- 
able torment of my life ; for there is nothing in him worthy of 
love, and I know it, and I love him still." 



CHAPTER XIII. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Sophia felt the necessity of entering on some explanation of 
the strange anomalies her conduct so visibly presented. In 
the hackneyed phrase _ she told me her story. And I do not 
deny there was much in it worthy of much pity and commi- 
seration. Mine it had, and from my inmost heart ; for every 
lingering sentiment of suspicion and rivalry vanished from it 
as I listened to the tale. 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 121 

I have no reason to think that Sophia exaggerated, or other- 
wise, on this occasion, attempted to give me false impressions. 
But I will relate what she told me, as nearly as I can recall 
the particulars, in her own words, though it is but too certain 
they did not often afford the most reliable gleams of torchlight 
into the secrets of her mysterious and complicated character. 

" I told yoiir mother the truth, but not all the truth, when I 
first presented myself before her," Sophia thus commeuced the 
story of her " distressful chances." " How could I, when I 
had just left the man who was undoubtedly my husband, and 
armed with all the merciless powers English law confers on the 
worst wretches that have a claim to the title, but who had 
behaved so villanously to me that I had resolved to part with 
him for ever, had made up my mind to endeavour to live away 
from him, concealed, on my own exertions, and never to assume 
his name in a country where as yet I was not known by it. 

" A strange thing, was it not ? But you will not think it so 
strange when you hear how it all came to pass. 

"In the first place, do you know why your mother was so 
kind to me when I appeared before her in my deserted plight 
at Mauleverer ? and why your proud father would not.^uffer me 
to find refuge under her benignant protection ? Ah, Miss 
Pomeroy ! your mother might very well have been mine 
instead of yours ! My father was at one time engaged to be 
married to her . when he was an interesting young curate, and 
she was only the fourth portionless daughter of a country 
squire. But your father came in the way, and carried off a 
prize for which mine lacked the energy . the selfishness and 
egotism^ he considered it, poor man ! . but half the people's 
goodness and conscience are only fine names for want of 
courage and activity of spirit to effect what they desire. to 
contend. But still, had your mother been mine, it would 
only have been of advantage to me, probably, in personal 
respects ! I might possibly have been another Helena. and 
worthy of the name . who has only to appear, ' to subdue every 
heart to her sway.' But I should not have been the elder 
Honourable Miss of your name . and to be Miss Sutcliffe still 
more emphatically were of very slight advantage indeed. It 
was bad enough to be so as it was. I reiterate, my poor father 
was starved to death ! I don't mean to say in three or four 
days, so as to make a newspaper catastrophe of it. On the 
contrary, it took him ten years' steady work at it before his 
originally excellent constitution was completely undermined 
by privations and troubles, and he sunk into a formal con- 
sumption. Ah ! I have known the time when I was sorry he 
was not a dancing-master or a singing creature, when I used 
to see the things alighting from their broughams to give 
lessons, at a guinea an hour, while my father toiled afoot 
anywhere with his Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew at half-a- 
crown ! 



122 MAtJLETEEEE ! S DIVORCE. 

" It was his own fault, however, I must admit. he ought not 
to have had a conscience ! Think of a curate with a hundred 
a-year. half deducted, too, hy one trick or other. setting up 
for a conscience ! And after committing matrimony to crown 
the absurdity ! Chiefly, I verily believe, that your mother's 
lingering hesitation on his account might no longer stand in 
her way to what she herself . a little unkindly . had openly 
avowed would otherwise be her choice. 

" Think, too, of his marrying a still poorer young creature 
than himself . purely because she had taken it into her head 
to fall in love with him in the pulpit, seeing him look so pale 
and interesting, in his Sunday lawn, after he found himself 
slighted for the sake of the great Welsh baron ! The mother 
. . poor, artless creature . my grandmother, whom, perhaps, I 
take more after than either of my immediate progenitors . 
could not keep the truth concealed from the gentle, forlorn 
young parson, for the sake of her poor dying child; and he 
took compassion upon the loving thing, you know . and here 
I am ! 

" My mother died when I was very young ; and my child- 
hood, Miss Pomeroy, was spent a good deal under the care of 
my grandmother. She was in most respects, however, the 
reverse of yours. Did you not tell me yours was a tyrannical, 
exacting old hag ? I beg your pardon, dear ! That is not a 
proper, roundabout, mellifluous phrase of society; but it is, 
perhaps, nigher the mark than most of its coinage ! My 
grandmother, then, was the most indulgent, careless old 
woman in the world, thoroughly well skilled in it too ; and . I 
don't mind confessing it to the heiress of a peer of the realm 
who, in her sixteenth year, does not think herself too good for 
a commoner . she was neither more nor less than a fancy 

haberdasher in the little town of S . Not very rich, you 

may conclude. I have even served behind her counter, when I 
was a child . more for amusement, certainly, than aught else. 
Allow me to assure you, I am not such an insensible wretch as 
to be quite indifferent to the disgrace ! What would they think 
of me at Plas Newydd. and even at Mauleverer Castle, where 
they have not quite such a horror, I believe, of everything low 
. if such a rumour had by any chance reached people's ears ? 

" My season of trial came early. My grandmother died . 
and my father took his religious crotchets into his head ! I 
have told you that he was fitted to be an ornament to the 
highest station in the Church ; had abilities, learning, and 
virtue, that would have admirably become a bishopric or a 
deanery, if bishoprics and deaneries were usually bestowed on 
abilities, learning, and virtue. Perhaps they are : I don't say 
they are not ; but then it is necessary to have good patronage 
also. Some people indeed think that the one real requisite ; 
and this also my father, at one time, possessed. But he had 
Tindert akento follow those strange, visionary, will-o'-the-wisps 



Att ATTtOBIOOfiAPnY. 123 

of his that he called convictions . and they led him into a won- 
derful mire ! After all, what is Puseyism ? I can see no great 
harm in it ! Really, for the most part, their innovations, or 
restorations, appear to me chiefly of an ornamental or decorative 
character that no person of taste need object to ! Do they 
expect the devil to come dancing in, in a jack-in-the-green, 
that they make such a noise about a few flowers ? But my 
father chose to have a conscience in the matter . to stand 
obstinately on what I think he styled the evangelical principles 
of the reformed churches ! even so far as to enter into direct 
collision, not only with his rector, but with his patron. His 
lordship . our patron was a lord . and we have not been lucky 
in lords, neither my father nor myself . wished to introduce 
some pretty objects enough, I am sure, into our little old parish 
church, which was already Gothic, and much as it had been left 
when they carried out the whole thing in proper style. An 
embroidered velvet altar-cloth, some handsome gilded candle- 
sticks, perhaps a crucifix, or something of that sort, beautifully 
carved, from Italy ; and my father was so enamoured of bare, 
shabby, whitewashed walls, and an old wormeaten oak table, 
as to object ! Of course we lost our patron, and turned out of 
our curacy, as soon as convenient. My father's learning, good- 
ness, diligence, the universal love of his parishioners, availed 
nothing. Out of our curacy we went, set adrift on the world 
like tame birds from the cage, to pick up worms and maggots 
with the active, unprincipled sparrows, and with hawks sailing 
overhead, in every direction, for a pounce ! 

"To complete our misfortunes, we got into the ecclesiastical 
courts on the questions in dispute, my father being pushed on 
by a number of persons who constituted themselves defenders 
of the true faith Protestant. We had three decisions : one 
against and two for us, and on a final appeal to the Privy 
Council, I think the judgment was pretty exactly divided into 
for and against. Each party was in consequence, very properly, 
mulcted in his own costs. The zeal of my father's backers 
fell off when they found they had only a partial success for 
their money. The little private fortune he possessed vanished 
in the shape of costs ; and he had acquired a reputation for 
zeal and learning that completely finished us up for any more 
curacies. 

" Some kind friends, however, did not desert us. There are 
good people in the world, certainly. They got me into a chari- 
table educational institution, founded and maintained by people 
on our side of the question, of course. But not until I had had 
a bitter seasoning of poverty with my poor father. I have even 
known what wanting bread means . literally. Oh, how 
wretchedly my father and I were off for many a day, Miss 
Pomeroy. 1 am quite sorry for hungry people still, sometimes 
. for hungry children especially. But it was not laziness 
brought it on us : you can't tell what an industrious man my 



121 maTjlevbrer's divokce. 

father was. I am persuaded he was one of the finest scholars, 
as well as best men, that was ever allowed to want for the 
common necessaries of life in England. Think of that. He 
could translate from Greek and Hebrew . and Sanskrit even, I 
believe,. as fluently as I can from French and Italian !. all 
manner of unintelligible stuff he understood. He taught in 
schools ; he taught privately. He read prayers, and did curate's 
duty, without the pay or the name of it, to keep him under the 
hundred a-year act, you know. He wrote sermons ; he chris- 
tened, he buried, he married, he attended the sick . did every- 
thing but give tithe receipts. It struck me as so odd ; my 
father was able to put any one through the Mecanique Celeste, 
that liked to ascend to the empyrean of mathematics, and had 
hardly ever enough to pay his baker's bill on earth. I declare 
that no beggars ever dressed so badly, fed so badly, were shod 
so badly, as -we. the Reverend Edmund Sutcliffe and his only 
daughter. We had often nothing in the house but the thanks 
of some learned foreign body, for some profound communication 
or other. 

"After I had been a few years in the institution I have 
mentioned, my father made a truly Christian end of it. But it 
gives me no great consolation to remember it. Ah, how white, 
how thin, how worn, he lay dying on his poor bed, and in 
arrears of rent for that too. I don't forget his last words either, 
when he saw me crying my eyes out for what, I am sure, if I 
had had any sense of pity for his dear, broken, crushed heart, 
ought to have made me very glad. He spoke in a voice so weak 
and low you would have thought it came from miles away. 
And. I will tell you what his last words . almost. were. ' My 
child,' he said, in that ghostly voice of his, ' you see in what 
affliction and poverty I am lying here, on my bed of death ! 
Had I preferred the world's goods to the integrity of my own 
conscience, before God, I might have been as rich in them . in 
all the pomp and pride and vanities of the world . ay, and with 
much outward approbation and applause of men . as I am now 

Eoor. Yet remember, my child (he was always preaching 
umility and patience to me, and I have profited in some 
measure, I hope, by his lessons), I would not exchange this bed 
of poverty and death, now when I know all but the full meaning 
of both dread words, for all the world could once have offered 
me, at the price.' 

" Don't you think he must have been delirious, Miss Pomeroy, 
to say so ? 

" I went back to school without a relation or friend left that 
cared enough for me to inquire what became of me. It was a 
religious school, you know . a very religious school ! So that I 
admit I have had every advantage to be a good, moral creature. 
I take no credit to myself on that score ! How many poor 
wretches, who have not such opportunities, are brought up 
quite to shock people by their wrong ways of going on ! But 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 125 

this institution only allowed girls to stay in it till they were 
eighteen. Until then, I remained there all safe and comfort- 
able. Then I was obliged to turn out. I had worked terribly 
hard for the purpose, and so I was fit for a good situation at 
once. And at my own earnest desire, the society procured me 
one as under-governess in a family travelling abroad. 

" Mr. Luxmoor was tutor to the elder sons of this family, 
young collegians, whom, at the request of the Marquis of 
Glumstarch, the great personage we all belonged to, he had 
accompanied on a continental excursion. 

" You have seen him. I can't pretend he is a beauty. Some 
people, perhaps, think him ugly. But I never placed much 
stress on mere personal attributes. I had none to boast of very 
particularly myself. Intellect I had always made the god of 
my idolatry ; and Luxmoor possessed it in a degree that excited 
the admiration of men, . a sure passport to women's ! I had 
seen how goodness fared in this world ! Besides, I did not 
know that Luxmoor was a bad man.. He filled a highly re- 
sponsible position in a great family, the mistress of which, at 
all events, was an exceedingly religious l and straight-laced 
woman ; and when he chose, he could put a restraint on his 
passions and appetites, and present himself to all inquiring 
eyes, not only as a decent, but as a highly creditable and 
honourable member of society. 

" His abilities, as I have said, were undeniable. He had 
taken the highest honours in his University, and was one of the 
most popular tutors in it . was fellow of a rich college, and one 
understood to be marked out for high preferment. He was of a 
most respectable family, son of an eminent Church dignitary . 
Dean Luxmoor. He was something of my own early turn of mind 
. free, bold, inquiring in his opinions ; so witty that he seemed 
wise ; as eager as I was, at that time, to enjoy the pleasures of exis- 
tence, which I had not tasted, and with which he had glutted 
himself without being satiate. He had the terrible advantage 
of being a great deal older than I was, without looking so ! 
Ugly people, if he is ugly, don't look old in a hurry ! Neither 
is he old. He wears his green spectacles as a disguise against 
his creditors ; and his baldness is the result of a fever brought 
on by excess of dissipation. 

" Luxmoor seemed to take a fancy to me from my first appear- 
ance on his horizon. He had previously been carrying on a 
flirtation with the head governess ; and, strangely enough, do 
you know, she was your staid essence of propriety, Madame Le 
Crampon ! And the old fool was actually going on the high 
sentimental tack with him . a wooden woman like that, to whom 
nature has scarcely granted the merest animal sensibilities . 
and with him who is as obtuse as a rhinoceros to all the refine- 
ments and delicacies of moral feeling ! The contrast between 
the realities of these people and their pretences struck me at 
once ; and I believe I first attracted Luxmoor's particular 



126 MAULEVEEKB'S D1V0KCE. 

attention by the unsparing fun I made (in English) of him and 
his whalebone amoureuse ! 

" Madame Le Crampon was, as you know, a widow, and nattered 
herself that she had made a conquest, jusqu'au mariage, of the 
laughing but crafty tutor. He never had a thought of the kind ; 
and, I believe, when he turned his affable regards first on me, 
he thought he should have made a still easier prey. But while 
he imagined he was simply entangling me, he was getting him- 
self into a mesh from which, burly as he is, he was not strong 
enough to break, when he came to perceive his danger. In 
brief, Luxmoor fell desperately in love with me . and, finding 
there was no other way for it, was obliged at last to offer me 
marriage. Only this worthy clergyman declared that, as he 
derived the greater portion of his income from his fellowship, 
we should be obliged to conceal our union until some one of his 
numerous patrons kept their words, and conferred on him a 
benefice, sufficient to enable him to live openly, in a style 
worthy of the condition in which he should like to present his 
wife to the world ! The good old monkish customs, it seemed, 
are still kept up at our universities, and produce, of course, 
some of the good old monkish results ! 

" However, as I have told you, I loved Luxmoor, and I am 
very capable of loving with a self-sacrifice and devotion that 
might, perhaps, even vie with the generous enthusiasm of your 
tenderness for Scarlatt. He had acquired with me the greatest 
of all influences over a woman . he was the first that had ever 
stirred the warmer passions of one in my breast. I consented 
to all he advised, accepted his offer, and we were privately 
married. Madame Le Crampon's jealousy was not long in 
enabling her to observe a degree of familiarity between us 
which, perhaps, justified the very unfavourable report shemade 
of mine and the tutor's conduct to the Marquis and Marchioness 
of Glumstarch. The Marquis was indifferent to it . a jolly man 
of the world. But not so the Marchioness ! However, I re- 
mained faithful to my engagements ; bore the insulting scrutiny 
to which I was subjected and consequent reproofs with 
patience, without betraying anything ; and received my dis- 
missal rather than divulge my secret. _ Luxmoor immediately 
declared himself indignant at the injustice of my treatment on 
his account, and dismissed himself. 

" We returned to England ; and with the understanding that 
it was necessary still to keep our marriage a secret, he went 
back to his college in Cambridge, and I followed him in a few 
days to lodgings, which he had taken for me in a quarter of the 
town where I soon found there was a good number of other 
persons in my supposed, not real, condition located. But I 
lived happily enough there for awhile, hoping constantly for 
better days, and fed by assurances from Luxmoor that he should 
infallibly soon reach the object of his expectation, and would 
then be enabled to introduce me to the world in good style as 



AN ATTT0J3I0GBAPHY. 127 

his wife. He devoted to me apparently all the spare hours he 
could snatch from his duties in the university, and took 
pleasure in introducing me into quite a new world of ideas and 
opinions, through the medium of his lively, jeering conversa- 
tion and books. And . though I am not naturally fond of 
study . to please him, I applied myself to acquire all that I 
thought would place me more on a level with his comprehensive 
and audacious intellect. What I learned now, I fear, pretty 
well reversed most of the information instilled in me at my 
religious school ; but you can't tell how it diverted the wretch 
to hear me come out in his own style, even on subjects that 
ought to have been doubly sacred to him in his sacerdotal 
capacity ! But he had not the slightest respect for that, and, 
of course, I soon lost it too. 

" But when I ceased to be a new toy, I' soon found that a 
change came over, not only the spirit, but the body of my dream. 
Luxmoor began to neglect me, and to throw off the mask in 
other very important respects. I found that he was addicted 
to habits of the most disgusting intemperance. He speedily 
destroyed even the slight degree of respectability my anomalous 
position at Cambridge enabled me to preserve, by coming 
repeatedly, in a state of the most dreadful intoxication, to visit 
me. You never saw a drunken man, did you, Miss Pomeroy ? 
It is a line sight at best, I can assure you ; but Luxmoor be- 
comes the most gross, sensual, and disgusting of madmen under 
the influence of drink ! When I remember what I have 
suffered from his brutality on those occasions, I am disposed to 
consider myself almost as vile as himself to have endured so 
much so long. Oh ! those abominable wine-parties ! those 
champagne breakfasts ! At last, while under the spell of his 
detestable vice, he took to bringing all kinds of riotous young 
fellows in his company to finish the day in mine. They were 
ignorant of my true position, and could not be expected to 
entertain much respect for my apparent one. The explosions 
of my irritation seemed to amuse them. I was exposed to insults 
which a husband, with the proper feelings of one, would never 
have allowed his wife to run the danger of encountering. Of 
course my temper was roused, and altercations of a violent 
character became frequent between us. Luxmoor is a perfect 
brute when he is enraged . he will even strike a woman ! I 
bear the marks of one of his cruel blows on my left breast 
still . but much deeper in the heart below it. I have been told 
it may, perhaps, produce a cancer some day. so let it ! 

" Add to all this, that at last I became reduced to want almost 
for the necessaries of life ! Luxmoor was already deeply in 
debt. He had gone through all the very considerable fortune 
left him by his father. But there was no extravagance of 
luxury or sensual gratification that he considered it proper to 
deny himself. His talents had hitherto in some measure enabled 
him to supply this demand on his resources, and stave off the 



128 mauleveeek/s mvoece. 

evil day_ of reckoning with his innumerable creditors. But 
with his increased obligations there seemed to have grown upon 
him a greater recklessness in their discharge. He drank more 
and more. Instead of teaching, he gambled. He is by nature 
the most indolent of creatures, and will only work when neces- 
sity drives him. I was soon so miserably off that I have actually 
been days without a substantial meal. Meanwhile he was 
revelling at his chambers in every kind of luxurious abundance. 
At last I grew tired of it, and broke his solemn injunction that 
I was never to visit him in the college ; and then I found out 
what completed the measure of my disgust and indignation 
against him. 

"I met his laundry- woman on the stairs . a great, fat, oily- 
looking woman, with goggle eyes, and a shape like a feather- 
bed with a rope tightened in the middle. I thought this lady 
asked my business with Mr. Luxmoor in a very saucy, peremp- 
tory, unaccountably assuming manner,. and I daresay I did 
not answer her so obligingly as I generally endeavour, even 
when I consider the questions people put me rather impertinent. 
But my new acquaintance was a fiery one, too ; in fact, she was 
a professional cook as well as laundry-woman, and enjoyed a 
fine reputation among the learned guzzlers of Cambridge for 
her skill in the preparation of certain of their most esteemed 
dishes, which had early recommended her to Mr. Luxmoor 's 
attention. Well, not to make my story too long, we came to 
a rather riotous explanation on the stairs, and I had the grati- 
fication of learning, almost in the same breath, that I was ' a 
Aartful young hussy, that ought to bo reported to the proctors 
for bad behaviour, a-coming after gentlemen in their own 
private chambers, where such creatures as me didn't ought to 
come ever ; and that my denouncer knowed Mr. Luxmoor didn't 
want no such trumpery after him, for he had promised and 
sworn, by all that was good, that although he couldn't, as a 
gentleman, marry her (the lady addressing me), he Would always 
be true and faithful to her as a husband should, and be a father 
to her six small children, which was all his, as he knew very 
well hisself, and had always acknowcolleged, though he couldn't 
openly, for fear of an exposure.' 

" I was hungry when I put my foot on Mr. Luxmoor's 
landing, but this information took away my appetite. I gave 
in a little tamely, perhaps, and went my way, in a very pleasant 
state of mind, you may imagine, home to my lodgings. When 
Luxmoor and I next met we had an explanation, you may 
believe. He came prepared to make a jest of the whole trans- 
action.to confess somewhat of what had been imputed to him 
by his intelligent paramour. but to pass it all off as a circum- 
stance of his bachelor days, with which I had no concern, 
except to join with him in a hearty laugh at Mrs. Ann Thorn- 
ditch's flowers of rhetoric and impudence. He did not find me, 
however, in the mood to see the excellence of the joke. I had 



AST AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 129 

made up my mind, in fact, and announced it to him with some 
little vehemence, that might have persuaded him I was in 
earnest. He should acknowledge me openly for his wife at 
once, and discard this woman for ever from his presence, with 
all her detestable brood, or I would never see or speak to him 
again. 

" Finding me in earnest, he endeavoured certainly to soothe 
me. He declared there was nothing he was more desirous of 
than to get rid of this huge admiress of his, who continued to 
persecute him with marks of her affection years after he had 
been totally disgusted and weary of her. As to the six children, 
there were at least as many other persons in the university who 
had as good a claim as himself to the imputed honours of the 
paternity ; but it would be impossible for him to stir in the 
matter at that time, he urged, unless he wished to render his 
position absolutely untenable. Ann Thornditch was a woman 
of the most outrageous violence of temper, and totally reckless 
of consequences ; and then, as to openly admitting his marriage 
with me, not only would it drive her into a paroxysm of rage 
and vengeance, in which she would do anything, but it would 
put him immediately in the grasp of his creditors, whom he 
had only been enabled to quiet by dividing among them the 
revenue derived from his fellowship, which about enabled him 
to pay interest on the capital of the sum due to them. 

" I favoured Luxmoor with my ideas on his conduct, you may 
imagine, with some energy . insomuch that he complimented 
me on the possession of powers of language which, he said, would 
qualify me to cut a brilliant figure among the female. not 
feminine . literatse of the age. Sneering was his great art . . 
he is supreme in it when he chooses, and is properly inspired by 
the malignancy of his feelings. My reply was, that, as that 
was the third day I had not dined, I was glad to hear that 
there might be a possibility of my earning an honest living 
independent of the noble exertions made by him to maintain 
me in a state of affluence. ' Here's what does instead of every- 
thing else, my love,' was his reply, and he produced a couple of 
bottles of burgundy from under his great-coat. He wanted to 
teach me to drink, too, I verily believe : a drunken woman 
would have been a fitter companion, you know, for a drunkard's 
orgies. I did not taste his wine, but I renewed my own threat 
unless he complied with my demand. He kept drinking on all 
the time the quarrel lasted . and it rose so high at last that the 
landlady came in, declared herself completely tired of such 
scenes, and gave me notice to quit. I accepted it very promptly ; 
and in my passion appealed to the woman on the shameful man- 
ner I was treated, openly announcing in what relation I stood 
to the man before us. It was then that he struck me. 

" But, even after all that. even after that blow, which still 
makes my whole frame tremble with indignation, and a pain 

K 



130 MATOEVEEER S DIVORCE. 

worse than any my flesh suffered ;. I don't know that I could 
have had the courage to leave him . as it seemed . for ever. 
Don't you think I must have loved this man . this brute . Miss 
Pomeroy, when I forgave him all this, and had almost patched 
up a reconciliation with him on the sole condition that he should 
order Ann Thornditch never again to make her appearance in 
his chambers ? But I soon found he did not keep his word. 
She drank, too ; and she came to insult me, on more than one 
occasion, with the assurance that ' I hadn't a-tumed the rever- 
end gent's 'art from her, try what I would, impudent minx, with 
my lies about being married to him, Mr. Luxmoor, the father 
of her six, small, orphanless babes ; owdacious, intermeddling 
young slut that I was, to pretend to no such thing ! She'd let 
me know ! ' And once or twice, I narrowly escaped a personal 
chastisement at her hands, besides a mobbing in the streets. 
Yet when I complained to Luxmoor, he only laughed ; declared 
he was a sort of clerical Macbeath, with a still more incompatible 
Polly and Lucy ; and wished that he was a Mormon elder, that 
we might ail live harmoniously together. 

" I grew weary of insults and hunger, at last. I even began 
to think that, after all, this mother of ' six small orphanless 
babes ' had the better right, because the prior one, to my spouse; 
more especially when he crowned all his wickedness by jeer- 
ingly telling me that as we were only married by a Catholic 
priest, in Paris, he, as a sound Protestant, was not of opinion 
that he was any worse, or better, than a bachelor still. At all 
events, I should have some little difficulty in proving my mar- 
riage, at Cambridge, so as quite to ruin him. _ At last, one fine 
morning when, in some lit of tender inebriation, he had made 
me a present of a ten-pound note just received from a pupil who, 
he said. and I thought, with a peculiar intention. had made it 
a condition that ' Miss Sutclifl'e ' should at least have a share in 
it . that fine morning (it really was a very fine one), I put 
myself, and the i'ew clothes I could abstract unobservedly from 
my lodgings, in the coach for London. 

" It was quite by chance that, in looking over my scanty 
wardrobe for the purpose of selection, I lighted on the letter 
which my father had given me, dying, to present to your mother. 
I knew, for he had told me, that in it he recommended me, in 
the most earnest and solemn terms, to her kindness and pro- 
tection. He thought that the memory of old times would still 
have the degree of influence with her that he needed not to die 
with the conviction that he left me without a single friend, or 
kindly overlooker, in the world. 

" You know the result of my application to Lady Mauleverer. 
But among the Suetts here, I imagined, for some time, I had 
found a secure and comfortable asylum. They all liked me 
very much at first. even young Ap Howel, who hates me so 
much now. My wretch of a husband's doings again ! . I can 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 131 

hardly tell you how he found me out. I know he had Mr. 
Scarlatt already in some training in his own dissolute ways at 
Cambridge. He was not his tutor, indeed . Dr. Stillcoke was 
then. but he had met with him at some of the riotous young 
men's parties, and, according to a common trick of his, had him 
in hand to extract what he could out of him, under pretence of 
' putting him up ' to university and gold-tuft ways. _ I suppose 
Mr. Suett must have mentioned me in some nonsensical, wine- 
flushed prating, after his vacation home ; and Luxmoor is so 
cunning, he speedily identified the governess at Plas Newydd 
with his stray wife. Particularly as, to obtain your mother's 
recognition, I was obliged to preserve my real name. 

" He wrote to me at once, with all the insolent authority of 
the relationship he had so perseveringly refused to acknowledge, 
ordering me to return to him. He threatened all kinds of ex- 
posure if I did not ; but my only answer was to inform him that 
if he drove me to despair, I would rather perish than return to 
him under the miserable circumstances in which I had left him. 
I was maddened, and I openly defied him. So he saw that plan 
was not the right one, and he wrote again to me . the most 
miserably affecting, penitential letter you would have thought 
it possible for even so ingenious a rascal to indite. He declared 
himself perfectly weary of his life in the university, devoured 
by debt, persecuted wherever he went by the relentless affection 
of Ann Thornditch. He was now ready, most desirous, openly 
to acknowledge our union, forfeit his fellowship, and escape 
from the university and his ponderous inamorata for good and 
ever. In fact, my repeated angry declarations had reached 
the ears of people in authority, and he had now little more than 
the choice of a resignation, or of a disgraceful expulsion. To 
crown all, he had discovered, in the sufferings inflicted upon 
him by my absence, how fondly and wholly he loved me still. 
Life, in short, was insupportable to him, out of my company, 
and he was determined to come into Wales and rejoin me at 
every risk. It would be the best possible means, besides, of 
breaking with the university, while it would afford him a very 
desirable seclusion for a time from the persecutions of Ann 
Thornditch and his creditors. 

" God pity me ! how I must still have loved the crafty wretch. 
How the idea of rescuing him from my greasy rival must still 
have been paramount in my mind. The quarrel between Mr. 
Scarlatt and Stillcoke happened too at this time, unluckily. 
Well, yielding to my infatuated hopes in his improvement, and 
fear of the, exposure threatened, I was idiot enough to interest 
myself to get Mr. Luxmoor the vacant tutorship. I was in 
great favour then with Mrs. Suett, and it was almost a sufficient 
recommendation to her that he had filled the situation in ques- 
tion in the family of a Marquis. Mr. Scarlatt himself had very 
favourable impressions already of the person whose claims I 

k 2 



132 MAULEVEEEE's DIVOECE. 

advocated. Finally, I was allowed to offer him the situation. 
And I did so. under conditions every one of which he violated 
in succession, excepting, as I imagined, avowing the relations 
between us. But I find he has also broken even that." 

"Perhaps he was jealous, Sophia !" I observed, with a feeling 
that I did not pause to analyze, but a very painful one. 

" Jealous ! when it was he who first . jestingly in tone, to be 
sure. drew my attention to the fact of the particular notice 
taken of me then by Mr. Scarlatt . when it was he who urged 
upon meto endeavour to cultivate my influence over him, so 
that I might secure him the capital living in the gift of the 
family,. when he kept stimulating the young man on his im- 
proper course by all sorts of challenges and incentives. Inso- 
much that I at last took the notion he purposed to get rid of me 
by thrusting me upon another ! . involving me in a criminality 
which frees men from the obligations they very often, I suppose, 
come to the conclusion they have injudiciously taken upon 
themselves. ±\or am I convinced to the contrary by the seem- 
ingly rebuking declaration he made to Mr. Scarlatt. He is 
base enough, perhaps, to have expected, by such an avowal, not 
to turn him from his pursuit, but to render success in it a very 
costly affair to him, and a means of replenishing his own purse. 
A bad wife is wortli more than a good one sometimes, you 
know, in England. But now tell me, darling, do you think it 
at all likely that for the sake of such a man as Luxmoor, I 
should have done aught to deserve Sir Vivian's wretched sus- 
picions ? I tell you, I had actually bought from him, at the 
price of all I might earn, the privilege of living unmolestedly 
at a distance from him with your dear self, when . but what has 
really happened between you ? I have disguised nothing from 
you now ! "Will you not tell me all ?" 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A WEDDING WITHOUT FAVOURS. 

And I did tell her all, thoroughly satisfied that my harmful 
suspicions were unfounded. All, at least, that related to the 
rash engagement I had entered into. Of course I did not wound 
Sophia's feelings by any more direct allusion to the opinion 
entertained of her conduct, towards himself, by Scarlatt. 1 had 
even the unkind candour to apologize for Ap Howel's suspicions, 



A WEDDING WITHOUT FAVOUES. 1 S3 

by mentioning the offer of his boyish affections he had made me, 
as if recognizing that an absurd jealousy and spite had prompted 
his accusations. 

Sophia laughed a good deal at the statement. She passed 
with inconceivable rapidity from one mood to another. But 
she did not forget so readily. This scrap of information was 
treasured up for a future use ! But with regard to my consent to 
Scarlatt' s proposition, she resumed all her seriousness. 

Under the circumstances of our position, it was a difficult and 
invidious effort on her part. But I must do Sophia the justice 
to say . -whatever were her motives . that she expressed a very 
great unwillingness to give her approval to the hasty resolution 
we had adopted. 

I repeated to her all the arguments Scarlatt had previously 
urged to obtain my consent. The hopelessness of ever winning 
my father's sanction save to what was irrevocable, was the prin- 
cipal one respecting him. For Scarlatt himself, the generosity 
pf his own intentions and devotion pleaded, as it seemed, very 
powerfully with her also. 

" I did not give him credit for such true and high-toned 
feeling!" she said. "He is worthy of you, and you of him! 
What a happiness for you ! Almost on no other possible condi- 
tions could the heiress of Mauleverer have acquired the certainty 
of being loved for herself alone ! No, I would not in the least 
deny him the just reward of so much disinterestedness and 
honour ! But might not the object be accomplished at a less 
hazard ? Do you know that there are very severe penalties for 
what may well be considered the abduction of a girl of your 
tender age ? And your father will take every revenge on the 
Suetts he can, you may depend !" 

" He can disinherit me ; and that is enough, I should think. 
And I should be glad of it !" 

" JN T o !" replied Sophia, rather too precipitately, " he cannot ! 
The barony of Mauleverer, and by far the greater portion of the 
landed property attached to the title, descend even to a female 
heir. Your father cannot prevent it." 

I myself did not know this. It had never occurred to me to 
feel any curiosity on the subject. I looked at Sophia in some 
surprise and misgiving . which she perceived and hastened to 
reassure. 

" Your mother honoured me with some confidence when I 
was at Mauleverer, and she often told me so," was her ingenious 
falsehood. " But I only mention it now as an additional reason 
against precipitation. Is not my fate even some warning to 
women not to place themselves too unreservedly in the power of 
men . Have you forgotten the caution I gave you ? Unless 
some regular settlements of your rights are made for you before 
marriage, and by very cunning lawyers too, do you know what 
the law of England will do for you ? It will hand over all you 



131 JSTAUXEVEBEB'S DIVOKCE. 

possess, or ever may possess, in the way of personal property, as 
an absolute gift to your husband ! And he will have the sole 
administration of any landed property that may be yours during 
your life, and after your death too, if you should happen to 
leave any children behind you !" 

" And do you not remember my answer, Sophia? That I 
would never wed the man whom I could suspect of such mean- 
ness of heart and character as to render such precautions against 
him necessary !" 

"Did I suspect Luxmoor?" she answered with a quaint 
smile. " It is true, I had nothing . but myself . and how did 
he treat that property ? But now, if I had brought the man a 
hundred thousand pounds, he would probably have reduced me 
to die a beggar ; or, if anything had remained from his extrava- 
gance, he might have left it as an inheritance to his laundry- 
woman's little bastards!" 

It is impossible to tell how indignant I felt at the bare 
notion of such a comparison ! Why did she continue _to_ fret 
me with this useless opposition ? Was it not further to irritate 
me in my determination ? . to stir the half-extinguished embers 
of jealousy in my heart ? PerlfUps to convince me still more 
emphatically of the falsehood of Ap Howel's insinuations ! 

I did not like these reiterated objections at all. _ But 
assuredly it was not the malignant and overbearing spirit of 
control and distrust which she afterwards denounced, that 
inspired the declaration I made in consequence. I know 
Sophia has imputed to me the great unhappiness of several of 
her subsequent years. But with justice? No ! Since I had 
myself loved, since she had persuaded me that she_ loved 
Luxmoor, I imagined it impossible in reality to enjoy existence 
in the absence. least of all in the alienation. of the beloved 
object. I thought I could effect nothing more truly beneficial 
and desirable for all parties than a reconciliation between this 
discordant, but still attached husband and wife. 

I proposed this to Sophia. I told her that my courage would 
fail me, unless I had her company and countenance in my 
flight to Scotland ; adding, with a sincere smile of affection 
and trust, that the best, the only security she could give me 
that thenceforth Scarlatt was nothing to her but the husband 
of her friend, would be a reconciliation with her own. It was 
already arranged that Luxmoor was to accompany us. All 
that her just pride and scruples could demand he had declared 
himself willing to comply with. A public acknowledgment of 
her as his wife, and withdrawal from the university, would 
put an end to her annoyances from Ann Thornditch. And in 
all pecuniary respects, until I could myself provide substan- 
tially and lastingly for her, she and her husband should share 
with Scarlatt and myself whatever means the liberality of the 
former's father might place for awhile at our disposal. 



A WEDDING WITHOUT FAVOURS. 135 

I think she was in reality a little affected by my loving 
earnestness. 

" Dear, dear child !" she said tenderly, "what a true, kind, 
generous heart . to be a sacrifice on such an altar !" And she 
looked at me for a moment musingly . very mournfully, indeed. 
" Yet what can the best of us ask more of fate ?" she continued, 
as if rallying some internal resolution, " than to have . even 
only in semblance . what we desire? I will give you the 
greatest possible proof it certainly is in my power to afford you, 
that the hope of blinding gazers to the facts of my comfortless 
and degrading position with Carolus Luxmoor, was the chief 
motive of my foolish coquetry with Scarlatt Suett ; and I will 
be the wife of the worst of husbands again, purely to give your 
dear heart complete satisfaction . on the conditions you name, 
or on none !" 

The arrangements for our flight were speedily completed. It 
was agreed that the carriage which was to convey Luxmoor 
and his pupil to the nearest railway station . then considerably 
distant. was to wait for Sophia and me also at the Kerig y 
Drudion. 

Thither accordingly, on the following day, at a concerted 
hour, under pretext of taking a walk together, Sophia and I 
hastened, each carrying under our cloaks . to wear which the 
now chilly and misty autumn weather gave us some excuse . a 
bundle of absolute necessaries in the way of clothing. 

We seated ourselves on the stones of the monument, to await 
the arrival of the vehicle, which was to start very shortly after 
us from Plas Newydd. 

I confess that my heart died away within jne, during that 
pause of destiny, with a hitherto unknown, but deep and 
deadly sentiment of dread. 

The space of five short weeks had completely revolutionized 
my whole existence. I had left Hauleverer Castle a head- 
strong, fearless girl ; I was now an all-confiding, submissive, 
timorous woman. 

I looked at Sophia. The inexplicably tranquil, fathomless 
smile of her prototype, the sphinx, was on her countenance. 

Chance and. my evil star had done for her all that might other- 
wise have been the work of years and of great difficulty, even 
danger. She was satisfied. 

I was not. I had received a new intuition. I had begun to 
consider all that was strange, precipitated, heedless in my 
conduct, and to view myself for a few moments with the eyes of 
the world's judgment. This illumination had been in a manner 
burned into me by the fixed, uneasy, all-questioning gaze 
young Ap Howel had turned upon me as often as we met for 
the last two days. Since the hour of my explanation with 
Scarlatt Suett, he perceived something unusual, doubtless, 
and that required explanation in my look and demeanour. I 



13G maitleyerer's divorce. 

knew myself how flushed were my cheeks . what a novel 
brilliancy lighted my eyes . what a gay and bounding spirit 
lifted my footsteps wherever I went. And I had encountered 
Vivian so often that day, that I was annoyed with the suspicion 
of being watched. Nor did he appear to be solitary in his 
forebodings. That very morning, Gelert, after enduring a good 
deal of neglect certainly, had disappeared from Plas Newydd, 
as if aware of my intention also to desert it. 

Sophia and I were sitting, as I have said, on these mystic 
stones, when a light footstep struck on our hearing, and the 
unwelcome presence of the young baronet was obvious to us 
both, coming from the interior of the Kerig y Drudion. And I 
remember it struck us both with alarm, when we observed that 
he carried a pair of pistols, one in each hand. The use of these 
weapons was, however, habitual with him, and was one of the 
marked signs of his strong military tastes. 

He addressed us with his customary abruptness. 

" You are haunted with rather unusual pertinacity by your 
very partial duenna to-day, Miss Pomeroy," he said, without 
the caution he generally observed not to mention my name. 

' ' There is occasion for it, Sir Vivian. Miss Pomeroy is haunted 
more pertinaciously than usual by her most eager and presump- 
tuous lover ! " replied Sophia, with smiling bitterness. 

Vivian glanced at me, and he perceived in my blush that his 
loving secret was betrayed. For a moment his own pale cheek 
Hushed, but he returned the mockery in Sophia's glance with 
one full of indignation and scorn. 

" To be plain with you, then, Madame Sutcliffe," he said, "I 
want to speak with Miss Pomeroy alone! and, if you refuse me 
that advantage, I must explain to her more clearly than I have 
yet thought it necessary why you are the most unfit counsellor 
in the world for a young and virtuous lady ! " 

_ " Explain what you will, Sir Vivian," she replied, with an 
air of calm defiance, "Miss Pomeroy is aware that I am the 
toifc of the Reverend Carolus Luxmoor. And now what can 
you say to my disparagement ? Have not you men. you con- 
sider yourself a man, don't you ? . imposed upon us a promise, 
in the presence of God, to obey our husbands in all things? 
Well, we can't always honour you, you know ; but we can 
always obey you ! " 

He was silent for a moment with surprise, while Sophia, 
coolly taking off her left-hand glove, allowed him to perceive 
that she now wore a plain gold ring on the third finger. 

"Well, after all, there is nothing very amazing in it!" 
Vivian replied, drawing a long breath. " For a witch to make 
a match of it with Old Nick himself was nothing very astonish- 
ing in the middle ages, however ! " Then turning to me, he 
exclaimed in eager and excited tones, "But why are you here 
with this bad, bad woman, Miss Pomeroy . all the worse if she 



A WEDDING WITHOUT FAVOURS. 137 

is in reality under some lawful bond to yonder wretch, Searlatt 
Suett's worthy tutor ? " 

" Allow me to tell you, Sir Yivian ! " replied Sophia, yielding 
to the excess of her exasperation at these words, " Miss Pomeroy 
is waiting here for the vehicle which is to convey her and her 
duenna and her affianced bridegroom, and his tutor, Old Nick, 
to Gretna Green. where Love, you know, laughs at jealous 
i-'vals and angry papas alike, till his little sides are like to 
burst!" 

"Is this so, Hugh-Helena?" he said, and the deep, melan- 
choly, though still boyish tones seem even now to echo in my 
heart. 

" Yonder is the carriage ! Four of the owner of Howel 
Mynydd's best horses dashing in it, to give the more pomp and 
circumstance to our departure hence ! What did you expect 
to see, that you stare so amazed? A chariot drawn by fiery 
dragons? . A lame boy would not speedily overtake even so 
commonplace a conveyance as a donkey-cart might have been ! " 
pursued Sophia, vengefully pointing to the approaching vehicle. 

" Lead, wingedwith fire, can, though ! " replied Vivian, with 
a glance at his pistols, that struck me with the deepest terror ; 
and he cooked them both on the word with a simultaneous action 
of his nervy fingers. I now interposed . 

"What do you mean, Sir Vivian?" I exclaimed, angrily. 
"I am going away from Plas Newydd by my own will and 
pleasure ! What control have you over my movements ." 

"Why, what madness inspires you, Hugh-Helena?" he re- 
turned, gazing at me with his whole imploring soul in his eyes. 
"Have they persuaded you that you are abandoned by your 
father because so long a delay has taken place ? . Know then 
that I have just received a letter from him ! . that he is at 
Mauleverer !. that he has been delayed by being out yachting 
on the Mediterranean.. But such is his hatred and contempt of 
the people here, that he will not come to Plas Newydd, even to 
retrieve a child whom he loves so dearly, as it is plain to me 
nowhe loves you, for he has travelled day and night, without 
ceasing, since he received Miss Sutcliffe's letter. He authorises 
me to assure you of his forgiveness, and to escort you at once 
home to Mauleverer . in this woman's company, he says ; but 
that cannot be, knowing what I know of her ! And, Hugh- 
Helena, Hugh-Helena!" he added, with wild eagerness, pro- 
ducing a letter, "look what your father says, besides !. That 
he hopes I will endeavour to make myself of as much impor- 
tance to you in the office as possible, for that nothing would 
give him more satisfaction than to have an Ap Howel for a 
son-in-law !" 

Sophia laughed aloud; and when she chose her laugh was 
like the fluttering of winged serpents round your head, sting- 
ing without alighting ! 



138 matjievekek's divorce. 

"You can tell him, if he is so anxious for a son-in-law of 
distinguished name, that he can have one of his own ! It needs 
only a gracious permission to change Suett into Pomeroy, and 
the nobleman of nature's making will also be one of the herald's 
manufacture !" she said, scarcely pausing in her scornful mirth. 

" In God's name, Hugh-Helena, do not listen to diabolical 
suggestion, or at least reserve your decisive resolution until you 
have asked the counsel of your father. of your fond and gentle 
mother ! " 

" You mean, until your proposed father-in-law has had time 
to make Miss Pomeroy a ward in Chancery . and to make it 
something a little short of high treason to look at her without 
an order from a master in that right honourable and rather 
slow-going court ! " Sophia jeered. " However, I must not have 
you teasing my charge ; she has need of all her best nerve and 
coolness at present ? Or have you really some notion, Miss 
Pomeroy, of returning to a thousand times stricter captivity 
and surveillance at Mauleverer Castle, until you make up your 
mind to wed this last of a used-up race instead of the founder 
of a vigorous new one ? . If not, I shall wave my handkerchief 
to hasten our friends to the rescue ! . Tut, Sir Vivian, you will 
not frighten me with your popguns ! . You might hit me with 
your crossbow ; but I should think you would miss a mountain 
with weapons so modern as these !" 

" Base woman ! but they were not meant for yoii," returned 
the lad, with a gloomy glare in the direction of the now near 
vehicle. Sophia continued to wave her handkerchief defyingly, 
and in a few instants the speed of the four spendid horses, 
which it was part of the elder Suett's state to exhibit on any 
occasion of family display, conveyed his eldest son and his tutor 
to the spot. 

Scarlatt leaped out of the vehicle instantly and approached 
me, without even observing Vivian, in his first eagerness of 
triumph and love. " Dearest ! all is right ! All is well ! I am 
already the happiest of men ! " And he clasped me with raptu- 
rous delight in his arms, and was about to hasten with me to 
the carriage, when he suddenly confronted Vivian. 

There was that in the young lad's murky visage which for a 
moment made Scarlatt pause, and almost relinquish his hold 
of me. 

" What the devil do you mean, Sir Vivian ? " he said, after a 
moment's startled consideration. " Are you here to murder 
me, like an assassin and a coward, after all your fine talk of 
being a soldier and a gentleman ? " 

" No !" replied the boy, with stern concision. " Take one of 
my weapons, and go with me a few paces into the cavern before 
us. Whichever of us comes out alive will then be rid of what 
must else prove, in a worse manner, a mortal foe." 

" You must be mad ! What mortal foe am I to you, boy ? " 



A WEDDING WITHOUT FAVOUHS. 139 

returned Scarlatt in undisguised astonishment, and declining 
with a gesture the offered arm. 

Vivian was silent for an instant, while his forehead rose 
in veiny corrugations with the workings of internal agitation. 
He spoke at last. "This young lady is Lord Mauleverer's 
daughter ; she is confided to my protection by her father ; and 
though she is herself ignorant of the fact, our grandfathers, 
who were jovial companions and friends, promised us to each 
other in the cradle, at a time when I was not a beggar nor she 
an heiress. You have cajoled her into forgetfulness of the duty 
she owes her family, and the nobility of her blood, and would 
lure her into a disgraceful elopement, and union with yourself. 
This shall not be. Let her leave this place at once with me, or 
take this weapon and pass with her on your way over my dead 
body ! " 

We were all silent, and at a standstill with amazement. 

" So you want to fight a duel with me, do you ? " said Sear- 
latt, at last ; " or is this mere bravado, because you Tcnoio that I 
have always condemned the practice as a barbarism of the past, 
and declared that I would never raise my hand in a private 
quarrel 1 ?" 

I own these words did not affect me pleasingly, though I was 
quaking but a moment before with terror, lest any harm should 
befall my lover from the wild lad's menaces. 

" Then you are A coward ! and I have always thought you 
one ! " was the passionate rejoinder. 

Scarlatt's usually florid complexion grew of a perfectly 
bloodless hue ; a much more fearful demonstration of internal 
feeling than the darkest flush. But he made no other observa- 
tion than turning to inquire of me, "Are you ready, dearest? 
"Will you come ? The child's crazy ! " 

"I will come. Oh, Vivian ! would you commit a murder? 
"What are you staring at? What are you thinking of?" I 
ejaculated, and gliding between the fearful boy and his adver- 
sary, I ventured to lay both my hands on his knotted grasp, 
and sink the weapons gradually down. 

" A murder ? " he repeated vacantly, and almost like a 
person rousing from a perturbed, opium slumber. "He will not 
defend himself, then. And this is the man you have chosen for 
a husband, daughter of a hundred bright- branded chevaliers ! 
No matter ; no matter. Answer me but one question. Do you 
really love this man, after what you have seen ? " 

" With my whole soul, with my whole heart ! " I replied, 
anxious to deprive him of all further incentive to interference. 

" He is your husband, then, in the sight of God," he 
answered, with a wild and haggard look. " Let him become 
so also in the sight of man . in my sight . before you leave this 
valley, and I am content. Your honour will then be assured. : 
but these men are base enough to place even that at their 
mercy." 



110 3IAULEVEKEK'S DIVOItCE. 

"What do mean?" inquired Scarlatt, with irrepressible 
amazement. 

" This grinning 1 jackal, Luxmoor, is yet a priest ; these 
stones support what was once a temple. Be united by such 
formulas as he should have at command, in my presence, and go 
in peace. Otherwise I will kill the first man, or the first 
woman, even, who dares to attempt removing Miss Pomeroy 
from my protection." 

"_ I have heard that the Ap Howels have been mad for genera- 
rations, though they have never been placed in strait-waist- 
coats. You are keeping up the charter, Sir Vivian ; but upon 
my honour I have not the slightest objection to the plan," said 
Scarlatt, laughing, though scarcely with the satisfaction he 
announced. 

"It is so much time gained, and 'making assurance doubly 
sure ; though that is no great advantage when we are forging 
the chains of Hymen," said the horrid Luxmoor, with a pecu- 
liar leer at his wife. " Yet for my own part, too, I have no 
objection to make, though we are scarcely going to work canoni- 
cally, I fear. You always carry your father's prayer-book with 
you, I know, Sophia, as an amulet against the old gentleman. 
We shall manage it. Have at you, my hearties ! " 

And this unreverend clerk began to mutter the matrimonial 
service from a little, old, crumpled book Sophia handed to him, 
while we all walked, in a strange kind of mechanical obedience, 
under the stones of the ancient temple of human sacrifice. It 
was a fitting one in which to make an English wife ! 



CHAPTEE XV. 

A EUNAWA? MATCH. 

I have dwelt, perhaps, at too great length on the series of 
chances and contrivances that led to my very early and impru- 
dent marriage. But these are not unnecessary preliminaries to 
the story of its barbarous and unjust dissolution. There is 
scarcely a particular I have recorded but throws some dark 
illuminating ray on the futurity in store for me ! 

I shall hasten, however, over all that seems to me of minor 
importance in the progress of events towards my great cata- 
strophe. 

Immediately after that strangely impromptued ceremony of 



A ET/XAWAY HATCH. Ill 

union between Scarlatt Suett and _ myself, at the Kerig y 
Drudion, he led me to the carriage in waiting for us. Sophia 
and Luxmoor followed. Sir Vivian disappeared as soon as the 
abrupt ceremonial was brought to a conclusion. And though 
it was very difficult to imagine that such could be the case, 
Scarlatt at once declared his object in insisting on its per- 
formance was an expectation that it would induce us to delay 
our flight, either until Lord Mauleverer could have time to 
arrive at Plas Newydd, or come upon us in pursuit. Such a 
marriage with a minor might easily be set aside ! _ It was, 
therefore, more than ever necessary to hasten our flight into 
Scotland. He had only assented to what had been done, 
because, armed as the lad was, and evidently seized with a tit 
of insanity, he must have hazarded his life to take his weapons 
from him, and could not, besides, answer for what he might 
have done to the "young devil" himself, in the event of a 
struggle. 

We proceeded accordingly, at the utmost possible speed of 
horse and rail, into Scotland, and went through the degrading, 
farcical ceremony of a marriage in the border style of celebra- 
tion . if celebration it can be called . in the presence of the two 
Luxmoors. I remember with what a deep feeling of humilia- 
tion and shame I found myself standing before a great, raw- 
boned Scotchman, who looked infinitely more like a Highland 
drover than a priest, and smelt of tobacco and whisky all 
around, on the tile-paved floor of a toll-bar hovel . listening to 
an assurance that I was as firmly married as if all the bishops 
in England has assisted in the operation ! . really with one of 
unutterable dismay and disgust ! But so the brawny forger of 
hymeneal chains declared to me, no doubt observing my con- 
sternation ; while Luxmoor laughed, and, with his inexpres- 
sibly offensive leer, observed. but I will not repeat what he 
observed. 

But for my previous marriage, by some formula of the Esta- 
blished Church, I do not think that I should have deemed 
myself married at all ! No friends . no smiling father . no tear- 
glistening mother there ! . the whole vulgar, hasty rite appeared 
to me an unblest profanation . the buffoon mockery of a sacred 
ceremonial. There was an inexpressible despondency and 
melancholy in my heart, as we made for the little neighbour- 
ing_ inn, where we were at length to rest from our long and 
fatiguing journey. I am convinced that had not Sophia been 
with me to dispel the terror and gloomy feelings . true pre- 
sentiments ! . that gathered round me, not all the bewildering 
passion and tenderness _ and cajolery of Scarlatt could have in- 
duced me to regard him as a veritable husband, until some 
more holy and solemn rite had declared him so. 

What a divinely beautiful evening it was, too ! What a sun- 
set of polished gold shone over the whole sky, as we stepped in 



142 HAHLEVEBER'S DIYOKOE. 

at our little hostel-door, to partake of such repast as Luxmoor' s 
zealous purveyance had been enabled to secure us ! 

How comes it that I recall, almost with my organs of sense, 
the rich perfume of the honeysuckle and sweetbriar that clus- 
tered over the doorway of the rustic inn ? The wild screeching 
drone of a bagpipe, played to divert us at dinner by a wander- 
ing old fellow with a hard visage, as weather-stained and 
many-hued as the coarse plaid he wore, seems still to vibrate 
on my ears ! That ill-furnished, but not unsavoury repast of 
ham and eggs, though it vainly wooed my appetite, won the 
high and substantial commendations of the epicure Luxmoor. 
And, though tears were continually springing to my eyes, and 
from the depths of my heart, I remember no banquet at which 
I have since sat where the talk surpassed in joyous hilarity the 
triumphant gaiety of my three commensals. Never was Sophia's 
display of wit more brilliant ; but it was like one of fireworks, 
that diffuse splendour without light! And when she and I 
were alone after the repast, I can well recollect that we sobbed 
in one another's arms as if our parting was to be for some dis- 
astrous doom. There was no good omen in her words as she 
left me, indeed ! " You are twice a wife, dearest ! What are 
you talking about \ " she exclaimed. "Twice a icife! . and I 
can tell you, there comes a time to a good number of married 
folks . there was one with me not so very long ago, before you 
reconciled poor dear Luxmoor and myself so delightfully !. 
when they consider themselves a little too much married with 
being so once !" 

And thus, by her own headstrong, unreasoning act of devo- 
tion did the heiress of Mauleverer place herself, and all that 
might be hers, unreservedly in the power of a husband, . a title 
which in so many other instances has been the only distinction 
from a professed and open pillager and oppressor. 

Yet Scarlatt could persuade me that he rejoiced chiefly in our 
stolen marriage, because he believed that, for aught besides 
myself and the nobility of birth to which our union allied him, 
he must remain dependent on my father's forgiveness and 
favour. He could convince me that he felt grieved rather than 
exultant in the information I thought I gave him . that it was 
not so ; that my girlish Cinderella fancy would be realized, and 
that I brought him the dowry of a peerage and of the large 
landed property of my ancestry. 

And yet there was something in his reply that thoroughly 
chilled my fond enthusiasm, when I told him this. "So, 
sweetest," he said ; " I cannot hope to share your honours un- 
less I achieve a political position of my own, and can demand 
it of a ministry. And you must not think I shall content my- 
self with being the mere husband and satellite, shining with 
reflected light, even of my adored and beautiful baroness. You 
know I am your lord and master in theory: I shall not be 



A ItT/NAWAY. MATCH. 143 

happy until I am so in reality ; . I mean so far as regards the 
first." 

Not happy, then . not happy until a gewgaw sound was 
added to his name ! 

Scarlatt wrote from this Scottish inn what I imagined was the 
first revelation of my true identity to his mother ; and thence 
we continued our wedding excursion. partly with a view to 
concealment, partly because my admiration of the writings of 
Scott made his favourite ground the most tempting possible to 
me . into the Highlands. 

The two Luxmoors were still in our party. Indeed I would 
not listen to the suggestion Sophia made, that we ought to part 
company, in order to mislead or distract pursuit. I could not 
bear the thought of parting from her. She was my last firm 
hold on the past ; the last assurance I possessed that, in yield- 
ing- to my tenderness for Scarlatt Suett, I had not done a rash, 
almost an inexcusable thing. 

She had an infinitude of arguments, of reasoning, to satisfy 
my now perpetually resurging doubts on this point. It was 
not that my love for my husband was not yet more absorbing, 
impassioned, all-concentrating than that I had borne for my 
lover ; but comprehension of the social fault I had committed 
dawned upon me in a thousand unexpected lights, and I needed 
the constant support of Sophia's defying and mutinous genius 
to feel satisfied that I had not too far overstepped worldly rules 
of right by so bold a stride. 

Hitherto she had carefully veiled from my inexperience, as 
well as from the observation of persons who had reason to con- 
sider themselves infinitely more skilled in such science, the real 
and strong characteristics of her mind and character. 

Never was there an intellect more audacious, questioning, 
less disposed to submit to the received maxims of society, than 
hers. There was, if I may so express myself, a topsy-turviness 
in her notions of things, which she expressed in an infinite 
variety of paradoxical, disorderly, extremely witty, and enter- 
taining forms. She was at war, in her secret heart, with all the 
established regulations of the world. They were all unfavour- 
able to her projects ; condemned her to an obscurity from which 
she was determined, at every cost, to emerge ; met and con- 
fronted her with inimical visages at every step of her audacious 
career ; and even now they stand around her, motionless but 
avenging spectres, that will some day raise their arms of stone, 
and crush her yet in her hour of highest vainglory and success. 

Much in the tone of Sophia's conversation, which I ought to 
have dreaded, excited only my laughter and amusement, so 
brilliantly did the wit in it dazzle my understanding, to lose 
sight of the worthless broken-bottle material of all that seeming 
glitter of diamonds ! The sarcastic and levelling edge to_ her 
remarks did not displease a listener who, although the heiress 



144 3.IAT7IEY.EEEK S DIYOHCE. 

of an ancient and high-placed race, cherished such wild and 
untutored notions as those of my girlhood. Moreover, all this 
was but theory ; in practice no one could be more observant of 
the words and caprices of superiors than Sophia. These were 
the engines she chiefly worked with to her own advantage ; but 
no doubt they required a watchfulness and enslavement of her 
proud self-will, which, when occasion served, she retaliated 
with an exaction of fearful interest. 

I must in fairness admit, Sophia possessed really brilliant 
qualities that justly entitled her to . and have in a degree 
obtained for her . far higher admiration than that of an inexpe- 
rienced girl, to whom the reality of things was too little known 
to detect what was exaggerated and false in a witty mockery. 
There were profound depths in that gulfing, shifting-sanded 
intellect, depths of ruin though they were ! And the erratic 
play of her wit at times warned from the quagmire when it was 
not engaged in the more congenial task of misleading into it. 
With me, to whom a solitary and neglected childhood had com- 
municated a sombre tinge to the ideas, the wildfire dance of 
Sophia's was always a welcome relief. 

But the spell of spells with this mistress of darker arts than 
ever magician or necromancer boasted, lay in persuading me that 
she more than reciprocated my affections ; that she loved me 
with the devotion and entirety my own intensity of feeling ever 
demanded from its objects. Almost an orphan, and alone from 
the cradle, I now believed I had found the most endearing 
qualities of all the female relationships I had forfeited, or had 
ever known, in this friend, whom my own heart had chosen by 
a kind of natural sympathy from the first. My nature was 
trustful as well as loving, and expanded like a flower of a 
deep cup, to receive those balmy dews of love and sisterly 
tenderness that seemed to distil from heaven itself into it. 

And was all this celestial show, on Sophia's part, only a 
beauteous but unreal phantasmagoria ? Could it be that she 
hated me always . then as now . when she has injured me far- 
ther beyond her own forgiveness than even mine ? Did she in 
reality envy me my superior fortunes also at periods when she 
knew well that my chief delight in their actual possession would 
have been to share them with herself ? .Without loving Scar- 
latt . for I am persuaded she never loved him . did she grudge 
me that excess of passionate affection he evinced, and doubtless 
felt for me, on the first period of our union ? And still cherish- 
ing a species of insane idolatry for her libertine husband, did 
her accursed and boundless spirit of coquetry already suggest to 
her a satisfaction to be derived from depriving me of the 
affections of mine ? 

No : surely this notion would have been too premature ! I 
am even of opinion that Sophia herself was wearied of the 
weaving of so many vain intrigues, and inclined at length to 



A BirXAWAY MATCH. 145 

rest from spinning snares out of her own finest filaments as well 
as those of all around her. Perhaps, if her husband had not 
been, what in the bitterness of her heart she had called him, 
"the most worthless of his worthless sex," she might have 
taken place thenceforward among the better of her own ! I do 
not dispute that there were the roots of good, generous, even 
magnanimous qualities in her, that might have produced 
flowers and fruit but for the blasting of a bad man's association, 
which distilled poisons into the plant at almost every stage of 
its development. But besides, she must have discerned that, at 
that period, I was fixed beyond the possibility of being shaken, 
in the core of my young husband's strongest passions and ambi- 
tious impulses. It is very possible also that her own feelings 
indisposed her to any attempt upon him at the time. I have 
reason to think that however profoundly wounded and. irritated 
her vanity might be, her sentiments towards Scarlatt were of a 
contemptuously hostile order, at this juncture ; and that even 
she could not have feigned so much to the contrary as would 
have been necessary in returning on her forsaken tack. More- 
over, if ever she really loved anyone, it was Luxmoor ; and they 
were now in the honeymoon of a reconciliation, which, with 
persons of their capricious but vehement passions, was probably 
not greatly declined from the glow of the first of love. 

At all events, she suffered no emotion that could have roused 
misgiving to appear on the surface. The most jealous scrutiny 
must have been foiled or quieted by the perfect, joyous ease of 
her demeanour in our society, throughout our whole bridal 
trip, when so much must have occurred to excite painful feel- 
ings, had she cherished any on account of the disastrous 
triumph I had achieved. In his eagerness to show his devotion 
to me, and utter renunciation of all sentiments calculated to 
cause me uneasiness, Scarlatt was even occasionally . and pain- 
fully to myself was it visible . almost rude in his neglect of 
Sophia ! The delirium of exultation he indulged in over his 
success in achieving a bride to whom he imputed, such over- 
whelming advantages, personal as well as social, could not 
have been pleasing to her. _ She must have been wearied with 
his endless effusions of admiration, and the constant absorption 
of his thoughts and attentions upon one whom she probably 
looked upon, in her secret heart, as a silly, rash, headstrong 
schoolgirl. 

His perpetual appeals to her to share these bridegroom 
transports, must have been irksome to any woman. " Is 
she not beautiful, Mrs. Luxmoor ? . is she not, now ? And 
am I not the very happiest happy fellow in the world ? " 
resounded continually in her ears. Her praises were claimed 
for every gesture, smile, expression of mine ! In a manner 
were extorted, though the wonderful patience and dexterity of 
Sophia never allowed her weariness, and possible reluctance of 

1 



146 mauleveeer's divorce. 

assent, to appear in the seemingly playful spontaneity and 
enthusiasm of her replies. 

It was fagging work, however, I doubt not, . and thence 
possibly her insinuations of the advantages of parting com- 
pauies for awhile. But she dared not press her wish, I now 
think, under the notion she might awaken in me suspicions 
that her feelings towards Scarlatt still rendered the sight of 
our happiness distasteful to her. 

She and her husband, therefore, accompanied us throughout 
our tour in the Highlands . all of us, of course, under 
assumed names. Luxmoor even took the fancy to distribute 
Russian titles of nobility among us ; and at most of our 
resting places we either astonished the secluded inhabitants 
by gabbling among ourselves a wilder dialect than their own, 
compounded of several languages, which they took to be the 
best St. Petersburg Sclavonic, or by speaking English with 
an excess of refinement and purity almost as foreign. 

With all his bad qualities, and total want of moral feeling, 
Luxmoor abundantly supported his reputation for intellectual 
ability, in this closer and more habitual intercourse. There 
was no such thing as ennui in the company of the lleverend 
Carol us ! His flow of spirits was inexhaustible ; he abounded 
in striking and novel anecdote, and could throw the most sur- 
prising and unexpected illustrations on almost every subject 
he touched. How could so much talent be so vilely allied to 
so much vice ? And, to do him but bare justice, notwith- 
standing his alleged brutality under the influence of liquor, 
good nature seemed to be a marked characteristic of his 
singular composition when not. And during this time of our 
association, Sophia's vigilance protected him from very fre- 
quent or conspicuous yielding to his most degrading habit. 
But when he did succumb to it in any noticeable degree, 
he showed the cloven foot very plainly, certainly. The 
sensuality of his nature and ideas then glowed out in a 
thousand indescribable emanations . and a furnace seemed 
suddenly opened where all was cool and orderly before ! 

The reconciliation I had effected between him and his wife 
had all the appearance of being complete and permanent. 
Luxmoor declared that it was equivalent to a new bridal with 
him, and that he loved his Sophia better than he had ever 
loved her before ! Yet, truth to say, the exhibitions of this 
tenderness were not always of the most refined order, and, in 
my opinion, sometimes excited her deep though silent disgust. 
And at times, in fact, they resembled a burlesque of the 
youthful bridegroom ardour and enthusiasm of Scarlatt that 
annoyed me too ! . A dance of the blooming, rose-wreathed 
Hours executed by leering hamadryads ! I am not assured, 
however, that Sophia instituted comparisons to Scarlatt's 
advantage in this. She had intellect and taste to have ren- 



A EOT AWAY MATCH". 147 

flevcd Luxmonr's behaviour, en occasions, disgusting to her : 
but her heart was not chaste. Nor was her temperament that 
of a Lucretia ! I do not wrong her in saying so. She has 
proved it. 

Very rarely, however, was a shade of chagrin ever allowed 
to appear on Sophia's countenance. She was gay always : the 
life and cheer of the party. Once or twice only I detected 
something in her glance at me of thoughtful and even sorrow- 
ful, that puzzled and a little startled me ! But the expression 
vanished almost as soon as I caught it . and an increase of gaiety 
on the contrary usually left me no pretext for asking the mean- 
ing of those momentary revelations of the spirit, relaxing from 
its tedious stand to arms. Nay, these were the very occasions 
when she threw the reins on the neck of laughter, and indulged 
in the wildest caprices of her variable and fantastic wit. Lux- 
moor had a peculiar skill in playing into her hands in these 
moods ; her genius was, in fact, of his training and tutelage ; 
his- own was the robust athlete whose strong muscles and 
knotted limbs are set in a variety of difficult attitudes, more 
effectually to display the agility of the lighter harlequin who 
vaults on his shoulders, or quivers in some almost impossible 
reversed position, crown to crown, on his coadjutor in the air. 
And his suggestive observations were often as torches thrust 
into a cavern of stalactite, in Sophia's rich imagination, that 
lighted up the particoloured splendours around instantaneously 
as thought. 

Our whole excursion, including in it so much of the excite- 
ment and bewilderment of an escape, was thus also one of the 
gayest of revels ! Money abounded with us. Luxmoor was 
the king of caterers ; he was in his most natural element feast- 
ing and merrymaking ; no man was ever more perfectly skilled 
than this luxurious sage in every provocative of appetite. in 
promoting the pleasures of the table. He had studied many 
sciences, but often declared he was weary of them all but this 
one ! Scarlatt and I, absorbed in each other and in our love as 
we were, could not but acknowledge that in sparing us so vulgar 
though necessary a diligence, Luxmoor was an invaluable 
addition to the party. 

When, in addition to all these elements of satisfaction, we 
add the contemplation of the grandest and most striking 
objects of nature, associated with the most romantic and 
pathetic recollections genius had as it were coloured into the 
very atmosphere of the scenes we visited . in spite of our dread 
of my father's pursuit, time sped with us on rapid and nigh 
shadowless wings. It is true that only in Sophia could I discover 
any real and intimate sympathy in the feelings awakened in 
me by the visual presence of those scenes I had so often tra- 
versed in the charmed pages of the great Scottish romancer. 
Luxmoor laughed at the bare notion of enthusiasm on such a 

L2 



148 maulevekek's ditoece. 

subject, and professed an almost total ignorance in the matter. 
He had never read any novel save the Golden Ass of Apuleius, 
in Greek, he said, and . perhaps making a jest of my ignorance 
. that, for the sake of the excellent morals it inculcated ! 
Scarlatt was perfectly familiar with the works in question ; 
but he took so cold an interest in my enthusiasm, that some- 
how or other it always chilled in his presence. I believe he 
had no particular relish for a genius that had done so much to 
restore the prestige of the past. He was a man of the future, 
he considered ! But he accounted for his indifference by de- 
claring that the dry substantialities of the studies he had 
pursued, to qualify him for the duties of a statesman, allowed 
him not to derive enjoyment from any purely fanciful source. 
In my love and admiration for him, in those days, I could 
not, and did not, suspect that he lacked a quality for which 
the possession of all the statistics in the world hardly in- 
demnifies the man who aspires to lead and govern men. 
imagination. 



CHAPTER XYI. 

ABKOAD. 

I had been soothed all along by assurances that my father 
would be sure to forgive what he knew to be irrevocable, and 
that a general reconciliation would be the happy and natural 
result of the alliance I had contracted. " Fathers always 
forgive," Sophia repeatedly observed with a laugh, "when 
they can't help themselves." 

Mine was then an exception . and a very remarkable one. A 
communication awaited us, at an appointed spot on our tour, 
from Mrs. Suett, that clearly indicated so. It declared besides, 
in the most extravagant terms, her own and her husband's 
enthusiastic approbation of the choice their son had made. 
It enlarged upon the wonderful relief Scarlatt's letter had 
afforded herself from a terrible apprehension she avowed she 
entertained at first that the elopement was with Sophia. She, 
on her part, she said, neither could nor would ever have 
forgiven him such a derogation as that. He could not have 
pleaded even average good looks, after he had seen what beauty 
really was, for such an act of folly. But young Sir Vivian, who 
brought the news in, "having spied us all huddling into the 
carriage," and who conducted himself in a very strange manner 



ABROAD. 149 

throughout the affair, "laughing at everything one said," 
insisted he was perfectly certain if there was an elopement at 
all in the case, it was between Scarlatt and the younger Miss 
Sutcliffe. And he invited Mrs. Suett to start a pursuit, but in 
such a queer, jeering style, that for a long time she thought he 
was only in jest, and of course never thought of taking his 
advice. Besides, Scarlatt was of age, and no one had the right 
or the power to hinder him. from marrying whom he chose, and 
his firmness and determination in whatever course he took she 
knew rendered dissuasion hopeless. But to crown all, the elder 
Suett expressed himself pleased that his son had had the spirit 
and good sense to get above the foolish notions his mother had 
reared him in, so far as to marry a wife for beauty or sense 
only. He only hoped that Scarlatt had the cleverness to take 
them both together in my person, whom he should rejoice 
beyond measure to receive as a daughter-in-law. He forbade 
all pursuit. and Mrs. Suett confessed herself to be much recon- 
ciled by the hope that her "darling, sweet Helena" really 
might, after all, be the favoured one. Indeed, she could not 
doubt it, " if her son had eyes in his head." So they were all 
getting a little more composed at Plas Newydd, when of a 
sudden they were startled out of their wits by the arrival of the 
" Eight Honourable Lord Mauleverer " in person. 

And now, to the Suetts' great surprise, it turned out there 
was some secret acquaintance between his lordship and Sir 
Vivian. Mrs. Suett knew the two old grandfathers used to be 
great cronies, but had no notion of this acquaintanceship. 
Instead of asking for herself or any other member of the family, 
Lord Mauleverer inquired only for Sir Vivian, whom it seemed 
he had been expecting for a whole day at "the castle," until 
losing patience he had come over in person to inquire the 
meaning of the delay. For it came out afterwards that his 
lordship was aware his daughter was living at Plas Xewydd, 
under her assumed name, but disdained them all too much to 
come for her himself; and so had sent word to "his young 
friend" to _ escort Miss Pomeroy home. Sir Vivian had then 
to drag himself in. very reluctantly evidently . Mrs. Suett 
herself had seen him going to the reception room, looking 
more dead than alive, . and confess how " beautifully we had 
done the meddlesome young gentleman by bolting at once." 
And moreover . what Mrs. Suett herself had never for a moment 
suspected, . Sir Vivian was now obliged to avow to his lordship 
that he knew I was clandestinely married to Mr. Scarlatt Suett, 
by the family tutor, the Reverend Carolus Luxmoor, having 
been himself a witness to a marriage between him and the 
young lady who resided at Plas JSewydd as the sister of Sophia 
Sutcliffe and a nursery governess. " At a time, no doubt," 
said Mrs. Suett, in her letter, " when he thought he was 
finishing up Scarlatt's chances of rising in the world, by 



loO MAULEVEBEK'S DIVORCE. 

helping to marry him to a girl without birth or money. For 
he always disliked you, my dear boy, I know. God knows 
why, I am sure I could never understand it. And so, I suppose, 
you played the joke off upon him of inviting him to be a witness 
to what he must have thought would prove your ruin, whereas 
you were marrying, as it turns out, the most beautiful young 
heiress in the world." 

But Mrs. Suett confessed she thought Sir Vivian had exerted 
himself to soothe Lord Mauleverer's really dreadful exaspera- 
tion on the discovery. Hearing a tremendous ringing of the 
bell, and a stranger's voice uttering shocking imprecations, she 
had herself hastened into the apartment, and found Sir Vivian 
assuring Lord Mauleverer that he did not believe in any pre- 
meditated conspiracy " among the Suetts," that the affair was 
strictly a love-match between the young couple, and that nothing 
could now be done but to endeavour to pardon them for the 
fault they had committed, and obviate as much as possible any 
evil consequences that might arise, from the precipitation and 
indiscretion of the whole proceeding, to Miss Pomeroy. 

All reason and persuasion were, however, vain, Mrs. Suett 
declared. The moment she appeared his lordship "flew at 
her." She could not have thought it possible a nobleman could 
have put himself in such a " flustration" about anything. But 
seeing' s believing ! Yet she had never " set eyes" on a man 
that looked so like a lord before ! So savage . so mad-like too ! 
He glared at her like the sign of the Saracen's Head, with his 
hair flying about in the same way, and his eyes half out of his 
head, and sparkling as if they had gold dust in them. _ It 
frightened her almost out of her senses to see what a taking 
his lordship was in ! Luckily John Thomas was away at his 
country-house, so that "them two fiery spirits were _ kept 
asunder ;" and Mrs. Suett declared she went through the inter- 
view in the most conciliatory style possible, on her own part, 
though she really felt herself half-a-dozen times going off into 
hysterics ! 

JS T ot that she was frightened by his lordship's threats, and 
furious demand that his daughter should be instantly -surren- 
dered to him ! His denunciation of the whole family as a vile 
nest of conspirators, or his declaration that he would imme- 
diately call in the aid of the law, and have her son, and Miss 
Sutcliffe, and the hedge-parson who pretended to have per- 
formed a marriage between his daughter and her infamous 
deluder, brought to condign justice, as guilty of the abduction 
and betrayal of a young girl of the tenderest years ! Mrs. 
Suett knew her own innocence, and was not dismayed. But 
she owned she was fairly turned topsy-turvy by the discovery 
of who I really was, and the certainty that her dear boy had 
connected himself in a manner so worthy of what he must "in 
the long ran rise to be," she knew as well as that the sun makes 
day! 



ABROAD. 151 

But all she could do to conciliate Lord Mauleverer was in 
vain. In vain she assured him that none of the family. not 
her son himself, she believed . was in the least aware of his 
daughter's real name or rank while resident at PJas Newydd. 
If it was so, the young people had managed it entirely between 
themselves, and she and her husband had been kept all along 
in the dark. But John Thomas, she was sure, would be willing 
to do everything in his power " to make all straight again." 
Her son was no beggar ! . no rascally fortune-hunter, she 
begged to tell his lordship ! . he would some day be worth his 
share in half a million of money ! He was, besides, as hand- 
some a young man as there was in England, though she said it 
that should not ! . and as accomplished as any nobleman in the 
land ! All was in vain. Lord Mauleverer forgot himself so 
far as to tell Mrs. Suett, that the _ entire family was a nest of 
swindlers, and that he would bring them . one and all . to 
justice, with their principal, "the broad-shouldered flunkey 
fellow," whom she called her son !. and he left the house, 
breathing vengeance and destruction like a madman, and de- 
claring that he would pursue Scarlatt Suett to the ends of the 
earth to obtain justice upon him ! Mrs. Suett plaintively 
added he had put it into young Sir Vivian's head to think they 
had done him, too, some grievous wrong, by denouncing them 
as the robbers and pillagers of the Ap Howel property also, and 
vowing he would compel them to disgorge their plunder there 
to the last penny ! 

Sir Yivian accompanied his lordship to_ his horse. But he 
seemed not at all enticed from his old friends by the "nasty 
attempt" to sow dissension with them. He came back shortly 
afterwards, and exhorted Mrs. Suett to lose no time in writing 
to warn her son and daughter-in-law, that Lord Mauleverer was 
going at once before a magistrate to take out a warrant for the 
arrest of the former, on a charge of abduction, and would, no 
doubt, set an immediate pursuit in motion. 

_ It was evident Sir Vivian had kept the secret of our intended 
visit to Scotland. Indeed, his conduct throughout the whole 
transaction threw upon him a lustre of generosity and devoted- 
ness that affected me more than I dare now seek words to say. 
But the warning was not to be despised. We had certainly 
taken a very circuitous course, and precautions that gave hopes 
of baffling, for a while, even so exasperated a pursuit. But the 
penalties of a possible disruption of the ties between us, of the 
heavy punishment the law might see fit to visit upon Scarlatt, 
which Luxmoor now placed before us in very strong colours, 
were too^ formidable for us to slight the notice we had received. 
A council of war among us, hastily summoned, came to the 
decision that it was necessary for Scarlatt and myself to pro- 
ceed immediately to the Continent ; and, this resolved, Luxmoor 
announced that it was impossible for him to accompany us, as 



152 jjatjxeveker's divokce. 

he had, unhappily, left some little accounts unpaid in Francs 
and Germany, besides having pressing business in England, 
where he was in hourly expectation that one of his patrons 
would have a living vacant, for which he intended to be a 
suitor. 

I was now myself willing enough to dispense with Luxmoor's 
company, for he had of late given way greatly more than at 
first to a freedom of language and manners which I disliked 
exceedingly. But I had the selfishness . or the blind affection, 
was it ? . to hope that Sophia would continue to bear us com- 
pany awhile. She convinced me, however, that it would be to 
hazard all the progress she flattered herself she had made in 
bringing her husband back to a sense of his duties to herself 
and to society. And I felt it would be egotistical and wrong to 
persevere with a view solely to the gratification of my own 
feelings. W e parted accordingly, at an obscure Scottish sea- 
port, whence Scarlatt and I embarked for Hamburg, with the 
sincerest sorrow and reluctance on my part ; on Sophia's, with, 
at all events, every appearance of the same. 

And yet . I know not how it was . but when we were once 
quit of the society of Luxmoor and his wife, both my husband 
and myself seemed to breathe freelier ! 

***** 

"We resided xipwards of three years abroad, in compelled, 
though apparently voluntary, exile. 

During all this period, it was impossible to hope that any 
change had taken place in my father's vindictive feelings and 
resolves against my husband. 

We heard so from many sources . -the most direct being from 
young Ap Howel, who, it appeared, continued a visitor at 
Mauleverer during his vacations, and dropped intimations to 
Mrs. Suett, from time to time, of the state of opinion there, 
exceedingly discouraging to our hopes. I should have men- 
tioned that, by a strange perversity, Lord Mauleverer resided 
almost constantly on his estate since the time of his return 
after my flight. And when she had no longer the consolation 
of her child's society to expect, my mother was permitted to 
return from her long continental exile. She was now, however, 
a confirmed invalid, and rarely left Mauleverer, even when my 
father, as he now sometimes did, gave a short attendance on 
parliament. 

Everything announced a confirmed irreconcileableness on his 
part. Both Scarlatt and myself, in vain, made every possible 
attempt to win some sign of forgiveness. From Rome my 
husband addressed his new father-in-law, for the first time, in 
an epistle the tone of which I secretly but strongly disapproved, 
without liking to suggest my reasons for the disapproval. I 
thought, among other things, that he threw too much of the 
blame of what had happened upon me. He himself considered 



ABROAD. 153 

it necessary to apologise for that obvious feature in the docu- 
ment, by saying that my father would certainly much more 
readily pardon his child for everything, than a person whose 
family he disliked, and who he might consider had surrep- 
titiously deprived him of the "comfort of his age." 

This sounded to me a very commonplace phrase indeed, but I 
had not then learned to suspect that Scarlatt's ideas all ran in 
grooves, and that established phrases were, consequently, the 
ones he chiefly delighted in and employed. But, to say truth, 
I was not much pleased to find my husband's disinterested 
affection for me demonstrated by the assertion that up to the 
moment when I stood before "the altar of heaven with him" 
(where, by-the-bye, I had never stood), and it was necessary to 
sign my name to the certificate of our union, he had not 
dreamed I was other than the Helena Sutcliffe I announced 
myself on my arrival at Plas Newydd. He added he should 
never else have had the presumption to raise his eyes to a young 
lady so much above him in so many important respects . 
above all, in splendour, purity, and antiquity of blood ; though 
he hoped that the great wealth possessed by his own family, 
and the considerable fortune designed for his immediate use by 
his father, would protect him from any suspicion of mercenary 
views in forming the alliance. 

My husband therefore ventured, he said, .to hope that his 
earnest overtures for a reconciliation might meet with a favour- 
able acceptance. And he proceeded to propose terms even of a 
degrading humility and submission, I thought, anxious as I had 
become to bring about such a result ! He himself, he stated, 
was a far different man from his father. Their notions, on 
almost all points, social and political, were opposed. He had 
the highest reverence for the present constitution of things in 
free and happy Britain, and was entirely hostile to any further 
concession to the levelling doctrines of the age, falsely styled 
reformatory. On the recently risen question of an agrarian 
confiscation, denominated by the popular agitators a " Repeal 
of the Corn Laws," . his principles were decidedly conservative. 
He hoped, indeed, that on no political point should he have the 
misfortune to be found at variance with my father. Could it 
happen so, he should have so much diffidence of his own judg- 
ment, in opposition to one so superior, that he should be afraid 
to act upon it. His father had promised to resign his seat in 
parliament, which, if Lord Mauleverer kindly united his interest 
to that of his own family, would be secured to himself beyond 
competition. And in parliament he should have no object but 
to assist, in the best manner his limited abilities permitted, in 
carrying out my father's political views, and in thus endea- 
vouring to repair, as much as was now possible, the great injury 
to the country which his own father's " untoward success during 
the Reform mania," had inflicted on it, by depriving it of Lord 



151 MAI'LETEEEIl'S DIV011CE. 

Mauleverer's services, at a time when his great talents might 
have been of most value and efficiency in arresting the increas- 
ingly threatening movement of revolutionary advance ! 

There was nothing, in fact, my husband declared, he was not 
willing to do, to obtain pardon for his inadvertent offence, and 
a gleam of encouraging favour for the future ! 

Farther to demonstrate his entire disinterestedness, he pro- 
posed to settle upon me, as a jointure, the considerable fortune 
his father was not only willing, but anxious, to endow him with 
at once. Moreover, he would, with pleasure, relinquish his own 
name. which he acknowledged was, for various reasons, one 
not _ likely to be pleasing to his lordship . and assume the 
family name and arms of his beloved wife ! . Much more, of a 
really very much too humble and cajoling quality, was added ; 
and, in still worse taste in my opinion, of a sort that seemed to 
insinuate a feeling of contempt and hostility towards his own 
father and plebeian relatives in general ! 

I ventured on some slight remonstrances to this effect, but 
they were immediately, and not exactly for the first time, 
repelled by Scarlatt with a degree of petulance and disdain. I 
had already had occasion to remark how strongly wedded he 
was to his own opinions, on almost every subject on which he 
professed to have formed them. But all my reverence for the 
superiority of intellect and experience I ascribed to him, hardly 
reconciled me to this epistle. I thought it probable my father 
would despise a submission so abject, and would in no wise be 
conciliated towards the offerer by the adulation addressed to his 
own abilities and influence. But Scarlatt persisted so steadfastly 
in the opinion that he had written the very perfection of a recon- 
ciling overture, that I ended by believing so myself. Besides, it 
had been already some time evident to me that my husband had 
no respect for female wisdom in general, and considered my 
opinions in particular, deprived of weight by " my total inex- 
perience of mankind and the world !" 

This humble petition, rather than epistle, was accordingly 
despatched . and the only reply it elicited was in the text-hand. 
of a lawyer, signed by the three names of an eminent solicitors' 
firm. 

This document informed " the person signing himself Scarlatt 
Suett," with business-like directness, that his communication 
had been received by the Right Honourable the Lord Mauleverer, 
who had thereupon desired Messrs. Sharpies, Staples, and Stop- 
ples, to inform the " person signing himself Scarlatt Suett," . 
Firstly, that his Lordship was not acquainted with any one of 
the names, and declined all intercourse, by letter or otherwise, 
with an individual who was, and should continue, to the last 
hoar of his Lordship's life, so far as was in his power, a perfect 
stranger to him. Secondly, that if " the person signing himself 
Scarlatt Suett " was one of that name who had rendered himself 



ABEOAD. 100 

criminally liable to the laws of his country, had he not fled from 
their jurisdiction, Lord Mauleverer recommended, as the only 
reparation in his power, that he should lose no time in returning 
to some portion of the territory of Great Britain, and submit 
himself forthwith to their legitimate action, Messrs. Sharpies, 
Staples, and Stopples having received his Lordship's commands 
to institute judicial proceedings for the abduction of the Honour- 
able Hugh-Helena Pomeroy, whom "the person signing himself 
Scarlatt Suett " falsely styled his wife, the instant he set foot 
on any portion of the British soil. 

Thirdly, with regard to the extraordinary proposals " the 
person signing himself Scarlatt Suett " had ventured to make 
to the Eight Honourable the Lord Mauleverer, his Lordship 
desired Messrs. Sharpies, Staples, and Stopples to express his 
hope that, notwithstanding the loss possibly sustained by his 
own unavoidable absence from a post of defence to those prin- 
ciples of order and legitimacy he had always professed, his 
Lordship trusted that what remained of precious and valuable 
in the British constitution might be preserved without the aid 
of renegades and deserters from the cause of democracy and 
revolution. His Lordship also hoped that, on a future occasion, 
he should be enabled to prevent "the person signing himself 
Scarlatt Suett" from having it in his power to make a traffic of 
the position conferred by any constituency, however misled, and 
the exposition of his intentions, under his own hand and seal, 
would probably be sufficient to save that of his Lordship's native 
county from the disgrace of being longer huckstered and bar- 
gained for by the Suett family in general, or in particular! 
His Lordship's interest, meanwhile, he must beg leave to say, 
it was his intention to devote entirely to the service of another 
candidate, whom he trusted to induce to undertake the contest 
as soon as circumstances would permit ; and he could not but 
think that years of the disgrace and humiliation of a Suett's 
representation of his own interest in their name in parliament 
would prepare the constituency in question to welcome a gentle- 
man of the ancient blood and familiar designation of Ap Howel 
in preference, to represent themselves ! 

As to " the person signing himself Scarlatt Suett" proffering 
to settle his fortune on the misguided young lady whom he 
falsely and illegally styled his wife, Lord Mauleverer had no 
opinion to give on the subject. It was, of course, entirely at 
the pleasure of any man to deal with his property as he thought 
fit. It was otherwise with women . for which reason his Lord- 
ship had constituted his daughter a ward of Chancery, and had 
taken all the precautions in his power to protect her from the 
rapacity of the conspirators who had ensnared her. But his 
Lordship was of opinion that " the person signing himself 
Scarlatt Suett" had better, in the first instance, ascertain 
whether he had any property to dispose of. His Lordship had 



156 mattleverek's divobce. 

received the opinion of three of the most eminent counsel in the 
country that there was a flaw in the usurped title of the Suetts 
to the great source of their riches, which he trusted would, in 
a short period, he submitted for adjudication ; when it might 
possibly be held that the consent of the heir of an entail in 
perpetuity, under the circumstances of the Ap Howel property, 
was necessary to give validity to the nefarious cozenage which 
had placed a company of London tradesmen in the possession of 
the estates of an ancient Welsh family. 

The effect of this reply on my husband may be imagined. It 
was no doubt sufficient to exasperate the temper of any man. 
But I think he had no cause to turn the revengeful bitterness 
of his feelings upon me. Yet Scarlatt addressed his denuncia- 
tion of the pride and insolence of the English oligarchy so 
plainly to me, that I could not be mistaken in feeling myself 
grievously hurt and insulted. 

It was the first time he had spoken to me, his bride of two 
months, with aught but the language of an almost idolatrous 
tenderness. It affected me accordingly. I left his presence in 
a fit of the most violent grief and indignation, and secluded 
myself in my own chamber, which I refused to open at his 
entreaties for a long time. But Scarlatt had speedily changed 
his note. I was still, and for a long time after, essential to his 
ambition, if not to his love. He addressed to me such fond 
implorings for pardon . such assurances of his unabated affec- 
tion . such apologies for the irritation he had laboured under 
and exhibited . that at last I yielded, and our tearful recon- 
ciliation re-established us in even more tender relations with 
each other than previously. 

Scarlatt, I found, quickly persuaded himself that the letter 
he had received was chiefly the work of the lawyers who penned 
it, anxious for their own advantages in blowing the embers 
between two wealthy families. For my part, I plainly discerned 
my father's _ own ideas, and even turns of ironical expression, 
jutting out in all directions through the stiff legal phraseology 
employed. But unwilling to hazard another disagreement . the 
first had been very dreadful to me ; had cost me an infinitude 
of tears and regrets . I made no attempt to dissuade Scarlatt 
from renewing his amicable overtures to Lord Mauleverer, com- 
plaining respectfully of the unkitd tone in which his remon- 
strances had been received, and begging a reconsideration of 
his proffers. And he was now enabled to add . -in the name of 
a yet unborn pledge of the happiness of his union with his 
beloved wife and Lord Mauleverer's daughter. The reply to this 
was also from Messrs. Sharpies, Staples, and Stopples, enclosing 
my husband's, unopened, and informing him that they were in- 
structed, the Bight Honourable the Lord Mauleverer declined all 
further communication with the "person signing himself Scarlatt 
Suett, saving in the presence of the justice of his country." 



ABHOAD. 157 

Meanwhile I had made a failure, though not quite so com- 
plete, on my own part. I wrote to my mother a true unvar- 
nished account, so far as I understood the circumstances myself, 
and as they did not clash with Scarlatt's previous narrative of 
the circumstances of my attachment and union with him, I 
declared I left Mauleverer with the sole view and purpose of 
escaping from the intolerable tyranny of Madame Le Crampon ; 
that my husband, Sophia Sutcliffe, and the whole Suett family, 
were entirely guiltless of any design to entrap me. I avowed 
the warm attachment we had mutually conceived, and my firm 
assurance of Scarlatt's ignorance of my real name and position, 
until he had irrevocably engaged himself to me, with the 
utmost purity of disinterested attachment. These were the 
sole causes of the rash step we had taken, pardon for which I 
implored of my mother with all the earnestness and fervour my 
really sincere love for herself, and desire to retrieve my posi- 
tion, could inspire. 

I would not, in my turn, suffer any of Scarlatt's improve- 
ments in my epistle. They were matters of form and phrase- 
ology certainly, but I thought they marred the genuine tone 
of the composition. We had a little discussion again, and 
Scarlatt perhaps began to understand that I had some will and 
determination of my own, or considered his hour of supremacy 
had not arrived, for he soon desisted from his corrections. 

I received a reply to this letter, hurried and short, evidently 
written by stealth, and with an agitated hand. In fact, the 
writer confessed so much, and that she replied at all against 
the absolute prohibition of her lord ! She blamed me, but 
gently, and with motherly forbearance ; and there was a touch 
of indescribably pathetic allusion to her own harsh fate in the 
words . " But if you love the man you have chosen so deeply and 
unalterably as you avow, I cannot condemn you to have chosen 
rather to be happy with him in exile and adversity, than 
miserable with all that the world affords with one whom you 
might find too late you could not love ! " But at the same time 
the poor lady declared she could never again receive any com- 
munication from me until her lord and my father's heart was 
more softened towards a reconciliation than it was possible yet 
to hope. For which happy object any influence she possessed, 
or might venture to use, should not be wanting. At least she 
could always afford her prayers, for God would pardon a 
woman's disobedience to her husband, so far as to permit her to 
supplicate Him to restore her family to peace, and an only 
child to the arms of a desolate and broken-hearted mother, who 
could scarcely hope to survive to witness this blessed result, if 
it was long deferred ! 

The iron had entered my poor mother's soul ! She was the 
very slave now, the relentless despotism of my father's character 
and system had been directed so many years to produce. 



15S MACLEYERER'S DIVORCE. 

Our hopes .were now turned altogether towards an event 
which it seemed probable, towards the end of the first year of 
our marriage, would cement indissolubly the union between my 
husband and myself. His own impatient eagerness was the 
chief cause of the failure of his expectations. He removed me 
by too rapid journeys to the coast of France, before my confine- 
ment, anxious to lose no time afterwards in returning to 
England. He imagined my father's hostility would inevitably 
yield after such an event, and that he could not persevere in 
his projects of bringing disgrace and chastisement on the pro- 
genitor of a race that must interest his own blood. My first- 
born perished in its earliest hour of existence. and it was two 
years later before the birth of a second, and my slow recovery 
from a descent to the very gates of death to bring his young, 
ill-starred life to the day, gave us the encouragement we needed 
to venture home. 

My poor, poor child ! . we called our son, and had it con- 
spicuously proclaimed, by all the means we could contrive to 
bring it to his grandfather's notice, after Lord Mauleverer'sown 
names . Herbert Loftus Pomeroy. And glad would my husband 
have been if we could have omitted the Suett from our own 
designation. But that could not be ; and I confess I myself 
could very well understand Scarlatt's fretful impatience and 
disdain of his patronymic. We neither of us had the philosophy 
to consider, at this time, that the man makes the name . not 
the name the man. 

Much had happened to affect our fortunes during this long 
interval. I corresponded very constantly with Mrs. Luxmoor, 
as I may now more properly style Sophia Sutcliffe, who kept 
me informed upon all events in England, of private interest, 
that came to her knowledge. And Soarlatt and his mother 
kept up quite as faithful an exchange of intelligence, though 
the former did not so habitually permit my perusal of his cor- 
respondence as I did his of mine. 

The Luxmoors' circumstances had undergone an immense 
improvement. The aged incumbent of the Ap Howel living 
had died off, and agreeably, no doubt, to previous promise, the 
elder Suett exercised his powers as guardian of young Sir 
Vivian, to confer it upon the Reverend Carolus. And this in 
spite of very vehement remonstrances on the part of the minor 
patron himself, who carried his opposition so far as to declare 
that he would divulge certain particulars of the man's conduct, 
publicly, if the design were persisted in, which would prevent 
any bishop from ever inducting him. Sophia made a trial of 
my friendship for her, by writing to beg me to use my influence 
with Sir Vivian, which she seemed to think still very powerful, 
"to remove his unhappy prejudices" against her husband. 
And though I was myself strongly disinclined to essay it, from 
motiyes the reader will divine, and which my enlarging expe- 



ABHOAD. 159 

rionce suggested, Scarlatt joined so earnestly in the request that 
I would do what I could to serve his tutor, and write in his 
hehalf to the " savage young cur " to get him off the poor man's 
heels, that I should not have known how to refuse, had I even not 
heen inclined toservemyfriendatamore severe personal sacrifice. 

I wrote, accordingly, to Sir Vivian ; and though his reply 
did not exceed, by a word, the briefest form of a polite assent, 
I could not hut perceive the tone of regret and reluctance 
pervading it. Yet, remembering the nervous tremours to 
which his early youth was subject, I did not think it strange 
that even these few lines had a wavering and hesitation, 
scarcely to be imputed merely to his dislike of my candidate, 
visible in every stroke. 

And thus the Reverend Carolus Luxmoor was inducted, 
without further opposition, into the valuable living of Llan- 
howel-cum-Poraeroy, in which, benefice his conduct did so 
little credit to the recommendation of his friends, and so 
much to the besotted perversity and wickedness of his own 
character. 

The elder Suett, indeed, made it a pretence for his gift that 
he had effected a private stipulation with Luxmoor to resign 
the living whenever he was called upon . whenever, as was 
likely enough to happen, the obstinate young patron should 
see through his folly, and be inclined to resume the excellent 
provision he now so foolishly threw away. 

But, from all we heard, it was more than ever unlikely Sir 
Yivian should ever claim the observance of this unlawful 
contract. He was still bent on the profession of a soldier. 
He had submitted to a severe operation to remove a disquali- 
fication in his lame foot, which had perfectly succeeded. And 
the only studies to which he would submit were such as con- 
duced to the object he had in view. Towards the end of our 
three years of exile, we heard that he had been pronounced 
duly qualified for the service, according to the slight scrutiny 
then_ required, and that his name was down for the first 
opening in a regiment of his choice, chiefly raised in the 
principality, and taking thence its name. 

Sophia, who furnished us with these details, seemed to have 
forgotten all her old dislike of Sir Vivian. She testified often 
now, on the contrary, to the young man's possession of brilliant 
and commanding talents, which she thought it a pity should 
be wasted in the lounging life of an English officer, at that 
period of general and profound peace. After she had obtained 
the living for her husband, there seemed reason for the con- 
stancy and warmth of these panegyrics. But she dwelt upon 
the high and generous traits of young Ap Howel's character 
so perseveringly, that Scarlatt declared himself weary of the 
subject, and uttered an impatient pshaw whenever it turned 
up in my friend's letters. 



160 MATTEEVEEEE'S DIVOECE. 

In general the tone of Mrs. Luxmoor's communications 
appeared to give him satisfaction. Their style was, indeed, 
remarkably good,. flowing, natural, abounding in keen obser- 
vation, and frequently brilliant and epigrammatic in expression. 
He always professed himself greatly attached to his jovial ex- 
tutor, and Sophia's constantly affectionate and admiring 
allusions to him he declared gave him much pleasure. It was 
the best proof of their perfect reconciliation, and of Luxmoor's 
good and steady demeanour. In fact Sophia's jealousy and 
conceit had always singularly exaggerated what was blameable 
in his conduct. Scarlatt thought it was probably enough more her 
own caprice and inconstancy than Luxmoor's ill-treatment, that 
had induced her to elope from him at Cambridge. He was glad, 
very glad, that her eyes were now open to her husband's superi- 
ority, . indeed she seemed now as much to err in a contrary ex- 
treme. But it was the way with women ! They knew no medium. 

I myself noticed that Sophia's eulogiums chiefly ran on the 
intellectual qualities of Luxmoor ; the excellence of his sermons, 
the reception his conversational powers had secured him among 
the principal society in their neighbourhood. She alluded 
sometimes to his popularity in his parish. Very little was said 
of any improvement in his morals or conduct. But as Sophia 
alluded to no causes of unhappiness as continuing to exist 
between them, I hoped the best, and refrained from inquiries 
that might revive, needlessly, painful recollections. 

By Scarlatt our three years of exile were passed with infinite 
begrudging. He regretted them as so much time lost to his 
ambitious hopes and purposes of self-elevation. And at last I 
shared in his impatience not inconsiderably. My ideas were 
too little expanded to comprehend the littleness of an ambition 
whose sovereign aim was not the good and advancement of man- 
kind, or of one's own country, but a peerage for one's self. This 
was Scarlatt' s . who regarded his alliance with me as a stepping- 
stone to that great object, but not as a realization. He wanted to 
be a lord himself, and was not at all contented with the prospect 
of being some day the husband of a peeress in her own right. 
But at a distance from all the centres of political action and 
influence, what could he do to forward his plans ? He certainly 
studied books of statistics and of political economy very hard. 

Meanwhile I was enabled to gratify one of the most eager 
longings of my youth, my father's resolute denial of which had 
been a motive in my revolt against his authority. I visited 
the most famous scenes and capitals in Europe in the society of 
my young- bridegroom-husband. We made the tour of France, 
Switzerland, Italy, and visited most of the principal cities of 
Germany, distributing our three years pretty fairly among 
them. We made the longest stay at Genoa, where my poor 
darling, Herbert Loftus, was born. And from Genoa we took 
ship directly home, when we had finally made up our resolution 
to venture all and return thither. 



ABBOAD. 161 

Even had we not possessed this little hostage of safety, the 
motives for our return had grown so powerful as to overcome 
any hesitation the inveterate exasperation of my father might 
have occasioned. The Corn-Law agitation had at last reached 
its culminating point, and a dissolution of parliament, to test 
the popular determination, was immediately expected. Scarlatt 
was now firmly persuaded that his hour of political emergence 
was at hand. He had, indeed, a notion that he was destined to 
make a great figure in the approaching struggle. The adulation 
to which he had been exposed from childhood had puffed him 
up with very extraordinary notions of his own powers. He con- 
ceived that it was given to him to stand in the gap between the 
English people and the aristocracy ; to stay the raging onslaught 
of the popular resolve, and rebuke the maddening waves back 
into their depths. And he had the Quixotic fancy that his 
achievements in defence of my father's order would be such as 
to compel his gratitude and acknowledgment of his merits. 
Confidence and favour would follow. 

I also had begun to grow very weary of foreign sounds, and 
scenes, and visages. The recollections of my early youth often 
returned upon me in new and more attractive forms. Since I 
was myself a mother I comprehended the anguish and wrong I 
had inflicted on my own parents in depriving them of their child. 
Above all, the image of my gentle, suffering, uncomplaining 
mother often recurred to me, with quickening starts of remorse 
at the conviction of how much my desertion must have added to 
her lifelong silent woe. Amidst the most gorgeoiis and diversified 
landscapes of the famous countries we traversed, my heart often 
returned with strange yearnings to my obscure native valleys. 
I wanted to see Mauleverer again at last. After all, it was my 
home . the home of my childhood. Very homesick indeed we 
both were at last ; and when our child was born, our doting 
love and admiration for the splendid little stranger made us 
conclude at once it was impossible my father's anger could 
survive the pleading of so dear and irresistible a claim on 
forgiveness. 

The news of my grandmother's death, which reached us about 
the time I was recovering from my confinement, seemed so 
visibly to better our chances, that we determined no longer to 
hesitate. The repeated and, truth to say, violent and abusive 
assurances of the elder Suett, that Lord Mauleverer's exaspera- 
tion continued unabated, and that he would resort to every 
means of revenge, no longer deterred Scarlatt. In reality, he 
had a conviction that his father purposely exaggerated in these 
statements, in order to prolong his son's absence from England 
until the danger of being called upon to fulfil his own promises, 
in the resignation of his seat in parliament, should pass over. 

"We landed at Milford Haven, and thence proceeded at once 
into Glamorganshire. 



162 hatjleveree's divoece. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

HOME. 

It was not very wisely done, but Mrs. Suett, who happened to 
be in supreme authority at Plas Newydd at the time, deter- 
mined to announce our return as a public event, by a grand 
fete. Her husband was in close and, for him, very unusual 
attendance on the moribund parliament in London. 

The whole county rang, for weeks after, with the details of 
the " splendid old English hospitality," at Plas Newydd, given 
to celebrate the return of its "eldest son and his highborn 
bride to the paternal roof! " There was a general holiday at 
the mines . oxen roasted whole, puncheons of ale and stronger 
liquors set abroach ; music, shouting, feasting, firing ; and my 
husband made a speech, returning thanks for our reception, 
in the midst of an applause from the already half-drunken 
multitude, that scarcely allowed a dozen of his words to be 
audible, but " gave the world assurance " of a popular speaker 
in three or four columns of the weekly county newspapers, 
devoted to what was thin supposed to be his party in politics. 
But, unhappily, these same journals took the opportunity to 
introduce some hearty abuse of my father's implacable pride 
and resentment, that gave him a hint, he was never slow to 
take, of what the ivorld . an abstraction before which his 
whole existence lay prostrate . expected him to do ! 

I could not, at first, discover much of visible change at Plas 
Newydd. Everything was still bright and gorgeous in the 
decorations. Mrs. Suett was still the same cheerful, good- 
looking, universally active mistress of a family she had been. 
She received me with really superflous marks of affection and 
homage ; loaded me with caresses and honours. As for my 
child, she literally adored it. Her own she could never have 
treated with so much respect mingled with the fondness she 
lavished on my little Herbert. He was to her a prince as 
well as a grandson. She won my heart inexpressibly by her 
devotion to my child. Her h's mute or aspirated in the 
wrong places, were thenceforth nothing to me. I looked upon 
her as half the mother of my darling, and loved her in him. 

My first impression of anything disagreeable, on my return, 
was derived from the fact that,_to my very great surprise and 
discomfort, I found Madame .Le Crampon installed at Plas 



HOME. 1C3 

Newydd as gouvernante of Bronwen Suett ! This circumstance 
had never once been mentioned in all the letters I had seen 
thence ; nor had Sophia alluded to it. The latter was, how- 
ever, less singular, as, according to her account, she very 
rarely made even a ceremonious call on her former mistress. 
Mrs. Suett, it appeared, could not forget that they had once 
stood to one another in the relation of employer and employed, 
and had treated her with such coldness and distance, on these 
few occasions, as to discourage any advances towards intimacy. 

I must confess I found Madame Le Crampon in a very 
forgiving humour, and willing to overlook any cause of dis- 
pleasure I might have given her. I believe she would gladly 
have kissed me once more. But I suffered no approach to 
cordiality between us ; and I almost thought my child's rosy 
cheek had lost in sweetness and freshness alter she had pressed 
it. Madame had made a good exchange. Bronwen was an 
infinitely more docile pupil than ever I could have been, and 
the Parisienne had established a species of supremacy at Plas 
Newydd, that suited her much better than her strictly assigned 
position at Mauleverer Castle. In her quality of ci-devant 
Marchioness . marquise, at all events . for so she now an- 
nounced herself, I found, despoiled by half-a-dozen revolu- 
tions ! . of a personage thoroughly conversant with the most 
refined and Parisian manners ; a familiar friend of the fallen 
Royal Family of France, and endowed with the inestimable 
advantage of being unable to speak intelligible English . 
Madame Le Crampon had not found it difficult to establish 
herself in a position of influence at Plas Newydd. But 
chance alone, Mrs. Suett rather blushingly assured me, brought 
about the arrangement. She had forgotten the name of my 
disliked governess, and until I recognised her, thought she 
had " picked up a perfect stranger," with the assistance of a 
London scholastic agent ! 

Bronwen I found the natural product of the Frenchwoman's 
absurdly forcing and artificial system of education. She was 
now in her fourteenth year ; but she had all the manners and 
formality of a dowager countess of fifty ! Nothing of tho 
vivacity and impulse of youth ! She never spoke but when 
she was spoken to : she answered you with every propriety 
of address, but entirely without animation or naturalness . . 
almost without vitality. You looked at her with a misgiving 
that she might he some skilfully contrived specimen of automaton 
work ! She uttered no idea that was her own : indeed she had 
no ideas but such as her governess dictated, and her class-boolcs 
had put into her head, with as much rational meaning and effect 
as a lot of rootless flowers in a garden bed, of germinative or 
reproductive power. Madame Le Crampon was the absolute 
ruler of this machine ;. her mother had ceased to hold almost 

M 2 



164 matjlevekek's divokce. 

any relation to it ! She had abdicated in favour of that hard 
and implacable usurpress. 

Bronwen still continued very pretty; her features had still 
their waxen purity and delicacy of finish : she had the com- 
plexion of a new-blown rose. Her timidity was excessive. 
She trembled and blushed if you addressed the commonest 
observation to her. 

Poor girl ! what a mechanical toy had Madame Le Crampon's 
system manufactured her into ! Not only all her actions, but 
all her thoughts, the simplest movements of her young heart, 
had been regulated like those of a chronometer ! It saddened 
me to see a human creature, in whose veins the warm blood of 
childhood was flowing, subjected to such minute cruelty of 
regulation and repression ! As if one free thought, one unbid- 
den throb of the natural heart, were an offence against the 
God of nature ! 

In her joy to see me, the poor child, however, evinced she had 
not altogether forgotten she was fashioned of human stuff. As 
for her young brothers, the twins, whom Sophia was wont to 
call the Suett Dumplings, I found they were much grown, but 
as worthy as ever of the designation. They also were under 
suitable tutelage. Dr. Stillcoke, Scarlatt's former tutor, who 
had been ousted in favour of Luxmoor, was reinstated in office 
with them. Mrs. Suett had arrived at the conviction that she 
had not greatly bettered things in choosing so much more 
fashionable and lively an instructor. The conviction being 
thrust upon her in the shape of Scarlatt's enormous college 
bills, which during our absence had accumulated against him 
at Plas Newydd. To such an extent, in fact, that his father, 
irritated at the discovery, and aware that his son was out of his 
creditors' reach, had flatly refused to pay a single stiver on any 
of them. 

This was one of the subjects of uneasiness we had to consider 
immediately on our return. But there were others. A per- 
fectly new view of the interior politics of Plas Newydd was 
presented to me on the very evening after the close of the day's 
riotous revel of welcome. I had become one of the family ! It 
seemed to be thought no longer necessary to conceal the true 
state of the domestic relations from me. 

In the first place, besides the elder Suett's exasperation at 
the heavy debts his son had left unpaid in England on our 
flight, another element of discord seemed likely to rise into 
flames between them. John Thomas, it appeared, if ever he 
had been sincere in promising to relinquish public life in favour 
of his son, had now entirely changed his mind. He had come 
to the conclusion that the failure in his own and family's 
expectations of procuring a baronetcy, arose from his having 
"played his game in parliament the wrong way ! " It was not 
by evincing subserviency and adherence to a ministry on all 



HOME. 165 

occasions, that you induced it to comply with, your expectations 
in return. It was by frightening 1 , by " bullying the people in 
power" . in John Thomas's own phrase . that you could make 
certain of your object. Once get them afraid of you, and they 
give you what you want. He had been driving on the wrong 
tack always hitherto ; but he would now " start on the inde- 
pendent dodge ! " He would let them see ! And, accordingly, 
he had gone to London, to oppose his old whig friends, tooth 
and nail, on a question comfortably apart from the popular one 
of the day, but on which their existence as a ministry was sup- 
posed to be at stake. According to Mrs. Suett, he expected the 
reward of his conduct in the new parliament likely to be 
speedily summoned, and meanwhile "laid himself out exten- 
sively" to conciliate his considerably alienated constituency, 
and she was certain had not the slightest idea of giving up his 
chances of re-election in favour of any one. 

Scarlatt's irritation at this announcement was excessive. He 
railed openly against his father as "an old humbug ; " and so 
possessed was he with his own favourite notions, that he de- 
clared he would set up against him, if he could bring about a 
reconciliation with "the Castle." So he always spoke of my 
family. and he seemed to have little doubt that this happy 
result was at hand. He would then present himself to the 
county, on the conservative interest ; and backed by his 
father-in-law's, he had not the least doubt he should distance 
all competition. His interests, he rather pompously declared, 
were now far more with the landed than with the commercial 
and manufacturing portion of the nation. He was for preserv- 
ing the Corn Laws in all their integrity, and would take an 
early opportunity of satisfying Lord Mauleverer, ^ind the 
country gentlemen in general, of his opinions on the subject. 
He was certain now, he said, that his father's accounts of the 
continued exasperation of feeling at "the Castle" were pur- 
posely exaggerated to keep him abroad, out of the way. And 
that was why he supplied us with money so liberally for our 
travels, while he allowed him to fall into disrepute at home, by 
refusing all payment of his just debts. But the " old boy " 
would find the ruse a failure now, and a much worse one soon. 

There seemed some reason, certainly, in another piece of bad 
news his mother communicated, for Scarlatt to desire his for- 
tunes not to be identified with the prosperity of the commercial 
world. Within a few days before our return, Mr. Suett had 
received a letter from Sir Vivian Ap Howel, to state that, 
before he joined his regiment, which was shortly to embark for 
India, he requested to have an interview with him, in the pre- 
sence of witnesses, on matters relating to the Mynydd Howel 
estate. Lord Mauleverer, with whom he continued on terms of 
the most suspicious intimacy, was to be one of these witnesses. 
And from all Mrs. Suett and her husband could gather, it was 



IG9 JIATJXEVEEEIt'S DIVORCE. 

the intention of the young baronet (o enter a formal protest 
against the legality of the act which had transferred the pro- 
perty in the wealthy Howel mines from his family to the Suetts, 
and the company they represented. 

Something hostile was certainly intended, for Sir Vivian 
declined to stay at Plas Xewydd in this ominous visit, and had 
ordered an apartment to be prepared for him in his own old 
ruin of a castle, where he had already located " a miserable old 
fellowwho played the harp, and had gone blind, with his two 
old grisly hags of daughters ! " 

I confess it was not without some painful emotion that I 
heard Mrs. Suett add ingenuously, "And in case of a lawsuit, 
God only knows how it will go with us. Our own lawyers 
look blue over it ; for they say Sir Vivian's father ought to 
have signed the deed too, which he always stood out in India 
he would not, and went through any poverty rather than 
consent. There's a screw loose in our case, you may depend 
upon it, Scarlatt, by your father's anxiety. "We shall have a 
world of trouble, anyhow, and I am sure your father's temper 
needs no more souring. His very look already is enough to 
curdle all the dairies round about for miles. And that's why I 
am so pleased now with always having behaved so kind to the poor 
young fellow, when he was left an orphan, and bringing him 
up as much as I could with Bronwen. For, if he would only 
fall in love with her now she is woman-grown almost, and take 
her fortune as a set-off for what he thinks we may owe him, all 
would be right again." 

My husband replied with a deep execration . an unusual 
thing with him. What he said, indeed, implied a really start- 
ling vehemence of hostile feeling against Ap Howel, and the 
more so, as I had rarely heard him allude to him in any 
manner since the scene of the pistols at Kerig y Drudion. 

" ' The poor young fellow ' be blasted.' If I have a word to 
say in the matter, he shan't have Bronwen, nor a single penny 
of ours, with or without her. Why, mother, what can he do 
without money in a suit against us, in Chancery ? And if he 
had plenty, possession is nine-tenths of the law ; and I would 
engage to hold the Mynydd Howel, in Chancery, to all eternity, 
if he had ten thousand times a better right than the best." 

I was shocked at the open and extreme injustice of this 
language. 

" Well, it does seem strange. After the mountain had fallen 
in on the mines for more than fifty years," sighed Mrs. Suett. 
" Still, I own I am all for conciliation. I liked the poor lad 
always well enough himself . and then the people about here 
consider him the rightful owner, and will, to the end of time." 

" He may not last so long himself, mother. Let us hope he 
may get his brains. if he has any . knocked out with a cannon- 
ball, or a Burmese mace, before we are troubled with him much 



HOME. 167 

more," replied my husband, adding vindictively, " I am very 
glad ho has the prudence not to take up his quarters at Plas 
Newydd while I am here. I owe him the chastisement of a 
good deal of bygone impertinence, and I doubt if I should be 
able to restrain my temper after this indication of his malice ; 
and in that case I should use very little ceremony in clearing 
the house of him, and all his ancestral honours, at the point of 
my boot." 

How was it that the scene of the Kerig y Drudion returned 
with such force and distinctness upon my mind, as I listened to 

this outbreak ? 

****** 

One of my most pleasing anticipations . perhaps the most 
pleasing . on my return to England, was that of being reunited 
to my friend Sophia. Llanhowel Kectory, which she now 
inhabited with her husband, was distant certainly about five 
miles from Plas Newydd. But I looked upon such a space as 
constituting hardly any obstacle to a renewal of our intimacy. 

The very morning after our arrival at Plas Newydd I deter- 
mined to drive over to Llanhowel Rectory, and surprise my 
beloved friend with the news of my return in person. I longed 
to present my little darling to her. _ I had all along felt that 
my happiness in the possession of this exquisite little treasure 
of beauty and innocence would never be complete until Sophia 
shared it with me. 

Every shade of umbrage, with regard to the former relations 
between my husband and Sophia, had long since entirely 
vanished from my mind. I supposed, indeed, that Searlatt 
would derive as much harmless satisfaction from the renewal of 
our intimacy as myself. I was, therefore, considerably vexed 
and surprised, when, on requesting him, before he went down, 
to bear me company after breakfast to Llanhowel, he inquired 
. and, I think, without any affectation of ignorance, . what on 
earth I wanted to do at Llanhowel ? I laughed . and perhaps 
I coloured a little as I reminded him that our friends, the 
Luxmoors, resided there. " Ah, so they do," he replied, as if 
he had forgotten all about them and they were suddenly 
recalled to his recollection. "And I should like to see 
Luxmoor ! he might be of some help to me. You may invite 
him to come over and talk with me, but I sha'n't be able to go 
out this morning . nor for a week or a fortnight to come . on 
mere visits. I shall be very busy looking after my prospects 
for parliament, and seeing what can be done about a reconcilia- 
tion with the Castle. Yes, you can invite Luxmoor up, but . 
what was I saying about visits ? . I don't want you to get on 
visiting terms with his wife. She don't exactly mix in our 
circle, you knoiv.a,t least the one we intend to move in,. and 
having been only a governess here, she is scarcely, the kind of 
person I should like you to associate with." 



168 mattleveeee's divoece. 

I reall y was surprised . but I was not gratified ; I was even hurt 
by his tone of neglect and disdain towards my own dearest and 
most cherished friend. " I do not see," I said, pettishly, " that 
I am likely to have so very numerous and agreeable a society at 
Plas Newydd, that I should wilfully deprive myself of that of 
the only clever and amusing person I know about here, merely 
because she has once been a governess ! " 

This was rather too hard a hit. The Suetts had but a scanty 
roll of visitors, for those whom they wished to visit would not 
visit them, and they gave no encouragement to others of inferior 
station, who would have been glad enough, no doubt, to pay 
court to such rich people. 

Scarlatt replied with sharpness, " You can do as you like, of 
course, my love ! Your receiving Mrs. Luxmoor will merely 
look like a renewal of kind patronage. It would be different, of 
course, if i" associated with her, on seeming terms of equality. 
I must, therefore, decline in toto ! " 

Nor do I deem this scornful indifference in the least put on. 
Scarlatt, absorbed in his projects of ambition, and resolution to 
make his way into the highest spheres of society, was probably 
quite in earnest in it. 

But his mother appeared to be still more disinclined to my 
intention, which I announced at breakfast, asking her for a 
carriage to convey myself, baby, and nurse, over to Llanhowel. 

" Nay, come, my dear ! " (she loved to display a good deal of 
familiarity with me now) " the woman there's no company for 
you. "What do you want looking her up again ? I am sure 
she has been amply repaid for any services she ever rendered 
you and your 'usband ! She and her 'usband too ! Take my 
advice and let her drop ; we've all had enough of her ! " 

"Why, Mrs. Suett, what can you mean? Do you wish to 
insinuate that I ought to be so ridiculous and absurd as to be 
jealous of Mrs. Luxmoor, on account of that foolish nonsense 
years ago ? And even then it was altogether a misapprehen- 
sion ! " 

Scarlatt was present, and he coloured up angrily. " Yes ! 
she had the infernal impudence to make me her screen, as she 
thought, with Luxmoor ! " he said, in a tone of excessive pique. 
" Well, I hope she enjoys her position at present with him ! . 
How is Luxmoor going on, mother ? Do you ever hear ? " 

"Like Old Nick himself!. And yet they say he does a 
wonderful deal of good, too ! I can hardly tell, sometimes, 
what to make of all I hear. But if ever there were two sides 
to a story, there is to the Luxmoors' ! " said Mrs. Suett, with a 
very puzzled expression. " Why, some people tell me that he 
actually beats his wife every now and then ! And she her- 
self declares no husband could possibly behave better to a 
woman! She knows best, of course. But then she says he 
hardly ever gets the worse for liquor now. whereas, I hear, 



HOME. 169 

often and often, that lie is even at times all but drunk when lie 
goes into the pulpit. There are lots of lies told about the 
Luxiuoors on one side or other, that's certain. But as to my 
thinking for one moment you could be 1 jealous of an ugly, 
stuck-up-nosed creature like Sophia! . though I used some- 
times to think she is not so ugly as she gives herself out ! . 
such a thought never once entered, into my head ! " 

" I assure you I am not jealous of her, Mrs. Suett," I replied, 
with, great tranquillity, " and to prove it, I intend to enjoy as 
much of her society as I possibly can, while we remain at Plas 
Newydd, if you do not forbid me to make my friends welcome 
under your roof ! " 

"If you could only hear what Madame Le Crampon says of 
her ! . I mean, I really have no objections to make, in that 
case," Mrs. Suett replied, cutting herself short, but evidently 
not much pleased. " I only say there is too much of the cat 
and the cream about her ways of going on, to make me very 
anxious to see her again in my pantry ! Why, even my own 
husband, John Thomas . I do believe she was quite making up 
to him at one time, only he was made of too tough material ! " 

I could not help breaking into a laugh at this observation, 
and after some slight reflection, Mrs. Suett joined me heartily 
in the demonstration. But Scarlatt said peevishly, " I can 
quite believe it of her ! Mrs. Luxmoor is a perfect coquette, 
and not at all a good associate, for you, Helena," and he left 
the room. 

I persisted nevertheless, seeing no good reason why I should 
abandon my friend, in any assigned ; and it was arranged I 
was to be driven over to Llanhowel with a pair of ponies Mrs. 
Suett kept for her own use. I refused the great state family 
coach, with the four " spanking greys," as Mrs. Suett called 
them, resolutely. 

I reached Llanhowel about noon on a wintry-looking spring 
day, leaving the hills behind me fantastically decked with 
wreaths of snow. Llanhowel is a village, or rather a group of 
farmhouses, connected by some scattered cottages and hovels, 
skirting a deep hollow glen, about half-way between Mauleverer 
and the Mynydd Howel. I remember to have avoided it by a 
considerable circuit on my flight from Madame Le Crampon ; 
and it struck me as very strange that, as I stepped out of Plas 
Newydd, to return so far on my way, I had politely returned 
this woman's profound, ancien regime curtsey ! How marvel- 
lously intertwisted are the threads of life ! Why need we 
wonder they are so seldom woven into a web of consistent hues 
and pattern ! 

Nearly all the way to Llanhowel I commanded, from my seat 
in the open chaise, a view of the distant towers of Mauleverer ! 
My mother and my father I knew were there ; and often during 
my journey I felt an inclination to extend it to their abode, and 



170 3IA.rLEVEUI'".K'S DIVORCE. 

throw myself at their feet for pardon ! It would, perhaps, have 
spared much future suffering and present uneasiness of sus- 
pense ! But Scarlatt had otherwise determined. He assured 
me I ran risk of being forcibly detained by my father, and that 
his main hope of reconciliation lay in observing 1 for a time a 
policy of "masterly inactivity" (the phrase of the day), and 
awaiting- the good effects of his own appearance as a conserva- 
tive politician and candidate for our county representation. I 
was not then aware of it ; but my husband had determined to 
act as if in full reliance on his father's former promises, and to 
make his pretensions known before John Thomas could arrive 
to say them nay. Once compromised in this manner, he thought 
that for very shame's sake his father must withdraw from oppo- 
sition to his schemes, 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

AN INDISSOLUBLE UNION. 

I saw Sophia some time before she could probably have seen 
me. The village lies at the bottom of the hollow, and was 
spread like a map at the foot of the steep road that descends to 
it. There were only two good houses in it : one a large, old, 
scrambling structure, which my jockey informed me belonged 
to a Squire Gawker, who was master of the Howel Hunt, and 
otherwise a most eminent sportsman. The other was the par- 
sonage. This was close on the church . a very ancient little 
Gothic building, overgrown with ivy to the very top of a dis- 
proportionately lofty steeple. The parsonage itself was almost as 
ancient probably, all on the ground plan and'roofed with rushes. 
Neatly enough, however, and of a size to accommodate a con- 
siderable family . always expected in a Welch cure, of course. 
The windows were latticed in small diamond panes, set in 
arched frameworks very deeply in the walls, and in parts 
prettily overhung with ivy, briar-rose, and a variety of 
creepers, among which was one whose scarlet leaves had sur- 
vived the winter, and gave a cheerful, fire-like glow to nearly 
the whole front. But what chiefly struck me in the scene was 
the fact that, although the space before the house was evidently 
a churchyard, from its numerous jutting memorials, it was 
trimmed and laid out in quite an elegant garden fashion. And 
along the well-gravelled walk to the house through this, under 
the shade of the tall yews bordering it, I perceived two figures 



AN INDISSOLUBLE UNION. 171 

walking 1 towards the gate. One I did not an instant doubt to 
be Sophia . the other I could not conclude to be her husband. 
It was a man about his height, and in clerical black ; but 
much more softly rounded and plump, and, besides, dressed in 
knee-breeches and buckles. an antiquated clerical style he 
never affected. 

My heart beat quick with joyous expectation. But I was 
unwilling that any stranger should witness its overflow ; and 
considering, from what I observed, that Sophia was about to 
dismiss her guest, I ordered the carriage to stop at a little tap- 
house I perceived in the village, at a stone's throw from the 
parsonage, but concealed from it by a group of elm pollards. 
Here I determined to await till the strange visitor passed out. 
His one-horse brougham, of dark bottle-green, was evidently 
open in readiness for his arrival. 

I could plainly discern from where I sat that Sophia was 
escorting this personage, whoever he was, with great marks of 
deferential attention. The personage himself, I could also 
perceive, seemed at once pleased, flattered, and reluctant, 
repeatedly pausing, as if to decline further homage, but allow- 
ing himself to be led on without much real repugnance ; for 
they arrived together at the gate, laughing and chatting in the 
most agreeable and amicable manner possible. The guest and 
hostess took there a very cordial farewell, and Sophia stood 
holding the gate in her hand until her companion had struggled 
his corpulent little person, with some visible difficulty, but great 
pretensions to agility, into the vehicle. " Really, Mrs. Lux- 
moor," I then distinctly heard him say, in the midst of the 
village quietness, " you must have some extraordinary spell at 
command. I had quite forgotten my rheumatism until I ceased 
to hear you talk." 

" We only required the accusation of witchcraft to complete 
the absurdity of the charges against us, Mr. Archdeacon!" 
Sophia^ replied, in her gayest tones, adding, with an arch glance, 
" But if it be as you are so polite as to say, you can always 
command the remedy . whenever you please to honour us with 
your presence. And I regret more than ever, Mr. Luxmoor 
should have gone on such a long round of sick visitation as not 
to be at home tohave had the pleasure of showing you over his 
improvements himself. His schools especially ! He could have 
explained the system so much better than I have been able. 
But I hope at least I have had the good fortune to convince 
you of the injustice of the base anonymous communications 
addressed to my lord the bishop, and that Mr. Luxmoor is 
doing, to the contrary, all the good he possibly can with his 
limited means (we have no one to help us, you are aware, sir, 
in this put-of-the-way sporting place !) and the obstinacy of the 
people in sticking to their Welch prejudices and gibberish !" 

" You may be satisfied I shall report most favourably to his 



172 mattlevekee's ditoece. 

lordship, Mrs. Luxmoor. And I believe, meanwhile, I can 
assure you no further notice will be taken on the subjects I 
have been obliged to mention to you. Everything I have seen 
and heard in Llanhowel . above all, your testimony . is in com- 
plete refutation of those vile anonymous slanderers ! " was the 
affable reply. 

Sophia smiled with her singularly fascinating mixture of 
melancholy and gaiety, and waving her hand very gracefully 
as the carriage drove off, she turned with a suddenly changed 
and impatient step from the gate, and seemed hurriedly making 
back to the house. I thought I would give her the full pleasure 
of a surprise ; so, desiring them to let me out of the carriage, 
I crossed and entered the garden churchyard, at some little 
distance behind her. 

I was rather pleased, with this plan in view, to perceive that 
Sophia made towards one of the out-houses . an uninhabited 
sexton's, or perhaps merely used for the purpose of stowing 
away tools and lumber. I followed softly on in her steps, and 
I saw her enter at a door on the farther side of the little build- 
ing. I was myself then passing an open wooden shutter set too 
high to see into the place, but whence any interior sounds were 
audible. And I was arrested at the spot by hearing Sophia 
speak, in raised and passionate tones, very different from those 
dulcet ones so lately on her lips. " Come into the house now, 
vile drunkard, and get to your bed ! What a morning of lies 
and tediousness you have cost me !" 

" You tell the lie ! I am not drunk ! What do you mean 

by having me shut up here, you ," and the most degrading of 

epithets, from man to woman, was applied to Sophia, in the 
hoarse, tipsy tones of a voice that I instantly recognized to he 
Luxmoor's. 

"Is it your intention to go on like a mad bull, as usual, 
before the Archdeacon is well out of hearing ?" Sophia 
answered, seemingly too much accustomed to abuse, to be 
ruffled by the insult. Yet she added, in a low, menacing 
mutter, that came distinctly to me . " Such a brutish spectacle 
as you present, Luxmoor, is enough to make any woman give 
you cause for the atrocious terms you apply to me !" 

" I have cause !" returned the drunken wretch. " Isn't there 
that great pile of horseflesh, Gawker, constantly haunting in 
and out of the house ? The devil fetch me, and a side of the 
house away together, if I stand it all much longer ! " 

"I do not see the necessity for the devil's taking a side of 
the house, Otherwise I have no objection, personally," was 
Sophia's irritating response ; and she added, in a still bitterer 
and more stinging manner, " So you are at your old game again, 
are you ? But what sort of damages do you think you could 
make out of Gawker ? A fellow who has ruined himself with 
dogs, as you intend to ruin yourself with. I will not use your 



Atf INDISSOItTBlE tTNIOST. 173 

word . with ladies ! For your delightful doings at Widow 
Wrangham's opposite, it seems, have mainly contributed to 
procure us the honour of the Archdeacon's visitation . a visita- 
tion indeed it was to me ! And had I shown a particle of 
natural feeling. of belief in the charge, which I know to be so 
true.your seven hundred'a-year would have gone to the winds ; 
and you ought to have rejoiced if the friend you have men- 
tioned had literally come and carried you off, without the 
house-side, however, if possible . that would be a dilapidation 
in a parsonage which we should have had to make good." 

I heard the words in reply . the brutal, the barbarous words 
. " I'll give you one for yourself, meantime, madam, you won't 
find it so easy to repair ! " and the sound of a heavy blow 
on human flesh . never mistaken ! . a - suppressed but piercing 
shriek that went through my heart ; but I know not what else 
happened before I found myself cast between a woman who was 
bleeding profusely, as it seemed to me, from the eyes, and a 
demon in human form . in the form of Luxmoor, who held her 
by the dishevelled hair, and was redoubling blows upon her 
with his unmanly first up to the moment when I threw myself 
between them. 

Marvellous, marvellous ! I was screaming for help, but 
Sophia herself . who recognised me at a glance . implored me 
to be quiet. "It is nothing . it is over. I provoked him too 
much ; he is intoxicated ! Do not bring exposure upon us, for 
God's sake, dear Hugh-Helena ! for I see it is you ; it must be 
you or an angel ! He is very good when he is sober, and he 
rarely exceeds now. But . but . I really can hardly see you. 
Go into the house, Luxmoor, dear, and tell Fanny to bring me 
a basin of the well water. I was to blame. I acknowledge it. 
Do pray let me alone now for a while !" 

For Luxmoor . transmuted altogether from the jovial jocund 
Luxmoor of our wedding tour . continued to glare at his wife 
with his bloodshot, angry eyes like some insane beast, keeping 
his fists clenched as if to renew the onslaught. 

" Mr. Luxmoor ! You remember me ? Pray don't hurt 
Sophia before me ! Oh, pray don't ! " interceded I, in terror. 

"Oh, you're Mrs. Scarlatt Suett, are you? Honourable Miss 
Pom . Pom . Pomerilli Raltum, &c, &c, &c, that was?" re- 
turned the inebriated brute. " I married you, didn't I ? 
according to the rights of the ancient Druids . at Gretna Green, 
was it ? No, Sark Toll Bar ! All reality ; no formality ! Well, 
what came of it all, in the long run ? Are you one of us at 
present? All the honey sucked ; nothing but the sting left ! 
And pray have you found out what a beauty my pupil 
really is ? " 

" Take my handkerchief, dear Sophia, and wipe your poor > 
poor eyes ! ' ' 

" I sha'n't want the water soon, though this is rather too hot , 



17-i jiauleveeee's divoece. 

too ! " my unhappy friend said, accepting the offer, and burst- 
ing into an hysterical paroxysm of tears and laughter, which 
she vainly attempted to control, as she staunched those bruised 
and most precious organs which the monster, her husband, 
seemed purposely to have aimed at. 

_ " You'll wait long enough for water, hot or cold, if you wait 
till I send you any. I don't care for you nor your d. d chit- 
chatty old woman of an archdeacon either ! I'll go over at 
once to Widow Wrangham's, and you can send for his venera- 
bleship to keep you company, if you like. I won't come home 
till morning, I can tell you. Nor even then, perhaps ; but if I 
see Gawker, I'll tell him it will be all right and snug, at least 
till then." 

And the abominable wretch, scarcely able to stagger and reel 
along, with what he had already imbibed, still shaking his fists 
in savage defiance at his unfortunate wife, made his way from 
the outhouse, no doubt on the errand he had announced. 

"0, Sophia . my poor, poor Sophia! how the monster has 
hurt you ! " 

"It don't matter, unless it can be seen very much. Have 
you anything with you, dear . Eau de Cologne, or anything of 
that sort ? But do look out first, and tell me if the archdeacon's 
carriage is quite out of sight. It would be horrible if he should 
see Luxnioor in the state he is in. after the fine account I gave 
him, too ! He will think me such a liar ; and so I am . the 
worst in creation ! But what am I to do ? Turn him and 
myself both out of our only possible honest means of living, 
now that he has given himself so completely up to the devils 
that possess him, and which have come into him out of the 
swine ! But honest! my God ! when we mock God himself 
hourly, to keep our seven hundred a-year." 

Let me abridge this painful scene. It was hours before 
Sophia and I recovered sufficiently from the shock of the unto- 
ward accompaniments of our rej unction to enjoy it. I am not 
sure, indeed, that Sophia's deep humiliation and vexation at 
the exposure of her truly miserable matrimonial position did 
not ratner render it painful to her to the close. 

The poor woman had quite reduced it to a system, her efforts 
to cover the delinquencies of her husband, and put a good face 
on her own disasters to the world. But after the scene I had 
witnessed, it was impossible to hide the truth from me : and 
marbled over as she might be by the stoicism of endurance she 
had endeavoured to teach herself, Sophia was taken at a 
moment of weakness . nigh vanquished by calamity, and listen- 
ing, for the first time for years, to the voice of womanly sym- 
pathy and tenderness. I would not, indeed, be denied. I 
compelled her, by the force of my love and tears, to grant me a 
confidence so closely locked up against the whole world besides, 
that few imagined she had any to yield ! 



AN INDISSOLUBLE T/NION. 175 

She told me all, I think. Luxmoor, always one of the most 
depraved of men, had found his Caprsea in this remote "Welsh 
village, where he indulged in all the worst vices that had pre- 
viously disgraced his career, in still more unrestrained and 
merciless excess. I must not stain my pages with the record 
of his enormities. In one of the frightful legends a mother and 
her own daughter figured together as objects of his bestial 
licentiousness ! Two women, who kept the taphouse within 
sight of every window in Llanhowel Parsonage ! Tet the 
unfortunate creature, his wife . induced by what frenzy He 
only knows, who, surely for better purposes, has implanted 
in the hearts of women feelings so deep and ineradicable. had 
literally devoted herself, and all the powers of her ingenious 
and indefatigable intellect, to the _ preservation for him of a 
position Luxmoor ought long previously to have forfeited, or 
never to have attained. And so well had she succeeded that 
everywhere opinion was balanced, and the efforts of the reve- 
rend wretch's enemies, raised by his own vileness, had hitherto 
failed to brand him with the condemnation and exposure he so 
richly merited. The plan she proceeded on itself would not 
have occurred to any but a woman of great industry and talent. 
Nearly all the good that he ought, or might have done in his 
parish, she did, and ascribed to him ! 

For example, she had organised a most excellent girls' school ; 
not on the principle of fashioning some score of human parrots 
to repeat certain scientific sounds, but on one of her own, by 
which, when she explained it, it appeared to me evident she 
would manufacture domestic servants, or first-rate wives and 
mistresses of families, for the neighbouring peasantry. A con- 
stant rotation of these girls in her own house were the only 
servants she employed, and they there acquired all the domestic 
knowledge that could be of use to them in service, or in the 
latter capacities. Yet even this, she whispered me, she ven- 
tured upon with fear and trembling ; and while she represented 
Luxmoor everywhere as the benevolent planner and director 
of this establishment, she dared not trust him alone with her 
young female pupils in its walls ! 

Yet Sophia could find apologies for this truly detestable 
ruffian. It was still the old cry. What could one expect much 
better from a man of talents so remarkable. of so devouring an 
activity . condemned to the ennui and unvaried dulness of a 
country village like Llanhowel ? If Luxmoor had been placed 
in a great town, now, where his conversational powers could 
have been properly appreciated, and where he could have met 
with persons his equals in learning and information, it would 
have been so different ! Had he anything of interest to employ 
his mind in at all at Llanhowel ? He was absolutely incredu- 
lous himself in matters of religion, and was perfectly indifferent 
to its diffusion ! Sophia could hardly induce him to deliver 



176 MAr/LEVEKEK'S BIVOKCE. 

the sermons she herself scrawled cmt for him, often enough to 
avoid open censure. Yet in reality he had by nature all the 
ambition and love of supremacy of a Hildebrand ! And his 
cruelty to her . I do believe the poor woman occasionally per- 
suaded herself . was only a misdirected effluence of his genius 
for control and absolute sway. 

Surely, had he not been one of the most insatiably craving 1 
and dissatisfied of wretches, Luxmoor had no reason to con- 
sider_ himself as ill-treated in the distribution of earthly 
blessings. His income was ample, even with the deductions 
made for the consequences of his former extravagance and 
profligacy. Sophia told me that she had placed all his debts, 
unknown even to himself, in a systematic course of liquidation, 
and though they were very heavy ; and another drawback lay 
in the fact that they were obliged to allow "the Cambridge 
Squaw and her piccaninnies" as she called them, an annual 
sum to keep all quiet there ; a few years she hoped would 
accomplish the result. It was astonishing, indeed, how quickly, 
after the disasters I have commemorated, Sophia recovered her 
natural tone of gaiety and persiflage, She was not, however , 
so much hurt as I had imagined. " A little blood makes a great 
show ! " she herself told me, laughingly, when, at her desire, I 
had procured her some water from a well in the churchyard ; 
and after washing her face, only two light brown discolorations 
remained round her eyes, which we both thought might easily 
pass for a slight bilious distemperature, until they changed to 
their next stage of green and purple. But looking at her now, 
I could less than ever account for the infidelity and brutish ill- 
treatment to which Sophia was so evidently subjected. Her 
figure seemed to me much improved ; it was thinner, perhaps, 
than of yore, but there was more grace and dignity in its 
motions than I had been wont formerly to discern. The mystical 
charm of her countenance was enhanced : that exquisite light 
of mind and feeling which she still possessed, shone with yet 
more play of fascinating variety over her features. She was 
dressed in excedingly good taste, thoixgh in the most modest of 
morning costumes . in snowy dimity, without a single ornament, 
and with a plain straw bonnet trimmed with quakerly simpli- 
city. And the more I conversed with her . now that I was 
better able to appreciate qualities of the mind . the more I was 
struck by the visible enlargement of hers, and its rare natural 
endowment. She explained smilingly, in reply to my compli- 
ments, that condemned as she was so much to solitude, by her 
husband's neglect, she had read more than ever she had read in 
her life before, and thought she should finally turn out a com- 
plete female bookworm. 

I suggested . No : an authoress ! I noticed that she slightly 
coloured, when I said so, and looked at me with some eagerness in 
her expression. " Do you really think I might make my salt 



AN INDISSOLUBLE UNION. 177 

by writing?" she said. "I own I am completely tired of 
governessing. But if Luxmoor drives me fairly to despair, it 
would be delightful not to be obliged to go upon the parish, and 
ivash pauper's shirts for an existence. Writing is hard work, 
too, and publishers are the coyest creatures possible to catch, I 
have heard. Still, anything would be better, perhaps, than 
making a mistake . which I have sometimes been tempted to . 
and slipping, accidentally for the purpose, into that deep, dark 
well, that goes halfway down to the antipodes, whence you 
brought me the water . I shall think of this, my darling pupil ! 
you teach me now ! " 

It was agreed that I should stay the rest of the day with 
Sophia, and then, for the first time, I mentioned about my child 
and the nurse. She expressed all the eagerness I anticipated 
to see it, and now, having smoothed her hair and visage, 
insisted on accompanying me to the gate "to receive little 
Herbert in the arms of his mother's sister-friend." 

Surprised at my protracted absence, my nurse had meanwhile 
descended from the carriage, and we met her coming up the 
avenue with her precious charge. 

Sophia's glance flashed eagerly on the infant, which was fast 
asleep ; and. a paleness, natural to her when deeply moved, 
came over her countenance. And deeply moved she was ! 
What else could be the meaning of that strange spasm which 
for an instant wrenched her features as she gazed upon my 
child ? 

" What a beautiful little creature ! His mother's features 
visibly . but his father's complexion. A regular little Christian 
Cupid, without the wings or the poisoned arrows ! Let me have 
it, nurse. I will not disturb it. And she took the sleeping 
cherub from the good Fleming's arms, and put her lips so 
softly and tenderly to its tiny rosy mouth that indeed she did 
not seem at all to ruffle its repose. " Ah ! " she then said, in a 
low, passionate murmur, rather to herself than to me, "had he 
given me children like this . or even little imps like himself! . 
I could have been happy with all. But Cod has denied me 
even this consolation, for the crime of loving such a wretch ! " 

It had not occurred to me yet to have made the inquiry . I 
ought to have known, in fact, that Sophia would have men- 
tioned so noticeable a circumstance in her correspondence. 
"You have no children then, Sophia?'"' I inquired vaguely, 
half lost in the contemplation of my blooming boy. She made 
me no reply . and the emphatic silence brought me back to 
recollection. 

On the whole, it was a happy day this I spent with Sophia, 
and it passed with an animation and variety of which _ I had 
not a long time had experience, and which renewed with me 
all the old fascination of her ascendancy. 

She was curiously well informed in the gossip of the country- 



178 matjleteeee's divorce. 

side, and communicated much that was interesting 1 to me, with 
.which the Suetts were not acquainted, or which they had pur- 
posely concealed from me. 

" My father and mother," Sophia said, " were living on much 
the same terms as of yore, though it was reported that " that 
dreadful old Hecate, my grandmother," had made some re- 
morseful admissions to her son, at her death, which should 
have softened his heart towards her. My mother's health, I 
was afflicted to learn, was believed to be fast declining, and it 
was said indeed she was now a confirmed invalid, passing her 
time almost exclusively in her own apartments, " dying of 
that slow but certain malady," commented Sophia, feelingly, 
" when alien natures are irrevocably linked together, and the 
stronger drags and worries the weaker on with it, till it sinks 
at last, and perishes worn out !" How much did I long then 
for the reconciliation which should give me power to devote 
myself to console that bruised and trampled heart ! 

But it was easy to see Sophia entertained very slight hopes 
that I should ever effect one with my father. She told me 
what until that moment I had never heard . that Lord Maul - 
everer had preferred a bill against the elder Suetts, her husband 
and herself, charging them with a conspiracy in bringing about 
my marriage with Scarlatt; which the grand jury had ignored 
at once for want of proof. 

She spoke of young Ap Howel, introducing the subject very 
casually by observing what a favourite he was at Mauleverer 
Castle, and how useful he might consequently be in promoting 
the project of a general reconciliation. 

" For I am convinced," she said, with her intricate smile, 
" that you still possess the greatest influence over him. _ Wit- 
ness how at a word from you he gave up his opposition to 
Luxmoor, whom he detests. And you must know that he 
honours me occasionally with a visit, when he is at Plas Kewydd, 
for no other reason, I am sure, than because he is aware I cor- 
respond with you, and can give him tidings of your welfare. 
Indeed he has never disguised that was the case. Of course 
(observing that I coloured) he has outgrown all those silly, 
boyish fancies of his ; and he has often laughed with me 
himself over his declaration to you, while he was still an Eton 
second-form . and I never saw anybody so pleased as he was 
when I gave him the first news. I had them before Plas 
Newydd even. of the birth of little Herbert." 

"I should not think of asking any more favours of Sir 
Vivian," I said. 

" You would scarcely know him if you saw him again," 
Sophia resumed. " But I suppose there are chances of a law- 
suit which will make him less welcome than ever at Plas 
Newydd, so you will not be called upon to produce your 
surprise. His system of sacrificing everything to bodily inv 



AN INDISSOLUBLE UNION. 179 

provement has answered wonderfully. He has grown quite 
a tine young fellow ! Too thin and nervy still perhaps, but 
full of lire, and restless as quicksilver ! I daresay he will 
look extremely well in his uniform . especially when he has 
covered it with stars, and himself with glory, as I have no 
doubt he will long before he is an old fogy ! I believe 
Alexander the Great was not particularly a giant to look at, 
was he r" 

I turned the conversation at once into another channel. I 
did not well know why, but the praises of this youth, whom 
I myself so highly esteemed and honoured, harassed me ! 

I spoke of my husband. I was, in fact, suddenly surprised 
to remember that Sophia had never made any inquiry about 
him. Yet there had been time, and a calm enough interval, to 
notice that he was not with me. "We were sitting together 
at an early tea, to give me time to return to Plas Newydd 
before dark, and as yet she had not alluded to Scarlatt at all. 

I mentioned, then, how very much engaged he was, and. 
rather awkwardly, certainly . introduced his message, wishing 
Luxmoor to come over and see him at the Plas. " But I shall 
give such an account of his doings," I said, " that Scarlatt will 
excuse Mr. Luxmoor's taking the trouble, no doubt." 

" You do not then expect Mr. Suett to escort you home ! " 
Sophia replied, with evident surprise . and perhaps some other 
feeling, for a dark red spot appeared, and burned for a moment 
on her brow. 

" You will have to do him the homage of a first visit, I am 
afraid, Sophia," I answered laughingly. " You cannot tell 
how absorbed in politics he has become. But it was lucky, I 
should say, that he could not accompany me this morning. No 
man could have seen Luxmoor's brutality . and not have 
broken every bone in his skin. 

" That might not be so-easy with Luxmoor . he is a master of 
the science of self-defence, and drunk or sober, is as brave as a 
lion," Sophia observed, with some vehemence. " But you will 
do more to ravel my work, by telling what you have witnessed, 
to your husband, than all the anonymous letters that perplex 
the cogitation of my lord bishop. So you must promise me, 
dear Hugh-Helena ! indeed you must ! . not to make any men- 
tion of the distressing spectacle you have witnessed, at Plas 
Newydd." 

" Well ! if you will promise to come and see how I can keep 
a secret, within the next three days." 

Sophia mused deeply for a moment or two. "Nay, now, 
dearest," she then observed with a smile that was yet full of 
uneasiness and hesitation, " you really must excuse me for a 
time. It will not offend you, if I tell you the true reasons why 
I must decline visiting at Plas Newydd ? In the first place, it 
is impossible for me to endure the stupid, ungrammatical 

N 2 



180 siatjleyerek's divorce. 

insults of your mother-in-law. In the next, it is a favourite 
plan of retaliation with Luxmoor . by way of dastard apology 
for himself, I presume,. to throw out the basest imputations 
on my character with other men. There is a great, buck-faced 
fellow about here. a Squire Gawker . whom he is always, 
without the slightest reason, throwing in my face. And now 
lie would not scruple, you may depend upon it, if he saw the 
least chance, to renew his old vile scandals in another direction. 
You understand me, dearest i" 

"What haughty demon was it prompted me to reply ? "What 
extreme nonsense, Sophia. Why, I don't know that you would 
ever even see Searlatt. He told me himself that he had no 
longer any time whatever to devote to amusement and the 
society of persons not immediately associated with his political 
objects." 

"Is he so much engaged as all that?" Sophia answered, 
fixing her penetrating gaze upon me. " He must be a good 
deal changed. But in the midst of my own miseries I have quite 
forgotten to inquire whether your happiness is still as much 
without a cloud as in those glorious, honeymoon days of ours in 
Scotland, which are still among the brightest of my recollec- 
tions ?" 

This question made me pause. It brought into sudden and 
marshalled array a long series of events and ideas which had 
succeeded one another too swiftly to assign each its just place 
and value, until that question seemed to bid the whole phalanx 
halt and present itself in reviewable order. 

What had happened during these three years, to change or 
modify the passion that sent Searlatt Suett and myself on so 
long an exile from our native land ? 

I can and will state truly what this lapse of time, and more 
familiar acquaintance with the character and manners of my 
husband, had effected for me. 

I do not deny that my imagination, and even my heart, had 
undergone somewhat of that process of disillusion, . as it may 
well be called, . that usually follows the overstrained excite- 
ment, the frenzy, of a passion such, as I believed, I had inspired 
and shared. 

No doubt it had happened with me, in the union I had 
formed, in a degree, as on my memorable mountain journey. 
Many a magnificent hue and light had vanished from the 
peaks. many a dark valley and turbid torrent had broken on 
my vision . since those earliest hours of love and joy. No 
doubt I was soon forced to discern in my husband glimpses of 
the selfishness, arrogance, and tyrannical assumption, which to 
others have always been marked features in his unmalleable, 
and yet not fixed or loftily unbending nature. Uncongeni- 
alities of disposition. even of temperament. could not but 
occasionally suggest themselves to me with painful distinctness. 



A FRIEND IN NEED. 181 

There was a coldness and an absence of all enthusiasm in 
Scarlatt's nature that sometimes affected me with a strangely 
abyssmal sense of repulsion . as if in our inmost essence we were 
beings alien and opposed. 

Scarlatt's mind. I too had learned to perceive . lacked ger- 
minative power and native affluence. It was well stored with 
much of the learning that can be taught, or is taught, in public 
schools. But the living and animating lire of genius was not 
aglow in the centre ! This I knew, or, rather, I had felt on so 
many occasions, that the suspicion had already gained some 
ground in my convictions. I had missed . and speedily . the 
tone of romantic tenderness that had won me, from my hus- 
band's demeanour. But the transforming power of love was 
still and ever busy in my heart and brain. I had built for my 
idol so glorified a temple that it was long indeed before I could 
understand it was not in reality a god ! 

And up to this period I had in fact little or nothing tangible 
to complain of in my husband's conduct to me. With all my 
craving jealousy of affection, I had sense enough to know that 
I could not expect a husband to continue always a bridegroom. 
No devotion, no anxiety of love, could exceed those which 
Scarlatt had displayed for me during the dangerous periods 
which occurred before the birth of my living child. These 
associations riveted him to my heart by a million delicate fibres ; 
and now that I was the blest mother of the infant whose sweet 
earliest babblings would call him father . now that I saw in the 
beautiful, innocent face of my little Herbert the features of my 
own ancient race, mingled with all that was most attractive 
and engaging in his father's fine complexion and clear, blue, 
masterful eyes . no woman's heart ever more literally accepted 
the words of marriage-plight from wife to husband. I loved, I 
honoured, I obeyed Scarlatt Suett from the inmost depths of 
my soul ! 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A FRIEND IN NEED. 

I could therefore in all sincerity and truth reply to Sophia s 
question in terms that satisfied her of my unabated love for 
my husband, and my conviction of Scarlatt's ardent tenderness 
for me. 

She listened to my glowing and delighted account with appa- 
rent satisfaction. With real, I thought it ! . perhaps even it 



182 matjletbeee's DIVOllCE. 

might be ! Could it be possible she imagined I exaggerated my 
happiness to deepen the contrast of her misery ? Suffering is 
very unjust !. But Sophia was too profoundly skilled in cha- 
racter and its influences to be much misled. She spoke to me of 
Scarlatt's early projects ; of his ambition to become a leading 
politician ; of the high hopes formed of him. Were all those 
impulses gulfed in the completeness of his domestic happiness ? 
Had he resolved to owe to his wife the elevation he once pro- 
posed to achieve for himself? . Oh, no ; Scarlatt had too manly, 
too aspiring a temper for that ! She elicited from me speedily 
that I had at least some degree of rivalry to dread from those 
alluring phantoms of power and vanity ! 

Time passed rapidly in this kind of conversation, and I could 
scarcely tear myself away from this dearly loved and unfortu- 
nate friend, though the increasing darkness warned me to be on 
the return. Sophia herself, at last openly, evinced uneasiness 
at the prospect of my being out late on the wild road I had to 
cross, and could not refrain finally from urging me not to delay 
my departure. I ascribed this hurrying wholly to a kind con- 
sideration for me. nor am I to this hour sure that it was not so ! 
I draw no inference, nor wish any to be drawn, from the fact, 
that just as Sophia was escorting me over the flowery church- 
yard . which owed its beautifying and elegance, it seemed, 
entirely to her wish to counteract the gloom of such a spectacle, 
always in view . Squire Gawker was announced, and made his 
appearance, bashfully stalking up the avenue of yews. 

Gawker was a very awkward, loutish young man, of gigantic 
stature and strength, terribly sun-freckled, with high cheek 
bones and sandy red hair ; and it certainly struck me a little at 
the time that he paid a visit so late in the evening, and still in 
the red coat and boots he had been hunting in probably the 
whole day, for an exhausted horse, of some fleet race, stood 
smoking and streaming with perspiration at the gate. 

He came also on an errand that appeared to me . and was in 
reality . a very awkward and foolish mark of homage to a lady . 
to present Mrs. Luxmoor with the fox's brush they had pulled 
down in the course of the day ! But the squire himself evi- 
dently thought not lightly of the gift, for until he observed 
me . I had stopped a short distance behind Mrs. Luxmoor, per- 
ceiving the approach of a stranger . he continued to flourish it 
triumphantly, and, as I thought, rather familiarly, aloft! I 
saw and heard that she received the attention with a coldness 
almost amounting to contemptuous disdain . and, remember- 
ing her husband's insulting allusions to this young sporting 
Hercules, I could well account for it. But not so readily for 
the surprised and gaping manner of Gawker himself, at the 
style in which his offering was received, for he wound it sulkily 
up at once, and muttering, as it seemed to me, "Nay, then, 
I'll take it where 't'll be more welcome ! " off he strode away 



A FEIEND IK NEED. 183 

like a stunned Goliath ! Sophia, herself, plainly saw that this 
scene required an explanation. She gave it me . with an air 
of vexation and embarrassment . and as usual taking care, in 
an underhand way, to inflict some portion of the discomfort she 
experienced " It is a great loutish Mmrod who ought to feed 
on thistles instead of grass ! . but who has taken it into his 
head that I have some influence with a wealthy widow lady 
living about here, whose fortune he would be glad to secure ! 
And so he comes boring me incessantly, to direct him how to 
manage his wooing ! . and even to write him his billets-doux 
and trash of that sort ! " 

I returned to Plas Newydd in a much less cheerful mood than 
I had expected, and without having been able to prevail on 
Sophia to promise to come and see me there. In fact, she at 
last plainly refused : but on a new ground. Madame Le 
Crampon was an inmate there ; a woman whom she detested 
from the bottom of her soul, and of whom she naively declared 
that she was. jealous ! She laughed indeed as she said so ; but 
reminding me of the particulars she had formerly communi- 
cated, she asked me if I did not think she was right not to put 
such inflammable materials as her husband was composed of in 
the way of temptation ? "We both laughed again, and parted 
without renewing the subject. 

As I have said, I returned to Plas Newydd in by no means 
so cheerful a mood as I had left it ; lamenting my friend's fate, 
and saddened by the recollection that I might be considered in 
some degree accessory to it, by bringing about the reconciliation 
between her and her truly detestable partner. 

I will be candid, however, and confess that I was not alto- 
gether displeased at the indifference, or rather repugnance, 
evinced by both Scarlatt and Sophia to a renewal of their 
acquaintance ! 

I was in a mood, nevertheless, after all I had witnessed, for 
the reception of evil news ; and very bad awaited me ! 

On arriving at Plas Newydd, I found the whole household 
in consternation, and Mrs. Suett, in an agony of grief and 
indignation, scrawling a letter to summon her husband in- 
stantly from town. I soon learned the disastrous occasion. 
My father's long-brooding vengeance had burst at last ! 
Officers of the law had arrived at Plas Newydd very shortly 
after my departure, who arrested my husband on a charge of 
abduction ! They conveyed him at once before a magistrate, 
a particular friend of my father's, besides having a private 
grief of his own against the Suetts . who had refused to 
take bail ; and consequently Scarlatt was committed to the 
county jail ! 

And thus the first meeting between my father and husband 
had been in a position of mutual hostility, as accuser and 
accused, in a charge of felony ! It was little consolation to 



184 maxtleveeek's divorce. 

me, under these circumstances, to learn that the insulting 
violence of Lord Mauleverer's demeanour on the occasion was 
only surpassed by the forbearance and conciliating tone 
adopted by Scarlatt. If ever mild answer turned away wrath, 
his should have mitigated my father's exasperation !. but it 
had not done so. For not satisfied with this pounce, Lord 
Mauleverer had openly applied for and obtained a warrant to 
secure my person and take me to Mauleverer Castle, as a 
fugitive, under age, from the lawful authority of my parents ! 

My absence was, therefore, so far fortunate. and after his 
committal, Scarlatt had sent his mother home, with all possible 
speed, to warn me, above all things, to keep myself from 
falling into my father's power, or the probabilities were that 
we should be separated as long as his parental dominion 
lasted ! I was then only nineteen. But, more than all this : 
Mrs. Suett herself had heard Lord Mauleverer expressly 
command the officers to take care that "no brat, of whatever 
age," was allowed to accompany me ! Mrs. Suett had but just 
returned from the deplorable scene before the magistrate, 
and had despatched a messenger to desire me to remain in 
concealment at Llanhowel, intending to inform the officers 
that I was gone back to the continent ! But being ordered to 
take a byway, the man had apparently missed me ; and 
Mrs. Suett thought she could at best only have a very short 
start of the officers in their post-chaise ! 

My distraction at this dreadful news almost deprived me of 
any faculty of judgment. I insisted on proceeding at once to 
join my husband in his captivity ! But his mother brought 
positive instructions from him that I was not to attempt it. 
Scarlatt had written me a few agitated words in pencil to the 
same effect, assuring me that he should be bailed in a few 
days, on application in London, and meanwhile, even peremp- 
torily, commanding me, unless I took my father's view, and 
disowned hiru for a husband ! to remain in the closest conceal- 
ment, wherever it might be most feasible to elude research. I 
proposed, in consequence, to go back at once to Llanhowel ; 
but Mrs. Suett would not hear of that : it was on the way to 
Mauleverer ; and she was convinced " the woman there " was 
not to be trusted ! She was involved in the same scrape, and 
to secure indemnity for herself and her rascally husband, she 
would not hesitate to betray me ! I was_ warmly rebutting 
this allegation, when the chances of effecting any evasion at 
all became doubtful. One of our miners, posted for the pur- 
pose, came running, breathlessly, to announce the appearance 
of a postchaise in the direction my intended capturers might 
be expected ! 

The idea of being separated from my child gave me all the 
energy and resources of desperation. And, while Mrs. Suett 
wrung her hands in despair, a glance I caught of the distant 



A FEIEND IN NEED. 185 

Ap Howel ruin suddenly suggested the_ recollection of my 
former proposed refuge in it . and the possibility of finding one 
there in this emergency. ~Ko one would dream of seeking me 
in a pile of ruins. I told Mrs. Suett my intentions, snatching 
up my child, in readiness for flight, from the fine lace-curtained 
cradle her fond pride and prodigality had provided for it. 
And I remember she made several objections : that certain 
" old rubbishing people of Sir Vivian's " lived there now, who 
might not give me a very kind welcome : that we were not on 
very friendly terms with Sir Vivian himself : that he was 
"cheek by jowl" with Lord Mauleverer, and being hourly 
expected at the ruin, would " most likely split where I was to 
be found." The very notion of anything disloyal or unkind 
on the part of young Ap Howel appeared to me preposterous. 
And Mrs. Suett herself admitted, in reply to my warm nega- 
tion of the suggestion, that there was no probability in it. 
Only her son might think, so, as they had never been very 
good friends. I soon, however, convinced her that we had no 
time to study niceties like these . and within a few minutes of 
the receipt of the intelligence, I was hastening, at a speed I 
knew not till then I could exert, up the steep crest of the 
Howel Mynydd. 

I was attended by my nurse with little . Herbert, only . 
Mrs. Suett remained to present a good countenance against 
the perquisition of the agents of the rusty, one-sided laws put 
into such vigorous action by my father. 

It _ was about ten at night when I and my attendant. 
luckily, a plump, unexcitable Fleming . reached the summit 
of the hill. And how often, as I heard the melancholy, raving 
voice _ of the torrent of the Rhaiadr Dhu, on that hurried 
transit, did I mentally repeat the words of the despairing 
Bronwen of the White Neck. beth y wnaf fi? 

I was in a really fearful state of exhaustion and dismay 
when I arrived in the midst of those dark, mouldering masses 
of ruins, where I hardly knew how to select the inhabited 
portion. I had no guide now ; and it was a night so dark that 
every indication was confounded under its black canopy. I 
had not recovered my strength completely since the birth of 
little Herbert . and I suppose I must have looked more like a 
hunted hare than a rational creature when I paused to en- 
deavour to ascertain whither to direct my steps, amidst the 
masses of fallen and falling masonry. 

On a sudden I heard the sound of a harp . of a legitimate 
ancient "Welsh harp. touched evidently by the hand of a 
master. "With an air, too, in strange unison with the disastrous 
circumstances of the undreamed-of auditor,. the exquisitely 
plaintive one known in England as "Poor Mary Anne;" in 
Wales, by its proper original title, " Ar hyd y nos." _ It was 
played with an equal tenderness and pathos by the invisible 



186 mattleveker's divoece. 

musician. _ But my chief motive in listening was to ascertain 
the direction whence the sounds came ; and while pausing for 
this purpose, the prelude ceased, and a voice which it seemed 
to me I remembered, and yet could not fully associate with any 
individual, began to sing to the accompaniment of those 
mournful chords. It was a full, rich, manly voice. fraught 
with feeling and expression. And to my great surprise, though 
the words of the verses were in "Welsh, every one of them 
seemed to finish with a sound exactly resembling my own name 
Hugh- Helena. And then it was. I know not by what com- 
pelling link of ideas . the conviction flashed upon me that the 
singer was young Ap Howel. But it was an inspiration of 
delirious excitement, doubtless, that induced me to summon an 
assistance I felt an unspeakable conviction would not fail me 
in the hour of my need, by shrieking loud enough to reach him 
the fatal words : beth y wnaf ft f 

The song and music ceased suddenly. A confusion of several 
voices came to my ear, apparently in mingled alarm and 
remonstrance. Then a ray of light streamed from an opening 
door, at some distance amidst the ruins, and a figure appeared 
at it, throwing the glare of a pine brand, evidently just snatched 
from a lire, over the whole surrounding scene, with an expres- 
sion of the most intense anxiety in the gazing visage. Two 
old but benevolent-looking women's faces peered over the young 
man's shoulder . for it was a young man . and a sightless and 
very old and snowy-haired but still fine-featured venerable 
man's completed the group thus illuminated. 

He was greatly changed, but I instantly recognised Sir 
Vivian Ap Howel. I called him by his name. and as if with 
the word he was beside me . arriving just in time to prevent 
my sinking to the ground with excess of fatigue and emotion. 
The two women had meanwhile followed in his steps, though 
with evident caution . probably under the influence of some 
superstitious apprehension. 

I shall never forget the indescribably mingled tones in which 
Sir Vivian exclaimed, . " Good God ! it is Hugh-Selena ! It 
is Mrs. Scarlatt Suett ! She has not been enabled to effect her 
flight from her father's barbarous frenzy ! She comes to me . 
to us . for refuge !" 

His figure, though now much taller and more muscularly 
developed, was still very slender, and gaye few indications of 
the strength he must have exerted in supporting my almost 
powerless frame into the tower. 

How kind, how patient, how wisely helpful and sympathetic 
did this young man show himself during all the paroxysm of 
grief and terror that came over me even when I felt myself 
placed in comparative safety ! How watchfully he directed 
and stimulated the attention of the two kind old women ! 
With what tender commiseration did he hear and reply to all 



A FRIEND IN NEED. 187 

my wailings of anguish and despair ! With what unwearied 
goodness did he listen to my reiterated and incoherent story of 
the disasters that had driven me to take refuge under his 
ruined roof ! And although. by an ungrateful kind of instinct 
.amidst the really half-delirious effusions of my gratitude 
for his interposition, I kept assuring him I had no notion he 
himself was there when I sought for refuge at Castell Ap 
Howel ! 

He explained as repeatedly that it was quite hy chance he 
was there indeed ; that he happened to hear from the friend 
with whom I corresponded . from Mrs. Luxmoor . that mine 
and my husband's return was expected, and he had hoped to 
conclude some unpleasant business he had at Plas Newydd 
before that event occurred. But he had been misinformed or 
mistaken in the time : and had only himself arrived at Ap 
Howel within a few hours. being on his arrival much grieved 
to learn the unhappy circumstance that had taken place so 
recently at Plas Newydd. 

Finding I still laboured under apprehensions of pursuit, Sir 
Vivian interspersed his explanations with the most earnest as- 
surances that I was now safe from it . that even if the officers 
traced me he could secure my evasion from the tower, and would 
defend me to the utmost of his power ! He barricaded the door 
and windows of the apartment, to convince me of his sincerity, 
and even went so far, moved by my almost frenzied entreaties, 
as to make a solemn asseveration that, at all events, they should 
not separate me from my child ! 

Hours passed almost exclusively in these effusions and conso- 
lations.in panic alarms and quietings . until about midnight, 
when a messenger arrived from Mrs. Suett to state that the officers 
were gone, after having, by virtue of their warrant, searched 
Plas Newydd ' ' from garret to cellar !" But they were suspected 
to be still lurking in observation about the house, and therefore 
Mrs. Suett advised me to remain where I was until more certain 
information could be obtained. 

These tidings tranquillised me so far that I was now enabled 
to understand the position in which I found myself, and to take 
a rational survey of the scene and persons amid which I had 
placed myself. 

It was the same apartment of the ruin as that in which I had 
formerly taken shelter. But it was now decently furnished, 
though in a very homely and unpretending style, combining the 
requisites of a kitchen and a parlour. It seemed probable that 
other chambers in the tower had been placed in habitable order, 
for the blind old harper, Caradoc, and his two daughters appa- 
rently resided in it. Indeed they told me so, when Mrs. Suett's 
message had been delivered to me, as, with a needless reflection 
that dyed my hitherto pallid cheeks with colour, I said, No : it 
was impossible : at every risk I must return to Plas Newydd 



188 IIATJLEVEKER'S DIVORCE. 

at once : there was no place where I could stay for a whole night, 
up there, I thought ! 

" Thereare rooms in the tower which have been prepared for 
my reception . and I can be accommodated, I have no doubt, as 
usual, at Plas Newydd !" Vivian replied, with a dark flush 
also. "I did not intend to trouble the good people there with 
my company again . but there is nothing I will not do with 

pleasure that can be of service to you, Mrs. Mrs. Suett ! 

at this unhappy juncture !" 

I would fain not dwell on these particulars of self-devotion 
and chivalrous delicacy and generosity, exhibited by Vivian 
Ap Howel towards me, in every stage of our intercourse saving 
only the unutterable last ! But I must do him the little justice 
still in my power.. It was determined upon as he had proposed. 
and by this singular evolution of circumstance, I became the 
guest of a host whom I dispossessed of his accommodations to 
make them my own. 

It is not necessary I should dilate on this episode, though it 
was afterwards wrested so cruelly and unjustly to my disad- 
vantage. With what injustice, in fact, may be ascertained from 
the true assurance I give the reader, that nearly the whole of that 
first night I spent under the decayed roof of Castell Ap Howel, 
I devoted to the consideration how I might best influence its 
young owner to become an intercessor on behalf of my husband 
and myself with my exasperated sire. 

Sophia's inuendoes . my own observation . had satisfied me I 
still possessed a degree of interest in the kindness and sympathy 
of Sir Vivian, which I thought might be drawn into the course 
I desired them to take. Mere youth as he was, he was known 
to enjoy much consideration and intimacy at Mauleverer. He 
had at once and spontaneously expressed his disapprobation of 
my father's rigid measures. I was too blinded by the excess of 
my affection for my husband and child to perceive how great, 
how unjustifiable, were the sacrifices I was about to demand of 
him in their names ! But, until Scarlatt was torn so relentlessly 
from me, I had certainly not known how much I loved him ! 
A few months previously, when he had actually himself pro- 
posed that I should solicit Sir Vivian's interposition on our 
behalf, I had rejected the notion with a kind of contumely ! 
Scarlatt, however, could not have been aware at the time of the 
peculiar reasons I had, not to wish to present myself as a peti- 
tioner, in such a cause, to young Ap Howel ! But now every 
consideration saving the possibility of redeeming my husband, 
and child and myself from the dangers menacing us, seemed, 
puerile, and unworthy to be weighed in the balance ! 

Yet I wonder now at my confidence in the boundless generosity 
which only . I should have known . could have responded to my 
appeal. at the seemingly unsupported consciousness I must 
have possessed of the dominion I could exercise over the young 



A FB.IEND IN NEED. 189 

man's motives and will, when on the following day, at our first 
meeting, I implored Sir Vivian, in every form of earnest intreaty 
at my command, to become the mediator between my angry 
father and my husband and myself for pardon . or at least 
desistance from the vengeful course the former had entered on. 

Ap Howel himself was, perhaps, struck with some surprise 
at the unbounded confidingness of this demand. But the lavish 
tenderness and generosity of his own nature suggested to him 
readily excuses for the seeming selfishness and forgretfulness of 
all but myself and mine implied in the petition. He, too, was 
moved by the innocent beauty of my child, to which I appealed, 
in my entreaties that he would plead it to melt its stern grand- 
sire's indignation ! He took the little creature in his arms, 
kissed it, and returning the infant to me . not to the nurse who 
expected it . while one large, dark tear, like a thunder-drop, 
fell and splashed on its sweet, rosy visage, he promised me, 
without a word of hesitation, instantly to proceed to Mauleverer 
and do all that lay in his power to fulfil my wishes. 

I furnished him with a full detail of what my husband would 
do and promise, to procure his father-in-law's forgiveness ; and 
once or twice certainly a smile of some feeling, nigh akin to 
contempt, glimmered over Yivian's quivering and sensitive 
upper lip. But I had the good news of his having departed for 
Mauleverer, on this mission t to announce, when Mrs. Suett 
waddled up the hill about noonday, to pay me a visit. On my 
part I learned then, with surprise, that he had not resumed his 
quarters at Plas Newydd, nor had Mrs. Suett seen him. at all 
since his return. 

Mr. Craddock, whoever . so Mrs. Suett, much to his annoy- 
ance, always persisted in styling Caradoc, the blind harper, 
whose family tenanted the ruin. had an explanation to offer. 
The young chief. so he always styled Sir Vivian. had been 
seized with a fit of restlessness to which he was subject, as all 
his ancestors had been before him, and had endeavoured to 
walk it off by wandering over the Howel Mynydd until dawn. 

But, in spite of this first gleam of success, the events of the 
day were but slightly encouraging. I received a letter, it is 
true, from Scarlatt, urging upon me the very course I had 
adopted. at least so far as regarded making an appeal to the 
friendly interposition of young Ap Howel, as soon as he should 
arrive. and forbidding me, under any fancy of alleviating his 
annoyances by my presence, to come near him in his place of 
confinement, where I might be so easily watched and captured. 
But Sir Vivian returned with yet more disastrous tidings. He 
had not seen Lord Mauleverer, who was set out in person to 
London, to procure a writ of Habeas Corpus, in order to compel 
the Suetts to surrender me into his custody. And the pleadings 
on that writ, an attorney, whom Mrs. Suett had sent for, infor- 
med us would involve, and perhaps adversely, the validity of 



190 mauleveeee's divoece. 

my stolen marriage with Scarlatt Suett and the legitimacy of 
the birth of my child ! It was but a slight mitigation to learn 
that Vivian had seen and conversed with my mother, who was 
heart-stricken at what had happened, had done all she could to 
dissuade her lord from the course he had taken, and promised 
that she would exert every effort, on his return, to induce him. 
to relinquish his violent purposes. Lord Mauleverer was 
expected home with his writ in three days, as the courts were 
then sitting. Bat I formed no hopes from this interposition, 
knowing what a very slight influence my mother had ever 
exercised over my father's determinations. 

A suggestion, however, broke upon me like a ray of light ; 
and at my earnest, almost delirious entreaties, Sir Vivian con- 
sented to hasten up at once to London, on my father's steps, 
and endeavour to persuade him to relinquish his mercilessly 
vengeful proceedings ! 

He did not lose a single hour in departing on this errand of 
redemption. And what a contrast did the generous ardour and 
singleness of the youth's devotion present to the demeanour of 
the father of the man whose chief possessions were placed in 
so much jeopardy, when he arrived a few hours after Sir Vivian 
had set out on his journey to London ! 

John Thomas had not received his wife's letter, containing 
an account of our disasters. He had left town immediately on 
the intelligence brought to him of the fete given on his son's 
return ; and with the intention, we soon learned, of prohibiting 
any farther demonstrations in the direction it was easy to 
discern Scarlatt' s views were turned. Some allowance must be 
made for the natural excitement of my father-in-law's feelings 
on ascertaining what had taken place. But he announced a 
foregone conclusion, when he avowed it was no longer his in- 
tention to resign his seat . that his son's extravagance and 
debts, and the extraordinary avowal he had made of a change 
in the " family principles" on the important question of the 
Corn Laws. independently of " the mess he had got into" . 
had decided him for some time in the resolution. 

John Thomas otherwise most certainly showed by no means 
the particular kind of sympathy and resentment he might have 
been expected to exhibit in his son's misfortunes. He declared, 
to all who chose to listen, that Scarlatt richly deserved all he 
had got, by allying himself to a pack of insolent aristocrats, 
who were quite right to worry so strange a dog for sneaking 
into their kennel ! The best thing, he said, that could happen 
to us all now, would be that the marriage should in reality be 
declared null and void, and my Lord Standstill Dustbin have 
his daughter back again. Damaged goods, certainly : but it 
was not his fault, if "the man" was bent on proving that his 
daughter was not a fellow's wife with whom she had been living 
these three years, and his grandson a bastard ! And so he 



A FEIEND IN NEED. 191 

would tell "his lordship, forsooth," soon to his face, he hoped, 
on the hustings. as parliament was just on the point of dis- 
solution ! Meanwhile his son must do the best he could in the 
scrape he had run himself into ! But, of course, with such a 
charge hanging over him, he could never dream of having any 
chance for the representation he wanted to oust his own father 



in 



In short, the selfish pseudo -democrat displayed the worst side 
of his character, in the worst possible light, on this occasion ; 
and, as I told poof, whimpering Mrs. Suett, I was glad I was 
not under his roof at the time, as the cruel unkmdness he 
exhibited would have compelled me to leave it at once, even if 
I had had no other shelter to seek than the woods of the Howel 
Mvnydd. 

I cannot bear to dwell on this afflicting exhibition of the 
action of inordinate and egotistical passions. I turn with a 
sense of joyful relief. mingled, yet, how inexpressibly with 
pain !. to the contrast offered in the whole conduct of Vivian 
Ap Howel, throughout this disastrous affair. 

After three days' absence, he returned to Castell Ap Howel 
with a faintly encouraging glimpse of success. His delinea- 
tion of my despair . of the beauty of my child . of the terrible 
consequences in disgrace and ruin to us all that must follow 
the steps he had entered on . won at length so far upon my 
father's better feelings that he had consented to desist from his 
application to compel my surrender : on the condition only, 
nevertheless, that I made it a voluntary one. And he had 
yielded also to suffer my child to accompany me, in the return 
he insisted I should make to Mauleverer. But his animosity 
against my husband and the whole Suett family continued 
unabated. He would not promise to relinquish any of the 
means of coercion or vengeance in his power against them. 
On the contrary, he seemed resolved to pursue them in every 
extremity that laws, contrived by angry fathers, surely, could 
place in his power. 

_ At first I rejected, at once, and with the most positive deci- 
sion, the bare notion of consenting to sever my fortunes from 
those of my husband. of yielding to my father's tyrannous 
will so abjectly . including, I doubted not, a separation of 
years from my beloved husband ! But Vivian reasoned with 
me in his sympathetic and truthfully earnest way, and induced 
me to reconsider this first natural impulse. He represented 
to me the certainty that my refusal would induce my father to 
proceed at once in his efforts to annul the marriage, and pos- 
sibly bring disgrace and dishonour on my whole connection 
with Scarlatt, and its issue . certainly, provoke a scandalous 

conflict, and throw a slur on my child's derivation, which, 

however decided, it would be difficult ever after to efface 

Whereas, if I yielded to my father's will in this instance, the 



102 HATJLEVEHElt's DIVORCE. 

submission would have the best effect upon him, and prepare 
him for the future efforts to which I could devote myself in 
bringing about a general reconciliation. " And believe me, 
Hugh-Helena ! . pardon me, if I cannot yet bring myself to 
call you by the name which is now yours too !" Vivian said, 
with his slightly sarcastic and playful, but still very melan- 
choly smile. " Believe me, it is impossible for anyone, even so 
obstinately relentless and determined a man as your father, 
long to resist anything you have set the true eloquence of your 
honest and tender heart to win. Do you know, I myself came 
down here, all resentment and relentless against the Suetts, 
although you had become one of them !" He checked himself 
suddenly, and then added in another tone: "I believe you 
have only to give signs of external submission . to plead your 
cause in person . to gain it ! Your mother will be there to in- 
tercede for you . I will do my best, and I am convinced that every- 
thing will become possible and feasible, when you are removed 
from the society and surrounding of the Suett family in general, 
whose vulgarity and insolence your father detests beyond ex- 
pression ! Scarlatt is handsome . still, I presume ! . and he has 
received a good. college . education! Your father will be 
brought to endure Mm much more easily, trust me, without his 
friends about him !" 

Remembering the recent coarse displays of the elder Suett, 
I was the more readily influenced by this argument. I per- 
ceived some impropriety also in my remaining at Castell Ap 
Howel, receiving the hospitality of so young and unmarried a 
host ! yet I could not bear the thought of returning to Plas 
Newydd, where, besides, I should not be safe an hour from my 
father's vengeful researches. I was constitutionally rash and 
precipitate in all my resolutions. But I own that, after all, I 
was to blame to adopt so decisive a resolution without my 
husband's permission ! In short, I resolved to return at once 
to Mauleverer, sending Scarlatt an account of the motives that 
influenced me, and of Sir Vivian's generous interposition. 

I was not restrained by Mrs. Suett's angry declarations that 
I ought never to think of going to Mauleverer, unless my 
husband was to be received there with me and " in triumph !" 
I declined John Thomas's offer of his carriage and four ; and 
finally, in a hired vehicle, accompanied by my nurse and child, 
and under the escort of Sir Vivian . without whose countenance 
and protection I felt I should never have dared to enter the 
presence of my irritated parent . I returned, after my long 
erraticism, to Mauleverer Castle. 



BEC0NCI1IATI02T. 193 



CHAPTER XX. 

RECONCILIATION. 

Vivian's knowledge of my father's character, and of the means 
of influencing it, had not deceived him. My unreserved sub- 
mission and return disarmed so much of his wrath, that my 
reception was even more than pardoning : it was tender. It is 
probable he intended to receive me with the upbraidings and 
reproaches he no doubt considered due to my want of duty, and 
the disgraceful derogation he believed in his haughty spirit I 
had brought on our name. But when, in the midst of my 
father's first vehement words, I sank on my knee3 at his feet, 
and raised my infant in mute supplication : when my mother, 
tottering in, threw her arms roiind his neck and mine, and 
drew us both to her bosom in an agony of joy, and love, and 
sorrow, which was a rare climax in her undemonstrative and 
seemingly passionless existence : when the young soldier, Ap 
Howel, himself sobbed aloud, and rushed from among us, van- 
quished by the sensibility of his brave and tender heart. my 
father, too, melted ; my father, too, joined in the solemn bless- 
ing by which my mother consecrated my child hers, his . the 
child of the house of Mauleverer ! 

It was several months, nevertheless, before this reconciliation 
extended its healing wings over my husband also. And mean- 
while I had to endure restless upbraidings and reproaches for 
what he chose to designate a desertion, which all my assurances 
and entreaties could not for a long time mitigate. Nevertheless, 
as a first fruit, all proceedings on my father's part against 
Scarlatt and his family were abandoned. No obstacles were 
offered to his being set at liberty ; and he returned to Plas 
Newydd, where the open rapture with his own father, that 
speedily followed the event, certainly facilitated his reconcile- 
ment with mine. 

At this calm interval of time, I am not disposed to defend my 
father's vindictive exaction . still less my husband's too ready 
acquiescence . in the condition the former placed on permission 
for Scarlatt to make a first visit at Mauleverer. My husband's 
electioneering address had appeared; and it was stipulated 
that in case of the resistance of the elder Suett to the resolution 
of the Conservative party in the county, to oust him, on the 

o 



194 hauleveeee's ditoece. 

first opportunity, from his seat, his son was to engage in open 
contest against him. 

Scarlatt, on his side, adroitly required that, to prevent too 
obvious a scandal in the concussion, he should be allowed at 
once to assume " his lordship's and his beloved wife's family 
name." 

Parliament was not, however, dissolved so soon as was ex- 
pected ; and had it not been for the condition in which I found 
myself, soon to become the mother of my daughter, Evelyn, it 
is probable Lord Mauleverer would have protracted much 
longer his resentment, and its external signs, against one 
whom he continued to look upon as an interloper and intruder 
in his family. 

But at this period I had gained almost wonderfully in my 
father's love and favour ; chiefly, I believe, through the ex- 
ceeding fondness he took at once for his little grandson. It 
was not difficult for Lord Mauleverer to trace the lineaments of 
his own ancient race in the splendid little fellow's developing 
countenance ; and for their sake he forgave Herbert his ruddy 
bloom of complexion and the golden tinge in his hair, though 
he ridiculed the latter at first by declaring that the child was 
a perfect dandelion ! My father finally lost the energy to refuse 
me what he plainly discerned was an object of hope and con- 
stant solicitude with me. 

He continued, certainly, to declare a total incredulity in the 
assurances I gave him of the disinterestedness of Scarlatt's 
attachment to me in the first instance . of his ignorance of 
my identity with the heiress of Mauleverer. But they had 
some influence in bringing about his final yielding, I should 
imagine. 

The first interview between my father and husband was of 
perilous and doubtful issue. The opposition between the men 
was typified in their very aspects and persons. My father 
looked like a portrait of Velasquez, stepped all dark, and 
stately, and stern, from an old canvas ; Scarlatt, as if he had 
just descended, in the newest and brightest of oils, from the 
gilded frame-work of a fashionable academician's most recent 
handiwork. 

But, on the whole, they got on together better than either my 
mother or I had ventured to hope. After all, Scarlatt had some 
reason for the demeanour he adopted ; and the despotism of my 
father's temper speedily found itself on congenial ground in the 
deference, r amounting to awe, which his now received son-in- 
law exhibited for all he said, or even looked, during that first 
memorable interview. 

Once at Mauleverer, Scarlatt devoted himself. even in my 
judgment . with too whole and implicit a submission and 
adulation, to win my father's further favour. Yet it is an 
indisputable fact that he succeeded for a while. 



RECONCILIATION. 195 

I did not at the time understand, or appreciate in its full 
force, a motive that no doubt greatly influenced Scarlatt in 
taking so decided a part against his own father, whose wealth 
at least should apparently have rendered him an object of 
more dutiful observance with a son trained in such maxims 
as John Thomas's had been. Sir Vivian, who visited occa- 
sionally at Maiileverer, before he proceeded to join his regiment 
for the first time, in its quarters in the south of England, 
informed me of the fact I allude to. But very carelessly, and 
as if it was one that scarcely needed to be taken into considera- 
tion. He had consented to waive for a time the decision of his 
claims for a restoration of the Howel Mynydd property ; but in 
the conference that took place on the subject, the elder Suett had 
so far admitted their legality, as to propose that on Vivian's 
attaining his majority, the whole case should be submitted to 
arbitration. This proposal, Vivian observed . and to me only 
. he had consented to. 

It did not, I say, at the time strike a person so ignorant of 
all kinds of business matters as myself, that the Suetts must 
veritably discern a great flaw in their title of possession to 
propose or yield to such a compromise ! Most assuredly they 
must have seen greater hopes of advantage to be derived from 
the generous forbearance of the young heir, than they could 
hope to find in any chicanery of the law ! And thus, I did not 
understand all that was magnanimous and self-denying in the 
young man's efforts to bring about a reconciliation, which must 
even in this respect be likely to deprive him of his most power- 
ful friend and supporter ! Neither did I know till long, long 
afterwards, that his father's plan of arrangement received the 
most persevering opposition from Scarlatt, and that their first 
open qviarrel was on the subject ! 

It was not from Scarlatt, of course . still less from the modest 
generosity of Ap Howel himself . that I was likely to learn that 
the latter's chief motive in refraining to urge his claims to an 
immediate and legal adjustment, lay in his desire not to throw 
further, discredit on the family whose alliance I had formed . 
diminish the only lustre to which it could pretend, or give 
pretext for my father's animosity to increase the obstacles to 
the restoration of that peace I so ardently desired to bring 
about between him and my husband. 

I neither conceal, nor wish to conceal this further . that 
during the slow progress of the reconciliation, to effect which 
I had devoted myself, Sir Vivian availed himself of several 
short leaves of absence to appear at Castell ap Howel, which 
he was beginning to place in some repair ! With the sole 
object, so far as I understood or dreamed, of witnessing the 
progress of those works. And whenever he chose to come over 
to Mauleverer, during these seasons, he was always a welcome 
guest. He was a particular favourite with my father, and, in 

o 2 



106 MAT/LEVEBEli S DIVCECE. 

spite of his youth, a companion in whose society he took great 
pleasure. My mother loved him as a son ! And surely I should 
have been a most ungrateful creature had I not been among 
those who felt and expressed the greatest satisfaction in these 
visits. But never. so may Heaven help or desert me in my 
dying hour .'.had I the least reason to suspect the existence of 
that misplaced passion, which it would answer no purpose now 
to deny, continued ever an inmate of the poor youth's too sensi- 
tive and unchanging heart ! 

A"o word or look from Vivian ever gave me cause to dread the 
unhappy secret. I had come to regard the circumstances that 
marked our early acquaintance, as merely eccentric exhibitions 
of the precocious imagination and premature moral develop- 
ment distinguishable in every stage of Vivian's advance to 
manhood ; effusions of the romance and excitability of his 
overstrained and feverish temperament ! It did not even strike 
me as a coincidence, that after my husband's formal reception 
at Mauleverer, he ceased to take such delight in his visits to 
Ap Howel, and, indeed, did not make his appearance again 
among us until he came to take a farewell before embarking 
with his regiment, which was under orders for India, and was 
already lying at Plymouth. 

I particularly remember it was the very day Scarlatt was 
returned, without opposition, member of parliament, in the seat 
his father had so long occupied. The elder Suett now held the 
unpopular principles amongst a constituency chiefly agricultural. 
But he made a virtue of necessity, vociferously declaring himself 
too great a friend to "purity of representation" to use such 
means of contest as might give him a chance of balancing that 
circumstance, and my father's interest. Rich as he owned 
himself to be, he added that he knew pleasanter ways of spending 
his money than in procuring " a squat" among a lot of fellows 
who had scarcely patience to hear a man open his lips, and were 
always crying " Question, question !" whenever anything but a 
" spawn of aristocracy" undertook to enlighten them. 

I myself hoped that the unnatural kind of conflict offered, and 
consciousness that he had so long and publicly announced his 
intentions in favour of his son, weighed something with John 
Thomas. But, certain it is, he retired from the field before the 
affair came to any decisive issue, and . my father had the pleasure 
to learn from his son-in-law . in a state of mortification and 
defeat that almost balanced the sufferings inflicted on himself 
years previously by his success. The whirligig of time indeed 
brings about his revenges ! 

However, as I have said, my husband and his reconciled 
father-in-law were away at the county town, engaged in the 
usual festivities of an election triumph. when Sir Vivian arrived 
at Mauleverer to take his farewell. 

I had remained at home with my mother, whose exceeding 



RECONCILIATION. 197 

languor and debility rendered every kind of excitement painful 
to her, and who could not bear'to be deprived of my society for 
any lengthened time since it had been restored to her after so 
disastrous an interval. Indeed, I have some hope that my devo- 
tion to my dear mother during that short remaining period of 
her languishing existence, in a measure atoned for the grief and 
discomfort I had been the means of previously bringing upon 
her. 

To complete the singular revolution of circumstances, Sophia 
Sutcliffe . Mrs. Luxmoor . was with me, on a visit for the day. 
Not for longer : she always, and with immoveable resolution, 
refused to stay away a single night from Llanhowel parsonage. 
It is horrible", it is disgusting to have to relate it ! But the un- 
happy woman dared not trust her vile husband, even for that 
brief interval, under the same roof with the young girls whom 
her really thoughtful and judicious superintendence was edu- 
cating into good servants, or mistresses of rural families, in her 
house ! 

Even his own home. the roof beneath which his wife dwelt . 
still young, still one of the most fascinating and engaging of 
women, even in the opinion of the depraved wretch himself . 
still not unworthy of the deepest affection and respect . not yet 
corrupted to the quality of the corruption she dwelt withal . 
nothing in heaven or earth, in fact, was sacred to that detestable 
man ' 



Yet even under these conditions, and when I was established at 
Mauleverer, where it could not have been so irksome for her to 
come to as Plas Newydd, Sophia continued a very unfrequent 
visitor. There seemed no other very valid reason . -excepting 
perhaps that her husband was now, on the contrary, a constant 
and welcome one with mine at the Castle. She dreaded to expose 
herself, she declared, to some open exhibition of his brutality 
towards her ! She wished above all things, she repeatedly 
assured me, with tears in her eyes, to spare herself public indig- 
nity and exposure of the true state of the relations between them. 
And at her continued earnest desire, I concealed them also, so 
far as they were known to me. 

Perhaps if I had stated all I had witnessed, I should not so 
readily have obtained credence at Mauleverer. at all events, 
with my husband. Scarlatt found the abilities of Luxmoor, 
his skill in language, and knowledge of men and manners, of 
infinite use to him in the career he had entered on. And 
Luxmoor took care to present and conduct himself at Mauleverer 
in a manner that seemed to give a practical refutation to the 
statements he might reasonably conclude his wife made to his 
disadvantage. My private conviction of his infamous misde- 
meanour, though I was not permitted to divulge my reasons, 
made me on my part turn a deaf ear to the scandalous accusa- 
tions which, from time to time, I learned from Scarlatt, Luxmoor 



198 MAPXEVEBEIt's DIVORCE. 

continued to insinuate against his' wife. He pretended to be 
jealous of her with the sporting squire, their neighbour . and 
even of a poor young curate of the next parish, whom Sophia 
was frequently obliged to request to perform his duties in church 
ministrations, when he had incapacitated himself. 

Sue herself told me that she liked this young man . a pale, 
consumptive youth of two-and-twenty . because she thought 
he somewhat resembled her father. 

Luxmoor even strove to apologise for such parts of his con- 
duct as he knew could not but be extensively reported, on the 
pretence of being driven to drink by domestic unhappiness. 
He would have had it believed that Sophia . who seemed to 
every one else so mild and patient in her temper. : was a perfect 
fury to him. He had even the grotesque absurdity to declare 
that she could scold worse with her silence, than other women 
with their tongues. Then again I heard that Luxmoor should 
aver she had become an insupportable pedant . refused him any 
comfort of society . and had, in fact, taken to bury herself among 
books, like a German professor ! Scarlatt pretended that he 
had himself observed a good deal of foundation for this last 
charge. Had / not noticed the pragmatical and conceited 
manner in which she presumed lately to join in conversation, 
" on subjects which it was quite impossible any woman 
could in the least understand," with my father. with Lord 
Mauleverer ? 

And true it is, I had noticed, and with satisfaction, the rapid 
progress Sophia made, from the most frozen and austere of all 
possible tolerations, to favour and even a kind of intimacy with 
Lord Mauleverer. My mother's constant kindness . tenderness 
indeed . towards her, could have been no element in her 
success. It evoked, on the contrary, unpleasing associations . 
and Sophia had further to combat the conviction, still lurking 
in my father's mind, that she had taken an active part in the 
conspiracy to which he continued to impute my flight to and 
from Plas Newydd. She owed the triumph she finally achieved 
solely to her faculty of comprehending the weak points and master 
impulses of those who approached her, and of turning them to 
her own purposes. 

Her progress was so gradual, too ! . from the first downcast 
humility of the introduction I gave her . almost by accident . 
to the gracious familiarity my father eventually took her into, 
talking with her for hours on subjects I myself had no notion 
she understood anything about at all. Scarlatt even took the 
fanciful suspicion that she devoted herself to a course of dry 
reading, infinitely irksome to herself, but which enabled her to 
keep up a position of " parrot-knowledgeableness" in the dis- 
cussions Lord Mauleverer liked best to exercise his profound 
and metaphysical habits of analysis upon. 

But I was far from sharing the strange idea Luxmoor infused 



RECONCILIATION. 199 

into my husband, and Scarlatt at last communicated without 
disguise to me. I need not, however, at this moment anticipate 
the wounding and degrading imputation. 

No man was ever better qualified than my father to appre- 
ciate the superior qualities of Sophia's mind. Still, it really 
was wonderful with what skill she managed so soon to overcome 
his strong prejudices, and moreover his disdain that any person 
of rank originally so inferior should presume to possess those 
superiorities, or that they should enforce a claim for their 
possessor to a position of equality with birth and hereditary 
station. But Sophia, by what I considered to be one of the 
marked and most singular paradoxes in her character, seemed 
only to apply herself the more assiduously to remove those 
ingrained prepossessions and natural counteractions. I was 
long well pleased to witness how she succeeded . -how my father 
grew gradually even to relish her society, until at last he almost 
always made one of our company, for a time, on her visits . 
in a haughty, condescending manner indeed ; but Sophia hit 
his taste admirably in this respect also. She never presumed 
on this favour ; and nothing could exceed the ingenuity of her 
submission to the pride and assumption of Lord Mauleverer's 
habitual demeanour. And yet there was nothing of an undue 
or toadying, deference in her manner. Sophia could crawl 
upright.' You would have said, for the most part, that she was 
yielding a homage she felt she owed to natural superiorities 
rather than the factitious usurpations of society. It was this 
that rendered her so pleasing to my proud, but at the same time 
distrustful sire ; and it was the grand distinction between her 
efforts to win his favour and those of Scarlatt. 

I should have mentioned that every vestige of suspicion had 
vanished from my mind, in relation to the circumstances of the 
early acquaintance between my husband and Sophia. The first 
meeting between them, after so long a remotion, was alone 
sufficient to dispel all apprehension. 

Scarlatt, involved at the time in his active projects of ambi- 
tion, seemed literally to have forgotten who she was, when, 
happening to bustle into my apartment for some papers he 
wanted, he found me tete-a-tete with Sophia. I believe it was 
even her third or fourth visit to Mauleverer before she saw 
him ! And no doubt she was altered considerably in person . 
latterly, with the anxiety and constant turmoil she lived in . 
somewhat for the worse ; but one would not have thought to 
such an extent ! Still there was nothing whatever of affecta- 
tion to be noted in Scarlatt's apparent forgetfulness ; and Sophia 
herself probably felt so. But the perfect equanimity with 
which she recalled herself to my husband's recognition, by the 
name of Luxmoor . the cold indifference he displayed at the 
announcement . the little trouble he took to make his brief 
tarriance in the apartment agreeable or cordial . would have 



200 mattleveeer's divoece. 

contented any person the most disposed to draw unfavourable 
inferences from what occurred. Scarlatt seemed, and perhaps 
literally was, quite absorbed in the political trifle he came in 
search of ! 

Sophia made a brief comment after his exit, however, which 
did a little trouble me. " You will have a formidable rival in 
politics some day, Mrs. Pomeroy !" . (My husband, and conse- 
quently myself, had then received the royal licence to assume 
the name.) . "But thrice happy the woman who needs only 
grudge her husband's devotion to a Blue Book, and can sleep 
on the security that he is at no worse mischief than making or 
listening to a dull speech on Popery or sugar, at half-past three 
in the morning !" 

On other occasions, when she had rather longer opportunities 
of observing us together, I did indeed, at times, think there was 
something of scrutiny in the silent attention she mostly devoted 
to the circumstances of our interviews ! 

I do not accuse Sophia of having formed any projects of 
seduction on Scarlatt then . if at any former period she had. 
He was no object for a woman of so much ambition and thirst 
for the pomps and vanities of the world . then ! She was much 
better informed of the real state of things at Plas Newydd than 
I was ! A woman in reality of so proud and disdainful a spirit 
was more likely to repay Scarlatt's scornful indifference with 
hatred and contempt than any other feeling ! But it possibly 
amused her keen and sarcastic spirit of observation to endeavour 
to penetrate the core of the outward seemings she witnessed. 
to ascertain whether the mock sun she had herself raised in 
my dazzled vision still appeared to me the veritable King of 
Light ! 

But she saw little at this time to reward the analysis. No 
affection could be stronger than mine for my husband. Scar- 
latt's passion, at least for the personal qualities he could appre- 
ciate in me, and consciousness how much depended on preserving 
my attachment unshaken towards him, made him almost as 
tender and devoted a husband as he had been a lover. 

Sophia, at all events, seemed to consider that nothing could 
exceed our happiness . to judge from her frequent expressions 
to that effect, and the poignant and mortifying contrasts she 
drew between her own condition and mine. 

But, as a general fact, she was not given to complaint. She 
did not take the tedious pleasure so many unhappy and wronged 
women do in dwelling on their domestic grievances. She 
allowed even my compassion and sympathy only an occasional 
glimpse into that dark interior of her existence . terrifying as a 
glimpse from the bright sunshine into a slaughter-house ! 

Undoubtedly Sophia Sutcliffe_ was one of the most deplorable 
of that numerous band of victims who by our laws find thea<fc 
selves irrevocably fastened in the fetters of an indissoluble 



KECONCILTATION. 201 

union to vile and heartless men . even at times to the worse of 
felons. The wretch who narrowly escapes from the rope of 
the hangman, perhaps to finish his days in a remote and dis- 
honoured exile, is yet supposed to keep bound to him, by what 
should be the holiest of ties, the innocent partner of his punish- 
ment . not guilt ! 

The secret of Sophia's quietism and seeming resignation lay, 
in fact, in one word . despair ! 

No possible alleviation of her fate could be looked for, saving 
. dreadful alternative ! to whose verge, I believe, she was even 
then tempted, but from which she yet shrank. saving in guilt 
of the deepest dye on her own part ! 

At times she would say laughingly (but what sorrowful 
laughter it was !) that she dared not complain ! It would cost 
her a " good beating," if any revelations she could be supposed 
to vent came to Luxnioor's ears !. besides the chances of losing 
their seven hundred a year ! " And then what an alternative 
for us ! . either to starve, or earn one's living honestly !" 

I had myself the conviction . witnessing all the barbarous, 
merciless, degrading treatment she endured, seeming anxious 
only to avoid any public scandal on it . that Sophia had not yet 
been enabled to vanquish her darly attachment for the wretch 
who so unkindly repaid her devotion ! I do not know that I 
was quite mistaken ; but all this uncomplaining patience . this 
silent hugging of the mortal agony in the breast . appeared to 
me irresistible evidences of a lingering sentiment of the kind. 
Insensible to pecuniary considerations myself . almost, in fact, 
ignorant of the value of money . I did not believe in any such 
absorbing anxiety on her part to preserve the excellent income 
derived from her husband's abused "cure of souls." Yet, 
strangely enough ! I had all the time the consciousness that a 
discontent unutterably profound and dangerous gnawed at 
her chains in the dark beneath all these shows of resignation ! 

It is a problem that still sometimes recurs to me . Might 
Sophia have been not only an unharmful but useful and 
salutary member of society, but for the reprobate vileness of 
that man's conduct towards her? Had there even been a 
possible release for her from his pestilent association, might she 
have righted herself by the force of her own strong mind, and 
the balancing influence of early good impressions ? If so, 
accursed be the laws that would not suffer it ! that kept in 
forced conjunction vitality with the corruption of moral death, 
and made Sophia. what she became. and thereby me also. 
what I am ! 



202 matjlevereb's mvoece. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

A FABEWELL. 

My mother reclined on a sofa, and little Herbert, wearied with 
some essays at walking, was asleep, nestling- in her kind bosom. 
Gelert, who . I cannot write him which . had ever, since my 
return, been indulged in his decided preference for interiors 
of castles rather than of hutches, . lay at the foot of the 
sofa, gravely on guard. We seemed all, save the sleeping 
infant, to be listening, with much interest and attention, to the 
perusal of one of Sophia's first essays in authorship. She 
read it to us in that sweet, clear, equable voice of hers, that 
sounded like the murmuring of a breeze among honeysuckles . 
so low, tranquilly-toned, and redolent of all soft thoughts and 
images. 

It was a quiet little village story, perfectly simple in its lan- 
guage and construction. Little would you have thought that 
gentle breeze over a verdant English down could ever sweep 
into a simoom of the desert. 

I am now convinced Sophia was almost making a jest of my 
mother and myself. mocking us in her secret soul . whenshe 
recited to us those simple, clear-aired legends as true effusions 
of her dark and complicated genius. To what end? I cannot 
say ; imless that she feared to give an insight into the turbid 
vehemence of her nature, and awaken the suspicion and 
dread the unknown and powerful are apt to stir, one would 
deem, even in the unsentient things within the scope of their 
influence. 

It was admirable, however, I thought, this little tale of 
Sophia's, in its tender and pathetic simplicity ; "Wbrdsworthian. 
Founded on fact, too, she told us. The story of a rustic youth, 
betrothed to a village maiden, who was accidentally drowned 
in attempting to cross the ford of the Rhaiadr Dhu, on an 
excursion to visit his sweetheart in a neighbouring dell. The 
lasting fidelity of this poor bereaved one . her death, very aged, 
still lamenting the lover of her youth with an unchanged heart 
. was the subject-matter of the tale. It brought tears several 
times to my eyes, as I bent over the embroidery with which I 
was amusing myself ; and my mother's plaintive face grew**yet 
more sadly beautiful as she listened. 



A FAKE WELL. 203 

"We were thus engaged, when a servant announced Sir Vivian 
Ap Howel. My mother, who always liked to see him, and had 
of late been wondering at his protracted absence, gave imme- 
diate directions that he should be admitted. In he came . and, 
for the first time since he had joined it, in the uniform of his 
corps, under a military riding-cloak. He looked very haggard 
and pale, I thought, in it, but soldierly and even stately ; and for 
the first time it struck me distinctly how much his figure was 
improved in the interval since I remembered him a sickly, 
crippled lad. 

We all received him with marks of cordiality, but my mother 
alone without embarrassment. Both Sophia and I coloured. 
It was never absent from her mind that Vivian was acquainted 
with a degrading secret concerning her ! As for me, I flushed 
with the warmth of the satisfaction I really felt at my youthful 
friend's reappearance. 

I noticed that our visitor only bowed to Sophia. He shook 
my hand with an electric tingling of the nerves in his own, 
which I felt through my whole frame. Then, hastening to my 
mother's couch, he kissed hers tenderly and respectfully, as 
was his wont, and snatching up little Herbert, whom the jingle 
of his spurs had awakened, he began tossing him in the air, 
laughing and imitating the crowing of a cock so admirably 
that the little fellow's attention was instantly caught, and he 
desisted from his evident opening towards a good cry. In a few 
moments Vivian was answering to its tiny babblings, as if they 
thoroughly understood one another, with the child on his knee 
. snatching intervals to explain to my mother that his regi- 
ment was to embark on the following day, and that as she had 
expressed a wish to see him in his uniform, he had ridden over 
from Ap Howel in it. 

" So now you will be able," he said to her, but looking at me, 
"to form a pretty exact idea of how I shall look when I am 
lying with my feet to the foe. if that is to be my fate. or when 
I am holding a durbar to receive the submission of emirs and 
soldans, out of number, as a general and a conqueror. both 
which I intend to be, or ever I return to the shadow of Snow- 
don ! Sha'n't I look a plain fellow, Mrs. Luxmoor, among 
robes of cloth of gold and diamonded turbans ? " 

" Tour sword, which I take it for granted will be naked, 
Brennus-like, in your hand, will diffuse sufficient lustre around 
you," was her reply. 

" I wonder how I shall find you all when I return, " Vivian 
said, fixing what seemed to me a strangely inquiet, piercing . 
even menacing gaze on Sophia ! 

'' You will have to seek me in Pomeroy vaults, I fear, Vivian ! " 
said my mother. 

" But I shall not look for you there ! " he answered, with an 
intensely compassionate and regretful look. " I shall look up- 



204 MAULEY-ERElt'S BITOECE. 

wards ! . and if I do not see you then, it will be because we are 
all very short-sighted heavenward ! And you, Mrs. Pomeroy ! 
(he did not seem to dislike so much, to call me by that name) 
where shall you be ? " 

" At the pate of my house, wherever it may be, to welcome 
home the kindest and most generous of friends . and so will 
Scarlatt ! " I said with all the warmth of the sincere gratitude 
I felt towards this disinterested and energetic young ally. 

His brow brightened at the first part of this speech . darkened 
at its close. There was a remarkable and emphatic pause in the 
conversation which Sophia broke, rather startlingly, by observ- 
ing, " I am afraid ice shall not be at Llanhowel, Sir Vivian ! " 
But no comment was made, and after a time the dialogue took 
a more general turn. The particulars of Vivian's intended 
departure and voyage formed the principal subject, and I 
remember he dilated with satisfaction on the probabilities of a 
speedy breaking-out of hostilities in India, and the chances of 
his regiment being speedily engaged in active service. 

The visit appeared to us all to be cut abruptly short. A 
distant sound of shouting came to our ears, which Sophia 
quietly observed she supposed announced the return of Lord 
Mauloverer and the successful candidate through our neigh- 
bouring village . where, however, they were expected to receive 
congratulations and reply to a speech over the broaching of a 
monster beer-barrel. And he arose abruptly. " I left my horse 
with a ragged urchin of seven onl}% at the forest entrance of 
the park," he said, rather hurriedly. "It is a full-blooded, 
wild creature . and the noise will startle it. I must be gone ! " 

My mother was much surprised. " You will surely stay and 
see Lord Mauleverer and congratulate Mr. Su . Mr. Pomeroy ?" 

" No, Lady Mauleverer !" he replied, with a tart smile ; 
" don't you know I am an Anti-Corn-Law man ? and besides, I 
take part with poor old Suett in the affair, and can't think his 
son . although he is your son-in-law ! . at all right, in flinging 
him from the saddle to mount in his place ! I cannot congratu- 
late Mr. 'Pomeroy sincerely . so I won't at all ! But as I am a 
knight going to win my spurs, I ought to be escorted towards 
the lists by the fair ! Will you not accompany me a few steps 
to my steed, ladies :" 

Sophia expressed her acquiescence at once ; and struck with 
Ap Howel's air of calm irritation, which I had seen break out 
so formidably on a previous occasion I thought it desirable to 
assent to the proposed movement. I was besides assailed with 
the conviction that there was something of mysterious signifi- 
cance in Sir Vivian's manner, as if he had a communication of 
an unusual nature to make to me. 

He took an affectionate farewell of my mother . on her part it 
was even a solemn one . for she gave him her blessing as to a 
son about to depart to scenes of danger, and whom she was 



A FAREWELL. 205 

never likely to see again. He kissed little Herbert, once more 
fallen asleep, and shook Gelert's huge paws, placidly resigned 
to him . and we three left the apartment. 

Sophia also seemed to think that Sir Vivian wished to speak 
privately with me. She did not accept the offer of his other 
arm, after we had strolled out into the park. She made some 
pretence to linger behind . her boot-lace came unknotted ! .and 
allowed us to gain considerably in advance. 

Ap Howel walked fast, as if proud to show with what a firm, 
military tread he could now advance. But when, missing 1 her, 
he glanced back, he muttered to himself " I thought so \" in a 
sarcastic and scornful tone. 

I soon found that my surmises were correct. With the di- 
rectness that was part of his character, Vivian told me he had not 
wished to wait my father's arrival, lest he should be forced on 
an explanation he did not desire to make. And producing a 
note in Lord Mauleverer's handwriting, I found, to my very 
great chagrin, and even shame, I must confess, that my husband 
had shown so little sense of the gratitude we both owed Sir 
Vivian, as to have communicated to my father the fact that 
although present, and assisting even officiously as a witness, to 
our first marriage at the Kerig y Drudion, the youth was then 
and all along aware of my identity ! And my father stated 
that Scarlatt named Mrs. Luxmoor as his authority, she having 
from my very first arrival at Plas Newydd taken Sir Vivian, 
and Sir Vivian alone, into her confidence ! And Scarlatt proved 
his assertion by the fact, that it was he who secretly posted her 
letter to Lord Mauleverer abroad, and throughout was the sole 
person intrusted in any way in the affair. 

On acquiring this information, it appeared, my father had 
written to Sir Vivian for an explanation, professing himself 
utterly unable to devise one for himself, but declaring that, 
until the matter was cleared up, he could not see him again on 
the terms of friendship that had hitherto existed between them. 
Adding this reflection, which among any other race and class of 
men would have been an absurdity almost amounting to in- 
sanity, . Did he think thus to revenge the indignity an ancestor 
of the Pomeroys had inflicted on an Ap Howel, already so amply 
retaliated ! . by extinguishing the line of Mauleverer in a plebeian 
one so distasteful to himself as that of the Suetts ? 

" So I take this epistle as a sentence of perpetual exclusion 
from Mauleverer ;. for how can I tell your father the real reasons 
of my conduct . so little, as it seems, he has yet forgiven your 
husband ! Can I say to him the truth ? Dare I even repeat it 
now to yourself, Mrs. Pomeroy ? . But as it is probably for the 
last time we shall speak together, I may reiterate that it was 
my sincere opinion . I laboured under the delusion, you will 
think! . that there was a conspiracy to secure you as a prey 
among the Suetts, and I thought it very possible' . No ! I will 



206 mauleveeer's divorce. 

not pursue the subject, since it seems to distress you so much !. 
But, at all events, I amaware that if Lord Mauleverer knew I 
had assisted at your wild nuptials . had even imperatively re- 
quired them to take place . with the means of prevention in my 
hands, even at the sacrifice of the man's life who had ensnared 
you ! . Indeed to this hour I ma?'vel how I controlled the dreadful 
impulse rising- in my heart !. Yet what could it have availed 
since you loved him ? . ' with your whole heart ! with your whole 
soul !' . annihilating- words, that are as it were burned into my 
own! . Pardon me, Mrs. Pomeroy ! I am aware these are not 
expressions I should use to you . or that you should hear from 
me ! But I have an excuse to plead . I go, sincerely proposing 
to return no more ! But do you not now think it is as well I 
should depart without seeing- Mr. Scarlatt Suett. Mr. Pomeroy . 
your husband, Hugh-Helena! . again ?" 

I was a good deal confused, but I answered in the affirmative 
to this query, without hesitation. What struck me, however . 
I cannot say most painfully, but most surprisingly, in the 
revelation, was the fact that Scarlatt assigned Mrs. Luxmoor 
as his authority in the truly unkind and ungrateful statements 
made to my father. "It is impossible!" I could not help 
involuntarily exclaiming. " Scarlatt has never had an oppor- 
tunity to acquire this information from Mrs. Luxmoor, either 
at home or abroad, since our marriage ! Let us question her 
herself !. It is impossible !" 

" She is lagging a good way in the rear," said Vivian, pausing 
and flashing his keen bright eyes in the direction of Sophia's 
distant figure. "Innocent, harmless soul! she is stopping to 
admire the lambkins sporting among the buttercups ! If butter- 
cups were sovereigns, what a Proserpine amid the fields of 
Enna should we have in her to gather them ! Tet I think the 
King of Tartarus himself should hesitate before he took posses- 
sion of such a prize !" A.nd he laughed with his clear, bright, 
ringing, and yet melancholy laugh, very briefly, and with an 
effect about the reverse of mirthful upon me. . The scorn and 
incredulity mingled in it besides, annoyed me. 

"You ought to be the last to rail so bitterly against Mrs. 
Luxmore, Sir Vivian," I said. "She is always chanting your 
praises, and reciting your good and generous actions, till one is 
almost tired of hearing them." 

" Is she ? . thank her ! I am not much of a pedant, Mrs. 
Pomeroy, but I think I may quote to you in plain English, 
that I dread the descendants of Danaus, even bearing rich 
gifts !" Vivian replied, still laughingly ; but his tone changed 
to one of the utmost earnestness and seriousness as he added, 
" I intended in reality to have given you a warning on the 
subject of that kind friend of yours, Mrs. Pomeroy ; only I am 
like that raving girl of Troy, whose prophecies were always 
disbelieved. and always fulfilled ! Yet take some heed of what 



A FABEWELL. 207 

I say. Don't have Sophia Sutcliffe . Luxmoor, that is. too 
much about you ! I am sure she is not a good woman, say 
what she will ; . appear regularly in her pew on Sundays as she 
may. Just you believe me for once, Hugh- Helena, without 
waiting for anything so deplorable as proofs would be in this 
case. I tell you, Sophia Luxmoor . Sophy, as I, too, call her 
now again . is too talented, too discontented, too unprincipled, 
too unfortunate . not to desire to change her condition at the 
expense of any one, of any right, of any duty ! Beware of 
her!" 

" How barbarously, how cruelly unjust you are, Sir Vivian ! 
. when you must have witnessed . what every one witnesses . . 
with what unfailing patience and submission she drains her 
bitter cup ! . endures all the infidelity and brutality of the 
wretch her husband !" 

" That's the very reason I am so afraid of her . she crouches 
to spring ! Hers is the calm of the boa- constrictor, wreathed 
in his coils, awaiting the tramp of the horse or of the bullock 
near his springs. The bullock she has already in Squire Gawker 
. . but she despises him too much to compromise herself with 
him. And besides he is poor . and the poor, I think, will 
always be safe from our friend Sophy. I do believe," he 
added, laughing again in that strange, nerve-tingling way of 
his, "poverty is my own chief protection against her sorceries. 
If ever I am rich, I shall take good care to keep out of her 
company. Why, Hugh-Helena, you don't know . she is the 
very kind of woman most men prefer . for most men are mere 
sensualists with regard to women . and though Sophia has a 
good deal of brain, too, she knows how to hide it, and appear 
at pleasure the delightful fool we like you all best to be." 

" I wonder . I do wonder. Sir Vivian, you can take delight 
in annoying me with these causeless insinuations," I said, and 
tears, I know, sprang to my eyes. " But," I added, with 
vehemence, " do not carry away with you the notion that I 
intend to add the withdrawal of my friendship to poor Sophia's 
calamities. I know it would be one to her ; and I am almost 
certain some catastrophe is at hand in her relations with 
Luxmoor . and where then will she find refuge but with me ?" 

" Then, if you give it her, think you hear Ensign Cassandra 
repeating his warning again and again from over the Indian 
Seas ! " returned Vivian, with singular earnestness. "I should 
not like to be in the way of her recoil, I can tell you, when 
once that explosion . which I foresee, also. takes place ! Oh, 
Sophia is_ too young . too fraught with ardent passions . too 
richly endowed with powers of the mind . to take to the life of 
calm delights and sisterly communion you doubtless image for 
yourself with her. Don't fancy she will or can betake herself 
to a cool retirement in a grotto, after having lived in a furnace 
with Luxmoor. And she is of the kind of women who take 



208 MATJLEVEKElt'S DIVORCE. 

their vengeance on the society that has trampled and ill-used 
them. And, above all, she is too proud to forgive a benefit. 
Confer none on her, then. But I know I am giving words to 
the winds. What must be, will be ! beth y lonaf fi ! How 
often shall I think I hear those anguished words over the 
bitter waves in vain ? " 

As he uttered this vaticination in tones of inexpressible 
mournfulness and tenderness, Sophia, observing we had stopped 
for her, rejoined us. " I thought you might have some private 
communication to make to Mrs. Pomeroy, on matters of busi- 
ness : do I interrupt ? " she then observed, with perfect sim- 
plicity of look and tone. "Pardon me, Sir Vivian; Mrs. 
Pomeroy has told me with what magnanimous generosity you 
have behaved throughout these late affairs." 

" Nay, now, Sophy ; Mrs. Pomeroy never made use of any 
such line phrase. She is incapable of it," Vivian replied ; 
but, nevertheless, his pale cheek flamed joyfully at the words. 
" AVell, if it be so . if Mrs. Pomeroy thinks she owes me any 
thanks . I have gained the only recompense that I value, in 
human gift. Peerages and stars are nothing to me compared. 
Nay, they do not enter at all into my ambition. I want to be 
heard of with renown ; to do some famous thing in the world . 
perhaps the world itself some great good ; and then . and then 
.to die regretted by the women ! " he concluded, laughing 
again, but at the same time bursting into a shower of tears : 
indeed he wept, and sobbed, and laughed together for several 
minutes, almost like a young girl in an hysterical paroxysm. 
I'm sure Sophia and I joined him in the demonstration, 
hardly knowing why. The poor youth was, however, infinitely 
ashamed of the exhibition of what he doubtless considered an 
unmanly weakness ; and I saw him searching for a handker- 
chief in his breast and coat pockets, to remove the hot blotches 
from his cheeks. seemingly in vain. I handed him myown, 
therefore, at ln.9t; whieh'hc received with a kind of avidity, 
and hid. his face in it for some moments, while he yielded to an 
irresistible climax of nervous sensibility. 

He regained the mastery of himself, however, in a short 
interval, and his laughing causticity and frankness of expres- 
sion. For putting the bedewed handkerchief in his breast, he 
said, " I will wear it as an amulet. It was not ivr ought by an 
Egyptian, Sophy," he added, with peculiar meaning. alluding, 
no doubt, to the handkerchief of Desdemona . "so there is no 
harm in my taking it, you know. If I am shot, Mrs. Pomeroy, 
you may depend it will be in the breast ; and I will then cer- 
tainly order them to bring you your handkerchief home again, 
as a token that I thought of you as long as I could think at all. 
That is, supposing I have the power of speech ; if not, you will 
make allowances, when you see my name in the black list. 
But perhaps they will try and persuade you. because you are a 



A IABEWELL. 209 

Suett-Pomeroy now. that you ought to pray for such an event 
.for a Sikh scimetar to send my head dancing, before I am 
twenty-one. Well, perhaps it would be as well for myself 
also. I shall take no pains to keep out of the way of either 
steel or lead. But here is my war-steed, Rhaiadr Dhu. What 
do you think of him ? " 

" That I envy you your ride upon him, in the midst of the 
thunder of battle, over a field of carnage and death, into the 
heart of a thousand spears," Sophia replied, with a fierce flash- 
ing energy I had never before discerned in her. 

" Poor woman ! and you can do nothing but sit at home, and 
write pretty nonsense with a parrot-quill," said Ap Howel ; 
adding, in softened tones, " Well, poor Sophy ! after all, yours 
is a very hard fate. But do be a good girl. Don't hurt any- 
thing I am fond of, dear, till 1 come back again ; and, upon 
my soul ! I will make you so well off then, that you shall not 
have necessity to plead for any harmful doings afterwards." 

" Do not come home sick of battles, and anxious to change 
your red coat for a black one ; and I owe enough already to 
your liberality, Sir Vivian," Sophia replied, in a really moved 
tone. 

" You don't suppose the Reverend Carolus would consider 
himself bound by an agreement which could not be enforced . 
Eh, Sophy ? " returned Vivian, evidently amused at the idea ; 
and by this time we were all standing by the beautiful black 
charger the young officer had devoted a considerable portion of 
his then scanty savings to purchase. He turned now to bid 
me farewell, and while Sophia, quietly drawing off her glove, 
averted her head in patting the glossy arched neck of the steed . 
I know not any reason why I should conceal the fact . Vivian, 
gently drawing me by the hand I had given towards him, for 
the first time in his life, touched his lips to mine ! . quivering, 
indeed, with emotion in all their fibres, but with a kiss, whose 
evanescent tenderness spoke only of an eternal and hopeless 
farewell. 

He meant this certainly himself. " Forgive . for I shall 
never even hear of you again, Hugh-Helena ! if I can help it," 
he said, as he- sprang with remarkable agility and grace on his 
steed, without the aid of the stirrup ; "I shall have no cor- 
respondents left in England now, excepting my lawyers ; and 
I shall trouble them as seldom as I can. But God bless you, 
happen what may to me, and always '..what, Sophia, and 
have I omitted to say farewell to you while I was on terra 
firma?" 

" I can shake hands with you on horseback. Sir Vivian. It 
is not the first time that we have been on cavalier terms !" said 
Sophia, smilingly ; and it needed a thorough knowledge of her 
character and feelings to understand how deeply wounded she 
was by this neglect. And Ap Howel shook her hand in a 

p 



.210 WArtEVEIlElt'S DIVORCE. 

careless and oblivious sort of way, until suddenly, as if startled 
into recollection, he stooped and gave her quite a country 
swiil luart"> smack of a kiss on both cheeks, exclaiming, 
" Thtrc ! that you may tell no tales !" and setting his horse 
into a fierce curvet with a touch of his spur, and giving me a 
plana. 1 so full of an inexpressible chaos of emotions that I was 
in a manner struck silent, he waved his hand and disappeared 
as if shot from sight, on his swift steed's forward dash. 

" I am triad he is gone, too! What a curious youth he is ! 
Quite a puzzle in all he says or does ! ' said Sophia, in her 
usual tone, almost immediately after, while I remained gazing 
translix. d. " What can he mean by all these strange warnings 
and i commendations of his?" And she added, in a deep, 
thoughtful tour, these words. words that dwelt long upon my 
iiicinorv. " lie is really, at times, the kind of man that one 
would 7//. f t<> kill! Yd, happy, happy were the woman who 
could mi ril and obtain the love of a heart like that ! What a 
soul of honour and chivalrous sentiment dwells in that young 
breast ! With him love would indeed be an affair of the 
heart ' With almost all other men, and many women, too, it 
is ns our old sentimental friend, Madame Le Crampon, might 
well s::v, tmit autre.'" 

I had determined not to mention the affair of Lord Mau- 
Icvi rer's letter to any one else ; but from Sophia I thought I 
had a right to demand and receive explanations. I did not 
slop to consider that a confidential communication between 
Vivian and myself had not been at all calculated on by my 
husband. 

Sophia gave one, however, that seemed quite satisfactory. 
" Luxmoor must have been the reporter," she said, without 
thinking: it necessary, as it seemed, to deny for herself. "I 
think he often listens craftily about the house when I have 
visitors, and Sir Vivian called on me one day last week, and, 
among other matters, we spoke of the Plas Newydd affair, and 
the aid he had afforded me. so uselessly . in keeping the secret 
from the Suetts !" 
" A week ago ! Has he been so long at Ap Howel ?" 
" Yes, a whole week; but this affair has no doubt hindered 
him from visiting at Mauleverer, and I must say . were it of 
any other man than your husband, my dear friend !. it is the 
shabbiest, poorest return for almost unequalled generosity and 
kindness, not on record in the annals of social man !" 

I felt that it was as she had said. Yet I could not patiently 
bear so stinging a reflection on my still beloved husband, and I 
answered Sophia with a haughtiness of reproof she had never 
yet experienced from my lips. It silenced her, and we parted 
with very unusual mutual coldness and reserve that ni°-ht. 



STRANGE BT7I TETJE. 211 



CHAPTER XXII. 

STEANGE BUT TEITE ! 

Sophia's misfortunes were, however, destined to retrieve for 
her speedily all my attachment and sympathy. 

A messenger arrived at Mauleverer late one evening with 
really fearful tidings from Llanhowel ! It was a poor old man, 
much attached to Mrs. Luxmoor, who had retained him as 
sexton in her hushand's parish, in spite of his wish to put a 
drunken vagabond, with whom he made acquaintance in a tap- 
house, in his place. And this man brought a message from 
her, at considerable risk to himself personally, imploring 
assistance to rescue her husband from the fury of his own 
parishioners. 

It appeared he had been detected in a most scandalous 
series of outrages on several of the young girls in the school she 
had organized ; and the father of one of the maltreated children 
had raised the whole village in a determination to stone their 
unworthy pastor out of it ! But according to the report, Lux- 
moor had barricaded himself with his wife and two female 
servants in the parsonage, and being well armed with a gun and 
two pistols, which he ordered the women, under threat of their 
own lives, to keep constantly loaded, swore he would there 
maintain himself against them all ! As the wretch was now 
perfectly desperate, and, as usual, under the influence of in- 
toxicating liquors, with which he continued to ply himself, while 
the villagers were in an almost frenzied state of exasperation, 
the most dreadful mischiefs were to be apprehended, unless some 
authoritative interference took place ! 

It was Sophia who secretly despatched the sexton to entreat 
me to induce either my father or husband . who were both in 
the commission of the peace . to hasten with auch assistance as 
they had at hand to quell the disturbance, and rescue Luxmoor 
from the fury of the mob ! 

Ivot at all to my satisfaction, however convincing a proof that 
he had not feigned his total change of feeling towards Sophia, 
Searlatt, to whom I hastened at once with this disastrous intel- 
ligence, received it with the utmost coolness and indifference ! 
" I don't believe two words of it . women so exaggerate ! Or if 
there is a row, it is all Mrs. Luxmoor's insane Jealous?/ and 
persecution of her husband have brought it about ! lie has 
himself told me how frantically she goes on about him . to cover 
her own doings ! . a thousand times ! To interfere would only 

F2 



212 mauxeveree's divorce. 

be to countenance her absurdities ! And, besides, if Luxmoor 
is really guilty of such detestable misconduct, I renounce him 
altogether ; and he may get out of his scrape as he has got into it ! " 

My father had been quietly listening with a newspaper in his 
hand, but he now started up with very unusual suddenness and 
vivacity. " But Mrs. Luxmoor ! what will become of the poor 
woman herself?" he exclaimed. " I care very little for her 
husband's fate . in fact, if I can ascertain any truth in these 
accusations, I will send him to jail as I would the commonest 
and vilest of rogues and vagabonds charged with the like offence ! 
But I cannot suffer so amiable and accomplished a woman . and 
a friend of my daughter's ! . to be placed in such jeopardy, by 
so infamous a scoundrel's conduct, for one moment ! I shall go 
to Lhanhowel at once . and all the men about the place that can 
find horses will accompany me ! You can stay, Mr. Pomeroy, 
of coiirse, if you don't think your friend's carcase worth the 
trouble of a gallop to rescue ! And I confess I am myself a good 
deal of that opinion . but people of my name have not hitherto 
shown themselves so slack to assist their friends in danger !" 

And he strode out of the room with as towering a step as any 
of his Norman ancestors might have gone forth to battle, in 
panoply of proof. 

Scarlatt nevertheless made no attempt to follow. He turned 
to me with an angry and flushed countenance. 

11 Do you hear that ?," he exclaimed, in a vehemently resentful 
tone. " Don't you see it is as I have long been hinting to you, 
only you will understand nothing that is not stuck up on the 
wall in letters a yard long ! The old fool is fairly besotted with 
her ! and, as usual, the lirst use she makes of her influence is to 
set people against me ! I have noticed that from the very 
instant she began to gain a footing here, your father began to 
think less and less of me ! . until now, I believe, he fairly hates 
me again. and wants me to go and expose my life against a 
madman like Luxmoor ! for the sake of a creature who, I know, 
has made up her mind to be the ruin of me !" 

I was offended for several reasons . some of which I dared not 
present to myself in any tangible form . with this speech. It 
was very rarely that Scarlatt indulged his temper with such 
viperous outbreaks : they stung the more. 

" So you call my father a fool, sir ! And are you really of 
that opinion that only a fool could take particular interest in 
Sophia?" I answered, too tartly, certainly. " But as to saying 
that she always uses her influence against you, I am sure her 
praises of you when I first knew you . were . must have been. 
frightfully exaggerated, quite the other way !" 

" That is to be seen, yet, Mrs. Pomeroy ! I shall be happy to 
have your opinion, a little less prematurely, the day after I make 
my maiden speech in parliament !" replied Scarlatt, with that 
smile of his of other days. full, to say the least, of an excessive 



STBA.NGE BUT TKTTE. 213 

self-appreciation. " But, as you say, Mrs. Luxmoor is a woman 
of talent ! . some women have not even the talent to see talent 
where it is most obvious ! and that is the reason why I dread 
her so much ! So do all reasonable men . always dread women 
of talent ! Poor Luxmoor had a good saying for that : know- 
ledge is power, and power is the devil, in a woman's hands ! I 
am quite sure she is trying to set Lord Mauleverer against me ! 
Only the other day, when he insisted so strangely on escorting 
her part of the way home to Llanhowel, and she would walk, 
though you know you had offered her a carriage. I saw them 
laughing quite heartily as they went . your father laughing, 
who hardly ever laughs ! And as they passed me . I happened 
to be going along the other side of one of the hedges . I heard 
her say to his lordship : "I am no great admirer of those large, 
haunchy figures myself: they remind me too much of state 
footmen out of livery !" 

" And did you suppose such an observation could apply to 
yourself ?" 

" She is capable of anything ; and I know she hates me. It 
could not otherwise be . " but Scarlatt, suddenly interrupting 
himself, added, " I am quite sure she has taken Lord Mau- 
leverer in tow out of pure hatred against us ! . for she hates 
you too, Hugh-Helena . you may depend upon it, Hugh-Helena. 
I wonder how the deuce they came to think of giving you such 
an awkward double name. as if you were both a man and a 
woman . which I verily believe your friend, Sophia, is . she 
knows so well what both sides are at." 

" What, in heaven's name, are you talking about, Mr. 
Pomeroy ? And what ' could not otherwise be V " I exclaimed, 
in amazement. 

" Pooh pooh, and bah bah !" replied my husband, insultingly 
enough : " as a woman of this world, you must know very well 
what I mean; . you must have observed how artfully she is 
creeping up j^our father's sleeve . pretty tight-fitting one at 
the wrists as it is. Didn't you notice, last visit but one, how 
she prated about the siege Mauleverer sustained against 
Cromwell, as if she had been present at it ? I am sure you 
pricked your own ears high enough too, when his lordship 
asked her to show him the spot where the first Ap Howel and 
Mauleverer that had been friends for centuries met with their 
tenantry to go to Worcester with Charles II. She knows our 
whole genealogy better than we do ourselves . I mean the 
Pomeroy genealogy, of course . though I have studied it night 
and day for the heralds' people, when they were making me 
one. And haven't you noticed she shows off chiefly to his lord- 
ship . when I am not there ? Didn't I hear her the other day 
in the cedar drawing-room, singing what she persuades you all 
is one of her own songs and musical composition, when she 
knew Lord Mauleverer was sitting listening, with the library 
doors open, with all his might i" 



214 HATTLEVERElt's DIVORCE. 

I Lad noticed that Sophia rarely " showed off " before my 
husband. But I did not think it so very singular. "You 
always behave so churlishly to Mrs. Luxmoor ; . depreciate 
everything she does so much," I observed. 

" "Well, he don't . Lord Mauleverer don't . and I can tell you 
he has gone now at some risk to interfere in Luxmoor's affairs 
. for Luxmoor already suspects something too." 

I lost patience. " What, in the name of everything absurd, 
am I to understand from all this, Scarlatt ? . that you suspect 
my father . my friend . of being capable . what do you mean ?" 

"Don't go into hysterics, and I'll tell you plainly enough. 
Sophia knows I despise her, and is determined on revenge ; and 
if her husband is so much disliked by her as you seem to say, 
she will do anything to get rid of him . and the only way for 
that, is to give him a chance of making money by getting rid 
of her. I know that of old. In plain English, I suspect her of 
a design to entrap your father. Luxmoor has warned me of it 
repeatedly, before now, in the most friendly manner ; though it 
is against his own interests : for, of course, immense damages 
could be got out of Lord Mauleverer. But, after all, poor fellow, 
I believe he is very fond of her. terribly jealous of other people ; 
though he is not able quite to behave himself with regard to the 
sex in general." 

" Poor fellow !" I repeated, mockingly. " But if you men 
extend to one another so much kind forbearance in judgment, I 
think you might display ever so little towards a persecuted, 
ill-used, shamefully-betrayed creature like Sophia. And allow 
me, in addition, to tell you, Mr. Pomeroy, that you have quite 
mistaken my father's character, who, whatever his other faults 
towards my mother, has never shown himself an unfaithful 
husband to her. And to prove that my confidence in Sophia is 
sincere, I shall this very moment dispatch the only man we have 
left in the castle . my mother's page . excepting yourself, of 
course . with my most earnest request to her to make Mauleverer 
her home and asylum as long as ever she pleases." 

I believe it was my first decided contradiction to anything 
my husband chose to expect. But I was excessively irritated. 

" Do so, and ruin us all ! She will have Lord Mauleverer and 
myself by the ears before she has been a month in the castle !" 

I was too much shocked and disgusted with what at the same 
time I considered to be the outrageously absurd suspicions and 
suggestions of my husband, to hesitate at all in the execution 
of the purpose I announced. Yet I own these reiterated warn- 
ings, from quarters so opposed, began to produce some effect 
upon me. After I had despatched my messenger, I even began 
to contemplate the possibility of Sophia's arrival and sojourn at 
Mauleverer, with a species of dismay. And I confess it was not 
without relief that I found my father returned to the castle- 
after a protracted stay of some hours at Llanhowel. alone. 



STEAWGE BUT TEUJ3. 215 

The villagers, it appeared, had not ventured to carry out 
their first resolution, deterred by the furious menaces and 
mortal weapons of their vile pastor. He had accordingly sus- 
tained his siege with little damage, excepting that all the 
windows of the parsonage were broken by two women who 
were suspected to have peculiar reasons for despising danger in 
their exasperation . until my father arrived with his little 
improvisated troop of cavalry. And only just in time to rescue 
Sophia from really the greatest personal peril ! Luxmoor had 
by some means ascertained that she had communicated out of 
doors, and concluding at once . naturally enough . that she had 
sent to summon assistance against him . openly avowed his 
determination to take her life ! She had scarcely time to flee 
and bar herself in one of the garrets . the door of which the 
wretch, insane with drunkenness, and consciousness of total 
ruin and disgrace, was essaying to batter down, like a furious 
bull, by driving his short but massive body against it : the 
servant girls were screaming for assistance without being able 
to induce the panic-stricken rustics to afford any, when Lord 
Mauleverer arrived. 

My father lost not a moment in forcing open the doors, and 
he himself headed the rescuing party up the stairs. Luckily 
Luxmoor had laid aside his firearms, conceiving an axe he had 
taken from the coal-cellar better adapted for his murderous 
purposes. " He was therefore secured without so much difficulty 
as might have been apprehended, being, in fact, so much 
inebriated, as to fall headlong down the stairs in a rash to 
regain his weapons, supposing the onslaught to be from the 
villagers. But he had still the cunning, on recognising Lord 
Mauleverer, to assume at once all the stylo of an injured man ; 
and declare that his wife's jealousy had provoked the tumult 
quite causelessly ! He had the impudence to appeal to Lord 
Mauleverer himself as a friend, who must be aware that it w; s 
quite impossible for him, a man of education and character, tu 
have disgraced his cloth in the manner imputed to him ! 

Sophia, poor soul ! was found crawling, at the most imminent 
risk of her life, out on the parapet of the garret window. with 
the intention, as she told my father, rather of precipitating her- 
self into the churchyard below, than of falling into the power of 
the brutish madman raging at the door of her place of refuge. 
I have seldom seen my father more moved than he was in de- 
scribing the excess of her gratitude to him for his timely 
interposition ! And it appeared that her patience was at last 
fairly worn out! Luxmoor had, indeed, still the confidence to 
appeal to her to bear witness that she did not believe in the 
accusations of his enemies . that she was herself present in the 
schoolroom during the whole period of his alleged misconduct ! 
But very properly, she turned from him in utter disdain and 
repudiation! And then it appeared lie had the insane malig- 



216 MAT/LEVEEEE'S DITOECE. 

nity to accuse her of heading a conspiracy formed for the 
express purpose of ousting' him from his parish, and bringing' 
in a young curate. whom he declared the patron . another of 
her favourites ! . Sir Vivian Ap Howel, had previously endea- 
voured to introduce. Nor did he hesitate to accuse her of the 
most criminal motives and objects in the organization of this 
design ! Even of having purposely provided him with extra 
means of intoxication, by leaving the keys of her cellars in his 
way ! 

Lord Mauleverer, disgusted beyond measure, directed the 
depositions of the witnesses to he made before him at once, and 
in spite of all Luxmoor's clamour of a conspiracy . that his wife 
was skilled in conspiracies ! . words which, however, my father 
repeated before both Scarlatt and myself, with bitter emphasis ! 
. he consigned him at once to jail on the dreadful and infamous 
charges fully substantiated against him ! 

But when this vile man was taken off, and Lord Mauleverer 
proffered an asylum in his house to the injured wife, backed by 
my mother's and my own earnest invitation, which arrived in 
the interim . she gratefully but most decisively declined it. 
She could not endure, she said, to remain in that part of the 
country during the exposures that must follow on the detection 
of her miserable husband. They would involve a woful 
display of indecision and almost criminal sufferance on her own 
part. The forfeiture of her husband's position was inevitable 
. but she did not imagine herself altogether destitute of the 
means of living apart from him, on her own industry. She 
proposed to go at once to London . existence would be 
insupportable to her, if she remained where she was. And my 
father briefly stated that he was convinced by her arguments, 
and sorry that he could not prevail upon her to accept any 
pecuniary assistance to enable her to proceed to the metropolis. 
But, he added, . still more carelessly . indignant at the dread- 
ful maltreatment the unfortunate woman had sustained from 
her villanous husband, he had offered her the aid of his purse 
and influence in any measures of redress or liberation she 
might find it possible to adopt, on consultation with the most 
eminent London practitioners of the law. And this she had 
accepted. 

But this indifferent tone deceived not Scarlatt . if, indeed, 
it was intended to deceive any one. No sooner were we alone, 
than he burst out, "I see it all now, I see it all now, Hugh- 
Helena ! The plan is to get a divorce from Luxmoor, and 
then for her to marry your father ! " 

I stared at him in complete bewilderment. "Are you 
mad?" I asked at last. "Do you not know that my father 
is a husband already. the husband of my mother . if even 
Mrs. Luxmoor were set free to marry any one ihis hour ? " 

" But you must know your mother's life is not worth six 



STEANGE BUT TET7E. 217 

months' purchase; and if Luxmoor has behaved himself so 
atrociously, I suppose he comes pretty well up to the standard 
at which they grant divorces to women. And though it might 
be a difficult matter, certainly ; yet if Sophia is thoroughly 
well backed with money and influence, she may obtain a 
divorce, I say. I know they have granted women divorces 
sometimes ; and I dare say it is quite as much their own 
stupid endurance, and clinging to fellows that serve them so 
desperately bad, as the difficulty and the expense, that have 
made them so few hitherto." 

" Heaven prosper her in the attempt to divorce herself from 
the abomination of such a monster's association ! " 

"But don't you see what will happen then? She is quite a 
young woman still. She will have children . male heirs both 
to the title and the estates. Luxmoor himself has confessed to 
me, that but for that row about the Cambridge woman he 
should have been a father ; though he said he detests children 
and their squalling, and did not regret it one bit. It was 
when I showed him little Herbert first." 

" Unnatural ruffian ! " 

"You had much better join with me against her than 
against him," said Scarlatt. " But if the worst comes to the 
worst," he added, vengefully, " I know a trick to stop her. 
I shall let Lord Mauleverer know what a life she led at 
Cambridge, and all her inveigling artifices to me." 

" Cambridge ! " I exclaimed. 

" Yes. Luxmoor can tell a pretty story of her doings there. 
I suppose she has persuaded you she left him because she was 
ill-treated by him there. not because she misbehaved herself 
so shockingly, that he turned her out of doors ? " 

" Do you think I would believe one word so depraved a 
wretch can say against the woman he has so basely injured . . 
whose fair fame itself he now wishes to lie away ? Who could 
believe so atrocious a calumniator, when, by his own showing, 
were all that he alleges true, he must be the most infamous of 
men to have taken her back again." 

"Oh, Luxmoor's faults have been caused altogether by his 
domestic unhappiness. And the poor fellow is not to blame 
for having taken her back. The truth is, he dotes upon her, 
and forgave her everything. He could not live without her. 
She is a very fascinating woman . you must see that. But no 
sooner was she settled comfortably at Llanhowel, than she 
took to all her old courses again. You should hear what 
Squire Gawker says of her, now she has cut him for her 
speculation on your father." 

_ " Neither would I credit what a disappointed fool and knave, 
like that fellow, may give out. But you have assuredly as 
rapid an imagination as it is at all necessary for a solid states- 
man to possess, Scarlatt, . since you have divorced Mrs. Lux- 



218 HAOXEVEEEfi'S DITOP.CE. 

moor . consigned my mother to the grave . and married her 
to my father, the proudest of aristocrats . a woman without 
station, birth, wealth. all in a breath." 

""Well, but I'll take care they shall not find the divorce so 
easy. As for your mother, even if she were quite well, I 
confess I should not like mine to be a life in the way of 
Sophia's attainment of a coronet." 

" What a most dreadful idea ! What has she done to merit 
suspicions too horrible to be formed even of the most notorious 
criminals . " 

" Is she not separated from her husband, or will soon be ? " 

" Has she not cause r " 

" That don't matter. Every woman who leaves her husband 
must be a bad one ! " 

I did not perceive the logic of this, and I tol 1 him so. 

"Ah!" he exclaimed, pettishly. "She is teaching you to 
chop logic, is she, too ? . persuading you your husband is not 
fit to be your guide and adviser in everything ? But if you 
are so determined to side with her . all of you," he added, 
after some reflection, and with a visible reanimation of coun- 
tenance, " we had better really have her at Mauleverer. She 
will be less dangerous here than at a distance. Go yourself, 
and try to prevail upon her to come." 

I was surprised at this sudden change in my husband's 
humour ; but it coincided so much with my own wishes, and 
the really utter incredulity I felt in Scarlatt's insinuations, 
that I agreed to the proposal at once. 

Accordingly, on the following morning, as early as I could 
manage it, I drovo over to Llanhowel. lint the bird was 
flown, and instead of my friend, I found a letter from her 
directed to me, which one of the whimpering handmaids 
handed over to me. 



EX-TENEBRIS. 219 



CHAPTER XXIII 

EX-TENEBRIS. 



"Dearest Mrs. Pomeroy ! " tins letter ran:. "aware of the 
generous goodness of your heart . dreading your influence over 
ray own. I have not dared to await the entreaties with which 
I know you will endeavour to prevail upon me to accept the 
kind proffer I have already declined. 

" I have several reasons for this . hut will not one suffice 
when I tell you I am convinced, in my own heart, that I take 
misfortune with me wherever I go ? You have all been too good 
to me at Mauleverer . your saintly mother, your dear self, your 
truly noble father . noblest even in my heraldry, which is not 
that of Garter King at Arms ! . for me to hazard bringing with 
me there the sorrowful company I am assured will henceforth 
dog my steps through existence ! 

" Do not ask me the reasons of these convictions ; they are 
rather instincts, sure presentiments ! The rest of my days are 
doomed to struggle and misery ; let me not bring upon others dear 
to me what I can alone suffer . perhaps alone ought to suffer ! It 
is, I repeat, a crime to have loved such a man ! And did not that 
honestest and most generous of youths bid me at parting spare 
what was most dear to him ? Who is dearer than you are ! . than 
your sweet children are . than all your house have ever been ? 

" Moreover, I do not say it by way of reproach, but Lord 
Mauleverer has stated to me what Mr. Pomeroy, your husband, 
was pleased to say and do on the occasion of my application for 
assistance on his friend's behalf. Luxmoor is indeed unworthy 
of all sympathy and aid . but still, still I cannot make up my 
heart to become a guest where such maxims of friendship are 
in vogue ! It is not a mere machine of circulation ! It would 
not permit me so calmly to have allowed one whom even I 
detested to be torn to pieces by an infuriate mob !. No more 
of that. 

"It must he admitted, I think, at last . that Luxmoor has a 
little exceeded even the just privileges of his sex. I have never 
pretended . at least of latter times. to his fidelity ! We cannot 
. we ought not, according to some reasoners . to expect to con- 
fine such variety-loving creatures as men in the pales they have 
themselves made, but so easily vault over . We are to be fixed 
as rocks in constancy to them ; for it is only we who can do the 
harm in families, you know ! We alone can taint the_ ' purity 
of the domestic hearth ' . we alone introduce a ' spurious off- 
spring ' into the house ! Of coarse, it is nothing that we are 



220 matjleteeek"s divorce. 

aware the guardian of all these domestic sanctities has just left 
the arms of a paramour : that children, who have a right to call 
him sire, but stranger- women mother, dwell under another roof, 
almost purified by their presence ! We only can despoil the 
true heirs of their inheritance ! Men cannot ! They have it 
in their power, it is true, to leave not only their own posses- 
sions, but ours also, to the children of the strange woman . to 
the woman herself . whom, by a beautiful provision of nature, 
they seem always to prefer to ' honest Madam ' and her issue ! 
. I have indeed seen with my own eyes a will in which Lux- 
moor left all the savings of my care from his prodigality to his 
goodly brood at the university, which he ever in words has 
disowned ! But what matter facts against- established legal 
fictions ? . I admit all these truths. Still, wide as is the latitude 
men allow to each other, it does really appear that there are 
limits to it ! Luxmoor's infamy is now open and apparent : of 
a kind that the utmost stretch of indulgence could not, without 
sharing, pardon ! Surely if there be justice for woman against 
man, it cannot be denied me ! The bond between us, which 
God is said to have joined, has become one of pollution and 
ignominy ! Can God sanction these ? 

" And have I not borne sufficiently with this man . this 
demon, Hugh-Helena ? What you have yourself witnessed 
is as nothing . a drop from the great ocean . to all I have 
endured ! 

" There is scarcely a crime in the decalogue, whose solemn 
forbiddings it was Luxmoor's duty weekly to give forth, to an 
insulted congregration perfectly cognisant of his depravity, of 
.which he has not been guilty, or attempted to be guilty ! Epi- 
curus's stye never produced a more wallowing sensualist than 
he ! He is notoriously a drunkard, a profligate of the worst 
order . an adulterer ! I have lived in constant terror, lest he 
should profane my roof . almost my very presence . by some 
enormity ! At his pleasure he has treated me with the most 
contemptuous neglect, or compelled submission to the most 
degrading and disgusting impulses of his furibund animal 
nature, excited by drink and constitutional recklessness beyond 
all restraints ! My person even . you have witnessed . has not 
been sacred from perhaps less unmanly blows and spurns ! The 
vilest abuse language could be cast into, by a ribald blasphemer, 
skilled in all its abuses, has been heaped upon me ! Forbidden 
to look to religion itself for a consolation . for what hope or 
meaning could there be to me in a religion that Luxmoor 
preached? . I have been driven to the verge of perhaps my 
own eternal condemnation . to the meditation of suicide . by 
the overwhelming and remediless nature of my wrongs ! And 
shall it be said that my measure is not yet filled up, and that I 
have no right to demand of divine and human justice redemp- 
tion from a monster's power like this ? 



EX-TENEBBIS. 221 

" From the very first, what has this husband . if he is still 
to be called such . been to me ? He found me, I will admit, 
causelessly impatient and discontented with my position in the 
world . anxious for higher fortunes in it than I had apparently 
any right to expect ; vain, coquettish, conceited with an air- 
blown opinion of my own claims and advantages. But he had 
from me all that the best of men can pretend to, from a woman 
whom he makes his wife : a love that was more than a passion ; 
a kind of tenderness so largely mixed with homage, that it 
seemed rather a kind of adoration. I had all the ignorance of 
schools about me, and he appeared to me a wise man : as if a 
bad man ever was a wise one ! I gloried in his abilities : I 
imagined him more than all you doubtless still deem your hus- 
band, saving that no illusion could represent him to me under 
externals so brilliant. Some phantom is surely permitted to 
roam the world, and present to the eyes of women whatever is 
most attractive to each, to lure us to our doom ! It vanishes 
with all its attributes, when we have once surrendered ourselves 
into the iron clasp of destiny. I imagined Luxmoor almost 
godlike in intellect : I have awoke, and found that he is only a 
profligate college professor ! 

" Yet, even when I knew how much I had been deceived, it 
cannot be denied that I laboured most strenuously to make the 
best of my unhappy chance. I continued to love this man when 
'I could no longer form a delusion in connection with him ; for 
no other reason, perhaps, than because I had lovtd him. I 
devoured my heart in silence. I knew his infidelities, and 
tolerated them. And worse than that ! . you remember how 
I told about his Cambridge mistress, or rather mastress . I think 
a new word ought to be coined in her favour. But you do not 
know all that happened there. It is my firm belief Luxmoor 
would have had me plunge myself in ignominy to assist in his 
riotous expenses, and leave myself at his mercy to repudiate 
me when he should think it for bis interest or pleasure to select 
another victim. As for his yet more infamous conduct with 
the two "Wrangham women, how could I avoid being aware of 
enormities enacted almost beneath my gaze ? Tet I exhausted 
myself in efforts to hide these criminal excesses from the ob- 
servation of those who ought to have punished them. You 
remember my interview with that poor archdeacon, where I 
denied all . persuaded him that all those true but anonymous 
accusations were false. Oh, believe me, it was hard worli to go 
after such a cloven-footed beast (pardon the strong expressions 
I use. I have no time to choose gentler ones, even had I still 
the temper) and obliterate the filthy traces of his passage- 
sometimes through the whiteness of my own trampled reputa- 
tion. Oh, heard you ever of so vile a husband ? He even took 
a pleasure in throwing soot on his own wife's fair fame. _ There 
was the Gawker affair . but I cannot speak of that with any 



222 MATJXEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

patience ! The foolish fellow himself was sufficiently misled by 
Luxmoor's insinuations as to imagine he might have a prospect 
of success with me. And I own that he ayowed a feeling for 
me which, while I repulsed it with the utmost contempt, satis- 
fied me I was neither so old, so ugly, nor so unnoticeable in 
every sense as my husband's preferences might have induced 
me to believe. He was a poor wretch, too, that Gawker. He 
lent not a hand in any attempt to rescue me from that raging 
felon, during the whole dreadful scene, all of which he must 
have witnessed from his house. Had I treated any real man . 
such a one, for example, as young Ap Howel . with a thousand 
times the disdain . had I preferred to him the least worthy of 
all mankind . still he would have hazarded life and limb to 
rescue any woman from such danger. But one whom he had 
loved ! . I declare to you your father appeared to me like a 
veritable knight of the olden chivalry . a St. George, a Bayard . 
when he hazarded so much . his own life, in fact . to relieve me 
from my dreadful situation. I feel that I owe Lord Mauleverer 
gratitude, homage . if I dared say so, without fear of being 
misconstrued . my deepest love and veneration to the last hour 
of my existence. 

" Well, you know the result of all my pains . the total failure 
of all my efforts to cover in this steaming corruption, which has 
burst itself a way at last, and fills the whole air with its betraying 
stench ! It is impossible that even the mild bishop, and my good 
friend, the archdeacon, can overlook so public and notorious a 
scandal. Your noble father himself, so conservative in all his 
opinions, pronounced, if there were another such priest in the 
Establishment, it would be necessary to make a new Reforma- 
tion ! Luxmoor will, in all probability, be branded with some 
infamous punishment, and turned out into the world a beggar 
and an outcast ! And am I, who have not shared his crimes, 
except by attempting to palliate them, to share this vile wretch's 
punishment ? Or, because I have unwittingly united myself to 
a monster, am I to be condemned either to his detested society, 
or to live a solitary creature in the world, exposed to all the 
temptations, all the insults that assail women in such a position ? 
Until my recent interview with your kind, your most generous, 
your truly noble father, I had deemed there was indeed no 
extrication for me ! No earthly power, I thought, could free 
me from the body of that death ! I imagined I was like the 
poor wretch in the Eastern tale, married in a country where it 
was the custom to inter the living spouse with the dead one ! I 
had hardly ever heard a ease of a woman divorcing her husband- 
though I had myself known many who would have had the 
right, and even who would have had the courage and resolution 
to exert it, but who still sat on the highways, hugging their 
chains, apparently powerless for redemption ! I had been often 
assured of the practical indissolubility of marriage, so far as 



EX-TENEliEIS. 223 

regards .women, in all but cases of an infamy scarcely to be 
dreaded ! But Lord Mauleverer, whose judgment and ripe ma- 
turity of wisdom and experience no one can dispute, seems to 
think that the time has arrived when a little extension of these 
rigid rules may be hoped for. Luxmoor has not committed the 
crime which our wise lawgivers seem to consider the only one 
that renders a wicked man unfit for the society of the best of 
women . because I have no sister and no daughter . thanks to 
his own cruelty for this latter ! But surely mine is a special 
case ; and, though parliament hitherto has only granted divorces 
to women three or four times in the course of a century, Lord 
Mauleverer thinks it is impossible they can refuse a release in this 
case ! His lordship has even most kindly undertaken, if it can 
be brought to such a stage, to take charge of a bill for my relief 
in the House of Lords. Moreover, as the expenses will be great, 
infinitely beyond any resources I can possibly command . with 
a really unexampled generosity . unexampled but for one excep- 
tion ! your best of fathers has offered to be at the whole cost of 
the suit in conducting it through the necessary preliminary 
stages. Upwards of twelve hundred pounds, I am assured, at 
the very least outlay ! What do I not owe to the chivalrous 
compassion and liberality of this great nobleman, this worthy 
' descendant of a hundred bright-branded chevaliers,' as 1 re- 
member, I think, having once before heard him styled . or was 
it yourself, dear Hugh-Helena? . But, of course, I am aware 
that Lord Mauleverer's princely kindness to me is entirely 
owing to the friendship he knows his peerless daughter bears 
me, and the more than maternal affection of her benignant 
mother ! 

" It is indeed very much on your dear mother's account that 
I have resolved to decline your third invitation to Mauleverer. 
In her failing state of health I would not for the world add the 
discomfort and harassment, which I shall have to sustain, 
doubtless, before I can achieve the blessedness of redemption 
from the corrupting corruption I am fastened to ! My poor 
father whose memory I still revere, thank God ! . it is my last 
hold on anything good !. would leave his nameless grave to visit 
me with his malediction, if I contributed in anything to the 
sorrows and sufferings of the dear lady's passage through a 
world unworthy of her ! Besides, my presence in London is 
absolutely necessary in preparing the pleadings and preliminaries 
of a decision in my favour in the Ecclesiastical Courts. I think 
there can be no doubt I shall have one, if there be one spark of 
justice or of humanity in the breasts of the judges there ! which 
one would fain hope, dearest, even though, of course, in those 
courts they represent all the oldest and rustiest prejudices of 
the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical system, framed with the view 
of exalting the Papacy in supremacy over every human right 
and privilege ! By the by, perhaps my poor father was not so 



224 matjleverer's divorce. 

very frivolous in his objections to Puseyism after all ! Perhaps 
those flowers, and golden crucifixes, and embroidered copes 
march before the sanbenitos of the Inquisition ! 

"I have another pressing and predominant motive to convey 
me to London without delay. I must earn my own living. 
Not a penny for any other purpose but the expenses of this 
suit will I receive from the generosity even of that most 
generous of men . that natural nobleman . your father ! I 
have only seven pounds, thirteen shillings, and a few half- 
pence to begin the world on ! But my own wants are very 
moderate, and I have good hope that even the poor abilities 
I possess may be turned to account in that great mart of all 
things . of kingdoms and penny-whistles ! And I would fain 
preserve myself from what would be to me the greatest of 
miseries . dependence upon the charity of even the wealthiest 
and the most munificent of friends ! You will, perhaps, 
wonder how. Men have certainly taken unto themselves 
almost all the lucrative occupations of life . the manufacture, 
the sale of everything. Do they not even make baby-linen 
now?. the cure of bodies and the cure of souls (how they cure 
them !), alike ? But they have not yet taken to themselves the 
sole wielding of the goosequill ! Of course they will not admit 
niuoh merit in any female composition. You know it is an 
established truth that only men can write anything that 
requires reach or soar of the mind ! Only men, for example, 
possess that profound knowledge of human nature . (if they 
consider women part of it, what funny things they make of us 
in their writings ! all cither simpletons or monsters !). that 
profound knowledge of human nature necessary to the drama- 
tist, or the historian, or the poet in general, or the . this, that, 
and the other ! _ Whatever is expansive in intellectual vision 
and power, glorious in imagination, subtle in wit, overswaying 
in eloquence . I admit are theirs! But they have not yet 
decided that we are absolute idiots, and incapable of putting 
words together in an occasionally pleasing and attractive form. 
I am going to try my hand at this art. I shall not starve these 
three months, at ten shillings a week, even if I fail ! But I 
will not fail . as Lady Macbeth observed, in a more perilous 
emergency ! At any rate you shall hear constantly of my 
progress ; and before I look out for Chatterton's apothecary . 
(but the worthy man must long since have followed his poor 
customer !). I will write you word. Meanwhile, do not send 
me a single sou. I will not accept charity, dearest ! and when 
I do, rather from the parish than from Mr. Pomeroy's resources ! 
And you have unhappily. but it is not too late, perhaps, in 
some way to repair the evil. not secured the right of calling 
one penny of your own, your own ! Do not be concerned for 
me ! London is the best place in the world to be poor in ! And 
in another point we are suited to one another : there are so 



EX-TEXEBKIS. 2'2-i 

many miserable people in it, that one more or less is never 
either counted or missed ! 

" After all, what has happened may be all foe the best . 
as the favourite of the man who was my husband, Dr. Pangloss, 
in Candide, is wont to observe. I don't know that I was made 
exactly for the frowsy life a country parson's spouse. I was 
beginning to grow very ;verytiredof it ! How I used to sit, count- 
ing those death's dominoes stuck upright in the churchyard of 
Llanhowel, musing vainly over a dream I once had . a dream 
of my girlhood. that I would be the first woman who by sheer 
force of merit obtained a tomb in "Westminster Abbey ! A dull 
and dusty finish after all ! I think I would now rather enjoy 
myself a little alive ! It is certain I was growing too dismal for 
good at Llanhowel. My thoughts, like an unnatural progeny, had 
begun to gnaw at the dugs that gave them nutriment : in brief, 
I imagine I was going mad ! Not the kind of madness you put 
in strait-waistcoats ; but one you can't, and that works very 
rational-seeming mischief ! I tell you, I am better gone : I 
shall breathe freelier in a great city ! The restless friction of 
an innumerable movement is necessary for my moral well-being, 
I am persuaded now ! Oh, no, my dearest friend ! whatever I 
was made for . and I confess I have very little notion myself 
what ! . I am afraid it was not to pickle walnuts, and praise 
my daughters to the squire ! I wish the country were invaded, 
and needed a Joan of Arc : you should see if I would not give 
it one ! . A good deal cracked, you must allow, am I not, to 
prate so ? 

" I have but little more, I think, to say as present. It would 
be so superfluous to assure you of my constant and unvarying 
love and devotion to yourself, and in all that concerns you !. 
and such assurances come with suspicious fervour from the 
unfortunate ! I know that I can safely commend to you the 
care of my reputation, should any scandalous tongue assail it in 
conjunction with these late disastrous events : and as I do not 
doubt the malignity of men, andihe fidelity of their co-partnery 
against our sex! for the purposes of refutation, I relea.se you 
from your promises of secrecy as to my real condition and treat- 
ment at Llanhowel ! You may tall to all the world . to all who 
ask it. that I was beaten more cruelly than a disobedient 
hound by my ' natural protector !' . disgraced, traduced, be- 
trayed in every possible form ! I may even need your kind 
testimony in the suit I am to prosecute . your evidence of the 
dreadful maltreatment to which I was subjected ! You will 
gladly afford it me, will you not, dearest of sisters rather than 
kindest of friends f" 

There was a postscript to this long epistle, the skilful drift of 
which I did not at the moment appreciate. It ran thus: "If 
I had time, I would venture to express a few words of regret 
that poor Eronwen Suett should remain under the tutelage of 

Q 



226 matjleteree's divorce. 

Madame Le Crampon ! I have some reasons now to think her 
flirtation with Luxmoor not altogether so platonic as at one 
time I believed ! I have lighted on some epistles when I was 
packing after his capture . as well as that atrocious will . which 
seem to me to place the matter out of doubt ! You shall 
yourself judge . if you deem it worth the trouble . when we 
meet again." 

Scarlatt insisted on seeing this letter, and its perusal con- 
firmed him in all his suspicions. The sudden resolution taken 
. the air of independence and determination with wbich it was 
announced . my father's extraordinary interest in the affair . 
" the cruel way he prejudged poor Luxmoor's case, by refusing 
bail, which he (Scarlatt) would have been quite ready to give, 
so convinced was he that it was all a trumped-up scandal !" 
. . every word in the letter seemed to confirm his preconceived 
idea ! His comments were of the most exasperated kind ! 
Lord Mauleverer, he was convinced, and Mrs. Luxmoor, bad 
arrived at some pretty mutual understanding during this 
long interview at Llanhowel ! He had ascertained his lordship 
and she were shut up together more than two bours, with all 
the machinery of tears and lamentations in full play . after 
Luxmoor's committal ! But he would take care to spoil 
her work ! . As to her humbug of refusing charity . what did 
she call the large sums he bad himself advanced, on various 
occasions, to her husband ? Had sbe no share in them? How 
did they live until they got Llanhowel ? was I not always 
asking money for them from him ? who paid all the expenses 
of the trip in Scotland ? . He saw through it all. She knew how 
tired Lord Mauleverer was of the submission and wo-begone 
resignation of my mother ! No doubt she had persuaded him 
she was just the kind of woman he had been disappointed in 
obtaining in his first wife ! (He spoke of my mother as if she 
was already dead !) Men had these cheating phantoms to lure 
them into the commission of matrimony, as well as women, he 
was sure ! On his part, Lord Mauleverer was just the sort of 
object she had been all her life craving after : a peer, wealthy : 
one whose prejudices it amused her daring and versatile genius 
to overcome ! But . and it was still the burden of Scarlatt's 
lay . he would thwart her yet ! 

I confess I did not quite like the tone and tenor of my epistle, 
apart from Scarlatt's interpretations. There really pervaded it 
an air of assertion and equality to which I was little accustomed 
from Sophia ! Her expressions breathed such a spirit of rest- 
lessness, discontent, defiance . I know not what of turbulent 
and challenging ! She had no reason indeed to be very content ! 
. but while I thoroughly comprehended, and would have aided, 
by any means in my power, her resolution of breaking from her 
yokefellow in the galley-chain, I confess I was shocked at 
Sophia's pretty clearly hinted purpose to form another and im- 



EX-TENEBEIS. 227 

mediate connection as a consequence and aim of her liberation ! 
The allusion to the " hundred bright-branded chevaliers" re- 
called the painful circumstances under which the expression 
was used by young Ap Howel ! And though I repudiated the 
base notion that Sophia could have formed any such projects as 
those imputed to her, on my father, I so far acted on the suppo- 
sition, that I was about to destroy her letter when Scarlatt 
declared that the numerous warm eulogiums it contained on 
Lord Mauleverer were inserted with a view to being brought 
under his observation. But he begged me to keep it rather as 
evidence, at some future period, of the deceitful plans she had 
formed, and of her craftiness of nature, which I still refused to 
credit ! Accordingly I put it by in a small inlaid cabinet, 
where I kept my most valuable writings, without drawing any 
inference from the particular notice Scarlatt certainly took of 
the place of deposit. 

He lost no time in his projects of counteraction, it must be 
admitted. The very next day, Madame Le Crampon received 
information of the imputations against her caractere in 
Sophia's letter, and arrived at Mauleverer, in a. state of 
extraordinary furor, to "demand audience" to vindicate it. 
I had some curiosity to hear what she could say, and granted 
what she required. And indeed, if I had not been most 
thoroughly prepossessed in favour of Sophia, and against my 
informant, the tales she told me of the artifices by which the 
former had "seduced the affections of that unfortunate man, 
le pauvre Luxmoor," from herself, would have stirred my 
indignation and even abhorrence. Madame Le Crampon 
laboured under the delusion, apparently, that Luxmoor was in 
reality strongly attached to her, when " this woman, without 
honour and without pudicity," arrived to dispute a heart 
which was tout a lui until that disastrous moment. Nay, 
Madame was convinced that the " poor professeur's " drinking, 
and consequent misconduct, had altogether arisen from dis- 
covering too late what a loss he had sustained in the change 
he was cajoled into making. Finally, I gathered incidentally 
from her incoherent effusions, that she intended to astonish 
the world, and Luxmoor himself, by an unprecedented act of 
devotion to him now, in his " desperation and despair." She 
would "let see, like the children before Solomon," who had 
really and truly loved him . for himself alone. " She who had 
deserted him in chains, in captivity, in a dungeon, or she 
who " . she left the sentence unfinished. But shortly after 
I heard she had resigned her situation at Plas Newydd, and 
had gone no one knew whither. 

Sophia, however, was better informed. In a subsequent 
letter she wrote me, she said she ascertained for a fact that 
Madame Le Crampon had actually betaken herself to console 
Luxmoor in his imprisonment. " Why not ? " she added, 

Q2 



228 HATTLEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

"What is more usual than to see phosphor on any putrid 
body ? Madame Le Crampon's ' purple light of love ' is even 
such, and eo other; though I dare say she fancies she is giving 
the ' most noble example of a touching devotion,' in the stvle 
of Josephine to Napoleon at Elba, deserted by Marie Louise." 

Scarlatt, who was present at my interview with Madame 
Le Crampon, took unusual pains, though apparently quite by 
chance, to communicate even an exaggerated repetition of all 
the particulars of her statement before Lord Mauleverer. 
But his lordship's only comment was, turning to me, " I am 
quite of your girlish opinion now, Hugh-Helena ! and your 
ex-gouvernante must be one of the most scandalous and rotten- 
hearted of Parisiennes . which is a corruption of some emi- 
nence, let me assure you, Mr. Pomeroy, if you have not drawn 
the conclusion yourself from observation on your foreign 
travels." 



CHAPTER XXIV 

LITERATURE AND LAW. 

SoniiA's first letters to me from town really almost dismayed 
me, from their tone of exuberant . indeed wild and lurid 
gaiety. It seemed to me too like the play of lightning- 
nickering with its wings of flame over the sky, but ready to 
descend, and blast where it touched . a kind of mirth that not 
unfrequently covers the deepest anguish of a proud, spirit, 
when it exists in conjunction with constitutional vivacity, and 
sprightliness of imagination and wit. But I have no doubt 
she expressed her real sentiments . though at times in a very 
fantastic, Madge "Wildfire style. when she boasted the hap- 
piness she found in her liberation from the society of her 
dreadful husband, and the carking cares and discontents which 
had ever accompanied her connection with him. The weight 
of a mountain, she declared, was taken off her spirits. She 
had been wont to tremble at every approaching footstep, at 
the sound of every stranger's voice, lest they should bear to 
her the announcement of some such catastrophe as that which 
had at last fallen on Luxmoor, through his own villany. The 
hours of suspense and miserable anticipation she had spent, 
expecting his often and unaccountably delayed return, could 
not be reckoned, but had long been rasping in secret at the 
most delicate and powerful springs in the mechanism of her 
being. Now she was freed from all this, she compared herself 



1ITEEATTJEE AND LAW. 229 

to the Ancient Mariner, when the albatross fell from his neck, 
" like lead into the sea." It was true that her albatross was 
still fastened to her neck by a strongly twisted plummet line ; 
but she cherished the most sanguine expectations that a full 
and perfect release was assured to her as soon as she could get 
the proper machinery for a severance in action. 

She consulted some of the most eminent practitioners of the 
Arches Court, to whom Lord Mauleverer had given her a 
recommendation, immediately on her arrival in London. And 
these learned, personages, after a thorough investigation (so 
she stated) of the particulars of her case, gave it as their most 
decided opinion that it was impossible the Ecclesiastical Court, 
to which she must apply in the first instance, could refuse her 
the degree of justice it was in its power to concede, namely, a 
divorce a mensd et thoro, as they called it . from bed and board 
. on the united accusations of adultery and cruelty, which she 
was prepared to substantiate against her husband. The eccle- 
siastical courts, true to the traditions of their origin, adhering 
to the papistical doctrine of the indissolubility of marriage, 
could grant no more than an unmeaning decree to this effect, 
which was yet a necessary preliminary to a demand on the 
legislature for a complete and substantial release . a divorce 
d vinculo. The House of Lords . or rather one of the old for- 
inulist law lords of a former generation . had so decreed it ; and 
yet by no means took the Ecclesiastical Court on its word, 
but tried the whole case over again before its own tribunal ! 
Sophia's lawyers, however, strongly recommended that no pro- 
ceedings should be taken in the Case until Luxmoor's trial was 
over ; a decision against him, in such a matter, by a criminal 
court of justice, being likely to remove some of the difficulties 
in the way of the proof of her allegations, and to establish the 
strongest points of the case in her favour. 

This event was, therefore, awaited by Sophia with an 
impatience of hope too atrociously justified . though, perhaps, 
evincing a degree of settled vindictiveness, I had not 
hitherto deemed her seemingly mild and variable tempera- 
ment capable of. 

Scarlatt watched over our correspondence, and continued his 
suspicious interpretations of Sophia's part in it. And, in fact, 
some circumstances presented themselves in the affair that sat 
not quite easily on my own mind. 

I had already sent to Sophia a sum of money which my 
mother and myself imagined, in spite of her prohibition, would 
be found useful to her in her forlorn position. But Lord Mau- 
leverer came to place a larger one in my hands, requesting me 
to forward it as from myself to Mrs. Luxmoor, since she would 
accept no pecuniary assistance, saving directly in her suit, 
from him ! And he certainly took a very remarkable interest 
in her letters, of the arrival of which he seemed always aware ; 



230 maulevebee's divoece. 

and he often requested me to read over to him such parts as 
I thought would give him the hest notion how my " hrilliant 
friend, and his own talented protegee" . so he now usually- 
styled Sophia . was getting on in London. He seemed not 
pleased when I suppressed any portion of these overflows of 
confidence ; though I never complied with Scarlatt's injunc- 
tions to omit the frequent and really eloquent and enthusiastic 
eulogiums of himself, with which Sophia's letters at this period 
were all aglow. On his part, Lord Mauleverer launched into 
constant panegyrics of the grace, and wit, and good sense of 
my correspondent's compositions, and the courage and ability 
with which she was following out her plans on the scene of 
action. And Sophia had in reality a peculiar excellence in 
letter- writing, and could communicate some of the best quali- 
ties of her lively, laughing, conversational tone to the flow of 
her epistolary style. In consequence of all this, Scarlatt would 
have it I was merely made the medium of a correspondence 
between my father and Mrs. Luxmoor, which otherwise they 
would have been rather at a loss to carry on without exciting 
observation. But he succeeded only in harassing and! irri- 
tating me with what I conceived to be the extreme injustice 
of his suspicions. More especially when he pointed out to me, 
as a, confirmation of his assertions, Sophia's constant and 
seemingly most affectionate inquiries after my mother's health. 
I could not believe in the possibility of such unfeeling duplicity 
and betrayal. 

The money I transmitted to Sophia was returned to me, with 
many thankful acknowledgments, but with an evident de- 
termination to refrain from accepting any pecuniary benefit at 
our hands. Yet the account she gave of the progress of her 
literary speculations, to which she had now some leisure to 
devote herself, was anything but encouraging. 

It appeared she had a novel already completed when she left 
Llahhowel, which she considered in a state fit for publication, 
and she placed her main hopes of procuring herself an inde- 
pendent existence in the success of this work. But now she 
gave me ludicrous, though in my thought, at the same time, 
almost tragically pathetic accounts, of her toils and disasters in 
the attempt to find a publisher willing to undertake the pre- 
sentation of this_ novel to the world. There was really some- 
thing very affecting, and calculated to inspire compassion and 
respect of the deepest in the laughing anguish . the brave 
bearing-up and undiminished vitality of hope . which per- 
vaded Sophia's narratives of her many mortifying failures 
among the London publishers. I think, if I remember rightly, 
this work, which afterwards achieved so signal and permanent 
a success, was rejected by nearly the whole round of the 
publishing magnates. Yet she told me the story of each suc- 
cessive discomfiture. described her interviews and ingenious 



LITERATURE AND LAW. 231 

little artifices to obtain attention . in the most amusing manner 
possible. Sophia had an extraordinary lively perception of the 
ludicrous and characteristic : it seemed as if she could penetrate 
the secret of the most veiled and crafty natures at a glance, 
and describe them in a word ! Her acute perception pierced 
below every species of pretentious and false _ external, and 
struck quite to the core of things, with an intuitive power and 
infallibility of aim that only belong to a very high order of 
the faculty with which I think Sophia was peculiarly endowed 
..the dramatic. This gave to her the incalculable advantage, 
not only of seeing from her own points of view, but from those 
of all the surrounding dramatis personce, whom her contriving 
and restless genius compelled to accept parts in that involved 
drama of real life, in which she was at once the creative spirit 
and principal performer. 

I often laughed, while tears came to my eyes, over these 
epistles. After all, there was so much that was magnanimous, 
self-relying, unconquerable, in this phase of Sophia's career, 
that doubtless something of the heroic must be admitted as an 
element in her strangely compounded nature. In spite of these 
multiplied failures, never for an instant did it seem to occur to 
her that her composition was worthy of its disastrous fortunes, 
or that it would not ultimately achieve a triumph. She ascribed 
them, with unquailing good spirits and resolve, to quite apart 
circumstances : the poverty-stricken lodgings from which she 
was obliged to date ; her sex . it was so hard to persuade men 
of the existence of mind in a woman ; once, to the fact of her 
marching into a fashionable publisher's shocked establishment 
with her manuscript under her arm, forgetting, in her absorp- 
tion, to put down the streaming umbrella in her hand, which 
confessed her to be, yea, even cab-less ! Neither did the biblio- 
polic worthies themselves allege much tangible objection against 
the work offered to their acceptance, which they yet seemed 
unanimous in rejecting, excepting that there was something new 
and queer about " the thing" they did not like. They could not 
say exactly what it was . but it was not written in the way Lady 
This, That, or the Other (it was the time of the supremacy of 
fashionable slip-slop) "wrote things." " People," commented 
Sophia, " who have no more idea of the realities of men and 
manners, than Chinese porcelain painters. But what in reality 
these gentlemen want, is a fine name to put in the title-page, 
and I have none to offer them. I am sick of my own, and hope 
to be rid of it soon. I don't want to go down to posterity by 
the disgraced name of the villain now in Glamorgan jail. I 
told one of them, who twirled my package over a little dubiously 
as he returned it, that if he chose he could publish it under 
some mannish name or other, in order to justify the writer's 
possession of common sense, and of some little understanding 
of the real waysey-paseys of this best of all possible worlds. 



232 SIATjLEVElU'.ll'S DIVORCE. 

So be shut up like an oyster at once, and knew my book would 
not, could not, should not suit him, happen what might ! . . 
Another of their songs is that, as I have published nothing 
previously, they are afraid there is no opening at this moment 
for an entirely new author. As if to be a stale old one, would 
be such a recommendation !" 

Her nearest approach to success appeared to be with some 
fourth or iifth-rate dealer in the light ware of literature, who 
after infinite hemming and hawings, and wailings over the bad- 
ness of the times, and evil estate of the entire publishing trade, 
Avithout exception, generously offered to undertake the risk 
and expense of a small edition of the work, on condition that he 
received all the profits . if any. that might arise. Wofully 
adding, that the almost certain loss the author must sustain. 
Sophia confessed but for the last contingency, she would gladly 
have accepted any means of producing her work for the public 
judgment. But with commendable pride and resolution, she 
refused to incur a responsibility which she might not by her 
own independent efforts be enabled to meet. and the novel 
was at last put aside altogether in despair. 

The indefatigable aspirant then betook herself to another 
course of action. She wrote a play . a melodrama . under- 
standing that no other more elevated class of dramatic com- 
position found favour with modern audiences . and which she 
imagined well suited for one of the London companies. She 
presented it to the manager . but there also she was destined to 
be disappointed. He liked the play itself very much, he con- 
fessed . but his principal actor, on whose abilities he chiefly 
relied, would not perform in a piece in which any other cha- 
racter was likely to attract, in however slight degree, the public 
attention. If, however, she could entirely extinguish the female 
part (which, he must say, he himself thought ridiculously 
prominent), and deprive ail the other small parts of any kind of 
rivalry with the one he thought might possibly suit that 
eminent gentleman, Mr. Fitz lloscius, the manager promised 
to take the subject again into consideration. 

On this meagre hope Sophia performed the mutilating feat 
required of her, to the best of her ability, and returned with 
the maimed product . only to find that meanwhile a successful 
new piece bad bcen_ produced at Paris, so that of course an 
English one was entirely out of the question. The manager, 
however, as some indemnification for loss of time and gain of 
trouble, handed his applicant six little Parisian pieces to trans- 
late, as literally as iwssible, as he intended to select a new and 
original one out of the number, of his own composition, being 
himself an admired writer for the stage, though he lamented 
he was not so much of a French scholar as it was absolutely 
necessary an English dramatic author should be in these times. 
Nevertheless Sophia, not liking the titles of one or two of 
these ingenious models, declined the task. 



LITEKATiniE AND IAW. 233 

She was now in a maimer compelled to turn her attention in 
another direction. Cheap periodical literature was at this period 
taking its first decisive impulse towards popularity ; and she 
managed to become regularly engaged as a tale-writer in one of 
these miscellanies for the million. At a very moderate salary, 
and with an infinitude of drudgery annexed ! But nothing 
apparently could exceed Sophia's satisfaction and triumph in 
this first permanent employment, and the prospect of the means 
of maintaining herself independently. And she often ex- 
pressed herself to me delighted to write for "the people," so 
frank, so credulous, so natural in all save that they required a 
" little " exaggeration in everything, and liked the colours to be 
laid on " perhaps a trifle glaringly," without any of the finer 
hues and gradations ! But how honest, how kindly, how chival- 
rously noble and tender-hearted this good, rough, popular public 
was ! What a yearning it had for love, still love ! and what 
infinite allowances it made ! How fearlessly might you set 
before it the coarsest of scene-painting, the most wild, incon- 
gruous, and even impossible inventions in character and events, 
provided only that you took care to show the whole under rapidly- 
changing and variable lights, and roared through your gigantic 
tubes with some resemblance to the human voice. -and always 
at the most vehement excitement pitch, whether of the tender 
and loving, or bellicose and stormy passions ! 

In spite, however, of my persevering inquiries, Sophia refused 
to inform me in which of these journals her compositions 
appeared. She would not, she said, suffer critics so refined to 
estimate her talent by these efforts. "Talk of out-Heroding Herod 
merely!" she exclaimed; "I do both the sexes equal justice. 
I out-Termagant Termagant too ! My women, dearest Mrs. 
Pomeroy, are such strange monstrosities of good and bad, that 
' as I live and am a Christian,' I am sure you would think 
I was mad in the one, and your noble father in the other ! His 
lordship does not, I am afraid, believe in Woman's goodness on 
so extraordinary a scale ! and you would not lend the least 
credit to my fables of their wonderful naughtiness when they 
are once ' set a-going ' on the wrong slide !" 

Sophia's literary affairs were in this condition when her de- 
testable husband's trial came on, a few months after the perpe- 
tration of his last offences. He came out of the affair much as 
was expected, yet he seemed to lack no means of procuring the 
best legal assistance : zealous moneyed friends evidently sup- 
ported him in the background. Moreover, the man himself, 
after so long an interval of enforced sobriety, had recovered the 
natural sharpness and craftiness of his intellectual faculties, 
and spared no exertions to save himself from the punishment he 
had merited. And perhaps there were other than legal 
promptings in the course of defence adopted by Luxmoor. I 
was not ignorant . though it was an exceedingly disagreeable 



234 MATTLEVEEEfi'S DITOECE. 

knowledge to me . that Scarlatt repeatedly visited his friend in 
his captivity ! So when the scandalous affair came on for trial, 
Luxmoor endeavoured to break the force of the proofs against 
him by asserting that his wife could prove his innocence, but 
that she had joined in a conspiracy of his disaffected Welsh 
parishioners against him, . who disliked him for being an Eng- 
lishman unable to preach to them in their own dialect ! And her 
motives were so plainly asserted to be of the most discreditable 
and even criminal order, that the presiding judge interrupted the 
plea to declare that he was not there to try Mrs. Luxmoor for a 
breach of her eonjugal fidelity, but her husband for one of the 
vilest offences possible against the purity and happiness of 
society, by which female innocence was assailed in its earliest 
development, under every circumstance that could exaggerate 
the crime ! 

In spite, therefore, of all his own ingenuity, and the laboured 
eloquence of his counsel, Luxmoor was found guilty. But this 
sentence Was probably mitigated by the doubts he contrived to 
throw in the case, . above all, by the supposition raised, that 
means of violent intoxication . under the influence of which he 
was admitted to be no better than a madman . had been pur- 
posely placed in his way. And to this must be added the excel- 
lence of the character he received, it grieves me to declare, from 
my husband and the elder Suett. Not that I believe either of 
them appeared very voluntarily in the affair ; for as Madame 
Le Crampon was the agent employed to convey Luxmoor's 
entreaties for their countenance in this manner, I have little 
doubt she was furnished with arguments, the cogency of which 
neither of them thought it convenient to dispute. Luxmoor was 
only sentenced to six months' imprisonment; but he was now 
branded publicly with his infamy, and, as a matter of course, 
was deprived of his living. So that when he should come forth 
into the world again, he was apparently deprived of all resource, 
even in his undoubtedly great mental powers and acquirements, 
by the irredeemable ruin of his character. 

Still Sophia was not satisfied with this catastrophe. " It is 
about as adequate to his guilt, as if you should condemn a devil 
to a fortnight in a warming-pan!" she wrote to me. "Yet, 
God be praised ! my sprrow at the smallness of the punishment 
satisfies me that, happen what may henceforward, Luxmoor has 
lost the power to injure me ! No doubt he will come out of his 
dungeon willing to do me any further wrong in his scope. But 
if he came like a panther churning for slaughter, he cannot hurt 
me now, except physically _ / And, physically, I should hope 
that even an English wife is not quite placed out of the protec- 
tion of the laws ! He cannot hurt me now, I say, but in the 
body ! I no longer love him ! I wonder how I could ever have 
loved him . I hate him ! I hate him . so that if it would not 
endanger my own life, I could actually . I almost think I could 



LITEKATUEE AND TAW. 235 

ictually destroy him with my own hand. kill him ! But I hope 
soon to cease to be a wife, and then, in no way, need I fear 
the monster ! For man can only procure himself a slave in 
England by marriage ; and when my marriage with Luxmoor 
is dissolved, I shall cease, I conclude, to be exposed to the 
worst indignities . stripes, spurns, the most contemptuous and 
japricious ill-usage to be imagined . as one !" 

It was shortly after this event that parliament assembled, 
xnd my father and husband went to London to attend it. 

I did not accompany them. My mother's languishing state 
)f health rendered it impossible for me to think of leaving her 
for any length of time at this juncture. Indeed her condition 
was so precarious . so frequently threatened the worst conse- 
quences . that one would have said, considering for how many 
pears my father had not thought his senatorial duties of suffi- 
cient consequence to command more than his services by proxy, 
there was ample reason to excuse his personal attendance at 
this critical period. But he manifested the most eager deter- 
mination, and even a remarkable degree of impatience, to 
ippear in his place in parliament on the occasion. To be sure, 
events of momentous political consequence were in agitation, 
and' the great Corn Law struggle, in which Lord ilauleverer 
took vehement part, was expected to be brought to a decisive 
issue. So I could lull myself with the firm assurance that this 
was my father's sole motive in desiring so earnestly to make 
the journey to London, in spite of all Scarlatt's renewed and 
very different surmises. 

As for my mother, she was too much accustomed to be neg- 
lected and laid aside on almost any other consideration to 
uomplain of this determination. She even wished me greatly 
to accompany my husband to London, observing with the most 
affecting simplicity "that she had not lived so long alone, 
without having learned, she trusted, to die alone." But I 
would not leave her " to die alone ! " . I must unwillingly add, 
that at parting, Scarlatt shocked me inexpressibly by entreat- 
ing me " to keep my mother alive, whatever I did, for that, he 
feared, was our only chance against that woman, if she should 
get her divorce . and he did not see well how it could be pre- 
vented." I remained incredulous. To say truth, I could not 
discern in Sophia so irresistible a power of fascination as my 
husband seemed to attribute to her, and based my security a 
good deal on his singularly exaggerated notion (as I then 
thought it) of the influence she was likely to exercise by its 
means. 



236 mauleverer's divorce. 



CHAPTER XXV- 

correspondence. 

I had now two London correspondents, and occasionally a 
third, for my father soon grew discontented with my poor 
mother's really physical incapacity to answer his letters, and 
as the task was delegated to me, he finally addressed his com- 
mnnications directly to me. 

Very little of this correspondence was on particularly agree- 
able subjects. But Sophia's communications were at least 
destitute of annoyance and offence to myself personally, 
excepting that she wrote to beg me to request Mr. Pomeroy not 
to honour her with a call, if he had any intention of the kind, 
as she resided where she could not wish to receive a visitor 
whom she had known under better circumstances, and who was 
accustomed to the opulence of Plas Ncwydd, and the state and 
order observed at Mauleverer Castle. I could easily figure to 
myself another reason for this reserve in the tlaming good 
character Scarlatt had thought proper to bestow on her dreadful 
husband at his trial, and which had doubtless proved of con- 
siderable advantage to him. 

It was somewhat amusing to me . though the diversion was 
of a paiuful admixture . to compare the varied and sometimes 
opposed tone of this triple correspondence. My father men- 
tioned Sophia only occasionally, and without_ apparent stress 
on any of the slight particulars he communicated. He had 
seen her : she looked excessively ill, and pale, and thin ; was 
certainly fagged to death with her absurd literary labours, in 
which she yet persisted with the utmost obstinacy, without 
considering them worthy even of acknowledgment. Soon 
after, it dropped incidentally, he had interested himself in 
procuring her a publisher for her novel, and had succeeded. He 
had dipped into it : it was really a production of remarkable 
talent, and of astonishing knowledge of the world in so young 
a woman. A little too florid and high-coloured . a fault of ail 
young writers of genius . in its tone, perhaps. This subject 
was then entirely dismissed, and he spoke of Sophia only in 
connection with her suit for a divorce : the ecclesiastical court 
was dragging on at an intolerably slow rate, it appeared. He 
was doing what he could to accelerate the progress. He had 
taken some trouble to secure her the services of two of the first 
advocates in Doctors' Commons; who, as well as her proctors 
and his own solicitors, were unanimously of opinion that the 



COUKESrONDENCE. 237 

divorce could not possibly be refused. Finally, he announced 
that the cause would come on shortly for judgment, -without 
seemingly attaching any very peculiar interest to the circum- 
stance, saving as the fortunes of my friend might be supposed 
to interest me. My father's ideas, to judge from his letters, 
were chiefly turned on political matters ; and it was unfor- 
tunately soon very easy for me to discern that anything but 
unanimity of opinion upon these prevailed between Lord 5Iau- 
leverer and the new member of parliament, his son-in-law. 

The truth is, the anticipated tergiversation of Sir liobert 
Feel on the Corn Law question was already agitatirjg the 
political world. The probability of this parliamentary coup 
d'etat was already a subject of general discussion ; and while 
my father remained immoveably fixed in his conservative 
opinions, Scarlatt seemed well inclined to march over to the 
new camp with the revolted "Wallenstein of the party under 
whose auspices he had entered parliament. 

This new cause of disruption, joined to so many others 
themselves never thoroughly soldered, were surely ample to 
account for the increasing coolness, amounting gradually to 
open alienation and repulse, of which Scarlatt complained in 
his letters to me, in his relations with his father-in-law. They 
both resided in the family town house, but after awhile came 
hardly to meet one another, saving at times when it could not 
well be helped, at some formal meal in each other's company. 
Finally, when the Peel Cabinet disclosed its mystery, and a 
discussion between them on the subject revealed the conclu- 
sions they had formed, Scarlatt and his father-in-law appeared 
confessedly in a contrariety of political sentiment not unlikely 
to introduce its venom into their domestic relations. And yet 
my husband persisted in imputing the animosity maturing 
between them entirely to the influence of Sophia. He cherished 
an opinion (I know not how formed) that but for this he could, 
by force of his own arguments and eloquence, have won over 
his father-in-law to his own and Sir Robert Peel's policy of 
expediency ; an adhesion to which, he pretty plainly intimated 
to me (surely with singular bad taste to a woman, who, although 
a wife, was also a daughter !), would secure his elevation to the 
peerage conjointly with myself, " whenever a certain deplorable 
event should take place." 

I perceived, and intensely regretted, that these two alien 
beings were thus thrown into constant attrition and concussion, 
without any of the breaks I had hitherto been enabled to in- 
terpose between them to soften their collisions. But it grew 
daily more and more impossible for me to leave my mother, in 
her now visibly almost exhausted and dying state. 

Scarlatt continued to write to me with the utmost exaspera- 
tion against Sophia ; and his insinuations against her conduct 
as respected Lord Mauleverer, though guarded, grew daily more 



238 mauleverer* s divorce. 

distressing and mortifying- to me, without being supported by a 
tittle of evidence. He confessed that he believed my father 
and Mrs. Luxmoor never met but at the office of his own and 
her solicitors. But there they did meet so very frequently ! 
He had once himself popped in there, quite by accident, on 
some business of his own, when he knew Lord Mauleverer was 
in the place, and Mrs. Luxmoor also, because she had passed 
him as she went in. But she wore a thick veil, and pretended 
not to notice him ; and a good time after, the door of the 
private room into which she was shown happening to open, he 
saw her and his lordship sitting quite familiarly chair by chair, 
with a lot of lawyers around them, evidently discussing some 
legal document before them with equal and most earnest into- 
rest! Then what could be infened from a nobleman of his 
lordship's pride and aristocratic feeling on all other occasions, 
actually handing out one of the shabbiest-dressed women he 
had seen for some time, through the open streets, to an omnibus ? 
And that Lord Mauleverer could condescend so far to Mrs. 
Luxmoor he had himself witnessed at the termination of this 
very interview . having a curiosity to observe how long it would 
last . from an opposite "coffee-house ! They came out, talking 
to one another with the utmost cordiality, and evident marks of 
mutual and vivid interest ; and though he could perceive that 
Mrs. Luxmoor declined the offer of his lordship's arm, they 
shook hands like warm and attached friends, loth to part, on 
the very steps of the vulgar vehicle which "the creature's 
poverty" obliged her to resort to ! 

With some obscurity of threat, Scarlatt assured me, in a 
subsequent letter, that he would teach "Madam" yet to re- 
member him, though she affected to have forgotten him so 
completely ! 

There could not be the smallest doubt what she was looking 
forward to ! he added. ¥o man could for a moment believe 
that a woman so attached to the pomps and pleasures of the 
world, could really be content with writing horrible trash in 
penny publications, at a few shillings a week, and living in a 
garret at Kentish Town ! For he had taken the trouble to 
ascertain where she did live, and what she wrote ! She was 
only running back, to Jump higher . trying to affect people, 
forsooth, with the contrast between her merits and her destiny, 
and excite admiration by a display of independence and proud 
reliance on her talents ! As to talents, he left me to judge of 
them. He sent me some of the numbers of her composition, 
and triumphantly invited me to give my opinion on them ! 

Now I confess that, in my judgment, those vast and rude 
cartoons, Sophia's earliest productions, were more instinct with 
the power and creative force of a realiy_ popular genius, than 
the finest and most elaborate of her finished cabinet composi- 
tions of later times. And notwithstanding these popular legends 



CORKESPONDENCE. 239 

of hers abounded in wild and improbable adventure . in the 
most outrageously sudden and tremendous vicissitudes of fate 
. I do not know but that their bold, unhesitating confidence in 
the reader's belief, exercised a more powerful spell on the 
imagination than the artificial contrivance and arrangement of 
incident in the most elevated classes of fiction. And though 
the black and white in morals stood there as plainly and un- 
shadedly opposed as soot and snow with each other, I ain not, 
perhaps, wrong in thinking that the morality inculcated would 
better bear the test of a close analysis than all the fine-spun, 
self-entangling sophistries of sentiment and exaggerated virtues 
with which Sophia's writings have since familiarised the Eng- 
lish novel-reader. 

But of all things I am least anything when I am critical- 
Let these remarks go for what they are worth, under that 
admission. My attention was destined to be speedily turned 
to a subject involving interests that were, and ought to have 
been, more nearly affecting to me. Scarlatt wrote me word 
that he found it impossible to resist the cogency of the Peel 
arguments as to the necessity of a surrender of the Corn Laws, 
and that consequently his maiden speech would be in favour of 
their repeal. He proposed to make one last effort to induce his 
father-in-law to join him in the evolution of opinion. But he 
plainly intimated that if his lordship persisted in his "ex- 
ploded notions," he should not consider himself bound to 
adhere to them, but should speak and vote as his conscience 
and his duty to his country suggested. 

Scarlatt's next epistle informed me Lord 2-Iauieverer had 
given him a refusal in language he was quite certain that 
"most malicious" of women must have inspired, but that he 
should neither be exasperated into any unbecoming expression 
of his feelings in return, nor turned from the " path of duty 
plainly chalked out for_ him" by the untoward circum- 
stance of my father's lending ear to her malicious suggestions. 

In consequence of this resolution, and in spite of my repeated 
entreaties that he would at least make his vote a silent one, 
my husband's first appearance as a politician was in open 
renunciation of the sentiments of the constituency which had 
placed him in the position he occupied. 

As he was one of the earliest of the old conservative party 
to give in an adhesion to the new course of policy marked out 
by the leader of what had been the party of resistance, 
Scarlatt's maiden effort in parliament commanded great atten- 
tion. It made an uproar, in fact, being vehemently cried up 
by the_ new party, while it excited quite furious indignation 
and criticism on the part of those who looked upon the act as 
one of apostacy and desertion. These were the very words . 
nay, they were yet more severe . renegade and betrayal . my 
father applied in characterising the occasion for his indignation 



240 MATTLEVEEEE'S DITOECE. 

in a letter to me. And with those words Scarlatt continued 
long after to be more publicly assailed and persecuted. Even 
his sire at Plas Newydd was said not to be sparing in their 
application. But Scarlatt enjoyed notoriety as if it had been 
fame, and gave himself all the airs of a martyr to a great and 
enlightened cause, far in advance of weaker intelligences. 
And the success of this first effort unhappily puffed him up 
for life with the notion that he possessed an eloquence to put 
him on a level with the greatest orators of ancient or of 
modern times, and which entitled him to pretend to the highest 
honours in a State governed by parliamentary majorities. 

Scarlatt never believed, even after years of ineffectual efforts 
to follow up his success, that he owed the brilliancy of his 
debut in great measure to factitious circumstances of the 
moment. But it must be allowed the speech itself was a 
remarkable one, and condensed almost all the chief arguments 
and defences for the act of imitative tergiversation it an- 
nounced, with rare fluency and power of language. I have 
since heard that Luxmoor, from the depths of his captivity, 
assisted greatly in the composition of this harangue. But 
Scarlatt must not be denied his due share in the florid, though 
greatly overlaid ornamentation of the discourse, and praise for 
the extraordinary courage . my father designated it effrontery 
. with which he stood up for the first time in the House of 
Commons, and declared that " for the good of this great 
empire he had forgone all private and local considerations," 
and stood there to avow himself a convert to free-trade prin- 
ciples, and determined to vote for their application in the 
extinction of laws to support which, it could not be denied, he 
had been elevated to the place whence he made the declaration. 

The alienation between my father and husband produced by 
this political transformation in the latter, "almost amounted to 
an open renewal of hostilities, but did not quite, until the 
circumstance happened which I am now compelled to narrate. 

I continued my correspondence with Sophia, during this 
whole interval, without being enabled to detect in her commu- 
nications aught but the very faintest shadows of support to 
Scarlatt' s vehement suspicions. 

It is true she continued very warm in her praises of my 
father and of his goodness towards her. But had she not 
cause, without the necessity of ascribing any blameable motive 
to her or to him ? A poor creature so persecuted, so abandoned, 
so friendless in the world . raised from the very depths of 
hopelessness by a powerful protection . her life itself possibly 
saved by Lord Mauleverer's energetic and courageous inter- 
position,^ . indebted to him now for a prospect of fame and 
independence . what marvel if Sophia looked upon my father 
in the light of a superior being, endowed with almost super- 
natural attributes of generosity and goodness. those of a 
Meca3nas and of a St. George in one ? 



COEEESPONDENCE. 241 

Of fame and independence ! for Sophia wrote me word how, 
at his lordship's request, she had given him her oft-rejected 
manuscript for perusal . how he had pronounced it excellent 
for a first attempt . and how, finally, with a rare condescen- 
sion, he took upon himself the trouble of offering the work 
again to the fashionable publisher, who had in the first instance 
rejected, but now accepted it with scarcely a glance at the MS. ! 
Satisfied that whatever Lord Mauleverer approved must be 
excellent, this enlightened bibliopole in fact concluded an 
arrangement, on very advantageous terms, with the unknown 
authoress at once. Such was the literary influence of a coro- 
neted carriage, with silver harness on the steeds ! Apollo 
himself on Pegasus, Sophia assured me, would not have obtained 
anything like so deferential an acquiescence in his recommenda- 
tion. 

Then, again, as Sophia had always professed the deepest 
admiration and reverence for intellect, why should she not feel, 
and declare to his daughter, her perception and homage of the 
great talents of my father, so long consigned to obscurity by 
his own neglect and the misfortune that descended on the out- 
set of his career ? Was she bound always to remember that it 
was my husband's family that had stood in Lord Mauleverer's 
way to the highest eminence as a statesman, and that these 
exaggerations of my father's legitimate pretensions were so 
many renewed accusations against the Suetts ? 
_ I could not but myself acknowledge besides that Sophia had 
little reason to be studious of any harmful effects these sugges- 
tive eulogiums might have on the fortunes of my husband. 
She hardly ever indeed mentioned him ; but she often dwelt on 
the fact, that it was clear Luxmoor was abundantly supplied 
with money from some unknown quarter, in organizing his 
plans of defence against her suit, which it appeared he was 
determined to resist. Some of her own most special witnesses 
had been tampered with ; and but that she also was powerfully 
supported by the vigilance and zeal of well-paid agents, her 
whole cause might have gone to wreck on some of the rocks 
and reefs thus raised, where all at first seemed such smooth 
and deep-blue sailing. 

I do not suppose it was quite all for love . or for hate either 
. that Scarlatt lent this assistance to his worthless friend. 
Luxmoor was in possession, through his wife, of important 
secrets . threats of revealing which need not have been ex- 
plicitly made to compel my husband's adhesion to his cause. 
But it must be confessed Scarlatt had abundant incentives of 
his own to induce him to lend every aid in his power to the 
opposition raised to that wretch's luckless wife's project of 
divorce. 

At my earnest request, Sophia kept me constantly informed 
of the progress of her suit . if such a slow, lagging movement 

E 



212 llATTLEYEHEll'S DIVORCE. 

of events, obstructed at .every step by the most expensive and 
tedious technicalities of procedure it is possible to imagine, 
could be called progress. It was that of a snail over a wilder- 
ness of withered furze and briars. One of her principal diffi- 
culties, Sophia assured me, arose from the fact that, as soon as 
a woman becomes a wife in England, she is supposed instantly 
to pass into a state of nonentity . or at least of suspended vita- 
lity ; her whole existence and powers as a living and rational 
being are absorbed in those of the man, her husband. And it 
required a series of tangled and complicated evolutions to re- 
invest this nonentity with some portion of the functions of 
humanity, in order to enable it to make a demand to be released 
from endurance of the severest kinds of suffering animated 
and sentient existence could by possibility undergo and 
survive. 

The evidence of a great number of witnesses had to be taken, 
residing in remote and scattered directions . and this of course 
lengthened the proceedings very considerably, ecclesiastical 
law permitting evidence to be given, in the form of depositions 
and written affidavits, by persons at a distance, instead of 
peremptorily assembling the witnesses at a given day and hour, 
and confronting and comparing their testimonies. The accused 
and witnesses are not necessarily brought face to face in these 
courts, it appeared ; and the collisions which so often elicit truth 
are thus avoided . to the great promotion, no doubt, of the 
tranquillity of justice, and at whatever expense in other es- 
sentials. But in these antiquated courts, it is no wonder that 
Justice ascends the tribunal in soundless list slippers, and dozes 
often and long upon her easy-chair on it, amidst the undertoned 
buzz and murmur of her equally lethargic retinue. It was, 
however, a great convenience to me only to be obliged to go to 
Llandail' to give my testimony in the cruelty part of the Lux- 
moor case . for my mother's sake, who now showed unmistakc- 
able signs of an approaching catastrophe, in the decay in all 
the powers of existence fast falling on her. Not to mention 
that I was glad of the comparative privacy of this operation, 
from the aversion approaching to horror I had always enter- 
tained to appearing in any position of personal publicity. But 
the strangeness of the whole case, considering I was' a witness 
on behalf of the wife, was greatly increased by the intelligence 
I received shortly after, that Searlatt had received a citation to 
attend before the same court on the part of the defence. 

I wondered much . indeed I was made very uneasy by specu- 
lation on the subject . what advantage Luxmoor could hope to 
derive from any evidence Scarlatt could give. And this I was 
destined to ascertain very painfully, at no remote interval, from 
my husband himself. 

The heart-sickening delays and thwartings I have briefly 
alluded to were at length all apparently surmounted. In a 



CORRESPONDENCE. 2-13 

letter sparkling and bounding; with the most confident hopes of 
success and of approaching liberation, Sophia informed me that 
a day for the hearing of her cause was at last assigned, and 
that her fate would be decided in the course of the ensuing ten 
days. And I admit that I was not much gratilied by the con- 
clusion of the note, in which she begged me, with particular 
earnestness, to inform her of my dear mother's exact state and 
symptoms, and whether she might hope to come and receive her 
kind congratulations on the approaching joyful event, in 
person, without too much risk of causing her any dangerous 
agitation. 

Almost immediately after the receipt of this letter, Scarlatt 
presented himself, most unexpectedly to me, and to lis all, at 
Mauleverer. It was just after the passing of the Repeal Act, 
but I had no reason as yet to anticipate he would find it pos- 
sible to absent himself from the absorbing game in which he 
was a player, and whose final results were still rattling in the 
political dice-box. 

Scarlatt did not allow me to remain long in the flattering 
notion I perhaps at first entertained, that he had found it 
impossible longer to withstand a very natural wish . as I had 
now been for some time thinking it . to see his wife and children 
again after an absence of several months . the first that had 
ever been between us. 

In the first place he snatched up Sophia's letter, which I had 
happened to lay down as he entered, and commented upon its 
contents, after unceremoniously perusing them, with the ut- 
most asperity. " Yes, yes ; she wants to watch in person your 
mother's ebb to low-water mark, after which her own fortunes 
are to begin to flow. Meanwhile my lord will be busy finishing 
with their divorce in parliament. But fair and softly, Madam 
Luxmoor ! you have yet a seven-barred leap to take, and your 
horse is broken-knee'd." He then informed me that he had 
taken this run down, at the greatest possible inconvenience, to 
obtain my concurrence in the best means of putting a stumbling- 
block in the way of this audacious woman. He knew how 
difficult it was to persuade me to anything reasonable, wherever 
an absurd refinement of fancy or feeling was concerned. But 
he hoped I could not hesitate on the point in question, when I 
was convinced that his, and my children's, and my own destiny 
depended on the resolution I might take in the emergency that 
had arisen. 

Scarlatt proceeded to state that he was astonished to find his 
conscientious and patriotic sacrifice in support of the policy of 
Sir Robert Peel, seemed to have irritated Lord Mauleverer 
hopelessly against him. Although living in the same house in 
town, they had rarely met or spoken together since the final 
division. From that time, his lordship had always dined 
abroad, at his club, or elseiohere, where he was possibly also as, 

ii 2 



244 mauxeveeek's divoece. 

welcome as money could make a man. Searlatt dined daily in 
solitary state, in Mauleverer House, and had every reason to 
conclude that his lordship's alienation was complete and final. 
Everything indeed tended towards an open rupture between 
them, and at no very distant period. Lord Mauleverer was 
evidently completely under the control and influence of that 
inexpressibly bad and crafty woman . that Sophia. And she, it 
was plain, was animated by an unappeasable spirit of vengeance 
against my husband. And now no gratification more suitable 
could possibly be devised than that, by Sophia's means, the in- 
heritance of the titles and estates of the House of Mauleverer 
should pass away from himself and me, and our children. She 
had certainly . most certainly . fascinated Lord Mauleverer into 
a forgetfulness of all the other actuating principles of his career. 
It was useless to dissemble to ourselves that my mother was 
fast speeding to a better world. Permission to marry again, by 
act of parliament, demanded and urged on by the zeal and 
influence of Lord Mauleverer, would certainly not be refused 
to Sophia, if she obtained the preliminary of an ecclesiastical 
divorce ; on that battle-ground, accordingly, we must meet her, 
for if that event took place, our ruin was assured. 

And Searlatt was determined, as he reminded me he had so 
often declared, that it should not take place. He himself had 
suggested to Luxmoor the plea of Condonation. And his 
lawyers assured them that, if sufficiently supported by evi- 
dence, there could be no doubt that in the ecclesiastical courts, 
secretly animated as they are by their tacit Papistical tradition 
of the sacramental nature of marriage, and its theoretical in- 
dissolubility . this plea, substantiated, would justify the judges 
in falling into the natural current of their predilections, and 
refusing Sophia the privileges she so "brazenly" demanded. 

In conclusion, Searlatt told me I had in my hands the most 
positive proofs of this alleged condonation, in the shape of the 
letter Sophia had written to me on her flight from Llanhowel 
to London. 

As to the cruelty, he went on to observe, without seeming to 
notice my surprise, it was notorious that hardly any extremity 
of it seemed to justify ecclesiastical judges, according to their 
favourite maxims, in pronouncing so great a punishment on the 
offending husband as to separate him for ever from the woman 
whom " God had given him as the spouse of his bosom." And, 
moreover, when the shocking, the revolting provocations Sophia 
had given her husband, came to be'eonsidered, no man could 
possibly adjudge that she had received more than the just 
punishment of her own vileness, and purposely-arranged course 
of disobedience and irritation. 

Searlatt, doubtless, thought he had charged me sufficiently, 
by his previous arguments and allegations, to consent without 
difficulty to the demand, which he now made to me, to place 



CORRESPONDENCE. 245 

this invaluable document in the hands of Luxmoor's advocates. 
And I cannot deny that the incessant iteration of the same 
accusation . the possibility of its correctness. the disastrous 
influence of Sophia over my father might have in its results on 
the destinies of all who were most dear to me . now broke 
upon me in a livid and appalling light. But I was utterly 
incapable of such a deed of deliberate and even treacherous 
counteraction. I refused in the most positive terms, and at 
once. In vain did Scarlatt renew all his most potent argu- 
ments . in vain did he assure me that Sophia was the most 
guilty and depraved of women, and that she would be clearly 
proved so at the trial. In vain did he endeavour to provoke 
the vindictive fiend of jealousy in my heart, by declaring he 
was convinced her animosity against himself arose from his 
slighting all her advances towards a renewal of their first 
happily broken-off relations. I stung him, in return, by 
deriding the accusation as a fiction of his own absurd conceit, 
and by repeating to him expressions of the contempt and 
dislike which from time to time Sophia had dropped, even in 
my hearing, against him. Somewhat unjustifiably I did so, I 
own ; but I was infinitely provoked. I even instanced her 
preference formerly . a preference so visible and so enduring . 
for her worthless satyr-like husband, and the designs he now 
imputed to her with regard to my father. We both grew 
angry. In short, for the first time since our union, my husband 
and I had a really violent and mutually obstinate and defying 
concussion. 

This ended by his furiously assuring me that, in spite of my 
obstinacy, for the sake of truth and justice, he should feel 
called upon to state openly at the trial the existence and 
contents of the letter. which he could repeat, he declared, 
almost word for word. But the Court had power to compel 
me to produce it, and doubtless would use it. Upon hearing 
which I flung to my cabinet, produced the dangerous epistle, 
and tore it into a thousand pieces before him. And I scattered 
these, I remember, in the delirium of my excitement, into the 
fire-grate, which was filled with an upholsterer's imitation of 
flame, in the shape of curling gold wire ; and this, brightly 
illuminated by the sun, perhaps gave me the notion at the 
moment that I had finally disposed of the fragments. Or 
rather I never thought on that matter, but overcome by an 
agony of mingled feelings, and fearful that I should commit 
myself to some yet more violent display of temper and irrita- 
tion, I rushed out of the apartment, and retired to my own 
bed-chamber, where I spent several hours in a state of inde- 
scribable agitation and misery. 

I had, however, disposed, as I thought, of the cause of con- 
tention : and as the fervour of my passion subsided, I grew 
ashamed and almost alarmed at the really frenzied violence of 



246 mattlevebee's divoece. 

my own demonstration. The sight of little Herbert, with his 
golden hair shining under his blue velvet cap, at play with 
Gelert in a courtyard under my window^ farther softened my 
heart towards my husband . the bloomy urchin's sire, and 
whom he strongly resembled in feature. I considered that my 
outbreak was of a 'violence scarcely justified by the provoca- 
tion, remembering how much Scarlatt held to be at stake in 
the struggle at hand. I thought, at last, that it was in- 
cumbent upon me to acknowledge myself in the wrong, and 
endeavour to effect a reconciliation with my irritated husband. 

I sought out Scarlatt accordingly, and found him busy in a 
little private study of his own he had assigned himself at 
Mauleverer. So busy, that he only admitted me after repeated 
applications at the locked door, and a somewhat, nay, very 
humiliating statement of my object in desiring to be allowed to 
enter. 

I thought Scarlatt looked very much flurried and confused, 
when at last he allowed me to set my foot in his sanctum. But 
he accepted my apology with great, even suspicious facility ; 
and during the rest of his two or three days' sojourn at 
Mauleverer, this painful subject was not again discussed 
between us. 



OJIArTEl! XXVI. 

ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE ! 

Immediately after my husband's return to London, I received 
a peremptory "citation" to appear before the judges of the 
Court of Arches, on a certain day, under divers pains and penal- 
ties, which to my own and my mother's inexperience appeared 
most formidable. 

The document did not state in the least what I was wanted 
for by this tribunal ; but of course with its heading of " Luxmoor 
v. Luxmoor," its general purport was explained. Moreover, as 
I was now cited to appear on the part of the " respondent," or 
defendant, it was to be concluded Luxmoor had heard of my 
possession of the document I had destroyed, and intended to 
enforce its production upon me. 

On consulting with our family legal advisers, in the country, 
it appeared that I had no power of refusing or evading obedi- 
ence to my summons. A recent Act of Parliament gave the 
judges in the ecclesiastical courts authority to compel persons 
making affidavits or written depositions, in causes before them, 
to submit to a viva voce examination and interpellation also. 



ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE. 217 

I was therefore compelled to " accept service," and resolve 
upon a journey at once to London. 

Satisfied that I had effectually destroyed the document that 
might have been of injury to my friend, I had no great reluc- 
tance to this excursion on any other score than my mother's 
extreme debility and unwillingness to part from me. But she 
had been as she was, with scarcely any perceptible change, for 
weeks ; and as I had purposely concealed from her my angry 
discussion with my husband, and its cause, she imagined I was 
cited to the Arches Court in favour of Sophia, and with her 
usual tender consideration for her, urged upon me not to lose 
the occasion of doing her any service. On the whole, I deter- 
mined on the journey ; though I delayed my departure to the 
latest possible moment, and gave a solemn assurance at parting, 
to my mother, that I would return to her as speedily as possibly 
I could. 

Just before I set out I received another letter from Sophia, 
who was clearly quite unconscious of my proposed excursion, 
jo3'fully informing me that her day of complete liberation was 
at hand, and naming it! Luxmoor, she said, in his cruelest 
inflictions, had often jeeringly boasted that he could get rid of 
her at any time, with the help of a little false swearing, and 
even unknown to herself, as the laws gave women no right or 
means of self-defence in such cases ! Whereas, however guilty, 
she would find it all but impossible to get rid of him ! She was 
going now, she said, to ascertain if such could in reality be the 
law of England . if any set of men, however mannish, could 
ever have legalised so monstrous a system of oppression against 
our sex ! 

I went to London, attended, at my request, by the country 
solicitor I have mentioned, and a female servant . finding there 
was no time to wait for Scarlatt to come and escort me thither ; 
and, besides, unwilling to give him an opportunity for further 
discussion of an unpleasant topic. 

An accident of some little importance, which happened on the 
line we were travelling, delayed us several hours on our journey. 
And I had been so anxious to lose no time away from my mother, 
that on arriving at the London terminus my legal friend called 
my attention to the fact that we should hardly have time to 
comply with the terms of my citation, unless we proceeded at 
once to our destination. We were both persuaded that my 
appearance at the court would be little more than a compliance 
with a form ; and as my companion had telegraphed the cause 
of delay, and our confident expectation of arriving still in time 
to give any.evidence that might be required from me, we thought 
it best to proceed at once to the Arches Court, and signify my 
arrival for that purpose. 

The case was still proceeding, though it was late in the day 
when we entered Doctors Commons, I am thankful yet that I 



243 itaexeyerer's divorce. 

was thus spared a considerable portion of the ravening excite- 
ment and suspense of the severe and inexpressibly scandalous 
and horrible contest that had consumed the hours so far ! Traces 
of the fearful climaxes undergone in their course, and the harass- 
ing- strain on mind and nerve suffered by nearly all, appeared 
either in the agitated or exhausted expressions of most of the 
.witnesses . into a numerous company of whom I was shown 
immediately on my arrival. These luckless people looked like 
the survivors of some cannibal shipwreck ! 

There was a great variety of persons present, male and female, 
among these ; most of whom I had never seen till then. But I 
recognized some few . Squire Gawker ; the servants at Llan- 
howei parsonage ; some labouring men of the village, fathers of 
Sophia's maltreated schoolgirls. and the poor young things 
themselves. I remembered also her plump little bedazed and 
beflustered friend, the Archdeacon. He was now sitting mourn- 
fully in a corner by himself, puffing and panting for breath, 
and occasionally fanning himself with his low-crowned, glossy 
hat. The two women Wrangham were also there . looking 
very much ashamed of themselves, to judge from their com- 
plexions of tarnished copper stewpans. I thought, too, that I 
comprehended who another immense woman was, looking like 
a fitting spouse for the Farnese Hercules, who sat with her 
eyes fixed on her proportionate feet, gnawing her under lip as 
a horse gnaws at the contents of his nose-bag. I remembered 
Sophia's description of Luxmoor's Cambridge mastress. 

But what most concerned and surprised me was to recognize 
Sophia herself . which I did almost instantly on entering the 
close, suffocating apartment . the only air in which entered 
through windows uncleaned for centuries, from a little dark 
courtyard, whither the light of day descended at a dusky angle 
for a "few minutes of the day only. 

She was sitting in a recess under one of the windows, quite 
by herself, on a coarse deal bench, which, for various reasons 
of commiseration or of shunning contact, no other person in 
the crowded apartment had attempted to share. 

Never before had I seen a countenance fraught with such 
fevered anxiety and expectation as Sophia's. An animal in 
the slaughter-house, conscious of its approaching doom, could 
not have turned a more fearfully dilated attention at every 
footstep . every sign of coming destruction . than this unhappy 
woman turned now on me. But though she stared at me with 
eyes biggened to almost twice their natural size, it is my belief 
Sophia did not credit their evidence for several moments after 
I had entered fully into their circle of vision, and had recalled 
my memory to her personally by putting my arms round her 
neck, and kissing her with all the tenderness and compassion 
swelling in my heart at the spectacle. 

"My dear, dear Sophia," I exclaimed; " how exceedingly 



ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE. 249 

ill you look. What is the matter ? Surely all must be going 
well with you in your unhappy cause. as far as we may use 
such a word in it at all." . . 

" I do not know, Mrs. Pomeroy,' replied Sophia, in a hard, 
unnatural tone, while a vivid streak of crimson shot up like 
flame to her blanched cheek. " Or rather, I do know but too 
well," she continued in a stifled whisper. "Your husband. 
your husband for whom I have done so much . is at this 
moment giving his evidence against me. I know what he is 
saying, my God ! heartless, unmanly slanderer, at this very 
moment. while your father listens. and that my cause, and all 
the little I have yet left of hope and consolation on the earth, 
are for ever lost." 

" I can excuse your irritation, my unhappy friend, at this 
moment," I said, struck with consternation also at these words. 
" But what can Scarlatt say that will do you harm, even if he 
is so inclined ? And I have destroyed the only document and 
information Luxmoor can have any motive in endeavouring to 
extract from me." 

"You are come here against me then, too? But I do not 
blame you, Hugh-Helena, for assisting in my destruction. 
I have never done you anything but harm ! But that man has 
cause to believe I have done him all the good in my power . 
and he is casting every stone on the wayside at me, to secure 
my utter crushing and ruin." 

" What has he done ? What can he do ? " I repeated, quite 
amazed. 

" He has presented himself to prove . to make me appear to 
the world. the most worthless, the most depraved, the most 
shameless of women. That my conduct justifies any measure 
of cruelty my husband can have inflicted upon me. That 
I, I, I . a woman, a fugitive from the protection of a husband 
whom I had already infamously betrayed and deserted . 
attempted . at Plas Kewydd . to . to . entrap him . your hus- 
band . Scarlatt Suett . oh ! not, not, Pomeroy, nought of 
nobility or generosity is akin to him . into the commission of 
the very offence I now charge upon the remorseless wretch 
whose chains he is wreathing round me again as with a million 
adder-knots." 

1 shall never forget Sophia's look as she uttered these words. 
Her eye burned with some consuming internal fire : she looked 
like a pantheress erecting its mane for mortal contest with some 
other beast of still wilder and more savage nature. Yet was 
there terror in all the frenzied exasperation of her words and 
manner. 

I was struck to the heart. " But it is impossible . it is im- 
possible !" I ejaculated. " Mr. Pomeroy . my husband . cannot 
be so base, so unmanly, so dastardly as to reveal such a secret ! 
. to support so infamous a misstatement !" 



250 MAULEVEEEE'S DIVORCE, 

" You do not yet then thoroughly appreciate your husband, 
Mrs. Pomeroy, if you think he is not capable of everything 
meriting those epithets. I have recognized his handiwork 
through this whole clay's proceedings : and what a day it has 
been for a woman with the common feelings of one ! . with 
more, with infinitely more !" 

What a day it had indeed been ! When I saw the full account 
in the papers on the following morning. which, in spite of the 
horror and even terror I experienced, a dreadful fascination 
compelled me to peruse: those reports over whose corrupting 
and abominable details millions in all the lands where the 
English tongue is spoken, gloated even for weeks and months 
after, until they were spread to the furthest limits of the circle 
. I wondered only how any woman could have survived shame 
so overwhelming . accusation so accumulated and atrocious. 

I do not propose (I should not venture, even if I listened to 
the promptings of a revengeful retaliation in my heart) to 
repeat the horrible, the disgusting scandals of that dreadful 
trial. Heaven only knows whether any, or what part, of those 
unclean revelations. of that foul exposure of the rotten core of 
one of the most unhappy unions ever contracted by man and 
woman . was founded in truth. But if none, or little, what 
numerous, what truly detestable perjuries were committed on 
that day, invoking the name of the God of Truth ! Yet I 
must needs briefly allude to the heads of the accusation and 
defence. A case unhappily so universally and odiously familiar 
to the world, does not require more. 

The evidence against Luxmoor was of a nature too decisive 
and overwhelming to be rebutted. His Cambridge mistress ; 
the two miserable women, mother and daughter, whose seduc- 
tion was possibly one of his most swinishly devilish offences ; 
the record of a court of criminal justice respecting his infamies 
at Llanhowel . presented a crushing mass of testimony of his 
guilt in the greater of the two charges brought against him. 
As respected that of cruelty, the unhappy wife herself had so 
carefully concealed, as a shame and disgrace to herself also, the 
brutal facts of her long maltreatment, that my evidence re- 
citing the barbarous scene I had witnessed in the sexton's 
house at Llanhowel, was the only one she had found it possible 
to produce. 

The worst particulars of Luxmoor's inhuman behaviour . his 
gross and animal sensuality . his drunkenness . his desertion 
of his wife, and suffering her to incur actual want in its most 
uncomfortable forms . the part of accomplice he had played in 
various attempts at the corruption of the unhappy wife, pro- 
bably with a view to be discharged from obligations towards 
her of which he had so speedily become weary . his subsequent 
capricious pursuit of her . his pillaging her of her hard-won 
gaias. his unmanly sport with ber fears and womanly dread 



ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE. 251 

of disgrace. his yet more barbarous use of the gentler senti- 
ments she still continued so unhappily to cherish for him,. by 
far the majority of these revolting details, in their very nature, 
admitted not of proof, and depended, of course, chiefly on the 
victim's own assertions. But surely no woman, however in- 
ventive and depraved, could, without some most hideous founda- 
tion, have raised so probable and consistent a detail of the horrors 
and perfidies of which Sophia declared herself to have been the 
injured and insulted, sufferer during nearly the whole period of 
her married life. 

In answer, therefore, to charges which he could neither deny 
nor refute, Luxmoor found it possible to plead only condonation. 
For all the atrocious acts of infidelity of which he stood con- 
fessedly guilty, condonation was his plea ; and excessive and 
reasonable provocation for the single act of cruelty proved 
against him. All the other allegations he denied : or, as a final 
answer and refutation, claiming the benefit of the practice in 
the ecclesiastical courts of requiring the person complaining to 
enter them with what is commonly styled "clean hands," he 
preferred numerous counter-charges against his wife, among 
which were painfully and disastrously conspicuous her attempts 
at the inveiglement of Scarlatt Suett. 

In proof of the condonation, Luxmoor produced a formidable 
array of witnesses and a piece of evidence of which I was yet, 
happily, for a time unconscious. 

The very notoriety of the wretch's delinquencies in the various 
places he had polluted by his abode was a strong prima facie 
proof in his favour, his advocates pleaded ! Sophia's own wit- 
nesses were obliged to admit the reckless shamelessness distin- 
guishing his depravity. The woman from Cambridge, who was 
animated by a spirit of bitter hostility against Luxmoor, was 
compelled to allow how often and violently she had forced the 
unfortunate wife to understand her open and continued rivalry. 
Mrs. Luxmoor's own testimony declared that her flight into 
Wales was occasioned by her discovery of this resumed intrigue, 
and the persecution she sustained in consequence from her low 
and malignant competitor. The villagers of Llanbowel. the 
Wrangham women. very unwillingly . for even the two latter 
deplorable creatures seemed to retain a kind of respect and 
compassion for Sophia . were obliged to admit the notoriety of 
the offences alleged, and that the nearness of the dwellings 
rendered it all # but impossible that Sophia could have avoided 
forming suspicions verifiable almost from her own windows. 
Her kindly credulous friend, the archdeacon, was brought for- 
ward to substantiate the fact that*ll these allegations had been 
urged in the most prominent manner on her notice, and elabo- 
rately refuted and denied by herself. But decisive evidence 
of the pretended condonation, it was, at an early period of the 
trial, stated was contained in a letter from Mrs. Luxmoor to a 



232 MATJLEVEBEE'S BIVOECE. 

material witness, at that moment absent, but whose approach 
had only been retarded for a short period by an accident. 

Sophia, whom constant reports of the progress of the trial 
naturally reached, had not dreamed that this witness could be 
myself, or what letter could possibly be meant. She was racking 1 
her brain on the supposition of a direct act of perjury and forgery 
on the part of her husband, when I was shown into the witness- 
room. 

On this point, therefore, I could offer her some consolation. 
I could testify to the destruction of the only document in my 
hands that might possibly have been used against her. How it's 
existence had been discovered at all she guessed too well ; but 
the marks of affectionate interest, and the soothing assurances I 
lavished on her, must have satisfied her she had nothing to 
apprehend in the way of voluntary testimony against her on 
any point from me. 

But she was justified in feeling to her soul's core the sting of 
the emotions naturally excited by the character of the evidence 
in support of Luxmoor's plea then being proceeded with. In 
rebutment of the charge of cruelty, this evil and crafty man 
alleged constant provocations on the part of his wife ; and that 
her own misconduct, her reckless spirit of coquetry, the actual 
dishonour he had reason to apprehend she even courted to him 
and to herself, disqualified her from any claim to relief on the 
score of his own admitted infidelity ! 

In support of these dreadful counter-charges, several Cam- 
bridge young men . some of them of high rank, but chiefly of 
dissolute and reckless manners. were produced to bear witness 
to Mrs. Luxmoor's demeanour, while occupying the equivocal 
position she had accepted in that university. This certainly 
blameable submission, which consideration for her husband had 
originally prompted, was now alleged by his advocate to consti- 
tute a proof of her indifference to all the finer sensibilities and 
proprieties of her sex ! These young men, to do them justice, 
were mostly very indignant at being called upon to appear 
against a woman whom they all seemed to like very much, on 
such a score. But the subtle, Jesuitical lawyers into whose 
hands they were consigned speedily extracted from them all 
that was necessary to support the allegations brought forward. 
The effusions of wild wit and gaiety, unchecked by the for- 
malities and restraints of the position she ought to have occu- 
pied . even occasionally (it now appeared) fired into reckless 
displays by the intoxicating beverages Luxmoor taught her to 
relish, or coaxed her into sharing. wit and gaiety, that lighted 
up into a kind of madness,. flourished like the torches of the 
bacchantes on such wild-aired verges of misery and desperation 
as those to which Sophia had been driven . were produced 
against her in that sober and solemn audience with the most 
strikingly disastrous effects. 



ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE. 253 

Luxinoor's violent conduct and desertion at Cambridge seemed 
thus in some measure excused. But much more powerfully was 
this view of the case supported, when Scarlatt appeared to bear 
witness to the pretended attempt to lure him into an intrigue, 
when Sophia resided as a single woman at Plas Newydd ! 

My brow still reddens at the recollection that the man was 
my husband who- made this shameful, this merciless revelation 
.representing Sophia throughout the whole transaction as a 
kind of Potiphar's wife, himself as the blameless but shamelessly 
tempted and craftily cajoled Joseph of the tale ! 

As to the inhuman acts of personal brutality to his wife, which 
my evidence . felt on all sides to be unimpeachable . amply sub- 
stantiated, the theory of provocation was still maintained. The 
clownish Nimrod, Gawker, whose vanity had been so severely 
wounded by Sophia, sullenly admitted that on the night pre- 
vious to the alleged assault, Mr. Luxmoor, being intoxicated, 
had ordered him out of the house, for grasping Mrs. Luxmoor' s 
hand as they sat playing at chess in the dusk of the evening, he 
concluding " parson to be asleep, snoring drunk!" whereupon 
he admitted that he stated he would go then, but would return 
on the following day with the brush of a May fox, to make a 
proper tie for the crafty old rascal's wig, if Mrs. Luxmoor would 
lend him a proper comb and brush for the dressing . being a 
rake and a birch broom ! The Squire further allowed that he 
had called on the morning of the day on which I witnessed the 
assault " in his pink," and openly, and in as loud a voice as 
he could, called to "parson" in repetition of his threat over the 
churchyard wall, seeing him staggering about in it pretty far 
gone in liquor, though so early in the morning. Upon which 
Mrs. Luxmoor threw open a parlour window, wished him every 
success in his day's sport, and said she should have everything 
ready for him to officiate as her worthy husband's barber in 
the evening ! Luxmoor no doubt both saw and heard all this : 
it was intended he should ! And he (Squire Gawker) had cer- 
tainly purposed to put his threat in literal execution that very 
evening ! . only Mrs. Luxmoor seemed to have changed her 
mind, and having some tine lady for a visitor, received him 
with such coldness and incivility, that he walked off in disgust 
at once. 

I was still ignorant of most of these particulars, with which 
Sophia herself was only very imperfectly acquainted, when I 
received my own summons to attend before the court. My 
arrival had been announced, and I was ordered in at the close 
of Scarlatt's evidence. 

I had never been in a court of (so-called) justice before, and I 
felt a good deal agitated when I heard my name shouted, as it 
seemed to me, from some remote chamber of inquisition, while 
the messenger of the court repeated the summons like an echo 
at the door of the witness-room. But I pressed Sophia's hand 



2-H maulevekek's divorce. 

encouragingly . and for the first time she returned my smile 
with one full of anguish, but also of trust and gratitude to 
myself personally. I felt comforted, and followed the officer 
out with a more assured step. 

On entering the court, however, I was struck immediately 
with renewed consternation by two circumstances. One was, 
the appearance made by Scarlatt just leaving the witness-box 
.flushed almost crimson with excitement. and amidst what 
irresistibly seemed to me an indignant and contemptuous mur- 
mur from the entire auditory ! The other was the really 
dreadful aspect of my father, who was accommodated with a 
seat on the judges' bench, and had been an auditor of the whole 
day's proceedings. He sat with his arms crossed on his breast, 
and his bloodless countenance was hardened into such an aspect 
of stern but dreadful immovability of endurance, that I felt 
instinctively some internal moral catastrophe of a tragical 
order was consummating in his mind. 

Scarlatt joined me as I entered, and whispering, "Now, 
don't make a fool of yourself! Remember our all and our 
children's all is at stake ! . you have only to answer plainly to 
one Question !" he lent me his arm . I needed some support! 
.ana brought me to the place assigned for persons under 
examination. 

I remember distinctly discerning a little chalkily pallid old 
man, of a keen intellectual countenance, half buried in crimson 
and much discoloured minever, who shot a quick keen glance at 
me from under his black cap . and doubtless was the judge. I 
saw how my lather started from his gloomy absorption, as his 
glance of amazed recognition fell on me. But for some minutes 
1 saw nothing else with any precision, until on a sudden a low- 
toned, bland, Jesuitical voice came to my hearing, inquiring if 
I was the Honourable Hugh-Helena Pomeroy, wife of Scarlatt 
Pomeroy, Ksq., . the gentleman who had just left the bar ? 

I replied mechanically in the affirmative, and the advocate, 
who was Luxmoor's, seemed for a moment puzzled with the 
peculiarity of my position in the case. He exchanged a few 
low-toned words with a man in a black robe, who stood behind 
him, and who exactly resembled an inquisitor, with his pale, 
cadaverous, anxious, searching visage. The advocate then 
returned to his place, probably not yet quite steadied in his 
notions respecting me. And perhaps it was quite as much to 
gain time to right his own ideas, as in compassion to my evi- 
dent discomposure, that he asked a series of indifferent ques- 
tions of me before coming to the important one he had in view. 
Such as, was I acquainted with the party in the informations 
before the court, Mrs. Sophia Luxmoor ? Had I ever visited 
her. and where ? Finally, the question came. did I correspond 
.with her at any time ? And this last was one evidently leading 
to a result, from the attention with which the judge himself 
seemed to listen for the reply. 



ECCLESIASTICAL JUSTICE. 155 

Of course, I answered in the affirmative to these queries. 
And then the important one was put. Had I received a letter 
from the said Sophia Luxmoor, of a particular date, which was 
mentioned ? 

I was rather startled with the evidently minute accuracy 
of this information ; but confident in the destruction I had 
effected, I answered, composedly enough, still in the affirmative. 

What had become of that letter then ? the examining advo- 
cate continued, in his smooth, cajoling accents. It had become 
necessary for the ends of justice that it should be produced. 
Would I kindly produce it for the satisfaction of the court ? 

I answered, with a deep feeling of relief and exultation, that 
it was not possible ; that I had destroyed the letter. 

Why had I destroyed it, if I would please to inform the court ? 

Because it contained matters of a private nature, which I 
did not wish should bo submitted to the notice of a public 
auditory. 

Did they concern myself or Mrs. Luxmoor ? 

Both : Mrs. Luxmoor was a dear and intimate friend of 
mine. 

There was a pause after this answer. The judge raised his 
grey eyebrows from his attitude of drowsy attention, and 
seemed to look with an expression of impatience at Luxmoor's 
advocate. 

The latter resumed : How had I destroyed the document in 
question ? 

I had torn it to pieces. 

What had I done with the pieces ? 

I reflected for a moment. I was about to answer that I had 
thrown them into the fire, when by some sudden and inexpli- 
cable revivification of memory I became distinctly aware, for 
the first time, that I had only cast them on a gilded imitation 
of flames in a grate. I know not what deep, unutterable dread 
assailed me, as I felt compelled to make the reply merely : I 
threw them into a fire place. 

What became of them afterwards ? 

I did not know : they were probably removed in the routine 
of domestic labour by a housemaid. 

Should I recognize the letter again, if I saw it ? 

Certainly : but that was impossible. 

Not quite, madam ! Would I be so good as to inform the 
court whether or not this was the exact epistle, repieced ? 

And I was astounded by having placed before mo, almost 
perfectly stitched_ together again, by au exertion of the most 
indefatigable patience and skill evidently, the entire of tha 
lengthy document which I had torn into so many, many frag- 
ments, a few days previously, at Mauleverer ! 

I was petrified with dismay ! My sight was so dazzled, that 
for some moments I could not at all comply with the pressing 



256 MATJLEVEKEll'S DIVORCE. 

demands of the advocate on Sophia's part, who, observing' my 
confusion, but of course supposing me on the contrary side to 
that he supported, raised his voice in a stormy and bullying 
tone, to require of me whether I pretended to recognize a piece 
of paper which had gone through so extraordinary a series of 
manipulations as to have entirely lost its identity, if it had 
ever possessed any, with a document that might in part pos- 
sibly have been of some similar import ? 

The judge interposed by mildly reminding me that I was 
bound to conceal no information in my power to afford ; and be 
requested me to answer merely to the fact whether or not this 
letter was identical with the one I admitted myself to have 
received from the plaintiff in that cause, and which I declared 
myself to have torn to pieces and thrown into a fire-grate ? 

I turned the leaves over, and perused them, hoping to find 
some reason for doubt . some flaw that might authorise a nega- 
tion to what I now understood in the very marrow of my bones 
was a decisive proof in bar of my poor friend's suit for liberation ! 

But I could find none. Everything was inexorably correct ! 
You could scarcely, in the greater part of it, perceive that any 
repiecing had taken place at all ! 

Luxmoor's advocate insolently reminded me that I was sworn, 
before my God, to speak the whole truth, and nothing but the 
truth ! A breathless silence and the most eager attention of the 
entire auditory watched over my hesitating perusal. At last the 
judge, perceiving that I was too much agitated to pursue the 
necessary investigation, ordered an officer of the court to read 
the paper aloud ! 

Nothing was changed ; not a sentence . not a word ! Unless 
I could have been guilty of an open, and useless, and easily 
detectable perjury, what could I have answered ? At the same 
moment I was overwhelmed with the reflection to whom this 
act of cruel and crafty treachery was imputable ! But surely, 
surely the heart-rending reluctance with which I was at last 
compelled to admit the fact, ought to have shielded me from 
any suspicion of complicity in this barbarous betrayal of con- 
fidence ! My misery in what I was compelled to do must have 
been patent to all present, for immediately after I had heard 
the judge testily pronounce the words, " Condonation is clearly 
proved there ! " I fainted away. 

I was borne out of the court, and luckily thus escaped the 
hearing of the merciless and iniquitous, but, according to the 
maxims of the ecclesiastical law, irresistible conclusions of the 
sentence against the unfortunate plaintiff in the suit ! 

The acts of condonation were declared to be most clearly and 
irrefragably proved ; and thus, in consequence of her own almost 
unparalleled endurance and patience of the wrongs she had 
suffered, was the wife of Luxmoor declared to be unworthy of 
any relief at the hands of the law. 



ECCLESIASTICAL JTTSTICt. 257 

The very reverend judge made a long and eloquent preamble 
on the necessity and policy of preserving and increasing _ as 
much as possible the difficulties in the way of any relaxation 
in the strength and unity of the great solder of society, by 
which nations and individuals are welded together, _ and the 
altar of domestic peace raised to all the holy charities and 
amenities of life ! A conviction of the indissolubility of the 
marriage union, except in cases which did not admit of the 
shadow of doubt, was one of its main strengths and securities 
in this moral and happy country ! He could not consider this 
case one, even apart from the repeated, evident, and he might 
aid/flagitious acts of condonation, plainly inspired by notions 
of the narrowest self-interest, or still worse motives, on the 
part of the very discreditable plaintiff in the suit. He con- 
sidered, in addition, that Sophia Luxmoor's own conduct 
entirely disentitled her to the relief she prayed for at the 
hands of that court ! And apparently fired with indignation 
at the accusations urged against the poor woman, and credited 
by him, the judge pronounced one of the severest philippics 
possible on her general character and demeanour in the married 
relation. Above all, her infamous behaviour under the respect- 
able roof of the Plas Newydd family, so clearly testified to by 
the distinguished gentleman who had with so much difficulty 
escaped her vile artifices, satisfied him that, for the benefit of 
society itself, so dangerous a woman should not be permitted to 
escape altogether from the custody and guardianship of a hus- 
band ! . whose own unhappy misconduct, perhaps, rather added 
to his qualifications as the jailer and restrainer of a person who 
disgraced her sex by imitating the worst and most injurious 
vices to society of the male one ! 

As to the charge of cruelty, considering the prodigious and 
almost unexampled provocations the respondent had received, 
this ecclesiastical Solomon -could not, for one moment, entertain 
it on evidence so weak as the opinion of a young lady, evidently 
reared in the lap of indulgence and family union, apparently of 
a refined and sensitive organization . who was thus disqualified 
to form a correct judgment . on such a circumstance as a slight 
corporeal chastisement, inflicted in the heat of passion, by a 
husband so shamefully outraged and insulted, if not betrayed, 
in the nicest points of honour and domestic happiness. The 
delicacy and sensibility of the sex exposed it always to exag- 
geration in statements affecting such matters ! And he confessed 
. . without intending the slightest reflection on the court of 
common law that had pronounced sentence in the case . he 
should have been disposed to sift the evidence relating to the 
Llanhowel children, evidently under the control and guidance 
of a woman so unscrupulous and artful, and animated by_ so 
bitter a spirit of hostility against her husband, and of rebellion 
against the divine precept that required her to love the spouse 

S 



258 matjxeyeheb's divobce. 

whom he had given her as dearly as herself . with the utmost 
suspicion and the most jealous scrutiny ! When it was remem- 
hered also that these infamous charges were preferred against a 
gentleman of talents acknowledged so eminent, one of the 
ornaments of the University to which he (the very reverend 
judge) had formerly the honour to belong; member also of a most 
religious and honourable body of men, whose piety and virtue 
usually rendered them the worthy exponents of God's holy 
word in these realms ! 

On the whole, therefore, the judge declared that he should 
dismiss this suit, recommending the parties, in all earnest- 
ness and tenderness of Christian goodwill, and conviction of 
what would be for their best interests, both temporal and 
spiritual, to return to cohabitation, and the mutual charities 
and forbearance of the sacred and endearing relation in which 
they stood to each other, and which they seemed for awhile, so 
unfortunately and scandalously for both . as almost always 
happened in such cases . to have laid aside and forgotten ! The 
certainty that death alone could release married persons from 
the obligations and duties they had contracted towards each 
other and society, was, and had always been, one of the best 
guarantees to the happiness and purity of that most holy and 
beautiful relation in which, as husband and wife, they stood to 
each other, in this moral and Protestant country ! And he 
hoped that while England and her ancient institutions con- 
tinued reciprocally to flourish, no unhallowed attempt -to reduce 
us in that most important respect to the level of continental 
and popish countries would ever be successful ! Rather would 
he himself pray to be released before the fulness of his days 
(this judge was nearly eighty !) than to live to witness in these 
realms so horrible a desecration of all that was most established, 
most English, most necessary to the preservation of the purity 
of our hearths ! as would be involved in the notion that because 
two parties, who had bound themselves to each other by the in- 
dissoluble chain of marriage, found it somewhat irksome and 
heavy to bear, they were justified in calling upon that court to 
assist them towards a violent disruption of the links by the 
agency of secular power, which he more than doubted the Law 
of God (meaning the traditional one of the Arches' Court) could 
anywhere be found to support ! 



CONSEQUENCES. 259 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

CONSEQUENCES. 

During the delivery of this solemn, and, I verily believe, 
conscientious mockery of all right and justice, I had recovered 
from my swoon in one of the passages of the court, and found 
Scarlatt supporting and bending over me with an appearance of 
very great anxiety. 

He seemed, however, in no wise ashamed or abashed at what 
he had done. " Everything is fair in war, Hugh-Helena !" he 
said, exultantly, in answer to the reproach and anguish in my 
eyes. " He can't marry her now at all ! And I was determined, 
however the case went, to make it impossible he ever should, 
without bringing eternal disgrace on the name he is so proud 
of . to leave no possibility that Luxmoor's divorced consort 
should ever be received in society as Lady Mauleverer ! Do 
you think I was going tamely to submit to have my own and 
our children's inheritance (you have some regard for our chil- 
dren, I suppose, yet ! ) lost, for want of opening my mouth, and 
telling the truth of one of the worst women that ever lived ! " 

" Let me go to Sophia. and satisfy her that at least I have 
nothing to do with this barbarous treachery," I implored. 

" Well, go, and tell her, with my compliments, that she needs 
no longer wait for your poor mother's uneasy shoes ! . they will 
never tit her, she may depend ! " Scarlatt replied, but without 
being able to infuse the bitterness of his own malignity into me. 

I turned from him . from my husband . in scorn. even in a 
kind of horror ! And I tottered my way back to the witness 
room, refusing his assistance, though he persisted in following 
me at a little distance behind. 

I entered it. Sophia was still in her former position ; but 
with even an increase of anxiety and horrified expectation in 
her countenance ! She arose as I approached, and uttered an 
eager "Well?" Then observing the expression in mine, she 
sank back in her seat, exclaiming, " What has been said ? what 
has been done? I see my sentence to a million times worse 
than death in your eyes ! " 

I stammered out a fearful and confused account of what had 
happened to me. and the final words of the judge which had 
caught my ear as I sunk into my deadly swoon ! 

To my great astonishment nevertheless, Sophia seemed to rally, 
and grow defiant under the very stroke of the thunderbolt ! 

" Oh, and is this the farce you have played between you?" 

S2 



260 MATJLEVEKEIt S DIVOECE. 

she said, glaring from Scarlatt to myself with a really .wither- 
ing expression of contempt and hatred in her maddened gaze ! 

I reiterated, in tones too earnest not to compel belief, the 
assurance of my innocence. But Scarlatt would not leave me 
even this poor consolation. "Do you think, Mrs. Luxmoor," 
he said, derisively admitting the imputation, " that our farce 
is at all to be compared with the tragi-comedy you thought you 
were playing with my Lord Mauleverer, and which was to end 
with a death and a marriage ?" 

" "What do you mean, base man r" she answered, flashingupon 
him a terrible glance. 

" That you will not be Lady Mauleverer in time to be pre- 
sented at Court this season," was his jeering reply. 

Sophia's visage grew pale and livid, as if she had received 
the bite of some poisonous reptile. 

"Some day," I heard her murmur to herself, in a fearful 
undertone, " I must be avenged ! " 

" But not as you thought. Look there ! " said Scarlatt, 
pointing with a malignancy of exasperation and triumph I had 
scarcely conceived possible, in the presence of such distress, to 
the crowd which was now streaming out of the court along the 
lobbies of the building. The door of the chamber in which we 
were was open, and my father's stately figure was easily 
distinguishable amidst the throng passing along. But he 
looked neither to the right nor to the left, and never even 
glanced into the apartment, where he knew Sophia still re- 
mained, and whither he had himself escorted her in the 
morning with the utmost attention and politeness. 

Sophia stared fixedly for a moment in the direction indicated. 
And then she turned to Scarlatt with a smile like the gleam of 
light on a steel sharpened for murder, on her violet-hued lips. 

" Yes ! " she said, " you have triumphed there also ! But 
the winning gamester rises with the stakes. We have not yet 
played out our game. This confidence should be mutual, Mr. 
Scarlatt Suett, and shall be !. If it be true that you have taken 
only an unwilling part in my ruin, Mrs. Pomeroy, come and 

hear what I can tell you, and prove to you to-morrow at 

those poor lodgings of mine, where, whatever this man. most 
emphatically, this maw. may tell you, no one of your house 
but yourself has ever set foot." 

" Excuse me, Mrs. Luxmoor, but you are not, in my opinion, 
fit society for a lady of station and character. and I forbid my 
wife, on the obedience she has sworn to me at the altar, to accept 
your invitation, or hold any further communication with you, 
of whatever kind," said Scarlatt, in tones the most imperious 
and peremptory that had ever yet passed his lips to me. 

" See youhowhe dreads the truth !" exclaimed Sophia. "But 
do you mean miserably to submit to become this man's abject 
slave. infinitely your inferior in every quality that ought to 



CONSEQUENCES. 261 

give the supremacy . in mind, inheart, in honour, in courage even, 
Hugh-Helena ! for did ever dastard more signally betray himself 
than he, when the boy Ap Ho wel openly proclai med him one ? Will 
you, I say, suffer a mere craven and base-hearted intriguer like 
this to become your absolute master and ^tyrant ? For such . . 
unless you make a resolute stand . this man, I tell you, purposes 
to become to you. I give you true warning . it is in his nature, 
in his intent. But it is not in yours, I trust and believe, to pass 
willingly under such a yoke . to exhaust existence in secret and 
powerless sighs, like your poor mother, with this aggravation 
of your sufferings, that your oppressor has neither brain nor 
heart to give him any natural claims to be one." 

With all, I could not endure this contempt and opprobrium 
heaped on the father of my children. 

"Mrs. Luxmoor," I said, "the faith and obedience I have 
promised at the altar were without limitation or reservation. 
And if my husband requires of me the sacrifice of your friend- 
ship and . and society. I must and shall henceforth renounce 
both, if need be, for ever." 

" Why then, this roof, which has echoed with other revela- 
tions, may repeat mine if it lists, when I confess to you at last, 
Mrs. Pomeroy, that your marriage with this man was in reality 
brought about by collusion and conspiracy," returned Sophia, 
yielding to the full tide of "her passion. " I am an accomplice, 
and I confess it. When Scarlatt Suett wooed you for his wife, 
I swear to you, by the infernal malignity of his own heart, he 
knew that you were the heiress of Mauleverer, and moreover, at 
the very moment. besides the original wrongfulness of their 
possession of the Ap Howel estates at all . that his father was 
in secret a defaulter and a defrauder, to an enormous amount, 
with the company he founded to work the mines, and which, by 
a series of miracles, he still deludes and leads on to the edge of 
a precipice that will swallow all." 

" Come away, Hugh-Helena ! She is mad, I tell you ! " ex- 
claimed Scarlatt ; and he drew me, with an impetuosity amount- 
ing almost to actual violence, from the presence of the unhappy 
and raging pythoness. 

I looked back once with a yearning sentiment of compassion 
and tenderness in my heart, when we reached the exit ; but 
Sophia had already vanished among the crowd of departing 
suitors, pleaders, and attendants of the various courts held 
within those antiquated, decayed, and therefore strictly emble- 
matic buildings, appropriated to the administration of Eoman 
and ecclesiastical law. 

We returned at once to Mauleverer House, our family town 
residence, where a decisive explanation with my father awaited 
us. He had desired to be informed of our arrival the moment 
it took place. Dinner was on the table, but he was in his private 
apartment. I sent him word that we were waiting his pre- 



262 matjleteker's diyobce. 

sence to commence the meal, hoping that further useless dis- 
cussion on what had happened might be spared. And I was 
stiting with Scarlatt, silently condemning all that he urged 
and re-urged with angry vehemence in defence of his doings in 
the Luxmoor trial, when I heard my father's measured tread 
approach. He entered the dining-room . cold, inscrutable, 
menacing, as the statue of the Commander to the banquet of 
Don Juan. 

I began some timorous expressions of affection and welcome 
. I had only seen him, since my arrival, in the court of justice 
. when he sternly interrupted me, " Is it possible, Mrs. Suett, 
that you are waiting for me with an expectation that I can 
ever again sit down, in any kind of communion or cordiality, 
with the miserable scoundrel whom you call your husband ? " 
were the terrible words. 

Scarlatt stared aghast at them. " Is it possible, Lord Mau- 
lever, you are still so besotted with this worthless woman as to 
be offended with me for having exposed her misconduct to the 
world ? which, besides, I was obliged to do. I was upon my 
oath. I was bound to speak the truth ! " 

" If you were a man with the common feelings of one . I do 
not say gentleman ! . that word and Mr. Scarlatt Suett . for 
I will never again suffer you to debase my name by wearing 
it. cannot by possibility be associated. If, I say, Mr. Scarlatt 
Suett, you had one spark of manly or honourable feeling in 
your breast, I would endeavour to make you hide your head 
with shame for the cruel, the detestable betrayal of a woman's 
weakness. were it even vileness . you have made. But you 
have none whatever, and I will say no more on the subject. 
Enjoy your triumph to the fullest extent. Youhave over- 
whelmed with disgrace and dishonour, from which she can 
never rise, an unfortunate and gifted worn an. deprived her of 
the only disinterested friendship and protection she could yet 
command in the world ; for I acknowledge that any woman who 
could ever have deemed you worthy of her notice must always 
have been unworthy of mine. Enjoy your triumph, but with- 
out my witnessing it. Henceforth I renounce the connection 
you have thrust upon me by fraud and conspiracy, and will 
disown you everywhere for any relation of mine. So help mo 
God ! I will never again sleep under the same roof with you, 
eat at the same table with you, or join in any species of friendly 
intercourse with you, to the last hour of my existence ! " 

Scarlatt paused for a moment in his reply ; but he had now 
lost all hope, and with it all fear. " Be it so, sir ! I shall not 
pray the less that it may be a protracted one ; and that your 
admirable lady may also survive to reap the reward of her 
wonderful patience and endurance of the strange species of 
platonic rivalry you had assigned her with this distinguished 
ex-governess," he said, with a "combination of defiance and 



CONSEQUENCES. 263 

insolence in his manner I had not previously suspected in him. 
"As to my name, luckily it does not depend upon your lord- 
ship's pleasure at present to deprive me of the advantage of 
signing myself a Pomeroy. And whether I am a gentleman or 
not, I shall assuredly some day be a nobleman . unless I should 
have the disadvantage to depart this transitory state of exist- 
ence before your lordship. I have the promise of it ! " 
_ " The man who could betray a woman's generosity or perver- 
sity (it must have been a very madness, either of the senses, or 
of cupidity in her) as you have done, Mr. Suett, must be a 
coward ! . else I should answer you in the only manner suit- 
able to your insolence," replied my father, turning from him 
with a degree of contempt amounting to utter loathing. Then 
looking at me, "As to your unfortunate wife, whose once 
honourable nature you have corrupted to your own baseness . 
who has joined you in betraying her unhappy friend under so 
miserable a gloss of hypocrisy, if she persists in considering 
you as her husband, I renounce her as my daughter ! What 
say you, madam ? Will you return with me at once to Mau- 
leverer, or never re-enter it again, and remain with this man 
who is your husband only by such rites as join a tinker and a 
gipsy in a hedge ? " 

Of course. what could I do else, thus challenged? . I sided 
with the father of my children . with my husband ! I answered 
this stern and insulting address in a spirit too much akin to it, 
perhaps. in words which I will not repeat. But the result was 
that I was compelled to relinquish even the prospect of soothing 
the dying hours of my poor mother, so rapidly advancing ; and 
Scarlatt and I felt ourselves obliged to quit the house in which 
we were, before its roof had sheltered us together for a single 
night. 

I was obliged to write from an hotel to my mother, accounting 
as briefly as I could for the cruel necessity of my absence from 
her bed of sorrow and death. Scarlatt also wrote to her, though 
he did not inform me of the fact . accompanying his letter with 
a copy of the morning paper that contained the fullest account 
of the dreadful trial in the Arches' Court on the previous day. 

And when I myself came to read that, Scarlatt certainly had 
no occasion to renew, as he did in a most peremptory and violent 
manner, his prohibition for me ever to renew any species of 
acquaintance or intercourse with Sophia Luxmoor ! 

When I had read all the horrible details of the ease . when I 
beheld arrayed in overwhelming order and mass the series of 
accusations against that unhappy creature ; even her own evi- 
dence of the crimes she had in a manner shared by enduring . 
when, above all, I read Scarlatt's account of the artifices and 
fascinations she had played off upon himself, with views even at 
the best so contemptibly mercenary and worldly, . I was seized 
with a kind of terror, as well as an inexpressible horror of the 



264 M.VTJLEVEREK'S DIVOKCE. 

woman ; and felt as if to venture into her society were wilfully 
to put myself again into the circle of the spells of a malignant 
sorceress ! Moreover, the insults and afflictions I had undergone 
on her account . even her last black revelations, which Scarlatt 
readily persuaded me were the foullest calumnies . completed 
my disgust and alienation. 

But this uproar and tumult of evil renown were not in all 
things disastrous for Sophia. Her work had appeared, hitherto 
with but moderate success ; but no sooner was it known that the 
Mrs. Luxmoor of that wonderful and detestable cause celebre 
was the authoress of the wildfire novelty, of which no one had 
as yet been able to form a decisive opinion, than the sale rose to 
something marvellous, and edition after edition appeared and 
disappeared before the public avidity was glutted, or some other 
glittering phenomenon attracted its capricious enthusiasm. 

In the depths of my heart I still sufficiently admired and 
compassionated my former friend to rejoice in this sudden blaze 
of popularity ; which I was, besides, gratified to think ensured 
her against the corporeal afflictions attendant on poverty and 
desertion. 

New signs of her evil influence, however, appeared before long, 
and completed my aversion to the cause of so much suffering 
and alienation to myself. 

Before we could establish ourselves in the new and extraor- 
dinarily magnificent residence Scarlatt insisted on taking in 
town, I received a message from my father, summoning me to 
my mother's death-bed, but under the express proviso that I 
was to come alone. And he had already had the unkindness to 
send away both my children, of whom he used to be so fond, to 
Plas Newydd ; where their grandfather on the other side could 
hardly be prevailed upon to receive them for a few weeks, until 
we could have them brought to London. In spite of all this, of 
course I complied with the terms of my invitation, and arrived 
at Mauleverer alune, in time to receive my poor mother's final 
sigh of release. 

I will not dwell upon the sorrowful particulars. But it was 
no slight aggravation of my affliction in the event, to ascertain 
that my mother herself was fully imbued with the notion that 
she had found a rival in the daughter of Edmund Sutcliffe ! 
The only rival whom she had ever had to dread throughout her 
long, and in all other respects unhappy union ! 

Scarlatt. my reckless, mischief-making husband . anxious to 
take additional securities against Sophia's ascendancy, and to 
vindicate the part he had himself taken in the affair, had instilled 
the idea into her ; which he supported by a series of suspicious 
facts, that in their dove-tailed ingenuity almost amounted, to 
proof ! The account of the trial, which he also forwarded to 
Lady Mauleverer, completed her conviction of the worthlessness 
of her once-loved protegee. My mother's heart might be said 



CONSEQUENCES. 265 

to be finally broken, by apprehension that vengeance was, _ as it 
were, dealt to her from the grave of the man she had so unkindly 
deserted, for another who repaid her thus ! 

She could not depart in peace, as it seemed, without ascer- 
taining the truth of this dreadful surmise. My father's spirit 
was at once broken and embittered by the mortification and 
disappointment he had suffered in the result of the Luxmoor 
trial. His heart was touched with a late remorse, contemplat- 
ing the close of the long martyrdom he knew in his own soul 
he had inflicted, in his pride and relentless despotism, on her 
to whom reparation could no longer be made. I was present 
at the agonizing scene, in which my mother put the solemn 
question to him . and received in reply, in that moment of 
overwhelming contrition and remorse, the acknowledgment 
that before the revelations of the trial were made, aware of my 
mother's waning condition, he had indeed at one time con- 
templated the possibility of making Sophia Luxmoor his wife. 

My mother in return implored her husband's forgiveness for 
having married him while her heart was still, and irrevocably, 
another's. To that cause, and the consequent feeling of aliena- 
tion which had never been overcome between them, the saintly 
woman ascribed all the misfortune of her own life, and the 
early neglect from which I had suffered so much calamity. 
"Neither of us loved our child as we ought to have loved 
her . as we should have loved her, had she been the child of 
our love . or we should not have deserted her to the carelessness 
of strangers," she murmured. " God forgive us, and avert the 
sad consequences I yet foresee to this uncongenial union our 
poor child has formed also ! . I alone am to blame, and I receive 
this last blow from the hand of the daughter of Edmund 
Sutcliffe with resignation and pardon . for I have deserved it." 

Almost my mother's dying words continued to warn me to 
beware of the craft and duplicity and relentless spirit of self- 
aggrandizement which, with the clear-sightedness of a vision 
purified of the mists of earthly passion and resentments, she 
could not yet fail to see were the animating springs of Sophia's 
character. 

Her death finally consigned my father to a condition of 
profound gloom and remorseful reminiscence, which deepened 
before the close of his remaining years into that stern and 
almost savage misanthropy and love of solitude that in the 
end constituted him the wonder, and almost the terror, of the 
country neighbourhood in which thenceforward, with scarcely 
any interruption, he continued to reside. 

My father was a man of very peculiar temperament and 
character in all things. I cannot now pretend to deny that at 
this very period . and even to the latest hour of his life, . he 
continued to cherish a passion for Sophia, of such rooted 
intensity and absorption, that, in spite of the undiminished 



266 HAULEVERER'S D1T0RCE. 

hatred and contempt with which he regarded my hushand to 
the last, no other woman could find sufficient favour in his 
sight to induce him to form a new connection that might have 
effectually barred the former's expectations. But his pride 
and exalted notions of female honour and purity were too 
severely shocked by the exposures relating to Sophia, to permit 
him to seek her society ever again, . even in a form in which I 
am constrained to admit my experience of her character 
hardly permits me to hope she would have refused to welcome 
wealth and a powerful protection. 

I had cause, at no very remote period, to know that she 
needed what aid either could have afforded her. Searlatt 
allowed me no long interval to attempt the consolation of my 
unhappy father. He required me to attend himself in London, 
that together we might enter on the course of life which he 
considered a necessary means of advancement in the ambitious 
career he had chalked out for himself. We were to constitute 
ourselves leaders of ton, and while a splendid luxury acquired 
for us a popular social distinction, he was to use it as a 
furtherance in his ascent to those dazzling stations of political 
eminence he appeared to have no doubt he should attain, 
when once he had devoted himself to the object. We were 
accordingly in the midst of the splendour and tumult of our 
first season in the metropolis (we took amazingly as long as 
we were supposed to be enormously rich) when I received a 
letter from Sophia, of which I subjoin an exact copy, that it 
may not be supposed I have added to or diminished the facts 
therein so emphatically set forth. 



AN ENGLISH WIFE. 267 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

AN ENGLISH WIFE. 

" You loved me once, Hugh-Helena ! and in spite of the 
wrongs which, by my own assertion, rather than the accusation 
of others, I have done you, I have loved you. and still love 
you with perhaps the only pure and unselfish emotion of my 
existence. It is therefore to you, and to you alone, that I 
appeal in the extremity of my dire distress. If I fail with 
you, I shall know that I have no other refuge on earth. and I 
shall seek for none. 

" You will be surprised, for you are not made after this 
world's fashion, to know that I ask money of you with this 
introduction. Yes, money . not much. A few pounds will 
suffice to bear me out of the clutch of the fangs of the monster 
who, after gnawing so long at my heart, weary of the slow 
process of destruction, is rending what remains of the quiver- 
ing prey bodily from my breast. 

"And no doubt you will be still more surprised to find that 
so soon after a great literary success, I can be in want of 
twenty pounds. I do not require . I do not ask for more. 

"Yet why should you be surprised ? Do you not know that 
I am an English wife . still an English wife, in spite of all 
my efforts to escape from so ' holy and honourable an estate ' 
of perdition. And that an English wife is in all respects as 
absolutely the property of her husband as any black American 
slave of his owner ? 

"I find it so. If I had lands, their rent and yieldings of 
every kind would be Luxmoor's ; if money, Luxmoor's abso- 
lutely ; if children, they would be his, and I who bore them 
should have no part in them. But I have only my own person 
and the products of the industry by which I weave a property, 
as it were, out of my own brain. and these are Luxmoor's. 
All Luxmoor's ! . He has claimed them, and the claim is 
allowed . enforced. The laws of England appointed to regu- 
late the relations of the sexes, are so framed that it is all but 
impossible for a woman to obtain any species of justice from 
their action. while the lightest demand of man can set the 
whole crushing machinery at once in motion to overwhelm us 
into the dust. 

" A plain recital of what has happened to me will best 
explain my meaning. Yoii know . you remember . in what a 



268 hatjleyeeee's divoece. 

delirium of amazement and horror you left me on the utterance 
of the sentence that consigned me back again to my hell, after 
a glimpse of the light, and one waft of the sweet-smelling air 
of liberty. But you know not . no other can ever know . the 
boundless excess of the agony I endured, when the full con- 
sciousness of my calamity came upon me. When incredulity 
was no longer possible . when I had perused the burning record 
of my disgrace and ruin in the public journals, which I knew 
would not leave the coarsest and most ignorant clown in 
England unacquainted with my imputed enormities . with my 
unjust but unutterable ignominy, which for ever associated me 
in the minds of my countrywomen with the abominable per- 
juries of the miscreant Luxmoor, endorsed, as it seemed, and 
ratified by the oracular voice of a tribunal . that being of law 
is, by some strange confusion of ideas, supposed to be also one 
of justice. Had I in the least doubted the effect of that terrible, 
branding judgment, I might have read it alike in your noble 
father's demeanour when he returned me my letter of appeal 
unopened . and in the conduct of the poor and, until then, 
kind and motherly woman who kept the lodgings I occupied, 
whose husband . a respectable, quiet, good mechanic. ordered 
her to give me notice immediately to quit them. 

" In this lowest depth of anguish and despair, a brilliant ray 
of light pierced the gloom, and restored me for a while to the 
possibility of a hopeful and even glorified and enjoyable 
existence. The kind of happiness which the heart of woman 
most craves . husband, children, the joy of household love and 
cares, had for ever eluded my attainment. But at least a 
splendid mockery of the realities I had lost spread its gorgeous 
wings before mc, and seemed to soar into regions of a wider and 
more illumined empyrean, whither it would be permitted me to 
follow. The brightness of fame descended on my darkened 
name. I laid my head down in the dust, and raised it wreathed 
with laurels, amid what seemed to be a triumphant paean of 
victory. I was assured of a proud literary success. I took my 
place, I thought, where I had always most desired to find it . 
among the intellectually gifted and honoured of the land. 

" Moreover, this success secured me, as I dreamed, from the 
horrors and temptations of destitution, which former experience 
had taught me to dread, perhaps too much. Nay, it seemed to 
guarantee me even against the fangs of those grim hounds of 
want, which I had beheld crouching so long with their ribby 
flanks on my threshold. I had established myself as a writer. 
Continued exertion only was necessary to secure me all the 
comforts, some, perhaps, of the luxuries of life. Toil of this 
kind I had never shrunk from. Toil of this kind was even 
useful and beneficial to a person, so situated, whose mind 
required to be kept in constant activity, lest it should sit down 
in the midst of its wrongs and crushed hopes, and, like a mother 



AN ENGLISH WIFE. 269 

whose children lie slain around her, madden as it gazed over 
the bleeding, mangled heaps. A consoling phantasy visited 
me. I dreamed that, by force of eloquent truth, I might 
retrieve the opinion of the world, and finally even compel its 
unwilling and careless attention to the wrongs I had suffered, 
and extort a glorious retribution in its compassion and homage. 

"I revived. I felt even the desire of a brilliant and orna- 
mented existence, which had always animated me, return. I 
deemed myself justified in taking some steps towards the attain- 
ment of this condition by the flourishing assurances of the progress 
of my work . the extensive sale it commanded . in the advan- 
tages of which I was to share. I took a charming little cottage at 
Kensington. I furnished it with elegance . with possibly some 
slight degree of research and taste. In spite of my misfortunes, 
I found there were some independent and superior spirits, who 
judged me from elevations above the paltry prejudices and 
detractions of the multitude. I formed some of these brave 
friendships. In the uproar of public applause I lost the sound 
of those serpent hisses of slander and of the narrow-minded 
credulity of those who believed in the aspersions cast on me. 
Even the cruel sneers and re-echoed calumnies of such as 
envied me my sunburst of popularity troubled me not. I 
forgave their malice for its cause ! I had fame, employment, 
the hope of a still brighter and <more lasting appreciation, 
pleasing society, books, flowers. I dreamed not even then . . 
after all I had undergone . I dreamed not the full, infernal 
egotism and oppression for women of man-made English law ! 
I had laughed till I almost imagined I heard fiends reverberate 
my laughter from the abyss, at my judge's recommendation to 
me to return to my ' duty' . to the roof of the monster who had 
profaned and betrayed me so inexplicably beyond the measure 
of all infamy, that even in that terrible brief, which will some 
day be his scroll of damnation, I had not dared to hint at all 
his atrocity ! But I thought those were merely words of jeering 
and stony mockery, withoul validity or power of fulfilment. I 
thought I had only to refuse submission to the horrors of such 
a decree, to turn aside its blasting descent from my head. 

" I was destined to discover my mistake. I needed money, 
and I applied to my publisher . who confessed himself my 
debtor in a heavy balance. But a wonderful circumstance had 
happened. In the brief interval since I had seen this gentleman 
last, nry whole glass palace of fortune had received a stone, 
that shivered all its diamond panes ! It came from my 
husband's sling ! From the dungeon where he had not yet 
expiated the slight punishment ordained for his enormities, he 
had sent my publisher a peremptory notice not to pay a single 
farthing of my earnings to any one but to himself, my husband, 
as he called himself. The former, therefore, declined, without 
my 'husband's' signature to the receipt, to hand over to me 



270 mauxevebeb's biyoece. 

the sums due to me, or even any smaller portion on account, 
excepting as a loan to myself personally, .which he must 
depend upon my honour to repay. 

" I could not believe in the full infamy of such law in a 
Christian land . a land that has been boasting- itself the land of 
freedom and security of individual rights for a thousand years. 
I applied to one skilled in the exposition of the deepest com- 
plexities of English law . that labyrinth of the Minotaur, which 
you traverse, after such infinite perplexities and wanderings, 
only to come upon destruction a last. But, involved as it may 
be with regard to male rights and privileges, English law is 
simple enough when applied to women. It consists simply in 
stripping them of all rights, and denying them any kind of 
vindication for wrongs. My good lawyer assured me that my 
' husband ' was proceeding quite legally. He had the power 
to enforce his demand, and my publisher had no power to refuse 
handing over to him the proceeds of my toil and ingenuity. 
Even had the ecclesiastical law pronounced for a divorce in my 
favour, the common law . that beauteous embodiment of the free 
will and conscience of the nation ! . would have continued to 
transfer any property I possessed, or ever might possess, to the 
person whom the Church had deemed unworthy to exercise the 
rights she had herself conferred upon him, in the name of God ! 
'The law of England, my dear madam,' said my man of it, 
quite pleasantly, ' contemplates a species of absorption, or sus- 
pension of the separate existence of a woman during the whole 
period of her wifehood. Wives can have no property even in 
their own persons, unless by pre-nuptial contract . and none 
appears to have taken place in this instance. It makes no 
difference whatever that the propertyin question is the result 
of a woman's own industry and abilities, mental or otherwise. 
Personal property is even more particularly than any other 
made over to the husband by our law ; and what can be more 
personal than the products of the intellect and imagination ? 
Not only what you possess now, but whatever you may possess 
at any future period, is the property of your husband ; and all 
your acquisitions will be his, of whatever species. I am very 
sorry for you, I assure you. I consider our laws on these points 
a disgrace to any civilized community ; but you ask me for the 
law, Mrs. Luxmoor, and I have given it you. Perhaps . in so 
extreme a case as this . I should be loth to advise . but if your 
publisher were a man of spirit, and would not object to the 
defence of an action at lav/, it is just possible that a jury . but 
I own I should not like such an appeal to be made on my own 
authority . because, in a country where the men who make the 
laws administer them, there is no knowing what a jury might 
decide upon as the proper limits of a husband's prerogatives. 
I know what all the judges would.' 

" But my publisher was not ' a man of spirit.' He did not 



AN ENGLISH WIFE. 271 

choose to incur the risk of a law- suit, and he continued to 
withhold my money from me until Luxmoor, quitting his 
dungeon, and no doubt a good deal in want of cash, peremp- 
torily compelled him to pay the whole amount over to himself. 

" Meanwhile, as you may imagine, I found myself reduced to 
great straits in my cottage ornee. But for my dear ' people,' 
whom I took to write for again, after the quarrel with my 
timorous, fashionable publisher, I roust have starved.' But 
you may imagine how miserable I was . continually dunned by 
persons reasonably anxious for their money, and speedily 
trumpeted, in consequence of the denials I was obliged to give, 
throughout my whole neighbourhood as a female swindler. 

" At last I bethought me, or my lawyer suggested, I forget 
which, that as Luxmoor persisted in being my husband, there 
were pains and penalties, as well as privileges, attached to the 
position. My ' husband ' was bound to pay my debts, or go to 
prison for them. I referred my creditors to the Reverend 
Carolus Luxmoor ; but he was a match for me still. He was 
living with his wooden paramour, Madame Le Crampon, in 
wasteful luxury on the product of my novel ; but he suffered 
judgment to pass in the demands made upon him, and my 
cottage ornee was stripped of every article of furniture in it, 
under an execution. The landlord very properly turned me 
out of doors immediately afterwards, and I left Kensington 
with a reputation equivalent to that of a robber and rogue in 
the stronger sex. 

" I now resolved not to write another word, but to compel 
Luxmoor, as I imagined he was bound, to maintain me, since 
he would not allow me to maintain myself. But 1 soon ascer- 
tained that to force this ' husband ' of mine to afford me even 
the necessaries of life, it was indispensable that I should live 
with him, 'cohabit' is the word, under the same roof; dwell 
with the vilest and most detestable of men, and with his hateful 
paramour also, I suppose, at the constant danger of my life, 
and to the certain destruction of my health and whole comfort 
and peace in existence. Luxmoor was not liable for any 
expenses I might contract, unless he had deserted me, or had 
turned me out of doors, or we had separated by mutual consent, 
and he had engaged to allow me a separate maintenance. He 
had not done any of these things, good, inoffensive man ! On 
the contrary, I had deserted him, had left the sheltering pro- 
tection of his roof, entirely without his permission you know. 
Besides, it was also a necessary preliminary that I should be 
reduced to ask my bread at the parish poor-gate, 'become 
chargeable to my union,' before any steps could be taken to 
force my kind husband to allow me a portion of my own earn- 
ings to live upon. 

" After all, I could not bear the idea of the workhouse. So I 
determined to content myself with the poor pay of my penny 



272 jia'cleverer's DIVORCE. 

journals, whose conductors were not so fearful of lawsuits, and 
live as I best might, until it should please God to send me some 
release. 

"But this did not at all suit the designs of my rapacious 
enslavers. They suspected, possibly, that I made money by my 
pen anonymously. So tliey fell upon a new contrivance to 
i'oree me to come to terms with them, and give myself up as a 
laborious bondswoman for the remainder of my life, to provide 
them with the means of ease and luxury. For it is impossible 
that the ruffian, my pretended husband . who, I hear, has 
threatened to take my life whenever he meets with me. or his 
vindictive and jealous paramour, can be in earnest in urging 
on the suit Luxmoor has ' promoted ' against me, in those same 
wise and humane ecclesiastical courts, for what they are 
pleased to style, with that peculiar vivacity that distinguishes 
them, a ' Restoration of Conjugal Rights ! ' I have no means 
now of defending my part in the suit, and consequently I am 

told judgment will necessarily go against me, and 

***** 

" A dreadful scene has occurred since I wrote that and above, 
which has finally driven me on the course in which, dearest, 
once friend . still dearest, whether friend or not . I ask for your 
merciful aid. 

" The wretch Luxmoor, quite sober for a marvel of his usual 
liquids, but drunk with passion and blasphemous fury, has just 
burst into my apartment, in spite of the efforts of the poor 
half-starved woman, the landlady of the wretched abode in 
which I now live. Dreading such a visitation, I had begged 
her to refuse mo to every one. But my dear 'husband' would 
not be denied. ' She is my wife. I will see her ! She is my 
wife, I tell you ! Everything that is hers is mine ! "What the 
devil do you tell me about her apartment, her private chamber, 
being hers ? Everything that is hers, is mine. She has 
nothing, is nothing, while I, her husband, exist.' And burst- 
ing into a hoarse laugh, ' You will see by her terror that she 
can't deny I am her husband.' 

" The sound of his approach, boisterous as that of a cannon- 
ball rending its way through every obstacle, struck me, indeed, 
with a dread I cannot describe. I expected nothing less than 
murder . my immediate destruction. But I was even tongue- 
tied with fear. Had there been any means of flight, however 
dangerous, I should have taken it. But there was none. I 
could only afford lodgings in a garret . at a terrible height 
above the busy and teeming, but rank and pestiferous street I 
was forced to inhabit. The pen with which I was plodding 
through my weekly drudgery dropped from my lingers . 

" However, at first the wretch appeared before me in a very 
different style from what I had expected ; and I recovered my 
senses when I found he did not intend completely to deprive 



AN ENGLISH WIFE. 273 

me of them. He even deigned to apologize for the noise and 
brutality of his approach.^ ' But that naughty woman wanted 
to prevent^ him from seeing his dear wife : let no man, and 
a debiliori, no woman, presume to separate whom God has 
joined. Might he request the good lady, now she was satisfied 
for the credit of her house who he was, to leave us for a few 
moments together? He was sure her children . the one 
especially that was squalling in the cradle in the kitchen . 
must need attending to. She must see, however honest her 
house undoubtedly was, as she said, that no disparagement to 
its virtue was intended. We were husband and wife, not only 
by marriage, but by the extra solemnity of a decree of a court 
from which there was no appeal. No, she would not go ! ' (for 
the good creature hesitated, seeing how frightened I looked ; 
she has a husband herself, a brute, who every now and then 
beats her to a mummy), ' then he must take the liberty of turn- 
ing her out of his apartment ; for since it was mine, it was his, 
and as long as we paid our rent, she was an intruder there 
when he bade her leave it.' 

" I had come to the conclusion by that time, that if he came 
to murder me, he might as well. I was so weary of terror and 
persecution. So I told my kind landlady to go, and she went. 
We were left alone, my 'husband' and I. He is a strange 
fellow, after all, this detestable mate of mine. He sat himself 
down on the miserable little broken-clawed deal table on whose 
planks I write, and said, looking round, quite in a complacent, 
kindly tone, 'Well, you must admit, Sophia, you haven't 
made much of a move in the affair, even for yourself. I declare 
I think my cell in Glamorgan jail was better and more tidily 
furnished than this of yours in Broad Street, St. Giles. And I 
should think this close air can't be good for your health, after 
the brisk Welsh breezes.' And so he went on to tell me, quite 
in the same comfortable, equable tone, that it was really very 
absurd of me to take up with an obstinacy of living so wretch- 
edly, when he knew for certain I might easily earn my eight 
hundred a year or thousand, more, in fact, a good deal more, if 
I followed up my first success properly. Now he would not be 
hard upon me, though I had attempted to make that darling 
Daniel of a judge believe him capable of some degree of un- 
kindness towards me. He knew I had had my troubles ; but 
I must allow I had brought plenty upon him too. He should 
need a wonderful lot of fresh air and good feedings before he 
got over his prison affair. Then, I had deprived him of the 
capital thing he had of it at Llanhowel, and his character was 
so devilishly ragged, that he did not think he should ever again 
be able to earn his living by honest means. Then, I had set all 
my cursed creditors upon him, as if he had not plenty of his 
own. His friends were, he supposed, a little tired of helping 
him out of the ditch : the Suetts had come down handsomely ; 



274 MATJLEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

but even they were growing a little fractious, and one should 
not ride even an unwilling ass to death. 

" In short, he came to make me an offer, which he thought 
would be mutually advantageous, and he would not boggle any 
longer in preliminaries. I must see he had it in his power to 
compel me to anything he thought proper, but he was weary of 
a life of wrangling himself, not particularly fond of lawyers, or 
of sucking oyster-shells. He had no desire to torment me per- 
sonally: he was as tired of me as I could possibly be of him. 
And after all, Madame Le Crampon, who honoured him at the 
moment with her affections, was a very agreeable sort of a 
woman, and took no delight in crossing his amusements and 
enjoyments as I had always done. On the whole, therefore, he 
had come to the resolution of permitting me to separate by a 
formal document, with the understanding that he was to allow 
me one-third of whatever I earned by literary labour, he 
receiving the money in the first place, and I guaranteeing not 
to write less than three novels per annum . which portion he 
calculated would yield me, with a little extra work perhaps, 
quite sufficient to maintain me in a position of comfort and 
respectability. The other two-thirds must go to him, as he 
had many extra expenses at the time, brought upon him by my 
own folly, until things were a little blown over, when he should 
be able to make himself all right again, and very likely we 
might in time agree to look over one another's little failings, 
and be as happy again together as ever we had been. 

"I am surely not such an insane fool as still to cherish the 
slightest regard for this detestable man ! But I do really believe 
it was the mention of Madame Le Crampon that chiefly fired 
me into the frenzy of rage I felt and expressed on this proposi- 
tion. 

Luxmoor then speedily threw off his grinning mask, and 
showed me again the ferocious fiend-face that has always 
lurked beneath it ! Since I would not listen to any reasonable 
terms, he said he would show me in what a husband's authority 

j rl P ts consisted ! He would see what I was busy at then 
and there !. making money on the sly, he supposed! and he 
would know who my correspondents were, and on what sub- 
jects ! It might be useful for him to know !. Was my Lord 
Mauleverer quite well. and how did he like paying his little 
bill at Doctors Commons ? What he got there, he was afraid, 
was scarcely worth the money !. but he supposed his lordship 
indemnified himself for his liberality, some way or other ! 

"My 'husband' then produced a chisel and hammer,' with 
which he came provided, instead of a jemmy and crowbar, and 
began breaking open my chest and drawers, and most shame- 
fully ransacking the contents of the few private receptacles I 
possessed. examining my papers. tossing my clothes. and 
scattering them in the most reckless and brutal manner all 
over the room. 



AN ENGLISH WIFE. 275 

" My cries and lamentations summoned the woman of the 
house, who, finding her interposition useless, at my earnest 
entreaty, ran out for a policeman. But before she could return, 
Luxmoor had made a bundle of the manuscript on which I was 
engaged, and of such articles of wearing apparel which he 
seemed to think might be useful elsewhere . possessed himself 
of a sovereign and some shillings . all I had in the world . 
and had got hold of a letter . the one I had ventured to direct to 
your noble father, as it was returned to me . still sealed . when 
my patience gave way. I seized it to take it away from him . 
and luckily managed to throw it with a jerk into the fire . 
there toas a fire in my grate . would there had been in yours, 
at Mauleverer, dear Hugh-Helena ! . Yet the success had nigh 
cost me dear, for the brute went into such a fury over his dis- 
appointment, that he vowed he would put me into the fire after 
my letter ! And I was struggling with him for my life when 
the policeman came in most opportunely and released me ! But 
understanding ' the gentleman was my husband !' he declared 
he had no authority to prevent him from taking everything he 
pleased to lay his hands upon, belonging (what a pleasant 
word !) to me ! 

" I could, however, and did prefer a charge of assault against 
my ' husband.' But the magistrate, being a man, and of course 
animated by a very proper esprit de corps, took a most clement 
view of the results of a quarrel between ' man and wife.' 
Luxmoor had only to pay a little fine to the poor-box, and give 
his own securities (he could not have procured any other) to 
be of peaceable demeanour, towards me and all other of the 
queen's liege subjects, for the space of three calendar months ! 
And to show that he meant to keep his word, he came yester- 
day evening with a ' monition ' from the Court of Arches in his 
hand, ordering me to return to ' cohabitation ' with him ! But 
he added facetiously . for he was quite in a merry humour- 
that fearing I would not come to my Mahomet, my Mahomet 
was come to me ! In plain English, that he meant to stay with 
me whether I would or not, and as my lawful owner he forbade 
my leaving the house under any pretext whatever ! 

"Nothing but my gristly old rival's jealousy preserved me 
from extremities of brutality I shudder to contemplate ! The 
people of the house dared not render me the least assistance, 
having found out that I was really my persecutor's wife ! But 
I had made up my mind rather to perish, than to remain any 
longer in the apartment confined with him, when luckily, at the 
moment when I was about to attempt a desperate sortie, Madame 
Le Crampon sent up some pretended message about a gentleman 
of the name of Pomeroy desiring to see Luxmoor immediately 
at his own lodgings. And though he cursed and muttered sadly, 
she seems to have him under some control ! He dared not 
disobey . a Parisienne is not quite the sort of personage to be set 

T 2 



276 matjlevebee's diyobce. 

at defiance where the ' sensibilities ' are concerned. He went 
down, and she walked off with him, . but no sooner was his 
back turned, than dreading he might bring her over to his 
plans of coercion, I slipped on a shabby shawl and bonnet, 
charitably lent me by the mistress of the house, and escaped, 
all but absolutely penniless, into the streets. 

" I spent the night under a tattered, cabbage-booth in Covent 
Garden, exposed to all manner of insults ; frequently scru- 
tinized by policemen's bullseyes, and pronounced to be some 
drunken market woman, not worth the trouble of station- 
housing and fining. It was besides a very wet, tempestuous 
night, which was some protection for me from coarser human 
violence. 

" I had still a few pence left to procure a little breakfast this 
morning ; and the poor kind woman at my lodgings gave me a 
direction to a friend of hers, where I can probably remain unmo- 
lested for a day or two. But I am left absolutely destitute ! . 
without even an article of wearing apparel of any value, to enable 
me to repay the little debts I must contract with the poverty- 
stricken but compassionate people who have given me shelter. 

"At the same time . (I formed the plan as I sat listening to 
the beating of _ the rain among the packages of oranges, whose 
scent put me in mind of Versailles). I have devised a plan of 
extrication from my miseries in which I think I can securely 
calculate on your assistance. If I am forced back to the 
custody of that man, I know that murder will ensue . on one 
side or the other ! If men have the right of the club, women 
have their appeal to the poison-bowl ! All English law is on 
the side of my oppressor. English law will compel me back to 
a polluted home. to the arms of an adulterer whose paramour 
will perhaps join in the reception with secret intents to relieve 
herself speedily of so irksome an addition to the family ! 
English law will not, and cannot, protect me from any of the 
most infernal outrages, bodily and spiritual, if offered by a 
husband . and as mine it_ persists in acknowledging Carolus 
Luxmoor ! Therefore I will take myself out of its barbarous 
jurisdiction ! I propose to leave England, and reside for the 
remainder of my days (they cannot be many) on the Continent. 
There I can earn my subsistence, however scantily, by teaching, 
or by renewed literary labour, which must continue anony- 
mous, deprived of every motive of emulation and glory- 
deprived of the impulse which a first success might have given 
to future attempts . but at least secured from the felonious 
depredations of my husband and his paramour ! 

" Perhaps it is as well for me that it should be thus. I am 
degraded, fallen in my own estimation. Never again can I 
merit such triumph as the friends whom I venerate as well as 
love could wish me to _ achieve. If a lily grew amidst cor- 
ruption, could it retain its white purity and musky balm ? I 



AN .ENGLISH WIFE. 277 

shall take the taint of my atmosphere . it must be so ! At my 
best, I could never assume the proper slave-crouch of a woman 
before the world ; and my critics will lose one of their chief 
means of abuse when they do not know that they are abusing a 
woman. I shall write anonymously. What matters personal 
fame to me now ? There are none now whom I wish, like the 
lover glowworm, to attract to me by its glow. I am content to 
live and die in obscurity, so that I may thwart the designs of 
my enemies. I can take no better revenge on Luxmoor and his 
paramour than to withdraw their victim from their grasp. I 
will go hence, and live under a brighter and clearer sky, among 
men and manners not so stern and so roused in hostility against 
me. At Paris, or at Rome, I shall not be shunned as if I had 
the pestilence, merely because I will no longer be the slave of a 
worthless husband, and because I have had the misfortune once 
to be an English wife. 

" Will you aid me in this attempt, dearest Mrs. Pomeroy, to 
the extent I have mentioned ? In the name of your blessed 
mother, whose gentle spirit I learn has exhaled its last sigh, I 
implore of you this aid ! I own myself vanquished by calamity. 
I have nothing now remaining but some last vestige of pride 
and feeling that prevents me from appealing yet again, in 
language I know he would not turn a deaf ear to, to your noble 
father. 

"It would be too much probably . . certainly . . to ask you to 
visit me in this lowly abode, that I might take one last farewell 
. weep for the last time in the arms of her who might have been 
my sister. Alas ! did not your sainted mother's dying words 
confess as much ? " 

I grieved then, and I grieve still in some sort, over the course 
which my conviction of Sophia's hypocrisy and baneful spirit 
of intrigue . of the mischiefs she had done to me and my hus- 
band, and I imagined purposed yet to do us . dictated to me. 

I sent her not money . for money I had not ; but all the 
means of raising it in my power, in the shape of some valuable 
jewels I possessed . my right to dispose of which, having been 
my mother's, I thought could not be questioned. 

I resided in a magnificent house, where everything needful 
was supplied in profusion by the Aladdin's lamp of credit. But 
there was as little ready money appropriated to my use in it as 
if I had been a perfect stranger. Scarlatt, who was ostenta- 
tiously profuse in many things, but mean and miserly in some 
to a wonderful excess, declared that I was too lavishly 
and indiscriminately generous to be entrusted with the strings 
of a purse. 

I applied to him for a hundred pounds. He insisted on 
knowing for what purpose I intended this sum . and when I 
told him, absolutely refused even to furnish me with the 
smaller one Sophia herself had requested. " Let her live with 



278 MAULEVJSSEIl'S DIVOfiCE. 

her husband : that is our best security still against Lord Mau- 
leverer. She is going abroad in the hope only of enticing him 
to follow her, where she can carry on her operations more un- 
molestedly. Do you know what Luxmoor has told me ? . that 
he expects he shall soon have a case for damages against your 
father, from the terror with which she hazarded her life to take 
from him a letter directed in her hand to his lordship. Lux- 
moor is only watching for proofs. Or perhaps they are bribing 
him to try for a divorce in his turn. and they hardly ever 
refuse it to a man." 

I made no reply, but I made a package of my mother's jewels, 
and sent them to Sophia, with these words merely ac- 
companying : " Send me the duplicates, that I may some day 
redeem them. They are yours to dispose of so far. They were 
my mother's, who forgave you dying, although she knew of all 
your unkind treachery to her. I cannot . at least not yet . I 
desire never again to see you. Farewell for ever." 

Nevertheless, I was struck to the heart when in a few hours 
I received the jewels back, with these words in return from 
Sophia : " I asked for bread, and you gave me stones . sparkling, 
precious stones, but stones still. I would not accept my 
salvation with such a message as you have sent with this glit- 
tering glass. But I am not so destitute and abandoned as I 
imagined myself. My misfortunes have raised me friends 
where I could not have dreamed to find them ; and I need owe 
no thanks where I never feared to lose one as I have now . 
eternally." 

What she meant, or what she did, I know not ; but I do know 
that for five years after she lived abroad in a condition, ac- 
cording to report, of even luxurious affluence. It could not 
be positively known, though it was extensively surmised, how 
secured. 



Time the avenger. 279 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

TIME THE AVENGER. 

A lapse of five years after the unhappy events recorded in the 
last chapter, found me on a glowing summer's day sitting in 
Mauleverer Castle, its mistress, perusing once more a letter in 
the handwriting of Sophia Luxmoor, which during all that 
long interval I had not again looked upon. 

It was a reply to an announcement I had been obliged, by 
peculiar circumstances, to make to her, on the demise of my 
father. 

I was sad, very sad. Not merely that the distressing event 
alluded to was brought back upon me, by the contents of the 
letter in my hand, with a painful force which the lapse of 
several months since it had occurred had somewhat deadened. 
But other causes of disquiet were abundantly suggested to 
me in the document ; and I can well account for that I ex- 
perienced, now, as a faithful presentiment of the terrible 
misfortunes destined so soon to overwhelm me. 

The letter bore a continental postmark. Lausanne. 

It commenced in a strain which the tone of my communi- 
cation had neither demanded nor encouraged . a tone of over- 
flowing cordiality and affectionateness, as if Mrs. Luxmoor and 
I had only parted an evening before, and then the best of 
friends. As if our once kindly relations had sustained no 
shock . no rupture . no long interval of total abeyance ! 

It pleased this now skilful penwoman to declare herself 
" melted in a flood of mingled joy and grief" when she recog- 
nized the " dear hand" once more, which she had ceased to hope 
would ever again address words to her that brought back the 
past with some touch of consolation and relenting in its scarred 
and ungainly visage ! So my goodness in writing to her at all 
had effected her ; for she would not, she did not believe, she had 
become to me the " Madam" of my address to her, after so long 
a silence ! But however the case might be with me, I could not 
prevent her from always preserving the tenderest interest in all 
that concerned my welfare. I could not prevent her from 
cherishing unimpaired the love and gratitude she owed to me 
and mine . heightened, if that were possible, by the surprising 
assurance of the generous remembrance and munificent kind- 
ness of which my noble father had made her the object, which, 
to her inexpressible grief, I had communicated with the melan- 
choly intelligence of his death. 



280 matjxevekeb's ditoece. 

Inexpressible grief !. Yes! it grieved her to the heart, she 
said, that this event had been so sudden, so uncomforted by the 
presence of those who, in spite of many unhappy causes of 
alienation, must still have been the dearest to him . the most 
sought for by his dying eyes ! Had not the senseless and heart- 
less customs and suspicions of the world prohibited, with what 
happiness would she have devoted the remnant of her own exist- 
ence . valueless as it was to herself . to have soothed the decline 
of so honoured and high-souled a career . since Mr. Pomeroy's 
unhappy differences with his noble father-in-law so absolutely 
prohibited his daughter's attendance on it ! 

I need not repeat the terms of the extravagant eulogium 
with which it amused this practised female rhetorician to 
garland that repelling and implacable tomb. For even descend- 
ing into it, Lord Mauleverer forgot nothing . pardoned nothing ! 
He continued openly hostile to the last towards my husband, 
and admitted of no advances of reconciliation, on my part, 
which could include him. And of course I could not hesitate 
in my choice between even a father and a husband ! . Yet 
though I longed to find some reason for the tears I continued to 
shed over the memory of a father who had hardly ever behaved 
to me with the common kindness of one, I would not, I could 
not, accept it in that mockingly fulsome panegyric ! For surely 
it must have been mockery which ascribed to that hautain, 
unbending nature all the softest and deepest emotions of the 
human heart, and perceived only a chivalrous elevation and 
grandeur of character in the relentless pride and despotism that 
had always marked my father's ! . From the pen of this woman, 
too, who had done so much to wrong my mother of the flower- 
ing of those late, aloe-like sensibilities, if Lord Mauleverer ever 
in reality opened his stern heart to their exposition, these praises 
came, methought, with an ill savour. In fact, I could not but 
construe much of this fine declamation into an indirect series 
of contrasting lights and sarcasms thrown on my husband. 

With regard to the "munificent bequests" I announced to 
her, Sophia declared that she accepted, " with indescribable joy 
and gratitude," the gift of the little house and grounds near 
Mauleverer Castle, called " Morgana's Haunt," but declined, 
" at once and irrevocably," the legacy of ten thousand pounds, 
my father's dying wishes . which I had so nobly determined 
should be sacred . had assigned to her in addition. 

" I am growing old now . upwards of thirty, I think, though 
I do not register time with too much exactness of late. And I am 
much older in my looks than in my years. you would hardly 
know me, I should imagine," this letter went on to say. " Old 
then . and besides very, very weary I am. Weary of remem- 
brance, weary beforehand of the future : weary of exile : weary, 
above all things, of the life of literary toil and drudgery to 
which I have condemned myself, that I might secure an un- 



TIME THE AVENGEB. 281 

stained present existence, and a competency for the few years 
which the exhaustion of my heart and spirits suffers me to 
hope . or to dread . may yet be mine. You will believe that I 
have worked pretty hard, dear Lady Mauleverer, when I inform 
you that all the works of fiction that have attracted the atten- 
tion of more than the novel-reading: world (though that is a 
gloriously extensive public, too, nowadays), of latter years, 
under the name of ' (Jeouge Diamond,' are written by me . 
and by me alone. _ Are they not a real miracle of labour, if they 
have no other merit ? I relinquished my project of an anonym, 
because I felt such would always be open to conjecture and 
suspicion. The bold assumption of another cognomen has 
hitherto preserved me from the rapacious perquisitions of my 
vile husband. And when I confide the secret to you now, you 
will perceive how incredulous I remain that you could ever 
wilfully have done me harm. 

"As things are, I am in no need of the noble generosity, the 
fruition of which your own assures me. I have amply sufficient 
for my own wants, and I have no relation, or even friend, in 
the world, whom I should desire to leave the richer for my 
passage over its burning ploughshares, excepting yourself. 
Why then should I subtract a sum from your inheritance, 
which a very brief period, I feel in all the waning powers of 
my frame, must restore to you ? A few books and flowers, and 
the society of those dearest friends of my youth, whose remem- 
brance still lingers in my heart, like the scent of rose-leaves in 
an emptied vase, would suffice to make all the happiness I could 
yet demand of fate, which I have yet indeed the moral or 
physical power to sustain. For, dear Lady Mauleverer ! I have 
no longer the strength or courage to welcome even happiness, 
if it came in any. new or agitating form. 

" But now, if it had been given me to choose on all the earth 
the spot in which it would have pleased me best to wear out 
the sands of my wasted existence, chosen I should that most 
charming little isolation, 'Morgana's Haunt.' And yet not 
isolation quite either. If I remember rightly, it is sufficiently 
near the castle to enable its fortunate possessor to share the 
effulgence of that great hearth, at quiet intervals, and yet to 
remain in seclusion from the pomp and parade of state the 
lords of Mauleverer must necessarily resign themselves to at 
times. I therefore accept, with a thankfulness I will not 
attempt to give utterance to, this portion of your dear and 
princely father's bequest, while I finally and irrevocably de- 
cline the pecuniary p.art of his munificence. On my death, 
which is perhaps not very remote, ' Morgana's Haunt' will revert 
to its rightful owners. But, meanwhile, do I ask too much when 
I request yours and the earl's kind permission to take possession 
at once of this delicious asylum, rendered still more lovely to 
me by association with the generosity and affection that con- 
ferred it on me, and have confirmed it to me ? 



282 MAt'LEVEREll's DIVOli.CE. 

" Above all things I need rest, they tell me . physicians tell 
me, whom I have wearied to devise remedies for the inde- 
scribable malaise, rather than malady, that prostrates me. Let 
' Morgana' s Haunt' become my hermitage of repose, and I shall 
never desire to stray from it, for I have found only pain, 
struggle, envy, and sorrow, abroad on the highways of the 
world. I am ill, very ill, as I have said, and these wise men 
Avhom I have consulted, recommend me most earnestly to try 
what my own watery climate will do for me. My affairs in 
England would go none the worse for a little personal inspec- 
tion. I do not even think I shall suffer so much in returning 
to the scene of my long dire agony. I can imagine a hare 
retracing the track of the hunt it has finally escaped from, very 
pleasantly. And I do think even my persevering husband 
(persevering in all evil, beyond praise) must now have given 
up the hope or expectation of coercing me under the obedience 
of those atrocious laws which he endeavoured of yore to make 
the engines of his cruelty and rapacity. He must, I think, be 
weary of persecuting me without the least personal results or 
advantage. Society itself must almost be satisfied that this 
unseverable chain, which the two wretches it pretended to 
unite have dragged at from their opposite ends, until all 
existence for both is entangled and destroyed in its iron links, 
can yet never in reality force us together again ; never compel 
us to litter together again, contented or exhausted, as dogs of 
different species, that have been contending the whole day with 
different instincts at work, coupled at random in a pack. I 
have parted with Luxmoor now eternally, I hope. Eternally! 
He is not very likely to go thither, but I would not even ascend 
to heaven, without tasting the bitterness of death, if I thought 
I should meet with Luxmoor there. So much for this indisso- 
luble union of ours. . Unutterable mockery ! 

" Besides, do you not think my ravening hawk himself must 
discern some degree of indecency and injustice in making any 
further claim on his escaped but half-demolished prey ? These 
live years of my exile Luxmoor has been living in a union of 
his own voluntary formation and keeping, which is much more, 
with Madame Le Crampon. There must be something con- 
genial and suitable in their natures, then, which, but for 
yonder sage-maximed ecclesiastical court, might have received 
a ' solemn and public consecration.' So my worthy judge styled 
my quiet little affair, in an aside chapel of St. Magloire, at Paris. 
There must be, for I have not heard that she has attempted to 
poison him even once, or that he has thrown her out of the 
window, or knocked her down, or set her on the fire ; or, in 
fine, done to her any of the little acts of unkindness, not at all 
amounting to cruelty, he exhibited, at playful, rallying intervals, 
towards me. I hear they are now keeping quite a respectable 
boarding-house for young ladies (adults), at the Court end of 



TIME THE AYE5GEE. 283 

London, under the names of Monsieur find Madame Moorlux. 
And in this establishment, one would hope, my husband's 
genius for knocking about women finds a sufficient and some- 
what legitimate exercise. 

" It is my intention and hope, however, to elude the grasp of 
my lawful tormentor, in case he should be inclined to trouble 
me any more, by the perfect seclusion to wjiich I purpose to 
devote myself at ' Morgana' s Haunt,' I shall besides assume 
another name . a spinster name. I have lived so lung alone 
now, that I really feel quite like one again. And as only you, 
dear Lady Mauleverer, and the earl, if you kindly comply with 
my request, will be acquainted with my true identity, I may 
hope to enjoy the few years, or months, I yet calculate on in 
peace and quietness. For surely the Earl of Mauleverer has 
forgiven the wrongs of Scarlatt Suett ? . if ever I did him any 
. never in my intention, though perhaps in the- perversity of 
my fate. You see I keep myself very well informed on all that 
happens of benefit to you : Earl and not Baron ! The only 
thing that surprises me in the elevation you have both acquired 
in the former title is, that, with his extraordinary abilities, 
Lord Mauleverer has stopped short in the attainment of that 
commanding position in the actual conduct of public affairs to 
which they ought to have raised him. As for any reason of 
complaint I might once myself have imagined I had against his 
lordship, in the long interval of cooling doivn I have enjoyed, I 
have seen the injustice of my exasperation. "Under the in- 
fluence of the opinions he must at that time have entertained, 
I recognize that Lord Mauleverer (the present Lord Mauleverer, 
of course) could not have acted otherwise than he did act. And 
any little superfluity of warmth in the execution of the resolves 
he judged necessary against my projects, I impute entirely to 
the generous enthusiasm of the faithful, though undeserved 
friendship, his lordship seems always to have entertained for 
his unworthy tutor." 

Such were the principal contents of Mrs. Luxmoor's reply to 
the dry announcement I had felt called upon to make to her of 
a circumstance that showed warningly to me how rooted the 
dominion she had once established remained in her victim's 
hearts ! 

My father died very suddenly. of an attack of gout in the 
stomach, to which his latter years' inordinate addiction to the 
pleasures of the table subjected him. I would fain not allude 
to the circumstance ; but it is necessary to state that finally 
Lord Mauleverer sought indemnification for what, it appeared, 
was the second and greater disappointment of his career, in a 
course of the merest sensual indulgence. Thus indirectly Sophia 
contributed also to my father's catastrophe ! In all other 
respects he died as he had. lived. He never forgave my husband . 
nor, by any external sign in his lifetime, restored me to his 



284 MAT/IEVEBER'S DIVORCE. 

favour. Oa the contrary, at the time of his death he was in the 
midst of a lawsuit with Scarlatt, who, as the guardian of our 
children, interfered to prevent the devastations he persisted in 
committing on the landed property of our family, which Lord 
Mauleverer knew he could not prevent from passing into my 
nominal possession and the virtual enjoyment of his son-in-law. 

On the other hand, my father devoted all his endeavours to 
the accumulation Of a species of property which his precaution 
in making me a ward in Chancery, at the time of my flight, 
enabled him to leave secured, as he imagined, for my " sole use 
and benefit," out of the power of the man whom, even in his 
last will, he designated as a person in whom he placed no con- 
fidence, for the security of his daughter's and his grandchildren's 
future comfort and independence of the world ! 

Acting on this angry conviction, Lord Mauleverer left a will 
in which he secured to me, by every known precaution and 
power of technical phraseology, a " separate property," entirely 
out of my husband's control, and in the hands of trustees, of the 
value of a hundred thousand pounds and upwards. This sum, 
his steward told me, was chiefly the savings of the last five 
years, and of his long continental residences, to which I now, 
for the first time, learned he had dedicated himself with the 
view of acquiring the means of recovering his lost county 
influence from the wealthy Suetts ! 

But this property was left to me under certain conditions, 
added in a secret codicil . if I may use the expression . which 
Lord Mauleverer scrawled to me, in the form of a letter, with 
almost his last efforts of understanding and will. 

In the document mentioned he charged the disposable inheri- 
tance in question with a legacy of ten thousand pounds to 
Sophia Luxmoor, and a gift to her of a house and grounds in the 
immediate neighbourhood of Mauleverer Castle, known by the 
fantastic designation of " Morgana's Haunt," for a reason which 
I shall mention by and by. And he assigned, as a special 
motive for this latter bequest, his wish to show his utter dis- 
belief in the main part of the countercharges that had prevented 
Mrs. Luxmoor from receiving justice at the hands of the 
ecclesiastical judges ! . alluding, doubtless, to Scarlatt's state- 
ments of her designs on himself. For not bequeathing the 
former part of the legacy in a more authentic form, he stated 
his reasons to be a desire not to give countenance to the odious 
and dishonouring reports he knew "Mr. Scarlatt Suett" had 
circulated respecting the terms of his acquaintance with that 
" wronged, and unhappy, and gifted woman ;" and the assurance 
of all the lawyers he had consulted that it would be impossible 
so to frame the terms of the legacy as to prevent her " atrocious 
husband" from obtaining the chief benefit of the acquisition, 
or giving him motives to renew the tortures he had already 
inflicted upon her, to extort it from her. As long as Luxmoor 



TIME THE AVENGER. 285 

bad no legal proof that his wife possessed anything, he could 
not reduce her again to heggary, and Sophia might be rescued 
from the life of toil and want my father knew she was subject 
^to, and which she would not hitherto permit him to alleviate. 
My father added that he was satisfied he could confide in my 
good faith and honour, in spite of the treacherous part I had 
formerly been cajoled into, to perform his wish in this instance ! 
But he enjoined me, under penalty of his dying malediction, to 
perform his will in this respect as completely as if he had been 
enabled to assign the gift by due course of law, without the 
danger of thereby enriching one of the most detestable of 
wretches and perjurers on the face of the earth in the person of 
the husband of Sophia Luxmoor ! 

At the conclusion of this remarkable document, my father 
called upon me to witness that he died execrating laws that had 
irredeemably fastened " that bright and mounting spirit !" to 
the earthworm Luxmoor ! and for ever debarred himself from 
repairing the misery of an early ill-assorted union, in one that 
would have satisfied all the life-long wishes and aspirations of 
his heart ! Like most very young men, he had imagined that 
beauty of person was sufficient to make man's happiness in 
woman ! But he had awakened to the conviction that the 
intellectual, the disinterested, the high-souled, were the qualities 
that only could content the ideal and yet truest yearnings of his 
own temperament ; and all these exalted qualities he had found 
in Mrs. Luxmoor! But tyrannous laws intervened, and com- 
pelled her to remain the tortured slave of their lying formulas, in 
the dungeon of her detestable matrimony ! 

I had rigidly complied with my father's instructions. Yet 
not, I own, without feelings of profound dissatisfaction and 
reluctance. 

In the first place, I no longer loved or valued Sophia as I had 
loved and valued her. Long absence, conviction of the dupli- 
city of her character and actions, substitution of other and 
more intimate affections, an enlarged acquaintance with the 
world and with society, which had enabled me better to esti- 
mate the qualities thathad once so dazzled me, allhad contributed 
to weaken, if not to dissolve, her spell. Then, again, the strange 
-vitality of her influence and fascination after so long a cessa- 
tion of their immediate action, alarmed and startled me. What 
little _ I had heard of Sophia during the long interval I have 
mentioned, was of a nature to disgust and alienate. Luxmoor, 
who continued to be favourably received by my husband, 
though I disdained to hold any kind of intercourse with him, 
diffused a very evil report of her manner of life in Paris. He 
affected to know all about it, through Madame Le Crampon, 
" his kind friend's " correspondents in that capital. And as 
Sophia's literary exertions, under an assumed name, were not 
suspected, there were probabilities to support these statements, 



286 ITATJLEYEBEB'S DIVOKCE. 

for she was said to live in very good style in that capital. It 
was nothing that she was also known to be well received in its 
incurious and indulgent society, which asks no questions, pro- 
vided it is interested or amused. 

I felt that I had personally several and heavy, if not alto- 
gether intentional injuries, to complain of, received through 
Sophia's agency. 

Was it not she who had alienated from me the affections of 
my father, who had given him the bitterest and most enduring 
of his provocations against my husband, who had strewn my 
mother's deathbed with its sharpest thorns ? Did I not owe to 
her, in fine . by her own confession owed it . the position in 
which I found myself, riveted for ever, and by the most bind- 
ing ties, to a nature whose uncongeniality every passing hour 
and event more strongly demonstrated to me ? 

For I must no longer conceal the fact. The magnificent 
disguise Sophia's mischievous genius wove for Scarlatt Suett, 
had fallen to rags and tatters in his wear, and I had learned to 
comprehend, but too plainly, who and what he really was to 
whom the ignorant credulity and passion of extreme youth had 
irrevoeably bound me. 

Far be it from me to dedicate these pages to the arraignment 
of a man who can have no opportunity to defend himself in 
them, and against whom my testimony would seem tainted 
with suspicion. Let his actions alone accuse him. The reader 
must gather the causes of the alienation and coldness which, 
long before Sophia's second destructive advent, I admit to 
have prevailed between us, from what he has seen recorded of 
my character and of the principal transactions in which my 
husband figured. He will discern how greatly repugnant his 
notions arid deeds mostly were to every fine sense of justice, 
honour, and generosity . qualities to which I think I may 
assert some claim, without imputation of an inordinate vanity. 
I speak particularly of the circumstances attending the Lux- 
moor trial. The cold-blooded meanness and vindictive dupli- 
city of his retaliation on Sophia, his ungentlemanly, perhaps 
unmanly, betrayal of her misconduct towards him, even had I 
considered her in all the odious lights in which he possibly 
did at that time, would have disgusted any person of feeling 
and sentiment. 

During the first period of our marriage, it is true, Scarlatt 
had taken great pains to preserve around himself some scattered 
glory of that bright illusion which had once so imposed upon 
my youthful imagination. But when he ceased to recognize in 
me the most effective agent of his mean but devouring ambition, 
he regarded it daily as less and less necessary to trouble him- 
self to sustain a part for which nature had not well adapted 
him. The romantic and chivalrous lover degenerated finally, 
by subtle and yet strongly marked degrees, into the exacting, 



TIME THE AVENGER. 287 

imperious, dissatisfied husband. For this husband's sake, I 
was obliged to spend the remainder of my life removed from 
the kindness and protection of my only surviving blood rela- 
tion. His subsequent bitter animosity against my father, 
when he found there were no hopes of retrieving his favour, 
was a constant cause of inexpressible pain to me. As the 
mother and natural protectress of his children, I was bound to 
aid Scarlatt in the preservation of our inheritance intact. 
But how could I have the vehement hostility he evinced in 
the sometimes frivolous and vexatious suits he instituted 
against my father? How relish his undisguised joy in that 
father's death ? How understand his disappointment and 
rage at the manner in which my father disposed of the property 
in his power ? How endure, without sharp remonstrance, Scar- 
latt' s violent and rancorous disrespect to that father's memory ? 

But in the very core of our natures. in mind and in heart- 
there were a thousand natural incompatibilities between lis 
which time and the indifference to which we both came at last 
to conceal or gloss them over constantly developed. Even in 
the first enraptured period of our union, when circumstances 
compelled us to be all in all to each other, it had fallen with a 
strange chill upon me to remark how utterly without emotion 
Scarlatt contemplated the most affecting or marvellous monu- 
ments of the past, while my whole frame thrilled at the very 
name of what we gazed on. He was as familiar as'the guide- 
book with the history of the celebrated scenes and ruins of 
Italy. Yet he would communicate his information to me, as 
we stood in the very midst of those attesting remains, in so 
mechanical and unsympathetic a tone, that even the grotto of 
Egeria became a hard and worthless matter of fact to me while 
he told its dreamy tale. 

But the five years that "followed our final rupture with my 
father, if they completed my disenchantment, by admitting 
me into the secret folds of that cold, haughty, domineering, 
crafty, and revengeful temperament, yet effected for me this 
good : that I had grown accustomed to its manifestations, and 
in some measure reconciled to the failure or betrayal of my 
most cherished anticipations in the married life. 

Not that I suffered myself to become the imbecile and 
resigned slave of the arbitrary character and despotic assump- 
tion of my husband : I had my mother's example before me as 
a warning in this respect. "What had all her implicit devotion 
and submission acquired for her with her husband ? Not even a 
chill approval. On the first opportunity he preferred a woman 
of audacious arid levelling genius, who took delight in denying 
almost every species of established supremacy. Besides, I was 
naturally myself of a proud temper, impetuous and warm in all 
my feelings . governable enough by my affections, but against 
every other means of influence as revolting and resolute as 
my father's daughter might have been most expected to be. 



288 mauleveeee's divoece. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

KISSED OE KICKED ! 

On the whole, up to the period of my father's death, Searlatt 
and I had managed to lead a very fair average married life, 
without any very serious or lasting cause of strife arising 
between us. Our interests . our supposed interests, at least . 
continued identical. We shared abundantly in all the distrac- 
tions and enjoyments the world offers. We were both still in the 
prime of our ages, and, I suppose I may say, retained the showy 
externals that had first mutually fascinated us. 

If, with that fatal instinct of my sex, I discerned but too 
plainly the decline of my husband's first ardent passion, 
through all the moods and effacings of satiety, into that dreary 
period of apathy and indifference that borders so dangerously 
on utter disgust, my oWn discoveries in the secrets of his 
character had kept equal pace, and so nicely balanced my 
regrets with convictions of the little value of the losses I sus- 
tained in those twisted and cross-grained affections that I had 
sunk on my part likewise into an acquiescence that seemed 
probably to him a reflection of his own discolouring and waning 
sentiments. 

But it was not so. If the idolatrous homage with which I 
had at first regarded Searlatt. if the gorgeous but unreal tints 
that once surrounded him had vanished on nearer inspection, 
like the ray from the glowworm . still he had been the lover 
of my youth ; the only being of his sex whom I have ever 
looked upon with the eyes of passion, whom nature and the 
laws ordained I should ever cherish with feelings so freshly 
luxuriant and all-embracing. I had learned inextricably to 
associate the fascinations of first love with his person. He was 
my husband . the father of my adored children, whose beauty 
formed the theme of every tongue that sought to give me plea- 
sure ; and who resembled him infinitely, in spite of the loftier 
and more refined type of their personal distinctions. He was 
not always nor uniformly so much the reverse of that cherished 
ideal of the past. Often as he appeared to those around him in 
every way unloveable, cold, insolent, tyrannical, there were 
times when his whole character appeared to sustain a sudden 
revolution . when he became tender, conciliating, gracious, to 
a degree that reversed the entire impression of his nature as 
completely as a burst of sunshine changes the effect of a pre- 
viously dark and melancholy landscape. And this uncertainty 



KISSED OE KICKED. 289 

of hue. these rapid alternations of strong lights and deep 
shadows . I fear, fix the attention and interest of women more 
rivetedly than the stationary qualities of more estimable cha- 
racters. At such times my early love returned in all its 
strength, like flame driven back for awhile by the wind, find- 
ing less fuel and a more withered and consumed pathway, 
doubtless, on each strong rally, but still the same eager, 
absorbing element. Above all, up to the time of my great 
calamity, I had no reason in any manner to suspect Searlatt's 
fidelity to me as a husband. If he did not love me as he had 
loved me, as my whole nature yearned in all its depths to be 
loved, at least he loved no one better ; had ardent, wild, im- 
passioned feelings for no other, though not for me. The sor- 
ceress had not yet handed him her maddening cup, had not 
taught him to relish the flaming wines of the passions excited 
to delirium, which she knew so well how to mingle in a 
poisonous nectar. The asps of jealousy had not made my 
heart their brooding-hole ; and, in brief, if I was not happy, at 
least I was not miserable. I had the consolation always of 
believing that at all events Scarlatt was proud of me, and 
gloried in being the husband of a woman who was his superior 
in the respects which he himself rated as the highest. I knew 
not then how much of carping envy and secret dissatisfaction 
lurked in the core of all this appreciation, that the station, 
riches, honours I procured for my husband, all became em- 
bittered to him by the very circumstance that it was I, and 
not himself, that had conferred them on him. 

So it was, I think, most certainly. Searlatt's failure in his 
own chosen and favourite paths of ambition was too evident 
and_ apparent to escape the admission even of the fondest par- 
tiality. Devoured by the passion as he was, devoting himself 
finally, almost to the exclusion of every natural and domestic 
enjoyment, to the laborious pursuit of political eminence, still 
the phantoms he sought seemed to elude his grasp. At all 
events, he remained himself always dissatisfied with the pro- 
gress he made, as if what he most desired remained ever 
unachieved ; as if some great void yawned and ached in his 
heart, which the sacrifice of whatever should have been most 
valuable to him as a man could not induce to close. 

It would have been difficult, however, in anything to come 
up to the craving ideal that always mocked the fruition of 
Searlatt's hopes_ with disappointment. But the degrees of 
success _ he obtained were certainly not sufficient to content 
a less inordinate thirst. In spite of all his efforts, and the 
zealous co-operation of Luxmoor's really masterly talents, un- 
weariedly exerted in that behalf, my husband could never 
force himself into the eminence he desired to attain as a party 
chief. He knew not how to win men's allegiance through their 
affections. He acquired no other reputation as a speaker than 

v 



290 mattlevekek's divokce. 

such as a perfect mastery of figures and details, rhetorical lan- 
guage, and laborious, unswaying argumentation, could win for 
one. He had a weakness to affect the wittily sarcastic, for 
which natural talent had not qualified him : and no failure is 
so complete and conspicuous as in the handling of those light 
and brilliant weapons that attract admiration only by finesse 
of stroke, but claim so much attention by their preliminary 
glitter. He acquired no substantial or commanding influence 
in the party to which he had devoted himself. And he was 
obliged at last to content himself, as the reward of protracted 
services to it, with an elevation to the peerage in what might 
fairly be called my right rather than his own. The Crown . in 
other words, the minister of the day . refused to create two 
peerages in our family by elevating him, on my father's death, 
to the Upper House, with the possibility of my son's inheriting 
our ancient barony in his father's lifetime by my decease. But 
it consented to raise the title to an earldom in our joint favour, 
on condition of the surrender of the earlier Mauleverer patents. 
I was grieved to change the ancient barony of my house for a 
modern earldom ; but my husband's heart was so set on tho 
point, that unless I had been disposed to quarrel with him 
absolutely and irreconcileably, I must have yielded . and I 
did so. 

Perhaps somewhat the rather that he continued to lay no 
small portion of his want of success, in attaining the position 
he desired, on me. Scarlatt held it essential to his views that 
we should make ourselves the centre-pieces of a fashionable 
London coterie. A\ T e were neither of us very well adapted 
for success in this task. I was too impatient of restraint, too 
plain-spoken, too proud . let me say it in one word . too honest, 
ever to succeed as the mistress of a salon which was to combine 
social and political objects. Scarlatt, on his part, was too con- 
descending, too indefatigably attentive, too much a man of 
forms and phrases, to become popular as a leader of fashionable 
frivolity and amusement. We spent large sums of money on 
grand entertainments, balls, concerts, soirees, matinees ; but 
we did not become popular leaders of ton. And of this my 
husband laid all the blame on me. I frightened the men by 
the satirical tone of my remarks, and disgusted the women by 
presuming on the "absurd advantages" of my face and person. 

Meanwhile we were amused with our separate toys, or were 
at liberty to impute much of the weariness, repulse, and dis- 
satisfaction that arose between us, to external sources of 
annoyance. A constant round of pleasures, or at least of 
dissipations, contributed to dizzy my sense of regret in its 
giddy whirl. Scarlatt remained absorbed in his politics, and I 
had gradually grown reconciled to behold myself become of 
secondary importance even to schemes of puerile and personal 
ambition which almost excited my contempt, when my father's 



KISSED OE KICKED. 291 

death occurred. This event produced an immediate and most 
unhappy addition to the elements of discord already lurking, 
like hidden adders, amid our feet. 

Nothing could exceed Scarlatt's exasperation at finding 
himself excluded, by Lord Mauleverer's precautions, and a 
thoroughly authentic testament, from that uncontrolled enjoy- 
ment of my inheritance, which the fact of there having been no 
kind of stipulations or settlements between us he imagined had 
insured him. 

The reasons for his conduct assigned by my father in the 
secret document I have mentioned, contributed largely to my 
husband's irritation. I do not accuse him, certainly, at this 
time of a deliberate plan to deprive me of the advantages thus 
secured to me. But from that hour forward, undoubtedly . 
designedly or undesignedly . all his efforts, in our financial 
arrangements, tended in that direction. 

Immediately after Lord Mauleverer's decease, I made the 
discovery that we were fearfully . almost unaccountably . in- 
volved in debt ! 

I knew, indeed, that the income my father allowed us . or 
rather myself, for his solicitors would take no acknowledgment 
but mine . must be inadequate to our expenditure. I knew 
that our rupture with Plas Newydd was so complete that 
we derived no assistance from the supposed wealth of our 
relatives there. And I knew, in conclusion, that we borrowed 
money ; because I was often annoyed at the ill-omened, bearded 
presence of a gentleman of the name of Levi, who always 
politely watched while I added my signature to the little docu- 
ments my husband handed me. But I had no suspicion of the 
rate we were running on at . that the terrible power of the 
multiplication table could eventually raise interest to more 
than principal. In short, I never dreamed that we owed 
fifty thousand pounds ! But we did owe fifty thousand pounds. 
My misgivings were put to rest by the confident manner in 
which Scarlatt slurred over the necessity of " doing a little 
shent per shent with the Orientals," only until he should 
obtain some high and lucrative office he was always expecting 
to be offered him in the ministries he served . or silenced, by the 
peevish and dogmatic style in which he reproved my attempts 
to understand the real condition of our affairs. " It was his 
business, and his business only . the man's business . to provide 
the funds for a house ; I had only to look to the expenditure !" 
Though this, by the bye, I was permitted as little to super- 
intend, under the plea that I was entirely ignorant on the 
subject, and so "carelessly extravagant" (which was not true), 
that I should ruin a Rothschild in a fortnight. 

_ To do Scarlatt's system of management justice, it was not 
till after three or four years of profusion that we began to find 
funds fail, and to be annoyed by demands for the liquida- 

T/2 



292 HATJEEVEEEE'S DIVORCE. 

tion of the heavy debts incurred. And those he kept as much 
to himself as possible, until it became necessary to have my 
signature to the various put-offs contrived. But when the 
Mauleverer inheritance lapsed to us, it ceased to be any longer 
feasible, or perhaps desirable, apparently, to spare me my share 
in these vexations. I was speedily brought to see the absolute 
necessity of getting rid of the liabilities we had incurred. I 
had the annoyance, in fact, to find that the event which had 
now taken place had been throughout these transactions 
assigned by my husband as the period of repayment. 

AVhereas it was not so easy for us to comply immediately 
with these demands. The landed property I inherited, being 
strictly entailed, of course afforded only an annual income, 
which, considerable as it was, could only have told in the 
course of years against so heavy an accumulation of debt. And, 
on the other hand, my father had left the large personal pro- 
perty which descended to me so strictly tied up in the hands of 
trustees, that it was impossible to move in the affair without 
their consent. 

Of these trustees, Sir Yivian Ap Howel, who continued 
abroad in India, was the principal ; my father's solicitors . 
Messrs. Sharpies, Staples, and Stopples . being joined with him 
in the administration. And this circumstance was a peculiar 
addition of irritation and exasperation to Scarlatt's feelings on 
the subject. 

Moreover, in the secret document formerly alluded to, which 
he insisted on perusing, a reason for this particular selection 
was stated very galling to his pride. My father therein de- 
clared to me, that while his distrust of my husband's avidity 
remained unabated, a statement made to him by Mrs. Luxmoor 
had satisfied him that the only circumstance which could give 
him cause to doubt the prudence and honour of Sir Vivian was 
explained so as to enhance his already very high opinion of his 
noble qualities ; while at the same time it convinced him that 
my interests could not be placed in hands more resolute to 
maintain them. This could only allude to the scene at the 
Kerig y Drudion, in which Scarlatt seemed always to be con- 
scious he had not played a part that redounded particularly to 
his credit. 

It was, however, necessary to apply to Sir Vivian to obtain 
his consent to the application of a portion of the funds placed 
under his control to the payment of our debts. And this office . 
greatly against my will . was peremptorily deputed to me by 
my husband. He declared he would himself rather "rot in a 
jail" than become a suppliant to that " Sepoy fellow" for leave, 
forsooth, to do what we liked with our own ! He was an old 
friend of mine, and for the sake of " Auld lang syne," he dared 
say, would still refuse nothing I might be pleased to ask. I 
need not enter into particulars : we were not going to make him 



KISSED CE KICKED. 293 

judge of the right or wrong, prudence or extravagance, in. our 
affairs. At that distance, it was only necessary Sir Vivian 
should give his consent to what the other trustees at home 
thought advisable. He must have enough to do in his Indian 
satrapy, without mixing himself up in matters that so little 
concerned him. 

I can truly aver, that during the seven years of Sir Yivian's 
now protracted absence in India, I had not wilfully once re- 
called him to mind. But his extraordinary actions would not 
permit him to be forgotten. All England had glowed with 
triumph and delight over an achievement by which, still almost 
a mere boy, he had signalized his name on his first arrival in 
India. Coming upon the scene of operations in the midst of the 
wildest hurry and danger of the Sikh war, and shut up with a 
raw detachment of some forty Europeans, in a lonely jungle 
fort, Ap Howel there effectually resisted the attacks of a whole 
raging army of our swarthy enemies, and prevented the revolt 
of an entire province by his wonderful activity and courage. 
In the course of these services he formed one of the first of those 
great irregular corps on whose fidelity and valour it is possible 
our supremacy in the East will ultimately be found to depend. 
And at the head of this levy he took a part in all the sanguinary 
and glorious campaigns which re-established our prestige and 
empire, shaken to the centre by the disasters of the Affghan 
war . a part which kept him continually before the public eye, 
and accumulated honour on his name. His dash and impe- 
tuosity in battle had, indeed, acquired for him the title of the 
Indian Murat ; but more than the glory of military achieve- 
ments illustrated the sudden brightness of that young career. 
In the midst of the uproar, the province he had preserved was 
tossed to the youthful soldier to govern ; and he displayed 
qualities in the settlement and administration of this stormy 
dependency, which almost induced a belief in England that he 
must be some statesman of ripe and solid experience, instead of 
one in the earliest years of manhood, who had only previously 
established a reputation for desperate energy and "pluck" 
among schoolboys. 

I cannot deny that I heard of the young hero's renown . that 
I followed his career of fame . with tingling ears, with a swell- 
ing heart, and at times with moistening eyes. "Wherefore, I did 
not then stop to inquire, and will not now. But the struggle 
for our supremacy in India had now for some time terminated. 
The names of Indian warriors ceased to resound in our insular 
ears. All that for a considerable period I had certainly known 
of Sir Vivian was that his regiment returned to Europe, but 
that he remained in India, having accepted a high commission 
in the Company's service, coupled with an office in the adminis- 
tration of the conquered provinces which almost realised his 
boyhood's dream of princely sway. He seemed resolved to 



294 mattleverek's divoece. 

execute upon himself the sentence of exile he had announced to 
Sophia and myself in our parting at Mauleverer. 

I wrote the required letter of explanation to Sir Vivian : and 
I must confess it was not exactly such a letter as a lawyer 
might have quilled on a similar occasion. How could I help 
alluding to the renown he had acquired ? . how, in common 
civility, avoid expressing a hope that his friends in England 
might yet have the satisfaction of welcoming him home to his 
native country ? Scarlatt sneered at all this . but he admitted 
that my letter was well " calculated to serve the purpose in 
view." And it was despatched on its errand. 

Very shortly after, the first really direct and open concussion 
between my husband and myself was produced by the circum- 
stances relative to Sophia's legacy. 

In our position at the time, so large an alienation from our 
inheritance could not but be a drawback of some consequence. 
Scarlatt railed at the act as one of the most senseless dotage . . 
declared it could not be legally enforced . that the document 
was mere waste paper, and ought to be put in the fire. And 
into the fire, I think, he would willingly have consigned it, and 
would have troubled himself very little afterwards to fulfil its 
behests But I was determined such injustice should not be 
perpetrated, and told him so in a manner that, possibly for the 
first time, let him into one of the secrets of my character. an 
inflexible resolution, wherever I imagined my honour concerned 
in maintaining it. In vain did he urge his remonstrances in the 
form of a really terrible exposure of the magnitude of the debts 
we had incurred. In vain did he rail at my determination as a 
first-fruit of the " infamous independence my father had secured 
me, with the sole hope and view of stirring everlasting wrangles 
between us." Although, in fine, Scarlatt announced he would 
resist payment of this absurd legacy, by legal means in his 
power, I was not to he deterred from what I considered the 
right and honourable course. I was resolved that, so far as in 
me lay, Mrs. Luxmoor should have every facility to enjoy her 
rights. 

It was some time, however, before I could discover how to 
make her even aware of them. Indeed, I did not know by this 
time whether Sophia was alive or dead. She had now dis- 
appeared for a long interval from Paris, and consequently 
from the notice of her husband's pretended reporters. The 
executors of my father's will, to whom I had also confided the 
discharge of the legacy, could find no better means of communi- 
cating with her than by advertisement in the newspapers . 
renewed from time to time on failure. But the few persons in 
Sophia's confidence in England, and she herself, long considered 
these notices a trick of her husband to discover her abode and 
resume his annoyances. At last my name and address at Mau- 
leverer Castle, which in the first instance I desired to be kept 



KISSED OB. KICKED. 295 

out of sight, "were added, and she wrote me at once. The com- 
munication just perused was Sophia's answer to a letter from 
me, containing a sufficiently laconic announcement of the piece 
of good fortune . as she had a right to consider it . that had 
fallen to her. 

Meanwhile several other circumstances combined to render 
the wishes, or resolves . I knew not well which to rate them . 
expressed in Mrs. Luxmoor's reply, distasteful to me. 

Lord Mauleverer and myself found our new dignity more and 
more exposed to a contact with degrading circumstances of debt 
and exposure. We had in a manner taken refuge in Wales, 
from the persecutions of our creditors in town, until the result 
of our application to Sir Vivian could be known, and when this 
arrived it produced a new series of disastrous complications 
and misfortunes of a darker hue than any we had yet encoun- 
tered. 

Sir Vivian's reply was very calm and business-like . polite 
almost to formality in its tone, but perfectly decisive. He 
refused to consent to the alienation I proposed until he had an 
opportunity to satisfy himself that it was a proper course for 
him to pursue, with a view to my interests and to those of my 
children. This he proposed to do in person in the course of a 
few months. He had affairs of his own to settle in England ; 
and as the rumour of a possible Russian war held good, and 
India no longer offered a sphere of military activity, he had a 
notion that he might find occupation in Europe, either in the 
Queen's service again, or as a Volunteer to the Turks. But as I 
complained of present inconvenience (Scarlatt had forbidden me 
to declare to what extent), Sir Vivian stated he should be most 
happy if I would accept the temporary loan of a sum which was 
at his own immediate disposal. A short explanation followed, 
by which it appeared that the result of the arbitration be- 
tween the elder Mr. Suett, of Has Newydd, and himself, had 
assigned him the proprietorship of the Howel Mynydd mines, 
on condition of his accepting from the company that worked 
them a certain royalty, in lieu of all other demands and 
arrears, and confirming to them a right to continue their opera- 
tions. Having no immediate occasion for this money, and 
desiring it to accumulate so as to allow him eventually to 
realize his favourite plan of rebuilding Castell Ap Howel, Sir 
Vivian added, he had acceded to Mr. Suett's request that he 
would suffer the greater part of the funds to remain with the 
company, receiving shares as acknowledgments, which in a 
short period would give him a most influential status in the 
proprietorship. And these shares, which by his latest corre- 
spondence with Mr. Suett he understood were at a very high 
premium, Sir Vivian now gave power to be disposed of, and full 
permission to me to devote the proceeds . which he imagined 
would be nearly fifteen thousand pounds . to the liquidation of 



296 MATjLEVEEEE'S DIVOECE. 

any pressing demands there might be upon _me. He gravely 
added that he should expect the same rate of interest as that he 
derived from the Howel Mynydd Company in the assignment 
of these shares, which to him was always made at four per cent, 
below their market value. 

Scarlatt grumbled and railed prodigiously, alike at the delay 
and the interim offer, which he designated as plainly an- 
nouncing a spirit of "poking and interference in our affairs, 
and of the most puppyish patronage and presumption ! " What 
use were fifteen thousand pounds to us ? He supposed Sir 
Vivian thought the sum was something wonderful, taking a 
schoolboy's view of it, of course ! Fifteen thousand pounds 
would buy a prodigious lot of lollipops, no doubt. The truth 
was, Scarlatt had no wish to have the causes of our heavy in- 
bebtedness too nicely looked into. It included (I subsequently 
found) all his own old university bills, to a really extraordinary 
amount, and numerous other items which did not court the 
light of analysis. He was himself conscious that his contractings 
displayed anything but the solid sense and skill in economical 
arrangements he always arrogated as his special characteristics. 
Luxmoor's name also figured among the discount transactions 
in a very embarrassing and inexplicable way. Though no doubt 
one of the largest items connected with it was to be ascribed to 
the expense of the law proceedings in his defence from the 
Llanhowel charges, and again in the baffling of his wife's suit 
in the Arches' Court. 

I vindicated Sir Vivian's generous conduct . as well I might 
. and a new source of discussion and irritation was opened 
between us. But Scarlatt very speedily made up his mind to 
swallow his bitterness, and accept the pecuniary aid thus offered . 
We had, indeed, very little choice . so grievously pressed as we 
were, . and he besides formed the notion that Sir Vivian would 
be engaged the more readily to comply with our full desire, 
when it involved the means of repaying himself his advance. 
I hope and believe Scarlatt could not in any degree have 
suspected how it stood with his father in the case. But some 
unsuccessful applications he had made to him, unknown to me, 
for pecuniary assistance, had violently irritated him against his 
churlish senior. He resolved upon his measures, without 
deigning to consult with John Thomas in the matter . and the 
appearance of Sir Vivian's shares in the market in a few days 
produced the most astounding exposures and catastrophe. 
They turned out to be all forged! . and by the elder Suett ! . 
and that? the affairs of the company were fallen into irretrievable 
disorder and ruin under his management. All this came to 
light when John Thomas himself, discovering that his post was 
no longer tenable, abandoned everything in the utmost confu- 
sion, and fled to Australia, . not without suspicion of taking 
with him the means of making his advent in that colony 



KISSED OE KICKED. 297 

favourably received, to the farther wronging of his numerous 
dupes. This terrible disaster reacted still more uncomfortably 
tban we had even reason to expect upon our own situation. 
Our creditors grew importunate to the last degree. _ Scarlatt 
declared peremptorily that he would not degrade himself, or 
suffer me, by becoming again a suppliant to that "jungle 
fellow " for leave to do what we liked with our own. And. in 
this emergency it was suggested to him . I would fain believe 
it was not of his own crafty and rapacious device. that we 
might raise money on our landed, property, on the simple con- 
dition of my abandoning the exclusive right in it which 
English law capriciously affects to secure to women, in the 
inheritance at least of that description of property. 

It was explained to me that it was only necessary for me to 
go before a commissioner appointed for the purpose, and make 
an acknowledgment that I voluntarily renounced my separate 
rights in the landed property that had. descended to me, to 
enable my husband to raise money on a mortgage of our united, 
life-interest in the possession. It was not explained to me that I 
thereby conferred on him forourjoint lives the sole usufruct, and 
all the powers of ownership, so far as they can be exercised over an 
entailed property. I was satisfied to know merely that my chil- 
dren's inheritance would not be at all endangered. I had evenhopes 
that the necessary restriction of our income until we had paid 
off these encumbrances would also limit my husband's habits of 
ostentatious profusion. In short, I made the required declara- 
tion, and became from that moment, so far as regarded my 
twelve thousand pounds a-year of landed property, a pauper 
and a dependent upon my husband and his Jews. 

I prevailed upon him, however . I made it one of the condi- 
tions of my assent. that we should relinquish our house in 
town, and should retire to Mauleverer until we could place our 
affairs on some footing of retrieval. 

Scarlatt was unwilling enough to consent to this. He had a 
great desire to launch out into yet greater extravagances, and 
air his new splendours in a brilliant Court light. But I was 
weary of London, and of the part he insisted on my playing in 
its turbulent vortex. Nature, as I have admitted, had not 
qualified me for a leader of fashion To attain this position . 
which, after all, I could not. I had been called upon for a 
long period to sacrifice all the real repose and enjoyment of life. 
But now I had grown exhausted even of the spirit of rivalry 
that pervades that outwardly tranquil and. perfumed world. 
I had ceased to wear the bell in London society, after a success 
of two seasons, which I was said to owe to my outward gifts, 
in spite of my wonderful coldness and. hauteur. Our house in 
reality ceased to be popular the moment it was suspected of 
being haunted by duns. Scarlatt was obliged to yield to my 
resolve on this point. 



298 mat/eevebee's ditoece. 

Yet, in spite of our embarrassments, I was surprised and 
grieved at his obstinate determination to interfere in no manner 
with the Plas Newydd businees . to afford his mother and her 
daughter, who still remained there, no species of protection and 
assistance in the progress of the exposures that followed the 
ruin of the Howel Mynydd Company. Scarlatt seemed anxious 
to_ disassociate himself in every way from the connection, . not 
without cause, so far as regarded his father's share in the 
transactions. But he persisted in laying a great deal of the 
blame on poor Mrs. Suett, for what he called, and perhaps 
justly, " her monstrous snobbish extravagance in everything." 
The rest he divided almost equally between his father and Sir 
Vivian Ap Howel. The former he railed at incessantly for 
being " such a clumsy rogue as he had proved himself !" and 
the latter he denounced as the immediate cause of the explosion. 
In the excess of his angry injustice, he did not even scruple to 
declare that he was satisfied it was the result of a regular plan 
on the part of Ap Howel to ruin his father and the family. 
And he more than insinuated Sir Vivian was aware that the 
shares assigned to him were forged, and that the whole trans- 
action of the arbitration took place without the knowledge or 
consent of the company, whom his father pretended to represent 
in yielding to his absurd claims. Sir Vivian knew he had not 
in reality a shadow of support for them, but thought this would 
be a good means of establishing some presumptive right. 

For my part, I visited Mrs. Suett with more constancy and 
even satisfaction than I had ever previously. I did all that 
lay in my power . she herself will not deny it . to console her in 
her misfortunes, and to assist her in the pecuniary difficulties 
she soon began to labour under in the midst of that splendour 
which myrmidons of the law had now seized upon, in the name, 
but entirely without the knowledge or consent, of Sir Vivian. 
His lawyers . with proper activity on their part . had hastened 
to assert his position as proprietor and ground landlord of the 
entire Howel Mynydd property, and succeeded so far, in the 
first instance, as to debar for the time all other claims. 

Of course these circumstances produced discussions and re- 
monstrances between Scarlatt and myself, which did not con- 
duce to our domestic tranquillity. But there were other occasions 
of difference. After the absolute surrender I had made of my 
separate rights in the landed property of my family, Scarlatt 
troubled himself less than ever to observe the degree of deference 
and cajolery he had previously deemed advisable in winning 
my consent to his wishes. He assumed daily more and more 
the tone of master and controller. He had the most extravagant 
notions in the world of a husband's rights and supremacy. 
But they were not so easily carried into execution with me. 
My spirit was still high and unbroken. I was resolved never 
to become the meek, trampled slave my poor mother had been. 



KISSED OK KICKED. 299 

And to a tyrant, also, so in every way my father's inferior. 
It really seemed to me, at times, as if Scarlatt had undertaken 
to revenge upon me the ignominy of the subserviency he had 
so long and vainly displayed towards Lord Mauleverer. Our 
discussions grew daily more and more significant of the pro- 
gress of these contrary resolves . the one to be absolute lord 
and despot ; the other never to submit to the yoke of the 
slavery intended to be imposed. 

Scarlatt's absurd and worse behaviour, in his new position 
and. rank, contributed to my annoyance and irritation. His 
excessive assumption of state and distance in his manners 
speedily excited ridicule and dislike, even among his new 
equals ; among his late ones it was yet more peculiarly so. 
He was perfectly intoxicated with his new dignity, and insisted 
on being addressed - as " my lord," on all public occasions, even 
by me ! The consequence was that he acquired the title of 
" My Lord Suett " in all directions, and was known in familiar 
converse among the gentry of the county by the sobriquet of 
" the Beggar on Horseback !" And not satisfied with making 
us subjects of derision in this manner, Scarlatt began to render 
us deservedly odious among our tenants and the poorer inhabi- 
tants of our territory, by the introduction of a variety of 
tyrannical novelties, which he designated as improvements. 
These principally consisted in changing our small holdings 
into large ones, and clearing the country of what he was 
pleased to style its " surplus population." He replaced our 
native Welsh farmers with men from Scotland and Yorkshire, 
exceedingly distasteful and alien in all their habits and ways 
to those they came to settle among. So that indeed this new 
Lord Mauleverer seemed to have formed a project of clearing- 
all the native-born off the land. His course of proceedings 
excited universal discontent, and provoked from me many and 
vehement remonstrances. But I found, too late, I had abdi- 
cated all effectual power of protecting my people from this 
cruel harassment. I could not even save my old trees ! 
Scarlatt cut down an ancient wood of them, which he pre- 
tended obstructed the view, . an attempt to the same purpose 
having yet been the occasion of the last lawsuit between my 
father and him. 

The heart-burnings and contention which all this produced 
may be imagined. But Scarlatt firmly held on his way ; almost 
without consulting me at all, at last, in anything. And when- 
ever he was not busy at some mischief of this sort, he seemed 
to be the victim of the most devouring ennui. I grew at last to 
have little delight or consolation in any of the environments of 
my position. My children were my only happiness . their 
innocent affection became my only resource and substitution 
for their father's finally scarcely concealed indifference and 
neglect. 



300 MATTLEY'EEEft's DIVOECE. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

MOBGANA'S HAUNT. 

Mattees were in this state between my husband and myself, 
when, after a long interval since my father's decease . probably 
seven or eight months . Sophia's reply to my communication 
reached me. On the points respecting her and her legacy, I 
had made the most resolute stand against Scarlatt's imperious 
will, and I had now the consequences to reflect upon. 

I must acknowledge my solitary comments on this epistle 
educed by no means a pleasing train of recollections or antici- 
pations in my mind. 

The consciousness that the act of justice I had resolved to 
complete produced so direct and open a collision between my 
husband and myself, was certainly not softened to me by the 
reflection that my father enforced it upon me as one of gratitude 
due on my part to Sophia Luxmoor. 

Of gratitude ! For, he stated, it was she who had first ear- 
nestly impressed upon him the advisability of redeeming as 
much of his property as he could from the avidity of my husband 
to my separate enjoyment, in the form of personalty and 
money, the law, as I had children, assigning the absolute ad- 
ministration of my landed property to him. 

This was an obligation (I felt it was one now), which it 
wounded a natural, if not a laudable pride, on my part, to owe 
to one who had been in some sort my dependant. 

It may be imagined that the general tone of the letter. the 
voluntary renunciation of that large bequest, which continued 
likely to occasion an open imbroglio with my husband, who 
persisted in his resolution to test the validity of the act at law 
. ought to have given me satisfaction. 

But I do not know how it was ; the calm, almost the dis- 
dainful magnanimity of the refusal, struck me with a vague 
suspicion that some greater, some more engulfing avidity, was 
opening its jaws, insatiable as the sea, beneath my steps ! 

The project of return announced of so near an approach, 
above all, disquieted me. What could this woman, accustomed 
to the brilliant life of foreign capitals. to the freedom of socie- 
ties unrestrained by the strict moralities and conventions of 
our national ideas . mean by desiring so earnestly to return to 
the seclusion of a remote Welsh province ? 

The exhaustion of heart and spirits, so elaborately paraded, 
perhaps suggested a reasonable explanation. But I felt a 



moegana's haunt. 301 

strange, inexplicable distrust of the statement : it was insisted 
upon with so much earnestness. 

I had no confidence in Sophia's professed attachment to me 
now. What good had it ever done me ? What evil not ? I 
was not disarmed by her flattery and placability. Her thorough 
acquaintance with our position and affairs struck me as strange. 
Earl. not baron ! Had she studied the gazette in our favour, 
then? What was her peculiar fancy to return and live so 
closely upon us, conscious, as I thought she ought to be, of the 
little probability that our once affectionate and familiar rela- 
tions could ever be resumed ? I had not forgotten the details 
given by my husband in the Luxmoor trial of the disgraceful 
artifice and fascination of the attempts she had made to ensnare 
him at Plas Newydd. There were times even when I fancied 
traces of her influence yet lingered with him also ! I have 
mentioned how openly he was wont to attribute his political 
disappointments to his want of a wife who, instead of attending 
to her own frivolous pleasures and objects, would devote herself 
as a helpmate in his projects of ambition. And he would often 
covertly rail at me for my non-possession of talents and in- 
dustry which he would say almost redeemed Sophia's moral 
worthlessness ! 

I recalled the various circumstances that might dispose her 
to seek revenge on me . on us both, it is true ; but revenge 
takes various means . is skilful in disguises. Did they not say 
that the Italian poisoners of the Tofana school could give then- 
deadliest venom in a kiss ? 

Already I had learned to dread the remarkable mental powers 
of this woman, which she could devote, as it seemed to me, 
indifferently to good or evil, according to the circumstances or 
reigning impulse of the moment with her ! But now that she 
announced herself as the authoress of the works presented to the 
world under the name of " George Diamond," my fears indefi- 
nitely increased ! 

It was not many weeks since I, as well as most other persons 
addicted to the species of literature, had been reading a novel 
of this same mysterious writer, replete with all the most showy, 
recklessly defying, voluptuous, materialistic qualities of the 
godless intellect of the age, and of the author's peculiar style. 
I had read the works published under this pseudonym certainly, 
because it was a fashion which I blushed to be detected in 
following. But I had never liked them. I had admired, indeed, 
the glitter and glow of their warm and richly-coloured style ; 
the passion and eloquence, tbe wit and brilliant gaiety occa- 
sionally exhibited in their uneven and bewildering variety of 
mood ; even the not unfrequent elevation and beauty of the 
sentiments. But witbal there was something diseased and 
rotten at the core of all these alluring externals, which I had 
always felt ; the beauteous colours and golden shimmer on a 



302 MAUXEVERER S DIVORCE. 

stagnant and putrid pool ! Original, daring, unconventional 
they were ; but these works seemed to me to owe their popu- 
larity chiefly to their exact reflection of an age abounding in 
the contrasts of a fretful and fevered outward activity, while at 
heart all is exhaustion and conviction of the nullity of all 
exalted and disinterested human striving. A period that 
perhaps precedes a revivification of the human race. the ad- 
vent of a millennium. or a lapse into the dissolution and 
despair of a final catastrophe more complete than that gazed 
over by Noah from his ark ! The malady of the age, in short 
. unrest and dissatisfaction with all that is . breathed in every 
tone, mournful or gay, of those tumultuous and daring compo- 
sitions. The spirit whose wild and turbid electricity animated 
them was one at visible war with the world and all its esta- 
blished laws and regulations, was engaged in the work of 
stimulating the passions, chained ragingly in the strong bands 
devised by society to restrain them, into a Promethean rebel- 
lion that should let Demogorgon loose . make of all human exis- 
tence as dreary a waste, or battleground of as insane theories, as 
those in the writer's breast . hurl the gods themselves down- 
wards from their thrones ! I was no longer what I had been, 
to relish this turbid stuff! I was a wife, a mother, on whom 
society had conferred most of its gifts and advantages; a 
baroness in my own right and a countess in that of my hus- 
band, with large possessions of various kinds to preserve intact 
as the inheritance of my children. Of latter times my mind 
had taken a strong tinge of religious feeling. 1 had become 
what is called a Puseyite ; and George Diamond's writings had 
ever seemed to me removed by but fine distinctions from open 
deism and socialism. 

I was astonished . but I was also dismayed . I may add, 
disgusted and terror-stricken . to find that what I had barely 
tolerated as effusions of a warring and rebellious spirit in a 
man, were those of a woman's most unfeminine and unrespec- 
tive genius ! For the most carping criticism could not deny 
" George Diamond" was the possessor of talents fully entitled 
to that exalted designation. 

I had never suspected the identity of Sophia with this literary 
phantom . for such it had continued in defiance of curiosity and 
conjecture, which, after many attempts, failed to assign a 
bodily presence and configuration to the name. Her first work 
was so different, inspired by so contrary a spirit, full of the 
worship of wealth and power, of the established in every form ! 
The discovery now startled me into the conviction that this had 
been written to please a class and A man ; and that as soon as 
Sophia spoke her real sentiments, without dread or restraint, 
they were almost diametrically the opposite of those she had 
professed under the patronage of Mauleverer Castle. How also 
was I now to reconcile the scornful, lurid, Mephistophelan 



MOEGANA'S HAUNT. 303 

gaiety of this last work, " The British Bonze," with the writer's 
dismal and worn-out tone in her letter to me ? 

I felt in my heart, as I have said, a kind of terror of this 
woman. a conviction that her approach would be, for me, that 
of an inimical and most formidable power. Above all, I felt 
that I could not bear she should become a witness of the change 
that had come over my relations with my husband. I had a 
full belief in the reality of the animosity he had so long dis- 
played against her, and I thought my plan would be to consult 
him on the subject, in the expectation that he would devise 
some means to prevent Sophia from accomplishing her intention 
of becoming our neighbour. 

I gave Scarlatt her letter to read ; but it produced a very 
different result from what I had expected. 

" Good heaven !" he exclaimed, as he perused it, " who can 
pretend, after this, to accuse this poor creature of mercenary 
views in anything she has ever done or can do ? to give up a 
sum of ten thousand pounds without a struggle, without an 
effort to retain it ! for she is quite aware of your fanciful prin- 
ciples and wonderful obstinacy, Lady Mauleverer ; and, any 
way, she might have managed to make Luxmoor as great an 
annoyance to me as ever I made him to her. How very kindly 
and forgivingly she speaks of me, too ; for, after all, I ean't 
deny I gave her a terrible serving out that time ; and she is 
quite right in all she says about what I ought to have been at 
this moment in the country. And she is quite capable of form- 
ing an opinion on the subject. What a devilish clever woman 
she must be if she really wrote those novels by George Diamond ! 
Why, I actually had them recommended to me, and have 
studied them as first-rate specimens of the sarcastic and bril- 
liantly cutting style . a regular ' diamond' style, indeed ! She 
is only wrong about the Luxmoors !" he concluded, neverthe- 
less with some visible degree of confusion ; for, during our town 
life, he had been a not unfrequent visitor at Luxmoor's house, 
and sometimes came away from the "quiet man parties" that 
worthy occasionally gave in it, in a state that marked some 
slight tendency to his friend's favourite style of convivialism ! 

" If we don't believe her, pray are we not to believe Mr. 
Luxmoor's statements of his wife's misconduct in Paris ?" I 
asked, with irritation. 

"Oh, they are angry with one another. We ought not to take 
any notice of what either of them says ! She had some cause, 
however, to be vexed with that able old devil ; and it is plain 
now she will never make it up with him But, no doubt, the 
stories told about her in Paris are all that vicious old hag, Le 
Crampon's, lies and scandals ! We can see very plainly how 
she lived, and even how she kept up her dashing establishment 
there. George Diamond is one of the most popular, and de- 
servedly popular, of our modern novelists." 



304 MAriEYEEElt's DIVORCE. 

" Men . some men, at least . may like such writings ; I don't !" 
I replied. " But what are we to do, Lord Mauleverer, to keep 
this clever creature from alighting among us ?" 

"Do? we can do nothing, and why should we? What! 
after resigning such a thumping legacy, could we, in common 
decency, try to prevent the poor woman from taking possession 
of that little, wretched, out-of-the-way hovel your grandfather 
called ' Morgana's Haunt,' out of some stupid old romance? 
And don't you see what excellent company she will be for us. 
for you ? Have you forgotten how fond you used to be of it and 
her?" 

" Have you forgotten how you shunned it, and why you 
thought you had cause ?" 

" Oh, that was when we were at war . secretly at war ; but 
we both knew it. But now, I can tell you, I shall be very glad 
indeed to have such good company within a half-hour's ramble 
of this great desolate jail of a castle." 

" Then you must write to invite Mrs. Luxmoor yourself. 
She will not credit such a change under less than your own 
hand and peal. And believe me, I will have nothing to do with 
invifing such a woman into my society or neighbourhood." 

" Certainly I will. Do you think to keep me still in the state 
of miserable vassalage I was obliged to preserve during your 
father's lifetime ? Am I not entitled to some opinion as to who 
are proper visitors to my wife ? You brought Sophia to Mau- 
leverer formerly against my will ; and, upon my word, I think 
it is but a fair retaliation if I bring her now even against 
yours." 

So saying, he turned on his heel, and left the apartment, 
taking Sophia's letter with him. 

In the space of one little year from that hour I was the most 
unhappy and betrayed of wives and women. 

Was that whole dismal catastrophe, from its first torrent flow, 
to the edge of the precipice, the result of elaborate contrivance 
and craft ? or of the downward, irresistible impulse of a series 
of fatalities and mistakes ? Sometimes it seems to me the one, 
sometimes the other. The mystery constantly eludes my 
analysis. All I know is that the draught was poison and 
death ; of what ingredients mixed I cannot yet clearly resolve. 

I was given a short reprieve. "We were obliged to go to town 
on business relating to our disordered affairs ; and Sophia had 
established herself fully two months in her neAv acquisition 
before we returned to take up a permanent residence at 
Mauleverer. 

Almost immediately after our arrival, Scarlett declared that 
we ought, in common civility, to make Mrs. Luxmoor. who 
was now become our nearest neighbour. a visit of welcome. I 
disdained to allow the repugnance I felt to appear. Besides, I 
thought that my demeanour in a personal interview would most 



MOBGANA S HATTNT. 3 

convincingly satisfy Sophia that her empire of delusion was 
over with me. I wished to assure her also that her renunciation 
of the legacy was not desired or finally accepted by me, though 
Scarlatt had thought proper to assent ta it on his own part. 
In fine, I wished to satisfy myself ocularly whether her report 
of her condition was founded in fact . whether or not I had 
reasons for the uneasy sentiments which I confess continued to 
haunt me. 

What I had heard hitherto_ was of a somewhat reassuring 
nature, certainly. Sophia either affected to accept, or, in 
reality, accepted my husband's answering her letter as an addi- 
tional assurance of welcome on both our parts. And in her 
reply to the proffer of placing the villa in her immediate pos- 
session, she expressed great eagerness to receive it, and an- 
nounced her determination to return to England at once. At 
the same time she declared her wish that she might be known 
on her arrival only as a " Miss Jones," renouncing her husband's 
name lest it should attract his notice, and that of a district 
where it was so odiously familiar. She was herself so altered 
in appearance, she added, that she did not fear to be recognized 
in the recluse manner of life to which she intended to dedicate 
herself. And now this Miss Jones, I heard on my arrival at the 
castle, appeared to be in reality a lady suffering under ill health 
and exceeding dejection of spirits, though with no very obvious 
bodily ailment. She had scarcely, it seemed, stirred out of the 
villa or its grounds since her arrival ; and almost the only ex- 
ception made in her plan of seclusion was in favour of my two 
children, who had been left at Mauleverer. She had en- 
countered them accidentally, on some occasion, but had induced 
their nurses to permit them an occasional visit to her villa, 
under the pretext that I was a very dear and intimate friend 
of hers. There she always received them with the most engag- 
ing kindness and tenderness, . so that the children, anxious 
always, children-like, for amusement and petting, had taken 
quite a particular fancy for her . little Evelyn especially. In 
fact, they both overflowed with pretty, childish cackle about 
their new friend, and how pleasant it was to go and see her, 
and hear her tell fairy-stories at her "beauty cottage," as 
Herbert called it. 

_ " Morgana's Haunt," so the place was properly styled, was 
situated about a mile and a half from Mauleverer Castle, in the 
very heart of the deep woods that hung on the banks of the 
river traversing the park of the domain. Here there was a 
small mimic lake, formed by art ; on the borders of which my 
grandfather built a gamekeeper's lodge, which the more elegant 
caprice of my father transformed into a most fanciful pile of 
architecture, in realization of his notions of a suitable residence 
for a fairy. In the summer, when the surrounding woods were 
feathered with the various foliage assembled on the shelving 

x 



806 MATTLEVEREll'S DIVORCE. 

shores of the lake, this spot appeared a not unlikely place of 
retort for such a being-, and especially for the fantastic and 
illusive sorceress of the legends of Arthur, the fairy princess 
Morgana. Thence it, had acquired its name. My father at first 
intended " Morgana's Haunt" as a summer-house and orna- 
mental feature in the grounds. But taking a great liking for 
the locality, he had fitted up the house as a place of study and 
retirement for himself. And with this view he enclosed a con- 
siderable piece of ground in a sunk but not easily passed ha-ha 
fence, and cultivated the whole into a flower-garden, which was 
the admiration of all the numerous tourists and sightseers who 
in the summer visited Mauleverer. 

l]ut of late years this charming little retreat had been 
t' rrildy neglected. Sophia must have found everything in a 
very dilapidated, forlorn-looking state, for we left it so, having 
no time as yet to devote to any minor improvements on our 
property And the short interval that had elapsed, and the 
m ;ison, which was autumn . or, perhaps her own listlessness 
and the tone of despondency she had to support. prevented 
her from making any effort at restoration. At least we found 
everything at Morgana's Haunt much in the same state of 
disorder and neglect as we had left it. 

Quite against my notions of the proper style in which to pay 
the visit, but, by Scarlatt's imperative desire, we went in an 
open barouche, with quite a retinue of outriders and mounted 
grooms ; all magnificent in a fine new livery he had himself 
planned for us, discarding the old, sober Pomeroy russet brown 
with white edgings, in favour of one of as bright a crimson as 
he could make it, without exactly infringing on the colours of 
royalty. But in his tastes, in all respects, Scarlatt adhered to 
those early infused into him by his mother at Plas Newydd, 
whose tendency to the gorgeous was as that of a peony in the 
sun. I told him we ought to have procured a couple of trum- 
peters, to complete the imposing style of our approach. 

I shall not easily forget the circumstances of this interview. 
When we arrived, our pompous equipage, and thundering 
summons at the gate, only produced the slow attendance of 
one stout, middle-aged Swiss woman, still wearing her country 
costume, who opening it, stared at us for some moments, unable 
to comprehend the meaning of so stately an advent at this 
dilapidated residence. 

Scarlatt impatiently explained in English, and was not 
understood. The poor woman, who had a very honest, motherly, 
careful expression, turned to me aghast, and declared, in Vaud 
patois, that she did not know a word that "Mossieur" was 
pleased to utter. I took up the tale in French, and then we 
learned, though with some hesitation, that "Ma'mzelle Jone," 
her mistress, was with Mossieur her doctor, from the village, 
feeling herself very much indisposed for the last few days. 



MOEGANA'S HAtTN*. 307 

"Worse than, helas! was but too usual with Ma'mzellc, . subject 
to the most deplorable accesses of weakness and of a depression 
toute mortelle. Yet, apparently struck with our magnificence, 
the good woman expressed her opinion that Ma'mzelle would 
be proud to pay her respects to milord and miladi as soon as 
possible, and invited us to enter. 

I should gladly have availed myself of the opportunity to 
withdraw, but Scarlatt would not attend to my movement. 
He drew my arm abruptly in his, and followed the Swiss, at a 
rapid and eager step, along a walk the disordered and ravaged 
parterres on each side of which attracted his notice and dis- 
satisfaction at once. " Oh ! we must have all this put right 
for her ! " he kept saying. " This is too bad ! Poor thing ! she 
must think we have been shamefully careless of her comfort." 

All the apartments of " Morgana' s Haunt" were on the 
ground-floor. "We were shown into one . a saloon . which, 
during my father's time, had been adorned with beautiful 
arabesque designs, and tastefully furnished, also in an Oriental 
style. But it was roofed with a glass dome, several of the 
panes in which were shattered, and admitted the weather. 
In consequence, the paintings on the walls were discoloured 
and decayed with mould and damp. The greater part of the 
furniture was gone : that which remained was much dilapi- 
dated. And still it was the cuckoo cry . " Oh ! we must see 
to this ; this is quite shameful ! " 

I seated myself on a tattered divan in one of the windows. 
I felt agitated . very strangely agitated . strangely altogether. 
It almost seemed to me as if I had, in a degree, survived 
myself. as if I once remembered to have been another person. 
So vividly brought into contrast was my change of feeling 
towards Sophia by what was occurring. 

The window looked out on the lake. Its waters, indeed, 
usually rippled almost quite close to the sloping walk just 
below, Not now. They were shallow, through the choking of 
the springs that supplied the lake, and were nearly overgrown 
with broad leaves of the lotus, now turned of a dun-brown, 
and floating with their decayed sedges on the surface. And 
here again Scarlatt followed me with his cry. "We must have 
it cleared out, and put in decent order, Lady Mauleverer. 
Bless me ! it is no wonder the poor woman is so low-spirited ! 
We must try all we can to comfort her." 

He was saying these very words, when a door opened, and a 
figure, which I really scarcely could have recognized to be 
Sophia's, entered the apartment. 

It was ill-dressed . very carelessly, in fact. in a loose French 
dressing-gown of some dark coarse stuff, scarcely shaped at 
all, excepting that it was fastened by a cotton cord round the 
waist. She wore almost the costume of a beguine nun. even 
a white linen hood, or sun-bonnet, or whatever the ugly thing 

X2 



308 MAUiEVEBEE'S DITOECE. 

might properly be palled, almost as horrid as an old-fashioned 
countrywoman's nightcap. under which her hair . which I 
thought also slightly grizzled . lay in disordered masses. as if 
it had not been put in order for a fortnight ! The figure thus 
ill-robed seemed bent at the chest, as if with some internal 
weakness. And was all this deception, and, so to speak, 
physical hypocrisy? I had much reason afterwards to think 
so. But if so, it must have been by a miracle of stage artifice 
that she had got up her look of haggard meagreness and pallor, 
cast into stronger relief . illuminated, as it were . by the 
fevered light in the eyes, environed by large brown circlets. 
But this light struck me at the same time as full of an 
unexhausted voluptuousnes and devouring thirst for excite- 
ment . and the bright glow which instantly visited her cheek 
seemed to me the hectic of passion in a still fiery and dis- 
ordered blood. Altogether she struck me with the disgusting 
and terrible notion that I beheld before me a courtezan, seized 
in the triumph of her dreadful existence by its consequences, 
in premature disorganization and decay. 

Under this notion, I really could scarcely find words to 
reply to Sophia's eager, almost deliriously excited salutation. 
Nothing, I am convinced, could exceed the frozen coldness of 
the repulse with which I checked her first caressive and 
familiar outburst of emotion and seemingly overpowered sen- 
sibility. I had learned how to rate her effusions in this way. 

It was quite otherwise with Scarlatt. He looked indeed con- 
siderably shocked and surprised at her first appearance; but 
instead of the feeling of suspicion and aversion it excited in me, it 
seemed to awaken in him the most vivid compassion and interest. 
In my life I had never heard him use accents so truly feeling 
and earnest as those iu which he expressed his sorrow, after 
so long an absence, to see her return looking so ill. so very ill. 

Mrs. Luxmoor evidently rallied with difficulty from the chill 
of my reception ; but she replied after a short pause, with an 
appearance of indifference, "Nothing ailed her but the need of 
a little rest. The kind medical man she had just been con- 
sulting had assured her so. But how exceedingly well his 
lordship was looking ; and Lady Mauleverer (she laid a strange, 
lingering, thoughtful stress on the title), she had never seen her 
looking so perfectly. Lady Mauleverer had always promised to 
be one of the most beautiful women of her time; and she had 
kept that promise, as she always did all she made, by exceeding 

But I had grown insensible to the flatteries of Sophia, aware 
of their value. " George Diamond necessarily has an abund- 
ance of fine words always at command," I observed drily. 

Scarlatt eagerly hastened upon this to pronounce a somewhat 
laboured, but evidently sincere, harangue in praise of those 
works ; and I could perceive that Sophia's visage brightened, as 



moegana's haunt. 309 

she listened, with an expression of power and gratification. 
Even the length of the panegyric . which undisguisedly 
wearied me, for I turned yawning away . seemed not at all to 
tire or disconcert her. 

" I thought you would like my books, Lord Mauleverer," she 
said smilingly, at the conclusion. " There is a dash of personal 
reminiscence in almost all my novels which interests even 
strangers, from the natural vitality and force of impressions 
derived from actual feelings and sufferings. But to my friends 
and intimates words which are sometimes nothing to the world 
in general touch the keynotes of a thousand varied strains. I 
am proud indeed to reckon your lordship still in the number. 
But Lady Mauleverer has, I suppose, forgotten too much of the 
past for her to find a source of interest in anything that may 
recall it? " 

"You are mistaken in that supposition, Mrs. Luxmoor. 
I have forgotten nothing," I replied, with perhaps too visible 
asperity. 

" Nor have I," said Scarlatt, in a peculiar, low, deeply-moved 
tone, that attracted my attention most certainly, and brought a 
vivid flash of colour to Sophia's now again pallid and rather 
jaundiced complexion, that showed the glowing hues of her 
blood could yet be very readily revived. 

She looked at him for an instant. The glance was a mere 
lightning of the eye, but fraught with what of inquiry, of 
recognising reminiscence, of subtle revivification of millions of 
half-extinct associations ? I could not tell, excepting by its 
effect upon my husband. He grew pale, arose, and declaring 
that the vapours from the lake were quite overpowering, walked 
away for a few moments up and down the apartment to conceal 
his emotion. 

" But for goodness' sake, Lady Mauleverer," said Sophia, 
turning to me, while the excitement rapidly faded from her own 
complexion, and left it of a really leaden-livid hue, "do not 
call me Mrs. Luxmoor ; unless you wish to bring back that 
dreadful man upon me again, and drive me back to find a grave 
in a foreign soil, from which I hoped I had rescued this English 
dust of mine. I am Miss Jones now, I beseech you to remem- 
ber. _ And I am very happy indeed in my spinsterhood," she 
continued, laughing, while her eye again wandered towards 
Soarlatt's agitated, pacing figure with an expression I could not 
follow or analyze, " and only wonder how any woman can have 
the folly to wish to make herself the sport of the caprices and 
harshness always to be found in the best of men . let be the 
worst, on whom I happed." 

" You have chosen your name better for the locality this time 
than when you came among us as Miss Sutcliffe," I said, I con- 
fess, rather pointedly. 
" I did not choose my name then. Circumstances forced me 



310 STATJLEYEEEE'S DIVOECE. 

to resume my father's, and I was sorry for it : I respected his 
name," she replied, quite patiently. " However, I hope to 
retain this of Jones much longer : it is so common a one about 
here, no one will trouble to wonder who I can be. Certainly I 
never intend to resume my Luxmoor : therefore pray, pray, 
Lady Mauleverer, never sting my ears with its abhorred sound 
again. You see I have discarded the main link of my chain, 
the ring . though it was so tight I had to have it filed off by a 
jeweller, and the dent is still left in my finger." 

"It was always too narrow for you, I suppose?" I said 
maliciously enough ; but I wished her to see that I was no longer 
to be made her dupe. 

Sophia looked at me with a very earnest, a wistful, even a 
plaintive and sorrowful expression, that I own rather touched 
me. Xo doubt her keen perception took in my sarcastic allusion 
instantly. Yet she answered as if she comprehended only the 
superficial meaning of the words. " It hurt my hand a great 
deal and often. But I never speak either of him or his fetters, 
when I can avoid it ; and I find that thinking of them does me 
little good ! Let us talk of something worth the expenditure 
of breath on. of your lovely children, Lady Mauleverer ! What 
a source of delight and infinite consolation have they been to 
me in your absence! What a feast of innocence and artless 
sincerity of affection and kindness ! Their pretty, prattling 
company has lightened the weight on my heart and mind better 
than the society of a score of the most brilliant wits or deepest 
sages that ever worried themselves and others with their vain, 
zigzag illuminations and researches !" 

" I am very fond of my children myself ! I mean, when I am 
at Mauleverer, I like to have them a good deal about me !" I 
answered, testily enough, no doubt. 

" I trust, nevertheless. as a charity. that you will suffer 
them to come and see me occasionally, that I may still believe 
. it will not, I hope, scandalize you to hear me say so. still 
believe in God ! Children are my only books of revelation, and 
of assurance, verily, in the existence of the All-good, the All- 
redeeming, the All-merciful!" 

I was touched. I was even very profoundly affected : this 
solemn utterance of a faith of love so congenial to a mother's 
heart, pleaded strenuously against my engrafted prejudices. 
Yet I was not pleased. on the contrary, I was exasperated, with 
reason. when Lord Mauleverer, with imperious eagerness, anti- 
cipated my office, and declared that his children should come 
as often and see Miss Jones, whom they already loved so much 
.as often as she pleased ! But, meanwhile, he hoped that Miss 
Jones herself would be a constant visitor thenceforth at the 
castle. 

I was so peevish as to say, "I do not know whether 'the 
castle' will be is 9. fit condition to receive visitors for these 



HOEGAH'A'S hauxt. 311 

months to come ! Lord Mauleverer, Hiss Jones, is occupied in 
changing an old feudal castle into a Plas Xewydd. at least 
internally ! The outside defies him, as it has defied many a foe 
ere now !" 

" Stuff, Lady Mauleverer ! I will engage if Mrs. Lux 

Miss Jones. will come and dine with us this day week, to have 
everything in preparation for as fine a banquet as if we expected 
the Queen herself !" 

Sophia glanced at us both. and that glance seemed to take in 
the whole meaning of the scene. 

"I shall be most happy!" she said, with peculiar warmth, 
before I could further interpose. 

" It is arranged, then !" said Scarlatt, joyfully. " "We must, 
in fact, do all we can to put you in spirits again, dear Sophia . 
for I would rather call you by that name than any strange one !" 
he said, interrupting himself with some confusion. " For ex- 
ample," he added, looking round, "we must turn this dreary 
place into a perfect little paradise for you. I will have your 
garden one immense nosegay, before I have done with it. And 
I'm sure the vapours of this nasty pond must be unwholesome 
for you, accustomed to the clear translucency of the Swiss lakes ! 
I will put workmen at it this very day." 

"No, my lord, no !" and she dwelt with a kind of admiring 
internal echo on the sound, though to me her tone had a degree 
of mockery in. it too ! " Things are much better as they are ! 
they suit me much better ! Decay and ruin are my fitting 
emblems. . I must not, above all, have my ponds fished clear of 
my drowned Nereids ; for I am convinced it is their long hair, 
twisted with flowers, that floats on this sluggish water, in the 
shape of those tangled weeds and lotuses ! . Nereids, who have 
drowned themselves in their native element for unrequited love, 
Lord Mauleverer !" 

She gave a long, languid, penetrating look at my husband, 
which I knew . which I almost felt in my own . glided like an 
invisible serpent through his frame ! He shuddered . but it 
was with a pleasurable thrill, and grew . not flushed, as was 
his wont under more habitual emotions . but pale ! very pale ! 
I was irritated to excess . and foolish enough to let my irrita- 
tion and even its cause be almost openly discerned ! " Nereids, 
who had drowned themselves for unrequited love, then, . of 
Narcissus ! . who was too much in love with himself to have 
any to spare for the poor forlorn creatures !" I said, half-stifling 
with exasperation. 

" What a line match, in that case, he and the nymph, Echo, 
would have made ! She listened to her own voice, and thought 
all nature around her answered!" replied Sophia, so sedately 
that it was impossible for me to resent the sarcasm I felt con- 
veyed. But I arose abruptly. " We have made you rather a 
long visit, Miss Jones, in your debilitated state," I said, with a 



312 JIAULEVEKEfi'S WVOHCE. 

touch of scornful incredulity in my accents I could not disguise. 
" However, as Mrs. Suett used always to declare you were much 
handsomer than you allowed yourself to appear, let us hope 
that now you are not so ill as you seem !" 

" I never was A beauty, say Mrs. Suett what she may !" 
Sophia replied, with a satirical twist of the corner of her mouth. 
" But if ever I have been sorry on that account, it has not been 
for my own sake, but for the sake of the divers kind people who 
have done me the honour to like me in spite of my want of it ! 
However, I do wonder, I own, how I won Luxmoor, whose ideas 
of women were all so strictly physical ! . Yet what a gain ! 
"Well, perhaps, dear, kind Mrs. Suett was right," she added, 
with sudden animation ; " at least, I will endeavour to prove 
her so ! . I shall take more air and exercise . and, perhaps, I 
shall not always look such a dreadful fright !" 

" A fright ! I never saw you look more . more interesting!" 
said my husband, rather stammeringly ; adding eagerly . " We 
have a pony-chaise in which the children sometimes drive 
out . I shall be delighted if you will accept it for your own 
accommodation awhile !" 
" But I cannot drive." 

" Oh, I could teach you in a lesson or two ; and it is a very 
wide thing . there is plenty of room in it for Evelyn with us, 
and the boy rides on a little .Shetland of his own now !" Scarlatt 
resumed with officious kindness. 

" It would be pleasant indeed to chat over old times, and 
whirl along as if we could leave the past for ever behind us !" 
said Sophia, with another of those looks that vexed and per- 
turbed me so inexpressibly. " But what will Lady Mauleverer 
say? . Well, thank heaven !" she added, with her old smile, so 
full of finesse, mockery, and conscious power, "it is one of the 
privileges of old age and ugliness. not, perhaps, the most 
desirable one . no longer to excite jealousy, even in the bosoms 
most open to the entrance of the yellow fiend !" 

I laughed . not very pleasantly, I suppose. "Have you often 
excited jealousy, Sophia, in Paris ?" I said. 

She gazed at me ; and I own I was struck for a moment with 
a feeling of remorse, and a conviction that I wronged her. that 
I had pierced her where her heart was still most susceptible. 
Her eyes, so large and wasted in their orbits, had in them all 
the yearning reproach and anguish which some poetizing sports- 
men, not endowed with the true huntsman obtuseness, have 
fancied they beheld in the eyes of the dying stag ! 

" Yes. among the women !" was, however, her quiet reply. 
"The women in Paris," she confined, with a brilliant heightening 
of her whole countenance, " are as jealous of intellectual success, 
as our own poor creatures are of the supremacy of their straight 
noses and blue, hard, unmeaning eyes !" 

" Shall we go now, Lord Mauleverer ?" I inquired, after a 
pause, during which I had been standing. He lingered. 



MORGAXA'S HATTNT. 313 

" I have been considering how we might restore these frescoes, 
Lady Mauleverer !" he said, coldly. "But Miss Jones has so 
much good taste, that I think I can't do better than send over 
our decorator to consult with her. I will bring him to-morrow, 
if you will be disengaged, Sophia !" 

" This place belongs altogether to Mrs. Luxmoor ! You have 
no right to interfere in her plans or notions on the subject !" I 
said, sharply. " And the ten thousand pounds, too ! J" by no 
means accept your renunciation of my father's dying gift, Mrs. 
Luxmoor ! As soon as Sir Vivian Ap Howel returns, I shall 
have it in my power to pay it over to you ; and I shall not fail." 
" Is Sir Yivian expected home again in England?" Sophia 
returned, with evidently vividly excited interest. 

" I hope so ! He seems to intend so, by a latter communica- 
tion to me. He is my trustee, you are not, perhaps, aware !" I 
said . colouring, I own, in my turn, under her keen observation 
as I spoke. 

A slight, almost an imperceptible smile, stole over her lips. 
" Perhaps not ! Of course not : how was I to know ?" she 
replied, relapsing into a tone of profound sadness. " But be 
that how it may, dear Lady Mauleverer, I will never consent to 
receive what would in reality be the strongest of invitations for 
a resumption of Luxmoor's annoyances ! So long as I am poor 
he will not trouble me ! If, therefore, you insist on my taking 
this legacy, be so good as to spare me the trouble, and pay it 
over at once to Monsieur and Madame Moorlux !" 

" He is fast drinking himself to death, I should imagine : he 
drinks worse than ever, now," said Scarlatt, not by any means 
in a tone of regret. " Last time I saw him, he was as bloated 
and purple in the face as a prize mangel-wurzel. Would you 
not be glad some fine morning, Sophia, if you heard that he was 
found dead in a gutter ?" 

A spasm, which she strove to make a smile, writhed over 
Sophia's lips at the words ; it shone over her troubled features 
like a glare of sunlight over torn and flying thunder-clouds, 
and something resembling a dark tear welled from her eyes. 
"No," she said, with singular bitterness ; "for I think I should 
miss him so, if I had no one to darken the universe for me ! 
Think what a blank Luxmoor's fall would leave for me now, 
when there is no other object to replace him in constituting the 
misery of existence to me. I am jesting, of course, Lord 
Mauleverer. And what a weak, foolish idiot I am ! These 
tears are not for Luxmoor," she concluded, placing her hand 
on her left bosom, as if some sudden dart of pain traversed it. 
Then, taking my coldly extended hand in both her own, she 
pressed it with convulsive fervour, exclaiming, 

"Do you know, when I am agitated, even with sudden joy, 
I have always such a fearful pain where the wretch struck me 
that time. If he were to die . anything very dreadful to happen 



311 macleveree's divobce. 

to hini. I believe it would hill me too !" And she burst into a 
passion of seeming grief and lamentation. 

1 drew my hand ha-tily and disdainfully away. this seemed 
to me such an absurd, such a useless piece of hypocritical pre- 
tence. " Yuu are the victim of sensibility, indeed, Mrs. 
Luxmoor, since you have lived so much among those exquisitely 
sensible Parisians," I observed. 

" I must try and get over it, then. I will !" she returned, 
with sudden . God knows. perhaps with vengeful reanimation. 
"Leave me, my dear, kind friends, now. I shall rally best in the 
company of my drowned JVereids ! I shall take care to be quite 
well again, my lord, when 1 do myself the honour to accept 
your kind invitation." 

All the way home, I remember, there was a lively discussion 
between my husband and myself . I maintaining, and with 
perfect truth, that I had never seen anybody look so much 
older and spoilt in the face, in so short a time, as Sophia. He 
maintained the contrary. "Even after all the calamities she 
has undergone, she don't look worse, though she certainly is 
much thinner and paler. What pathos and appeal there are in 
that poor, sweet face of hers ! What a worried, unhappy look 
she has ! I am afraid that affair of the trial sunk deeper into 
her mind than one would have thought." 

" I suppose she did not like to have it known how she had made 
love to another man, to get rid of her husband," I answered. 
" But I am sure I hope, for her own future sake, she is unhappy 
enough in her mind, if half the things people say of her are 
true ! " 

" They are not !" he replied, briefly and sternly. 

"They were chiefly made upon oath, however ! " was my 
response. in a similar key, I imagine. 



THE STINGING OF THE STUNG. 315 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE STINGING OF THE STUNG. 

I will freely admit that for a considerable time after our 
rej unction, Sophia made every possible effort to win back my 
former favour and affection. But whether in love or in hate, 
I am not easily induced to change. I saw too clearly what a 
dangerous creature she was. I distrusted her character and 
her motives. I could not perceive under what pretext she 
arrogated a position of equality with me ; and I felt that after 
the degrading ordeals she had passed through, her society was 
not that which a woman of untainted honour and elevated 
station ought to seek. Nevertheless, I was obliged almost to 
frequent it ; for Scarlatt was always wanting to go to Morgana's 
Haunt, on some pretext or other, and I was determined not to 
allow her the facilities of private intercourse she had formerly 
so perilously abused. 

I took care, however, to retain in my manner the distance 
and reserve which I wished in future to establish in our rela- 
tions. 

I was not mollified. I was affronted, disgusted, by the affec- 
tations of withdrawal from my husband's extraordinary atten- 
tions, which for a time Sophia seemed to think it would assist 
in deluding me to the real character of her projects to preserve. 
I saw she managed, at the same time, to show herself pro- 
foundly grateful to him, sometimes moved almost to tears at 
these marks of commiseration, and possibly of remorse. I 
could not remain blind to her artifices, when I found that she 
put off accepting Scarlatt's invitation to the castle, until it 
became quite an absorbing object with him to induce her to come. 
Meanwhile, on our visits to her, I could plainly perceive she 
discerned all that was " rotten in our state ;" and thus the 
great rents and fissures at which her evil influence might flow 
in . a darkness in the mantle of light ! 

She had the insulting folly, the absurd arrogance, to let me 
understand she perceived the discomfort of my relations with 
my husband, and to undertake to school me in the best manner 
of " retrieving his affections." 

Had I listened to her exhortations, I should speedily have 
reduced myself to become the mere echo, the shadow, the repe- 
tition, of a vain, antic-playing, arrogant, and peremptory man, 
who certainly considered himself my superior in every intel- 
lectual point, but whose supremacy was by no means so indis- 



316 mattlevekeh's ditoece. 

putable now with me, and who bad lost for me in satiety even 
the poor homage men pay to personal distinctions in women. 

I speedily silenced Sophia by her own example. What had 
all her patience, her submission, her condonation, in fact, as 
they called it, done for her with Luxmoor ? Had it " retrieved 
his heart?" had he not uniformly preferred to her a set of the 
ugliest, coarsest rivals it had ever been my lot to contemplate as 
women ? 

On the final occasion of the discussion of these matters 
between us, Sophia answered, slightly flushing up, though the 
habits of her youth had given her a great command over her 
feelings, " But when I appealed to Society, what did it answer 
me ? That I was indissolubly that man s and no other's. I 
thought so at the time you speak of, you know; and did I not 
carry my chain almost as lightly and unrattlingly as if it had 
been one of flowers ? I annoyed the nerves of Society as little 
as I could, I am sure, with the noise, though my shackles were 
of the heaviest kind, and of the coarsest metal ; and yours are 
of gold, and might easily be wreathed with myrtles almost com- 
pletely out of sight." 

" You have deceived me once before with this fine magic of 
words," I answered her in bitter rebuke. " What did you 
not teach me to expect in that man whom you have made my 
husband ! and what is he ?" 

She avoided the direct accusation and impeachment in my 
look. Scarlatt had just gone out of the apartment in a huff, 
after an angry discussion between us as to whether a great 
clump of ancient elms, which intercepted the view between the 
castle and Haunt, should be cut down. I had refused to have 
the park stripped of some of its finest ornaments. Sophia 
affected also to coincide with me ; but she took the other side, 
I was very well aware, with her eyes. 

" Well," said she, with a painful smile, glancing back to see 
that the door was well closed, " what is he i" 
I was violently irritated. 

" Harsh, egotistical, arrogant, a man of words, and not of 
ideas, nor of deeds either ; indifferent to everything but the 
gratification of his own vanity and exorbitant pretensions. 
Indifferent to me ! Not a tender and loving father, but one 
who almost envies his own children the superiorities the blood 
mingled with his in their veins confers upon them. And this, 
this, this is all your work ! You have yourself confessed it . 
vaunted it !." 

" Is the fluid of two colours in the veins of those sweet, 
young creatures ? Why, this is another of the things I would 
fain have remarked upon to you, Lady Mauleverer, if I might 
without offence. You surely cannot expect your husband to 
relish your frequently contemptuous and satirical allusions to 
his descent ! " 



THE STINGING OF THE STUNG. 317 

" I do not. Does he care so much whether I relish what he 
does?" 

" What does he do ? " she returned, the colour stealing, in 
spite of her efforts to prevent it, over her brows. " From all 
I hear, or can imagine, Lord Mauleverer is at least one of the 
most faithful of husbands ? " 

" He seems so; but I suppose the love of variety you once 
remarked as a characteristic of his generous sex will prove 
irresistible at last." 

" Let him find, then, variety in one," she returned earnestly. 

" It is not so easy, Mrs. Luxmoor," I answered, " to be all 
things to one man . as it is, perhaps, to be all things to all men. 
Suppose, now, for example," I continued, enjoying, I confess, 
her confusion at the allusion, " Lord Mauleverer should take 
a fancy to resume his old 'caprice' for you, I am afraid I 
should not find it easy to assume the exact form and features 
necessary to enchant him in such a conjuncture." 

Some strange emotion rose to the surface of Sophia's usually 
placid and resigned countenance as I spoke. But it grew calm 
and smooth again, as a pool whose surface has closed over some 
loathly descent, as I looked at her. 

" I was wrong," she said, after a pause, "to impute so much 
to my own agency in bringing about your union in that 
moment of frenzied irritation. Scarlatt Suett would not have 
paid the least attention to my revelations at Plas Newydd, had 
you not been also the most beautiful young creature he had 
ever seen." 

"It required that, no doubt, to wean him from the fasci- 
nations in which he was involved," I answered, I admit, with 
a sneer. 

Her cheek flushed. " However lightly you may estimate 
that difficulty, dear Lady Mauleverer," she, however, made 
reply, " do not set yourself so vigorously to undo my work, 
or . or . you will succeed." 

" Is this a threat, Sophia ? " I retorted, though I very rarely 
now called her by her Christian name ; and I believe I looked 
away from her worn countenance to my own, reflected in a 
mirror before us, with a contemptuous challenge I could not 
disguise. 

_ She_ laughed. but I remember now the laughter was not 
infectious of mirth. 

A few days after this conversation, Mrs. Luxmoor volun- 
teered acceptance of Lord Mauleverer's long-standing invitation 
to dinner. 

I could not but see and feel that my husband took unusual . 
most indefatigable. pains in arranging everything to display 
to _ Sophia the magnificence and good taste with which he 
enjoyed the wealth and honours she had contributed so much 
to raise him to. He applied himself most assiduously to the 



318 HATILEYEREE'S DIVORCE. 

completion of a suite of apartments lie had had modernized. 
greatly against my wish . and he invited quite a large circle 
among the country gentry, all whom he could have any hope 
would accept his invitation, ostensibly to signify in an agree- 
able manner his intention to become a resident proprietor, but 
really, as it seemed to me, to dazzle Mrs. Luxmoor with a 
display of his grandeur and influence. And the list was sub- 
mitted to her, in order that no one might meet her who, she 
thought, after so long a lapse of time, could recognize her. 
Mrs. Suett and her daughter were thus, of course, erased. 

On her part, when she arrived, I was amazed at the change 
that had taken place in Sophia's whole appearance. She 
seemed absolutely revivified as by some potent Medean charm. 

Her complexion was wonderfully freshened. Her eyes had 
lost their unnatural and portentous shine, and instead were 
pervaded by a deep, fascinating pathos of languor and melan- 
choly which heightened the charm of her singularly attractive 
and subduing smile. Paris had taught her the choicest arts of 
the toilette certainly, if only those comparatively harmless 
ones. Her hair was now arranged gracefully as that of a 
Grecian muse. Her dress was a perfect model of mingled 
elegance and brilliant piquancy of ornament, the variety of 
colour in it being as well matched or contrasted as in a bird of 
paradise. She wore a great quantity of jewels, too, though 
several ladies who were present . I knew not what to make of 
them . thought they were paste. While, at the same time, the 
golden shimmer of her silk robe effectually relieved the sallow - 
ness into which her once very fair complexion had sunk, like 
the whiteness of a marble statue long exposed to the variations 
of the weather. 

I gave this fine lady a very cold reception, but she seemed to 
take no heed of it. Her manner to me was now as reserved and 
distant as my own had been to her from the first of our reunion. 
I have no doubt she came prepared and resolved to reassert 
that old empire of hers, that supremacy of mind and will, that 
irresistible fascination, which in her was the substitute for all 
the personal qualities in which she could not hope to rival the 
great majority of the women she encountered. 

I could not myself but perceive that Sophia gradually de- 
throned me from the eminence I should have occupied, and 
became the centre of attraction and attention to the whole 
company, long before it was dissolved by the lateness of the 
hour. Lord Mauleverer's marked homage inducted her into 
this supremacy. I disdained, in fact, to enter into rivalry 
with the ex-governess of Plas Newydd, and probably did 
myself no little damage in the opinion of our country guests, 
by the reserve and silence I observed, which they mistook for 
haughtiness and disdain. "Where I was not all, I determined 
to be nothing. I had a right to be all under the roof of my 
ancestors, and with the man whom I had made its lord. 



THE STINGING OF THE STTJNG. 319 

And this skilled actress managed in a wonderfulrnanner to 
preserve her spell of melancholy and tearful sensibility, in con- 
nection with displays of the most brilliant coquetry, wit, and 
gaiety . a combination that produced the indefinable, but inex- 
pressibly tender and alluring effect ascribed by antiquity to 
the songs of the syrens, when, with inebriating sweetness, they 
lured their victims into the depths of a visible destruction. 

It could not well escape my attention how much Scarlatt 
was enthralled by these artifices. Strangers noticed it even. 

" Who is the lady Lord Mauleverer is so attentive to ? Some 
very great foreign personage?" at least a dozen persons in- 
quired of me. 

I answered that it was a Miss Jones ; and that was all I 
answered. 

I make no doubt that from the very date of this festivity, if 
she had not come back with a formed intention to destroy me, 
Sophia fell upon her fiendish project of rivalling, and finally 
dispossessing me, in what I held most dear on earth. 

With all her pretended elevation of ideas and sentiments, 
her mind was essentially plebeian. I have no doubt she was 
dazzled, allured by Lord Mauleverer's display, by the glitter 
of a title, by the foolish homage of that assemblage of country 
magnates, under the full influence of the tuft -hunting spirit 
that pervades all English society. 

Much as she gave herself out to be exhausted of the passions 
and their agitations, beyond their stirring impulses, she was 
still no Lucretia. And Scarlatt's always handsome and tower- 
ing person, in spite of the absurd stateliness he affected, was 
one on which the eye of such a woman would rest with appro- 
bation. She loved power . had thirsted all her life to attain it. 
She had to revenge on me numerous social and personal supe- 
riorities which the possession^ intellectual'gifts so paramount 
might induce her to look upon as so many strokes of the malice 
of fate, demanding retaliation. The instinctive repulses to 
which I felt compelled to subject her, doubtless quickened 
these sentiments, until they darted finally all their stings into 
my soul. Sophia was weary, certainly, of earning the luxu- 
rious appliances that had become necessary to her, by a toil- 
some taskwork of the pen, from which no visible glory ever 
streamed and radiated back upon her. Misfortune corrupts ; 
and I have since known that while she so haughtily refused 
ten thousand pounds, she was in reality dependent on the 
chances of the publication she had just issued for the means of 
livelihood in her fairy bower. 

It was not possible, as has been seen, long to conceal from so 
penetrating an observer the development of all the profound 
uneongenialities between my husband and myself, which 
rendered our union so much worthier of a reversed designation. 

Lut it did not follow, because I could not help discerning 



320 matxleveeeb's ditoece. 

the numerous weaknesses, and even worse points, in mj 
husband's character, I was calmly to see him become the 
victim of the artifices of a licentious and rapacious woman 
Calmly surrender him, who had been the idol of a first absorb- 
ing passion, who was still my husband, the father of mj 
children, to the meretricious allurements of such a rival! 

But how was I to resist that torrent of fatality ? How inter- 
pose to prevent the destruction I saw, from day to day, ap- 
proaching me nearer and nearer, looming hourly into largei 
proportions, while I, like an Andromeda chained to her sea- 
rock, could only await, in breathless horror, the advance of the 
destroying thing ? 

It was thus indeed with me. I could not make myself a 
spectacle of jealousy . the derision and laughter of my own 
servants . of my neighbours. of the world in general . by giving 
open expression to the ravening passion which ere long fastened 
on my heart. And what would it have availed to yield 
to its impulses, and display at once my resentment and its 
impotence ? 

Yes, impotence ! for ere long a true mistrust warned me 
Sophia had re-established an empire which my efforts to shake 
only cast into more solid and settled foundations. 

All the time I had no outward cause of complaint afforded 
me. Yet who will say I had not reasonable cause for the 
loudest ? 

My husband's indifference to my society, always, of late, 
sufficiently obvious to myself, increased now to the observation 
and comment of perfect strangers. On the other hand, his 
resort to Mrs. Luxmoor's was as constant, and began to excite 
as much remark. He seemed to consider himself, now, too great 
a personage to be called upon to study a common attention to 
appearances. Although, since her first visit to the castle I had 
done all in my power to impose the terms on which I desired we 
might thenceforth stand towards each other, the cordiality and 
empressement on her, Mrs. Luxmoor's, side remained unabated. 
I left off returning her frequent calls even by the formality of a 
card or a ten minutes' alighting at her door ; but it appeared to 
make no difference. She affected to dispense with the usual 
formulas of social intercourse, in consideration of the great 
superiority of my rank. She who, in her soul, was too proud to 
have owned an empress above her ! . she accepted all my 
husband's invitations, rarely as I seconded them ; and I had 
the satisfaction of presiding at fetes which I knew, in reality, to 
be given in honour of an insidious rival. I was not even at 
liberty to repulse, with the detestation I felt, the marks of affec- 
tion and homage with which she pretended on all occasions to 
approach me. 

Her very looks, heightened by the artifices of the toilette, to 
which she seemed now to devote herself, improved daily, until, 



TIIE STIXOING OF Till: STUXG. 321 

united with the fascinations of her conversation and manners, I 
myself came to the conclusion that Sophia was beautiful. It 
was in vain that one saw with one's eyes that she was not . the 
effect remained the same : she ivas beautiful. The ill-painted 
transparency, illumined by its gorgeous lamp, shone out a 
masterpiece of glorious art, that exceeded the most vivid 
realization of natural effects. 

Lord Mauleverer was constantly at " Morgana'' s Haunt," as 
I have said, under various pretexts ; indifferent at last to my 
refusals to accompany him. I told him I was weary of the 
society there, and he stared at me in amazement. Where was 
there anything like it in that part of the world ? I might as 
well say I disliked the verdure, and flowers, and sparkling 
springs of an oasis in the midst of a desert. Besides, he had 
always business with Mrs. Luxmoor. Now it was to consult 
her on the repairs and improvements necessary in her place, 
then to watch their progress ; finally, when the villa was re- 
stored to more than all its original beauty and comfort, they had 
literary affairs on which to spend the time in one another's 
company. Scarlatt was writing a political pamphlet a part of 
the time, with which he assured me he should effect an im- 
portant revolution in public opinion, on some question that 
interested him. Where could he go for a better critic and 
adviser, in everything that related to literary composition, than 
to " George Diamond ? " Oh, he could now discover, and 
acknowledge that Mrs. Luxmoor possessed quite a profound 
understanding in subjects the most removed from the compre- 
hension of " ordinary women." Even my self-opinioned 
husband confessed to have received many valuable hints- 
positive rays of illumination . from Mrs. Luxmoor's judgment 
and sagacity. In return, she paid him the subtle compliment 
of consulting him on her own writings ; and so they worked on. 

Other pretences failing, they had an inexhaustible one in my 
children. The poor things had grown so attached to this 
woman, who had spells of fascination for them also, that they 
were always asking to go and see her. What more natural than 
that their indulgent father should take them ; and chat a little 
when he was there ; and go again for them, and linger longer 
yet, when their hour or two of enjoyment was over ? 

jS'ot satisfied with all this, they contrived, at last, that Sophia 
should undertake, almost regularly, the function of initiating 
little Evelyn into the first rudiments of her education, as if she 
delighted in returning thus lowly to her original pursuit . so 
weary as she had always shown herself of the office before she 
attained to distinction as a would-be teacher of mankind, and 
had exercised her talents on the loftiest world-influencing 
subjects. 

I could perceive in all this, I thought, a formed design to 
deprive me also of my children's affections. I knew Sophia 

T 



322 MAULEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

envied me their possession ; and I did not believe in the extra 
vagance of her pretended devotion to them. These were th 
conviction and the dread that finally overmastered my patienc* 

Of course, I remained ignorant of what might really occu 
during those endlessly prolonged visits, sanctioned as they seeme 
to be by the presence of my young children. But I knew tha 
Scarlatt always returned to me from them full only of th 
praises of the fine intellect, the wit, the imagination Mrs 
Luxmoor displayed ; the charm she threw around the commones 
association. Indeed, he seemed to me to praise these mente 
gifts in Sophia in disparagement of mine, though I never pre 
tended to such. I was no retired governess, no popularity 
hunting authoress ; I neither knew, nor desired to know, th 
subtlest intricacies of human thought and passion. But 
desired to remain a mother and a wife ; and in these position 
a true instinct warned me Sophia was indefatigably under 
mining me. 

Was I to draw no inferences from the most obvious signs 
Was it nothing to mark with what zeal my husband devotei 
himself, in spite of her affected preference for the disorder am 
neglect in which she found it, to transforming Sophia's abode int 
a little terrestrial paradise ? The constant presents he mad 
her, "mere books and flowers," as he designated them.hi 
increasing coldness, and visible weariness in my society, variei 
only by fits of irascible defiance and exasperation . were al 
these to go for nothing ? Could I avoid the most bitter specula 
tions on the causes of the profound reveries to which Scarlat 
became subject ; the absorbed, absent, fitful train of his commoj 
conversation and demeanour ? 

It had not been so with him when he professed to love me 
But had not Sophia convinced me that he never had realh 
loved me ? 

When she was under my own observation, what did I discern 

Displays of an affected sentimentality, a romantic sensibility 
which all I knew of her satisfied me she mocked at in hei 
secret heart. Intervals of dejection and touching melancholy. 
during which she doubtless meant it to be inferred she wa: 
suffering under a depression of spirits Scarlatt was at liberty t( 
interpret, as I saw he frequently did, into regrets and reminis- 
cences of the past . were in her interspersed with the mosi 
captivating displays of a finished and refined coquetry. Anc 
she was mistress of all the resources of that baleful art : hei 
glance had the subtlety and penetration of flame, veiled and 
beamless as it always was to women. It is my belief she even 
found a wicked charm in the danger and forbidden nature ol 
the allurements she offered. fruit of Paradise gathered under 
the shadow of death. 

This evil magic was not _ acquired : it was born with her. 
Mrs. Suett's strange suspicion that Sophia had formerly dis- 



THE STINGING OF THE STUNG. 323 

scnibled a portion of her rarest fascinations, was but too well 
founded. And it was part of her revenge now to convince me 
that I had not vanquished her in our first rivalry, but that she 
had willingly resigned the field to me. 

I have learned too well that it was so . that when she chose 
to do it, she could inspire in Scarlatt Suett a passion distin- 
guished in no respect from frenzy, save in its implicit ductility 
to an external will. 

Her skill in flattering the inmost, even the most secret 
vanities and hopes of her victims has been often exemplified. 
Scarlatt needed not the finer species of adulation : yet what 
could be more so than the assurance that she . herself a woman 
of genius . regarded him as one of the greatest intellects of his 
age ; as more than her equal in everything ? True, she esta- 
blished this belief in his mind by inferences only, by her 
submission to his taste, her consultations with him ; indirect 
allusions, sybilline vaticinations, seemingly inspired by that 
freemasonry of mind whereby one superior spirit understands 
and welcomes the advent of another. She carried this species 
of flattery so far, as even in my presence repeatedly to lament 
that by becoming a peer, Scarlatt had deprived -himself of the 
fitting arena whence his talents might have swayed the coun- 
cils of England and of the world. 

As to the means by which she persuaded him that she loved 
him . had always loved him, had not her bondage to Luxmoor, 
and his own subsequent engagements with me, restrained the 
impulses of her heart . she needed only the language of her 
deep, melancholy, haunting eyes, and the egregious vanity of 
the man himself, to effect the purpose. 

_ Of course, I remembered also their early association, and its 
circumstances ; and the natural suspicions engendered by that 
past were now verified by the probabilities that I had always 
been preferred only as the more lucrative prize. 

And yet again, all the advantages that had won me this poor 
preference . my birth, my rank, my rich inheritance . seemed 
turned by some malignant spell into reasons of alienation 
against me. At least, my husband frequently, of late, re- 
proached me with them as causes of an insupportable arrogance 
he professed to observe in my demeanour, and a desire to arraign 
all who approached me on imaginary offences I was pleased to 
impute to them, in order more insolently to exercise my pre- 
tended authority of lady paramount of the right and fitting in 
all things. 

I could not deny the charm of Sophia's conversation, for it 
was still even with myself very great. There was such a variety 
in her ideas, and in their expression ; such an infinite play of 
witty mischief, of gaiety and paradox . shifting so rapidly into 
every shade of jesting or sentiment ; at times, passing into 
flights of rare eloquence and poetical elevation, that to follow, 

y2 



524 MATJLEVEKEE'S DIYOECE. 

dazzled without fatiguing the gaze of the imagination. Sophia 
was never a bore, it must be admitted : and you might have 
spent a year with her without suspecting she was an authoress. 
Partly, no doubt, the result of her system of concealment, but 
in greater measure of a certain ostrich-like indifference to her 
productions, which she always asserted herself to feel, from a 
conviction that they fell short of her purposes and powers : thus 
exalting the opinion of her talent, as if it had some centre, not 
yet developed, of intensest glory and radiance. 

Her unflagging gaiety in itself was a powerful attraction 
for a man of slow and gloomy faculties like Scarlatt. It 
was rarely indeed that a tone of reflection came over the con- 
versation when Sophia was present. I know now that in 
solitude nothing could exceed the dejection and even despera- 
tion of her moods. But abroad she was all laughter and 
carelessness. The burden of existence sat lighter on all who 
listened to her. She rarefied the atmosphere of thought with 
her own warmth, and it weighed less heavily on men's memories 
and apprehensions. The scenes of angry recrimination and 
discussion that now became frequent between my husband and 
myself, were brightened even to me by her arrivals, while at 
the same time I could not but remark, with bitterness, the 
effect she exercised in dispelling Scarlatt's morose and churlish 
reserve. His features on such occasions lighted up as if some 
unseen lamp had been brought into the room ; while the relief 
afforded by these visits made the succeeding weariness and 
depression yet more emphatically remarkable. 

Sophia was herself in full possession of the secrets of the 
tedium and dull lacunes of married life, and she was thoroughly 
cognizant of that deep discontent and weariness of the routine 
of common life seated in the hearts of so many men. Pro- 
foundly skilled in human nature, she knew that only the 
unattained excites their desires or their regrets. She detected, 
with her intuitive glance, that Scarlatt, in the possession of all 
the objects of his early ambition, found yet that he had not 
achieved happiness. And she managed, by an inexplicable 
sorcery, to persuade him that this priceless essence of all success 
was in her bestowal. 

It may be thought that I am labouring at an apology for the 
conduct which, as the only means of counteraction placed in 
my power, I ultimately adopted. But not so : I appeal to all 
mothers and wives if I was not justified in the effort I made, 
or was at last driven into, to rid myself of this portentous 
presence ! 

I found it impossible to remove the inauspicious shadow by 
fairer means. My coldness and distance was of no use ; and I 
could not find any way to provoke the "Fairy of Morgana' s 
Haunt," as Lord Mauleverer was now pleased to style her, into 
any direct collision. She enjoyed her vengeful superiority too 



A SQUABE DUEL. 325 

calmly ! She would understand no inuendo . accept no invita- 
tions to a decisive explanation ! She only retaliated upon me 
from remote and unassailable points of retreat, whence she 
could launch her poisoned arrows, seemingly dipped in honey, 
without danger of the wind drifting them back upon herself ! 
Meanwhile, that unworn endurance and patience confirmed my 
dread, and desire to bring matters to some speedy issue. I re- 
membered Ap Howel's words : She crouches to spring ! Would 
that acutely sensitive and proud woman have endured so much, 
if she had not had the most powerful restraining motives . 
designs which her presence and association with us were neces- 
sary to mature ? 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

A SQTTAEE DUEL ! 

I knew there was but one person in the world of whom Sophia 
stood in awe, and who possessed the means, if not very indis- 
putably the right, of restraining the harmful overflows of those 
choked channels of a woman's natural existence ! 

I felt convinced that if Luxmoor knew she was in England, 
and in the enjoyment of means of which he could pillage her by 
his marital authority, he would immediately resume annoyances 
against his wife that would probably compel her once more to 
return to her continental seclusion ! . at all events, to leave a 
spot where she was recognized ! 

But I did not put this lever in action, until my own provo- 
cations had increased to a degree that rendered it impossible 
for me to rest any longer under the burden ! 

The dread of Sophia's designs grew upon me hourly. And 
though unable to pass the strong lines of defensive offence she 
had drawn round herself, I had unhappily succeeded but too 
well in provoking the anger and impatience of my husband. 
Yet it seemed I had nothing tangible with which to accuse or 
upbraid him. The real cause of our dissensions was hardly 
ever even alluded to. And no doubt it may have seemed very 
outrageous, almost irrational, to find fault with him for a few 
harmless civilities to a neighbour. A neighbour in such a 
really pitiable condition of health and spirits . and whom, my 
husband now confessed, we had much reason to reproach our- 
selves with having brought to so forlorn a pass ! For he, too, 
could now perceive the injustice, the uncivilized cruelty,_ of 
chaining such a woman to such a man as Luxmoor, for life, 



326 mattleverer's divorce. 

merely because, in the unguarded innocence and credulity of youth 
and of a trustful temperament, she had slipped into his clutches ! 

I was still, happily or unhappily, as I had been in my girl- 
hood, a person of high and unbroken spirit . perhaps, as I have 
been reproached, of too haughty and exacting a temper. I had 
exalted, though I do not suppose, exaggerated notions, of my 
rights as a wife and a mother . as the source of all the prospe- 
rity and honours that had befallen Scarlatt Suett. My keen 
sense of wrong, of indignity, of resentment, did not always stop, 
I am afraid, to measure its language, moderate the sting of a 
retort, withdraw the poison of a sneer. 

Whereas to encounter me was a man of revengeful, domineer- 
ing, imperative character . who could do nothing wrong in his 
own eyes, and who imagined that whatever pleased himself 
ought necessarily to please others. And Scarlatt owed me no 
gratitude for his success in life . he imputed it entirely to his 
own talents and labour ! So if I too often adopted the style of 
the exacting heiress, he met me with a still worse version of 
the imperious husband. But with so ample a field of retalia- 
tion open to me, in his own birth and family, was I tamely to 
endure those constant sneers at mine . those declarations that I 
inherited all the insolence and tyrannical " assumption " of my 
Norman ancestors ? If my husband thought proper to identify 
himself with a defying narrow-souled, democratic feeling- . was 
not I to adopt my own side of the question, and show him in 
reality that I possessed some of the unquailing aristocratic 
qualities he imputed to me almost as crimes ? 

But what completed the measure of my irritation, was the 
conviction that grew upon me, that Sophia was engaged in the 
task of alienating my children's affections from me ! 

I could perceive, and by no slow degrees, how they grew at 
last to prefer a visit to Morgana's Haunt to any other recreation 
that could be proposed to them ! How they ceased to look upon 
an afternoon with Mama, " in the great room with the pictures," 
as the most delightful of possible contingencies ! They were ever 
prating to me how good " Miss Jones " was to them ; what 
beautiful flowers she had ; what fine stories of fairies, and 
knights, and giants she told them ! Finally little Evelyn 
declared altogether for the fairy life . that she meant to be a 
little fairy herself all her life, with the great one at Morgana's 
Haunt ! My darling Herbert informed me in confidence that he 
was resolved, when he was a man, to put on one of the suits of 
armour in the gallery, and go about killing all the giants that 
would not let " Miss Jones" come out of her garden to the fair 
at Llanhowel, where there were tumblers, and Punch and Judy 
and all, because his nurse had seen them, and he had proposed 
to the " fairy " to take him thither, and she could not for fear 
of them ! 

I bore all this as long as I could. But it was not in human 



A SQUARE DUEL. 327 

nature to endure it always. I determined to resume my children ! 
They at least were mine ! I forbade their nurses to take them 
to Morgana's Haunt any more without my special permission. 
And all their little holidays I endeavoured to appropriate to 
myself. But I soon found, to my inexpressible sorrow, that I 
had not the same faculty of enthralling and amusing even those 
childish fancies ! Their mother had become less to them than 
the wicked Scheherazade, who made her own intellect infantine 
to build those dwarf palaces of splendour for their young imagi- 
nations to revel in ! 

Lord Mauleverer speedily remarked the course of conduct I 
had adopted, and declared his dissatisfaction with it. Sophia's 
name, secretly animating as it did our whole domestic dissen- 
sion, came openly into the arena on this occasion. He stated 
that the company of the children was " poor Mrs. Luxmoor's" 
chief consolation ; that she complained and wondered at their 
absence ; that she was forming their childish minds quite sur- 
prisingly ; and, finally, that he could see no meaning in my 
order prohibiting their visits to the Haunt. 

I answered, much exasperated. Did he think I needed no 
consolation ? The children were mine : I was their mother ! I 
would account to no one for my conduct respecting them ! But 
no one save himself surely would ask a reason why I would 
not suffer my daughter, at all events, to be exposed to the cor- 
rupting influence of a woman whose character he himself had 
done his best to parade before the world ! and whose writings 
continued to attest, that all that was right in the world, and 
by the consent of mankind, was wrong with her ! 

Scarlatt's reply was remarkable. " Since the event you allude 
to, I have had reason to think I was mistaken in almost all my 
opinions at the time respecting Mrs. Luxmoor. Her husband's 
atrocious calumnies entirely misled me ! As to Mrs. Luxmoor's 
writings, it is quite certain the descendants of Norman pillagers 
and adventurers are not quite deified in her pages. But, perhaps 
if the world had treated you as ill as it has treated her, Lady 
Mauleverer, you would give as unfavourable a report of your 
pilgrimage through it. As to any consolation you may need, 
you bestow so little among those around you, that I could not 
imagine you were yourself in such great scarcity of the article. 
But you are very much mistaken, Lady Mauleverer, in imagin- 
ing that, because you are the mother of Herbert and Evelyn 
Pomeroy, you have the disposal of their education and futurity. 
It so happens I am their father ; and the law of England gives 
to the father of minors their absolute control and disposal. 
And I shall use my rights to restore my children at once to 
their favourite and instructive visits at ' Morgana's Haunt ! ' " 

Lord Mauleverer kept his word. I found myself powerless, 
without open scandal. and, perhaps, with it. to resist his 
behests ! And it was then, for the first time, suggested to me, 



32S MATJLEVEEEH S BlVOfiCE. 

by the mention of Sophia's husband in the discussion, and a 
burning conviction of the necessity of ridding myself of this 
woman's evil and masterful presence, that a means to effect the 
purpose existed ! 

In my now matured indignation and disgust, I thought that 
she indeed deserved to feel the authority of a husband, who 
stimulated mine to exert his so ruthlessly ! 

I conjectured pretty certainly that, if I revealed to Mrs. Suett, 
my husband's mother, who this Miss Jones in reality was . 
which had already strongly excited her curiosity . she wouldsoon 
spread the tidings in a manner that would infallibly come to the 
notice of Luxmoor. Up to the time of the bankruptcy, Madame 
Le Crampon, I found, occasionally wrote strenuous begging- 
letters to Plas Xewydd. 

This was a channel of communication it could not be difficult 
to reopen ! 

I know not whether I was to blame in executing this resolu- 
tion. It was attended with the most disastrous consequences to 
myself, and so far I may be said to have had a direct agency in 
my own catastrophe. 

Mrs. Suett still resided at Plas Newydd, by permission of the 
principal creditor of the Mynydd Howel company, which turned 
out to be Sir Yivian Ap Howel ! His lawyers, who had all 
along unwillingly coincided in the plan of arbitration, finding 
that the agreement entered into with the elder Suett was quite 
unauthorized by the mining company he pretended to represent, 
instantly entered a claim on his behalf, which constituted him 
at once the chief creditor of the estate. The Court of Chancery 
admitted Sir Vivian's claim, as original proprietor of the 
Mynydd Howel, in default of any opposition to it on the part of 
the company, which was believed to be too completely ruined 
and dispersed to take upon itself the chances of a litigation 
weighty opinions were shown to have pronounced untenable on 
several previous occasions. These active lawyers were enabled, 
by another adjudication, to seize and retain possession of all the 
buildings on the estate, in discharge of the lord of the manor's 
long overdue and accumulated royalties. A fortunate circum- 
stance for Mrs. Suett; for Sir Vivian. I found on this visit. had 
sent word she was not to be molested there until he had time to 
arrive and make some equitable arrangement for the disposal of 
the property. 

Mrs. Suett's whole conversation was in praise of the "young 
'ero of Lahore," as she called Sir Vivian . and, indeed, as he was 
generally called, in an aspirated form . from one of his most 
remarkable achievements in the course of the campaigns in that 
province. She was busy with great preparations for his reception 
at Plas Newydd, where she seemed to make certain she should 
now prevail upon him to take up his quarters, in preference to the 
" musty, old, topsy-turvy, blacking-bottle tower " on the hill. 



A saUAUE DUEL. 329 

And she more than intimated to me her expectation, in that case, 
of bringing about her former favourite plan of a union between 
her daughter, Bronwen, and Sir Vivian. As Bronwen had 
enlarged into quite as beautiful a wax figure of a woman as she 
had been of a child, I thought I might conscientiously flatter 
this hope . and I did so. But never did wonder and vexation 
surpass Mrs. Suett's when I came to my own affair, and 
communicated . apparently quite accidentally . who my "queer 
neighbour at that flower-place thing " was ! And to the 
strengthening of my own dismayed convictions she jumped at 
once to the conclusion that " the creature would be at all her old 
games worse than ever again, now that Searlatt was a great lord, 
and so well off in all respects," if ever I let him see her again ! 
" No matter for the row between them once ! You never knew 
half the truth of that story, Lady Mauleverer ! I didn't myself, 
until you all made off together . and it was supposed to be her 
and him, you know ! The servants told me then : such goings 
on in a respectable house, by a private woman, I never heard of! 
And she married, all the time ! So it's no security that she is 
still fastened to that Luxmoor ! She made one of the deadliest 
sets at Searlatt ever was, and he was more than half hooked, 
I'm convinced, when you came and got him off!" 

And Mrs. Suett told me a whole string of stories . certainly 
only gossip of servants and similar persons . but which irritated 
me to a degree that I made no secret of the reasons I had to 
suspect Mrs. Luxmoor was resuming " her old tricks," as my 
mother-in-law phrased it . concluding that I should be very 
glad indeed if she could be removed out of that part of the 
country, without my seeming to have anything to do in the 
matter. I would not for the world, I said, and most truly said, 
have it reported, or believed, that I could suspect, or had any 
reason to suspect, such a person of possessing any undue influ- 
ence over my husband. 

Mrs. Suett's ideas instantly turned in the direction I expected 
and wished. " Quite right, my dear, quite right. Jealous of 
such a thing as that! I should as soon be jealous of an old 
broomstick. It would be much more proper and reputable, I'm 
sure, for her to live with her own husband than to go about the 
world trying to get other people's from them. That's the way 
she manages it, I have not the least doubt. Why, I am all but 
certain she was once after John Thomas himself, and, perhaps, 
if she knew where he was to be found in Australia now, she 
would be for taking advantage of his unprotected situation. 
But just you look if I don't put a drag on her wheel. I won't 
say how . but if Luxmoor is so terribly in want of money, I 
don't see why his wife should be lolling in the lap of luxury 
here . at the expense of my son, too, from what you say, who 
cannot afford me a twenty-pound note to pay off an impudent 
footman." 



330 MATTIEVEEEIt'S DIVOKCE. 

My object was gained ; and yet it was surprising with what 
a guilty and uncomfortable feeling. a feeling that I had com- 
mitted a cruel and oppressive act . a breach of confidence . I 
returned to Mauleverer. I repented of my revenge before I had 
secured it, and wished that my project might prove inoperative, 
long before I drove in at the castle gates on my return. 

A piece of news awaited me on my arrival that was not cal- 
culated to restore my equanimity. I found Lord Mauleverer just 
returned home also from Morgana's Haunt, where he had been 
to bring back Evelyn from her now daily resort. I saw at once 
that he looked excessively annoyed, and he explained the cause 
to me with very little preparation, just as I was apprehending 
that he suspected some purport of my visit to Plas Kewydd. 
Sir Vivian Ap Howel had arrived home from India ; had been 
a day or two at his old ruin without letting any one but his 
dependants there know of his return, and Lord Mauleverer had 
found him that very day at Morgana's Haunt, paying his first 
visit to any one in Wales to Mrs. Luxmoor. How he had dis- 
covered her he could not dream, or what on earth the fellow 
wanted with her. It was quite inconceivable why he had made 
his first visit to her. He did not know they were such particular 
friends : were they ? Did I know ? 

I could not refrain from answering : " Jealous, Lord Maule- 
verer ? " with a smile ; but it ill concealed the pang at my 
heart. 

"Jealous! jealous of that puppy ! You and he used to be 
terrible cronies certainly, but I assure you I am not quite come 
to be jealous of such a mustachio'd scarecrow as that !" replied 
Scarlatt ; and I was left in doubt whether my inuendo was 
understood, or simply evaded ; " for he is a shaggier, more wolf- 
like looking fellow than ever, . with a pair of eyes glowering at 
one like some wild horse's in a dark stable. In fact, his hair 
and beard quite hang about his head in the same tattered, mane- 
like way . But, talking of j ealousy , he had the cool impertinence 
to state that, as your trustee, he should be happy to see you 
at the earliest possible period, his stay in England being very 
limited. And he inquired whether he should have the honour 
of waiting upon you at Mauleverer Castle, or whether you 
would be pleased to meet him at your late father's solicitors' 
offices, in Llandaff or London ? Those great, unkicked gentle- 
men, Messrs. Sharpies, Staples, and Stopples, to wit, I suppose." 

" Of course I shall be very happy to see Sir Vivian here. 
This house is, I should think, sufficiently mine to receive my 
father's and my own kindest and truest friend in it." 

" Certainly, Lady Mauleverer, you have the absolute disposal 
of the delight of your society. But, you must excuse me if I 
decline to have anything to do with such an insufferable, inter- 
fering, glaring-eyed personage, on anything whatever relating 
to your late father's absurd will. And I am not very desirous 



A SaUAKE DUEL, 331 

of closer intercourse of any kind with Sir Vivian Ap Howel. 
But I suppose you will want to be tremendously civil to him 
till we can get the money to redeem the mortgage." 

"I shall be guided in everything respecting that by Sir 
Vivian's advice. Thank God," I said, with tears starting to 
my eyes, " I have now at least one true friend in the world to 
apply to for disinterested counsel and assistance in my need." 

" You were always a great admirer of Sir Vivian's, I believe, 
Lady Mauleverer," said my husband ; and stretching his arms, 
and giving a yawn, he sauntered carelessly out of the apart- 
ment. 

On the very next day, greatly to my surprise, and very little 
to my satisfaction, Mrs. Luxmoor . who had become quite an 
expert whip, under my husband's tuition . drove Sir Vivian 
over to Mauleverer, in my children's pony-chaise, to which she 
now seemed to have established a prescriptive right. 

I do not deny that I was internally agitated, almost beyond 
my own control, when these two names were announced . and 
in conjunction. And I was given very little time to rally, before 
Mrs. Luxmoor made an impetuous entree into the drawing-room 
.almost, as it seemed to me, dragging in Sir Vivian after her, 
by the arm. I could perceive at once, from the now unusual 
cordiality and effusion of her manner, that she wished him to 
infer we were on the most familiar and affectionate terms. " I 
am bringing this bashful hero to see you, Lady Mauleverer, 
literally almost by force of arms. You must be more formidable 
than an Indian army with all its elephants . you positively 
frighten him ! " 

I was speechless for a moment, with an emotion I could not 
suppress, and would not betray. But seeing them together, and 
listening to thetreacherous cordiality of those tones, recollec- 
tions thronged in upon me which vanquished all my efforts. 
and a gush of tears came to my eyes, as I exclaimed . " Oh, 
how glad, how very glad I am to see you again, Sir Vivian ! 
Have you, indeed, heard me murmuring over the bitter sea, a 
thousand times of late . ' beth y wnaf fi ? ' " 

Vivian was looking as pale as his now bronzed complexion 
permitted ; but as I spoke these words . unforgotten, doubtless, 
by himself also. a flash like fire broke over all his lineaments ; 
and he replied, "Indeed, indeed, Lady Mauleverer! I have 
come home quite as much on your account as on my own . to 
take care that your too lavish generosity and confidence 
do not betray you into a forgetfulness of what is due, at all 
events, to the interests of your children." 

" Nay, now, Sir Vivian, let me tell the truth of you. You 
have come home because you are tired of a two years' rest from 
glory ; and thinking we good people of Europe are likely to be 
in want of a great general shortly, young enough to relish the 
charms of a campaign in the Balkan, you allow us the oppor- 



332 1T.VTJLEYJSEEU S DIVORCE. 

tunity of selecting' one by the light of a reputation already all 
ablaze in the lands where the sun rises." 

"Mrs. Luxmoor is as good as ever; always too good," said 
Sir Vivian, with that well-remembered satirically playful smile 
of his. " But I had some notion, certainly, of a campaign or so 
on the Danube, just to keep myself from rusting quite ; I hate 
to be idle. I don't suppose, however, people here take much 
notice of our doings in India, so I don't feel so very famous 
yet as to expect the Turks to send a deputation to secure my 
services ; and the allies seem to intend to confine their assist- 
ance to palaver. Indeed I know I ought to have some better 
apology for coming back at all, dear Lady Mauleverer," he 
continued, with his quaint, laughingly-melancholy expression. 
" But as there really was not the least chance of getting 
knocked in the head in India, I am not much to blame in 
taking Glamorgan on my way to Constantinople, where there 
is a very good one . having it in view to try and introduce 
some order into the distraction of affairs at Plas Newydd." 

I followed a natural, an irresistible movement of my feelings, 
when I extended my hand again to Sir Vivian, and almost 
wrung his in both mine for several moments. I felt that a 
loyal, and brave, and devoted friend was restored to me in the 
very depths of my desolation. 

" You see you owe no apology to Lady Mauleverer, at all 
events, for coming back to see your friends once in eight or 
nine years, Sir Vivian," said Sophia. " As for me, I under- 
stand my age too well to wonder at anything that happens in 
it . and you are its very epitome, full of weariness, and yet 
insatiably athirst for excitement and movement. You might be 
chained by a word or a look for ever to this spot, or despatched 
on a voyage of discovery to the skies, on a stream of electricity, 
at an hour's notice." 

" Oh, indeed ! you owe me no apology, Sir Vivian," I said, 
with one or two tearless sobs I could not suppress. " I am 
very, very glad to have once more a true friend near me ! " 

His line, sensitive features thrilled all over with emotion. 
" I should not have ventured so abruptly, but Mrs. Luxmoor 
brought me, almost by force," he replied with agitation. " She 
assured me so earnestly I should be welcome, else I should 
have awaited your summons. I saw Lord Mauleverer 

yesterday." 

" And you paid your first visit to Mrs. Luxmoor, Sir Vivian ? 
How did you discover her under the name ? Do you still 
correspond ? " I said, striving to put on an appearance of gaiety 
and indifference. 

"No, I paid a first visit to Sir Vivian. that is, I did not 
know he was at Ap Howel, but I am fond of ruins . I am one 
myself. and had strolled thither quite unconsciously, when I 
encountered a pair of eyes peering over an old battlement, 
which it is not very easy to forget." 



A SQUAEE DUEL. 333 

" If associated with the vivid reminiscences I have always 
understood to hallow Ca.stell ap Howel for yon," I could not 
help saying ; and Sophia flushed darkly as she met rny scornful 
glance. 

"We are both of us very suitable ornaments for a ruin. I 
am as blase as Mrs. Luxmoor can possibly pretend to be," said 
Vivian, with his old, quick-edged laugh. 

She never forgave me that provoked, or him that gave that 
laugh, I am convinced. 

" 1 have a right to feel blase. I am growing the oldest of 
all possible things . an old woman. You told me frankly 
enough, Sir Vivian, yesterday, what time had been doing for 
me externally. Now tell me what it has done for Lady Mau- 
leverer ? " inquired Sophia ; and she expected the answer with 
evident attention. 

He turned his brilliant eye upon me without an attempt to 
dissemble . perhaps without being conscious of the excess of 
admiration expressed in it, as he answered, " Oh, she is not 
improved at all, Mrs. Luxmoor ! Nothing could improve Lady 
Mauleverer ! She is only what she has always been, and must 
always be . perfection ! " 

" Very far from that to some people, Sir Vivian, whose 
opinions have changed possibly as much below a true estimate 
as yours are above one ! " I replied, with a throb of pleasure, I 
deny not, and the more satisfaction in this incense offered to 
my vanity, that I saw Sophia looked annoyed. I glanced at 
Sir Vivian at the same time . almost for the first time since he 
had entered the room. Into what a line, though still mace- 
rated and prematurely worn countenance his had developed ! 
The years he had passed in the midst of strenuous thought and 
action, in the command of men and the presence of difficulties 
and dangers, had produced the brightest stamp of that lofty 
and towering spirit, in every line of the remembered visage, 
instinct from boyhood with genius and power ! 

Throughout this interview I could perceive Sophia laboured 
hard to persuade Ap Howel it was all well between her- 
self and me ; that she deserved the premium he had laugh- 
ingly . and yet, I doubt not, seriously . assured her, when we 
three parted, under such different circumstances, years pre- 
viously. _ But I was determined not to be made a convenience 
of in this instance . her cat's paw, in fact ; for I imagined I 
already discovered, in her conjunction with Ap Howel, signs 
of not so much accidentalness as must have been inferred from 
her statements. When the visit had lasted as long as Mrs. 
Luxmoor seemed to think suitable, Sir Vivian asked me what 
time would be convenient for me to explain my wishes relating 
to his trusteeship ? and I answered, whenever he was alone for 
a couple of hours . that very day, if he could dome the pleasure 
to remain at Mauleverer to dinner. If lie could: I made no 
overture in favour of his companion. 



334 maitieveeek's diyokce. 

Sir Vivian thanked me. " But no," he said, with some pecu- 
liar expression, " Lord Mauleverer might not expect an addi- 
tion to his family party to-day, and I have already taken the 
liberty to invite myself to dine with Mrs. Luxmoor." 

" Oh, I don't suppose Lord Mauleverer will be at home to 
dinner to-day," I said, aware that he would take care to be 
absent; and I own that I did not relish the prospect of this 
artful woman having the power to make all manner of first 
impressions on my only remaining friend, in the intimacy of a 
convivial tete-a-tete. 

"If it is so, dear Lady Mauleverer," said Sophia, "you have 
never yet honoured me with your company at the Haunt (the 
most deserted, unfrequented Haunt in the world, by the bye) ; 
but as I have things in some little order now at last, will you 
not also dine with us to-day ? " 

I thought by her tone she did not wish me to accept the 
invitation. I considered it would be a fitting retaliation on 
Lord Mauleverer for the many lonely repasts to which of late 
he had abandoned me, scarcely taking the trouble to send a 
groom or a gamekeeper home with an apology. " Well, Mrs. 
Luxmore," I said, after a moment's deliberation, " I really will 
honour you, as you are pleased to style it, though perhaps not 
to think it . why should you ?. with my company to-day ! I 
will even go back with you in your pony-chaise. I suppose I 
can sit where Evelyn is usually planted on those charming 
drives that have done you so much good, and restored you to 
every appearance of health . so suddenly ! " 

The tone of pique in which I spoke probably struck Sir 
Vivian. He looked at me with a startled expression, and then 
at Sophia with one of profound and watchful interest. But he 
made no observation ; neither did Sophia. And thus the matter 
was arranged. 

I remember that as we went, Sophia and I sitting in the front 
seat, side by side, she driving, she whispered to me with great 
earnestness, to be so very good as not to make any allusion 
before Ap Howel to the circumstances of the ecclesiastical suit. 
' ' I am so shamefully bedabbled in it with the foul mire of the 
kennel I had been so long swattering in ! " she said, in her 
strange way. " Sir Vivian has probably heard nothing about 
it in India, and I would so fain preserve his esteem ! His kind 
cordiality to me since his return has been a real balm to my 
poor sore heart. You promise me ? " 

No ; I did not promise her. I merely replied, " You can 
always convince him . or any one else, with your command of 
words. that all you do, or have done, must be right. That 
ought to 'content you." 

" I must try and justify your eulogiums, should the necessity 
arise," she answered, with her calm, inscrutable smile. 



AN AKRAY OF BATTLE. S3 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

AN AEEAT OF BATTLE. 

I had not seen Morgana's Haunt since the various alterations 
and improvements had been completed under my husband's 
superintendence. What I now beheld, was not calculated to 
restore my good humour. It was evident that no expense had 
been spared, and Lord Mauleverer made no secret tbat the 
restorations were effected entirely at his own, or rather at 
mine . as the least thing we could do to show our sense of 
Mrs. Luxmoor's " extremely proper feeling in resigning that 
absurd legacy, which, however, showed how justly my father 
appreciated her merits." But her taste dictated all that was 
done ; and, as it formerly embellished a churchyard, it had 
now converted into a perfect little paradise a spot originally 
planned with a view to ornamental effects. The interior of 
the house itself had an aspect of light brilliancy and airy 
elegance that might well have befitted the abode of a fairy 
princess. I could not refrain from observing, doubtless with 
some bitterness, after we had dedicated a short interval before 
dinner to a survey of the improvements, which I thought Sophia 
pointed out to me with an air of challenge and triumph . " It 
would really be an advantage in gome respects, Mrs. Luxmoor, 
if you could control Lord Mauleverer's taste as effectually at 
the castle. These decorations are at least in harmony with 
the fantastic building they are intended to adorn." 

" There is a much better taste than mine to regulate matters 
at the castle," replied Sophia, quietly. 

" If you mean the taste of its supposed mistress, I am 
allowed no say whatever on the subject ; whereas your opinions 
are evidently the all in all with Lord Mauleverer at this 
place." 

Vivian looked round at us both with startled attention. ' ' I 
thought you told me, Mrs. Luxmoor, that . that this place had 
been left to you by the late Lord Mauleverer, at his wife's 
dying request ; and that all that has been done in the repairs 
and beautifying was your own fancy and arrangement," he 
observed, in a seemingly careless tone. 

" Oh, no ! assuredly my mother made no such dying request 
. it was all my father's kind consideration . who, besides, left 
Mrs. Luxmoor ten thousand pounds," I interposed, with doubt- 
less something remarkable in my tone. 

"You have not mentioned that, Sophy," said Sir Vivian, 



336 MATJLEVEREE'S DITOIICE. 

with singular familiarity of expression, I thought, though it 
was certainly habitual to him as a boy. 

" Because I have refused to receive it. I had no claim to 
such generosity," she replied, colouring violently : hut she 
added, rallying with an effort, "Moreover, Sir Vivian, I 
cherish my independence too much to owe so great an obliga- 
tion even to a family who have already conferred upon me so 
much kindness." 

" You are an inexplicable creature, Sophia," Sir Vivian 
answered, looking at her with surprise, and . as it seemed to 
me. a kindling admiration in his lustrous eyes, "Here, then, 
goes another of my delusions respecting you. Forgive me ; 
but I thought you liked money better tban . better far than 
such an unsubstantial castle of moonshine as independence. 
But still you let people embellish your little palaces of earthly 
sojourn for you, it appears ? " 

" I was content with the Haunt exactly as it stood . a com- 
plete desolation. But my kind friends at If auleverer would 
not allow my residence to remain in the very suitable order in 
which I found it," she observed, evidently embarrassed. 

" Oh ! " and again his eye reverted to me, with that puzzled, 
searching expression which I now repeatedly remarked in it. 

It cannot be denied that Sophia made a very brilliant and 
engaging hostess . and the recherche little banquet she set 
before us combined every requisite of good taste and prandial 
attraction. She speedily regained the coquettish vivacity and 
case that usually marked her manners in society; and it was 
soon unpleasantly obvious to me that she exercised a very 
peculiar influence over Sir Vivian in bringing him into her 
own style of conversation and demeanour. I had never before 
seen him play the gallant and wit . especially with Sophia. 
His tone with her formerly was almost uniformly one of 
sarcasm and contest . nearly amounting to disdain and 
aversion. In general lie had shown himself frank and plain- 
spoken, almost to rudeness. But now I found that he could 
bandy gay compliments, and the most courtly and honied 
turns of flattery, even with that mistress of the syren's art. 

It needed, in fact, all my dislike and justly excited sus- 
picions, to enable me to resist the charms of Sophia's conversa- 
tional eloquence. And yet there was something unreal and 
factitious in all this splendid display. You felt you were not 
gazing at a natural effulgence, but at the sparkle and glow of 
the glass diamonds in a playhouse chandelier, in the glare of 
its insalubrious gas. My dislike and reserve were sustained by 
the certainty to which I speedily arrived, that this insatiable 
coquette had now dedicated herself to the task of entangling 
Sir Vivian Ap Howel also in her snares. It even became 
ominously apparent to me that she was in some fair way of 
succeeding. It was clear that he was dazzled and attracted 



AN AllIUY OF BATTLE. 337 

into a seductive competition by the brilliant intellectual dis- 
play she offered to his admiration. And, at the same time, 
she managed to unite the most opposite fascinations _ of a 
seeming excess of sensibility and tenderness ; for when, in his 
brave, careless way, he chanced to relate some anecdote of the 
eventful and heroic career he had run, her eyes would fill with 
tears, and she would follow his words with a breathless eager- 
ness, as if she were stepping after him in very deed over those 
fields of glory and death. But it was ever one of her spells to 
mingle that inexplicable and enthralling touch of pathos and 
passion amid the wildest play of her reckless and revolted wit 
. . as if all that showering spray and fantastic rainbow illusion 
of colouring sprung from a fountain of living waters, deep and 
exhaustless as the human heart. 

It occurred to me as a subject of the most serious considera- 
tion, ought this cruel syren to be permitted to enthral this 
latest and noblest victim, without an effort being made . if 
such were possible. at his redemption. 

Two things in particular struck me. Vivian was evidently 
kept in ignorance of Mrs. Luxmoor's peculiar literary successes 
.and he seemed to be under an impression that she was a widow. 
He alluded once or twice to the Reverend Carolus, and he spoke 
of him always in the past tense. 

On these two points I considered it would be but my duty to 
enlighten him. It struck me, with the' force of conviction, that 
she was attempting to play upon him the trick she had formerly 
nearly succeeded in with Scarlatt. And I thought this new 
victim had a right to understand, as clearly as possible, what 
kind of idea'd woman courted him so assiduously to her 
intimacy. 

I therefore inquired of Sophia, with as little appearance of 
design as I could manage it, " How does your last book go off, 
Mrs. Luxmoor ! . I have inquired of Lord Mauleverer, but 
even he seems to know very little about it." 

I saw that she looked excessively annoyed ; and she gave me 
a look as if to deprecate conversation on the subject. But 
Vivian had caught the words with his usual quickness. 
" What, Mrs. Luxmoor ! do you write ? " 

" A little ; nothing worth reading, I fear. How do you think 
I earn my living ? " she replied, with visible confusion. 

" Did you not mention you taught in Paris . and Lady Mau- 
leverer's children here ? " 

" Well," she said, with affected playfulness, " a writer now- 
a-days mostly is a teacher . or assumes to be one ; and I do 
teach Lady Mauleverer's children here." 

"By Lord Mauleverer's arrangement, but not, I trust, the 
doctrines of George Diamond . that is Mrs. Luxmore's nom de 
2)lume, Sir Vivian . George Diamond: have you ever read any 
of her works under that designation ? " 



333 JIAfLEVEREli'S BIVOKCE. 

"One or two . when the weather was not too sultry . to 
while away the hours in a bung-alow or a tent," replied Sir 
Yivian, evidently taken very much aback. 

" George Diamond approved of your works in India ; but I 
am afraid you did not approve very much of his } " said Sophia, 
with a glance full of reproach and even indignatiou at me. I 
was indifferent to it. But, greatly to my surprise . after a 
moment's astonished pause, Sir Vivian broke into quite a florid 
eulogium of the works of George Diamond, and descanted so 
warmly in their praise, that I looked at him in utter incredulity 
and astonishment. Sophia laughed . but there was something 
hollow and forced in the sound of her mirth. 

" I had no notion that I should please such a critic as Sir 
Yivian Ap Howel . and that is why I have not solicited his 
judgment in the matter," she said, checking herself suddenly. 
" In fact I am told very few of my critics speak so favourably 
of this last production you so kindly inquire after, Lady Mau- 
leverer, as would give much support to Sir Vivian's partial es- 
timate of my powers. Another reason for reserve . but you had 
forgotten, no doubt, that I confided to you my identity with 
this madcap, George, as a secret which you were not to impart 
without my permission." 

I perceived my opportunity to dispel the other deception I 
thought I saw attempted. " Oh, there is not the least fear, Mrs. 
Luxmoor, that Sir Vivian will carry the tidings of your literary 
exploits to your husband," I said. 

" I should hope not," observed Ap Howel, drily ; " a descent 
to Tartarus is not at all to my taste, though acclimatized to 
Indian summers." 

"Mr. Luxmoor is not dead, Sir Vivian. Whatever put that 
into your head ? He is as well as his excesses will allow him 
or any other man to be," I resumed. 

Ap Howel looked indeed amazed. "Why, my dear Mrs. Lux- 
moor, did you not give me to understand ' ' 

" I gave you to understand that Luxmoor is dead to me. And 
so he is, and shall be to my latest breath ; and besides, from 
what I hear, it is not at all likely he can live much longer- 
leading the dreadful life he does," said Sophia; and she was 
evidently disconcerted as much as it was possible for one of her 
ready-witted and audacious morale to be. 

Suddenly Sir Vivian broke out into one of his old caustic, sad 
at once and merry, peals of laughter. " Just to think of it !" 
he exclaimed. "Lady Mauleverer, you have saved me from 
the most horrible repulse and mortification ! Only imagine !. 
if I had proposed to Mrs. Luxmoor on the fanciful conclusion, 
which I know not how I came to, that her lawful proprietor 
had descended at last to his native realms ! Yet how else could 
I explain to myself the fact of her living here in solitude ? for 
I have had no time to make inquiries, and what more natural 



AN ARRAY OF BATTLE. 339 

than for mo to conclude that the worthy Carolus had finished 
his mortal career, and that his widow had retired from Llan- 
howel to the society and protection of the dear old friends, with 
whom I left her so tenderly united ?" 

Sophia bit her lip, and coloured vividly, as she replied, ''You 
know what kind of man my husband was, and is, . yes, is, no 
doubt; and therefore, I should say, Sir Yiviau, you cannot 
wonder to find us separated, not quite by mutual agreement, 
for he is a real monster of rapacity and revenge. I need say no 
more, I know, dear friend, to bind you not to reveal my identity. 
I did not think it necessary to mention it to you, previously, as 
my solitary and foreign domestic who admitted you,_isinmy 
confidence, but Miss Jones is my designation in this neigh- 
bourhood." 

"Miss Jones! good God!" repeated Sir Vivian. " Hiss Jones 
and George Diamond ! Well !" he continued, in a tone of 
acquiescence, " when a woman is chained for existence to a 
Carolus Luxmoor, one can't blame her much for being anything 
else she pleases to be. If Society makes desperadoes," he added, 
musingly, "she must expect to have her garners broken into." 

If Sophia was displeased with my revelation of her husband's 
existence, she well knew how to avenge herself. She fell, as it 
were quite naturally, into a philosophic commentary on the 
delusive power of the passion she admitted, with a jesting kind 
of remorse, she had once experienced for Luxmoor. She de- 
scribed a woman tricking out her idol from the resources of 
her own heart and imagination, with a bitter gaiety and a 
pointedness of allusion that convinced me she was thinking 
rather of my girlish insanity for Scarlatt, than of her own case. 
She jeered at me to my face in this way, with perfect ease, and 
without the least risk of producing an ill effect in a report to 
him. There was, indeed, something inexpressibly ludicrous, 
though at the same time desecrating, utterly heartless and 
disheartening, in this analysis, for even I could not help joining 
at times in Sir Vivian's constant and really excessive mirth 
during its progress. She concluded with another of her indirect 
flings. " However, Sir Vivian, you men have your dolls too, 
which you dress up in as fine tinsel and rags as we do ours, and 
fall down and worship as senselessly, for goddesses, while we 
are busied in the like creation of demigods. What makes you 
laugh so much?" 

He made no reply, but his gaiety received a sudden check. 
" It is not strange," she continued, after a pause, following 
up her advantage, "when we consider what men and women 
really are, after all this deification, that the only lasting 
passions are the unsuccessful ones." 

" I should say you have taken care never to inspire a passion 
of that sort, Sophia r" The poignant words came to my lips, and 
I could not forbear the utterance. 

Z2 



340 MATTLEVEB.EE' S DIVORCE. 

" "Well, I don't know," she replied, shunning- my glance; but 
I could perceive how her own flashed as she did so. "The 
ancients would not pronounce a man fortunate while his state 
was still liable to fluctuation . till, in short, the man was dead. 
The rule will apply, with a little change, to our subject: no 
passion can be pronounced unsuccessful until it is finally so." 

She glanced then at Sir Yivian, and I saw that he coloured 
slightly. 

" So you think there are no happy unions then, Sophia? But 
if near acquaintance is such an infallible dis-illusion, how comes 
it that couples are not flying off at tangents in every direction ?" 
said Sir Vivian, with more earnestness in his look than in the 
tone of his words. 

" Oh, the attraction of repulsion is of as binding strength in 
moral as in physical nature, I suppose. And when there is no 
longer love, there are vanity, jealousy, egotism . there is dog- 
in-the-mangerishness, in short . women especially. Don't you 
know that even if we no longer valued, or had never valued, 
the affections of a man, we would rather trample them in the 
dust, than see them transferred, green and flourishing, on 
another wall? And, the nobler the heart we crushed, and the 
less capable we were of understanding the value of the priceless 
offering we despised, the more we should enjoy and triumph in 
the operation !" 

She said this quite laughingly, and handing me a plate of 
melon which she had been all the time artistically carving, 
but with a look never effaced from my recollection to this hour. 
It was so full of false but bitter accusation and challenge that 
1 was struck absolutely dumb. 

When I could listen again I heard Sir Yivian saying in a 
careless, laughing tone, "Oh, there is no occasion for such a 
dangerous specific as matrimony in most cases, Mrs. Luxmoor. 
If you could only imagine what a number of fancies and 
caprices, which we thought lifelong, or still more probably 
eternal, at the time, we sprightly young fellows survive . 
no extent of polygamy could suffice to cure us of the thou- 
sandth part of them." 

" Well, I have no right to blame people for not doting 
always where they have doted once," said Sophia. "One 
grows out of a passion often enough, as one does out of one's 
swaddling clothes. Do you take sugar to your melon, Sir 
Yivian, or have you survived the simple tastes of your existence 
in that respect also ?" 

In that respect also ! What did she mean ? I do not know 
what strange, unhappy impulse urged me to turn to Sir 
Yivian, as I heard the words, and inquire, with a degree 
and kind of meaning which I own to have been blameable : 
" Have you indeed survived all your boyish fancies, Sir Yivian? 
Quite all ? I remember you had a great variety of them at 



AN AKRAX OF BATTLE. 341 

Plas Newydd. I perceive very plainly you have grown out 
of some of your aversions : is it the same with your likings ?" 

I felt myself colouring, bungling and hesitating in my 
speech as I proceeded, in spite of every effort that I made to 
control my consciousness of the impropriety and folly of the 
question I asked. I was the more agitated, observing how 
deadly pale Sir Vivian turned as I thus addressed him. while 
Sophia surveyed us both, with a seemingly careless, but in 
reality absorbed and searching attention. I could see it in 
her eyes, however busy she appeared chipping off the little 
nobs on the melon-rind in the plate before her with a fruit- 
knife. 

There was a really considerable pause in the feeling of all 
present, though it probably only lasted a second. 

"No, Lady Mauleverer !" Vivian then replied, in a tremu- 
lous voice. " I am not of so capricious a turn as you imagine. 
If my colours were shot away to the last shred, that last shred 
would still be of those with which I sailed out of port to do 
battle with the world ! See how I cling to every vestige of 
the past ! Did I not promise Mrs. Luxmoor years ago, when 
she lent me a handkerchief to dry tears, of which I am less 
ashamed now than I was then, that I would keep it through 
all that might betide me, and bring it faithfully back ? . and 
here it is !" 

As he spoke he produced from his bosom the identical hand- 
kerchief which 1 remembered, years gone indeed, he had 
possessed himself of when we took farewell on his departure 
for India . not Mrs. Luxmoor's, but mine !" 

"Did J give you that }" said Sophia, carelessly laying her 
hand on it. " My wardrobe was not so very extensive in those 
days . but I don't remember to have missed this handkerchief, 
certainly !" 

"No, for it was not yours, and never shall be," I said, 
pierced to the soul by what I supposed to be this marvellous 
instance of forgetfulness and indifference . or still more cruel 
determination to sacrifice me to the novel ascendancy which 
he seemed anxious to submit himself to . the pride and vanity 
of a woman who had already so grievously mortified my feel- 
ings. I snatched the handkerchief, no doubt a little rudely 
.and from that instant it became truly "wrought by an 
Egyptian !" 

" I thought so. at least I thought it never had been mine : 
how came you to make such a mistake, Sir Vivian? My initials 
were never surmounted by a coronet and S.L. are 

not easily mistaken for H.H.P., after one has once thoroughly 
mastered that A was an archer that shot at a crow, and Z 
was a zany whatever he might know. I have rhymed, you 
see ! I am not like Hamlet and the peacock," said Sophia 
coldly. "But really, Lady Mauleverer," she added, with her 



312 MAULEVEEEK S DIVOECE. 

intricate smile, "I did not attach so much, importance to the 
trifle as to wish to deprive its legitimate owner of its pos- 
session." 

"You are a great admirer of legitimacy, and very studious of 
the rights of property, in everything, George Diamond," I 
remarked savagely. 

"I am very much what I have been made . and perhaps I 
shall be still more what I am made ! " replied Sophia, with 
oracular obscurity. " Of my own nature originally I think I 
had very little of the burglar in me . . but we must all fulfil 
our destinies, however little or much inclined to them. Sir 
Vivian here, for example," she continued, dexterously changing 
the conversation, "may survive all this talk to become the great 
general of the age. Wellington was only a ' Sepoy Captain ' 
when he returned to Europe ! . or he may till a nameless mound 
in the Balkan, in the service of his polygamous friends, the 
Turks, since the allies seem only to intend prating on their 
behalf." 

Who knows indeed what he might have become, this youth 
already recognized as a hero by his country and the world ? 
Perchance the very man and general England most needed 
during her direful struggle under the thunder-guarded walls 
of Sebastopol. Young, valiant, famous . of a matchless military 
instinct and genius already so marvellously displayed : what 
might Yiyiau Ap Ilowel not have proved himself amid those 
terrific crises of history, when England for the first time showed 
herself to be still so affluent in men, but in such lamentable 
lack of A man? 

Subtlest of flatterers ! I saw Vivian's whole visage illumine 
with the effulgence of a conqueror stepping into the car of 
trium ph ! I heard with what tenderness and sweetness he 
answered, " And you, my kind Sibyl, what destiny do you 
assign to yourself ? " 

" Oh, for me ! my destiny is accomplished ! " she replied, with 
singular vivacity. " I have returned to these solitudes but to 
die in peace. I consider myself the hull only of a once gallant 
and triinset bark, cast by the tempest among hospitable rochs ! 
where I may get sandchoked and go to pieces at my good 
leisure, with only choughs and seagulls for mourners and 
spectators. Why, what on earth could I wish for more ?. 
surrounded, as I am, by the dearest friends of my youth. so 
weary and exhausted at the core as I feel. than leave to perish 
tranquilly ? But what a strange fit of the dismals has come 
over us all. Brighten us up, Sir Vivain ! You have not yet 
told us the story of your Indian campaigns ; let us be your 
Desdemonas over the desert, while you tell us the marvellous 
tale ! " 

Sir Vivian laughed, but he, too, seemed to feel the 
necessity of effecting a change in the conversation, and he 



AN ARKAY OF BATTLE. 343 

began to relate to us some anecdote of his first arrival in India, 
which gradually, under Sophia's skilful promptings, expanded 
into an animated relation of his most remarkable military 
experiences. Vivian had a simple but vividly picturesque 
style of narrative, which enchained the interest almost as much 
as his subject . rich in deeds of high heroism and achievement 
as it was. He scarcely ever spoke of himself personally in 
these details ; but it was not possible to perform the play of 
Hamlet with an entire omission of the part ; and, moreover, 
Sophia took care to supply the lacunes his modesty left ; for she 
was wonderfully and minutely familiar with the events of his 
career, and seemed to have made it a subject of her special 
observation and record. Surely she could not have studied up 
those scattered historical memoranda of years for the occasion ? 
Yet I own some such suspicion entered my mind ; and, with 
other circumstances, confirmed in me the notion that she had 
formed the most insidious and baneful designs upon the young 
heroic narrator, which required only time and opportunity to 
develop. Had he not himself formerly told me how he dreaded 
her powers of fascination, should he ever be possessed of such 
advantages as might tempt her to exercise them on him ? To 
feel the danger was a sufficient attestation of its power. I 
determined to observe, and, if need were, to do whatever lay in 
my scope to thwart the designs of this malignant sorceress. 
Not withheld but rather stimulated by another and almost 
contrary conviction in my heart, that her real aim in the course 
she adopted towards Sir Vivian might be merely to blind me 
the more effectually to her designs on my husband. 



344 MAULEVEEEE S DIYOECE. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

QUID PBO QUO. 

It needed only as many months to produce the catastrophe of 
four existences. 

Let me avow it. I had a share in my own destruction ! Of 
a verity, perchance might have avoided it could I have been 
content to allow the success of those entangling artifices in 
which I speedily became convinced Sophia was labouring to 
involve the hery and impetuous nature she had allured so skil- 
fully within the range of her invisible but adamant-netted 
snares. She might have spared me my husband, could I have 
been content to suffer her to destroy the generous lover of my 
youth. 

From the time of the reunion I have mentioned, Sir Vivian 
became an almost constant visitor at Morgana's Haunt. The 
arrogant condescension with which Lord Mauleverer received 
him at the castle was so little to his taste that he only visited 
us once, until, at my husband's desire, I requested his presence 
on matters of business connected with his trust in my affairs. 
But the progress of Sophia's artifices could not well escape my 
observation, as, in pursuance of my own plan, I found it neces- 
sary to acquiesce in a renewal of some considerable degree of 
visiting intercourse between her and myself. Moreover, the 
complaints and annoyance of my husband in the fact of Sir 
Vivian's frequent visitation at the Haunt, would have sufficed 
alone to establish it. 

All that I thus saw and heard confirmed me in my notions ol 
Mrs. Luxmoor's detestable plans. What else could they be 
considered . those persevering efforts to lure a young man, ol 
passions so ardent and inconsiderate, into such a terrible gulf ol 
ruin and disgrace as an intrigue with a married woman whom 
such a man as Carolus Luxmoor held as a property to be mar- 
keted, in anyway most suitable to his own interests and exigen- 
cies ? Such I could not, and did not, doubt, very soon, was Sophia's 
object, unless I was to consider her actuated by a motive still 
more poignantly offensive to me personally . as using this 
rivalry to urge on Lord Mauleverer's passion for herself into 
the mad excesses it finally betrayed him. 

She certainly took no pains to disguise her levity and coquetry 
with Ap Howel from my observation. rather, she seemed to 
take pleasure in exhibiting to me the progress of her triumph 
. all the play of the bewildering fascinations she set in motion, 



QUID PEO QUO. 345 

casting their flowery but inextricable wreaths around him at 
every step. I took pains . as I feared, with little success . to 
counteract these ensnaring manoeuvres. I opposed a reserve 
and silence in my own manner which was a direct condemna- 
tion of the reckless licence Sophia assumed in hers. But in 
vain. Even the open reproofs at times extorted from me pro- 
duced little other effect, I found, saving to irritate her into the 
use of weapons of sarcasm and defying ridicule, in which I was 
no match for her, or disdained to show myself one. 

The more I observed, the stronger became my conviction that 
Yivian was being fast drawn into that magic circle whence only 
shocks so rude as struck men lifelong to the earth, seemed 
capable of rescuing Sophia's victims. They suited one another 
strangely now ! The singularity and hardiness of Mrs. Lux- 
moor's ideas and expressions no longer appeared to repel Vivian. 
Experience of the world had given him apparently a relish for 
wit of the mocking and mordant order in which, most frequently, 
of latter times, she indulged. But how was he seduced into 
the sympathy he manifested in her subversive notions in 
morality . in the social relations of the sexes . in the regula- 
tions law and propriety have established in their intercourse ? 
On one occasion, I remember to have heard her maintain, that 
a woman has as good a right to fall in love with a man, and 
declare her passion, as a man could possibly have for a woman ! 
And she endeavoured to prove this shameful, or rather shameless 
thesis, by a thousand whimsical arguments. And Ap Howel 
applauded by constant laughter, until I cut her abruptly short 
by inquiring whether she ever had, or could have, the face to 
put her theory into practice ? She knew to what circumstance 
of her career I alluded ; and this was one of the many cases in 
which my knowledge of Sophia's bygones enabled me to silence, 
if not to confute, those vicious paradoxes ! But it was evident 
the habitual gaiety and brilliancy of her conversation possessed 
great charms for Sir Vivian, whose constitutionally deep though 
easily ignitable melancholy was a well-prepared fuel for those 
dangerous sparks. He hated nothing so much as to be aban- 
doned to his demon . and Sophia's was its laughing opposite, 
from whose presence it fled as darkness flies the light. 

Her own unhappiness she never suffered to appear on the 
surface. _ She had the Spartan's endurance, with his fox gnaw- 
ing at his heart under his cloak, in this respect. She diffused 
a counterfeit happiness ever around her in society. Men felt it 
to be unreal. that all those splendid flashes gave out no true 
light ; but they felt themselves amused for the hour ; and so 
dark are the abysses surrounding existence, that every flutter 
of brightness seems to the aching sense like a glimpse of its lost 
eternal day. 

It was by laughter that Sophia sapped morality. She set tip 
the most cynical and destructive theories in the form of light, 



316 MAULETEKEli'S DIVORCE. 

playful paradoxes and vagaries of wit, which it seemed as 
superfluous a waste of reason to refute by argument, as to bring 
a fire-engine to extinguish the evanescent flicker of a jack-o'- 
lantern. Even her own misfortunes often only furnished her 
with the materials of a bitter pleasantry ; and considering all 
she had suffered in her matrimony, her constant inveighing 
against the restraints and shackles of the married state. her 
endlessly diversified sarcasms on its sameness anddulness, even 
under the most favourable influences . her reckless theories of 
change in all the customs and laws regulating the relations of 
the sexes . might have had some claim to indulgence, if she had 
not put her fancies into practical forms so detestable. It really 
seemed to me at last, that under cover of a pretendedly ironical 
and sportive antagonism to the pedantic and absurd usages of 
what she characterised as an effete, Chinese system of civiliza- 
tion, which deprives the soul of all natural impulses and work- 
ings, she was exaggerating the general tone of allurement and 
cajolery in her manners towards persons of the opposite sex, 
into almost open love-making and temptation to Sir Vivian. 

It was not possible for me to know, or even to imagine, that 
under cover of responding to this dangerous flirtation, the un- 
fortunate young man concealed the reviving intensity of his 
misplaced passion for myself; perhaps, in the fascinations of a 
sensual allurement, endeavoured to divert its frenzied^ardour 
from the forbidden, but too real object. It is also certain now, 
that, with the wild and subtle rcvengefulness of his blood and 
eharaeter, Vivian endeavoured thus to retaliate upon my hus- 
band. upon Sophia herself. the wrong he imagined they had 
united in inflicting upon him, in the eternal loss of the woman 
upon whom his strong affections had fixed themselves, in their 
first luxuriant spring and growth. 

And this passion had now lost the sublime purity and in- 
tegrity of youth : was mixed with a dark, choking underwood 
of briars and jungle, in which the serpent and the tiger might 
glide and crouch for prey. 

My husband on his part did little or nothing to diminish the 
fervour of the dislike he ought to have known he had formerly 
done all in his power to kindle in young Ap Howel. They 
rarely met but at Morgana's Haunt, and then on terms of a 
mutual reserve and coldness, or of an excess of politeness, as far 
removed as possible from real respect and deference. Lord 
Mauleverer availed himself of the pretext of his dislike for Sir 
Vivian's authorized interference in our affairs, to abandon to me 
all personal part in the negotiations pending with him, as chief 
trustee of my property under my father's will. But even Mrs. 
Luxmoor's skill in management, finally, hardly sufficed to pre- 
vent some open display of the sentiments lurking in the hearts 
of the two men. Lord Mauleverer shunned the approximation 
as much as possible : and Sir Vivian's arrival anywhere, became 



QUID PKO QUO. 317 

at last almost the signal for his departure. But it resulted 
eventually, from Sir Vivian's system of retaliation, that the 
former found himself almost compelled to relinquish the society 
of the mistress of Morgana's Haunt, unless on condition of 
sharing it with that he most detested. 

There was no ill-feeling of any kind lost between them, cer- 
tainly ; but in my husband, disdain and hatred probably 
struggled for the ascendancy, for he still affected to look down 
on Sir Vivian as an upstart, audacious boy, who had no right 
to pretend to an equality with men of mature age ! One would 
have thought he entirely ignored the facts that this boy had 
been the absolute governor of a province as large as a European 
kingdom ; had raised, disciplined, fed armies ; and had com- 
manded in numerous actions, entitled to the glory and distinc- 
tion of battles deciding the destiny of whole races of men ! Yet 
Lord Mauleverer could not have found it easy to forget these 
circumstances. No sooner was Sir Vivian's return to his native 
county known . that county in which my husband had made 
himself so disliked a resident . than every species of popular 
ovation flowed in upon the youthful hero. Deputations, with 
fine speeches in their mouths, thronged his ruined halls ; free- 
doms of cities were presented to him ; and a splendid sword, for 
which the whole county, rich and poor alike, eagerly subscribed, 
was bestowed upon him. 

Nevertheless, as long as Lord Mauleverer cherished any hope 
of making Sir Vivian an agent in his plans to obtain the entire 
possession of my inheritance, he concealed his rancorous senti- 
ments towards him under a decent veil. 

But this lasted only for a time. Sir Vivian insisted on a 
thorough inspection of all the documents on which my husband 
based his plea for the immediate redemption of the heavy 
mortgage on our landed property, before he would give consent 
tothe necessary means. This had become a paramount object 
with Lord Mauleverer. and indeed it was not difficult for him 
to show that we stood at a tremendous disadvantage with our 
borrowed money, from the intricate and doubtful nature of the 
security we had been enabled to offer. Mere insurances of our 
lives swallowed up the interest of a very large sum of money. 
And besides, Scarlatt often protested that he could not bear the 
idea of any " hook-nosed, sharky usurer," holding a species of 
ownership and control over our possession of " the only property 
worth calling property !" But Sir Vivian and his lawyers were 
dissatisfied with their examination of the documents reluctantly 
submitted to them. It was not merely the prodigious extra- 
vagance and want of judgment, but too observable in all our 
pecuniary transactions so far, that set Sir Vivian against the 
scheme. It was found that Lord Mauleverer had become virtu- 
ally, for life, the owner of my landed property ; and to redeem 
the mortgage with the moneys of the trust fund, would be to 



348 mauxeveber's divobce. 

place me and my children in an entire state of dependence 
upon him. Owing to the circumstances under which my mar- 
riage was contracted, there were, of course, no settlements 
between us . and Sir Vivian insisted that this defect should be 
remedied before he would consent to the transfer. On the other 
hand, Scarlatt would not hear of " this unnecessary complica- 
tion" being effected ; and thus no decision was arrived at for a 
considerable period. 

Meanwhile, the discussion of these affairs necessarily threw 
Sir Vivian and myself a good deal together in private. I am 
far from imputing to my husband, or even to the still viler 
serpent-craft of Sophia, any purposed encouragement and 
multiplying of these occasions, with a view to furnish some 
foundation for the future infamies of their device. I cannot 
think that Scarlatt could have matured the plan of ridding 
himself of a wife to whom he preferred another, by one of the 
most detestable plots ever formed against a woman, and which 
included the sacrifice of.his own honour ! I believe his crimi- 
nality as yet extended only to having conceived, or suffered to 
revive in his breast, a passion for another woman, the gratifica- 
tion of which he hoped to secure in a stealthy and undetected 
manner. As for Sophia, it is still my belief, that if she could 
have succeeded in substituting young Ap Howel as the victim of 
her own vile needs, and resolution to free herself, by any means, 
from the thraldom of her detested husband, she would have 
deigned to leave me mine ! But not until she had thoroughly 
humbled me by establishing her power over him, and taken 
vengeance on himself for ancient grudges, by the defeat of his 
now favourite hopes ! 

It is true also that lawyers, stewards, and other persons 
connected with the investigation entered into, were frequently 
present at our interviews : but matters of a secret, family nature 
were sometimes to be discussed, relative to our debts and obli- 
gations. And surely Lord Mauleverer ought not to have lent 
so many facilities . even under the peculiar circumstances of 
the case . to an intimacy between a young woman, whom the 
world in general did not set down as entirely destitute of per- 
sonal attraction, and a young man who united so many qualities 
likely to win the enthusiastic admiration of the sex .glittering 
in the species of renown that most commands its notice ! But 
Scarlatt was too much absorbed in his own views and objects to 
trouble himself about any other consideration. He generally 
took advantage of Sir Vivian's visits to the castle, to hasten to 
Morgana' s Haunt, where he was for awhile assured the detested 
shadow of his supposed rival would not intrude. For me, I can 
solemnly declare, that so far from suspecting the real state of 
Vivian's feelings, I was harassed daily more and more, by the 
conviction that he too was entangled in the magic circle of 
Sophia's fascinations, and that the difficulty of extricating him 



QUID PRO QUO. 349 

from them rendered the duty of attempting it, by any means in 
my power, hourly more and more imperative. But I knew not 
how to begin upon such a subject . what excuse to allege for 
my interference. For above all I dreaded Yivian should suspect 
me of a jealous feeling with regard to my husband . or should 
imagine I had reason to fear the ascendancy of a woman so little 
worthy . as I dreamed in my pride . of exercising any over me. 

At last, however, not only my own observations, but the still 
more exasperating complaints of my husband, satisfied me that 
I ought at least to put Sir Vivian on his guard, as far as lay in 
my power, to the true character and motives actuating Sophia. 
Lord Mauleverer was always teasing me to know whether 
Mrs. Luxmoor and Vivian had been on such friendly terms at 
Llanhowel, as to account for the cordiality and seeming sudden- 
ness of their intimacy now. He thought they had even disliked 
one another at Plas Newydd. He was constantly bringing me 
in accounts of what he began to characterize as the extraordinary 
and suspicious excess of friendliness existing between them ; 
and expressing his dissatisfaction at Mrs. Luxmoor's disregard 
for her own position, and the caution it demanded of her. I was 
driven, as it were, into what I did, by my anguished conviction 
that her success in the task of luring my only true and sincere 
friend into a gulf of ruin and disgrace, in which all his bright 
qualities . all the high hopes formed of him . would be irre- 
trievably lost, was looming into a distinct and inevitable form 
of destruction ! 

I was at last myself the witness of a scene of such lively 
flirtation between Mrs. Luxmoor and Vivian, that it gave me an 
opportunity I had for some time desired of decisively expressing 
my disapprobation of her Parisian freedom of manners. an 
introduction of which, I told her plainly, I thought, was not a 
desirable improvement in the simplicity of our Welsh provincial 
notions of female decorum. She endeavoured to laugh it off; 
but I left the Haunt abruptly, taking no pains to conceal my 
disgust. And when I next saw Sir Vivian I entered into an 
explanation of the reasons of my conduct, which I imagined 
ought effectually to satisfy him of its propriety. 

I told him explicitly that I desired to put 'him on his guard 
against the artifices of a woman whom I knew by bitter expe- 
rience to be of the most treacherous and dangerous character ! 
I supported this statement, which evidently startled Vivian, by 
a relation of the extrordinary manner in which Mrs. Luxmoor 
had infatuated my proud and cold father into a course of conduct 
so unbecoming . at variance with his whole previous career. 
Tears rushed to my eyes . and I could see almost extorted 
Vivian's . when I told him how the knowledge of my father's 
profound moral, if not actual, infidelity had embittered the last 
moments of my poor mother, whom he himself had loved and 
honoured once almost as a son[! I related to him the full story of 



SoO MATTLKTF.UER's DITOltCE. 

the trial iu the Arches' Court, and of the damning revelations 
that accompanied it. Above all, the unwomanly, the infamous 
part Sophia was clearly shown to have played in the attempt to 
inveigle Scailatt into an intrigue, knowing herself to be the wife 
of another; and that she was cajoling him into inextricable 
ruin and disgrace as a consequence ! A detestable plot, in which 
it appeared to me . I declared to Sir Vivian, in the most earnest 
tones of warning. she was now attempting, older, and withered, 
and disgraced by years of a wandering, reckless, unprotected 
career. to involve him in, to the certain destruction of his 
character and brilliant prospects in the world. 

I own I did not sufficiently discriminate mere suspicions, the 
accusations of enemies, from certainties, when I delineated 
Sophia's residence abroad as the career of one of those most 
dangerous of courtezans who unite the externals of decency. of 
every splendid attraction of mind as well as of person . with the 
worst corruption of their class ! 

Finally . overmastered as I proceeded by passion and in- 
dignation . I denounced to Ap Howel all I knew or suspected of 
Sophia' s designs and progress in seducing from me the affec- 
tions of my husband. I endeavoured to make him share my 
conviction that the terrible preference she now seemed to bestow 
upon liim was rather an artitice to excite Lord Mauleverer into 
some open violation of his duties, than a real one. I do not 
deny, in short, that I painted Sophia, to her intended victim, in 
all the darkest colours in which she appeared to me at that 
time arrayed. Corrupt, heartless, destitute of all real affection 
or tenderness ; covering the vilest designs under the fairest 
seeinings; coquettish almost beyond the utmost verge of decency: 
in brief, wholly unworthy of the love of any man of feeling or 
honour. independently of the fact that she still remained in- 
dissolubly the wife of another. Of a detestable villain, 
certainly . but not for that reason debarred from the absolute 
roperty the laws of England gave a husband in his wife. Such 

say, she appeared to me ; and such I strove, with every 
energy of language the most vehement indignation could sup- 
ply, to make her appear. 

Say what I might, however, I could not bring Sir Vivian to 
take a serious view of the circumstances I placed before him. 
He continued to laugh nearly the whole time with his singular 
double-toned gaiety. He seemed only once struck and annoyed 
when I alluded to the almost certainty of his being used by 
that intriguing woman as a spur to the progress of her designs 
upon my husband. 

" You still think Scarlatt Suett, then, the eighth wonder of 
the world, before whose star all other men's must grow pale ? " 
he said, with a sudden quiver, as of violet-hued lightning, over 
his visage. " Well, no matter, we shall see. Meanwhile, I 
cannot but think that you exaggerate poor Sophy's delinquen- 



I 



3>ltO QUID QtfO. 55 1 

cies, Lady Mauleverer, tinder the influence of jealousy. Quite 
causelessly, too, I am well assured ; and hope to convince your- 
self ere long. But I certainly never did hear of this trial before. 
And did Scarlatt Suett really confess . declare before a public 
auditory. I beg pardon, did my Lord Mauleverer . absolutely 
state that the poor woman made love to him ? " 

I replied by producing a newspaper containing a record of 
the trial. It was the one Scarlatt had sent to my mother, which 
I had found among my father's papers. Vivian took it away 
with him, with scarcely another observation, desiring, as he 
said, to peruse and judge at leisure. Sophia had calculated 
well. In the tumultuous events of his first arrival in India, he 
had missed all but the public events of English history ; and 
this revelation, which I made to him, was one indeed ! 

Vivian returned me the newspaper in a few days, but only 
with this comment . that he thought Mrs. Luxmoor had very 
much wasted her kindness ; but that he could not think it would 
be always the case with so charming a woman. 

Nay, far from producing the effect I had intended, I soon as- 
certained he had become a still more assiduous visitor at Mor- 
gana's Haunt. And this I learned chiefly from my husband's 
exasperated report. I was offended . and even more than 
offended . at this slighting of my warning. I could not bring 
Lord Mauleverer or Sir Vivian into any yielding of their points 
in the affair of the trusteeship. I began to feel that there was 
something systematic and strange in the manner the former de- 
clined taking any personal part in the discussion. Altogether, 
I grew at last, as I considered, and still consider, justly ir- 
ritated with Ap Howel himself, and ordered myself to be 
denied to him on several subsequent occasions when he 
presented himself at the castle. 

These circumstances led to a result which was a great step 
in our advancing catastrophe. 

I had noticed something very strange in Lord Mauleverer's 
demeanour for several days. He had scarcely stirred out of the 
house, but seemed in constant expectation of some very im- 
portant intelligence reaching him in it. I could observe him 
whenever a messenger approached the castle, start up, and 
hurry downstairs to meet the tidings on their way. He com- 
plained of no indisposition ; he harshly repelled the suggestion 
that he might be in need of some special attention to his 
health. His whole demeanour was even unusually abrupt, stern, 
and peremptory. I was, nevertheless, gratified to make certain 
that his habitual visits to Morgana's Haunt had ceased. I 
began to hope that politics had resumed their old interest for 
him, and that he expected news from town which might entirely 
divert his fhoughts from the unlawful pursuit to which I ima- 
gined he had dedicated them. 

In the midst of this false beaming of hope, Sir Vivian arrived 



352 H/UJLEVEBER'S divorce. 

one morning at Mauleverer, and sent up his card, with so 
earnest a message, requesting to see me on particular business, 
that I thought it would look strange to the servant himself to 
refuse. 

Sir Yivian was admitted. To this moment I do not forget 
his vivid expression of triumph, mingled with an agitation he 
could not wholly conceal from my notice. 

He came . he speedily explained, in his ironical, laughing 
way . to set my mind quite at rest on the notion I seemed to 
entertain, that Mrs. Luxmoor had any improper designs on 
Lord Mauleverer, or that she was using himself as a foil and 
incentive to any wrong inclination I might be so unhappy as to 
imagine his lordship could possibly entertain for her. 

I had scarcely power to falter forth a demand to know his 
meaning. He communicated it very briefly, but with an almost 
boyish delight and glee of triumph that showed how young he 
still was in the most youthful of passions . personal vanity ; 
or with what skill he gave to the fiercest and strongest of 
mature manhood the airy giddiness and inconsequence of its 
manifestations. " I know now what a fine thing military repu- 
tation is. I thought, in my first fight, glory meant dead bodies, 
and a most insufferable scent of brimstone. But it means the 
favour . the preference of the fair, and in the most wonderful 
degree. The thing I always most aspired to, Lady Mauleverer. 
Do but imagine, form a notion of an impossibility, that is ten 
thousand times more than impossible, and you will realize that 
my company may be preferred to the favour and protection of the 
noble earl, your husband . essential as they have always 
hitherto seemed to the well-being of the enchantress of Mor- 
gana's Haunt. Summon all your powers of belief, Lady Mau- 
leverer," . and he laughed still more energetically . " and learn 
that the earl is so disgusted with my refusal to see my duties, 
as trustee of your father's will, with his eyes . or for some other 
reason J . that he has informed Mrs. Luxmoor she must take 
the alternative either of declining my friendship and visits, or 
his own ! And, by the tomb of Hyder, she is so oblivious of the 
priority and delights of the literary and platonic association 
they have so long enjoyed, as to tell him plainly that in these 
matters she will not be dictated to . will receive whom she 
pleases in her own house . and, above all, a gentleman whom 
she honours with so high and particular an esteem as my illus- 
trious self ! Illustrious that is to be, you understand. And so 
they had quite an affair of leopardess and jaguar over it ; and 
the jaguar left the Haunt in high dudgeon, with an intimation 
that until the little concession is made to him, he shall not 
again grace it with his presence !" 

My husband's anxiety of expectation, impatience, tempestuous 
humour, were thus disastrously explained. But I was struck 



QirrD pao auo. 353 

by a still more pressing sense of danger on the score of my 
imforniant. 

"Good heavens! how do you know this r" I exclaimed, 
breathlessly. 

" She has sent me a full, true, and particular account ; de- 
clares that she has not hesitated for a moment to resist com- 
pulsion so unauthorized ; that she has not seen Lord Mau- 
leverer for several days, and never intends again to see him on 
such terms ; . concluding by requesting me to favour her with 
a visit at my very earliest convenience, as a complete demon- 
stration of the way she has decided." 

" Have you the letter ? Will you allow me to see it ." I 
said, quite unable to give credit to what I heard. 

"No," he replied, colouring ingenuously, "that would not 
be fair. I shall not take Lord Mauleverer as my model in 
anything. I mean," he added, retractingly, " I have no right, 
unless I receive it from herself, to exhibit information intended 
only for my private appreciation, and couched in George Dia- 
mond's most lively and indiscreet style. For you know poor 
Sophy is always forgetting herself that she is a woman, from 
the habit she has got into of writing as a man." 

"I understand!" I replied, with an inexpressible pang of 
almost every feeling in my heart wounded to its most sensitive 
quick. " And you are going hence to Morgana's Haunt . to the 
presence of this detestable syren ! .to hear from her own in- 
sidious lips the declaration of the preference that dishonours 
you, and is intended to secure you in its treacherous embrace 
to a fathomless destruction ! " 

I spoke with sadness, mingled with a bitterness mounting 
from the deepest founts of my heart. 

" Why, what makes you so angry, dear Lady Mauleverer ? 
I think you ought rather to rejoice in the result . if you were 
sincere, which I can hardly think, in imagining Lord Mauleverer 
was listening a little too attentively to the strains of this same 
syren . who, it seems, never sings iu vain ! " Yivian replied, 
in tones that startled me. I looked up . and quailed beneath 
the lurid, searching inquiry in his gaze. 

" Of a syren indeed ! " I replied, hardly knowing what I said. 
" Gracious Heaven ! what are the spells with which this 
woman lures men to forget every duty to God, to society, to 
themselves ?" 

" She has spells, whether of the white magic sort or not ! " 
said Yivian. " Upon my honour, Lady Mauleverer, I must admit 
that I incur no light danger . and partly for your sake . in con- 
senting to accept the flattering preference Mrs. Luxmoor evinces 
for my society ! She is the most seductive and brilliant crea- 
ture in the world . of the sort ! " 

This last expression gave me a degree of hope. it was pro- 
nounced in so peculiar a tone : one full of a strange contempt 

2 A 



354 maueeveree's divoece. 

and shrinking away as from some inner contemplation. I re- 
membered that I had drawn a dreadful portrait of Sophia, which 
could not have failed to haunt the memory of Sir Vivian. All 
that I could recall of the likings and antagonisms of his youth 
were opposed to her influence. Was it impossible still to save 
him from the deadly folds enveloping him ? 

"Why then do you venture into her society?. Vivian! 
remember all that I have told you of her ! . think of all that 
she is capable ! You know that I love you as a brother . and 
that your disgrace and ruin by her perfidy will break my 
heart - !" 

I reminded him then of all the degrading, wicked intrigues 
in which Sophia had been clearly proved so guilty an agent. I 
confess, I exaggerated on all my previous exaggerations. My 
whole soul glowed with indignation . at the fate menacing one 
whom I held so dear, and had so much cause, as him to whom 
I denounced this fatal woman. I even added to the passionate 
diatribe, what I knew would move Sir Vivian most of all . the 
expression of my own conviction, at last, that she had been con- 
cerned in the conspiracy which inveigled me, in my girlhood, 
into the imprudent marriage I had now. I tacitly admitted- 
lived to see cause to regret ! 

This fired him evidently. " Poor child ! and do you know 
your own misery then so well ?. It wanted but this ! " I heard 
him mutter, incoherently. " But what would you have me 
do ? . I will do anything. I think. that you can bid me do ! " 

" Promise me then, upon your faith and honour as a gentle- 
man, that you will never accept this infamous invitation . for in- 
famous it must be ! . That you will never go again to Morgana' s 
Haunt ! . Never wilfully place yourself again in the society of 
this depraved woman ! " I said with energy. 

He turned round upon me, his blue eyes filling with a strange 
light of mirth, and some thought I could not analyse, gliding 
with a yet more meteor fire in their depths. 

" But don't you think . . after all . . not exactly as a 
woman . . but as a fellow-Christian," he said, quaintly, 
"that this will be to inflict too severe a mortification upon poor 
George ? . For after all, she is a woman to the very core of her. 
by heavens ! large and generous, and unselfish heart, say what 
we will of her ! " 

This sally completed my anger and indignation, with my 
apprehension for the peril in which the enthusiastic utterer too 
clearly stood. I deny not that I was well aware of the intense, 
the bitter, the unpardonable mortification I was bent on secur- 
ing for Sophia ! From all Ap Howel admitted, I could not but 
perceive that he himself took her invitations as advances, which 
it was infamy in a person of her sex, and in her position, to 
have offered ; but a rejection of which was the greatest of 
possible slights in a person of his ! But I was too much exas- 



QUID PRO QTTO. 355 

perated against Sophia, by my own sufferings and apprehensions, 
to put what regarded her in any balance against the motives 
that weighed so heavily with myself at the moment. 

"Very well, Sir Vivian," I said: "Mrs. Luxmoor's heart 
may be all you have described it ; it's very large certainly. it 
could contain, I verily believe, all mankind, so infinitely 
philanthropic is it : but as yet I only know two of the forms I 
discern in it. my father and my husband. If you are inclined 
to make the third, so be it ; I cannot prevent it. But I have 
suffered this woman's approach, since I knew of these facts, 
only by compulsion : I am now utterly wearied and disgusted 
with her ; and I intend never again to see or hold any friend- 
ship or association with her. And, moreover, with regard to 
my friends, I take a leaf out of my husband's book, and I tell 
you and all whom it may concern, Sir Vivian, that it is neces- 
sary you should choose between my society and hers ! Visit at 
Mrs. Luxmoor's still, and I will never see or speak to you again, 
if I can prevent it, on this side eternity ! " 

" That is a long time," said Vivian, after a profound pause of 
several minutes' duration. " But, after all . fascinating as she 
is . I would rather, I think, Lady Mauleverer" (his voice grew 
thick and troubled), "spend eternity with you than with 
Sophia Luxmoor ! Say only the word, and . without your 
permission . I will never see Sophia again . never speak to her 
more ! But you know the penalty ! . I am sure she will have 
one victim or other; and if not me . her old Plas ISiewydd 
conquest ! " 

" She has already destroyed her influence with my husband 
surely by her preference of yourself. He cannot be so infatuated 
. so base . as to persevere in such a case." 

"But you will run the risk! . say only that!" returned 
Vivian, in tones which, whatever light they shed into my mind, 
I was too much absorbed in my own ideas at the moment, to 
investigate. 

"Yes, yes !"I replied, with vehemence . and the compact was 
made. Vivian pledged me his word of honour ; and perhaps 
he was glad to raise such a barrier to the infirmity of his own 
resolution . that he would not again visit Morgana's Haunt, 
without my permission. 

We shook hands, both of us perhaps with lightened hearts, 
on this agreement; and it so happened, unluckily enough, 
that at the precise moment Lord Mauleverer entered the 
apartment. 

He started and looked at us for a moment with an expression 
of the greatest surprise. " Have you then concluded on some 
arrangement respecting that unhappy trust-fund, at last?" 
he inquired, in a strangely haughty and peremptory tone^ 
almost certain to provoke instant ire and retort, on the part of 

2 A2 



356 HATTLEVERElt's DIVORCE. 

Ap Howel. But I gave him no opportunity to act on his 
probable impulse. 

"No; Sir Vivian was just going-," I said; "and I am not 
aware that we are any nearer an arrangement respecting the 
money ; only I was endeavouring to express to him my sense of 
gratitude and confidence in the friendship which induces him 
to take my part in what I am determined shall prove a final 
discussion between myself and Mrs. Luxmoor. To such an 
extent indeed, as to induce him to promise me to refuse a very 
urgent invitation she has sent him to Morgana's Haunt ; and, 
in fact, to decline her society in future altogether." 

I saw, with satisfaction I own, what a dark cloud came over 
my husband's countenance. 

" Have you received an invitation from Mrs. Luxmoor, 
.which you have declined, Sir Yivian, for this strange reason?" 
he observed, in tones of moody pique. "And pray, madam," 
turning in sudden irritation to me, from Ap Howel's half- 
ironical gesture of assent, "what may be your pretext for this 
extraordinary freak of your very extraordinary temper?" 

" I am disgusted. completely disgusted . with Mrs. Luxmoor's 
language, conduct, and ideas!" I replied, with angry vehemence. 

" Say the truth ! . say that you are humiliated and exas- 
perated by her superiority in all those respects to yourself !" 
returned Lord Mauleverer, in a similar tone. " However," he 
continued, looking with scarcely disguised vindictiveness at 
Sir Yivian, "I should be glad to understand whether this long 
negotiation is ever to come to any conclusion; as, if not, we 
have no right to absorb so much of Sir Vivian's valuable time." 

" I don't think of that, Lord Mauleverer. I shall have more 
than ever at my disposal, unless I should resume my pleasant 
lounges at Morgana's Haunt. For, though I comply with the 
request of a friend whom I value above all others, men think 
very differently from women, of course, on certain subjects," 
replied Ap Howel, with laughing defiance in his looks. "But 
with regard to these funds," he continued, " on which there has 
been so much more said than done, I must repeat, as I have 
declared all along, as soon as your lordship is prepared to make 
settlements to the full amount of the transfer, I am prepared to 
permit the discharge of your encumbrances, with a sufficient 
portion of the money placed at my discretion." 

" We must try, then, some other way . such as an act of 
Parliament disentailing the property. It is impossible to 
submit to the insolence of such dictation!" returned Lord 
Mauleverer, swelling and flaming in the countenance with rage. 

"But if Lady Mauleverer listens to my advice, she will not 
entertain the idea for a moment of becoming a party to disin- 
herit her children!" Vivian retorted. 

My husband was silent for a moment. struggling, possibly, 



OTID MO QUO. 3-57 

with, feelings to which he did not think it advisable or prudent 
to give vent. Passion, however, won the throw. 

" You must then permit me to say, Sir Vivian," he resumed, 
in a voice tremulous with anger, " that henceforth I shall thank 
you to abstain from bestowing any of your advice at all upon 
my wife : and I shall look upon your presence in this house as 
an unauthorized intrusion !" 

" If this house . if this castle . belonged to you, Lord Mau- 
leverer, I should have been the last person in the world ever to 
have intruded in it. But as it does not, I will only take my 
dismissal from the owner ! " And he turned to me. 

"Then you are always welcome to it! I shall not be so 
suicidal as to deprive myself of my only sincere friend and 
adviser." I said these words, exasperated beyond the limits of 
a patience which had been so long on the utmost strain. 

"Make your choice, then, Lady Mauleverer, between your 
friend and your husband!" was the abrupt rejoinder, and Lord 
Mauleverer left the apartment. 

The expression . the look that accompanied it. recalled mo 
to a sense of the danger and incongruity of the position in 
which I had placed myself. "You hear him, Sir Vivian!" I 
exclaimed, clasping my hands in despair. " Yes, I must part 
with my only friend ! You have placed me in safety from the 
treachery of my only enemy ! Be content for awhile with your 
good work, and do not visit me again until . until" 

"My Lord Mauleverer sends for me?" Vivian interrupted 
me with a scornful, bitter laugh. "I shall expect a summons 
from him as soon to the Kerig y Drudion ! But, however, 
it is plain how you love this man . who cares so little for you . . 
and it is enough. It is to be hoped you will succeed in retaining 
your invaluable prize. I doubt it. Meanwhile you have pro- 
nounced upon me a final and irrevocable sentence of banishment ; 
and, under those circumstances, I certainly shall resign the 
trust your father's will conferred on me . agreeably to the 
option he assigned me. into your own hands. I shall stay at 
my ruin only long enough to make certain that neither friends 
nor foes desire my longer presence in England . and then for 
the Danube ! " 

" But . but . you will not go to Morgana's Haunt again ! " 

" You have beguiled me of the promise, Lady Mauleverer, 
and I have already lived to regret it. Good God!. as poor 
Sophia herself has often said, we cannot do without some species 
of happiness on the earth. if not of the heart, at least of the 
senses !" 

Poor Sophia indeed ! But he gave me no time to comment 
on his words. He flung out of the apartment with as little 
ceremony of leavetaking as my husband had previously exhi> 
bited. 



358 MAtTLETEEEK's DIVOHCE. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 

"What a period of ravening anxiety for me followed this inter- 
view with Sir Vivian ! There were no visible signs, no flash, no 
hoarse mutter, and yet I felt that a thundercloud, fraught with 
devastation and ruin, was blackening over me ! 

It must have been fully three weeks since I had seen or 
heard anything of Mrs. Luxmoor, but what I myself talked. 
I made no secret of my thorough alienation ; and I found that 
people in general, women, at all events, perfectly shared my 
opinion of her manners and conversation, and wondered how I 
had countenanced such a woman so long ! Mrs. Suett, in par- 
ticular, to whom I thought it best rather to hint suspicions of 
her new designs on Sir Vivian, than of the progress she had 
made in the resumption of those she formerly entertained on 
her son, . Mrs. Suett, I knew, would be the more irritated 
against her on this account, from the sanguine hopes she che- 
rished that Sir Vivian's generosity and kindness were so con- 
spicuously displayed towards herself and daughter, from a 
feeling of admiration, ripening into attachment towards the 
latter. I take, indeed, no shame to myself to acknowledge that 
I desired to -make my neighbourhood, the whole county, in 
fact, an uncomfortable residence for this many-aliased Miss 
Jones ! It seemed I had no other resource. Her husband 
himself appeared to take no further malevolent interest in her. 
Mrs. Suett let me understand pretty plainly that he was aware 
of her residence in Glamorgan, but he had not stirred in the 
matter, so far as she could any way ascertain. 

Concerning Sir Vivian, I was left in a much more torment- 
ing state of doubt. He was become, according to report, a 
perfect recluse at Castell Ap Howel. _ But his estrangement 
and resentment against me were established by the facts of his 
continued absence, and of his having sent me a formal resig- 
nation of his office of trustee. By the arrangements in my 
father's will, I was now at liberty to name another in his 
place, and it could not be difficult to find one of a more com- 
plying mood. Meanwhile I did not feel assured that my 
unkind treatment would not throw him back for consolation 
into the labyrinth of seduction from which I had sought to 
withdraw him. What, after all, was the pledge he had given 
me, against the enthralment of the senses in a young man ? I 
knew Vivian, honourable, indeed, to a point of romantic 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 359 

chivalry ! But might he not consider himself absolved, by 
the sudden change in our amicable relations, from what might 
be made to seem merely a prosecution of a spiteful and cause- 
less vindietiveness on my part ? 

So I thought it possible to be, and would have given much 
to be enabled to satisfy myself of the groundlessness of my 
apprehensions. 

I had nearer reasons of uneasiness also, that might have 
sufficed alone to make me miserable. 

I earnestly desired a reconciliation with my husband. I 
could not look at my sweet children, of whom he now took 
scarcely any fatherly notice, and not desire it. I disliked, 
above all things, that any report of our alienation should get 
abroad, and revive Sophia's hopes, after the failure in her 
plans produced by her own supersubtle entanglements. Even 
to give the triumph of knowing the dissension she had effected, 
was a misfortune to be avoided at almost any sacrifice. 

But, unhappily, Lord Mauleverer's temper, as well as my 
own, was charged with secret causes of discontent and irri- 
tation. In him these feelings took the form of an immovable 
sullenness and gloom. We rarely met on any occasion which 
a respect for appearances we both preserved did not compel. 
We exchanged little conversation, and that of no very cheerful 
or conciliatory kind. It was chiefly on the disagreeable state 
of our pecuniary relations. Scarlatt had just, with inex- 
pressible bitterness, paid over the greater portion of our large 
half-year's income in the exorbitant interest of our borrowed 
money. We were again beginning to fall into all manner of 
arrears in our expensive and ostentatious housekeeping. 

But, as time wore on, and no further fuel was applied to my 
indignation, it became still more difficult to sustain it against 
the man whom I had once so passionately loved. Both the per- 
turbers of our peace had vanished, for I was well informed 
that Scarlatt, for all this considerable interval, had not once 
directed his steps towards Morgana's Haunt. He remained 
almost altogether in his private apartments, engaged, the 
people about him concluded, in his usual political studies and 
calculations. He wrote a great deal, I was told, and what 
other subjects could he have had ? 

At last that strange weakness which besets the heart of 
woman, and renders us such very fools of time and mutability, 
came -whelming over mine. I was stirred with a deep pas- 
sionate yearning to win back that love, which had once been 
the whole aim and happiness of my existence. A lawful. a 
hallowed emulation awoke in my soul, and a vain hope whis- 
pered it, that it could not be in the nature of a man not abso- 
lutely and irredeemably corrupt (and how should Scarlatt have 
become so, in so brief a period ?) to prefer those evanescent and 
meretricious allurements of a courtezan, to the pure tenderness 



360 UAULEVERElt'S DIVORCE. 

that exalted what it loved, of a faithful wife. I was not a fool 
of personal vanity and conceit ; but I knew that in no external 
advantage could Sophia be held my equal, much less my supe- 
rior, in however prejudiced a judgment. I determined, as it 
were, to compel my husband to restore me those wandering 
affections, dearer to me, as in the parable, for the loss. and 
which had been so inhospitably driven back from the purple- 
shining wilds, and precipitous headlands, whither they had 
strayed. 

I determined to commence by an act of submission . by an 
act I imagined would dissipate a main cause of uneasiness and 
alienation between us. 

Full of these fond and not ungenerous relentings, I conquered 
the last reluctance of my pride and misgivings, that would con- 
tinue to haunt my steps, like goblins, and seem to draw them 
back ; and finally made my way to my husband's private apart- 
ment. I sent him no announcement . in my eagerness I did not 
think it necessary to make any at the door. I entered. He 
Avas writing. apparently a letter ; but numerous fragments of 
predecessors strewed the table ; and when he saw me he started 
up, gathered them to him with an air of dismay, and looked so 
confused and panic-stricken at me, that I was pierced m a 
moment with the conviction that Providence had possibly guided 
my resolution, only just in time to prevent a new phasis of 
infidelity and degradation on the part of my husband. 

My heart swelled nigh to breaking ; but I controlled my agi- 
tation sufficiently to express to him quietly my wish for a re- 
conciliation, and my hope in future to remove every cause of 
dissension between us . commencing with the trusteeship. I 
had obtained its resignation from Sir Vivian, and had resolved 
to constitute himself in the place. It was no light sacrifice. 
My father's lawyers had already expressed themselves favour- 
able to the redemption of our exorbitant mortgage ; and I knew 
that I was thus making over to my husband all that left me the 
shadow of independence . all that he had been craving for so 
long. that I resigned myself to all that my father's precautions 
had been directed to preserve me from. Searlatt was visibly 
astonished. He even blushed as with some internal sense of 
shame. Perhaps he was moved for a moment with some better, 
more tender sentiment ; I saw how his countenance worked ; 
but it was but for an instant. I would fain have cast myself 
into his arms, and completed our reconciliation in an overflow 
of all the fond, grief-and-joy-mingling passions that brimmed 
in my soul, and sought a relief in the tears I yet had pride and 
strength to suppress. I looked at him, though, with an expres- 
sion he could not mistake . but which produced an exactly con- 
trary effect to any I could have thought possible. He raised 
the hand which had just received the document so precious to 
him, with a gesture of repulse ; and words, cruel, cold, unfeel* 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 361 

ing, false words, fell on my ears that iced the living' waters as 
they rose, and kept them frozen in their source. " Better late 
than never, Lady Mauleverer. You seem to have a wonderful 
influence over this haughty Indian jackanapes, when you choose 
to exert it. I hope it is not merely meant to throw dust in my 
eyes. I shall go to London as speedily as possible to test the 
validity of this act. And believe me, the first act of justice I 
shall perform, if it enables me to do any, will be . to pay to 
Mrs. Luxmoor the legacy left her under your father's will." 

I turned away with a look of undissembled anger and con- 
tempt ; and had not our needs been so pressing and overwhelm- 
ing, had it been in my power, I may add, to revoke the deed 
which I had caused to be drawn up in the most authentic form, 
appointing my husband my trustee. he would not have found 
it long at his discretion to execute this ill-timed act of justice, 
if act of justice it was, to which he had so often refused assent. 
"" ^Nevertheless, the expression Scarlatt had used relative to 
Vivian remained in my memory. I was even so foolish as to 
derive an unwholesome species of comfort from it. . A wrong, 
but an inevitable sense of satisfaction in the notion, that if my 
husband no longer loved me, at least I exercised upon him some 
kind of retaliation in the bitter repugnance he manifested to the 
generous devotion and friendship, hitherto displayed towards 
me by the noble youth for whom he cherished a causeless, but 
lifelong detestation. It was this reflection that induced me, 
when, a few days after the scene described, Sir Vivian Ap 
Howel was announced to me, to give directions for his instant 
admittance. 

To say the whole truth, however, I was so fevered with 
anxiety and suspense, at what might be taking place unknown 
to me . for no tidings reached me now from any direction ; and 
Lord Mauleverer had grown still more profoundly gloomy, and 
locked up in himself . that I could almost have welcomed a 
fiend from the abyss, to enlighten me ! And up to this period 
I had found Sir Vivian my only true and faithful friend. 

I remember it was a cold winter's day, threatening storm and 
snow. I had ordered a couch to be drawn near the lire, and 
was sitting on it reading a book, or rather labouring to fix my 
attention sufficiently to read it. And that book was George 
Diamond's last . "presented, with the author's kindest regards 
and grateful acknowledgments, to the llight Hon. the Lord 
Mauleverer." 

I can too well interpret to myself, now, the meaning of that 
dark quiver on Vivian's countenance . the rolling fire in his 
wild, fervid gaze ; the mockery and menace that mingled in his 
strange, vibrating, hollow tones. sounding like the muttering 
echoes of far-off, but baleful and mysterious utterances ! 

He began, however, much in his usual way. "Don't be too 
much amazed to see me, Lady Mauleverer ! I am come to 



362 hauleverer's divorce. 

take farewell of you for the second time. for ever ! You know 
.if you read the papers . "What ! reading; one of Sophia's 
diatribes against everybody, and everything ? . You know, 
there are to be battles on the Danube for certain now ! . Men- 
sckichoff. that haughty prince, whose grandfather was a pieman 
. has gone off from Constantinople in a huff ; and I suppose 
those who offer their services first, will have the best chance of 
a Turkish command ! So I am going to the city of the Sultan 
at once . with very good recommendations promised me from 
the "War Office, and my subscription sword blazing by my 
side." 

I was struck with a strange feeling. or rather combination of 
feelings. It seemed to me that I was about to be left utterly 
friendless and deserted. At the same time a notion, not desti- 
tute of some external support, piqued me not a little. " Do you 
find it then impossible to withstand the fascinations of your 
Armida. saving by flight almost to another quarter of the 
globe ? " 

Vivian stared at me for a moment with a strange vacancy, 
coloured violently, and starting up from his chair near me, 
began pacing the drawing-room with a rapid and agitated step ! 
Not an unusual, though rather harassing movement of irritation 
and impatience with him. 

" Well, Lady Mauleverer, I really do !. I am possibly con- 
vinced that nothing but flight can prevent me from making a 
fool or a villain of myself !. I have sailed too near Charybdis, 
and I must crowd canvas to be off before I strike, and every 
living soul on board of me go down and perish ! " he said, at 
last, with his eccentric, habitual laugh. 

"'Fool or villian ! '.Really, Sir Vivian, it is but a small 
compliment to make you ; but if you exile yourself from your 
native land, from the dread of the worn-out fascinations of the 
haggish Morgana of the Haunt, you may safely assign yourself 
the former designation ! " 

" But I tell you she is not a hag at all, Lady Mauleverer !. 
or if she be so in reality, she is a sorceress, who knows how to 
disguise herself in half-a-myriad forms of irresistible attraction. 
In your presence, certainly, she makes herself look at times- 
worn, as you say ; and sometimes almost as if she had some 
deadly asp at work at her in secret, like Cleopatra's, under her 
purple robe, cheating her captors of the best part of their 
triumph. But the moment your back is turned, what a real 
miracle of charm, and . I was going to say. beauty, Sophy 
becomes! But it is not beauty; she has something more 
engaging . riveting . than beauty about her ! . Stay ! you have 
heard that story, have you not, of the enchanted princess, who 
was obliged to seem an old woman. hag, if you like . until 
she could allure some matchless knight to her arms, in spite of 
her wrinkles. Speaking modestly so far as regards the cheva- 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 363 

Her, I think the story must hare been told of Sophia and . and 
myself." 

I was speechless for some moments with amazement . with 
dread . at this revelation of infatuated enthusiasm ! 

" With all you know of her artifices, her treachery, her utter 
depravity, can you speak thus kindly of this detestable 
woman ? " I exclaimed. 

" Oh, she has so many apologies ! Just picture her to your- 
self. What a barbarously ill-treated woman and wife she has 
been ! Think what talents she has ! What a warm, splendid, 
glowing imagination ! Cast out in the world in the fervour of 
the passions . you women have passions, too, sometimes . con- 
demned to a life either of celibacy or of profligacy by the sense- 
less, merciless laws that make poor Sophy the property of the 
most hateful and villainous of wretches ! Place yourself in 
Sophia Luxmoor's situation, I say. Lady Mauleverer ! Would 
you have remained so near perfection as you now are, through 
all her trials and temptations ? It is so easy to be virtuous 
with a husband one doats on by one's side, children, a castle to 
live in, and fifteen thousand a year ! . quite clear, soon, I sup- 
pose. My lord has sent me some documents to sign, that show 
you took my resignation in earnest, and did not care to trouble 
me with occasions of visitation, Lady Mauleverer. Yes, I say, 
if even Sophy is as bad as she is represented, in her situation a 
good number of women might not have been very much better 
themselves, and possess no particle of her talents and redeem- 
ing virtues." 

"Sir Vivian! if you come to insult me" . I said, almost 
weeping with vexation. 

" But Sophy is not so bad as she is represented, by a great 
deal ! I know it, and can prove it ! " Yivian resumed, inter- 
rupting me with a rudeness of vehemence to which I was little 
accustomed from him. 

" You have been to see her then, and listened to her cajo- 
leries, in violation of your plighted word ?" 

" No, Lady Mauleverer, no ! but she has been to see me, and 
I found it quite impossible to escape from hearing what she had 
to say ! " he replied, laughing at my gesture of amazed disgust. 
" You know, of course, she would grow surprised at my con- 
tinued absence from Morgana' s Haunt, after the distinguished 
preference she had shown me ! But, besides, she sent me a 
direct invitation or two, which I declined. In quarrels between 
friends there is nothing like a little personal explanation ; so, 
as she is above all vulgar prejudices in other things, she showed 
herself indifferent to opinion respecting the propriety or impro- 
priety of visiting a gay young bachelor in his own apartments. 
And this morning early, before the rime was off the grass, I 
found Sophy had come to breakfast with me openly, in her 
pony-chaise, at Castell Ap Howel." 



361 mattleveeer's divorce. 

" She perhaps rather wished the visit to be remarked ! It is 
pretty well known Mrs. Luxmoor is anxious to give her hus- 
band an opportunity he might think it worth his while to take 
to get rid of her ! " I said. 

" Well ! all the decrees in Chancery are going in my favour ; 
I shall be worth plucking shortly, certainly ! " replied Ap 
Howel, quite gravely. " And, according to her own admission, 
she has devilish good reason to apprehend that Luxmoor is 
hounding on her track again ! " 

" What reason r " I inquired, with a chill at the heart ; for 
I thought I knew it already but too well. 

" But let me tell it you all in a methodical way, as Sophia 
told it me over our bread and milk. I offered her coffee and 
one of Rebecca Caradoc's nicest new-laid eggs . but she pre- 
ferred, she said, to share my diet ! " 

And Yivian proceeded, indeed, as he said, in a methodical 
manner, to relate to me the almost incredible behaviour of the 
abandoned creature. 

Luxmoor, it seemed, she declared, had at last made the dis- 
covery, by what means she could only conjecture, of her iden- 
tity with George Diamond, and he had filed a bill of discovery 
in Chancery against her publishers, to compel them to render 
him an account of all the emoluments derived from her writ- 
ings.in his own words, "to disgorge their plunder!" She 
knew not whether ho was acquainted with her place of refuge, 
or how long she might consider herself personally safe. 13ut 
this was the reason : she pretended . according to Vivian, with 
a blush that attested she spoke the truth . she was so very 
anxious to see him, that she might consult him on what was 
best to be done. 
" And what was your reply ? " 

" Upon my life, I hardly know myself to this minute," he 
answered, his eyes sparkling with a strange wild mirth. " But, 
tush ! I may as well confess the truth at once. I responded 
like an idiot. that I could not possibly tell. I had not wisdom 
enough to guide myself, for I believed I was going abroad to try 
and get myself brained with a Russian cannon-ball." 
" Well,. and did she not understand you, even then ? " 
"In faith, she did, . but not in the sense that you suppose. 
She asked me, quite coolly, where I thought of going; and, 
when I told her, declared that above all things in the world, 
she thought her pen would find most congenial occupation in 
describing the glories and horrors of a campaign ; and she 
actually concluded by asking me to lend her a hundred pounds 
to enable her to transport herself to the East, where she might 
follow in the march of the armies, and describe all that she saw. 
It would prove a most saleable work, she was sure ; and, as 
she should now be obliged to take a new alias, it would be just 
the thing to introduce a name favourably to the public," 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 365 

I looked at Sir Vivian, fairly petrified. " Good God ! and 
.what reply did yon make to escape from this strange overture ? 
Surely it cannot be otherwise interpreted * " I said, as soon as 
I could speak for shame and astonishment. 

" You misinterpret her again. I believe she meant precisely 
.what she said. She assured me so ! " he answered, smiling. 
" She is a strange, an inconceivable woman, . she made no 
secret that she saw what I was afraid of, . but asserted that 
verily her purpose was to follow an army . not a man. To 
witness great exploits, and to record them, not to make love or 
to be made love to ; and really I think she is quite capable of 
going into the thick of a battle merely to silence the voice of 
her own heart in the hurlyburly, . and it is, after all, a capital 
way to do it. She asked me in such a quaint, peevish way, . 
' Do you think you are the only person in the world who would 
be glad to be stunned out of memory and consciousness r ' " 

" Disgraceful wretch ! . she may well desire to forget her 
crimes, and to lose the dread of the sure chastisement she must 
apprehend from the justice of Heaven." 

"She defends herself pretty well, however, from the majority 
of your charges against her, Lady Mauleverer," said Yivian, 
quietly. 

I started. " What ! have you raised the crests of the serpent 
against me ? Have you told her what I have revealed to you 
for your own warning and preservation ? " And I really felt a 
terror glide through my veins, as if I had seen some such deadly 
denizen of the brake quivering its forked tongue over me. 

" I did not name my authority, you may well believe. But 
you cannot deceive that woman . she named you instantly. As 
I am a living man, I knew not what else to answer without 
hurting her feelings too much . and then what an absurdity 
was it, I did answer ! That although I was myself perfectly 
satisfied she had no deleterious intentions upon me, how could 
we induce the world to believe so, too, considering all it knew . . 
and all it conjectured of her principles and practice." 

" Did she not die before you of her shame ? " 

" Not at all ; on the contrary, she looked a great deal livelier: 
her eyes shone up, as if you had stirred a gassy coal in them. 
And she asked me to tell her, plainly and unreservedly, all that 
the world knew and conjectured of her principles and practice 
. and she would tell me, on her soul, how far it lied, and how 
far it told the truth. Wonderful as this statement was, I could 
thoroughly believe it of Sophia." 

" And what did she admit?" I inquired, breathlessly. "I 
know what she would deny." 

" You know what most women would deny . but Sophy is not 
at all a routine girl,. not made after the regulation pattern in 
anything, I'm afraid," said Ap Howel. "But that is her 
master-charm, I think. After all, women that are quite the 



366 jiauxevebek's divobce. 

right sort of thing- are apt to be a little tedious. But nonsense, 
. what am I saying? 1 must try and not be tedious myself, 
i'or I see you look impatient, Lady Mauleverer. Well, Sophy 
denied in the first place, and with a startling emphasis, I can 
tell you, all that related to her pretended courtship of Scarlatt 
Suett, at Has Xewydd. He made wild love to her, if all she 
said is true, and there must be a passionateness in his nature 
which until now I had never suspected, . for, ambitious and 
greedy as he has always been, he came at last . she declared to 
me . to such a pitch of frenzy as to offer the friendless, money- 
less governess, marriage ! " 
" And you believed her ? " 

" She showed me the letter . a written document, mark you 
. in which he most abjectly begs her forgiveness for the dis- 
honourable objects with which he had hitherto pursued her ; and 
offers her all the reparation that an honourable alliance with his 
noble self could guarantee. That was about a month before you 
strayed to Plas Newydd." 

The stroke of a dagger could not have pierced my heart more 
keenly than those words. But I dissembled the excess of my 
anguish. I answered, almost tranquilly . . " And she was 
obliged to refuse the handsome tender, from the trifling cir- 
cumstance that she was already married to the Reverend Mr. 
Luxmoor, of Cambridge ? I don't suppose that her flirtations 
there would have injured her prospects, had they been the only 
difficulties in the way." 

" She did not quite deny her flirtations there; but laid all the 
blame on Luxmoor, who forced a mob of lively, reckless young 
fellows into her society, whose tone she could not but in some 
degree adopt," replied Vivian. "But remember, Sophy de- 
clares her flirtations never passed that word . and that it was 
her disgust on that account, almost as much as Luxmoor's 
neglect and infidelity, that drove her to quit him." 

" So she has told me . she will say anything; and very young 
people indeed, believe her ! " I said. But what has she not 
denied, so far, that the most ordinary of her sex would not ?. 
Wonderful exception, thank God ! that she is ! Concerning my 
father, and my mother's broken-hearted death-bed, what [did 
she say ? " 

" She confessed she should have been very glad to marry Lord 
Mauleverer that was. He suited her, she said . Heaven knows 
what she meant. Perhaps, that he had a title and a great estate. 
Yet, though Sophy likes many things that money can pur- 
chase, she sets her heart on others that it cannot. As to your 
mother, she denies she ever, wilfully, gave her one moment's 
uneasiness; to use her own sprightly expression, she would have 
taken a run down the Hhaiadr Dhu sooner." 

"And Paris. did she explain Paris to your satisfaction 
also?" 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 367 

" Oh, she went on in a very foolish, strange way about Paris 
. she seemed a good deal cut up with that part of the accusa- 
tion ; and said that was unkind of you, because you had no pro- 
vocation, real or imaginary, to speak ill of her there. She cried 
and laughed together in a most absurd manner . like any other 
woman . but the sum was that, if I liked, she could show me a 
balance-book of all her expenditure in Paris to a sous, with an 
account of how she came by it, as fair and honest as a merchant's 
private ledger . intended only for his own perusal. She alluded, 
I suppose, to the miserable document old Suett forgot to take 
with him on his flight." 

" Of course, she would omit no opportunity for a reflection on 
my husband's family . she don't love him much, I imagine, 
either. But what does she say to her present pretences of doing 
so? . to her glorious attempts to win the affections of a married 
man . the father of another woman's children ? " 

" To retrieve the affections, you mean, Lady Mauleverer," re- 
turned Vivian, with a dark smile. " Why . she repeats 
the old tale : that it is he who is hankering after her . who ima- 
gines he shall never be happy, until, on some terms or other, she 
is his. But. and buts are important little words- . she admits 
that you have behaved to her so provokingly, so overbearingly, 

so gallingly, insultingly . that- -she wants, above all things, 

to be removed from a place where the possibilities of retaliation 
lie as temptingly to her hand as the thunderbolts of Jove, when 
he gave over the keys of all his cupboards to Juno to keep, and 
went courting Semele in a shower of fire. That is her own com- 
parison . I, for my part, have forgotten my Lempriere. 

" In plainer words . she has discovered that you are rich now ; 
younger than her other wooer ; in possession of a bright, unsul- 
lied reputation . and she thinks you would suit her better to 
bring to ruin and disgrace." 

Vivian's cheek flushed. " Let me sacrifice myself then," 
he resumed, laughing in a short, rattling peal like sudden 
thunder. 

" Sacrifice yourself . what do you mean ? " 

" To grant the poor soul her moderate request ; and give her 
what facilities lie in my power . to write a narrative of a cam- 
paign on the Danube. What do you say ? " 

"What have I to do in the matter?" I replied, looking at 
him, with eyes that certainly sparkled with indignation. " Is 
it one in which a woman of virtue and character . a lady !. can 
be supposed for one instant to have any concern or say ? " 

" You mistake the thing altogether, Lady Mauleverer," 
Vivian returned, still laughingly. "Strange as it may appear 
to you, I am certain Sophia means merely what she says. I am 
to figure in her history, but not in her memoirs. In fact, 
would you believe it ? " . he arose again, and resumed his 
pacing of the floor . "the strange creature assured me that 



36? mauleveheb's divorce. 

slie did not believe I cared an old stone of the Kerig y Drudion 
fur her . after all the trouble I have taken to convince her that 
I am desperately enamoured of her. And that I used my 
assiduities with her merely as a cover for another and for- 
bidden passion, which has grown with my growth, and strength- 
ened with my strength, even to this hour." 

I confess there was something in the deep fervour of his 
utterance of these words that ought to have struck me more 
forcibly. But my ideas turned instantly in another direction, 
or else I could fall upon no better means of eluding the drift of 
expression I could not affect to misunderstand. "Slanderess! 
I perceive all her malignity. It is she then who has instilled 
into Lord Mauleverer the unfounded ideas that render him 
even more than usually harsh to me and rude to. to others ! 
But again, I repeat, what have I to do in this infamous affair? 
Am I required to prostrate myself before this worst of women, 
to implore her mercy ? " 

" I am afraid things have come to just such a pass," returned 
Vivian, and he grew flushed as I grew pale to hear what fol- 
lowed. " You don't know all yet. My Lord Mauleverer is 
inclined to enjoy himself a little en grand Seigneur, now that 
he has attained the rank of one. You don't know all, I tell 
you. But ought I to tell her all ? " 

He paused ; and standing before me with his arms folded, it 
really seemed to me as if my physical configuration vanished 
from his gaze, and he was talking and thinking of some remote 
simulacrum of me. 

" Ought I to tell her all ? But it will happen, whether I lend 
a hand in it or not. And has he not deserved it? And is it 
not best for us always to know the truth, even if it pierce one's 
heart with a poisoned knife. Lady Mauleverer," he continued, 
awaking from his strange reverie with a start, "understand 
this matter clearly. Sophia declared to me at last. vaunted 
to me if you will . on my declaring off the honour she offered 
me, on the plea that I had sacredly promised you, never even 
to see her again without your permission . that she knew you 
would not refuse it even for the excursion to the Danube, when 
you are informed Lord. Mauleverer accompanied his peremptory 
request for my banishmentfromMorgana's Haunt . withan offer 
of his own entire devotion to supply the vacuum. Coupled . 
since I have resigned my trusteeship . with the assurance that 
the ten thousand pounds of your father's legacy shall he the 
first sum paid out of the funds now placed at his disposal." 

I was silent for several moments with unutterable horror, 
amazement . even terror . at the wickedness thus revealed 
to me. 

I do not well know what I said at last, when I could speak 
at all ; but I believe it was some incoherent raving, to the 
effect that it was all utterly false ; that the wretched creature 



LOVE AND JEALOUSY. 369 

had invented this calumny, purely to degrade me in his, Sir 
Vivian's, estimation, and to exalt herself as one who had 
triumphed over me in the affections of the vile, perjured man, 
into whose power she had originally betrayed me. 

"Yes; a debt of vengeance is due indeed to her on that 
account," Vivian replied, with flashing eyes ; " and if you 
think so, Lady Mauleverer," he added, in strangely soft and 
supplicating tones, "the means of vengeance are in your 
power, if this seductive syren really seeks to lure me into 
her depths. To be brief and intelligible, Sophia and I came 
to this decision, . that I was to tell you all I have told you, 
and then to demand whether or not you will consent to release 
me from my promise." 

" And in that case ? " 

" Sophia and I pack this very noonday for Stamboul." 

No ! . language can never give utterance to the prodigious 
tumult of feelings in my heart at these words. I will disguise 
nothing. I know not myself what, amid all that chaos of 
contending and terrible passions, dictated most my reply ; it 
was a combination perhaps of ail the direst, maddening im- 
pulses of a woman's outraged love, pride, sense of propriety, 
honour, decency. a sentiment of the warmest, tenderest friend- 
ship . what shall I say? This I answered, " I do not consent 
to release you from your promise. I exact from you its 
observance to the very letter. If it depends upon my decree, 
never, never, never again shall Sophia Luxmoor and Vivian 
Ap Howel meet ! " 

His whole countenance shone up with joy. 

"Yes, once again!" he exclaimed, in tones of wild, ecstatic 
relief, "I did not dare to hope . to fear this resolve, I mean ! 
And as human nature requires some substitute for the reality 
of happiness, I had agreed to take your decision to Sophia iu 
person !" 

" Take it then !" I replied. " And with it my utter defiance ! 
Bid her do her best or her worst against me ! But come back 
as speedily as possible to assure me that you have finally and 
irrevocably escaped from the witch's sorceries!" 

Alas ! I did not dream that in striving to inflict upon my foe 
the retaliation I imagined in my power, I was in reality myself 
blindly accelerating the action of all the engines she had com- 
bined for my destruction. 



2B 



370 MAT/LEVEREE's ditoece. 



CHAPTEll XXXVII. 

A CLIMAX. 

I EE3IAIXED alone, and alone I desired to be. I wished to 
savour the full sweetness of this draught of revenge I was 
raising to my lips. I wished to make certain that there would 
be no interruption to my acquiring the earliest tidings of the 
result of that momentous scene. I felt, moreover, that I could 
not restrain my feelings if I saw Lord Mauleverer. I did not 
consider any other possible inference to what I resolved upon, 
or perhaps any inference at all ; I therefore sent him word to 
his apartment that I was very much indisposed, and desired 
to dine alone. He sent me for reply, that that would suit him 
very well, as lie was busy making arrangements to go to Lon- 
don on the affairs of the trusteeship ; and should probably set 
out in a few hours. He hoped I should be better before he 
set out ! 

I scarcely noticed the message, the coldness of which, at 
another time, might have struck me unpleasantly. I threw 
myself on a couch, and closing my external senses, endeavoured 
to realize and follow, in imagination, every step and stage of 
Vivian's arrival and explanation. 

I depicted to myself, with minute and ever-diversified 
changes of revengeful satisfaction, the mortification, the shame, 
the fury, the despair, of my detested rival. I hated Sophia 
now more than ever I had loved her. I investigated, under a 
million aspects, all that there was of most quick-stinging, soul- 
piercing, in the heaped measure of retaliation I presented her. 
I had flung upon her a nest of vipers and scorpions of to me 
unknown, but, I could not doubt, most deadly venom and 
lance. It pleased me to consider, separately, and wdth the 
microscopic observation of a naturalist, the power and scope of 
each separate pang. Not, indeed, with the calm of one. my 
whole soul was in tumult. 

I calculated to an instant the time I considered necessary for 
the going and return of my agent in the work ; and it was not 
until the interval began to grow protracted, that these raging 
thoughts stilled themselves in some degree, and I had leisure to 
contemplate the subject under another of its aspects. 

What vengeance would she not take or propose to herself? 
And how could I elude the probable reaction of her rage and 
despair. the rage and despair of a woman scorned by the man 
whom she evidently preferred. who had in her power the hus- 



A CLIMAX. 371 

band of the woman by whose decree this prodigious humiliation 
and disappointment had been inflicted ? 

Terror seized me. I could not doubt what kind of vengeance 
was in store for me. And the thought returned upon me with 
emphasis that there could be only one chance of safety for me ; 
and this was to bring Luxmoor again upon her ! I determined, 
since Mrs. Suett's indirect informations had produced so little 
result, to write to him myself a full relation. And I resolved 
to stimulate him to exertion by declaring to him the rich legacy 
to which his wife was entitled . It diverted some portion of 
the anxious time I had still to spend, to write this letter. I 
sent it by a special messenger to be posted at Llanhowel. 

A considerable interval had now elapsed. I had time to re- 
sume my cogitations. But a new source of anxiety speedily 
began to mingle in them. "What did this delay portend ? 
After all, might not the blandishments of the sorceress prove 
more powerful than a young man's resolution ? Might not 
Sophia have undone my work . reversed my projects ? 

I was in a state of the most comfortless perturbation on this 
point ; and the early winter twilight was darkening rapidly 
into night, when Lord Mauleverer came into my apartment, 
ready equipped for travelling. He told me, with particular 
brevity and abruptness, that he intended to take the night 
express to London, and inquired if I had any commands for 
town which he could execute. " But perhaps," he added, with 
seeming carelessness, " you have just been writing there ? I 
saw Davis making across the park, with a letter in his hand, 
on the Ap Howel road ! . For upon my word, it ought to be 
called so ! . the fellow is never off it ! What was he doing here 
this morning, after, I think, my almost forbidding him the 
house ? But I am not the master . and no one considers 
me so !" 

No doubt I showed some signs of the violent emotions throb- 
bing and beating in my breast as I answered, " ' The fellow ' 
came . came to say thathe was goingabroad . and should shortly 
call to take his farewell of us all ! As to the letter (and I own 
I may have looked a little guilty and confused when I remem- 
bered its real contents) it was for town . and I don't know 
of any commission which you can execute there for me, unmen- 
tioned in it !" 

Lord Mauleverer made no further observation on the subject, 
excepting that the country could well spare even so great an 
ornament to it ! . and taking a very cold farewell of me, set out, 
as I supposed, on his journey. 

My ideas instantly reverted to the subjects of anxiety that 
had previously possessed them. It almost seemed to me that 
Sophia must needs have been victorious in the struggle. that 
her prey had yielded himself up to the fascinations which so 
many had found irresistible ! But I cannot describe all the 

2 B 2 



372 mattleyeeeb's divoece. 

agony of that suspense ! It tasks no great powers of moral 
analysis in any of my readers to conceive very easily how it 
was that the thought of the singularity and even impropriety 
of Vivian's repeated visit, in my husband's unexpected absence, 
never once occurred to me. I had no other feeling but that of 
satisfaction, amounting to joy, when at length I heard the 
approaching hoofs of a horse through the darkness of the winter 
night. and I knew well the tramp of Sir Vivian's wind-matched 
charger, Rhaiadr Dhu ! 

He entered . looking excessively harassed and fatigued, his 
wontedly wildly careless black hair scattered still more disor- 
deredly under his military cap. " Where have you been so 
long r" I exclaimed, before the servant who showed him in, had 
time to leave the room. " I have been expecting you these 
three hours !" 

" Is Lord Mauleverer at home ?" he inquired abruptly. 
" Why do you ask ? . No ! he has gone to town." 
" Upon my life, then, I think I must have passed his wraith 
not half an hour ago, as I came out of the furze plantation, 
behind Morgana's Haunt ! I took it as the shortest way to 
Mauleverer, but you know very few people care either to come 
or go by it. There was a driving storm of wind and snow at 
the time, and I was galloping from my own thoughts, which 
are rapid pursuers, good faith ! . and he was pelting along on 
foot, like the winner of a pedestrian race. But I think I could 
not possibly be mistaken in him, for he made a visible stop as 
we shot past each other. But when I looked round, a few 
hundred vards ahead, he had vanished ; and whether the 
ground had swallowed him or not, I did not think it worth my 
while to inquire." 

A terrible . an overwhelming suspicion struck me as I 
listened. "He has but feigned this journey then to London! 
or he has come off of it to renew his adulterous proffers more, 
unexpectedly." 

" He will find Sophia in a suitable mood to receive them," 
Vivian replied, hurriedly. " We parted like two devils that 
have quarrelled for a soul ! I have been obliged at last to 
reject her as plainly as ever woman rejected man, and the 
upshot is, she says she will not fall again into the power of 
her husband, happen what will ; that she is certain he has 
hounded her out, and intends to make a spring upon her ere 
long ; that she has only to make the least sign to your husband 
to bring him to her side, and so, since you will not permit her 
to find a protector in me, she will seek one for herself in a 
man who has always in reality loved her so well that. that 
he has never ceased to persecute her !" 

.' Merciful heaven ! and do you really believe that it could 
be Scarlatt whom you met ?" 
"lam certain of it, since you ask me thus solemnly, and 



A CLIMAX. 373 

that he was going a road he already perhaps knows full well," 
replied Vivian. 

"But it may not yet be too late to save him. I will go at 
once to Morgana's Haunt before she can have time to wind 
her spells inextricably around him . to subdue him wholly to 
her wicked will !" I said, almost in a state of frenzy, and 
rising as if to put my purpose in immediate execution. 

" Be quiet, for God's sake ! It is already too late, Lady 
Mauleverer . it is hours since I met your husband, within a 
crow's flight from nest to carrion of the Haunt !" Vivian 
replied, throwing himself between me and the door. 

" And you have had the infamous cruelty not to return at 
once and warn me?" I shrieked in my agony. "0 my God ! 
and am I betrayed and given over to my enemies by the only 
being in the world whom I deemed my friend ?" 

" No, Lady Mauleverer, no ! I took a more effectual means 
to serve you . a means you have yourself procured to be at 
hand and in readiness. Sophia's husband . Carolus Luxmoor 
. has been lurking for weeks, perhaps for a much longer 
period, in the neighbourhood of his unhappy wife, with two 
or three London detectives, in the disguise of country clowns, 
to obtain at last decisive proofs of her guilt with Lord Mau- 
leverer. I knew it, for I recognized his satyr visage through 
all his mufflers and smockfrock, in which he intended to pass 
as a railway navvy on a chance occasion, as he was boozing 
in the Wranghams' bar, where he seems as much at home 
and welcome as of yore. I told him where I expected he 
would find my Lord Mauleverer earthed at last, and he is off 
with his whole pack of viewhounds to the Haunt." 

I looked at Vivian thunderstruck. "It is a conspiracy, 
then, to expose my husband's ignominy to the world, which 
your hatred has contrived, inhuman man !" I exclaimed, as 
soon as I could recover speech. " But still I may not be too 
late to save him from the atrocious plot you have perhaps 
concocted with Sophia herself ! Luxmoor would wait until 
he imagined his victim was thoroughly in the toils. it is 
scarcely five minutes' run between here and the Haunt . 
miles between there and Llanhowel. I shall be in time yet 
to foil ye all !" 

"Stay, Lady Mauleverer ! you shall not go on this errand ! 
Nay, dearest Hugh-Helena ! do but listen to me for a moment 
. hark how the wind howls ! . see how the ghastly snow is 
wrapping all the landscape in a shroud ? . -would you hazard 
perhaps your life abroad in such a night, to save two wretches 
who hold you in scorn and detestation, and who perhaps at 
this very moment are laughing over your agony? Nay, then, 
wrench out my heart if you will, and throw it to your dogs, 
but beyond this .threshold you shall not pass while I have 
power to restrain you, even thus !" 



:;;t MATJLETEHEB S DIVOECE. 

And before Icould in the least imagine that such could be 
his intention, Vivian had thrown his arms around me ; and 
.while I was rendered mute and stupified with astonishment 
and indignation, yielding doubtless to the ascendancy of the 
fierce passion so long stifled in his fiery nature, Vivian clutched 
jne to his heart, and devoured my gasping lips with his 
frenzied kisses! I had but just regained my utterance, hut 
ju?t regained the power to rend myself partially from his 
arms, when the door flew open, and Lord Mauleverer, accom- 
panied by his favourite valet and two or three of the upper 
servants, including my own woman, broke tumultuously in ! 

What a cruel Medusa's head is surprise ! I have no doubt 
that for a moment both Sir Vivian and myself. the offender 
and the offended. looked equally petrified, equally convicted 
of offence. Lord Mauleverer himself was a fearful spectacle. 
lie was bloodlessly pale, as he was ever wont to be on the few 
occasions of vehement internal commotion in his nature which 
I had witnessed. But great God! there was almost a smile of 
something nigh akin to malignant satisfaction on his coun- 
tenance as he .surveyed us. 

" You see them ! " he observed, with a gesture to the servants. 
" Kecollect what you see! . I understood that your ladyship 
was severely iudisposed when I left for town . but I am afraid 
I cannot trust. you sent word to that effect by the messenger 
I saw on my way towards Castell Ap Ilowel before my 
departure. I have been then correctly informed, Sir Vivian, 
that you would repeat your visit here this evening, when I was 
imagined to be on my way to town ? But not being able to 
credit the intelligence concerning a youthful hero, who is 
already the glory of his country, and a lady of such virtue that 
even the comparatively innocent indulgence in a little freedom 
of speech on the part of another compels perpetual banishment 
from her society, I have come in person to ascertain the reality 
of the fact ! " 

" You make but one slight mistake in your statements, Lord 
Mauleverer. I happened to be aware, as I passed you on the 
way, that you had stopped short in your journey, to make your 
adieux in pretty close propinquity to the castle at Morgana's 
Haunt ! " Vivian retorted. 

" And thither. since this castle is not sufficiently my house, 
it seems, to enable me to enforce the order I had given that you 
should never set foot in it again, Sir Vivian Ap Howel !. thither 
I return. My friend and neighbour, Mrs. Luxmoor, will be 
willing, I doubt not, to give me a few weeks' accommodation 
until I can ascertain, in a legal manner, who is the master, 
and who the intruder, in these halls ! " 

Lord Mauleverer turned, as if to leave the apartment, on 
these words. Up to this period I had been silent. absolutely 
unable to utter a sound. struggling as under the pressure of 



A CLIMAX. 375 

some frightful nightmare agony. But I could speak . could 
move at last. I had burst towards him . had seized the arm that 
repulsed me . and I shrieked, in accents that rang through the 
chamber like the cry of some poor wretch under a murderer's 
knife: "No, no, no ! Scarlatt, Scarlatt ! by all the love 
that has been between us ! by our children's innocent beauty ! 
. do not believe that I have wronged you . that I am capable 
for an instant of deceiving you ! Circumstances. appearances 
. the madness of this unhappy young man . condemn me ! But 
it is a plot, a conspiracy of that dreadful woman, to entangle 
us all in perdition ! Do not desert me, do not desert me, for 
her who values you not . who would within these few hours 
liave followed the fortunes of another, in any extremity of 
danger and discomfort . who has even shamelessly offered her- 
self to Vivian Ap Howel, as once long ago she offered herself to 
you ! my husband, my husband ! " I continued, and frantic 
with grief, and fear, and love, and jealous frenzy, I threw my 
arms around him, as if to detain him by my powerless force . . 
straining him convulsively to my heart, as I repeated a 
thousand, thousand times, " Do not desert me ! do not desert 
your children for this vile woman's sake ! Husband, lover ! 
dearest, dearest Scarlatt ! be true to me as I swear by the 
Almighty Father of Truth I have ever been to you ! and we 
shall yet be happy . yet be happy ! when this wicked man and 
wicked woman have removed their black shadows from our 
souls ! " 

He shook me off as if I had been some loathsome thing of 
the serpent kind, that had wrapped him at unawares in its 
folds. He flung me away from him with a force that sent me 
reeling to a considerable distance from him almost to where 
Sir Vivian yet stood with his arms folded, looking on with 
apparent indifference. This latter made a slight mechanical 
movement, as if to open them ; then closed them still more 
rigidly on his breast. 

" Your wife, Lord Mauleverer, speaks merely the exact truth 
. and if you had human faith within yourself, you would 
believe in words like these ! " he then said, in quiet, firm accents, 
that rang as clearly as if he were using the most ordinary 
speech. " I do, for my part. Unworthy as you are, I see that 
she still loves you, as she has always loved you . the better for 
your unworthiness. If you have any fault to find with the 
part I have taken in endeavouring to bring Lady Mauleverer 
to a surer comprehension of your demerits, I shall not quit 
Castell Ap Howel until I perceive I can be of no further service 
in the affair. And, meanwhile, Eady Mauleverer ! let all pre- 
sant interpret it as they may, I declare before heaven your 
perfect innocence of any share in the rashness which has been 
so shamefully perverted by a man eager to exhibit to the world 



376 MATTLEVEBEB'S BIVOECE. 

what would be his own deepest dishonour. and will await what- 
ever commands you are pleased to send me at the same place." 
" Take them now ! Leave me, leave this country for ever !" 
I had but just uttered these words with a frantic gesture, 
almost as if I spurned him from my presence, when a cry like 
the cry of a banshee sounded from the open staircase, and a 
female figure, in what appeared to be actually a suit of night- 
clothes with the coverlet of a bed thrown in disorder over it, 
which was glistening' on the edges of the pattern with snow ; 
with naked feet, cut and bleeding ; hair streaming in wild dis- 
order around her neck and bosom ; with terror, anguish, all the 
madness of flight from some overwhelming danger in her eyes 
. rushed in among us. 
It was Sophia ! 

In her own frenzy of excitement she did not seem to observe 
the astounding nature of the scene upon which she had broken. 
She grasped Lord Mauleverer's arm, who attempted in vain to 
stay her, but perceiving me, flew at once past him, and actually 
cast herself on her knees at my feet. " Do not say so. do not 
fear so, . she will not reject me in a moment like this ! My 
Hugh-Helena will not refuse the protection which no human 
being . no woman . could deny to another under such circum- 
stances ! I ask shelter from the worst of usage. almost from 
murder. Lady Mauleverer ! Luxmoor has arrived. has 
broken into my house with a band of ruffians, armed, as they 
pretend, with the power of the law ; he has dragged me with 
indecent violence from my bed, ransacked all my repositories, 
overwhelmed me with threats and abuse, and a declaration 
that he will compel me to return a prisoner with him to his 
house in London, until he discovers who are my paramours, 
and I have only escaped at the risk of my life, with the aid of 
my faithful Swiss, while, burglar-like, they were solacing them- 
selves with the contents of my cellar and larder ! But they are 
on my track, the bloodhounds ! Oh ! save me, save me ! Do 
not surrender me to my merciless husband ! " 

All the sufferings I had undergone within so brief a space ; 
all the indignation, fury, despair in my soul, boiled up like the 
lava of a volcano, as I listened to these words. And I fairly 
spurned my suppliant, and answered, in tones that must cer- 
tainly have been audible to a very considerable distance, . 
" Ungrateful, infamous woman ! and is it to me you come for 
refuge ? Quit my house this instant, in which your presence is 
pollution ; and since he alone of all the undamned of mankind 
is worthy of you, return to your husband! This is my house ; 
quit it, or I will have you turned out of it by the hands of my 
menials ! This is my house, I say. the house of my ancestors 
. the house where my mother perished of a broken heart, whose 
last and deepest stroke was inflicted by you! Quit Mauleverer 



A CLIMAX. 377 

Castle, Sophia Luxmoor, or, if there be a servant in it who will 
obey me yet, you shall be cast out of it ! " 

" Come then, Sophia. Come with me, under my protection ! 
Do not debase yourself by kneeling to a woman whose disgrace 
those menials she appeals to have witnessed, and whom I re- 
pudiate henceforth and for ever as my wife ! " Lord Mauleverer 
said, raising Sophia in his arms with every sign of tenderness 
and compassion. "Do not be afraid, I say, for from this hour 
to the close of my existence, Scarlatt Suett will prove your 
faithful guardian and protector, come what come may beside ! " 

" But he is here ! . Luxmoor. Hark, he is here ! " gasped 
Sophia, who had continued to gaze stonily at me, as if blinded 
by some heavy pressure on the brain. The great hall-bell rung 
as she spoke, with a peal that seemed to make every chamber 
in the castle echo. 

" I will admit the Reverend Mr. Luxmoor, and our party will 
be complete again, as at the Kerig y Drudion !" said Yivian, 
darting out of the chamber before any one could attempt to 
intercept him. In scarcely a moment after, he reappeared, in 
company with that fearful man, and three or four persons dis- 
guised as countrymen. His blotched and swollen countenance, 
bloodshot, glaring eyes, and strange disguise of a dirty smock- 
frock and slouched straw hat . the huge club rather than cudgel 
in his hand . gave Luxmoor the most ruffianly look imaginable. 
But his horrible facetiousness had not deserted him. " So, my 
beloved spouse, my literary Dulcinea del Toboso ! . is this the 
way to receive a husband after so long a separation? But I can 
very well understand why you look so prettily abashed, and 
shrink from my glowering Othello glances !" he continued, 
laughing at Sophia's look of unutterable dread and horror. 
" And true it is, my Lord Mauleverer, I am in possession of all 
your pretty little billets doux to my immaculate wife, and am 
at last in a condition to prove myself a hart royal to the satisfac- 
tion of the most experienced in antlers Doctors Commons lean 
boast. But don't alarm yourself, my lord ! and get the better of 
these tremors, my wise and witty Sophy ! Within this hour, I 
have found out that you are worth ten thousand pounds to me 
as my wife . and I won't part with her, Eight Honourable Sir, 
at a maravedi less !" 

" "What do you mean, Mr. Luxmoor ?" said my husband, 
evidently panic-stricken at the mention of his letters, doubtless 
discovered in rummaging out Sophia's apartment. 

" You know what I mean ; and, besides, I have it under your 
lady's own writing and signature, that the late Lord Maule- 
verer, her father, left my wife a legacy of ten thousand pounds, 
which she is willing to pay, and which I now claim as husband 
and owner !" returned Luxmoor, laughing, and nourishing the 
identical letter which only a few hours previously I had written 
and directed to him in London. How it could have been inter- 



378 M AtfLEVERER' S DIVORCE. 

cepted by him 1 could not imagine ; hut, petrified as I was, I 
felt a gleam of consolation in the conviction that I could have 
done nothing more calculated to effect my wishes and object. 
What appearance that I had done would wear in other respects 
I was too confused at the moment to gather ; but I saw that 
Sophia gazed at the document and then at me with a mixture of 
incredulity, horror, despair, and rage in her eyes, that might in 
any other moment have appalled me ! 

" There is nothing for me then but to appeal from men to my 
God . to take refuge in the most unfathomable of his secrets, 
death . rather than remain in the power of the man who calls 
himself my husband !" she said. " But, no !" she added, in a 
low, breathless tone . as if awe-stricken herself with the cruelty 
and abominable treachery which, even at that moment, I can- 
not doubt, formed itself duskily, as a hend from the seething 
cauldron of a witch, in her mind . "no ! I will live yet to take 
awful vengeance for this barbarous hetrayal !" 

" There is no love lost between us, car a sposa !" said Lux- 
moor, imagining the menace addressed to himself. " I only 
take possession of your somewhat passes charms . as my friend, 
old Nick, of Russia, would phrase it. as a material guarantee 
for my ten thousand pounds. Be so good now as to place your- 
self under my care for a metropolitan trip, or I shall be obliged 
to request these Scotland Yard rurals to use a little soft compul- 
sion to soothe you into my post-chaise at the gates." 

" I am ready ! Let us hence, since fate will have it so ; hut 
whosoever of all mankind rescues me from this hideous thraldom 
commands the devotion of my whole existence !" were Sophia's 
words, and I saw her eye wandering round upon Scarlatt, like 
the stealthy lamp-ray that lights an assassin to his victim's 
heart ; hut mine arrested it on the way. 

" Why do you not renew your appeal to Sir Vivian Ap Howel? 
lie has, perhaps, not rejected you finally, Mrs. Luxmoor !" I 
said. 

What a terrible glance she gave me ! The fire of revenge 
shone up in it : hatred glowed at white heat all over her visage 
as she answered me. 

" Well, Lady Mauleverer, war to the death, since you will 
have it so ! Shame, disgrace, ruin to you, as you and yours 
have heaped it upon me ! So, I take these living coals you cast 
upon me, and throw them back to you on the whirlwind you 
have yourself raised ! Since you challenge, provoke, defy the 
worst, you shall learn that, in spite of all the advantages that 
are yours . beauty, wealth, name, fortune, health even ; for, 
though you profess your incredulity, death is busy with me as 
I speak . I will triumph over you by the supremacy of mind, 
and make you drink to the dregs of that infernal cup, which the 
order from which you sprung has commended to the lips of all 
who have not wealth or power to compel redemption from the 



A ClIilAS. 379 

horrors of that fate whose utmost verge of desperation I am now 
driven to ! Scarlatt ! do you desert me. or may I hope yet to 
be rejoined by the only friend and protector I have now left on 
all the earth ?" 

"You may! I quit this polluted abode now and for ever!" 
my husband answered. 

'" I cannot well offer you a seat in my post-chaise, Lord 
Mauleverer ; but I and my wife, I am sure, will be glad to see 
you in town ! As soon as the ten thousand are punctually 
paid . a few thousands more in the way of damages will not 
come amiss !" the jeering monster, Luxmoor, said. " My lady, 
it seems, is quite willing I should have my rights, but the 
Suett-Pomeroys are of a thriftier cross ! Come, my accom- 
plished bride ! the partner in my French academy . the intelli- 
gent Madame Le Crampon, ' elevated above the prejudices of 
her sex,' as she assured me, when we parted on this adventure, 
she felt herself . will make you very welcome ! Come, gentle- 
men mole- catchers ! you are regular bricks ; but I will soak 
you like sponges at our first baiting-place to-night." 

He clutched Sophia's hand, and drew her arm violently in 
his own, though she made no resistance, and moved to the door, 
jumping and frisking to the joyous, villanous tune of " Nix 
my dolly, pals ! " which he himself hoarsely rollicked as he 
went. She only looked back once : it was at me ! To this hour 
I cannot decipher the fearful enigma of anguish, rage, hatred, 
tenderness, compassion, and relentless devilry, that shone up 
in her countenance as she met my parting glance. This was 
the last time ever our eyes met . or ever, methinks, shall meet 
again, until we encounter each other at the bar of eternal 
justice ! 

I waited with a strange calm to see what Scarlatt woulii do. 
The moment Luxmoor had disappeared with his prey, he 
followed in the steps of the official myrmidons, without a word, 
without a look at me . 'at any one ! 

In a few instants I found myself alone with Vivian, who 
remained immoveable in the attitude I have described a few 
pages back. 

"Are you satisfied now, man?" I said, in a tone so weak 
with the exhaustion of suffering that it sounded strange even 
to myself. " Are you satisfied ? You have given them the 
pretext they have long sought ! Now leave me to my despair ! " 

" I will leave you for ever, Hugh-Helena ! . or stay with you 
for ever, as you shall command me ! " he replied, in the like 
accent. " There is nothing I will not do to repair the conse- 
quences of my error . of the madness of a moment, which has 
betrayed the secret of my existence . a secret I proposed to 
carry with me to a grave I had determined the swords of the 
enemies of human liberty and progress should dig for meon 
the Danube ! Consider me now as a desperate wretch, willing 



380 mattleyerer's divorce. 

to do your bidding, if it were to plunge into the boiling crater 
of a volcano ! . and dispose of all I am or may be ! " 

"You can do me but one service . but one kindness, Sir 
Vivian," I answered. " Follow this woman ; I am sure she 
prefers you to my cruel husband ! . and be you the rescuer she 
invokes from the thraldom of those wise and merciful laws 
which have vainly striven to protect the homes of other women 
from the blasting influence of one who has deserted every duty 
with her own ! " 

Ap Howel stared at me aghast. only for a moment. An 
expression of wild, vindictive passion suddenly lighted up his 
whole saddened and desponding countenance. "Oh, but you 
have loved . but you love. this Scarlatt Suett ! " I heard him 
grind the words between his teeth as a hungry tiger grinds the 
ribs of an ox. " But, do you believe," he continued, fixing his 
fierce and yet sorrowful eyes upon me as he spoke, "that a man 
who has ever truly loved you, could love such a woman as 
Sophia Luxmoor . could sacrifice all hope ever to behold you 
again, to become hers ? " 

" Thank God, then, thank God ! " I exclaimed, deliriously, 
" I am saved ! Scarlatt loved me once . and he must still love 
me ! He cannot have forgotten that I was the first love of his 
youth . that I am the mother of his children ! " 

"You are mistaken. As far as love at all can exist within 
your husband's heart, he loved Sophia first . and always ! " 
returned Vivian. "I am content to abide by the issue of the 
events in progress : you will soon learn whether he prefers not 
Sophia Luxmoor to the mother of his children ! " 

" Leave this house !" I shrieked, " and never again dare to 
re-enter it !" 

"And leave you . perhaps to your husband's unmanly vio- 
lence ! He is a coward ! Your sex will invite his cruelty ! " 

" I will tell him that you said so. and he will spare me ! " 

" Do so. The Kerig y Drudion is still where we left it some 
ten years ago. Tell him, whenever he wishes to see Vivian Ap 
Howel on the subject, a word will bring me there ! " 

And, with a look of mingled indignation and despair, he 
passed me . strode to the door. and disappeared. 

I remained for hours after, fixed alternately in a stupefaction 
of grief ; alternately giving vent to every imaginable expression 
of rage and despair . every sentiment of an outraged woman's 
heart, in which love, and hate, and jealousy, and crushed pride, 
hissed and writhed in every direst form. 



PTJESUIT. 381 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

PFESTJIT. 

It seemed to me now that I could breathe again. I had dis- 
missed Sir Vivian with a contumely that would prevent him, I 
hoped, from ever again desiring to see me. I had made it so 
much worth Luxmoor's while to retain his wife, that there was 
good cause to expect she was irrevocably consigned to his 
custody. Ah, me ! the delusive hope smiled upon me, like a 
ray of light from amidst the piled up thunder-clouds, that all 
might yet be well ! I persuaded myself my husband must now 
be convinced of the danger and disgrace, if not of the wicked- 
ness, of his projects ! I was so thoroughly aware of my own 
innocence, that I could not imagine any real doubt of it existed 
in his mind. What he had exhibited was feigned as an apology 
for his own infidelity ! Or if he really entertained the suspi- 
cions Sir Vivian's improper behaviour might for a moment 
justify, I would see him, and explain all with the irresistible 
sway of truth ! What other proof, indeed, was necessary than 
that I had banished the offender for ever from my presence, for 
a momentary failure in the respect he owed me ? 

But where was my husband to be found ? It was impossible 
to think he could have left the castle in the company of 
Luxmoor and his captive wife, and the London officers ? To 
Morgana's Haunt ? I would follow him thither, instantly ! I 
rang the bell. A servant appeared, who stared at me with 
insolent curiosity. But my mind was too intent on other 
subjects, to notice this change ; a remarkable one, for I in- 
herited my father's hauteur of manner to inferiors, and 
exacted from all who approached me the respect I had always 
been taught to consider due to my rank and station. I asked 
for Mauleverer ; and, to my inexpressible relief, ascertained 
that he had retired to his own apartment in the castle. 

I hastened thither. I knocked at a closed outer door. There 
was no response. I tried to open it. It was locked within. I 
called my husband by his name, begging admittance in those 
of God and of our children ! I told him I came to offer an 
explanation which it would be impossible for him to dis- 
believe ; that I forgave him all ! No answer, but a smell of 
burning paper came to my nostrils when throwing myself on 
my knees at the door I repeated my expostulations and 
entreaties in every form I thought likely to move him from his 
stubborn silence. I comprehended then what he was at,. 



382 HATTLEY-EHEtrS DIVORCE. 

arranging for his_ departure. getting rid of superfluous, 
perhaps of compromising', documents ! I redoubled my suppli- 
cations almost to shrieks ; yet all in vain. At last, a new 
paroxysm of rage and indignation took possession of my heart. 
I cried aloud, that he should not leave the castle without an 
explanation ! That I would remain at his door until I perished 
rather ! 

And I did stay at that cruel, that relentless door, all night ! 
Scarlatt heard me sob through its long hours, pacing like the 
sentry of despair on his threshold; heard my constantly 
renewed entreaties, and remained deaf and inexorable as the 
solid oaken panels that derided, with hollow echoes, my frantic 
efforts occasionally to break in to him. 

I have but a confused remembrance, r as of a horrible and 
tormenting dream, of the events of that dreadful night. My 
soul was athirst with suspense, fevered to its inmost depths 
with fearful expectation ; sometimes abyssed in a sense of utter 
powerlessness to ward off the insufferable calamity threatening 
me ; at others, fired to madness with the resolve to prevent it 
at whatever cost. I should have preferred the most violent 
and furious demonstration to that implacable silence. How I 
listened to the chime of the hours through the darkness of that 
horrible night, from the great hall clock of the castle, which 
had measured out the time of five generations of my ancestors ! 
"With what sickening eyes did I watch the slow break of day . 
its faint increase . till the whole sky became flooded with red and 
golden light, and it seemed impossible my husband could any 
longer delay coming forth. 

At last I heard a movement in his apartment. The key 
turned in the, lock, the door opened, and Lord Mauleverer's 
English valet appeared, pale and gaping as if he were about to 
step out to his execution. 

The menial was right to dread the encounter with me. A 
number of trunks lay about the room, arranged for departure ; 
and rather than face me . rather than listen to my true excul- 
pation . rather than be forced to believe what left his own guilt 
without a shadow of extenuation . Scarlatt Suett had escaped 
from the castle he had been so anxious to enter, as if a raging 
fire had driven him forth. He had made a rope of torn blankets 
and counterpanes, and descended, at no little risk of his life, 
from his window to the filled-up moat below. 

He had gone for hours . so Thompson stammered out, with 
the addition that he_ had orders to follow his master instantly 
with his luggage. I inquired, with a strange calmness, whither ? 
To the Continent . to Paris . the poor rogue said ; but Lsaw at 
once that he lied. It was to London. to the rescue of that 
detested sorceress ! I forbade him, in terms that made every 
fibre of his sturdy body quake, to dare to remove a single 
article unless his master returned to enforce his commands 



PURSUIT. 383 

in person. I sat down on one of the trunks to watch that 
my orders were obeyed ; neither the valet nor any other of 
the affrighted and wonderstruck menials dared to cross me in 
this mood. 

Will it be believed ? For three days and three nights I never 
left that chamber, nor closed my eyes from constant vigilance ! 
I made certain Scarlatt would return to claim his property. I 
cared not if he returned to my utter destruction, in revenge of 
the opposition offered to his will. His valet must needs have 
rejoined him in that time, but still he came not. 

At last a thought pierced my excited brain like a dart of fire. 
Scarlatt concludes I have broken into his baggage ; and he has 
left evidence of even worse guilt than yet I imputed to him 
behind. conscious of which he dared not return to face me ! I 
resolved to ascertain if this was the true solution of the enigma. 
I had his trunks wrenched open . I ransacked them all. 

One box . an iron one . was full of papers. There were 
hundreds thrust in, labelled in a manner that showed they 
related to our most momentous pecuniary concerns. I scarcely 
glanced at them ere I fiung them aside. But I seized, with the 
clutch of a tigress, the epistles which I recognized in the cruelly 
clear, calm handwriting of Sophia. 

What miracles of craft and subtlety those letters were ; from 
the very first of the series, dated from Plas Xewydd, years, 
years before, evidently in answer to several Scarlatt had written 
to her, without obtaining a reply, from Cambridge ! Yes, their 
correspondence extended so far back. But how easy it was to 
see through all the pretended coldness and discouragement in 
these letters ! How they abounded, in reality, in all the most 
inebriating allurements and stimulants of passion ! . among 
which you might easily see she had used even the difficul- 
ties arising from the disparity in their rank and position . the 
wealth and pride of his family, and her own poverty and 
inferiority of condition. Who can doubt it ? She affected 
constantly to dwell upon these facts. An acknowledgment of 
her marriage with Luxmoor would have been decisive ; yet this 
was never made. never once even hinted at. I for one doubted 
no longer ; and I maddened over the further conviction that if 
Sophia had thrown out the first baits of attraction, Scarlatt 
had swallowed them with most ravenous and gudgeon-like 
avidity. But what was there besides, still more decisive, still 
more overwhelming ? A numerous batch of letters from Mor- 
gana's Haunt (answers to those addressed to her by my 
husband), at first on literary and political subjects, truly ! 
Sophia was a politician too . she was all things her victims 
desired to find in her. Yet. for I will be just. there was 
nothing in all these replies of hers to convict her of absolute 
criminality. It was only evident as the light, that she excited, 
fed, encouraged by all the most seductive artifices, my husband's 



384 matjleverek's divorce. 

reviving passion for her into the frenzy it had reached. Indeed, 
I almost myself ceased to wonder he had been betrayed by steps 
so imperceptible . as an angel might down such a path of 
sloping sunbeams. into a cave of destruction. Glowing with 
eloquence, with tenderness, with all the pathos of a glorious 
but wasted existence thrown into the chalice of a vain passion, 
Sophia's very repulses had in them a more voluptuous charm 
and fascination than the yieldings of other women. Paradise 
. a paradise unattainable ! I comprehended, as I maddened 
over the syren strains, why it was Sophia was not so guilty as 
she might have been. It was not virtue . it was no sense of 
honour or of gratitude, that had kept her, in a merely physical 
sense, unstained. She knew the capricious, easily satiate heart 
of the man she had enthralled, and that had she consented to 
be all to him that he demanded, she would soon have been 
nothing. 

I will not, I cannot say, what I became on this perusal, which 
supposed so much of soul-criminality on the part of the corre- 
spondent, my husband. A perusal evidently so endeared to him 
that he had incurred all the risk of preserving these frightful 
monuments of duplicity and depraved genius ! 

I no longer doubted in the least now but that Scarlatt had 
followed in the footsteps of Luxmoor and this dreadful woman ; 
and that he and she alike would discard all further restraint 
under the circumstances in which they were placed. Therefore 
it was I determined to hasten after them, without a moment's 
delay, to London ; and on my part to do all that lay in human 
endeavour to prevent the completion of a crime which would 
render my children worse than orphans . myself a thousand 
times more desolate than widowhood could make me. 

And yet in the absorption of my agony, these very children 
themselves . I scarcely embraced them . certainly shed no tears 
over them, when I parted from them that day, leaving them 
only in the charge of a few scared domestics, whom I imagined still 
faithful to me. But little dreamed I then that I gazed on their 
angel visages, as I may almost say, for the last time, or 
that parting were yet to make ! I only said to them that I was 
going to bring them back their father. These were simple 
words, but the nurses sobbed when they heard me utter them. 

Meanwhile that something was wrong at Mauleverer, was 
well known all over the county. I had already refused myself 
twice to Mrs. Suett, who, in spite of her quarrel with her son, 
drove over to the castle, on two separate occasions, after his 
departure, to ascertain what was amiss. I desired my servants 
merely to state to other inquirers that the Miss Jones of Mor- 
gana's Haunt was in reality the wife of the notorious Carolus 
Ltixmoor, that she had been seized by her husband, and that 
mine had gone to London to ascertain the fate of our friend. 



tuKsriT. 385 

Even frenzy lias its cunning', and I must still have cherished a 
hope that the mischief which had happed was not irreparable. 

If the craftiest of inquisitors examined me, I could not at 
this hour relate by what process I got to London. I have a 
strange, whirling recollection of a succession of vehicles that 
bore me along. but how procured, how discharged . though I 
went to town quite alone, I cannot say. I would not even 
suffer the attendance of my woman, who had been called in 
by my husband to witness the wrongful interpretation he had 
laboured to put on my interview with Tivian, and whose pert 
and familiar manner subsequently completed my disgust. 

On my arrival in London I hastened at once to Luxmoor's 
house. I found it with little difficult; - , being in possession of 
the fact that he called himself by a reversion of his name at his 
west- end quarters. I scarcely noticed that people seemed only 
to recognize the establishment as that of a Madame Moorlux, 
who kept a boarding-house for ladies. I had forgotten the 
character bestowed by Sophia on her rival's real occupation, in 
the form of an insidious sneer. Or rather everything had 
ceased to be of consequence to me, but the attainment of the 
great object I had in view. I thought for certain I should 
ascertain the whereabouts of my husband from Luxmoor, and 
whether I might still confide in his custody of Sophia. I 
believed I had the means of strengthening him in the salutary 
resolution in which I had last seen him. 

Externally, Madame Moorlux's residence was perfectly 
orderly and respectable. The doorsteps were elaborately 
whitened ; a large brass plate on the portal was inscribed 
ostentatiously with her assumed name; a verandah, painted of 
a bright green, on the drawing-room floor, was decorated with 
evergreens in pots ; every appearance announced habits of neat- 
ness and decorum. AVhen I rang the sonorous hall bell, the 
door was opened by a grave-looking man in a plain livery : 
there was only something a little sinister and sly in his ex- 
pression, perhaps due to a slight squint. This man never looked 
you directly in the face ; but you felt that he took in a full and 
perfect view of your characteristics, by some process of his own, 
at once. The result in my case seemed dubious. He raised his 
forehead in a singular succession of wrinkles, and seemed quite 
amazed when I inquired if Monsieur Moorlux was at home, 
and gave him my card to deliver. After a moment's thought, 
however, he said he would ascertain, and disappeared. Very 
shortly afterwards, I heard the rustle of a silk dress ; and, 
instead of the master of the establishment, beheld the mistress 
come sailing down the stairs, attired in all the elegancies of the 
Parisian mode, and diffusing the scent of several essences from 
her dress and tine laced handkerchief. I do not, of course, speak 
of Sophia, but of my ci-devant model governess, Madame Le 
Crampon ! I recognized her instantly, looking as stonily fleshy 

2c 



386 jiatjleveher's divoece. 

as ever, only a good deal more rouged and wrinkled than of old, 
and wearing a wig of black hair that seemed plastered im- 
moveably to her Chinese forehead. 

_ I had the meanness, in my anxious desire to conciliate intel- 
ligence, to extend my hand to this woman. She took it barely 
with the tips of her own, curtseying in the old regime style as 
of yore, almost to the oilcloth on which she stood. She affected, 
in fact, not to know me ; but by the pursing of her cruel lips, 
and the vindictive gleam in her bad-minded eyes, I saw she 
recognized me instantly. 

" I have not de honneur to know Madame ! . Miladi Mau- 

leverer ? . I should once know her, but she is dead, helas ! and 

I am myself ignorante . Milor Mauleverer . is he again 

. en secondes noces. married a une si belle et jeune 

Miladi?" 

" You must have learned from Mr. Luxmoor, that Mr. Pome- 
roy and myself have succeeded to the title, madame," I said. 
" He will know me, at all events, and I beseech you to let me 
see him." 

Madame Le Crampon's evil expression deepened as she 
answered, "My name is Moorlux, madame, not Luxmoor . 
that is my husband's name to him also. But if madame desires 
to place herself on my ptensionnat, there is no need of any 
intervention. Mon Dieu ! I have also others de la premiere 
qualite . and an appurtement at this moment which is at the 
devotion of madame." 

"You have forgotten me then, Madame Le Crampon?" I 
exclaimed, perceiving that it was absolutely necessary to 
conciliate my detestable ex-gouvernante. You have forgotten 
your pupil and . and friend . Hugh-Helena Pomeroy ?" 

" Qii.' entends-je? Grand Dieu! que vois-je ? Mais c'est 
done bien elle ! . It is she . it is my child, my pupille ! veritable 
Helene de beaute et de malheur ! Ah, let me press her once 
more to my heart . once more overwhelm her with the caresses 
of a mother of the infant prodigue." And in spite of the 
faint resistance I ventured to offer, Madame Le Crampon darted 
on me like some animal of the feline species, and seemed to 
draw me to her in her claws, to devour. She only, however, 
embraced me most voraciously. 

As soon as I could rescue myself from this display of 
cordiality, I repeated my request to see Mr. Luxmoor on the 
most important business . business, the nature of which, I was 
assured, Madame must be too well aware. 

" Ah, my poor shilde ! my dear shilde ! my charming 
Miladi ?. Helas ! but I did not predict to you but too truly the 
consequences desastreuses of that miserable mesalliance ? Did 
I not do all in my power to save you ? Watch over you de jour 
et de nuit f But all is vain . our destiny must fulfil herself 
always. My poor shilde ! why should I have any secrets from 



PUBSTTIT. 387 

you more ? Yes, my poor Carolus is at home . he is upstairs 
in his chamber ; but, mon Dieu ! in what a deplorable con- 
dition ! Alas ! he has feasted himself too profusely on this 
journey of capture of that detestable woman . he, and the 
members of the civil force who attended him.. Delirium 
tremens, inaladie terrible, which already he has twice escaped, 
has made a cruel seizure of him. Four strong men can hardly 
keep him in his bed . JEcoutez ! do you not even now hear 
him ? " 

Too plainly I heard him. The yell of a maniac resounded 
through the house from some upper apartment, uttering the 
words, . " Water, you devils ! . bring me molten lead, if you 
will, but something to drink, I say ! . "W here's Demogorgon !. 
Let him pour the sea this way when he is bringing chaos back 
again. I'll drink it dry ! " And Luxmoor's well-known tones 
roared out, at a frantic pitch, a succession of what sounded 
like Greek tragic verses. 

I was struck with dismay. It was almost in a breathless 
whisper I inquired, "Where, then, is his wife? . I mean . you 
know who I mean, madame." 

" Do not call her his wife ! It wounds _ me. On that point 
only I am yet susceptible. Innumerable infidelities otherwise 
have not touched me," replied Madame Le Crampon. "My 
God ! how is she then his wife ? . She, whom a man loves, 
whom he prefares, whom he returns to after a thousand wan- 
derings . she is the wife of that man ! Ah, and do you demand 
in a voice that trembles rather with pity than with rage, 
sur cette femme atroce. whom you have as much reason as 
myself to deplore, to hate ! " 

"I have, madame . I acknowledge it . I merely asked to be 
assured that she is in safe custody." 

" In safe custody ! . Ah, ah ! why should I dissemble any- 
thing longer from one whom I love so well? my pupille of 
formerly . who has so much reason to detest her also ? . In safe 
custody ? . when she is in mine ! . But enter an apartment ; 
let us talk together in all private. We are one . our objects 
are one ; let us speak like two sisters, who are cheated, reviled, 
betrayed by a creature so detestable, of the same sex ! " 

Madame Le Crampon threw open the room of a parlour, as 
she spoke, and motioned me in. Three young women, of very 
prepossessing, ladylike appearance, and beautifully dressed 5 
who were gabbling in French together over some needlework, 
rose as we appeared, and seemed to wait the commands of the 
hostess with every sign of deference. "Retire, mes filles . 
Miladi and I wish to be alone," she said, in the same language. 
"Madame est obeie," one of the girls answered; and all 
gathering up their work and materials, instantly quitted the 
room, not, however, without some sidelong glances at me, and 
an exchange of looks of surprise with one another. 

2C2 



.' i MAXLEVEliER'S DIVOECE. 

Alone with Madame Le Crampon, she seemed, in her own 
expression, " no longer to have any reserves for me." I found 
that she was perfectly well acquainted with the particulars of 
Supliia's capture. and either knew or suspected the rest of the 
complications attending: it. 

" Creature indigne ' execrable .' worthy of all condemnation ! 
. what she does to me in depriving me of my lover, by the 
most infamous coquetterie, such she repeats to you with your 
husband. It is but too plain . thrice in one day, since she is 
here, Milor Maulcveror arrives to implore of Luxmoor one five 
minutes' interview with that vile opprobrium of our sex. to 
assure himself that she is well treated. to assure her she is not 
abandoned. My dear professeur refuses. "What, shall he also 
be blamable of condonation ? shall he assist the betrayer of his 
honour? . He upbraids your husband with his treachery, in 
concealing the ten thousand pounds . in striving to rob him of 
his rights . and refuses him to deign the least answer. the 
least assurance, until, as a necessary preliminary, he places 
that sum at our banker's, to my dear friend's account. Milor 
goes away in distraction and despair ; but, ma foi ! I believe 
it is that he may comply, at every sacrifice, with the requisition 
of my sagace Carolus." 

I was stung to the quick of the soul. Can he get the money? 
flashed as the most tormenting of queries on my mind ; and of 
a sudden I recollected that I had made over to my false 
husband full power over my father's legacy. that all that had 
ever belonged to me was now his. landed and funded property 
alike ! 

" He will use it to redeem his paramour ! " I groaned aloud. 
The only consolation that occurred to me was, that the prospect 
of so large a ransom was the best possible security, in the 
interval, for the detention of Sophia. There might yet be 
time, yet_ means found, to recall my husband from her fatal 
lure. 1 inquired where she was placed ? whether it was quite 
certain she could not effect her escape ? Madame Le Crampon 
replied with a shruR and a smile, and a significant gesture at a 
SitL° ut -£?l SG . J Perceived in the yard, behind the main 
St lfLTT ch - ln * th , e more flourishing times of the street 
. old W o een -^ te z nde ^ f\ a stable - <P She is besides tied to 
an old manger- it is lawful, he has all power. She is his wife, 

IZ ^Kft? twt *? I s ? a P e with a paramour," my hostess 
said, and with that hateful leer. I would not I dared not 

1 s n n q T ,Z e w a a n 7^ fUr f her ! ?I S0U1 tokened, but T felt SnvinS 
bopma was m safe custody. 

"At present let us talk of another affair," Madame re- 
sumed, in a pleasant chatty manner, satisfied that I understood 
the meaning of her byplay. "Let us understand each the 
other, ma chere Miladi ! It seems to me, then, that I perfectly 
comprehend your game. I also, I tell you, am weary of all this ! 



runsTTiT. 389 

.Figure tow many years I am insulted by that word ' My 
wife, my wife ! ' Always she is his wife '.do what he will 
against her, murder her almost : still it is ' my wife I rob ; my 
wife I beat ; my wife I imprison ! ' I do not like to hear her 
called my wife ! . You are weary to call him your husband, that 
veritable real mushroom, sprung of the dirt of commerce ! 
You have your objects, my dear pupille ; I also have mine to 
me ! I will be his wife at last . he shall divorce her. though 
he pretends she is worth so much more to him as his wife, than 
any damage he can hope ! Ah, miladi, you must be in posses- 
sion of evidence sufficient, in company of those precious letters. 
When we receive the ten thousand pounds, we let her escape, 
if she will, to Milor ! "We bring our action for damage . five 
thousand more. We dedicate a portion of this sum to complete 
the divorce ; and as your husband and Luxmoor's wife will be 
exactly culpable the same, you also obtain your divorce, and are 
free to marry again. No longer this time a miserable canaille of a 
roturier of a manufacturer. . You marry a nobleman, a gentle- 
man, a hero who adores you ! a soldier, in fine, worthy to count 
among the preux of that detestable Empire of the older Bona- 
parte ! " 

This suggestion, which convinced me how far the fearful 
calumny respecting me had spread, lighted me up into a flame 
of indignation. "Do not dream for one moment, Madame Le 
Crampon ! " I exclaimed, " that you will find in me an accom- 
plice in such an attempt ! It is not in the power of man to 
sunder lawfully those whom God has joined ! And even were 
it so, deem you I will play the very part my enemies would 
most desire I should ; and be myself the means of in some 
measure legitimating their criminal proceedings ? But I will 
not believe . never, never ! . but that my husband will yet 
listen to the voice of honour and duty . recognize what he owes 
to his position in society, and return to his children and his 
wife!" 

" Ah, for that, you read his letters to your rival, miladi !. 
Who would have thought a parvenu of the nom ridicule of 
Suett, could have all the fire, the tenderness of Jean Jacques, 
in his expressions of a devouring passion? Ah, were such 
letters^had been addressees a. moi, myself, attached as I am to 
my poor professeur . I know not how I shoiild so obstinately 
sustain my role of virtue as she for cunning has do ! " 

" Let me see these letters ! " I said, in an agony of jealous 
curiosity I could not stifle. "I have the counterparts, which 
you shall see in return. And perhaps the documents in your 
possession may persuade me to the step which at present I 
abhor and shrink from ! " 

" You shall see tbem ! " Madame replied, eagerly. " But I 
cannot at this moment procure them. Luxmoor keeps an in- 
vincible hold of them through the whole access of his delirium, 



390 matjxevekeb's divorce. 

saying that tlieyare an anchor to prevent anybody from setting 
his slaves free not to work I Alas, he imagines himself at times 
not the husband, but the owner of that woman, whom he calls 
his white niggeress ! Hitherto no drug has had power to procure 
him repose ; but to-night we shall increase his dose, and with- 
out doubt the papers will surrender themselves to my disposition. 
Come, and you shall see them ! " 

"And Lord Mauleverer?" I said. "Can you give me any 
information where he is to be found ? " 

" I should not betray a confidence of the sort even if I 
possessed it. but I know nothing ! " replied Madame, with her 
toad-like smile. 

The thought nevertheless struck me that it was extremely 
probable Scarlatt would repeat his visit of inquiry and solici- 
tation at some period of the day. very possibly in the evening. 
It was thfc hope of lighting upon him by some chance of this 
kind, far more than even the eager desire I had to ascertain 
the worst that was to be known from the inspection of the 
documents in question, that made me consent to Madame Le 
Crampon's proposition. It .was agreed that I should return 
about nine in the evening, when, under the regulation of her 
own presence, and a solemn promise to respect " the rights of 
Sophia's husband ! " in them, I was to be allowed to peruse the 
effusions of my husband's unlawful passion to its object. 

Madame Le Crampon and I parted seemingly very good 
friends. She escorted me to the door, possibly rather as a 
measure of precaution than as a mark of respect. Yet I 
thwarted what was most likely her purpose, by openly ad- 
dressing the porter, and informing him that I would give him 
ten guineas if he could discover the abode of a gentleman who 
had called lately three times at the house. And I described 
Lord Mauleverer's person to him in a manner that I perceived 
he recognized. The fellow seemed now to comprehend the 
case. A jealous discovery relating to some visitor to the 
unhappy inmates of the house ! He promised me his adhesion 
with a heartiness which doubtless received an efficient rebuke 
from Madame Le Crampon the moment I quitted the threshold. 



CHEZ MADAME MODULUS. 391 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

CHEZ MADAME MOOKLT/X ! 

When I returned in the evening, I was received by my polite 
hostess with even an increase of cordiality. She showed me, 
as she informed me, into her own private apartment, in order 
that we might be secured from interruption. It was a little 
closet of a sitting-room, communicating with a bedroom of 
about the same dimensions, admirably adapted to her tastes by 
the circumstance that a stifling party-wall ran almost close up 
to the only window in it. There was, besides, a large fire : 
decanters and cakes stood on the table, in company with a 
withered nosegay of exotic flowers that had possibly graced the 
opera some weeks previously. 

It was thought, I suppose, I should need stimulants to sup- 
port me in my investigation ! I refused a repeated and very 
urgent invitation to that effect, while Madame, alleging the 
shattered state of her health from attendance on her dear 
professeur, in his alarming state, filled herself quite a tumbler- 
ful of brandy and cold water. She then produced a bundle of 
letters, in a handwriting which I recognized at a glance, pre- 
facing that no quantity of laudanum appeared to have any 
effect on Luxmoor ; but that he had voluntarily resigned these 
documents on being informed by Madame Le Crampon that it 
was in reality a nest of scorpions he waskeeping in his grasp, 
the venom of which, being absorbed into his blood in the 
contact, made him feel so fiery hot and ill ! 

She sat down opposite to me, sipping her liquor, and watch- 
ing me throughout with her round, green, cat-like eyes, in the 
full enjoyment of my sufferings. 

There were a great many letters. I read them all. 

I read them all, though at times the sight vanished from my 
tearless, burning eyeballs ! He had never written or said 
aught to me that gave me the least notion he possessed feelings 
so impassioned, so earnest, so overflowing with tenderness, that 
could inspire language so fraught with the power and pathos 
of expression I found in those dread documents ! I com- 
prehended, as I read, that Sophia was in reality the only 
woman my husband had ever loved, and that his love had 
remained, and would remain, the master-passion of his exist- 
ence, the key to all the strange inconsistencies, contrarieties, 
vices, and failure of his career ! 

With Sophia he might have been happy. with me he had 



392 HATJXEVEKEE'S DIVOBCE. 

always been unhappy. Jt was not permitted me to doubt. 
These letters recalled to her incessantly . often with upbraidings 
and bitter regrets, but oftener in language of profound sadness 
and despondency . that it was she who had induced him to 
sacrifice the reality of happiness to false views of interest . that 
he had always loved her, and her alone. Incessantly my 
husband declared the cause of his failure in political life was to 
be_ sought in the want of all sustaining stimulus in my society 
. . in the profound discouragement he had felt, from the moment 
.when he forfeited hers, in every object and pursuit of ex- 
istence. His very revenge and perfidy against her. as he 
himself styled his former persecution . were but expressions of 
a devouring love and jealousy, which would not suffer him to 
allow her to have even a chance of happiness with another. 
80 long as he knew she was chained to one whom she did not 
love . with whom her existence was, like his own, destitute of 
every charm. he could the better endure his fate ! . was not 
tormented with reflections so odious and bitter, in the con- 
sciousness of the irreparable loss he had sustained ! 

Not satisfied, I say, with these wailings of a repining passion 
for another, my husband plainly intimated feelings not easily 
to be distinguished from absolute contempt, and even hatred, 
against me, his unhappy wife. He ascribed to me qualities of 
pride, of domineering insolence, of folly, of envy, of jealousy, 
of which I certainly never dreamed myself to be possessed. 
My temper was declared to be intolerable, violent, unmanage- 
able, unreasonable ; my whole demeanour apparently designed 
for the alienation of all who approached me. I was accused of 
despising Lord Mauleverer for his birth, and the other acci- 
dents of his early position. I was denounced as having made 
the brilliant promise of his outset a nullity . first, by depriving 
him of the finest years of exertion, the consequences of our 
runaway match ; then, by the abortive or slow fulfilment of 
the hopes he had been led to entertain, and the wretched state of 
dependence on my implacable family into which I had either 
led or forced him. My extravagance, my haughtiness, my 
repulsive demeanour, concurred subsequently to thwart my 
husband in his progress. to overwhelm him with petty cares 
and pains that consumed his time, and deprived such natural 
abilities as he possessed of all spring and elasticity. Had he 
married Sophia, he avouched, the obstacles to be encountered 
would have animated and braced, instead of chaining and. 
depressing all his energies. 

Dark hints were interspersed, which did not yield me the 
consolation of believing that Scarlatt had ever loved me suffi- 
ciently to be jealous of me ; but made me aware that he wished 
to excuse his own conduct under the imputation that my affec- 
tioDS were in reality devoted to another,. and that other a 



CHEZ MADAME HOOBLtrT. 393 

man whom he looked upon as his own bitter and detested 
enemy. 

Finally, there was a crowning and overwhelming insult 
conveyed in the last letter of the series. Sophia received it 
but a few hours before Luxmoor reclaimed her. In this my 
husband declared that my temper and conduct towards him 
had become totally unendurable ; that . calumniator ! . he 
even doubted my fidelity towards him, and was convinced, at 
all events, that my affections were devoted to Yivian Ap 
Howel ; and he concluded by announcing a fixed determina- 
tion to effect a final and complete separation from me, and by 
an offer of the love and devotion of his whole heart and remain- 
ing existence . in defiance of the cruel laws to "which she had 
subjected him' . to herself! "But, whatever her resolution might 
be, Scarlatt assured Sophia now of the possession of the large 
legacy bequeathed to her by my father. He had only desired, 
he shamelessly avowed, to keep her poor to guarantee himself 
against the renewed efforts of her husband's rapacity, and an 
independence and freedom of action which would have con- 
ferred upon her possibly the power to leave him for ever alone ! 
Sir Yivian Ap Howel's accession of wealth, he said, which 
alone could render him formidable, should no longer furnish 
him with advantages in her poverty, and the pressure of neces- 
sity under which she might imagine herself to have fallen. 

What I felt . what I became . as I read these evidences of 
unmatched perfidy and falsehood, it would be of little profit 
now to relate. Madame Le Crampon watched me with her 
cold glass eyes sparkling tranquilly in the light of the fire, 
as she sipped her intoxicating beverage, reclining perfectly at 
her ease in an arm-chair. She remained altogether unmoved 
with the most heart-rending expressions of my grief, and in- 
dignation, and despair, excepting that from time to time she 
bore a kind of burden to my lamentations, in the words, 
" Tenez, ma chere Milddi, but these messalliances end always 
in a mutual misery on both sides ! " 

Nor was this all. Madame Le Crampon retained a letter in 
her own hand, which she plainly declared she did not like to 
venture " in the power of my despair," inasmuch as it was Mr. 
Luxmoor's most substantial proof of his wife's being entitled 
to a legacy of ten thousand pounds from my father. She, 
however, read it to me ; and in it my father explicitly declared 
he had made his will exactly as Mrs. Luxmoor had pointed out 
to him as most suitable, in his daughter's favour, since she re- 
fused, so solemnly and decisively, the gift of his entire personal 
'property, which he desired to make her ! But he did this on 
condition that, after his death, she should at least accept the 
home she had refused during his unhappy lifetime, and a 
small portion of all she had declined, barely sufficient to keep 



394 mat/ieverek's divorce. 

tlie "Haunt" in order, in the form of a sum to the amount 
stated above. 

" Ah ! and you hesitate any longer, belle Helene meprisee ! " 
Madame Le Crampon cried, observing my look of wonder and 
horror at the revelation. " Ah ! and will you not also aid my 
poor professeur, as soon as he has secured this legacy, to get 
rid of his indigne wife, by ridding yourself of your indigne 
husband, who prefers her r " 

Maddened with grief and disdain as I was, I yet answered, 
without an instant's hesitation, "Never! never will I suffer 
the triumph of that perfidious woman ! Never shall she take 
my place as the lawful wife of the man she has infatuated to 
such an excess of cruelty and calumny against me ! _ Never 
become the mother of children who shall have the right to 
inherit his name, and, perhaps, to disinherit mine of the 
wealth the betrayer owes entirely to me ! I will die a thousand 
deaths sooner ! and I will prove to all the world my innocence 
of these atrocious suspicions, by renouncing the only possibility 
that can exist of my ever being aught to Vivian Ap Howel but 
what I am and have always been . an admiring and affectionate 
friend ; no more ! " 

Madame shrugged her shoulders impatiently. "Ah, bah! 
we understand these affairs, we other Parisians ! What do you 
expect ? that we should believe such stuff as this ? Milor has 
explained all to Mr. Luxmoor ! . how you are surprised with 
Sare Vivian, at Mauleverer, when you imagine the husband on 
his way to London ! Mon Dieu ! when without scandal we can 
follow our pleasure, whyfore should we not ? And know you 
not, if you do take the initiative not, you will find yourself in 
the position . disgraced, infdme, pilloried by public exposure . 
in which I would prefare to see . Ah, ah . ' his icife !' It is a 
real madness of amour propre, and of the most deplorable 
egoisme on your part, to wish to retain p, man who despises you, 
with all your beaute merveilleuse ! Grand Dieu ! qu'est ce 
que cela ?" 

This latter exclamation was occasioned by a peal from the 
street-door knocker, that made the whole house reverberate. 

"It is the drunken marquis?" my vile hostess muttered. 
"But, no !" she continued, in a tone of elation, "it is, without 
doubt, your husband, Miladi ! He brings, possibly, the ten 
thousand pounds as a preliminary of negotiation for the release 
of his charmante Sophie ! " 

" Bring him to me . let us conclude this tragical farce ! Let 
me but see him once more, and if he turns still a deaf ear to 
my entreaties . to my forgiveness . to the recollection of his 
children . I, too, will become of marble ! . inexorable to every 
human sentiment ! " I gasped, sinking in my chair. 

Madame snatched up the letters. "I will descend. I will 
ascertain!" she said, thrusting them into a pillow-bear, in 



CHEZ MADAME MOOELTTX. 395 

which she had brought them. " But my poor professeur will 
begin to miss his documents ! Adieu, for some moments. Ah, 
ah !. the explication between yourself and Milor may as well 
take place here as in a place less adapted for an explosion of 
the sort!" 

She left the room, and I remained alone for several minutes, 
expecting, with indescribable agitation, the results of the 
admission now evidently granted to the new arrival below. 

I heard footsteps on the stairs, double-paced with impatience. 
I thought Madame Le Crampon had allowed herself the diver- 
sion of leading my husband to expect that he was to be admitted 
to Sophia's captivity ! My blood curdled at the idea. the light 
forsook my eyes, and I fainted. 

When I returned to my senses I found myself placed on a 
couch, with Madame Le Crampon holding a bottle of the 
abominable vinaigre aromatique to my nostrils . a man bending 
over me with an expression of the most intense anxiety on his . 
features. But this man was not my husband . and 1 nearly 
swooned again when I recognized Yivian Ap Howel ! 

"There! she revives ; and I leave you to an eclair cissement 
in your affairs, which will, I hope, dissipate the scruples, infi- 
nitely ridiculous, of Miladi!" said Madame Le Crampon; and 
she was about to quit me, when I started up, and clutched her 
back with a convulsive effort. " You shall not leave me alone . 
alone with this gentleman !" I gasped. 

"What are you afraid of, dearest Lady Mauleverer? I have 
only learned by the merest chance you were here ; though I own 
I followed you up from Wales, fearing some desperate project 
on your part, and guessed whither your frenzy would conduct 
you. Gracious heaven ! and do you fear the man who would 
die for you?" Vivian exclaimed, and tears . real tears . gushed 
in a dark shower from 'his eyes on the hand with which I re- 
pulsed him from my side, and which he seized in both his own. 

" Leave me ; I ask no more of you ! Why do you pursue me 
to my destruction?" I sobbed. 

"Miladi is inexorable ! In spite of these proofs of an infi- 
delity of heart infinitely worse in the eyes of a veritable 
sentiment than any of body, she persists there shall be no 
divorce for her !" said Madame Le Crampon. 

" I know it already ! " Yivian replied, flinging away my hand 
in turn with an explosion of rage and despair. " She prefers a 
villain who detests her, to all who love and honour her ! But I 
will not leave you, Lady Mauleverer," he continued, in calmer, 
but resolute tones, " until you are fairly out of this detestable 
house. where your life may be in danger from the adhesion of 
its wicked inhabitants to any plan which your husband may 
contrive against you ! Are you aware of its real character, and 
of the infamy of the people surrounding you ? Do not be angry, 
Madame Le Crampon ; one must speak the truth sometimes ! I 



396 MArLEYEREii/S DIVORCE. 

came in the hope . in the dread . to find this unfortunate lady 
here ; and I will not leave it until I have rescued her ! " 

" lioth of you leave my house this moment, deplorable egoistes ! 
persons destitute of every bienseance . without rationality or 
comprehension of what the situation exacts from you ! Quit my 
house, and may Milor, son man, whom I expect this moment, 
witness your exit in society ! That will be decisive, je crois, if 
my house merits the imputations grossieres with which you load 
it, monsieur !" Madame Le Crampon, yielding 1 to an exaspera- 
tion she had for some time suppressed, almost screamed these 
words. 

The idea she started struck me with panic, more especially as 
Vivian, clenching his teeth, muttered between them, " Let him 
come ! If we meet, we will not part so easily as at the Kerig y 
Drudion, again !" But just as I was about to declare that I 
would leave the house instantly and alone, we heard a loud 
uproar and trampling of feet in the room above ; and before we 
could form any distinct notion of what the cause of the dis- 
turbance could be, a servant girl rushed into the apartment 
with every sign of consternation. 

"Ah, Madame!" she exclaimed, "Master's gone regular 
furious mad now, and says he knows the devil's com'd for him 
with that thundering rap at the door a few minutes ago. And 
he says the gents that are watching him are set there by his wife, 
to keep him all tight till the Old un comes up and grabs him . 
and he's a trying all he can to throw them out of the window ! " 

" Pardon me for a few moments. I must increase his dose 
until I tranquillize him ! Mon Dieu ! mad or no, he dares not 
dispute with me . dares not disobey me ! Pollie, ma bonne fille, 
bring me the extract of opium from the table." And Madame 
Le Crampon hastened from the apartment, closely followed by 
the servant-girl. 

The tumult in the chamber above quieted almost the moment 
she reached it ! 

This man, of ferocious and indomitable passions to all others, 
was evidently in the habit of yielding to the ascendancy of his 
hard paramour, since she controlled him even in the raging of 
delirium ! 

The certainty that Ap Howel would accompany me, and 
dread, under the circumstances, of encountering my husband, 
stopped me in my first motion to follow her out of the room, and 
quit at once this mansion of infamy. But Ap Howel would not 
have suffered it. Unless at the risk of an actual physical 
struggle, I almost think, it would have been impossible for me 
to leave the apartment, until, as he said, I had listened for the 
last time to the accents of a true devotion from his lips . of a 
love that had always preferred my honour and happiness to 
every other consideration ! And it was true, and I knew it. 
But I did not willingly await this forbidden revelation. I re- 



CHEZ MADAME HOOHLTJi. 39? 

mained, because I hoped that by assenting- to hear finally all 
that Vivian could urge in behalf of himself and of his projects, 
and pronouncing irrevocably against them, I might be rid for 
ever of the dangerous and compromising subject. 

I confess that I was moved . deeply moved . by the poor 
youth's fervid confession of the unchanged absorbing passion 
he had always cherished for me, from the first hour when we 
met, a girl and a boy, at the fatal Kerig y Drudion ? Had I 
been a stone I must have trembled to hear that he had exiled 
himself solely on my account, for so many years of his still 
young_ life, on finding, in spite of all his efforts, that day by 
day his abortive love had gained in strength and intensity. 

Could I avoid being troubled in all the depths of my heart . 
that heart so cruelly and recently lacerated . by the heroic 
young man's declaration that all the deeds he had wrought in 
the East were the result of the desperation and recklessness of 
life his unfortunate passion inspired, or of the hope that his 
recollection would thus be forced back upon me by the lustre of 
the glory he achieved ? Was it not necessarily an exquisite 
balm _ to my hurt and bleeding heart, to learn that the fidelity 
of this unhappy love had never for a moment really wandered 
from me . that Vivian's pretended attachment for Sophia was 
founded merely on the need he felt for some means of diverting 
attention from his real absorption, or perhaps the vain hope 
that her strange fascination, so irresistible for others, might 
exercise a counter-spell to the frenzy that led him on ! 

Vivian had no need to represent to me the generosity and 
regard for my welfare he had exhibited under circumstances 
the least likely to elicit such sentiments. My memory abun- 
dantly recalled them. He scarcely alluded to these incidents 
in our career ; but he dwelt with a violence of exaggeration to 
be expected, on Scarlatt's long course of unkindness and ill 
usage towards me . his preference for Sophia . his mercenary 
motives from the very outset of our relations . and, in conclu- 
sion, the acts of contemptuous desertion and indifference he 
seemed to propose to crown with the basest calumnies, and by 
giving himself over entirely to the dominion of a rival who 
had all along been my evil star, and the shadow of all my 
happiness ! 

I listened to him patiently, interrupting him only with the 
sobs of a heart which I imagined even then to be breaking in 
my breast. 

But when he concluded by assuring me that if Luxinoor 
brought an action against my husband, it would in all probabi- 
lity not be opposed, both Sophia and he being willing to with- 
draw her from his ownership at every sacrifice. That however 
unjustly disposed towards woman's claims to_ an equality of 
rights, in general, parliament could not commit so flagrant an 
act of partiality as to refuse me a divorce from my husband 



398 MATJLEVEEES'S DIVOECE. 

after it should have granted one, through his guilt, to Luxmoor ; 
when throwing himself at my feet, Vivian implored me to eon- 
sent to this arrangement, and accept as a recompense the entire 
devotion of a heart that had never for an instant ceased to 
worship me, and of the great possessions which a final decree of 
the law courts had confirmed to him. Then, I do confess it, 
there arose a struggle in my heart, which for a time rendered 
me speechless. 

I knew now that I had never been loved by my husband, and 
that I had always been the idol of that high, and chivalrous, 
and constant heart, which thus poured its tenderness like a pre- 
cious oil over all my bleeding wounds. And I was loved as I 
had always most desired to be, for myself only. I could now 
discern an heroic disdain of all other considerations in Vivian's 
having permitted my husband's final absorption of my inheri- 
tance. Rejected, despised by a man who confessed his career of 
selfish aggrandizement a failure, Vivian placed the rich 
blazonry of his renown at my feet, and was ready to proclaim 
to the world that he had achieved all for my sake only. But I 
protest in the face of heaven and of man, that I yielded not to 
the temptation ; that in the fierce furnace of that trial the firm- 
ness of my principles withstood the utmost raging of the name 
. that I came forth victorious from the strife. I rejected my 
unhappy lover's offers as insults, and I declared my irrevocable 
resolve never to consent to a divorce from the husband who had 
probably provoked me to the verge of madness to obtain by 
that very resentment the objects of his own unhallowed wishes. 
I told Vivian, happen what would, I would never consent to 
violate what I deemed to be the law of God, by accepting a di- 
vorce, which men, in my opinion, had no power to pronounce, 
and marrying another man in my husband's lifetime. I endea- 
voured to soften my refusal, indeed, by acknowledging that I 
believed in the sincerity of his love . that he alone had ever 
loved me . or was worthy of the devotion I had wasted on an 
ingrate. " But what kind of recompense would it be," I said, 
with bitter tears, "for so much generosity, to bestow upon him 
the wrecks of a mind, and heart, and person such as mine were 
now ? " I told him, in fine, that I believed marriage to have 
all the rights and efficacy of a sacrament ; and that I would 
never consent to place myself on a level with Sophia Luxmoor, 
by constituting myself a legal adulteress / 

Vivian grew_ absolutely frantic when he found all his argu- 
ments broken like water on a rock against this religious con- 
viction and determination. He let out all the fury and scorn of 
his soul against Scarlatt ; he accused him of every species 
of baseness . of personal cowardice even. He raved against 
myself at last, whom he denounced for superstition, for a 
revengeful egotism, or the poorest meanness of spirit that 
induced me to submit to intolerable wrongs, and still to cherish 



CHEZ MADAME MOOELTTX. 399 

an insane attachment for a man who despised, who spurned 



me 



I grew frightened at last with his vehemence, and I was aware 
that time was passing rapidly . that it was growing late, very 
late . that I was alone with a man accused of being my lover, 
by my husband, in an apartment of a house whose externals of 
decency did not protect it from the most scandalous reputation. 
I had pronounced again and again the most absolute refusal of 
all his despairing proffers. I was insisting finally on my right 
and resolution to quit the house unaccompanied, and return 
to my hotel, when the door opened, and Madame Le Crampon 
re- entered. 

" Tenez, Scire Vivian," she said, flourishing a paper in her 
hand, evidently in the full flush of some recent success, "I 
bring you an agreement that should have assurement some in- 
fluence with Miladi Malevrier. Behold, an order on Milor's 
banker to pay my dear professeur his ten thousand pounds in 
three months from this hour ! And know, moreover, that as I 
am not myself so inexorable as Miladi to the prayers of a real 
tenderness, I have been prevailed upon to permit the escape of 
the charmante Sophie with this generous and devoted Milor, 
while you are absorbed in your foolish entretien here. Mon 
Dieu ! time was not given us for nothing . and fortunately 
Milor does not arrive with an annonce de tonnerre, like you, 
Sare Vivian." 

I gazed at the evil woman in petrified amazement. Had 
it been for my life I could not have uttered a sound. After a 
moment's pause Vivian turned to me with an expression of the 
tenderest compassion. "You hear, Hugh-Helena," he said: 
" and do you still reject the love which opens its wings for you, 
and is now your sole refuge in the world ? " 
_ I had rallied by an effort which to this moment I still con- 
sider supernatural. " There yet remains to me justice . ven- 
geance ! and I will make it the sole business and object of my 
existence henceforth to attain them ! I will pursue these 
betrayers, if need be, to the ends of the earth, and proclaim 
them everywhere the guilty wretches that they are !" 

" Miladi must lose no time then, certainly," said Madame Le 
Crampon, with ironical gaiety. " They are embarked these two 
hours of her entretien for Boulogne. I heard the order to the 
postboy ; 'the Boxilogne packet stairs.' " 

" And Luxmoor . your paramour, vile woman ! shall know 
the part you have taken in the transaction." 

"I go with this step to inform him . if he is awake . but I 
had to calm him with a strong dose, vraiment, while I effected 
this negotiation. Let me dare to hear him complain. to express 
admiration for her talent again. that is all." 

And flourishing her promissory note, or bond, or whatever it 
was, with a countenance flaming up with a vengeful, jealous 



400 MATJLEVEUElt S DITOHOE. 

expression, Madam g Le Crampon strode imperiously out of the 
apartment. 

I moved towards the door. Yivian once more placed himself 
in my way. " Am I a prisoner ?" I inquired, desperately. 

" Xo, no ; but whither, dearest, would you go with this pale, 
resolute look "-" 

" To Boulogne . to the extremities of the earth . to denounce 
them to all mankind ! " 

" I will aid you in the pursuit, Hugh- Helena; but do not 
look and speak so wildly. You will need protection . for they 
are desperate now. Go when and where you will, if you allow 
me to accompany you ! " 

" If you offer to follow me a single step, I will demand the 
protection of the law, or strike some weapon to your heart with 
my own hand ! " I returned. 

" I care not ! " he replied. " I will never leave you ! " 

" Dare to obstruct me in my way . " I began to retort, when 
struck with the full consciousness of my desertion and im- 
potence, I burst into an hysterical passion of tears and sobs. 
Vivian folding his arms, gazed at me, moved, but for some 
moments irresolute. 

" Go then," he said at last, in a softened, broken tone ; " and 
go . since you will it so. alone ! I will return to Plas Newydd, 
and marry Bronwen Suett," he added, with a wild, derisive 
laugh. " Her mother thinks I ought, since she is in love with 
me ! All the world don't despise me, you see ; though there are 
two of you who prefer such a fellow as Scarlatt Suett." 

" You could not do better than marry Bronwen Suett," I 
answered, hardly knowing what I said ; and I was about to 
leave the room, when on a sudden, Madame Le Crampon made 
her reappearance. She came into the chamber, singularly 
enough, since she must have heard us in vehement altercation, 
from the exterior, on tiptoe. But she looked so affrighted . her 
red sandstone complexion so drained of its colouring . that we 
both stared at her for an explanation, without the utterance of 
a single word to ask it. 

" Come upstairs, Sare Yivian, one moment, if you please. 
He has grown so cold . and he sleeps so profoundly . I . I am 
afraid I have given him too much sedative to compose him, 
because I knew he would resist my plan to set Ms wife free ! He 
had not yet tormented her enough, he said ; but I dreaded her 
reviving influence !. Mon Dieu ! que deviendrai-je si jel'ai tue, 
mon cher professeur." 

" I will waken him with the news of what you have done ! 
Were he dead it would waken him ! " I cried ; and rushing past 
Yivian and the aghast Frenchwoman, I made my way, as you 
make it, over all opposing obstacles, in a delirious dream, to the 
apartment above, occupied by Luxmoor. 

I recall the scene with fearful distinctness. A dreadful 



CHEZ MADAME MOOKLrX. 401 

stench of brandy and laudanum . of all ill odours, as it seemed, 
combined. greeted me when I threw open the door. The 
window was closed, as if to confine more effectually this miasma 
of disease and debauchery ; and the only light in the room was 
from the gas- lamps in the street below. Two or three rough- 
looking men, whose business in the sick chamber had been to 
restrain the frantic movements of the patient, stood staring 
stupidly round his bed. The servant-girl, sobbing and blub- 
bering, was rubbing the feet of the dead man . for dead 
Luxmoor was : a glance certified the fact. The yellow glare 
from the street fell full upon the bloated and livid outlines of 
the visage. the gaping, frothy mouth, the open, protruding, 
meaningless eyes . revealed the stiff arm hanging to the ground 
from the bed ; and even I, a rare spectatress of the tragedies 
of life, knew that I gazed upon a curpse. Vivian followed in 
my steps, felt at the silent heart for a moment, and turning 
to me, said, in a low, aghast voice, " Sophia Luxmoor is A 
widow ! " 

Madame Le Crampon uttered a loud shriek, and threw her- 
self on the body with all the demonstrations of the most 
frantic grief. " Ah, it is then I who have killed him, my 
poor professeur, mon cher Carlot ! Let one send for the officers 
of justice ! . I desire to surrender myself . to die ! I have killed 
him!" 

I stood like one unconscious. 

" Come, Hugh-Helena ! " I heard Vivian whisper ; " this 
is no place . no scene in which you ought to be known to have 
played a part. Take my arm : I will lead you forth in safety." 

I neither acquiesced nor resisted. I was completely bewil- 
dered. I suffered him to remove me from the presence of this 
horror. how I scarcely knew . but I found myself standing in 
the grey dawn with Vivian Ap Howel on the steps of that evil- 
haunted house. He was hailing a cab. "We got into it together. 
The squinting porter assisted me in with a strange leer of the 
most anxious curiosity. A crossing-sweeper, on the way to 
commence his labours, touched his tattered hat dubkmsly at us 
as we passed him. A policeman stopped, stared, turned his 
bull's eye, light as it now was, full into the cab upon us . took 
its number carefully. " Don't she look queer ?" to this moment 
I distinctly remember hearing him say to the sweeper. 
"Mother Moor lux's too !. really looks like a hocussing case! 
I must keep my weather eye open here, you . what's your name ? 
. you've seen it too ! 

The cabman inquired where he should drive. Vivian looked 
at me. In the tumult and confusion of my mind one idea only 
predominated. " The Boulogne packet stairs," was my reply. 



2d 



402 matjlkyebee's diyoece. 



CHAPTER XL. 

THE LAW OE DITOECE EOE WOMEN', 
A.D. 1857. 

The Boulogne packet had sailed two hours previously. Yivian 
had expected this, and imagined I should then be convinced of 
the uselessness of my pursuit. But it was quite otherwise. In. 
the interval I had recovered my powers of understanding and 
will. I perceived the utter impropriety of the companionship 
to which he subjected me, I was not cajoled by the profound 
respect and distance of his manner . his avoidance of every 
subject that might have renewed my irritation. I told him 
plainly that I was about to proceed to Boulogne by the next 
packet, and that if he persisted in forcing his company upon mo 
I would apply to a magistrate for protection. He looked at 
me earnestly, after I had uttered this resolve . drew the driver's 
cheek. wrung my hand . leaped out of the vehicle. and dis- 
appeared. 

i desired the man to stop again at the first hotel he reached. 
Having determined to follow the guilty fugitives in the next 
packet, which was to start in a few hours, I wished to remain in 
the neighbourhood of the wharf. 

I arrived at Boulogne, but again too late. The fugitives had 
not delayed an instant . they had gone on to Paris. I ascertained 
this fact clearly through the description I received from a railway 
office-keeper, who had been struck with something remarkable 
and agitated in their appearance. I was myself, however, de- 
tained for some time . a whole, priceless hour . by the necessity 
of procuring a passport, which I had not thought of in London. 
But no obstacle could turn me from my enterprise. I felt that 
to pursue was the best, the only indication, I could offer of my 
own innocence ! All my faculties seemed to have returned to 
me, brightened and sharpened by the necessities of my position. 
I was perfectly calm, . I behaved myself like an unconcerned 
traveller. I endeavoured to _ retrieve the time I had lost, by 
engaging an express. I was informed that one was just about 
to start, engaged by an agent of the English government, who 
would permit me to travel in it ; They handed me into the 
carriage. In a corner, wrapped in a large cloak, I perceived 
the figure of a man, apparently fast asleep, who, I was informed, 
was my travelling companion. I entered without misgiving . 
and it was not until we were several stations from Paris that he 
affected to wake up, and I recognized Vivian Ap Howel ! 



THE LAW OF DIVORCE FOR WOMEN-. 403 

I do not deny . I admit to the fullest extent . that he renewed 
all his arguments, all his most passionate entreaties, to induce 
me to cease from the pursuit of my unworthy husband, and 
consent to a divorce, which, under the circumstances, he still 
thought it possible to obtain. My only reply was, that at the 
first halt we made I summoned the guard, informed him that 
I felt too ill to proceed, alighted from the carriage ; and the 
train proceeded with Vivian alone, leaving me at Abbeville . 
necessarily for another lapse of precious time. 

I arrived in Paris, however, the same night, though very late . 

I took up my quarters purposely . having first ascertained, by 
inquiry, that no person of the name of Ap Howel was staying 
there. at one of the largest hotels in that capital, much frequented 
by the English. I could not hope or fear that my husband and his 
paramour would be there. Yet I made inquiries, apparently 
quite calm and indifferent inquiries, as if for some common 
acquaintance. No such persons had been seen ! It was midnight; 
the vast maze of Paris was around me. I knew now that my 
misfortune was irretrievable ! I returned to my solitary apart- 
ment . but it would be in vain to attempt to describe the night 
I passed in it ! 

And what would it profit minutely to detail how those subse- 
quent terrible weeks in Paris were consumed ? I prosecuted 
researches untiring, unremitted : with the sole hope and view, 
I own it, of descending like a Nemesis of reproach and retribu- 
tion upon the honeymoon of that guilty union. 

I thought at first that I could accomplish this result by my 
own exertions . my own unflagging diligence. Lhoped that the 
fugitives would not apprehend my pursuit . they had no reason, 
so far as J knew, to be aware of it . and that they would remain 
in Paris without feeling the necessity of unusual precaution. 
I felt satisfied, that I should speedily light upon them, and over- 
whelm them with the public denunciation their odious crime 
so well merited ! 

Doubtless, my demeanour in Paris, under this persuasion, to 
persons ignorantof my motives, admitted strange interpretations. 
I visited constantly places of the gayest resort . the public 
buildings, the parks, the theatres, the churches. I was present 
at all the public fetes ; everywhere I hoped to encounter my 
betrayers . everywhere they eluded me. I was alone always on 
these excursions . alone constantly in my resting-places. This 
I assert on my salvation ! Some loyal natures will judge by 
their own hearts, and believe me. Yet I denynot that several 
times, on these woful pleasure-huntings of mine, I discerned, 
with grief and dismay, the presence of Sir Yivian Ap Howel ! 
I treated him always as an absolute stranger, wherever we 
encountered. I could do no more. I was entirely ignorant of 
the hideous plot organised against me. What right had I to 
prohibit Paris to him ? 

2 11 2 



404 MAUIEVEKER'S BIVORCE. 

Ko doubt this unceasing 1 repulsion . this unceasing pursuit 
of objects so contrary to his wishes . worked, with the atrocious 
counsel of Sophia, to betray that once bright and chivalrous 
spirit into the gulf of blackest treachery and cruelty it plunged 
into finally, dragging me down with it into irretrievable misery 
and ruin. 

Day followed day, until days became weeks . weeks, a 
month ; still a constantly deceptive expectation lured me on. 
I now began to search into the more secluded districts of Paris. 
I considered at last that there were ample reasons, independent 
of any dread of my personal pursuit, to induce Sophia and my 
husband to keep their criminal happiness in the shade. I pre- 
served some method in my frenzy. I visited the most remote 
and secluded suburbs ; everywhere I made my inquiries with 
the delicacy and zeal of a police agent employed in the de- 
tection of some elaborate conspiracy. I kept up an assiduous 
correspodence at the bureaux of passports, with clerks, whose 
services I had retained by handsome fees. Their replies con- 
vinced me that since my arrival the fugitives had not quitted 
Paris. No! for, warned by Sir Vivian, in that accursed inter- 
view with Sophia, in which the two concocted their destructive 
plan against me, Scarlatt and his paramour left Paris almost as 
soon as they entered it. 

At last the lapse of time occurred to me, in the shape of a 
failure in my pecuniary resources. The expenses of my resi- 
dence and incessant perquisitions were, of course, very heavy ; 
my stock of money daily ran lower. Until then I had not been 
able to prevail upon myself to confide to any one in England 
the secret of my wanderings, and of their disgraceful cause. I 
was now compelled to write home to my steward, at Mauleverer, 
to desire him to send me a supply of money ; and I found it 
necessary at last to pen to my mother-in-law, at Plas Newydd, 
a heart-broken narrative of the discoveries I had made, and of 
the object of my abode in Paris. 

Weary, however, now at last of my own useless researches, it 
occurred to me that I had a right to invoke the protection and 
assistance of the representative of my country in that foreign 
capital. I determined to request the advice, and, if possible, 
the interference of the English ambassador. I was surprised, 
however, at the difficulty and delay which I had to encounter 
before I obtained at last an interview with this high function- 
ary. But no marvel was it : from his lips I was destined to 
learn the spawning of that overwhelming treason which was so 
soon to take forms so tenfold hideous. The ambassador listened 
to my complaints with great politeness, though with an ap- 
pearance of embarrassment and incredulity for which I could 
not account. At the conclusion, he informed me drily, that he 
had no reason whatever to believe that Lord Mauleverer was in 
Paris at all. still less on such an errand as I imputed. 



THE LAW OP DITOECE FOE WOMEN. 405 

" Public report, on the contrary, rather reverses the roles 
designated," he continued, with a sarcastic smile. " But, if 
circumstances are as you represent them, Lady Mauleverer, I 
should advise you to hasten home at once to confute that 
report ! . and Sir Vivian, also, who seems, by his card left at 
the embassy the other day, to be lodging in the same hotel with 
yourself !" 

" What report, my lord ?" 

He rang the bell and desired his secretary to be sent for, and 
to bring with him a fashionable morning paper, of a date he 
mentioned. The young man appeared, handed it respectfully 
to me, folded at a particular paragraph ; while the ambassador, 
rising and looking at his watch, feigned business, and retired 
on my first exclamation. 

I read these words : . " The Elopement in High Life !. Xo 
doubt can now be entertained that the gentlemen of the long 
robe will find some interesting occupation, in connection with 
the recent distressing revelations. Lady Mauleverer and Sir 
Yivian Ap Howel have been clearly traced, after their flight 
from the castle, in company, to lodgings in a house of very 
questionable reputation in the metropolis, whence they took a 
speedy departure for the Continent, where they are now sup- 
posed to be resident. Proceedings for a divorce will be com- 
menced at the first opening of term, and are looked forward to 
with great interest by all the numerous admirers of piquant 
revelations in the -higher spheres of life !" 

What I became, after reading this document, cannot be 
described in the words of any human language ! Ino doubt I 
behaved myself like a madwoman. The ambassador refused to 
see me . feigned to have left his house . and I returned to my 
hotel in a state of almost actual frenzy ! 

In my delirious absorption I had neglected everything but 
the one object of my journey. I had not seen a newspaper, at 
least to notice it, since I left England ; even now I forgot to 
refer to the date of the paper in which I had seen the shocking 
statement, whose words I distinctly retain. It was, in reality, 
seven or eight weeks old ! Immediately on their return to 
England, and they were only absent from it long enough for 
their flight to Paris, and as rapid return »on hearing of the 
death of Luxmoor, and forming their complot with Yivian, 
Sophia had availed, herself of her acquaintance with persons 
employed on the press, to propagate the calumny placed on 
record above. 

My sole desire and intention was now to return to England, 
to refute this monstrous libel by any means which the laws 
might place at my disposal ; but, excited to a real frenzy as I 
was, I found I could not move until the arrival of the re- 
mittances I expected from England. I was indebted in a con- 
siderable sum at the hotel where I resided, and for a supply of 



406 MAULEVEREE'S DIVOECE. 

necessaries I Lad been obliged to procure from Parisian trades- 
men, who had begun of late to watch my demeanour with sus- 
picion. I had not even the means to pay my travelling 
expenses to London ; I was obliged perforce, therefore, to wait 
the supplies I expected. Meanwhile the answers to my letters 
had already, I found, been delayed beyond a reasonable time. 

With my mind thus harrowed up with grief, indignation, 
astonishment, it was strange, but I was overtaken with a 
feverish thirst for intelligence I had hitherto so slighted. I 
had not, I solemnly declare, the faintest apprehension that this 
marvellous calumny would be, or could be, followed up by any 
substantial movement against me. I imagined I had only to 
appear, to compel the withdrawal of so baseless a scandal, and 
restore myself in the public opinion as an individual most 
vilely calumniated in absence and ignorance. But I now 
anxiously sought for English news, and endeavoured to divert 
my ravening anxiety by a perusal of every English paper I 
could procure. 

It was thus that on the second day of my enforced delay in 
Paris, while I was yet sickening over my morning's disappoint- 
ment in the post, that my eye suddenly lighted on the awful 
heading, under the general one of legal intelligence, in the 
Court of Queen's Bench : . 

The Earl of Mauler crer v. Sir Tic km Ap Howel ! ! 

The sight deserted my eyes, and it was several minutes after, 
before I could distinctly read, and realize to myself that I was 
reading, the flagitious document, which, nevertheless, was burn- 
ing, as it were, in living characters of flame, beneath my gaze ! 
Still burns, letter for letter, in my memory ! 

The report was headed by a list of lawyers for plaintiff and 
defendant, that certainly seemed to me like the names of 
actual living members of the legal profession whom I had 
heard mention. They were arranged, too, with an order and 
coherence which all my efforts to believe myself suddenly 
struck with madness, could not disarrange ! 

I saw that the leading counsel opened the case in the usual 
form of such procedures, and which it seemed to me no species 
of delirium could have bestowed upon me the faculty of 
composing ! 

" This was an action to recover compensation for one of the 
greatest injuries that could be inflicted by man on man, 
brought by his noble butmost unhappy client, the Earl of 
Mauleverer, against an individual whose illustrious distinction 
as a soldier, only, alas ! rendered his lapse from the laws of 
friendship and morality the more signally disgraceful to him- 
self and to all the unfortunate parties concerned. 

" The details of the case, which the learned counsel trusted 
E o be enabled to establish by the most irrefragable evidence, 



THE LA"W OF DIVORCE FOR WOMEN. 407 

.were of an unusually painful and heart-rending description. 
The facts were few in number, but they comprised a chain of 
the most irresistible proof ! The marriage had been one most 
certainly of affection, even more particularly, he believed he 
should be enabled to establish, on the part of the unhappy 
lady, the subject of this deplorable investigation ! He believed 
he was correct in stating that it had been what is commonly 
called a Gretna Green match, rendered necessary by the 
political differences between the two distinguished families 
whose youthful representatives took upon themselves to heal 
thus the antagonism of two powerful families of provincial 
Montagus and Capulets. It was not for him to argue an 
original lightness of character in the lady from this circum- 
stance, which was productive for a considerable period of the 
happiest results. A general reconciliation followed on the 
stolen match, and for years no happiness could exceed that of 
the couple, who, attracted, possibly in an equal degree, by all 
the fascinations of personal and mental endowment, should, 
one would have thought, have continued to offer the very 
model of a happy union. 

" He need not enlarge upon other advantages of position and 
results to this apparently brilliantly-starred alliance. His 
noble client's career was before the world : his political distinc- 
tion was such as to reflect credit on any woman's choice. On 
her part, Lady Mauleverer had justly achieved a reputation as 
one of the leaders of ton, familiar to the frequenters of the 
fashionable circles of society. *Two lovely children . one of 
them a female, to whom this unhappy divarication from the 
paths of duty on the part of her maternal relative would be a 
lifelong drawback and reflection . crowned this seemingly 
auspicious marriage. But to come more directly to the facts of 
the case ; he (the learned counsel . I read it all as if I had been 
a mechanical toy, contrived for the purpose) was far from being 
desirous to burden that unhappy lady with accusations he was 
not in a condition to sustain by the most positive proof. But 
he might state that so long ago as the year 18 . (it was the 
year of Vivian's departure for India) an intimacy of a some- 
what dubious and perplexing character had arisen between 
the distinguished defendant in this case and Lady Mauleverer, 
then the Honourable Mrs. Pomeroy. It would be proved to 
the satisfaction, he believed, of his lordship and the jury, that 
on an occasion of some disagreeable domestic occurrences . 
including, he was compelled to state, the vindictive arrest of 
the young husband on a charge in connection with his marriage 
with a minor . -the lady had withdrawn herself from his 
parents' roof to the residence of Sir Vivian Ap Howel. The 
impropriety of this step would be judged from the fact that 
Sir Vivian had no female relatives, and lived in an almost 
solitary bachelor condition, in a lonely tower among the moun- 
tains of Glamorganshire. By his persuasion also, it would be 



408 MAuXEYEREfi'S DIYORCE. 

shown, the unfortunate lady was induced to relinquish her 
hushand's society for a lengthened period, taking refuge finally 
in her father's house, who was at the time in a state of hostility 
against his son-in-law, that precluded the possibility of the 
latter taking up his abode at the same place. But while her 
husband was even peremptorily exiled from her society, Sir 
"Vivian was furnished with easy means of access and visitation, 
being an acknowledged favourite with the exasperated father, 
and one whom he had always himself intended for his son-in- 
law. He (the learned counsel) was far from alleging that 
motives of disappointment and revenge at this time weighed 
with Sir Vivian Ap Howel, who, nevertheless, might think he 
had reason for both feelings in the loss of a lady, still regarded 
as one of the most beautiful of those whom he might justly 
designate the most beautiful women in the world . the women 
of this fortunate land, which, in common he did not doubt with 
the jury, and all his auditory, he (the learned counsel) was proud 
to call his native land. And unhappily, it was but too certain 
that the avowed object of the noble relatives of this lady, for 
a considerable period, was to sever the holy but somewhat 
informal bands that united her to the unfortunate plaintiff. 
Yet happy, he might say, would it have been for him if an 
attempt, which at the time . so narrow and limited is our 
vision . he looked upon as the greatest of calamities, had suc- 
ceeded. As it was, no distinct degree of criminality could be 
urged against the misguided pair at the period, and not a 
shadow of suspicion for long*after crossed the mind of the 
bereaved and trusting husband. On the contrary, with the 
generosity and candour of a nature raised by its own virtues 
above the very notion of vileness in others, his unhappy client 
was induced to place the greatest confidence in Sir .Vivian Ap 
Howel's friendship and assistance. But subsequent events, on 
which he would not now dwell, had thrown the most painful 
doubts upon all the circumstances of this era . even on the 
legitimacy of a child born to his unfortunate client at the time 
. one of the most dreadful consequences of a married woman's 
lapse from the special virtues of her sex. Fortunately, soon 
after Sir Vivian was compelled to leave England with his 
regiment, though he (the learned counsel) should reluctantly 
be compelled to draw the attention of the jury to certain 
circumstances accompanying his leave-taking from Lady 
Mauleverer . including the gift of a handkerchief . not, he 
was sorry to say, under analogous circumstances to the loss of 
that one Othello valued so highly . which, though perhaps in 
themselves ' trifles light as air,' became of heavy weight and 
significance in connection with subsequent events. 

"On Sir Vivian's departure, the long-protracted reconcilia- 
tion between the families of these Welsh Montagus and Capu- 
lets was effected, and innumerable witnesses would testify to 



THE LAW OF DIYOKCE FOE WOMEN. 409 

the uniform kindness and attention exhibited by the unfortu- 
nate plaintiff to his wife during the whole long intervening 
period to the date of the defendant's return, covered, it must 
be confessed, with a glory merited by the most distinguished 
services, but of a kind the most assured to attract the admira- 
tion . not to say the blind enthusiasm . of the female sex. From 
this date, however, his noble but unfortunate client had de- 
tected a great change in his wife's manner and feelings towards 
him, which he endeavoured most assiduously, and during a 
course of years, in vain, to restore to their pristine warmth and 
congeniality. The cause, unhappily, became but too evident 
in a short time, but to the observation of others only, before 
whom the guilty parties had not motives so strong to put a 
control on their demeanour, actions, and conversation. Sir 
Vivian Ap Howel was a near neighbour of the Mauleverer 
family, and the friendship so long subsisting between the 
houses authorised a degree of intimacy and familiarity not 
so usual possibly under other circumstances. Having been 
also named trustee in a large property left to Lady Mauleverer, 
by her father, to her separate use, he was presented with 
facilities . he would not say with temptations, though the 
separate property of married women, he was sorry to say, was 
too frequently the bait of the artful and designing seducer. 
In this instance, however, the seducer was one of the wealthiest 
mining proprietors in the country. He was presented with 
facilities, at all events, he (the learned counsel) would say, to 
the abuse of a husband's generous confidence, which it was 
impossible to blame in the latter, but of which the former had 
fatally availed himself. From motives of a rare delicacy, 
which yet he trusted the jury would appreciate, Lord Mau- 
leverer had declined any personal interference in the arrange- 
ments under this trust. But not satisfied with the opportunity 
thus unavoidably, he might even say most creditably, allowed, 
it would be proved in evidence that the guilty parties met 
almost constantly at the house of a lady in the vicinity, whose 
friendly intimacy with the Mauleverer family, and addiction 
to literary pursuits of an absorbing nature, rendered her house 
very suitable for the purpose, and herself very unlikely to 
imagine or detect the dishonourable uses to which it was put. 

"These circumstances were the chief elucidations he could 
offer, on the part of his noble client, to the apparently sudden 
and irremediable lapse from virtue and discretion exhibited by 
the unhappy lady, the subject of this investigation. 

"It would be proved by the clearest evidence that, Lord 
Mauleverer, being compelled to leave his home to go to London 
on pressing business, his infatuated wife did not even wait for 
his departure before she sent forth a messenger with a letter 
summoning her partner in guilt to her presence. But an 
accidental . perhaps he should say a providential. circumstance 



410 :.IAtILEY£EEIl's DIVORCE. 

occasioned the sudden return of Lord Maulevcrer, and his 
discovery of circumstances that could leave no doubt of the 
criminal nature of the intimacy existing betweeu the unhappy 
lady and the defendant. 

"Yet, unwilling- to abandon his wife and the mother of his 
children altogether to infamy, Lord Mauleverer had quitted his 
own roof, rather, than by expelling her with her paramour, 
render it open and manifestto all the world. But the infatuated 
lady herself resolved on quitting it, alone and apparently 
unprotected ; and it would be clearly proved that she rejoined 
her paramour immediately afterwards in London. Direct proof 
would be tendered that they had passed several hours in each 
other's society exclusively, in a house in the metropolis, which, 
with some of the externals of propriety, was but too well known 
as a haunt of high-class depravity. The despicable, but still 
credible, mistress of the establishment was unhappily enabled 
to furnish an evidence on this part of the case, which, however 
open to suspicion on divers scores patent to his lordship and the 
jury, he (the learned counsel) trusted it would be discerned was 
precisely of that nature which was to be expected in a case of 
this kind. ' Tile means to vile deeds, are handles necessary,' 
they would be pleased to remember, in the words of one of the 
greatest poetical elucidators of humanity. But this was not all. 
Finding themselves in danger of pursuit from the justly 
irritated husband, this unhappy pair had taken a hurried 
departure from the house of Madame Moorlux for the Continent, 
and whatever precautions they might have taken in avoiding 
public signs of recognition and intimacy' . in Sir Vivian's 
assumption of a false name . as men of the world, and men ac- 
quainted with the frailties and passions of our common organi- 
zation, the jury could draw but one inference from the fact of 
these unhappy fugitives having resided, and still residing, 
in the same hotel at Paris . although, from a panic that seized 
them on the road thither, travelling together by express, the one 
under the false assumption that he was a government messenger, 
and both closely disguised, they had not arrived in that capital 
together. 

" Under these circumstances, he (the learned counsel) antici- 
pated that the justice he was there to demand for his noble 
client could notie denied him. It was of course known to the 
jury that this action was a necessary preliminary to a dis- 
solution of the tie which united this unhappy nobleman to the 
false partner of his bed, who had disgraced his name and that 
of her own illustrious ancestry, had forgotten so utterly all that 
was due to herself and to that bright assemblage of the high- 
born matronage of the land of which she was now a fallen 
member, and had once been a bright and conspicuous ornament. 
Of course the motive paramount with his unfortunate client was 
to obtain a release from ' the loathed Mezentian thraldom ' of 



THE LAW OF DIVORCE FOR WOMEN". 411 

such an union ; and therefore he was instructed to pray for no 
.vindictive damages, but for such as would satisfy that higher 
tribunal before which a subsequent stage of the proceedings 
would conduct them, of the impossibility of collusion' or 
understanding letween the parties . impossible indeed as 
such was even to imagine. Damages, however, let hi;n add on 
his own responsibility, they ought to give, of an amount to 
establish the estimate an impartial jury of Englishmen made of 
the grievoi;s nature of the injury his unfortunate and noble 
client had sustained in the loss of the companionship of a most 
beautiful, accomplished, and he might add, without fear of 
being misunderstood, w T ealthily-endowed lady . of the mother 
of his children, whom he could never again contemplate 
without anguish, and of the heartrending character of the 
disgrace and dishonour which unhappily the opinion of the 
world continued to affix to the principal sufferer in these 
unspeakable calamities. He should now call witnesses, one of 
the first of whom would be the excellent mother and accom- 
plished sister of the noble plaintiff, who would establish on 
what terms of happiness and endearment he had lived with his 
wife up to the ill-starred return of Sir Yivian Ap Howel to the 
country." 

At this point of the address, the report went on calmly to 
state, the counsel for the defendant rose, and intimated that it 
would not be necessary to call witnesses. He was happy to say 
that the jury would be relieved from the necessity of trying the 
case. He and his learned friends who appeared for the defen- 
dant FELT THEY COULD NOT RESIST THE PLAINTIFF'S CLAIM 
TO DAMAGES, AND HAD AGREED TO AN AMOUNT ! ! 

Some indifferent observations on the part of the judge 
followed, adverting to the unhappy nature of the case, which 
had precipitated a lady, whose beauty and accomplishments 
were the themes of universal admiration in society, and a 
young soldier, who had promised to become a glory and safe- 
guard to his country, into an abyss of shame and ignominy 
from which no future repentance or heroic achievement could 
rescue them ! and the report concluded briefly with the words 
. " Verdict for the plaintiff. Damages £10,000." 

No . I could not believe my own senses ! What ! without 
having been in any manner summoned to the bar of the tribunal 
. without having any knowledge even of its proceedings . was 
I declared infamous ?. pronounced to have forfeited my place 
in society, . to have become the opprobrium of my children, . 
the disgrace of my ancient name ? "Was I to be cast off to 
shame, and degradation, and poverty ? Were the atrocious 
objects of my enemies to be attained without my being per- 
mitted to speak a word in my own behalf? 

But if so . if this could be possible . if a woman had no right 
to raise her voice in defence where her all was at stake . what 



412 hattieveeee's divoece. 

was the meaning of this . that the man. the man who was 
conjointly accused of a detestable violation of every principle 
of morality and honour with me . who was, however, permitted 
every means of repelling the horrible calumnies . that this man 
had suffered judgment to be pronounced against us? 

I say, I read these paragraphs a hundred times, and still 
seemed to remain outside the meaning of the words > I refused 
to believe in my senses ! I had a conviction that what I pe- 
rused was a mere hallucination of the brain, which could not 
abide the steady analysis of the deceived faculties for many 
minutes ! I read, and read, and re-read ; but the words re- 
mained steadily there ! I felt a strange whirl increasing in my 
head, . everything in the room seemed to float and swim around 
me ! I tried to convince myself that I was insane ! I rang the 
bell for a waiter. He was an English one. I asked him to 
read the paragraphs I pointed out to him. 

He did so, and though his voice trembled . perhaps with some 
compassionate feeling . perhaps merely with excitement of the 
unusual office . he read me word for word what I had read ! 

A supernatural calm descended upon me. I thanked him, 
and asked him if he thought it possible to find Sir Vivian Ap 
Howel in Paris. 

The man smiled, as it seemed, involuntarily, and said that 
Sir Vivian occupied his apartment as usual, at the end of the 
corridor where mine was situated. He seldom went out till a 
few minutes after my ladyship ! Should he summon him ? 

Nothing surprised me then. I answered in the affirmative. 

The waiter returned in a few moments, with word that Sir 
Vivian would do himself the honour of waiting upon me in a 
short time, and meanwhile begged to forward me some letters 
which had been taken by mistake to his apartment, intended 
for me ! 

I took them mechanically. One was in my steward's hand- 
writing. I opened it. He was a worthy man, who had been 
in my father's employment for many years, and whom I had 
retained in mine, in spite of Scarlatt's wish to get rid of all the 
old servants at the castle. It announced to me, with sorrowful 
brevity, that he had been dismissed by Lord Mauleverer, imme- 
diately on his return to the castle after his vain pursuit of 
myself and Sir Vivian to the Continent.' That his lordship had 
taken the entire management of the property on himself, and. 
permitted no one else to receive any money ; and as he was 
now in legal possession of my whole inheritance, and I had so 
unhappily compromised myself with another gentleman ! . 
whatever excuses there might be for me in the unkind behaviour 
of the earl ! . he, my steward, had no available funds to offer 
me, excepting the scanty savings he had been enabled to make 
from the wants of a large family of his own, and which he 



THE ±AW OF DIVORCE FOE "WOMEN. 413 

humbly ventured to assure me should be at my disposal as soon 
as I signified a wish to that effect ! 

I next read, with a strange, obdurate calm, the letter from 
Plas Newydd. from Mrs. Suett, my mother-in-law. It was 
conceived in terms of abuse and violence I will not attempt to 
recall, and contained a direct accusation . on which seemingly 
there rested no shadow of doubt . of my having eloped with Sir 
Vivian Ap Howel to the Continent, and of having thereby proved 
myself not only the worst of wives to her poor son, but the 
cruellest sister-in-law possible to her dear Bronwen, whom I had 
deprived of a husband on whom she had set her " young affec- 
tions ever since she was born !" As to my wicked scandals 
against her " poor injured son, and that poor dear Mrs. Luxmoor 
I had always been so bad against," Mrs. Suett did not believe a 
single word of what I said . nor would a jury of my countrymen ! 
But there needed no other proof of my " lies," than that as 
soon as ever the death of her horrid husband released her, Mrs. 
Luxmoor had returned, quite by herself, to enjoy the rewards of 
her own labour, at the place my father had very kindly and 
properly left her in his will ! And if my poor husband visited 
her pretty constantly from the castle, it was no more than he had 
always done, and was likely to do, now that he had put his poor 
deserted children under her care and motherly superintenence ! 

This last stroke completed the work ! When Sir Vivian 
arrived in the apartment, I am told, he found me shrieking at 
the open window to the passengers in the crowded street below, 
imploring them to come in and rescue me from murderers ! 



414 MiULEVEKEIt'S DIVORCE. 



CHAPTER Xtl. 

PASSION AND PKINCTPLE. 

"What followed is still in. great measure a chaos of confused and 
horrible dreams in my recollection. But I must not dwell on 
the ghastly reminiscences that return upon me, lest my reason 
should again yield before the infinite horrors of the phantasma- 
goria ! For several months I was a madwoman . Horrible, 
horrible ! . I had a fixed idea that all who approached me were 
plotting my murder in some inconceivably fiendish or abominable 
form ! My distracted imagination created a hell around me in 
an infinitude of appalling visions of the means to be employed 
in effecting this purpose ! Sometimes they hung me for days 
by a rending skirt over the edge of fathomless precipices : now 
one sharpened a knife in a secret corner for my throat : poisons, 
I thought, were mixed in all my food and drink ! To complete 
the awful nature of the calamity that had befallen me, even my 
insanity took part with my enemies . abetted them in their 
atrocious plans ! Vivian Ap Howel, my betrayer, was the only 
person who approached me in whom I placed trust. whom I 
believed incapable of injuring me ! I would eat or drink only 
from his hands. I could only sleep when he watched beside my 
couch ! 

Let me do him what justice I can, in any measure to redeem 
the blackness of his great crime and treachery ! No father, no 
bi other . I had almost said, no mother, no sister . could have 
attended on all the wild and varying moods of my terrible 
malady with a deeper purity of tenderness and devotion than 
this fiery-hearted young man on the woman for whose sake he 
had parted with what he had held dearer than existence . his 
honour and his faith ! 

The people of the hotel imagined they understood the nature 
of our relation, and, with the laxity of continental manners, 
readily admitted the claims of Vivian to my exclusive care and 
management. 

Nothing that wealth could procure. that the most anxious, 
unwearied, all-devoted love could administer . was spared to 
effect my restoration. The most eminent faculty of Paris . even 
my own family physician from London . were summoned to my 
eouch of agony and delirium. The unhappy youth himself, 
they tell me, never once left the hotel . scarcely even my pre- 
p~' " v v-until the first terrible violence of the symptoms had 
\i. They were those of brain fever. which abated only 



PASSION AND PRINCIPLE. 415 

to give place to the dreadful species of lunacy I have described. 
The paroxysms incidental to this terrible form of excitement 
were usually succeeded by long hours . even days . of insensi- 
bility, or of lethargic prostration, during which, on several 
occasions, frequently, in the opinion of those around me . of all 
but Vivian . I had passed the eternal bourne. But he would 
not suffer me to die ! His cruel love and indefatigable cares 
recalled my wavering spirit perpetually to its confinement ; 
perpetually fostered back and renewed the departing flame of 
life in its spent and darkened receptacle. 

How often did I awake from trances of death-like stupefaction 
to find those deep, yearning, all-absorbed eyes fixed on mine, 
in an unutterable and unuttered agony of love, and woe, and 
fear, and devouring expectation ! Which then I encountered, 
even when scarcely conscious, with a sense, so hideously mis- 
taken, of a powerful protection, and shelter, and comfort from 
the vague but perpetual conviction of horror and danger sur- 
rounding me ! How often did I feel as if a clew of gracious balm 
were falling on my burning brows . which were in truth but 
the tears of remorse and vain compassion shed by my betrayer 
over his work ! 

But I must not dwell on these recollections. Above all, I 
must strive not again to realize that fearful vision of a prodigious 
serpent with the head and eyes of a woman . the head and eyes 
of Sophia Luxmoor ! . coiling and folding round me in easy, 
wave-like undulations . which I felt were destined finally to 
enwreath and crush me, till not a rib or joint should remain 
whole ! If I should again distinctly revive that dreadful 
phantasy, I should be mad again ! 

Let me hasten over what remains to be told of this dark tale. 

During that long and, at times, hopeless period of halluci- 
nation, the crime of my husband and of his paramour was 
completed. He had become the mere slave and servant of her 
will. The additional preliminary of an ecclesiastical divorce 
was readily passed through, where no opposition was made. 
A bill to complete my legal repudiation, and enable my husband 
to marry again, was introduced and passed, with a little more 
ceremonial pretension to the forms of justice, in the House of 
Lords. There they affected to hear evidence and examine proofs . 
evidence which the principal accused was allowed no opportu- 
nity of rebutting ; proofs which were necessarily accepted as 
such where no opportunity of exposing their fallacy was 
permitted to the only person who had the wish and interest 
to refute them. 

I was declared guilty ! Unheard, untried, unsummoned in 
any form before the internal injustice of these tribunals called 
of justice, I was declared guilty of the worst of social crimes . 
consigned over to public disgrace and ignominy . my children's 
names branded. their true descent impugned ! The bill for 



416 hatteeyeeee's divoece. 

my divorce became a law. The Eight Honourable Scarlatt, 
Earl of Mauleverer, was pronounced free to marry again. A 
beggarly pittance, of some twentieth part of my own inheritance 
. of the property that had descended to me from my ancestors- 
was assigned me. All the rest passed into the possession and 
absolute disposal of him who had thus shaken me off to ruin 
and despair. I was convicted in the eyes of mankind of the 
crime he alone had committed, and he remained at liberty to 
exalt in my place the vile woman for whose sake this whole 
horrible conspiracy had been devised ! 

This deed was consummated during my period of mental aliena- 
tion. But if I had been in the fullest possession of my faculties, 
I could have done nothing to prevent it. I had no voice, no 
claim to be heard, before the tribunal that condemned me. My 
husband, and the treacherous lover who threw away the priceless 
jewel of his soul to make me his prey, only had the right to 
present themselves before that phantom of legality, whose real 
office was but to fling to each his bleeding portion of the spoil ! 

Gradually, and with frequent returns of darkness, a gloom, 
as of the shadow of the departed tempest on a wreck-strewed, 
tossing sea, after a night of storms, rather than light, of reason 
revisited my clouded faculties. I iay for hours in long reveries 
of profound and often wholly illusive reflection ; everything 
around me was unknown and unfamiliar. In reality, I had 
been removed to a little villa in the Bois de Boulogne, which 
Vivian had hired, in the hope that the change from the thronged 
and noisy hotel might have a beneficial effect on my nerves. 
His features, his tones, were the only keynotes that for along 
time remained to me amidst the confused and wandering tenor 
of my thoughts ! 

I will not afflict and weary my reader by describing all the 
slow process of my recovery, if recovery it could be called, 
which restored me from realms of fearful hallucinations to still 
more fearful actualities. I remembered at last what I was. 
what I had been : where I was, and what I might have become, 
in the world's opinion, did not occur to me, did not trouble me, 
in any form, for many days. They were days of profound rest 
and calm for me. of still more intense anxiety and terror to 
Vivian : he feared I was sinking into a state of idiotcy. Un- 
fortunate and guilty yoixth ! the first_ sign for him of my 
reviving intelligence was an inconceivable impatience . an 
abhorrence and dread of his presence. This feeling grew with 
my comprehension of my situation. Every effort was made to 
turn the current of my ideas on this subject, by himself and all 
around me ; but in vain. At last a tremendous recollection 
broke upon me like a flash of light. I made inquiries, which it 
was found could not be eluded without renewing my excitement. 
I Nnprehended then, at last, that I was under the roof, and in 
^solute power, of the man who had so barbarously betrayed 



PASSION AND PRINCIPLE. 417 

me. Finally, that thus, in all human conviction, my guilt was 
proven ; my good name. the honour of the mother of my 
children . irretrievably stained, lost ; myself caught and en- 
tangled hopelessly in the toils that had closed around me ! 

What superhuman power prompted, sustained me in my 
resolve that it should not be so ? . that I would never give to 
my remorseless enemies the consolation of believing me guilty, 
at least in the end ? . never reward the perfidy of the man, who 
had abetted in the atrocious machination, with the attainment 
of his aims ? 

In spite of all that I have suffered in consequence . of the 
tragical issue that awaited my resolve . it is still a consolation 
to me to remember that, betrayed, abandoned by all the world 
else, as I was, I once more, with an unshaken resolution, 
which he himself felt to be irrevocable, refused Vivian Ap 
Howel's kneeling supplications to be allowed to repair, in the 
only manner he declared to be any longer possible, the injuries 
he had inflicted on me ! 

He no longer disguised from me their full extent. It was 
his object, indeed, to convince me of their irretrievable nature : 
I compelled the explanation. As soon as my understanding of 
my position was fully restored, I demanded to see him, after 
having refused for several weeks, with an inconceivable horror, 
to permit his approach. 

He came ! What a trembling, guilty, self-condemned wretch, 
that hero of glorious fields, that highborn, chivalrous gentle- 
man ! . now fallen so low, even in his own esteem, that he 
dared not raise his eyes to the pallid and wo-begone victim who 
awaited there to question him ! But he felt, as well as I did, 
that the climax in our disastrously-mingled fate had arrived . 
that all must now be decisively won or lost ! 

He replied, without varnish or circumlocution, to my in- 
quiries. Yes ; the house in which I found myself was his. at 
least it was in his occupation. Yes ; all the world believed I 
had accepted his protection, and was living there under it. 
Yes ; the proceedings against me, against himself, on the part 
of the Earl of Mauleverer, had been carried out to the fullest 
extent. I was divorced, by a decree of the Ecclesiastical 
Court, and by Act of Parliament, from a man who had 
always been unworthy of me . who preferred another woman, 
and who, he knew, was on the point of marrying her with the 
most indecent haste unless it was designed as an added insult 
to me . or, as he believed, was rendered necessary to legitimate 
issue, for whose sake mine would probably be set aside, and 
shorn of their inheritance ! That very day, in fact, Vivian 
stated, he knew, for a certain fact, he who had been my hus- 
band, and Sophia Luxmoor, were to be married in the face of 
day, and with the approbation of the world ! 

I was wonderfully calm and composed. I inquired of him 

2 E 



.418 MAT/LEVERER'S DIVORCE. 

how I had ever injured him to so fearful an extent, that he had 
joined my enemies and his own in their horrible plot for my 
destruction ! 

He entered into an explanation that wanted no sophistry 
and eloquence that passion, and even a fallacious semblance 
of reasoning, could lend. 

He told me that, on his return from India, he had come to 
the certain knowledge that I had been deceived into my 
marriage with Scarlatt Suett ; that my union with him had 
been productive of the greatest misery ; that in temper, 
character, feelings, we were the reverse of each other. He 
confessed that his own early love for me, never for an instant 
subdued, revived, with all the flame and violence of the 
matured passions of manhood, when he beheld me again on 
his return. It was fed by a jealousy that gnawed into his 
vitals . by compassion for my unhappy situation . by the 
exasperation of witnessing a treasure so despised by its 
possessor, for which he would have resigned every other hope. 
A chain of fatalities, whose links he himself could scarcely 
discern, had contributed to the result. A singular combination 
of circumstances had accumulated a mass of apparent proofs 
against me and himself, in conjunction, which, even if he had 
been most anxious and determined to resist the consequences, 
would have been overwhelming. But so convinced was he of 
the impossibility of a woman's obtaining justice, in the shape 
of a divorce, against a false husband . so satisfied that, even 
were that feasible, my scruples were not to be overcome. that 
he had found it impossible to resist the temptation of assisting 
to set me free, by offering no obstacles to the plans of Lord 
rUauleverev and his paramour. 

Vivian was deceived by my strange serenity. I said, after a 
slight pause, that I hoped, at least, he could convince me he 
had himself been rather an agent than the contriver of so 
villanous a plot? 

I trust he had the right . at all events he assumed it . of 
throwing the horror of its original invention upon Sophia. 

He had arrived in Paris, he averred, after I had left him in 
the express, maddened with the sight of my misery, of my 
clinging pursuit of my detested husband, of my disdain of 
himself. He had found out Sophia at once, under Lord 
Mauleverer's protection . communicated to her the news of 
Luxmoor's death, and of my approach. She also was desperate 
. compromised irretrievably ; the prizes for which she had 
been all her life striving were placed in her grasp, at the price 
only of an enormous crime. "What was a crime to Sophia ? Her 
genius of invention and combination accursedly seconded the 
impulse of the fiend. She persuaded Vivian, even by her own 
example, that relief for the wrongs of a woman was not to be 
hoped for ; and finally, she suggested the plan that had been 



PASSION AND PRINCIPLE. 419 

crowned with success, and which he had only regretted, he 
said, when he witnessed its consequences upon me. 

I was satisfied on this point. I had scarcely doubted when I 
inquired. But I was satisfied. I desired only to know yet 
another thing ; . was Lord Mauleverer a direct conspirator with 
these twain ? Vivian had not yet learned to lie fearlessly. He 
assured me he was entirely ignorant whether such was the 
case or not ; that he had carefully avoided meeting with him, 
lest he should be unable finally to prevent himself from wreak- 
ing vengeance upon him for all his insolence and calumnies. 
But there could be no doubt Lord Mauleverer was now 
convinced I was wholly his, and he had all along the im- 
pression that from an early period after our union my heart 
had been turned towards him. 

I laughed a little. I could perceive, I said, Sophia's motives: 
a man, a coronet ! But Sir Vivian Ap Howel's, what were 
they ? He, at least, knew that there was no foundation for 
such a supposition ; . he, at least, might give me credit for the 
possession of some of the right and honourable sentiments of 
my sex. 

Vivian turned pale, and faltered in his reply. His motives, he 
said, were solely to redeem me from the unhappiness I plainly 
suffered in my uncongenial alliance, and to offer to me the entire 
dedication of his own existence, to recompense me for all 
that I had suffered. 

" Let me sum up all then," I said, I remember, quite quietly 
and sedately ; " you have been made the poor tool of this foul 
conspiracy, Sir Vivian Ap Howel. By your means the man 
you hate has been placed in the full possession of all he has 
ever coveted : your own name, whose lustre always excited his 
envy, you have made dishonourable . covered it with a lasting 
ignominy. You have enabled Sophia to accomplish her re- 
venge, maturing for so many years, upon me. She has debased 
me to her own level . made me infamous . thinks possibly to have 
made me deserving also of my shame. You have betrayed me yet 
more villanously a thousand times than your ancestor formerly 
betrayed mine ; for J had not injured you ! And all for what ? 
For this !. that never, to my dying hour, shall you be aught to 
me but the vilest of traitors and betrayers ! A woman covered 
with disgrace would indeed be worthy of you ; but until I feel 
myself as much debased in my soul as I am in men's opinion, 
nothing else to you will I ever be but the most wronged and 
resentful of women ! I utterly refuse, despise, abhor, your 
proposal to make me a sharer in my own destruction, and unless 
I am a prisoner in your house, I will pass from under your roof 
at once and for ever ! If I am, I will yet find the means to quit 
the infamy of its shelter, if it cost me my life, by the most cruel 
form of death !" 

Vivian gazed at me with a look of petrifaction : was silent 

2e 2 



.110 JIArLEVEREK'S DIYOBCE. 

for several minutes. " You are not a prisoner, Hugh-Helena," 
he said, at last. " When your reason is perfectly restored, you 
are as free to leave this house as you are to remain in it. But hear 
what will he the certain result : when you quit it, you pronounce 
upon mc my sentence of death. I will hasten to the East, and 
the first conflict in which I am one, if I am mortal, I will lay 
down the load of an existence which you will have rendered 
insupportable !" 

" Let that be as it will. The moment I know myself to be at 
liberty to follow my fixed resolutions, I return to England, to 
exhaust all the means in my power to procure the restoration of 
my good name. If not, at least to enter my solemn protest 
before God and the world, against the abominable treachery of 
which I am the victim ! " 

" The world will rather believe that, deserted by your para- 
mour, yon haw invented a ridiculous fable, to retrieve its 
worthlr- c m ; bs" Vivian replied. "But even thus, it is irre- 
mediable dishonour to me ; if it listens to you, no disgrace, no 
infamy can surpass mine ! And do you think, Hugh-Helena, 
that I eould survive such infinite dishonour and infamy?" 

" Aud do you expect me ." 

He gave a profound sigh, and was silent again for along 
pause. On a sudden he exclaimed, as if waking from a dream, 
" I trill know the truth, then, at last !. whether Sophia has de- 
ceived me in the assurance that she loved me ! We do not 
willingly give those whom we love to death !" 

He turned to me. " When you quit me," he said, " I go to 
my doom ! but no restraint shall henceforth be placed on any 
of your movements. Here are ample means to transport you 
whithersoever you may please to direct your steps. Leave me 
to perish, if you will! If such be your will, you have never 
loved me, and what I have done is worthy of death ; nor do I 
care to live, assured at last that you can never love me . never 
repay the devotion of my life with the return which might still 
have made me supremely blessed ! could alone have recompensed 
me for all I have lost for your sake !" 

As he spoke, he placed a thick rouleau of notes on the table. 
I took them. The words he had uttered filled up the measure. 
I comprehended what engine had wrenched his soul from its 
place ! "You shall soon see that I am in earnest," I said; 
" soon learn if I have loved you. if I could have loved you. to 
the sacrifice of my ownhonour ,and of my children's name ! All 
else failing me, I have yet a sacred duty to perform to them . 
to rescue them from the pollution of the hands into which they 
have fallen . the hands of the betrayers of their mother !" 

"It will be in vain; Sophia loves your children, and will 
keep them in spite of you. You cannot reclaim them. you are 
only their lawful mother ! Had you been unlawfully so, their 
own father could not have taken them from you. You have 



PASSION AND PiUNCirLE. 421 

heard what I have said;. leave me, and you leave me to 
perish !" 

***** 

I left him, and I left him to perish ! 

Not many hours after this conversation, a postehaise drew 
up at the gate of this villa in the Bois de Boulogne. I got into 
it. alone. 

He, Vivian Ap Howel, handed me into it. 

"I am convinced at last!" he said, in low, tranquil, re- 
signed accents, as he did so, " you do not love me, and Sophia 
liedlikethe juggling fiend when she said you did love me! 
Believe, Hugh-Helena, it was that delusion that has made me the 
basest of men ! But you shall be soon avenged ! You prefer 
your wretched husband, who has cast you for ever from him, 

like a loathsome thing, to me, who No matter : we have 

fulfilled our destiny ! After what we both heard and saw that 
night when we first met at the Rhaiadr Dhu, we ought to have 
shunned one another worse than pestilence and death ! Nay, 
feign not that look of inquiry ! You too saw the apparition of 
my wretched ancestress on the torrent . you too heard her shriek 
our ill-omened conjunction ! But God knows! I dreamed not 
then I could surpass, as you have said, the perfidy of my 
ancestor, since I have had no provocation ! . And yet, no provo- 
cation ? Is all the misery of my life to count for nothing ?" 

I could not quit him thus : nor wholly without consolation. 

" Vivian," I said, " you are mistaken : Scarlatt Suett is no 
longer anything more to me than the impersonation of that 
essence of all injustice against which I go to appeal in the 
name of my unhappy sex ! I do love you, but I will never see 
you more ! " 

I turned away from him as I spoke, and said to the postboy, 
"Paris!" 

Vivian gazed at me : an eternity of love and regret and 
despair was in his eyes ! "I comprehend," he said at last, 
very softly. " The baseness of which I have shown myself 
capable, has for ever alienated your noble heart ! It is so : 
my crime is my punishment ! It will be so with poor Sophia, 
too ! Yes, poor Sophia ! . hate and despise her as you may . 
triumphant as she may deem herself. poor Sophia!" he 
repeated in tones of the tenderest, saddest pity ! "Go then," 
he added, with firmness. " You will not let me live for you, 
Hugh-Helena ; but you cannot prevent me from dying for 
you ! " 

His last look of yearning, passionate grief and love, entered 
my soul ; but, thanks be to God, I yet remembered Who hath 
said, " Whosoever putteth away a wife, and marrieth another, 
committeth adultery : and whosoever marrieth her that is put 
aivay from her husband, committeth adultery ! " 



422 maoxeyeeeb,'s divorce. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

LOVE IN DEATH. 

No one at all familiar with the public records of the last few 
years, is ignorant of the efforts I made to reverse the judgment 
pronounced against me . to retrieve the good opinion of a vile 
world which pronounced on me by its own experience ! 

My tale was listened to as a curious and ingenious legend, 
furnishing an amusing paragraph occasionally to a newspaper, 
or as the ravings of a lunatic. 

The law courts, the legislature, had already pronounced, 
there were no means, had the will existed, to reconsider their 
decision : vested rights had arisen to bar it : my husband was 
the husband of another ! 

My outcries attracted some attention, some curiosity, cer- 
tainly : the affair was designated " a romance in real life !" 
But on the whole, it was concluded that I was a guilty woman, 
deserted by my paramour, who thus laboured at the annoyance 
and misery of a betrayed husband ! 

I perceived, after a long, fruitless struggle, that this task 
was in vain. The world grew Aveary of my reclamations. I 
had no money, no friends, to buy advocacy or hearing ! My 
health failed : I desired then only to retrieve the society of my 
children : I thought it would be a consolation at least to die 
with them around my couch ! 

But I found that, according to the law of England, a woman 
has no right in her children but such as the father chooses to 
afford her ! Had Lord Mauleverer even been acknowledged as 
the most depraved of men, I as the most injured of women, it 
would have been all the same ! But my enemies had reversed 
the positions : the world applauded Lord Mauleverer when he 
refused me, in a public court of justice, even the privilege of 
seeing my children for a few hours alone ! I would not, I 
could not, endure to see them in the presence of the woman 
who . but what avails it to repeat the powerless tale ? 
* # * * # 

'I consented. I do not well know why . to embark for this 
remote isle. I did not value life in the least . yet I was to go 
to Madeira to preserve it ! My object was, I now think, at 
least to die in some land whose air was not thickened by the 
breath of my betrayers ! 

It was a foolish, an unmeaning, but irresistible impulse that 



LOVE IN DEATH. 423 

sent me, before I could bring myself to embark, once more into 
my native Glamorgan. 

I believe I had some quaint fancy that I should like to see 
my children once again! . my children! . and that I could 
achieve this object by stealth. 

How was it I made my way back that darksome, windy day 
to Mauleverer? I have forgotten. Once I had left it as a 
peasant girl : I returned now as a peasant woman. A hood and 
mantle concealed my features and figure : I was familiar with 
the paths of the domain : I knew where to conceal myself, that 
I might have the best chance of seeing my children on the 
daily exercise I supposed they took. 

It was the third weary day of my watchfulness. An open 
carriage and four horses drove from the castle gates. My 
daughter Evelyn sat in it, fondling with the hand of a woman, 
who leaned in an attitude of languor, but yet of profound repose 
and comfort, on the shoulder of him who had been my husband ! 
No doubt her situation claimed every solicitude : no doubt it 
accounted for the rapt tenderness and anxiety of the gaze 
fastened on her ! 

They passed like a dream. Four horses ! . all the pomp and 
nourish of rank and wealth for which both had ever strained, 
intrigued . bartered their immortal souls ! They were happy 
now! 

I made no utterance. They went past me with the rapidity 
of a cloud on the wind . yet methinks Sophia was startled as her 
glance fell on my form ! I heard her give a faint exclamation : 
her husband checked her with soothing words : it was a nervous 
imagination incident to her condition ! 

My little Herbert followed at an interval on his pony. The 
manly child took a pleasure in isolating himself, as if he liked 
best to feel himself under his own guidance and discretion. He 
was walking his pony and switching the bushes, near which I 
stood, as he went, with boyish wilfulness. I put myself in his 
path . I called him by his name . my son, my darling Herbert ! 
He looked at me, shrieked out " Mamma, help ! here is wicked 
Mamma !" and set his pony into a trot that speedily left me far 
behind . a statue of grief and despair ! I saw him gallop up to 
the carriage as if some fiend form was chasing him . and I too 
fled. 

I know not what dread impulse drove me forth of my ancestral 
bounds, and urged me on the road that led towards the ascents 
of the mountains which so many years previously I had climbed 
in my flight from my father's house to the accursed walls of 
Plas Wewydd. I remember only that I longed, as one ravingly 
athirst for a stream in which to slake his thirst, to behold, for 
the last time, the torrent of the Rhaiadr Dhu ! If the horrible 
notion of suicide had entered my head, God pardon it ; I was 
maddened ! 



.121 MAULEVEEEE S DIVOECE. 

I reached the high, moss-grown gate, where years before I had 
rest.il on my flight and desponded . mercy of Heaven, with what 
cause ! And I sat down there again on the old stump of the 
tree, and I listened to the roar of the woods in the high wind 
with a species of dreadful delight. The whole landscape howled 
around rue ! 

Fur some time in my progress I had been vaguely conscious 
of a whining, sniffing sound, that had seemed to follow in ray 
traces. It gained upon me in my pause, yet I took no notice. 
On a sudden I looked down, and 1 saw crouching at my feet, 
with joyful signs of recognition . Trusty Gelert ! The noble 
animal had been long nearly blind, and was now almost spent 
with age; but while I remained at Maulevercr he had always 
been carefully looked after, and left at his freedom. I patted 
the poor beast's large head, and I perceived at a glance that he 
was reduced nearly to a skeleton . starved by the barbarous 
negligence of the new race of menials who had at last dispossessed 
all the Welsh servants at Mauleverer. 

I had become like stone. But the spectacle of the faithful 
animal's maltreatment restored me to my human nature. I wept 
over the starved hound, I remember . Oh, such tears ! Every 
drop was a clot of my heart's blood : fell as heavily and hope- 
lessly on the gaunt sides and head of the moaning and whining 
companion of my disastrous journey to the Ap Plowed hills. 

Poor Gelert, ah, poor Gelert !. weak and exhausted as he 
was, he continued to drag his ribby skeleton after me until I 
reached the spot I desired to reach. It was the edge of the 
precipice immediately below Castell Ap Ilowel, that overhung 
the Khaiadr Dhu. 

I sat and mused. The roar of the torrent soothed me in- 
finitely. I knew that the races of mankind passed as its waters ; 
but that the justice of God remained as its unshaken rocks ! 

Yet I thought it would be good for me to die. Only I desired, 
before I plunged down the whelming waters, to see the sun as 
low as it had seemed on that first night when I stood on that 
very spot with the boy Vivian Ap Ilowel. 

I wished him well. I had no resentment against him then. 
He was serving as a volunteer . as an amateur . what you will 
. in the armies of the Turk on the Danube. I said so, I think, 
aloud . that I forgave him, as I hoped God would forgive me 
what I was about to do. 

The sun was fast descending to the level of the mountain tops. 
Methought he resembled a warrior sinking on a field crimson 
with slaughter, but resplendent with the glory of victory! 
"When the bright shield had totally disappeared, I resolved that 
all should speedily be night with me, too. 

Of a sudden, Gelert, who lay panting at my feet, raised him- 
self on his own, set himself on them, stiffly and firmly' as on a 
wooden bench, and glaring wildly upward, utteredthe most 



LOVE IN DEATH. 425 

fearful yell that ever startled the echoes of that dismal valley ! 
But mere echoes they were not that answered around in such 
doleful foreboding sounds that they recalled to me a legend of 
whose truth Yivian had often playfully . and yet himself cre- 
dulously. assured me ! Whenever an Ap Howel perished by 
violence, the dogs with which his ancestors and mine had 
hunted on their fatal sport together, howled in that valley still ! 
They were well called Cwn Annun . the dogs of hell ! 

It was the day of Oltenitza : of that great battle in which 
the Turks, with their European volunteers, stopped the advanc- 
ing tide of Russian invasion on the Danube. 

I knew nothing, of course, of that. But I knew at once that 
Vivian Ap Howel was slain ! . fallen, as he had told me he 
would fall . in the first onset of battle where Death and he 
could meet in the light of fame ! 

I thought truly it was time for me, too, to die. I arose ! I 
gazed down the ceaseless avalanche of waters . I was about to 
fling myself headlong into forgetfulness in their flowing arms. 

I know I shall not be believed . but even as my foot stepped 
into the yielding air something clutched me back from behind. 
A shadow, which would have his form had it been of substance, 
glided past me. A cold cheek touched mine . I heard a voice, 
which said, albeit soundlessly, "Ah! slay not my soul also 
with your despair. Yet a little while, Hugh-Helena, and we 
shall meet again in heaven ! In heaven they unite those only 
who have loved sincerely upon earth ! " 

I stretched my arms . When the morning came, 

I found myself lying on the rocks with my red country mantle 
firmly clenched in the teeth of Trusty Gelert. but Trusty Gelert 
himself lay stiff and dead by my side ! 



It is weeks since I have written what is above, and I still 
survive ! . have survived to be cheated of my last consolation 
.which was to die detesting this woman, invoking the justice 
of Heaven on her head. It is not even permitted me to die 
before her . to die and leave the sting of an eternal remorse in 
their hearts ! Many hours have not elapsed since I received 
the letter I place on record below. She is no more, since it 
was only to be transmitted to me if a fatal result . I know- not 
what I write. And still I linger ; still they can give me no 
assurance .of my doom. Well indeed may I conclude my 
mournful tale with the banshee's cry, O beth y wnaffi ? 



426 MATJLEYEREB S DIVOBCE. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

THE LAST LETTER OF SOPHIA. 

Be not amazed ! It is my handwriting ! the handwriting of 
her who has so wronged you that she would not even wish to 
be forgiven in this supreme hour of anguish and death ! For- 
giveness would in you be superhuman virtue, Hugh-Helena : 
but it would overwhelm me with fire from heaven ! 

Yet, were it possible Sophia Sutcliffe could hope for pardon 
from Hugh-Helena Pomeroy, it would be now, when a ven- 
geance, perhaps heavier than any that in your wildest moments 
of indignation you have called down upon her head, has 
descended on it ! 

For are you not avenged, unhappy lady ! grievously as you 
have been wronged } The emotion caused by your unexpected 
and terrible apparition at Mauleveror . the dread, for many 
hours after, that you had committed suicide in some frightful 
form . cost me the last hope to which I clung in the midst of 
all the horrors of remorse and disappointment that have 
assailed me in my guilty triumph . the hope that I might yet 
be saluted with the redeeming name of mother ! My constitu- 
tion, exhausted by so many struggles and sufferings, thence- 
forth no longer lent me power to withstand the progress of the 
fell disease which the ruffian hand of Carolus Luxmoor inflicted, 
and which had long fastened its consuming fangs in secret on 
my bosom. A fearful operation, which I know it is impossible 
I can survive, and which if I did would disfigure me past even 
the love of the unhappy man whom the same barbarous laws 
that bound me to my murderer permit me to call my husband, 
is yet the only poor chance medical skill can offer to preserve 
my existence. Oh ! are you not avenged, Hugh-Helena ? since 
it is Searlatt Suett himself who has been obliged to announce 
to me this sentence, to implore of me to run this hazard of 
immediate death, as the only possible means of prolonging for 
any period my existence ! Immediate death to me 
under circumstances of cruel pain ... to me whom his 
distant skeleton shadow always filled with horror . to whom 
pain, even in its minor degrees, has always been insupportable ! 

I have consented, because he has asked the sacrifice of me, 
and I know that I have parted thus with the few weeks of exis- 
tence that might yet have remained to me. The surgeons have 
arrived ; I can almost see the glitter of their fearful, keen-edged 
knives. I know that this dying glory of day is the last sunset 



THE LAST I/ETTEE OF SOPHIA. 427 

that ever my despairing eyes shall track in its descent from the 
golden fields of heaven. But I dare not raise my glance above 
its darkening effulgence for mercy to the throne of Him whose 
holiest laws I have violated. The best that I can hope is, that 
I may have forfeited eternally that divine essence of conscious- 
ness and existence whose possession I have so abused. 

It is thus with me, who have but just attained the supremacy 
in all that through life have seemed . not without much cause 
. to be the objects of my unwearied pursuit. I am the wife of 
Scarlatt Suett . Countess of Mauleverer . mistress of a castle 
and of a great estate ; surrounded by throngs of emulous de- 
pendents . menials, eager to win favour by the devotion of their 
services. Literary fame, tardily and languidly bestowed upon 
the unknown plebeian aspirant, crowns the titled claimant with 
her brightest wreaths, lavished with both hands. All this I 
have attained . all this must leave : wealth, rank, honours, the 
idolatrous love (pardon me the words, Hugh-Helena,) of the 
man for whose sake 1 have soiled the whiteness of my soul for 
ever ! Nothing can preserve me from the dreadful doom that 
awaits me. And are you not avenged, I ask, once more ? At 
least, when you receive this letter, I shall be beyond the reach 
of farther earthly retribution. 

But for this certain consummation, yawning for its prey, I 
should not, I own, have the courage to declare, as I now purpose, 
your innocence, to Scarlatt Suett and to the world. My testi- 
mony alone can establish it. Your own frenzied appeals have 
been in vain ; the solemn declaration, contained in the will of 
Vivian Ap Howel, found in his breast . pierced with the same 
bullet as his noble heart, and bathed in its ruddiest flow. has 
arrested opinion, but for a moment . not turned the tide. 
The clause, which made you the the inheritrix of all his large 
possessions, has balanced the impression in your favour, 
by all its weight of gold, in the scale. In vain have you 
repudiated the crushing gift . transferred it to the young 
girl who had been looked upon, by her mother and herself, at 
all events, as the fitting bride of him who thus endeavoured to 
repair some of the consequences of his fault against you. _ You 
stood, and stand yet, condemned in the world's wrong judg- 
ment, and I alone can clear you of the stains that darken your 
fame. I will. and I do. All that you have alleged in your 
demands for justice, I bear witness to all mankind, is true. 
You are the victim of a conspiracy between your own desperate 
lover and the desparate wife of Luxmoor, whose chains only 
fell from her at the instant when she was irretrievably com- 
promised with your misled and unhappy husband ! 

Some excuses, perchance, I might allege for my own vile part 
in this vile deed. The indissoluble bond that bound me to the 
worst and most detestable of men ; the impossibility which you 
yourself, alas ! so inexorably decreed should cut me from every 



428 matjleveheb's divorce. 

other means of extrication I so vainly essayed ; the years of in- 
describable suffering, calumny, exile. ill-requited, hopeless, 
inglorious toil, I had undergone; the bitter, innumerable, 
crushing disappointments, in so many forms, I had sustained ; 
the impulse, the relentless unkindness you evinced for me ; the 
ernel humiliations to which you subjected me ; the spirit of re- 
taliation and revenge you awakened in me, by the persecution 
and slander with which your jealousy, and irritated pride, and 
sult'-love pursued me . all crowned by that barbarous betrayal 
into the hands of the rapacious felon, who called himself my 
husband. There might be matter of apology in all this, well 
silted ; but I have no courage, no time for the task. Men must 
judge of me what they will : it matters little to me now, in very 
deed, what verdict they mav pronounce. Nothing of all this 
will I plead ; but one apology. which, perhaps, will only exag- 
gerate my offences in your eyes . I will and must declare, 
because it is the key to all that may still be inexplicable to you 
in your own destinies, while it unlocks the secrets of my entire 
existence. Scarlatt Suett and I loved each other . and have 
loved each other only . from the hour when we first met. 

Ah, did I not love Scarlatt Suett when, to make him rich and 
great, as it were, by a fairy stroke of fortune . had I no respect 
for my duty, no love of virtue, when, to preserve myself and 
him from the gulf of temptation, on whose verge we were slip- 
ping, hand in hand . I resolved on wedding him to you ? Vile, 
indeed, would have been the plot . base the heart that could 
have conceived it. had I not in reality believed Scarlatt Suett 
to be all that I represented him to you ! And if you had ever 
loved him as I have loved him, you could not have wakened 
from the delusion. if delusion it was . so soon and so thoroughly. 
But for me, I die with the conviction that, had he not bartered 
his better and nobler self for the glittering toys I offered him, 
Scarlatt Suett would have realized all that my own dazzled 
vision depicted him to you ! 

And if the love of Scarlatt Suett for me has chiefly, to the 
world's eye, been exhibited in the forms of aversion, of venge- 
ful, crushing contumely and rejection, I, who knew the secret 
source of all that bitterness, knew that love only . love so in- 
tense as to take the character of hatred in its despair and 
agony of hopelessness . whelmed me with waters which fate 
had poisoned, but which had else been of sweetest and purest 
flow! 

What need to repeat the tale ? I was Luxmoor's wife when 
I first saw Scarlatt Suett at Plas Newydd . Luxmoor's fugitive, 
hunted victim rather ! An irresistible attraction drew us 
together ; and since I knew myself to be the bondswoman of 
such a monster, and concealed the fact from Scarlatt, it was not 
without reason that he laid so much of the blame of the misery 
to both of us, that was to follow that short, ineffable dream, 



THE IAST LETTER OF SOPHIA. 429 

upon me. It was then that for the first time I knew what it 
was to love. I never loved Luxmoor, whatever I may have 
feigned to yourself, to excuse the vile subjection in which I was 
known to be held by him . to cover projects and a passion I 
ought never to have cherished. The sympathies of our relative 
position, in a great household, isolated by the prejudices of 
caste from all around us . the exasperating rivalry and perse- 
cution of Madame Le Crampon . the man's own artifice and 
craft. urged and dragged me into the pit of perdition I found 
in my union with Carolus Luxmoor ! Not love . not love ! 
Never could I have been so ignorant of what my heart needed ! 
. so worthless myself as to have loved that wretch ! Supreme 
Judge of the hearts Thou hast fashioned ! was it indeed an 
inexpiable crime that I yielded for a while to the overpowering 
sweetness of the sentiments inundating my heart ! . lingered 
a few hours of celestial happiness on the golden islet, in that 
dark and swollen sea, that was rising on all sides around, to 
engulf me for ever in its sunless depths ! 

Oh ! and indeed, Hugh-Helena, you are mistaken, if you 
imagine that the regard and tenderness I have expressed for 
you, at every stage of our opposed and yet mingled destinies, 
has not been sincere. I cherished you always as the dearest of 
sisters, and at the same time the choicest of nature's master- 
pieces. I thought I resigned to you every earthly hope of 
happiness of my own with the man I loved. And can you 
imagine, verily, that I returned from my long exile with 
projects of rivalry and vengeance on you and yours ? Believe 
me, I returned, as I deemed, only to look again upon the faces 
I had loved, and to die ! The terrible malady, which is con- 
signing me at this hour to the grave, had already commenced 
its ravages in my constitution, though not yet developed into 
any certain form. And surely, surely, death is a fact that 
cannot be discredited ! 

But who can defend a whole existence in the few words 
remaining to me to utter ? Over that other, but nobler ruin. 
the hero boy, who reposes in his bloody grave in the East . 
what lamentation can I pour that will not sound to you only 
the howl of the desert hyena over its mangled prey ? Poor, 
poor, Yivian ! After having been on his guard against me all 
his life, I cheated him of the only wealth his generous heart 
ever coveted as its own . but that was a diamond beyond all 
price . his honour ! But for my desperate suggestions . my 
assurances that you loved him well enough to pardon him all 
that he might do to effect your liberation from the man he 
hated, and union with himself. what force of eloquence or of 
torture could have induced him to act the part he played in 
your betrayal ? Yet. God forgive me, if you cannot, Hugh- 
Helena . I 'believed all that I said. I believed you loved and 
preferred Yivian Ap Howel to your husband . to all the world ! 



430 MArLTCTPliEE'S DIVORCE. 

And what was there that I would not . had not. pardoned to 
the man I loved ? 

Farewell ! . this is a vain rhapsody. The returning day 
breaks, and already I discern your . merciful Heaven ! is this 
no dream ? . and my unhappy husband, alone with his per- 
turbed thoughts, pacing the terraces below. Insensible to all 
the sweetness of nature, the grandeur and state around him. 
he presents his haggard and wo-begone face to the sun which 
lights . he fears, and I know . the last day of a woman he has 
loved so fatally too well. And now take from me one dying 
assurance which mny comfort you, Hugh-Helena . may incline 
you some day to afford him consolation too. He will need it. 
and your children are his also still . Scarlatt took not, know- 
ingly, any part in your betrayal. He believed in your guilt; 
evf : y external circumstance was against you. He believed too 
ri :i(Hly, perchance . was too inexorable. But is not the judg- 
ment of God also upon him .. See ! one of the executioners joins 
him . and he is compelled to smile and be of good cheer, and 
fall:, it may be, of the extent of his domains, spreading broad 
and glistening under the rosying dawn. 

Ali, would I could believe now, Hugh-Helena, in the 
doctrine of expiation the Church you have embraced teaches. 
Set the misery of my existence against these few short months 
of guilty happiness, and the fiend himself will stand mute 
in my accusation ! 

Think of what I suffered in the year of my first union with 
Luxmoor . during your wooing with Scarlatt . -during that 
terrible wedding tour, when 1 was condemned to the spectacle 
of your happiness, myself in the power of a loathsome satyr, 
whose heart and mind exhaled the miasma of every species 
of immorality. Remember me at Llanhowel . when I kissed 
your child, of whom Scarlatt Suett was the father. .Oh, I 
needed indeed to be loved by your children ! . and did you 
dream my purpose was to win their consoling tenderness from 
yourself, their mother? . Recall the horrors of that ghastly 
trial, when a measureless injustice received as it were the stamp 
and approbation of the divinity that should inspire law. View 
me through all those long, solitary, aching-hearted years of 
exile. Reckon up, if you will, all that intervenes of a dark 
and perturbing triumph . of a struggle whose successes were 
not joys. wherein to fail was mortal . And behold me now, 
in this sumptuous chamber, overlooking this fair landscape . 
this broad temple of nature, which has been too, too much 
my divinity . awaiting the certain approach of doom ! 

Ah, why are human laws so merciless ? How different might 

all have been if, when I fled from Luxmoor, when, to all 

moral intents and purposes, my union with him was dissolved 

. it had been so in law also ? 

Cruel and remorseless laws have done this for me . for you . 



THE LAST LETTER OF SOPHIA. 431 

for all -whom the misfortune of my position has involved. Will 
they never be changed ? "Will no hero of civilization arise . no 
statesman, worthy of the name . who, despising the interested 
and superstitious clamour certain to howl and hiss around him. 
in the effort, will resolve to restore to woman some portion of 
the rights due to the human form she hears ? Perhaps if even 
but one such ghastly example as I present were set before the 
world . but it is too late ! Death taps even now at my door . 
though so softly, so cautiously, with such anxious tenderness ! 
I lack the time, even if I had the courage, to execute such a 
work. to lay bare the throbbings of that once lacerated heart, 
whose tale is the tale of thousands in its anguish, though Heaven 
forbid it should be also in its guilt ! 

Farewell, Hugh-Helena ! Remember some day that I loved 
you best, though I injured you most, and that the wronger is 
always more unfortunate than the wronged. You cannot, you 
ought not to forgive me ! But some day, I know, you will ask 
forgiveness for me where your consoling faith teaches you it is 
to be found even for the worst not wholly reprobate ! I repent 
and I die ! But until you ask it for me of Heaven, I dare not, 
and I do not hope for more mercy at its tribunals than I have 
received from those of men ! 



THE END. 
