NEVER FORGOTTEN. 



CHAPTER THE FIEST. 

EASTPORT. 

A FEW cottages . scattered like odd grains of 
com along a short strip of English coast . after a 
rickety and precarious infancy, had grown up into 
a village. With such fattening nutriment as fishing 
and smuggling, it became a strong child. Later, 
in the war times, it was fancied by the miUtary 
authorities : a heavy fort and large barracks were 
built, and soldiers sent there. From that moment 
it became respectable, ceased to be a city Arab, 
and was called Eastport. In a short time it was 
timidly advancing to the grade of watering-place . 
a shy debutante . ^raised from the ranks, and appa- 

VOL. I. B 



2 Never Forgotten. 



rently as ill at ease in its new finery of dotted 
villas and dampish plaster terraces, as the sergeant 
who has been made uncomfortable by a Com- 
mission. But, in ten years more its patent would 
be regularly made out ; and it would be enrolled 
permanently among the dignified watering-places. 
The threads of railway were already converging 
and gathering up there, as into a hand, heading 
after beading of snow-white terraces would em- 
broider the edges of the cliffs. A monster hotel, as 
white and bright as if it were every morning bur- 
nished by mammoth housemaids, and teeming Avith 
life like a monster warren, -would have burst out on 
the hill, and noble persons have poured in, and have 
been cramped in tight drawing-rooms, scented with 
new plaster, at twenty guineas a week. A glis- 
tening strand reclaimed from savagery and ugly 
boulders, would have burst into gay files of sentry- 
boxes on wheels, travelling out in the sun to the 
deeper waters, and have become an animated en- 
campment, where the splash and the plunge marked 
time, and where countless novels and newspapers 
would be read to the pleasant music of children's 
prattle and young ladies' voices. 
But the moment had not yet come. The fairy 



Eaftport. 3 

queen of fashion, always fanciful and arbitrary, had 
not yet let hea* robe fall upon this comer, nor had 
she touched it with her golden wand. She had not 
given the signal for the rush. So it lay now in a 
state of Cimiparative squalor, enjoying a sort of 
vegetable life . just as its half-dozen stranded 
fishing-boats lay over on their bulging sides in a 
helpless and sluggish imbecility. A little pier 
straggled out awkwardly and timorously to sea: but 
by-and-by there would be a vote in Parliament, 
and a new harbour, and f ast^-sailing packets shoot- 
ing across with Mails to the Dutch and Belgian 
coasts opposite. 

On the lowest tier, next the shore, were the 
fishermen's huts. A couple of sloping roads ran 
np the cliffs like ribbons, and became streets, and on 
the top the bits of terraces and strips of villas broke 
out in spasmodic and disorderly fashion. These 
were in such white patches, with such sudden gaps 
. ^where an ambitious speculator who had gc^e in 
for an entire terrace and had been compelled to 
stop short ingloriously at Nnmber Three . that the 
whole cliff, taken together, seemed like one gigantic 
jaw smiKng at the sky, with teeth knocked out 
here and there. The barracks and fort were far 
b2 



Never Forgotten. 



away to the right, on a clifif that looked as soft and 
crumbly and friable as a crag of ripe old dinner- 
cheese. 

In this way the settlement gradually retreated 
inland, and the sea colony was linked by a chain of 
houses . straggling like videttes . to a genuine 
country town about a mile away. The country 
town was proud of its watering-place, and lived and 
had its being by two artificial stimulants . one the 
presence of soldiery in a sort of fort (a foot i:egiment 
and some artillerymen), whose officers were precious 
to the neighbourhood ; the other a steeple-chase of 
some mark, which annually brought down a strange 
miscellany, who, for a couple of nights swarmed 
over the little town, and utilised even its haylofts. 
The whole district was now cheap. As yet life 
was to be enjoyed there with economy, and it was 
therefore in esteem with many genteel families 
whose means were not on the same high level as 
their gentility. Life, too, was strongly savoured 
by the presence of the officers, who became the 
llamas of the territory. They were the salt of that 
special earth, and the leaven of every social meet- 
ing for miles about. With some they were as the 
air we breathe, and by such were inhaled in deep 



Eqftport. 5 

draughts. The warm tint of their dress became 
necessary to the landscape, as an agreeable patch 
of colour, and lit it up as the late Mr. Turner did a 
dull sea-piece . ^with a vermilion buoy. 

In these barracks . ^which were rude and almost 
squalid in their discomfort, and described a dozen 
times in each day as "this d. d infernal hole" 
. one night Captain Fermor and a friend, who 
was called " Young Brett," were sitting at the fire. 
The daily feast was done, and those who had feasted 
were scattered. " Young Brett" was a new ensign, 
white-haired to a strange degree, and half a child in 
appearance, but he was full of respect and admira- 
tion for men of experience like the Mentor beside 
him. The Mentor beside him was very fair, and 
pervaded by a general yellow tone . ^with a corn- 
coloured moustache. His legs were upon a chair, 
his shell-jacket open, and on his lips was a steady 
air of composed indifference and almost habitual 
disgust. 

The fledgeling ensign's enthusiasm was not yet 
chilled. He was describing a hunt. 

" We then went right through the Old Field," 
he said, " up to the brook which runs into the mill- 
race, where there is such a stiff jump . and such a 



Never Forgotten, 



fall ! You never saw such a business : every second 
fellow down. Old Bowley well pounded." 

*^ They don't know how to ride/' said Captain 
Fermor, tranquilly. " All tailors, every man of 'enu" 

" I went over with the rest," said the white boy, 
a little ruefully, " with such a ducking ! Some one 
pulled me out. That beast I rode pulled so." 

"Some way it always is the beast we ride," said 
the other, with the same inert smile. " It's not a 
country for a; gentleman to hunt over. I had to 
give it up myself. You know Fve seen the proper 
sort of thing. Who were out? the usual set?"' 

"The usual lot; and that Hanbury, as usual, 
leading. He got over the brook. But then he 
rides such horses I" 

The right side of the other^s lip went up a little 
at this speech, and he raised himself in his chair. 

" Of course he did ! These country fellows can 
scramble over every drain in the place. / have 
broken a horse's back before now over a little 
fun'ow. Any fool can make a show on a great 
strong brute that knows every stone and hedge. I 
don't care to lay mind to studying their topography. 
If I chose, I suppose I could do it with the best of 
em. But it wouldn't repay me the trouble." 



Eq/iport. 7 

Captain Fermor had an eye-glass which he used 
occasionally, being a little near-sighted ; but he had 
another moral bit of crystal, through which he un- 
consciously viewed his own personal nature. It 
was a sort of polite and social Pantheism. He 
really fancied that his " ro eyoi," as. the Germans 
call it . ^the great "I," the grand "Moi" . ^pervaded 
all things, and that everything that was said or 
done, in which he was called on to speak or do, 
must have necessary reference to him. 

" But he rode like a man," said the white-haired 
youth, with a thoughtful admiration ; ^ all through 
the same . never thrown out a moment* I wonder 
what he gave for that horse ? Two-two-nought ?" 
" Bred him, you may be sure . ^bred him to sell. 
That's AiV line. It's the way with all these low 
farmer fellows." 

" But you recollect the parson said the other day 
he was of good family . Sir Thomas Hanbury . or 
Somebody like that." 

" That don't make him a good huntsman," asked 

Captain Fermor, "does it?" Then added, with a 

characteristic wunt of logic, "It's nothing to me 

who he is^ or what he is . / don't care, I'm sure." 

The white ensign, still following his hero with a 



8 Never Forgotten. 



smile of admiration as he flew over a jump, went 
on the same key of panegyric. " And then coming 
home dead beat (would you believe itf), I saw his 
horse at the gate of that terrace where those girls 
live . Kaglan-terrace . and he himself with them 
in the window, as fresh as if he were out of his 
bath." 

Captain Fermor gave a sort of short contemp- 
tuous snort or sniff, and his fawn-coloured mous- 
tache, which hung over his mouth like the eaves of 
a thatched cottage, went up again. One limb, too, 
dropped off the chair. But he said nothing. 

" They say he's going to be married to one of 
them," said the ensign ; " the younger one, so the 
doctor told me to-day. But mind, don't say I said 
it, because it may be only a bit of gossip." 

The way in which Captain Fermor opened his 
aluminium-looking eye& on the youth, was some- 
thing to see. " Wliy should I ?" he said. " Whom 
should I tell ? I suppose I shall have forgotten it 
all in five minutes. What on earth, my good child, 
can you suppose these people and their stories are 
to me? It is very well for you, who have seen no 
life as yet. You may be quite easy in your mind, 
and tell your apothecary or parson . ^whose names. 



Eaftport. ' 9 

thank God, I don't know . that their secret is quite 
safe with me . ^because quite forgotten." 

The boy coloured up, and became pink at his f ore^ 
head, which contrasted oddly with his white hair. 
, Captain Fermor,, really pleased with himself with 
having spoken with such success and such an under- 
current of quiet sarcasm, became of a sudden quite 
free and good humoured. He took out his pipe 
and his tobacco-pouch, and began, with an agree- 
able leisureness, to fill it. 

" And so you saw these girls ? They are pretty," 
he said, making that allowance. 

" Yes, yesl" said the other, eagerly; *^ there's 
one very handsome. I wish . ^I wish," he added, 
" I knew her. I have tried every way. But they 
won't know people." 

" / could have known them fifty times over if I 
wanted," said Captain Fermor, trying whether his 
pipe drew freely. " There were people plaguing 
me a dozen times. But I don't care for that sort 
of thing. It's not my line, you see. Made it a 
rule not to make new acquaintances more than I 
can manage. People say to me, I wish you would 
let us introduce you to the . the . ^what do you call 
them?" 



10 Never Forgotten. 



"Manuels! Manuels!" said the youth. 

" But I don't want to. I don't care. There are 
fellows who want to know all the world. Pm not 
one of that sort." 

" O !" said the young ensign, with an uncon- 
scious piteousness ! *^ If I could only manage it ! 
They are so handsome ; and if I cotdd get to know 
them!" 

"Out of* the question, my good Brett," said 
Captain Fermor, becoming cold again. "I never 
do that sort of thing,, unless for friends, you 
know. Besides, take my advice ; don't trouble 
your head about that direction. I fancy you would 
scarcely be the description of thing for them, you 
see. 

In many of those people in whom personality or 
this organic egotism is strong, a sort of cruel truth 
breaks out, almost " brutal," as the French put it. 
But it is only a logical development, and really 
almost unconscious. From it the white-haired 
ensign suffered. And there was silence in conse- 
quence for a few moments. Captain Fermor, with 
his pipe now fairly alight, was still thinking how 
placidly he could turn a bit of quiet gentlemanly 
sarcasm. A tranquil smile was mantling about 



Eaftport. 11 

the tube of his pipe, and broke the blue clouds, like 
a little human sun. 

"I suppose," he said, after a time, and taking 
his pipe out to look at it nacrowly . " I suppose 
that strong-built brute will be entered for the 
steeple-ehase ? " 

"Yes," said the youth, shortly, and there was a 
wounded modulation in the key. But the captain, 
wrapped up in his egotistic cloak, had now tra- 
velled miles from any results his speech might 
have produced. 

"And I suppose," added the captain, "that 
fellow Banbury . ^Hanbury . ^^vill ride him? " 

"Yes," said the youth, a little more heartily, 
and trying to forget his hurt, for his soul was in 
horses, "O, he'll ride! They'll be very good 
this year. / shall ride ! " 

The captain smiled. Here was another oppor- 
tunity for stropping his satirical blade. 

" Of course they will be good, because you ride, 
eh ? You'll draw the whole coimtry. Don't you 
see what you lay yourself open to by that loose 
form of speech? I call your attention to it as a 
friend. Of course it's no affair of mine." 

" Yes, I see ! But they are to be first rate. I 



12 Never Forgotten, 



have entered Kathleen, and Taylor has entered 
Malakoff. I am in already for the Welter . all 
gentlemen riders, you know." 

Again the captain began to whet his razor. 
" Gentlemen riders ! Then they must let no na- 
tives enter. Good gracious ! what a lot of cads 
will start." And. again he smiled to himself. It 
was good practice turning this raw child to profit. 

" Brian is to start ! " said Young Brett, still on 
the horses. "And Small will rideiiim himself." 

"Ah! that is a horse," said Captain Fermor, 
taking his pipe out of his mouth with real in- 
terest. " How he will cut up the local fellows ! 
And a man that can ride . ^very tolerably. He'll 
give them a lesson." Here Captain Fermor took 
a weary stretch, as if life under this accumulation 
of monotony was indeed a burden. 

And yet, taking the average of his days, and the 
duties with which he filled in his days, he seemed 
to enter into its current with something far short 
of indifference. The truth was, this was only the 
fruit of his extravagant egotism. For him the 
genuine race of the world was the race that wore 
uniforms ; that is to say, the men whose uniform 
was scarlet. Other soldiers of other countries 



Eaftport. 13 

were mere impostors, theatrical fellows with gaudy- 
coats. It was notorious there was but one real 
" Service" known, which was the British. Thus, 
the bulk of English mankind who did not bear 
commissions were cagots, and the onus of respecta- 
bility lay upon them. Again, as with men so with 
things. Town was the centre, the city of true 
metal. Town things, bought in Town shops . 
bought, too, at the places where "our fellows" 
were accustomed to buy . the true Procrustean 
gauge to which all things must be stretched or 
fitted . this was more of Captain Fermor's creed. 
Yiet he was a gentlemanly devotee, and did not 
rant these tenets ; but they were so kneaded into 
his constitution, air, and deportment, that every- 
thing he said, and everything he did, seemed to 
whisper an article of this faith. 



14 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTEE THE SECOND. 

THE MANUELS. 

In the window of that miniature house in Raglan- 
terrace, where Young Brett had seen the admired 
horse standing, were the ladies of the Manuel 
family. The house was Number Four, in one of 
those terraces which had started so magnificently 
. intending a swoop of at least a street long, but 
had halted at Nimiber Four, through a sudden 
spasm. In the window was Mrs. Manuel, a shoii; 
handsoriie olive-toned elderly lady, whose hair was 
iron-grey, and whose eyes travelled faintly from 
east to west, and back again, but whose face had 
a worn look of suffering. There was also Violet, 
her second daughter; and Pauline, her eldest, now 
flashing out in the sunlight, was framed in the 



The Manueis. 15 



window. There admiring Young Brett saw her, 
in a window to herself, looking out at the noble 
horse, and fallen into a true statuesque attitude . 
into which she fell unconsciously some dozen times 
in the day. 

Young Brett looked wistfully, and languished to 
know her. But for him, and for such as him, 
Number Four was as a convent of the very strictest 
order. The ^second daughter, whom they called 
Violet, was not dark, but round and full, with a 
strange bright glistening in her eyes, which were 
large and " fine." About her altogether there was 
a sense of rich colour, with a sort of soft sweet de- 
votional aip . as though she had been copied from 
a saint on.au old Italian church wall. 

The hall door was open as Young Brett passed, 
and coming out with Hanbury, to feel that great 
horse all over, with that wonder and respect which 
foreigners have for great Englidi horses, was a son 
of the house, with black glossy hair that shone and 
curled . ^with a iaint olive tint about the cheeks, 
square heavy eyebrows, bluish shading on cheeks 
and upper lip, where moustache would later ripen 
and flourish, and a thoughtful business air beyond 
his years. . 



16 Nevsr Forgotten, 



He felt and patted the stout strong horse all 
over. Then Hanbury, an over-healthful, pink- 
cheeked, open-faced man of the country, mounted 
into his saddle with some pride, for he knew that 
eyes were upon him, and took ofif his hat to the 
windows, with an emphasis towards that on the 
left, where the full-eyed girl was with her mother. 
Then he made his horse amble and plunge gently, 
yet with grace, for some purpose of his own, 
struggling with him in a sort of sham contest, and 
finally, as it were, let him have his way, and 
plunge off in a dignified canter. All this Young 
Brett saw, as he had seen many such kindred 
scenes, with a sort of aching. He pined with a 
boyish pining for ladies' company, and longed to 
play at knights and social jousts in the drawing- 
room. 

Manuel . the gossips told each other . ^had been 
a sort of Anglo-Spanish merchant, who had lived 
years at Cadiz, and had married a Spanish woman. 
Wine was his divinity, and in that faith he had 
lived and died, sending home butts and casks 
every week. To the figures that flitted round in 
. the little watering-place, this meagre detail had 
tftivelled, and, meagre as it was, no one knew how 



The Manuels. 17 



it had been found out. Still, it was welcome as 
far as it went. And one more skilful discoverer 
than the rest was able to point to some cloud or 
mystery, which hung between them and Mr. 
Manuel's end. For it was ascertained that the 
butts and casks had broken up suddenly, and in 
that wreck the merchant had disappeared. In 
short, there was a story and mystery, or there 
should be a story and mystery, which, being un- 
resolved, caused much torture and suffering in 
the neighbourhood. Public interest in their regard 
was the more inflamed by the jealous reserve they 
maintained in their plaster-covered little castle on 
Raglan-terrace. The whole colony struggled to 
know them, men made violent efforts to pour in 
and carry an acquaintance by assault, but in- 
effectually. Only Mr. John Hanbury, who rode 
the admired horse, had found some breach through 
which he had stolen in. 

It seemed natural enough to those who knew 
him well; for he was penetrated through and 
through with a blunt gentleness and simplicity 
which, of all characters in daily currency, is the 
most acceptable, and even superficially makes the 
most way. The plated artificial world likes this 

VOL. I. c 



18 Nver Forgotten. 



sort of nature, and inhales it as it does a sea- 
breeze at Brighton. He had been in India in 
some civil station, had broken down physically, 
and had come home, thirty-eight years old, with 
six feet of height, broad shoulders, a square, rather 
massive face, a large kindly eye, black glossy hair, 
and a black moustache as glossy. He delighted in 
sport, had some dozen guns or so on his shelves 
with which he had shot the tiger and the elephant, 
and respected the character of a brave and upright 
horse pretty much as he did that of an upright 
Christian. He spoke with an earnestness verging 
upon dignity, and for him the buffoonery argot, 
called "chaff," nursery language of witlings, was 
hopelessly uninteUigible. 

That admired horse, The Baron, ambled up to 
Raglan-terrace very often . nearly every day. Its 
rider and owner came yet more often. The dust- 
men and dust-women of gossip, who went about with 
baskets on their shoulders and a hook, picking up 
old torn shreds and scraps and tossuig them into 
their baskets, met the party often on the roads and 
cliffs. It was given out officially, as it were, that 
a marriage must follow; and the eagerness for 
original details as to the Manuels' history became 



ine lYianueis^ ly 



almost exquisite. Any damaging scraps of whisper 
abont their early days would be most precious 
now. 

Captain Fermor, who spent a great deal of his 
day in a miserable listlessness, lounging along the 
roads, but most of all sitting on a low wall by the 
roadside in the sun, busy with a blunt stunted 
meerschaum, and swinging his legs like pendu- 
Irans . ^a polite Crusoe cast adrift on this savage 
district . strange to say, took a greater interest in 
these ladies than he had acknowledged to his 
friend Young Brett, He had got to be fond of 
his wall, and swung hk feet pretty nmch about 
the same hour each ds^ He had come to know 
the sisters thoroughly, their walk even half a mile 
away, their favourite bonnets, their clothes. He 
^really admired "that second girl," and the sleepy 
dreamy languor of her eyes, and he half indulged 
himself in a speculation how, with proper dressing 
and training, under good masters of fashion, " that 
girl" might "do" up in Town. But he soon 
checked himself, almost with a blush, for this 
heresy . as if anything good could come out of 
barren provincialism. 
The two girls tripping past . and they stepped 
o2 



20 Never Forgotten. 



together as sisters do, with the harmony of well- 
trained ponies . soon came to know the fair officer 
who swung his limbs upon the wall, quite as well 
as he knew them. At first they did not know his 
name, but this some way reached them in time. 
There are plenty of such surface intimacies. As 
they walked past they dropped their eyes with 
a modest precision, but there was a forced com- 
posure about their faces that looked like con- 
sciousness. Captain Femior suspended the pen- 
dulum motion, and looked long after them with 
tranquil approval. 

By-and-by, when Mr. Hanbury walked by with 
them very often, this expression changed. Man 
does not relish famiKarity in man with any of the 
other sex. It seems a sort of preference after 
rivalry; and though this view is really absurd, 
and based upon a fiction, it operates very largely. 
So at first Captain Fermor's lip used to curl con- 
temptuously, as who should say, "A fellow like 
that!" Then he grew more hostile, and as one 
day, Hanbury, full of smiles, was stooping well 
across the sisters, as he walked, in his eagerness in 
what he told, and as they listened with smiles and 
an interest that showed clearly they had taken no 



The Manuels. 21 



note of the captain upon his wall, the latter broke 
out almost loudly with " A low cad of a fellow I " 
Though why cad, and why low, there was no 
reason for pronouncing. Nay, he took this preju- 
dice actually away with him from his wall ; and 
when some one was criticising (a little unfairly) 
the riding of Mr. Hanbury, Captain Fermor 
joined in with a light growl, and repeated his 
censure that he was " a cad of a fellow ! " So, as 
there are surface intimacies among people who are 
never to know each others' minds, so are there 
these surface animosities. 

What irritated the captain specially was the un- 
conscious way in which the almost gentle blue eye 
of his enemy used to settle on him . if anything, 
with a kindly leaning towards him. This the 
other resented : and felt his lip curling up with 
contempt. 

But the summit of unreasonable exasperation 
was reached, when Mr. Hanbury was seen riding 
by with the two young ladies. Captain Fermor 
almost raged against this outrage on decorum. " In 
Town," he said, " or, indeed, in any civilised place, 
it wordd be screamed at. Two girls going out with 
a fellow like that ; no chaperon. It was a pity," 



22 Never Fcrgotten, 



he added, with compassion, "they had. no friend 
to hint to them what was proper. Any fellow, that 
at all approached a gentleman, would not allow^ 
them to compromise themselves like that." And 
when the marriage rumour reached him, his scorn 
and amazement could not be contained. 

There were other characters on these little pro- 
vincial boards, invariably to be found on such oc- 
casions : types kept in stock, who will drop in 
presently. Such were doctor and'doctor^s wife; 
clergyman and wife ; local solicitor in large busi- 
ness, often flying up to London ; and the landed 
gentry, whose nearest representative was Sir 
Charles Longman, of Longwood. These threads 
of different colours crossed and recrossed eadi 
other, and became plaited together into a sort of 
dull monotonous strand, which was Life at East- 
port. Life, in fact, oozed on here pleasantly for 
some . tranquilly at least for all. Periodically Sir 
Charles Longman broke into a spasm of a dinner 
out at Longwood, and had an artillery officer, and 
an infantry officer, with the parson and the doctor, 
and a solemn and impressive ceremonial ensued; 
when Sir Cliarles Longman, tall and well creased 
in his skin, and shining as though he had got into 



7he Manuels. 23 



a suit of serpent's skin, peered at every one through 
a very glistening eye-glass, as though he were 
afraid of mistaking them. His voice came out so 
aridly, it seemed to have newly arrived from the 
Desert, and dried up all within the area of its in- 
fluence like a hot wind. The soldiers went home 
loudly execrating host and entertainment, but 
Captain Fermor reUshed both with a smile of su- 
periority, and said it was refreshing to meet a gen- 
tleman after all. 



24 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTER THE THIED. 

A MESS DINNER. 

The barracks, which were the vital organs of 
the place, and the very centre of its nervous sys- 
tem, were austere and sour looking. They were 
buildings constructed as if for the reformation of 
the hardened soldiery who resided in them. Like 
the men themselves, they seemed to fall into line, 
to deploy into galleries, windows, doors, chill-look- 
ing iron-bedsteads, arches, whitewashed passages, 
and numbered cell boxes. As there was properly 
no flesh and blood in the place to be taken cogni- 
sance of officially by the authorities, but merely 
letters and numbers, so the same system was rea- 
sonably extended to the bedsteads, passages, arches, 
and even dead walls. 



A Mefs Dinner. 25 



The barracks were on a hill commanding the 
town, which had been fashioned irresolutely into 
a sort of fort; and when the sun was shining, 
little lengths of scarlet ribbon were seen to un- 
wind themselves on the walls, like a cheerful 
edging to a dull grey surtout, attended also by 
lively drumming, and the winding of trumpets. 
In this sort of climisily disguised reformatory 
the soldiers took their punishment, were drilled, 
snapped at with words of command, and, above 
all, "inspected," 

Which dreadful operation was now just being 
performed. It was a depot, and samples of several 
regiments were here herded together for training 
and exercise. Major-General Shortall had been 
down, a gaunt, red-cheeked man, with what used 
to be termed the mutton-chop whisker, and who 
was determined to do his all to save the Service 
from the destruction to which it was hurrying 
. by keeping his upper lip clean and bare. The 
men had been scrubbed, pipeclayed, French 
polished, burnished, holy-stoned even; had been 
reviled and sworn into perfect cleanliness, before 
General Shortall was taken down the ranks. 
. With a scowl of distrust, as though each 



26 Never Forgotten. 



private was busy hiding some breakage or stain, 
and might, after all, skilfully evade detection of 
his crime, the general walked down by a row of 
chests and faces, pried into buttons, twitched open 
cartouche-boxes, and pulled at straps sourly, then 
walked up past a row of backs, poked, probed as 
if he were making a surgical examination, and 
finished off a line with an air of disappointment. 
Colonels and captains walked with him in agita- 
tion. 

In the evening, General Shortafl was to dine 
with the mess; so, also, was Sir Charles Long- 
man, the generic territorial person of quality, 
and one or two gentlemen. The leading clergy- 
man, too, had been "thrown in :" just as the mess 
cook had "thrown in^' a dash .of wine, to give a 
tone to the soup. It was a sort of little festival. 
Tie general, in a grudging sort of fashion, had 
allowed some commendation to be wrung bom him, 
in which the words "efficient" and "soldier-like" 
were distinguishable. Thus there was a weight of 
care off the minds of the superior officers. 

Like two kings at a conference. Sir Charles 
liongman and General Shortall met on the rug, 
as at a free town. Colonel Benbow presented 



.A Mefs Dinner. 27 



them to each other. The general said he had 
known a Longman in "my old regiment" in 
Jamaica, and Sir Charles, promptly fixing his 
glass in position, and painfully investigating the 
general all oyer, ^aid^ doubtfully, " that he . er 
. quite . ^really most curious." They went in to 
dinner then, in a sort of clanking procession. 

Such splendour as the dep6t could compass 
was put forward. Two silver soldiers, back to 
back, in full marching order, with knapsack and 
straps all complete, with the minutest buckle, 
exquisitely modelled, bad been presented by Colonel 
Bolstock, O.B., to his regiment on leaving; and 
the two silver soldiers, leaning on their firelocks, 
mounted guard at the head of the table, under 
the general's eye. The study of the accoutre- 
ments, as here reproduced, was an inexhaustible 
source of delight to the officers. It never palled, 
and it was customary to refer to it as a standard 
for other works of Art. But the general had 
the silver soldiers imder inspection, and pro- 
nounced, sharply, that the belt of " that fellow on 
the right" might have been tightened by another 
" hole," which critical bon-mot soon trickled Aofm 
the whole table, and was greatly admired. For 



28 Never Forgotten. 



weeks an animated discussion took place after 
dinner, as to the propriety of this tightening by 
" another hole f and the most ingenious tests were 
suggested to find out the truth. 

As they Were sitting down, Captain Fermor 
came in hurriedly, and found there was but one 
Httle gap near the bottom of the table, into 
which he dropped. One flank of the gap was 
red, the other black, and just as he sat down, 
and waiter hands had pushed in his chair from 
behind, he found that the black civilian patch 
resolved itself into " that cad of a fellow," Han- 
bury ! 

The mere contagion of the thing was not so 
much ; for once, he could have put up with this 
sort of society. But the awkwardness was here : 
"this fellow" was sure "to fasten" an acquaint- 
ance on him, "what, positively," as he declared 
afterwards, " he had been struggling with all his 
power to fence off," but which he knew all the time 
. ^he had a presentiment, in fact . ^would come 
about. 

Honest John Hanbury's face actually lit up 
when he sg<w who was his companion. He was 
delighted, for he was of the line of Uncle Toby. 



A Mefs Dinner. 29 



" Captain Fermor," he said, at once, " we (yagkt 
to know each other. It is so droll meeting and 
passing each other in that sort of way . and know- 
ing each other all the time. It is absurd. You 
know me, and I know you. I am so glad, in short. 
This is better than half a dozen introductions." 

The captain's lip went up. " O, I see. Indeed ! 
You are very good to say so." 

The other assumed that there was correspond- 
ing joy at this pleasant dinner consanguinity. 
" Yes," he went on, " the very thing I was wishing 
for, and all brought about so naturally*. without 
trouble. Do you know, fifty times I have been on 
the point of walking up to you and saying, ^ Cap- 
tain Fermor, let me introduce myself.' I should 
have surprised you, I dare say." 

The captain's eyes first settled on Mr. Hanbury's 
drop chain, then travelled up slowly to his face. 
" I must say you would," he said ; " excuse me for 
telling you so frankly ;" and Captain Fermor grew 
a shade less ill humoured as he thought how gen- 
tlemanly sarcastic he could be at times. (This 
was where he was so much above " our fellows," 
who put anything offensive all in the rough and in 
brute shape.) 



30 Never Forgotten^ 



Though he had stepped inta a soeial ice-pail, 
Hanbuiy did not begin to feel the freezing as yet. 
" We are always talking of you* I should not 
betray secrets, but we are. We know you per- 
fectly, meeting you so constantly. on that walL 
Hal ha!" 

^ Most flattering^ of yon and your family to take 
such an interest in me . very ! " 

" Famify !" said the other, laughing. " Come, 
that is good ! Come now ! as if you don't know 
who! mean." 

Anything like rallying came on Permor like an 
east wind. ^1 really don't understand," he said^ 
nervously. " I take my w^ks, and don't trouble 
myself with all Imeet." 

" That's a wonderful horse of yotoSj Mr. Han- 
bury," struck in a young officer from the other 
side. " Great quarters ! So dose and brought 
together !" 

Every one broke in here with delight on this 
topic. A conversational sluice had been lifted, 
and talk poured out: Horse or horsemanship is 
the one touch of nature that makes all the man 
world a kin. 

"What would you take for him?" "Gwd 



A Mefs Dinner. 31 



action r' " Showy ?" " Hands high ?" " Off 
pastern ?" ^^ In for the National ?" 

Hanbmy^ a good fellow, put his foot in the 
stirrup, mounted, and rode his beast up and down 
the table for them ; that is, he told them all de- 
tails with fulness and with delight. "Yes," he 
said, "I have entered him. I really have. I shall 
ride him myself." 

" And win, by Jove I" said Young Brett, enthu- 
siastically. 

'^ Well," said Hanbury, with an expression of 
pleased doubt, "these things are so risky, and one 
never knows ; but I hope to do respectably. You 
have seen him?" he said, turning to Captain 
Fermor. " Of course you have." 

" That horse of yours ? Well . ^yes. I bdieve 
so. I see so many horses, you know ^" 

" Of course he has," said Young Brett, with the 
same enthusiasm. "And, by Jove, don't he admire 
him ! He told me so over and over again !" 

Fermor measured Young Brett as if for the 
rack. The look made him penitent on the spot. 
"I say I see so many horses ; but I really have not 
thought of the matter at alL" 

'' O, but you mu8t see him . see him regularly 



32 Never Forgctten. 



He's worth a study, I can tell you. Let me see . 
to-morrow ! Yes, Til ride him down here." 

Forsyth, another horse devotee, and pious in the 
faith, said, " Come at two, and have lunch." 

" Ah ! Thank you ! " said Hanbury, very earnest 
about his charger. " I will. Though, by the 

way ^'^ and he started. " No. I can't at two. 

I have," he said, confidentially, as it were, to Fermor, 
" to go out with the two girls, you kno'r^. By-the- 
by," he added, still in his cloak of simplicity, 
'^ that reminds me. You ought to know them." 

" Indeed I Ought I ?" said he, with an expression 
which was meant to be that of " amused surprise." 
"Well, granting that, to whom do you allude, 
pray?" 

(" I can play on this fellow," he said to himself, 
with satisfaction, " as upon a piano," which was 
scarcely a wise conviction, for he could only 
^' strum" upon the piano, and in human music he 
was but an indifferent player.) 

" O, the Manuels, to be sure," said the Piano, not 
seeing that it was being played on. " As I said, 
it is so odd, almost so droll, meeting in that funny 
way. We have discussed you very often, I can 
tell you." 



A Mefs Dinner. 33 



Something like "too much honour," or some 
such speech of ironical humility, was on the cap- 
tain's lips ; but, in spite of himself, he felt com- 
placent. Contempt and vanity were struggling 
for him. So he listened to hear more. 

" Miss Manuel is very curious about you, and 
has all sorts of speculations. She says she iis sure, 
from your face ^" 

An expression of interest spread over Fermor's 
face. But there was a Thersites in the regiment, 
just opposite, rough, loud-speaking, rude, and 
horribly truthful, a graduated professor of " chaff," 
and he was listening. Fermor justly considered 
him a " low " fellow, but shrank from him as from 
a social chimney-sweep. 

" She says . Just look at Fermor ! " he said . 
" ^ He thinks every young lady in love with him. 

He turns back on the roads if he meets one, for 

 

fear of disturbing her peace of mind.' Ho I ho ! " 
And an orchestra of " Ho 1 he's 1 " from the in- 
strumentalists about, who relished this coarse music 
of Thersites, now broke out. 

Fermor tui*ned red, and addressed his neigh- 
bour. He made it a rule, he always said, to take 
no notice of these " low " jokes. But John Han- 

VOL. I. D 



34 Never ForgottefK 



buiy, being a simple good-hnmotcred d^eatore that 
knew how to laugh, Sid laugh now Teiy loud. It 
seemed to him such a comical accident that Thep- 
sites should have actually stumbled oo the true 
state of things. 

" Why, as to walking along the Toads, I can 
tell you something," he said, looking slyly at 
Fermor. "You know there's no hiding of oMe's 
face exactly." 

"O, hoi" said Thersites. -"Was there ever 
anything like this? What did I say? Now we 
shall hear something," And the orchestra rubbed 
its hands, and even struck its thighs with delight. 

John Hanbury was one of those who innocently 
overlook what is strict propriety, in the satisfaction 
of giving pleasure to others. 

" I don't think it is quite fair," he said, looking 
from side to side ; " but since.-" 

Fermor was blazing and glowing. ^ I must 
request," he said, in a low hasty voice to his 
neighbour, "there will be no more of this. I 
don't like it." 

But Hanbuiy had been trained in wild places 
of India, where a joke, being a scarce thing, and. 



A Mefs Dinner. 35 



once trapped, is not enlarged without a sort of 
hunt. 

So he nodded his head pleasantly to the right 
and to the left, ajs if he had a secret^ and said, 
" He doesn't like it, though. It wouldn't be fair, 
you know." ' 

Again the orchestra broke in, fortissimo : " Come, 
come ! Nonsense ! Out with it." 

Major-General Shortall and Sir Charles Long- 
man, who had long since strayed away and got 
lost in the bogs and marshes of conversation, 
where every step cost them infinite pain, heard 
the roar of the instruments, and accepted it as 
though it were a stick which some one held to 
help them out. 

 Cheerful," said the general " What is it ? " 

" Eather some joke, I think," said Sir Charles, 
doubtful as to the meaning of laughter generally, 
and gluing on his eye-glass to try and get a good 
view of it. 

" O, sir," said Captain Thersites, " only a good 
thing about Fermor. Tell it oui^ Mr. Hanbuiy, 
the general wants to hear it" 

Hanbury, still relishing the thing with delight, 



36 Never Forgotten. 



though, indeed, there was neither joke nor story 
in the whole, was about to begin, when he chanced 
to look at his neighbour, and saw his crimson 
cheeks and his curled lip. Fermor said, " I request 
you will not take any freedom with my name ; 
at least, I am sure you will respect that of those 
ladies '' 

"Ah I don't mind him," roared the orchestra, 
suspecting what was going on. But this was a 
new view for Hanbury, who coloured in his turn. 
It was conveyed in an unpleasant, even an offen- 
sive manner, but the caution was just. His rough, 
coarse provincialism was stupidly making free with 
the sacred names of ladies he respected and ad- 
mired. His face changed in a second. 

" Let me suggest," said Fermor, seeing the 
effect, and suddenly taking out his razor for strop- 
ping, " a mess table is scarcely the place . you 
understand . of course it is no concern of mine." 

Nothing could be got out of Hanbury. Dis- 
appointed, the crowd, led by Thersites, followed 
at the heels of Fermor. Once in six months or so 
they had their revenge in this shape for many 
supercilious outrages. Personalities were now 
showered on the luckless man, and even the 



A Mefs Dinner. 37 



general was seen to smile in a dry way, Fermor 
glowed and grew white, and glowed again, and 
devoted his neighbour to the fury of the gods. 

The latter, quite sobered, whispered him ear- 
nestly, " Thank you a thousand times ! I was so 
near doing it, and you saved me. I should never 
have forgiven myself." 

That depended very much on his own turn of 
mind, but he might be sure of this, that Captain 
Fermor would never forgive him that public 
mortification. The captain chafed secretly, and 
looked at his glass as though he were chewing 
aloe-leaves. But there was worse in store for 
him. 

Some one had flung the party at the head of 
the table a plank in the shape of a little bit of 
Indian discussion. "They have such odd words 
now," said General Shortall. "Ton my soul, I 
can't make 'em out. I don't know what they will 
bring the Service to. They talk in the Times 
about waUahs and fellahs, and such stuff. Now, ' 
we always called them blacks simply, and niggers 
. and as good a word as any, I say." 

Captain Fermor, superior always to his own 
herd, was literary and well read, getting down 



38 Never Fvrgotten. 



green cases from Mr. Mndie. Part of his ritual 
was setting " fellows" right on matters of informa- 
tion. So now, brooding and brooding orer his 
injnries, he saw aid at hand, and listened. 

 WaUahr What. ei--is a wallah?" said Sir 
Charles. 

" And I see they have fellows they call ryots," 
said the general. " Not but that they have plenty 
of 'em otrt there . ^rows enough." Which remark 
brought forth, as was fitting, obsequious hilarity. 
When this had died away. Captain Fermor saw 
the opportunity for putting out Mr. Mudie's infor- 
mation to interest. 

" They call a wallah, sir," he said, with quiet 
respect, " one of those unhappy creatures who are 
obliged to work at forced labour . at the Suez 
Canal, for instance." 

" Ah, quite so," said Sir Charles, interested, 
making his glass adhere. " Most interesting." 

" And a ryot," continued Fermor, half turning 
to him as an appreciative listener, " is, I believe, 
a . a man who works in the fields for a few pots 
of rice . one of the greatly oppressed castes of 
India." 

The colonel was looking round as if this expla- 



A Mefs Dinner. 39 

nation reflected great credit on the depot, and the 

general seemed a little imparessed, when John Han- 

buiy, who had been listening with wonder and 

almost stupefaction, broke out with honest expos- 

tolation^ "No, no, no! Gome now. What are 

you talking of ? That is the funniest jumble . ^I 

beg your pardon for saying so . ^but it's all wrong. 

A^ xyot working for a pot of rice ; I wish you or I 

-were a ryot, good Lord ! But Fermor is joking, I 

know he is I " 

Fermor^s lip trembled a little. This was the 
fruit of being ever so little familiar with these 
liorribly low and familiarly free persons ! 

^^Why ^fellahs,'" continued Hanbury, laugh- 
ing heartily, "are the Suez people. I wish a 
^ivallali heard you speak of him in that way, or a 
ryot either.'^ 

^^ There'd be a ryot, I suppose," said General 
Slxortall, encooraged to repeat his joke. 

^ By Jove, yes I Why, they are farmers, culti- 
vators, merchants. It's so funny how you con- 
trived to jumble them.'* 

^ It may be f mmy," said Fermor, with an effort 
at calnmess, " but with all respect to you, sir, I 
tbink I am right." 



40 Never Forgotten. 



" Nonsense, you're not serious." 

" Have you read, might T ask, Jenkinson's or 
Thurlowe's travels ? " said Fermor, with chilly 
politeness. . 

" Not a line of them/' said the other, laugh- 
ing; "but if they say that, they're not worth 
reading." 

" The world thinks differently," said Fermor, 
looking round with calm triumph. " Jenkinson 
is a standard book. I have the second edition up- 
stairs; got it down from London . from Mudie's. 
He travelled five years in India." 

"If it comes to that," said Hanbury, with a 
good-humoured smile, "I was there five-and-twenty, 
but I don't go much upon that." 

" Ha, ha 1" said Thersites, "not bad that !" 

The statement produced a weighty impression. 

" That settles it," added Thersites. 

"By Jove!" said little Brett, suddenly, "how 
lucky ! I have a Hindustanee dictionary some- 
where ! " 

There was a cry of " Fetch it ! fetch it I " 

It was fetched, but it confirmed Hanbury and 
degraded Fermor. Hanbury became the Moon- 
shee or Pundit of the night, an office Fermor had 



M lYiejs umner, 41 



silways claimed. He suffered acutely. His "fa- 
<3ulties" were now taken from him, and lie could 
see that the (in his eyes) uncouth, half-civilised 
fghting miscellany were enjoying his deprivation. 
He saw the general whisper grimly to the chief 
with an inquiring smile, and he had a faithful in- 
stinct that this was about him. 

Presently that potentate rose and went his way. 
The dining crowd dispersed. They brought away 
with them the honest John Hanbury into a snug 
private room, where they lounged and stretched 
themselves after the rigours of the night, and 
clouded the air with fumes of tobacco and spirits. 
These were happy moments. The fighting men 
were boys again. They were attached by the 
genial simplicity of Hanbury, and the link was 
the horse. That noble brute was led out and 
admired over and over again. They became elo- 
quent, witty, even wise, in that curious tongue. 
These simple natives interchanged the blank 
counters and cowries they had for ideas, with a 
marvellous fluency. They talked of the "Na- 
tional," now close at hand, of the course, of the 
great horse Baron, of the greater Irish horse that 
was coming, of the gentlemen riders, of the odds. 



42 Never Forgatteiu 



Then af the *^ Welter Stakes," and of a grievance 
against the "handicapper/' and general monstroos 
oppresaon and injustice. And Hanboiy, who in 
some other societies might have been insignificant 
and overlooked; riding in here on his horse, was 
immensely respected and hearkened to. 

Fermor did not hear the last of that nighf s 
defeat for many days. In the barrack life there 
is a barrenness of incident^ and this was welcome. 
He was sensitive to " low chaff," and though he . 
habitually awed them as being inferior in intellect, 
it made him shudder one day to hear a low " un- 
gentlemanly" nickname associated with his own. 
" The Wallah " was actually profanely joined with 
his sacred being, and one morning he heard 
" fellows " below, in the court, under his window, 
asking familiarly if "The Wallah" was in his 
room. 



An Introduction, 43 



CHAPTER THE FOURTH. 

AN INTRODUCTION. 

Hanbuey came down pretty often to the bar- 
racks, and was esteemed "a good fellow." He 
brought his horse, he brought his guns. objects of 
absorbing interest to many beholders. They soon 
learnt that the gossips had given out the banns of 
marriage between him and one of the Manuels, 
and Young Brett, in his off-hand way, asked him 
about it openly. 

"Well," said Mr. Hanbury, with an honest 
smile, "I am not at liberty to say much, you 
know, but I hope it is not very far off. I am 
afraid I am not bom to be so lucky a fellow." 

Then they all spoke in praise of their looks; 



44 Never Forgotten. 



they were " fine girls/' but the youths lamented 
their exclusiveness, and the cruel way they kept 
themselves " so close." 

To whom Hanbury, in his simplicity, assuring 
the soldiers that this was all a misconception, and 
that foreign manners and foreign ways were at 
the bottom of it, said that, for his part, he fancied 
they would be rather glad to know people. 

On which encouragement they burst into genu- 
ine raptures. "Fine creatures!'' "Such eyes!" 
And the professors of military argot expressed 
their meaning in their slang, in which they were 
very fluent. " A stunner, by Jove !" " Clippers!" 
and with such rude admiration. One gentleman, 
after a long rumination, gathering up strength, as 
it were, added the epithet, " A spanker 1" 

But he had not met Fermor since. Once he 
and the Manuels had passed by that wall, where 
Captain Fermor had swung his legs and held 
communion with his blunt pipe, but neither cap- 
tain, nor captain's limbs, nor captain's pipe, were 
there. In short, as Captain Fermor said half 
aloud to Captain Fermor going to bed, when 
chafing and filled with disgust, "This comes of 
encouraging low people; the only barrier . and 



An Introduction. 45 



t;lie more I see of life I am confinned in this view 
. ^is a cold and steady resistance to any attempts 
at intimacy," and he had hoped that this would be 
a warning to himself for the future. 

But his mortification, whatever it was . and, 
indeed, it did not seem worth while looking back 
to . ^rankled in his mind, and, with a curious weak- 
ness, he thought if he could only get a fair oppor- 
tunity of publicly stropping his razor on his enemy, 
his peace of mind would return, and there would 
be a salve for his honour. 

That none but gentlemen should be admitted 
into the army; that, as at present constituted, it 
was sadly overrun with creatures of low extrac- 
tion ; that it soon would be " no place " for a man 
of refined feelings and good birth^ was the sub- 
stance of a meditation which passed through Cap- 
tain Fermor^s mind as he went out one evening, to 
lounge . ^scarcely to walk. It was summer, and it 
was fine, and though the roads were more green 
lanes than roads, especially where a hedge opened 
out in a sort of hawthorn window, and showed the 
sea far away glistening tranquilly, still never was 
the provincialism of the place so rank in his 
nostrils. He came past his favourite seat on the 



J 



46 Never ForgotteK. 



wall . ^forsworn now for some ten days . sat down 
on it; and fiuned away afresh at the place and all 
its works. 

After half an hour or so, he heard voices, and 
three figures came past him very gaily, a gentle- 
man and two ladies. "Natives" he assumed 
them to be, not worth a thought beyond a pettish 
protest that even iu these backwoods, whose merit, 
at least, should be privacy, it was hard (but quite 
in charact^) that one could not get a moment 
without intrusion. . 

These were^ however, the two ladies of Raglan- 
terrace and Mr. Hanbury. The face of the elder 
and taller seemed to flash on his, like the strong 
light of the sun, which had set but ten minutes : 
that of the younger, so soft, so xich in colour, 
with strange, full eyes, to absorb and draw him, as 
he looked. For the moment he forgot his grim 
Fakir creed of indifference. Beside the two 
faces, the third, genial and good as it was, seemed 
as of a low clown* 

The "low clown" called "How d'ye do?" to 
him very healthily. 

The three drifted by. Fermor thought how^ 



An Introduction. 47 



after all, they must be "low," coarse people at 

least, when they could " take up " mth such 

But here was the low clown hut a few yards away, 
turning back irresolutely, and coming to him. 
Fermor^s lip cniied with hostility. 

" I say," said Hanbury, "I must introduce you. 
It is really too absurd, this sort of thing. Come, 
now!" 

To him, in a sort of haughty alarm, Fermor 
rephed, 

" Excuse me . most kind of you . ^but ^ 

" Hush !" said the other, looking back. " Don't 
you see? I have told them. It wiU appear so 
rude. You couldn't, I am sure ^" 

Fermor dropped from his wall, half impatient, 
half pleseed . ^impatient of the gaucherie which 
this awkward fashion of introductioQ must bring 
about, pleased at this one more instance of a uni- 
versal homage. 

^^ This is Captain Fermor," said Hanbury, 
taking him by the arm like a gendarme, " our 
friend that we have known so long, and yet haven't 
known. Ha, ha! Isn't it good?" 

Jfermor gave his calmest, saddest, Town bow^ 



48 Never Forgotten. 



from long training exquisitely graduated to the 
suitable inflection of homage. Rustics might strive 
in vain after such manners. 

They walked on together. The elder girl 
spoke in a voice firm and musical, but it was 
decided in key. ,The younger girl shrank away 
shyly. 

" Mr. Hanbury is right," the elder said, "we do 
know you, and we have talked of you very often." 

Fermor smiled. He took out his humility mask 
(for he carried all his " properties" in his pocket), 
and said, 

"What time misspent, I fear I What useful 
moments abused 1 " 

(A good stroke, that would have filled the social 
pit and boxes on a crowded Town stair with 
wonder and delight.) 

"Ah!" answered the elder girl, "but we have 
so little to talk of here." 

This was the result of the effect on her, and the 
captain looked at her suspiciously. But on the 
younger it had clearly produced the right Town 
effect, for she was looking up with a compoimded 
feeling of half awe and half surprise . and, under 
the awe and surprise, admiration. 



An Introduction. 49 



There is always a process of election. Even on 
meeting people but for ten minutes, there must be 
preference of some kind, even the most superficial. 
So Captain Fermor chose the younger girl on the 
spot, as being softer, and, above all, more reverent. 

They walked together for half an hour, four in 
a line. But Captain Fermor was the officiating 
minister of that little congregation. He preached 
the sermon . they listened devoutly. He had some 
tact in the management of the commbn counters 
of talk, and could shift and change his bits of foil 
with the skill of a conversational juggler ; at least 
his bits of wit were so new to his company, that 
there was, at least, the element of curiosity. 

There were a few topics at which they had been 
looking through mere pastoral. or rather say pro- 
vincial . glasses, and for which he now lent them 
his more worldly lorgnette. In a gentlemanly way 
he lifted his eyes and sneered mildly, yet not ill 
naturedly, at what was about them. He worked 
the TO cyo) plentifully. He put his personality 
through all moods and tenses for them. 

Yet presently he began to see that his little 
arrows were shooting past the elder girl. He paid, 
"They persecute me to know this person and that. 

VOL. I. E 



50 Never ForgotUn. 



I declaife, if you were to know all I suffer^ and 

the worry I have to endure ^But I don't waot 

it. In ToMni, of course, there I lay myself out for 
it . ^I get interest for my money. In fact, I am a 
different being altogether. But here I have mad^ 
it a sort of rule If you dxm't draw the line some- 
where, you know ^" When he had got so far, 

he found the eldest Miss Manuel saying something 
in a low voice to John Hanbury. 

But there was a reverence in the large eyea of 
the softer girl which indemnified him. He re^ 
marked, too,, with a sort of pleasure, how beside 
him on this occasion " that boor," a& he christened 
him, seemed to sink down into a lower Yahoo sort 
of grade. Among corresponding Yahoos, i.e. at 
MesSy such might have a sort of elevation, but cm 
a proper ground like this, it was different. It 
was so-, indeed, tS tb certain (Jegree. He artfuUy 
kept the talk up^^n the higher social table-lands^ 
where Hanbiilry could scarcely breathe, and he 
really contrived to be amusing . ^because half bior 
graphical . on the topic of Town parties and 
dinners, and some notable men whom he had 
met. Hanbury the honest,, the admired, was 



An Introduction^ 51 



almost reduced to silence* Fermory too, had not 
forgotten the "outrage," as he considered it, on 
"that boor^s" part, and several times when Mr. 
Hanbnry struck in with scmie rough and hearty, 
and, p^haps, too uniyersal a choir of praise, he 
quietly, and with the half superiority of pity, set 
him right. 

The elda: Miss Manuel did not seem to take so 
much interest in this exhibition. She presently 
broke in on the personal current of Captain Fer- 
mor^s life (he was giving them a sort of psycholo- 
gical analysis r "No one qmi^e und^stands my 
mind," he said, with his agreeable smile, as if 
speaking of another person altogether. "Some 
think me proud, some say I am so indiffereiit ; but 
neither of these classes know me really. It would 
take years of study to know me properly . one side 
of my character, ev^n . and even then, Ac"), and 
it was just at this point, not, however, rudely, and 
in the middle of a sentence, that Miss Manud 
struck in eagerly : " WeU, about the Baron . do tell 
us ? I am dying to hear." 

This was an opening for John Hanbury to ride 
in o^ his great h<rse, which he did with a genuine 
e2 



52 Never Forgotten. 



ardour and enthusiasm. It was like the fresh 
air of daybreak after the candles and hot close 
vapours of a ball-room. 

" To be sure," he said. " I know you will be 
all interested to hear of the Baron. He is down 
for a little training . down at Bardsley . out every 
day on the downs. Had a letter to-night about 
him. Sure to carry all before him. There won't 
be such a horse in." 

The two sisters looked eager: even the softer 
faced, who had stayed a few seconds behind with 
Fermor's psychology, was now busy with the 
Baron. 

"Nice, charming, darling creature!" she said, 
with a sort of dreamy rumination ; " and his dear 
noble neck!" 

" Fine old fellow !" said John, taking a different 
view of him. " And he shall, have the honour of 
carrying you the day before, to give him an arti- 
ficial courage." 

" O, shall he I" said she, the round eyes swim- 
ming in pleasure. "How I shall enjoy it. We 
must go and see him win ! O, Pauline I we must 
see himl Surely mamma would not mind just 
for once." 



An Introduction^ 53 



Thus was Captain Fermor and the analysis of 
his mind left leagues behind. He had misgivings 
that, after all, these might prove " low" people too. 
But the true source was the incurable lowness of 
" that boor," which was breaking out in this law- 
less way. He thought how he must make an ex- 
ample of him ; how with such there was no keep- 
ing terms. But the horse, now introduced, was 
hard to struggle against. Even the soft, the round- 
eyed devotee was drawn away. He said to her, in 
a low confidential voice, " You have been in Town, 

I am sure you have " 

But with an absent smile she answered him, " O 
yes I . ^that is, not for ages." Then to Hanbury, 
suddenly, "And when vrill he arrive, the noble, 
gentle thing ? I am longing to see him again." 

" On Monday," said Hanbury, with the same 
eagerness. " I saw him yesterday, his coat shining 
like a looking-glass . and such a stride. When I 
took him over a stiff fence, he cleared it like a 
furrow. O, he will do," said John Hanbury, rub- 
bing his hands with delight. 

The two girls' faces were turned .to him with 
wonderf id eagerness, that of the elder girl with a 
sort of pride in Hanbury himself, the yoimger with 



54 Never Ftrgatteru 



an interest that seemed to travel away to where the 
noble brute was in his paddock. For tiie moment 
no one in the company was taking thought of the 
refined Fermor. He smarted under it. 

" This horse," he said to Hanbury, with bitter- 
ness, ^^ seems to be about the most distinguished 
person of his time. Every one appears to be ab- 
sorbed, to live, move, and have his being in him." 
And he gave a sort of smile athwart the two ladies. 
But John answered him with simplicity, quite 
pleased that he too was interested in the matter. 

" I am," he said, " absurdly so. To tell you the 
truth, there are one or two nights that I have not 
. slept for thinking of him. In fact, I have been 
foolish enough to put a good deal of money on 
him ; more indeed than I like. You'll think me 
very absurd?" 

"This 'low' horse again," thought Captain 
Fermor, and answered with exquisite satire, " Well, 
if you put it to me so directly, I must say yes ! " 
and he looked for the applause which the stroke 
must extort. The bright flashing face was cold 
and impassive, and turned towards him with stea- 
diness; that of the younger was waiting shyly, 
with a half smile of curiosity, to hear more. A 



An Introduction. 55 



good opening for a handsome exit off the stage. 
He made his bow, calling in Lord Chesterfield. 
" Most sorry," he said ; " must really go now. Hare 
to be in barracks. So glad to have had the plea- 
sure, &c." 

John Hanbtuy wrung his hand awf tilly. ^ Bcyrit 
you like them?" he whispered, as he walked away 
a few steps with him. " You saw how interested 
she was about the horse. The fact is, I have set 
my heart on winning this race. And with the race, 
old hoy^^ he added, with a hearty and dreadful 
familiarity that made Fermor^s blood curdle, ^^I 
shall win something else ! I must tell you / tliirJc 
it is all right . you understand . the Younger one. 
Don't tell any fellow, though. Good-by." 

Now as Captain Fermor lifted his hat to the 
two ladies, the idea before his mind had been 
that he had happily lowered their respect by a sort 
of contrast. So he naturally thought, with some- 
thing like disgust, of the whole of the scene. 
" How they can put up with that boor^s insuffer- 
able coarseness ! It jars on me at every turn. 
And how she can I If she was dressed properly, 
and trained under good hands, she might do. in 
Town." And Captain Fermor thought of the 



56 Never Forgotten. 

soft liquid eyes, and that pleased expression of 
curiosity as he talked. " All to be thrown away 
on that low boor." 

That low boor and the two ladies walked home 
together; but they were more silent than usual. 
" By the way, what do you think of Fermor ? " he 
said. 

" He is very well," said the elder ; " quite the 
common run of exquisite. We know as much of 
him now, as we ever shall." 

" But he seems to know the world so well," said 
the younger girl, timidly. 

The other's eyes flashed, and she laughed. " How 
well you know the world, to tell us that, Violet. I 
should never ask to see him, and if Mr. Hanbuiy 
is wise, he will never inflict him on us again." 

Mr. Hanbury looked mystified. "Why so?" 
he said ; " would not that be rude1 " 

' Because we know him," she said, impatiently. 
"And there is nothing more to know of him ; he 
is conceit all over, and of the most foolish sort." 

" He 18 a little fine," said John, reflectively. 

" If you take my advice," said Miss Manuel, 
meaningly, " for your sake as well as for ours, you 
will spare us his company." 



An Introduction. 57 



"But won't he amuse us, Pauline?" said the 
younger sister, douhtfuUy. They were at their 
own door, and she went in first. The elder girl 
stayed behind a little with Mr. Hanbury. It was 
nearly dark. The stars were out, and down at the 
little port . ^far away below . ^the lighthouse newly 
lit, was twinkling. 

" Why did you do this ! '' she said to him. " He 
is a cold, heartless London creature. It makes me 
uncomfortable to be in his society. He says he 
wants amusement here, and who can tell how he 
may find amusement. You know you have called 
me the wise woman before now, and I tell you I 
can read character, and he dcrrit like yoxi. So, my 
dear honest John Hanbury, we will just leave him 
where he is." 

John Hanbury went his way home that night 
thinking very deeply. He respected and admired 
Miss Manuel, so her words impressed him. " She 
sees things where I don't," he thought, and there 
certainly was a " nasty" bitter manner in Fermor 
towards him. 



58 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEK THE FIFTH. 

A VISIT, 

A WEEK after, Fermor and he met again, not 
very far from Eaglan Villa. Hanbray was going 
away for a day, but was to be bact again in the 
morning. " Were you going to see the Manuels ? " 
asked John Hanbury, bluntly. 

" How abrupt you are," said the other, smiling; 
" you quite affect the nerves. I called there yes- 
terday, so it would be a littk too soon, would it 
not?" 

" I have just been there," said the otiier ; "but 
am going away now, to see about the horse, but 
shall be home to-morrow." 

The first thought of Captain Fermor was, 



AViftt. 59 

. \ . 

" What on eaxth does this fellow tell me his plans 
fior? As if /care whether he goes car xetums to- 
marrow*" The second was, that possibly there 
might be a fair and open arena^ happily secured 
fmm interruption . ^this boor always hanging about 
the place^ aaid thrusting his stupd preseaafce per- 
severingly on these ladies. He thought this over 
sevWal times, put on some elegant decoration, 
wod, about five o'clock, sauntered up to E.aglan- 
tearace. 

He went in. There were in the drawing-room 
Mrs. Manuel, who " had been handsome," but was 
now ^ worn," and the younger daughter. It was 
the entry of a disguised prince into the viQager^s 
cabin. It was exactly the little stage he delighted 
in, and the audience he would have chosen. . Mrs. 
Manuel was a woman of silent and depressed 
maamers, a little shy, perhaps, with suffering of 
some sort. For him it was like a little circus in 
which his personality might go round and round. 
He thought to himself how . ^as a mere exercise for 
his faculties, now long rusted by disuse . ^he would 
show them the difference between true and trained 
refinement, and that dull common stuff they had 
had to bear with of late. He really exerted him- 



60 Never Forgotten. 



self) sitting on a low chsdr, and from that, as from 
a little pulpit, gave out his monologue. He was 
entertaining. He aired all his properties. He 
took his mind, as it were, into his hand, and showed 
it round. " This is where I differ from other men. 
The common fellows that we meet in the drawing- 
rooms, they can speak but can't talk. Now / can 
talk but I can't speak. I wish I coidd. I envy 
those creatures . ^upon my word I do. I suppose 
if I laid my mind to it I could. If I chose to talk 
upon, say horses, I suppose I could ring the changes 
on horses as well as another . pasterns, curbs, 
and the rest of the jargon. But I don't want to. 
I ride a horse out in the open air, not in the house, 
you see ! " 

Two smiles on two faces, one, though, a little 
doubtful, welcomed this sally. Just then entered, 
as she always did, with a flash, the taller Miss 
Manuel. She looked at him with a sort of hostile 
inquiry. 

It made one more for the audience, and Fermor, 
turning himself in his pulpit, went on: "Now 
there's your friend Mr. Hanbury. We know him 
so well, no better person breathing, but he has his 
line ; and what I like him for, he feels it, and don't 



I 



A Viftt. 61 

try and travel out of it. Then he talks as we have 
heard hun, about that horse of his, over and over 
again. It is very pleasant to hear it, because, you 
see, it is nature. Now you see, / can't manage 
that sort of thing. I suppose I know a horse as 
well, at least, as most men, and, perhaps, can ride 
one a great deal better than many ; but then I 
can't put it in so dramatic a way . ^I can't indeed I" 
and Captain Fermor smiled pleasantly. He felt 
he was getting more fluent every moment. The 
soft devotional eyes were fixed on him. 

Miss Manuel struck in. "I hope he will long 
keep that dramatic power, as you call it. I hope 
he will never exchange it for the false affectations 
of fashion. I don't see much good brought by 
them. I hope not . ^neverl" She spoke this a 
little excitedly. 

Captain Fermor shrugged his shoulders, and 
smiled at Violet. " You know your friend better 
than / do. I don't pretend to say how he will turn 
out. I can't lay my mind to thxt sort of study. I 
wish I had time." 

Violet gave a little low laugh. She could not 
help it. It was a titter of approbation. 

" His is a fine open manly character," said her 



J 



62 Never Forgotten. 



sister, her face beginning ta flush,: ^ that would be 
worthy of all stndy. If he does talk of one sub- 
ject, if he is proud of his horses,, it is a manly 
English taste, and the taste of English gentlemen* 
Some of the best En^sh lords ace on the turf, are 
they not ? . the most intellectual and most culti- 
rated. I can tell you it requires some courage to 
ride a steeple-chaseJ* 

She was walking up and doiwn. ia this excited 
manner, working up gradually to scmiething like 
anger. Her ^ster seemed to fed. this, for she made 
a low protest : " O, Pauline 1"' The oliier stopped 
suddenly, and said r 

^ Captain Fermor, are yom going to ride in this 
race?" 

He was smiling and twisting lib hat between his 
knees, like a globe, two lavender fingers being the 
pivots. " Why, I beHeve nol^" he said " Not but 
that I should like it. Some of our people will, ride, 
which I am vy glad of. It will give the rustics 
here a lesson.. None of them know 1h)w, not one; 
they will learn something, if they have the sense 
to profit by itJ' 

" But Captain Fennor, it seems^ is not to give 
the lesson.!' 



A nju. 63 

He coloured a littku 

"We/' she went on, " have all been brought tqp 
to adjmire these manly a^rts, eyea when there is 
ris^ and danger ; we respect tbem^ and we hope 
r champian siiall win. Don't you^ Violet ? " 

While th^ were; eapecting the answer from 
Violet, the door op^ed,. and Joha Hanbuxy entered. 
He stopped as he saw Captain Fermor. " Why J' 
said hc^ " I thought- you w^are. . " 

The other waited coldly for him to finish. " Yea ? " 
he said. 

"I mean,. I did not think you were coming 



"Yoke have just arriyed ia time," said Miss 
MamieL '' Captain Fermor ha& been turning into 
ridicule, I may say ?' 

" Prayy pray 1" he said,, with remonstrance ; " you 
do use such ugly unpleasant words." 

" Sneering at dangers he has reasons for not en- 
countering himself . at. our English horses, and our 
races, and raceKsourse, and the nafitics who are to 
ride, but don't know how." 

John Hanbury,. wh had been reflectivcj^ and 
even moody, since he entered, now coloured a little. 

*' We shall haye some o yowar friends in, shall 



64 Never Forgotten. 



we not? Well, the rustics shall try and show them 
what they can do." 

" O, as for that, you must recollect when a man 
has been a whole course of Goodwood, and the 
Derby, and Ascot, and a hundred such things, 
these local affairs must seem a Uttle poor. Of 
course every allowance must be made. But you 
know even the course." 

" Why not try it?" said honest John Hanbury, 
with something really like a sneer. " Well, never 
mind, wait for the day." 

"Yes, wait for the day," said Miss Manuel. 
" Our horse shall win, and our champion. We have 
* backed' him . ^is not that the word . ^heavily." 

The younger girl caught some of this enthu- 
siasm. " O yes I we must win." 

"I shall win," said John Hanbury, looking at 
her with a sort of pride, "or . or break my neck in 
a ditch. I shall deserve it." 

" Don't speak in that terrible way," said the two 
together. " But do tell us about the Baron ;" and 
both drew over with him towards the window, quite 
absorbed in him and the subject, and forgetful of 
other persons. 
Captain Fermor, still twisting his hat on the 



A Viftt. 65 

little low chair, looked after them bitterly. " Se- 
cond class people, after all," he said to himself. 
" Just, indeed^ what I might have expected. This 
is what invariably comes from stepping down out 
of one's position." And rising, he prepared to take 
a formal leaver " I am sorry," he said, with calm 
sarcasm (afterwards it was balm to him to think 
with what Koman dignity he had departed), "I 
am sorry to interrupt, even for a moment, your 
discussion of this interesting subject," and, with 
his voice, he, as it were, put in italics the word in- 
teresting. But on the younger girl's face there 
was a sort of gentle appeal, or beseeching protest, 
which he thought of afterwards. 

He was one of the most sensitive creatures in the 
world . ^laughably so, and he went his way chafing. 
He would give anything, he thought, for a horse in 
this race, just to show them how calmly, and even 
elegantly, a true gentleman could ride in to victory, 
in the face of all dangers. He liked to map out 
for himself Uttle schemes of polite vengeance, and 
make for himself gorgeous pictures of triumph; 
he victorious, boors beaten, shouts of joy. Then, 
this would be the retribution : when all were press- 
ing forward to salute him, to cover that family 

VOL. I. F 



66 Never iPorgotten, 



with conf usioB bjr.a cahn OTQrloiokiQg-. witlK>ut 
pique^ of course, which would he the way with 
vulgar, auitrained people. 

In that little assomblj it was natural thab the 
first topic should have been Fermor. 

'' There ! Ifeel warmth agair^" said Mias Manuel, 
walking backwards and forwards. " I am glad he 
is gone. There is something so false and heartless 
about his manner !" 

John Hanbury was silent for a moment " I 
don't think he is so naturally ; but he has trained 
himself into that odious stiffness. Still, I don't un- 
derstand him." 

" It is all thrown away on us," said Miss Manuel. 
" We are simple creatures. All his attitudes and 
cold refinements are quite wasted here." 

" What amused me," said John Hanbury, " was 
his holy horror of our poor horses. I suspect a 
steeple - chase would be too rough and coarse a 
style of amusement for him." 

But the younger girl made no criticism on the 
absent "fine" Captain Fermor. He soon passed 
out of their talk. 

They knew very little of " fine" Captain Fermor 
when they set him down as shy about horses. In 



England, the rough jousts of the hunt do not dis- 
arrange a fold in the delicate cambric which 
the exquisite wears. Dandy Guardsmen did well 
at Waterloo. Fermor, putting his foot into the 
stirrup, left all his affectations and ess-bouquets 
on the ground in a heap. In the saddle there was. 
another Fermor. But he had not been seen to hunt 
this season. He was cramped in means, and could 
not support the charge of hunting-horses. 

He thou^t it over with naany a curl of the 
lip. The prospects of overwhelming foes, friends, 
" boors" and all, by a dashing victory, was very 
pleasing to feed on. But he presently dismissed it. 
" She^^ said he to himself, " saw the true metal I" 
And again he .thought what an effect lliose large 
swimmings absorbing-like, two deep lustrous little 
lakes would produpe on the proper stage . a 
London stage . if she wei^ suitably drilled, as it 
were, and refitted, and brought oat to see under 
the care of, say Lady Mantower. " To be thrown 
away on that boor I" 



f2 



68 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SIXTH. 

THE SISTERS. 

The house in Kaglan-terrace, where the Manuek 
lived, though small, was as fresh as a rose . ^per- 
haps as a white rose ; and though it could not display 
a plaster eagle, or an ice-pail of the same material 
. as some of its companions did . ^it in some way 
seemed to be the least flaunting of the whole row. 
There was a little garden in front and another 
behind ; and the grass and the walks did not 
suggest the idea of tufts of green cotton and dry 
sand glued on to a deal board, as the other pleasure- 
grounds did. 

Their little drawing-rooms were fitted out with 
all the gaudy decorations and bits of clean showy 



. The Sifters. 69 

finery usually constructed for Houses made "to 
let." The ceiling and paper were as white as 
ceiling or paper could be got for the money, so 
that it seemed as if it would be a relief to the eye 
to look at them through smoked glasses. The 
gilding of the moulding and looking-glasses were 
of the strongest and fiercest yellow that could be 
got for the money, and the radiating fireplace, 
having holiday during the summer, flashed back 
a distorted picture of the room, like the glass over 
its head, and was also about the best polished steel 
and bars that could be got for the money. So 
with the knobs of the walnut chairs and the wal- 
nut headlands that projected from under the table- 
cloths, and the prominent portions of the rockery in 
the middle of the room (which was in reality an 
ottoman), all of which shone with little splashes of 
Kght, and were only now getting over their pri- 
meval stickiness. 

The effect of this air of stark and grim luxury 
the Manuel family had unconsciously neutralised 
by the dispersion here and there of many tasteful 
articles of their own. They broke up the stiff 
regimental ranks in which the furniture had been 
drawn up, and brought about a graceful orderly 



70 Never Rrgotten. 



** noordep;" In' a very Amt time tbe eontract 
magniffcence war happilj eirerlaid: aaxd tempered^ 
and tlse gloss mbbedi away to die dimness a 
gemteeiier Kfe. 

A large kdger faanily next: dooir^ dgfat or ninr 
strong in' ckildren; (with a fadier in a wllbe 
waistcoat with faamd? imder Bis; eoat-^ails^ seen with 
an air of piiide upon his doon^steps during the 
eyenings^ who had ingeniDnslj- turned to account 
every comer cupboard, and might reasonably 
fancy he had hired a rabbit^warreai afc so mai^ 
guineas a month), looking from their plate-^lass 
windows, began to know and take interest in the 
Manisel family^: in the mother, whom they saw at 
times wandering listlessly in the garden ; and in 
the two sisters,^ who' went forth and came in from 
their walking. The nurses and heads of various 
sizes which were always permanently m the 
window, as if a procession were expected to go by 
every moment, made no account of the small- 
featured timid mother; nor did the eold-eyedy 
rough-mannered son, who went in and out making 
the gate clatter behind him, excite their interest 
They were m^re lay figures; but as the two 



The Sifters. 71 

jesters appeasred^ mfantine cnes^ were raised^ and' 
chubby fingers' pwnttedl 

Black was' tilie dres* of all' the family. With 
iSle motJier and' soirit seemed' t3ie* stiff conven?- 
tional motirniiig, ugly aad appropriate; but with 
the sisters it became* the flowing drapcay of scarf 
and liace- shai^j which fell abon ttiiem in graceful' 
folds. The^ figure of tibie eider, and her rich 
heavy hair, which she set off with a deep scarlet 
geranium, wrong toleration^ if not admiration^ 
from a London maid who was put away in a very 
high burrow next door; but the chubby fingers 
were pointed with far more favour at the younger 
girl. 

She seemed to be almost a child like themselves, 
and whatever shadow of sorrow was in the house 
must have passed by her. They saw her tripping 
out after' her sister, always a little late; and her 
voice supplied' music for her walk, which was more 
a dance than a walk. She was shortfer than her 
fl&ter, and her fiace was small and round, andi so 
bright that it seemed to be set in her airy bonnet, 
like a boucpiet of soft-coloured flowers in its border. 
She was very young, and she seemed to have all 



72 Never Forgotten. 



the delicate bloom of tlie flower after which she 
was named. She was all softness, and tenderness, 
and love, and was made to sit the whole day in the 
warm sun of life ; rather, those about her felt that 
she should be reared carefully in a sort of social 
hothouse, as a flower they might visit and watch 
carefully. In all the cold greys and browns of 
that mansion, she was a bright patch of colour. 
The cold didactic east winds, the blasts of reproof, 
and chilling precepts, "all for her good," they 
found were to be kept carefully away from her. 
She was not to know the rough things of life, or 
she would fade, and the stalk wither and droop. 
Thus, when there was destruction and general 
break-up going on all about them, they stood close 
round her, in a circle, as it were, and affectionately 
prevented her from seeing. There was an amiable 
confederacy to this end. The brother was rough 
and soTjr ; the mother querulous, with every nerve 
in her system shattered by sorrows ; and the sister, 
impatjent and impetuous, though full of strong 
affections . ^which were not workable elements on 
the whole. Yet the family fused them all together 
for her sake, smiled for her sake, talked lightly 
with aching hearts for her sake, and concealed all 



The Sifters. 73 

their scars and writhings for her sake. She was 
so pretty, so trusting, so full of little endearing 
ways, that dark rooms became lit up with a flash 
when she entered, and foreheads overcast with 
black clouds cleared suddenly. 

And yet she was not one of the flighty grown-up 
children who at twenty still find life a toy-shop. 
She was what is called "steady," and took her 
share in the family duties. 

The father in his white waistcoat, from his 
door-step, thought the elder sister "a finer wo- 
man," but the current of infantine public opinion 
ran in favour of the younger girl. Stray skir- 
mishers of the family, out under the command of 
the London nurse, had met her, and had been 
spoken to ; and on one day news was passed for- 
ward from burrow to burrow of the warren, that 
she had put back her tiny parasol, stooped over, 
and bent her bright face close to that of the then 
infants of the family. There were two uncouth 
boys, whose habitual occupation seemed tfi be 
hanging their heavy heads, and dealing with their 
fingers as if they were sticks of barley-sugar, but 
whose faces began to rage and glow awfully when- 
ever her name was mentioned, as though a blister 



74 Never FtfrgotHm. 



had been n&nkf takeni off their dieeks. She was 
seen when gomg out, turning; bade at the goto to 
wave salntationB ta ther mndows^ of the drawings 
room with, hor tinip paxaBol^ and the bright^ round 
face breaking from itsr goraamer bonnet aBfrom' $l 
shell, flaahecL back pretly signals^ of acknowledg- 
ment And Ifce pretty' picture presently direw 
swarms to ths: windows next cbor, and stolid faces^ 
mostly busy with human sogar^eft, Bhed the 
plate^ass as in an ampiulheatre. The respective 
maids, who> had escrly mterchanged cards,: talked 
the. matter over^ and through these c&annels' 
authentic information: trickled Iflirough the fa^ 
mily, as it were down the stones of a weir, and' 
which was a fa^rourable testimonaal' to^ Miss- 
Violetfs merits; "She was- like Sr child in the 
'use," said the Manuels' Lady Ito' her friend. 
^' And we ail look* ons her as a child^ The mother 
would mope herself away into her grave, only for 
'er." Mr; Louis; was'  rough, untjivil kind of 
gentleman, " with* no manneri^" but Miss Violet 
someway "kep" him in ordier. It was added 
that this youth, though only twenty, had the 
" 'ed" of a man of' fifty.. As for Miss Manuel) 
she was a fine statdy creatore to look at, "for ail' 



The Sijiers. 75 

the world Hke a married woman'*. aff if that was 
the final type of fineness and stateEnesff. and was, 
in addrtioi^ Eke one of the famous' immarried- 
^^picturs at 'Ampton Court,?* 

The details of thesr inner Hf^ tlodogh gveedily 
inqirired after^ were of coiirae not' ao full and 
satisfactory. Thus they would have been j^ad. \3&. 
Imye had  sketcl^ of the little nigbthpieee in the 
drawing-room of Number Tharee after Fermoaj^ij; 
TiEat. The moBtard-coIoiired Uindff had been 
pulled down, plate-glass was happily out of sight,, 
and their lamp had been lighted. Mrs. Manuel 
was busy with some needlework, which^ as repro- 
ductive labour, am^ tested on principles of political 
economy, could not hold its own in the market,, 
but which, ts^en as a source of entertainment and 
of occupation for the mind, brouj^t back large 
returns. The brother, a youth who had been fitted 
out with no professiony had shown a repugnance 
to entering Ae underground wine-vaults where 
\m father had spent so much of his lif ej as it were 
down in a mine. He had no titular occupation, 
and went about "mooning;" protested often^ 
against his haard fate in not having been put early 
to a profession, and at times was subject to- curious'^ 



rO Never Forgotten. 



fits of gloom, as thougli he had been deeply injured 
by his family. On this night he was at the table, 
busy with a pencil, absently sketching odd gro- 
tesque heads, and ladies with veils and dogs . ^an 
occupation with which he very often soothed his 
feelings, injured at not being " fitted with a pro- 
fession." 

Miss Manuel had been at her piano, and her 
sister, in gayer spirits even than usual, had been 
getting up, and sitting down, and going out of the 
room to fetch something, until the constant rustle 
of her silk dress made the youth who was sketch- 
ing impatient. 

" Do, Violet, sit down, or stand up ; fix on one 
thing or the other,'* he said. 

The sister looked after her affectionately. " We 
must excuse her," she said. " I know what is in 
her head, and what she is thinking of." 

Her mother, whose fingers were busily crossing 
a pair of steel weapons in carte and tierce, as 
though they were rapiers, looked over at her too. 
" When the two gentlemen were here to-day," she 
said, " I saw it too." 

The young girl, who had been still getting up 
to search for many things, and falling uncon- 



the Sifters. 77 

sciously into innumerable graceful attitudes, stopped 
short, and looking away from them shylj'^, and with 
colour rising on her cheeks like a tide, said, by way 
of protest, "Such nonsense! I am sure I don't 
know what you all mean." 

" All ! " said her sister, greatly pleased, " I saw 
to-day what an impression you had made on him. 
His distress was almost amusing. He never took 
his eye off the other. He was in a most uncom- 
fortable state all the time." 

" Now, Pauline, such nonsense 1" said the young 
girl, still in protest. "I am sure I don't mind him 
in the least." 

The brother suddenly dropped his pencil, jimiped 
up, aifd caught her by the wrists. " Do you be- 
lieve thatV^ he said to the audience, and turning 
her round to the lamp. "Is that like blush- 
ingi" 

He was the detective of the family, and in truth 
the tide was surging up violently in her round 
cheeks. 

She shook herself free, with a pretty little pet- 
tishness. "When you are all looking at me so," 
she said, " it is very hard for one not to get red. 
He scarcely spoke a word to me." 



78 Never Forgatten. 



'' I iirifih he did talk a little morc^" said her 
brother, 

'' Excefpt iidien he gets upon hoEses," said her 
siflter^ '^^ and then he is fluent enough." 

" No, indeed," said Violet, in a low voice. "I 
think he haies the subject; for he said to me, that 

to be ridiog a hfiffse round a drawing-nroom ^" 

'' That was C/aptain Fermor," said the detective, 
quietly, so as not to scare her from making the ad- 
mission. " I heard him." 
'' Yes," ahe^aid. 

There was an awful pause for a few seconds. 
The elder sister bent down her head in deqp dis- 
tress. " We have been speaking of Hanbury," he 
said. " Pray who were you thinking of?" (An- 
other pause.) " Upon my word, we do make dis- 
coveries." 

In the other faces there was something like pain 
and consternation. The eldest sister^s foot beat 
impatiently on the ground. The brother sketched 
with fierce strokes, and put in vindictive shading. 
The young girl stood there at the bar, guilty and 
penitent, her face glowing like one of Mr. Tumer^s 
sunsets. 



The Sifti^ng. ' 79 

." So this :is what is going on," ^aid Ahe brother. 
^^ This 08 what mob aee blushing fior*" 

But her .asstei;, who saw that she was in Teal 
trouble and sadly humiliated, hurried up to assist. 
" ,Stop, Loiii^'" she said. " We are always ieasing 
her, and I saw ithat you laid it trap for poor 
Violet." 

The brother shook his head. ^ She would not 
have fallen into it, if she had not- . '' 

A hasty rudtle interrupted this sentence. Violet 
had fled i^ Jher room. The whole was of ridicur 
lousLy smaU momfint:; but, somekow, it left a blank 
feeling among them^ for they were all bound to 
Hanbury, and were his sworn. and most affectionate 
allies. Thej were disappointed, and with a gro- 
tesque misture of feeliag, were half inclined to 
la(gh and half ioaclined to despond. W!hile she 
was away, they talked Captain Fecmor over 
angrily. 

" The very look of him," said Louis^ " is enough. 
I never felt bo inclined to quamel with any man. 
As he passes in the street be ahnost sneeiB at you. 
The other day I could have turned back and 
struck him." 



80 Never Forgotten. 



" I am afraid," said Pauline, hesitatingly, " he 
has cast his conceited eye upon Violet. He is so 
vain and empty, and so idle in this place." 

" He had better not bring his idleness here," 
said her brother. " I suppose he would like nothing 
better than amusing himself in this house. If he 
comes here again, Pll insult him." 

"Nonsense, Louis. You must not be violent. 
That sort of thing does not do in this age. No ; 
the acquaintance is scarcely even begun, so we 
can drop it quietly, and without any fuss." 

At tea-time Violet was obliged to come down 
and present herself, which she did with a pretty 
confusion, and a wish to hide her head in the 
ground . ^under the gay contract carpet, if that 
were possible . ^just as a foolish and pursued ostrich 
would do. An act of indemnity, however, had 
been passed. Later, however. Captain Fermor 
was skilfully introduced, without causing alarm, 
and depreciated with all the powers of his com- 
bined enemies. He was ridiculed and jeered at, 
sacrificed in a hundred different ways. His say- 
ings of the day were collected and set in a comic 
light. They were thinking how well contempt 



ne &/iers. 81 

can kill, and went to bed that night convinced 
that they had happily succeeded in making him 
appear utterly contemptible in Miss Violet's eyes. 
Most probably they had; for she was seen to 
laugh very often, especially when her brother sent 
round a very broad caricature of the wretched 
Fermor, very cleverly drawn. 



VOL. I. 



82 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH. 

THE NIGHT BEFOBE THE STEEPLE-CHASE. 

The National Eastport Race was fixed for a 
certain Tuesday. Inland, some five miles away, 
there was a broad tract of rather shaggy country, 
ragged as a well-worn hair trunk, and broken up 
in swellings here and there, known, in short, to 
agricultural men as hopelessly "bad 'Mand. But 
it did famously for a rough race-course. 

Some of the military gentlemen, with a very 
skilful person, named "J. Madden, Esq.," who 
always seemed to be generated specially a couple 
of days before every race . ^an amphibious species, 
almost wholly professional and yet accepted as 
gentlemanly . ^had been over the ground and laid 



"The Night before the Steepk-chafe. 83 

it out pleasantly,, with a judicion^'eyefor difficulties 
and well-selected dangers. A hundred yards from 
the startingf^detoe^, there was a fine opening in the 
shape of: a low fence^ and ^ good, fkll or "drop" 
behind it:; faxtheD on^ l^ere- was a; quiet biod^ 
which had ofiben hem: fished for teaxxtj but which 
Ihe sdentQTc eye- of: " J\. Madden,; ^^^'y saw had 
wonderful capabilities, and,, by a liisde di^^rgenoe^ 
eould be included in the. course.. It wa& sO' timid 
and narrow that iit offemd only poot opportunity 
for accident;. but it was arranged! that half a 
doKon. labouras should be set to work ta mden it 
into a- handsome ands dangerous jjunp^. Then the 
ground unhappily became smooth for a run. of nearly 
three-quarters of a) mile ; but the well-trained eye 
of "J. Madden^ JE^qv,'' marked. down asuitable spot 
for an artificial jump ; and finally, after three 
miles and a half of sound labour^ by a chance that 
seemed almost ^ providential^ a hard and. satise 
factory stones wall preswited. itselfy which looked 
as if it had been fashioned of cold iron blocks and 
fragments. It was consideised that this.- fatai ob- 
stacle cotdd not have been found at a more oppor.- 
tune place^.as making a sort of handsome finish to 
the whole^.and.bdiig sure^ as; ^^ J. Madden, Esq.,? 
q2 



84 Never Forgotten. 



put it, to "thin off" a good many of those who had 
successfully got round so far. 

The day before, the usual unclean miscellany 
poured in. The field began to spread such a 
cloud of dirty dun-coloured sails that it seemed 
as if a fleet of shabby fishing-boats had some- 
how got in there and put out to sea. The gipsies, 
the players, the menagerie keepers, the roulette 
gentry, all camped there for the night. The 
right of putting up a " stand " had, on the advice 
of "J. Madden, Esq.," been farmed out to a 
speculator, and some of the speculator's men were 
busy hanunering together some terribly raw and 
rude planks, which might have been an enlarged 
flower-stand, .or a gigantic gallows for carrying 
out the extreme penalty of the law. So open was 
it, and so put together with such an economy of 
the material, that it did seem to present nothing 
but a succession of " drops." On the night before, 
a miscellany of another order had poured into the 
little town, and filled and distended it to bursting. 
Betting men came from distant quarters, who 
contrived to make even poor affairs such as this 
bring profit; for money can be won and lost on 
such " events," as drops of rain running down a 



The Night before the Steeple-^hafe. 85 

pane of glass. The betting men were so shaven, 
so collarless, so tight about the limbs, so partial to 
imitating a pipe with a single straw, and so gene- 
rally flavoured with the noble animal who was 
their profession, that it was hard to distinguish 
them from other professors of the noble animal on 
the green, who came with a tent or a "Monster 
Pavilion," and whose evening existence was 
ushered in by a gold fillet and web fleshings. A 
kind of inn, or " public," with rooms as low as the 
cabin of a ship, received temporary rank as an 
hotel, and charged a guinea for a comer of a room 
whose walls were sadly bent. It became like an 
hospital on a campaign. 

The evening before, too, all the horses came, 
who seemed to be regarded with far more inte- 
rest than the men who owned them, or the mis- 
cellany who were to bet on them, or the persons 
who were to ride them. As a train of them 
walked in procession through the place late at 
night, after the lamps had been lit, all closely 
swathed in their robes, and hooded and veiled, 
they seemed like brethren of a pious society 
who were about to inter a brother of their 
order. They were "coddled" almost like -deli- 



86 Never Forgotten. 



cate children that had mamnias to wrap them 
up against the night air. They had greaves 
on, like a Koman soldier, and some who had 
red edging to their clothing seemed to look 
out through red rings round their eyes, like 
clowns in a pantomime. Their symmetry and 
nmooth clean limbs were not then to be admired, 
for they were in great-coats like prize-fighters 
before the battle. But it was known that the 
square tall horse, that was a hand higher than the 
others, and stepped in a rude sturdy way, was 
indeed "King Brian," the famous Irish horse, who 
had raced here and raced there, had beaten at 
Chester and Liverpool, and was to beat at other 
great Games. Small was his owner, and was to be 
.tis rider, and Small was to arrive that night . 
but very Jate. No one cared particularly, . since 
" Small's horse " itself was present. Mr.Hanbur/s 
horse, " The Baron," had only a local reputation, so 
that the shaven well-pumiced gentlemen who came 
from a distance did not make much account of 
him. He was, however, visited in a mysterious 
stable by mysterious admirers, for whom it was 
hoped he would win moneys, and who felt him, and 
stood in a half-circle about him. Mr. Hanbury 



The Night before the Steeple^hafe. 87 

was to lide The Baion in person. The precaaidons 
Wihich are taken mi ^greater occasions were carried 
out m 2i;nmmc way on the present occasion, and a 
gcoom waited on him in his stable all night, who 
was popularly supposed never to have closed Ms 



Still there was a strange belief abroad that Eling 
Brian would not mn after all. It was whispered, 
though no one iaaew who had whisrpered it, that 
Small, to whom " Small's horse " belonged, would 
not appear himself, which was a matter of small 
momenta bnaitit was currently believed that " Small's 
horse " objected to any other rider, which was a 
matter of far more significance. 

" J. Madden, Esq.," dined with the military gen- 
tlemen that night, and prepared jsl good deal of 
punch. The admirmg crowd listened with delight 
to his rambling periods, which flowed from his 
moaith lubricated as it were with oil. Over the 
fumes of his favourite liquor his face grew into a 
rich lake coloiu^ His legends of his craft were 
abimdant. Craftily and confideiitially ladling out 
his punch mto a wine-glass, he ^^put them up to a 
Shing ar twou" He mantled iuto a profuse and 
boundless good nature. 



88 Never Forgotten. 



Hanbury and Captain Fermor were both there, 
listening. Hanbury was delighted with this genial 
flow of counsel. The other thought him one of 
those " dreadful persons " so free of manners, 
whom it was a terrible trial for refined people to 
encounter. From sheer ignorance, such break 
down all the elegant guards, the carte and tierce, 
of conversational fencers. Mr. Madden, still fluent 
in speech, his punch, his lubricating oil, his lake- 
coloured smiles, which spread away in great coarse 
waves over his face, was not unmindful of his 
politics. At intervals between his ladling he was 
busy with his book. The children about, noisily 
made bets with him. "He'll be scratched. Tm 
fearful of it," he kept saying, with moaning. "/ 
know Joe Small. He's been at his old tricks 
again." (The old tricks were tricks that led to 
the affliction called delirium tremens.) " If if s 
thaty^ said Mr. Madden, lifting his wine-glass 
half way in the air, " there's as much chance 

as ^^ And he engulphed the remainder of 

the sentence with the liquor. But still, with all 
these doubts and misgivings, "J. Madden, Esq.," 
good naturedly "took" any offers that were laid 



The Night before the Steeple-chafe. 89 

against " Small's horse," just, as he said, to keep 
the thing going. 

Just at midnight a despatch was brought in 
and given to "J. Madden, Esq." He read it. 
"By Jove!" he said, striking the table, "was 

there ever anything What did I tell ye ? 'Tis 

from Cox," added he, looking at the envelope in a 
ruminative way. " Cox is Small's friend." 

" Well? " said all the boys and men together. 

"Weill He can't come. The old tricks, as 
I said. But Cox says, ^ We must put some one 
on his back;' and, by the Lord, some one must be 
got," added Mr. Madden, rising in some excite- 
ment. " I tell ye, we must get some one." 

"Ah! but that's just it!" said white-haired 
Young Brett. " Such a wild brute as that I" 

"Not he," said J. Madden, Esq. "There's a 
way with him. I know it, and his groom knows 
it. But is there a fellow among ye ! By Jove ! 
we must have some one. The horse must start. 
I tell ye he must." 

Hanbury had been drinking some of the pimch 
. ^from curiosity . ^in a sort of pottering fiddling 
way. He was a little excited . ^with talking, and 



90 Never Forgistten. 



talking loud above the others, and with, perhaps, a 
very little of the punch. Some days before, Fermar 
had said to himself (he only drank claret), ^^I 
nciust keep this fellow at a distance," and had taken 
out a new manner from his bag of properties and 
had fitted it on . one cold and formal, but poUte 
to a nicety. This, honest John Hanbury jKsented 
and fretted against. 

" We are all of us booked," he said, " for some- 
thing or other. We are all in to break our necks 
except ^^ 

" Except Fermor there," said Thersites. ^^ Hang 
it, man, why don't you side with somebody or 
with something? You never seem to me to do 
anything ! Why don't you take a side ?" 

" For many reasons," said Fermoc, sipping 
claret, ^^too long to enter on here. I have no 
horse to ride, nor do I want to ride one." 

White-haired Young &ett laughed, a little 
foolislily. He, too, had relished that punch. 
" Hurt your leg, eh, Fermor ? Ha 1 .haJ" 

John Hanbury, who had a laugh always as it 
were on a hair-^tn^er, could not jotestrain another 
burst. Fermoi^s Up began to curl. J. MaddeUf 



Ihe Night, before ^he Steeple^hafe. 91 

Esq^ struck in suddenly. ^^^Beg pa3rdQ%" .he said. 
^^I know what's in a man or a.hcffse* No case of 
sore leg." Then, with great respect, "Seen you, 
Captain Fermoi;, I am fiure, out with the .Qrawther 
hounds."; 

" Yes 1" said Fermor, a little astanished. 

" Becolleot the day Lord Tiptree broke Jus leg ? 
You and three others in at the finish. How many 
miles was it . ^twenty -two I" 

"Twenty-four," said Fermor, suddenly lifted 
out of his ice-pail. "How well you recollect! 
It wasn't the dintance though, hat the heavy 
country. Horse died of it after." 

" Ah!" said the other, "no case of hurt legs 
there. By the Lord, sir, you are the man for 
Small's horse ! I know your style as if I saw it 
yesterday. I saw you take the ditch and lie heap 
of stones. Yours is the hand for him, sir. You'll 
sit him, sir, by ^" 

Mr. Madden had risen in his enthusiasm, and 
ven pushed his tumbler into the .middle of the 
'table. The children's iaoes were -all .turned to 
IFermor. He sat with a calm rhut gratified smile, 
caught at the daret jug, and, with a gush, filled 



92 Never Forgotten. 



his glass leisurely. "I am very sorry," he said. 
" It is very tempting, but I can't. The time is so 
short . and ^" 

" Not a bit," said J. Madden, Esq. 

" Pray allow me to finish," said Fermor, with 
great politeness ; " and there are little matters 
about weight, dress, and the like. I am afraid it's 
wholly out of the question ^" 

John Hanbury laughed. 

'' I was afraid so all along," said Captain Ther- 
sites, insolently. 

" But," said Fermor, slowly, and measuring 
him curiously, as though he were a preserved 
specimen in a jar, pushing back his chair and 
rising, "under the circumstances . ^and to prevent 
a disappointment . ^I should not be inclined to 
make diflBiculties." 

" What? Ye mean you'll ride?" said J. Mad- 
den, Esq., with something like a shout. 

" I suppose so. -I think so. well, yes," said Fer- 
mor, deliberately. It was quite an opening for 
true unflushed gentlemanly bearing. " Come to 
me at six to-morrow morning. We'll go out and 
look at the ground. I don't promise, because there 
may be difficulties. I have a jacket of my own 



The Night before the Steeple-chafe'. 93 

somewhere . ^I always ride in mauve. Mind^ six. 
Good night, Mr. Hanbnry." 

Thersites looked after him with amazement. 

 He'll do," said Mr. Madden, in delight. "By 
the Lord ! he'll do. better than Small, I can tell 
you. Was there ever such luck !" 

Honest John Hanbury, however, kept looking 
steadfastly at the door by which Fermor had passed 
out, as if he could not quite understand. Perhaps 
it had begun to strike him that this was to be 
something more than a mere race between two 
strong horses. 



94 Never Forgotten.. 



CIMPPBR THS aiGffiLlIH; 

THE RAGE. 

It was a bright and fresh day, and the sun co- 
loured up the acres of faded haur trunks that spread 
over the race-ground, with such good effect that it 
really presented all the air of respectable and legi- 
timate verdure. The crowd had poured out over 
those mangy downs; the whole fleet of sepia-co- 
loured sails had spread itself on the horizon. The 
business and bustle were surprising. Some one had 
been sowing racing dragons' teeth, and they had 
come up a soiled, tarnished, noisy, glib miscellany 
.one that was at work ceaselessly with arms and 
hands, and a very hoarse voice, making ceaseless 
invitation. A miscellany that declaimed noisily 



The Race. ' 95 

over carts of stone ^gep-becE botdes, that cowered 
down over a tiire&-le^ed stool^ and conjured wiiii 
a mysteions bridle and'  skewer, that presided 
over pieces' of coarse ofl-cloth danbed with very 
raw colours and a very yellow Ebyal Crown, and' a 
VKTjr rusted weathei^eock that moved- round lan- 
guidly. A miscellany that did a vast business in 
nuts' at nttle shooting-targets, whose- range was 
enly three feet long ; a mracellany^ in short, who 
donced'and contorted in dirty fleshingS) who picked 
pockets, wha soM cardi^ lit cigars^ sang moumf td 
comic songs, wore decayed old scarlet huntii^ 
coats, and swarmed generalTy, in and out, in irre- 
gular streams, through the cars and carriages. 

mie krge nurseryman's flowernstand was black 
with human ftoweivpots. B^low the flower-stand 
was the enclosui^, where every one was- as busy? as 
in a market . ^whare. there was a sort of enlaiged 
nd>bit-hutch, and; where there was something Aat 
looked like a mammoth slate hoisted at the top of 
a pole. The human flowernpots, growing' animated 
at times, came down here to market, and wore little 
ydSow tickets in their hats, and pushed backwards 
and forwards, and talked' hoarsely and loudly, and 
all together, to stray men upon horseback, who 



96 ' Never Forgotten. 



carried their himting-wliips on their knees at an 
acute angle, much as the bronze mounted Louises 
do their truncheons. Beyond this was a plantation 
of carriages, carts, and cabs, all horseless, and put 
closely together like a gigantic barricade; and 
here, in a little chartered phaeton, were the Manuel 
family, broken from their privacy, amused, de- 
lighted, and wondering exceedingly. That is, the 
two girls merely. But Mrs. Manuel had sat in a 
vast stone amphitheatre, and had seen the wild 
plungings of the bull, and the gored horses, and 
the sand steeped in clotted blood, and stayed at 
home. Tliis gentler spectacle seemed a little tame 
after that. 

With them was a new figure, about whom neigh- 
bouring carts and carriages began to speculate; 
but who was soon known to be a brother, a swarthy 
meditative brother, very youngs and with rich black 
hair, so glossy that it looked as if it had been 
steeped in unguents. He was only twenty, but 
looked about him with a grave air of wisdom. In 
that little phaeton, however, reigned a certain 
flutter. There was to be battle and danger, which 
is the true basis of excitement, and a likely 
victory. 



The Race. 97 

Some small skirmishing had been got through 
. ^worthless contests between say two inglorious 
steeds, mere foils for the greater struggle fixed for 
one o'clock. Hanbury had come up to them, his 
face all one great flush. " Only an hour off," he 
said. " You never saw anything like The Baron 
this morning . as bright and glossy as silk . ^you 
could see yourself in his coat. He will do, I 
think," he added. " I have not seen King Brian. 
But I am not afraid of him." 

The sun flashed upon the face of the eldest Miss 
Manuel. "And that discreet Captain Fermor ! I 
hope he is here to see you win." 

" O !" said Hanbury, ever so little embarrassed, 
" I didn't tell you, though . ^you haven't heard . 
he is to ride King Brian." 

"To ride King Brian!" said the two girls to- 
gether, but in quite different keys. 

"Why not?" said Hanbury, doubtfully. "And 
yet I am sure I don't quite understand it. And 
he will do it well . at least, I suppose so," he 
added. 

"But you told us," said Violet, fluttering, "I 
think, that . ^that no one but his master could ride 
him." 

VOL. I. H 



98 Never Forgotten. 



" Exactly," said he. " And they say it is great 
pluck to try it. But it now turns out that he is a 
great horseman, or something of the kind. I am 
sure I don't understand it." 

A harsh and conspicuous bell, which had been 
bom in the night, and rang every five minutes in 
a drunken disorderly way, now began again. " I 
must go," said Hanbmy. " Saddling bell." K so, 
it had been about the twentieth saddling bell. 

" Vanity," said Miss Manuel^ excitedly, and look- 
ing at her sister. " More of that vanity ! He is 
one mass of it. This is all, I suppose, to show us 
what an accomplished creature he is " 

The younger girl cast down her eyes. " I am 
afraid," she said, " it will be a dreadful thing to 
see. Do you think there will be danger ?" 

" And poor Hanbury," said her sister, reproach- 
fully. " You let him go without a word of comfort 
or encouragement. I saw him looking at you so. 
I should have given him one of those red gera- 
niums, as they do \tl Spain. It would have com- 
forted his heart and given him courage. He will 
want every stimulant for what he has to go through. 
See, he is looking this way. We must call him 
back. Ah I" 



The Race. 99 

It was Fennor passing them quite close . in a 
great-coat like a dressing-gown. calm, tranquil, 
as if going to a ball. He bowed to them in* a sort 
of knightly fashion. Miss Manuel stamped on the 
bottom of the carriage with impatience. " He is 
coming to practise his skill on us/' she thought. 
But, strange to say, with his pleasant smile he 
passed on. 

Hanbury, a few yards away, had stopped doubt- 
ingly when he saw Fennor approaching; for he 
had all the wonderfully long sight of ardent and 
sensitive love. But when Fermor passed by so 
indifferently, and did not go near his treasure, his 
rude broad honest, heart was struck. He thought 
of the other^s calm courage, and skill, and training 
in society, and of his own natural bluntness, which 
had really reached to surliness ; and one of his most 
genial smiles was spreading over his face. He 
was ashamed of his little petty jealousy. He was 
actually getting his hand ready to stretch out, 
when he saw Fermor turn back, and go up to the 
carriage. He saw the younger girl detaching a 
flower from others which she had in her hand; 
but she held also a large black fan. Some, there- 
fore, had dropped on the seat. Hanbury, colour- 
h2 



100 Never Forgotten. 



ing and watching with fierce wariness, just saw 
Captain Fermor making a sweet speech, and put- 
ting a red flower in his button-hole. In reahty 
he had helped himself, and was saying, "I must 
carry off one of these. Just going to ask you. 
Pray for the mauve jacket I" And so he retreated, 
smiling. 

That was, however, the genuine saddling bell. 
For presently, out of some secret confine, bright 
gay-coloured figures, on horses as bright, began 
to defile among the human flower-pots in the en- 
closure. New modem centaurs, so light, so airy, 
and striped over with streaks of yellows, and 
pinks, and all the gay colours, and seeming ac- 
tually varnished like the toy figures in Noah's 
arks. Presently the flower-stand began to fill again, 
and to grow black, and to rustle and flutter, and 
the miscellany inside the paling, with the white 
tickets in their hats, to crowd round each gaudy 
centaur with admiration. There was a buzz and 
a hum as John Hanbury, in pale blue silk, came 
along on his great horse. Such a mammoth steed, 
mahogany coloured, high, square, with a chest like 
a Torso, with a fierce eye, and his mouth strapped 
down to his waist. But so bright, and oiled, and 



The Race. 101 

curled, he looked as if he had stepped out of a 
boudoir. As he passed, his wake was marked by a 
glitter of little white note-books, and a fresh flutter 
of leaves. Approving eyes settled on him. When 
he got upon the open ground he swooped away 
into a full bold stride, as even as a pendulum. 
Men with broad brims awry over their brows worked 
away knowingly with pencils. 

There was a little procession of the others . 
some small, some large, some long, some shy, and 
some wild; and each with a gay parti-coloured 
puppet on his back. Presently there was another 
hum. " Small's horse I" 

A delicate Persian silk mauve jacket, grateful to 
the eye, and Fermor looking as light and small as 
a boy. His horse was an iron grey, close knit, 
with a heavy secret strength in his quarters, but a 
quiet unobtrusive beast, as if walking out to water. 
There was great admiration among the sloped hats 
at this evidence of secret power. The simlight 
glinted down, and brought out the rich tint of the 
rider^s dress : the Manuels caught it some hundred 
yards away, and the second whispered to her sister, 
with something like a shy whisper of delight, 
" Look, look, Pauline I There is Captain Fermor." 



102 Never Forgotten. 



" How calmly he takes it," said the other sister, 
scornfully. " All assumed. All acting !" 

Mr. Madden, with a flag in his hand, was beside 
Fermor. " Steady is the word," he whispered. " Ke- 
coUect, he will run away with you at the last mile. 
but let him. Then gather him up quietly . qui-etly. 
He is in beautiful order." 

Bell again! and start in some undiscovered 
comer. All the figures on the great flower-pot-stand 
were swaying uneasily . steward in red coat cracking 
his whip excitedly to clear away last few stragglers. 
A roar and half-leap among the flower-pots. Thir- 
teen little wooden figures out of a Noah's ark, a 
mile away, have been seen to shoot out, and are 
spreading like a fan. 

There is a gentle rustle and agitation on the 
black flower-pot- stand, and every second hand 
holds a glass . ^but a thousand faces are all tiuned 
one way. A few Lilliputian horses may be seen 
far off, travelling very slow, and straggling, and have 
gone over a very tiny jump, as might be over a bit 
of card. But now the flower-pot-stand begins to 
be agitated : there is a crescendo hum swelling up 
into a roar, as from a thousand shells held to a thou- 
sand ears. Flower-pot-stand is giving spasmodic 



\ 



The Race. 103 

shouts, hoarsely. " Blue, by ! " " No ! . red 

. blue . ^red . ^yellow . ^blue again ! . by he's 

down ! . no, up . they're all over!" 

They were, in fact, at the stone wall . ^what Mr. 
Madden had called the " beautiful stone wall" . 
and were growing into sight, coming on nearer, 
magnifying steadily. Great agitation and flutter 
in the phaetons, for they knew not what was doing. 
But here was the stone wall. Up, down ! up, 
down ! one after the other I Blue leading, coming 
into sight with a flash, and going over soft as velvet. 
Then a flash of red, then of yellow, then a roar of 
dismay from the stand, for two are down together. 
Boar ! reverberation of shells growing louder, arms 
tossing, and a soimd of hollow thudding on the 
ground, as if giants were having their carpets 
beaten. Every head turning with a flash, making 
an inclined plane of faces, every neck straining, 
every foot stamping, every hand clapping, and 
the train came thundering by, blue leading, then 
a streaked yellow . ^black, and then that mauve 
jacket, fifth or sixth, at a calm gallop, his stretches 
keeping time musically. This was but the first 
time round, and they have swooped away round the 
comer, and are gone. 



J 



104 Never Forgotten. 



They come round agam. They grow out gradually 
from Noah's ark horses in the distance, but have 
been thinned down to some seven or eight. A rider- 
less horse, very wild, and with his own stirrups 
scourging his flanks, is going on with the rest. 
Blue comes to the fence, and is seen to look behind. 
Pink over the first. He has it. No. Yes. Blue 
next. "That's the man 1" Then Mauve. "Yes," 
Mr. Madden shouts; "now let him go!" But he 
lias gone. They are coming with a rush, and 
Mauve, calm as in a drawing-room, has glided 
ahead. The great gaunt horse is seen to be in 
distress, and Blue is using his whip. Flower-stand 
is one disordered roar of " Blue wins ! Mauve has 
it . ^no . ^yes . ^no . ^yes!" And here is now the 
terrible wall at which they are rushing, as if they 
wanted to crash through it. 

There are wise people who affect to know the 
great horse. He is waiting, and will go at a rush 
on the smooth ground. Here is the w^all. Now I 
Crash ! As they rise in the air, there is a dust of 
fallen stones ; and Blue, darting out of the cloud 
like thunder, comes poimding in, the ground 
shaking, arms working " lifting" his horse. 



The Race. 105 

Pink second, half a dozen lengths behind ; and 
Mauve 

Where was Mauve? Shouts of joy, victory, 
execrations, confusion, and a great rush down to 
the fatal wall. A mob was already gathered there 
before this one reached the wall. " Stand back !" 
Some who pushed well to the front got a good 
view, and helped to drag a shattered rider from 
under a shattered horse. " Killed . ^he must be 
killed!" No one can speak as to this for a few 
moments, imtil a surgeon, who is hurrying up, 
shall pronounce. Then we see what has been done. 
" Small's horse" is lying helpless on his side, with 
his great round eye glazing fast, and his poor 
smashed flanks heaving faintly. But Mauve, his 
bright jacket torn, and soiled, and smeared, lies 
stiff and stark on a bank as if he were dead. 

The doctor is presently feeling him all over. He 
must be bled at once. Other doctors, looking 
after the horse, pronounce it is all over with Aiw, 
and that he must be shot on the spot. 

Others not so near, talked of it excitedly, 
straining their necks to get a view. " I took my 
place here on purpose. I saw it, by Jove ! He 



106 Never Forgotten. 



rode over on him, as sure ajs I am standing here. 
I was as close as I am to you." Excited men from 
the top shelf of the flower-stand, with extra strong 
glasses, and opera-glass cases slung about them 
like canteens, came panting up. ^^ He ^ cannoned' 
him, didn't he ? Fm sure he did ! Who was close 
. ^who saw? He was winning. Til swear !" But 
no one was so frantic as Mr. Madden. For the 
better enjoyment of what he had an instinct would 
take place at this stage, he had posted himself 
close to the stone wall, but in secure shelter. He 
was tossing his arms wildly. "I saw it all; the 
^ King' was coming beautifully to it." He was 
furious and savage, and threatened frightful penal- 
ties. 

From the Manuel carriage had been seen an in- 
distinct ruin of men and horses crumbling down 
together. The second girl had the opera-glass, the 
others were all excited and in a flurry with Han- 
bury's victory. ^' I knew he would win," said Miss 
Manuel ; "did I not tell you?" But she noticed 
the frightened restless way her sister was looking 
towards the stone wall. 

" Pauline, some one is hurt. I am sure of it. 
Do you see the crowd ? I am afraid that some one 



I 



ne jsjace* 



is killed. O! Louis! Louis! run and see what 
has happened*" 

Pauline turned suddenly aiid looked at her 
sharply ; the other dropped her eyes. 

The brother went away to fetch news. Just as 
he got up, a doctor was saying something about 
concussion, and giving directions for removal, with 
quiet, &c. " Stand back !" he had to say every in- 
stant ; and a thoughtful crowd, pressing on him 
all the time, called out to others, " Stand back !" 

The brother came back, but Mr. Hanbury did ' 
not. " Well?" the two sisters said together. 

" He is hurt," said he, " and very seriously, I 
thmk." 

Even the eldest Miss Manuel showed some 
eagerness, some agitation. 

" Hurt ? No, it can't be. Go on. Tell us 
about it," she said. 

But the second girl, a little flushed, was gatheiv 
ing up her black lace shawl about her in a restless 
fashion. 

" He is quite insensible," 4ie went on, " and no 
one seems to be able to say whether he is alive or 
dead. I didn't see a doctor there, and they don't 
appear to know what to do." 



108 Never Forgotten. 



The younger girl had her hands clasped, and 
gave a cry. " O ! let us go," she said. "Don't let 
us leave him to those rough people." 

" Go ! No I no ! What could we do I" said 
her sister, irresolutely. She was thinking how 
cold, how unjust she had been to this poor steeple- 
chaser. 

" Don't let us lose time," said the other, opening 
the door herself and springing out. " He has no 
friends here . we might lend this carriage . we 
might be useful. O come, cornel" and, with a 
flush on her cheek, and a decision in her speech 
quite imusual, she took hold of her brother^s arm, 
and they walked towards the group. 

There was a sort of sporting doctor there, who 
was busy with professional exploring and ap- 
praisings. In the centre, with closed eyes, and 
a face as white, and dull, and close in texture as 
marble, lay the luckless Mauve rider. His wrist, 
which the doctor had been feeling, when let go, 
dropped upon the Mauve chest with a heavy inert 
sound. The brother. felt his sister^s arm tremble 
in his. 

"If there were any house quite close, quite 
close," said the doctor (whose sleeves were turned 



The Race. 109 

over as if he were about to begin an operation at 
once), " or if a roomy open phaeton could be got 

that we could lay him in at length ^" and he 

looked round, 

A very crisp neat-looking gentleman, seeming 
as if he were a clean cast from a mould . ^whose 
grey whiskers, if one took the liberty of touching 
them, would crackle as if made of wire . came up 
to the doctor, and said : " Just the very thing ! our 
carriage . ^not twenty yards off. Only too happy ; 
shall have it brought up at once. . Beg your 
pardon, excuse me." This he said with extra- 
ordinary courtesy to a poor racing Fool in a bat- 
tered cap and tarnished scarlet hunting-coat, and 
who, utterly bewildered by the civility, allowed 
him to pass. 

" Very good," said the doctor, again looking round, 
" so far. But the barracks are out of the question . 
two miles away, and a broiling day like this." 

John Hanbury, with hands clasped, and a face 
of the most abject despair and horror, was standing 
beside the Manuels, quite stupified. He had hardly 
noticed them. 

" Has he no friends close by t" said the doctor, 
" just to take him in for a few hours . some one 



110 Never Forgotten. 



in those houses there, eh?" and he nodded at an 
incomplete terrace close by. 

John Hanbiiry woke up. "To be sure," he 
said, hurriedly ; " the very thing ! Won't you T 
he said to the younger girl. " O ! of course you 
will." 

She understood this ellipse at once. "Yes, 
yes !" she said to^ him ; " let him come !" 

" Come ! Where ?" said her sister. 

" To our house. Yes, he must," said the younger 
girl, excitedly ; " it is only humanity I You heard 
what the doctor said." 

Her sister was overpowered by her eagerness. 

" But '' she began. 

" Thanks, thanks," said Hanbury ; " here is the 
carriage." And the fresh crisp gentleman was 
pushing through the crowd. " Now, please." 

" Gently, gently," said the doctor; and Fermor 
was raised softly, and carried as softly to a little 
open phaeton. 

" My house is so far away, on the hill there . else 
really I should be delighted," said the crisp gentle- 
man, shutting the door on the doctor. " Is it to be 
the barracks?" 



The Race. Ill 

" No, no," said the other ; " we have got a place 
close by. What number did you say?" 

" O ! Four, Kaglan-terrace," said Hanbury, dis- 
tractedly. 

" Go at a walk," said the doctor, " and O ! go on 
quick." 

The bell was ringing out harshly for saddling 
for the next race . ^little patches of bright colour 
were seen far off up at the stand. circulating in 
the ring. There was to be another race. The 
crowd had seen the best part of this show, and 
might be late for the other. A good many, how- 
ever, remained beside this critical jump, as it was 
very likely there would be more falls and more 
accidents. 



112 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTER THE NINTH. 

IN HOSPITAL. 

The charitable gentleman with the clean crisp 
whiskers, who had lent his phaeton for the in- 
sensible Fermor, was a Major Carter, who, with 
his son, had newly come to Eastport. At the 
foot of his letters he wrote, "Yours sincerely, 
Henry Deane Carter;" his son signed himself 
"Somerset Carter," having received that name 
in compliment to a Lord Alfred Somerset, "the 
man who first took me by the hand," said his 
father very often and very gratefully ; and father 
and son and Mrs. Carter had taken the first floor 
of one of the villas, on one of the terraces, and 
were come to live economically at Eastport. 



In HofpitaL 113 



Not that this was made profession of, or was 
even hinted at, by the small public of the place. 
There was a sort of little Prado down near the 
pier, where a band sometimes played, and where 
the men and women came and sauntered; and 
here the crisp major, so clean and dry and wiry, 
80 brushed, so speckless, so Qanary-coloured in his 
gloves, and with little boots almost reflecting the 
company like small speculums, first entered, as it 
were from the wings, upon the Eastport stage, 
and attracted the whole audience in pit and boxes. 

He knew a few people already, and, leaning on 
the arm of the thoughtful boyish son, had put the 
canary glove into several hands. He had a plea- 
sant gay face, like a little open pleasure-ground 
fenced on each side by a little light shrubbery of 
crisp whisker. He was the most "youngish" 
man for his years, and had always a smile of 
eternal welcome upon his face: which smiles 
were not, however, without something mechanical 
about them, suggesting the idea that his face 
was fitted up with snowy-white jalousies, like a 
foreign villa, which he threw open all together 
when accosting a friend. 

In a few days, by some mysterious process, he 

VOL. I. I 



114 Never Forgotten, 



knew most people . ^most people, at least, that 
ought to be known. The people that ought to 
be known knew that he was a desirable addition 
to society- They told each other often about 
Lord Alfred Somerset, and used this nobleman 
as a tonic. The mention of that name, receiyed 
with a sort of reveropce, was found to be about 
as invigorating as Jesuit's bark to the languid 
system of the place. He was delightfully well 
bred, needed no social valet-de-plaoe to take him 
round drawing-rooms, but subsided without vio- 
lence or exertion into general acquaintance. There 
are people who are thus never strangers in a 
strange country, and float into company and 
friends. 

In that little comer the accident was a tre- 
mendocus source of excitement. It lent a prestige 
to the race. There was some noise and confusion 
on the course, in which Mr. Madden's frantic 
cries were to be distinguished ; and from that hot 
and brick-coloured racing society, which greased 
its hair, and swathed its neck in a yellow cloth, 
confining it witii a glass pin, came loud charges 
of foul play . charges marked, as it were, into bars 
by loud execration. The stewards, indeed, held a 



In Hojpital. 115 

sort of investigation on Mr. Madden's indignant 
requisition. And there were many witnesses for 
Hanbury, but the best witnesses of all were his 
own honest temper and open soul . ^familiar to aU 
the riding men. He was fully cleared. His pro* 
found grief was a spectacle, and excited sympathy. 

Fermor was taken in slow and dismal procession 
to the house in Eaglan-terrace. Some one had 
run on huqiedly to give notice. The parlour was 
hastily got ready. Mrs. Manuel, surprised and 
aghast at what was intended, made a sort of pro- 
test, but was frantically overborne by Hanbury. 
A crowd followed and hung about the place, 
telling the story with relish to inquisitiv-e pajssers- 
by. Insensible still, Termor was carried in, and 
Major Carter, who had the command of the whole 
party, and who gave orders with a skill and judg- 
ment and readiness of resource that evoked respect 
from all, was, almost as of course, admitted into 
the house as a sort of friend whom they had long 
known- So, too, was the doctor and that young 
white-haired ensign . also in sad distress about the 
friend he so reverenced. 

Hanbury came in as they stood waiting in the 
drawing-room. " It is dreadful, isn't it ? " he said. 
i2 



116 Never Forgotten, 



" I couldn't help it, indeed I couldrit ! " He 
glanced nervously at Violet, who, in a flutter of 
distress, was looking steadily away. "But the 
doctor says he thinks . ^he is sure, that is . it will 
be a very trifling accident. It was, indeed^ half his 
own fault," he added, piteously, as if asking for 
comfort. 

" Yes, yes," said the elder girl, " I am sure it 
was. It was all unavoidable." 

Her sister, with eyes resolutely turned away, 
had been half panting all this while, and now 
turned round suddenly, her cheeks colouring fast. 

"O, don't say that . ^you must not say that," 
she said, hurriedly. "His fault? No. I saw it all. 
I had the glass. No, you shouldn't say it, you 
can't say it, you know you can't ! " 

" O, Violet ! Violet ! " said her sister, reproach- 
fuUy. 

As for John Hanbury, he stood gasping at her . 
all " ebahi," as the French say. 

" I saw it all," continued the girl, with the same 
excitement. " I shouldn't have said a word if there 
had not been an attempt to put it on . on . that 
poor creature . ^who is lying below, and who can't 
speak or deny anything." 



Li Hofpital. 117 



Hanbuiy gave a groan. "I never said so . 
indeed I never meant to say so . only I admit it 
looked so ugly and so wicked in me. -especially 
after the way we left the carriage before the 
race." 

The elder sister said, warmly, " No one thinks of 
such an idea, and as for Violet, I know she doesn't. 
We are all flurried. We don't know what we are 
doing." 

Violet cast down her eyes ; she was a little 
ashamed of her sudden outbreak. 

The doctor was now seriously at work on the 
luckless Fermor. An express had been sent for a 
greater doctor, who might arrive by evening. The 
two girls fluttered about, half way up, half way 
down stairs, uneasy and excited, the second 
strangely so. Every one that passed up to fetch 
some aid or appliance, she seemed to search with a 
look of anxious questioning. Major Carter was 
invaluable. He gave confidence. Hanbury was 
of no more practical use than a child . ^was even 
in the way. The major was in the drawing- 
rooms, in the parlour . always pouring out liquid 
sentences in a low and steady voice ; just as he 
w^as presently pouring out "drops" from a medi- 



118 Never Forgotten. 



cine-botde. He had known something of that 
" fine young man below." He was Lady Liatira 
Fermor^s son . who had been, you know, Lady 
Laura Stonehewer . ^he had met the whole family 
at Nice, or Florence, or Aix-la-Chapelle, and 
they were charming people. "No danger, I can 
assure you. I make it as a particular request you 
will not be uneasy. I know something of the man 
below . very safe and steady . attended an old 
friend of mine. Sir James Macgregor : but when 
Cade comes down, in his hands he is quite safe. 
There is no man in whom I feel such confidence, 
in any crisis of the kind. In any part of the world, 
I would telegraph for Cade." 

In about three hours Cade arrived, a thin 
swarthy man, in a very high-collared frock-coat. 
He did not lose a second. He was in a hurry to 
see what business there was for him to do, but 
happily, by some fierce engines of the local doctor's, 
a little life and feeling had been brought into that 
poor beaten, battered skull. 

Mr. Cade turned back wet cloths, unswathed 
the head as if he were unrolling a mummy, 
pressed it firmly here and there, tapped it, 
looked at it reflectively with his own head a 



In Ho/pital. 119 

little to one side, as if he were admiring phreno- 
logical bearings. When he had done, he con- 
ferred with his professional broths, seemed to 
agree with him, and then, as of course, picked out 
Major Carter. It was thus, by a sort of fixed and 
eternal law, that Major Carter was to affect any 
one into whose presence he came. Mr. Cade 
spoke, then looked nervously at his watch. 

The ladies were waiting anxiously for the ver- 
dict of the medical jury. For one with whom 
they had so trifling an acquaintance there was 
no pretence of deep feeling or positive anguish. 
Still it was one of those "dreadful things" which, 
happening under our own eyes, with all the drar 
matic effects and properties of an accident, excite 
an almost artificial sympathy. 

To them gUded in the foreman, Major Carter, 
with the issue paper in his hand. It was a pre- 
scription. 

" Well !" they said, together. 

" Hush, hush ! my dear madam," he said ; " we 
must get this off first. There, now, Cade says 
he will do. No danger at present. I knew Cade 
was the man." 

His listeners were so thankful, that they did 



120 Never Forgotten. 



not perceive this little encomium on Mr. Cade 
was scarcely just; for, unless he possessed the 
Royal Charm of healing by Touch, as yet his 
services had not gone beyond mere examination. 

"And I think, my dear madam," continued 
Major Carter, " that by noon to-morrow we shall 
be able to get him away down to some quiet 
place." (He, too, had a sort of medical manner, 
solid and reassuring.) "I can quite feel how un- 
pleasant it must be for you all, having this busi- 
ness going on here. But you know . common 
charity, my dear madam . common charity." 

It was a relief to Mrs. Manuel to hear both 
pieces of n^ws. She had hardly recovered the 
shock of their having a male, possibly a dying, 
invalid cast down among them. 

Mr. Cade was gone, having taken his confi- 
dential pecuniary farewell of John Hanbury. 
For these offices, to say the truth, he had looked 
towards Major Carter, as being the more promi- 
nent of the persons he had been in relation with, 
and had seen him retire with uneasiness. But 
John Hanbury performed the duty with even 
splendour. 



A Night Scene. 121 



CHAPTER THE TENTH. 

A NIGHT SCENE. 

Mbs. Manuel^ it has been said, made a sort of 
protest against the reception of Fermor. It was a 
very eager, earnest, and excited protest, quite out 
of her usual key, and it surprised even her own 
family. "It is so extraordinary!" she said, sadly ; 
" one of his name, above all ! It is so strange . so 
extraordinary ! Any one but one of that name." 
And when Pauline, wondering, said to her, "Dear 
mamma, what do you mean? Surely we could 
not have turned him away from the doors?" she 
only repeated the same wondering and excited 
speech : " One of his name I . one of that name !" 

This common danger and common excitement 



122 Never Forgotten. 



is a link of sympathy. By the close of this day 
they knew the white-haired boy-ensign, ^* Little 
Brett," perfectly. He showed a natural feeling 
that quite gained upon them, and though serving 
his poor friend had unconsciously brought about 
an introduction, this idea scarcely visited him. 
Major Carter was gone ; but after dinner it was 
agreed between John Hanbury and Young Brett, 
both eager to do the whole duty, that each should 
relieve the other in watching, Hanbury taking 
one half of the night. Young Brett the other. 
Young Manuel, who, after the first sensation and 
earlier sympathy, had begun to look distrustfully 
on the whole alBFair, now that it had gone forth 
there was to be an early removal, affected a show 
of interest and even zeal. 

The two girls sat in the drawing-room till late, 
trying to carry out a pretence of being busy with 
their ordinary labours. But so great a domestic 
cyclone does not soon go down. The whirl con- 
fuses. With an agitation so recent, there is a sort 
of fascination, drawing all talk back to the one 
topic. They went over it again and again, with 
an ingenious variety. When recollection slackened, 
there was speculation for the future. But in all 



A Night Scene. 123 



this the second girl took Httle part She was no 
longer a demure Madonna, but had warmed up 
into a blight bit of colomr. Presently she went 
awaj, and repaired to her own room ; for it was 
now all but midnight, and full time to think 
of bed. 

She heard them all go up, and stood a long time 
at the window looking out, with her hair down 
upon her shoulders. Below her, she could see a 
square bright patch of light upon the ground, 
which was thrown from the window of the room 
where Fermor was lying with a dull numbed brain, 
sore and half stupified. It was as if his head had 
been changed into a lump of rough stone. She could 
see the lights of the town twinkling far away down 
the hill, and these lights were in greater glory 
than on a common night ; for there were revellers 
busy singing the Race, and the Horse that had 
won the Eace, or drowning the sense of a sudden 
and fatal poverty. A few black figures would pass 
by trolling, with a rather halting gait, and become 
bathed in the light from the parlour window. Then 
she sat down, looked long at the ground, and put- 
ting her hands on her forehead, over which fell 
her heavy hair, drew a long deep sigh of oppres- 



I 



124 Never Forgotten. 



sioiiy and shuddered. She was thinking of the day 
and its events^ which seemed hke a nightmare; 
and the shudder was for that horrid crash of men 
and horses and stone wall all mixed, which, though 
she had not seen, some one had described too gra- 
phically. Then she heard steps on the gravel, rose 
again softly, peeped out cautiously, and saw Young 
Brett lounging slowly to the gate. He looked up 
and down the road, for he was getting fatigued 
with his watching, and was wishing to be relieved. 
Then he lit a cigar. 

Still in a flutter of anxiety, she stole out upon 
the stairs and listened. She was indignant with 
this " selfish boy" for leaving his post at so critical 
a season. Uncertain and anxious, she crept down 
softly, and stood in the little hall dose to the 
parlour. The hall door was open, and she could 
see that the " selfish boy" had walked away. At 
that moment she heard a sound of tossing and a 
deep groan, with a sort of half cry. She did not 
hesitate a second; she had a good deal of Spanish 
leaven in her, and entered the room softly. 

Poor ghastly Fermor, heavy, haggard, and re- 
vealed under the light of a waning candle, was 



A Night Scene. 125 



writhing and twisting before her, with his arm 
drawn across his forehead. He was on the de- 
batable ground between consciousness and dull 
lethargy. As he turned and writhed, he kept up a 
low groaning like an Irish keen. She did not stop 
or hesitate, as a correct, well brought up English 
girl might have done, but, full of grief and sjnm- 
pathy, went up to the bedside, spoke to him, and 
asked what she could do to soothe him. 

His eyes settled on her with a dull store, but 
she thought he did not know her, for he com- 
menced his keen again. There was some cooling 
drink on the table close by, and she suddenly took 
it up and held it to his lips. It seemed to do him 
good, and he took it gratefully . ^then began tossing 
his arms again, and groaning as if in d6ep suffer- 
ing. Quite helpless, she sank on her knees beside 
the bed, and covered up her face. He will die . 
she was thinking. So brave, so gallant; above all, 
so calm, and so all but victorious, as he had shown 
himself on that day. He had suddenly changed : 
there was an indescribable interest and romance 
about him. All but victorious: except for that 
dark and suspicious collision, and that strange 



126 Never Forgotten. 



meaning look with which, just before the race, 
HLanbiuy had foUowed him. It was dreadful ; and 
the half Spanish girl began to heave, juid flutter, 
and grow agitated. ^ O, he will die ! he will die !" 
she said aloud. ^^ And what shall I do f " 

Two figures were standing in the doorway, look- 
ing on with astonishment . one, at least, with ad- 
miration ; for Violet's face seemed to glow softly 
through her hair, like a sunset seen through dark 
leases. 

^' By Jove 1" said one, under his breath. Han- 
bury, the other, gave a half groan; then suddenly 
caught his oompanioii's arm, and lad him softly 
out to the hall door again. 

 What is this fw?'' said Young Brett. " I say, 
what are youati" 

" Hush 1" said Hanbury ; " not a word." 

She had heard their steps, as he had intended 
she should, and rising ap softly, half scared at the 
peril of discovery, glided out as softly, and fluttered 
upHStairs. From the top she looked down to th/e 
hall door, where Hanbury, with a new-born inte- 
rest in astronomy, was busy pointing out a star to 
his friend. " What an escape !" she thought. John 
Hanbury was not thinking of that star. 



A Night Scene. 127 



He did not speak for some moments; then, 
roused by the groans of his friend, he went in, 
gave him what was ordered, which presently 
soothed the patient into a profound sleep. 

Ektrly the next morning Fermor awoke better. 
He had got back to sense and intellect, and al- 
most his first words to Young Brett were (spoken 
wearily) : " I had such strange dreams last night, 
or nightmares, which ? Tell me. Come, was 
there any one here last night . any girl . or nurse 
. a soft, beautiful creature?" 

Young Brett, who had all the openness of a 
boy, and a boy's delight at a question to which he 
could give a full and* satisfactory answer and thus 
gather importance, said eagerly and ardently, " O 
yes, dear yes. Such a surprise ! When we came 
in last night about midnight there was the younger 
one '' 

Fermor motioned languidly upwards. 

" Exactly. One of the girls kneeling there, in 
such a state . crying, I think. She looked like an 
angel, hanging over you, by Jove ! But, by Jove I 
I was not to talk to you. There, lie down." 

The old complacent languor came on Fermor^s 
white lips, and the affected smile, as who should 



J 



128 Never Forgotten. 



say, ^' Even in this ruin and decay comes the old 
story 1 Go on," he said, languidly. 

He would have liked all the particulars, just as 
he would be presently feeling a convalescent's 
appetite for a little chicken. But Young Brett, 
somewhat frightened at what he had done, would 
tell no more. 



A Splendid Departure. 129 



CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH. 

A SPLENDID DEPARTUBE. 

When the happy change was known, there was 
great joy. Hanbury was silent and grateful. A 
weight was off his mind. The doctor came early, 
and lifted it off finally, by announcing that he 
could not have wished him to be doing one particle 
better . ^which seemed a grudging sort of Umitation 
to favourable wishes. But there was another trouble 
come into Hanbury's breast instead of the real 
capital anxiety. 

Still it was found that " we could scarcely move 
him to-day, my dear madam . scarcely 1" The 
generic doctor was playing the piano softly and 
nimbly on his lips with his fingers. " I don't know 

VOL. I. K 



130 Ntver Ftir^aam. 

but that, it would be risky, too risky; we might 
lose all we have gained. N. o . o," he continued, 
as if the minutes of a council held inside him 
somewhere had just been brought to him, and he 
had to give his casting voice, "I dorit think it 
would do. I would not recommend it." 

Mrs. Manuel had all a housewife's terror of a 
residence of many weeks, perhaps ; but, relieved 
from that apprehension, she rather liked the ex- 
citement. A couple of days more, and Fermor 
began to mend. Another day, and he was to be 
moved away to fresh, airy rooms, upon a hill, 
taken specially ^fj Major Carter, who had proved 
himself through all the crisis one of the most 
collected, efficient men of business that could be 
conceived . so practical, so delicate, so friendly, 
and, above all, making his good offices more felt 
than the doer of them. The Manuel family 
actually came to look on him as an old friend. 
Hanbury, as the danger receded into the distance, 
passed from deep gloom, and even despair, into 
spasmodic delight and thankfulness : ' but from 
this stage again sunk gradually back into uneasy 
gloom and distrust. He came and went restlessly. 
He looked from face to face doubtfully. Since 



A ^enM B^arture. 131 

tifte niglit wben Yioibt bad been sorprised 9t 
f .CiiMr's bedside, sbe had jrecoi^eoed (niie of her 
19^ maimer towasxls him; hot this might have 
1>e.ai to dspifecate misccmfitruction, or even dicH 
pleasure^ aod to seenre sEemce. The sense of com* 
mon danger Jbdd xoade such littk nuBconfixuction 
appear dbi^t trifling. But now it began to be 
magnified . to HiabnTy, at kaBt . eyerf hoar. 

It came to noozL of the daj of the xenof^Tal, and 
:a carriage, hived again by Major Carter, waited at 
the door. The invalid . the dstU, braised, e(m- 
fnsed Fermor . had be^i gradaally fading out, 
like a dissolving view, axid, in his place, were 
coming back the harder lines of the older sle^j* 
qred (rfSoer who had dawdled into the saddle in 
the mauve jacket not many days before. In a f (Mrt- 
night he wonld be well, ot convalescent, and loung- 
ing about in. an invalid's demi-toilette. Now he 
looked pale and delicate . almost interesting, as it 
ajxpeared to t3ie miid-flervants. {^^Lovely,** one 
thought him, who suffered nrach aft^ his de- 
parture.) As he was Hiding himself from his sofa, 
Hanbury came in, with distress and doubt again 
seen on his f oi^ead. 

^^ 0/ said he, " so you are going, and I do hope 
k2 



132 Never Forgotten. 



you will get quite well. And I am sure I never 
sliall forgive mjrself, and I know you will believe 
me when I say, solemnly and sincerely, and from 
my soul, that I never intended it . ^never 1 never !" 

Fermor smiled his old smile for the first time 
since the accident. It had not been damaged. 

" O, of course," he said ; " who supposes it ? 
Such an idea 1 It never even occurred to me." 

" Thank you, thank you ! I am so glad," said 
Hanbury, fervently. " I knew you would stand to 
me. And now, would you mind . ^but this is flurry- 
ing you, and we weren't to agitate you -" 

"Weren't you?" said Fermor, coldly. "We 
should have thought of that a little earlier. Doesn't 
that strike you? But we may as well now finish, 
please, as you have got so far." 

" I didn't mean . ^I did not, indeed. But 0, 
would you mind just saying it over again to 
ihemr 

" Saying what, and to whom? Pray speak out. 
I really don't follow you." 

"Why, you see," said the other, in fervent con- 
fidence, "it is most unfortunate . ^but she, that 
gentle second one, has taken up some notion that 
it was done on purpose, and it is so unfortunate 



A Splendid Departure. 133 

that it looked ugly; but, upon my soul, as I 
stand here, and if I were to go to my grave to- 
morrow ^ 

" Really you are fatiguing yourself," said Ter- 
mor, wearily, " and fatiguing me. I have told you 
what I thought already." 

"Ah, true! yesl" said the other, a little 
vaguely, "so you did. But I want you, as you 
are going away, and may not see them again for 
long " 

Fermor smiled dubiously. 

" You would do me such a service by telling 
them so." 

*. What," said Fermor, " that I am going 
away?" 

" No, but about the race. The fact is, we are 
gone much further than you suppose. It is vir- 
tually settled, or understood, and but for this un- 
fortunate idea ^Indeed, if I could be capable of 

such an act, she is not to be blamed; so it is 
quite natural, you see." 

" I see," said Fermor, " I see ; it would quite 
account for it. Very well. Would you help me 
down, please, for I am as weak as a child." 

He re^Jy was, and moved vierjr slowly, step by 



134 Never Forgotten. 

stepy on sterong Joko Hanbtuyfl ami. He reached 
the kndbg quite spent^ and sank down upon a sola. 
Wine had to be fetched hastily for hint 7 in facly 
he had nearly fainted. Tlie women were all full 
of sympathy. The maid who thoo^t him "loveJj^ 
was looking on in private agony. 

Nothing could be more effective than that pale 
face, so refined, so deHcate in tone. His voice, 
too, was soft and gentle. It was an opening for 
a graceful retirement, and he knew how to make 
profit of it. There was a touch of pathos in the 
way he returned thanks for their kindness to him. 
He should not easily forget. He was not strong 
enough n&w to say all he was inclined to say, but 
he hoped they would understand him. At the same 
time, would they forgive him if he were to say 
they were a Utile bit responsible themselves for the 
infliction of his presence ? for if they recollected, 
Miss Manuel had all but challenged him to ride 
the race. Had she not, now? . and he would 
appeal to Miss Violet there ? 

A little flush came upon the second girl's face, 
and her eyes stole over to the sister's with a glance 
of reproach. The idea had, indeed, occurred be- 
fore now to Miss Manuel with some remorse. 



A Spiendid Departure. 135 

I I I . !..... I n il 111,1 I I I ipl I. 

" I did not do so badly aft^ all, yon see," he 
said, smiling:; ^^and cmly for that stupid animal 
irhich our friend rode, ^ould have done better." 

Yiolet herenas compressing her lips and beat- 
ing her foot on the floor. 

" By the way," he continued, "I had just time 
at the moment to see how lie turned and lurched 
over on me. I saw you trying to keep him strai^t, 
Hanbmy, but the strongest anns in England 
could not have kept that brute from having his 
way. Forgive me," he added, gaily, "but you 
know I never was frantic about him." 

Hanbuiy looked round triumphant, and there 
was more exuberant gratitude flooding bis cheeks, 
as from a burst sluice, than even triumph. Miss 
Manuel looked pleased. The second girl turned 
away her eyes, then walked over to the window to 
look at the sea. 

Major Carter now came bustling in, crisp and 
crackling. It was time to go. Would Captain 
Fermor take his arm ? There. He had been up 
at Brown' s-terrace. He had been putting the 
last few final touches to the new and airy lodgings. 

Fermor, propped up on the friendly Carter's 
arm, faded gracefully from the room. Wistful 



136 Never Forgotten, 



eyes followed him. The maid, whose peace of 
mind was hopelessly gone, took a last and long 
wistful gaze. Hanbury, brimming over, bounded 
down before him and about him with the exuber- 
ance of a mastiff. At the carriage door he gave 
Fermor a grip of gratitude. 

" I shall never forget it, never !" he said. "It 
was noble . ^perfectly noble !" 

And when the carriage drove away, he came 
bounding up again, with his tail wagging; for 
he was now fairly "rehabilitated;" perfectly 
cleared and made straight in his character. 

Alas, how little he knew. It was only the 
"rehabilitation" of Fermor. For that bit. of 
chivalry and generous testimony to one who was 
scarcely a friend, had painted in a sort of exquisite 
" nimbus " roimd his head as he retired. It was 
about as unfortunate a calling of testimony into 
court as could be conceived. 



A Converfation. 137 



CHAPTER THE TWELFTH. 

A OONVEBSATION. 

The little watering-place was gliding into its 
season. . Fashionable brooklets came trickling in, 
houses were in demand, and house-rents high. 
The natives looked on proudly, and said to each 
other that it was going to be "gay." 

Among the same class there was an instinct that 
Major Carter, so newly arrived, was to be accepted 
as a being from the fashionable immortals, and 
took his place in his proper niche without effort. 

Without effort, too, he had come to know nearly 
all men and women. They were delighted with 
his talk, inlaid with fine glittering names, like a 
mosaic with bits of lapis lazuli. He stood by, a 



138 Nixxr Far^en. 

conversational pointsman, and skilfully turned his 
train of talk into aristocratic sidings. 

What passed in Fermor^s mind as he came 
slowly up the stairs into his new rooms at Brown's- 
terrace, was an impatient " This fellow will want 
to fasten an acquaintance on me I" and he thought, 
with the peevishness of sickness, what a penalty 
this was to pay for the few little offices he had 
received. He was laying out, with disgust, how, 
after a mess dinner, he should ingiit (ml a receipt 
in full, and coldly " drop the fellow," when Carter, 
having got him to the sofa, said, in his gay way : 

" Now, good-by ! You sham't see me again for 
weeks, until you are welL PositiTely no. And 
even then . ^I don't know^ I am not a visiting msii. 
I like to know a few people, not a whole town, you 
know. By the way, how do yon find this place?" 

Fermor raised his eyebrows, then said ellipti- 
cally, "Well, scarcely!" 

" Ah I so I should think. Yon want the ^ Ju- 
nior,' and 'Brooks's,' and Lady Glastonbury's box. 
Of course this sort does well enough for the 
common sct^ for your friends up at the fort, and 
thai sort of thing. I tell you, you must get away 
from us as quickly as you can." 



A Corwerfathn. 139 

Thift was like a censer swung before him^ and 
he accepted tbe fumes very complacenttj'. ^^ Don't 
go yet," he i^d, gniciondy. ^Sit down . for a 
short time." 

"Only for a moment, then," said Major Carter. 
^ Though I recdlect that Lady Ghmning always 
said that those Tisits where one was in a hurry to 
got, turned out the longest Timts after all." 

" You knew the Ghmnings ? " said Fermor, with 
a little eagerness. 

"O yes; used to meet her at Aix-larOhapelle." 
And on that text being giyen out, the two together 
broke into a sort of hymn of lemzniscence, re- 
calling in alternate yersicles many fashionable 
names. This sort of oomnmnion service is in 
itself a great link of sympathy. Fermor, for so 
long in convalescent jail, was now let into the 
glare of daylight, and could breathe a little fashion- 
able fresh air. The visitor was very amusing; 
knew of, if he did not himself know, innmnerable 
" men ; " men of peace and men of war, and men 
of clubs, concerning whom he had newer and 
more recent news than Fermor could have ; and 
though conscious of being made a little inferior 
by having to recdve infcnmation, his zest for the 



140 Never Forgotten. 



details made him overlook the form of the channel 
of this information. He was already rather in- 
clined towards this Major Carter, but one little 
incident finally determined his inclination. 

" By the way," said Major Carter to Fermor, 
turning back, "I am afraid, while you were sick, I 
took a serious responsibility on myself." 

"How?" said Fermor, a little suspiciously. 
(Was he now going to encroach and get free and 



" Why," said he, " there was a telegram sent to 
your family at Nice, and ^" 

Fermor's cheeks began to colour faintly. 

" Do you mean to say they ventured to do thutf 
Bring them all over here! Was there ever such 
conduct? The thing I was so guarded against. 
Good gracious ! " And in real distress he half rose 
from his chair. 

" I am very glad to hear you say so," said the 
other, soberly. "Don't disturb yourself now. I 
quite took that view, and ventured to interpret 
your wishes. That well-meaning, but not over- 
discreet person, the tall strong man with the horse, 
you know, was for telegraphing all over Europe, 
for everybody, in a sort of frantic way. I saw 



A Converfation, 141 



there was no use reasoning with him, so I took 
charge of the message, put it in my pocket, never 
sent it, and . ^here it is." 

"Thanks, thanks!" said Fermor, with more 
earnestness than he had exhibited for months. 

"It is really a relief to my mind," said the 
other. "I was afraid I was taking a little too 
much on myseH." 

Then changing the subject, as if it were too 
trifling to be dwelt on further : " You won't be 
disturbed here. I took care to see about the 
neighbours. The house to the right is unlet, and 
the one on the other side belongs to an mvalid, a 
girl in a consumption, with a grim old father . 
your landlord, by the way. I was quite scared 
when I saw him first. Good-by 1 Good-hj, Cap- 
tain Fermor." 

Fermor said good-by with wonderful cordiahty- 
He was pleased with his visitor's humble depar- 
ture. " But if he had dared to ^ Fermor ' me ! 
By Jove ! I had made up my mind to cut him 
from that moment." For this was one of those 
little tests and gauges of gentility which an Officer 
of the Fashionable Customs holds ready in his 
pocket to apply on the instant, " I thought there 



142 Never Forgotten. 



was something of the gendeman aiout him. I 
generally pick oat the right thing." 

In stricter truth, the right thing had picked Urn 
ont ; but the invalid Fermor that ni^at a]j^)royed 
pleasantly of all 1^ invalid Fermor had done. 
Specially did he rerert to the graoefnl and dra- 
matic fashion in which lie had " backed ** ofiF the 
Mannel stage ; then thought sweefly of the roosd- 
eyed gu*l, and that odd diBcorery, at wUdi he 
smiled with half-shut eyes. A really ehanziing 
creature; something so natural in the biisiaaiesBi. 
Yet was it not nsnaJly so ? The whole little |)]aj 
seemed to him, afi he lay back on his euduoned 
arm-chair, still with half-closed eyes, very aweet, 
and painted in warm soft clouds. everytiiing about 
ii^ even the utter root of that po(r boor, wi& his 
horses and horse-talk. He was thinking, according 
to his f avonrite formula, how your true4>red gen- 
tleman always must win in l&e loo^ run, wh^i 
that honest Young Brett, who kq)t at his heels 
like a rough simple terrier, came in. 

Almost ;ait coiiee he booke iuito that lii^le night 
adventune, and dwelt on it with wonder aj^d 
admiration. Hie imade no secret of his reveirence 
for Fermor. ^ I don't know how you manage it,** 



A Cvnverfatkn. 143 

he said, widi a sort of oondc deaqMor, . ^It's very- 
odd; axid Tdth mo txtmble to y<>iirself; while 
other ^ fdlows' imi^it jtust put their eyes upon 
sticks." Fermor ^vms a little amdous he should 
oome to that snibject, ion he was misty about 
tibe details. His head had ibeen racked with pain 
just at the moment it W8s being told 1 him. But 
he was now too pioud to have Ihe appearance of 
being anxious to hear it again. The youth, how- 
ever, was eager. Fermor had only to gire him 
iiie catch word. 

^^ Nonsense!" said he, calmly. ^She was just 
pacing the door, gcing to her room." 

"Passing the doorl" said the othei^ with an 
enthusiastic d^iiaL " Well, if you call kneeling 
at a man's bedside, and praying, and crying ovj^ 

him ^Wly, I aaw her myadf ; the lampli^ 

wags stn^ng upon her face. By Jcfvel suck a 
creature she looked! And bar hair all tumbled 
down upon her shouldess." 

This was like jspoau-feeding to Fenmic. 

"And you tdoe these things so quidiy! I 
flhonld have jumped out of the wimdbw, to think 
that such a lovely creature was poiaying over 
mer 



144 Never Forgotten. 



Fermor started. " Nonsense ! " he said. 

"Surely you know it," said Young Brett. 
"Don't tell me. I can't make out how it is," he 
added, in a sort of piteous way, "some fellows 
have a knack of that sort of thing, and yet they 
don't seem to care about it, while other fel- 
lows ^But it's always the way." 

"But you know," said Fermor, still enjoying 
the spoon-feeding, "it is that . ^that . other man. 
I never can recollect his name." 

"Hanbury, Hanbury," said the youth, eagerly. 
"No, no; not he. It was all settled, but his 
chance is done. Poor old soul I / could tell him 
that. I can see a thing or two." 

"Poor devil!" said Fermor, half closing his 
eyes with pity. "It is not his line, you know. 
That was the mistake he made. Every man has 
his line. As for what you say about me, my 
young friend . of course when a girl meets a gen- 
tleman, and puts him beside a creature without 
an idea above oats and mangers, and that sort 
of thing, the difference rrmst strike her. I don't 
take any credit for it. It would be the same with 
any other man." 

After a pause, Young Brett said, " I told them 



A Converfation. 145 



to bring up Don. I thought you would like to 
have him, as he would be company for you. I 
got a house put up in the yard for him ; you can 
see him from your bedroom window." 

He was a " good fellow" this Young Brett, and 
it was not surprising that most people liked him. 
He was always doing some well-meant thing of 
this sort. Fermor thanked him languidly. " Very 
good of you, indeed. Glad to have the dog. 
Thanks ! " He always said "thanks," not "thank 
. you," as a more refined acknowledgment. 

Fermor was fond of reveries and castle-building ; 
such castle-building, at least, as in the grounds 
attached he could make out his own figure strolling^ 
with a divine air about it, like a god dressed in 
human clothes. These grounds and castles (he 
now reclining back on the pillow of his arm-chair, 
with eyes half closed, the tips of his fingers brought 
together) he liked to people with men and women 
of the courtier stamp, eternally bowing before him, 
seeking him out, and passing by rival gods to do 
him homage. He made himself speak, and loved 
to hear his own voice in 'a calm and quiet way, 
doing marvels. On this night he thought pleasantly 
of the day's work. His eye rested with pleasure on 
VOL. I. L 



146 Never Forgcttsn. 



the half Spanish gu:l. Her devotioa axid personal 
worship, diflco^RNred so enrioasly, was moit accept 
able; he ssoaled as. he thought of her. ^ &ie is a 
lady/' he said aloud : ^^ the onfy lady among than 
all." The rest, indeed, luid long since been sorted 
off into **cada" and "low creatares." "Very odd,'' 
he contintied, musing; "she i& just the aort of 
diaracter I had always laid out I shooid mairy. 
that is, if I ever were to marry." And he smiled 
again, as he watched her walking pensively through 
his grounds, mournful, melancholy . weeping al- 
most.faithful, worshipping gttl 1 Then, recruited 
by tiie little panorama, and really " fond " of Ae 
"poor child** (as he caUedj^her aloud), he went to 
bed. 

' He was fond of dogs in a negative faahion, and 
liked them for a sort of society. Bat this night his 
love for them was not strengthened; for about one 
o'clock he was awoke by the full backing of Don, 
who, though otherwise sensible, felt stmnge andun- 
comfortabie in new qu^lers. From the back of 
alarm it glided into steady, sustained, and dismal 
howling. Sleep was precious to Fermor; and, 
after an hour's impatient waiting, in the hope that 
it would abate, he got up and rang for his man. 



A Canverfation. 147 



As lie rang, his Up curled in the dark as it used to 
do in the daylight, and he chafed impatiently at the 
nuisance. 

His man had been awakened also, and had long 
since been protesting in stronger language against 
the disturber. He went out as he was ordered, 
and beat the dog, which he was not ordered to do, 
then let him loose. He had been bidden to look 
round for robbers, of which there was no trace. 
In fact, it was but the dog's way of proclaiming 
that he was uncomfortable^ and scarcely at home 
in the new tenement that had been hired for him. 

About four in the morning he broke out again, 
and awoke Fermor once more, who, between his 
teeth^ said aloud^ ^^ I'll have him shot at once ;" a 
sentence which he later changed into "I'll give 
him away." 



l2 



148 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE THIBTEENTH. 

A FAMILY FERMENT. 

After Fermor had gone off the stage with such 
effect at Raglan-terrace, Violet fled to her room. 
But when she came down again later, in the half 
light . which, perhaps, she was waiting for . she 
found a silent and gloomy council sitting. The 
young girl, with sparkling eyes, looked from one to 
the other with a sort of triumph, as much as to 
say, "Is he not charming? And his generous de- 
claration going out, all to clear John Hanhury !" 
But they said nothing, and her brother walked 
over to the window, and, drumming on the pane, 
looked out. 



A Family Ferment. 149 

" Well," she said, a little embarrassed, " so he 
has gone after all ! Such a curiotis thing as it has 
been altogether . ^his coming, and his being brought 
to our house." And again she waited for the talk 
to be taken up with sympathy. 

" I wonder," said her brother, turning round 
suddenly, "how you mean all this to end? It is 
very well as an amusement, but this is a serious 
business, I can tell you. How do you propose to 
behave to John Hanbury ?" 

"To JohnHanburyl" 

" Yes, dear," said her sister, with a sort of 
" humouring," coaxing manner, " you know we 
must think of him. Louis is right, indeed, and I 
am not sorry we have got rid of our sick man." 

" Sick man," said her brother, sorrowfully, " sick 
actor, if you like. He knows how to do the thing 
with effect. He is eaten up with vanity. I saw 
what he was at the whole time." 

Violet looked at them both wistfully. Her lip 
was trembling. " No, no," she said, "he was really 
ill; he really suffered. The doctor said so, and 
they all said so." 

" That may be," said her brother. " But, my 
dear good child, it is time that we should try and 



150 Nn)er Forgotten. 



grow sensible, and steady, and leave off onr ro- 
mances," 

'' Yes, dear," said Mrs. Manuel ; '^ listen to Louis, 
who is always very sensible in all lie says. Yon 
know it is for your good." 

" Here you are fully committed to Hanbnry, 
and as good and honest a fellow as you could pid^ 
out of the worid. I have told him so. You have 
told him so yourself . ^at least, gave him to under- 
stand as much." 

" No, indeed no," said the girl, eagerly ; " he 
was to wait . to wait as long as I pleased; and 
I might change my mind, he said, so he would not 
hurry me. He is very good, and noble, and ami- 
able, and I should not like to hurt his feelings, 
indeed I should not ; but ^" 

"What!" said the brother, turning on her 
gravely. "Do you mean to teU us you have 
changed your mind, after leading this man on 
for nearly a year to believe you liked him, and 
giving him what amounts to a consent . ^and that 
you are going to go back, all for a diildish whim 
of this sort ! O ! I couldn't believe it. Ah, Violet 1 
I am astonished at you ! You think a good and 
faithful heart can be picked up like any pebble on 



A Family Ferment. 151 



the roadside. If you throw it away, you haye 
only to look for another.*' 

The voice of Mrs, Manuel was now heard. 

" Hush ! Don't, now ! Violet has been foolish, 
but she sees her foolishness. She is very young; 
she has much to learn. She will do better in 
future.** 

"WiU she?" said the young man. "I don't 
' think so. At this very moment she is thinking 
of that empty-headed conceited fellow that went 
off so theatrically. A vain English fop! I know 
the man thoroughly, and there are many more 
like him." 

^^No, no, Louis," said her mother, anxiously, 
^ she never said tso. She does not dream of it." 

^ Of course not," said her sister, gaily. ^ We 
are frightening tha poor child with our lectures." 

"I never said so," said ^olet, a little pite- 
ously. "I am sure I respect and like him, and 
always did ; only I don't want to be hurried on so 
dreadfully." 

^^No, of course not," said her mother; "why 
should you, darling? We were only alarmed 
about that captain, who is so full of himself." 

" Tm sure she has too much sense," said her 



152 Never Forgotten* 



brother, "and I knew she had. I only wanted 
to be on the safe side. You see, it is no trifling 
matter, now, once a thing has gone so far. But 
we have got him safe out of the house. It was 
natural poor John should be alarmed. And I 
shall take good care we shan't have that languid 
mass of affectation here again, doing his antics day 
and night." 

Violet spoke with a forced calm : " But why 
do you fix that friend of yours on me ? I have 
never sought him. It is you . ^it is he . ^that . ^has 
pursued me ^^ 

" Never sought him ! " said the youth. " No. 
not since you met this other man. But before 
then, how did you behave? Did you speak to 
him . walk with him? Did you ride his horses? 
Did you encourage him in a way that, even if you 
never spoke a single word, was quite intelligible?" 

" Why do you speak to me in this cruel way ? " 
she said, rising up in growing excitement. "Ah ! 
I see none of you understand me . ^not one ! Let 
me go to my room," said Violet. " I have no one 
to help me . ^no one to pity me here . and ^^ 

The anxious mother, more observant than the 



A Family Ferment. 153 

others, saw hysterical signs, and mterposed. She 
ran to her. 

"There! we shall say no more about it. 
Hush, dears 1 We shall not see him again for a 
long time, and be gradually rid of him. Go and 
lie down, dear ; you look heated^ and we will talk 
no more about it." 

" But she must promise !" said her brother, who 
was as excited as she was. " She must promise 
me before she goes." 

Her face glowed, and she fell again into her 
supplicating manner. It was as though she were 
helpless among them all, and begging pity. "I 
can't. Indeed I can't!" she said. Then she 
suddenly burst out into floods of hysterical tears. 
" This is very cruel of you ! What have I done ? 
How can you go on so to me I But'I am stronger 
and wiser than you think, even if you all join 
against me." 

It was clear she was of an hysterical tempera- 
ment. Her mother came over, in alarm, to soothe 
her. Violet sobbed upon the sofa. The sister 
and brother looked on from a distance, moodily. 



154 N.wr Forgotten. 



yet a little disturbed. Louis then broke out imr 
patiently: "Such childishness! Such folly! It 
was Violet all over! Look at this! He could 
not contain himself to see a bra^e noble honest 
fellow, who could make her happy, treated in 
this way." Which was all apologetic, for the 
discussion was virtually at an end, and she pre- 
sently rose, and, with a start, fled away to her 
room. The others looked at each other with 
doubt and alarm. The mother, in a few moments, 
stole away softly after her ; the son, however, 
paced backwards and forwards . ^as he had been 
doing for some time. She was the excitable one 
of the house, and had to be humoured and petted. 
Now they were in confusion, and looked at each 
other guiltily. The son was troubled: she was, 
in fact, loved by them all, and was their human 
toy. These chidings were all for " her own good ;" 
so, at least, they always apologised to their own 
hearts ; but when she showed signs of this sort of 
distress, she had them at her mercy, and did what 
she pleased. 

In a few seconds her sister had flown up-stairs 
after her, had found her on the bed with her 



A Family Ferment. 155 

face pressed against a very wet pillow, and in an 
instant was kissing her almost with violence. The 
odier did not push her away, but onlj sobbed 
bitterly. 

^^ Hn^9 hush I" said Pauline, g^&tly ; ''you axe 
not to go an this way . ^you will get ill again. 
There, we won't worry you any more. We didn't 
mean it, indeed we did not. We were only sorry 
for Aim, you know. But we won't talk of it." 

The brother, a little repentant also, had stolen 
up, and was listening. Presently he was heard 
tapping. The younger girl was quite softened at 
these advances ; she was even forward, in faintly 
owning that she was wrong, that she did not mean 
anything, and that she had headaches. In short, 
there were mutual concessions, and it was all 
" made up." 

A few minutes later, Hanbury came in, joyous 
and rubbing his hands together. He was very 
happy. He knew that now the clouds had passed 
*over. The sad impediment was now happily trans- 
ported away. His own fame had been cleared, 
and he was almost boisterous. 

All the family came down to him. Violet bathed 



J 



156 Never Forgotten. 



her eyes, and, possibly a little ashamed of her late 
outburst, came in with smiles, and even affected 
g6od humour. There was an effort in all the mem- 
bers of the family, as if they were anxious to get 
rid of the recollection . ^all, too, with this odd re- 
sult, that Mr. Hanbury went away that night late, 
singing softly to himself in placid contentment, 
convinced that he never had been so firmly esta- 
blished in the affections of her he loved. 



New Acquaintances. 157 



CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH. 

NEW ACQUAINTANCES. 

When Fermor had just done a very light break- 
fast, which he took in a sort of " gleaning" fashion, 
his man came in to saj there was a gentleman 
below who wished to see him. 

" Who is he, and what is his business?" said 
Fermor, with the polite haughtiness he always 
adopted towards servants. 

" Doctor Carlay, sir, he calls himself, and I 
think he's from next door." 

" I won't see him, I really can't see him," said 
Fermor, pettishly, and dropping the autocrat 
manner of a sudden. *'How I am persecuted!" 



158 Never Forgotten. 



His tone was b& of one who could have wept over 
himself. " I want no doctors, I have one of my 
own ; send him away, please." 

"Please, sir, I don't think he's come about that 
. ^I think it's about the dog." 

"What a persecution!" said Fermor, again 
about to weep over himself. " How can / help* 
it? He is to be sent away. There, make him go. 
How I am worried !" 

Three firm steady knocks were heard at the door, 
which was then opened gently, and a man's figure 
was in the entrance. The servant went over to 
prevent his entrance, but he kept his hand on the 
handle of the door, and bowed a sort of firm 
protest. 

He was a yeiy singular-looking person, moEre 
than six feet high, and so hard ia texture, rough 
in comers sad projections, and geserally impene- 
trable, that he soggested the idea of being cast- 
iron all over. He was stiff and imbending as that 
metal, and, where he had any haxr, it was all 
roughened into a sort of grey wiry grizzle, that 
locked like deep nist upon the surface of the iron. 
The same rust al&N) seemed to have spread gene- 
rally over all hia cbthes. 



New jicquaintances. 159 

Fermor looked at him with astonishment. But 
he had no efiFect upon the servant, who was accus- 
tomed to strange characters; and he was pre- 
sently described below stairs as "a queer cus- 
tomer." 

" I have taken a liberty, a very great liberty, I 
am afraid,'' he said, in tones which were gentle . 
certainly gentlemanlike . and not what might be 
expected from a grim casting, "to break in on you 
without ceremony. It is only the necessity of 
the case that nmst excuse me. Your dog last 
night '' 

" O, I know," said Fermor, still pettishly ; " he 
disturbed me, too, as well as you. I am sure it 
was no fault of mine. You know I could not 
divine it beforehand." 

The other began to grow yet more grim, his 
words to get -sharp and metallic in sound. 

^* I don't speak icft myself. It would be very 
hard to awake me* And if I was awakened it 
WDuld not make much matter. I must ask you. to 
have the dog sent away ; in fact, I must insist on 
it . and, really, without discussion." 

There was a hard churlishness about the way 
this was put which was offensive. Fermor co- 



160 Never Forgotten. 



loured, and hurriedly got into his most chilling 
outside coat. 

" If you had waited," he said, "you would have 
heard that the dog wm to be sent away on this 
very day. There is no necessity for insisting, or 
for compulsion, or any allusion to such things. 
What did I tell you this morning, Bates, about 
the dog?" 

" He is gone, sir. He was at the barracks an 
hour ago." 

This little conversational stroke brought back 
all Fermor^s good humour. The thought that 
crossed his mind was, "How I excel in putting 
down low rough beings of this sort." 

" I am glad to hear it," said the other, not in 
the least more softly. " I mistook, it seems. I 
thought you might not be inclined to do as asked. 
Sometimes, you know, you meet men who object 
to do things simply because they are required to do 
them. Some of your profession have that way. 
You will recollect, I had never spoken to you 
before." 

" Well, curious to say, / always know a gentle- 
man," said Fermor, " by a sort of instinct." He 
was in excellent vein, he thought, that morning. 



New Acquaintances. 161 

" I am detaining you," said the other, not in the 
least conscious of the thrust. " I must again 
apologise for disturbing you. I might have written, 
but writing is not nearly so much to the point as 
speaking. Writing only leads to more writing. It 
was only the necessity of the ease and comfort of 
one whom I care for more than I would for a 
dozen like myself, that could force me in upon the 
world in this way. In fact," he added, coming 
back a little, " it is only fair to let you know, that, 
if I had heard your dog last night, and he could, 
not have been got to remain quiet, / should haver 
quieted him at once. Between human welfare and 
canine life, you know, I could not hesitate. Good 
morning!" 

And with this he passed out and shut the door. 

Fermor looked after him, indignant, fuming, and 
yet mystified. " Such manners, such free and 
easy airs! Like every one in this place!" He 
tossed impatiently in his chair. He then called to 
his servant. "Bates! never let that . ^person in 
again ! " 

He was mending a good deal. He was better 
to-day than he had been yesterday, and looking 
in the glass, among his brushes heavy as ivory 

YOL. I. M 



162 Never Forgotten. 



mallets, and ids sdlv^-topped botties which might 
have filled innumerable bins in a small perf mneiy 
cellar, he was struck by what he called the " half 
delicate, half spiritual" tone his face had assumed* 
He looked down at his fingers, and rejoiced in their 
sort of mother-of-pearl tinge. Then he was ready 
to " see" people. Some of the " fellows" would be 
sure to come boring him with their dull talk, and 
now they had him helpless and at their mercy. But 
they did not come, and he sat there fretting be- 
cause they were svre to come, and because, at the 
some time, they did not come. Captain Fermor 
was, however, not what is called popular with his 
fellows. The gap in their social ranks was noticed 
for a day or so, as a gap always makes itself 
noticed, but, beyond this, there was no regret. 
When his accident, and the little " sensation" it 
brought with it, had begun to pall, no one thought 
of the invalid wrecked upon the lonely shore of 
convalescence. He was indignant at this desertion, 
and over and over again pronounced them a " low, 
selfish set." 

Young Brett, however, faithful as a terrier, ap- 
peared about noon, and Fermor, a little grateful 
for this attention, was almost inclined to pass a 



New Acquaintances. 163 

short statute excepting him from the penal clauses 
of general " lowness" and " cadship." Young 
Brett had not much to say, yet, somehow, was com- 
pany. He had no flow of talk, and yet people . 
notably "fellows" . looked kindly towards him. 
Later, on his way out to India, he had gone in and 
out of a poor stranger officer's cabin,, had cheered 
him with a word or two and a scrap of ship news, 
had read him a newspaper, but all without any 
effort or show. The other passengers made a showy 
visit now and again, but found the thing a nuisance. 
Young Brett's honest sympathising face was worth 
all the drugs the ship's doctor ordered. The sick 
passenger's eyes lighted as he filled up the little 
cabin door. By-and-by the sick officer died, and 
was cast over the side. Long after, when Young 
Brett had forgotten the voyage, he received a 
letter from a famous London gunmaker asking for 
directions as to the make of a gun he was busy 
with for him. The other repudiated the gun, and 
said there must be a mistake ; which brought out, 
that the sick officer had added a postscript to the 
last letter he ever wrote, begging his people at 
home to send Young Brett a gun . ^and as hand- 
some a gun as money could purchase . in token of 
M 2 



164 Never Forgotten, 



how he esteemed his kindness during that last 
voyage. 

He was now looking out of the back window of 
Fermor^s lodgings, on the row of gardens, which 
were large, and pretty, and grassy. It was a fine 
sunny day. "'Jove !" he said, " should like so to 
roll oneself in the grass . ^lie there all day, you know, 
and smoke cigar after cigar. You ought to go out 
yourself. Yes, by Jove ! " he added, as if lighting 
on a sudden discovery, " the very thing." 

" And lie on the grass," said Fermor, " all day ? 
No, no. That is not the life I should like." 

" Well, I mean for a time, you know ; the fresh 
air would set you up. 'Jove !" he added. this was 
his favourite heathen god, whom he appealed to 
constantly . " there's some one in the next garden 
now. Come and look, Fermor. Did you ever 
see such a grim old ^ buffer ? ' He's as stiff as a 
musket." 

"Yes," said Fermor, calmly, above all curiosity. 
" I know him. He came bursting in on me this 
morning : something about that dog you brought 
here." 

" And I suppose you shut him up. A very awk- 
ward customer though, eh ? "/ 



New Acquaintances. 165 

* " Why yes," said Fermor, placidly. " I think he 
did not take much by his visit. I have a way of 
my own for that class of people.'' 

"Ah!" said Young Brett, with admiration; 
"that's it ; just what I envy so in you ! 'Jove ! " 
he said again ; " look here. They're coming with 
a sort of procession, I declare. A girl, and an old 
fellow, and a maid . and a chair." Then, after a 
pause, a long deep drawn " By Jove ! " 

Fermor looked out, succumbing to curiosity. 
There was a sort of little progress . a girl leaning 
on the grim figure . maid, pillows, chair, just as 
Young Brett had described. The sun was very 
strong and sultry, and not a breath of air abroad. 
The chair was set down full in the sun, and 
the young lady assisted into it, but sat with 
her back to the houses. The maid then opened 
her parasol for her. The grim figure stood over 
her, talking as grimly; at times walked away on 
a sort of beat with stiff iron motions, and came 
back. 

" Why don't she turn round and let us see her 
face ! " said Young Brett, impatiently. " I wonder 
who she is 1 I am sure she's pretty." 

" She is the girl," said Fermor, with an air of 



166 Never Forgotten. 



knowledge. "I know it all. It was about her he 
came in." 

" I thought it was about a dog," said Brett. 

^ Well, it might be. One don't necessarily ex- 
clude the other. Hush ! I declare. Did you see 
her then?" 

She had looked slowly round while her father 
was away on his beat. They both saw her. A 
round, full, soft English face, full of goodness, and 
<rf the beauty of gentleness and good humour. But 
there were traces of sickness and delicacy. 

" 'Jove !" said Young Brett, who was of the age 
at which every girl seems to be lent temporarily from 
Paradise. " She is one ! You are always in luck, 
Fermor. You always tumble on your feet in these 
sort of things. Lucky dog ! " he added, with jocu- 
larity. " Don't tell me ; you knew of this all the 
time, and picked out the house." 

This sort of freedom, and on this class of subject, 
always made Fermor shiver. He said, coldly, " You 
took the lodgings yourself . ^you or that Major 
Carter . ^I forget which. I neither eare nor know 
who are my neighbours." 

" Nonsense ! What nice work will be going on. 
Enviable fellow ! Telegraphing, eh ? " 



New Acquaintances. 167 

Fermor coloured. Kallying confused him. " I 
don't understand you," he said, in a voice registered 
a good deal below zero. " I never do understand 
that sort of thing. Pray don't talk in that way. I 
don't like it." 

The other coloured in his turn. " I didn't 
mean ^" he said* " I beg your pardon." 

" No, no," said Fermor, soothed by this humi- 
lity; "there are fellows with whom that sort of 
thing goes down. I don't care for it. It may be 
a defect ; but I don't." 

" I saw the Manuels this morning," said Young 
Brett, abruptly. " Ah I the second is a nice one. 
I am beginning to suspect our friend is really 
getting her." 

"But is he, though?" said Fermor, contemp- 
tuously, and yet a little nervously. "Is he quite 
sure?" 

" Well, I met him this morning, with a mouth 
open from ear to ear, and he squeezed my hand as 
if it were in a vice, and when I asked when he 
was going away, he looked knowing, and said it 
depended. But I must be off myself; promised 
to go with Page and look at a horse.' 

" What a hurry you are always in !" said Fermor. 



168 Never Forgotten. 



" Surely you're not quite a Secretary of State, or 
Governor-General of India, or a Member of Par- 
liament . or is this horse affair matter of life and 
death, that you can't afford to be a moment late I 
Will the horse die, if you are not precisely punc- 
tual?" 

" O no," said poor Brett, sitting down ruefully 
under this shower of sarcasm. "Not at all; just 
as long as you please." 

" Well, is there no news I Surely there must 
be something going on ? " 

" No ; nothing that I know. Every day is much 
the same with us, you know." 

" You should read Mrs. Barbauld's little story of 
' Eyes and No Eyes.' K you don't use such facul- 
ties as you have, you will become quite dull. Did 
the Manuels tell you nothing? By the way, which 
of them did you see ?" 

" The second one. She was in the front garden, 
and the gate was locked, and I spoke to her over 
the rails ; and when I told her I was going to see 

you, by Jove But you will be angry if I tell 

you." 

" Not at all," said Fermor, good naturedly. " Tell 
it your own way. Goon. Well?" 



New Acquaintances. 169 

" Well, I assure you she had a bunch of scarlet 
geraniums in her hand, and I could not tell which 
was the reddest." 

" Which I of the geraniums I " 

" No ; the geraniums or her cheeks. Tm afraid, 
old fellow, you have been doing mischief there ; I 
am, indeed." 

Fermor passed over the " old fellow " with 
wonderful good nature. He shook his head 
with great good humour, and said it was non- 
sense. 

"And yet," said Young Brett, thoughtfully, 
^* what deep ones they are I" 

" Who ?" said Fermor. 

" O I women . ^girls 1" said the beardless Eoche- 

foucald. " That night, when I caught her 

Well, any fellow would have thought it was a des- 
perate case, and yet, you see ^*' 

Fermor suddenly became cold. " I don't follow 
you," he said. 

" I mean," said Little Brett, " it turns out that 
all the while she is to marry that fellow. Any 
fellow would be taken in, you know." 

" I can't keep up with you at all," said Fermor. 
*^ Your partiality for that word is quite confusing. 



170 Never Forgotten. 



Have you heard anything since? What do the 
precious gossips you go among say ? " 

" Well, Showers says ^^ 

" O, Showers I " said Fermor, witii contempt. 
(Showers was Thersites.) "Is he to be quoted 
next?" 

" I don't know," said the other. " He picks up 
whatever is going on, and he says they have settled 
it all, and that you ' ' 

" // " said Fermor, colouring. " Do you mean 
to say they have been daring to mix my name up 

in the business? I hope you have not been 1 

am sure you have ^" 

" No, no," said the other, in great alarm. " It 
was only one night that Showers was talking in 
his impudent way about you, and saying you went 
^ sniggering ' after every girl, making people think 
they were dying for you, and I got angry, and . 
and '' 

"And told what you saw that night," said 
Fermor, very hot and excited. "Just what I 
would expect. It was a great liberty. You had 
no business to do it. Such a thing ! " And he 
began walking up and down the room. 



New Acquaintances, 171 



"I never meant, I am sure-; ^^ aid Little 

Brett, penitently. 

"And how did he and those people take it? 
You may tell it all nowJ' 

" Well, they laughed," said the other, with great 
eiigemess and candour, as a Jdnd of atonement, 
*^in a sort of way, you know. And Showers 
said ' he didn't believe it, that it was all brag, 
and that you were always in some ^ sickly 
dream' or other, and that he had it from Han- 
bury himself, on that very morning, that it was all 
settled." 

Fermor groaned once more. This, again, was 
like being plunged into the sea on a December 
morning. 

Little Brett, somewhat scared, left him still 
pacing up and down, and in great distress. He 
was morally shivering every time he thought of 
that odious Thersites Showers and his coarse jest- 
ing, and of the loud chorus laugh of the rest. 
Above all, his emphasis rested on "that stupid 
Brett." "But what could be expected," he said, 
with all scorn and pity, " from such a set ? Not 
a gentleman among them: even their names . 



172 Never Forgotten. 



Thrupp, Slack I. I should like to give them a 
lesson . to take them down a bit. I should like to 
show their mean natures how little they know 
about the matter." And with many bitter similes 
he seemed to be laying out some very satisfactory 
schemes which would confound them all, and lay 
them grovelling at his feet. 



A Convalefcent Vifttor. 173 



CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH. 

A CONVALESCENT VI8IT0B. 

He was very indignant with the Manuel family, 
who had neglected him, as he conceived. The 
son came once only, and he had merely called at 
the door. Not that he desired his society; for he 
considered him a sort of "low," brusque, ill- 
mannered foreigner, who, it was plain, had never 
been with gentlemen. He (Fermor) could tell in 
a second whether he was " the real thing" or no. 
Clearly a fellow out of an orchestra. And this 
notion, which seemed to him something in the 
style of M. About, appeared a very happy illus- 
tration. "A low fellow out of an orchestral" 
There was only the one lady in the family . and 



174 Never Far gotten. 



the more he thought of that little night incident, 
the more soft and agreeable it seemed. He 
thought of her as a "poor" faithful little wor- 
shipper. She was very pretty, and he declared 
that, as soon as he got well, she should be hand- 
somely rewarded. If he had heard any one talk of 
"rewarding a girl" by a visit, he would have 
scoffed at him as a low, ungentlemanly creature ; 
even if he were talking aloud with no one present, 
he would not have used such a form of words ; but 
still the idea, as a sort of motive for his resolution, 
was present to him. 

His health was mending rapidly. The fresh 
air of the place was serviceable; the improve- 
ment could be marked day by day. He had been 
down to his barracks; in a few day& more he was 
to resume duty. 

He dressed himself with care, looked in the 
mirror over the chimney-piece, and thought there 
was a refined "^iritual" tone, in such delicate 
colouring as there was in his face, which was not 
to be matched in the district. A gentle air of 
weakness . which would contrast well with the 
coarse robustness and gross he^alth of some of 
his fellows. Going to a box of gloves, he chose 



A Convalefcent Vifitor. 175 

out a pair . faintly coloured too, as with a blush 
. so as to be in keeping. 

It was about five o'clock in the evening, and 
be sauntered straight to the house of the Manuels. 
The maid who had thought him "lovely," and 
who, indeed, had dwelt on his image very often 
since, broke into rustic smiles. " O yes, sir, I am 
sure they are in . some of the ladies." 

He went up before her, opened the drawing- 
room door himself, and entered. There was only 
one figure there, sitting on a Uttle low chair and 
looking listlessly out of the window, with her 
book half closed upon her knee. She did not even 
look rooind as she heard the door open. 

She was pale. As Fermor did not speak, she 
looked round, started to her feet with a sort of 
cry, half ran forward . ^then stopped, her face and 
neck bathed in glowing carmine. She felt this 
rich colour dyeing her face^ and put up both 
hands. 

"Quite well?" said Fermor, delighted with 
these fflgns: of. his power. " Thisr is the first day 
I have got out . ^the voy first hour, I may say . 
and yours is the first place I have found my 
wary to." 



176 Never Forgotten, 



She stood quite irresolute. " O," she said, "I 
am so glad. You must have suffered so much." 

"I suppose I shall get strong again/' said 
Fermor, " some of these days. May I get myself 
a chair?" he added, with a smile, as though he 
were saying some very lively thing. 

Her face assumed a scared look at once. "0 
yes," she said; "but I am afraid ^" 

A shade came upon Fermor^s fair forehead. 

"I know," he said; "the regular objection. 
You are quite right, of course, on the score of 
propriety. I understand." 

" O no,, no, no, no I" she said, with extraordinary 
eagerness, and clasping her hands together pite- 
ously. " Not that ! no, indeed ! " 

Fermor looked at her appealing eyes with admi- 
ration . ^with great satisfaction, too, in himself. 
" Bird fluttering in the f owler^s net, and fluttering 
so prettily," was the idea floating in his mind. 
For curiosity and amusement he would make 
her flutter yet a little more. " You want me to 
go," he said. " I intrude here. And yet," said he, 
" for a sick man, tired by his first walk. exhausted, 
in fact . to be turned out ^" 

Again the little bird fluttered nervously to the 



A Convalefcent VifUor. 177 

window, fluttered back again, almost wrung her 
hands. Fermor began to be astonished. 

" O ! " she said, " it seems very odd and very 
cruel, but I gave a sort of promise. If you could 
come again later ; indeed I could not help it ; but 
if they come back ^" 

" I see," said Fermor. " Upon my word, this 
is. taking the shape of a romance. What a pity 
to put all your family to such trouble . ^solemn 
promises, and the like! I assure you there was 

no need. The shadow of a hint would have 

But how a mere call of civility could cause any 
confusion or misapprehension, is, to me, a perfect 
mystery. Pray assure your family that they may 
set their minds at rest for the future." 

This was more of the fowler and of the fowler^s 
net. The little bird looked at him wistfully, and 
seemed inclined to sob. 

"What shall I do?" she said. "I should not 
have told you. I don't know what you will 
think ! O, let me go, please, for I am very un- 
happy ! " 

She flew past him out of the room, he looking 
after her with wonder, half pleased, half morti- 
fied. He should like to make an effective stage 

VOL. I. N 



178 Never Forgotten. 



exit, but there was no audience. His curiosity 
was, besides, piqued . ^almost to a vulgar degree 
. and he was dying to leam more. He walked 
away, and came back undecided; walked away 
again, and came back. " Poor little soul," he said, 
looking tranquilly at a Fermor that was in the 
glass, "it isalWery fresh and natural!" 

He rang the bell suddenly, and presently came 
the maid who had thought him ^lovely-" He 
spoke to her with exquisite poKteneas. ^^ Might 
1 give yooi the trouble," he said, "to ask Miss 
Yiolet Manuel if I could see her for cme mo- 
ment." 

The girl went away delighted with the mission. 

Violet appeared again at the door in sad con- 
fusion. ^O," she said, "I have behaved so 
a'bsurdly, so childishly, I am /quite aBhamed. You 
won't think of it. Will it be too much to ask jt>u 
not to say lliat I have told jcm ^" 

"A little secret?" said the fowler, smiling. 
" Is it to be or secret ? Witli all my heart. But 
what is the meaning of all this ? What are these 
mysterious promises and tyrant relations ? Or is 
it my poor head that is not yet recovered? I think 
it must be." 



A Convalefcent Vifttor. 179 

She was hanging down her head, and said over 
again she had been so foolish and so ridiculous. 

Fermor's roice became wonderfully soft. 
^' ' Foolish and ridiculous ! ' No. I cannot think 
candour and perfect nature to be foolish and ridi- 
culous. Seriously/' said he, ^^can I help you? If 
you were, indeed, to do me the honour of thinking 
me worthy of being consulted, such poor advice as 
I am capable of would be at your service. I have 
seen a little of the world . have been knocked 
about here, there, and everywhere. I ought to 
know something. Do consult me, and I am sure 
I could help you." 

A melancholy sort of flageolet voice was the 
most effective of all the instruments in Fermor's 
orchestra. He was playing on it now, and ^ath 
surprising effect. 

" O, you are so kind, so good," she -said, tear- 
fully, " and I dcm't know how to thank you. But 

they don^ know, tibey don't understand ^" 

"r%? Who?" said Fermor. "You won't 
be angry if I say something . that is, if I suspect 
that there is a friend of yours who has something 
to do with this. You see, a sick man . from his 
mere helplessness . hears something occasionally. 
n2 



180 Never Forgotten. 



Now, I know his nature very well, having come 
in contact with ever so many natures up and down 
the world. I may not have profited by all my 
opportunities as I ought to have done, but, in spite 
of myself, I have come to know human nature 
at least. Well, your friend Mr. Hanbury is an 
honest, good soul, that means well ; and I seriously 
tell you, if he does make a mistake, and is hurried 
out of his regular course by a little honest rough- 
ness, I know enough of human nature to see that 
it is only on the surface." 

" O, it is not that ; but this place, as you know, 
is full of . stories,'* said the girl, passionately; 
"but I don't like him . ^that is, like him as they 
mean," she added, dropping her eyes in confusion ; 
" and never can Uke him ! never ! " 

" Never like him 1 " said Fermor, looking round 
in astonishment. "How singular! How sur- 
prising!" (Over and over again, when he got 
home, did he rehearse this scene with delight and 
complacency, the exquisite skill with which he had 
"played" seeming to him above all other efforts of 
his life.) "Do tell me about this, for really / 

should have thought ^but then I always forget 

that I have been a sick man with a battered head. 



A Convalefcent Vifttor. 181 

and, what is worse, a defeated one, on an occasion 
when I would have given I can't say what to have 
gained a victory I " 

Fermor was walking up and down the room as 
he spoke all this very volubly, his coat fluttering 
back as he walked, like the drapery of a robe. 

" I should have come back to you, to your car- 
riage, to be crowned ; but it was no use struggling 
witB destiny. Your wishes, I know, were against 
me, like a strong gale. You had your champion . 
why not? To say the truth, I never do expect to 
succeed in anything in life. I expect to -be always 
near it . ^to want something just at the last mo- 
ment. See the life I lead, forced to associate with 
tliat herd-.-a set of blocks . ^good in their own way, 
but for a mind like mine that looks to better 
things, scarcely companions. But I am a dreamer 
. a mere dreamer I " 

He was pacing up and down, delivering his 
speech with singular fluency. " A dreamer I Yes. 
Such dreams I During that illness you cannot 
fancy what dreams, and even visions . especially 
one night . ^here . ^in this house I" 

He halted suddenly on his beat and looked at 
her. Again the carmine flood was gushing to the 



182 Never Forgotten. 



surface. " Curious, was it not ?" he said, resuming 
his walk. He was chai'ined with the whole situa- 
tion. It seemed to him that she was " hanging 
on his words." She was " under a sort of spell," 
he thought, afterwards. If he were a man inclined 
to boast, what a thing to tell . ^to overwhehn those 
creatures at the barracks I 

He was surprised at his own fluency. He went 
on, still pacing: " You don't care to trust me, and 
yet, perhaps, I might be found useful. I often 
think I should have been a priest. Yes, I should 
have liked to have been a priest. To have sat all 
day long in a confessional . and yet, I dare say, I 
could guess at the whole state of things. I have 
an instinct for hinnan affairs, a strange instinct. I 
can read a situation like a book. I can read minds, 
too. For instance, I can take the front of this 
house off and look in. I know at once who are 
my friends." He went on : "In this house, how 
many have I ? Possibly not one !" (This last sen- 
tence he spoke in a low, half-melancholy tone.) 
" Possibly not one !" he repeated. " But that is a 
mere personal view. What does it matter ? The 
other day, if there had been a little rough stone 



A Convalefcent Vifiior. 183 

where I fdil^ why I should not be talking to you 
here . and perhaps boring you so terribly," 

"No, noj no.!" said the girl, casting down ber 
eyes; "indeed, no. I could listen for . that is,- I 
like hearing all this ^" 

" TheUy as for you," continued he, glancing at 
the other Fetmor in the mirror, "I can under- 
staad it all. ^Relatives, sisters, mothers, brothers, 
who have our interest at heart, and think they un- 
derstand it better than we do, hurrying us on 
eagerly into some serious step . all for our good," 
added he, si^castically.. " Dear Miss Manuel, I 
feel like an old friend to you, and seriously . for it 
would be affectation in me to say I do not see that 
you have something on your mind . seriously, if by 
advice or assistance I can be of use, pray employ 
me." 

She looked up at him with her full round eyes, 
now little, glistening, and tearful. 

" O !" she said, " Mr. Fermor, I am unhappy, 
very imhappy; I don't know what to do. They 
are so kind, and so good, and mean so well, and, 
as you say, all for my interest." 

" Exactly," said he, smiling. " Everything dis- 



184 Never Forgotten. 



agreeable is for our interest." His intuitive know- 
ledge of nature was surprising to himself. 

" And I am, I may say, alone in the house with- 
out support, and I do fear I shall be hurried on 
into a step. which ^^ 

Fermor went over, and sat down beside her on 
the sofa. He was going to hear it all. It was 
growing dusk. "Dear Miss Violet." At that 
moment the door was opened. A joyous, noisy, 
hearty figure burst in. 

" We have been waiting for hours," it said, in 
the gayest key : adding, after a bewildering pause, 
"What! Fermor?" 



The View of a Man of the World. 185 



CHAPTEE THE SIXTEENTH. 

THE VIEW or A MAN OF THE WORLD. 

" What I Fermor ? " this he repeated after a 
second pause ; the speaker^s face halting the while 
between his habitual laugh and doubting frown. 
Violet had moved a little apart on the sofa; but 
Fermor, who always looked on these little " situa- 
tions " as so many openings for mental training, 
determined that there should be no awkwardness. 
Why, indeed, should there be? A man of the 
world was present. 

"Glad to see you, Mr. Hanbury," he said. 
*^ The first evening I have got out. And my first 
visit has been to the charitable friends who took 
me in, after that stupid blundering accident." 

Hanbury was glowing all over, and looking 



186 Never Forgotten. 



excitedly from one to the other of the two faces. 
But the last words of Fermor recalled to him 
certain obligations, as indeed their speaker had 
artfully intended they should, and checked some 
unmeaning and perhaps wild speech he was about 
to make. 

" They are waiting for you," he said, bluntly and 
even roughly, " down at the beach. Shall I tell 
them that you can't come ? " 

" Yes, yes," she said, timorously. " I can't go 
to-night; I have a headache. It is too late. I 
don't care to walk." 

But Fermor rose to go. *^It is too late even 
for me. I laugh at myseH, but: am obliged, in 
spite of myself, to be an invalid, and take all 
manner of ridicoloas precaation& about my health. 
Mr. Hanbury and I can go part of the way to- 
gether. Miss Manuel and I have been improving 
each other. I have been teaching her some of my 
morbid philosophy." 

The two went out together, and so this rather 
extraordinary interview ended. At the door, Han- 
bury stopped abruptly, and in a gauche, almost 
rough tone, said, "I am not going this way. I 
am very sorry, but have an appointment." 



The View (fa Man of the World. 187 

" Good gracious ! " said Fermor, gaily, " keep it, 
by all means. Don't think of it. I shall get 
home very Ti^U ; not qnite an old man yet." 

"Such a boor!" he thought to himself; "a 
true navvy!" And he walked along, smiUng 
to himself, and thinking almost with delight of 
his "consummate acting" in the little piece of 
that evening. " Charming little creature she is ! " 
he said, half aloud. "There is really something 
bewitching about her. If that stupid lout had 
not come in, she would have told me everything 
about herself. I knew what she was coming to." 
Then he thought perhaps it was as well the lout 
had come in, for that confidence might have led 
on to "a business." "I believe I could wind her 
round my finger," thought Mr. Fermor, as he 
entered his room. " Confiding little child ! " 

These speculations entertained him a great part 
of the evening. As usual, he got out his little 
theatre, lit up his castle in Spain, and put himself 
down walking among the grounds with the little 
Spanish girl upon his arm. Good old family, he 
dared to say. Money, he dared to say also. After 
all, a man must settle down some time or other. 
Then changing the scene to an inner room in the 



188 Never Forgotten. 



castle in Spain, he saw himself as lecturer, preacher, 
teacher, moulding this soft mind to his own pattern 
. a delightful occupation. So he worked the idea 
through a whole little play, and then . ^thinking of 
the earthly creatures down at the barracks, whose 
ideas were centred in a pipe . contrasted his own 
intellectual day's labour with theirs, and thought 
of going to bed. 

They came to tell him there was a gentleman 
below who wished to see him . ^Mr. Hanbury; 
Fermor did not relish this visit. " Eeally, at this 
hour," he said. " Come, I suppose, repentant. 
These boors are always as ready to humble them- 
selves, as to offend. Show him up." 

Hanbury walked in heavily . stalked is the 
word . ^but had scarcely the bearing of a penitent. 

" I am sorry," he said, " to come in on you at 
such an hour, but the fact is, I could not have 
slept without seeing you. A great deal has hap- 
pened since I left you this evening, and. . " 

Fermor, though he had shut his theatre for the 
night, threw open the doors again with alacrity. 
The excited "lout" would afford him a little after- 
piece before going to bed. 

" Sit down, do," he said. " The hour is a little 



The View of a Man of the World. 189 

unusual, and I will ask you not to stay veiy long . 
an invalid, you know. Well, about this horse, eh ? 
You are coming to that ? " 

Hanbury sat down mechanically, and looked at 
him. " Horse? no ?" he said, impatiently. " You 
know what I mean, and what I am goiag to say ; 
you know you do. What is the use of this affectar 
tion of carelessness I I am tired of it ; I want to 
speak very seriously." 

"As seriously as you please," said Fermor; 
" but, I hope, with quietness and temper. Excuse 
my saying so. Indeed, if I did not know that you 
are one of those honest, sincere natures that must 
say out what they think, I assure you I should," and 
he paused for a little and smiled, " I should ring 
for a candle and go to bed.'* 

" Not until you have listened to me," said the 
other, standing up excitedly. " We were very 
happy till you came, and she liked me . and it . 
it . ^was all. settled ahnost. And now it is all 
changed, and I am convinced you have something 
to do with it. You know in your conscience you 
have, Fermor!" 

"Wliat logic 1" said Fermor, smiling almost 
contemptuously. " But I suppose I am to un- 



190 Never Forgotten. 



derstand you are alluding to the fiecoiid Miss 
Manuel?" 

" Yes, yes," said the other. 

" Well, all I can say, Mr. Hanbury, k," said 
Fermor, "you astonish me I" 

" But that is not it," said the other, stopping 
before him still more excitedly ; "you are evading 
the question . purposely evading it . you know 
you are." 

" But it is the question, excuse me," said Fermor, 
very coldly. " Here is a person with whom I have 
but the pleasure of a very slight acquaintance, but 
whom 1 trust I shall come to know better, comes 
bursting in on me at scarcely a visiting hour, pours 
out a torrent of reproaches about a young lady 
being changed, and says I know it, and can't deny 
it. What is ity pray? Well, if I cfo know, and 
don't deny it? Keally this is what I must call 
very childish. Now do, as a favour, jsit down again 
and tell me what it is you want, or what you com- 
plain of ; and let us talk rationally." 

Hanbury, very much sobered by this speech, did 
sit down, awkwardly, after a second's hesitation. 

" Now listen to me," said Fermor, " for I will 
reason with you . as we have got so far in the 



The Viewvfa Man of the World. 191 

matter, wb may as well finish with it to-night. A 
lady you admire has suddenly changed towards 
yon. Very well. Now^ wiiat have I to do with 
that?" 

" Exactly I" said Hanbury, startmg up. " Now 
-we are coming to the point. It isTery hard. It 
was all settled. And we w^e so happy, and . 

and ^Why did yon do it ? I never injured you," 

he added, piteonsly. 

^Not intentionally," isaid T'ennor, smiling. A 
clever allusion to the race day. " But, still reasoning 
with you (for to another man I would say at once, 
'Sir, you have no business to bring me to account'), 
I ask yon again, what have I tto do with it, having 
been shut up here for three weeks? Do you 
suppose, becamse a young girl, who has seen about 
as little of the world as a nun, grows a little cold, 
that you are to go about fnon house to house 
ventilating your grief? Keally, I must say, for 
the lady's sake, it is scarcely ^" 

Hanbury, who felt Uke a great fish in a great 
net, feeling his helplessness, and, perhaps, some 
truth in what had been said to him, now struck 
out ivildly, as it were. " I carit talk with you, 
Mr. Fermor," he said ; " I have no gifts that way. 



192 Never Forgotten. 



But this must be settled one way to-night. I 
want to know what you mean to do.'* 

" Mean to do ! " said Fermor. " That is a wide 
question." 

" It is far too important a matter to be quibbled 
away in this fashion/' said Hanbuiy. " You know 
what I mean." 

"To save time," said Fermor, "and supposing 
that I do catch your meaning, suppose me to do 
as you say I have done ; or rather, what would 
you have me do ? " 

" Give her up-^not see her . not speak to her . 
yes, to speak plainly, give her up. I know you 
are superior in many ways. You have been in 
the world, and know how to manage these things. 
Can t you find some of the fine court ladies . ^they 
are more suited to you ? Do, and leave me her." 

" I see it is hopeless," said Fermor. ^' In fact, 
it is so very delicate a subject to discuss, and 
if I were to speak freely on the matter, it would 
not be respectful to our common friends. If you 
mean by ^ giving up ' to cut off visits, or make any 
ridiculous marked expos6 of the kind, I decline to 
do so at once. It is much better to be candid, you 



The View of a Man of the World. 193 

know. I can't afford to get into an absurd posi- 
tion for anybody." 

Hanbury looked at him hopelessly and help- 
lessly. "If I might suggest anything/' continued 
Fermor, "I should say the proper manly course 
would be to exert yourself, and go in regularly 
and win back your position. You know the old 
saying about women having to be won, and the 
faint heart, and that sort of thing." 

"I see," -said Hanbury. "I understand at last. 
But don't be too confident, Mr. Fermor. I kno\f 
I am rough, and can't show off in a drawing- 
room ; but still I believe that honesty and manli- 
ness will always have some sort of weight of their 
own. We shall see how it will turn out. I will 
take your good advice, though I believe it was 
not meant to be taken." 

" You are quite a privileged being here 1 " said 
Fermor. 

"I won't detain you longer," said Hanbury; 
" but I see my way. I may know little of women, 
but I should scorn to find my amusement, or 
feed my vanity in what they call ' Conquest! I 
should prefer trying to save them from such a 
cruel fate." 

YOIj. I. o 



194 Never Forgotten. 



" With all my hjeaxt," said Fermmv rising aad 
taking the candle ; " a very proper rfilfi^ which I 
quite envy yotu But let me teU yon lb requires 
some gifts . something more tham the mere wilL 
You may break down." 

" Never ! " said Hanbuxy, turning to go. 

" We shall see," said Fermor. ^Well, we 
have agreed on something.. And now will you 
let me ask a favour?. only one . which is, not 
to let us have aoy childish petti&hness before 
other people. It is so absurd, ^ Let do^ delight,' 
you know, but not men of the world, grown up like 
you and me. There, good night." 

" Upon my word," he said, as he lay his head 
on his pillow that night, "this is getting more and 
more exciting every minute. It i; like a play. 
This place is really rising in my opinion. I shall 
have a little excitement here presently. I am 
almost sorry I gave him that bit of advice. Poor 
soul ! I shall beat him easily." 



Difcovery of a " True Gentleman:' 195 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH. 

DISCOVERY OF A " TBUE GENTLEMAN." 

Febmob's days went by tedionBly enough, solaced, 
indeed, by bnt Kttle company and the "potted 
meats'* of Mudie, with which he was victualled 
steadily. In what was to be seen, however, from 
his back window he began to take a growing 
interest. Every day there was the same little 
scene, which he watched, himself unseen, the chair 
brought out, the cushions, the invalid daughter, 
with a face that would have been charming to look 
on if only lit up with the colours of health, and the 
grim, rigid father, trying to bend his stem economy 
into the gentle offices of nurse. On him Fenaot 
o2 



196 Never Forgotten. 



looked with repugnance. He was a mere " day- 
labourer^* in manners, but still even in that class the 
family virtues are sometimes strongly deVeloped. 
With this salvo . a sort of apology made to his 
nicer feelings . he could indulge himself in looking 
on, and, curiously enough, began to find an interest 
that increased day by day in the companionship of 
these figures . ^for to him they were no more. He 
would have given a great deal to " find out some- 
thing" about them. But he could not bring him- 
self down to the familiarity of questioning his man, 
though he knew that his "man" enjoyed almost 
the friendship of the " woman" next door. 

On the evening before he went out of hospital, 
as it were, a letter was brought in to Fermor, in 
a stiff, broken hand, that looked like a bit of iron 
paling. " A bill," said Fermor. " How they do 
persecute one." He opened it, and read with some 
surprise : 

" Sir, . I called on you lately about a dog which 
kept my daughter awake a good part of the night. 
When I waited on you, I assumed, both from your 
appearance (excuse my saying so), as well as from 
the way in which I have always found such remon- 



Difcovery of a " True Gentlemanr 197 

strances are received by men, that the mere fact of 
requiring the dog to be removed would offend yonr 
pride, and that you would therefore meet me with 
a hostile and impracticable tone. I thought, then, 
the best way would be to anticipate, and prevent by 
a sort of firmness, any such reception. 

" The thing was too serious to be trifled with. I 
have but one daughter in the world, who, after a 
life of roughness and trouble that I long wished 
to be rid of, has become a life to me that I care for. 
We had thought her in a decline ; but this place 
has been the first where she has shown any signs 
of mending. Naturally I felt anxious, and spoke 
more strongly than, perhaps, was necessary. I 
see I made a mistake, and that I was speaking 
to a gentleman. I have never apologised to any 
man, and never shall to any man, but, at my 
daughter's request, I beg to thank you, which 
I omitted to do, for your so kindly anticipating 
our wishes. 

" I am. Sir, yours, 

" John Carlay." 

Though there was an unpleasant taste about 
this paper, still Fermor was pleased with it. He 



198 Never Forgotten. 



turned it over and oyer. "An original/' he said. 
"I said so from the first" . ^this was scarcdy 
true . "and yet there is decidedly somedmig 
of the gentleman about him" (which, perhaps, 
lay in that recognition of the gentleman in Jdrn), 
"Very odd," 'he went on, and thought how 
curiously true blood thus always impressed every- 
body. He went to his Ktde writing-case, and, 
on delicate paper decorated at the top with 
two letters, he wrote a coldly polite acknowled^ 
ment: 



C*JF* 




" Captain Fermor begs to acknowledge, &c." 

Then he recollected that the other had written 
to him in the first person; "an ill-bred thing," 
no doubt, but still, it would look like "ungen- 
tlemanly" insolence to freeze him up with an 
answer in the third. " Now," said he, tearing it 
up, " that is just what Forsyth, or Showers, or 
Oadby, or any of those fellows down there would 
do." 

He knew better, and began again : 



Difcovery of a " True Gentlemanr 199 







"SiE, . I beg to acknowledge the receipt of 
your letter. I am very glad that the misappre- 
hension xmder which you laboured has been 
removed^ I fancy you will always find that a 
true gentleman will be ready to anticipate any 
request, so reasonable as the one you made, 
especially when a lady's health or wishes are 
concerned. 

"I am, Sir, yours truly, 

^ Charles Febmor." 

In his present condition of monotony, this 
little incident was something to think over with 
interest. He read again his answer to the " day- 
labourer's " production, and thought nothing could 
be more nicely turned. He even fancied himself 
speaking these sentiments coldly and calmly. It 
seemed to him like the skilful French fencer 
gracefully parrying with a frail rapier the rough 
clumsy stroke of a sabre. It was all sleight of 
hand, and he looked down at his pale woman-like 
fingers, and thought how it was that good breeding 



200 Never Forgotten. 



and gentility helped them to wield that social 
rapier . ^the pen. 

A couple of days later, when Fermor was 
quite given back to the world (only he had been 
recommended to stay in his lodgings on account 
of the "good air"), he met Major Carter on the 
road, leaning, more for affection's sake than sup- 
port, on his son's arm. No one ever saw Major 
Oarter^s wife leaning on Major Garter^s arm. But 
then she was in such "wretched health." "So 
glad to see you," said Major Carter, with his 
airiest smile of encouragement. " You are looking 
much better, but not quite restored as yet, I can 
see. Delicate about here," said the major, putting 
his hand on his own face. " No wonder, I declare. 
And how are you now f " 

"You never came to see me," said Fermor. "I 
assure you I should have been glad to have seen 
you. I had no one to tell me the news of the 
place, or anything." 

Not in the least affected by this candid con- 
fession of motives, Major Carter replied hastily, 
" Very good of you. Shall I tell you the reason f 
Somerset here- knows it as well as I. I said it 
to him only yesterday at breakfast. Fact was. 



Dijcovery of a  True Gentleman:' 201 

I knew you would be worried with visits, per- 
haps with having to talk when you were not 
in the humour, or having to listen when you 
were dying to be rid of us. Indeed, I passed the 
other night, and saw that man that has the horse 
. Orawfurd, or Hanbury, whatever his name is . 
coming out. After that, I felt it would scarcely 
have been fair." 

Fermor smiled. There was a good deal of the 
gentleman about this major, after all. 

" By the way," said the latter, " I knew it would 
be no use asking you ; yet if I did not mention it, 
it would look naturally very strange. But we are 
having some friends coming to us to-morrow night, 
in the French way." 

Fermor began to .jcontract sensitively. Here 
was this man trying to fasten an intimacy on 
him. "I rarely go to parties; never, in fact," 
he said, coldly. 

" So I said to Somerset this morning. In one 
sense it is scarcely worth asking you. It was for 
the Prices . old friends of yours . ^the Prices of 
Bletchley." 

" What I are they here ? " said Fermor. 

"Yes, they came when you were sick. Sir 



202 Never Forgotten. 



Charles Honeyman, the two CampbelLs, the Ma- 
anels^ Mr. Butler our new clergyman, and a few 
more." 

^' If I ean manage it/' said Fermcxr, in a rami- 
nating sort of way, ^Tll try and look ia. Yoa 
see, I mast take cae of myself now," 

"To be sure," said the major. "We'll leave 
it in that way. Tm ashamed to ask a Town mam 
to such a thing, and yet I suspect those manttf ac- 
turing people, the Slacks, who are giving their 
rsumptuoas ball next week . ^a blaze of vulgar 
splendour'. will not get you to go to them. Tell 
me if I have guessed right? I know I am only 
the merest acquaintance of yours, scarcely that, 
indeed ; but I am sure I have judged you right." 

Fermor smiled^ a little pleased at this comph- 
ment. " Well, finery," he said, "is scarcely my 
line. Give me ladies and gentlemen, and let 
them give their parties in a bam, if they like." 

" Capital ! very good, very good indeed 1" said 
the major. "Ah, Scnnerset 1 Somerset 1" he con- 
tinued, sadly, shaking his head. Which, though a 
little vague, somehow did convey to Fermor that 
there had been a design of taking him for a model, 
but that it was now plainly hopeless to imitate him. 



Difcovery of a " True Gentlemanr 203 

" An odd thing, too, you will say," the major 
went on ^^ I have asked that strange man next 
door to you^ the stiff, gaunt man . Carlay." 

" A sad bear," said Fermor, thinking of his 
own experience of him. " Yet a something . ^I 
don't know how, but really there u something of 
the gentleman about him%" 

" How singular I " said the major, with admirar- 
tion. " Somerset, what was our conversation this 
morning?" 

The youth only elevated his eyes . as if the co^ 
incidence passed aU speech. 

" Ah, you see ! Why, I confess I am ashamed. 
My first judgment was that he was wo gentleman. 
He wanted the air, you understand. But since, I 
have heard all about him* A most singular history. 
A good Scotch family gone astray, and all that 
sort of thing. It is very odd. Do you know. 
Captain Fermor, I envy you that instinct of 
yours." 

'^ Yes," said Fennor, with quiet superiority ; " I 
think I am pretty well up in ^t sort of thing. I 
can't be taken in easily . ^not easy to pass off plating 
on me for silver." 

As he went home, Fermor owned to himself 



204 Never Forgotten, 



that that Carter was a well-bred sort of person, and, 
it was easy to see, had mixed in superior circles. 
He was half inclined to "look in" at his little 
party. 

Sauntering on, he began to think with tranquil 
pleasure on what he, without affectation, considered 
his "conquest," and the dramatic scene he had 
passed through. Marriage was not to be thought 
of. "Though," said Captain Fermor to himself, 
"I 'suppose, one of these days!" . ^that is to say, 
one of these days the nuptial Juggernaut would 
demand its victim and crunch his bones. He thought 
he would go and see them again, and have a petite 
verre of dramatic excitement. He wanted a fillip. 
He looked at himself. Suitable touching and co- 
louring had been got in skilfully. The canvas 
would do. " Poor, poor Hanbury," he said, smiling, 
" how he struggled and ^ flopped' when he felt my 
harpoon in him ! " 

He was coming dovm one of the little streets of 
the town, when there crossed it at right angles, 
about a couple of hundred yards away, that very 
"poor, poor Hanbury," walking with that veiy 
Miss Violet Manuel of whom he had been think- 
ing. They did not see him, and passed out of view 



Difcovery of a " True Gentleman^ 205 

in a moment. But he recognised at once a sort of 
check shooting-coat, which had often offended him 
on the score of its being in execrable taste, and 
Hanbury's companion . ^not from dress, but from 
an instinct hard to describe . ^he knew at once. He 
stopped impatiently, turned back, then turned again, 
as if he were ashamed of himself for what looked 
like a mortification. Curious to say, in the midst 
of all that confusion of anger, disgust, contempt, 
and disappointment, which seemed to choke him 
disagreeably, like a cloud of dust, he felt a sudden 
9harp stroke of pain, not coming from his recent 
illness or suffering, but of a kind that surprised 
him. It was not known to physicians or surgeons. 
For the rest of the day he was moody, and bitter, 
and pettish, and felt a curious restlessness, which 
prevented his settling down to Mr. Mudie, or, in- 
deed, to anything serious. 



206 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH. 

BOGER LE GAR5ON. 

Captain Febmor often said pleasantly that he 
was " a social Van Amburgh," and that Tvith his 
steel whip he canld tame any savage human lion. 
Pleased with himself for his handling of the next 
door wild aonimal, he very soon began to regard 
the wild animal itself with complatjeney. It 
was like a tonic, he thought . even like bitters : it 
was refreshing to meet these odd mental crooked 
branches. The common run of minds were a heap 
of smooth sticks turned in a lathe. One stick was 
merely the duplicate of the other. And in this 
trscin of thought it occurred to him that it would be 
a " gentlemanly" thing for Van Amburgh to go in 



Roger le Gargon. 207 



and call on the wild animal he had so happily- 
tamed. 

He knocked, A grim woman, like a Swiss toy, 
said that her master was out. out in the garden, 
which was, perhaps, as good as out. Let him " leave 
his business,'^ whatever that might be. Fermor, 
growing highly sensitive, and selecting a card, was 
nervously making protest against the idea of his 
being supposed to have business, or of being eager 
to secure his way. " Not at all ! Pray, don't . ^I 
have not the least wish in the world . just give 
that, if you please," when there appeared at the 
end of the hall the tall, grim, cast-iron figure of 
Mr. Carlay^ with a grey hat on, that looked like a 
steel helmet, and leaning on a stick that might 
have been an iron rod. * 

" Captain Fermor," he said, without advancing 
to meet him, " from next door ? Do you wish me 
to do anything for you? It is quite useless asking 
me. I know nobody, and nobody knows me, either 
in this place, or anywhere else." 

" :2(cuse me," said Fermor, hastily, " you quite 
misunderstaiKd. You need be under no apprehen- 
sions. Merely the common every-day form of 
leaving a card." 



208 Never Forgotten. 



"A card?" said the other, taking it from the 
maid, and looking at it as if it were a curiosity. 
^^ Ah ! I am outside all this sort of thing. One of 
the forms, as you say." 

Not relishing the way in which his well-meant 
condescension was being accepted, Fermor said, 
" I am really sorry to have intruded on you. In 
fact, I . almost a mistake indeed. So you mil 
excuse me." 

He bowed and was going, when the grim voice 
said shortly, "Wait. Would you care to come 
into the garden a moment?" 

" I don't understand," said Fermor, hesitating. 
" I don't understand that sort of thing . ^much, that 
is.. No. Thanks." 

" I should nt care to show you what I don't 
care for myself. I want to show you what I do 
care for . ^my daughter." 

Fermor shrugged his shoulders as though he 
said, " I object to the whole business, but as there 
is a lady in the case . ^lead on !" 

The girl was sitting, as usual, in the sun, on a 
cushioned chair, and her head rested languidly on 
a soft pillow. Her eyes were fixed vacandy on one 
point. 



Roger le Gargon. 209 



" Here," said Mr. Carlay, stalking down upon her 
with the steady swing of a pendulum, " here is Mr. 
Fermor, the gentleman who sent the dog away." 

The girl raised her head in some confusion, for 
she thought that it was only her father returning 
on his old grim beat. 

Fermor, himself again in the presence of a lady, 
thought he would " reassure" her, and got on his 
most soothing manner. He was sorry to see she 
had been suffering . he hoped she was getting 
better. He was sure the air was good, at least 
he had found it so, for they were both invalids. 
His, indeed, was only a trifling accident . a mere 
scratch ; people had, however, insisted that it was 
dangerous. 

Fermor used often pleasantly to divide humanity 
into tongues without ears, and into ears without 
tongues. The convalescent girl was of this latter 
class. He might, too, have classed her as a " de- 
votional ear." In a very few moments he had set 
his fluency stop on, and the " Moi" . the ro cya . 
was whirring round. 

" Now take i/i^," he said, " for instance. I think 
I may say I am independent of the usual associa- 
tions. Someway I have trained myself to it. Other 

VOL. I. p 



210 Never Forgotten. 



men talk of being bored, and that sort of thing. I 
can hardly follow them. I confess I have trained 
my mind systematically. I don't allow myself to 
be bored. / don't make any boast of it, &c. &c." 

And in this way he aired the ro ry ap and down 
in a gentle canter, and opened to her the secrets 
of his personal psychology. She listened at first 
a little astonished . then not quite following him . 
finally interested. It was all new to her, who had 
been accustomed to the grim gritty diapason of her 
sire. She was a soft amiable girl, all gentleness, 
made for p^ting, and to have her hair smoothed 
through the day by fond hands. Seeing he had 
touched the proper key, Fermor put spurs to the 
TO eyo, and made it caracole with fire. 

The grim Carlay, meanwhile, was walking far 
away up and down on a beat as if he were a Prus- 
sian sentry on duty. He took no account of them, 
and was no doubt working the cast-iron machinery 
he called his thoughts. After what Fermor thought 
of as a " conversation," but which,, strictly, was a 
monologue, he went away. The grim sentry never 
went with him to the door. And this was Fermor's 
introduction to the Carlay family. 

" Poor invalid," he thought, " what a life she 



Roger le Gargon. 211 



miist have?" And if his conversation had much 
the same virtue as a Mug's touch was believed to 
have, it would surely be churlish not to apply it. 
"And yet I dont know/' he thought; "people 
would say it was affectation* But I declare 
genuinely I take no trouble about it; the thing 
comes to ray lips of itself." 

Between the two gardens there was only a low 
wall. Taking his cigar in the morning, which he 
did about as regularly as he did his roll and coffee, 
he could see the "poor invalid" already disposed 
on her cushions ; and leaning on the wall, he wished 
her good morning, and asked how she did. He 
was going to " touch" again, as the kings used to 
do. His eye noted a little change . ^a red bow on 
her neck, and an ornament or two. 

He began again. He made the to cyo) . the " I"- . 
leap the wall backwards and forwards, ai^d perform 
all maomer of gambols. " You think me affected. 
I know you do ; yet / don't call it affectation. It 
really is not iny way, &c.," according to the usual 
formtda. 

Fermor was " refined looking," and though only 
visible as a sort of Elgin marble, by reason of the 
wall, made a very effective torso. He travelled 
p2 



212 Never Forgotten. 



through a couple of cigars before he had finished 
his monologue. Then he thought, with his skilful 
powers, he would examine this " child'* on her 
history, about which he was a little curious, which 
made her talk, and the simplicity of her narrative 
amused him. Then he tried her on reading, she 
saying that she read a good deal. Did she read 
French f Indeed I Had she ever read a thing of 
Roger le Garfon, called " La Rose en Evidence ? " 
No? Then would she let him send it in to her? 

" Common people," said Fermor, " taking up 
that book, would say it was a common thing. Of 
course they would. / found it out. Mind, I don't 
want you to take my view. You must, of course, 
judge for yourself. I only say this, that if you 
want philosophy, sense, wit, and human nature, 
you have it there. Above all," said Fermor, be- 
coming deeply grave, "it is fit for any lady's 
perusal . any lady's. I am always most careful, I 
. assure you." 

In the evening arrived Roger le Gar9on, in 
paper swaddling-clothes, and sealed with pink seal- 
ing-wax. Roger le Garfon had not made his 
fame as yet, nor did he quite enjoy the esteem on 
railway stall or bookseller^s shelf, which Fermor 



Roger le Gargon. 213 

awarded him. Some day, no doubt, it would come. 
There was a picture or two by an artist of the 
name of Calkinwood, who had been much ne- 
glected by the public, and a song or two by an un- 
discovered composer, in which he discovered beau- 
ties corresponding to those of Roger le Gar9on; 
and thus literature, music, and painting, were em- 
bodied in Oalkinwood, Roger le Gar9on, and the 
undiscovered composer. But the little pale green 
Roger had gone on many visits to ladies' houses, 
and had almost travelled round the country like 
the Kensington Loan Collection. 

It was the calumet or pipe of peace of all 
Fermor^s intimacies. Once it passed into her 
room, a telegraphic cable had been successfully 
laid. This was but the first step ; then there was 
to follow a little series of lectures and illustrations 
of the beauties of Roger le Gar9on. 



214 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH. 

CAPTAIN THEESITES, 

On the eveaiing of Major Oarter^s little party, 
Fermor was dining with his fellows at mess. He 
had not spoken of it to tbem^ but was sujcpiised to 
find them all talking of it eagerly and vodferously. 
He was a little disgusted and inclined to revoke 
the " gentlemanly" patent he had so hastily issued. 
But it would have brought discredit on his own 
powers of judgment. 

All, however, had not been asked. The regi- 
mental sluice had not, as it were, been lifted to let 
the flood tumble in a sort of deluge on the major^s 
modest party, and lay the whole room under 
crimson water. He had exercised a nice selection, 



Captain Therfites. 215 

pulling tliem Kfce flowers, by the aid of ids Landed 
Gentry, and, with his wonderful discnnunation, 
had asked half a dozen of the very choicest men erf 
the corps. 

That very day Showers, who was always playing 
Thersites in respect of Fermor, eaime home from 
leave. Fermor shivered as he saw him sitting 
opposite. And yet this very Captain Showers was 
liked by the other men. He had a loud, strong 
voice, with a fat face and large mouth, on which 
he produced laughs by very much the action of a 
forge bellows. He was always teUing "good 
things," and ^ good stories," . stories without spine 
or stamina, but w^bich the simple souls about him 
roared at. The stray one or two who had heard . 
as in a dream . ^the names of Hood or Hook, and 
the single one who had met a joke of Sydney 
Smith in the stray serious book he had taken up 
in a dentist's parlour, placed him far above those 
humorists. 

Through this dinner he was busy detailing ad- 
ventures, and studded them over pretty thickly 
with ^' good things," like silver buttons on a court 
suit. Not merely " good" things, but " capital" 
things, and even the " very best things you ever 



J 



216 Never Forgotten. 



heard in your whole life." Of which last class 
several were brought out even in that one night, 
which must have made it an evening very re- 
markable to think of and look back to, for long 
after. It was not until this stock was exhausted, 
and they had adjourned to their ante-room, that 
he began to cast about him for his favourilie sub- 
ject, Fermor. 

" Well, Fermor," said Thersites, turning sud- 
denly on him, " what made you go and break the 
horse's back f Eh ? What had he done to you t " 

" I broke no horse's back," said Fermor, with 
quiet dignity. (It was odd, he believed even to 
the end that there was a magic power in this 
manner of his that could awe the profane^) " If 
you had taken the trouble to pick up the details, 
you would have heard a different story." And 
pleased with this retort he turned to his evening 
paper again, and began to read. 

Captain Thersites, not in the least disturbed, 
worked his forge bellows into many grins, looking 
round on the company, and began again. 

" And I am told, I say. Termor . ^I am told you 
got into a house among a lot of fine girls . best 
bedroom, and all that . sisters on the stairs with 



Captain Therfttes. 217 



the gruels and codlings . ^mamma settling the 
pillow. I don't beUeve a word of it. You're too 
proper a man." 

A chorus of boys sitting taking in more drink 
and smoke than was good for their age, broke in 
with delight, " Oh, Showers, who told you that f " 

Fermor, brought up to believe that truth was 
the most gentlemanly of a gentleman's virtues, 
said, coldly and seriously, " If you are alluding to 
the family who so kindly took care of me when 
I was ill, I must request . as a favour^^ added 
Fermor, leaning ironically on the word, " that the 
subject will not be pursued." He had cast this 
bolt in his best manner, as it appeared to him. 

The other, however, was not to be disposed of so 
easily. " I see," he said ; "private grounds. Visi- 
tors are requested not to walk on the grass, eh, 
Fermor!" 

" I don't follow you," said Fermor, again rising 
out of his newspaper. " There are no visitors here, 
and I can see no grass." 

Some of the boys tittered at this. They always 
enjoyed these little scuffles between the pair. 
Thersites, like all professional jesters, was nettled 
at what he considered his habitual target becoming; 



218 Never Forgotten, 



animated and returning his fire. " How smart we 
are ! " he said, becomijag personal ; " how sharp we 
are! Come, did they teach you? Four lessons a 
guinea ? How many days were you in class! 
Which of them gave lessons, eh ? " 

This was deceived with loud laughter. Fermor, 
getting redder, still looked round from on^ to the 
other with a curling lip. 

" A most original joke," he said, with an attempt 
at bitterness. " You are improving every day." 

"I only repeat what was told me, and what is 
reported in the town." 

" And what do they report in the town? Pray 
go on," said foolish Fermor. " O pray go on." 

" Well," said the other, ^' as you ask me ; you 
then did your best to cut out another feUow . that 
heavy-built man with the large horse . and tried 
on the looks and graces and a whole dressing-case 
full of arts. And when you thought you had all 
safe they suddenly and cooUy turned you out. 
So I think, my dear fellow, to be taking up the 
championship of such people who have behaved in 
this way, is being rather too good natured. I only 
tell you this for your own good, you know." 

The delight of the audience at this point knew 



Cap^im Therfites. 219 



no bounds. A low-bom, ungentlema-nly set . ^he 
would give the world to mortify them, aud put 
them down* 

" Before the man with the large horse our poor 
friend had to beat a retreat. Of course he couldn't 
contend with the lacge man and his lairge horse. 
A good fortune, I am told. 0, these women, 
Fermor, these women 1 I hope it will be a lesson 
to you." 

Fermor could scarcely contain himself any 
longer. If h^ put up with this much more it 
would become a standing tyranny. "What wise 
people you all are," he said. " How wonderfully 
wise 1 You should get better information. From 
beginning to end there's not a grain of truth 
in it." 

" Don't be sure of that," said the other, sharply. 
^^ They all heard the same, too. At any rate, that 
marriage is settled, and Twigg here saw the pair 
walking about the town together. So, my dear 
friend," he added, rising, " dry your eyes, for your 
pipe is completely put out." 

Again came forth the roar at Fennor's expense^ 
making his ears tingle. ** You are going to this 
party to-night ? " he said. 



220 Never Forgotten. 



" Well 1 " said the other, lookmg round from 
the door, " Suppose I am ? " 

" Well/' saidFermor, "I am going too ; and we 
shall see whether, to use your forcible language, 
my pipe is put out as you say. I shall leave it to 
all here. You shall see. We shall see." This was 
received with a sort of jeer. 

Fermor went to his room chafing in a flurry of 
agitation. "It is growing unbearable," he said. 
" No wonder the Service is becoming what it is 
when such low creatures are let into it. No 
matter, I shall have them all at my feet yet. I 
hope they will all go to-night. TU confound the 
whole crew." He then proceeded to decorate him- 
self with his best care and finish, determining, for 
that night at least, to produce an artistic work. 
The delicate "spiritual" toning of his face would 
be a new effect, and, under wax-light, who could 
tell what further result as yet undreamt of. By 
eleven the scaffolding was down, and the figure 
stood out perfectly finished. He was pleased. 
As he looked in the glass, something about "a 
head of Ary Schefifer" occurred to him. 



Major Carter^s ^'Little PartyP 221 



CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH. 

MAJOR carter's " LITTLE PABTT." 

Major Carter's rooms were of a very modest 
order. They were not very large, not very high, 
not very long, and not very broad. This was 
known to most people, but it was not so well 
known that he got them very cheap. 

The little chambers, for they were not called 
*' lodgings," which was a mean description, were 
now blazing with light. There was to be a little 
music. They were gay and tasteful, and excellent 
in every point but room, and, though a sort of 
polite famine reigned, the major was unaccountably 
profuse in light. " Light your rooms, light your 
rooms," he used to say, in his pleasant way. Wax 



222 Never Forgotten. 



he considered the true basis of society. It supplied 
furniture, gilding, jewels, meat, drink, and clothes 
. ^that is, supper, champagne, and dress. 

The " rooms" could be seen afar off blazing Kke 
the lantern of a lighthouse, and inside the illumi- 
nations produced astonishing marvels. They spread 
out into spacious apartments. The furniture . be- 
came glorified. Guests found their old tulle turned 
for them cheaply into new, and possibly their older 
cheeks brightened artificially into yoang. 

While Captain FenHor dressed, there was a 
scene of another kind going on not very far away 
from him, in the house of the Mairaels. Mr. Han- 
bury had been there that evening, btit had only 
seen the eldest Miss Manuel. Her sistier was lying 
down with a headache. Xiatterly his boisterous 
tone had been quite tempered down. He had 
come in very often, and had sat in a moody im- 
settled way, talkative and silent by spais. Of 
this night he had abruptly asked were they sure 
they were going to Mr, Oarter^s, quite sure ? He 
was told tliey were sure. Then, in the same dis- 
appointed way, he answ^u^i that he would go too, 
as it would be most likely the last party he would 
be at tliere. He was tired of the place and of its 



Major Carter's "Little Party.'' 223 

monotony, and had made up his mind to go in a 
day or two. " I am a sort of wandering man," he 
said, " and half an hour gets me ready for the road. 
The horses Bates will look after." He amplified 
this text a good deal, then returned to his inquiry 
if they were sure . all of them . to be there that 
night ? " I should like to go to Australia," he said. 
^ That would be the place for me. The woods and 
prairies, hunting and fishing. I believe those are 
the only things I can understand. As for the 
'World and society, I begin to find I am a mere 
child. I mistake things, the commonest things. I 
have too plain and matter-of-fact a mind for the 
world. I believe in my senses, and take words 
and speeches to be what they mean ; and so," 
added John Hanbury, with a rueful smile, " it is 
better that I should be off to the backwoods and 
sheep-walks, imless," he added, " something turns 
up to stop me." Pauline, greatly distressed, soothed 
him. " Wait until to-night is over," she said, sig- 
nificantly. Hope came back again into his face. 

An hour later, Pauline Manuel was with her 
sister as she dressed. It was nearly eleven o'clock, 
and they were late. It was a curious mixture 
of vehement expostulation and adornment. The 



I 



224 Never Forgotten. 



younger girl, with her hair down upon her shoul- 
ders, was excited, timorous, and a little defiant by 
turns. Her sister had influence with her, and on 
this night spoke warmly and almost passionately. 
She walked up and down, vehemently pleading 
for the cause she had at heart, with quick gestures 
and kindling eye. She told her she was a child, a 
baby, that should have its toys, its rattles, and 
drums. She told her that it was only a giiilty, 
wicked nature that would make a plaything of a 
brave and honest man's heart. She could have no 
heart herself; a point of view that rather scared 
the gentler girl, whose cheeks kindled in a sort of 
piteous protest at what ^she said was a "cruel 
tyranny." But at half-past eleven, when the elder 
girl came down to the drawing-room, a sort of 
empress in her dress, she spoke softly to her 
brother with a sort of satisfaction . a commimica- 
tion, too, that was received with moody satisfaction, 
as though it was Ukely that all would be well 
before the night was over. " The other," said the 
brother, thinking of Fermor, "will not be well 
enough to go out at night." 

It looked a pretty little party. Careful selection 
had been made, and but few had been allowed to 



Major Carter's '^ Little PartyJ' 225 

pass the wicket. " I might have had the whole of 
our little city," was a speech the host made many 
times that night, in many quarters, and to many 
persons. " Indeed, you cannot conceive the pres- 
sure that was put on me to get to our poor little 
party. It is astonishing the lengths people will go. 
But we made up our minds,- Mrs. Carter and my- 
self, &c." Mrs. Carter and himself ! Poor quiet 
soul . ^she had no mind to make up, nor, if she had, 
would she be allowed to make it up. He was part 
of the lighting himself, and his clear, clean face 
flashed out in all quarters of the room at unex- 
pected moments during the whole night. There 
was Mrs. Carter also present, so quiet, so silent, 
so timorous, so swept along in the breezes of her 
husband's conversation, that the company regarded 
her no more than they did a cheap china figure 
which was on the chimney-piece. She was timid 
and mouse-like in voice and manner, and when 
sometimes she would glide out nervously over the 
carpet to perform some duties of reception, her 
husband, who seemed to dislike such exhibition,, 
would be down upon her in a gust, and swallow 
her up in a tempest of words. 

Fermor arrived very late, and in a sort of agita- 

TOL. I. Q 



226 Never Forgotten, 



tion. He felt there was something for him to go 
thnyagfa that night, though he did not know what 
Looking in a little glass below, where his hat was 
taken by another admiring maid, he thought his 
face had all the delicacy of Sfevres. The stairs 
were narrow, and the house offended with the 
strong fresh- savour of new paint and varnish. 
He was relieved when he saw Ae blaze of light in 
tlie little rooms, and then his name was sung 
according to the due ritual, and Major Carter, at 
the other end of the room Agoing about," came 
down on him affectionately. It was so good of 
him to look in on a little thing of this kind, to 
eome in this sort of way. He was ashamed to put 
people in ^ a little cabin " of this kind. ^ I know 
yem are laughing at me, Captain Fermor," con- 
tmued the major. ^*For shame, yoa have your 
pencil out, and jotting down notes for a friend or 

two O come ! you see, I have heard. Do let 

me off Ais time." 

Fermor smiled. 

** Introduce you to anybody?" said the major, 
doubtfully; then answering himsejjj after con- 
sulting Fermor^s face, which had answered him : 



Major Carter's ''Little PartyP 227 

"No, no! scarcely. You are more at home in 
this place than I am." 

" Thanks, thanks," said Fermor, moving away. 
" I think I see a few that I know. I shall get on 
very well. Thanks." 

The major had again hoisted his mainsail and 
was away, making the opposite comer. Fermor 
saw there was a border of tulle round the room, 
with an inner ring of black cloth, and men 
scattered irregularly, like sentries. 

Close beside him was a sort of little gipsy 
encampment, the gipsies of which (though they 
did not wear red cloaks, and had no fire or kettle) 
were two pretty girls, whom Fermor knew to be 
Miss Campbells, Jessie and Fanny. They were 
social vivandiires, and they had little red books, 
published once a month by authority of the 
War-ofiice, which they read far more devoutly 
than they did other pious books ! Fermor had 
often studied, and sarcastically described, their de- 
votion to the Service. They knew every soldier 
there. dealt with them with an air of proprietor- 
ship . gave them orders. Wherever there was a 
" Campbell girl," there was a picket of military, 
q2 



228 Never Forgotten, 



with the oddest names, posted about them. There 
was Mr. Tite, and Mr. Crowe, and Mr. Oadby, 
perhaps Captam Lockit, and Major Peachmn. If 
there were a party in a house, and a sheltered nook 
on the staiys of that house, the curious explorer 
would awkwardly stumble on a "Campbell girl" 
concealed behind a curtain. If any one gave an 
al fresco party, and there was a retired walk or 
arbour associated with that al fresco party, a soldier 
and a " Campbell girl" were certain to be made 
out as figures in that rustic passage. These are, 
indeed, only Captain Fermor^s observations, who 
made* them a study as he would natural history, 
and was often sarcastic on it. 

As he entered, they were camped to the left, 
with Sturt, Peachum, Lockit, and others, round 
the camp kettle. Fermor, looking round the 
whole company, at one end saw two bright 
faces, rich in fulness and colour, which were as 
effective as a good many of Major Carter^s wax- 
lights. He saw their brother standing up beside 
them, looking towards him sojirly and distrustfully, 
while on the other side was bending down a figure 
whom his instinct told him was Hanbury. When 



Major Cartet^s '' Little Party:' 229 

the latter lifted himself from his bent position, and 
the light from some of Major Carter^s wax-Ughts 
fell upon his face, Fermor saw that it was radiant 
and blazing, with what, in a momenjb of pique, he 
would have called " oafish good humour" and hap- 
piness. Some of this light was reflected on to the 
two girls' faces. 

Fermor, feeling another of those sharp pangs 
which he had experienced before, turned suddenly 
aside with his best air of indifference, and broke 
suddenly into the little gipsy encampment beside 
him. He was scarcely of the pattern for that 
company . for the noisy, roystering irregularities 
in which they deUghted. He had always treated 
them with a coldness that was almost insolence, 
and had passed them with a look of half astonish- 
ment, half contempt. But though thus long out- 
raged, they seemed to look wistfully at him ; for 
there are those who are grateful for even a crumb 
of civiUty. His irruption was now a surprise, and 
welcomed with dehght. He threw the party of 
boys into disorder, who could scarce cope with a 
craft of this metal. The eldest tossed her head 
proudly, and was almost obsequious to him. Violet, 



230 Ne^r Forgotten. 



looking over of a sudden, saw the Christian knight 
ensnared by the Moabitish women, and started 
Hanbnry, whose face was like a sunbeam, and 
who found himself that night drifting deliciously 
down tlie river, suddenly found her grow dis- 
trait. 

There was now to be music. The eldest Miss 
Manuel was taken over to a tiny cottage piano, led 
by Major Carter, who, leaning on it as it were on 
a balcony, and looking in her face, talked critically 
and with fluency of its beauties and secret powers. 
'' I dare say," he said, " you would not guess who 
chose this for me. I can do nothing in this way 
myself . -at least, nothing you would care to listen 
to. Yet old Lord Dogberry always said I was 
made for something better than merely strumming 
tunes." 

Miss Manuel let her fingers amble very lightly 
down over the keys, and up again, as it might be 
over a smooth green sward. She smiled. The 
sound was woody and dull. She was happy that 
night, and glanced over at her sister, where all was 
going so well. 

" You don't think so much of our piano," he 
said. "No wonder I You should have had an 



Major Carter's ''Little Party.'' 241 

Erard, the most splendid that could be got for 
money. Yet I ajssrure you Miss Van Tromp, Lady 
Charlotte's daughter, you know, chose it herself. I 

aasure you she said '' continued he, half turning 

round and addressing a little audience that had 
gathered . " she said there was a peculiar sustained 
ring in the middle notes which she had never met 
with in any other instrument. One might 'be 
choosing pianos for years without meeting such a 
thing. Quite an accident." 

Miss Manuel, out of a sort of curiosity, began 
to somxd this middle department in many keys. 
It did seem wonderful how that dull percussion 
of wood upon wood could have so struck Lady 
Charlotte's daughter; but such is the force of 
prestige and musical authority, that heads were 
presently seen bent a little on one side at a 
slight angle, ^d it was thought that indications 
of this rajre and peculiar timbre were to be 
detected. 

Major Carter listened with pleasure, looking 
round from one to the other. "As you may 
imagine," he said, "I only thought myself too 
lucky, and snapped it up at once. And there 
you see what it is ! " 



232 Never Forgotten. 



This is a sample of that shining varnish^ a 
bottle of which Major Carter always carried in 
his conversational pocket. With this he lubricated 
every article of his personal property, and made 
them dazzle the eyes of the public. It was an 
artful, but at the same time a cheap process. 
As she broke into her symphony, which had 
a sort of wild awkwardness, and a lawless measure, 
she thought she would do her best, and sang 
a sort of Spanish song, full of a strange defiance 
and picturesqueness, and in which the clinking 
sounds of the castanets were heard, and short 
scarlet petticoats seemed to flash. It was sung 
with extraordinary spirit and almost reckless- 
ness. 

This sort of entertainment scarcely fell within the 
round of amusements the Campbells affected. Music 
was profitable for them in a certain sense : they 
found it like the music in a melodrama, effective 
for " talking through." Fermor entertained them 
with an acted hilarity and gaiety, but he noted, 
warily, piteous restless glances stolen over in his 
direction, and was pleased with his own skill. 
Presently the brother passed close by, and rather 
fretted him by a satisfied supercilious air, as who 



Major Carter's ^'Little Party." 233 

should say^ all danger is past and we are now in 
port. And finally Miss Manuel, having vocally 
danced her Bolero, and being led past in a sort of 
progress by ^Major Carter, who was expatiating 
airily and with lively gesture on her as they 
walked, she looked so bright and " lustrous," and 
gave Fermor such a warm cordial happy greeting, 
that his brow became suddenly overcast, and his 
manner absent; and having accepted a lively 
sally of Miss Jessie Campbell with an extraordi- 
nary assumed reUsh but a few moments before, he 
now received the next with his coldest stare, and 
quite discomposed her. Presently, he saw some of 
the youths of the regiment, whose angry passions 
he had inflamed by his sudden interference, and 
who had gradually withdrawn, growUng vindic- 
tively, telling new ladies to whom they had 
attached themselves all about the mess-table scene. 
And Captain Thersites, passing quite close, and 
lounging past, called out with an unmistakable 
sneer, " Poor, poor Fermor ! I thought we were 
to wait until to-night ! " 

Miss Jessie Campbell, who illustrated the thin 
texture of her small-talk with a border of giggles, 
that seemed almost hysterical, found herself, to her 



234 Never Forgotten. 



surprise^ left on the broken rafter of an incom- 
plete sentence. Fermor had strode away, clearly 
not thinking of her, or of what she was sajing, 
and was whispering to Major Carter at the other 
end of the room; vWho, delighted and flattered, 
received the conununication with a smile of sur- 
prise. " Ah, you think so I What an idea ! I 
am really under obligations to you. The veiy 
thing, just as we were beginning to flag a 
Kttle.'' 

" Quite easy," said Fermor, esplaining^his theory 
with great fluency and a professional air ; '' move 
away these things . ^get those dowagers into the 
comers . ^the young ladies to play by turns . ^less 
formal, you see ; and we can make a beginning, 
say . with . ^with," added Fermor, looking round 
the room . " ah. Miss Manuel I" 

" To be sure, so we can," said Major Carter, in 
a tumult of delight. 

" And you can get Mr. Hanbury, and some of 
those strong men," continued Fermor, '^ to clear the 
room . a sort of fatigue party." 

Miss Manuel was dehghted . pleased to do any- 
thing useful on that night. And Hanbury called 



Major Carters '' Little PartyV 235 

over, was presently warehousing all the furniture 
of the room in comers, stowing away heavy weights 
with enthusiasm, Uke a porter at play. At every 
party there are honest creatures like this, who revel 
in being made social hodmen. M|ie '' boys" assisted 
with juvenile deUght, and there were marvels done 
in the way of wheeling off on castors, and hemming 
up one of the Miss Campbells (engrossed with Mr. 
Lockit) behind an ottoman. Mr. Lockit had helped 
her back off the broken plank of a sentence where 
Fennor had left her, and they both agreed that a 
more vain, conceited, brusque creature never was . 
with " nothing in him." 

When Hanbury, boisterous. ven heated . ^with 
his exertions, looked round for general approbation, 
he saw Fermor on the chair he had quitted for a 
few seconds only, and closeted with Miss Violet 
Manuel. At that distance, too, he could even see 
that Fermor was speaking very fast and earnestly, 
and that she was listening with an absorbed devo- 
tion. Was this a crafty artifice on the side of 
Fermor? It must be said, such were not his usual 
weapons. 

Hanbury plunged over in a blunt hurried way. 



236 Never Forgotten. 



"They are going to have a quadrille," he said, 
" and . and I am come for you . that is, if you will 
dance." 

Fermor looked up at him with his most good- 
natmred smile, ^'wt^ )iSi\e been doing wonders," 
he said ; " we have been looking at you. Properly, 
Miss Violet is engaged to me, but I thirik^^ he said, 
" we shan't dance at all. What do you say t Now, 
you should make yourself useful, and ask some of 
those people yonder." 

He looked at her for an answer, but she gave 
none. " Are you engaged?" he said. 

" Good gracious ! " said Fermor, " I have told 

you. Why " and he whispered something to 

her, with a smile and a look of intelligence. Han- 
bury did not mind the first, but when he saw the 
second, he turned round and walked away. Miss 
Manuel, who had been playing scraps and patches 
of music very pleasantly, had seen part of this little 
episode, and flew across to speak to her sister. 
Between sisters these expresses are common, and 
she whispered a few words ; but they were vehement 
words, full of concentrated meaning. But, " So you 
are really to be our orchestra," came to her ear in 
the voice of Major Carter. " I don't know^ what to 



Major Cartet^s '^ Little Partyr 237 

say to you, it is so kind." And he made a coasting 
voyage round the room, saying to every one, " You 
see who I have got for orchestra." " Miss Manuel 
is good-natured enough to touch my little piano, 
Miss Van Tromp, &c." 

Fermor and his companion were the only two of 
the yoimger human family not dancing. Every 
one standing up in the little hollow square looked 
round at them as at something conspicuous or 
marked. The orchestra must have thus been busy 
herself, for she had a sort of reputation for this 
kind of playing, and her fingers used to perform 
whole ballets on the keys ; but now it wanted spirit, 
and she was glancing uneasily over the top of the 
little cottage piano. 

No wonder. For all this time Fermor^s words 
were pouring out very fast. Violet seemed to be 
feasting on them as on some delicious fruit. There 
was a tender air about her that night, her eyes had 
a soft shy look, and she had a half helpless, half 
tender and trusting manner, which to Fermor was 
fascinating. 

'' If you would only confide in me . ^my advice 
has been found useful sometimes . ^I should give you 
the best I am capable of. Or perhaps . and you 



238 Nen)er Forgotten. 



won't be angry? . ^I know the story, or can gaess 
it aU." 

A softness, too, had come upon Fermor's voice, 
and covered it like a delicate bloom. The liastrous 
eyes seemed to lift themselves to meet his, not so 
much languidly as reverently. 

" There is poressure, persuasion, what may be 
called family intimidation, put upon you," he went 
on, a little excitedly. *^From the best motives, no 
doubt. I know not what that sort of thing means. 
If we put our home lives side by side there would 
be a wonderful likeness. These things repeat 
themselves. But / can use a firm resistance. We 
men can fight, but you are helpless . ^that is, if you 
will not let me help you." 

" Oh,'' said she, softly, " it is so good of you. 
But I cannot ask you. I ought not to speak of 
these things, but in some way I feel ^*' 

" You f eeV said Fermor, with his " lighter 
scornful manner," as he would call it, " that I am 
not exactly the person . quite so. You take what 
I say for mere fashionable words of course. 
Exactly. Why not choose that rough honest 
creature yonder, who is glaring at us^ so sa- 
vagely? " 



Major Carter's '' Little Party:' 239 

Honest John was, indeed, looking back from his 
ranks in the quadrille in sorest distress, and then 
dancing desperately. 

What Fermor intended when he sat down he 
could not well tell himself. If any one had said 
to him, " You are going to ride the rough stormy 
waves of a great ocean . mind, I warn you," he 
would have smiled, and have returned with his 
usual triumphal air of victory. In the same way, 
if any one had said to him, lightly, " You are going 
to amuse yourself with a poor girl, and make a 
plaything of her," he would have scouted the idea, 
and, by way of compensation, have been gracefully 
considerate to her the whole night long. The truth 
waSy he did imt know what he wanted, or what he 
intended. He only felt a void of longiaag for a 
dramatic scase, and he fdit himself gradually drawn 
on and on, to the stage. 

"Well," said Fermor, "may I go on?" He 
waited a monajent. "The wretched gossips of this 
wretched place have the whole story too. They 
say it is a very suitable thing ; riches, honesty, the 
f^ood ^ blufbiess' of the novels^ and a warm attach- 
ment." 

"NevOT, nev^r/' said diey not lifting her eyes. 



240 Never Forgotten. 



" They wish me, they are pressing me, and I am 
too weak to resist. But the thought makes me 
wretched." 

Never did Fermor enjoy a dramatic situation so 
much. 

" Why," said he, with pleasant astonishment, 
" how you surprise me ! I declare I thought it was 
an old attachment ! " 

" It was, it was, until ^^ She stopped. 

"Until what?" 

She was colouring and flushing, and dislocating 
her fan. " Oh," she went on, " I am very un- 
happy, and I don't know what to do. I have no 
friend. I am alone in that house. They are all 
against me, except mamma. And they say, and it 
is true, that it would be so dishonourable, he is so 

good and generous and faithful. And, and ^" 

she hesitated, " I am to decide to-night, for he is to 
go away to-morrow for ever, and . '. . ^" 

She was so beautiful in her confusion, so deli- 
cate, so brilliant, with cheeks so lit up from within, 
that Fermor, in a warm infatuation, lost in a second 
his cold and steady command of himself. The reins 
slackened in his hand, and he was carried away by 
the whirl of dramatic effect. Even in a flash of 



Major Carter^ s "Little Party^ 241 

a second he had a glimpse of Captain Thersites op- 
posite^ motioning him out with his eyes, to the lady- 
he was dancing with ; to whom, no doubt, he was 
stooping and whispering contemptuously. 

That look decided him. Perhaps the triumph of 
so splendid a repulse . the vision of the mess- 
table . ^this might have been the little straw, the 
feather, perhaps, that turned the balance. He 
bent down his head and whispered to her softly. 



VOL. I. R 



242 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIKST. 

THE TWO SISTERS IN COUNCIL. 

That dance was done. The orchestra came 
over hurriedly from the little piano, released at 
last. Her lip was compressed, and her eye 
severe. Fermor got up, and, with a curious flush 
in his face, moved away. Hanbury, "hanging 
about" undecidedly for a time, seemed to draw 
near in gradually narrowing circles, and finally 
stood before Violet with a piteous injured look. 
He found comfort in the sudden change in her 
manner. She was excited; talked and smiled 
excitedly. She was eager to dance, and accepted 
when he proposed it. Her manner, however, was 
" distracted," and though she answered him a 



The Twa Sifters in Council. 243 

little at ramdazn^ he accepted her smiles in place of 
a more direct ansifTBT. Her sister, delighted, again 
volunteered to step into the orchestra, and, looking 
with beaming face over the little cottage piano, 
poored forth a mad tantalising galop, that chal- 
lenged every foot in the room. It was only " a 
carpet dance;" but presently the Miss Camp- 
bells, each armed with a naalitary boy, were 
huirrying round, their dresses sweepiLng the faces 
of older dames who were seated. Major Carter 
looked on in deUght. " ^Pon rsiy word/' he said, 
'^ this is surprising ; quite a gay httle rout ! Casoe 
on me by surprise ! " 

Fermor's heart was beating as he looked on. 
^ Won't do," said Captain Thersites, passing him. 
" Poor Fermor I Look over there " 

Fermor looked after hiisu with triumph and con- 
tempt. " Fool to the last ! " he thought. " Tliis 
will crush him for ever." And for msuiy minutes 
he enjoyed the thought. 

At one o'clock came in a few emaciated ices, 
and some phials of cdoiured sugar, and water^^ 
^' sorbets " on the French plan. Abundance, how- 
ever, was supplied, or the poverty of material 
covered, by the triumph of the entry,, which was 
r2 



244 Never Forgotten. 



in all the clatter of ice-spoons and the jingling of 
innumerable glasses. With which was mixed up 
the voice of Major Carter, chanting an anthem : 
" Take an ice 1 do take an ice. Let me get you a 
sorbet. We try to have Paris over again, in our 
little way, of course. I am afraid I am half a 
Frenchman. Do have an ice, &c." 

It was a very happy little evening ; such good 
humour on all sides. Not till nearly two did they 
go away. 

Hanbury drifted after the Manuels down stairs * 
out to their carriage, like a heavy beam of wood. 
Rude joy was on his broad honest face, yet he was 
a little doubtful and mystified. As they went down, 
the elder girl had just opportunity to whisper with 
delightful anticipation, "Weill all settled, I am 
sure." To whom John answered as secretly and as 
ecstatically, with a friendly look and crushing 
squeeze. And, while Hanbury was getting her 
cloak. Miss Manuel turned to her brother, and, in 
the same delightful whisper, told him, " All settled. 
Poor good John. How happy he is." 

Afterwards, there was a sort of hurried conclave 
sitting in the eldest Miss Manners room . a wild, 
flurried meeting. TVvft xao'Gcvftx^'^slix^.^^xieQ^^ 



The Two Sixers in Council. 245 

called in to listen. " I knew it," said the younger 
girl, rapturously. " I told you all so, in spite of 
all you said, and all you prophesied. Now has he 
not redeemed himself?" and she lool^d round on 
them all, from one to the other, very triumphantly. 
Her eyes were glistening, her cheeks glowing ; she 
was curiously excited, as, indeed, a very small oc- 
casion would excite her. She was the heroine of 
the moment. Her face seemed to play with re- 
peated flashes of light. Like a child in* her joy, 
she walked up and down before them, in little 
quick short marches. The others looked, on her 
with pride, and yet with sadness. 

" Y^, dear," said her sister, " you were right . 
and will be very happy . ^but the only thing is, I 
am thinking " 

The younger girl stopped her. " Now for the 
difficulties," she said, smiling, " you dear, wise, old- 
fashioned Pauline. You arQ going to give me 
advice. I know you are." 

" No, indeed," said the other ; " but I am think- 
ing . ^and I cannot help thinking . of poor, poor 
John. What is to be done wifti Aim?" 

Violet's eyes were suddenly cast upon the ground. 
For a few moments there was silence. 

"I have thought of him," she said/^ 2CsvftL,\xA^^^^ 



246 Never Forgotten. 



I am very sorty. Ho is so good, so kind, so gene- 
rous. He is so strong. He may suffer a Kttle at 
first. But he will get over it. I could not hdp it, 
you know, dearest Pauline, I couM not. I did not 
know my own mind, and thought I liked hiin." 

Her brother, who had come in, was now standing 
in the doorway. 

" There is the misfortune," he said, gtavely. 
" How will that console him I Such a brave, honest, 
faithful man. Ah, Violet, you don't know what 
you are doing!" 

" He is, indeed," said the young girl, eagerly, 
and in some confusion ; *' and he has been so good 
to me ! And I have behaved very cruelly. tBut I 
did not mean it, and I am sure . ^I know . ^he has 
such a sensible, manly heart . ^that after a Ettle time 
he will " 

" Ah ! exactly," said her brother, excitedly; " it 
is these sensible manly hearts that feel these things. 
No, no ; I know him by this time. This will spoil 
his life . or many good years of his life. This is 
not a mere scrape or scratch. Poor Hanbury !" 

" I am very unfortunate ! I am very miserable !" 
she said, looking from one to the other in great dis- 
tress. " I never thought . ^I never meant it : indeed, 



The Two &Jiers in Council. 247 

I did not f and Iter soft round eyes began to grow 
dim with coming tears. 

The elder girl, who, up to this moment^^had been 
supporting all that her brother had b^n sayings 
now suddenly deserted him, and running to her 
sister, put her arms about her. 

" No, no," she said; " things wiH turn out much 
better. Poor John is sensible, as you say, and will 
suffer a little at first, like all men. He is strong. 
Come, darling, don't think of him. We shall see 
him in the morning, and set it all right. After all, 
the point is that you are to be happy . and you are 
to be happy." 

The brother, still gloomy, sighed. " Ah ! that is 
the point," he said, dejectedly ; " we know so little 
of this man." 

The elder girl had made her protest, as a duty. 
She now cast away her grim grandmother^s cloak 
and hood and crooked stick. Shutting her eyes, she 
got rid of the gravities of judgment and sage 
counsel ; and the two talked the new engagement 
over when they were going to bed . ^rapturously, 
as sisters do in coundl. Alone together, letting 
their hair fall, and undressing by slow lingering 
stages, everything became gold and colour: the 



248 Never Forgotten. 



richest gold and the richest colour. The future 
was bathed in the glowing Turner tints . ^lakes and 
crimsons . ^but neither of them dreamed for a mo- 
ment of their being mere opera skies^ and ingenious 
effects of the electric light. The little scene at 
Major Oarter^s party was acted all over again, and 
over again after that, with pre-Eaphaelite detail. 

Violet had soon swept away any momentary 
clouds. She was walking up and down, fuU of 
enthusiasm, and telling all to her sister with 
charming confidence. "From the first day he 
spoke to us, you recollect, dear, out near the gate, 
I someway felt . I can't describe it . a sort of 
sensation that he was to be . ^something to me. It 
came on me like a flash. There was something in 
his eyes, and you recollect how he came to me 
straight . and I understood him . and he almost 
told me," she added, shyly, "he had much the 
same feeling about me." 

" And you never told me," said her sister, " to 
whom you tell everything, or say you tell every- 
thing, you quiet, sly child, whom I thought so 
innocent. I suppose you were afraid about poor 
John." 

"Ah, yes," said Violet, dropping her eyes, 
'^ you were all such, irieiiis oi\xv&r 



The Two Sifters in Council. 249 

" And I suppose," said her sister, " it was on the 
same day that poor John's fate was sealed." 

" Why, I am afraid so," said Violet, still looking 
down. "And O ! Pauline dear, it was the most 
curious thing in the world. For I did like him so, 
and admire him up to that day, I did, indeed. And 
he really seemed quite handsome until ^^ 

" Until the other came," said PauUne. " Well, 
you won't be angry, but, someway, if /were to 
compare the two, in point of looks ^" 

" No, no I " said Violet, with childlike eagerness, 
** indeed he's not. There's something so refined, 
and so calm and quiet about him, and so intel- 
lectual ^" 

" Say perfect at once, darling," said her sister, 
kissing her. 

" Ah, that is the thing," said the other, sighing* 
^^ What will he say when he finds out how much 
below him I am in knowledge? Indeed, I told 
him as much. But he has promised," she said, 
brightening, " to teach me everything himself, and 
to ' form my mind,' as he says." 

" Your poor little mind I " said her sister, with a 
sigh. And presently they were both asleep. 

Not until he got to his own room that night, 
when the footlights were out, aivA. \S[v^\\TkfcTv q\^t^ 



250 Never Fwgotten. 



put round the boxes^ did Fermor awake. Day- 
light, grey and cold, mixing oddly with his lamp, 
was coming in at his window. He felt a sort of 
sensation that he had taken some fatal step, and 
could not turn back. 

He turned, almost shivering, from himself. "I 
have been too hasty," he said, and half groaned. 
After every step of any decided sort this inde- 
cision comes, which perhaps arises from the feeling 
that it is impossible to go back. This may act on 
the vanity, as being a curtailment of the will . 
an interference in one direction, at least, with the 
power of doing as one might please. Fermor sat 
long in that mixed light, gazing a little vacantly at 
his watch and guard-chain. " How could I have 
been so hasty?" he said. " I might have waited a 
Httle." 

Then he thought of his mother at Nice, Lady 
Laura Fermor, a cold woman of fadiion, of 
reduced means. Perhaps this was the spectre 
that was threatening him. And he had to re- 
assure himself with his Spanish Castle, setting 
that Miss Manuel walking liiirougli the grounds in 
shadow and in rich light ; but somehow his build- 
ing now seemed formed of lath and canvas. 



The Two Sifters in Council. 251 

However, self-confidence came to help him. 
^^A good sensible letter," he said ("one of my 
good sensible letters," was the special shape of the 
thought), "will set the thing in its proper light 
before her. After all, a man can't go on in this 
unprofitable way, neither good nor useful to him- 
self, nor to others. 1 should be ashamed 'to de- 
scend into the grave after such a selfish career. 
No, she is ^charming ! such devotion, such pretty- 
devotion, I have never seen."' And the recollec- 
tion of it, with his own excellent playing all 
through it, came back on him more acceptably. 
With ail eagerness not unnatural (just as though 
he would have the satisfaction of setthng the whole 
affair before he weat to bed, and get it off his 
mind), he got out his ink and crested and initialed 
paper, and actually wrote the " good sensible 
tetter" to his mother. It could go by the moming^s 
mail, and he would have an answer signifying its 
effect within a week. 



252 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEE THE TWENTY-SECOND. 

febmor's new oharaoteb. 

The sensation produced in the little colony when 
the news got abroad, which it did very soon, was 
something astonishing. It was passed from hand 
to hand like a fire-bucket at a conflagration. 
There were those who had never thought it, and 
those who had always thought it; those who be- 
lieved it from the beginning, and those who now 
could not believe it . ^with a smaller and more select 
class whom it affected in rather an overwhelming 
way, falling on them "like a thunderbolt." It 
was taken with buns and ices at noonday at the 
little pastrycook's of the colony ; it was served 
after the fish and soup at the festivals of the 



Fermor^s New Character, 253 

colony. Finally, it became as steel and bark, and 
invigorated the jaded systems of the social gossips. 

Fermor detested undue publicity of this sort, 
and to have any plans of his special life made free 
with in the common speech, was a gross liberty. 
He froze over all congratulations, and congealed 
them before they had time to flow from the 
speaker^s mouth. It was wonderful when he looked 
back on the singular and sudden step he had taken 
. ^how one of his character could have carried him- 
self steadily through. But, as he said to himself 
pretty of ten, the " truly balanced mind" is never 
surprised, suffering no starts or shocks. Everything 
is foreseen, and everything falls into the tranquil 
daily current. Besides, he had within him an ex- 
traordinary amoimt of what he took for resolution, 
but which, when the tests and acids came to be 
applied by a moral chemist, sank to the bottom, 
resolved into a powder composed of vanity and a 
little obstinacy. The vanity could not allow him 
to think he could have made a mistake. 

He had now, too, his melodramatic dress on, and 
for a few days the whole sensation of the situation 
became a sort of stimulating food for him. He 
felt that he could enjoy the luxury of being 



254 Never Forgctten. 



" generous," and thought with quite a suffusion of 
noble feelings ol the caoe of John Hmbmy. His 
worsting of &at gentlemaa^ and orrertibirow of 
other enemies, were indeed cempboent thoughts 
he was never weoiy of pertaining. One of the 
fosrt things he did was to call on J^m Hanbmy^ 
and, as he walked to the hcmse^ he had hss haai 
out, morally, all the way. 

Hanbury was at his desk, and had been writk^ 
but his face was oorered up by his hands, and 
when he looked up, FerEnor was almost stsurtled by 
the plain marks of snffieriBg and anxiety. In all 
projecting places it had been sharpened, and ail 
colour had passed away. 

Hanbury received him with a violent flush, and a 

paleness as violent. " To what am I indebted '. 

he was beginning, with a clumsy attempt at oeld 
dignity, which amused Femtor. 

^' Come, come I" said the latter, putting out his 
physical hand this time, just as he hadrefabeaarsedil^ 
^' let us be plain axtd aboveboard with one anoither. 
I am sorry aboixt the wiKkle business, for your sake, 
indeed I am. But yon must otmsider what I am . 
merely a passive instrumenit."^ 

The other took has hand doubtfully. " I did not 



Fermor^s New Character. 255 

expect it . Lscaredy expected it of you, Fermor," 
lie said, mournfully. " I would not have behaved 
so to an(Mther man." 

" Poor dbildbh boy," thought Fennor, pityingly, 
yet singularly gratified with himself, "how ab- 
surdly he feels it, or shows that he feels it." 
Fermor himself, in a sinular case, would have let 
the fox under his uniform eat his heart out; at 
least so he thought. "' Gome, come ! you will be 
reasonable, I know. You will bear it in a manly 
way, I am sure^ when you think of it coolly." 

" Ah 1" said the other, bitterly, " with some that 
comes very natural. There are people who think 
of everything coolly ; / can't ; I wish to God I 
could; I would not be as . as miserable as I am." 
He sat down again at his desk, and put up his 
hands. " It was a new life to me," he went on, in 
a sort of dismal monotone. '' It was like a ciange 
to heaven . I mean, all these last few months. I 
never, never was so happy ! And I firmly believe 
she was as happy, and liked me . for a time, at 
least . -until . ^until ^Ah!" he contimied, ap- 
pealing piteously to Fermor, " why did you do it? 
How could you amuse yourself with such heartless 
sport ? You will have had things of this sort over 



256 Never Forgotten, 



and over again; with me it happens only once. 
It is a whole life, and now that you have taken 
away life from me, what is left to me I I tell you, 

Fermor ^' he was growing vehement, but he 

stopped himself. " Though, after all, I suppose, 
you are not so much to blame." 

^'Now," said Fermor, laying his hand on his 
arm, " if you would listen to me for a moment, I 
think I could put the matter in such a reasonable 
light, that '' 

" I know, I know," said Hanbury, dismally. " I 
don't want reason, it is a poor comfort to me. I 
suppose it is all right . ^it was to be, and so it came 
to be. Of course she has her free will, and could 
change her mind if she pleased. It would be very 
hard if she couldn't." 

"Now, that is a rational way to take it," said 
Fermor, " and if I could speak of myself as a third 
person . only it is a little delicate, you will admit 
. ^you see, as I said before, I was really passive in 
the business. And you will pardon me, I think, if 
I remind you that at our last meeting you really 
almost threw down the glove. You recollect ? 
Now, when a man's pride is appealed to, and he is 



Fermot^s New Character. 257 

put upon his mettle . ^you see ? I really don't know 
but that if you had appealed to me as you did now 
. ^that is, put the thing in the present forcible 

light '' 

" O, I know," groaned Hanbury. " I am sure 
of it. But I am so awkward, and clumsy, and 
stupid, I always do something heavy and foolish. 
And now," hq continued, with a doleful smile, " the 
only thing left for me is to bear it as best I can, 
and go away to the sheep-walks again. I am sure 
to make no blunders there. Good-by." 

Fermor went away full of real pity and com- 
passion for this "honest poor soul," who in so 
confiding a way exhibited his foolish heart to all 
comers. " He will hawk his sorrows all over the 
place," thought Fermor. "Perhaps it would be 
the best thing that could happen to him, if he only 
knew how to get profit out of his misfortune. But 
he does not. If I were in his place, it would be 
a whole fortune to me." Even as it turned out, 
it was a whole fortune to him, for Hanbur/s 
acute sufferings seemed to make his victory more 
precious. 

" It is curious," he thought, as he came away, 
TOL. I. s 



258 Never ForgcOten. 



" how everything falls into the groove I lay out 
for it,** Then he began to think how, by practice 
and skill, this mysterious faculty of his would 
grow to a wonderful perfection, and lead him into 
the foremost ranks . ^parliamentary and ministerial, 
perhaps . ^with very different elements to deal with 
than Hanbury. 

But it was not until he first saw Thersites 
Showers in full mess council, when the chiefs met 
at dinner, that he reaped all the profit of the step 
he had taken. When Fermor came in among them 
they now looked at each other shyly, and at him 
with reverence. They were boys after all, and 
they felt their boyhood. Here was their master. 
The horse-race had estabUshed him : so, too, had 
this other race. He who had indifferently tolerated 
all their childish splashing in the water, their 
making of mud -pies, was all the time calmly 
plotting this brilliant coup de th^tre. They all 
seemed to feel their littleness in his presence. He 
walked in like a hero, and was very gracious to 
them. But his real superiority Imt in the defeat 
of Showers. Just as the -regiment had its adjutant 
and messman, and even a brains-carrier or two, so 



Fermor^s New Character. 259 
.  

Showers was kept in pay as their sarcastic sharp- 
shooter, in a lull, or in a critical moment, he was 
ordered to the front, like the comic-song singer 
among the privates on a march. Now he seemed 
to be cashiered. He had broken down, and was 
held in contempt. 

" Somehow," saidFermor, after the mess dinner, 
in the great arm-chair, and with his hands in his 
pockets, looking down the length of his legs, as it 
were along an engineer's level, " you see I know 
myself thoroughly, and what I can do. Anything 
I lay myself out for seriously I can bring about in 
the long run. I don't," continued Fermor, mo- 
destly looking round on them all, " set up to do 
more than other men, but, you see, I make more 
of my materials. Another thing," he continued, 
" when I make up my mind to a business, I always 
have it done at once. Every second of dawdling 
over a serious step is diminishing its value. It is 
like," continued he, smiling at some pleasant little 
fancies that were coming into his mind, ^* like, say, 
so much out of |)|e proceeds of a bill . commission, 
brokerage, and that sort of thing." And in thisv 
fashion Captain Fermor lectured away for a long 
s2 



260 Never Forgotten. 



time to a very serions and attentive congregation. 
He came home very well satisfied with himself, in 
a cloud of will-o'-the-wisp conviction that he had 
really carried off a prize, defeated innumerable 
competitors, and was on a sort of envied table- 
land looking down on all, and regarded by all with 
a wistful admiration. 



The Fermor Family. 261 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD. 

THE FERMOB FAMILY. 

Lady Laura Fermor, fourth daughter of a 
late Earl of Hungerford, was well recollected, by 
many gentlemen with grey whiskers, as Lady Laura 
Stonehewer. Tall, almost plain, with a gauntness 
about her shoulders, kept in confinement by secret 
power below, from which they seemed struggling 
to escape by sudden contortions, she had perfect 
"style" and "tone;" and as she performed her scenes 
in the circle with daring, and went roimd and round 
in the social circus with rapidity, she came to be 
admired. Like the ugly Mr. Wilkes, she was but 
a few seconds behind the loveliest ; and some extra 



262 Never Forgotten. 



exertion and hard riding always brought her to 
the front. 

She had been long in the service. For years 
she had been in the drawing-rooms, and met only 
indifferent sport. At last, a mild country gentle- 
man . Thornton Fermor, Esq., of the Holyoakes . 
looking down one evening, saw her in her gauze 
and spangles dashing by, almost covering him in a 
cloud of the sawdust. He was delighted with her 
" dash" and action. The shoulders were, luckily, 
not insubordinate. There was another gentlepian 
" after" Lady Laura, Mr. Westende, later Sir John, 
whose prospects were not so good, and who was 
said to have been badly treated ; but his sufferings 
were of small moment. Lady Laura Stonehewer 
became Lady Laura Fermor, and retired down to 
the Holyoakes, where the surrounding gentry de- 
lighted in sending notes, requesting the pleasure of 
" Mr. Fermor's and Lady Laura Fermor's com- 
pany at dinner," and positively rang them joyfully 
together in concert, as though they had been a 
peal of church bells. 

In due time they began to contribute to the 
Heraldic Koran ; and the mild Thornton " by her 
had issue :" 



The Fermor Family. 263 

1. Charles Hungerford ; 

2. Alicia Mary ; 

3. Blanche; and 

4. Laura. 

Charles Hungerf ord grew up, became a fashion- 
able child and boy, never showed the least taste 
for ostler or kitchen society, took no interest in 
stable, ostler, or kitchen topics, and, in the lower 
ranks, was considered a cold, " stuck up" lad, with 
" no manners." To him his mother was an inde- 
fatigable missionary, preaching the gospel of good 
society, and the companionship of genteel con- 
fessors. " However high you are," she was always 
saying to him, '' look a little higher, and you will 
be sure, if you do not advance, at least to keep 
your place. Everything has a tendency to slide 
down." So with dress and appearance. The best 
clothes, the dearest and best tailor, these were 
cheaper in the end than the cheapest and meanest, 
as they returned all outlay in the respect and con- 
sideration they brought with them . obtaining, as 
it were, free tickets to all social exhibitions. So it 
was with select companions and selecter tastes ; 
and Charles Himgerford became an eager cate- 



264 Never Forgotten. 



chumen in this faith, and almost a raging little 
fanatic. 

Thornton Fermor, Esq., had only a genteel pa- 
trimony, and as Alicia Mary, Blanche, and Laura 
junior, as well as Charles Hungerford, were en- 
couraged in the same virtues, their combined outlay 
became a serious total. Charles Hungerford was 
sent, not so much to a fashionable school, as to a 
fashionable set aJt the fashionable school. Till he 
was twenty he sat in a private box everywhere. So 
with Alicia Mary, and Blanche, and Laura junior, 
who, before they had passed through a beginning, 
or even a middle stage, were put to a " finishing 
school," where they were drilled and smoothed and 
burnished up to an exquisite smoothness. Lady 
Laura, taking stock of her labours and good deeds, 
often said that she had at least given them the 
best education " that money could procure," which 
really meant no more than that they had been 
well grounded in the best juvenile society that 
could be found. She herself was a wonderful 
captain and she-lanzknecht, a drawing-room Frei 
Ritter, and with her curious gauntness and pale 
complexion, seemed not to care either for eating or 
- drinking, or, above all, for sleep. What she found 



Ihe Fermor Family. 265 

in the hard, hopeless sort of life she lived, and 
which she called "gaiety," would be difficult to 
discover. 

Thornton Fermor was a sort of quiet woman in 
a man's dress, and received orders from her. She 
felt a little twinge when Mr. Westende became Sir 
John: but she did not vent this wrong on Mr. 
Fermor. And it was just as well. She had settled 
that Charles Hungerf ord, who had been at Oxford 
studying young Lord Chester and Sir Victor Ban- 
bury, and other young gentlemen of quality, should 
be " put" into a Guards' regiment, when Thornton 
Fermor glided away out of the world . ^just as he 
used to glide away of an evening out of his home 
racket to a tranquil club . ^but leaving his affairs, 
as friends told each other, "in sad confusion." 
This brought about a luU. A huddled hasty set- 
tlement of things .was effected. Charley Fermor 
had to "go" into a corps where there were no 
youths of quality, but only the sons of thriving 
merchants ; where the senior captain was the 
second child of the well-known Manchester horse 
repository ; where the adjutant was understood to 
take largely under the will of an eminent wedding 
pastrycook ; and where some of the junior ensigns 



266 Never Forgotten. 



bore names that awkwardly and pointedly suggested 
brewing, cotton-spinnings and colonial produce. 
Finaljy, Alicia, showing symptoms of " weakness 
of the chest," Lady Laura Fermor broke up her 
camp, loaded her baggage-carts, and marched for 
Nice; whence very soon was written home news 
of " Alicia's chest being restored." 

It was hard not to admire the boldness, the 
energy, the unflagging spirit of this untiring wo- 
man. K she had ever thought of the unimportant 
little matter of making a soul, or could have spared 
any time for that kind of d^lassement, she would 
have held a high spiritual place. She worked out 
a fashionable salvation with infinite mortification 
of the flesh, and all manner of painful austerities in 
the narrow and thorny paths of social pleasures. , 
Poor soul ! Did she ever smile when she heard the 
select preacher at the select church she attended, 
declaiming against what he called the " alluring 
seductions" of the world ! 

At her time of life, a lawyer, a merchant, a 
soldier, who had seen such service as she had seen, 
would think of honourable retirement. The soldier, 
spent and battered, might hoBourably retire to his 
Chelsea or his Invalides; she was entitled to her 



The Fermor Family. 267 

pension^ her seai in the sun, and, figuratively, her 
tranquil pipe. She might gossip with other veteran 
dowagers, also in honourable "retreat." But this 
undaunted woman was only thinking of new fields 
and new campaigns. She found strength, and 
spirit, and courage, and endurance, for the new 
venture : but where she got them it would be hard 
to say. 

Yet she worked under grave discouragement. 
Alicia Mary, Blanche, and Laura, with remark- 
able promise a^ children, did not answer early ex- 
pectation. In all of them there was a tendency to 
inherited gauntness. In all of them there was a 
tendency to a plebeian broadness of features, often 
associated with scrubbing of door-steps, and at- 
tendance on many lodgers. Late bivouacking and 
exposure had told roughly on Alicia Mary and her 
sisters. Their mother did what she could with 
them . almost tried to reconstruct them altogether. 
She might dress them with costhness and the best 
taste, of which she had abundance, and she might 
turn on perfect conduits of porter and port and 
" nourishing" stimulants ; she might push and twist 
them untiringly, wearily drilling them : it would 
not do, and could not be done. Could she fill in the 



268 Never Forgotten. 



hollow gaps in their necks and shoulders, and pare 
off those sharpnesses which projected like chimney- 
piece comers, she would have had more than mortal 
skill. No wonder that Captain Singleman, in his 
coarse way, said of the young ladies they were a 
" hopeless lot." 

Still she persevered, and by never relaxing her 
efforts, by ceaseless training, by dressing them well, 
by talking of them as superiors, and filling the air 
round them as they marched with the sound of the 
Stonehewers and other family titles, like Turkish 
music, and, above all, by hurrying up when she saw 
them broken, and making them form square, she 
managed to secure for them a place and a sort of 
false prestige. Thus they were always led out to 
the dance, and never looked on sadly at the 
whirling measure while others danced, like de- 
serted drawing-room Calypsos. 

At Nice, things seemed brighter. In that quarter 
there was what her ladyship called an opening . ^ 
destitution in the matter of good serviceable girls. 
There unsound chests, " affected" lungs, and con- 
sumption, went out to parties, and, with flushed 
cheeks, were ready to stand up and go through the 
dance with all comers. The delicacy of Alicia 



'The Fermor Family. 269 

Mary's chest was quite a different sort of thing. In 
this narrow little paddock " Lady Laura Fermor^' 
was said to be quite an addition. She had the 
freedom of every drawing-room at once presented 
to her. She took, almost as a matter of right, the 
fowling over those moors. 

Afar off her wary eyes had already marked down 
something stirring in the underwood. She came, 
not unprovided with reliable information. She 
knew of some young and noble chests that were 
^Hhreatened," and, as she had anticipated, foimd 
yoimg Gulliver and Lord Woodleigh, yet younger 
and more tender in years, already in this happy 
sanatorium. Those youths idolised the valse and 
the wilder galop, and Alicia Mary and Blanche 
ambled round in those measures with singular 
grace and agility. 

It was a surprise to meet these young men so 
far away, in one of the little narrow chambers 
where the Nice festivals were given. A few of 
the colony . the Welbore Cravens, the Browns, 
the Selwyns, and a delightful French family, the 
" La Motte-Terrays,'' whom all the select English 
knew . "saw each other^' a good deal, and gave 
each other reciprocal dances. 



270 Never Forgotten, 



.^ 



"Ah I that winter we spent at Nice!" said 
Major Brown, a couple of years later. ^^Yon 
remember, Fanny t The nice Mttle parties we 
gave to each other. No scandalous waste in 
suppers, and music, and tumbling the house out 
of windows, as we do in this absurd country. You 
stuck a few wax-candles about, and squeezed a 
dozen of lemons, and the thing was done. We went 
from one house to another. ^ Sir, you have me to- 
night, and I have you to-morrow night.* The 
prettiest girls came to us, and how they enjoyed 
themselves. You recollect that young La Motte- 
What's-his-name, when he got up the cotillon at 
our house?" 

This style of entertainment suited Lady Laura 
Fermor^s taste exactly. She called it "rational 
enjoyment," and she carried out the total absti- 
nence principle even further than her neighbours. 
As conquerors make war support war, so she made 
dances support dances, and guests support guests. 
She artfully went round " drawing the line," ex- 
posing plaintively unworthy intrigues thait had 
been set on foot to break into her select pleasure- 
grounds, and actually succeeded in setting an arti- 
ficial value on her little cheap " drums." People 



The Fermor Family, 271 

struggled to get admission to those Kttle hot rooms, 
and Ahcia Mary, Blanche, and Laura junior, were 
contended for with animation. As they drifted 
of a night into one of these festive cabins, with 
their indomitable parent in the front of the little 
procession, young Gulliver and the younger Wood- 
leigh came swooping down on them, eager to 
secure them . ^both showing signs of excessive heat. 
In those youths, indeed, they exercised a sort of 
proprietorship : with them they exchanged glances 
of intelligence and significant words. At their 
humorous sallies . and sometimes they gambolled 
before them in the Ethiopian manner . ^the sisters 
Fermor were convulsed ; their sense of the humour 
of the exhibition contending with an attempt at 
grave reproof. Lady Laura, true and faithful 
night after night, got into her uniform and went 
on duty in the trenches ; and, all through wet and 
exposure, exhaustion and fatigue, never once failed; 
never would fail unto the end ; and when her hour 
came, would surely be found at her post, appa- 
rently sleeping, having at last found rest, and 
grasping her fan as it might be her firelock. 

Later on she was telling friends how she was 
expecting her relative. Sir Hopkins Pocock, C.B., 



272 Never Forgotten. 



late governor of certain colonies . ^Prince Rupert's 
Island it might have been . a gentleman whose 
profession was Governing, and who was now 
moving round pleasantly from one Governing 
station to the other. He was not unknown, for it 
was he who, after long and harassing boundary 
wars, had concluded the famous treaty with the 
Waipiti tribe. Before this diplomatic triumph he 
had been in the Indies, and was said to have col- 
lected wealth. Waiting now till he should begin 
Governing again . and there was to be a vacancy 
in a few months . ^he was coming to Nice for some 
trifling repairs. 



A Diplomatift. 273 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FOURTH. 

A DIPLOMATIST. 

Lady Laura had discounted him in advance. 
At languid little teas, at the furious Dervish dances 
of Major Brown, she menaced them with her rela- 
tive, flourished him in the air, brought him down 
on them at intervals like the lash of a whip. 
Finally, at one of the little parties specially or- 
ganised for the purpose, she discharged him among 
them as if he were a cartridge. As may be con- 
ceived, the imion of two such first-class powers was 
irresistible, and seriously disturbed the balance of 
power in the colony. 

At her house select persons were taken into 
custody, as it were, led off to be introduced to 

VOL. I. T 



274 Never Forgotten. 



^^mj relative," Sir Hopkins Pocock, and found 
themselves bowing before an exceedingly tight and 
clean-made little man, whose clothes were dapper 
and clean-made too, and rather spare as to their 
material, so as to give no undue advantage to diplo- 
matists on the other side. He had a round pink 
head, pierced for two small twinkling eyes ; cheeks, 
lips, chin, and throat, shaven away right and left, 
as if, again, to^ leave nothing that could afford a 
ready purchase to the opposing diplomatist. He 
had a thin layer of iron-grey hair on his head ; but 
if tonsures were at all in fashion, he would have 
seized on the least pretext to have laid out his 
head in a sort of pond or ornamental water of bald- 
ness. Failing this, he was obliged to content him- 
self with a general air of perkiness, and succeeded 
in easily throwing an air of perk into his nose, into 
his chin, and with more diificulty into the front 
portion of his lips, which he brought to regular 
points. 

He had a marvellous fluency, and five minutes 
after the company had assembled, his talking was 
trickling smoothly over two or three gentlemen on 
the rug, like oil from the thin spout of an engine- 
driver's can. There was no interruption in the 



A Diplomatijl. 275 



rich stream; and, with strictest impartiality, he 
turned the mouth of his conversational can from 
one to the other, so that all might have their share. 
He illustrated his stream with perks, and suc- 
ceeded in producing a general perk in his chest 
and body, and put himself through all the gentle 
spasms of a Eobin. Such an opportunity being 
not likely to recur, they had got him on the state 
of Europe, and on the schemes of designing 
powers, and the conversational oil was flowing very 
freely indeed. 

He would illustrate it, he said, by a matter that 
came within his own experience [(oil-can to Major 
Brown) when he was busy concluding that treaty, 
which they might have heard of, with the Waipiti 
tribe. He had had the honour of finally deter- 
mining the great boundary question (oil suddenly 
directed on Mr. Welbore Craven). Mind, he did 
not accept the foolish stories then current about 
the Waipiti being worked by other parties who 
were pulling the wires. Some pointed to the Omai 
country ; some, to beyond the hills. It would not 
be betraying a state secret to say, now that the 
thing is past and gone, that Harboard, Minister fw 
Waste Lands and Marshes, hdd this strongly in 
t2 



276 Never Forgotten. 



council; so did Bond, afterwards Premier (who 
went out on the squatter question. But he (turn- 
ing the oil with a jerk on to Brown) simply said, 
Wait . simply wait. No groping in the dark. And 
what was his principle? People at home, and 
people abroad, and people generally, still wondered 
what was the secret instrument he had used in com- 
posing these Waipiti troubles. Other governments 
and other governors had tried before him, and . 
no discredit to them . ^had failed. And why? 
Simply because they ignored this obvious prin- 
ciple: "Never seem to want what you want" 
There was the whole of it. The world was wel- 
come to know it. (This was spoken with a look as 
if he were distributing five-pound notes all round.) 
The result was, he believed, pretty well known at 
home and abroad. Upon his word, that was the 
whole secret history of the transaction. He was 
glad it should be known. And the whole con- 
cluded with a general sprinkle of oil over all, as 
from the rose of a watering-pot. 
. The constituents of the group might be changed 
one by one, as a factory-girl changes her spindles, 
but the conversation trickled on. Sir Hopkins 
marked its time with jerks and little spasms, gesti- 



A Diplomatijl. 211 



dilating with those useful points of his nose, his 
lips, and his chin. Lady Laura looked on with 
pride, brought up young Gulliver and younger 
Lord Woodleigh, most unsuitable objects, but who 
were at once oiled abundantly. 

In this retirement, and waiting a promised va- 
cancy in one of the Indian provinces, Sir Hopkins 
Pocock received unusual local honours. The maire 
and syndics called on him : he walked in a diplo- 
matic cloud, and aired the Waipiti question innu- 
merable times. He kept his little diplomatic tools 
from rusting by practice in drawing-rooms and 
other places, putting on his Government House 
manner as if it were his uniform, and laying his 
head on one side in the Kobin attitude, when any 
one was bold enough to utter a long sentence . as 
who should say, " Fm looking over the wall at you. 
I can see you." 

He often talked with Lady Laura over her son 
Charles. He had had a sort of liking for Charles 
when a boy, really surprising in one into whose 
system a bundle of despatches had got introduced 
instead of a heart. He had wished that he should 
be put to diplomacy, but at that time he had not 
made his Indian money, and his wishes naturally 



278 Never Forgotten. 



did not cany the weight with l^em they now did. 
Lady Laura often bitterly bewailed it to him. 
^' We should have made an attach^ of him, indeed 
we should," she said, penitently. ^^But I must 
say we never knew . poor Thornton and I . ^that 
you so wished it." 

The diplomatist rubbed his fingers gleefully, 
perked his head on one side as if he were going to 
pick up caraway-seeds, and said : 

" You were not wanted to know, my dear Laura ; 
there was my policy, you see. One of my little 
secrets has been never seem to want what you do 
want. Do you understand ? " 

Lady Laura was confounded at the discovery 
of this powerful engine ; but she . did not remark 
to him that it had broken down in that particular 
instance. 

" However," continued he, " we shall get him a 
better profession . marry him off, when I am at Go- 
vernment House, in my Indian district. He shall 
come with me as secretary, aide-de-camp, or some- 
thing of that sort. We shall get him a Kajah's 
daughter . a Nabob's child . with half a million of 
rupees. Leave it all to me." 

Sir Hopkins came back to that subject often. 



A Dipkmatift. 279 



and planned it minutely. Lady Laura welcomed 
it mth delight, for Sir Hopkins had been too hope- 
lessly abandoned to diplomacy to marry, and this 
really looked like adoption. She had often thou^bt 
of her son's offering himself for marriage in the 
City, only that such a scheme, coming from her 
to him, would be hopeless. In the hands of a 
trained diplomatist it was likely to have different 
results. 

Meanwhile, the refitting was going forw^ard, and 
the diplomatist was getting on new sheathing 
and copper fastening, and being fresh riveted all 
through. Every day he sent away many letters, 
which he found a pleasure in ipgeniously shaping 
m much like despatches as possible. He said he 
was ^^feelifig his way," and, judging from the 
many times he wrote, the feeling must have been 
on a veiy extensive scale, and the way of enor- 
jjaous length. 

It was near the end of the season. The brave 
enduring mother had led her fair squadron, again 
and again, to the front, and, tho^h unable to 
break the enemy's line, had never 1/ost courage. 
Soon the daylight would be gone, and there would 
be no light left to fight by. To do them justice^ 



280 Never Forgotten. 



they, too, did not falter, but came on again and 
again, being so well led. Yet it seemed idle. The 
two youths had all the training of old Machiayel- 
lians. They were almost affectionate in their 
bearing . ^these young traitors. They gambolled 
about the premises like young dogs . ^ate in a 
friendly way off the family board at dinner and 
supper-time. They suffered themselves to be led 
about on brotherly terms. And yet one day young 
Gulliver, helping himself as he spoke to the family 
sherry, announced gaily to the girls a pleasant bit 
of news, at which they should all rejoice. 

" Do you know," he said, " we're to be off in a 
few days. The govemoi^s relented at last, and I 
am so glad. Woodleigh's been dying to go this 
age, and so have I. I can tell you, we're going to 
have a jolly time of it now. Do you know, we 
have been getting greatly bored here." 

A ghastly smile showed the two girls' apprecia- 
tion of the news. But Lady Laura had not for- 
gotten to train their muscles, as she had all other 
points about them. 

" How pleasant I" they said. 

" Ain't it jolly 1" said the youth. " I am count- 



A Diplomatift. 281 



ing the hours till we get oflf. Woodleigh's got an 
invitation to a house in Ireland filled with pretty 
girls . on draught . ^ha ! ha ! . and he's to take me ! 
Jolly I" ' 

The mother received the news of how the labour 
of months had been swept away . like an embank- 
ment by a violent storm . without even a twitch in 
her face. 

" It is pleasant," she said, " getting away at 
this time. And when did they go ? They would 
all miss them so." No one could have guessed the 
stab which this true Spartan felt at her heart. 

For the first time. Lady Laura had begun to 
feel a sense of hopelessness, coupled with the idea 
that she was only rolling rocks up hills like a 
fashionable Sisyphus. Latterly, her mind had 
begun to travel over in the direction of her son 
Charles. She talked a good deal with the diplo- 
matist on his schemes., " Leave it to me," said 
that wily negotiator. " I should like nothing 
better. I shall manage. But we must have no 
forcing it on, no eagerness. Old Governor Baines 
tried that with the Waipiti tribe, and we all know 
how it ended. He put on his blue and gold, and 



282 Never Forgotten. 



went down to them with a flourish. I said how it 
would be when I heard it. No, no, my good Laura, 
leave it to me." 

"But couldn't we get him over here?'* said 
Laura, anxiously. " At such a distance ^*' 

" Now, do leave it to me," said Sir Hopkins ; 
and for the present it was left to him. 

The idea, however, took violent hold of Lady 
Laura Fermor. She began to turn from the three 
" hopeless and helpless" daughters, whom no 
labour, or pains, or propping, or "dioring up," 
could do anything for. She often thought, that 
if she herself had had but a quarter of such ad- 
vantages, what splendid results would have been 
achieved. As it was, she had had to work for 
herself. 

Yet they went throiagh the old routine. They 
dressed and decorated themselves, and set out for 
the shows, and their faithful officer, with her old 
" hault courage," went with them. 

On one of these occasions, the Prefet or the 
Hotel de Ville was giving an entertainment . a 
high festival that had been talked of ior some 
weeks in advance. New ladies' uniforms had been 
ordered, and new flowers, and even new ladies' 



A Diplomatift. 283 



faces. The busy clink of armourers was heard on 
all sides. The girls, rallying a little, took on many 
hands, and laboured earnestly. Hope was the last 
of the virtues that was to flutter away from the 
little chambers in the Ponchettes, and there was 
an invalid baronet, and an honourable planet or 
two, whose place in the social firmament had been 
ascertained with all but certainty, whose right 
ascension had been calculated, and who might be 
looked for on the horizon at any moment. Majors, 
too, were made out in the welkin. . These scraps 
of astronomical science inspirited their fainting 
hearts. The darkest hour is that before the day. 



284 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIFTH. 

NEWS FROM HOME. 

On the night of the festival, the young ladies 
Fermor took a long while to dress. Lady Laura 
had finished her dressing early, as she always did, 
and her gaunt worn figure was hung with rich 
stuffs, just as they hang the aged stones of Temple- 
bar on a royal visit to the City. She was sitting 
waiting with her relation, dressed also, and they 
were both discussing Charles. 

The English mail had been late, and was just 
brought in. A small despatch for the diplomatist, 
which he flung himself upon and tore with his 
talons ; two or three ladylike letters for the family, 
in shape like enlarged visiting-cards. One was in 
Fermor^s writing. 



Newsjrom Home, 285 



" A letter from Charles," said Lady Laura, with 
something like enthusiasm; "now we shall see 
what he is to do." 

"Well," said Sir Hopkins, glancing over the 
letter he also had received, " that is so far satis- 
factory. Old Seymour is likely to go . ^to move 
on, as he should have done long ago. What did I 
tell you? I know how to deal with these sort of 
people. WeU, what does Mr. Charles say ? " ^ 

The answer was something like a scream. The 
tail gaunt woman, in all her finery, had fallen 
back on the sofa. For a moment he thought she 
was in a fit, but he was well accustomed to the 
Waipiti cries and war-dances. With true diplo- 
matic instinct, he went over on tiptoe . ^for which 
there was no need . and closed the door softly. 
He was more alarmed about the letter, for he was 
sure that Charles was dying or dead. 

The next moment she had started into a sort of 
galvanic life. "Think of it!" she said, "only 
think of him ; it is dreadful, isn't it ? O, that such 
a blow should come upon me ! " 

Sir Hopkins made attempts to secure the letter 
for his own reading, but she was brandishing it 
hysterically. " Gambled," thought the diplomatist. 



286 Never ForgoUen. 



" The fellow has gambled^ and lost every aaxpence. 
Shan't pay a florin for him, though." 

" Such a disgrace to bring on na all ! He must 
be mad* Does he want to ruin uaf What have 
we done to him that he should degrade us in this 
way ? One blow after another I I am sure we had 
troubles enough of our own without that! " 

Again the diplomatist tried ineffectually for the 
letter. "Married an innkeeper^s daughter," he 
thought, bitterly. " A fool 1 I have done witk him. 
Let me see what he writes, Laura." 

" You know," she said^ swaying herself back 
and forward, "what we reckoned on from himl 
You know how we talked, and what we were to 
make of him. Now that these girls have failed so 
wretchedly, he was the only Idling we had to lixdc 
to. And the sur with which he writes it to me, as 
if he were getting a princess ! " 

" It 18 the innkeeper's daughter," thought the 
diplomatist; and she now let him take the letter. 
He got out his silver double gliass, which hung 
about his neck like an amulet, and read it care* 
fully. 

It was our friend's ddlf ul composition, breaking 
the news of his proceedings. It is plain that he 



News from Home, 287 

had sadly miscalculated its effect. Carefully 
worded as it was^ it had not made this raging 
mother and cold diplomatist see the thing in the 
light he fancied it would* He thought his words 
were sure to be as soothing as drops of camphor^ 
julep. Poor Fermor ! so much rhetoric expended 
like blank cartridges. 

Lady Laura waited while the diplomatist read, 
her sunk flattened chest heaving outwards like a 
decayed wall about to fall in. Into her worn and 
faded cheek colour had actually forced its way, a 
visitor long estranged. Sir Hopkins read through 
Fermor^s philosophical composition. The embossed 
and initialed document began : 



 



' ** Mt deab Mother, . I wish to communicate 
a little matter, which I dare say may surprise you. 
Not that there is anything astonishing in what I 
am about to do, for it is a step which I and evray 
man, who proposes seriously to take his proper 
station in the commonwealth^ must eventually 
take. The idea, my dear mother, of a long life 
spent selfishly in administering to oneself, in doing 



286 Never Forgotten, 



nothing for others, and, above all, the notion of 
leaving no more mark of one's path behind than if 
it were made on the sea, this is what I never could 
bear to look forward to. I shrink from it, and 
always have shrunk from it. Your true gentle- 
man will live for others as well as for himself, and 
will bequeath his name in trust to those who have 
a legitimate interest in guarding it free from speck 
or stain. 

" In these views, I now merely write to say I am 
about to marry. Ordinary boys would, of course, 
dilate on the charms of the person I have chosen. 
I know you too well to indulge in rhapsodies of 
that kind. But this much I may say : she will be 
no discredit to our family. She is a Miss Manuel, 
of a half Spanish family. I think her charming; 
but she will make an excellent wife, which is the 
point to look at. I do not enter into details now, 
as it is so late (or early, perhaps), but I lose no 
time in communicating to you news of this im- 
portant step, which I almost assume you will ap- 
prove of. You shall hear again to-morrow. 
"Your affectionate Son, 

" Charles Febmob." 



News from Home. 289 

" Well f " said Lady Laura, eagerly, when he 
had done. "Is not this charming news I It is 
deplorable I But I give up. I can't go on any 
more. I am sick and weary of the whole business. 
Let them all do as they please . ^marry out of the 
street, if they will." And the veteran lady, utterly 
beaten and baffled, seemed to bend up and col- 
lapse physically, just as all her hopes had done 
already. 

The diplomatist got to the end of the letter much 
relieved, yet there was a shade of disappointment 
on his face at his divination having broken down. 
The penetration that had pierced to the bottom of 
the savage nature of the Waipitis, was inf alUbly 
certain as to the innkeeper^s daughter. He shook 
his head slowly at it, as if it were the water- 
trough of his cage, then laid his head on one side, 
then on the other. 

"Stupid fellow!" he said at last, tranquilly; 
" I thought he had more sense." 

" And what shall we say to him ? " said Lady 
Laura, suddenly standing up, very fiercely. 
"Write to him and tell him never to come into 
my presence again! Tramp round, he and his 

VOL. I. U 



290 Never Forgotten. 



low wife, from barrack to baziack untU thej 
starve ! Not one farthing shall he erer have from 
me again ! And I con jme yoMy Cousin Pooock, 
promise me that jou will never let him haye a 
sixpence of yours." For certainty a dozen years 
back Lady Laura Fermor had nefyer .been so 
excited. 

Sir Hopkins was smiling to himself all this 
while. An idea had struck him. He seemed to 
have on his diplomatic uniform, its collar of deal 
board and all. His eyes twinkled as he thought 
of this prospect. 

^ Never see him again," hfi said. "We shall 
see him very often, I hope. No, no, things are 
not so bad. I don't take this gloomy view at all. 
A skilful negotiator would very soon restore the 
status quo ante." 

" I don't want to restore anything," said Lady 
Laura. " You don't know him. He is so prcnid and 
stubborn. He will never listen to reason." 

"Except to his own," said the diplomatist. 
*^The most suitable disposition in the world for 
working on. I recollect the old Waipiti chief ^" 

"Yes, yes," said Lady Laura, a little impa- 
tiently. " I know. But it will be no use, I tell 



News from Home. 291 



you, spealdng or writing to him. As an infant, 
he was the same ; as a boy, he was the same ; as a 
young man, he was the same ; he will always be 
the same. Let him take his own way. What 
does it matter? They talk of those women that 
make the shirts ; but what has my life been ? All 
disappointments and trouble, crossed in every way. 
I can do nothing with any of them, so I give it 
up now.** 

"That's the way with you women," said he, 
rubbing his hands, and looking into the stove; 
" you give up when we begin. This poor f ooUsh 
Charles ! Never mind, we shall see what can be 
done to-morrow. Ah ! here we come at last ! " 
and the girls came "swelling" in, like two yachts, 
with all their finery spread, and a maid coasting 
behind with a spare sail or so on her arm. 

They did not notice their mother's shrunk and 
wof ul face ; there were some final touches to be 
given. In the carriage she broke out with the 
story that night's mail had brought her. " Your 
brother is making a fine fool of himself! Go to 
somebody . ^I wish to Heaven you would . and 
leave me here. I am sick of you all. I am sick 
of the world. I have done what I could for you, 
u2 



292 Never Forgotten. 



and I am tired and exhausted. Only just let him 
write me one of his hypocritical letters when he 
wants money ! I, that have always scraped, and 
pinched, and denied myself, to keep him up in his 
proper station 1 " 

It was a dismal progress in that dark carriage. 
The girls had been a little excited by the hope of 
this party, though indeed, by this time, it should 
have been as monotonous as parade or drill. This 
news came on them with a chill, and made the 
opera-cloaks on their shoulders feel like palls. 
Their hearts felt tight even under the stiff silk 
armour, which the maid Jane had tightened with 
many struggles. Suddenly came the lights and 
the music of the *^ dance," seen and heard through 
the open drawing-room. As though the fashion- 
able sergeant had called out " Attention 1" they 
fell into regular line, fans were "ordeifed," smiles 
and general happiness mounted to their faces; 
they bent and swayed, shook kid-covered hands, 
were so glad, and so sorry, and so alarmed at being 
late ; and were so smiling and delighted, that the 
idea was conveyed that by impediments they had 
been long kept away from this delicious retreat, 
and that they baud giyen their jailers the slip, and 



Newsjrom Home, 293 

were now finally got to the place for which then: 
souls had yearned. They had put on theur smiles 
with their gloves. The ugly family nightmare . 
just heard of . they thrust down, and shut the lid, 
up, though it would fly open at times in the midst 
of a valse, like a jack-in-the-box. Lady Laura 
Fermor " taken down" for an ice by Shafto Lyons, 
M.P., who was getting his chest "shored up" at 
Nice, was rallied by her in the gayest manner, on a 
rumour of marriage. He was a tall, florid bachelor, 
very red, and much tightened about the throat, 
and, as he looked at her sideways with relish and 
admiration, his collar and necktie seemed to fit 
about his throat as a frill of paper does about a 
ham. In one of her laughs of appreciation the 
box flew open, and the sight of the "jack" almost 
sobered her, but she had him wired down in a 
second. 

So, too, with her daughters. They ambled round 
in a galop and valse : the elder in the arms of a 
" delightful French officer," with a figure like an 
hour-glass. So with her sister, who did a little 
quiet unostentatious work with a young English 
gentleman. They went apart from the world, and 
opened a little " store" in a greenhouse among the 



294 Never Forgotten. 

plants. Stupid single men who knew nobody, blun- 
dered on them hpe . in the desert, as it were . ^and 
hastily retreated, mentally whistling. 

It came to the end when Lady Laura sounded 
the "rappel." Then came the gosh of farewell 
smiles, general delight and grief : an evening to 
look back to. Shafto Lyons, M.P., took out Lady 
Laura, and looked fondly after her out of his 
paper ham frill, as she drove away. She shook 
her fan at him with gay menace. But when he 
was in the supper-room telling Fobley what "a 
fine woman'^ he had just taken out, all the springs 
had relaxed, and the "fine woman's" face had 
sunk, and dropped, and fallen into hollows. Not 
a word was spoken during that mourning-coach 
progress. 

That very night, before she went to bed (a form 
she went through from habit), Lady Laura got 
out her desk and wrote to her son all in fact that 
had passed through her mind that night. He was 
to take his own way . ^ruin himself if he pleased, 
ruin them, ruin everybody. By all means take his 
own way. She was sick of the whole business. 
God knows, she had had a weary time of it with 
the whole set. However, this she begged, that he 



Nnosjrom Home. 295 



would never again trouble her by letter or other- 
wise. In short, a hot, passionate denunciation. 
She then read it over with satisfaction, as though 
she were delivering it to him in person, and went 
to bed. In the morning, when Sir Hopkins came, 
she took him aside privately, and showed it. 
" There," she said, " it will be a satisfaction to my 
mind to have sent him that." 

He read it smiling, sat down, talked with her 
a good hour, talked of the Waipiti now and then, 
and finally wrote a short note, which she copied. 
Hers lay in pieces under the English grate. It ran : 

" Nice. 

" My deae Charles, . ^Your letter was indeed 
a surprise. I hope you have not been a little hasty. 
However, if you are irretrievably committed, you 
must of course go through with it. You shall see 
us before long, as the air of this place someway 
does not suit Alicia Mary. I shall let you know 
when we shall be in London, where I hope you 
will try and meet us. 

" Your affectionate Mother, 

" Laura Feemor." 



296 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SIXTH. 

AN INVITATION. 

The lectures on Eoger le Garfon were sus- 
pended by more absorbing matter. Fermor vir- 
tually put up "Rel&che'' at his door. His head 
was full of the incidents of his new dignity; every 
one was carrying up, as it were, Addresses to the 
Throne, and he had 'to deliver Gracious Replies. 
His hands, too, were full enough, and he was very 
busy in the mornings writing prettily-turned notes 
to many acquaintance, male and female, and the 
turn was sometimes sad, sometimes humorous. 
^^ You will be concerned, dear Mrs. Fazakerly," he 
wrote, " to hear of my approaching dissolution." 
Which little metaphor was worked pleasantly to 



An Invitation. 297 



the bottom of the first page. "You have always, 
dear Miss Biddulph, felt such an interest in any- 
thing that concerns my happiness, I cannot let a 
post go by without, &c." This was the serious and 
plaintive style. 

He was busy in this way one morning, some ten 
days after Major Carter^s party, when his door was 
opened, and his cast-iron neighbour, cast-iron rod 
in hand, swung in . as a crane swings round . 
close on the servant, who would have announced 
him. " Sit down, Mr. Carlay," said Fermor, affably; 
" I am glad to see you." 

" And I am glad to hear you say so," said the 
other. " I was thinking something had been done 
to offend you." 

" Dear no I Quite gratuitous," said Fermor, "I 
must say. I hope there has been nothing in my 
conduct which a gentleman would not sanction. 

! you are thinking of my unexplained absence ? 

1 see ! Ah, there were reasons for that. I must 
tell you," continued he, with something like a 
simper. " By the way, Miss Oarlay . ^I hope she is 
improving?" 

" Better, thank you," said the other, rising sud- 
denly. " I am not a man for seeing the world, or 



298 Never Ftrrgotten. 

for managing it, and have no wish to learn how; 
therefore, if I do things in a rough abrvipt f ashkjB 
of my own, you must excuse me." 

" Certainly, certainly," said Fermor, smiling 
" I have knocked about the world a pretty good 
time, and am used to that kind of thing." 

" Because, if you would not mind taking us as 
we are, in the backwoods, as I may say, and 
putting up with roughness . ^in short, would you 
dine with us to-day?" 

Fermor started. This was a true surprise. But 
in a moment he saw the secret springs that 
were working. It was very, very odd* This was 
always to be the result of his presence. He had 
not intended to be more than ^gentlemanly . his 

common manner . ^he had not, indeed. Could he 

 
help it? 

Of a sudden he became gracious and courtly. 
He would have the greatest pleasure. He really 
liked that sort of thing, no fuss, or state ; '' pro- 
vided," added Fermor, "you 1a?eat me as . one of 
the family, mind. There, at the mess, they have 
got a Frenchman, who lived with Count Walewsld. 
I beUeve, in his own line, he is worth his weight in 



An Invitation. 299 



gold ; but, on my word and honour," Fermor added, 
earnestly, ^I wduld sooner sit down to a mutton- 
chop . 2i well-done mutton-chop . and a pint of 
sherry, than a dozen courses of his ragoftts." 

With this Kttle profession of faith, which he 
threw in gratuitously, he sent away his visitor. 
During the day he thought pleasantly over the 
prospect, and laid himself out to amuse them by 
some new phenomena of his personality. He 
dressed himself with effect, set a freshly-puUed 
gentleman's bouquet in his coat, and at the fixed 
hour he and his to ryw ascended the stairs together, 
and were announced. 

He was astonished to see what an elegant look- 
ing room it was, and to find that the furniture was 
not of rude cast-iron, nor of imhewn wood. Miss 
Carlay was there, but not, as in the garden, propped 
up with pillows. Almost as soon as he had shaken 
hands, Fermor had started with his graceful gar- 
rulity. 

" I can see a marked improvement," he said. " I 
am not at all surprised. The doctors, you know, 
are beginning to send people here. / find myself 
better. I am one of those people that feel every 



300 Never Forgotten. 



breath of air. In fact, I am an animated baro- 
meter, a human aneroid." As soon as he entered, 
Mr. Carlay, in a grim dinner coat cut out of sheet 
iron, and new black trousers' like short lengths of 
an iron water-main, had drawn off, and was walk- 
ing up and down at the other end of the room. In 
Miss Carlay a faint tinge of colour, and the manner 
which is peculiar to delicacy, made her appear 
very interesting to Fermor. 

They went down to dinner. A small round 
table, a little graceful silver, a little glass, as 
graceful in shape and pattern, and flowers. No 
iron ore, as Fermor had almost expected. It was 
surprising. Everything was good, and tasteful, 
and hot; with a bottle of claret too, Fermor^s 
favourite wine. He was much pleased, became 
much surprised, and to reward them put spurs to 
the TO ey. "By the way," he said, "I have a 
little bit of news, which I dare say will take you 
by surprise.. Perhaps it is no news, and perhaps 
you have heard it; and perhaps, again, it is not 
worthy of the name of news, and you would not 
care to hear it." He waited for deserved applause 
for this ingenious way of putting the thing, and 
got it. 



An Invitation. 301 



The young lady welcomed everything he said ; 
not indeed with words, but with silence, which to 
him was golden, and, therefore, far better. 

" They are going to marry me 1" he said, looking 
round and smiling. 

Mr. Oarlay gave a grim and sudden jerk, which 
in another would have been a start. Fermor, who 
had his eye on the daughter, saw, to his real 
astonishment, a flutter . ^not a start . and colour. 
He really had the idea that he was giving them 
what the French call " a good mouth," and that, 
at the news, there should be illuminations gene- 
rally, in all directions. 

" Yes," said Fermor, speaking of himself as of 
another person, and as if he were helpless in the 
hands of some one else. " The thing, I believe, is 
appointed for every one, like death . ^it is only a 
question of time. My dissolution has been coming 
on a long time : so I only wrap my robe gracefully 
about my head, and fall down pierced with many 
wounds." He was immensely gratified at this 
effect, and felt compimction. " Of course I should 
be glad, and yet I feel sorry. I should like it to 
be delayed a little . ^perhaps not to come off at all. 
She is charming, and too good for me : but who 



302 Never Forgotten. 



can tell how these things turn oat? It is quite a 
lottery . all a lottery." 

This gracious apology . ^so ooosiderately made- 
seemed to do little good. 

But he could not but observe the confusion his 
sudden news had caused. Miss Carla/s eyes were 
on her plate^ and she was making a pretence of 
eating very fast. For the rest of the time she 
scarcely spoke at all, and very early fled away. 
Her father rolled his eyes grimly, and gave out a 
word now and again, like the sound of rusty mar 
chinery in motion. But F^mor, in great spirits, 
let his talk whirl round like the fly-wheel of an 
^igine ; and perhaps the name of that fly-wheel 
was the ro tym. 

He said afterwards he never had such a dreadful 
duty cast on him as the struggling against the sense 
of that oj^ressive man, who would not talk. ^ I 
might as well have been in a room by TjajseH^^^ he 
said to Toxmg Brett, *^ speaking to the ^pergne. 
Such a moody soul as it was." Finally, Mr. Cariay 
pushed back his chair roughly, and got up. 

" Ah, join the ladies," said Fermor, washing his 
fingers, "or lady, eh?" 



An Invitation. 303 



'^ We have ways of our own here," said the 
other, standing at the door. *^ We are early per- 
sons. We don't join the ladies, or carry out that 
sort of thing. My daughter is not nearly strong 
enough, so you will excuse us, please." 

In fact, at that moment a maid came down with 
a message. Miss Oarlay was not very well, and 
could not appear again. "You see," said Mr. 
Carlay, now in the hall. " We are not suited for 
company and its forms, and must take our chance 
of being considered behind the times. So ^" 

He had opened the haU door. Fermor felt him- 
self, in fact, morally taken by the shoulders and 
put out. He went down the steps diafing. " This 
is but the usual thing," he said. " I own I deserve 
it. This comes of going down into a lower rank. 
And really," he added, with a wounded air, to him- 
self, " after all I said, and the way I exerted myself." 
Still, it was a grateful subject to think how oddly 
the news of his "happiness" had been received. 
That poor, soft, good-natured girl . ^it did seem as 
if it had overwhelmed her. As for her father, he 
was a conumcm ploughman ; but while he gave him 
Bp to the sword, he would mark a white cross on 



304 Never Forgotten. 



her door. In f act, he would go in and see her in 
the morning, encourage her, smoothe h^ soft hair 
(morally speaking), and console her. 

The next morning, which was sunny and withr 
out a breath of air abroad, he looked out from his 
back window. The usual picture was not to be 
seen: neither the yoiing girl, nor the arm-chair, 
nor the pillows, nor the maid holding the parasol 
Uke an Indian servant. Later in the day, he set 
his decorators and upholsterers to work, fitted him- 
self up with great nicety, and went in to calL He 
had not lectured on Boger le Gar9on for a long 
time. 

'' Miss Carlay in?" he said, almost passing the 
servant, as a matter of course. But he was told 
" No.'* (This maid was not of the class who 
thought him " a lovely young man.") He retired 
much disgusted, and took down all his fine hang- 
ings and upholstery. Two days after he called again, 
feeling a strange longing to say something on 
Roger le Gar9on, but was not admitted. Yet he 
had seen the young girl in the garden that morn- 
ing. He was furious. It was all that low engine- 
driver, stoker, ploughman . ^that anything . ^her 
father. That poor soft girl was tyrannised over. 



An Invitation, 30 5 



and could not resist. However, now he had a f aur 
excuse for " cutting the whole concern . ^toute la 
boutique." The course on Roger le Gar9on was 
suspended, and the lecturer himself " interdicted," 
like M. Renan. He had a little mental slate, and 
he wiped their names off with his sleeve. 

Fermor had, besides, laid out for himself the 
pleasant pastime of " forming Violet's mind." 
With this view he used to converse with her a 
good deal upon the phenomenon of his ovm mind. 
In this department of psychology he was very 
fluent. Violet, in a devotee attitude, with her soft 
eyes fixed on her master, tried hard to follow, and, 
curious to say, her lecturer seemed better pleased 
when he could n^ot be followed than when he was 
suddenly halted and eagerly shown that her was 
understood. He did not, however, include the rest 
of the family in his lectures. 

From the very first day after Major Carter's 
party, he had suddenly drawn the line, as he called 
it, and erected strong barriers between the rest 
of the family and himself. "Though I take the 
daughter," he said, "I do not, on that account^ 
marry the whole family. She is absorbed into ours. 
I don't want her to bring them with her. No I 

VOL. I. . X 



306 Never Forgotten. 



No!" And to her he said privately, "My dear 
Violet, you are charmiBg, as of conrse, and what 
I think of yon I have shown. But I must really 
protest against your relations . ^that is, against 
taking them en masse. It may be vary well now, 
but I do sincerely hope they may be got to under- 
stand the footing I desire to have them on. Now 
I must say, coming home the other day and find- 
ing them all in a carriage at the door, and that 
wild brother of yours in the hall ^ 

^^ Indeed," interrupted Violet, piteously (she 
someway never could gain courage to call him 
Charles, and therefore never called him by any 
name), ^indeed they meant it well, and Pauline 
and Louis were against it, but mamma said you 
would think it so rude if they did not call on 
you. 

" And why," said Fermor, with a curious want 
of logic, ^* should they be so violent against so 
common an act of courtesy? To tell you the 
truth, my dear Violet, I don't like your brother, 
and you must not be angry with me for telling 
you." 

" O no, no," said Violet. 

" I can't help it, and I can't give a distinct 



An Invitatvm. 307 



i^sason for it, no more than I can for not liking 
cacnmbers or beef, or any other of the strong 
things. He is the cucnmber of your family,** he 
added, smiling, and wishing to reward her atten- 
tion by the present of a little jest. 

She laoghed and enjoyed it, as she enjoyed every- 
thing he meant to be enjoyed. 

" Now," said he, " snppose we go back to 



That is, to the personal psychology, and to the 
psychology they returned. He turned on a little 
jet, and the personal experiences began to flow on 
steadily. 

" Many people say I have a cold manner, and 
further think, because I have a cold manner, I 
must be cold. Does it follow ? The fact is, I don't 
care to be enthusiastic, at least not about every- 
thing. It is not my nature, and yet . ^perhaps it 
is. Perhaps I feel that if I were to give way to it 
I would become all enthusiasm, and froth away 
like a bottle of champagne left open accidentally. 
Now, what would you say I " 

A dreadfully embarrassing question for the shy 
little witness und^ examination. And, indeed, 
any expert even would have found it hard to havcj 
x2 



308 Never Forgotten. 



extracted any plain positive theory out of Captain 
Fermor^s contradictory speculation. Most likely 
he did not wish her, for he shook his head over 
her, smiling. 

" No, no," he said. " It is not every one that 
can understand me. I am like a Chaldee manu- 
script. It would take years of patient labour to 
find the key." And so, with a hailstorm of 
" I, I, I," the personal narrative flowed on for 
twenty minutes more. Violet listened with soft 
and dilated eyes, trying hard to keep up with his 
broader stride, and, to say the truth, was a little 
fatigued. But all this while we can understand 
that her mind was being " formed." 

Young Brett, that good boy, had been in and 
out with him all through . ^the most faithful of 
faithful terriers. Fermor really began to like him, 
and once or twice shifted a dreadfully sarcastic 
" snub " on to the head of his own man. With a 
little adaptation it did just as well. Young Brett 
had been up and down to Town with mystery and 
meaning, and finally burst upon Fermor with a 
superb fire-arm, breech-loading, silver mounted, 
with needle and the rest of it . ^reposing, too, in a 



An Invitation. 309 



luxurious couch of green velvet, where it would be 
exceedingly warm during the winter nights. Poor 
child, he had the Indian notion about a weapon of 
this sort, and would have given all the skins, furs, 
and cowries he was worth for a rifle and powder 
and shot, considering that human happiness, riches, 
comfort, and amusement, lay packed in a gun- 
case. 

Fermor received this marriage offering in a very 
kindly manner, turning it over graciously . after a 
short inspection, ringing for his man to take it 
away into his bedroom. This was very much from 
him. For presents were one of his grievances. 

"People encumber you with them," he said; 
and one of his comic pocket definitions, which he 
often took out and handed round the company, 
was that of a Present ; " something you do not 
want, to be repaid by something you cannot afford. 
That is my idea," he said. 

He took Little Brett with him, as it were upon 
his staff, to see the Manuels pretty often, and sent 
that honest boy to them as often, when he was not in 
the- vein to go himself. The family liked the sight 
of his white hair and his free speech. He secretly 



310 Never Forgotten. 



axlmired both, more particularly the elder girl, who 
was " splendid, by Jove 1 " He would have liked 
to have given her a gun* He saw they liked 
hearing about Fermor, and "rattled" away viva- 
ciously on that pleasant theme. He spoke of him 
always with the deepest reverence and pride. "I 
believe," he said, "I am about the only fellow he 
likes among them all. He never told me so, but I 
think so. O, he is wonderful ! av^ch knowledge of 
the world,- such quietness, such. ease. I would 
give anything " (the image of his favourite breech- 
loader rising before him) " to have something like 
it ! He says it is training ; that he has trained 
himself. O, it is wonderful ! He can do what he 
likes with people," he went on. " There is an old 
cynic next door to him, with a daughter . ^I should 
be afraid to look at him with an opera-glass. But 
he has got round him : has the run of the house, I 
may say. O, it is wonderful I " 

The girls became interested. These were the 
times of the lectures upon Eoger le Garyon. 

" And who are these people ? " said Pauline. 

" O, a fellow like a tall schoolmaster. I know 
he scared me out of all my senses. But Fermor 



An Invitation. bll 



knows how to tame every one. He made Fermor 
dine with him. the other day." 

" And the daughter ? " said Violet, anxiously. 

" A nice soft creature, that sits in a chair," said 
Young Brett, rapturously, as if this last attitude 
were one of her virtues ; " so delicate and gentle, 
and, by Jove ! so grateful when Fermor goes in to 
see her. He does it very often," continued Young 
Brett, with great seriousness ; " out of charity? 
Uke visiting the hospitals, he says." 

Pauline, glancing nervously at her . sister, 
changed the subject, by asking Young Brett how 
he liked his new gun ; and presently Violet, 
making some vain attempts at doing her work, 
got up with an impetuous rustle, and fled to her 
room. Her sister knew these signs of trouble. 

A quarter of an hour afterwards, Pauline found 
her in sore distress, with two red rims round her 
bright eyes. "O child, child!" said she. "I 
knew you would be fretting yourself with these 
trifles." 

"I am a child," said the other, bursting out 
afresh, "and I can't help it. And lie knows it, 
and treats me like one. O, Pauline, you were 



312 Never Forgotten. 

wise and I was foolish. He just thinks of me as 
he would of his httle dog . ^just to amuse him 
for half an hour. O, I am beginning to be very 
miserable." 

And there was anguish and despair, and the 
good sister appEed the usual soothing lotions, aiid 
tranquillised her, as she alone had the -power of 
doing, with the weak li nimen t of reason. 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 313 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SEVENTH. 

A LITTLE HEART IN TROUBLE. 

Late in the afternoon arrived Fermor the 
Splendid. He came to "form her mind." He 
noted the faint red rings and the remains of the 
dejection. He was soothing and gallant, and 
encouraging. He comforted and petted with his 
noble and silvery accents. Her little soul was 
burning in her to bring him gently to account, 
but she stood too much in awe of him, and shrank 
into low spirits. He freezed down any hysterics 
in a second. 

" A little frowardness," he thought. " Upon 
my word, I am sorry to see this. I must eradicate 
it gently but firmly. Violet," he said, gravely, 



314 Never Forgotten. 



" you are not in your usual spirits to-day, I fancy. 
No ! You can't conceal anything from me. Some- 
body has put you out a little." 

" No, no," said Violet, eagerly. 

" My dear child, it is written there," he said, 
pointing to her face, " in text-hand. It is a great 
pity to let you really be put out by trifles, for in 
your little round of life you can only encounter 
trifles. Now, take me. In the larger tract of hfe 
through which / have to walk, what purgatory / 
should suffer if I let myself be disturbed. I might 
as well give up. Things must master me, or I 
must master things. I prrfer the latter. You 
should make an exertion, Violet. It will come 
after a time." 

Violet cast down her eyes, trembling a little. 
These " hortatives" always chilled. 

" How will you face the world?" said Fermor. 
" How will you rough it ? for rough it we must, 
to a certain d^ree. Or I must rough it for both, 
I suppose," said Fermor, resignedly. " It will all 
come on my shoulders." 

"01" said Violet, sorrowfully, "I would not 
mind . that is, I would do . I mean . anything, if 
I only thought . ^that is ^" 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 315 

" Keally," said Fermor, " I do not quite follow. 
Your English, Violet, is rather unconnected. You 
should try and throw your words into the form of 
a sentence." 

" But whena ^" began Violet, passionately ; 

then stopped short, a little scared. 

" Yes ?" said Fermor, quite calmly, who thought, 
as he walked home, how he had played her skil- 
fully, like a little perch at the end of his line. 
" Let us hear it." 

" O, if I thought," said she again, becoming 
passionate, "that you really cared for me, and 
loved me 1 But you don't. No, you don't. jTo 
you ? Tell me now. Do you ? " 

Fermor was secretly pleased. She looked really 
beautiful at that moment. Her cheeks were glow- 
ing, her eyes glistening, as if a shower were about 
to fall, and there was an imploring air about her, 
an acknowledgment of superior power, and an en- 
treaty for mercy. 

" My poor child," said Fermeor, very tenderly, 
^ what have you got into your little head? Some- 
thing foreign, I know. Come, tell me. I am not 
to be taken in, you know. Of course I like you," 
he added, graciously. 



316 Never Forgotten. 

" And nobody else ? Do you like nobody else J " 
she said, plaiting the comer of her dress like a 
little girl stopped and questioned in the street. 

" No one else? " said Fermor, a little surprised. 
" Why, of course not ; at least, not in the same 
degree. These are very odd questions." 

" I know, I know," she said, eagerly, " and I . 
should not speak in this way. But you are so run 
after, and are so clever, it is only natural people 
should ask you into their houses, and listen to you 
. and . sit with them in the hospitals . ^whereas I 
am so foolish and so little sought, I have only one 
person to look to. I think of ^^ 

The clouds on Fermor's face drifted away to the 
right and left. The sun came out. 

" You little, absurd, ridiculous child," he said, 
with gracious vituperation. " So that is what you 
are coming to. Because Lgo in and see a dull old 
gentleman and a sick girl? Some of the gossips 
have been entertaining you, eh ?" 

Violet hung down her head and said nothing. 

" And you have been inflaming your little jea- 
lous wits with their stories. Now, if I had not 
luckily hit on the true state of things, we should 
have had a combustion and explosion, perhaps, and 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 317 

possibly," Fermor added, with a climax, "a . a 
scene! As for having a special Act of Parlia- 
ment passed forbidding conversation with ladies, or 
having a portable wall built round me," continued 
Fermor, with great humour, " and a sunk fence 
too wide to be jumped across by young girls, 
these things, my dear Violet, are not to be thought 
of in the nineteenth century. Even if they were, 
they would be absurd." 

Violet smiled, not through tears, but through 
that little mist which was before her bright eyes. 

" You hnowj^ she said, repeating her one idea, 
" you are so superior to me, and know the world so 
deeply, and so wonderfully. Still, as a favour to 
me, if you only would ^^ 

" Put up the six-foot wall?" said Fermor, gaily, 
and with smiling encouragement. '' Well, it is up. 
Consider it up from this moment. There I" 

Overpowered by this generosity in impromptu 
masonry, Violet humbled herself at her lord's feet, 
and he raised her good naturedly. 

" I shall take no more notice of them," he said. 
" They are scarcely, in fact, in our sphere. You 
well understand me, I fancy. A mere sick girl, 
and I, out of charity, went round the hospital." 



318 Never Forgotten. 



Thus, in general effusions^ and with fireworks 
and catherine-wfaeds flying round, the sc^ie 
closed in. 

Bat that little heart was restless and troubled; 
she was scarcely satined with the magnificent 
explanation and the metaphors of the stone wall 
and Acts of Parliament. Her instinct pierced 
through all the disguises of " sick girl," " charity," 
" hospital," and the rest of it. If a " sick girl," per 
haps an interesting girl, and charity was terribly 
akin to warmer feelings. Soy wh^i h^* grand 
caliph was gone^ she gave way to the gloomiest 
despondency. She was miserable, and there was 
no happiness on the wide earth. 

She knew Fermor was gone dow|i to the bar- 
racks " to be made a machine of," as he put it, and 
she knew where Brown's-terrace was pretty well. 
She presently got on her bonnet, the bonnet with 
the red flower, and that seemed to be made of 
spiders' webs, and with her little face full of care, 
tripped away in a guilty sort of fashion. 

At Brown's-terrace she passed hurriedly before 
the house, scarcely venturing to \oc^ at it ; tlien 
came back, reconnoitring it softly like a vidette. 
Gradually growing bolder, she got courage for a 



. ji Little Heart in Trouble. 319 

steady look at the drawing-room windows on each 
side, but saw nothing. She went away, took a 
short walk, and came back timorously, and then 
saw at one of the windows a girl in an invaEd's 
attitude, with a book which she had been reading 
on her lap ; and this girl she saw in a second was 
not " a sick girl" in the sense described, but a very 
soft and interesting " delicate '' creature. 

The colour came to her cheeks again, as, indeed, 
it did very often in the course of a day. She was 
indeed plunged into misery. She was thinking 
how it was now practically "all over,'* when she 
heard Young Brett's voice close beside her, telling 
her that she would be sure to find Fermor out 
now, but that if she had any message he would run 
up to the barracks for him. 

He was at that moment full of the good nature 
which is troublesome. Should he knock at the 
door and see had he by any chance come in I 
Very likely he would have called at the Carlays', 
next door, with whom he was " always in and out." 
By the way, look ! there was Mss Carlay in the 
window, and it was a great pity she was so ddicate, 
was it not? 

Violet, thinking she was now fairly embarked in 



320 Never Forgotten. 



diplomacy, thought timorously how she would 
examine this boyish witness. " But he never sees 
these people . ^latterly, I mean," she said. ^' I think 
he said he had given them up ! " 

Young Brett laughed with all the boisterous 
scorn of superior knowledge. "No, no," he said; 
" they are great friends. He is the best fellow in 
the world. He gives up hours of his time to 
sitting with that poor, pretty invalid. There I" 
he said, triumphantly, " there's her father ! " And 
the grim figure stalked down the steps, shut to 
what was almost part of his flesh and blood . ^that 
is, the iron gate. opened the gate next door, and 
stalked up Fermor^s steps. 

In hopeless confusion she returned home, and 
spent a troubled night. Poor soul 1 she was a 
child, as Fermor had told her, and she tried hard 
to comfort herself with his assurance about the 
stone wall and the sunk fence. Though she knew 
so little of the world, she had her hurricanes in a 
Sfevres teacup, and a whole view of the whole 
world in a stereoscope. 

When Fermor reached home, he found a letter 
and a piece of news waiting for him. The letter 
was from Lady Laura Fermor, and his forehead 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 321 

contrax;ted as he looked at it. The piece of news 
was that Mr. Gaday had called, and his brow 
deared again. '^ On his knees^ it seems/' he said, 
gaily. Before he had been in ten minutes, the 
human casting was stalking into his room once 
more. Fermor fetched out his coat of supreme 
indifference, and got into it as into a paletot. ' 

^\ was here before . to-day," said the other. 
" You were out, it seems." 

Fermor shrugged his shoulders, and the shoulders 
seemed to say in their own language, " Was our 
master obliged to wait at home! or to be in 
always, on the chance of yoewr honouring us with a 
visit?" 

*' You have been busy all this week past," con- 
tinued Mr. Carky. " Your time has been taken 
up, I presume ? " 

" I generally contrive that it shall be," said 
Fermor, carelessly. " I have generally to com- 
piss two days' work into one. I like to be busy." 
This was the idea in his mind, but in reality he 
never had any of that trouble cf compression. 
"Well," he continued, with a smile, "assuming 
this as a basis . that I have sufficient to keep me 
employed?" 

VOL. I. Y 



322 Never Forgotten. 



The other looked at him steadfastly. " I think," 
he said, " what has once been begun should go on. 
There should be no interruption without cause. 
If one man cares to see another, and has been 
seeing another for a time, it seems unmeaning that 
he should suddenly break off without reason. Life 
is not to be a series of spasms." 

Fermor followed him perfectly. " Of course 
not," he said. " I hope Miss Carlay is better 
to^ay?" 

Mr. Carlay rose a little hastily. "I don't 
know," he said, with really something like agita- 
tion ; " she was better, and I thought she was- 
mending. Sometimes I think it her spirits. I am 
too gloomy company. But what can I do ? No 
one naturally cares to come to our gloomy house, 
and I have not the knack of giving a cheerful 
welcome ; perhaps contrive to offend, besides. I 
don't mean it, God knows I don't." 

" You should cheer her up," said Fermor, gaily. 

"I!" said Mr. Carlay, grimly showing his 
teeth ; then, with an almost painful effort to give 
flexibility to the iron about his face, "Ah 1 if you 
would be kind enough to look in at some spare 
time, and talk a little to her as people of the world 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 323 

do. She likes it, I think, and / have long since 
lost the trick." 

Fermor smiled ; first at the notion of his calling 
genius a trick ; secondly, at the notion of his ever 
having had it. But the flavour of the homage in 
the whole transaction was so welcome, that the 
message from the throne came couched in the most 
gracious terms. 

"Would Miss Carlay be able to see people to- 
morrow % " he, said, as if a new idea had occurred 
suddenly to him. "Any rate, I will take my 
chance. I have just got some of Hachette's new 
things I should like to show her" (i.e. lecture 
upon). 

Then Mr. Carlay went his way grimly rejoicing. 
And Fermor, stretching himself like a minister 
who had just given an audience, began to open his 
mail of letters. There were the usual elements . 
a circular, a bill, an application to be steward at 
the dinner for Charwomen's Orphans, and the 
domestic letter. They all received speedy and 
decent burial in a waste-paper basket under the 
table, with the exception of Lady Laura's. It was 
headed " London, Duke's Hotel, Dover-street," 
which startled him a little, and ran : 



324 Never Forgotten. 



"Mt dear Charles, . We are all arrived here 
safely, after a dreadful journey, which has tamed 
Alicia and Blanche mto perfect wrecks.** (It was 
a little unjnst laying this wholly to the aocount of 
the jonmey.) " We shall rest here until to-morrow, 
when we shall set off for EastpcHt. 

" We are aQ in a fever of curiosity to see the 
girl you have chosen. At least, the girls are ; for 
I, at this vray moment, have a perfect idea of her 
before me. I always agreed with you in liking those 
high-bred, tall, classical creatures, almost cold in 
theu* manner, and as well trained in society as 
soldiers. You are a little cold yourself, my dear 
Charles, and run a little into the extreme. But it 
is de rigueur in a woman. 

" Our relative, Pocock, is coming with us, and 
in his way is, I suspecl^'as curious as the girl?. She 
must be careful before him, my dear Charles, for, 
entre nous, he knows men and women Hke his 
spelling-book. 

" You will have apartments looked out for us in 
a genteel situation ; three bedrooms, a atting-^'oom, 
and a pariour. ^ -7 . . * 
^ Believe me>your affectionate Mother, 

/^ Laura Fbbmor." 



A Little Heart in Trouble. 325 

He was chafed and "put out" by this letter. 
" Why should she take that into her head t " he 
said. "Does she suppose I am to marry a stalac- 
tite? Not one of them ever understood me. 
Women always take you literally in everything 
you say. Now, we shall have a regular exhibition, 
and I shall have them all staring with eye-glasses 
at my show." He got up disgusted and walked 
about. " I knew they would be making a fuss. I 
had an instinct of it. Coming this way in a mob ! 
Really intolerable!" And he walked round and 
round with angry protest. "And fiA," he said, 
with a stamp, " to be ' cold,' forsooth, and exhibit 
training indeed I " He was now at the very pin- 
nacle of disgust, but at the same time he felt a 
sudden uncomfortable chill as he thought of how 
"the girl he had chosen" would behave among 
these cold inquirers. 




END OF VOL. I. 
VOL. II. 



NEVER FORGOTTEN. 



CHAPTER THE FIRST. 

PRESENTED TO THE FERMOR FAMILY. 

Next morning he was with the Manuels very 
early, and with a grave face demanded . though 
not in terms . a private interview with Violet. 
" My relations," he said, " are to be here to- 
morrow, and desire that you should be presented 
to them. As I need not impress on you how much 
depends on the first effect you produce on them, I 
may recommend you to be very careful how you 
behave." 

When she heard this terrible news, Violet felt a 
shock. She had all along anticipated this dreadful 

VOL. II. B 



Never Forgotten, 



ceremonial, and her little heart fluttered as if she 
had got a summons to the fashionable Council of 
Ten. If she had known of that fearful tribunal, 
she would, perhaps, have preferred it. She felt all 
" blankness ;" her heart sank in, as though Fermor 
were the governor of the jail come to tell her that 
she must get ready for her scaffold on the next 
morning. 

" Now," said Fermor, become suddenly like her 
spiritual adviser, "this is a more serious thing than 
you would perhaps imagine. Sit down, Violet." 
And he got her a chair, in which she placed 
herself, trembling, as if it were a dentist's. " You 
have not seen so much life," he went on, "and 
have been brought up differently. They have 
hved and had their being in the highest classes. 
Fashion is as the air they breathe. Naturally they 
are nice and critical, and have a different order of 
associations. They are very curious to see how you 
will behave, and how you will turn out ; and the 
question is, how will you behave ? Now give me 
an idea?" 

Violet, who never thought how she would behave 
before any one in the world, and whose instinct in 
"acting" was her own simple heart, looked up 



Prefented to the Fermor Family. 



wistfully at the dentist standing beside her, and 
said, sadly, " O, how can I ? I don't . ^know." 

" O," said he, gravely, " but we must try and 
know. I am sorry to see you don't appreciate how 
much depends on all this; you do not, indeed, 
Violet. I am really nervous about it myself ; for 
there is a . a . ^and I would not say this to you, but 
for the gravity of the situation . ^a lightness, if I 
may call it, in your manner, a sort of rusticity, 
which I know would jar on persons brought up as 
they have been. Tim is the rock I dread for 
you." 

Poor Violet ! whose voyaging had been a grace- 
ful pleasure-yacht in the sun and the smoothest of 
seas, to hear now of " rocks ! " In sore affliction 
she did not know how to answer. 

" Take time," said Fermor, gravely. 

^^ O," she suggested, after a pause, and raising 
her eyes to him timorously, " I think if I were to 
be natural, you know . ^just myself-^ " 

She stopped, for Fermor started back in alarm. 

" Good gracious ! no ! Not for worlds I O, I 

see, it is very hard to get you to understand. You 

have not been trained to think, and it is scarcely 

your fault. I see how it must end. So we must 

b2 



Never Forgotten. 



try and pull through as best we can." And having, 
as it were, extracted the tooth, with a hopeless air 
he prepared to go. 

Seeing his resignation, and not knowing what to 
do, she ran to him helplessly. " O," she said, " if 
you would only tell me . -teach me." 

" O no," said Fermor, still resigned. " I have 
never found ikat to do. No, we must trust, as 
you say, to nature. Only I beg, I entreat . at least 
no spirits, no violent bursts of laughter. I know 
it seems bad to tell you this, but it is all for your 
own good." 

Poor Violet ! Bursts of laughter before them ! 

Fermor good naturedly made allowance, as for 
a child, and she saw this idea plainly in his face. 
He left her miserable ; and then the idea of what 
had since passed out of her head . the "invalid 
girl" . came back. " She is not a child," she 
thought, "and can understand his instructions; 
and he respects her." Then with a weight of 
worldly trial pressing on her little brain, she went 
away to her room, and battened on her new-found 
miseries. This, we may say, on the whole, was 
the most gloomy day of her little life. 

Restless towards evening, she asked her sister 



Prefented to the Fermor Family, 



to come and take a walk. From her she received 
balm, and Gilead was pom'ed abundantly into her 
wounds. They walked towards Brown's-terrace. 
Pauline ahnost laughed as she was told the parti- 
cular woe of that sick girl. " If you torment 
yourself in this way, my poor child," she said, 
"you will fret yourself into a grave. They live 
next door to him, and a little civility is natural. 
Besides, he has told you that he has found them 
out to be low people, and has given them up." 

" Yes," said Violet, half convinced, " I suppose 
so . ^I suppose he has." 

They were entering the terrace, when she drew 
Pauline back suddenly. " There he is," she said, 
hurriedly. 

" Well," said Pauline, laughing, " we are not 
afraid to meet him? Ah I you doubting creature, 
you deserve punishment! Don't you see he is 
setting otit for our house. Come ! " 

" No . ^not now . at least, not for a moment." 

Fermor was coming out of his house, magni- 
ficent as a decorated Apollo Belvidere. He was 
smoothed, and brushed, and polished, and wore 
virgin gloves of the most delicate grey in the 
world ; and the delicate grey fingers were closed 



Never Forgotten, 



delicately upon a packet of yellow-toned pamphlets 
. ^new works of the well-known Roger le Gr9on 
school. In his button-hole he had a fresh flower. 
He passed out of his own gate . ^looked up the 
road which led in the Manuel direction . ^then 
opened the next gate, went up the steps, and gave 
a dainty knock as if he were doing " a shake" upon 
the piano. Pauline, always ready with assuring 
doctrine, had not a word to say. Not in pale grey 
gloves, and with a flower at its button-hole, does 
the charitable Misericordia society visit its sick. 
Brother Fermor's "habit" was scarcely spiritual 
enough. 

But they had to think of other things. There 
was the Day of Execution fixed for the morrow, the 
awful presentation to the Queen-Mother. Violet, 
agitated by her new troubles, scarcely slept that 
night, but tossed and rocked as if she were on the 
waves of a real ocean. The utter wreck of a 
night's rest is not much loss for a young girl ; but, 
looking in the glass, which she did anxiously as 
soon as she had set foot upon land, she saw red rings 
round her eyes, and flushed spots upon her chedos* 

The great domed black boxes of " Lady Laura 
Fermor and suite," each with a coronet at the hasps. 



Prefented to the Fermor Family. 



and wrapped carefully in a canvas paletot, had 
come down into Eastport, and had heen got tip- 
stairs into the genteel lodgings. Filtering the snite 
carefully, a residuum fell to the bottom, and re- 
solved itself into one single maid, who was called 
Gunter. Gunter was delighted to get home again 
from what she called " Knees " (but which was 
spelt " Nice"), and which, as lying in a foreign 
land, and being in the hands of foreigners, she 
held, entailed a loss of caste in those who employed 
her. She professed many times her delight at 
finding herself home again in " a Christian 
country." 

Fermor had been with them early on the morn- 
ing of their arrival, and had been encircled by cold 
arms. He was a little nervous, though he did not 
acknowledge it to himself; for he was, at least, 
outnumbered. The girls welcomed him with the 
artificial blandishments of fashionable affection, 
and talked to him and put questions as if company 
were by, and he was Colonel Silvertop, of the 
Grenadier Guards. They felt that this was acting, 
and they felt, too, the absurdity of it, but could 
not help it. Their voices would fall into the ball- 
room cadence. 



8 Never Forgotten. 



" We are dying to see her ;" they always called 
Violet her. " I am sure she is hke Lady Man- 
tower^s girl, you used to admire so much." This 
was Alicia Mary's speech. 

" You must make up your minds, my dears, to 
be frights near her. Even as a boy, Charles, you 
were the most difficile person in taste. She shall 
go out with us in Town, all jewels and lace, and 
the richest dresses. I like those stately queen-like 
creatures." 

" O, mamma, and she can take us to court, and 
we shall walk behind her, every one asking who 
that magnificent woman is ? " 

With his mouth expressing sourness, and some 
impatience in his tone, Fermor broke in : "I don't 
understand," he said, "you run on so fast. As for 
being a stately creature, and that sort of thing, she 
is a very nice unassuming girl; and as for those 
fine dresses and drawing-rooms, we shall be too 
poor to be thinking of such things. I couldn't 
afford it." 

" I hope not," said Lady Laura, gravely. " No* 
plebeian saving and scraping, I hope. *Making a 
handsome show is not so dear a thing after all; 



Prefented to the Fertnor Family. 9 

and that ten or fifteen thousand pounds, for we 
are disputing how much it was you told us ^^ 

" Ten, mamma," said Blanche. 

" What do you all mean I" said Fermor, turning 
very red. " Who was talking of ten or fifteen thou- 
sand pounds f /wasn't. If you mean Violet's for- 
tune, she has next to nothing ; and," he added, 
with an attempt at generous emotion, " and thank 
God she doesn't require it." 

Lady Laura laughed. "This is quite a new 
tone for you. Well, be it ten, or nine, or eleven, 
you must make a show on it if you wish to get on. 
It 18 very little, my dear Charles ; for your father 
always said you would want plenty of money to 
keep you alive." 

" But," said Fermor, bluntly, " we had better 
understand this once for all. I am not one of 
your mercenary people. From the first, I said I 
never would look out for money. In fact, it al- 
ways seemed to me a . ^a sort of drawback, a kind 
of manufacturing thing. What I wanted was a 
person who would suit me exactly, and I at last 
succeeded in finding her. Violet, I believe," he 
added, looking round with a sort of pride, "will 



10 Never Forgotten. 



not have a sixpence of her own . ^literally, not a six- 
pence/' 

The family looked from one to the other, with 
blankneas mingled with contempt. Fermor saw 
their glances, and became aggressive. 

^ Yon," he said, "who naturally think the whole 
of life to be one long ball ^^ 

"Hnsh!" said Lady Lanra, calmly; "don't 
reproach them. You have not, I hope, let these 
people take you in ? I am sure you are too sensible 
for that." 

" Who says so? " said Fermor, sharply. " Per- 
haps that will be the next thing." 

" Well," said Lady Laura, " you are old enough 
now, Charles, to know what is best for yourself. I 
tried to bring you up as well as I could to a cer- 
tain age. The thing must go on now, and we 
must make the best of it. What time," added she^ 
calmly, " are we to see your Miss Manuel ? " 

"O," said Fermor, constrainedly, "don't put 
yourself out. Any time to-morrow." 

" You said to-day, I thought," said Lady Laura, 
coldly, and rising. " Now, my dears, we must get 
our things settled in this place* We have plenty 



Pre/ented to the Fermor Family. 11 

to do. We shall be in all to-day, for I feel very 
tired." 

Fermor went home chafing. " What a way 
they take things!" he said to himself. "Why 
should they be expecting this and that? I am 
sure I am old enough now to take my own course." 
But what really jarred was their resigned air of 
toleration ; for he had expected banners^ and bon- 
fires, and acclamations, and general jubilee. 

He arrived at Raglan-terrace in no very good 
humour. "Where is Violet?" he said; "please 
send her down, as we have no time to lose. Is she 
ready?" 

Violet was up-stairs, but not ready. The final 
decorations were being pushed forward desperately. 
Nothing could be found, nothing was put on right 
or straight ; agitated fingers tried to attach por- 
tions of dress to poor fluttering Violet's figure. 
The poor child had been bathing her face for 
hom^, imtil it became all flustered and inflamed, 
and she had the wildness that comes from want of 
sleep. Every moment expresses came from im- 
patient Fermor below. At last she came down. 

He started back. " What have you been doing 



12 Never Forgotten. 



with your face ? Good gracious ! what is the 
matter?" 

Violet came up to him timorously. "O, it is 
nothing," she said; "we have been in such a 
hurry. Let us go." 

" But why hurry?" said he. "I thought that 

all this morning, surely ^Let me see you in the 

light. Heavens ! Is there no eau-de-Cologne in 
the house ? This is dreadful ! " 

" Indeed, indeed^ Charles, I tried all I could. I 
have been bathing ^" 

" Ah, that accounts for it," said he, calmly ; 
" you have certainly a judicious sister. And you 
must not mind if I make another remark . ^but it 
is too serious an occasion to stand upon trifles. 

And that bonnet Where is your little lace 

bonnet?" 

" O," said her sister, standing by her side like a 
workwoman over a piece of work newly brought 
home, " this is a new one, just got home expressly ;" 
and she telegraphed a special appeal to Fermor to 
forbear further criticism. 

He shrugged his shoulders. " Come, let us go. 
We must pull through as well as we can." 

They went alone, for Lady Laura had said, 



Prejented to the Fermor Family. 13 

"Please let her come without any of her other 
people. I am really not equal to it to-day. Later, 
of course . ^but please don't ask me to-day." 

In truth, poor Violet was in the most unfortu- 
nate plight for presentation that could be con- 
ceived. On this day she had determined to be 
splendid, and the result was that she looked a 
thousand times better in her every-day dress. 

As they went in, Fermor said, solemnly, himself 
sadly out of humour, "Please recollect all my 
instructions. I assure you, though I dare say you 
don't see it in that light, you don't know how much 
depends upon the next few moments." 

Thus encouraged, Violet entered. Primness and 
austerity distributed over three persons welcomed 
her. Lady Laura rose upon her gauntly, and 
wound her thin cartilages about her. The " girls," 
with a set smile and faces cold as china, waited 
their turn. 

" Sit down, pray do," said Lady Laura, looking 
curiously into her face. " I am so glad to know 
you, I am- indeed." The others sat about and 
looked at her as curiously, taking her dress as their 
department. In utter confusion, and with Fermor^s 
eye steadily on her, Violet could only murmur and 



14 Never Forgotten^ 



murmur a little stupidly, when Lady Laura got 
out some fashionable platitudes and gave them to 
her, and then paused, waiting to hear how they 
would be acknowledged . ^Violet could only say 

she was "so kind," and "so ^*' an encomium 

that reached no greater maturity. She heard 
Fermor change his place in his chair impatiently, 
then all her small forces fell into complete disorder. 

Alicia Mary was busy with that unlucky bonnet, 
and Violet felt that she was. The conversation 
languished terribly. 

" We must come to know you a little better," 
said Lady Laura; "if you have any spare mo- 
ments, we shall always be delighted to see you. In 
time, you will have, of course, more confidence in 
me. Alicia, you will make out Mrs. Manuel's 
address ; we shall be delighted to leave cards and 
make her acquaintance." 

Alicia Mary and Blanche and Laura gave her a 
cold accolade, and said they supposed they should 
meet her during the season in Town, which they 
also supposed she found " deUghtf ul." 

Violet, in a tone that seemed to deprecate any 
violence, said she did not know. She was longing 
to be gone. Fermor abruptly stood up. He was 



Prefented ts the Fermor Family. 15 

angry, and saw that the whole had been unsatis- 
factory; yet, curiously enough, he was not so 
much angry with Violet as with his relations. " I 
don't want their patronising airs. I can do in 
spite of them." And as he walked away he re- 
lieved Violet's mind unspeakably, by telling her 
that she had done fairly, very fairly indeed. He 
fumed against them all the way home. But the 
breeze was not able to carry him further than 
that day. 



16 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SECOND. 

SIR HOPKINS EXAMINES THE GROUND. 

On the next inoming, excited by a sort of 
curiosity, he went to see his family again, and 
said, with an air of unconcern, "Well, how did 
you find her ? " Lady Laura, with an affectation 
of ingenuity, sent out her daughters on various 
pretexts. "I did not hke," she said, confidentially, 
" to speak of it before them. It is no use going 
into the matter now. It does no good. Now, 
tell me what time are you thinking of for the 
marriage. We shall, of course, try and meet your 
views in every possible way." 

" O yes," saidFermor, " quite so. But you were 
satisfied on the whole ? " 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground. 17 

He saw that Lady Laura was kindly trying to 
avoid giving her opinion. "Don't be afraid/' he 
said ; " tell me candidly. I am not a boy now, 
you know." 

" What is the use ? " she said. " They were 
more disappointed than / am. I am an old 
woman now. Seriously, my dear child, as you do 
ask me, what was over your eyes ? I declare I 
thought I should have dropped when she came in. 
At first I was sure there was a mistake." 

" But," said he, impatiently, " don't you think 
her pretty ? I know here she is considered the belle 
of the place." 

" Here^^ said she, with a half smile. " O, that, 
of course. After your description and all, I really 
felt a chill at my heart. No manners, no style of 
any kind, not able to speak, and as for dress, my 
dear Charles, I lay it on you to speak seriously to 
her, for really it is not creditable." 

How this criticism, which was in the tone of ma- 
ternal condolence, affected Captain Fermor, may 
be conceived. He thought of it a good deal after- 
wards, and the remark about dress appeared to 
him specially just. Lady Laura seemed anxious 
to change the subject, so as not to give him pain. 

VOL. II. c 



18 Never Forgotten, 



Sir Hopkins Pocock, she told him, would arrive in 
a day or so. " Seriously," she said, "you must lay 
your mind to making way with him. He is won- 
derfully inclined towards you, and said the other 
day you had the making of a diplomatist in you. 
He is to be a governor in a month or so, and I 
think could be got to take you out with him. He 
will have splendid appointments in his gift." 

Fermor's face lightened. "I always thought," 
he said, tranquilly, "you should have put me in 
the diplomatic hne. I should have done veiy well 
as an attache. If I have a taste, it is f or negotia^ 
tion. I should be very glad indeed to go out with 
Pocock." 

He was, in truth, getting tired of arms and its 
dull round, which presented no opening for a man 
of abilities. 

" I will speak to him about it," said Lady Laura. 

Sir Hopkins arrived the next day, plenipoten- 
tiary, as it were, accredited to a new country. He 
was seen perking down the street with an air of 
smirking surprise, as who should say, "Really 
now, this is very forward civilisation; quite sur- 
prising, 'pon my word." If he went into a shop, 
he seemed to go as an embassy to that shop, 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground, 19 

and prepared to negotiate a little for the article he 
wanted, as if he were dealing with the Waipiti 
tribe. At every turn something . ^really now . 
quite took him by surprise. He entered the prin- 
cipal bookseller^s shop in the place, and negotiated 
out of him the leading persons then residing there. 
The principal bookseller had an inside room where 
two or three newspapers drifted about, and taking 
down Sir Hopkins's name with LadyXaura's, be- 
came impressed suddenly with respect. 

"We are very full indeed now, sir," he said. 
" Colonel Gouter was in here this morning, and 
said he never recollected such a season. The 
bishop came only yesterday." 

Sir Hopkins was surprised. "No, really? You 
don't tell me so ? Now, what bishop ? It cannot 
be the Bishop. of. er ? " 

"Yes, sir. Doctor Bridles. We have got his 
lordship's ^Charge,' which has made such a sen- 
sation. Got down six copies last week, and only 
one left." 

Sir Hopkins was smilingly amazed. And so 
this was the "Charge," really now? That was 
curious. Well, and who else, now ? 

" We never were so full. The Miss CampbellSy 
c2 



20 Never Forgotten. 



and the officers, and Major Carter, who gave the 
little parties.'* 

 Carter 1 Carter 1" said Sir Hopkins.  What ! 
Not an elderly man, with light clean face, and 
greyish whiskers t No. I should say not t" 

" Why yes, sir,'* said the leading bookseller, a 
little mystified by this way of putting the thing. 
"Why, that w very like him* It must be the 
same. He has been in the best society, I assure 
you, sir. A great friend of Captain Fermor^s, 
sur. 

" 1 That is very nice indeed. Come now. 
A great friend," said Sir Hopkins, setting his head 
on one side, and resting his hands on the rail of a 
chair, as if it were his perch, and he were about 
to drink. 

" O yes. In fact, sir, they say that it was at 
his house that Captain Fermor^s marriage came 
about. Is it not interesting, sir ?" 

Then Sir Hopkins, having bought half a quire 
of note-paper, and not having subscribed to the 
lonely lee coast where the wrecked newspapers 
were drifting about, went his way pleasantly. 
This was what he called getting the lie of the 
ground. 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground. 21 

Fermor thought a good deal over what Lady 
Laura had hinted. It diverted him, too, from 
other unpleasant reflections. "Keally/' he said 
to himself, " I begin to think Violet is only a toy 
. a very pretty toy . ^and she seems scarcely to 
think life can be a business at all." But he was 
pleased with the notion of the diplomatic opening. 
" The very thing for me," he said. " He is most 
likely of the old-fashioned school, and I will go 
out with him as secretary nominally . ^in reality as 
adviser and minister." 

Major Carter, he felt, had a sort of little bill 
against him, and he thought he would settle it by 
a dinner at the mess. " No man shall say I am in 
his books," Captain Fermor added, sternly; and 
Major Carter came to dinner that very day. 

Mess dinners repeat themselves; hundreds of 
impressions can be taken from the one mould. 
The mess dinner, the mess plate, the mess waiters, 
waiting as if on parade, the mess diners, and, 
above all, the mess itself, are all according to a 
"sealed pattern," and turn up in every corner 
of the empire, as undistinguishable as one re- 
gimental button from another. Major Carter, 
as crisp and short as thin Scotch cake, bathed 



22 N.ver ForgotUn. 



pleasantly in these scarlet waters. He paddled 
conversationally among tliem, adapted himself to 
the "young fellows," and was pronounced, with 
serious military gravity, to be a man of " uncom- 
mon knowledge." Wise Folly, busy with its pipe, 
shook its head with profundity at Wise Folly in 
the opposite lounging-chair, and uttered thickly 
that Carter was a man that had read a good 
deal. A stranger is always welcome; for they 
had gone round and round over the dried-up patch 
of grass they called their " minds," until they 
knew every foot of it by heart. The wells, in 
^hich there was such brackish talk as horses^ 
uniforms, "my setter pup," and "jolly" cigars, 
had long been pumped dry. Heads turned eagerly 
to drink up the clear brook of Carter talk. And 
yet he was insinuating and deferential, and with 
skilful tact suffered Fermor to lead. 

After dinner there came the little ante-room, 
the playground, where the you^ths could dispoj;t 
with tobacco and strong drinks. A few got out 
the card-table, and applied themselves painfully to 
the serious game of whist. Major Carter shook 
Jiis head sadly as he was asked to take a hand. 
" No, no," he said* " What I know of whist was 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground. 23 

bought a Kttle expensively. A very pretty comer 
of Carterstown had to pay for bad play. After 
that night I gave up. Ask General Munro (then 
Colonel Munro . he was there the whole night) if 
I did not bear it pretty well." There being now a 
promiscuous distribution of cigars, Major Carter 
giving in on* one point, said, good humouredly, 
"Come, I tell you what, I will take a cigar. 
Thanks." When the cigars were lit all round, 
and the room seemed glowing like a coal country 
at night, Major Carter got very pleasant, and 
began to unpack some of the little worldly wares 
he had gathered up in his journey through life. 
He set before them ghostly dinner-parties, ghostly 
balls, little domestic farces, in which Sandwich, 
Lord Yokel's brother, who was humorously called 
by his friends Lobster Sandwich, from the colour 
of his face, figured. General . ^then Colonel . 
Munro also had part in these recollections. More 
interesting, however, was it when Major Carter 
brought upon the scene a certain Maltese lady whom 
he had met in garrison, " really one of the finest 
creatures in the Italian way" he. ever encountered 
in the whole course of his life. "For myself," 
continued Major Carter, "I am not very much in 



24 Never Forgotten. 



that line ; and men tell me such and such women 
are handsome, and of course I take then* word for 
it. But really, when I saw this girl coming down 
the Strada Keale, literally lighting up the path- 
way, I confess I did feel ever so little curious 
about her." 

The youths settled themselves to listen earnestly 
. for at least the very youngest, not eighteen, might 
speak judicially on this subject . ^when a mess 
waiter entered with a card in his hand, and said to 
Fermor, " That gentleman wishes to see you." 

" Who can want me at this time ? ^ Sir Hop- 
kins Pocock !' O !" Fermor added, aloud, and 
rose to go out. He therefore did not see the 
curious effect of this name on his friend. Major 
Carter gave a scared look round from one to the 
other, and half rose also. 

" Well," said a Boy-officer, breathless, " what 
did she do then?" 

" Why then " Major Carter said, ab- 
stractedly : " I fear I must go now. Good 
gracious ! Had no idea . so late." 

A tumult of protest. " O, hang it. Confound 
it ! Tell us about the woman." 

" Must go, indeed," said Major Carter, looking 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground. 25 

uneasily at the door. Letters, you know. Good 
night . good night." Quite a sudden thought. 

Meanwhile Fermor was greeted warmly by his 
relation. " Just been up at your lodgings. Fol- 
lowed you down here. Don't know that I should 
know you, though." 

" You must come in, my dear sir," said Fermor, 
with warmth ; " we are just sitting after dinner. I 
asked a friend, Major Carter." 

" Carter . ^Major Carter. Is he here ? " 

" O yes," said Fermor. " A sharp clever man of 
the world. You are certain to like him." 

" Am sure he is the same . ^met him at Monaco. 
And a friend of yours ? Come, I will go in and 
sit down for a few minutes." 

As they entered, they brushed by the major, 
who was hurrying out, with his hat half way raised, 
as it were to catch a train. 

" Good gracious ! where are you going ? " said 
Fermor, catching him by the arm. 

"I must go," said the major, in a low whisper, 
still bent upon catching his train. " Please let me 
. ^business." Curiously, too, he spoke with his 
face to the wall, and turned away from Fermor. 

" Major Carter, Major Carter I " said the diplo- 



26 Never Forgotten. 



matist, with undiplomatic heartiness, "we have 
met before. You recollect me . ^Pocock ? So glad. 
So very glad." And the diplomatic head was jerked 
on one side, aaid the diplomatic hand held out. 

Major Carter slowly took a sort of under-look at 
him, much as a dog does suspicious of his master, 
and instantly changing into the former crisp Major 
Carter that was sitting telling of the Maltese lady, 
became delighted to welcome an old acquaintance 
met with at Monaco. 

" Sir Hopkins Pqcock," said Fermor, intro- 
ducing him to the company. " Major Dobbs, Mr. 
Slack, Captain Showers." 

The hospitality of a cigar was promptly offered, 
and several open cases were proffered. Sir Hopkins 
chose one carefuUy, and smiled on all round in 
return. His talk flowed on them steadily in its 
thin stream; he never was at a loss, but to Major 
Carter he was specially attentive ; appealing to him, 
and listening to him when he had appealed, almost 
with reverence. ^^ Stay long at Monaco after I 
left ? We had a very pleasant time of it. Recol- 
lect old Grimani from Naples, when he tore up my 
Times'^ They said he had lost fifty thousand 
francs that night." 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground. 27 

And Major Garter^ who tad' not aeemed to re- 
collect liim well at first^ andi whose imaginaiy train 
lad long since starfeod^now became aa act old friend 
o the Kinelieist memory, and a Yery delightf id and 
genial old friend. 

Fermor was pleased. "1 always knew," he said 
sagely, next day^."thafc Carter was of the proper 
set ; I can always , tell by the ring of the metaL" 
H0 was pleased^ too,, with his new relation.. " Just 
the sort of man. I required," he* said; and presently 
had drawn him out of the crowd, now beginning to 
bet upon the whist party, and was talking to him 
gravely. 

" They told me, sir," he said, " of your promo- 
tion. I am very glad of it. It requires peculiar 
gifts to govern. If you were thinking . as they 
told me you were . of taking with you any man of 
a peculiar turn that way, as secretary, or that sort 
of thing, I confess I should be very glad to go. 
Y(m can understand that a man, who feels himself 
made for better things, and with ambition, must 
find himself rather thrown away in this sort of 
thing;" and he glanced round the room. 

" 0, of course," said the diplomatist ; " quite 
so. And so you find this place dull ? It seems to 



28 Never Forgotten, 



me pleasant enough. I rather envy you here. Do 
they ever give a ball or a dinner, eh ? " 

" O, I suppose so," said Fermor, carelessly. " I 
don't know, really. I am the worst person in the 
world to apply to. But, sir. of course, if you have 
chosen any one already, that is a different thing. 
But I think I could be of use ; in fact, I am sure 
of it. Better, perhaps, than any one else." 

" Ah, quite so," said the other ; " no doubt. And 
the men here, how do you find them now ? Plea/- 
sant, I should say, for mere daily use . ^like roast 
leg of mutton, not a refined dish, but we have to 
come back to it." 

" But have you made up your mind, sir," said 
Termor, keeping to his point, " if I might ask you 
directly?" 

" Do you know," said Sir Hopkins, turning 
round on him, "you remind me of the chief who 
was our stiffest card in the Waipiti. All our 
diplomatic forms were thrown away on him. Well, 
no. My good Charles . ^we will talk of this to- 
morrow." 

Fermor, fretting at this cool reception of his 
proposals, which he always liked to be as promptly 
received as they were offered, said ironically, " You 



Sir Hopkins examines the Ground, . 29 

have to make the acquaintance of these men here, 
as yet, sir." 

" No, no," said the diplomatist, smiKng. " I 
have read a good many more men than I have 
books. For instance, that sunburnt man opposite, 
who made that comic remark about the halter of a 
horse." 

Fermor smiled with compassion. "He never 
gets out of a circle much larger than a halter," he 
said. " Showers is his name. He is our pro- 
fessional jester ! " 

" Showers? Showers? I knew a Colonel Showers 
who commanded out in the islands, and headed the 
attack on the Pah." 

" My uncle, sir," said Showers, striking in ; "he 
was out there many years." 

" Good gracious 1 " said the diplomatist, drawing 
his chair over to him, "how curious, how won- 
derful! He was my great friend . often dined 
with me at Government House. How is he? 
Heard from him ? " 

The diplomatist was so delighted at this dis- 
covery, that he addicted himself to Showers for the 
rest of the night. Showers, elated by the proud 
distinction, grew, as it were, rampant in his ardour, 



30 Never Forgotten. 



and threw out on all sides his f escennine jest^ m 
they would be called in the old Roman History, 
being reckless enough, even,.to level a shaft or two 
at the Fermor Jove. But the face of the Fermor 
Jove wore an expression of deep pain and disgust, 
as he saw this, strange preference. Later, some- 
thing like this thought passed through his mind: 
"That the destinies of thousands of our fellow- 
creatures should be committed to a man who was 
so ignorant in reading the human mind! Sur- 
prising bKndness 1 " It made him sad. 

Late that night they set out to walk home to- 
gether. Major Carter and Fermoi?, with the diplo- 
matist in the middle. At Fermor^s gate they said 
good night, and Fermor went in. JBut he heard 
Sir Hopkins say in his cheeriest diapason, "My 
dear Carter, give me your arml Which way do 
you go? I want to have a talk with you over old 
times." 



Sir Hopkins' s Verdict. 31 



CHAPTEE THE THIED. 

SIB HOPKms'S VERDICT. 

FsBMOB was beginning to grow sour and pettish 
at the restive course his life was taking. He felt 
towards it much as he had done towards a shjring 
and kicking horse that he once rode. He was 
annoyed, and he disliked being annoyed, he said. 
This road was getting rough, and he preferred 
walking on the grass. Perhaps he was piqued 
that eveiy lady was not in a tumult of delight, 
astonishment, or envy, at what he had done. 

In this train of mind, and eager to give a little 
premium for such good conduct, he again set 
the decorators at work, put together the new 
" Hachettes," and went in to call at his next door 



32 Never Forgotten, 



neighbour's. He wanted a little soothing, too ; and 
often a successful visit, he said, was a glass of 
anisette to a Frenchman. 

The girl's eyes sparkled as he entered, and she 
half rose. The colour came to her cheeks. " Even 
in her dress," thought he, "the Fahrenheit of 
gentility . quite the lady." Her eye fell on M. 
Hachette's little volumes. "/ know," said he, 
" from experience, how welcome a new book is to 
the convalescent. Of course it is easy for any one 
to say : ^ Write to that man in London, and tell 
him to send a box of the newest things.' And you 
do get," added he, smiling, "the very newest . 
trash. No; I think I know your taste and the 
tone of your mind." 

" It is so kind of you," she said, eagerly turning 
them over. 

" I got them expressly," he said, " and I have 
good news. Our friend Roger le Gar9on is on his 
way. We shall have him next week." 

"Next week!" said the girl. "You are too 
good to me. Papa says what shall I do when I 
lose our neighbour? I must only make the most 
of the time." 

" O," said Fermor, smiling, and thinking of the 



Sir Hopkin/s Verdict. 33 

metaphor he had written to Mrs. Fazakerly . ^his 
were always good serviceable images that would 
wash and wear . "you are thinking of the ap- 
proaching dissolution, the lying in state, and the 
interment. A time is appointed for all men. But 
it is a good way off. The judge has given me a 
long day." 

This was a very natural girl, and she said more 
with her open honest face than with her voice, " O, 
I am so glad." 

Fermor looked at her with great interest. He 
was now going to take his anisette. " So you are 
sorry for the poor convict ?" he said. 

The other looked down. " It is mere selfishness, 
I am afraid," she said. "You will say we miss 
what Has been a comfort and assistance to us, and 
. ^you have been very, very kind." 

She said this in a straightforward way, without 
any affectation. At that moment it occurred to him 
how helplessly that poor little Violet would have 
floundered, and what a spectacle of confusion she 
would have exhibited. 

" I hope," he said, graciously, " we do not give 
up all our friends when we marry. It would be 
reiy hard if we were to lose our caste like the In- 

VOL. II. D 



34 Never Forgotten. 



dians, and be cut off from society. I shall be the 
same Captain Fermor, I hope. I sincerely trust 
so. But, as I say, the thing is altogether indefinite. 
That is to say, I never like being fixed to a day, or 
a month, or even a year. In matter of time I am 
always a despot. They must give me breathing 
space and opportunity to look about. And so," he 
said, smiling encouragement, and morally smooth- 
ing her hair, ^^ we can hope to spend a great many 
more hours together over Eoger le Garfon yet." 

He was greatly delighted with her confidence in 
him, and the naivete of her almost unconcealed 
liking, which he thought he would play on a little 
more still. 

" I would give the world to see her," she said, 
fixing her soft, honest eyes on him. " When I am 
strong enough to drive out, which will be to- 
morrow, I shall get papa to take me where she 
is walking. I can look at her hard, without being 
rude." 

Fermor good naturedly passed over the false ex^ 
pression in this speech, for he might have told her 
it would be rudeness all the same; then said, 
^^ Why not see her in the regular way % I tell you 
what, Violet shall come and see yoM." 



Sir Hophtns^s Verdict. 35 

" No, no," said she, eagerly, and colouring. 
'' Not for the world." 

"And Trhy not?" said Fermor, stiU watch- 
ing her. 

"Violet!" she said. "O, what a charming 
name ! And I am sure suits her." 

" Yes," he said, carelessly, " it does. I confess 
I rather fancy a name of a more neutrial tint. You 
expect everything to be in harmony . to be shrink- 
ing like a violet." 

" And I am mire she shrinks. Tell me^ now." 

" Yes," said Fermor, laughing. " She does. 
almost a Uttle too much. I abnost like your name 
.Mary . ^better." 

" O no, no," said she, in some confusion. " You 
only say that." 

" I speak of the name in general," said he, 
gravely. 

This sort of discussion is a little dangerous. So 
it would have been with any one less trained than 
Fermor, who felt he had the reins of the situation 
well in hand He was thinking how much nearer 
the edge he Gotdd dtive, when the door half 
opened, and a sort of Uttle sharp voice said per- 
guasively, 

d2 



36 Never Forgotten. 



"May I come in? Eh?" 

The face of Sir Hopkins was looking round 
the edge of the door, as if he had his eye to a 
telescope. 

" My dear Charles, you here ! Just dropped 
in to see Mr. Carlay. Carter was to have met 
me. Miss Carlay, I am sure. Charles, I must 
ask you ^"^ 

The other was really taken aback. What brought 
him ; above all, what brought him at such a mo- 
ment, when the suspended lectures on Roger le 
Gar9on were about beginning. But, true to his 
principle of never being surprised, never thrown 
off his centre, Termor introduced his relation at 
once. 

The deUcate girl received the visitor with perfect 
self-possession. No shell had exploded in that 
drawing-room. There had been nothing like an 
order for execution. She went to meet him with a 
smile and with a welcome, said she was sorry her 
father was out, and seemed not in the least embar- 
rassed at having to play the amversational game 
against two gentlemen. She uttered the usual 
hopes and questions. Was Sir Hopkins going to 
stay with them long, and how did he like the place ? 



I 



Sir Hopkins's Verdict, 37 

Immensely, Sir Hopkins said. Did not know- 
when he had liked a place so much. Though, in- 
deed, to a man who had roughed it a good deal in 
the world, all places should be like all beds . ^very- 
much the same. 

" Indeed," said the young girl, half shyly, half 
earnestly, and with an animation that became her 
wonderfully, " our little ways and manners must 
seem very trifling to youy who have travelled so 
many, many miles, and have managed those dread- 
fully savage people. I would give the world to 
know how it is done," she added, the shyness being 
now all absorbed in the earnestness, " and how 
even a beginning is made." 

(This was not the venial hypocrisy of the draw- 
ing-room, for Fermor had indeed invested his re- 
lation's achievements with an air of adventure.) 

" Why, you don't tell me," Sir Hopkins said, in 
great delight, "that you have been reading up the 
Blue Books ? Where did you pick up about the 
Waipiti?" 

Fermor and Sir Hopkins went away together. 
Pretty much the same feeling was in both minds. 
^ My dear boy," said the latter, detaining him 
gently at the library door, " we older fellows may 



38 Never Forgotten. 



not have as fresh a taste, but I fancy I know a 
girl about as well as you know a horse. And, 
positively, if I had to choose between our good 

little innocent rustic and that girl, I declare -" 

And he finished the sentence in an expressive 
squeeze of his lips. " To say nothing," he added, 
in a lower voice, << of the money. Ha ! ha 1 I 
suppose I am getting old and exploded . ^though 
the F. O., I am glad to say, does not think so . 
but of all the incomprehensible bewildering things 
in the world this selection of yours. of our amiable 
little rusti c ^ " 

With .another man Fermor ^vould have burst 
out haughtily, "Incomprehensible to t/ot*. that is 
yow concern." And he would have dashed in his 
face Burke's " As well might a rabbit understand 
the gestation of an elephant," like a glass of wine. 
5ut he restrained himself. This relation was to 
be dealt with by suasion. ^You are never tired, 
MT, of this unfortunate subject," he said. "I am 
truly grieved, indeed I am, that ^" 

" Now, nowy^ said Sir Hopkins, "why will jout 
I never succeed in convejdng myself. Though you 
know, we are trained not to convey ourselves. But 



Sir Hopkin/s Verdict. 39 

^it intriguea' me, as old Mungo used to say in 
his dinged French* I don't see it. I want to see 
it. Here are you in a whole parkf ul of desu-able 
girls, every field here ahve with them . money, 
rank, everything . and you pick out our little rustic. 
My boy, I tell you this, you have a game. Don't 
tell me." 

Fretful, pettish, hot, wounded (if he had been a 
girl he would have cried), angry, Fermor did not 
know how to answer, could not answer. His enemy 
would have laughed to see his irresolute conf usicm* 

" It is 80 odd," continued Sir Hopkins. " But I 
shall find it out, depend upon it. It quite piques 
me. When I was an attache they used to call me . 
^ Young Tally,' a funny abbreviation, you know, of 
the great diplomatist. First, that fine girl the 
sister . and now, this fine girL Ah! deep, deep 
feUowI" 

Later that evening he met Major Carter. 

^^ By the way/' said the major, ^ could you tell me 
what is Mr. Showers's attraction for Sir Hopkins? 
Most mysterious and incomprehensible I " 

" Why do you ask meV^ said Fermor, opening 
his eyes with resignation. " As. well ask me about 



I 



40 Never Forgotten. 



the magnet, or the tides. What is the attraction 
about the little arts of flatteries and meannesses 
and sycophancies, daubed on in coarse vulgar 
streaks ? That is a pretty old story, I believe." 

The major elevated his eyes in such intelligence 
and surprise, that the creases of his forehead 
seemed to fall into the shape of notes of inter- 
rogation. 

" Of course," said Fermor, " Sir Hopkins sees 
through it, but we all . the wisest of us . cannot 
find it pleasant or amusing." 

Major Carter, quite overpowered by these won- 
derful revelations (explaining a mystery that had 
bewildered him for years), could only write more 
large-text interrogations on his forehead. 

" What can you expect? " said Fermor, half in 
remonstrance. "Do you know what his father 
ist . a gutta-percha maker in Cockspur-street . 
air cushions, indestructible toys, and that sort of 
thing. Would you believe it 1 But I know it." 

If Showers had been the newly revealed author 
of a murder, or an escaped convict, greater horror 
could not have been shown in the other^s face. " God 
bless me ! You don't tell me so ! Gutta-percha 
toys 1 Well 1 well ! after that '' 



Sir Hopkins's Verdict. 41 

"Well," said Fermor, "what of that? I am 
pretty well accustomed to that sort of thing. But 
in the army, it seems, all the third-class passengers 
travel first-class." 

"Ha, ha! un-com^monly good," said Major Carter. 
"Pray forgive me for telling you so. But you say 
those things so quietly. Another man would keep 
them for a dinner and a large audience. I must 
tell that to Miss Manuel, my friend. It will make 
her laugh." 

" Your friend?" said Fermor, lifting his eye- 
brows with some scorn. " Ah ! that is good ! " 

Major Carter, getting on a wrong tack, thought 
that Fermor was about to resent this familiar 
tone, and had mistaken it for Violet. He added, 
hastily, " I mean Miss Pauline, my ^ friend.' You 
can't conceive how confidential we are. She tole- 
rates me more than any one." 

Fermor surveyed him with an amused air. He 
was delighted to be behind the scenes. " Your 
friend ? Ha, ha ! Very good I " 

Major Carter now saw his way. 

"You think I am going to make an old fool of 
myself. Not at all. I know the world too well, I 
assure you." 



J 



42 Never Forgotten. 



^^So it appears/' said Fermor, with what he 
would have called " a sneer and water." He 
had a short struggle . for he thought of the 
recent compliment . ^but it was impossible to resist. 
Besides, it would not be "loyal." "Seriously, 
Carter, you should give up that idea. It is only 
charitable to tell you so. You might be talking of 
it to other men ; and indeed any one else would 
not tell you. But I think it a sort of duty." 

" About what ? " said the major, seriously taken 
aback. " God bless me I " 

" About Miss Pauline, as you call her. I think 
it loyal to warn you. As a friend, I advise you 
not to be boasting of her friendship. She is a 
dashing clever woman, far too clever for me. Some 
people admire her." 

"So. I perceive," said the major, colouring; 
" she has been ^" 

" Exactly," said Fermor, smiling. " You are a 
man of the world, and can bear the truth. But the 
fact is, she does not like you. In fact, worse than 
that . (which is a good joke) . suspects you I " 

For the first time for years a genuine colour 
flooded the major^s cheeks. " Suspects me ? What 
do you . ^what does she mean ? " 



Sir Hopkins's Verdict. 43 

. * 

"Ah, that's for her," continued Fermor, gaily. 

" She says you are dangerous, too. Talks about 
hunting up the old Army Lists. Ton my word, 
I forget half all she said." 

The major saw the joke, and smiled over it, and 
murmured his appreciation of it, . which, however, 
was unintelligible. 

Fermor went his way whistling, and really in 
good humour again. 

Major Carter went his way, thinking over " the 
joke," which, perhaps, as he said, he would not 
forget. 

Sir Hopkins came to Fermor next day almost 
chuckling. 

"This place," he said, "is getting quite ex- 
citing. It is really a fine training-ground. I 
thought my diplomatic joints and muscles would 
get stiff and rusty for want of practice. But I 
find I have plenty to do. My dear friend, I have 
managed our httle affair. Would you beUeve 
that ? And all in a day !" 

Fermor became good humoured at once. "I 
am so glad, sir. It is so good of you." 

*^ I mean about our young friend Showers. He's 
a lad of good spirit, and should be encouraged." 



44 Never Forgotten. 



Fermor^s face began to contract, and shrink like 
metal cooling. " I am quite tired of him/' said he, 
impatiently. "And I think, sir, when you come 
to know him better, so will you be. Why, there's 
nothing in him ; nothing. Of all the empty, self- 
sufficient wind-bags, without an idea beyond a 
horse, and the horse-laugh ^" 

Sir Hopkins shook his head from side to side 
with great enjoyment. "Ah, I dare say you're 
right," he said, "We have all our fancies. 
Luckily for him, everybody does not take your 
view. Seriously, my dear fellow, I think he has 
made a good impression on those people . on the 
good-natured daughter. I am glad, very glad, of 
it, for the sake of my old friend Showers. We 
were like brothers." 

" What ! he has made a conquest, has he?" said 
Fermor, with bitter scorn. " Come, that is quite 
a new line. For my part, I am surprised at 
nothing now-a-days. I suppose it is all quite 
right." . 

Sir Hopkins looked at him still with an amused 
air. "And, k propos," he said, "how is our 
little rustic to-day ? She is such a charming bit 



Sir Hopkin/s Verdict. 45 

of natural gaucherie. Because, observe, I distin- 
guish, she is not one of your peasants let loose in a 
drawing-room. I must say she is all nature. And 
her fine sister. Ah ! I never shall let that sub- 
ject go, never, you military owl, you. Master 
Charles, if / had been at your elbow when you 
were choosing ! I declare to you, Charles, on . ^my 
. so-lemn word of honour" (Sir Hopkins put little 
jerks between each word), "if I were ten years 
younger, I would go to her within the next half 
hour, and offer her the vacancy in my house. 
What a pair we should be! What a governor's 
wife she would be I We would rule the colonies. 
What was the reason, eh, Charles ? I think you 
were a little in awe of her, eh? I have very 
sharp eyes. I remark she has a quiet, decisive 
manner about her, which (naturally enough) you 
would not relish. Only for her, how would it 
have turned out, / should like to know ? Clever, 
clever woman, that ! I admire her." 

" I assure you, sir," said Fermor, excitedly, " in 
that view you are quite astray." 

" Perhaps so," said Sir Hopkins, carelessly, 
'^perhaps so. But a word of advice, Charles. 



46 Never ForgMen. 



Don't have the look of being directed by any- 
whole family . ^I say the look; because, whether 
you are or not, is quite a matter for your own con- 
cern. I see the beginnings . ^it may be all fancy 
. and my advice is worth something." 

How Fermor fumed and glowed out of Sir 
Hopkins's presence may be imagined by those who 
know him even a little. 



The Eqftport Show. 47 



CHAPTER THE FOUETH. 

THE EASTPOBT SHOW. 

Some intelligent and influential persons living 
about Eastport and its dependencies had long 
been thinking that the only way to crown, as it 
were, its growing commercial importance, was to 
hold a cattle festival, or congress. 

You had a great grazing country dose by, said 
Lord Porkchester, the local lord, in a tone of remon- 
strance. You had a great carrying trade with the 
opposite coast ; you had a convenient place of ex- 
port ; you were within half a day's travel of one of 
the great markets of the empire ; you had pasture 
land unrivalled in Europe for richness ; you had an 
intelligent population, with more or less proportion 



48 Never Forgotten. 



of that creditable " bone and sinew " which made 
the State . ^you had, in short, every element suit- 
able for mixing in a cattle show. Lord Porkches- 
ter "looked around" him at a preliminary meeting 
held at the hotel, and saw all these things. Nature 
in that part of the world, it would seem, was rising 
up, and clamorously appealing for a cattle show. 

In good time the Eastport walls flamed with 
crimson carbuncles of advertisements, and broke 
out into a healthy eruption of posters. The com- 
mittee, with Lord Porkchester in the chair, sat 
daily. Its sub-divisions, the dinner committee, the 
reception committee, and the ball committee, sat 
daily also. By-and-by a bit of waste ground be- 
came strewn with planks and timbers, as if a hun- 
dred Indiamen had been wrecked and gone to 
pieces there ; and lengths of very raw deal shed- 
ding began to spread out, as if they were unrolled 
from a reel. By-and-by, too, engines that seemed 
like racks and enlarged thumbikens, were seen 
reclining awkwardly on the quay, sprawUng like 
metal tortoises, and unable to get up. These were 
the famous "mowers," the more famous "win- 
nowing machines," and, above all, the wonderful 



The Eqfiport Show. 49 

patent " bone crushing machine," which title did 
indeed, in the minds of serious and rehgious elderly 
ladies, seem to support the "rack" theory. No 
wonder that the Eastport local paper reminded its 
public that the " eyes of the empire " were watch- 
ing it. 

Later on the show animals began to arrive. 
Precious beasts, hidden away in their own fat, 
and covered up in clothes, were seen reeling and 
tottering through the street, led by rings fixed in 
the sensitive part of the nostrils. At comers they 
would halt and give out deep and piteous protests. 
One or two, full of heat and foam, and blowing off 
steam like a locomotive, lay down with all their 
fine clothes in the mire, and looked roimd with 
deeply injured eyes. But no one had yet seen 
Bullington's noble white cow, " Milky Jane," who 
had taken prizes in every county, and who might 
have been hung all over with cups like a French 
lemonade-seller. She travelled down in a van of 
her own . first class . ^resided at the best hotels 
of her tribe, and arrived under cover of night. 
Through the bars of small railed carts could be 
seen something like blinking corpulent old gentle- 

VOL. II. E 



50 Never Forgotten, 

men^ who had dined well, and drunk very well, 
and who were drowsy and stertorous. These 
proved to be competing pigs. 

It was quite a provincial festival. There were 
judges, and stewards, and committees, and heavy 
agricultural nien, a little higher in intelligence 
than the other animals which were exhibited. 
Everybody came. Other ribbons fluttered in the 
air besides those of committee-men and judges ; 
and all the ladies of the district seemed to be 
filtered through the place, who courageously picked 
their steps through the lanes and alleys of the 
yard. And the band of Captain Fermor's regi- 
ment, led by Herr Sangmann, a saffron-coloured 
German, played waltzes and overtures, after the 
rude rough fashion of British regimental music . 
stiff and painful as the stocks the men wear, noisy 
yet thin, shrieking and ear-piercing, yet unsus- 
tained. Ladies were led round to have audiences 
of the prize animals in their cabinets. The visitors 
saw tails waving sadly, like pendulums, and glower- 
ing and reproachful eyes measuring them ; they 
saw, too, what seemed monstrous breastworks and 
ramparts of flesh and fati Gentle voices were 
attuned to cadences of wonder and delight, and ^ 



The Eaftport Show. 51 

curiosity; though the air was heavy, and dresses 
had to be gathered up carefully, and there was an 
embroidery of straw to every petticoat ; but there 
was young Mangel, and Harry Wurzel, with other 
charming showmen (whose regular residence was 
in the saddle), who went roimd with them, and 
put the thing in so attractive a light (like Pro- 
fessor Faraday lecturing), that this avidity for 
bucolic knowledge became natural. 

"Milky Jane" attracted the largest crowd. 
She was all pure white, with pale pink nostrils 
and "lovely horns" (a casual burst of ecstasy 
from one of the ladies), and every now and then 
she turned her head round to look, with a dreamy 
complacent expression of perfect happiness. Man 
of the world or diplomatist might vainly hope for 
that perfection of ease and unaffected absence of 
restraint before company which "Milky Jane" 
exhibited. 

A poultry show was part of the sight. Some 
one had put a question about a week before, 
specially addressed to no one, "Why not have a 
poultry show?" And no one being prepared with 
an answer, this feature was resolved upon. Ladies 
in the neighbourhood, who had long nurtured 
s 2 



52 Never Forgotten. 



mysterious-looking birds, sent them in ; and rare 
specimens of the Dorking and Cochin families 
strained over each other^s shoulders with jerks 
and starts, and looked out through their wire net- 
ting like inflamed and apoplectic retired colonels 
in the bay-window of a club. 

Captain Cadby led roimd the Miss Campbells. 
They were enraptured with Captain Cadby's 
band. With the ingenuousness of girlliood, the 
younger said she could listen to it "for ever!" 
In those raptures she almost hinted that the music 
of an after state must be of the pattern of Captain 
Cadby's band. With more pointedness the elder 
insinuated that this celestial perfection was owing 
to Captain Cadby himself. 

"Yes," said that officer; "we pay him well, 
that's the secret. And I blow up Sangmann . 
that's the way, too. You see, I sometimes go 
down and hear them practise. I make Sangmann 
keep up the pace, you see. They take everything 
too slow. Ever hear the ^Pop goes the Weazel 
Galop?' No! O, hang it, you mmt hear that. 
I'll make Sangmann play it. Do you know," 
added Captain Cadby, modestly, "it was I that 
made, him set it. I do believe there's more 



Jhe Eqftport Show. 53 

genuine music in that air . though common fel- 
lows wouldn't see it . ^than in all the music of the 
great swells, and what-d'ye-call-'em Mozarts, they 
puff off so." 

The girls looked at each other in speechless de- 
light. They knew he was musical . they always 
had said it. 

Well, he was as musical as most fellows. He 
would tell them what . he knew what was good, and 
what was bad. O, had they seen his new " Snaffle ? ' ' 

No I Delight, rapture, wonderment, all strug- 
gling together. What 1 a snaffle, a real snaffle ? 

" 'Be sure 1 I say, come along. This way." 

This way was through a little bog, over which the 
officer tramped gaily, in very stout boots. The 
girls were prettily shod in pale cloth boots, the 
colour of their dresses. " I say, look at my boots ! 
/ don't care how muddy it is ! Tm all right." 
The girls had served in the ranks, and were true 
drawing-room Spartans. They never faltered, 
and walked on bravely. 

The snaffle might have been a diamond neck- 
lace, it caused such delight and surprise. The 
sisters struggled for it. They seemed to be in the 
enjoyment of the beatific vision. Such ingenuity. 



54 Never Forgotten. 



skill, and incredible talent. But had he thought 
of a name for it, the elder said, with a sigh . ^some 
pretty lady's pretty name f He should call it the 
Alexandra or the Carlotta Snaffle. 

" O, said Captain Cadby, in an off-hand way, 
" that is settled long ago. I call it the ' Jennjj 
after a pretty girl in the north of England I am 
desperately gone with. YouVe nobody here to 
match her. I could tell you a long history about 
her:' 

Something like the breath of an east vnnd 
seemed to pass across the Campbell faces, but 
they were well disciplined, and were as eager 
about the girl in the north, and ^Maid on*' as 
much surprise, joy, interest, and other varied 
emotions, as they had done for the " snaffle." 

The next night there was to be the ball. This 
was to be given by the united regiments. The 
soldier organises the best ball in the world, because 
he does not spare money. The public rooms were 
taken. A ball committee for " advice and decora- 
tion" was formed. Major Stagg, who had hung 
his rooms with some dreadfully rhubarb-looking 
horses, and who had a rude faciUty in sketcliing 
yachts, was put in the chair as representing Art in 



The Eajlport Show. 55 

the regiment. A couple of guns were dragged in 
and hung about with flags and evergreens; mus- 
kets were grouped in a star on the wall, and the 
whole christened a " trophy." The bare walls 
were draped with pink and white calico. , Fermor 
was of the committee of advice and decoration, 
and was for "getting down" some one from the 
Messrs. Tabaret, but a cabal, secretly prompted, it 
was believed, by " that low fellow " Showers, re- 
ceived his proposition so offensively, that he with- 
drew from the board altogether. " Don't ask me 
about their proceedings," he said ; " I know nothing 
about them. I have washed my hands of the 
whole business. Let us wait and see what will 
come of it." 

It was the great day of the great night. Lady 
Laura with her three daughters, with the versati- 
lity of French soldiers . ^who carry their cooking- 
pans and tentes d'abris on their backs, and can 
adapt themselves to all camping quarters . were 
beginning to find that Eastport was not altogether 
barren. This hard working family were as the 
Irish reapers, who come over and find work wait- 
ing them in all places. And thus, as she had 



56 Never Forgotten . 



entered ball-rooms heading her little procession at 
Nice, at London, at Brussels, and at the county 
town (dulling the races), so now she was entering 
this Eastport room, presenting a white smile to 
her hosts. That smile was as well worn as her 
passport. 

Fermor found her, on the morning of the ball, 
as it were in a drain, up to her waist in water, 
plying the shovel. " Violet," he said, moodily, 
"Violet of course goes with you? Wh^t time 
can you call for her ? " 

Lady Laura jumped out of her trench. " I have 
not heard of that arrangement," she said. " I did 
not know she was going." 

" It is only the right thing," said Fermor. " I 
suppose she must be brought out properly. At 
what hour, then ? " 

"Why, my dear Charles," said Lady Laiu'a, 
retiring, with her neck at an angle to get a better 
view of a dress, " to tell you the truth, I should be 
glad to do anything for you and youi' future wife, 
but really the thing is getting so troublesome, and 
there is so much diplomatic work and care about 
what we are to say, that really I don't understand 
it. That is the truth. One day she is sick, and I 



J^he Eajlport Show. 57 

take her to be offended or hurt at something; 

another day she is hurt at something, and she 

turns out to be sick." 

" You must consider she is a child/' said Fermor, 

coldly, " and make allowance." 

"Ah, that's just it," said she, shaking out the 
folds of the dress, and retiring again to get a good 
view. " I am too old, Charles, to begin studying 
children. I expect to be studied myself a little 
now. I have my own girls to look to, and perhaps 
not much time to do that in. To speak plainly to 
you, Charles," she added, laying a strip of ribbon 
down the dress to see the effect, " if you had mar- 
ried an heiress, or some one of rank, yon would 
have a right to expect this sort of thing from us. 
But for a little gu'l of tliat kind, you could hardly 
expect us to put ourselves out of the way. I am 
sure we shall get on very well after. Because, of 

course, you have done what is. right and proper. 

But I have a duty to my girls, Charles. There, 

Charles, the milliner of this place . a wretched 

creature, without two ideas . ^is waiting, and I have 

literally to teach her everything." 

Fermor departed without a word. He was too 
proud to explain. He told Violet she must go 



58 Never Forgotten, 



with her brother and sister. In these visits, of 
late, he had come very moody and distrait. There 
was uncertainty and flutter in gentle hearts when 
he came. He was under a sense of injury, spe- 
cially as regards Pauline, who had attempted to 
control him. She said, in her natural way, when 
he told of the new arrangement, "How strange! 
how odd!" 

Fermor looked at her suspiciously. " How 
strange, or how odd, pray ? " he said, with hosti- 
lity. " My mother. Lady Laura, has her daughters 
to look after. At her time of Ufe, it is rather too 
much to expect that she can adapt herself to our 
little whims and changes." (This protest Fermor 
had adapted from his mother^s speech.) 

Pauline was looking at him with calm wonder, 
and a sad gaze that seemed to " bring him to ac- 
count" . a manner that was disagreeable to him. 

" Surely," he said, a little warmly, " you have 
your sister and your brother I I have tickets for 
you all. Good gracious I Let us not make diffi'- 
culties out of these little trifles." 

" O yes, yes, yes," said Violet, hurriedly. " To 
be sure. Charles is quite right. I can go any 
way." 



The Eajtport Show. 59 

Fermor smiled grimly. " Scarcely," he said. 
'' I shall not be able to go with you myself, having 
to be at the rooms. But I shall be at the door to 
meet you. Don't be late. Pray don't." 

He went away beating the steps of the stair 
with his cane. He was dissatisfied with all things. 
" Everj^body is making a fuss," he said, fuming. 
Violet, when the door closed, gave a piteous look 
over at her sister, and then her head drooped. 
Actually, a faint little line of care was coming on 
her cheek. The sister went over to her. 

" He is worried," she said, " darling, with busi- 
ness. He is getting his affairs into order, which 
must be done before men marry. And, darling, 
he is . so fond of you. I saw the way he looked 
over at you." 

A wave of colour drifted softly across Violet's 
cheeks, and washed out that little line of care. 

" You think so," she said, in delight. " Do you 
know, I am such a baby. I fancied he was a little 
cross with me." 



fiO Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE FIFTH. 

THE BALL . ELEVEN TILL ONE. 

Now were the lamps lighted, and rivers of 
crimson carpeting glowing in the light, and there 
was actually a last man on a last ladder, driving in 
a last nail. Now were a party of soldiers standing 
at their posts outside, holding torches . animated 
chandeliers . a pleasant device ingeniously adapted 
by the one novel-reading officer out of tlie Legend 
of Montrose. Now were the carriages arriving, and 
now was the colonel and his followers, bashful as 
boys, drawn up to welcome their company. The 
whole society of Eastport came, and its many 
mixed yams, of which the mass was coarse enough, 



The Ball. Eleven till One. 61 

were woven together in a cord of average quality. 
A few gold and coloured threads carried oiBf the 
rest. They came in swarms. They spread over 
the rooms. 

For that night the Campbell girls seemed to be 
rampant. Their voices were heard in all corners. 
They led the military about, as it were in hand- 
cuffs, and with an air of ownership. They were 
delighted with all things. It seemed to be Captain 
Cadb/s " snaffle" enlarged in a microscope. That 
free and familiar officer went round with the more 
daring of the two, who had secured him as her 
prey. "Ton my soul," said he, in his pleasant 
easy manner, " you are the gamest pair I ever en- 
countered . ^you are, indeed I I'm not joking." 

Picini . bright-eyed and mercurial . ^was in the 
gallery leading his orchestra. For in this point 
Fermor had prevailed; they had got down this 
famous band. Captain Cadby was in deep protest ; 
and, far on in the night, he said many times with 
the earnestness and feeUng that sets in after 
supper, " I wish to God they would play the Pop- 
goes-the-Weazel Galop." 

Fermor leaned against a pillar near the door, 
listening. " So punctuality is not to be of our 



62 Never Forgotten. 



virtues, it seems," he said. "Even they axe in 
time I " He was thinking of his mother and sisters, 
who had long since debouched, taken up good 
ground, and were abeady well engaged with 
skirmishers. The three girls had been " placed 
out" respectably. There were many officers of 
retiring natufes working on half time. Young 
Brett hovered about Fermor wistfully, and made a 
request. " My dear friend," said Fermor, answering 
him good naturedly, " it would be useless. You 
see they are engaged, what they call so many deep. 
Besides, I tell you frankly, it would not do exactly 
. ^you see." 

But the youth longed to know Fermor's sisters, 
for the prestige of the thing. 

" Well," said Fermor, with a sigh, " as j^ou 
please. Come 1" Selecting the youngest, Laura, 
as the more innocent, who was trooping by exult- 
ingly, talking, rustling her dress and exuberant, 
he stopped her on the highway. " Laura," he said, 
" you will let. me introduce a friend of mine ; " and 
he leant upon the word by way of warning. Laura 
dropped at once into the introductive smile. 

" Mr. Brett!" said Fermor. But Laura was a 
dancing Black Brunswicker, trained neither to give 



rhe Ball'.Eleven till One. 63 

nor to accept quarter. With that corps minutes 
in a ball-room are counted as golden sands ; they 
are economists of time. So, when she saw " Little 
Brett" fully revealed : 

" O no," she said, shaking her head sadly ; 
*^ quite, qyiite full-^out of the question . so sorry," 
and rushed away to the field, with her companion 
in arms. That poor child Brett, who saw her afar 
^^in screams "-^no doubt at him. was dreadfully 
overcome. 

The night was getting on. Here was a first 
galop, or perhaps first " riot." Picini had rushed 
into his famous Pandemonium Galop . a wild in- 
spiring "Call," which could not be resisted. The 
Eastport young men and women were kept on half 
diet, in nlatter of dancing, all the year. A full meal 
was rare. When the first notes of the Pandemonium 
were heard, they flung themselves on it like ship- 
wrecked passengers before whom food is set. 

Fermor, still at his post, looked on. " This is really 
pushing it too farl" he said, indignantly. "That 
elder one, perhaps, wants to train me . ^break me 
in, I suppose. I must teach that lady I am not 
quite a schoolboy. I shall wait no longer. It will 
be a good lesson for them." 



64 Never Forgotten. 



Showers was keeping close to the door, perhaps 
watching him, looking for material for his odious 
jokes. Him, too, he would disappoint. He was 
walking away, when a fresh party entered and went 
through the form of presentation to the bashful 
committee. This hid them for a moment. But 
the next instant, to his amazement, he saw that 
the two figures, who were entering, a little be- 
wildered, into a strange country . as it were into a 
tropical island . ^were his neighbour Mr. Carlay, 
and his neighbour's daughter ! The father grim, 
unjointed as ever, and in an evening dress ap- 
parently of some dark metal . ^as stiff as one of the 
hired chandeliers ; but the daughter, fresh, bloom- 
ing, fair . dressed, as it seemed to him, sump- 
tuously, and, what he more approved of, with good 
taste, and with jewels in her hair. They both stood 
a mc^ment dazzled, like strangers m a foreign 
land, and then Fermor, who was almost rubbing 
his eyes, saw " that Showers" hurry up (Fer- 
mor had done him injustice . ^he was not watching 
hiin)j seize on them, overpower them with welcome, 
and bear them away. Some sort of welcome, too, 
Fermor had been getting ready, which he had now 
to throw aside as useless. Presently he saw them 



The Ball. Eleven till One. 65 

. ^ _ 

enthroned by the officious Showers on a dais kept 
for distinguished people. He saW smiles of delight 
on Miss Carlay's face as Showers wantoned in his 
low fescennine jests. He heard two of his own 
cloth passing by say to each other that " Showers 
was making a good thing of it up there/' and was 
a " confounded " lucky fellow. 

She had seen Fermor too, and had given no start 
of joyful surprise, but merely a tranquil nod, as 
though the thing were of course. Showers was 
jubilant, exultant, and almost "dancing" round 
them, always impeding Fermor's view. " Just Kke 
them all," he said^ bitterly ; " a new doll for every 
day in the week. And such a doll !" He saw, 
too, Sir Hopkins standing with them, talking plea- 
santly, with his arm on Showers's shoulder, in 
good-himioured affection. 

Here they were at last. Fermor saw their en- 
trance from afar off. It was unassuming and timid ; 
Pauline, the brother, and Violet a little behind. 
" Heavens 1" thought Fermor, with a httle stamp^ 
*^will no one impress a little style upon them. 
What are they afraid of!" The public did not 
form an avenue to stare at them as they came in* 
And the dress ! Great efforts had been made, but 
VOL. II. r 



66 Never Forgotten. 



there was something wantmg. There was no 
sensation. Why, indeed, should there be? Violet 
was not brilliant or splendid ; yet her little troubles . 
and anxieties had given her a soft look, and a sort 
of seductive interest Many faces turned to look 
after her: especially those experienced eyes who, 
like bric-a-brac collectors, can tell a bit of real 
beauty, however odd and rococo the setting. 
Pauline, in truth, dimmed her a little. 

Fermor went up to them. " You are late," he 
said, calmly, to the brother ; ^' I have waited a 
whole hour at the door. Come," and he took 
Violet's arm, "we must find you a seat on the 
dais." 

Violet shrank away. " O no, not in that public 
place, dear Charles . O no." 

Fermor l^t go her arm at once. He had been 
much annoyed that evening. "As you please,'* 
he said. " I only want you to take yom* proper 
place among the company. But just as you 
please." 

" O yes, of course," said Violet, hurriedly ; " let 
us go there at oncei." 

" Which then is it to be f I dare say there will 



The Ball. Eleven till One. 67 

be no getting a thair now/^ said he. " Was there 
any mistake about the hour?" 

*^ No," said her sister, calmly ; ^^ the carriage 
did not come, and Violet's headache was so bad, 
that at one time we thought of giving it up 
altogether." 

Fermor did not answer. 

^' Here is a chair now," he said presently. " We 
must go through a quadrille, I suppose, for the 
benefit of these people here, or we shall furnish 
them with some food for talk. I shall come back 
in a moment." But one of the secret causes of 
Fermor's bitterness was that the public were not 
so absorbed in his motions as he expected. 

As he moved away, Pauline touched him gently. 
There was an imploring look in her large eyes 
She said : " This is a very trying place for her. 
Be a little soft with her ; encourage her, and she 
will do very well. You must promise me." 

Fermor could not trust himself to speak. This 
was more of the family " intimidation." He had no 
reply ready, so he merely bowed and strode away. 

Sir Hopkins and Showers passed him, arm in 
arm. 

r2 



68 Never Forgotten. 



There was a sort of ritual aitd a ^^fonn" of 
thanksgiving chanted through that night. It was 
heard at all comers. It was charming, delightful, 
dehcious I Young ladies fell into little contortions 
of rapture. They never, in the course of their 
lives, had experienced anything to approach its 
enchanting character I From the hundred-and-one 
little processions made that night, backwards and 
forwards, under cool and tropical conditions, from 
ball to supper room, and from supper to ball room 
. ^the same anthem was raised. The beatific vision 
was found at last. So with the military showmen, 
who were busy with their duties all the night. 
They accepted these compliments with modest 
diffidence, brushing them away, as it were, like 
flies. "O, I say, come," would the bashful war- 
riors repeat. " Good ! You^ indeed. You are 
chaffing me ! You see . er . ^we know how to do it. 
That's the whole secret, you see." The devotee 
on his arm, however, received it as a grand and 
dazzling truth. 

Borne on the flux and reflux was seen the 
major, glass m eye, and a smile fixed into his 
mouth, very much on the principle that he fixed 
the glass into his eye. At heart he was a little 



The BaU. Eleven till One. 69 

troubled, for the crowd was almost too great to 
admit of easy access to persons of quality. Often 
the breakers swept him past the shore on which he 
could distinctly make out noble inhabitants, like 
Sir Charles Longman ; but when he had beaten 
back and made the shore with grievous hardship, 
he f oimd them gone. In which struggles, though 
the glass was often torn from his eye, still he 
always kept the smile adhering firmly to his 
mouth. 

Thus late in the night was he borne up to the 
Manuels. The wistful, almost worn, face of Violet, 
high as it were upon a rock, looking out sadly, 
struck even him. He came up to them. 

" Charming, isn't it? " he said, joining his voice 
to the choir^s, "I declare I think I have never 
seen a thing better done. I remember at Nice 
there were some officers of the French Guides, 
young Balay, and some more, who ^^ 

Pauline, who had some secret trouble of her 
own, here interrupted him, a little abruptly it must 
be said. 

" Major Carter, would you do a kind thing, and 
take me round the room ; I want so much to see the 
people . ^would you ? " 



70 Never Forgotten. 



" Dear me ! " said Major Oacrter, with deep into- 
nation of surprise. " Good gracious ! To be sore. 
How delightful ! A regular exploring racpedition. 
Come, Miss ManueL Now this is what I call con- 
fidence/' 

They set out. Major Carter chatted pleasantly 
all the way, and described, and gaye the names of 
every one, as a waxwork showman does his figures. 
Pauline scarcely listened; but she looked eagerly 
where he pointed his wand, which perhaps an- 
swered as well. Still, there was a half-sarcastic 
tone about his speech, a little different from his 
usual deferential manner, and which, on another 
occasion, she might have remarked. 

^^ And how odd," he said, suddenly, " that you, 
Miss Pauline, should have turned curious about 
these lay figures. For me^ whom some of these 
young fellows would disrespectfully call a Fogie 
(I am serious), it is intelligible ; but for Miss Pau- 
line to turn curious about things of this sort ^" 

Pauline answered him absently. " O yes," she 
said, "of course. And could you tell me who 
that is?" 

"That old lady out of a jar of spirits of wine? 
She's a ' preparation,' Miss Pauline . ^Lad;^ Man- 



rhe Ball. Eleven till One. 71 

tower. I know most of them. For, to tell you 
the trath," said he, stopping short, and turning 
round to look at her, " /am about as curious in old 
^Peerages' and * Landed Gentrys ' as others are in 
old Army lists ^^ 

He leant a little on the last words. There was 
a sharp wicked twitch in his mouth. The sound 
seemed to waken up Pauline. But after that 
slight emphasis the major's talk rolled away 
smoothly, as if it was on springs. 

'* But," continued he, airily, "popular prejudices 
are almost unaccoimtable. There are people, you 
know, who resent your prying into their family 
papers, and inquirmg into their pedigree and 
history. Some won't have it on any terms. So I 
think . on . ^the . ^whole, my dear Miss Pauline," 
said the major, gaily renewing his march, " where 
there is so much prejudice it is better to let the 
thing be. Genealogical inquiries are often found 
dangerous. Now you understand me, I see." 

Pauline, quite abstracted from what she was 
earnestly searching for, was now looking at Major 
Carter with perfect intelligence and a little alarm. 

^* Dangerous ! " she repeated. 

" Bless me 1" said he, cantering away from the 



72 Never Forgotten. 



subject. "Do look at Sir Charles Longman, he 
has got his foot in a lady's dress, and cannot see 
her trjdng to pull it away. He thinks there is 
some convulsion of nature going on under the 
floor. Ha, ha ! Not bad, that. And look, Mss 
Pauline-.. that tall man dancing. He is separated 
from his wife. There was some story about a 
Mrs. Burton Cox. I am the worst person in the 
world for details of that sort." 

Another listener might reasonably have disputed, 
this affectation of modesty on his part, for without 
flattery he was an excellent authority in that de- 
partment. But Pauline heard nothing about Sir 
Charles, or Mrs. Burton Cox. Her voice became 
low, and gentle, and appealing. 

^' It is dangerous," she said, and she looked back 
at Violet's wistful face; "but these things are 
often said and done without thought or reflection. 
Indeed they are," she added, with great earnest- 
ness, "and they are repeated and exaggerated . 
indeed you must think so. I, myself, say a hun- 
dred things i^i the day on the moment, which I no 

more mean than ^" 

" Good news ! good news I " said he, gaily ; " we 
shall have placards out in the morning announcing 



The Ball. Eleven till One. 73 

it for the benefit of the poor youths you gibbet In 
the drawmg-rooms. How glad they shall be. 
Look at old Jackson^ doesn't he look as if he was 
corded up securely in brown paper ? " 

" But," continued Pauline, despairing almost to 
bring him back to her subject, "if any foolish 
speech of mine about . about, as you say. Army 
Lists . or ^^ 

" Army Lists ? " said the major, in his gayest 
gamut. "Ahl ^ Partridge always.' Toujoursper- 
drix. The young ladies' rock ahead. I believe . 
really and truly I do . ^that the fruit in the garden 
of Eden was an Army List. You will come back 
to that subject. Here we are, you see, back again 
at our family party. You don't want me any 
more ? Then I shall say good-by . for the . for the 
present." 



74 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SIXTH. 

THE BALL . ONE TILL THREE. 

Fermob, a little softened, was indeed maMng 
his way over to Violet, and generously publishing 
an amnesty for the past. Violet saw him coming, 
and the wistful look fled. Showers, with Miss 
Carlay on his arm, was drifted up near him. The 
low triumph on Showers's face was too much, and 
he walked straight across to Miss Carlay. 

The round fair honest face looked up at him 
hopefully, almost with delight. " I never expected 
to see you here," said Fermor. "Nor did I hear 
you were coming . though there was nothing sur- 
prising in that. I mean my not hearing it." 

She smiled. " How were we to tell you ? " she 



The BaU.One till Three. 75 

said, gently. ^^ We never see you now. You have 
given us up.'* 

" I am very busy now/' said Fermor. " I have 
given up vanities. I have forsworn all my old 
ways and pleasures. I have no right to amuse my- 
self. I am to look the world in the face now, and 
who cares about me notr ? " 

" I am very sorry, 'cery sorry," said the girl, 
opening and shutting her fan. " I thought we 
were friends of yours, and you . ^bore with us so 
kindly." 

" O yes," said Fermor, with artificial careless- 
ness (he was getting into one of the dramatic 
situations he loved), " that is all the old story, you 
know. It is very good of you to say so. But 
after all, what does it reduce itself to? A book or 
so lent, an hour or so of my tediousness bestowed 
on you. This is the way we go through life. To- 
morrow you will be next door to some one else. 
And Tm figure will be refracted into heroic pro- 
portions. The day after, I shall be next door to 
some one else, and she will be refracted too. I 
have not told you half of my philosophy yet. You 
were right, after all, in dealing with me as the 
merest of acquaintances." 



76 Never forgotten. 



" I never dreamt of such a thing," she said, a 
little sadly ; " and if you would take the trouble of 
explaining " 

" Eeally f " said Fermor, carelessly. " And you 
are curious to know f " 

At this moment interposed Showers, eager, 
alarmed, and panting like a horse at the end 
of a long stage. " Now, Miss Carlay," he said ; 
"we can go now. There is not such a crowd 
now, and we can reach the supper-room before it 
is opened." 

Fermor lifted his eyes quietly to hers, and moved 
his chair a little. She dropped her eyes. There 
was a pause. The simplest, most unsophisticated 
girls are bom with these ball-room artifices. 

" But," she said, ^' Mr. 3howers, it seems so 
crowded still. We shall never get through." 

Showers urged it as a thing of course, yet 
nen^ously. " Do come," he said, holding out his 
arm ready bent. " I shall manage it, never fear." 

She was so honest and natural, this girl, and 
saw he was so earnest, that on another occasion 
she would have gone with him at every risk of 
personal sacrifice. But Fermor^s eyes were on her. 

"Would not," she said, irresolutely . " would not 



The BaU.One till Three. 77 

a little later do as well? Say after the next dance. 
There, that's settled," she added, with gaiety. 

Showers was deeply wounded. " Very well," he 
said, " very well." 

Fermor stood up. " What 1 " he said, " after Mr. 
Showers has had the trouble of fighting his way 
through all that humanity to get to you! For 
shame. Miss Carlay. Tlvat is cruelty, if you like. 
Look at his arm waiting. No, no. Go. Do ; for 
the mere decency of the thing. The flowers will 
be all withered if you go later. Surely, after Mr. 

Showers has had such trouble ^No, I am sure 

you will." 

And with a pleasant smile and a sort of half- 
nod, as of encouragement to her, he moved gaily 
away. She looked after him with a half-wounded, 
half-astonished expression, then set Showers's trou- 
bled heart at rest by going with him. Fermor, at 
the other end, watched them, smiling. He was in- 
finitely pleased with himself. 

Strauss's Vake was now winding out again. He 
listened with half-closed eyes as the music seemed 
to sway up and down. Some floated by him as 
harmoniously as the music. Others with vulgar 
action, in the loud spasmodic trot of a lame horse. 



78 Never Forgotten. 



He had a sort of toleration even for these. Pos- 
sibly they knew no better. But some one touched 
him on the arm. It was the brother of Violet. 

" Charming music," said Fermor, languidly. 

" Listen, now. There, the subject comes in again." 

, " Yes," said the other, bluntly. " But it seems 

as if it has made you forget Violet altogether. 

You were to dance with her, were you not ? " 

Fermor, .becoming hard and cold^ lifted his eyes, 
as who should say, " Well ? Granted." 

" You were to dance with Violet," continued the 
other, more loudly ; " and made a sort of point of 
it . to show her to the company, you said." 

Fermor felt his colour rising at the manner oi 
all this. "Well," he said; "I irdend to do so. 
The night is scarcely over." 

" Well ; better do it at once," said the brother. 
" I tell you the truth, candidly . ^though it u only 
a trifle, these suspenses and agitations are Tvot good 
for her. She has had too much of them lately. 
You know, as well as we do, she is too delicate to 
be trying experiments on." 

" Trying experiments on ! " said Fermor, his 
face darkening. " I don't follow." 

"Yes," sjud the other, more hard still. He al- 



The Ball. One tiU Three. 79 

ways showed that he had no awe of Fermor. " She 
can't bear it. It is abnost cruel. She has been 
accustomed ix) be watched and petted and treated 
with kindness among us all. It must be kept up, 
or any coldness would kill her." 

Fennor's chest was heaving, but he dreaded the 
absurdity of quarrelling with any quasi relatives. 
" You will excuse me," he said, calmly, " if I can- 
not understand you." 

" Then we ought to understand each other," 
said the other. " She is too precious to us to let 
ceremony stand in the way." 

" This is scarcely the place to enter on these 
matters," said Fermor, bowing ; "if you would not 
mind concluding your remarks in the morning. As 
to the dance, you may reassure yourself and your 
sisters ; I was just going. I assure you I require 
no inspiration in such matters." 

He left young ManueL 

" Upon my word," he said to himself, " things 
are coming to a nice pass. To be schooled and 
lectured by her sister, I suppose I maxt put up 
with that ; but from the brother Pll 'mt take it. 
I must show them they have not got gtdfe a poor 
soul among them. Upon my Word 1 As for Violet^ 



80 Never Forgotten. 



poor child, she is not accountable. But she is weak 
and foolish, and they do what they like with her." 

He was thinking whether he should go at once 
to take her. Poor child, after all there should be 
indulgence for her, and she was not responsible 
for these people about her. Raised seats in tiers 
went round the room, and very far off he could see 
her face looking out anxiously and painfully, as 
from a ropk, expecting succour. It looked so 
piteous, that he thought he would at once walk 
across to her. 

But again Showers and his partner, homeward- 
bound from the private view of the supper-room, 
came up. Showers was pettish. " Will you see 
Miss Oarlay back through the crowd? Colonel 
wants me. Shall only be a moment, only a mo- 
ment, on my honour." (This he added to Fermor 
with great impressiveness.) 

Fermor did the work appointed to him very suc- 
cessfully. She was very silent, and looked up at 
him now and then timorously, as if half shy, half 
afraid. Fermor was [gay and imconcerned. Just 
then Picini from his gallery intoned Strauss once 
more. It was one of the sad songs sung by a cor- 
net. " Do you hear," said Fermor; " one of those 



The Ball. One till Three. 81 

divine valses. You should be dancing, not sitting 
down, to such music. Where is the wretched 
being who has dared to be late? Shall I fetch 
him?" 

" It is Mr. Showers," she said ; " but I am sure 
he will not come. I am keeping you. You are 
dying to dance it." 

" Well, I am," said he ; " but as for looking for 
any one in this place ^*' 

" How charming 1" she said ; " I would give 
the world to be dancing it." 

" But you are engaged," said Fermor, gravely. 
" We must respect these httle obligations. As for 
me^ I have served my turn. I am fit only for 
being carried out, like the old Indians, and left 
with a pot of rice on a mountain." 

" No, no !" said she ; " indeed I don't think so." 

" I don't mean literally," he said, gravely. 
" Well, then, putting off that exposure for a few 
days," added Fermor, in his gayest mood, "sup- 
pose we try this valse. Ah ! but Mr. Showers !" 

"O, tfon'^mind AzVn/" 

"Don't mind Am/" said Fermor. "What, 
Showers, the favoured, the admired, the man 

VOL. II. Or 



82 Never Forgotten. 



whom the world is talking of and congratulating ! 
What, not mind him ? Can you be serious ? " 

She coloured. ^^It is all his fault," she said, 
rising. " Would you mind, now ^*' 

In a moment Strauss had engulfed them. They 
were floating round. Fermor talked through the 
music (and through the dancing), as they do in 
melodramas. Curiously, he had forgotten, for the 
moment, other duties and other faces. No matter, 
the night was long. 

" The surprise of seeing you here to-night I" 
said Termor, still in motion. "I had no idea of 
it. I suspect a mystery. Do explain." 

Half a dozen turns. Then she answered, with 
great confidence, " I wished . ^that is, papa and I 
wished . that you should see me in another charac- 
ter than that of an invaUd. You must have been 
weary of me in that shape." 

The face of Fermor, which was over Miss Car- 
lay a foot or so, smiled with complacent triumph. 

A few more turns. ''I have never seen her 
yet," said she. " Miss Violet. She is here, is she 
not?" 



The Ball. One till Three. 83 

" O ys," said he. " In the other room, I 
believe. And now tell me . ^why are you so 
curious?" 

She did not answer this direct question. " Do 
let us look for them."^ 

But Fermor was not so eager. " We shall find 
them," he said, "when this crowd clears off a 
little. What boors these countrymen are! Sir, 
would you ? You are destroying thisi lady's dress." 
This to a fatty harmless man, who staggered back 
in dreadful confusion, with flames rushing to his 
face. 

" I am afraid," she said, ^ thiis will be my only 
chance. For I don't know," she continued, " did 
we tell you** (she knew weU she had not) *^that 
we are leaving this place in a few days ?" 

Fermor hastily drew rein, halted under a tree, 
that is at a pillar. " Going away !" he said. 

^Yes," she said. "I am very sorry, oh, so 
sorry. But we are obliged." 

" O, of course," said Fermor.. "Why not? " he 
was almost going to add ; " you are not obliged ta 
give notice to the whole parish." . "And when 
was this sudden move thonght of, pray ? " 
o2 



84 Never Forgotten. 



" Papa says so. O, I am o sorry. I was 
beginning to like this place. Every one . ^that I 
knew, at least . ^was so kind to me." 

" I am sorry, too," said Fermor, " to lose my 
neighbours. These things can't be helped. We 
must come and go . it is a law of the nineteenth 
century. We shall meet sometime and somewhere, 
I suppose." 

" I hope so," she said. 

" And poor Showers," he continued. " I hope 
you won't be angry . ^you know you have taught 
me to speak freely to you. What is to become of 
Aim? I was imder the impression . at least, his 
manner and behaviour made me think so. that 
really there was something ^auspicious,' as the 
newspapers say, on foot. No ? Is he to follow ? 
or to wait, or ^" 

"Absurd!" she said, eagerly. "What ridi- 
culous stories I I dislike him more than any one I 
have seen for years." 

"Astonishing! Amazing!" said he. "And 
now," he continued, smiling, " who is there, as a 
matter of mere curiosity, that you like better than 
any one you have seen for yeai*s ?" 



The Ball.One till Three. 85 

Again here was the bird in the net of the 
fowler, as Fermor wished it to be. The bird flut- 
tered, grew nervous, did not answer; but would 
have answered presently, when Mr. Carlay came 
grimly up. " We must go away," he said. 

Fermor took her down stairs. " You must tell 
me these secrets another time. I may be useful to 
consult," he said, as he put on her cloak. " I shall 
call to-morrow;" then went back jubilant; then 
he thought, with a start, of Violet. For though 
the night wa% long, he had detained her a Uttle. 
But the wistful face was gone from the rock. He 
could not find them anywhere. "Gone in to 
supper, I suppose," he thought, wdth unreasonable 
resentment. He was turning away when he was 
touched on the arm. 

" Hanbuiy! Mr. Hanburyl" Fermor said, "I 
was told that you were gone away, and that you 
had made all the traditional farewells in due 
form." 

" I have come back," said the other, coldly ; 
" and it seems not a bit too soon." 

" That is for yourself, of course," said Fermor? 



86 Never Forgotten. 



now relapsing into himself ; " at least, so far as I 
cam make you out. Excuse me, I am going to 
have some supper." 

Hanbury happiily crushed and repulsed, Fennor 
went, had supper, and drank champagne. He was 
very elated with the events of that night . ^with 
the dramatic events; he had acted the Jeune 
Premier. As he was putting the flask down, he 
felt a lowering face on him, like a cloud overhead. 
"What, followed me here?" he said, smiling. 
" Going to have some supper? Try that Mayonr 
naise, you know I am host here." 

The other put him away, as it were impatiently, 
with his hand. ^^ Fermor, I have been here," he 
said, " the whole evening. And I have se^i it all." 

Fermor laid down his glass on the table, and 
said, "Indeed!" 

" Yes," said the other, speaking very fast, 
" from the beginning of the night to the end. It 
was vmf cold and cruel. I could not have be- 
lieved it, if any one had told me. But I am glad 
I am here myself, I should never have gone 
away." 

" Now, if I might ask," said Fennor, trying to 
steady his voice, " what does all this mean?" 



The Ball. One till Three. 8 7 

" I never saw such a change I" said the other. 
" It makes my heart Kleed to look at her. Poor, 
poor child ! Oh, Fermor, you ought to blush." 

" This is getting imbearable," said Fermor, 
losing all patience ; " it inu%t be stopped. Do you 
think you have a right to come and lecture me ? 
I suppose you have received your instructions. 
But I tell you what, Mr. Hanbury, I am too old to 
be schooled rum^ by you or any one else. Your 
brusque and honest candom' must select some other 
object for its confidence . it is disagreeable to me. 
Upon my word, we axe coming to a pretty pass ! " 

*^ O, do not take it in this way," said the other, 
just as excitedly. " You must hear the truth at 
all risks! I fear you think, because there are 
two poor helpless girls, with a more helpless 
mother ^" 

" Then ymi shall hear the truth too," said Fer- 
mor, turning round on him in a fury. " You 
shall hear, that it is exceedingly improper to thrust 
yourself into my concerns. A very great liberty ! 
There! This fine candour and manly qualities 
won't be your privilege, I can tell you. I look 
on your interference as exceedingly ill judged, 
and, if it is pursued further, I shall have to give 



88 Never Forgotten. 

you a serious lesson, my good friend." (Fermor 
threw all the insult of voice and manner he could 
muster into this speech.) 

" And you can speak to me in this way after 
your conduct," said the other, also angry. " Very 
well. I now begin to see what you are . a cold, 
cruel, hard ^" 

Two arms opened between, in gentle expostula- 
tion. " Hush ! hush ! My good friends," said Sir 
Hopkins, " you are talking very loud. You don't 
want the whole room, I am sure, to assist at this little 
discussion, eh ?" Some stray men who had dropped 
in . now that work was nearly over and they had 
earned their crust . for a solitary and substantial 
repast, had been drawing near, attracted by the 
sound of loud voices. 

"Hush!" said Sir Hopkins again. "We caii 
talk this over in the morning. Come with me, 
Charles. This* way, down towards this chicken 
salad. Everything here seems excellent. Cham- 
pagne, please'. No, not in that glass. There; 
thanks. Now I think I am complete." And stoop- 
ing down over his supper. Sir Hopkins said, in a 
low voice, filtered, as it were, through his chicken 



The Ball. One till Three. 89 

and his salad, " Admirable, Charles ! I heard the 
whole. You cut him up like a melon." 

" Such a thing I" said Fermor, still furious. 
" Everybody seems to think they are entitled to 
bring me to book. I believe he is set on . employed 
by the family . for this work." 

" Is there any bread, I wonder?" Sir Hopkins 
said, looking up and down the table anxiously. 
" I dare say you have remarked, at balls, the bread 
always gets away, behind somewhere. All ! my 
Httle rustic I was she here to-night ? Ah, to be sure 
she was, as fresh and as gay as a lark." 

" Ah 1 That's the cry now^' said Fermor, in- 
dignantly ; " wasting away. I, of course, wearing 
her into the grave." 

"What nonsense!" said Sir Hopkins. "Who 
says this I The sister, I suppose?" 

" Exactly, sir. Always to this one tune. I am 
getting sick of it." 

"Ah!" said Sir Hopkins, "fine woman that, 
but knows what she is about. Can see that in her 
eye. She will pull the whole family through the 
world. Mark my words, settle them all well, even 
to the mother. / know the sort of woman exactly. 



90 Never Forgotten. 



I dare say takes a little of the schoolmistress on her. 
Now may I give you a scrap of advice. You 
are a man of the world, and I may speak freely 
to you." 

" O, sir/' said Fermor, " your experience is 
always useful." 

" Yes," said the other. " But, on principle, never 
let them school you. On principle, mind. They 
will encrdach until you find yourself growing down 
every day into a child. You know this yourself 
as well as /do." 

" Exactly, sir," said Fermor, eagerly; "that is 
the view that has guided me all through." 

" I thought so," said the other. " (My dear 
Charles, there was a Seltzer-water bottle here a 
moment ago, and some one has carried it off. 
Thanks.) No, I am serious. You are quite right 
in maldng a stand against these people. I assure 
you, I tell you candidly, I quite admire the spirit, 
as well as the clever diplomacy, that has regulated 
your behaviour. You see I have been watching. 
And as for the capiiul manner in which you dis- 
posed of that rough person just now, who, no doubt, 
as you said, toas set on by others to that particular 
duty, it quite commands my admiration. You 



The Ball. One tUl Three. 91 

want no advice, my dear fellow. Who are they, 
by-the-by?" 

" I don't know, I am auie, sir," said Fennor. 
^^ It is radier too late, I fear, to be thinking of 
thatj now." 

Sir Hopkins looked up at him from his chicken 
salad. ^^No, Charles, that is quite a false impres- 
sion. Even after a treaty is agned, we, that is, 
nons autres, can have ^a rectification/ as it is 
called. We can never be too late with anything . 
excepting death, and actual marriage. There's a 
truth for you in return for 'your excellent chicken 
salad." 

The ball was breaking up. The company were 
drifting away like sheep. The ground was open 
and clear ajs a prairie, and a few untired couples 
were flying round wildly. Picini, fresh as at the 
beginning, was leading on one of his most despe- 
rate galops. It seemed to echo down like music 
in a church, the floor was so clear. 

Shawls and opera cloaks were being put on. A 

universal hymn and responses were heard on all 

sides. " Such a delightful evening! Enjoyed 

, ourselvos so much I" To which military choristers 



92 Never Forgotten. 



in scarlet surpKces would answer, in full acclaim, 
" Aw ! so pleased, aw I Quite glad you liked it . 
'pon word am!" as though imder a tacit suspicion 
of insincerity, and the speaker was anxious to clear 
himself. 

Fermor, coming out full of pride and excite- 
ment, met his mother and sisters at the door, in 
the act of being shawled and clothed. They were 
in the hands of a band of admiring men. " Such 
a charming evening!" whispered Lady Laura, 
whom long service had trained to business, and 
who always brought a large white bag, easily re- 
cognisable, and marked " L. F." (" Your worsted 
shoes, my dear, are at the bottom of the bag.") 
" Mr. Piper, Charles, has been so kind. Only for 
him I don't know how we should have managed. 
Charles! Mr. Piper . my son!" And Charles 
found himself introduced to a bashful child, little 
older than' one of the regimental drummer-boys. 
" Next brother to Sir Thomas. No children," she 
whispered Charles. "Quite taken with Alicia." 
Alas! at every entertainment there was to be 
always the typical man, who was "quite taken 
with Alicia." 

" By the way," she continued, " we were all ad-. 



The Ball. One till Three. 93 

miring that striking-looking girl you were with. 
Who is she, my dear? Such style, and quite an 
air. I was struck by her. The only decent person 
I have seen here. Come, dears. Mr. Piper, you 
won't forget? Any day, at three. You will always 
find some of us in." 

Fermor turned back into the rooms again. It 
was over. Picini was disbanding his forces. Sleep- 
ing violins were being tucked away in snug green- 
baize cradles. Fermor looked up at them. Major 
Carter came glissading to him over the smooth 
floor. 

" Dear Captain Fermor," he said, " I am so 
glad to meet you. Going home? Would you 
mind letting me walk with you ? I have some- 
thing to tell you." 

Fermor was gracious. " Come in here and have 
some wine," 

"Most kind of you. I should like it of all 
things. That man Hanbury . where is he?. he 
was skulking about here just now." 

Fermor helped himself. He had not had too 
much, nor was he going to have too much ; but 
good wine made him talk with eagerness, and a 
sort of fervour. 



94 Never Forgotten, 



" I know," he said. " He has honoured me with 
some of his instmctions. But I fancy / gave him 
a lesson instead.'* 

" I heard," said the major, smiling. " It was 
admirable, I am told. So quiet and gentlemanly, 
and, at the same time, so determined. He has not 
got over it yet.'* 

"The idea!" said Fermor. <^ Therms a set of 
them that think they have a right to come up one 
after the other and lecture me. I won't stand it. 
Major Carter. I have made up my mind this 
night. I won't stand it. What relation has this 
man to me ? What right has he^ because he is a 
great strong animal, and rides strong horses, to 
come and hector me? I won't take it from any 
man." 

" O, of course," said the major, filling his glass, 
" he has his instructions. It's only natural. He is 
stiU kept on, you know." 

"Ah I you think so too ?" said Fermor, eagerly. 
" Do you know, the same idea occurred to me, and 
to Sir Hopkins."" 

" I was sure you would see it in that way," said 
the major, selecting a bonbon in the shape of a 
mushroom. " I suppose he was sent for." 



The Ball. One till Three. 95 

" Sent for ! " said Fermor, scornfully. " They 
may send for a dozen more like him. That 
won't do." 

They were now getting their coats and hats. 

"By the way, Showers ^Ah, Captain Ter- 
mor!" and Major Carter shook his head pro- 
foundly. He had a young man's hat and a 
young man's cape, and, nnder the lamps, looked as 
&esh as any young man. " I met him going ont, 
absolutely raving and imprecating. I never saw 
such a beating! You have thrashed him . ^mo- 
rafly:" 

" O, nonsense 1 " said Fermor^ smiKng. 

They were now in the street. It was half-past 
four, and very cold, clear, and bright^ 

" Would you take my arm ? " 

Termor did so gracionsly. 

" Ah, you have known me only a very short 
time, and I have no right to speak freely about 
your affairs. I know you don't prmit it, even 
with men who are old friends, and I must say I 
admire that reserve and restraint in you. Bnt I 
will say I am sorry for the whole business. I am." 

" You mean. . t " said Fermor. 

" I mean, I am sorry to see the way your gene- 



96 Never Forgotten, 



rous conduct has been received. I don't like it," 
said the major, with growing warmth. '^ A man 
gets into the thing ; there are people by to work 
on his pity and appeal to his sympathies. / under- 
stand that sort of pressure, and how a refined and 
chivalrous man may give way. But he shouldn't 
be taken advantage of. No. I confess I took 
another view at the beginning ; so did Sir Hop- 
kins ; so would any man of the world. But that is 
the way with a certain class of people. They wiB 
always encroach." 

Termor did not resent this free view of his 
affairs. " It is not so bad as that. I suppose they 
mean well. Yet I am afraid there is something in 
what you say," he said. 

" If," continued Major Carter, eicpostulating, 
"they were of quality, one might put up with a 
good deal, but when we hear such stories ^" 

"O, I know all ihat^^ said Fermor, drawing 
himself up sei^^itively. " I ascertained all that be- 
forehand. The . er . wine business, and all that. 
Younger sons of the best families have often been 
put into that sort of thing." 

"No; I did not mean that," said the major, 
" but really I feel a delicacy in touching . ^but I 



The Ball. One tUl Three. 97 

have correspondents everywhere, and I confess 
s(yme stories have reached me.'* 

'^ Indeed V^ said Fermor, eagerly. "Of what 
description, pray ? " 

" O, I had rather not. People write me every- 
thing. This was from old Foley, who served in 
Spain. Some other time. I will show you the 
letter one of these days." 

" If," said Fermor, excitedly, " there was any- 
thing like concealment in the business, I never 
could bear tJwi. No feelings of pity or regard 
would stand in my way." 

" We shall see about it another time," said the 
major. " How cold it is ! " I declare here are my 
lodgings ! You see / have my latch-key like the 
young fellows. Good night I " 

'' Good morning ! " said Fermor. 

" Ha, ha 1 very good, very good," said the major, 
laughing heartily. " Only for my known cha- 
racter, what things would be said of me. Good 
morning, then ! " 

This was the end of the Eastport ball. For 
many people in the Eastport colony it ^ was an 
epoch to look back on . a glorified milestone in 
their life. To unbroken Eastport girls it seemed 

VOL. II. H 



98 Never Forgotten. 



like their first pantomime; luibroken Eastport 
youths it hopelessly unsettled* Young Mr. Piper, 
a mihtary " child," and whose years should have 
protected him from " imdue influence/' was sent 
away home, raging with a frantic passion for 
Alicia Mary. That virgin had at last struck fire. 
But in Fennor it had wrought the most strikii^ 
change of all. In the morning he looked back set 
the land on which he had been standing the even- 
ing before, as it were across a river, and the Manuel 
Family had not come over with him. 



'^Jane^ the Fairy Godmother. 99 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH. 

" JANE," THE FAIRY ODMOTHEB, 

The night of that Eastport festival, which for 
many young girls in Eastport was a night of 
sweet and exquisite dreams, in which lovely scarlet 
angels floated quite glorified and spiritual, was for 
Violet one of the most wretched of her life. All 
her thoughts seemed to be seething and boiling in 
that small head ; her bed seemed to be turned into 
a furnace. She suffered a weight of agony, and 
when day came, and the steady daylight of nine 
o'clock, she rose up exhausted, and trembling, and 
with a worn face, but with eyes that sparlded like 
the lamps of the night before. 

The anxious aster, Pauline, came into Violetf^ 
u2 



100 Never Forgotten. 



room as soon as she heard her stirring, which was 
indeed betimes. She found her hot and flushed. 
There was a little wildness, too, in her eyes. She 
had, in truth, never slept, which was but a small 
evil of its kind ; but she had tossed, and fretted, 
and been miserable, until morning brought day- 
light and almost despair. 

" Darling Violet," said her sister, going up to 
her, "this is dreadful. You will wear yourself 
into a grave. Your heart cannot bear it, I know 
it cannot." 

" I am better this morning," she said, " much 
better . ^if I could only make myself sleep." 

Pauline looked at her, irresolute as to how she 
should begin. "We have been thinking and talk- 
ing over that ball of last night; and now, my 
dear darling Violet, this is to be considered, and is 
worth considering. You were very happy a short 
time ago . ^we were all very happy . ^until certain 
things took place, and you are not strong, and 
much anxiety or sorrow would wear you. Now, 
dearest, is it not better, before it is too late, to have 
courage to go back. I fear we have made a mis- 
take. We, I say, who ought to have been more 
sensible, and to have known better. Now what 



''Jane;' the Fairy Godmother. 101 

we have thought is this . and it is a cruel thing, 
darling, to propose . ^would it not be better, after 
last night, to have done with this . altogether?" 

Violet's glistening eyes had been widening and 
distending all this time. It was only at the last 
word that she caught her sister's meaning. She 
broke out in a fright. 

" No; no ! I can't, I could not. And to come 
from me! No, I could not, indeed," she added, 
piteously. 

" Ah," said Pauline, in tones of the softest 
compassion, "that is it, darling. Is it not better 
that it should come from you, than that ^*' 

" What!" said the other, excitedly. "Do you 

know anything ? Do you believe it ? Do you ^" 

. She was so excited that her sister said to her, 
" No, no ! it is only that I fear. You know you 
said it yourself last night. We, who have seen a 
little more of the world than you, dearest, under- 
stand the meanings of little signs, which you would 
pass by. Indeed, it is better, Violet, that you 
should see it now, than see it later." 

" Then you have heard something. He told 
you last night," said Violet, distractedly. " O, I 
had a presentiment that this was coming I" And 



102 Never Forgotten. 



she lay back on the sofa and panted nervously, aad 
a look of scared terror came to her face that quite 
alarmed Pauline. She ran to her. 

" It is nothing," she said, " I am all Tvrong, 
indeed I am. I know nothing, and have heard 
nothing . upon my word and honour, as I stand 
here, I have not. It is only some of my foolish 
sense and caution. Won't you believe me when I 
tell you so?" 

The other raised herself, drew a slow sigh of 
relief, then gave a child's smile. 

" O, you terrified me," she said. " I . am 
getting so foolish and nervous. But it is non- 
sense, all nonsense. I know Charles so well now 
. better than yow, Pauline. And he has these 
ways, which are ways of his own. And you hnow 
he has told us over and over again that he hates 
that public exhibiting, and ' engagements on view,' 
as he calls it. He never does anything without a 
purpose, and I shouldn't be surprised," she added, 
with a sudden flash of gaiety, " if he was what he 
calls trying me. Ah. There it is." 

Her sister was o relieved at this change from a 
scene she dreaded, and almost delighted that she 
accepted this far-fetched fancy, with her arms 



'''Jane;' the Fairy Godmother. 103 

about this fluttering Violet, even fortified it. She 
was sure it was so; was confident that out of 
his sensitiveness he had planned this little experi- 
m!^at* And presently the sisters, by mutual en- 
couriigement, had worked it into actual pleasant 
proof of attachment and devotion ; and Violet, as 
if thirai was BOW, finding something to rejoice 
at, said, with alacaty, that she would now come 
down. 

The maid who. now a long time ago . ^had 
thought Ffinnor ^ lovely," had come in, busy with 
shutters and curtains. She saw Violet's worn 
face, the weary lines of pain upon her cheeks, and 
the tightened look about her forehead. More sig* 
nificant stiU were her strained eyes. She was a 
" smart " girl, and glowing ribbons always were 
fluttering from her caps like pennants from a 
mast. AU through she had taken a deep interest 
in the love affair, and, strange to say, knew per- 
fectly all the ebbs and flows of that uncertain cur- 
rent. For Fermor she had the deepest admiration. 
Had any one introduced the well-known Apollo 
Belvidere into her associations, that famous type 
of plastic beauty would have exactly satisfied her 
as a standai?d for her hero. She yearned for some 



104 Never Forgotten. 



such type. And yet the hero himself, when she 
threw open the door for him, hurried past her up- 
stairs, not rude or blunt, but whoUy unconscious 
of her, and of all the ribbon-flags with which she 
was purposely " dressed." 

She had long guessed the state of things. That 
hall was indeed a sort of self-registering meter: 
the flags were often at the mast-head for a salute ; 
but the personage to be saluted did not come. 
The two sisters were fond of her, and talked with 
her often. She amused them with legends of the 
ladies and gentlemen of her own sphere. Not that 
they needed gossip, but when she was busy with 
their dresses, and Violet sat with her long hair like 
a mm's veil on her head, " Jane," busy with the 
brush, poured out a stream of curious speculations, 
odd rumours, and dark suspicions which were rife 
in the society she affected. But in Violet she had 
a greater confidence. 

She had sore suspicions about this business ; and 
being, after all, an honest girl, was a Uttle troubled 
in mind. At the same time she was convinced 
that the whole affair had been "mismanaged." 
The hero, she judged indulgently, being only like 
other heroes, in all ranks. But there were certain 



^'Jane^' the Fairy Gedmother. 105 

Kttle rules and traditions, without which affairs of 
this kind would never go well. These she had 
seen applied with success, in the instances of 
lovers down stairs . they were understood to be 
part of the established procedure. Down stairs, 
sighing coachmen, and eUgible valets, in the pro- 
gress of their courtship were treated with studied 
scorn, and elaborate contumely when other ladies 
and gentlemen were present ; and this, it was felt, 
showed the power of the cruel fair, and piqued the 
ardour of the swain. With wonder and surprise 
Jane saw the total neglect of these wholesome 
principles, and from the beginning augured the 
worst. 

Before that morning she had learnt the whole 
history of the ball. Through the interest of Fer- 
mor^s esquire . a pleasant oflScer with whom she 
was intimate . she had secured the privilege of 
being present. That gentleman had even gone 
further, and with a soldier^s thoughtfulness had 
borne her secret cakes, and yet more secret re- 
freshment. The maid had therefore seen the 
whole from a gallery, and she was determined that 
morning to " speak her mind " to her while there 
was yet time. 



106 Nevir Forgotten. 



Violet wa a little hurried and exdted in her 
speech. " Did I look well, Jane, last night ?" she 
asked. " They told me I did, and I am sure we 
did all we oould." 

^ Lovely, lovely, miss !" said Jane; ."but I aeq 
afraid you're not well to-day" 

^ I could not sleep," said Violet, nervously; 
" never closed my eyes once. I don't know what 
is the reason." 

^ It was a beautiful ball, miss," said Jane, ab- 
ruptly, and brushing with great activity. 

" O, you were there ! " said Violet, with a litde 
start. " To be Bure, I knew you were." 

" Yes, miss ; Mr. Bates, that is, the captain's 
gentleman, waa good enough to put me in the 
front seat of the gallery. (He has great interest, 
you know-) And I saw you, miss, the whole 
night." 

^^ Yes," said Violet, hturiedly ; " I did not care 
to dance ; I had a headache ; I was dying to be at 
home again, O, Jane," she said, turning sud- 
denly, "I am wretched and miserable ; ajad, Jaae, 
what is to become of me ? " And Violet began to 
sob hysterically. 

Jane had laid down her brushes, ami was sooth* 



'^Jane;' the Fairy Godmother. 107 

ing her like an infant. " Now, now miss, you must 
Bot. This is what wears you so . don't think of it, 
it will all come all right," 

Violet was now in spasms of agitation. She got 
up suddenly, and went over to the bed, on which 
she flung herself. The maid looked on in sore 
distress. Not for many minutes could all her 
soothing take effect. 

Poor Violet felt she oould confide in her, as in- 
deed she might. " O Jane, Jane, and before them 
all too, was it not dreadful? Not that I mind 
ilaU But I fear . ^I do so fear . ^that they have 
been changing him to me . I know they have." 

" No, no, miss," the maid said, with a smile of 
superiority. " Not that at all ; you make too much 
of it, miss, indeed you do* / know what it is." 

Violet became earnest, and looked at her steadily. 
"Wliat isit?" she said. 

Jane was thinking of the tactique popular below. 
" It's all wrong, miss. The thing has been mis- 
managed. Tve seen it all along." 

Thus poor Violet, catching eagerly at any plank, 
and beseeching her to tell, Jane became like an 
old fairy godmother, whom this young creature 
had come to consult, and to get advice. With 



108 Never Forgotten. 



great wisdom (and ^^-itli some diflBculty in the 
choice of words, for Jane had delicacy), the maid 
expounded the true secret of success in such affairs, 
and the little old-fashioned amatory cruelties which 
still obtained in the servants' hall. 

" It don't do," said the fairy godmother, " to let 
a gentleman come too easy, or come too often. 
They don't like it themselves, don't gentlemen. 
There are days," added Jane, as an illustration, 
" when I make believe not to see Mr. Bates, it 
might be in the street, or it might be on the road; 
and though I don't pretend to say that there's any- 
thing going on therCy still, miss, you can have no 
manner of idea how he does take it. You see, 
when they have it all their own way, they come to 
take it as easy as . anything." 

This seemed like truth to Violet, to whom any- 
thing like a little salvation in this emergency was 
welcome. Her eyes distended, and her breath 
came and went as the fairy godmother explained 
the mystery. The introduction of Mr. Bates as 
an illustration to the workings of the charm on him 
especially, did not import any burlesque into the 
matter. She even began to regard him -wdth an 
interest which would have amazed that simple 



^^Jane^ the Fairy Godmother. 109 

soldier. She was told how on certain days he was 
received with an unbounded aflfection, purposely ex- 
aggerated to lead him into some slight forwardness ; 
which, on the next occasion, would be seized on as 
an opening for treating him with the most mor- 
tifying and insulting neglect. A short course of 
this fitful treatment was enough to " take him 
down" . not only to take him down, but to reduce 
him to an unmanly and grovelling degradation. 
From whence he would be as unexpectedly . and 
as unreasonably . lifted from this level to the sun- 
shine of unbounded favour. 

" But," said the fairy godmother, coming more 
to the point, "if there was another gentleman, 
miss, as could be found . and I know of such as 
could be easily got, and willing, and whose place, 
indeed, by rights it ought to be . ^that were the 
real way I " 

Violet's eyes opened still wider. She coloured a 
little, for she understood. 

The captain, said the fairy godmother, was a 
charming gentleman, so fine and so high in his 
manners. But all gentlemen were the same in that 
point. They required to be " kept up and stirred." 
Now, couldn't Miss Violet just try it a little . ever 



110 Never Forgotten. 



ao little . ^and see how it would answer ? Not to be 
just " quite so ready," but more " stand off," and, 
above all, just " lean a little" to that good but " soft" 
gentleman^ Mr. Hanbury . Mark her words, if in a 
day or two the remedy had not the most startling 
result. 

The child Violet listened, first with curiosity, 
then with hope, then with confidence, finally with 
devotion. Here was a reasonable chance. She 
caught at it* She began to think herself a mere 
infant, whose own folly waff the cause of all ; but 
here was a sensible woman come to advise her, 
but happily not called in too late. 

" Now, misSy" said the godmother, " there's 
another thing. You should have the two gen- 
tlemen together here of a night ; just a nice little 
party of a dozen to look on ; for it'a the hdng 
done before people that makes all the effect. No 
gentleman, miss, likes to see another gentleman 
put up before him, where there's people by. As 
sure as I am standing here, miss, if you, only get 
your mamma to have a few people in to tea, and 
haTe the two gentlemen together,, and be a little 
partial to Mr. Haabtiry, giving him his tea first, 



"Jane;' the Fairy Godmother. Ill 

or sitting with him in a comer, or even," added 
Jame^ with a little hesitation, for she was not ceiv 
tain whether the mark of favour was so firmly 
established above^ as it was below stairs^ " putting 
a flower in his button-hole . as sure as you do this, 
everything will be well in the morning." More 
pocticmlar details, then, of this infallible nostrum 
adief then disclosed, leaning on them so earnestly, 
that she had Violet gazing at her as intently as 
though she were a physician telling of a certain 
cure for any iHiiDesB, The physician even inspired 
such hopes anxl confidence, that Violet began to 
question, a little nervously, whether that little gal- 
kBHtry about the flower and button-hole . on which 
her adviser seemed to rest above all . might not be 
introdueed, wM, of course, some dexterity. The 
poor child was so trusting, and so accustomed to 
lan upon evCTy one for assistance, that it was easy 
to persuade her. So when her dressing was over, 
she had been ehanged into a little conspirator, 
for from the strraigbtforward Pauline . but who^ 
indeed, waa conspiring in her own way . ^it was 
thought best to> conceal the whok. 

Eady that mocBiiig came in Hanbucyr They 



112 Never Forgotten. 



had not seen him the night before. This was a 
thin, sad, unhearty man, a sort of changeling 
Hanbury. 

Pauline started. " Come back?" she said. 

" Yes," he answered, gloomily ; " and you will 
own, not an hour too soon." He then told her of 
his quarrel with Fermor. " He has shown himself 
in his true colours," he added, speaking fast, " for 
which we should all be thankful. I have found 
him out to be what I always thought him, a cold, 
calculating, heartless fine gentleman. I have 
given him a lesson, and shall teach him a little 
more yet." 

Pauline had listened with gathering wonder and 
even dread. 

" O, folly ! folly I" she said.  What have you 
been doing?" 

" Doing I" said he ; " I have saved her. I have 
at least thii to comfort me ; I have been of %(ym 
use. You think I have some selfish view. Ah, 
no! T have long since given over that dream." 

" O, what have you been doing?" said Pauline 
again. " I know you did not mean it, but every- 
thing is turning out so unfortunate. Surely, to 



^'Jane;' the Fairy Godmother. 113 

quarrel with him . ^with Violet's husband . ^you 
might have known ^" 

" But surely," he said, " you cannot mean . ^you 
don't suppose, after last night, that this will go on ! 
Women believe to the end ! But I khow what his 
game is." 

" Hush ! hush ! " said PauUne, rising ; " we 
must not think of this. O, you should not have 
done that. He will think we have set you on, and 
he is so proud he will resent. No. Violet's whole 
soul and life is bound up in him. She believes in 
him still, and will believe through everything." 

Hanbury looked at her, confounded. He gave a 
sort of groan. " It is to be always the same with 
me . ^the same stupid blundering John Hanbury 
to the end. I am very miserable and very unfor- 
tunate. And what am I to do ? " 

"Go to him at once," said Pauline, hurriedly, 
"we can only repair the mischief as well as we 
can." 

"Go to him. well?" 

"Go . ^go to him and tell him you are sorrj'. 
You know how men make these things up." 

" Sorry ! " said he, a little distractedly. " O, I 

VOL. II. I 



114 Never ForgsHen. 



can't do that ! Yoa don't know all that has passed, 
the words he used to me, which I could not pass 
over. Indeed I could not.** 

^But it must be set right. You don't know 
what mischief you may have done." Then, as 
Hanbury seemed irresolute, she added, after a 
pause : ^ I thought you would have done anything 
for Violet." 

"What does it matter," he said, "after all? 
First wretchedness, now degradation. I care very 
little now. With all my heart, then." 

" Ah, if you had seen her," said the sister, ear- 
nestly, " how her heart is set on this affair, how her 
life is boimd up . how her little soul is wearing 
away. . 

"To be sure," said he. "How selfish I have 
been. Of course it must be done. . I will go at 
once." 

" Always generous, noble, kind," said Pauline, 
taking his hand. " You talk of selfishness. At 
this moment I blush for myself. But we know 
not where to turn to, and moments are precious 
and slipping away, and this is our treasure, our 
only treasure." 

Hanbury hurried out of the room. 



Amende. 115 



CHAPTER THE EIGHTH. 

AMENDE. 

Febscob, who had risen late^ looking back nn- 
easily to the night before, as to a strange country 
through which he had driven, and bcooding over 
his injuries, was walking up and down his room. 
He was still on the other side of the river, looking 
across ; and on the opposite bank were the same 
figures standing there, but with another light on 
them. In fact, they were olher figures. 

A letter was presently brought in to him. It 
was from Sir Hopkins Pocock, and ran : 

" Deab Chablbs, . Could you spare me twenty 
ounutes this morning ? " H. P." 



116 Never Forgotten , 



He found him at his desk, with strong blue 
paper before him, and the papers in the despatch- 
box overflowing their banks ; a sure symptom of 
heavy business. He laid down his pen and smiled. 

" Well, Charles. How do you feel after your 
ball? Done uncommonly well. Wonderful! I 
was really greatly pleased. I have not tasted a 
better mayonaise I don't know when." 

Fermor was glad that he was pleased; then 
looked restlessly at the overflowing banks. 

" I have been a good deal over the world, as you 
know," continued Sir Hopkins, leaning back in his 
chair, and laying the tips of his fingers together as 
though he had sent for Fermor specially to tell him 
this. " And men out there are always getting up 
things of that kind. But they break down. Why? 
What would you say, now, was the reason ?" 

Fermor moved restlessly in his chair. "It is 
hard to say," he said. " By the way, sir, I think 
you had something to mention ^' 

Sir Hopkins drew in his chair suddenly, and be- 
came grave and official. 

" I have this morning," he said, " been favoured 
with a despatch from her Majest/s Under-Secre- 
tary of State for the Colonies . ^the Eight Honour- 



Amende. 117 

able Harding Hanaper, M.P. That despatch is 
dated yesterday morning. It would seem, Charles," 
he added, becoming suddenly unofficial, "they 
desire my services once more. An important de- 
pendency . the name I am not at liberty to men- 
tion . ^will be vacant in a week or two, and I leave 
this to-morrow morning." 

" Yes, sir," said Fermor, nervously. 

" Well," said Sir Hopkins. " I sent for you be- 
cause I knew it would interest you. I dare say it 
is about the most important news that has come to 
this little settlement for many months. No one," 
he added, looking at the large envelope with re- 
flective complacency, "would suppose that this 
little paper contained such grave tidings and such 
responsibility. Of course there are drawbacks. 
Now they will begin worrying me out of my life 
with applications. It is almost as bad as the new 
manager of a theatre. Fancy, only yesterday 
came a letter, in anticipation, from my old friend 
Showers . of course about his young fellow. I 
can't well refuse him. I am writing to. him by 
this post." 

Pride and mortification came to Fermor's face in 
the shape of colour. He rose to go. 



118 Never Forgotten. 



^' Candidly^ my dear Charles, I am sadly disap- 
pointed aboat you ; f or I hare a great opinion of 
your sense, and I did think there was in yon all the 
nutteriel of a diplomatist ; 'pon xny aonl I did. 
But . ^you know . when I heard of that . hem . 
marriage of yours, and saw that when I asked, 
^ Where is the money?' and got no answer . 
' Where was the love and f oBy and that sort of 
thing?' and got no answer . and ^ Where was 
the connexion?' and heard scnnething about a 
wine merchant . when, in short, I fouaad the 
business could be accounted for by no known 
reason on . the . face . of . God's earth," he 
added, excitedly, making these words fall like 
little sharp taps of a hammer, "why, I shook my 
head and said: ^He won't do for a diplomatist; 
he won't do for me.' There, Charles ! There's 
the candour you always like. But it is the truth, 
on my soul ! " 

Fermor stood biting his lip and colouring. He 
was deeply hmrt. He did not answer for a few 
moments. 

" I was afraid of this, sir," he said, at last. "But 
I see it is hopeless to think of altering your 
opinion." 



Amende. 119 

" Good gracious ! " said Sir Hopkins, startiijg 
up and seizing him by the hand. ''^ How you mia- 
construe me. Am I not your relative ? Do you 
suppose I would not like to do all I could for you ? 
But I must look to myself. It is a load of respon- 
sibility. How could I be dragging about with me 
an impoverished assistant . we are speaking can- 
didly, recollect . ^with what is called ' a struggling 
family.' These poor girls always have large fami- 
lies ; they can't help it. I couldn't do it." 

"But you don't consider, sir,." said Fermor, 
warmly, " a man's position. His honour is often 
engaged. You don't know everything. It is imr 
possible to resist an appeal made to your sympathy 
and even compassion. It is not so easy as you 
think, sir." 

Sir Hopkins's lip curled. " That sort of thing 
may do with boys of twenty. A delicate school- 
gbl's tears ! It is simply absurd amcwig grown-up 
people. I can understand it at a ball, where cham- 
pagne makes a man do many a foolish thing ; but 

in broad daylight ^If that is all you are going 

on, it is ncKisensical. I tell you, if you were my 
son, this moment I would walk straight out of this 
house to those people, and settle it off in half an 



120 Never Forgotten. 



hour. It' I? shameful . ^'pon my word it's shameful," 
Sir Hopkins added, with warmth. 

Fermor stood there with his eyes fixed upon the 
ground. He felt full of foolishness and of shame 
in the preseince of this sensible man who had seen 
the world. 

"I have no business to talk on this matter to 
you, I know. And it seems harsh and cruel and 
worldly, but I have your interest at heart, and the 
girl's too, I can tell you. O, I know the whole 
thing. It's a duty, Charles, as you have invited 
free speech in me, to set these things before you. 
Besides, who are they ? Are they in Burke ? No. 
Are they in the Blue Book ? No. Where are they ? 
Wine merchants ! God bless me ! A whole French 
romance about wine merchants ! Besides, those 
stories ! They should be looked into. I don't mind 
stories about men. There were heaps flying about 
Lord Poolbeg ; but about a whole family ! " 

" Stories ! Ah I yes. But I never heard," said 
Fermor, eagerly. 

" Of course you didn't," said his friendly adviser. 
" That would scarcely happen. You don't expect 
people of that sort to take you into the parlour, 



Amende, 121 

and say, 'My dear sir, there are such and such 
stories about us, which it is right you should know.' 
Scarcely, I think. No ; Carter, who knows every- 
body, has picked them up somewhere." 

" Yes, he did hint something to me last night," 
said Fermor, growing excited. 

"JTaturally," said Sir Hopkins. "It is not 
pleasant to do such things. I assure you I don't 
like it at this moment. There, I must go back to 
my letters. Time and tide, you know . and the 
Under-Secretaries . wait for no man. At least, 
theyil blow you up afterwards. I am very glad I 
have spoken to you candidly. I should have gone 
away under a complete misapprehension otherwise. 
I tell you what . if I can be of any use by way of 
advice or action, use me. And I tell you what 
besides, as I am writing to Harding Hanaper, I 
shall mention your name." Fermor made a faint 
protest. "Don't misunderstand me," said Sir 
Hopkins. "It is merely for precaution's sake, 
and binds you to nothing." 

" O, sir,'' said Fermor, " you are so kind and so 
thoughtful to me. Indeed I wish I had consulted 
you earlier. The whole thing is such a complica- 



122 Never Forgotten. 



tioa. For instance, last night there was a man 
who I believe waa attached to her before . be- 
fore '' 

^^ Before you csLxney^^ said Sir Hopkins, smiling. 
"Of course . every one in his turn. You may, 
perhaps, be predecessor to some one else." 

"A rough, rude, heavy fellow . Hanbury,'\con- 
tinued Fermor. "And he, it seems, chose to bring 
me to account as their champion. I could not pot 
up with thatj and of course I had to repress him, 
very firmly, and with some strcmg language. I 
showed him, I think, that I was not to be intimi- 
dated." 

" Quite right," said Sir Hopkins, " quite so. I 
saw it. It was very gross; and, I tell you, a not 
uncommon manoeuvre. And you met him with 
spirit and firmness ? " 

" Yes, sir," said Fermor. 

" 0, then you'll have him with you this morning." 

" How, sir ? " said Fermor. 

" They* II send him to make it up, and all that 
sort of thing. The move failed, you see. I shall 
be greatly surprised if they don't. Now, my dear 
boy, letters, letters 1 Under-Secretary waiting." 

No wonder that Fermor, for long after, should 



Amende, 123 

think of his relative's powers of foresight, and 
acuteness of mental vision, with something like 
reverence . even with awe . for when he reached 
home, he found, waiting in his room, John Han- 
bury ! Who, exactly as had been prophesied for 
him, walked up to him with a sort of sad con- 
trition, and said, with a humility that affected the 
other : 

" Fermor, T am sorry for what passed last night. 
I hope you will not think of it. I can say no 
more." 

For the moment he was almost affected. It 
pained him to see this poor rough creature laying 
himself in the dust so humbly, aD through the 
strength of his unhicky attachment. Through the 
films of natural vanity, distrusts, suspicions, 
through which he saw most things^ Fermor for 
a moment got a clear view of this honest bit of 
aelf-sacrifice. He grasped Hanbury's hand. " As 
you say," he said, " let us think no more of it. I 
was rough enough myself last night, but have 
been much put out of late. You don't know how 
I am worried. We can't always keep a watch 
over ourselves." 



124 Never Forgotten, 



CHAPTER THE NINTH. 
volet's little plots. 

Pauline, when Violet had come down, was as- 
tonished at the change. Violet's eyes were as 
glittering as before, and she went about with a 
nervous vivacity, but the look of misery and hope- 
lessness was gone. 

Very soon this restlessness had worked itself to 
a point. "Dear Pauline," she said, as if asking 
a favour, "I am thinking of going out for a 
walk to the library (my head is so hot), and taking 
Jane." . 

" To be sure, darling," said her sister, delighted 
that she was taking interest in such a thing as a 
library. " The very thing, and get yourself a 



Violefs Little Plats. 125 

nice amusing book." She assumed . ^this delicate 
sister . ^that Violet would prefer going without her, 
for they could not avoid coming to that one sub- 
ject, and therefore she did not propose herself as 
a companion. But this was really the first step in 
Violet's little conspiracy. She had a curious and 
irresistible instinct that she would meet with some 
one of the characters with whom her little plot 
was to deal. And this is often a very sure and 
faithful instinct. Jane, who always associated 
every progress outside the house indistinctly with 
Mr. Bates, attended her with alacrity. 

The librarian^ . ^gentlemanly and conversational 
. ^took a great interest in her, and had put by (the 
tenderest little attention that was in his power) a 
new and choice story for her. Thus, unhappily, 
was her business transacted only too speedily ; and 
then Violet, indifferently skilled in all the devices 
of social life, began to talk against time, and there- 
fore a little wildly. 

The librarian talked professionally, as it were, 
and was glad of the opportunity. " There's a 
book," he said, "I am keeping for Major Carter, 
' The Virgins of Mayf air ; ' they say it is by Mrs. 
Mackenzie Tollemache. He is to call for it him- 



126 Never Forgotten. 



seK at one o'clock. The major knows the world 
so well," added the librarian, with a smile. 

But her instinct wajs not to fail her^ for pres^itly 
she saw John Hanbiuy, with a heavy gloom upon 
his face, smoking a cigar dLnnallj, lounging past 
with heavy steps. He saw her in a second, and 
his face became a conflagration* Now, Violet felt, 
was the moment to get out her heavy cloak and 
dark lantern, if she ever wa to be a conspirator. 
Hanbuiy had passed irresolutely, and then, turning, 
saw Violet's soft face looking out at him with en- 
couragement and sympathy. He came back as 
if he had been called. Violet welcomed him with 
a warmth almost extravagant. Jane was looking 
on from the inner shop, and looking on with ap- 
proval. So Violet had made her first step in the 
character of a conspirator. 

Hanbuiy was confoimded, and almost agitated 
at his reception. Strange thoughts came tumbling 
tumultuously through his brain, wild dreams for 
the future rose in his head. Could it be that she 
had at last seen that other in his true colours ? 

" Shall I take this?" said the library messenger, 
now going out and pointing to " The Virgins of 
Mayfair," who were on the ground bound together 



ViMs Little Plots. 127 

with strong twine. " No, no," said the librarian ; 
^' I see the major croBaing." 

Instantly Violet had become almost coquettish. 
^^ We neyer see yoa now, Mr. Hanbnrj," she said, 
softly. ^ Yon used to spare ns an hoar sometimes. 
But that was long ago." This was not very skilful, 
but it was wonderful for Violet, and did excel- 
lently for Hanbury, who could have prostrated 
himself there on the well-wom boards of the 
library. 

Major Carter was JocAdng in at the window at 
the title-pages of the new bools 

" Indeed," said Hanbury, "you are most kind, 
only too good ; but I thought ^" 

Now entered Major Carter, fresh from his 
window studies. He was astonished and delighted 
to meet Miss Violet. Little did he know the 
pleasure that was in store for him when he crossed 
over. Could he help her to choose a book? "You 

have kept that new thing for me, Mr. ; all 

thanks. This is," to Violet, " one of Mrs. Tolle- 
mache's, whom we all know, so you can imagine 
why I was dying to see it." 

In the presence of this skilful player Violet felt 
her histrionic power a little chilled, but she thought 



128 Never Forgotten, 



of what was before her, and set herself to work 
with wonderful purpose and resolution. "No," 
she said ; " Mr. Hanbury has always helped me. 
He will choose me something, for I believe he 
knows my taste." Poor Violet. This was spoken 
awkwardly enough, but it imposed on the two gen- 
tlemen. " I must go back now," added she, getting 
even bolder in her little strategy. "I am going 
to ask Mr. Hanbury to see me home. Jane has 
business . ^marketing, and what not." 

Hanbury, scarcely knowipg whether he was 
living or breathing, glowed a delighted consent, 
and this wonderful Violet, whom some fairy had 
metamorphosed into a perfect little intrigante, 
hurried into the back portion of the shop, and 
whispered her maid that she must walk after 
Major Carter and watch if he went near BrownV 
terrace. 

Hanbury was to know strange fluctuations in 
his treatment, for he had scarcely walked a hun- 
dred yards in this new tumult of happiness, when 
Violet apparently began to weary of his society. 
The worn lines began to show in her face, just as 
invisible writing ink comes out before a fire. " I 
won't take you any farther," she said ; " indeed, no. 



Violees Little Plots. 129 

It is very kind of you to have come. Please leave 
me here. Do. I must go by myself." 

And thus Hanbury was left gasping in the road, 
quite dazed, and with his heart all filled with 
grief. Still there was consolation . something to 
turn over and think of, in that incomprehensible 
change of manner. 

Later in the day the maid came back, after 
being detained rather longer than her mission re- 
quired. She brought good news, however, for the 
major had gone straight to Brown's-terrace, na 
doubt charged with intelligence. 

Joyfully our Violet flew up-stairs, began ta 
smoothe her hair, and work at personal decoration. 
The excitement of both night and day had given 
a brilliancy to her face. Ribbons, lace, dress, orna- 
ments, all of the best, were got out, for it was 
now certain that Fermor, having quaffed the elixir, 
^ould come . come in excitement and with all 
speed. 

Her sister saw the change with delight and 
bonder, but forbore to ask a single question. even 
^ put out a hint. She ran up to her mother with 
the good news, and to enjoin caution. 

*' Violet has a little mystery of her own, poor 

Vol. II. K 



130 Never Forgotten, 



child. It is all going well again, I can see. He 
has been writing, and, I suspect, will be here in a 
moment. I knew it was some mistake. Don't let 
us notice anything, mother dear, and I shall watch 
for Louis and warn him against any of his blunt 
speeches." 

Mrs. Manuel, whose face was all arid and worn 
with old private sorrows, where tears seemed to 
have sunk for themselves watersheds and gullies, 
smiled with some pleasure. Such news was light- 
ing up her darkness. 

Violet, below, was setting the room in order over 
and over again, to do honour to the king that was 
coming in state. Thus busy, she talked, and with 
a spontaneousness quite unusual. 

" I was thinking, Pauline," she said at last, from 
the window, and with her face to the garden, "of 
a little plan, a little scheme of my owri^ . ^an an- 
nouncement received with genuine delight by her 
sister. 

" To be sure, dear," she said; "let us hear it. 
Mamma wiU be delighted." 

" I want," said Violet, still at the window, "to 
. ^to . ^give a little party. You know we have been 
here so long, and never ^" 



Viokes Little Plats. 131 

Pauline answered with genuine wonder. " A 
party, dear ! Good gracious ! No. why should we 
do that?" 

^^ O, we must !" said Violet, turning round and 
hastily crowding a number of reasons together. 
" It is expected. We ought to have done it long 
ago. I am sure they say so. O, Pauline, indeed, 
indeed we must ; and . and . ^I should so like it." 

" But this is so odd," said her sister, still won- 
dering. " I never thought you cared for it. And 
mamma, you know, she could hardly bring her- 
self to '' 

" O, she will," said Violet. " Indeed, we must 
do it," she added, piteously ; " it is the only thing 
I would ask. Indeed, you will help me^!" 

Sisterly instinct had now at last divined that 
something more was asked for than a mere party, 
and Pauline was presently as eager as Violet. 

But the shadows of evening began to gather, 
and she sat and made a pretence of reading, then 
of settling again^ then of imaginary searches and 
inquisitions in her own room as imaginary, until 
the day was fairly gone. Then she became ex- 
hausted. The excitement could not carry her on. 
Light lines on her face began to come out, and 
k2 



132 ^ Never Forgotten. 



she turned to her fairy godmother quite hopeless 
and helpless. 

That counsellor was not without ready comfort 
She wrapped her consolation up in the pithy saying 
about the time it required to build the city of 
Rome. The ways of "gentlemen" were almost 
as inscrutable as those of Providence. Certain 
experiences connected with Mr. Bates had almost 
established the same truth. Leave it to time. 
To-morrow, miss, we should see. Eome was 
not, &c. 

But, the king was not to come that day. He 
had not drank of the elixir, which might be ac- 
cepted as a reason, such as it was. Major Carter, 
posting away to see him, had found him out. The 
king had gone in next door in all his glory to con- 
sole yet another maid. While Violet was keeping 
her weary evening watch, A^ith the greys and 
dusks descending about her like clouds, her lord 
was sitting beside a Moabitish woman, who had 
also, from the old instinct, decked herself for his 
coming. 

Their song was to this effect. 

" Shall you ever come back again?" said he. 
" Scarcely, I should say. Chance rarely brings 



Vwlefs Little Plots. 133 

friends again together at a place of this sort, at 
the same time. No, you shall be at the west when 
I shall be at the east. It is always the way." 

" We are to go to the south of France/' she 
said, speaking this to the comer of her dress. 
" Papa likes quiet and retirement. We shall be- 
come regular rustics, and live among the vines and 
honest peasants. You, we are told, are to have a 
different sort of life, out among the Eastern tribes, 
conquering and ruling. Something splendid and 
exciting." 

'' No," said Fermor, with some embarrassment ; 
^^ nothing is settled as yet. Of course I might, if 
I chose." 

" And you will choose," said she, timidly, but 
looking at him. " I am sure of it ; I told papa so 
this morning." 

Fermor smiled. There was a refreshing natural- 
ness about this girl that was always piquant. A 
new view at every turn of the road. " That would 
suit my nature, I suppose," he said, inquiringly, 
'' ruling and conquering?" 

She dropped her eyes again. Then, after a 
xnoment, looked at him. " I . ^I think so," she 
said. 



134 Never Forgotten. 



" Quite right," he said, approvingly. (He had 
always a sort of paternal manner to her.) " WeD 
answered ! I should like being captain over slaves, 
in opening their brute intellects. I would relish 
the barbarous splendour of that country. No better 
background for anything like mind or intellect." 

" You should go," she said, eagerly. " We 
should so like to hear of you." 

" But what would you hear of me?" he said. 
" The ordinary routine account." 

" No, no," she said ; " something more. I know 
you would be famous." 

" At least," he said, " you are anxious to get me 
out of the country. That is the fairest construc- 
tion I can put on what you say." 

^^ No, indeed," she said ; " you misjudge me. 
If you must go, surely the south of France is as ^ 
far removed from India . at least to all intents 
and purposes . as England. You will never come 
that way." 

(This " nature " is really charming, he thought, 
because she makes no pretence to anything else.) 

" We never know how things may turn out," 
he said. " I could no more tell where I shall bess^ 
in three months' time than I could the age of the.. 



Violds Little Plots. 135 

age of the iik)oii. It may be England, India, . 
perhaps the south of France/' he added, smiling. 
^^ It is all on the cards." 

She smiled too. "You don't mean ihaiV' she 
said. 

" I can mean nothing,"- said he, importing one 
of his mysterious aphorisms, "where I know 
nothing. I confess you have read me right in one 
point. I do feel a call towards India. It is the 
country for me ; and but for the absurd forms and 

formulas of our diplomatic service ^No matter. 

X have not at aU dismissed the notion, I assure 
you. People someway seem to e^ect me to go 
there. I have really very moderate abilities, which 
I am sure they overrate. I dare say, in the end, I 
shall have to go. But remember . ^the south of 
France is on the road to India." 

" O, how charming it would be," said she, in 
one of her unconventional httle bursts of delight. 
^' Some morning, perhaps, we should hear of a 
strange gentleman at the gate, and we should be 
wondering, and then it would turn out to be you. 
Though, indeed, I should know for certain that it 
-hoas you as soon as I heard there was a stranger." 
" And do you mean to say," said Fermor, " that 



136 Never Forgotten. 



a morning call from a mere conventional being 
like myself . finding you, too, among all the at- 
tractions of the sweet south . would give you any 
pleasure ? because, if so ^^ 

" Indeed it would," she answered readily, and 
without hesitation. 

Fermor had expected, in the course of nature, a 
little confusion and dropping of the eyes ; still it 
was a bit of nature, and she was really delightful 
for that. It was like real fresh eau-de-Cologne 
after all manner of heavy perfumes. She was so 
simple and so natural, he could have gone on 
" playing" on her for an hour more, with fresh 
entertainment, only he was obliged to go. 

" Good-by! good-byl" he said, rising. "As' I 
say, nothing is settled, and you must be prepared 
for that morning call in the south. For I suspect I 
shall have to rule over the Easterns after all. It is 
better than decay in a country like this. There is 
something grand, as you say, in being a satrap. I 
feel a call to it : and so," added Fermor, gliding 
into a tender cadence, "good-by, dear Miss Carlay. 
We have had some pleasant hours together; at 
least /have." 

The girl said nothing. Fermor held her hand a 



Violefs Little Plots. 137 

moment, let it go suddenly, and then left the 
room. Without any "pronounced" sensation in 
this farewell, there was still a secret hint as of 
something dramatic and touching. Fermor^s " ex- 
quisite steering" (his expression to himself) had 
^yen this tone to the situation. At the door he 
came full on Mr. Carlay. 

" We are going away," said the latter, " as no 
doubt you have been told. I know very few, and 
scarcely one that I care for here ; so it is not a 
great sacrifice for me. She would like to remain." 

" Then why go?" said Fermor. 

" This air of the south has been ordered for her. 
The winter is drawing on. And what is to become 
of you I I am told you are to go to India full of 
honours." 

" Well, so they sayj" said Fermor, greatly grati- 
fied with this universal nomination of himself to 
office. 

" Well, I am sure you will succeed. Write to 
us . to me. You have done great good in this 
house; you have really cheered her up. It was 
kind of you to come in and talk with her. A grim 
stiff fellow like me is no companion for a girl." 

" Don't mention it, sir," said Fermor, in high 



138 Never Forgotten. 



good humour. " It was a pleasure to myself. It 
is rarely one finds so cultivated a mind.'' 

" If/' said the other . " if it should evr come to 
pass-^and we hear how short a way money goes in 
India . ^if . ^and I can assure you I don't want to 
offend; but I am a rude rough fellow ^*' 

" I understand," said Fermor, " perfectly. And 
to show that I take it as it is meant, I do promise 
to avail myself cf your goodness. I do appreciate 
such kind thoughts, rely upon it. Perhaps one of 
these days I may YwHl in upon you in France . 
who knows?" 

This concluded his farewell with father and 
daughter. The whole scene quite filled his mind. 
The Manuel family faded out and became small 
figures at a distance. At all events, there was no- 
thing pressiug. Thus do pamters, by heightening 
the colours in one portion of a picture, dim, with- 
out touching, other parts near them. 

The Eastport season was indeed drawing to a 
close. Sharp blasts were coming from the sea, 
charged with daggers and raasors. The polite world 
was flitting away. Every day, at the newly-opened 
railway station, porters had busy work of it, label- 
ling dark and heavy boxes for " London." And 



Violefs Little Plots. 139 

in first-class windows was seen a crowd of ap- 
peals, growing daily more freqnent, crying out 
piteously, " To Let," " To Let." Every one was 
eager to be gone, once the rush had set in ; and 
the air was filled with declarations, " We are going 
on Monday," "We are going on Tuesday," &c. &c. 
The haste and hurry was almost indecent, and not 
unmixed with contempt. It was as though some 
family with whom they had been intimate had been 
suddenly discovered to be unsuitable to know, 
and was to be "dropped" with all speed. Next 
year, when the season came on, the people would 
be bowing and greeting Eastport again with the 
pleasant effrontery of worldlings. 

Thus, in a day or two, had Sir Hopkins Pocock, 
CJB., passed away, his despatch-box being put 
under the seat. Thus, also, in a week or two, was 
Lady Laura Fermor and her daughters busy up- 
stairs putting up their camp-kettles and knapsacks, 
once more getting ready for the road. 

The Eastport sea-breezes, and the comparative 

inactivity of this campaign, had not been without 

profit for the veteran commander. If it had been 

otherwise it would have made little difference, as, 

however worn and footsore, she would have marched 



140 Never Forgotten. 



out of the place with the same spirit. Yet, though 
no serious operations had been undertaken, some 
successes of a substantial order had crowned their 
arms. It did, indeed, seem likely that what might 
be called a fort . Fort Piper . ^was about to fall. 
That stronghold, it will be remembered, was a sort 
of child, but of good expectations, and well worthy 
sitting down before and investing in all form. 

The ripe charms of Alicia Mary had affected 
him. " Good God ! " said Fermor, with strong dis- 
gust, as he met the child day after day in his 
mother's apartments. " You don't mean to say you 
are thinking of that infant ! I declare it would be 
a sin . a crime ! I could not stand by and look 
on. His friends ought to interfere. I am ashamed 
of you, Alicia." 

For once the veteran sergeant lost command of her 
temper. This was tampering with the ranks. Her 
voice trembled. "None of this," she said, walking 
up to him with a look he did not soon forget ; " it 
is easy for you to make remarks. You must not inter- 
fere with the girls. No one asks you to give yourself 
trouble, nor, indeed, have you put yourself out in 
any way. We have had work enough of it, with- 
out help from any Qne, and I won't suffer any in- 



Violefs Little Plots. 141 

terf erence now. You understand ; you have done 
for yourself in the way that suits you best, and no 
one has said a word to you. It is only fair that 
we should have our way. There ! " 

Fermor withdrew in some disorder to the ground 
he had occupied before. The Boy found myste- 
rious attraction in AUcia Mary, who was kind and 
encouraging after an almost maternal manner. He 
positively adored her. There were guardians in 
the way, it is true . pro^ddentially no Chancery, 
which had been fatal. And it was to sit down 
before these guardians that Lady Laura was now 
preparing to march. A ridiculous disparity, said 
the malicious. Disparity, when he was next brother 
to Sir Thomas ! Disparity, when the Sir Thomas 
alluded to hath not, and ought not to have (on 
reliable guarantees), any children ! Disparity, when 
the estates were worth so much ! Away with 
these puerile objections. Were not these sufficient 
answers ? 

Violet kept her mournful watches ; only the in- 
spiration of her maid sustained her. Fermor came 
in a day or so. He diffused joy over the mansion ; 
but he was moody, and " short," . lowering symp- 
toms ; Violet welcomed him, after the first shock. 



142 Never Forgotten. 



with some pleasure. The elixir was working. 
Pauline did not come down to him ; her presence, 
she thought, would only cloud the air more. Very 
soon his grievances came to the surface. He had 
observed, he said, that "your friend, Mr. Han- 
bury," had come back. This was more of the 
elixir. What did that mean, pray? Violet, a little 
flurried, called up her presence of mind. She did 
not know, she said. She supposed he had business, 
or some such reason. With a voice that trembled a 
little, she added, that he was ^Wery good," and 
that people seemed to like him so, 

" O, that is it," said Fermor, getting up, and 
walking over to the window ; " I see." Though a 
little terrified, Violet was pleased, for here were 
signs of the elixir. Fermor turned round smiling 
with grim scorn. " I see ! " he repeated. He was 
thinking how this poor child was inconsistently 
showing " the little game" of the family. 

The little faint lines in her face, and her secret 
suspense, struck him with a little pity. " That was 
all a mistake, you know, the other night. I came 
back as fast as I could, and there was such a 
crowd, and when I got to the other end, you were 
gone." 



Violefs Little Plots. 143 

This was a noble amende ; the view that Violet 
in her heart of hearts had clung to all along. He 
was a hero again. 

" O, how good of you," she said, in a tumult of 
foolish gratitude. " I knew that was the reason. 
I said so, all along." 

" Yes," said he ; "I suppose there were plenty of 
persons to take the worse view." 

Now was there an opportunity. 

" O, by the way," she said, with a sort of nervous 
coquetry, "I want you to do something for me. I 
have a plan . ^a great little scheme." 

" A great little scheme ? " said Fermor, smiling 
at this description. " Well 1 " 

" It is all my own plan entirely. I am going to 
give a little party." 

Fermor started. " A party I Give a party ! Li 
the name of Providence, why should you do that ? " 

" O, it's all my own idea," said Violet. "I 
should so like it." 

" It's simply absurd," said Fermor ; " a party 
when everybody's out of the place; and in this 
little room." 

" But it's to be a Utile party," said Violet, coming 
up to him, and now filled with misgivings as to 



144 Never Forgotten. 



the policy of her proposal. " Only a few, I assure 

you." 

" That of course you can arrange as you like," 
he said ; " I only give my opinion. If you take my 
advice, you would not think of such a thing. It 
is at least laughable. It will only end in failure." 

" O, if you please," said she, imploringly, '' my 
heart is so set on this little scheme." 

" Good gracious I" said he, "am I preventing 
it ? Do just as you like. I only give my advice." 

" But you will come ? If you were to know 
how I have set my heart on it." 

" On my coming?" said Fermor, smiUng in 
spite of himself. " Well, I suppose the great little 
scheme must go on." 

He was provoked afterwards that he had given 
way to this levity, or good humour. It took away 
from his sense of injury. But he left happiness 
behind. The maid, who was fairy godmother, 
found herself embraced, and overpowered with a 
burst of confidence, everything was going on so 
prosperously. 

A week more, and more fashionable Israelites 
had gone out of the place. There were no tracer. 



Violefs Little Plats. 145 

even of the place where the Laura Fermor tents 
had been pitched a few days back. The fashion- 
able London Fremdenblatt had announced them 
at their hotel, in Dover-street. Sir Hopkins, said 
the same register, was staying at Wycherl/s, St. 
James's-square, genteel and costly chambers, well 
known to colonists. 

Every one was arriving somewhere in Town; 
and Eastport, abandoned and forsworn, began to 
have very much the look of the field where a gay 
circus has flourished temponirily, where the horses 
had galloped round, and the scarlet and tinsel flut- 
tered, and the crowd shouted, but where now there 
was only the mark of a worn sawdust ring. 

Fermor fumed against this abandonment. 
Things, as regards his personal affairs, had settled 
into a dead level. There was a lull. But he 
would have preferred something that he might 
w^ork against. He went to see the Manuels fit- 
fully, and bestowed some gloom and mystery on 
them. The brother seldom appeared to him, and 
when he did, he seemed to be held, as it were, in a 
leash. But Violet, still anxious and still fluttering, 
said to all their gentle remonstrances, "Leave it 
to me. Do, do now. We shall settle it all the 

VOL. II. L 



146 Never Forgotten. 



night of the little party." This was indeed her 
plank. 

The good woman in the wood, with a good deal 
of the pride which successful advice brings, had 
forecasted prodigious issues from this night. It 
was understood that it was to bring forth a new 
and perfect understanding, a resolution of all diffi- 
cidties, even the naming of a near and certain day 
for the nuptials, and universal happiness and de- 
light. "Leave it all to me I / know," said 
Violet, with a Kttle air of mystery. And she had 
now come to brood anxiously over this eventful 
night, as though it were finally to determine her 
fate, as, indeed, it was destined to do. 

Fermor, too, was waiting another event. Sir 
Hopkins had said he would write to him from 
London as soon as everything was settled, and 
" he saw his way finally." Someway Fermor had 
begun to have a restless feeling, though he had no 
grounds for it, that this paper would concern him 
eventfully. Yet the letter did not come. His 
family had not written either. " I suppose they 
think I may be treated any way and any how 
now," he said, bitterly. " I am a sort of cast-off, 
it would seem, to be dead and buried at once. 



Violefs Little Plots. 147 

They assume they have got rid of me now for 
good, and now that no profit may be made of me. 
Take care. I may disagreeably surprise them 

yet." 

But there was yet another letter expected which 
did not come. Major Carter had said to him, " I 
have written, as you wished it, to old Foley at 
Dunkirk. He is the most wonderful * gather-ups ' 
of old stories in nature. Quartered in Spain, as I 
told you. He knows everything about everybody, 
and, depend upon it, we shall have a very full and 
curious letter. Now, my dear sir, don't say a 
word. I take this all on myself. I have no right 
to say anything of my own suspicions. I feel it is 
going beyond what I ought to have done. The 
only thing I can do is to support what I say, or 
own that I have been wrong. You have no part 
in it whatever. I have forced it on you." 

Thus it came to a certain Monday, for which 
evening Miss Manuel had asked a few friends to 
tea and music. 



l2 



148 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TENTH. 

FAUST AND MEPHISTOPHELES. 

That day of the Manuel little party . and 
Violet had taken all its responsibilities on herself 
. seemed almost to trail by. Fermor was still fret- 
ting against what he thought the "unmeaning- 
ness" of the whole affair. Why, however, should 
they mind him ? It was only to be expected that 
they would take their own course. No letters by 
post that morning. He had a good mind not to 
go at all, the thing was so absurd ; but then if he 
got unwell and stayed away, he would be talked of, 
and asked about, and looked at, which would be 
yet more absurd. Above all, there would be a 



Faujl and MephiJiopheUs. 149 

scene . ^tears and injured looks, and that kind of 
pressure. 

Hanbuiy had gone away for a few days, but 
had come .back express the night before. His 
passage . some himdred and twenty pounds' worth 
. had been taken and paid for out, but the 
splendid fast steamer had sailed out of South- 
ampton a week before. Groaning chests, ranked 
under the title of " heavy luggage," had been put 
on board a sailing ship, and the sailing ship had 
weighed anchor and dropped down the Thames, so 
that was lost as well as the passage money. He 
" sold off " many things, furniture, dogs, horses . 
among others, the famous brute that had won the 
fatal race . ^liurriedly, and at a sacrifice. So here 
was further loss. Yet he did not care. He was 
beginning actually to live again, to breathe, to 
stretch his arms. He was seen to walk fast and 
excitedly, not to slouch along. His hopelessness 
was being mixed up with uncertainty . which was 
an improvement ; just as a condemned prisoner is 
encouraged when he knows that powerful exertions 
are being made for a reprieve. 

Major Carter, who had got letters that morn- 
ing, met him in the little street. Hanbury was 



150 Never Forgotten. 



full of importance. The major turned back with 
him. 

" A great day for Eastport," said the major, 
cheerily. " We are all so interested in our friend's 
little adventure. Quod faustum, &c., you know 
the quotation" . ^which Hanbury did not. " They 
are charming girls . what I call a sweetness about 
them." 

Hanbury turned on him eyes that almost swam. 
" Indeed they are," he said ; and out of gratitude 
he could not but add : " and I know, I am sure, 
they like you." 

" I dare say Miss Violet does," said the other, 
" I don't think Miss Pauline quite so much. She, 
Miss Violet, is so soft and winning ; like the flower 
she is called after, so retiring and delicate. Do you 
know, my dear Hanbury, I often get uneasy when 
I think of the rough east winds . ^you understand 
me?" Hanbury sighed heavily. "And that, I. 
will confess to you," added the major, lightly 
touching the arm of his friend, " is the only thing 
that gives me a little uneasiness on her score . ^I 
mean, our friend Fermor, who,' though he has a 
fine natural disposition, and is full of the best 



Fauji and Mephijiopheles. 151 

points, is scarcely suited . ^you understand. And 
now, do you know, it has occurred to me lately, 
that some such idea has lately come upon her gentle 
mind ; and it has heen remarked," added the major, 
with mystery, " by others, too." 

Hanbury became irresolute. "Termor," he said, 
" is indeed scarcely suited. I doubt if he under- 
stands her." 

" He is really a fine character," said the major, 
warmly, " and is my friend. But I tell you, can- 
didly, I never liked this match. He is for the 
world. She is for quiet domestic happiness. Poor 
sweet child ! I can see she is even now turning 
back to old days. Another sort of nature would have 
suited her better. It is too late now to go back." 

" Yes," said Hanbury, gloomily. 

" But," said the major, " I am very glad of this 
opening, for I have wished to speak to you, and you 
are not a man to misunderstand frankness. It 
would not do . ^it would not answer . and would be 
scarcely fair ^" 

" How ! " said Hanbury, colouring. 

" I say, I wish it could be undone, but it can't. 
No, it lies on you. You must discourage it as 



J 



152 Never Forgotten. 



much as you can. She is young and impulsive, 
and cannot hide her feelings. But you must be 
generous, and make the sacrifice." 

Clumsily disguised pleasure flashed in Han- 
bury's eyes. He could hardly contain himself. 
" You know," said he, confidentially, " I owe no- 
thing to Fermor. He used me unfairly. It is an 
open game between us. Besides," he added, with 
pride, " if I could only save her ^" 

" Hush !" said the major, "this is all in con- 
fidence. I merely threw out the hint. Fermor 
would be in a fury if he knew it. I must go. 
Think no more of it, 1 beg. We shall meet at the 
little festival. Au revoir ! " 

Hanbury went his way with all his spirits, soul, 
heart, everything bounding and springing within 
him. He hurried tumultuous to the Manuels. He 
found them in confusion. Violet and her con- 
fidential maid were out. She was almost, Han- 
bury found out, in a sort of light fever ; for the 
crisis was now coming on. Her sister had noted 
even a little wildness. She was wrought up to the 
highest pitch, for she had given out, as it were by 
proclamation, that this night was to end the whole 
. to bring everything to a splendid issue. By this 



Fauji and Mephiftopheles. 153 

chann, she had with difficulty laid that sleeping 
lion, her brother. 

Hanbuiy, roaming about the little town, soon 
lighted on her. He came up to her shyly, yet 
exuberantly. She welcomed him according to her 
new tactics ; led him about as her escort to many 
shops, and chattered all the while . all the while, 
too, looking eagerly round to the right and left for 
spectators. These she soon found. For Young 
Brett passed by, and looked after them, wondering ; 
and Major Carter passed by, also wondering; 
before whom Hanbury drew himself up with pride. 
But Fermor, who was most desired, did not see 
that little progress. 

He had paced his room a great deal, that night. 
He was now feeling the monotony of desertion. 
He had no excitement to keep him up. " To be 
wasting in this place," he thought ; " and a life like 
mine, by my own stupid folly, to be flung away." 
Rarely, indeed, in his life, had Fermor made so 
honest a confession of incapacity. 

It was coming to four o'clock, and darkening 
gradually. Post came about five. He had bade 
his man, Mr. Bates, to be sure to go down before 
the time and fetch his letters. " Of course there 



154 Never Forgciten. 



will be no letters," he said, "because I want 
them. I suppose they think, nowj I am not worth 
writing to." 

By-and-by dropped in Young Brett, who, on 
the mention of Violet, or her " little party," told 
eagerly how he had just met her " with that fellow 
Hanbur}\" He remarked that that gentleman was 
plucking up wonderfully. He wondered what he 
(Haabury) "was at" in "hanging about" in this 
way. 

" I know," said Fermor, starting up and begin- 
ning to pace the room. " I understand it. It's qo 
matter now, but it will all come right in time." 

Some little friendliness on Young Brett's part 
being repelled rather roughly, that youth went 
away scared. " We shall meet to-night," he said, 
as a farewell. 

" Well I " said the other, " I suppose we shall. 
We meet now, and may meet to-morrow. There 
is no need of telling each other such good news." 

" No ! no ! of course," said poor Brett, colouring. 

Later came Major Carter. 

" I met your friend Hanbury in great spirits." 

" I suppose," said Fermor, " in Miss Violet's 



Faujl and Mephijlopheles. 155 

company. What is the meaning of this?" he 
added^ violently. " Do they want to set me up for 
the whole town to laugh at? It is outrageous. 
People coming in here every minute telling me 
what they see." All Fermor^s injuries came rush- 
ing on him. "I'm not to be played on in this 
fashion. To be talked of by the low tea-table 
gossips of a low place like this. How dare they 
attempt to be playing these petty tricks on me I I 
tell you what, Carter ; I have a good mind to give 
the whole tribe a lesson." 

"No, no," said the major; "I acquit her . 
she is too much of a child, too quiet and horm- 



" Who mentioned her, pray," said Fermor, be- 
coming calm. "Did I ? Then pray don't say so. 
Too much of a child ! There's a nice alliance for 
a man that might rise in the world. A man that 
at this moment might be high in India, and talked 
of. I declare, Carter, I could sit and cry when I 
think of all I have lost and been obliged to give 
up, and for such a set. You know what I am, 
and what is in me. Isn't it a cruel thing? And 
Sir Hopkins knows, yet I must say has behaved 



156 Never Forgotten, 



nobly; but what could he do? *A child,' and 
^ perfectly harmless,' in India! And after all this, 
to dare to be playing their wretched little games 
upon me." 

This was a tremendous burst for Fermor, 

" I must say," said the major, calmly, " their 
proceedings are quite beyond me. It ts a game, I 
tell you candidly. I have reason to know it." 

" You have? " said Fermor, eagerly; "show it 
to me. Prove it." 

The major shook his head. "I can only say," 
he said, "that I met that very Mr. Hanbury with, 
as you say. Miss Violet Manuel . ^and had a little 
talk with him previously." 

" He was in spirits," said Fermor. 

" How did you know that ? " said the major, 
astonished. "So he was. He threw out some 
hints. You know he is rather of an open nature. 
By the way, he seemed to hint at a sort of jus- 
tification of himself, as he said you had used him 
very ill." 

*^ I suppose so," said Fermor. " What is he 
aggrieved about ? Good gracious I is not this a free 
country? Who forces her, or who is forcing? 



I 



Fauft and Mephiftopheles. 157 

If they want him, let them take him, in God's 
name. Let her say so at once, and let them' have 
done with these wretched tricks. Tm sick of 
them." 

This was the irritation ctf, say, a month back, 
all burst forth at one moment. The major paused. 
" I am glad you have spoken to me so frankly," 
said he. " I should advise some decided course. A 
clear, final, and positive explanation. I shall come 
here again, late, if you will allow me." 

The major was gone, the darkness was coming 
on yet stronger. It was past five o'clock, and 
here now was his man. Bates, entering with the 
lamp, and the post. Absolutely a whole mail of 
letters for Captain Fermor. "And here, sir," 
added Bates, " is a letter as was just left by Miss 
ManueFs maid." The demeanour of Miss Manuel's 
maid, had she to make such an announcement with 
a reference to Mr. Bates, would have been conscious 
and awkward. But Mr. Bates was a soldier and 
unmoved. Fermor, however, gave preference to 
the regular mail. 

One from Lady Laura. One from his army 
agent. Several from tailors, perfumers, besides 



158 Never Forgotten. 



circulars, and a large envelope directed in Sir 
Hopkins's well-known official hand. Nervously, 
though he expected nothing from it, Fermor drew 
his chair in and began to read. It was very 
closely written, and with a heart which beat 
quicker and quicker with every line, he read it 
through. Towards the end, "he rose and took a 
short hurried march backward and forward, then 
read on ; when he had finished, there was a strange 
look in his eyes. 

He rang the bell. "Go for Major Carter at 
once," he said to Mr. Bates ; " do not lose a mo- 
ment." 

He did not open Lady Laura's epistle, though it 
contained news that young Piper had, the night 
before, offered himself to Alicia Mary at the 
hotel ; nor the mixed crowd of tailors' and other 
tradesmen's. He read his relative's letter over 
again. 

The major came. He had had a letter, too, 
from the same writer, but he did not mention it. 
Another- time he would have been all amazement, 
delight, and surprise. Now he took the letter 
gravely which Fermor put into his hand. 



Fauft and Mephi/lopheks. 159 

" Eead it out," said Fennor. 
He dropped into a chair, and the major, leaning 
his face over the lamp, read out the letter : 

" Sunday Evening. 

"My dear Chables, . I am starting, sur- 
rounded by boxes and packages, but must find a 
moment to write to you on a very important 
matter. 

"I have just heard of the death of old Colin 
Mackenzie, who has been treasurer of my govern- 
ment for the last forty years. The place is in my 
gift, and must be worth at the very least fifteen 
hundred a year. As my first bit of patronage, I 
offer it to you. 

" You must think of this seriously, and decide at 
once. The little office I spoke of before was not, I 
admit, sufficient to tempt a man of parts to change 
his life; but this is a different question. The 
position is very delicate, considering the way you 
are situated. You will do me the justice to say 
that I never, by persuasion or advice, have 
attempted to interfere with your plans of life; 
but, on this occasion, I must speak plainly. This 



160 Never Forgotten. 



is really a great opening ; it may lead to all sorts 
of things ; and, if I were in your place, I would 
not hesitate a second ; but it is for you to decide. 

" As for that family for whom you seem to have 
a sort of infatuation, you know my opinion. If I 
had time, I could tell you some little matters I 
have picked up here. As for the child herself, I 
would pity her, if I did not think she was a little 
too clever. My dear boy, these things occur every 
day. Young St. Eouser . ^Lord Nimmo's eldest . 
behaved badly, as it is called, to Vansittart's 
daughter, and there were tears and broken hearts ; 
but in a week she had accepted old Bob Major of 
the Blues. She had been protecting herself all the 
while. 

" Or again, why be in a hurry ? If you cannot 
live ^-ithout this soft innocent, why not put it off a 
year or so, until you look about you? The thing 
is common enough. She can do, I suppose, as other 
young ladies have done before, and her people have 
no right to be taking extra airs on themselves. 
My dear Charles, you are a man of sense, and I 
have no right to tell you to do this, or do that ; 
but you must decide at oncey as the post is for some 
one else, and the appointment must be made before 



Faujl and Mephijlopheles. 161 

I go out. I shall wait one day . twelve hours . at 
Paris, for your answer by telegraph. Direct to 
the Hotel Mirabeau. 

" Yours truly, 

" Hopkins Pocock. 
" P.S. . ^The packet leaves Marseilles on Friday 
at noon. If you accept, you would have almost 
time to sail with me. Tuesday, London (arrange 
with War-office . sell your commission. You will 
find a note at my rooms for Sir Charles, one of 
my oldest friends) ; Wednesday, Paris; Thursday^ 
Marseilles. You will find me at the Empereur. 1 
have just met old Lord Welbeck on the stairs." 

Major Carter lifted his face from the lamp. 
There was a pause for a moment ; then he said, 
" A kind, sensible letter. A judicious letter." 

" But," said Fermor, " assuming all that, what 
am I to dot" 

" I should say you had no choice. It is all de- 
cided for you here," said the major, tapping the 
letter. "Good gracious, Fermor I" he continued, 
suddenly becoming warm, "what are you about? 
Are you going to ' let this chivalrous sort of 
indulgence for a set of people . forgive me . ^who 

VOL. II. M 



162 Never Forgotten. 



have treated you infamously . ^yes, infamously . 
wreck your whole life? I can't stand by and see 
it ; I can not. Your friends must interfere, even 
at the risk of offending you," 

" Yes, yes," said Fermor, hastily, " you are 
right. They have no title to expect anything 
from me." 

" It is splendid, a magnificent opening," said the 
major ; " what I always prophesied." 

" Yes," said Fermor, absently, " they deserve 
nothing from me . ^nothing. The only thing is that 
poor, poor girl." 

" Poor girl I" said Carter, with a meaning look 
that conveyed volumes ; " but no matter. Besides, 
what does Sir Hopkins say 1 Could anything be 
more delicate, considerate? Is there any hurry?" 

" To be sure. No . certainly," said Fermor, 
hastily. 

" I tell you what," said Carter, slowly, " you 
should go without delay. This very night. The 
express passes through at midnight." 

Fermor started a little guiltily. Perhaps some 
such notion had been in his thoughts. 

"Yes," said the other, quickly, "the best, the 
kindest, and most charitable /course. I know what 



. Fatd/i and Mephiftopheles. 163 

your own generous instincts would suggest. But 
it is time that your friends, if they have any in- 
fluence, should interfere, and act for you." 

" But that poor Violet," said Fermor, moving 
about restlessly. 

" It is of her we are thinking, are we not ?" said 
the major. " Is it not best to spare her the agita- 
tion, the fuss, and all the rest of it ? It is the best 
opportunity you could have. It is like a providence. 
They have their little party (a woman's mind is 
easily filled), and their music, and our friend . er . 
Mr. Hanbury." 

" Ah, true !" said Fermor ; " quite right. I did 
not think of that. I really begin to think it would 
be all for the best," 

" Now that is sensible, and manly, and, I must 
say, most considerate. If you would care for it, 
we could go together. I have business that will 
take me to Town later, so it is only anticipating." 

" O, thanks, thanks," said Fermor ; " I should 
so like it." He had been rather shrinking from the 
gloomy journey by himself. 

" Is it settled then ? Yes ? Very well, I shall 
be back in an hour," said Major Carter. 



m2 



164 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH. 

violet's pabtt, 

Fermob, left to himself, was in a whirl of ex- 
citement. His heart actually beat as he thought 
of the daring move he was about to make. Still 
he shrank from it ; it seemed ungentlemanly. Above 
all, he thought of Violet's anxious face, appealing 
piteously. The crust of the fashionable world had 
not yet so wholly covered up his heart. For a 
moment he thought there was "no hurry," and 
that the most generous course was the best. But 
Bs soon as he had taken this view, he began . ^what 
is not uncommon with uncertain minds . to see the 
merits of the opposite course. It was quixotic; 
they were provident adventurers looking after their 



Violefs Party. 165 

interests, and, above all, there was that soft Violet 
skilfully furnishing herself with a useful reserve 
in case of his failure. And thus he swung round 
indignantly to the other view. Then, through the 
clouds, broke out the soft, appealmg face of Violet, 
and her " little ways," and before he had done with 
that vision the major returned. He found Fermor 
sitting in the chair by the lamp, just as he had 
left him. The major had on his travelling-cap 
and cloak. 

"All packed!" he said. "Not much time . 
half-past eight." 

" I don't know what to do," said Fermor, im- 
patiently. " It does seem so heartless, does it 
not f Poor, poor girl ; when they tell her in the 
morning !" 

" These feelings are most creditable," said the 
major, calmly. "I quite sympathise with them. 
But recollect what Sir Hopkins says, and what 
occurred to me too. You only put off . ^not break 
off. My dear Fermor, take my word for it, they 
are well used to this sort of thing . ^that clever 
sister and that unlicked brother." 

" By the way," said Fermor, starting, " there 
was a letter came from him; where is it?" 



166 Never Forgotten. 



He looked for it and opened it. The major 
saw Fermor^s brow contracting as he read; but 
did not know, though he guessed, that it was to the 
old tune, of which that brother was so fond. It 
hoped imperiously that Fermor would consider the 
matter seriously, and make up his mind; that 
these delays were scarcely respectful to his sister, 
and to them all; that her health was suffering; 
that young Manuel must be excused if, once for 
all, he required a definite settlement of the whole 
question that night. The whole key was impe- 
rious, and, to Fermor's mind, insolent. It was 
fatally mal a propos. 

He tossed down the missive, and said, " My mind 
is made up. I shall go at once. The colonel is 
sure to give me leave." 

At the moment Fermor flung down the letter, 
Violet was in her room dressing for the little fes- *** 
tival. Her sister and the faithful maid were 
assisting. The faithful maid was on her knees, 
busy with the skirt. Both these assistants seemed 
to know that much depended on the work of this 
night. The maid having, indeed, foretold certain 
success, was calm and confident. 



Viokes Party. 167 

Violet was before the glass, flushed and excited. 
She had not a particle of vanity, but she dressed 
herself to-night as though she had been another 
being . ^say a sister. She was nervously vivaciouis, 
and talked with a little rambling. She came down 
at last, and, as she entered their httle drawing- 
room, felt herself all panting ; for she knew she was 
now embarked fairly in the scheme she had under- 
taken, and that the time was at hand. 

" You look charming," her sister said, going up 
to her; "so bright and sparkling, and in such 
spirits." The sister had said the same to the maid, 
and the maid had agreed with the sister. 

" Do you think he will like me ?" said Violet, in 
a little rapture. " O, you shall see to-night how 
he will behave . that is, if I have any power with 
him." And her face fell a little wearily, for her 
head was confused and her brain overcharged with 
little speeches and little tactics, which she had been 
planning all day. 

" He cannot resist you, dearest," said her sister^ 
kissing her. " He never can." 

The little rooms had been laid out artistically 
with flowers and modest decorations. There was 
the foreign air and the foreign touch over all. 



168 Never Forgotten. 



There were only a few people to come after all. 
The fact was, as Fermor had put it, they knew bnt 
few, and nearly all those few had left Eastport. 
After many weary searches and beating up of 
districts, the entertainment was to resolve itself 
into such homely elements as the representative 
clergyman, the representative doctor, the represen- 
tative solicitor, the representative stray young men 
and old maiden ladies of the place, shrubs never 
transplanted, and to whom a little feast of this 
sort was as water in sultry weather. It was now 
ten o'clock, and they . and Mr. Hanbury . came 
with provincial punctuality. 

She was very nervous, and thought how she 
would begin, or what was the first of those pain- 
fully planned operations. Her little head was 
miserably confused. But she had not time to 
think. For here was the representative clergyman 
with boundless wife and daughters ; and after hini 
the doctor; and, following, the choir of maiden 
ladies and debatable youths, scarcely boys, nor yet 
wholly men. Yet these latter were negotiable, 
and the two or three girls who leavened the com- 
' munity welcomed them cheerfully, 
. Major Carter and Captain Fermor would, as of 



Videfs Party. 169 

course, come flashing in late. For such brilliants 
a dull background or setting was necessary. Yet 
already had a white-faced pendule (a gilt classical 
lady, sitting on a metallic sofa, with the dial be- 
tween the legs of the sofa) given a smart " ting," 
meaning the half-hour. Young Brett, faithful as 
a terrier, had come, and was keeping close to Miss 
Manuel, with his faithful terrier eyes fixed on her 
face. Another officer or two, reluctantly asked by 
Fermor, gave "an air" to the party, as a master 
would give a touch to a drawing. Those gentle- 
men were looking round with the surprise and 
wonder of Europeans newly landed on an Indian 
island. They seemed to keep together, too, for 
protection against the natives. Miss Manuel flit- 
ting about, with Young Brett following, tried to 
break up this confederacy. They would not go 
away; yet remained imder a sense of injury at 
having been trepanned into the situation. Still 
Pauline contrived to stir these elements of her 
little pot-au-feu. She finally broke up the crowd, 
and brought about temporary alliances between 
the newly-arrived Europeans and the daughters of 
the natives. She was at the piano, out of the 
room, in the room, and everywhere. When the 



170 Never Forgotten. 



dial between the sofa legs of the pendule gave out 
eleven "tings," Violet's face began to show some 
of the old lines of anxiety. As little processions 
entered the room, of ices, teas, and cakes, she 
started and looked towards the door. The opening 
of her little campaign was being too long delayed. 
Her heart was growing sick, and she heard a mili- 
tary European say aloud, with the freedom of his 
tribe, " What the deuce can have become of Fer? 
mor?" 

Below stairs others had been wondering also, 
but for this reason : that Mr. Bates, who had 
readily promised his services with trays and other 
heavy objects, had appointed to be there at ten 
" sharp," as he put it. Ten "sharp" had long gone 
by ; it was now more than eleven sharp. No Mr. 
Bates. Much troubled in mind by this, desertion, 
and laying it to the account of death or accident, 
the faithful maid, Jane, "slipped on" her bonnet 
and shawl, and flitted away up to Brown's-terrace. 
When the door was opened she asked for Captain 
Fermor. He had gone up to the barracks . ^taken 
his things, too . so had Mr. Bates. But a note 
had been left, which was to be sent up in the 
morning to Mrs. Manuel's. Here it was. 



Vioiefs Party. 171 



"Wondering, much mystified, and not at all 
** seeing her way," for so clever a fairy god- 
mother, the maid went home. She could not get 
further than that Mr. Bates and Captain Fermor 
had gone to their barracks for the better facilities 
of dressing. 

By the time she reached home it was long past 
twelve o'clock. The brother, Louis, had been 
biting his Ups ; his heart was full of fury at this 
public slight, as it appeared to be. Certain of the 
elderly maidens had said to Pauline in a friendly 
endearing way, " How was it that Captain Fermor 
was not here, my deai?? " Violet, in such distress 
that she had flung away all thought of acting, sat 
with her eyes fixed, worn, and hopeless, on the 
door, and her figure drooped, her fine clothes 
hanging about her, Hanbury watching her with a 
puzzled interest. As the French pendule " tinged" 
half-past twelve, she started as if it were the bell 
for execution. Another bell rang at the hall, and 
she went hurriedly over to the window. It was 
the maid, and Violet saw the note in her hand. In 
great trepidation she almost ran out of the room. 

At that moment the London express had halted 
for refreshment forty miles away. Fermor and his 



172 Never Forgotten^ 



friend Carter, wrapped in cloaks, were standing on 
the platform, under an illuminated clock. 

The maid tripped up-stairs, bonnet and shawl on. 
Violet met her at the door. 

" Give . ^give it to me," she said, wildly. 

" All quite right, miss," said the maid, confiden- 
tially ; " they will be here presently." 

The door was wide open, and every one of the 
little company . ^the Europeans, natives, all . ^heard 
a slow, sad, agonising cry outside, and Young 
Brett ran out just in time to catch her in his arms. 
Many crowded out and saw the hapless child, with 
what seemed death in her fdce, and one arm out- 
stretched, holding tightly the fatal sheet of paper. 

In a moment they had all poured out on the 
little landing, with a curiosity which overbore all 
decent restraint. The girls crushed and rustled to 
see. " What is it ? what was it ? what is in the 
letter ? has he broken it off ? gone off, has he ? " 
One, indeed, had artfully glanced at the open 
paper in that now rigid little hand. The story 
was, indeed, known, or as good as known, in a few 
seconds. 

There lay the poor child in her flowers and 
tulle, ghastly white, relaxed, and, as it seemed, 



VioUes Party. 173 

dying, supported by Hanbury, who, bursting 
through the little crowd, had taken her from Young 
Brett. In a few moments more they carried her 
up, her little finery all torn into shreds, as it was 
trod on by those who carried her, amidst the de- 
spairing faces of her own family. The crowd, 
transformed into a " low " crowd by the greed of 
curiosity, crept half way up the stairs, and listened. 
But Hanbury, coming down, bluntly and roughly 
and without ceremony, cleared them out of the 
house. Only the representative doctor . ^who had 
come as a guest . ^remained professionally; 

However terrible such a crisis, shattering the 
brain even as a blow of a bludgeon does the skull 
. ^it seldom kills. Later on that night, or morn- 
ing, she opened her eyes on the anxious faces 
gathered round her, shivered, shrieked again, sub- 
sided soon into low sighs and quiet moans. The 
representative doctor then stepped in, and brought 
such remedies as he could apply. 

At that moment the express, a hundred and 
twenty miles away, was rolling into London. It 
was a cold morning. The colder grey was break- 
ing. For the last hour, under the pleasant en- 
couragement of the major, Fermor had ceased to 



174 Never Forgotten. 



look back, and was beginning to look forward to a 
gay and brilliant future. The little fibres whose 
parting had caused him a little pain, were joining 
again very fast. They had even had some snatches 
of sleep. 

" They must have had a merry night of it/* said 
the major, as they went to claim their luggage ; 
"much more so than we poor travellers . eh? 
Goodness I how sleepy I am I And our friend 
Hanbury has not been making good use of his 
timfr-^h?" 



A Meeting. 175 



CHAPTER THE TWELFTH. 

A MEETING. 

All that long day Fermor had hardly tune to 
think. At the Horse Guards. at the Indian out- 
fitter's . at his tailor's . at his family's. He lived 
almost in cabs. He saw that Sir Charles who was 
**one of his relative's oldest friends/' and was re- 
ceived with unoflScial cordiality. " Glad to do any- 
thing for my old chum, Sir Hopkins. Besides, you 
have had no leave for eighteen months. Severe 
accident, too. Very wfell. Leave directions with 
your agents, and we shall take care of you." 

Later he saw his mother. Lady Laura. 

The "girls" were in the Park with ^^ Young 
Piper," riding th^ coursers of Young Piper. That 



176 Never Forgotten. 



youth was, as it were, drunk with his infatuation. 
Lady Laura welcomed her son as though she were 
an ordinary mother of flesh and blood, gave him a 
really maternal embrace, and approached nearer to 
weeping than she had ever done in her life. 

" My dear boy," she said, as he told her his story, 
"I am indeed proud of you. This is a brave, 
manly, and sensible course. I always said I ad- 
mire your resolution and self-denial. I do indeed. 
Look at that child Piper, that is running after 
Alicia Mary, like a weak schoolboy. But I said 
all along that you were following out some Uttle 
plan of your own ; and I was not far out." Fermor 
was a little elated with these praises, and had a 
sort of dim impression that '^ all along" his hand 
directed the course of events. " As for the girl. 
who, I am told, is clever enough . ^would you, my 
dear Charles, leave it to me? Shall I write a kind, 
friendly note, to say the thing must not be thought 
of for the present, and that if you are both in the 
same mind when you return, it can all begin again! 
That is the proper way, Charles, and a very good 
test it will be of her smcerity. Young Monboddo 
went to his regiment at Ceylon under exactly such 
an arrangement with that country girl, Hemans; 



A Meeting. 177 

but, my dear, when he came back, he found her 
Lady Nugent." 

By the evening he had done a wonderful day's 
business. He met Major Carter by appointment 
at Starridge's, the correct bachelor^s hotel in Bond- 
street, and they dined together. At eight they were 
driving up to the South-Eastem Bailway . ^among 
the lamps . ^to go down by the mail to Dover. 

'^ I met," said the major, as they got out, " some 
common friends to-day. I did not tell you, as it 
was to be a little surprise for you." 

Fermor was glad. He was growing gloomy and 
morose as he thought of this second night's journey 
to be taken alone. The major was to stay in 
London. 

" Here they are," said he, as they emerged on 
the busy platform; and Fermor saw a tall stiff 
figure in shadow, and a muffled lady on his arm. 
"Here are our friends," said the major. "De- 
lightful, is it not ? Going the same way, too. quite 
a coincidence." 

Perhaps it was. The Carlays were going to the 
south of France after some days' stay in London. 
Now, indeed, the gloomy prison-like journey, 
which he had shrunk from, would become a little 

VOL. II. N 



178 Never Forgotten. 



blue boudoir, well lit, comfortable, and cheerful. 
This simple girl would entertain him with her 
unconcealed worship. The act of making a 
journey together is a link of sympathy ; for there 
are common troubles and a common undertaking 
to be got through together. 

And so the bell rang, and the night-mail flew 
down to Dover, past many pointsmen, who had 
come out of their hutches on duty, and saw the 
cozy well-lighted blue chambers flit by ; in one of 
which, Captain Fermor, his knees wrapped in his 
rug, was stooping over, talking with great anima- 
tion of voice and gesture to the lady next him. 
Then came the cold night air on Dover pier, and 
the Calais packet, and Paris in the grey of the 
morning, and the great Boulevards, with the trees 
and the white palax;es, and the men in blouses 
going to work, and the great door of the great 
hotel, which a portier, who never slept, swung 
slowly open. Then the sleepy travellers went .to 
their rest . ^for an hour or so. 

Fermor often boasted of his " iron constitution," 
and by ten or eleven o'clock was asking to see 
"his Excellency" Sir Hopkins Pocock, who was 
breakfasting in a private room of the hotel. 



A Meeting. 179 

The welcome he received from that high public 
servant was wonderfully cordial. " My dear, dear 
boy," he said, *^this is right, now. I am proud of 
you. You were made for the service. I knew 
you would turn out of the right sort. This is our 
hard fate. We are obliged to pocket our nicest 
feelings for the public. Breakfasted ? No ? Ring, 
please." 

Sir Hopkins was a Frenchman in Paris, and 
could speak French. 

They breakfasted together, spent the day very 
pleasantly going about Paris, Sir Hopkins leaning 
on his arm; dined at the Three Brothers cafe; 
went to the Opera; and walked after the Opera 
along the Arabian Nights' Entertainment, trans- 
lated into the Boulevard des Italiens. Fermor 
felt pensive among these glories, yet was not dis- 
turbed in mind . great dreams of ambition were 
.filling his soul. 

In the morning they were gone, flying down 
through the delightful wine comitries to Lyons, 
seeming to breathe the bouquet of Burgundies 
and other choice vintages as they passed. De- 
lightfully musical names rang in their ears. They 
were at Lyons that night, and there was light 
n2 



180 Never Forgotten. 



enough^ as they crossed the airy bridge, to see the 
molten silver of the Ehdne below. They slept 
soundly through the night, and in the morning were 
breakfasting at the Empereur, at Marseilles. The 
hum and clatter of the Canebifere was tmder their 
windows. The gay parti-coloured sails before the 
shop windows were fluttering below them. The 
delightful quay of La Joliette was but a few yards 
away, where the ships of all countries, and the 
sailors of all countries, and the merchants and the 
wares, and the voices and the dresses of all, were 
as gay and bright under the sim as the market 
scene in Masaniello. The steamer was to sail at 
noon, as, indeed, were many more steamers, and 
the commissionnaire was busy in their interest. 

"By the way, my dear boy," said Sir Hopkins, 
picking his teeth, " (I have sent for the cab), I 
found a letter here this morning. Sent on, you 
know. It is rather awkward. That post I spoke 
of . ^Mackenzie's . ^you know." 

" Yes," said Fermor, nervously. " Good gra- 
cious ! nothing wrong, I hope ? " 

" Oh, it will all come right, I am sure. But, it 
now seems (I don't understand it, I am sure), the 
home government claims the appointment." 

"What!" said Termor, breaking out hotly. 



A Meeting. 181 

" Do you mean to tell me that, after all I have 

done, and been made to do ^*' 

" It is outrageous, as you say," said Sir Hopkins, 
coolly ; " they grasp at everything. The worst 
part is, they have a sort of a shadow of a title, you 
see . some arrangement or composition. But, of 
course, it must be looked into." 

"But," said Fermor, pacing up and down ex- 
citedly, " this is very odd . looks very odd, sir 1 I 
don't understand it at all. I have been led away 
depending on assurances, and now it seems . ^I 
must tell you, sir . it has a very curious look, sir." 
^ " I am not accountable, Charles. You must 
deal with the home government. It is they who 
are grasping at your office. You know there is 
time yet to withdraw." 

" Ah ! it is easy, sir, to say there is time to with- 
draw. At this place . at this time . after sacri- 
ficing everything on the faith of this . my word . 

my honour ^" 

" Your honour ! Good God 1 " said Sir Hopkins, 
starting up, and nearly overthrowing his chair. 
" Your honour, Charles ! I hope not. O, I hope 
not. You are not in earnest? No, I see you are 
not." 

Fermor hung his head. It almost seemed the 



182 Never Forgotten. 



bargain of Faust and his Mentor^ done in water- 
colours. There was a panse. 

" Well, I don't mean that," he said. " But, sir, 
sir," he added, sadly, ^' how could you deceive me 
in this way?" 

" Come, come," said Sir Hopkins, in a friendly, 
hearty manner, " I allow for this excitement, 
Charles. It is quite natural, and I r^pect you for 
it. There are other things going, and we shall make 
out something for you. You know," added Sir 
Hopkins, smiling, " it would hardly do to re-present 
yourself after all this fuss and esclandre. As the 
Frenchmen say, ridicule always kills. I declare," he 
added, looking down over the balcony, " here is the 
cab. We really ought to pay the bill now. Yes, 
and put the final touches to the baggage. Will 
you look after those servants, like a good boy? 
AUons." 

Fermor bowed his head and said not a word. In 
a few minutes more he was driven away to the 
quay, and was on board the Indian mail-boat. 

The life on board the Mediterranean steamer 
was epicurean. There were bright days and cobalt 
seas. Youth was at the prow, and Pleasure at the 
helm. It was a gay voyage. 



Fading Out. 183 



CHAPTEE THE THIRTEENTH. 

FADING OUT. 

At the very time that Captain Fermor (who 
must fill up his day), seated on a camp-stool on 
deck, w^s gossiping agreeably to an Indian lady 
whose husband was below at cards, a dreary de- 
solation and hopless sorrow was falling on the 
Manuels' house. 

Violet rose up after the shock sooner than her 
family dared to hope. For a week the very acute- 
ness of the suffering, the excitement and specula- 
tion it brought with it, carried her forward. Her 
sister, worn away with night watching, had whis- 
pered desperately, "You must not give way, 
darling; keep away the thought; fight it off!" 



184 Never Forgotten. 



For she knew, if it once seized on her, the talons 
would sink deeper and deeper, and never let her 
go. She said this over and over again, with a sort 
of despair . almost with menace; and Violet, al- 
ready stunned and exhausted, actually found her- 
self avoiding the thought by a sort of horror. 

It was when she came down again into the old 
routine of life . ^white, worn, shrunk, and with a 
timid, cowering look, as if she expected that the 
blow would come again from some imcertain quarter 
. that the change was seen in all its dismal force. 
They could all have wept over her. And when 
sister and mother clung about her, and pressed her 
to them, they remarked a sort of insensibility that 
did not seem to require consolation. 

" I am getting better," she said, looking at them 
with a little air of resolution. " I am indeed. I 
shall gradually learn not to think of it, and then it 
will wear itself out." 

Wear itself out ! Alas ! There was something 
busy at that work already: thoughts in myriads, 
seething and bubbling night and day . thoughts of 
fearful self-reproach, as if this business had been 
the work of her own folly . ^thoughts of lost hap- 
piness, sheer hopelessness, and a cloud of despair 



Fading Out. 185 

in the west, coming on slowly, though now no 
bigger than a man's hand. With such fierce con- 
tests the little delicate frame was wearing, though 
slowly. The sheath was fretting away. And, be- 
sides, there was the struggle of concealment . 
which was, indeed, the only purpose that kept her 
up . not to hurt those kind, miserable, interested 
faces that were turned to her a hundred times in 
the day. 

The suffering was, indeed, almost divided. On 
Mrs. Manuel and the others the blow had fallen so 
tremendously, the crash had been so bewildering, 
so unexpected, so wholesale and complete, that they 
did not even dream of looking back, or think of a 
remedy. They might as well have been looking 
back after an avalanche, to where their house once 
stood. It could hardly be called hopelessness, for 
they had never dreamed for a moment of hoping. 
The whole thing was too plain. And now all they 
thought of was saving what was left to them. 

What coldness and almost rawness in the house ! 
As though there was a dusty lonely hearth in 
every room, and the fires were never to be lighted 
again. The terrible gauntness of life, that sets in 
after the death of any one that has been loved^ 



186 Never Forgotten. 



seemed to be present. Yet Violet, with a cheer- 
fulness that absolutely made the hearts of others 
ache, went hither and thither with what seemed a 
newly-found zest for the practical duties of life. 
No one, however, could see how it would end, 
as yet. 

As the Eastport season was now over, and the 
town itself almost emptied, this little catastrophe 
came in seasonably enough for the natives. Even 
in the matter of news it was believed that Provi- 
dence tempered the wind; but this sending so 
precious a store did, indeed, seem almost a special 
deliverance. The good folks were grateful, and 
the "witnesses" to the scene . unhappily too few 
in proportion to the wants of the population . were 
held even in a competitive esteem. Even in com- 
munities of greater importance such a business 
rarely takes place. It was canvassed in many 
shapes, with eagerness, humour, anger; but in 
most instances with satisfaction. 

Young Brett . as indeed might be expected. 
showed out in brightest and most faithful colours. 
More honest and serviceable devotion could not be 
conceived. He took it grievously to heart, yet with 
divided emotions ; for he could not bring himself 



Fading Out. 187 

to believe much ill of his friend, whom he clung to 
so loyally. He charitably held to there being 
foreign influences at work, and to Fermor's being 
in some sort the victim of destiny. Having arrived, 
through many painful stages of reasoning, at this 
conclusion, he was at liberty to indulge his sym- 
pathy. How his heart was wrung for that suffer- 
ing family I How, with a deeply dejected face, he 
came there when he thought he could, and as 
often as he could, with decency I And when 
admitted he could have wished himself away, he 
found himself so dull and clumsy. He would have 
given worlds to have been allowed to show his 
deep, deep feelings in some bold, substantial 
shape; for what were words . ^which, after all, 
he did not possess, and could not buy. He thought 
faintly and remotely of the gun, so satisfactory in 
the instance of men. He had always found it the 
fullest and happiest exponent. Here he saw it 
was wholly out of place, but the idea in his mind 
was as of something analogous to the gun. This 
lay on his mind, and the honest child laboured 
ninch, and with real distress, at what he called 
seeing his way, and saw, at last, that he must 
bound his wishes by mere sympathy. 



I 
188 Never Forgotten. i 



For Pauline he felt most, and was so earnest 
that she should employ him in some way, that she 
felt for him, and did give him some trifling com- 
niission. He would have been proud to have been 
used, as errand-boy even. His good terrier face, 
full of sympathy, brought a sort of comfort to the 
house. 

Someway he seemed more suited to the present 
tone of affairs than John Hanbury, who came too, 
and tried hard to make himself useful and accept- 
able. Yet he felt . and it was felt in the house, 
felt very unjustly, too . ^that he was associated with 
the late business. His honest face, full of un- 
bounded sympathy, kept alive what all were 
anxious to put away, like the vacant chair of a 
lost relative, or a picture. Such a place should 
always be filled up speedily, and the picture re- 
moved. He could not bring himself to see it in 
this way, and was, in fact, longing and praying 
for some opening in which he could prove himself 
devoted. 

Those weeks were indeed an awful time. The 
weary look in Violet's face almost shocked him. 
About the twentieth evening of the twentieth day 
Hanbury found her alone in the drawing-room, 



Fading Out. 189 

and with the best intentions in the world began to 
offer some earnest good advice, but which he 
handled clumsily. 

It was to the strain of " going away," of " keep- 
ing up," of "having a duty to oneself, and the 
friends who loved her so," with the other pla- 
titudes, about as useful and practical as though 
one were to say in the case of a broken blood- 
vessel, " Do make an effort, and the bleeding will 
stop." He spoke with a trembling voice. " For 
God's sake, do, dearest Miss Violet. It is killing us 
all to see the way you look. For all our sakes, do, 
I implore you ; and there are some of us who would 
die for you." 

Violet listened a little vacantly at first, passed 
her hand over her face, tossed her head, and 
laughed a faint laugh. "Why do you talk of 
dying? " she said ; " pray don't mention the word. 
We have wonderful dispositions. I will get 
mamma to go somewhere. I should Uke a plea- 
sant watering-place, with plenty of people ; some- 
thing gay, for this is growing dull. So dull," 
added Violet, forcing the muscles of her Ups into a 

smile, "thatr.that ^" 

Hanbuiy was looking at her, wondering and 



190 Never Forgotten. 



terrified, when she broke out suddenly, covering 
up her face : 

" I can't, I carUt any longer ; I can't indeed. 
Go away, leave me . do. let every one leave me. 
O!" and she was tossing on the sofa, gasping 
and sobbing in a sort of frantic tempest of grief. 
Hanbury rushed to the bell, rushed to the door. 
They were all in the room in a moment, round the 
unhappy child. Hanbury fled to the open street, 
beating his forehead as he went. More of the old 
clumsiness ! He could go and drown himself. 

Posting along, and not caring where he went, 
he suddenly saw Colonel Bolstock,Fermor's colonel, 
riding by ; rather, he saw a horse of his own which 
the colonel had bought. The colonel pulled up : 
fgr a little talk about a horse, in the presence of a 
horse, was hke having a cigar. An idea suddenly 
flashed upon Hanbury : not often had he such in- 
spirations. 

" Doing well," said the colonel, looking down 
the flanks of his horse ; ^' turning out very fairly 
indeed." 

" Tell me," said Hanbury, hastily ; " Fermor^s 
gone, I know, but what time did he say he would 
be back?" 



Fading Out. 191 

" I gave him ten days' leave," said the colonel ; 
*^ by the way, there's a horse of his ^" 

^ There, that will do," said Hanbury, turning 
back ; " I must go " And he was gone, 
leaving the colonel looking sourly after him. Here 
was news indeed ; stupid of them all not to have 
thought of that. After all, Fermor was true . 
called suddenly away. Above all, that he should 
be the bearer! This would redeem months of 
clumsiness. 

He rushed up-stairs and plunged into the 
room again. Violet was still working in hyste- 
rical sobbing. The anxious faces were about 
her. 

"I have got some news," said Hinbury, his 
great eyes twinkling with honest delight. They 
all started. " Yes, some news," he said, " at least. 
He's only gone for ten days." 

Violet flew to her mother with a cry. " I knew 
itl I knew it! I knew it!" she almost shrieked. 
*^0, manmial mammal" and she fell on her 
mother's shoulder, weeping and sobbing, and laugh- 
ing again. 

Pauline looked at Hanbury doubtfully, almost 
angrily. "What is this story?" she said, in a 



192 Never Forgotten. 



half whisper; "you should not have done it. Tell 
me about it." 

" No, no," said he, scarcely listening, but looking 
anxiously at Violet ; " it is all certain . ^the colonel 
himself told me. And I tell you what," he added, 
with excitement, " this night I am going up to 
London, will find him out there, teU him of our 
poor darling child, and return with joyful news. 
Perhaps bring him back I There ! " 
Pauline shook her head sorrowfully. 
He saw opposition, and said, piteously, " Let me 
go. Do ! I must, indeed. It will be doing some- 
thing." 

It did strike PauKne that it would, after all, be 
doing something. Anything . and the bare ex- 
pectancy of anything . ^was better than the fatal 
waste of hopeless despondency into which they 
were now plunged. 

She said no more, and Hanbury went his way. 
Alas 1 if he had only waited to hear that mounted 
colonel finish his sentence leisurely, he would have 
been told of a letter which had arrived at the 
barracks the day before. He had not waited. 

Hanbury came back when he was ready. Violet 
was in a nervous flutter, saying over and over 



Fading Out. 193 

again, with a frantic delight, " I knew it 1 I knew 
it ! What did I tell you all ? " 

" Don't reckon too much, darling, on these 
things. How it goes to my heart to damp your 
spirits . ^but don't." 

" Nor do I reckon on too much, mamma. But 
now I have a conviction, a certain conviction. I 
knew it . I said it." (Poor child, she never had 
said it, indeed.) " Dear Mr. Hanbury, my own\ 
true friend, you know me, you understand me. t 
always believed it. Go, now. Don't lose a secondL 
You will be too late, indeed you will. He will come 
back with you if he can ; if not, make him write. 
Be sure you do." 

Violet's face was earnest and wild, as she im- 
pressed these instructions on him. 

" I must go up now," she said, the tired look 
spreading like a film upon her face, " for I have 
gone through a good deal lately, thinking over all 
this. And I have been very fooKsh ; but you must 
own that his going away so suddenly on that night 
.it looked ^" 

Her eyes began to swim, and in a moment she 
was weeping silently and bitterly, but without her 
old agitation. And her mother had put her amxi^ 

VOL. n. o 



194 Never Forgotten. 



round her, and aaid, strainmg her close, as if some 
one were about to take her awaj f rooa h^: : 
" My ovra dear, darling, darling child I'' 
And thus Hanbuiy started after this fatal will- 
o'-the-wisp. He got to London, and there was told 
the truth. 

Fermor at that moment was seeing the sun rise 
on the blue waters of the Mediterranean with fine 
effect. The packet was listlessly ghding over the 
sea. It was charming dolce far niente. 

The little romance he had passed through came 
back on him with a gentle pain, not wholly un- 
pleasant. "Poor, poor Violet 1" he said, "I feel 
some reproaches of conscience. I do indeed. She 
was 80 gentle. Only for that set about her . ^they 
were turning her into a perfect little Machiavel. 
Ah 1 Mrs. Kose, you out so early on deck ? Is not 
this a picture I Is not this like molten cobalt, &c !" 



Sicut Flos. 195 



CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH. 

SICUT FLOS. 

On the day that Hanbury returned to Eastport 
by the mail train^ there came with him, in the 
railway post-office, a letter in Lady Laura's writing 
. a letter which she had put off writing, partly 
from its being a disagreeable duty, and partly from 
her haying other more important affairs to claim 
, her attention. Her hearing of Hanbury's inquiries 
brought the matt^ again to her mind. " That girl" 
had been sending one of "her set" to look after 
Charles, perhaps to intimidate, so she went to her 
desk and wrote a good practical letter, a little kind 
in parts, a little cold in others, but, above all, lady- 
02 



196 Never Forgotten. 



like. " After all," said Lady Laura, " the girl has 
some reason to complain. Charles had no business 
to make a fool of her. With people of her class 
time is money. I must say," thought Lady Laura, 
beginning to ruminate, " we got him out of it very 
cleverly. If I had been one of the stupid, storm- 
ing, crying mothers, he would have been tied to that 
girl by this time." 

She enclosed a letter of " Charles's" directed to 
Violet, which had been lying in her desk for many 
days, and sent both to the post, 

Hanbury could not bring himself to go near the 
place for hours after his arrival. A day had been 
fixed for his return, so he was expected. Violet 
was flitting about the house anxiously and rest- 
lessly, in a wearing agitation. She was, in fact, in 
a sort of low fever at the moment. Her pale face 
was seen at many windows looking out wistfully. 
A mysterious instinct of some terror or horror ap- 
proaching filled all other hearts in the house. 

The post came. With a little swoop Violet was 
down at the door. With her hot hand she got a letter 
addressed to herself, and knew Lady Laura's writing. 
She gasped as she tore it open. The others were on 



Sicut Fhs. 197 



the stairs hurrjdng after her . ^but too late. There 
was Fermor^s letter inside, and, with a cry of joy, 
she flew up-stairs. "He has written! He has 
written ! " she said. " I knew it ! I knew it ! " 

What followed may be conceived . ^when the 
first lines of that letter, written ever so tenderly 
and gently, trembled before her eyes. She had 
instinct enough to guess it all. That was her last 
blow. How was it to be expected that so frail a 
creature should endure so much ? The little reso- 
lution . the little " manfulness," if it may be called 
so, which she had kept up for the sake of others, 
had now given way. The waters rushed in. 

On that night all was changed into a house 
of sickness. A wretched mother of a wretched 
daughter, aged and feeble herself, could not endure 
all these shocks. The low fever present in Violet's 
hot hands spread violently. The local doctor, the 
same who had been at their little feast, came in again 
and began his work. He did what he could, yet he 
was not of " the skilful." Yet one of greater skill, 
even than Mr. Cade, whose touch had so miracu- 
lously healed the bruised Fermor . (O sweet days ! 
basking in a golden hght, and removed centuries 



198 Never Forgotten. 



swsLj !)^-even ke oould not avail miich more. A 
qtdet patient ; giving " no trouble,'' waiting for the 
moment eageiiy. 

Two miserable faces, worn and haggard, watcl^ 
that slow travelling away : that soft face gra- 
dually spiritualised into a i^adow. She was as 
quiet as a child, which indeed she was ; so quiet, so 
calm, that tkey began to whisp^ doubtfully to 
themselves that she was growing better. 

One Sunday morning the unskilful local doctor 
ran in to see her as he went to his chnrch. The 

sun came in so brightly; the new flowers which 

 

thoughtful hands sent every day to fill the room, 
looked so fresh and gay ; and there was such a re- 
flected brightness on Violet's face, and she spoke so 
softly and calmly, though still with her old weari- 
ness, that he was quite confounded. " The turn ha^ 
come," he said below in the drawing-room. "My 
dear friends, there is every hope. I say so seriously. 
I do indeed. I am the last man in the world that 
would encourage vain expectations. I tell you, I 
am astonished at the change." 

Grateful eyes were bent on this angel of good- 
ness : full and suffused hearts could not trust 
themselves to speak. " Take her out," he said, 



Siaa Flos. 199 

turning to Lotas, and pointing to Pauline ; " this 
fine son will do her good. She is exhausted 
with all this watching, and it will ^ve ymt 
both strength.'* 

The faitfafoi maaA. remaiiied wkh Vkrlet, wiio 
seemed, from her soft half-KJosed eyes, to be on^ 
the Terge of sleqp. On the last night she had 
dept a little. Tke brother and sistesr went out, 
too grateful to omit anything they were told tp do. 
They wandered on ilong a certain greem lane lined 
with trees . a walk the sisters were f oaid of . for half 
an hour. They heard the church bells at a distance, 
and from the green lane could see the congregation 
in a gay parti-coloured ribbon imwinding from the 
porch. Thejr then turned to go home, for they 
were f earftd of staying too long, and laet John 
Hanbury on the way. The air was delicious. The 
three walked together slowly, and in a low voice 
they told him of the happy change. 

When they wea not a hundred yards from 
hoixie, they saw some one running to than aad 
beckoning Tioksiaitlj. it was the faithful maid^ 
with a scared and terrified face . the certain in- 
stinct of danger. They hurcied down to the house 



200 Never Forgotten. 



to meet her. As she passed them she did not 
stop, and they only caught the words, "for the 
doctor 1 " 

They were in the room in a second. A frantic 
woman was on her knees at the bedside, hardly re- 
cognisable as Mrs. Manuel. There was a face lying 
there, whiter than they had ever seen face before, 
and a sort of light seemed to flutter over it from 
the eyes to the lips, from the lips to the eyes back 
again. Sweet, soft Violet . ^sweet, sof t, persecuted 
Violet . ^wds drifting slowly away out of the rude 
rough waters which had been too troubled for her 
gentle Uttle soul. 

As the three came round her, either the sound 
or the sudden appearance seemed to stay that 
gliding progress ; faint colour floated back into the 
pale face, the eyelids were lifted slowly ; and from 
those eyes, not yet glazing, stole out gentle recog- 
nition. Light hovered about her lips, which seemed 
to move, either attempting to speak or trying to 
meet her sister^s. Now, happily, the old troubles, 
the old doubts, the old expectancy . troubles, 
anguish, all . were dropping fast behind. Pauline 
stooped over, and the lips of the two sisters were 
pressed together. Such little power as there was 



Sicut Flos. 201 

left seemed to be spent in that kiss, and when 
Pauline raised herself, and looked down again with 
dim eyes, she saw a sweet and gracious tranquillity 
below, and a smiling repose, which told her that 
that little heart was no more to be fretted by man's 
cruelty. 

All through the fatal and immemorial routine 
which succeeds a departure such as has been de- 
scribed . ^through the early blinding stupefaction, 
the dismal leading away, the horrible sense of soli- 
tude, and the tremendous and gaunt desertion 
which walks in and takes possession of the house 
like an ogre, with tears after a time beginning to 
flow in frantic bursts . when in this dismal succes- 
sion that Sunday was nearly spent, and evening 
had drawn on, Pauline was seen sitting in the 
drawing-room, stiff, hard, stony, with strained eyes 
that had shed few tears, and had almost a fierce 
look. The faithful maid flitted up to her at times 
in alarm, and spoke to her softly and soothingly, 
but she did not hear. 

Alarmed, the brother came down with red and 
swollen eyes, took her hand in his, and with a 
broken voice tried some of the hackneyed "common 



202 Never Forgmen. 



forms" of comfort. The faithful sertant <mme and 
joined him, ad(ng her voice. She, iadeed, felt it 
as sorely as any of them, and her consohtifm miide 
its way through Bohs. But Pauline did not hear 
them. Her eyes were tm some object in the 
window, where there was no perceptible object. 

He grew alarmed. " Come, Pauline dearest, try. 
Do spealc to us 1 We H feel and are heart-broken, 
but we nrast help eaxjh other. We have to live 
for others now I"" 

A flash came into Pauline's f aice . a ^tiA. thai 
made him draw back. She started to hca" feet. 
With a sharp, hsErd tone, they heard hCT speak now 
for the first time. She said: 
. " Yes. We have something else to live for, too. 
If I had not that to think of, I slwmM die. Then 
is a murderer to bring to juBticel^ 



The New Phy. 203 



CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH, 

THE NEW PliAY. 

A LITTLE white rething HMMiiment in the East- 
port churchyard, marked with a carved violet and 
a simple girFs name, was beginning to turn a little 
grey, after two years' exposure. Over at Eastport 
the soft rain was dropping gently on it; but in Paris, 
at the same moment, a hot Paris day was fading 
out, and French Capua, where Youth is always at 
the prow, tod Pleasure sleepless at the helm, was 
getting ready for the night. Little standing 
armies were drawn up in rank and file at every 
theatre door; and in the court-yard of the Grand 
Sybarite Hotel, at the foot of the stone staircase, 
was waiting a carriage of the establishment, to take 
away guests to the opera or tbeatre. 



204 Never Forgotten. 



The Sybarites had feasted some four hundred 
strong, and were dropping away down the steps 
two and three together, in a pleasant rout. The 
Frenchmen, very warm and mellow, like true vo- 
luptuaries, were lighting cigars and picking teeth, 
or abstractedly feeling their purloined sugar lumps 
in their pockets. The hotel was lit up. Lights 
flashed from the Hundred and One Bureaux. In- 
distinctly the stars were seen through the great 
glass roof over the court. There was a glimpse of 
Paradise at the bright cafe to the left, where were 
wandering in the sated diners to lounge on velvet. 
Bright clean waiter youths lolled on the great 
stairs and chattered ; forwork was done. Carriages 
plunging and clattering in under the porch, were 
pulled up with violence, and, flinging out a visitor, 
clashed to their doors, and were gone again. There 
was lull in the life of the huge hotel ; for it had 
been rather spent with the grand operation just 
passed through, and there was a reaction. The 
Capuans were languid. 

The carriage of the establishment had been 
waiting more than half an hour, when a shining 
boy of a waiter called from the top of the steps 
to the coachman to be on the alert, for his com- 



The New Play. 205 



pany were coming down. Presently there did 
come down a tall EngKshman in evening imi- 
form, with an aubm'n-haired girl in a white cloak 
upon his arm . ^wreath, fan, and snowy gloves. He 
was clean, fresh, and transparent of skiii, as only 
EngKshmen are. Two young gay waiters leaning 
on the balustrade smiled after them. A man in 
green and gold, bursting from some concealed 
hutch or warren, was holding the door open mag- 
nificently, then shut it to firmly as the couple 
entered, and the direction was given. 

Boy-waiter the first looked at his neighbour in- 
quiringly. Boy-waiter the second answered the 
look in speech. 

" Capitaine Anglais." 

" La petite ? Tenez . 9a va ! Numero 60." 

Deft handmaids had long since investigated 
minutely the crested ivory brushes in Numero 60, 
and studied Madame's dresses, and seen on a 
roomy portmanteau large white initials, " C- F.," 
and read with lame pronunciation a little card, 
" Captain Fermor." 

Not alone the two English in the neat fiacre, 
but all Paris, was converging to the one theatre. 
They were lighting up Aladdin's Wonderful Lamps 



206 Never Forgotten. 



all along the magic Boulevards* Crowds of the 
faithful fiittmg at tiajr marble tables, sipping from 
the cloudy caraffes^ saw through the trees the train 
of dark coaches tnmdlLng by with a flare to the 
one spot. 

The English gixl-wife^ sitting in the carriage of 
ike Sybarite establishxnenty burst out with all a 
diild's raptnxes^ as she saw this gay panorama pass 
by. She brdce out with little soft spasms of ts^ 
tnre. " How beautiful I How lovely ! O, look ! 
Do look !" while the English captain, cahn as one 
who had seen all the known shows of the world, 
does look out . ^as a concession to this pleasant po- 
pular humour . and says that they do these things 
very well on the whole. 

He was pleased that she was pleased : Ihat is, 
he was calmly complacent. And, as they rolled 
along, he did the showman as if he were good- 
naturedly talking in his own grounds. There will 
not be so enraptured an audienee at any of the 
theatres open tonaight as his eompanion. It was 
her first night in Paris. 

They got to their theatre. " Scone fellow has a 
new play to-night," said Captain Fecmor, care- 
lessly, as he helped her out and looked round with 



i 



The New Play. 207 



disgust at aoBEie oae who jostled him. '^ They 
do niake smch a fuss, ahouit these thiu^ iu this 
coujatry." 

The " fellow " who had written the play was a 
very fanuxus young author^ who, in his round of 
daily lif e, had played many characters, and shown 
many profiles. He was briliLuit,. witty, sentimental, 
a petted darling of the salons, free and easy in 
manner,, freer and easiar in his. life, penniless and 
politicaL In short, a true young French author. 
All these profiles, howev^, he might have shown 
save the last; which was the wrong one . ^and 
which he had exhihited to wrong persons. So that 
when the Ught-haired English captain and his wife 
. in custody of a dreadfully business-like woman 
in green, armed with little footstools- . ^was let into 
a box or balcony, they found it crowded to the 
ceiling, but with two armies mixed together below, 
who at the proper season would draw off and join 
battle. 

Captaiffli Fennor settled himself, drew his hand 
up and down freely over his fresh clean shirt Unen 
(perhaps the freshest and cleanest of all shirt 
linen in that assembly), fetched out hist glass, and 
did the honours of the place. The girl beside him 



208 Never Forgotten. 



had a round quiet soft face, that would be called 
handsome, with a good smile. With fresh round 
cheeks, that twenty years hence would be fresher 
and rounder, she had a smile and a laugh ever hover- 
ing . hiding, perhaps . at the comer of her mouth : 
which, on faint encouragement, fluttered out and 
crossed to the other side, like some of the little 
figures in the Strasburg clock. She was very 
happy at that moment, in the gay and almost ex- 
citing scene, in herself, and in the noble . almost 
too superior . ^protector and patron who sat beside 
her reading his bill, who was so good natured as 
to teach her, in reference to many of the little 
matters about her. 

He took her through that document. "These 
fellows," he said, with comic pity, "will make a 
play out of anything. Just listen : ' L' Amour se 
Paie.' This is what we have come to see, L' Amour 
se Paie. There they are, all like children down 
there, crushing each other flat to get a doll or a bit 
of sugar-stick. I should like to throw it down to 
them . ^how they would struggle for it !" 

The girl laughed at this pleasant way of putting 
the thing, and looked down at the amphitheatre of 
big children below. It was the most crowded play- 



The New Play. 209 



ground they had seen for some time ; but the game 
would presently turn out of a rough sort. A low 
hum and buzz rose from it, and nearly every one 
was standing up with the usual optical fire-arm 
levelled from his eye. 

Next door, as it were, were a pair of typical 
Frenchmen, well dined and well filled. They had 
about begun to live ; that meal was almost the first 
tangible act of this day. One was black and 
glossy haired, with cheeks shaded over, through 
imperfect shaving, like parchment written upon ; 
the other a gross swollen Frenchman, who under 
his waistcoat might have been corded round and 
round like brawn, and whose hair, black, short, 
and stubbly, dipped down in the centre of his 
forehead like the peak of a lad/s waist. Both did 
a great deal of navvy's work, with little pickaxes, 
about their teeth, and both contemplated the Eng- 
lish girl with quiet and critical study, as if she 
were part of the entertainment for which they 
had paid. 

" English ? " said the corded gentleman, half 
across his pickaxe. (He had come on a rocky and 
obstinate stratum.) 

"Yes," said the other, also excavating; "a 

VOL. II. P 



210 Never Forgotten. 



dish fresh and soft, too ! " Both critics, calmly ap- 
probative, did not even care to drop their voices. 

" Dear Charles/' said the girl, delighted with 
everything about, "how charming all this is! It 
is fairy land I O, what a place to live in ! Ah," 
said she, suddenly, "do you recollect Roger le 
Garfon, that you used to lend me ? Dear me," 
she added, in a. sort of rapture of recollection, 
" how pleasant that was ! Only this morning I 
was reading the old, old copy. But you forget." 

" Ah, yes !" said he. " To be sure. You know 
I don't like plays. Why don't they begin in the 
orchestra?" Someway, he did not dwell on the 
reminiscence with the same relish as she did. 

" How long ago all that seems," said the girl; 
"like a dream. Your going to India . and coming 
back again. And that soft, sweet child Violet; 
who had such a charming name, and was so cold 
and treacherous ^" 

" A year and six months," said he, in a diy 
key, " is a year and six months, I believe. There 
Were things at that place, and persons at that 
place, one meets every day. We have done with it 
now, and had better let it rest, and think of the 
present." 



The New Play. 211 



" But, somehow/' Ae went on, " I felt such an 
interest in her ; though I never saw her, I felt to 
her like a sister. And I assure you," she continued, 
in a little confusion, "only that papa had set his 
heart on your marrying me . ^I had often hegged 
of him to go away and leave the place ; it seemed 
so cruel to interfere with such a sef t darling as I 
fancied her." 

Fermor coloured. " You are candid," he said, 
a little bitterly. It was only the first two months 
of their marriage, or the infusion would have been 
stronger. " You tell the truth, certainly. I sup- 
pose there are to be no secrets between husband 
and wife." 

She smiled, taking this for a welcome little burst 
of nuptial jealousy. (Olives come in very pleasantly 
with wine.) 

" I like to talk of Eastport," she said, coquet- 
tishly, "for I was very happy there, though so ill. 
And yet it was so odd, so incomprehensible." 

" What, pray? " said he, suddenly. 

" I mean her turning out such a cold, designing 
creature . ^marrying that other man. I could not 
hare fancied it. I was so sorry, though it was so 
fortunate for me." 

p2 



212 Never Forgotten. 



A smile of complacency struggled in Fermor's 
f ace, while he said, '^ And for me too, I suppose I 
must say/* 

" AndO ! will you forgive me for telling you?" 
she went on, eagerly. " When I first heard of it, 
f thought the poor girl had been what they call 
thrown over, and I felt so much for her, that I said 
to papa ^ 

Fermor turned sharply round. " We have come 
to hear this play," he said, "and to amuse our- 
selves, have we not? By-and-by, we shall have 
time enough for these reminiscences; so please^ 

now ^" * And he forced the rest of the sentence 

into a hard smile and a harder nod. 

She was sufficiently trained to see how thin the 
ice was about this part. And she moved away 
cautiously from the subject. 

The three strokes of a mallet on the stage made 
every flower rustle its leaves as if a breeze had 
fluttered round, and the curtain went up. 

L' Amour se Paie was after the true pattern. 
of which regular "forms" seem kept in stock in 
France. It was very long and all conversational, 
and shifted from Madame HautefiUe's drawing- 



The New Play. 213 



room to her garden and back again. When it 
came to be printed by M. Dentu of the Palais 
Boyal, the reader found his page planted scantily 
with a few lines of type, and each line boasted a 
few meagre shrubs of words. Still it was a marvel 
of neat wit . ^wit that is fined and delicately grained 
with emery-powder, and real ladies and gentlemen 
seemed to walk from Madame HautefiUe's drawing- 
room to her garden and back again. 

The way in which the truth, or aphorism, or 
even hypothesis of L' Amour se Paie was set before 
the audience, lay in working together a financier 
of tempered fun, a marquise, a Paris man of 
fashion, a simple artless school- girl, and a " noble " 
tutor, suffering from his situation. All during the 
first act these threads were plaited languidly : a 
warp of conversation was woven in volubly. The 
exquisite showed his exquisiteness, the simple girl 
her simplicity, the financier his finance, and the 
"noble" tutor his nobleness . ^yet nothing had been 
done. As the act-drop came down there was ap- 
plause from the grown children crowded below, 
applause met strangely by scornful laughs and a 
few hisses. But as yet there was nothing to 



214 Never Forgotten. 



applaud, nothing to condemn; the storming parly 
were artfully waiting their time^ until, say the 
end of the third act; when, waving, their red flag, 
they would fly at the redoubt and sadk the doomed 
piece. 

Captain Fermor, looking down from his loge, 
which was high enough, and from a yet higher 
balcon of lofty English disdain, said, with a curling 
lip, "And they call this thing a play, do they! 
What is it all about? Why, it isn't a patch upon 
the Haymarket." 

The fresh soft girl knew French . that is, the 
French of men and women . ^thoroughly. Fermor 
had some old building materials of that tongue, 
bought at school, lying about in his head. 

" O, but, Charles," she said, " that poor young 
man, so chivalrous ^" 

"Do you mean that whining tutor?*' he said, 
contemptuously. " The whole thing is a bore. It 
must fail. I wish," he added, putting up his hand 
pohtely to stop a yawn, " I wish we had gone to 
that other, what d'ye call it . spectacle." 

The two Frenchmen still looked at the English 
lady steadily. The corded one . ^mellowed with 



2he N.w Play. 215 



good Medoc and coffee, and a little cognac on the 
surface of the coffee, which, coming so near the 
top, gave his cheeks and eyes a warm inflamed 
tone . approved. He nodded approval to his 
neighbom*. He was thinking how it would be 
compatible with his other little engagements. r 
he would make up his mind before the play was 
over. 



216 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH. 

A MEETING. 

Second act. The mournful tutor was leaning 
his forehead pn his hand and trying to read. For 
six francs a day he had to come and give a lesson 
to the simple girl whom he loved. She has loved 
her tutor, because, as she told her friend. Made- 
moiselle Laroux, " he was the first man I had ever 
seen, just as I was eprise of my first doll." In 
truth, she had a leaning to the exquisite, who was 
so pleasant with his Paris talk. Financier again, 
tutor, marquise, school-girl, all in a check pattern 
of talk ; but no serious work. 

At that moment there was a rustle and noise of 
moving chaurs close beside the English lady and 



A Meeting. 217 

gentleman, with the sound of a box-door closing 
like the click of a trigger. Three seats had been 
vacant the whole night, guarded jealously. These 
were now at last to be filled. Then there came 
boldly down to the front, where she stayed a mo^ 
ment drawn up to her full height for the house to 
admire, a tall figure, lustrous and brilliant, flashing 
under the lights with every motion. A few beings 
of the parterre, not engaged in tumult, instantly 
turned their backs to the stage and levelled their 
glasses with effrontery. With her also came a dark 
square-built young man, with vellum cheeks and 
thoughtful meditative eyes, and a second gentleman. 
But they were in cold colours . dull sketches in 
greys and neutral tints, beside her. They sat down 
together. She continued to draw all eyes. 

It was that bright radiant look which seemed to 
reflect back the radiance of fascination. Her rich 
black hair flashed back the light from a hundred 
ripples. It hung over her white forehead, and was 
gathered away to the right and left like the heavy 
folds of a cmtain. Her face was oval, her eye- 
brows marked and arched, her eyes liquid and dark, 
and though brilliant, were not sharp nor piercing, 
and, above all, her face seemed to be lit up from 



218 Never Forgotten, 



within by a strange piquant expression. But 
among the folds and draperies of her hair (and this 
the opera-glass musketeers in the parterre noted 
specially) was a rich scarlet geranium placed with 
excellent effect, and, carelessly dropping from her 
shoulders, was an Eastern black and gold opera- 
cloak. She might bfe a Jewess or . a Spaniard. 

The English girl was absorbed in the tutor and 
his woes. She had never seen anything so delight- 
fuL Fermor, with a curl of depreciation on his 
lip, seen under the black opera-glass, was slowly 
travelling round the house. 

" I never saw such an exhibition," said he, not 
taking the glass from his eyesr; " but we must stay, 
for I suspect there will be ^^ 

He stopped suddenly, for the two muzzles of his 
glass were resting on the new faces ust come in. 
The glass dropped on his knees. Then he gave 
a half start; half rose, and sank again into his 
chair. 

His eyes were fixed on the apparition of the 
bright lady and her two companions. A few 
" amateurs " in the parterre were looking too ; but 
the whole house was absorbed in the play. The 
girl beside Fermor, with tearful earnest eyes, and 



A Meeting. 219 

the round chin resting on her hand, was wrapped 
up in the young tutor. She had never heard any- 
thing so interesting. There was such agony^ such 
suffering in his face . that 

Suddenly she heard her husband whisper bluntly : 

" We must go away now. Gome !" 

She came back to practical life. 

" Go away !" she said, in blank astonishment. 
'^ Why ? O no, no ! Just at this point, too ! " 

"I am sick of it," said he, rising. "I have a 
headache. I suppose you will not ask me to stay 
if I am ill?" 

She rose in a second, and gathered up her cloak 
and "materiel" She looked back wistfully at 
the noble young tutor, whose face showed actual 
writhings of moral suffmng; his sense of the 
degradation of his position was so very acute. As 
she turned to go, her cloak caught in a chair and 
overturned it. A flash of faces was turned to 
them, and a subdued " ts . s . ^^ was heard. 

" There ! they will all see us !" said Fermor, with 
something like ferocity, " and I wanted to get out 
without noise ! " 

He caught her arm roughly, and hurried her 
away. 



220 Never Forgotten. 



She was frightened. "What is the matter, dear 
Charles?" she said again. 

"Nothing," he said, shortly. "I did not say 
" there was. Now please don't tease me, and let us 
get home in quiet." 

He hurried her along the great passages. They 
got to the top of the flight of stairs. 

" Take my arm !" he said. 

But there, at the same point, they were met by 
another party going away. It was the brilliant 
lady and her companions, who could not have heard 
a sentence of the new play, and were literally going 
away almost as soon as they had come. 

Though in a little trouble, the girl was struck 
by the brightness of the Spanish-looking face and 
the flashing of her beauty, which she had now 
seen for the first time. 

"O look, look, Charles!" she whispered, hur- 
riedly ; when, to her amazement, the lady came to 
meet them. 

" Captain Fermor," said the stranger, and in her 
voice there was a sustained chanting sound almost 
melancholy, "what a meeting! How strange, 
how curious ! And at a theatre, of all places in 
the world!" 



A Meeting. 221 

Fermor was not yet composed enough to answer . 
steadily. He forced a kind of smile. 

"Not forgotten me, surely?" said the lady. 
^^You remember when we last met, or when we 
were to have met ?" 

" Yes," said Fermor, faintly. 

" And this," said she, "is Mrs. Fermor? I was 
sure of it, at a distance. I was one of your hus- 
band's old acquaintances. One of that crowd 
which lie had to brush through, when life for him 
was Uterally a ball-room One of the crowd whom 
he has paid visits to, and taken down to supper, 
and whose name he has forgotten by next mom- 
mg. 

Fermor was now collected enough to speak as 
Fermor was accustomed to speak. 

" We are going home," he said ; " a stupid play, 
that has given me a headache." 

"How long do you remain in this place?" said 
the Spanish lady, abruptly, addressing Mrs. Fer- 
mor. 

The latter, who had been looking at the strange 
lady quite fascinated, answered hastily, " O . ^we 
are to stay a month, I believe." 

Termor struck in hurriedly, " No, no. We 



222 Never Forgotten. 



leave to-morrow; we are obliged to return. Got 
a letter to-day." 

^^ Stay a month ? Leave to-morrowt^' said the 
Spanish lady, with a smile. " Then your plans 
are scarcely decided. You recollect my brother!" 
she added. " This is Mr. Bomaine, his friend." 

"I am afraid," said Fermor, "we must go away 
now. We have to ^" 

" Where are you staying ?" 

" At the Grand Hotel," isaid the English gh-l,. 
who was addressed. 

"O, then we shall see you there. Ours is 
Number 110. We have hardly chosen our rooms 
yet. But we shall see each other very often, and 
renew an old acquaintance. Indeed, we fihall come 
and see you to-morrow," said the Spanish-looking 
lady, gaily. " Louis and I. You will be at home 
at twelve?" 

"Yes, yes," said Fermor, hastily. "Delighted. 
To-morrow, at twelve." 

"Good night, then," said the Spanish-looking 
lady. "I am so glad to have met you again. 
This is life, you see, all over, parting in a ball-room 
. ^meetmg at a theatre. Now, Mr. |JKtimaine, be 
bitter on that text." 



A Meeting. 223 

Mr. Eomaine . whose face had a handsome 
gartntness, and whose black eyes, and whose black 
moustache hanging like curls over his mouth, had 
an odd attraction for Mrs. Fermor . said something 
in a low voice to his friend. 

"Ah, exactly," said the Spanish lady. "To-moi^ 
row, then, at twelve. Good night." . 

In the dark carriage, where Fermor^s face could 
not be seen, the girl began to chatter and wonder. 

"And you have forgotten her name ?". she said, 
suddenly. "How wonderful! I should have re- 
membered that splendid face till my dying day. 
I shall long to see her again." 

"Yes," said he, catching at what she had sug- 
gested ; "is it not odd? I shall recollect it later, 
I suppose." 

"It is so strange," she said; "if I had seen a 
man with such a face, I should never have for- 
gotten his name." 

Captain Fermor was moody and gloomy, and 
said impatiently, " I dare say . ^no doubt.* Please 
don't ask me -why this, and why that, and wonder 
at me for this and that. I have a headache, and 
the racket df this place is enough to give one a 
hundred headaches." 



224 Never Forgotten. 



She was full of concern in a moment. 

" How thoughtless and stupid I am," she said. 
" Why did you not tell me t " ' 

At their hotel the green and gold official came 
rushing, and opened the door, as if it were a 
matter of life and death they should be extricated 
at once. The great stairs flashed out white and 
spacious. The sleepless Bureaux, where the lights 
blazed, were busy with their entries and erasures 
of arrivals and departures day and night long : of 
what were, in fact, the Births and Deaths to the 
Grand Hotel and its monster family. 

At the top of the stairs Fermor stopped short 
suddenly. "What a place!" he said. "I am 
sick of their noise and flurry. One can't get a 
minute's quiet here. Look there I What did I 
say?" . as another carriage clattered in. "Shall 
we leave early in the morning, and go to the Mira- 
beau, or some Christian place ? " 

Deeply concerned for the pain which he must 
be suffering, she answered, eagerly, " Yes, Charles. 
Or what would you say. could we not go now ? " 

It was not nine o'clock. 

" A very good idea," he said, with real pleasure. 
" You could put a few things together, and send 



A Meeting. 225 

for the boxes in the morning. You are a clever 
child, and a ready child too." 

Greatly elated by this unusual commendation, 
she tripped away. 

He went down to the Bureaux, where they 
were so busy with the Births and Deaths. This 
was to be a Death, for he was going to ask for his 
bill. As he came out suddenly, a lady and gentle- 
man, who had descended from the carriage, stopped 
him. 

" What I Home again?" she said, "and we 
just as soon as you." 

Fermor began to bite his moustache. 

In a moment a waiter came to him with a strip 
of paper, and asked would monsieur have a 
carriage? 

" Going away?" said the Spanish lady. " Only 
think, Louis ! At this hour, too. Surely not. Re- 
collect, you were to have seen us to-morrow." 

Fermor crushed up the paper. " We have 

had to alter our arrangements," he said. "We 

are obliged to go. We have very little time. 

So '' 

" No, no," said the Spanish lady, smiling, and 

shaking her head. " This is a little f ourberie . some 

VOL. II. Q 



226 Never' Forgotten. 



of the old, old phantoms. Don't yoa recollect when 
we lived at Eastport, and when we were all so 
happy together ? I dare say you have told her all 
about the time. No? Absurd. You can't go 
to-night. Where is Mrs. Fermor ? I shall easOy 
persuade her. Send up for her.** 

Fermor looked at the lady doubtfully and irre- 
solutely, still crumpling the paper. 

" No, no," she said, with encouragement. ^' To- 
morrow morning is more rational. More Kke a 
cahn, sensible Englishman. Above all, when we 
meet an old friend, whom we have not seen for so 
long, and whom a mere chance has helped us to 
meet. Do oblige me in this. Let us sit down 
here awhile in Paradise, in the Arabian Nights I 
There are a hundred things I want to ask you . a 
hundred things you will want to hear from me. It 
win be old times returned over again." 

There was something almost fascinating in her 
face and voice. Fermor, bewildered, confused, 
above all, surprised at the strange change in her. 
at the lightness and airiness of her manner (for she 
seemed a new Pauline) . made no resistance, but 
passed out with her into the bright colonnade 



A Meeting, 227 

where the thousand-and-one tahles are clustered, 
and the clink of glass and china furnishes music. 

Five minutes later came tripping down the 
young Mrs. Fermor. She was ready, and her 
little packing all done. But her husband was 
gone. A Uttle confused from the sense of this 
desertion, she went in to the Bureau. 

Numero 60. Yes. Monsieur had been fur- 
nished with the note. A little fit of curiosity 
came over her at that moment, and she thought 
she would refresh her husband's memory about the 
lady at the theatre . ^pleasantly surprising him with 
superior information. Who were in Numero 110 ? 

A few pages turned over with complaisance, and 
the young lady registrar answered : 

" Numero 110 et 111, Monsieur et Mdlle. 
Manuel." 

The young girl started. At the same moment 
an obliging young boy-waiter came to tell her that 
^^Mr. the Captain" was outside the caf6, sitting 
with a lady. 



Q2 



228 Never ForgtMen. 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH. 

THE COLONNADE OF THE GRAND HOTEL. 

Under that colonnade, and in the cool air, with 
carriage-lights twinkling past, and seen through 
the leaves of the trees, as though in a garden. 
with airy waiters flitting by with snowy napkins 
for wings, the English lady and gentleman sat at 
coffee. It was the best scenerj^ in the world for 
confidence. 

Every moment he was more and more amazed 
at the change in her. 

She was a new Pauline, older, yet " finer," more 
dazzling, more splendid, more womanly ; more de- 
cided, too, in manner . firmer, and more distinct 
in her voice. She was leaning over the little 



The Colonnade of the Grand Hotel. 229 

marble table, looking at him earnestly as she 
talked. 

" Two years is a long time," she said, sadly ; " I 
seem to have lived a quarter of a century. A 
thousand events have been crowded into that time. 
Spain, France, England . Spain again. We have 
been always travelling. It," she added, in a low 
voice, "it was the only thing. Best seemed like 
death." 

Fermor dropped his eyes. "And Spain," he 
said, absently; "why Spain again?" 

" Ah," she said, " our poor mother, you know. 
It was her country, and it was natural that she 
should like to see it before she died. Old people 
someway think of these things. We had money, 
thank God. Her cousin left her everything. But 
she did not enjoy it long. Poor mamma." 

" Good God!" said Fermor, in some distress. 

'^ Is she ^? I did not hear . I did not, indeed. 

I have heard nothing. I was so far away, or I 
should have written." 

Pauline laughed, a laugh faintly harsh, which 
was one of the changes he had noted in her. ' 

" Written 1 " she said. " Why ? There was no 
reason in the world for that We wanted no con- 



230 Never Forgotten. 



solation from any one. You saw very little of hear. 
I can fancy, too, in India, with precious time taken 
up . every moment of it. I have often heard what 
strain is put there on men of capacity/' 

Fermor looked at her a little uneasily ; but the 
large eyes seemed to be fixed on him with, perfect 
honesty. 

" Yes," he said, " they dH work us there. But 
I am so sorry to hear this. And when ? " 

" O, long ago ! A few months after you . had 
left. She was half a Spaniard, and very sensitive 
and delicate; and our poor Violet's death took 
hold of her mind a good deal, and, at last, un- 
settled it a little. You might have remarked how 
she doted on her . more, I believe, a great deal, 
than on me." 

There was a silence for some moments. Then 
Fermor said, in a low voice : 

" And Violet . poor Violet . ^I am glad you 
have mentioned it . ^I have often, I assure you, 
thought of it, and of that night, and what my 
conduct must have appeared. And I was so 
grieved when I heard it. But you know," he 
added, eagerly ; " xchxit could I do ? I don't like 



The Colonnade of the Grand Hotel. 231 

speaking of it, it is so distressing a business, and 
has ended so unfortunately ; but ^' 

'' Why not ? " said Pauline, hurriedly. " There 
is no need to take that view of it. After all, it is 
different with me, you know. Sisters will be 
sisters, and I," she added, more quickly, '^had an 
affection for her that was almost extravagant. 
But that is my concern, you see. I must keep my 
own sufferings for myself. She was a child, too 
soft and tender for life. Had she been a girl," 
added Pauline, earnestly, " she would have lived." 

Again she laughed, and Fermor saw a film 
gathering over her eyes. She brushed it away 
hastily. "Is it not absurd?" she said. "And 
two years ago !" 

Fermor was all ioftened. The picture of poor 
Violet came back on him with a pang of self-re- 
proach. 

" I know," he said again, eagerly, "what you, 
what she must have thought. The business, I 
confess, had an odious look. But, if you had been . 
behind th^ scenes, and seen what pressure ^" 

" Of course," said she. " A mere ordinary 
affair. I suppose five thousand things of the 



232 Never Forgotten. 



same sort go on eveiy year in England. Poor 
foolish girls take f anci&s, and men, not so foolish, 
are naturally flattered; and so it goes on for a 
time. Then it is discovered that the whole is un- 
practicable and will never do. Intellect must have 
something more to lean on than mere love and 
worship. And so the whole vanishes in a pretty 
cloud of romance." 

^' Exactly," said Fermor, eagerly. 

^ Your friends," said she, with eyes fixed on 
him, " naturally wished to see you advance in the 
world. You had brilliant prospects, abilities, good 
interest, and it was a pity to sacrifice them." 

" Exactly," said Fermor again. " You quite 
understand it. It was a youthful attachment, but 
you know it would have ruined me. It was better 
for both in the end." 

"Exactly," she said;, "better for both. You 
say it was the only sensible course, after all. Of 
course you are right. Only a man of firmness 
and resolution could see it in that light. One of 
your weak youths would have plunged headfore- 
most with her into ruin, and let the future take 
care of itself." 

" I considered," said Fermor, growing quite 



i:he Colonnade of the Grand Hotel. 233 

assured, " that I was bound to look to lier as well 
as to myself. Far more, indeed. I know human 
nature pretty well. I have, in fact, made it a 
practical study. I knew there would be some 
suffering at first; but that would be far better 
than ten times that suffering later." 

Pauline's face was growing intensely earnest as 
she listened. When he looked up, the expression 
changed suddenly. 

"I knewy^ said Fermor, "you would make all 
allowance. I was sure of it. The fact was, / saw 
it was . I may tell you now . ^I saw it was a mis- 
take, about as soon as it was done. I knew it, and 
was quite grieved." 

Her eyes were fixed on him with a greater and 
greater earnestness. But he did not see how her 
lips were compressed. "Yes?" she said, with an 
interrogative anxiety. 

" We can't be always wise. As you say, the 
next best thing after a mistake is to see that it is 
a mistake. I saw it the very next day." 

" You did?'' she asked, with a sudden energy 
that would have startled another; then added, 
hastily : " To be sure. Sensible always. We are 
only women, after all." 



234 Never Forgotten. 



*^ Poor child ! ^ he went on. " Another would 
have been blunt, and spoken at once. I thought it 
better to trust to time and chance, those two great 
contrivers.** 

Again her eyes were fixed on him with a strange 
and almost deadly expression. *^ You did ? " she 
said. " That was the plan, was it ? I see. And 
it succeeded.** 

He looked up in a little surprise. 

" Poor, poor Violet ! " she suddenly broke out. 
"Poor, sweet, wretched darling! To be handed 
over to chance and time, those two great contrivers ! 
What a life I Why could we not have saved her, 
poor lost darling? Time and chance!" and she 
gave one of the strange laughs. " That was the 
secret, was it ? But we should have had a stronger 
and less delicate subject to practise on. O, Violet ! 
Violet!" 

Her face dropped upon the little marble table, 

and Fermor heard her hysterical sobs as she stayed 

j.<inMn for many minutes. He was greatly 

1, ill most shocked at the violence of this 

d tried to soothe her. In a few moments 

d her face and wiped her eyes. " This is 



; 



The Colonnade of the Grand Hotel. 235 

very foolish," she said. " We women should train 
oul^lyes* Bnt it does me good to think and talk 
of all this ; it brings relief. It has quite comforted 
me, meeting you. We must have many a talk on 
this matter in London and here. But you go 
to-morrow. Of course you have your duties, 
and cannot waste time on a poor lonely sister like 
me. 

She looked at him with a sort of shy fascination, 
and her voice was very musical and melancholy. 
^* Twelve o'clock I" she said, rising suddenly ; "how 
time has flown 1" 

"Good gracious!" he said, for the first time 
thinking of Mrs. Fermor. " So late 1 Yes, I 
shall see you again. We are not bound to a day. 
But I am so glad you have taken a calm, sensible 
view of this affair, as, indeed, I anticipated you 
would." 

" Ah, yes I Let us go in now," she said. They 
went into the great court. It was almost deserted. 
But the sleepless Bureaux were still at work. At 
the bottom of the great stair she said "Good 
night." 

She followed him with her eyes as he ascended 



236 Never Forgotten. 



slowly: when he reached the top, he looked 
down and saw her figure in a wonderful atti- 
tude of grace. He thought again of the curious 
changes that had taken place in her. " What a 
crisis," he said, as he looked down, "to pass 
through! How would a less skilful man have 
done?" 

At that distance he could not see her face, nor 
the features in her face. But the eyes were flash- 
ing. And he could not hear the hard voice that 
came from the lips : 

" It was, then, his own work ; and he is satisfied ! 
Before God, then, I shall not spare him 1" 

Once more, at the door of the lobby, he looked 
down, and saw her hand raised towards him. 
Complacently, he thought it was a sort of saluta- 
tion, and he waved his own to her. Then went 
his way along the galleries. There was a smile on 
his face as he passed along ; it was softened to a 
gentle feeling of romance very pleasurable. " My 
life," he thought, " has been a strange one. It 
might be written in a book. And who can tell 
what is coming on, either?" 

He found the young wife up, waiting. She had 



The Colonnade of the Grand Hotel. 237 

been writing . ^writin^ home to her father. He 
required one letter every day, without fail. 

"I was having some coffee out on the Boule- 
vards," said Fermor. " So sorry to have kept you ; 
met a friend." 

There was a curious look on the young wife's 
face, a colder one than he had ever seen. 

" Tell me about it," she said, calmly. " An old 
friend, or a new one? Had he anything to tell ?" 

Fermor walked to the window impatiently. 
'' Nothing that you would care to hear," he said. 
'^ By the way, we need not be hurrying away in 
the morning. There is no necessity for such a 
precipitate departure. It would look absurd. We 
should be having the police after us!" He said 
this as though silie had been proposing it. 

" Just as you please," she said. 

Her passiveness mystified him. But no more 
was said on the matter. 

On the next day, about two o'clock. Captain 
Fermor fixed a flower in his button-hole, chose out 
a new pair of gloves, put some perfume on his 
handkerchief, and sent up to Numero 110, to 
know if Mademoiselle Manuel was at home. "I 



238 Never Forgotten. 



have not talked to a clever woman I don't know 
when," he said; "I must tell her the whole" story 
about poor Violet from the very beginning." He 
had, in fact, prepared a dramatic little narrative, 
in which he himself was painted as an object of 
great interest. 

The boy-waiter came with word that Mr. and 
Miss Manuel had left for London by the early 
train that morning. 



The Houfe in Alfred-place. 239 



CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH. 

THE HOUSE m ALFRED-PLACE. 

In time, over the interval of two months. In 
space, from Paris to London, From the Grand 
Hotel to a bright cozy compact house. -one of a 
dean series in Alfred-place, standing together like 
a TOW of Sunday-school children. Neighbours 
hardly knew who lived there, but the number 
was down in the note-books, and in the minds 
of many skilful men; was familiar at the Great 
Literary Club, and the name of Pauline Manuel 
lifted many faces from the Times or Ghbe. 
Among these was the face of, say, a herculean 
humorist who growled pleasantly at a hollow world 
. over claret; the faces of leading witty men who 



240 Never Forgotten. 



brought their jokes and quips to dinners, like con- 
jurors bringing their apparatus to a child's party, 
and who, like the conjurors, would not be received 
without their apparatus; of leading clergymen, 
hard thoughtful men, who dug and trenched in 
the heavy soil of reviews ; of younger and more 
unclerical men, who did the ornamental gardening 
of magazines ; of a placid Italian barytone, gentle- 
man in everything save birth ; of a bishop or two ; 
of a doctor or two ; of a lawyer or two ; of a mem- 
ber of Parliament or two. These, with the faces 
of their wives, were Pauline Manuel's constitu- 
ency . a miniature world in itself. In that small 
house in Alfred-place was a small round table that 
held exactly eight ; it was lighted by white Dresden 
candelabra, and the light fell usually on a >vitty 
face, a clerical-reviewing face, a singing, a barris- 
terial, a senatorial, or an editorial face. They were 
delightful little meals . complete. choice in all 
points. 

How she drifted into such circles, or rather 
how they came floating and drifting about her, 
was through the mere general attraction which 
a bright, flashing, dazzling face, a face that people 
looked long after in the street, always exercises. 



The Houfe in Alfred-flace. 241 

Lord Putnenham, who had but one standard of 
beauty^ which was a musical standard, said she 
was like Grisi in her best days. To the house in 
Alfred-place came fossil old noblemen, like Lord 
Gilliflower, about as infirm as old furniture ; tall, 
florid, general officers, as fond of the warm rays 
of beauty as of sitting in the sun ; lively wives of 
lively men ; in short, a delightful miscellany. At 
Alfred-place were the most delightful of morning 
calls, where new music was heard, and new paint- 
ing worked at ; of afternoon visits, where tea was 
drunk, and talk mixed with the tea, like cream, and 
where the little dinner was spread ; from Alfred- 
place went the pleasant party to opera or play, and 
to Alfred-place came home the pleasant party from 
opera or play to the little supper on the round 
table. All liked her. Older acquaintances were 
eager to know her better; others outside were 
struggling and canvassing to be admitted. It was 
noted how eager she was to extend her list. She 
wished to know everybody. 

" You only care for new faces," said Fobley 
of the Guards ; " half a dozen in the day . ^like 
new gloves." 

Pauline, who had for many minutes been eagerly 

VOL. II. R 



242 Never Forgotten. 



searching a gay crowd, flashed him a gay smile. 
^' I do," she said; " I like, variety. The man from 
Oovent-garden changes these flowers for me every 
second day. Mr. Griesbach," she said to that i:e- 
viewer of Gibbon, Pitt, the War of the Succes^on, 
and of other heavy men and subjects, " being at a 
window and seeing a procession go by all day 
long, that is the true notion of life ! Don't you 
think so?" 

When a new soldier came home from the Caroo 
Islands, or a new sailor from the Main, she always 
said to some of her staff, " Bring him to me." 
Travellers of any degree she relished, making them 
sit down beside her. The young soldier would 
think fatuously of his own charms, the seaman 
would glow with his pinkest blushes. 

" O," she would say, " I have known so many 
who have gone out there. It must be delightful. 
I envy you all," 

" We were up at Yalalabad, you know," the 
fatuous youth would say. " I and Filmer and old 
Jekyl. We used to dine with the .Commissioner, 
an old Scot<!hman, with a daught^, and ^" 

" Did you ever meet with Sir Hopkins Pocock 
out there?" 



The Houfe in Alfred-place. 243 

" Who f Never heard of him. who's he ? " 

^ O, nothing," said she. " An old f riend.J 
thought you might." 

From that instant the youth . ^and he was but a 
type of many more who suffered under the same 
process. found the soft warm water growing sud* 
denly colder, until he had to leap out and fly in 
confusion. So with an agreeable .traveUer, newly 
returned and writing a book . ^Six Months with 
the Queen of Bushra" . ^Bushra was not far, that is 
to say, less than six hundred miles, from Sir Hop- 
kins's government. O yes, he had made an ex- 
cursion as he came home . governor civil enough . 
wanted him (the traveller) to dine with him, but 
didn't. Saw nothing . saw nobody . ^heard nothing, 
and heard of nobody. Nothing to the Queen of 
Bushra, who gave him a bracelet of teeth, which 
she had gathered with her own hands. The water 
grew icy cold with startHng suddenness. 

So with the tourist, the author of the lively 
journal " From Spa to Spa." " You meet all sorts 
of people at those mcked places, Mr. Duncan 
Davis," she would say, with a smile, " and touch 
them off so cleverly. I sat up till one last night 
reading the book you sent me. I have frvo^Aa 
b2 



244 Never Forgotten, 



that go every year, and can tell me nothing. By 
the way, did you ever fall in with a Mr. Carter and 
his family?" 

"Carter,.. Carter!" said Mr. Duncan Davis, 
searching the old closet he called his memory. 
" Yes, to be sure, at Nauheim. There was a Carter 
there." 

Pauline's face grew very eager. "You did?" 
she said. "Tell me about him . ^you quite inte- 
rest me." 

" To be sure," said Duncan Davis. " I knew 
him intimately. He was the chaplain, and had the 
English chapel, and daughters, and ^" 

But some one had turned the cruel cock, and 
the water again grew icy cold. Duncan Davis 
never told more of the Nauheim chaplain. 

This had been Pauline's life, and Pauline's 
curious purpose of general inquiry had been noted 
by a few gentlemen as a phase of fascinating 
oddity. The wives of the gentlemen . strongly 
intellectual in their way, and whose voices rang 
out at dinner sharp and clear as their lords' . were 
pleasant on this fancy, and hinted at the supposed 
matrimonial end of all society. 

" With so large a net, my dear," said Mrs. Win- 



The House in Alfred-place. 245 

slow Jones, " she will have a salmon one of these 
mornings." This drawing in of her net was de- 
lightful to all assistants, for the fishwoman's voice 
was so gay and so fascinating. Her talk was 
a sort of moderated burlesque . a softened comic 
exaggeration . a dressing up of light flying topics 
in quaint, sober, solemn language. Then her deep 
limpid eye flashed, the bells began to ring, and the 
music to play, and the voices of gay laughing 
revellers were heard in her throat, as though a 
door had been opened quickly. But when the 
lights were down, and the social theatre closed for 
the night, the deep limpid eyes grew dull, the clouds 
began to gather, and an old look of weary rest- 
lessness, which seemed the reflection, as in a glass, 
of a heavier and a yet wearier restlessness, now 
more than two years old, came and settled on her 
face. These two looks were familiar and habitual 
with Pauline, during this year or two. The first 
the world saw: the second, only that gloomy 
brother, now grown yet more gloomy. 

In a mean street . that hung like a torn bit of 
ribbon from the skirt of Belgrave-square . and 
in a rather mean house (but which was let, as 
birds'-nests are sold in China, for its weight in 



246 Never Forgcttefu 



silver), Lady Laura Fermor and her band had 
thrown up fresh works. Flushed with recent 
success, she had seen the truth that all things 
naturally tend to the centre and to tibe metro- 
polis; and she was now operating from a sort of 
"pah" in town. 

At pleasant chambers in St. James's-square, 
the special morning paper whose function it is to 
calculate the right ascension of the feshionable 
heavenly bodies^ had announced tiiat Sir Hopkins 
Pocock had recently arrived. The Eastern 
dependency had not been so skilfully manipu- 
lated as the Waipiti. With those intractablie 
saTages he had won glory; more civilised beings 
he had found less impressionable. He was re- 
called. His staflF and dependents fell with him: 
^ and Sir Hopkins Pocock, C.B., returned to Eng- 
land, his health having broken down sadly, as we 
all well knew. 

In Clarges-street, idlers, and neighbours who 
were idlers, had noticed men, like shipwrights 
on a ship's side, busy burnishing and scouring a 
model house from top to bottom; and at whose 
door a little later, great wains were seen disgorg- 



^he Houfr in Alfred-^iace. 247 

ing furniture from their dark jaws, lij^e whales 
on wheels. The more curious still, four days 
later, that there was a tall, grim, stiff gentleman, 
whose name was Oarlay, in possession, and who 
was expecting home his married daughter and her 
husband, who were to live with him. 

These are the little strands which are to make 
up the cord. The weaving may now begin. 



248 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH. 

A VISIT. 

During these days there was often sitting in 
Pauline's drawing-room, and almost at Paiiline^s 
feet, the chair was so very low, the gauntly 
handsome Mr. Romaine who was of her party at 
the French play. He was one of the travellers 
whom she had sent for, and who had been con- 
temptuously turned away with the rest, when it 
was found that there was no profit in him ; but he 
had declined to accept that furlough. It suited 
him to stay. His cheeks were well scorched, even 
to a hard red; his cheek-bones were high and 
glossy; there was much of his neck seen; he 
had shiny eyes in deep ambuscade, and a glossy 



AFiftt. 249 

overhanging moustache. Yet he was tall, manly, 
gaunt, alivej and, when he chose, soft as a woman. 
He was one of those men who put up a dozen 
guns for luggage, and go and range among the 
poor wild beasts, who no doubt wonder what 
manner of wild beasts these are that come to 
their forests to scatter fire and smoke, and the 
sharp report, and the smashing stroke, and the 
cruel agony. He had gone among odd tribes . 
blacks, and greys, aild red-coloured . and received 
the freedom of their wigwams, and had been 
offered wives in profusion, and had written very 
agreeable narratives of his adventure of Ulalumai, 
or the Tawny River. The Great Circulator took 
five hundred copies. 

He was not married, and never would marry ; 
but liked to scoff and gird at women with polite- 
ness; sitting at their feet (on low chairs) tell- 
ing, too, of his rough sports . a sort of Othello 
in outline. To hear these matters they did se- 
riously incline. There had been a lady whom he 
called Virginia Grammont, whom he loved to en- 
tertain in this fashion, on whose low chair he sat, 
whom he taught, scolded, carped at, complimented, 
sneered at, but regarded in some sort as his own 



250 Never Forgotten. . 

special property. At the hour of four every seccmd 
day, he took her as regularly as he would his 
cigar, or dinner. She was a sort of book . more 
a pamphlet he would have said^ . ^for him. He re- 
quired her. 

She, of course, was of the gay young condottieri 
who scour the ball-rooms. Here making war for 
" an idea " does not obtain, and could not obtam. 
For, speaking metaphorically, how are horses and 
forage, and caparisons and accoutrements, and 
subsistence, to be found on such terms? There- 
fore, suddenly one day she became Mrs. Massinger. 
Mr. Komaine was thrust with a shock from the low 
chair. 

He was in a fury. He raged as if some per- 
sonal injury had been done to him. He would 
have liked to have gone out with a rifle and shot 
Massinger like a panther. But Mr. and Mrs. 
Massinger were away, going to spend the winter 
at Eome. He now discovered that he loved this 
girl. The gaunt face glowed with col^Mir; the 
man who had seen savage women until he had 
began to think the whole sex mere cattle, was in 
sore distress. 

He had begun to know Pauline about Ais time* 



A Viftt. . 251 

She laughed openly at his troubles ; fanciful, she 
called tii&em. He: did not much care how she 
received them; all he wanted was some one to 
make cooapany while he talked, and sometimes 
*^ crooned" oveir himself ,^ and more often sprang 
from the low chair, aud tramped heavily up and 
down with long strides^ on her carpet. She bore 
with him patiently, and ofteni without speaking, 
sometimes throwing on fuel, a& it were a log of 
wood, quietly. 

"This is all your own pride, which has been 
touched," she would say. On this he would stop 
hiis striding, pulling himself up, as if he were a 
strong horse, and would begin champing his bit 
impatiently, and pawing the carpet, fixing on her 
a strange half fierce look from his bright eyes. 
Then he launched into harangues, half invective 
and half expostulation. This was one pattern of 
many such scenes. It fell in with his daily life, 
and about every second or third afternoon a huge 
rough poncho of his was lying on the hall table, 
and the heavy hollow beat of* his stride was heard 
on the floor overhead. 

The house in Alfred-place had a balcony, which 
was a perfect garden. From the top of the street 



J 



252 * Never Forgotten. 



was seen what looked like a flower-bed in the air . 
luxuriant greenery, hanging and clustering, with 
large bright patch of rich red, so that strangers 
and passers-by often turned down the street to get 
a nearer view. A yet brighter patch of colour 
attracted them when the face of the mistress was 
seen bent down over her flowers. Not that she 
fancied gardening, but as she once said in her odd 
way to Lord Putnenham, who had protested that 
his gardener should send up a box of rare cuttings 
and roots from Putnenham, "She liked flowers, 
because they were sure to die." 

Thus was she, one eveninjg about four o'clock, 
bent down over the balcony, pulling away a living 
leaf as often as a dead one. The little street was 
deserted, never at any time having much traffic. 
Two figures had walked past the top . ^two girls, as 
they seemed . ^who were caught by the bright flash 
in the balcony, the gorgeous reds . and came down 
slowly to see better. As they came under, they 
looked up with women's delight in flowers, and 
Miss Manuel, who did not care to look at any 
faces, could not help seeing the upturned ones 
through the green leaves. 

In a second she had flown back into her room. 



A nftt. 253 

and rang the bell. " Ask that lady to come in," 
she said to her servant. "Bring her in; and if 
she refuses, call me." The servant bowed, and 
Pauline, shooting a glance round her room, said 
aloud, "Ah! they are come at last, and it is full 
time to begin." 

It was a lady and her maid that were admiring 
the flowers. The servant did his office so gravely, 
discreetly, and impressively, that the lady hovered 
timorously on the steps. There was a mesmeric 
influence of cold respect about his sad sphinx eyes 
which seemed to draw the young Mrs. Fermor 
inside the open door. 

"I am afraid," she said, " that is . ^really I don't 
know the lady ^" 

" She is waiting, ma'am, for you in the drawing- 
room," said the menial of the stony eyes ; and then 
there came a melodious voice from the stairs, and 
the figure of Pauline glided towards her. She 
brought her in, and the cold-eyed closed the door 
as though he had been a jailor. From this after 
noon it all began. 

Young Mrs. Fermor, hardly recovered, and 
still timorous, made as though she would go away 
again. "You remember that night at the play?" 



254 Never Fx^gatten. 



said Pauline, leading her into Uie drawing^oam, 
as though it had been a strong-room, '^* Of ^sourse 
you forget my face. I do not forget yours. The 
moment I saw you in the box I had a sort of 
instinct who it was. You must know me, and I 
want you to like me." 

The young ^1 recollected that theatre Tery 
well, and when she was looking up admiring the 
flowers, also recollected the face she had seen 
through the leaves. Soft and gentle as she was^ 
and not likely to be flurried into speechless con- 
fusion, as hapless Violet would have been, fihe 
looked at Pauline for a moment, and said : 

" After a time I shall try. I have only seen you 
once, recollect, and that for a moment." 

Pauline smiled. "You have seen more of the 
world than I have. I wish I had that wise caution. 
Sit down, won't you, and let us talk ? 'Or, first, 
let me apologise," added Pauline, dropping ier 
eyes humbly, " for thus violently carrying you into 
the house. You have a hundred things to do, I 
am sure; and now that I have seen you and 
spoken to you ^^ 

A himdred feelings were woi'king in Mrs. Fer- 



A Vtftu 255 

mor^s mind. She recollected the night at the 
Grand Hotel, and she had accepted her husband's 
f orgetf ulness of the lady as though it were truth. 
But this had not passed out of her mind ; it had 
only been packed up carefully and put by. That 
little compliment about knowing the world better 
than the grand, flashing creature before her, had 
some little sweetness . ^there was curiosity to know 
more, to discover more ; and so she did not rise to 
go away. 

"We ought to know each other well," said 
Pauline, after a pause, "after all that has hap- 
pened. It is so curious, our sitting this way to- 
gether, we two. of all people in the world. There 
are some . ^pray forgive me . who could not bear 
to look at you." 

Mrs. Fermor smiled. She was thinking that 
winners should be gracious always, and could 
afford to bear much. 

" I don't know what to say," she said ; " these 
things will come abotrt." 

"Of course," said the other, " of course. Well, 
you are tired of our story and our woes. He has 
told you of it over and over again . every minute 



256 Never Forgotten, 



detail . until you are sick of the whole business. 
He has described everything to you over and over 
again." 

The girl coloured. " No, indeed," she said ; " I 
had no curiosity. I never asked him." 

"Never told- you!" said Pauhne. "I should 
have thought it had been the one subject of his 
mind. It should have been burnt into his brain. 
I should fancy its haunting him like a nightmare. 
You would fancy so too ! Naturally so, only that 
the subject would not be so welcome to a young 
wife. You have fitted up your skeleton-closet 
already, my dear child. No matter; it does as 
well as other furniture. You are very happy, of 
course . while that poor darling . ^you will say at 
least hers, my sister^s, was a very cruel fate." 

" Why," said young Mrs. Fermor, " is she not 
happy?" 

Pauline looked at her. " Why do you take the 
trouble of acting with me ?" 

" I protest," said the other, warmly, " I know 
nothing . and have heard nothing. Was not her 
marriage happy?" 

Pauline started, gave a half cry. "Marriage! 
What marriage ? Ah, she was to have' been mar- 



A Viftt. 257 

ried. Ah! now I see. They have not told you 
anything. He thought it was better not, as it was 
only one of the old, old pathetic romantic stories." 

Mrs. Fermor was troubled ; she looked wonder- 
ing and timorous at Pauline. 

"She died," the latter went on, speaking fast, 
"poor sweet child; foolishly, I think. Some 
would have lived on through everything ; slie was 
only a child, and the idea of being deserted wore 
her out of life." 

"Deserted!" said the other, starting up. "Q 
no. Why, I was told " 

" O, of course," said Pauline, her cheeks glow- 
ing ; " these were too ugly ideas to be introduced 
to a young bride ! Ah ! and yet it was a cruel, 
cruel story." 

Young Mrs. Fermor, greatly shocked, could 
only say, "I never heard, indeed I did not. O, 
this is dreadful; poor, poor child. I am so 
grieved," 

Pauline looked at her half scornfully. 

" That should be all over now, and time should 
have healed . ^what's the phrase? Yes, Mrs. Fer- 
mor, death had to be called in to make a place for 
you. In some of the long nights, get Captain 

VOL. II. 8 



258 Never Forgotten. 



Fennor to tell you all the details. By-and-by, you 
will discover other secrets which he has not yet told 
you. But all in good time." 

Mrs. Fennor was all confused, almost over- 
whelmed by this news, and looked at her help- 
lessly. Just then the door opened sharply, and a 
heavy figure swung in. It was the Mr. Bomaine, 
who was so handsomely gaunt. 



Mr. Romaine. 259 



CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH. 

MB. BOMAINE. 

His tread became heavy^ as he saw there was 
some one else present. He flung himself with 
open ill humour on to a seat^ casting a look of im- 
patience at the lady in shawl and bonnet^ who was 
so perversely in the way. 

"This is Mrs. Fermor; don't you remember, 
Mr. Romaine ? You were introduced before ; for 
shame ! You should send and have your memory 
cleaned and oiled." 

Bomaine looked at her angrily ; pushed the low 
chair back. 

" I want to recollect as little as I can, as you 
know," he said, bluntly ; " I am sick of remember- 
ing. I wish the whole machine was worn out.'* 
s2 



260 Never Forgotten. 



" Yqu have been in France ^^ said Pauline. 

"Yet no Frencliman would have made such a 
speech." 

"Frenchman!" he said, with contempt. "I 
mean no offence to your visitor, and if any one is 
offended, I am sure I am ready to apologise. But 
I say still, thank God I am not a Frenchman. 
Better the lowest English boor before that ! " 

He thus artfully escaped a special acquaintance 
with the visitor, keeping her under the general 
category of " a lady." Young Mrs. Fermor . ^not 
yet recovered from the strange things she had 
been hearing; and this wonder mixed itself with 
yet another wonder at this strange person, also 
with a little pique at his rudeness . ^said, softly, 
" I am not the least offended. I must say a word, 
though, for our low EngUsh boors ; I have always 
found them polite." 

She said this very naturally, and perhaps meant 
nothing special, after all. Pauline smiled. Eo- 
maine looked at Mrs. Fermor fixedly for a mo- 
ment. 

" Out of the mouths of babes, you know .'' 

said Pauline ; " rather it is not likely you should 
know. Take care." 



Mr, Romaine. 261 



He said nothing, but got up and began to 
pace. "I hear, after all," he said, "they will not 
go to Borne. That fellow has listened to reason 
at last." 

" To the doctors ? " said Pauline. 

" To reason^ I said 1 " he replied, stopping sud- 
denly before them, laughing grimly. " Poor Vir- 
ginia's chest is made of gauze ; a Boman winter 
for her . God help her, when it all begins so wisely 
as that, how will it go on f " 

"0, very well," said Pauline, calmly; "he 
will make a very good serviceable creature ; kind 
and thoughtful, better than a hundred of your 
showy theatrical men, who wish marriage to be 
all Husband, and Lord, and a Hairdresser's Bust." 

Young Mrs. Fermor sighed deeply, and even 
loudly. Pauline's eyes floated round significantly 
to Mr. Bomaine's eyes. That sigh saved ten 
minutes' explanation afterwards. Then Mrs. Fer- 
mor rose to go. She bowed with a timidity not 
unacceptable to him, who returned it with a 
gracious . ungraciousness. Pauline went out with 
her. 

"You must excuse him," she said; "he is in 
an odd state at present, and we have all to humour 



262 Never Forgotten. 



him. A girl he liked has jtist married, and he is 
sufferings poor sonl. Shall we see each other 
soon? I want you to love me. I do indeed. 
I live in the solitude of the world. I have no 
one to care for me since my poor darling was 
taken from me. You know it was hard, since she 
was not to go with him, that she could not have 
stayed with us. Won't you love me I " 

Mrs. Fermor saw her eyes glistening. She was 
conqueror, and could be generous. Pressing her 
hand, she said, "Indeed I will." 

Coming back to her drawing-room, Pauline 
found the steady pacing going on. 

" You seem to have a good deal to say at the 
door there," he said. " Is the lobby to become the 
drawing-room ? " 

Pauline laughed. " How intolerant 1 *' she said ; 
" intolerant even of a simple girl like that." 

" Simple, indeed," he said, still pacing. " Who 
is she, pray?" 

"I should tell you nothing," said Pauline; 
"you had a field for yourself, and one of these 
Frenchmen you despise so would have shone. 
However, you confounded her, I think . ^I sup- 
pose she had not seen so wild a being in her life." 



Mr. Romaine. 263 



"Folly!" lie said, roughly. " Simple enough, 
though. Who is she f " 

" A married girl. This is her third moon." 

"I remember the husband now . a stick, and 
a conceited stick. A stick I should like to break 
across my knee." 

" She is a half school-girl," said Pauline, " full 
of wonder and admiration for anything wonder- 
ful or admirable. One of the true worshipping 
souls . ^the rarest kind of this sort of virti." 

He stopped pacing. " I have given up collect- 
ing," he said. 

"The marriage, I suspect," continued Pauline, 
opening tod shutting a fan, "will not be the 
happiest. He is fine and vain. He is de par 
amours, as the old French romancers say; his 
head is turned with conquests. There was a poor 
girl HSo matter." 

There was scorn in Mr. Komaine's face. He 
wad intolerant "I knew he was a stick," he 
said. " I took his measure for a prig at the first 
glance." 

"There," said Pauline, laughing, "make her 
one of your vestals. She is actually made to 
worship. Don't you see devotion in her eye, 



264 Never Forgotten. 



poor soft child ? There are many weary moments 
in the day, you know, hard to fill up." 

Thus Miss Manuel and Mr. Somaine talked 
until the lamp was brought in. Then the Bishop 
of Leighton Buzzard came in, bringing with him 
those finely-turned ebony legs; and, after the 
bishop, the pleasant reviewer ; and, after him, the 
general company. A crowd of faces . many false, 
many indifferent ; but by-and-by appeared among 
them one true one . ^that of Young Brett. 

An ofBceivchild or an officer-boy in that com- 
pany would have been wholly irrelevant. He 
would have fallen upon evil days, and have been 
stoned . that is to say, politely jeered (tut of the 
place. But Pauline honoured and even loved that* 
faithful young soldier. 

" No one must touch my terrier," she said. 

For him there was always a happy smile. She was 
glad when she saw his figure. His ready service . 
his faithful devotion in old cruel days, now happily 
far off, were not to be forgotten. Indeed, his 
true and simpte devotion had been made mani- 
fest in a hundred kind and useful ways; and, 
so long as he had stayed at Eastport, he had 



\ 



Mr. Romaine. 265 



watched tenderly over that quiet marble slab which 
rested over poor Violet. When the regiment 
moved, which it did in about a year, Pauline, re- 
turning home, discovered that he had privately 
salaried an assistant in a nursery-garden to look 
after the weeds, and such little gardening as would 
be wanting. 

But, in that mixed company, his own merits 
soon exempted him from any protection. This 
day he came and was welcomed by Pauline, who 
had not seen him for a fortnight. He sat down 
beside her. "Do you remember your wonder- 
ing," he said, " what had become of that man at 
Eastport . that Major Carter? " 

Pauline's eyes flashed. 

"Yes . ^yes," she said, hastily; "and have you 
heard anything?" 

"I saw him to-day," said Young Brett. "I 
never liked him. But I went up and spoke to 
him. I found out all about him." 

" Yes," said Pauline, with great interest ; " go 
on. You are the most useful friend I have." 

"Nonsense, Miss Manuel," said he, colouring 
under this praise; "you will spoil me. He has 



266 Never Forgotten. 



been abroad. Some little town in France. He is 
in mournings and has lost his wife; in great grief, 
I suppose." 

^'Lost his wife I And is he going back to 
France? " said Pauline, eagerly. 

" Dear no 1 " he said ; " has just taken a house ; 
he told me his address ; asked about you." 

" He didV^ said Pauline, with compressed Ups. 

"O yes," said, Young Brett; "and soon after 
we parted at the comer of Pali-Mall. I was going 
to the club, and he went to the Irrefragable 
Insurance Company." 

"Insiurance Company!" said Pauline; "why, 
what for!" 

" I don't know," said Young Brett, in a little 
distress at not having made this out ; " but I could 
ask, you know . ^find out ^" 

" No, no," said Pauline ; " it is nothing. Thanks* 
You are always good to me, and useful. Now, 
hand the bishop his tea." 

And to the bishop, whose turned ebony Umbs 
lay over each other like two miniature gymnastic 
clubs reposing in a comer, he hurried over, eagerly 
bearing a cup of tea. ^ 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jireet. 267 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST. 

THE HOUSE IN CLARGES-STREBT. 

Captain Fermob, having now done with the 
anny, and failed in his Indian profession, had been 
washed ashore on the great London strand. How 
interminable that strand is ; how barren, how mi- 
serable, for all such new waifs and strays, has been 
over and over again proved. Fermor, a young 
man, and, as men go, not by any means a dull 
man, met with a few stray inhabitants on this 
lonely coast, running down from their huts ; that 
is to say, from a club or two: but in London 
practically he had only a few acquaintances, and 
scarcely any friends. 

He had come home with Sir Hopkins, had passed 



268 Never Forgotten. 



up through the south of France, and had made 
that dramatic morning call just as he had pro- 
mised. He had heard of Violet's death, and had 
been much affected, but that was long, long before. 
He was not well off : he stopped with this family 
rather longer than a mere morning call required, 
and, before very long, the marriage was settled on, 
and it was known that " Fermor had picked up an 
heiress," and also "an old father." There was 
some truth in this last odd expression, for Mr. 
Carlay gave his daughter fifty thousand pounds, 
after this fashion : It was conveyed to trustees 
for " her use for life," and afterwards to Fermor 
absolutely. 

" I cannot live without my daughter," he said, 
half piteously. " You might cut me off water, or 
bread, or meat, or even air. I have lived with her 
always ; I cannot part with her now in my old age. 
I will make it up to you. You shall see I shall, 
/know how young married people do. If it was 
settled on her, you would soon come to think me 
in the way, and I should have to go. Now I shall 
have a stake in the house. No, no. I will do 
everything ; you shall see." 

Fermor smiled at this foolish eagerness. It was 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jlreet. . 269 

an exceptional arrangement certainly, but after all 
lie was a quiet old man. clay in a fashionable 
potter's hands . and the consideration was abun- 
dant. Thus the house was furnished and made 
splendid, and thus a little room at the top of the 
first flight, leading to the drawing-room, where 
there was a greenhouse, a study, and a bedroom, 
became Mr. Carlay's home, where he read French 
and Spanish books. It rolled on very smoothly 
for some weeks. Then Fermor began to weary a 
little. 

Fermor alone, and Fermor doubled, were two 
different things in fashionable life. He had hung 
a millstone of disability about his own neck. 
Young Mrs. Fermor could not show her passports, 
or her papers were not "in rule." A pleasant 
wandering man was always welcome : he filled in 
gaps in the ranks. But when it was given out 
that he had married " some low creature," and the 
knowing him entailed knowing the low creature, 
it was perceived that the game was not altogether 
worth the candle. And thus it was that in crowded 
London he began to find himself in a sort of 
elegant desert. 

This he did not at all relish. He loved the old 



270 . Never Forgotten. 



incense, the incense which in private drawing- 
rooms ladies were accustomed to swing before him 
from little feminine censers. There were none 
now to swing ; rather, the censers were busy be- 
fore other images. He resented all this bitterly, 
just as a reduced gentleman resents the loss of 
luxuries, and came home of evenings to domestic 
joys, very moody and silent. 

He thought very often of the l^apless Violet 
It seemed to him a very pretty romance, and it 
became sweet to him to dwell on it. The whole 
was a soft picture to look back to, and he felt 
deeply and sorrowfully, as he thought of her sad 
end. Yet the feeling was not ungrateful. It was 
a sort of pet flowei>garden, into which he retired 
at times to walk. And he thought very, veiy 
often of the splendid flashing sister, and their dra- 
matic night outside the caf ^, and of " the curiously 
strange impression " he seemed to make upon her. 
He felt a sort of restless wish to meet her again, 
and know more of those soft details which almost 
fell into the shape of a dream. He made many 
inquiries, but could not find her out. He had no 
clue. He asked those who might have known, but 
without success. 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jireet. 271 

Suddenly one evening, on the steps of his club, 
he met Young Brett, whom he had not seen since 
an Eastport day, ever so long ago, and the day of 
an Eastport little party. But those times were 
now rolled up and huddled away in a comer . ^like 
old canvas scenery. 

Young Brett coloured up, gave him a blunt nod, 
and was passing on. Fermor stopped him. He 
was quick enough to see this feeling, ahd was 
amused ; Brett was only a child. 

"I am so glad, Brett," said Fermor, putting his 
arm in the boy^s. " Come back in here, I want to 
talk to you." 

The other stood irresolute. 

^*I have to go ^" he said at length. "The 

fact is, Fermor ^^ 

Fermor was, luckily, in a good humour that 
evening. " The fact is," he said, " you are crusty 
to-night, and not so glad to see an old friend as 
you ought to be. Come. I am going your way, 
whatever way it is. There." 

Young Brett was no match for handling of this 
sort. "Now," said Fermor, after they had walked 
a few moments, " what is the matter ? What have 
I done to you? Have I not always tried to be 



272 Never Forgotten. 



kind to you . done everything I coold, in my small 
way?" 

" O yes, yes," said Young Brett, a little 
ashamed ; " but . ^but . O, Fermor, how could you 
do that . it was dreadful. Such misery, such ruin! 
If indeed it had been to me^ how glad I should 
have been. But that poor sweet innocent girl. 
It killed her, Fermor, it did indeed, as much as if 
you had poisoned her or stabbed her." 

Fermor was silent a moment. Something like 
shame was in his cheeks. Yet there was something 
in this honest young creature he could not be 
angry with. "Brett," he said, in a low voice, 
"you have been hearing these stories. I was 
very sorry. I could not help it. How was I to 
know? Even her sister, who is the best judge, 
whom I saw in Paris the other day, she does not 
believe that idle history." 

"Pauline!" said Young Brett, starting; "you 
met her ?" 

" To be sure," said Fermor, confidently. "Ask 
her about it if you like . ^we had coffee together 
on the Boulevards. Is she at Eastport still?" 

Young Brett . relieved infinitely, and even de- 
lighted to find that his friend was in some sort a 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jireet. 273 

true man (for so he now found him, from his faith 
in anything Miss Manuel did) . ^became eagerly 
communicative and told all that he knew, and left 
Fermor with Miss Manuel's address in Alfred- 
place, and many other particulars. 

Fermor came home pleased with himself, and 
very gay. The nuptial stage moon was still 
shinmg, and the new husband and new wife wore 
their theatrical dresses and properties for each 
other's sake. But on this day young Mrs. Fermor 
had come home sadly troubled and distressed^ 
She had two griefs : a deep and intricate deception 
practised on herself, and the image of a poor soft 
girl who had withered away unto death. 

She had a little comer or closet of romance into 
which she retired, and found pleasure in painting 
up a dreadful picture of desertion, and miserable 
blight. Not but that this brought with it a sense 
of conquest for herself ; but there was also present 
a dread sense of disquiet. For already had the 
glorious sun in whose light she basked sent forth 
some cold chilling rays, which made her shrink 
away in a sort of alarm. 

By another week . she being now left a good deal 
alone, with a vague curiosity to know more of the 

VOL. II. T 



274 Never Forgotten. 



bright Miss Manuel, and that curious stoiy in which 
her husband had played such a part . ^Fennor 
came to her about noon, and asked would she go 
for him into the City, and do some small commis- 
sion ? He had West-end business of his own to 
attend to. For, though he had now no known 
profession, there was a sort of fiction accepted in 
the house of his going out each day for business, 
and of his coming home to dinner after business 
was done. Would she oblige him in this? said 
Captain Fermor, ceremoniously, for the stage 
moon was still shining, and the pantomime running. 
She was delighted. It fitted in very nicely, and 
she set out that afternoon with her maid, in a cab. 
She had some little commission in some City 
shop, which was not readily found, and a sort of 
rude Siberian cabman (with a gaunt angular horse, 
whose legs swung like a pendulum in a slow trot) 
had made a low grumbling protest at each fresh 
direction. When, finally, he was bidden from the 
heart of the City to make straight for AK red-place, 
at Brompton, he began to dwell with savage irony 
on the advantages of having " a 'ds of hiron," and 
to hint at young Mrs. Fermor^s " calling 'erself a 
lady," which she had not done, though perhaps 



The Houfe in Clarges-fireet. 275 

considering the title implied. Taking a kind of 
short cut, the Siberian cabman got into a network 
of slnms and narrow streets, devoted to ancient 
smelling fishes, and meat perhaps as old, and, to 
the general furnishing of a larder, mostly in a state 
of decay. Where, too, were some old book-stalls 
and some curiosity shops. And here, while turning a 
comer, the pendulum limbs of the cab-horse slipped 
from beneath him, and he was on the stones . 
himself as rough and as angular as a heap of 
stone. 

In an instant there was a crowd ; a crowd that 
came from behind the ancient meats and ancient 
fishes, and out of dark places yet farther behind, 
just like brigands stopping a diligence. The two 
women inside, long since in trepidation at these 
strange regions, were now filled with terror, espe- 
cially when the Siberian, instead of striving to 
raise his beast, came straight to the window, and 
began to assail them publicly as the authors of the 
misfortune. This was " wot it was come to," he 
said, still maintaining the irony. He hoped they 
liked it, and '' was proud of their work." 

"Let us out! let us out! Do, please," said 
T 2 



276 Never Forgotten. 



Mrs. Fermor, as the ring of faces drew closer to 
listen. 

The Siberian put his hands in his pockets. 
" You want to see it, do ye? Nice ladies, eh! 
Now " he said, suddenly growing savage, " wot are 
you going to do ? Gome I " 

" O, this is dreadful!" said Mrs. Fermor. 
"Help us, do. Do, please, let us out. Here is 
money." 

They had only a few shillings. At the other 
side, where the glass was up, raw unshaved faces 
were pressed against it, looking in. There was 
much merriment and great curiosity abroad as to 
the result of this pleasant scene. 

" Do you suppose," the Siberian added, with a 
loud bang on the door that made the whole cab 
clatter . " do you suppose that you're^ to go about 
all day a killin' 'orses on honest men, with a drive 
here, and a drive there, and then not pay for your 
game ? I tell you wot ^" 

" We are ladies ; indeed we are. Here is our 
address, and Captain Fermor ^" 

The Siberian laughed. "I want no captings 
I wants my money, and I wants my 'orse. And 
I tell you, you don't go till I gets one or the other 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jlreet. 277 

Ain't it a shame," he added, turning to the crowd, 
" for people as dresses as ladies, and ^" 

In utter despair, young Mrs. Fermor had been 
looking across the wild faces, and beyond the i?sdld 
faces. Suddenly she saw a tall gentleman . a 
European, as it were, among the Indians . ^picking 
a way round the outskirts of the crowd. In an 
instant she had called to him. " O, sir, sir ! Do 
come here ! Help us ! do, please." 

The tall gentleman stopped a second, listened, 
then shrugged his shoulders, and was passing on. 
That stopping showed Mrs. Fermor his face . 
the "gauntly handsome" face . and the trailing 
moustache. 

" O, Mr. Romaine," she said, in a lower voice. 
"Do come to me!" 

Slowly Mr. Komaine swung his way through 
them. The crowd was knocked aside heavily, as 
though his elbows had been the comers of massive 
furniture. He was at the window in a moment, 
confronting the Siberian, on whom he looked down 
a head taller. 

Young Mrs. Fermor, in some confusion, was be- 
ginning her story, when he stopped her. "After- 
wards, if you like," he said. (Gab, cabman, and 



278 Never Forgotten. 



horse, in fact, narrated the whole thing much more 
shortly.) " Now you had better get out." He took 
hold of the handle of the door. 

" Come, now. I say ^^ said the Siberian. 

Mr. Bomaine let it go at once. " Well, open it 
yourself," said he. " It will save my gloves. And 
look sharp." 

The Siberian was a little staggered. "And 
who's to pay for the 'os and the damage? This 
won't do, I say," he said, coming in front of the 
door. 

" Stand back, please," aid Mr. Romaine, gently, 
at the same time calmly pressing his elbow on him. 
It was like the comer of a chest of drawers. 
" There . ^thank you I That will do. You should 
keep these handles a little freer . oil is not so dear. 
Take care," he said, in a low warning voice, to 
him. " You will get into mischief by interfering 
with me. Stand away ! I once killed an Indian 
with a blow of this fist. I did; on my word. 
There's my card ; I have got yours. I shall re- 
collect the number. Here, my friend" (to a smart 
ostler-looking man), "get this horse on his legs 
again. He is only shaken. There" (and he put 
something into the ostWs hands). " And you help 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jireet. 279 

. 
too" (to a parcels boy, whose hand he also \dsited). 

" Here" (to the Siberian), " go to the next pubUc 

with that. Wine makes the heart of man glad . or 

spirits. Now, Mrs. Fermor, take my arm. I know 

a short cut out of this place." 

He led her away without further protest or ob- 
struction. He was indeed a hero. a quiet, calm, 
grand hero. With so slight an exertion of power, 
what might he not accomplish if the occasion re- 
quired? Women always overflow with gratitude 
to preservers of this sort . even to those who have 
saved them from a driver. 

Civilised Europe was only a street away after 
all. Better still, here was a stand of cabs. Then 
Mrs. Fermor recovered herself, and began to dis- 
course incoherent gratitude. 

" Good gracious!" said he, "it is nothing. I 
heard a lady calling from a cab-window, and I came. 
Do what we will, we can't make a romance out of 
it. Now, here is a cab. I suppose I can go 
now?" 

" O, thank you I " said Mrs. Fermor, still over- 
flowing with gratitude. "I don't know what to 
say, I am sure; how to thank you for such a 
service, knowing you so little, too." 



J 



280 Never Forgotten. 



" As for that," said he, " I may, without rude- 
ness, relieve your mind. If it had been a washer- 
woman in her cart, whom I had never seen in my 
life, I should have done the same. It is really 
nothing," he said, smiling. " You make too much 
of it. Here is a cab. Could you spare me now ? 
I really have an appointment." 

" O, I am sure," said young Mrs. Fermor, "if 
we could leave you anywhere, I am sure ^" 

" I assure you I like to walk, unless," he added, 
smiling a little contemptuously, "you still think 
yourself in danger. I assiire you this driver looks 
moral and respectable. Don't be afraid." 

A little mortified, she got in, and she saw Mr. 
Komaine hurry away, apparently glad to be free. 
The maid pronounced him "a short" gentleman . 
that is, as regards manner. 

Fermor was a long time out, and came home 
late . ^with the drum hoisted, as it were. She was 
not skilled in reading those meteorological signals, 
and flew at him eagerly with a full narrative of 
her adventures. It was sixh an escape . such a 
rescue . and such a rescuer. But Fermor was 
chafing. He had called twice at a House, and 
had not been admitted, though he had seen a 



The Houfe in Clarges-Jireet. 281 

bishop's carriage drive up, and finely turned ebony 
limbs go down its steps, and up other steps into 
the House. It was an insult, and not a mistake. 

Mrs. Former's eyes were sparkling as she dwelt 
on the details of her story. "And would you 
believe it, Charles, he no more seemed to mind 
what he had done, than if he had walked across 
this room." 

" Well, I take it all for granted," said her hus- 
band, getting up suddenly. "I have heard it 
three times over now. A cab horse fell down, 
and a gentleman called another cab for you." 

Young Mrs. Fermor coloured. 

A cold fog or Scotch mist had covered up the 
stage moon. Now she saw the drum hoisted . and 
wounded, withdrew her little narrative. 

" Can he be getting tired of me already," she 
thought, a little bitterly. " How cold and cruel he 
can be." She had a dismal evening before her. 
The personal worship, the little censers that swung 
delicate little compliments, and the pretty sweet- 
smelling vapours of Koger le Garden, had been 
tumbled away into a comer. They were tar- 
nished ; they were old plate now. 

A note was brought in. She took it, wondering 



282 Never Forgotten. 



who was to write her notes. She turned to the 
signature^ and found it signed " Pauline Manuel." 
As Pauline's face flashed and glittered, so there 
was something of the same light in these written 
words, something in the invitation they gave. She 
had been expecting her, she said. She wished to 
see her so much, to talk over a hundred matters. 
"I am alone," said Pauline, "and have a hun- 
dred other things I want to keep out of my 
thoughts. You owe me a debt . ^you should be 
generous. Your husband kindly called twice to- 
day, but half by a mistake, half out of intention, 
was not admitted. I can know youj even like you 
. ^but him not so much; at least, not for a long 
time. You will understand this. Come to me to- 
morrow." 

Colour flushed her cheeks. "So this is what 
he is busy with," she said ; " carrying on a plot, a 
mystery. Oh, I am very miserable, very un- 
happy." 

Fermor came in precisely at this unlucky mo- 
ment. He saw her tell-tale cheeks. He was in- 
tolerant, and did not rehsh any one being out of 
humour but himself. "What," he said, "not 
blown over yetf Is it possible that you are dis- 



The Houfe in Clarges-flreet. 283 

pleased because I did not enter into your cab ad- 
venture ? Good gracious 1 Come, now, you won't 
be so unreasonable." There was an air of sar- 
castic good humour in his tone, which was a little 
disagreeable. 

Young Mrs. Fermor looked at him tremblingly. 
Her round red lips were quivering. She was 
thinking of all her " wrongs " accumulating since 
the Paris night. 

But she answered calmly : " You might reduce 
every action to that shape, if we looked at it in 
that sort of light." 

Fermor did not like being argued with, so he 
said, sharply, " And let me tell you, my good child, 
now that you are come to live in London, that this 
making a nine days' wonder out of every cab you 
take, and of every man you pick up out of the 
street, will lead you into all sorts of embarrass- 
ments. Seriously, we should get rid of our little 
Eastport simplicity, my dear." 

Her lips shaped themselves into deep reproach. 
" How cold, how unkind you are," they seemed to 
say. Fermor heard these words as much as if 
they had been spoken. " Go to your father," he 
said, '^ and tell him about the cab. I have busi- 



284 Never Forgotten. 



ness now, my dear . ^letters. I have been worried 
all day. The story will amuse him." 

Young Mrs. Fermor, with her round soft cheeks 
full of colour, was sensitive, and a little quick of 
temper. Over the pantomime moon a cloud had 
suddenly spread itself. The soft cheeks were glow- 
ing and flaming. "How cold and unkind," she 
said, quickly. " I did not expect this from you. 
If papa knew this- ^ 

Now indeed the colour came to Fermor's cheeks. 
" Don't say that," he answered, with a trembling 
voice ; " never speak in that way to me, if you 
wish us to live quietly together. I shall not be in- 
timidated by his name. No, I am not come to 
thxd; no," continued he, walking up and down, 
" though people may say I have sold myself * into 
genteel slavery.' " 

Now was the fitting time for opening the hyste- 
rical flood-gates. Down burst the torrent of tears, 
carrying with it, like stones, ejaculations of cruelty 
and unkindness. " Indeed, I might have expected 
this," she said. "I was warned in time. And 
when she^ poor thing, was treated in that way " 

" She I Who?" said Fermor, stopping short in 
his walk, and turning pale. 

" I know it" aaid^o\3H\^Mx^. Fermor. "It was 



The Hoife in CJar^es^ut. 285 

kept veiy secret ; but I have heard it aDL Periiaps 
it ^win be nty fate one of these dajs. God help 
me. It was not suitable that I should know it. I 
was kept in the dark, it seems . on . until . ^nntil 
the slaveiy . the genteel slaveiy was accomplished. 
Yes, I know the whole, though you had reasotis 
for not telling me . what the poor giil, now in 
her grave, who, / was told, was manied and 
happy ^ 

" Never, never !" said Fermor, eag^y. " I did 
not indeed. I could not tell such a falsehood." 
And indeed, to do him justice, he had never said 
so. ^^ But what is the meaning of this? This is 
simply absurd. Do let us have no vulgar matri- 
monial quarrds . not as yetj at least," he added, 
with a forced smile. He tried thus to sweep away 
the subject into a comer. But unhappily . ^to use the 
odious language of the ring . here was first blood. 
Veiy soon the pantomime, with its stage moon, 
would be withdrawn. The " run" was nearly 
over. 

It was of course patched up ; both shrank a little 
from this ^^ vulgar quarrelling." They had not 
yet learned to cast down the idols, or, at least, to 
be careless about casting them down. 



286 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND. 

AT A BBOUGHAM WINDOW. 

The Irrefragable Insurance Company, Limited, 
had a new home in the West-end, a very narrow 
strip of front, that looked like the " console" of a 
mahogany sideboard, or like the edge of a thin 
slice of bride-cake. The small patch of ground 
upon which it stood would not have furnished 
room . ^by way of burial . for many of the '^ Lives" 
the office insured ; yet, if it had been floored with 
golden sovereigns instead of encaustic tiles, it 
would not have represented all it cost. It was 
doing a thriving business, chiefly from an unques- 
tioned readiness in accepting anything that came 
loosely under the designation of a Life (even 



At a Brougham Window. 287 

though the value lay rather in the direction of a 
Death), and from a profession, not quite so un- 
questioned, of paying all claims with a readiness 
that was almost " soft." 

In these days a brougham drove up to the door 
of the Irrefragable . ^a brougham, no doubt, con- 
taining a Life. The Life was a Lady Life. It 
came in, and the mahogany doors swung to behind 
it . as it were the lid of a box, shutting down 
firmly on the Life. The greatness of the business 
seemed to be revealed in its mahogany, and the 
Lady Life was reflected in panelling and partitions 
forward, and from a monster solid counter (that 
would have dined giants, and borne the weight of 
their elbows after dinner) upwards. 

The Lady Life was a flashing Life, bright, 
dazzling, and handsomely dressed. The faces of 
many clerks converged to her with admiration. 
Mr. Speedy, manager and actuary, imprisoned all 
day in a little compartment that looked like a ma- 
hogany match-box, looked out over the edge to the 
brilliant Lady Life. Mr. Speedy, who did showy 
calculations, and furnished the instructive examples 
out of "The Books of the Company," beginning, 
" A has insured in the year 1837 for one hundred 



288 Never Forgtftten. 



pounds," reconnoitred the lady narrowly, for aboat 
every Life that entered he did a little exercise to 
keep his mental hand in. ^^I know," said Mr. 
Speedy to himself; ^^ handsome young wife, old 
husband, with Life utterly uninsurable. Thai 
won't do here, madam." He listened, as Pauline's 
soft clear voice travelled to him readily. 

She wished to insure her own Life, only for a 
trifle, say two hundred pounds . ^say in favour of 
her brother. Could they oblige her with forms % 
Mr. Speedy, over the edge of the match-box, had 
seen the dark brougham . ^the spectre of the unin- 
surable octogenarian husband had happily faded 
out. Here was a case for extended connexion. He 
came down softly out of his box with forms, and 
took the case out of the hands of the inferiors. 

" You will find everything here," he said, col- 
lecting quite a little library of fat almanacks, co- 
loured pictures of the "branches" at Montreal, 
Dublin, &c. " We offer very advantageous terms. 
We ask no disagreeable questions, and give as little 
trouble as we can. I am sure you would not re- 
pent coming to us. In fact, if you were satisfied, 
and would kindly mention us to any of your 
friends '' 



At a Brougham Window. 289 

" I certainly shall," said Pauline. "In fact, I 
have come to you chiefly because a gentleman that 
I know has been with you . ^Major Carter." 

Mr. Speed/s brow contjfacted. "Ah! A claim 
^uit is ! The most unfortunate transaction we have 
had yet. Seven thousand pounds, and only twc 
years' premium paid I We were advised to resist ; 
but, as we are a young institution, we thought it 
better to avoid the . scandal," said Mr. Speedy, 
smiling. "It was the fault of our medical adviser 
who accepted the lady's Life too hastily." 

" Mrs. Carter ? " said Pauline. 

" Yes," said Mr. Speedy. " But we are pre- 
pared cheerfully to make any sacrifice . any sacri- 
fice to keep up the irrefragable character of our 
corporation. As we have dealt with Major Carter 
openly, fairly, and honourably, so, if you honour 
us, madam ^*' 

" You will pay my heirs," said Pauline, smiling, 
" as readily as you did Major Carter ? " 

" The board has not paid yet," said Mr. Speedy. 
"By the terms of our charter, we can keep the 
policy money nine months. But what is thatt 
Fairness and honesty before everything." 

TOL. n. u 



290 Never Forgotten. 



Pauline took away her pictures and thick alma- 
nacks into her brougham. 

Mr. Speedy retired into his match -box, but 
looked out long over its edge after the bright and 
fashionable lad^ who had visited him. He told 
Mrs. Speedy at dinner of the interview he had had 
with a very " high" person, indeed, at tihle oflSce, and 
he hinted that by Ins tact and management he had 
secured that " interest" for the office. He did not 
know, however, that the "high" lady had thrown 
herself back in her brougham with a weary air, 
and had flung down his papers with a sort of 
disgust. " How I loathe . ^how I detest myself," 
she said, " for these meannesses. I am ashamed to 
hold up my head. But what can I do? Women 
have no other strength. Trickery and cunning 
and nieanness . this must serve ivs in the room of 
brute force. Is my life to become an organised 
hypocrisy ? O, Violet 1 " 

She was coming to the Park. Her face became 
bright again. She drew herself forward,, and 
looked out proudly from the window. A few 
pec^le were waiting half way at the crossing to let 
a string of carriages go by. To her astomishnMSi^ 
she saw young Mrs. Fermor and her maid among 



At a Brougham Window. 291 

these. In an instant she had the glass down, and 
was callmg to her. 

The yonng wife, unhappy and tossed about by 
her new bitter troubles, had determined to for- 
swear her society. She shrank even from the 
name. But now, with Pauline present, it seemed 
altogether different. She felt herself a mere child 
before that brilliant woman of the world. There 
was an influence in her . an absorbing glance . 
which she could not resist. IVIiss Manuel bade her 
send home her maid, and get in. She must come 
and drive with her, and see the company in the 
Park. Mrs. Fermor made a faint protest, and put 
forward her dress,, but she was powerless in those 
hands. There was a seduction about Pauline as 
she made a place for her beside herself, which, for 
the moment, she did not wish to resist. 

She had never yet seen this shape of Vanity 
Fair . ^the procession of people of quality moving 
along like a bright Coventry ribbon. Her lord, 
Fermor, had always dismissed it as childish, and as 
a childish taste. Had not he seen it over and over 
again, until he was literally sick of the business ? 
Now it quite dazzled her . ^the noble horses, and 
the knights, and the ladies of the knights, and the 
u2 



292 Never Forgotten. 



wealth that shone with a rawness and vulgarity, 
and the nobility of birth, that glowed with a rich 
but subdued quietude. She was delighted with 
this wonderful show, for she was a rustic. 

Even the loungers . who came to stare and per- 
haps remained to talk . attracted her. She asked 
about them . about everybody. Pauline was charm- 
ing . told her all things. " I like you to ask me 
everything," she said, "in that natural way. I 
want you to consult me, and in time to like me, if 
you canr 

" Ah I " said young Mrs. Fermor, stooping for- 
ward a little eagerly, and in some confusion, "is 
not that . ^yes, I am sure it is ^" 

" How well you know," said Pauline, looking at 
her with a strange quick look. "You are quite 
right. We shall call him over. Mr. Komaine ! " 

" No, no ! indeed no," said Mrs. Termor, hur- 
riedly ; " not while I am with you." 

" Nonsense ! " said Pauline, smiling. " I know 
what you are thinking of. You are afraid of 
him." 

Mr. Romaine, in pale gloves, was at her window. 
Mrs. Fermor saw the look of impatience on his 
face as she came into view. " I am always to be 



At a Brougham Window. 293 

in his way," she thought. " He will be rough to 
me." He nodded slightly to her. 

" So you come to the show," he said, " Miss 
Manuel. Of course you do. And yet I know 
what you think of the whole business. I am 
astonished, you that talk so." 

" Never mind that now," she said. " You see 
my friend Mrs. Fermor here? " 

^' I do," he said, looking down to beat his trousers 
with his cane ; " that is, I should say I have that 
pleasure." 

" Mr. Romaine was so kind to me the other day," 
said Mrs. Fermor, warmly. " And I am afraid I 
never thanked him sufficiently for ^*' 

" O," said he, " are we never to be out of that 
cabl Heaven preserve us! do let us leave it 
where we left it. I declare . and think me 
candid, but not rude, please . I am inclined never 
to go to the assistance of any one in that way 
again." 

Pauline looked from one to the other. Mrs. 
Fermor showed her confusion and mortification. 
"Because you," she said, quickly and wiarmly, 
" are above all these forms, there is no reason why 
we should be. I assure you it is more from re- 



294 Never Forgotten. 



spect to ourselves that we say these things. I 
should consider myself quite rustic if I passed 
it over. You must make allowance ; you should, 
indeed." 

This was all spoken very hastily, and with a 
voice that almost trembled. She was a little quick 
of temper. He looked at her with really blank 
astonishment. Pauline clapped her hands. 

"Exceedingly good," she said. "There, that 
will do for yott," and she pressed Mrs. Fermor's arm 
under her shawl with encouragement. ** Charm- 
ing, my dear," she whispered; "a good lesson. 
Now, Mr. Romaine, after that, tell us news, 
wicked news, if you have any. There's old Lady 
Canonbury rolling by and swinging like Mahomet's 
coffin. Look, dear; and she is worth looking at, 
for that spotted and fiery face can be set off with a 
hundred thousand pounds' worth of diamonds." 

But Mrs. Fermor's face was glowing and flush- 
ing still, and she was biting her plum-coloured h'ps 
with vexation, at the sharp attack of which she had 
been the subject. These pretty little emotions were 
as yet a sort of awkward squad, to be trained and 
drilled into good soldiers by-and-by. 



\ 



At a Brougham Window. 295 

"What about Miss Lorele/s match?" cried 
Pauline. " Come, we wait? Begin.** 

" Look at Aer/' he said, suddenly, " how angry 
she is ! She could grill me now . make a pin- 
cushion of me . all because I won't be overioaded 
with thanks. How good 1 " His eyes were fixed 
upon her as if she was some show or exhibition. 
Mrs. Termor only flushed the more. 

" No, indeed," she said, " I don't care in the 
least. You quite mistake. But I think you need 
not have been so excited about my little thanks." 

" Excited 1 " he said, smiling. " Who here is 
excited ? /am not. I only speak for myself." 

" It's twt about that, then?" said Mrs. Fermor. 

"What isn't about that, then?" he said, still 
amused. " I protest I don't follow." 

Still, really angry, she would not answer, but 
looked out of the window. 

" I won't have this," said Pauline. " You must 
go away; you are creating a disturbance. The 
savage is breaking out. If you really want a battle, 
you may have it in my house, with dec^icy, at the 
usual hour. There, go." And she drew up the 
glass and bade the coachman drive home. 



296 Never Forgotten. 



" O," said Mrs. Fermor, suddenly, " I don't 
know what you will think of me. I am quite 
ashamed of myself, and of such temper." 

Miss Manuel laughed. " It was capital," she 
said. " You have done him a world of good. I, 
who am not in much terror of him, could not have 
said it. Ah ! I see you are clever." 

" No, indeed," said Mrs. Fermor. " Charles 
often tells me I am a child still." 

At that name Miss Manuel started a little. 
" Some men would have us children always. 
Our poor Violet would have been a child always. 
Sometimes, looking at you as I do now, it reminds 
me of her . something in the tone, something in 
the manner. Ah, poor Violet ! " 

Mrs. Fermor saw the deep eyes glistening. She 
was quick and impulsive in all emotions. She put 
her hand affectionately on Miss Manuel's arm. 

^' Indeed^ I feel for you," she said, "and all 
about that Indeed I do. It makes me miserable 
at times to think of it. Though I had never seen 
her, someway I felt as if it had been for my own 
sister. And for youy too," she added, " who loved 
her so dearly." 

Pauline drew away from her suddenly with a 



At a Brougham JFindow. 297 

startled look, and began to talk rapidly. " Yes, I 
know," she said ; " a sad story. A sensation inci- 
dent they would call it now," she added, with a smile, 
but a very mournful smile. 

They were at Alfred-place, and had the unfail- 
ing tea. " We shall have a quiet talk together," 
said Miss Manuel; "you on that sofa, I on this. 
The mob won't be here for an hour to come. 
This will be delightful. Talking of poor Romaine, 
there is something to be said for him now. He is 
scarcely an accountable being. You would hardly 
guess that he is in a very wild state of mind." 

Mrs. Fermor looked curious. 

" Yes," said Pauline, " I could tell you a long 
history about that. There was a girl he fancied, 
and who, he tells me, fancied him. As you know, 
that is good authority ; but no matter. These 
rough savages, as you can fancy, when they do love, 
love like a hurricane . ^like a storm. Well, she has 
just married . a good match, too." 

Eeally interested, and not without a little com- 
punction, Mrs. Fermor waited for more. Women 
delight in these little dramas. 

" So, after all," said Miss Manuel, " we should 
not be very hard on him. You can understand 



298 Never Forgotten. 



what a straggle is going on. He wants to be good, 
and to do the right thing, and we should help him, 
if we can. He thinks the newly married pair ate 
to be away for the winter, in Eome ; but the worst 
is, I know that they are to be here. Their plans 
have been changed. So I say we mnst help him, 
and be indulgent. Don't you think so?" 

At this moment, the tall figure which they were 
to help came swinging in. " I knew we should 
have you," said Miss Manuel, half scornfully. 
" You may sit down, however." 

Mr. Eomaine dropped instinctively into his low 
chair. "I told you I was coming," he said. 
" When I get into the habit of a thing, I must go 
on, even if I am not in the humour. So . ^I had 
to come." 

" Polite always," said Miss Manuel. " Tea ?" 

"No," he answered, bluntly ; "I don't care for 
that. Once a sharp thing has been said to me," he 
said, fixing his eyes directly on Mrs. Fermor, "it 
puts me out for everything. even for that sort of 
wash." 

Mrs. Fermor coloured at this allusion, which she 



understood perfectly. 



At a Brougham Window. 299 

^^I never meant, I am sure," she said, casting 
down her eyes. " I thought you ^ 

" Ha ! ha I ha !" laughed Mr. Eomaine, as if he 
was in the hunting-field. " There's human nature ! 
We apply everything to ourselves. Alas ! we are 
always the first object in our own thoilghts." 

Another sort of colour was hurrying to Mrs. 
Fermoi^s cheeks at this fresh outrage, when he 
added, slowly : 

" Not but that, in the present case, you were 
right. I was alluding to you." 

Again, in fresh confusion, Mrs. Termor, vexed 
with him, with the situation, with everybody, but 
mostly with herself, hurriedly rose to go. He lifted 
himself hastily. 

"Going home?" he said, ^thinking me, of 
course, a Honololu islander. Well, I can't help it ; 
I can't change my spots. But I can do this . beg 
pardon. Forgive. I don't mean all I say or do." 

Mrs. Fermor looked up at him with more confi- 
dence, and a smile. She was hopelessly mortified 
at these ups and downs, but gave him her hand. 
PauKne came out with her, and kissed her. " You 
are a wonderful creature," she said; "you amaze 



300 Never Forgotten. 



me. I could not dare to go on in that way. I must 
see you again soon. You have promised me, 
mind." 

As the young wife passed out, Miss Manuel, 
staying on the stairs, and looking after her, dropped 
her hand on the banister, and stamped her foot 
with what seemed a sudden pain. ^^Poor inno- 
cent 1" she said, "is she beginning to like me I 

How Uke to ^" Then she turned sharply round, 

and walked back into the drawing-room. 

" There ! " she said, half contemptuously, " you 
have foimd a sensible woman at last, on whom all 
your fine tragedy is thrown away. Now, is your 
mind at rest! What can repay you for the lost 
time?" 

He began to pace the room, impatiently biting 
his moustache. He looked at her angrily. ^^ So 
she defies me through you? Take care. That is 
not to be done to me." 



A Hollow World. 301 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD. 

A HOLLOW WORLD. 

Captain Fermor, very restless. destitute, as 
it were, as regards that pleasant sort of romance 
which used to be his daily food . ^was in a state of 
impatient hostility with the world in which he lived. 
On this very day he had determined to go and 
spend a pleasant tranquil afternoon with Miss 
Manuel, and thus work the current clear. One 
of the old pleasant conversations . a conversation, 
that is, where lie talked, and brought out the fine 
Arabian to cy, now, alas I too long in stable. 

That wild notion of her not seeing him, which 
presented itself to him as he walked, must have 



302 Never Forgotten. 



been a mistake or misconception. Perhaps . and 
it was the ro eyw whispered this . ^perhaps she felt 
there was some of the old danger in these retired 
interviews, and was wary in exposing herself to 
risk. At this notion he smiled, and patted the 
Arabian's neck with fondness. 

He was smiling as he was just turning into 
Alfred-place. He saw the balcony, and the flowers 
in the balcony; but he suddenly saw under the 
balcony a lady coming out on the steps. The lady 
wore a dress and a bonnet which he thought he 
knew; and, looking closer, he recognised young 
Mrs. Fermor, his wife. 

He was thunderstruck . speechless. This, then, 
was it. Ah ! this explained it all. Sere was the 
interference that had closed the door against him. 
With bitterness on his lips he turned away full 
of anger. ^^Upon my word, it has come to a 
pretty pass ! " 

He thought first of hurrying after her and con- 
victing her in her "spy system" at once. But 
this seemed imprudent : he could not trust him- 
self in the street. How was he to pay his visit! 
He was "upset" . not "in tone" to be smiling 
and fluent. It was always the way. Besides, he 



A Hollow World. 303 

thought bitterly, the door was effectually closed 

He walked away very fast, came through the 
Pads, where the gay ribbons were still winding 
round, and the gaudy flags of fashion still flying. 
" All ht&re should be 'my friends," he said ; " my 
true sphere until I lost it." And he stood at the 
rail, and saw the thousand-and-one little boudoirs 
on wheels pass him^ now stoppings now going on. 
He knew everybody . ^by sight at least. The men 
perched high, driving spirited horses, and the 
young girls in the tiny boudoirs. Suddenly he 
started. 

" I declare," he thought. " Old friends. I am 
so glad." And he was at the window of a little 
chamber in a moment. 

These were some " Craven people," a mother 
. and daughters, who lived in the purest fashionable 
air. Sojourned permanently in ball-rooms, and 
occasionally went out to their own home. To him 
they were always kind. He had leave to come in 
when he pleased^ and at every dinner they gave, 
dined, as of course. They allowed him to do a 
hundred things fm^ them . ^the best proof of 
fashionable intimacy and affection. Fermor's eyes 



304 Never Forgotten. 



lighted with complacent delight as he drew near to 
the window. He was thinking what a surprise for 
them. 

At the same moment a tall gaunt man was 
raising his hat and approaching the window. There 
were smiles of welcome, three smiles of welcome, 
and three " O ! Mr. Romaine" s. 

Fermor, a little disordered, said : " O, Mrs. 
Craven 1 So glad, I am sure ^" 

The three faces looked at him. One, a younger 
and simpler face . she showed no scars as yet . 
said, softly : 

" Mamma, Mr. Fermor 1 You know ^" 

" Ah, to be sure. How-de-do, Mr. Fermor ? So 
long, you know ^^ 

" O, Mr. Romaine 1 we have been dying to see 
you. Why didn't you come t *' 

The other girl, who was her mother^s sergeant, 
said: 

" Ah, you didn't care. I know / never missed 
you." 

Fermob. I am so glad^ Mrs. Craven. I am sure 
I have been (this spoken a little sadly) all over the 
world since I saw you. 



A Hollow World. 305 

Mrs. Craven (with no curiosity). Indeed. O, 
of course. But, Mr. Romaine 

Fermor. It is so curious meeting in this 
way 

The Sergeant. You wotH tell us I No ? I said 
so to mamma. No, you won't. 

Mr. Somaine (gently pressing on Fermor to 
the window). I heg your pardon . would you? 
Thanks ! (Fermor now behind, with only a glimpse 
of the boudoir, over a steep hill formed by Mr. Ro- 
maine's back.) 

Miss Craven (with a little pity for Fermor ; 
but her voice does not reach over the hill). Have 
you been quite well, Mr. Fermor ? 

Fermor (glowing, raging, biting his lip, and 
not knowing what to do). Good morning, Mrs. 
Craven. 

Three eager smiles are shaken at him like three 
white handkerchiefs, and he gets off the stage 
somehow. Looking back, he sees Mr. Romaine 
bent, as he leant on the carriage window, looking 
after him with a grim smile. If he had been 
near, he would have heard Mrs. Craven say, in 
answer : 

VOL. II. X 



306 Never Forgotten. 



" O, one of the girls' friends. Now, I am told, 
he has picked up some low creatuie, and thinks he 
is to be all the same. It really is so disagreeable 
both for him, and for us I " 

" Quite understand," said Mr. Romaine. " There 
are fellows who never take a hint." 

Tliat was a gloomy walk of FermcHr'* ! ^' Heart- 
less set," he said. "They might have recollected 
all I have done for them, and all the money they 
have cost me. I suppose they think nothing more 
is to be got now that I have". and he laughed. 
^^done for myself. They are no loss, at any 
rate." 

Suddenly he thought of his relation, Sir Hop- 
kins, whom he knew was in Town, but whom he 
had never yet found time to go and see. Some- 
way he had rather shrank a little from the meet- 
ing, for he had not consulted him about this mar- 
riage. He was in. It was close on six o'clock, 
and Sir Hopkins was -wilting. He was still boring 
into the old diplomatic molehills . still burrowing, 
tunnelling, indefatigably. Only now, as he grew 
older, the molehills grew smaller and meaner, and 
the tunnels narrower. The awful whisper had 



A Hollow Wor'ld. SOT 

GYGiEL iDieen heard m F. O. ^ocaddocs itihat ^^OLd 
P.oGock's day" was "gome hj^^ aud yoHBger sei?- 
vents used the word "fogie,'* WWi isefenenoe to 
his last ex|>enmeni^ iit was said pLakil^ ajBbd firmly, 
"You know he t)roke dow. Lwd Eadley in- 
sisted, ;and they haid Ao ^vb it io Tsatm. He was 
in one of his mulish fits . ^thought they were 
putting him off-iand bo fixed m Hm. Re was 
very soxay for it afterguards, dJaough." 

When Fenaaor came in, ie was am a molehill, 
tunnelling away. Letters to one, letters to the 
other; to lords, to no lords; to ^^fficial, ife non- 
offidaL Was there a little ^pin, resibfaug ion a leyer, 
which lay on another levee, which was one of a 
thousand other little levers, to move the great 
machine . ^he sent a letter to thaA pin. Was there 
a thread hanging down among n cloud of threads 
. ^was there a loose wire among a million of loose 
wires . ^was there :a fly upon the great wheel . ^he 
addressed dismal letters to that thread, to that wire, 
and to that fly* He was still intriguing for oflBce, 
as he had intrigued forty years before, that is, 
calling letters intrigues* 

He looked up as Fermor entered, and looked 
x2 



308 Never Forgotten. 



down. His pen was in the middle of a sentence. 
** Sit down," he said ; " excuse me." He wrote on 
for a minute or two, then stopped. 

" Glad to see you,'' he said, coldly. " How 
have you been? Now what is it? What do 
you want me to do? I have no interest nowy 
you know." 

"I merely came to see you, sir," said Fermor. 

" O, that was it," said the diplomatist, beginning 
to write again. " I have not been so well, lately. 
To teU you the truth," he added, abruptly, " I am 
very busy, as you see, and " 

"O, certainly," said Fermor, rising, with a 
wounded air; "you need not stand on ceremony 
with me, sir." 

Sir Hopkins looked at him a moment. "So 
you married, it seems. I dare say you find a 
change." 

Fermor said, " How, sir ? " a little doubtfully. 

" Why, the life, the attention, the consideration. 
/ know how soon that comes, unless you dazzle 
them with what you have done." 

" I don't want to dazzle anybody," said Fermor, 
in some confusion 

"No; that was pretty plain," said the other. 



A Hollow World. 309 



"No fear of that. Ton my soul, Charles, I had 
hoped better things of you; I had indeed. In 
plain words, you threw yourself away . you did. 
We would have made a man of you, if you had 
let us." 

"Why, God bless me, sir," said Fermor, with 
great warmth. " Did you not advise me yourself ? 
Did you not get with the father, and keep saying 
to me, ^ There was a match?' Surely you re- 
member?" 

Sir Hopkins shook his head. "I am sorry to 
see this," he said. " You are only a novice, after 
all. Why, couldn't you see that was all my little 
foreign office business . setting up one girl to 
bring down the other? " 

"And you did bring her down," said Fermor, 
bitterly. "I believe it had been better for me, 
after all, if I had cast my lot with one who loved 
me, and who, I believe, died for me, instead of 
being made the object of foreign office business, as 
you say." 

" That was all a matter for your own choice," 
said Sii' Hopkins, calmly. " But, to tell you the 
truth, I don't follow the tone of this discussion. 
On this occasion, I think it right to tell you plainly, 



310 Never Forgotten, 



CharleSy to prerent miseonceptioa hiereafter" . 
and Sk Hopkins paused a little, and looked at 
bim. meaningly . ^ that I am not altogether {leased. 
Ton have taken your course, and disappointed me; 
made what I can only call a low marriage, without 
connexion or rank. I don't like the transaction, 
and I say aoi. You imderstand? '* 

^^Well, sir," said Fermor, with a wounded defi- 
ance, " it can't be helped. I am: sorry for it." 

^^I don't care telling you now that it has been 
a disappointment, and a great one, to me. I don't 
choose to be disappointed. I don't mind telling 
you now, that I had a girl for you, ready and 
waiting . a girl out of our office. Such a conr 
nexion 1 Why were you so sudden about it. It 
took my bireath away when I heard it, and brought 
back that old pain mider the shoulder-blade.. Good 
God ! What a fool you made of yourself L Good- 
by, Charles. I am fearfully busy. I am afraid I 
shall be very busy for the next few weeks." 

Fermor came home, straight to his home, his 
cheeks tingling. "This is what I have brought 
myself to/' he saidy with utter bitterness and rue^ 
fulness. He was dreadfully mortified and wounded. 
He beat the rails impatiently with his cane as he 



A Htdlanxr World. 311 

passed by. Coming to his hioiise,. Le went sadly 
into the drawing-roomy where was. young Mrs. 
^Fcmaor waiting. 

"Dinner is, spoiled/' she said, ringing the belL 
' Three-quaxters of an hour !" 

He flung himself on a sofa. "What does it 
matter?" he said. "I am late for eyerything now* 
It is a wonder you "waited for me." 

She looked at him astonished* 

" Yes," he went on, " why should any one take 
the trouble? Jam not worth it. Everybody can 
treat me as they please^ it would seem.. Good 
gracious I" and he started up, "it seems, hke a 
conspiracy to mortify and humiliate me*" 

The young wife went up close to him, full of 
sympathy. "Dear Charles/' she said, "teU me 
about your troubles. Indeed I feel for you. What 
is it ? Who has. hurt you ? " 

" Such treatment I" he went on, angrily. " Mrs, 
Craven, Sir Hopkins, and the rest of them ! As 
if there wa& some mark on me. What do you 
suppose my crime is ? Throwing myself away, as 
they call it ; making a low marriage." 

Deeply hurt, and with deep reproach, she said : 
^' O, Charles,, you ccmnot mean this?" 



312 Never Forgotten. 



"/don't mean it,** he said; "but they all tell 
me so. The world is right, it seems. Else, why 
do they mortify and insult me at every turn, as 
if I had done a crime ? It's not your fault. I 
should, of course, be a monster to say so. But 
no man has paid so heavily as I have for any act 
of his life. There's Sir Hopkins, too, has hinted 
plainly he means to punish me, because he doesn't 
approve. The women in the Park will hardly 
deign to speak to me. Is not this pleasant ? De- 
lightful sauce to flavour one's dinner with !" 

At this moment entered the stiff, grim father, 
who, in this new shape of life, rarely seen, and 
emerging for meals from his secluded quarter on 
the stairs, was as grim, and rigid, and metallic as 
of old. The old casting was sharp and hard as 
e^er. 

He stood in the doorway a moment ; then, with- 
out a word, turned and went down. The others 
followed. It was a silent and solemn meal. A 
blank had fallen on them all. Fermor cut his 
food savagely and defiantly. At the end . ^Mr. 
Carlay never sat over wine, but was absorbed 
silently into his quarter . if Fermor was out, he 
came and read to his daughter. Now, at the end 



A Hollow WorU. 313 



of dinner, when she was gone up to a dismal medi- 
tation by the fire, and Fermor was thinking of a 
lonely night walk, just as dismal, the cast-iron 
figure said : " Would you wait a moment, Fermor ? 
I want to speak to you." 

A little surprised, the other came back, 

" Take your seat again," said Mr. Carlay. " I 
wish to say a few words to you seriously. It will 
save a good many more serious, later." 

Fermor did not like this magisterial tone, and 
perhaps, on another occasion, would have said some- 
thing about this " solemn preface." 

" Mary is not looking well," Mr. Carlay went 
on. " She is growing unhappy. I have remarked 
it for some time." He paused a second or two. 
" Are you as kind to her as you should be?" 

Fermor started. "I should hope so," he 
answered. "Why should you ask me such a 
question?" 

" As you ask me," said the other, " I will tell 
you. Because I begin to think you are not. 
People think, because I live out of the world. 
as it were out of the house almost . ^that I see 
nothing, and know nothing. Never was there a 
greater mistake, if that be the impression that 



314 Never ForgcOten^ 



directs any particitkr couxse: of cciduct I see 
everything, amd kn>w everything." 

Often and often, had Fennox laid it down at 
mess, and at other places where he, as it werey sad 
judicially, that anything like leetureship from a 
person in the relation that Mr. Carlay was to him, 
would be fatasL From the outset he had settled 
that such enenMchaKiiit was to be resisted at onee. 
He thought of this ibow. 

" Whatever there is to see and know, yoa are 
welcome to," he saidy cahoaly, ^^Periiaps, if you 
did mix a little more in huBfian concenas,, you 
would have truer views of things. I hope I behave 
as weDi a most husbazids dow. I know my duty, 
whatever complaints may have beem made to you," 
he added, with some meanings 

Mr. Carlay was growing more grim^ andi dense, 
and hard^ every nuMoaemlt. His Kps scarcely seemed 
to move as the words passed from them. "Look 
here," he said^ ^' Fermor. I da not. waat to inter- 
fere with you: hitherto I have not done so. If 
you only hint it, you shall see even less of me 
than yon have done Those rooms up-stairs 
make up my world^ and . ^my daughter* But 
I tell you this now . and 1 tell it to you 
solemnly . ^if 1 finA. \\ie ^\^V^^\. dsixi^ towards 



A Holhw World. 315 



HEJE^" . hexQ he stood up and seemed t& grow in 
gauM lieigja^. iato a stack prophet . *^ if she is not 
treated gentljj^ tenderly^ softly, even childishly . ^if 
she is not humouired. and petted, and made the 
queen and darling of this house, as she. has always 
been of miaa^ I declare there will c(Hiie a change 
over me that you camiot direaoL oL Yoo. don't 
know me. You donJt know what I can be^ or 
what I have beea. Bufc I warn yon now in time. 
Tanchi her, and you touch me., I am wUHng to be 
tranquil for this life,, aiiid go out. of life peacefully, 
after all the storms I have passed throngh. But 
one other sign of what I have seeu this evening, 
and I become what I would not becomLO. You 
are no match foi me. Come now," he said, sud- 
denly changing his tone, "you have sense and 
taiCt, and will take this in good part. But, be- 
lieve me, nothing was ever meant so much in 
earnest, or will so surely come to pass J' 

He left Fermor speechless, and really over- 
powered by this denunciatieHi. The gaunt figure 
seemed to grow as it spdie. Its eyes flashed, and 
there was an air of undefined menace. Fermor 
knew not what ta say or to. reply, but felt his 
strange influence, and shrank away from collision 
with this wild being, whom he now saw iu a. insj^ 



316 Never Forgotten. 



light. But he went forth upon the night in a 
storm of humiliation and passion, scarcely knowing 
what he was doing. He thought not so much of 
the degrading intimidation which had been tried 
on him that night, as of the unworthy " delation" 
. the complaint that must have been made by 
Mrs. Fermor . ^which he should register and never 
forgive. If the world was in a conspiracy against 
him, he had strength enough to do battle with it 
But for her . she who had dared to behave in ihxit 
way . ^he could not bring himself to think of it. 
With that violent and dangerous Carlay it would 
not do to quarrel openly, but to her he could mark 
it in a cold, cutting, quiet way that she should 
feel. So, when he came home that night again, 
there was upon him a new, formal, chiU sort of 
manner, a kind of icicle politeness, under whose 
touch she seemed to wither away. She had an 
instinct what it came from, and with timidity tried 
to make some excuse or extenuation, but shrank 
away from his cold look of wonder and colder 
disclaimer. On this night a domestic Nemesis 
seemed to have entered into the house, and from 
this night it was steadily busy at its work. 



Constructing a Weh. 317 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FOURTH. 

CONSTRUCTING A WEB. 

In a day or two Miss Manuel's brougham was 
standing at the door of the " Irrefragable," and 
Miss Manuel herself inside, reflected in the highly- 
polished official mahogany. 

Mr. Speedy had come specially from his box 
with yet more "irrefragable" literature, for the 
bright lady seemed to be an eager student of the 
little tables, and could not have enough of the 
supposititious A who had insured for one hundred 
pounds at the age of twenty-one years, and who 
in a surprisingly short time had come in for 
" bonuses," and other good things, to the amount 
of five or six times his policy. Not without interest, 



'31:8 Never Forgotten. 

too, were the "fatal warnings" against improvi- 
dence. Miss Manuel still could not make up her 
mind. 

" We should be delighted at any time," said Mr. 
Speedy, " at ani/ time, to purchase up the policy at 
its full value." 

" I know," said Miss Manuel, leaning on her 
round hand. " That would be charming. If poor 
Mrs. Carter could have done that," she added, 
smiling. 

Mr. Speed/s brow contracted; he only liked 
dwelling on the bright side of the company's affairs. 
" We tdom't accept Major Oarter^s," he iBaid, " as a 
pattern case. If we (did, -we might close. We do 
not consider tkset he has behavied -well in tibe trans- 
action. But our practice is .to shult <aar eyes to a 
certain extent, and maititmn an ^krefragable' 
principle." 

^^ Where did poor Mrs, Oarter die?" said Miss 
Manuel. " I knew them very weflil." 

Mr. Speedy, not aft all displeased to be seen by 
the office on terms of agreeable familiarity with a 
'^ fine woman," became almost confidentiaL 

" At an out-ofrthe-way place," he said, ^ Bngor; 
and in, it seems, an out-Kjf-tibe-^way piart of Bangor. 



Comtruciing a Weh. 319 

We had a scarcdy Fecjoj^aed agent there . a post- 
mistress, I think . snd we never dreamed ^of busi- 
ness in such a place. Howeveoc, we reoeived Ihe 
ppoposal, jad the board accepted it. After the 
receipt of the second premiiam we received the 
claim. We made iaqniries, but everything seemed 
regular. We trusted to those local doctors . =a 
system I have always set my face against. It was, 
of course, a damaged Life at the beginning." 

^^But when I Tmew her,^ s^d Miss Manuel, 
"she was quite healthy and quite strong. O, it 
must have been a sudden thing, I assure you. 
Poor Mrs. Carter ! " 

This was the iJhird time she had called the de- 
ceased lady " poor," and Mr. Speedy looked at her 
a little earnestly. The l)riglit lady looked at him 
unsuspiciously. ("There was something in her 
eyes," said Mr. Speedy, at dinner that day, pur- 
suing his narrative to Mrs. Speedy, " about her 
eyes so strange and odd.") He looked round to 
see were the clerks listening. Suddenly the doors 
were flapping like heavy mahogany wings, and a 
gay gentleman came up . ^to be reflected in the 
world of mahogany. 

"Well! here I have come again," he said. 



320 Never Forgotten. 



" You can't tire me. A large stock of patience on 
hand . 2l reserve fund, like yours." 

Miss Manuel turned round and knew the voice. 
'^ Major Carter!" she said. It was Major Carter, 
but he was altered. The gay young manner, 
which lay on him like a bloom, was dried off ; he 
was not so bright, or, perhaps, so clean, and he 
had a sharper and more earnest manner. He 
started with astonishment and some confusion as 
he saw her and Mr. Speedy bent together over the 
counter. 

" Miss Manuel !" he said. " So glad. Been well, 
I hope? But. er . ^why hereV^ he added, with a 
sort of sneering tone. " Ladies don't go round to 
Life offices as they do shopping, eht" 

Mr. Speedy, who had been scanning him coldly, 
and did not relish his interview being interrupted, 
said now: "It is no use coming imtil the full 
board meets again. I told you so, Major Carter, 
before." 

"O, quite right, quite right," he said, hastily; 
" I was only passing, and looked in. And so you 
are at this sort of thing? And why the ^Irre- 
fragable?' No better office, of course, he added, 
hastily. ^^ It is melancholy to be obliged to think 



Constructing a Web. 321 

of such things, and to have vile profit associated 
with those whose memory we love But what can 
you do ? Grown up sons, Miss Manuel, and a 
little extravagant. Ah, / can't treat myself to 
such a pure luxury as feeling." 

Miss Manuel was looking at him steadily. "I 
was sorry to hear it," she said, " very sorry. So 
sudden, too. It must have been a great trial." 

" It was a blow," he said, " a trial to us all. 
But, after all, we were prepared for it. She had 
been ailing a long time ; O dear yes I That is," 
he added, hastily, "when I say a long time, I 
mean within a year. You are now in town ? Ah, 
80 glad ! After all, poor Eastport ; though, indeed, 
I know it brought us aU our troubles. Indeed I 
felt for you. Must go now. Good-by. Morning, 
Mr. Speedy!" 

With lip that fluttered nervously, the bright 
lady looked after him as the heavy door swung to 
and fro, as it were, in a rage. For a quarter of an 
hour more she and Mr. Speedy talked together ; 
then the brougham drove away. As she swept 
round the comer, she saw the figure of Major 
Carter looking about cautiously. Her face flashed 
up. ^^ I* ^^ beginning. It is coming 1 " she said. 
vol** i^* ^ 



Never Fpt^attm. 



^ la time die Lovd will deliver tbon all ioto 
jny hands. It is written on Us face." 

There wom semething written cm Major Gartei^s 
face . ftt least, a different writing from the oM 
light and careless hand familiar to all at Eastpoift. 
There, evoy day, a himdred gay little ^^ devices," 
as airy and nonsensical as the mottoes in bon-hoDS, 
were to be read. Now, tiiere was a serioos 
^^egend," written in eontracted diaracters. He 
tamed away hastily when he saw her. 

She went home in a sort of elation. Life was 
beginning to have a zest. Often and often there 
had come great gaps and blanks, when all hope 
and interest, and even consciaasness of life, had 
left her ; when time and life and the gay things of 
the gay world round her, seemed only a long white 
monotonous reformatory gallery, with barred grates 
and windows . as dreary, as hopeless, as prostra- 
ting. She had nothing to lire for. She was 
oppressed with the chilling blankness of loneliness. 
But now she was beginning to apprehend life, and 
the scattered objects of life were striking on hcff 
senses, for she was living, breathing, and moring 
towards a purpose. 

As she drr^^^ up to her own dr ^ <1 a 



Consrtucting a Web. 323 

figure standing on the steps^ It was Fermor . the 
ocridawed Fermor^ as he almost seemed ta be now. 
This image- fitted hannonloasl j with all that was 
in her mind. He saw her drive up with one of his 
bitter "^sore" smiles upon his month. 

^^I should have come a httle kter/' he said^ 
^^ and been received with the usual answer. The 
next thing, I suppose^ wiU be^ jon wiU tell me with 
your own lips thaii yoa are not at home.'' 

^^The Loni" thought the iimer Miss Manuel 
again, "will in full time deliver all into my hands." 
But the outer Miss Manuel, leaning on his arm to 
get out of her carriage, said, with bright eyes and 
soft encouragement, " I can see you are aggrieved 
about something. Come in. No, I know you wil 
not. I must be punished and made to feol." 

Fermor walked up-stairs after lier, Sho wttH 
never looking more dazaling than at that uumiinU. 
What she had been thinking of had %mi ttchUt ioiuU 
sparkles from her eyes. She was thinklnp; how fwi 
the fly was coming to the wel) . t^uinln^, fi>o^ of (ik 
own wish not to be kept out from IIim Wib wllli 
a foolish eagerness to be camght. To him^ this 
brilliance. a brilKance set ofif by drcfiw, aiul clu,iee 
^^ ^^u^P jjjj ^iress . ^was almost confouiidlng ; ^g^ 



324 Never Forgotten. 



the feeling in his mind was a secret wonder how 
ikia had never struck him before in the old East- 
port days. As he sat opposite to her on Mr. 
Eomaine's "low chair," he looked and looked 
again, and marvelled at what cloud had been be- 
tween his eyes and her. 

He was full of his grievances, and ready with 
indignant protest ; but, as he looked, he began to 
soften. They fell into the category of those little 
outrages and insults which were a delightful and 
, welcome little armoury for him in drawing-rooms. 

" I am getting so used," he said, plaintively, " to 
hard knocks from all sides, that nothing comes 
upon me now as a surprise. I am persecuted 
for justice' sake. You, of course, only follow the 
crowd." 

" Yes," said she, gaily, " I am now of the world, 
worldly. It is the only true course. Sentiment^ 
scruples, delicacy, consideration, and the rest of it, 
is all waste of time and unprofitable. A la guerre, 
comme & la guerre. In the world, why not as the 
world?" 

" Just what I thought," he said. " I have not 
lost my old power of judgment, though I suppose 
people say it is dulled. You are now sought and 



Constructing a Web, 325 

courted, and I suppose flattered. Every one that 
comes, pays, I suppose, for his welcome by some 
coin of this sort. You relish it every day more 
and more, and do not care for those who come 
unfurnished, or do not care to furnish themselves. 
I am not skilled in that sort of thing. Oncey per- 
haps, I could do it as well as any of them." 

Her eyes fell on the ground. Her voice became 
low, and soft, and plaintively musical. " I thought 
you understood me. You, who know the world by 
heart, should make allowance for some of that 
rouge and patches which we must all put on. 
OncBj indeed, I knew life, and fell ilito its ways, 
but that was long, long ago, down at poor East- 
port." 

His eyes fell on the carpet too. " Ah ! I begin 
to think those were very tappy times," he said, 
sighing; "happier than will soon come again."" 
He did not see how she was looking at him, nor 
did he know how she was thinking how much 
faster Nemesis was walking than she had calcu- 
lated. " Yes," he went on, " I often think of it . 
I do indeed. of your pleasant home, and the life 
we spent together." (He, m fact, often did, for 
there had been an excitement and uncertainty in 



326 Never Fargotteft. 

the life, which had made it advayno^ms and agree- 
able to thifik of.) ^ I do not expect that you have 
yet learned to judge me fairly, but you will in 
time, I am sure." 

A pang shot aeross he? faee. ^ Of coarse," she 
said, hastily. "As I said, we were all victims of 
circumstances. I oduld make allowance. I saw 
what engines were set at woric. Someway, I can- 
not bring myself to talk of these things^ with the 
quiet indifference I ought. But every day I am 
learning, and ahcdt learn. The worid ia a delightful 
master." 

"I like to talk of old times," he said; "it has 
a sort of soothing effect. At home they do not 
understand these things. I can get no one to 
understand them. Practically, I am a stranger 
there. You understand me. I should like now 
and again to talk with you over such matters. 
But they are too pastoral and unsubstantial. The 
worldlings, it seems, and the flatterers, hare stronger 
claims." 

He was determined to force himself into the 
web. HUs foot was on the outer thread. 

" How you misjudge me^" she said, in the sweet 
key her voice sometimes sang in. ** I am as you 



Constructing a Web. 327 

. we are fitcongely like . ^lost in a cccnrd of friendB 
who are not friends. There is a tfiimnbiB0aB 
crowd pressing ronjid me, and yet I am aibae . 
as if I was in a deserL These pleasant airy 
chattering men, so light imd ^j^ what do ycm 
suppose they can do but chill my heart? With 
you I could have sympathy. We are in the same 
tone. I could gradually come to know you better 
and better, and find a soothing comfort, as ycra 

say, in talking over old times, but . ^but " 

Greatly interested, Fermar said, hastily, ^But 
what . why not tell me ? "" 

She shook her head. "No, no ; I lave reasons. 
Better for me to keep in my present groove . ^go 
on as I have gone on. Forgetfulness, coldness, 
heartlessness, indifference . ^these are the medicines 
for me. I should have nothing near me like sym- 
pathy, manliness, generosity, love, nor appreciation. 
No, no. Now you will understand what seemed 
ungracious . ^what you took for barring of doors 
against you ! I thought you would have under- 
stood me better. So, I say, better cross over the 
street, and leave me on my own pathway." 

Bewildered by this speech, and strangely inte- 
rested, Feimor was not ready with a reply. 



328 Never Forgotten. 



Suddenly came pouring in the hollow world, the 
pleasant set who sat round Miss Manuel : critics, 
biographers, bishops, wits, and the rest. 

He went his way in a strange exhilaration. 
After all, here was the old charm at work still. 
There was something strangely piquant about her. 
She made liim talk as others did not make him 
talk. She was full of genius, and of the dramatic 
sense. 

But there was a soft mystery about her last 
words . a pleasant confusion . ^above all, a compli- 
ment to Am, in that persistent exclusion, that was 
welcome. He was pleased to find himself "re- 
habilitated," and he walked home with dreams 
floating before him . the old dreams of vanity 
and complacency. Work had been resumed with 
the censers. 



END OF VOL. II. 
NEVER FORGOTTEN. 



CHAPTER THE FIRST. 

MAJOR CARTEB. 

A RIM of low, old-fashioned little houses, like 
dolls' houses, runs round a sort of hexagonal tear 
board-shaped patch of green, called Hans-place, 
just at the back of Sloane-street. A slumbering 
monotony reigns there. The hall doors are tight, 
and have a huddled hunchback air, and the houses 
themselves are squeezed close, like a crowd at a 
show where room is precious, and where stewards 
ha,ve been making people move up. Major 
Carter and his son had three rooms in one of 
these httle houses^. the parlour story and a cold 
little warren at the top, where the roof began to 
slope inconveniently just over the deal dressing- 

VOL. III. B 



2 Never Forgotten. 



table. The major had seen troubles of late ; 
things had not gone smoothly with him. " Poor 
Mrs. Carter's long illness was a heavy ^draw' upon 
us," he used to say. "She required many com- 
forts, and all the care we could give her. Our 
doctor said change of air . ^keep moving about : 
and she had change of air, poor soul ! So I am not 
as rich as I was, and I am not ashamed to own it." 

Heavy business matters, too, were entailed on 
the major by the death of his wife . what he called 
"winding up her affairs" (in the Irrefragable 
Company), kept him in Hans-place. He had to 
watch those "fellows," who were treating him in 
a shabby, unhandsome fashion. Otherwise, town 
was not nearly so suited to the major^s life as 
the little realm of a watering-place. There he 
had everything under his hand: he could cover 
them all with his hat. " We were more thrown 
together there," he said. '^ Some of the pleasantest 
days of my life were spent at Eastport." 

But there was yet another attraction. A stout, 
round, red, and wealthy lady, called Mrs. Wrig- 
ley, had a house in Cadogan-place, where, having 
twenty years before decently interred Joseph 
Wrigley, Esquire, Chairman of the United Bank, 
she lived in quiet and substantial splendour, and 
swung about London in a quainl old chariot. As 
the late chairman had been what is called " uni- 
versally respected," so his [relict was as sincerely 



Major Carter. 



admired. She was the object of many gallantries 
from young gentlemen and men of a more " suit- 
able" age ; and she treated these worshippers with 
mature coquetries, which did not seem in the least 
out of place, and were conventionally accepted by 
the circle in which she moved, ajs quite becoming. 
Youths struggled who should " take her down" . 
Le, to supper; and at parties younger pairs were 
often detained at the foot of the stairs, while she 
slowly passed down the straits . ^a sort of human re- 
production of Turner's " Fighting Tem^raire towed 
to her last Berth" by a light military tug. 

Yet with these worldly elements she mixed a 
little religious seasoning. Until she came to know 
Major Carter, she affected the society of the 
Reverend Punsher Hill, a dissenting clergyman of 
a strong spiritual flavour, whose chapel was in the 
Chelsea district. There he poured out streams of 
holy hartshorn . ^the very Preston salts of divinity 
. and " drew" large crowds. With him was com- 
bined, in her society, a clergyman of the more es- 
tablished ritual, who sprinkled ess-bouquet and 
rose-water from his pulpit, and made everything 
pleasant. 

For these gentlemen a sort of "main" of tea 
was kept flowing in Cadogan-place. The odium 
theologicum did hot, as it ought to have done, 
hinder their assimilating or balancing Mrs. Wrigley 
symmetrically on each side, as though they were 
b2 



Never Forgotten, 



"supporters" for her arms. She had contributed 
handsomely to Mr. Punsher Hill's new conventicle, 
built for him by admirers of his Preston salts, 
which was called "Mount Tabor;" and she had 
given moneys to Mr. Hoblush for what he called 
his " visiting women." A " delightful young man," 
said many; too long expended on the rural dis- 
tricts, now happily given up to the vast fields of mis- 
sionary labour, which lie in the uncleared country 
of drawing-rooms, and among the pretty soft tulle- 
clad natives, all more or less benighted. 

These two influences reigned until she came 
to know Major Carter. That worldling gradually 
began to undermine her faith, or at least her warm 
devotion. She was too good natured to feel any 
change, or show any change; but the worldling 
had more force of character than the two spirit- 
ualists. They felt themselves slipping as on a par- 
quet floor, and soon the success of Major Carter was 
so marked at to attract public whispers, and public 
attention and public murmurs, and public anger. 

She was delighted with Major Carter^s quiet air 
of the world, with his calm "weight" of manner, 
and readiness of speech. The others seemed un- 
trained children near him. When his cold eye 
fell upon them, the two clergymen did not like the 
sensation. 

One little transaction firmly established him as 
suggesting the association of intellectual power, and 



Major Carter. 



the command of men's minds. The two clergy- 
men were sitting with her one afternoon, when 
the " main" of tea had been laid on. Mr. Punsher 
Hill's figure was round, coarse, and Jersey-pear 
shaped. It was like a Seal in clerical attire. His 
face was red and brawn-like, and his throat but 
awkwardly confined in heavy folds of linen. But 
Mr. Hoblush's spiritual dress, and the figure which 
that dress enclosed, was all elegance. It was 
shapely, uncreased, unfolded, and unwrinkled. His 
coat or mantle seemed to flow downwards, and with 
such a low full grace, that there seemed a hint 
. by a sort of little artifice . as of an apron. His 
voice was soft and tender. He could not sing, but 
he " played a little" on the violincello. 

Major Carter came in as they were busy on the 
"Mount Tabor" Chapel. The Eeverend Alfred 
Hoblush was tolerant of all denominations. But 
Mrs. Wrigley was not so interested in these 
matters as she used to be. She talked to them of 
Lord Putnenham's coming music. 

" I have done what I could," said the Reverend 
Alfred, sweetly, "but I have not sufficient interest. 
I would give the world to be there myself." 

As for Mr. Hill, it was understood, without more 
allusion, that his walks were not the Putnenham 
walks. No reference was made to him. 

Suddenly entered the worldling Carter, who 
began to chatter airily and delightfully on mun- 



Never Forgotten. 



dane topics . ^bringing in a Kttle legend about Lady 
Mantower and Mrs. Weynam Lake . serving them 
delicately to Mrs. Wrigley as though they had been 
morsels of warm toast spread with marrow. The 
clergy present looked at him ruefully. ^^All 
the world," continued the worldUng, " is crowding 
to this Putnenham party . and his wife, of course. 
More the wife, perhaps, than the world;" and then 
he worked this text pleasurably and fluently for a 
half-hour, and then rose to go. He put his head in 
again. " By the way, Mrs. Wrigley," he said, *^I 
have a message, which I had forgotten. Strictly in 
private, though." He whispered, *^ I have ventured 
on a great liberty, but that is all right . the Put> 
nenham affair, you know. It will come to-night. 
But a profound secret, I stipulate that." 

The surpassing delicacy with which Major Carter 
had transacted this little affair . ^his anticipation of 
her wishes . from that hour established his su- 
premacy. 



Lord Putnenhants ^'Little Muficr 



CHAPTER THE SECOND. 

LORD PUTNENHAM's "LITTLE MUSIC." 

The Town knew Lord Putnenham very well. 
He was sometimes darkly mentioned as the " noble 
Amateur." He was a musical lord, had played " a 
little," Le. execrably, on a hoary Cremona violin, 
and gave a little musical senate laws. There was 
no Lady Putnenham, and so, through his fine 
house in Dover-street, strange and protracted 
agonies were heard, as of a maiden wailing, which 
was the musical lord busy with his " scales ;" and 
in the musical house sheets of music lay tossed 
here and there, high and dry on chairs and cabi- 
nets, floating wildly on the carpet, as though there 
had been a wreck^ and a great musical Indiaman 
had gone to pieces in the drawing-room. The 
musical lord going about on duty, sat as a musical 



Never Forgotten. 



magistrate, and had cases brought before him, on 
which he passed judgment. New harmonious gip- 
sies, eager to get a hearing, and who had brought 
either a voice, or a fiddle, or a whistle, from the 
Continent, were led away to him, and adjudicated 
on. His head lay so much on one side with this 
listening, that the attitude became habitual and 
normal ; and on occasions of extraordinary atten- 
tion he listened with his head erect. Yet he was 
a florid, round, selfish, and practically useless 
nobleman. With all his audiences, his whisper- 
ing in comers, his taMng of buttons and button- 
holes, his shrugs, his showering of criticism and 
musical terms as from a dredger, he never did any 
real good for any new or wandering artist. And 
when one had, with infinite struggling, rowed into 
public favour, the musical lord came paddling at 
the stem with a little oar no bigger than a fan, and 
really enjoyed the credit of having contributed 
largely to the success. 

In the large mansion in Dover-street, the musi- 
cal Lord Putnenham gave entertainments, which 
were known mysteriously as "rich musical treats." 
These were a sort of dry Trappist matinees and 
evening "reunions," where the board was spread 
with music, and music only; and the tables 
groaned with quaver entries, and light crochet 
hors d'oeuvres, and a sparkling presto, served as 
champagne. Lord Putnenham always bewailed the 



Lord Putnenhants ^'Little Muftcr 9 

decay of classical music, and did his best to restore 
it; and if a sort of "service," that lasted hours, 
the close to which was marked by the flutter of 
the turning of the twentieth page ; and if faces of 
agony, and jaws hanging wearily, and mournful 
rustling on chairs, and acute pains about the spine, 
and welcome drowsiness (with some), and strange 
cerebral confusion (with others), and something 
like incipient idiocy (with one or two) ; if this was 
restoring classical music. Lord Putnenham did so 
effectually on every one of his "second Thurs- 
days." 

Strange to say, people came eagerly, nay, 
struggled to come. People of fashion, and people 
of quality, and people with daughters . ^like Lady 
Laura Fermor. Wise and wary woman I She saw 
that the soil was soft enough for rifle-pits. She saw 
that, from the hopeless and dispiriting character 
of the place, the warriors and chiefs would be 
driven in perforce upon what entertainment she 
could offer ; and that in the arid desert character of 
the country, her daughters would stand out with 
an artificial attraction, from the force of contrast. 
Noble . zealous . almost chivahrous commander! 
What she suffered in the way of austerities . for 
cane chairs, affording rude and imperfect support, 
were brought in, to economise space . will never 
be known. If holding out her poor arm day and 
night, and keeping her fingers closed till the nails 



10 Never Forgotten, 



grew through the pabns . according to the Brah<- 
min practice . could have helped forward her 
mission, she would have done it cheerfully. She 
did not know Lord Putnenham, but she soon 
"reached" him; and though the girls could move 
their ivory keys in the same rude way that they 
had learned the "dumb-bell" practice and the 
" pole" exercise at Madame Cartier^s, and the 
graceful handling of the mallet . still they had 
qualified sufficiently, and could be rapturous in 
musical praise without falling into blunders. 

On a certain second Thursday all the world 
was there. For weeks before, the Putnenham head, 
well to one side, had whispered, and hinted, and 
shrugged, of a new artist that he was bringing 
out ; " A young Hungarian fellow ; heard him 
last summer, in a com-mon cabaret at Prague, 
absolutely a Com-mon cabaret. I never heard 
^ Tone' before. A very unassuming young fellow. 
And I have got him to come to England. He will 
coin. He will put them all out . Sainton and the 
whole gang. It was the merest chance I just 
turned in there. Otherwise he would have been 
fiddling away to Boors and Beer for the rest 
of his life. I thinJc I know what Tone is; and 
I say distinctly. Tone has never been heard until 
nowl" 

As Lord Putnenham spoke thus at his own draw- 
ing-room, a faint echo from behind said, softly : 



Lord Putntnhants ^'Little MuftcV 11 

"Tone never been heard till now 1 " And the re- 
gistered owner of the echo was Vacchi, a musical 
aide-de<;amp on his staff. Vacchi was professional, 
and a sort of Italian Englishman, who was the real 
chain that bound the musical lord to the actual 
professional world. He had what he called musical 
"circles" of his own, where there was genuine 
music provided, and genuine music paid for; and 
Lord Putnenham he found useful as a fine ground 
where he could pick up fashionable subscribers. 
A melodious duke or two, an harmonious earl, 
had been seen moving their heads with accu- 
rate beat, in time to the lively rhythm of an 
" Allegro Vivace,'^ the Promised Land coming 
into sight after montlis of wandering in sterile 
" Adagios." 

Lord Putnenham had far more ladies than men 
coming to have the torture applied. Men did not 
suffer the '^ Little Ease" so cheerfully. They 
were restless. Once, indeed, three ill-conditioned 
*^ cavalry fellows," who had got shut hopelessly 
in the heart of the cane chairs, and not being 
trained to habits of restraint, rose at the end of 
a ** maestoso," and rudely and loudly and conspi- 
cuously forced their way out through the company, 
causing great confusion. One was heard at the 
door using what Lord Putnenham called " a ribald 
expression," and which sounded in the key of " utter 
.rot I " " From that moment," said Lord Putnen- 



< 



12 Never Forgotten, 



ham, " I have made it a rule never to ask any of 
those soldier people." 

" Won't you have an Analysis, Lady Laura?" 
said Lord Putnenham, handing her one, " We 
have a ^ rich treat' to-night. Only one daughter, 
I declare ! Now, now !" 

" We knew," said Lady Laura, " how precious 
space was to-night. We left poor Alicia Mary, 
whose passion is music. We shall get no seat 
my dear" (this sharply aside to Blanche), " if you 
don't move on." 

The place looked like the Tuileries Gardens 
there were so many cane chairs. It was crowded. 
Major Carter had, somehow, managed to " get" to 
the party, by clambering with infinite pains and 
heat and diflSculty up into a tree. Still he was 
there among the leaves and branches like the rest 
of the company. The fashionable paper had his 
name, also that of Young Brett, and of Captain 
and Mrs. Termor. Miss Manuel had merely said 
to the noble host: "You must give me a few 
blank cards for those I like," and a whole sheaf 
had arrived. 

Mrs. Termor had welcomed this promised treat 
with delight. She enjoyed music, and even the 
homily - like classical music. " Oh" she said, 
" how kind of her, how charming, how we shall 
enjoy it." 

Termor was still icy, and had plans of his own 



Lord Ptdnenham's ''Little Muftcr 13 

for that night. " I think you had better not go. 
It is really too great a tax upon a stranger. We 
could scarcely go upon such an invitation. If you 
like to go yourself with Miss Manuel " 

" O no, no. And you think so? But," she added, 
a little quickly, and her cheeks beginning to glow, 
"I suppose the same argument will apply to us 
both?" 

" Not at all," said he, colouring too. " You don't 
quite follow me." 

This looked like the beginning of the cold skir- 
mishings which lead to incompatibility. Mrs. Fer- 
mor went to her room, ready to cry like a child, or 
like a girl, as she was. But they both went, after 
all. Grim Mr. Carlay came stalking down from 
his rooms on the stairs ; he someway heard weep- 
ing, and appeared before Fermor in his study. 
The metal in his face seemed to have assumed a 
greater tightness and density. There was an air 
and manner about him that was irresistible. His 
remonstrances . ^for they were only remonstrances 
. ^seemed to be edicts. They went together ; but 
Fermor went chafing, as though he had been a 
free man chained to a convict, whom he must take 
with him. 

When they got there, the concert had begun. 
They had arrived at the " Grand Posthumous 
Quatuor in E minor," which was being interpreted 
by these four artists : 



14 Never Forgotten. 



Eagwitz Bela^ 

Krowski, 
Smart (alto), 
and M. Piletti (cello). 
Ragwitz B^la was the young violinist whom the 
hpst had discovered in the " pothouse." 

They had travelled many posts, at a sort of 
steady amble, along a high road " moderato," until 
they reached the last bar, when it was thought 
they would draw rein and bait. But Lady Laura, 
who had secured end chairs for her party, a judi- 
cious coigne of Vantage, and who already was suf- 
fering mental and physical pain, and had been 
glancing wearily from side, to side, now sadly con- 
vinced that a harem-like seclusion was indeed to 
prevail, saw, with a sudden sinking of the heart, 
the pages " turned back," and the four artists begin 
their journey again. It was a "repeat." When the 
stage was happily accomplished, there was a little 
pause, and Lord Putnenham led off applause, with 
interjections of " What tone I I never heard tone 
before!" Then came an entreating "Hu-s-shI" 
for the " quatuor" had recovered its instruments, 
and was proceeding into the " adagio." 

This might be described to be a musical inter- 
ment . ^they proceeded at such a slow and mourn- 
ful walk . ^Eagwitz BSla leading and drawing out 
wailing strokes with contortionate agonies . some- 



Lord Puttimhanls ''Little Muficr 15 

times laying his fiddle like a dish under his own 
throat, as though he were anxious to decollate 
himself on the spot; sometimes quivering and 
straining as though he wished to driye his instru- 
ment into his neck and lay it finaUj against the short 
joints of the spine ; sometimes struggling with it, 
sometimes beckoning with it; sometimes making 
spasms with his knee and foot, as though he wished 
to rise and fly through the air with it. The others 
went to the work gloomily, and with awful con- 
centration; and Piletti, who had charge of the 
violincello, seemed to have a conveniently-shaped 
coffin between his knees. 

The mortuary music was at last over. Lady 
Laura, already worn and haggard, but still " coming 
up smiling," was feeling the cane pressure acutely. 
Poor soul I she was old, and tall of figure, and re- 
quired little comforts at home and abroad, not the 
rafter-like support imparted by cane chairs. Yet 
she smiled on, and tocJs care that smiHng should 
be kept up in the ranks ; and when Providence at 
last brought the " first part" to a conclusion, she 
had a smile for Lord Putnenham drifting by her, 
and an ejaculation of ecstasy, " How lovely ! Did 
you ever hear anything like it?" 

A light and airy repast (as though the host was 
belonging to a severe Order) was laid on the stairs ; 
and yet the company poured out and flung them- 



16 Never Forgotten. 



selves on it with an avidity that seemed to hint 
that they had been shipwrecked and newly taken 
off a rock. 

Mrs. Fermor sat penned up on a centre chair, 
her eyes fixed on Ragwitz Bela, whom she thought 
divine. Miss Manuel was in another part, while 
Termor made part of a small crowd herded to- 
gether at the door. 

Eude persons were pressing on him ; and 
early in the night, when he was whispering a 
pleasant sarcasm to young Bridges, Lord Put- 
nenham had tapped him bluntly on the shoulder, 
and said, rather roughly, "You must go outside 
if you want to talk." He was looking over at 
Miss Manuel . ^looking sourly . for sitting beside 
her w^as that "low, ill-bred, insolent" Mr. Eo- 
maine, who had been so forward at the brougham 
door. 

At this happy release . ^the end of the first part 
. Mr. Eomaine left Miss Manuel, and came over 
to Mrs. Termor. A cane chair creaked as he 
dropped into it. Termor was about offering to 
take down Miss Manuel, when Lord Putnen- 
tam, just behind him, touched him on the arm : 
" Beg pardon, let me pass, please. Miss Manuel 
come I " And Miss Manuel went away gaily on 
Lord Putnenham's arm. 

As she passed Mrs. Termor she stooped down 
and whispered, "Be kind to poor Eomaine to- 



Lord Putnenham's ''Little Muftcr 17 

night. He is afraid of you. He is to be pitied, 
poor fellow. Guess who are here . ^the Massingers, 
who were to have been in Rome. You will, I am 
sure." And, pressing her arm affectionately, she 
passed on. 

" You are still angry," said Mr. Romaine ; " I 
can see it. Yet I am the one who ought to 
suffer, after that awful onslaught on me the other 
day." 

Mrs. Fermor bit her red lip, but smiled in spite 
of herself. " You began," she said. 

"I know," he said; "I always begin. Every 
inan and every woman tells me so. And yet I 
cannot help it. I am worried and tried. No one 
understands m6, or, of course, tries to understand 
me. Why should they, indeed?" 

Mrs. Fermor looked at him with bright and 
sympathising eyes. 

" You judge us all very harshly," she said ; " we 
are not all so bad as you think." 

"Why not?" he said. "I begin to hate the 
world. I used to believe in it. I found my ac- 
count in it, for I never accepted the rubbish about 
a ^hollow world,' and its faithlessness, and that 
cant. But now I feel shaken. I have seen some- 
thing to-night that has shaken me. If that faith 
has left me, I have nothing to trust to." 

Mrs. Fermor was filled with a sort of missionary 
enthusiasm. She thought how, in her own weak 

VOL. III. O 



{ 



18 Never Forgotten. 



way, she might confirm and strengthen this strange 
being. 

" I can feel for you," she said, softly, " indeed I 
can. But I would not give way, if you would 
listen to me. I would fight bravely . as I know 
you have done," she added, colouring a little at 
her own boldness ; " you would struggle on, and 
you would find strength as you went on, and you 
would, at the end, conquer, and conquer splen- 
didly. You should do that, Mr. Bomaine, and 
you would be helped by the sympathies of your 
friends." 

She was quite excited, and he looked at her 
half astonished, half interested. The look, how- 
ever, was gradually gliding into a sneer. " But 
no," he said, " I won't. I was going to be sarcastic 
about ^struggles,' &c., but I won't. Thank you. 
I really do thank you for your advice. Not that I 
think it will profit me, for I am past that, but I 
thank you all the same." 

"But," she went on more eagerly still, "you 
muft let it profit you. You will try, I am sure. A 
Kttle wiU do it. It is only a sacrifice, and we must 
all make sacrifices." 

" Well," he said, a little roughly, " and was I not 
willing to make sacrifices ? I went through it all, 
and suffered, God knows how much. No matter I 
the thing was done, and here is the whole thing to 



Lord Putnenham's '^Little Muftcr 19 

begin again. But I forget, you don't know what I 
am talking of." 

"But I do/' said Mrs. Fermor, with a naive 
toss of her head- " I have heard, and, indeed, I 
sympathise." 

*^ Well, so far, at least, I have done well . for to- 
night I mean . come 1 " said Mr. Romaine. 

" Yes," said she, " but you must go on : we must 
encourage you." 

" It is very hard," he said, with a sigh. " Look 
over there, and say if it is not very hard." 

Mrs. Fermor looked over, with great curiosity, 
and saw a fair snowy girl . a little insipid, perhaps 
. "cream laid" . ^but tall and fair, sitting and 
smiling, and receiving polite adoration from two 
gentlemen. 

"There!" said Mr. Romaine, bitterly; "that 
was once my Marguerite. She has married Valen- 
tine after all, and become homely. Look at him 
over there . ^Fatuity incorporate I Yet Valentine 
is restless and troubled in his mind. He doesn't 
relish Marguerite's doings. I almost wish he may 
be more troubled yet." 

" Hush, hush ! " aaid Mrs. Fermor, with coquet- 
tish reproof. " You have promised to struggle, re- 
collect." 

" And how am I to do it ? I am alone. I have 
no one to help me . ^to encourage me." 
c2 



20 Never Forgotten. 



Mrs. Fermor smiled. P 

" We will all do our best. That is not much, 
but we will try." 

" If/' said Mr. Romaine, looking at her fixedly, 
" there was any one who would bear with me, and 
talk with me, and whisper good things now and 
again, and say kind words of encouragement when 

I felt my strength giving way ^" He stopped 

and waited a moment. 

With great eagerness, and longing to make a 
neophyte of him, and have the glory of converting 
one of these rude rough splendidly savage men, 
Mrs. Fermor said, with a smile, that she would be 
glad to have this Samaritan office. now and again. 

Alas ! This was but a fatal species of missionary 
labour^ and Miss Manuel, sweeping by on Lord 
Putnenham's arm to her chair, saw the two faces 
close together, and the little innocent delight in 
Mrs. Fermor's, and a sort of flash of triumph in 
the other's. Behind Miss Manuel was walking 
Nemesis like a page. 



A Difcovery and a Mi/Jion. 21 



CHAPTER THE THIRD. 

A DISCOVERY AND A MISSION. 

Young Bbett did not come that night until 
late. Miss Manuel had been looking for him, 
and beckoned to him from the door, where he had 
made one of the herd. He flew to her. "Sit 
down beside me," she said. "Get that chair." 
A lady, with the true selfishness which is roused 
by chairs, and chairs only, was adroitly spreading 
herself over two chairs, which she seemed to oc- 
cupy debatably . not wholly on or wholly off. 
Another claimant she would have frozen off with 
look, manner, and answer. But there was a good- 
humoured graciousness about Young Brett which 
saved him, and a sort of homage which she took 
as payment for the chair. He was allowed to 
take it. 

" My dear child," said Miss Manuel, " you have 



22 Never Forgotten. 



been always so true, and so kind, and to faithful 
to me, and tq us all, that I would ask of you things 
that I would not ask of others. Would you do 
something for me now . something very trouble- 
some, and very important ? " 

" O," said Young Brett, in a tumult of grati- 
tude . it was as though she had accepted the gun 
at last . " how kind, how good of you ! Now jou 
are making me happy. What is it ? " 

She was indeed making him happy. For months 
he had been panting to get an opportunity to do 
something for her. He thought it was money, and 
he had plunged his hand eagerly into his pocket. 

Miss Manuel smiled. " No, no," she said, " not 
that. Then I may tell you ? Would you go on a 
journey for me 1 " 

Young Brett half jumped up. " Is that it ? To 
be sure. When . now? Though . O my good- 
ness ! " and his face fell. " I have to join the day 
after to-morrow. What shall I do ? " 

" Join, of course," said she, good humouredly. 
" I must go myself . I shall not get any one else." 
" But I must go," said he, in real distress. " I 
shall manage it . leave it to me. I know some 
one that will get it for me . and if they don't, why 
. ^I am beginning to get very tired of the whole 

business . and ^' 

" Not for the world ! " said she, in real alarm. 
" You must not think of it." 



A Difcovery and a Mi/Jion, 23 

" But I see Low it can be done/' he said, joy- 
fully, " and without that. Leave it to me. Where 
do you want me to go ? " 

" First, then," said she, " it is to be secret. The 
place is Beaumaris, in Wales, and the house is called 
Bangor House, looking on the green. Now, I want 
you to go down, lodge there for a week or ten days, 
and find out all about the people who lodged there 
before . ^that is, seven or eight months ago. It will 
be useful for me to know. Mind, everything. 
Everything will be welcome, and everything useful. 
WiU you think it cruelly unreasonable to do this ?" 

She saw delight in his face, and gratitude too, 
for being chosen for such a mission. 

" This is really kind," he said ; '' I was getting 
80 bored with London. I was really thinking of a 
week at Bangor, or some of those places. It just 
falls in nicely . that is, I mean," he added, growing 
grave as he thought of his first statement, " if I 
had got leave." 

" Hu-sh ! " came from Lord Futnenham ; " no 
talking, please 1 H-ush ! " 

In fact, the second part was beginning, and 
Kagwitz B^la was now giving his great Hungarian 
solo, Verbocsy OzdrdAs, in which he first "agonised," 
and swung, and shocked, and wailed, and quivered 
through a " largo appassionato," and presently was 
plucking, and tearing, and mangling his strings (as 
though they had been his own hair) through ten 



24 Never Forgotten. 



terrible spasms, called " variations." He worried 
his violin as though it were a rat ; he seemed to 
long to bring his teeth into play, and to work at it 
with that extra power. He dug his fingers into its 
bowels, and seemed to root and tear at its heart. 
He made it yell and groan and crack ; and, at the 
end of each variation, tucked it violently under 
his arm, as it were to smother it up like a child, 
and mopped his face and hands in moist exliaustion. 
This was Kagwitz BSla and his solo, wliich at last 
happily ended. 

Later on, Mr. Komaine was looking with interest 
on his pleasant little missionary. Said he to her, 
wath a sort of low plaintive music he would throw 
into his voice : " I have a rude log-house of my 
own, rude and unfurnished as myself. Civilised 
people call it '' Chambers." There I can be as 
lonely and as savage as I hke. Sometimes the 
Charitable come and see me, and reUeve my wants. 
I have curiosities to show . something that would 
amuse. At least, people tell me so. I could get 
your friend Miss Manuel to come, and if you would 
care to meet .her there, to-morrow evening, say at 
five '' 

But Mrs. Fermor shrunk away from this scheme. 
Alarm came into her face. Mr. Romaine was 
hurrying on too fast, and this was being too bold. 
She answered coldly, and yet with agitation : 



A Difcovsry and a Miffion. 25 

" No, no. I never go anjrwhere in iliat way. 
Don't ask me, please. No . ^I am very sorry." 

She seemed to awake suddenly. All the new 
Missionary Ordination had gone for nothing. Mr. 
Bomaine did not relish any plan of his being re- 
jected ; so he rose hastily, and flung himself on his 
feet. " Very well," he said. " With all my heart. 
I am sorry. But it can't be helped." He stalked 
away to the door. ("He is a dangerous person," 
thought Mrs. Fermor, looking after him in dread.) 
At the door he passed Miss Manuel. 

" Poor Romaine ! " she said. " Keep up your 
heart. Things will go better another time, and in 
another direction. But recollect, I warned you ! 
You think a little too highly of yourself ! " 

" I shall not go with you to supper to-night," he 
said. "At least, I have half determined not to. 
But it is not over yet, that little business." 

Lady Laura Fermor had sat unto the end . 
would have sat had it been hours longer. Faithful 
captain ! She had ceased to suffer pain. A sort of 
dull numbness came on. One would have said she 
was enjoying pleasure, for she hung out mechanical 
smiles, like Signs, at regular intervals. And she 
found her reward. For the youth. Lord Spendle- 
sham, whose father was happily dead (within three 
months, but the boy had really shown feeling in 
keepmg himself retired so long), was there in 



1 



26 Never Forgotten. 



decent black gloves, and had actually got to a 
chair beside Blanche. He was rich, empty, vain, 
and foolish . a combination of good qualities that 
Lady Laura always admired. 

At the end of Lord Putnenham's musical party. 
Miss Manuel was at the door, on the inside, and 
people, as they passed, had little flying "chats," 
each no longer than ten seconds. That night she 
was to have one of her compact little suppers, and 
she was enrolling a few. Young Brett, t^ith con- 
fidence and the brightness of hope on his little 
forehead, posted past her. There was meaning in 
his eyes. She was talking with Westley Kerr, an 
agreeable man, when Young Brett said, meaningly, 
as he passed, and with secret mystery : 

" Bangor House, Beaumaris . all right, Miss 
Manuel ! *' and she smiled to him that he was 
right. 

But the next instant a face was put round the 
door from the outside . ^Major Carter's face, but 
so drawn and contorted, so contracted with fury, 
terror, and wonder, that Miss Manuel hardly knew 
it. It was laid against the sill of the door, and 
came close to hers. 

" Take care 1 " he said. And though the voice 
was low and hoarse, he. broke into the old trained 
smile. " Take care, I warn you I What you are 
doing is dangerous. I tell you in time, take care, 
or 



A DycQvery and a Miffion, 27 

" Take care ! " said Lord Putnenham's cheery 
voice. " Good gradous ! what is Miss Manuel to 
take care of, Carter? " 

" Of the draught, my lord," said Major Carter, 
pleasantly. " Standing in these doorways is a little 
perilous. I give warning in time always." 

A flash of fire passed from Miss Manuel's eyes 
direct to his face. " I have a strong constitution," 
she said, " and fear nothing ! " 



28 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE FOURTH. 

TO EUSTON-SQUABE. 

Fermor had been watching restlessly from a 
distance. Somehow he was troubled and disturbed 
in his mind on the subject of Miss Manuel. He 
had an uneasy sensitiveness about being over- 
looked by her, and to his ears had drifted a 
whisper of the coming "little supper." Westley 
Kerr . " a trading wit," a " mere professional 
ladies' man" (this was the disparaging description 
in his mind) . ^had passed him with a sort of ex- 
ulting patronage. " They want me at the Manuel 
house to-night. One of the old little suppers, you 
know. Not going ? Why, I thought you were an 
intimate there." 

He strode across to her. " She cannot mean," 
he thought, " to mark me in this fashion." 



To Eufton-fquare. 29 

" Good night," said Miss Manuel to him. " I 
am going a little earlier. I have 'a few choice 
friends to-night. Fom, unhappily, are disqualified. 
I have rules which you know, and which I cannot 
break through." 

He bit his lips and almost " bridled" with mor- 
tification. 

" No, no," she said, suddenly altering her tone. 
" Look over there ! I am getting fond of her. I 
want you to be domestic . ^to be a proper model 
family man . a chronicler of the beer. You un- 
derstand. Seriously I wish this. You have all 
the virtues for home life, and I want you to cul- 
tivate them. You will shine in that department, 
whereas in our poor company of fools and triflers 
you would be lost. So I tell you, candidly, I am 
not going to ask you." 

There was a surprising mixture of contempt, 
badinage, and haughtiness, in the way she spoke 
these words. Fermor was altogether overpowered, 
and could hardly reply. 

" O, as you please," he said ; " you have, of 
course, the right to do so." 

" Of course I have," she said, laughing. " Now 
go, and let me see you in a conjugal light. It will 
be a treat. I must gather my little flock together, 
now. Where is Mr. Romaine?" 

Mr. Romaine had just left Mrs. Fermor, having 
brought her up from Lord Putnenham's slender 



30 Never Forgctten. 



restoratives. She had been very earnest, and 
prettily earnest, in her work of conversion, and 
was quite elated with her progress. 

For that whole evening almost she had purposely 
" kept Mr. Romaine to herself," and he had not 
even spoken to the blonde bride. She had indeed 
aided him in his brave struggle. Fermor came up. 
to her chafing and disgusted. "We must come 
away," he said, somewhat roughly. "We have 
had more than enough of this place. I am sure 
you can't want to stay longer." 

The tone jarred on Mrs. Fermor in her present 
missionary excitement. She was beginning to be 
deeply hurt by her husband's late neglect. She 
could not help answering, 

" You have not helped to make it so agreeable 
to me." (This was in the carriage going home.) 

" Ah 1 " he answered, " I suppose you will now 
go straight to your father, and bring me to judg- 
ment before him. We always had tell-tales at 
school." 

This was the key-note . ^how the rest of the air 
was played may be conceived. 

They entered their house in silence. She went 
up-stairs without a word; he was turning into 
his study for a moody and hopeless meditation, 
almost raging against that cold heartless womtm, 
whom he had now finally done with, when a 



2"o Euflon-fqtiare, 31 

pa^ came to the door and handed him a note. 
It ran: 

" Can you forgive me ? I have been worried the 
whole night, and took it into my head to try you. 
You came out of it angelically. It is all my own 
helplessness, and I suppose I do not know how to 
treat you. Of course you would not come now. I 
have no right to expect it: and yet . there is a 
place at the round table. " P. M." 

Hesitating, pleased, angry, fretful, elated, doubt- 
ful, Fermor at last went forth slowly, got into a 
cab, and drove away to Alfred-place. 

Mrs. Wrigley had sat and suffered through Lord 
Putnenham's musical party. Major Carter had 
been at her feet, figuratively, the whole night. 
He had talked to her of his finer friends, and the 
finer houses where he was intimate. All her life . 
which had been strongly impregnated with the 
City . ^she had panted and thirsted after the choice 
hunting-grounds of society. She listened with 
curiosity and an oily glance of tenderness. The. 
major was rapidly drawing near to the golden 
gates of proposal, when he would knock and show 
his papers, and beg that he might be allowed to 



He had just gone to look for the heavy old- 



32 Never Forgotten. 



) 



fashioned chariot, and was coming back with news 
of it (he had stopped outside the door to have 
speech with some friend), when he heard those 
Welsh names which had contorted his face so 
terribly. For a moment he had forgotten the old 
swinging chariot, and the lady who swung in it ; 
but the smooth look had come back -to his fa6e 
again, and he was presently carefully and kindly 
guiding Mrs. Wrigley down stairs. At the chariot 
door she said . ^there was a coquettishness in this 
interview at the chariot door . " You will come to- 
morrow, Major Carter, at the usual hour. We 
shall expect you. I shall be not at home for 
^ those men.'" (Alasl for poor Hoblush and 
Punsher Hill !) 

But the major^s face was overcast. He answered 
in trouble : " I am so sorry, so grieved ; but press- 
ing business calls me away to the country to- 
morrow." 

Anxious lines came upon his face as he spoke, 
and he looked round restlessly and absently. Mrs. 
Wrigley languished, said he must be sure and not 
stay away long ; and coquettishly pulled the glass 
of the old chariot between her and the major, as 
she thought she had already risked scandal. 

Major Carter walked away to Hans-place. He 
found his son up . a quiet, unquestioning, and 
dutiful youth, of whom he often complained that 
he had to find brains for him, and thought, and a 



To Eu/lon-fquare. 33 



sort of earthly providence. He accepted his father 
in every situatioii without so much as a doubt, 
which was an advantage. He was a handsome 
youth, too. 

The impatience and contortion that was on the 
major's face in the room of the fashionably smooth 
smirk he had taken out with him, struck young 
Carter; but he asked no questions. 

" Where's that old Bradshaw," said, the major, 
roughly, "that was knocking about here? Now, 
when it is wanted, it can't be got." 

The son found it, and brought it. As the father's 
face was bent over the lamp to read, the light 
played upon worn furrows and gullies, and strange 
twists of sour impatience. 

"It will answer," he said, "for a wonder. 
Where's that hand-bag? " 

He began to thrust a few things into it, talking 
as he did so. " I have to go away for a couple of 
days. Don't mention to any one that I am out of 
the house. Now mind I Not a word I Good God, 
how I am persecuted ! I shall just catch a heavy 
train. Good-by ! " 

Major Carter hurried out of the house, carrying 
his hand-bag, and shut the door softly behind him. 
He got into a cab. He passed Lord Putnenham's 
house, where the lights were still in the windows, 
where the link-boys were still shouting hoarsely, 

VOL. III. D 



34 N^ver Forgptteru 



and where the haQ door, opening now and again, 
showed a patch of brilliancy. 

By that time Mrs. Wrigley was at her dressing- 
glass, being imscrewed and ungirthed, and ap- 
proaching mospe neariy the normal figure of a Seal. 
Softly amorous of her admirer, ^ was receiving 
the hired homage of her maid. 

At Euston-square, Major Oartesr asked for a 
ticket for Bangor, and got ready for a dreary and 
miserable night. 



Mifs MmtteFs '^Little St^per^ 35 



CHAPTER THE FIFTH. 



Harding HjlNTAPEr, M.P., her Majesty's Under- 
Secretary for Foreign Affairs^ Wesdey Kerr, 
Doctor Jay, F.R.S., aad Mrs. Jay, Colond Lang- 
ton, O.B., Gr. Gds., and Webster . someway' 
abways spoken of without the homage of "^Mr.," 
or the famiUarily of a christian name, a dr^ sa. 
tnmine satirist, rather inclined to be silent . ^these 
formed the fringe of Miss Manuel's little sapper^ 
table. The company were in spirits^ and came in- 
clined to be gay. The fire was bkrii^, the table 
was lighted with pink wax in white china candle- 
sticks. Eyeryidiing was delicate and inyiting. 

Webster settled his napkin about his limba with 
antieipatory satisfactkn. '' I think Putn^iham 
d2 



36 



Never Forgotten, 



gives the best parties in London," he said. " There 
are none I like so well." 

Harding Hanaper, fair and simpering, and con- 
sidered to be a young official of great promise, 
knew there was something masked under this 
speech. "Come," he said, "explain." He had 
almost said, "will the Honourable Member ex- 
plain." 

" They fit the mind for enjoyment," said Web- 
ster, appraising the dishes. " Don't you see ? It 
is like being in jail for a year, or being on a 
regimen, and then eating what you like . or on a 

desert island, or in a spiritual retreat, or He 

takes good care to leave no knives and forks in the 
way. What a narrow soul the man has !" 

This was like the "cur^e" at Fontainebleau. 
The huntsman had given the signal, and the 
hounds all fell, full cry, upon the Putnenham 
stag. 

" The prostration that comes on me in that 
place," said Harding Hanaper, bathing his hand 
in his long hair, "the languor, the loathing of 
life '' 

" And of office, I suppose I Eh?" said Webster. 
" And his fiddlers I Where does he get those 
horrible beings ? If, indeed, it was anticipating a 
place of final punishment . or it was a pantomime 
and demons were wanted ^" 

Miss Manuel's supper consisted of delicate game 



Mifs ManuePs ^'Little Supper!' 37 

and other dainties. Champagne lay cooling in the 
centre, like an Indian belle on an ottoman enjoy- 
ing the punkah. 

Now Fermor entered with a sort of shyness, for 
he found a ring of faces that were strange to him. 
But Miss Manuel sheltered him promptly. 

" Here is a place next to me, Captain Fermor. 
Mr. Hanaper, become acquainted with Captain 
Fermor, and help himl'* Then, in a low voice, 
" I see you are not too proud ; and you might have 
humiliated me. So, I am grateful.'* 

" I saw you at Lord Plitnenham's," said Harding 
Hanaper, graciously, and again dipping his hand 
in his hair. 

" Escape of another convict from Portland," 
said Webster, suddenly. " So I see by the even- 
ing papers. Let us drink him." And he bowed 
to Fermor ceremoniously; and they all drank to 
him. 

" Seems a regular outbreak," said Mr. Eomaine. 

Fermor was pleased at this company, though he 
recollected Eomaine at once. Miss Manuel had a 
way of making it felt among her subjects that she 
wished a prot^g6 to be respected, and Eomaine? 
though he did not relish Fermor, and would have 
liked, as he had said before, " to break him like a 
stick upon his knee," yet still was trained to affect 
a sort of respect towards him. Even " Webster," 
ready to crunch him, as he was crunching the 



Never Forgotten. 



mipe, bones and all^ and havi: 
^oie, and was grackms. 
was flattered by this universal 
i, towards each otiajer, there 
mnliarity which almost made h 
rdbster" especially there wa 
bitterness and shortness . ^k 
ich he was busy with his 
ras casting about for more, 
i^hing short and smart Eve' 
^[ueezed an intellectual lemon 
1 help myself,' Miss Manue: 

over to the champagne, 
inson, who has just come oi 

and glistens like this bottle.' 
aghed at this simile, 
leck," he said, looking at it 
is me. Only her mother ha 
[ the wires, and the cord, and : 



i-cap 



! Ha! ha!" 



lame !" said Miss Manuel ; " ; 
out. She takes very well,'' I 



) well as this dear girl," he sai 
^ Her mother may send her bt 
in the country." 

listened, and said something 
JT, which was welcomed with 

He was not altogether an ou 



Never Forgotten. 



wing of a ssipe^ bones and all^ and having a snarl 
ready, forbore, and was grackms. 

Fermor was flattered by this universal homa^. 
In IJie rest, towards each other, there was a re- 
publican familiarity which almost made him shiver. 
About ^^Webster" especially there was a good- 
humoured bitterness and shortness . ^long silences, 
during which he wsus busy with his snipe; aad 
when he was casting about for more, coming out 
with something short and smart Every now and 
again he squeezed an intellectual lemon, 

^ I shall help myself,* Miss Manuel," he said, 
stretching over to the champagne. "The ]aew 
Miss Jenkinson, who has just come out ! Look ! 
She shines and glistens like this bottle." 

They laughed at this simile. 

" The neck," he said, looking at it sideways, 
" so reminds me. Only her mother has taken the 
tinfoil, and the wires, and the cord, and made them 
into a mob-cap I Ha! ha!" 

" For shame I" said Miss Manuel ; " a poor girl 
yxki ccone out. She takes very well," I can assure 
you." 

" Not so well as this dear girl," he said, patting 
the flask. " Her mother may send her back to the 
family bin in the country." 

Fermor listened, and said something in his 
old manner, which was welcomed with general 
cordiality. He was not altogether an outlaw, he 



Mifs Manuel's '^Little SupferJ' 39 

feh. This was something like the old life. He 
kept up a kind of confidential talk with Miss 
Manuel. Under that soft light she seemed to glow, 
and glitter^ and flash, Hke a precioisis stone. 

*^ I ought to be at home," he said, in the old 
half-injured tone he was so fond of. " It is my 
proper place. I have been told so, at least. I am 
more fitted to adorn fanmdnun life than this sort 
of scene." 

" Ah ! you are thinking of the way I behaved 
to-night. I know you are," she said, looking down. 
" I am so strange, and behave so strangely. I have 
Spanish blood in me, and I must curb myself in 
everything I like . even mortify myself-. or else I 
don't know where I shoiild end !" 

With a sOTt of ghmpse of the meaning of this 
mysterious language, Fermor waited to hear more. 

" You don't know me," she aaid, hurriedly. 
"I am one of those natures that must rule my- 
self, or be ruled by myself. S<Hnetimes I dare 
not trust myself. Is it not better, then,'^ she added, 
half piteously, " to run the risk of seeming rough, 
and brusque, and blunt . ^and, in fact, what you are 
not, than ? " She paused. 

" Than what ? " said Fermor, almost tremu- 
lously interested, for now he was sedng quite dis- 
tincfly. 

Komaine was looking on from across the table- 
perhaps listeoiiig. Fermor saw the "contemptuous 



40 Never Forgotten. 



glance on his Up, and was pleased. Of course he 
was not pleased at the preference, and this put 
Fermor into great good humour. 

Soon Miss Manuel fell again into the same tone. 
" Do you like this sort of thing ? " she said, in a 
half melancholy tone. " I think I shall not have 
them again . ^I shall give them up." 

"Why do thatV^ said Fermor, in a gentle re- 
monstrance. 

" Why have them ? *' said she, looking at him. 

Fermor smiled. 

" You are smiling," she said, " because you 
know me, and how little able I am to keep to a 
resolution. You know I went out to-night with a 
firm resolve not to ask you here. I bound myself 
up, almost by a vow, and yet here you are, sitting 
next to me." 

Again Fermor smiled. The old armour was 
still bright, and the sword still sharp. " What have 
I done ? " he said, in a low voice. " I know I have 
many faults ; but still . . ^" 

" More," she went on, " I want you to promise 
me one thing, that you will be generous ^*' 

" Generous ! " repeated Fermor. 

" Yes, generous," she said. " You have con- 
quered me to-night. Let me have some little vic- 
tories in future. I want to train myself, and shall 
do so. Why not let me ? You have everything 
at home, why not be content f No, we shall have 



Mfs Manuel's ^'Little Supper^ 41 

no more little suppers. I want to live in the world 
as I have hitherto done . ^without heart, or soft- 
ness, or esteem, or regard . ^in what is called the 
hollow world. You understand me. Do, I con- 
jure you, let me, and rub Alfred-place out of the 
map of London." 

Some one struck in at this point, and with a 
sentence came between Fermor and Miss Manuel. 
When she returned to him, she said, "Do you 
know who was to have been here to-night, or at 
least I asked him I Poor John Hanbury." 

Fermor started and coloured. " He has come 
back," she said; "he has been doing the savage 
travelling, Gabooning it, and that kind of thing. 
He never cared for it really ; but I suspect, poor 
fellow," she added, in a low voice, "he had another 
object besides gorilla skins. He wanted to get rid 
of his old self. You see," she added, slowly, " he 
was very sensitive, and allowed things to take hold 
of his mind, which another more sensible would 
have fought off. And the worst is, he is come back 
just the same as when he went out, after all the 
Gabooning." 

Fermor did not lift his eyes. Was this a re- 
proach of hers, or merely accidental ? 

" Poor soul 1 " she went on, " (poor fool I Web- 
ster over there would say,) he is greatly altered. 
You remember, he was a sort of rosy, hearty, f ar- 
mei^like creature. Now you would not know him ; 



42 Never Forgotten. 



he is a dry, gaunt, silent being. Ah, the poor old 
John Hanbury I" she added, monmfally. " He died 
out with the dead past. The iron has entered into 
his soul, as Webster would say, in his comic way." 
She laughed a little harshly, and rose. " Now," 
she said, gaily, " for the drawing-room ; there is a 
better fire there." 

During tius little supper Miss Manuel's brotker 
had sat silent, and apparently moody. They ac- 
cepted him as such, and no remark was made. He 
had altered a good deal since the Eastport days, 
wore a large coal-black beard, while his black 
bright eyes roved from side to side with a look of 
inquiry. Sometimes he spoke; but he usually 
seemed to hare something on his mind, and was 
reckoned " odd." StiU he was accepted b& a useful 
male chaperon for his sister. She was always 
noticed as being very kind and gentle to him, al- 
most humouring him. 

When they had gone up into the drawing-room, 
Harding Hanaper, who affected the character of 
the overworked official, who could yet by ability 
combine late hours and pleasure with all the 
drudgery of business, came over to Miss Manuel 
for some privafce talk. H!e leant his elbow on the 
chimney-piece. The others were boisterouflly plea- 
sant 

^^ I shall have to be up ait six," he said, languidly. 



Mfs Mamets ^'Little Supper.'' 43 

^to make up or thifi. A shoal of people will be 
wanting answers by to^njorrow. I nmst look into 
their papers b^ore I go to bed- Old Pocock . 
ymir friend. Miss Manuel, he calls himself . ^is per- 
secating ns at the office. I beUeve we shall have 
to give him something . for your sake." Miss 
Manuel opened her great eyes with surprise^ or in- 
difference. It might be either. "I believe he 
would be glad to get even the Lee-Boo Coast^ poor 
soul ; he has come very low indeed." 

^ The Lee-Boo Coast ! " said Webster, striking 
m; "who are you sending out there? Who are 
Harding Hanaper's enemies ? It is rank murder." 

" The average of human life on that coast," said 
Mr. Hanaper, placidly, "is, we are assured, from 
eighteen months to two years. The salary is but 
nine hundred pounds. So it really amounts to 
this : we buy a man's life from say thirteen hun- 
dred to eighteen hundred pounds. We can't get a 
bishop at alL" 

" What ! the jsheen of an Apron aH unavailing ? " 
said Webster, with a sneer. 

" It will be vacant in two or three months," said 
Harding Hanaper ; " the two years are nearly rmi 
out. Yet old Pocock is wild for the place. I 
suppose we must let him have it. We can give 
him nothing else. He is too old, and too old 
fashioned." 

With gentle persuasion, and almost seductive 



44 Never Forgotten. 



intercession, Miss Manuel made a request to the 
official. " You must spare hirn^^ she said, " for my 
sake. I will not have my old man sacrificed on 
the Lee-Boo Coast. He would die in a week.'* 

" But he will die in a week if we do not send 
him," said Mr. Hanaper. " He looks quite worn 
and fretful with anxiety." 

" No matter," said Miss Manuel, " he shan't be 
murdered officially. We shall keep him at home 
for his own good . ^like a child." 

" Very well," said Harding Hanaper; "I shall 
recollect your orders at the proper time." 

The little gay cohort was gone and scattered; 
and Miss Manuel was left alone with her brother. 
It was past two. As usual, the brightness fled 
suddenly from her face. A strange, weary, and 
hopeless look came in its place. The brother 
looked at her gloomily, and with eyes rolling 
darkly. 

" This life I" she said, " my soul revolts against 
it. I am sick at heart. It is turning me into a 
demon." 

" I never took my eyes off him to-night," said 
her brother, gloomily, "never. I was thinking 
how strange to have him so near me, and to be 
so calm and friendly with him. Ah I he little 
knewl" 

" But this is all so wicked . so horribly wicked," 
said she, starting up. " How can I go on with it? 



Mifs Manuel's ^'Little Supper^ 45 

Only to-night to see that poor soft child . whom 
I am really getting to love . ^to see her falling gra- 
dually into the power of that bold man." 

His face lightened. " And she is ? I thought 
so to-night. All is going well, then." Then sud- 
denly changing his voice, " No, Pauline, no going 
back now. I won't have it. Or," he added, slowly, 
and with a meaning that she understood, " if you 
are tired of the business, or have forgotten what 
we owe to our darUng, whom at one time you said 
was murdered, as much as a girl was murdered by 
knife, or rope, or poison, why . have done with it, 
then, and leave it all to me. My course shall be 
shorter, and perhaps sharper." 

" No, no," she said, hastily. " I don't wish that. 
But the poor girl that loves me, who is trustful 
and gentle, why must she be destroyed?" 

" Every one of them," said he, savagely. " We 
shall spare none. I am glad she is soft and trustful 
and tender, very glad. So much the better. Violet 
was soft and tender too. Ah, poor darling ! and 
how was she treated ?" 

There was a pause. Pauline then spoke. "I 
am not equal to this sort of struggle," she said; 
" it is confusing me. My head seems to be flying 
round. No matter, as you say, we must go on." 

Fermor went home that night in a state of 
wild exultation. He still "lived;" he was not 



46 Never Forgotten. 



in a state of ^^ social dotage,^ thank Heaven ! 
The old power survived. It was wonderful the 
curious attraction he still exercised on every one 
coming within his sphere. He was passive. He 
had long since ceased to care for these Kttle 
triumphs; but the old power remained, in spite 
of influences whose interest it was to hold him in 
contempt and subjection. 

As he entered his hall the clock struck two. He 
went up-stairs softly, still smiling to himself. The 
door of the settlement on the stairs opened, and the 
grim Carlay figure stood before him, with a light 
in its hand. " Come in here," it said. 

Fermor^s recent triumph had made him defiant. 
This sudden return to the rude prose of life jarred 
on him. "I cannot," he said. " You must excuse 
me to-night. You must put off your remonstrance, 
or lecture, until the morning." 

Mr. Carlay made three strides towards him, and 
grasped his arm as in a steel vice. ** No trifling," 
he said. " You know me ! Stay, then, where you 
are, and listen to me. I gave you a warning a 
short time ago. How are you attending to that 
warning?" 

Fermor burst out in a fury. "This yoke is 
getting intolerable I " he said, drawing back. 
" What title have you to lecture me and bring me 
to account in this way? Once for all, Mr. Carlay, 
I give you notice ^" 



Mfs ManuePs '^Little Supper^ 47 

^Qnce for all," said the other, "I give you 
notice. Take care what you are doing. Do you 
suppose this tone of yours has any effect on me? 
I am not thinking of myself now, but of her. And 
I tell you solemnly, and I call Heaven to witness," 
here his long stiff arm was lifted, "that this must 
not, and shall not, go on ! And I charge you to 
take care what you are doing. For I have snatched 
my daughter from death once before, and I will 
not have her life risked again. Mind. There 
have been desperate passages in my life that you 
cannot guess at And if warnings are of no use,, 
and it comes to this, that there is to be a choice of 
lives between hers and any other's . no matter 
whose it is . ^there shall not be a moment's hesita- 
tion. Her life before all: my life after hers 
cheerfully. So . ^take care. / know where you 
were tornight. Forswear that house. You will 
find her in the drawing-room. Good night ! " 

He disappeared into his settlement. Fermor 
was left in darkness. In presence of this being he 
lost his self-possession. But he was abnost scared 
by the dark meaning of his significant hints, which 
he could not but accept as genuine. The cold 
withering sarcasm and contempt of his look and 
manner, as he met the weary, injured, anxious face 
of hi^i wife in the drawing-room, it would be hard 
to describe. 

" Where have you been?" she said. 



48 Never Forgotten. 



He threw the very concentration of contempt 
and anger into his look and manner. "Though 
you may run to tell your father and protector of 
this speech, I shall tell you this much : You shall 
never, between you, reduce me to such abject 
slavery ! I tell you this much : I shall never forget 
to-night. Fortunately, there are places, outside 
iJiia house, where I am still liked and appreciated. 
1 shall say no more." 

Mrs. Fermor was not of the guild of suffering 
wives. She was warm and quick of temper. Her 
bright eyes flashed. She answered him with the 
heat of wounded pride and repelled affection. 
That was all for himself, she said. He was wel- 
come to choose his house, and to choose his com- 
pany. With glowing cheeks She drew herself up 
with proud defiance, and said that slie^ too, was in- 
dependent, and could find amusement and appre- 
ciation elsewhere. As to what he said about " tale 
bearing," she scorned it. 

She was still in her Putnenham finery . in 
her tulles and fiowers and "low neck." The 
wreath was on her little head, and the flowers 
rustled and shook as she spoke with trembling 
voice, and threw down this challenge to her hus- 
band. 

He was astonished. " So this is the way you meet 
me, then," he said. "With all my heart! You 
have me at an advantage. I have been bought 



Miff ManueFs ^^LittU Sufper:' 49 

-> 

and sold. This is one of the grand mistakes of 
life found out too late ! Poor Eastport I Ah I " 

Mrs. Feimor understood that allusion perfectly. 
It confirmed her. " Very well ! " she said. 

That very night, or morning rather, Mrs. Fermor 
went to the devonport, and, with compressed lips 
and trembling fingers, wrote a little note. The 
little note was to Mr. Bomaine. It was prettily 
and coquettishly worded, saying that she would be 
at his Chambers at five o'clock; and she was so 
eager it should reach him promptly, that she sent 
out her maid to post it in the nearest ^^ pillar box.*' 
After she had done this, her pink lips were pressed 
together a little yindictively, and she walked to her 
room in indignant triumph. 



VOL. III. 



50 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SIXTH. 

MB. BCXKLAXBTE GBOTrnTG ^^ STEADY." 

In the Fermor household the furies of conjugal 
discord were tossing their torches violently. But 
they were genteel furies, and created no public^ 
disturbance, and a chilling and bitter politeness 
was their chief instrument. 

Mrs. Fennor, in a sort of excitement, dressed 
herself the next afternoon for a little expedition. 
She felt a sort of flutter, as though it were an 
enterprise of great moment and anxiety. But she 
was determined to be free and independent, and to 
do something that would commit her to being free 
and independent. And in a little quiet brougham, 
that was sometimes hired for her, and glowing like 
a fresh pulled rose, she drove away to Mr. Ro- 
maine's "log-house." 

She stepped out boldly, and almost gave a wistful 



Mr. Romaine growing " Steady, ^^ 51 

look up and down the street, in the hope that 
Captain Fermar might be passing by, to see her 
glove thrown down. 

Such a "log-house" indeed; that is, accepting 
the richest stuffs, the mast gorgeous arms, gold, 
silver, china, leopard skin rags, and filigree lamps, 
as the rude materials with which log-houses are 
ornamented. Mr. Bomaine came out and met her 
at the door like a sultan from his palace. 

She looked in timorously, and shrank back. For 
the sultan had no one with him. " Afraid I " he 
said. " Quite right. I was prepared. With you 
I had asked all the poHte conventionalities, but 
they have not come." 

"It is not that," said Mrs. Fermor; "but you 
told me our friend Miss Manuel was to be here." 

"Well, so I did; but I can see you won't 
come in." 

Mrs. Fermor drew back again. " No, no," she 
said, " you could scarcely ask me. Married ladies 
do not pay visits to gentlemen in this way." 

Mr. Romaine gave a loud and genuine laugh. 
" If all these caftans, and cloaks, and damascened 
blades had tongues, how noisily they would contrar- 
diet you." 

.Mrs. Fermor. looked at him with a little alarm, 
and turned to go. 

His voice became soft of a sudden, and entreat- 
ing. " What, no comfort to-day for the poor lonely 
e2 



52 Never Forgotten. 



outcast ! No encouragement I If you were only 
to know how much better I feel since last night . 

how much stronger and better able to struggle 

But what is this to you ? " 

^* A great deal," said Mrs. Fermor, warmly ; " it 
gives me more pleasure than anything I could 
hear. But you must promise me to go on, and do 
your best." 

" Why should I ? " he said, gloomily. " No one 
cares to help me. Look here," he said ; " read tluxt. 
Just sent here, not ten minutes before you came. 
And I am expected to be steady and keep straight." 

It was a sort of Lilliputian note, signed " Vir^nia 
Massinger," the name of the fair blonde girl. It 
said that she was coming that afternoon to see him, 
and to talk over old times. 

Mrs. Fermor was astounded. 

"Now, you see," he said, "how / live, and 
what I have to go through. The best way is not 
to affect anything quixotic, but to go by the 
old road. So now, good-by, Mrs. Fermor. Let 
me see you down, and then to order tea for Mrs. 
Massinger." 

Mrs. Fermor paused. She was a warm, impul- 
sive creature, and full of enthusiasm. She seemed 
to hear a secret call to her, to help, and protect this 
strange, struggling, even noble heart, who was so 
unfairly tried. Her cheek glowed as she turned 
and said : 



Mr. Romaine growing " Steady ^ 53 

" No, no ; we must do what we can for you. I 
won't desert you. So come and show me your 
curiosities." 

She was bewildered with the treasures that he 
exhibited; and he illustrated them so agreeably, 
with such a pleasant commentary, that an hour 
slipped away. No Mrs. Massinger came, however ; 
for though Mr. Romaine had indeed received a 
note from her, he had written one in reply, plead- 
ing business for that evening, but fixing the same 
hour for the next day. How he talked, and almost 
bewailed the miserable state of his soul . a kind of 
wreck now . ^while Mrs. Fermor listened with a 
sort of devotion to the curious scraps and hints, 
patches of his life, which he allowed to escape 
him carelessly, as it were, and which had for her 
young soul an unavoidable interest . ^may be con- 
ceived. 

" This is so good of you," he said ; " so kind, 
so thoughtful. Is it profane or disrespectful to 
say that you have been my guardian angel? When 
I see you there before me, or rather when I think 
of your advice (is it not absurd almost, I that have 
rubbed through the world, the wise and experienced 
man, wanting advice 1), I feel so strong. But of 
course I cannot hope for more. Still, for what 
is past, accept my most grateful thanks, Mrs. 
Fermor." 

She, thinking herself a perfect little monument 



54 Never Forgotten, 



of wisdom, shook her finger at him. " It all de- 
pends," she said, ^ on how you behave." 

Driving away, at first she was in a sort of ela- 
tion; then fell into some little mis^vings and 
troubles. Why had not Miss Manuel and the 
other lady come tool She thought of her then as 
of a dear friend, and indeed her heart had lately 
been ticming to Pauline with almost a sort of 
affection xind yearning. She was so splendid and 
brilliant, she admired her, and ^ was so kind and 
encouragii^. She thought she would go and see 
her, and tell her her Kttle trouUes ; ihen bade the 
coachman drive away to Alfred-place. 

At the door of the house was standing a sober 
practical brougham; and a sober practical figure 
was letting himself out slowly, and shutting the 
door behind him leisurely, as thoi^^^h it were the 
leaf of a wardrobe. He went up the steps sharply, 
and rang the beU sharply, as who should say, 
" An hour contains sixty guineas, not sixty 
minutes." 

Mrs. Fermor knew him to be a doctor. They 
told her at the door that Miss Manuel had been 
taken ill that morning, and was in a raging fever. 

She- had been so full of little schemes for con- 
fidence, for consultation, for kind sympathy to- 
wards this friend, whom she had determined to 
make a cherished inmate of, and love, and honour, 
that the news came on her like a blow. It roused 



Mr. Romaine growing ^^ Steady r 55 

up all the endmsiasm of hsst ytnmg beart. ^ I will 
go in/' she said. ^* I will go up to her. O, thig 
is dreadfiil ! Where is the reom f 

Half way up the stairs^ she met a dark figure 
with black beard and gleaming eyes, who barred 
her passage. "I am sorry," he said, "we camiot 
see yon. My sister is seriously ilL Another time." 

^ Bat,'* said she, almost piteonsly, ** I am her 
friend. I vxmt to see her. I am- Mrs. Fermor, 
teU her." 

He started forward; his eyes flashed. "You 
Mrs. Fermor ! ^ he said. " Not a step, please I I 
must request you will go. She is ill, and half 
unconscious : so / am master now. A pleasant 
surprise for her, indeed ! You must go away, and 
go home, and I must beg you won't come here 
again." 

Eeally frightened and overpowered, Mrs. Fermor 
hurried down stairs. The gleaming eyes, and a 
sort of restrained ferocity in his maimer, scared 
her. She went home full of grief and confusion. 
"She has no one to help her," she thought. 
"Only a woman Mko me could be her nurse. 
Noble, generous nature ? " And Mrs. Fermor, full 
of enthusiasm and excitement, longed to be a sort 
oi hospital nuise. 

Oa tl next evening, Mr. Bdmaine came stag- 
ing into the itxxn. This visit she did not relish ; 
at least, its boldness alarmed her. She tried to 



56 Never Forgotten. 



assume a little cold manner^ but he was so earnest 
and eager that she put it aside at once. 

" You have heard," he said, " about our friend 
Miss Manuel. It is dreadful, poor, poor girl." 

"But is she better?" said Mrs. Fermor, wist- 
fully. 

*^ She is in danger," said he, " serious danger. 
She has worked herself into this fit, and of course 
all her fine friends will fly the house like a 
plague." 

Mrs. Fermor clasped her hands fervently. " In- 
deed, I tried yesterday," she said, " to get to her. 
I feel for her. I hardly slept last night thinking 
of her. But there was a terrible man there, who 
turned me away." 

" I know," said he ; " that was her brother." 

" I would give the world," she went on, " to get 
to see her, to watch over her, to sit up with her at 
nights, and be like a Sister of Charity to her." 

"You would?" he said, with great interest. 
*^Are you serious? There is a good deal of the 
theatre and poetry about ^watching' and vigils, 
&c., which may, perhaps, be leading you astray." 

A Uttle wounded, Mrs. Fermor looked at him 
sadly, without speaking. 

" No, no," he said, " I am only joking. That 
rough speech was not meant for you. I believe in 
you . a little. But if you are in earnest, come with 
me now ! " 

" Come with you?" she said, wondering. 



Mr. Romaine growing " Steady^ 57 

" Yes," he said, smiling, "I am a sort of gnome, 
or genii, I can unlock doors and get into houses 
by mysterious agency. Will you come ? But no I 
prudery has its claims, even on an occasion like 
this. She is the Moloch of our day." 

Mrs. Fermor^s eyes sparkled. She seemed to 
feel a holy sort of call. The devotion of the Sister 
of Charity was before her eyes. "I will go," she 
said, " and I will trust you." 

He got a cab, and she set off with Mr. Romaine. 
She was actually proud of her superiority to the 
conventional laws. 

" I admire you," said Eomaine, looking at her, 
steadily, " for the way you have done this. I do 
indeed. No fuss, no confusion, but practical 
action. I begin to believe there is some good in 
the world after all . and some sense." 

She laughed. "You will learn in time," she 
said. 

"Ay," he answered, gloomily, "but who will 
teach ? You are tired of the scholar already. I 
saw that in your face when I came in. No matter, 
I suppose 1 must go back to the old school again. 
Another note this morning. Isn't it good I Here 
we are." 

They went in, up-stairs into the drawing-room. 
A gentleman in black was waiting there, a tall and 
sorrowful-looking gentleman. Romaine nodded to 
him. "How d'ye do, Hanbury?" he said, and 
left the room. 



58 Never Fxjrgatten. 



Mrs. Fermor drooped her head a litde gniltily. 
Hanbury looked at her sadlj^-and for a moment 
or two sikntly. ^ So you are Fennor^s wife !" he 
said. She, often thought afterwards of the sad, 
hopeless, and wistful 'look, with which he said 
these words. It was a little epitome of a whole 
history, that began with her own coming to 
Eastport. 

Romaine came back in a few minutes, "I have 
seen Manuel," he said. " He has a good deal of 
the mule in him, but I have made him do what I 
like, as I do with most people," and he looked at 
her for a moment significantly. " Now," he con- 
tinued, " you may come when you please, and stay 
as long as you please." 

Mrs. Fermor^s face glowed witii a sense of 
grateful obligation for this service. This power of 
" doing," and compassing what seems diflicult, is 
what excites the true reverence of women. The 
" almighty" man is thmr hero. 

There was a soft and vital enthusiasm about h^ar, 
even in little things, which was veny interesting to 
others. She was ful of quick, eager affections, 
and a kind of romance, and threw herself into 
the new duty she had chosen with an ardour and 
earnestness that was surpri^ng. The brother re- 
ceived her gloomily, and with distrust. He was, 
indeed, something of a mule. 



A Night Scene. 59 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH. 

A NIGHT SCENE. 

Miss Manuel was tossing in the gripe of a sort 
of fever. " Over-excitement," said the doctor, a 
csdm, wooden man, who, wilJi a steady attachment 
for the house, came twice in the day, and twice in 
the day let himself ont of the one-horse wardrobe 
at the door. He was not a gloomy man, and used 
to stand for several minutes by Pauline's bedside, 
studying her flushed face and her eyes-^brighter 
than ever they were before . ^with unrestrained 
approbation. 

^ Nothing could be better," he would say to Mrs. 
Permor, watchmg him wistfully, and whose heart 
would leap at this joyful news ; " nothing ccndd be 
better. We shall have the worst symptoms by to- 
morrow. Pulse not yet high enough, blood ab- 



60  Never Forgotten, 



normal, and a little wandering of the brain. I 
should say by to-morrow at the furthest. I should 
like an oppression of the chest, a difficulty of 
breathing ; but," he added, with a sigh, as if illus- 
trating the unreasonableness of our nature, "we 
can't expect everything. Still, nothing could be 
better." 

And Mrs. Fermor, wondering, and mystified 
and overwhelmed with deepest grief at this awful 
language, could only go through the usual fare- 
well medical offices with anything but the de- 
licacy, which custom exacts. She often missed 
her road to the doctor^s secret palm, and the piece 
of gold described many noisy circles on the ground 
before it reached its home. 

Pauline was really in danger for a few days. 
The doctor was right, though he put it in an odd 
way, when he wished for the crisis and the more 
dangerous symptoms to pass by. The excitement 
in which she had been living, the strain upon her 
life for so long, had begun to break her down, and 
she was now tossing and working in the hot fieiy 
waters of fever. 

Mrs. Fermor was a perfect Sister of Charity. 
She sat by her all day, and was really useful. But 
she longed to be able to show yet greater devotion. 
She would like to sit up with her all night long, a 
duty taken by a professional lady with a false curl 



A Night Scene. 61 



at each side, like the volute of an Ionic capital. 
But the brother came pitilessly and roughly in the 
evening, and turned her away. 

She spoke to Mr. Romaine. " I would give the 
world/' she said, " if you could kindly manage it." 

"What can I do?" he said. "I am only a 
rude rough being, without power of any sort. 
However, we will try." That evening he came to 
her at Miss Manuel's with good news. " I have 
seen the mule," he said. " We had rather a 
struggle, but I managed him." 

Again Mrs. Fermor was suffused with gratitude. 
She had the greatest confidence and a sort of trust- 
ing admiration for this all-powerful man. She 
was going home in a flurry of delight. It was 
raining, and there were no cabs. He said, care- 
lessly, " But how am I to get home I " 

Still grateful, Mrs. Fermor said, proudly, "I 
wish I could take you home. But " 

He was a trm friend, and she was almost a little 
proud to show to the world that in the instance of 
so true a friend she could be above its vile conven- 
tionalities. 

" The old song and the old tune," he said, with 
what appeared to her real bitterness and wounded 
feeling. " I suppose, if we were wrecked together 
on some wretched island, we should be hearing 
about chaperons, and the other miserable pro- 



62 Never Forgotten. 



prieties* Of course you can't help it . ^you only 
follow the crowd. They would tear you in pieces. 
you know they would 1 " 

The little lady waia delighted* She felt a glow 
of honest sympathy. " What would you say," Ae 
said, "if I did not care for the crowd and their 
tearing in pieces ? " 

" I don't believe it," he said, sadly. 

"Get in," she said, triumphantly. "You de- 
serve to go home in the ram . ^hut I know you 
mean well ^" . 

Mr. B(Hnaine, after helping Mrs. Fermor in, had 
his own ioot on the carriage step, when Fermor, 
with an angry face, came up. Romaine welcomed 
him with a cordial smile. 

" Just putting Mrs. Fermor into her carriage to 
send her home to you. You are just in time." 

Suspiciously, and with a sort of sneer, Fermor 
answered, 

" It seems so 1 " 

" Ay, so it does ! " said Romaine. " Why don't 
you offer me a seat, Mrs. Fermor?" he added, 
fixing his eye upon her. 

" O," she said, hastily, " you know ^" 

" Why, now ? Come ? " said Romaine. 

He seemed to put this question purposely for 
some test of his own. Mrs. Fermor coloured a 
shade, hesitated, and then said, with a little forced 
manner : 



A Night Scene. 63 



" Well^ we alwU ask you* You must not think 
of walking. Where shall we set you down ? " 

The test^ whatever it was, was soccessful ; for 
Mr. Bomaine smiled triumphantly. He took off 
his hat. 

^No^" he said, "I should only crowd you. 
Gt)od-by. Good-by, Fermor." 

Fermor looked after him sourly. He disliked 
him, and his presence at ikat house ; yet, of all the 
men whom he had ever known, this one alone 
seemed to intimidate hiuL 

" I should only crowd you too," he said, with an 
ironijcal bow to Mrs. Fermor. " Don't let me in- 
terfere with your arrangements." 

Mrs. Fermor was just saying, "But, Charles, 

Charles ! I want to explain ^" when he turned 

and walked away. She threw herself back, and 
bit her red lips. " Very well," she said. " Let him 
go ! I wish I had told him openly that I had asked 
Mr. Komaine in. Why should I not ? I am not a 
child, and if he treats me this way ^" 

She drove home and came again that night for 
her first vigil. She was in a tremor of excitement. 
A great business was before her. She had dressed 
herself for the task, and got lamps, books, fire, 
arm-chair, everything, ready with earnest prepara- 
tion. By ten or eleven she was sitting there alone 
. ^the attendant with the curled volutes had re- 
signed, wounded, not to say angry . a little faithful 



64 Never Forgotten. 



sentry, with bright wakeful eyes, in an arm-chair 
sentry-box. She was determined not to sleep on 
her post. Pauline was tossing there beside her. 
The crisis the medical visitor had wished for was 
at hand; but presently she became quiet and 
seemed to sleep. Joy and hope filled Mrs. Fer- 
moi's heart. Her trust and affection had increased 
with her attendance. She had never read the 
" wicked" Laurence Sterne, or she might have seen 
in his gay Sentimental Travels that " You take a 
withering twig and put it in the ground ; and then 
you water it, because you have planted it." But 
Mr. Romaine had lent her a transcendental French 
romance, called " L' Amour Spirituel." (Alas ! did 
she not occasionally lift her eyes ruefully, and 
strain them backwards to the days of "Roger le 
Garfon"?) And this was so dreary and "spiri- 
tual" in its sense of the peculiar relations of those 
who loved each other all through its pages, that 
the long-lashed eyelids began to droop, and by one 
o'clock the sentry was sleeping soundly on her 
post. 

She woke up suddenly, startled by the sound of 
some one talking. There was Pauline, sitting half 
up in her bed, her long rich hair down over her 
shoulders like a veil, her eyes flashing like glowing 
coals, and her arms beating back the curtains 
beside her. Li terror, Mrs. Fermor half ran to- 
wards the door . ^then came back . ^thinking how 



A Night Scene. 65 



late it was, and tried to soothe her. The glowing 
eyes fixed themselves suddenly on her. The fingers 
pointed at her, trembling. 

"Send for her," said Pauline; "quick . send 
for her, and see . ^when she comes, keep her until I 
come down to her." 

" Send for whom? " said Mrs. Fermor, soothing 
her. " For whom, darling? Lie down, do, dearest 
.there." 

"Keep her!" said Pauline, struggling, "until 
I come down to her. I wish to settle with her . 
and with them all. But with her and her husband 
first." 

A little terrified, again she tried to soothe her. 
" Do lie down," she said ; " you must, indeed." 

" I must tell you," said Pauline, confidentially. 
" They don't suspect . and she, the wife, actually 
thinks I have a sort of affection for her." And 
Pauline laughed. 

Greatly alarmed, Mrs. Fermor let her go, and 
shrunk away. " But who do you mean ?" she said. 

" Fermor . ^the Fermors," she said, mournfully ; 
"he who destroyed her . our Violet . put her to 
death with his own hands . took away her sweet 
life. Was it not a cruel and most dreadful 
murder? Was it not ? And yet they hang people 
every day. But listen to me. I can tell you 
something. We are on their track . ^his and his 
wife's." 

VOL. III. F 



66 Never Forgotten. 



" But what harm has she done you?" said the 
other, 

"Harm!" said Pauline, with a half shriek. 
" Who are you that ask me ? Come closer. I cajn 
tell you," added Pauline, slowly and doubtfully, 
"there is something about you very like her! 
Ah !" she said, again beating the curtains, " she is 
not far off ! Send her to me quick, or I shall get 
up and find her myself." 

Dreadfully shocked and terrified, Mrs. Fermor 
ran to the bell and rang it. In a very short time 
the brother and some of the servants were in the 
room. But Mrs. Fermor did not watch again. 

The doctor was right. The crisis had come and 
was past. Pauline began to recover. In three 
weeks, he said, rubbing his hands, " We are gaining 
strength, eh?" And certainly, accepting that com- 
munity of expression, it must be said there was a 
sort of strength in which he had gained sensibly 
since the commencement of her illness. Later on 
he said, "I don't see why we should not be kept 
up by the strongest beef-tea and generous port 
wine ? " Later on still, he said, " I think we shall 
do. we are pretty sure to do ;" and, accepting the 
community of the expression as before, it must be 
said that he had done very well indeed. 

He had said, "We might be got down for an 
hour or two to the drawing-room, but mind, we 
mustn't over-do it;" and Pauline, in consequence. 



A Night Scene. 67 



had come down, and was sitting in the drawing- 
room. 

The doctor had come in .person to siiperintend 
this critical juncture, and looked on with pride at 
her as she sat on the sofa. He seemed to hint that 
without this supervision fatal results would have 
taken place. "We got her down wonderfully," 
he said. " It was critical. And at one moment . 
on the lobby there . ^I had misgivings." The usual 
amber acknowledgment was introduced, in the 
usual guilty way ; but he whispered, " Not to day ! 
No, no." This was a sort of gala or festival. There 
was a common link of sympathy running through 
us all, and why deny us the luxury of indulging 
our feelings. 



p2 



68 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEE THE EIGHTH. 

AN EXPEDITION. 

When Miss Manuel was recovered or conva- 
lescent, some letters which she asked for eagerly 
were brought to her. She picked out three with 
the Beaumaris postmark . ^three in the handwriting 
of Young Brett. She opened them eagerly. They 
were in the shape of a sort of journal, and full of 
details. The honest youth, not very fluent with his 
pen, had sat up many nights writing everything 
with a fulness that he thought would give pleasure. 
He had gone into the work with enthusiasm, and 
what follows is a short history of his adventures. 

It was a very wintry journey down to Bangor. 
At Bangor he got on board a sail ferry-boat, and 
made a stormy passage across with a " stiff" breeze, 
shipping seas every moment. "There is a long 



An Expedition, 69 



pier of wood," wrote Young Brett, "more like a 
plauk than a pier, by Jove I " (even in writing he 
could not keep clear of his favourite god,) " and 
the wind was blowing %o hard, and there was no 
rail to hold on by, and the sea was washing over 
your feet. I give you my honour. Miss Manuel, 
this thing was a quarter of a mile long. I never 
saw such fun ! There was an old Welsh clergy- 
man's hat that was caught by the wind, and went 
flying away like a bird. I could have laughed, only 
the poor old soul looked so distressed. And you 
would have laughed, Miss Manuel, to have seen us 
all tottering along that plank, some of us scream- 
ing, some of us laughing, and some of us stopping 
short altogether, and afraid to go back or forwards. 
There was a young woman, too, with children and 
baskets, and she was dreadfully embarrassed be- 
tween the baskets and the children. Just as we 
were half way across, and close to the pier, I heard 
a scream in front, and I saw a little child in a red 
cloak fall half over the edge of the plank, and 
there was a wave coming, and the wind blow- 
ing," &c. 

Young Brett went on to say that he caught hold 
of the child by the hand, as if he had just stooped 
down to lift up any child that had tumbled on the 
gravel in a square. But the truth was, he had 
jumped forward along the edge of the slippery 
" stage," shot past a man who was in front of him. 



70 Never Forgotten. 



and with imich danger and tharongh wetting, had 
caught hold of this little child. He raised her up, 
and carried her caref uUj and tenderly all the rest 
of the journey. The boat went " swirling' through 
the water, shipping a sea now and again, to his 
great delight ; but he had the red-cloaked little girl 
on his knee all the time, and laughed for her, 
which she could understand, and talked English 
for her, which she could not, and finally set her 
down on diy land. 

The young woman . ^a handsome, striking-look- 
ing young Welshwoman . was deeply grateful; 
not so much for the little service, for which she 
would have nodded her thanks to one of her own 
station, but for Young Brett^s- manner; which 
caused the feeling of every one he came in contact 
with to take some shape of affection, slight or 
strong. It was so with the cabman who took him 
but two streets away ; with the porter who canied 
his portmanteau from the train to the cab ; to the 
people who got in at one station and got out in 
ten minutes. Every one felt that he was good, and 
this vnnncr Wplshwoman had thft same feelinn*. 



An Expedition^ 71 



of them. Besides, they were very strong, and we 
trundled along quite cheerfully. But I was think- 
ing if Showers, or Slack, or any of our fellows had 
seen me I Luckily it was dark.'' 

Most Welsh travellers have seen the little 
old-fashioned, dun^colotred, remote, unfriended, 
pocket town called Beaumaris, which we come to 
along the river, and which .we see jutting out be- 
fore us into the water, with a sort of sham air of 
a tiny fortified town, with a dull resemblance to a 
miniature Ostend. The little dun High-street^ 
through which no carriages travel, and whose little 
dun houses seem toy-houses freshly taken out of a 
child's toy-box ; the general air as if not only the 
streets were diligently swept up every morning hke 
a hearth, but that the toy-houses also were swept 
down ; and the quiet slumber that reigned over the 
men and women, and the windows, and the lone 
common at the edge of the sea, contributed to 
make rather a dispiriting impression on Young 
Brett as he entered triumphantly drawn by hisr 
donkeys. 

It was all out of the season, it being the depth 
of winter. The little town seemed to be laid up in 
ordinary, stripped, unfurnished, like a ship out of 
commission. Young Brett drove to the hotel of 
the place^ and was received with a little surprise. 
They were all out of gear. The rooms had a 
mouldy air ; but he was made welcome. 



72 Never Forgotten. 



To one of his temper these were dispiriting in- 
fluences. But he manfully struggled against them, 
and thought of the friend whose mission he had 
come down to fulfil. Later, he was sitting at some 
dinner in the coffee-room, when a gentleman, rub- 
bing his hands together isoftly, came gliding in. 
" God bless me 1 " said Young Brett, starting up ; 
" Major Carter ! What do you do here t" 

" Well, of all the coincidences in the world, my 
young friend !" said the major, casting up his eyes 
devoutly. " Is it not ? It looks like a providence, 
that we two, of all men in the world, and here, of 
all places in the world ^^ 

" I don't imderstand it," said Young Brett, 
bluntly. 

" Recollect," said the major, " this was my 
home for a long time. I had good reason, unhap- 
pily, to connect me with this place. I ought, to 
remember it. You may be sure it is no pleasure 
to me to revisit it. And now let me ask you, my 
young friend, what brings yow down here, eh ?" 

Young Brett was as sharp and ready as he was 
straightforward. " Some business," he said, with- 
out hesitation. " Welsh business, major. Travel- 
ling makes one hungrj'^, as you see." 

" Welsh business?" said the major, slowly, and 
looking at him steadily. " For a friend, I suppose, 
not for yourself f" 

** Common, every-day sort of thing," said Young 



An Expedition. 7S 



Brett, helping himself. " A little confidential ; you 
understand ? Otherwise ^^ 

" I dare say, now," said Major Carter, looking 
at him still, "where it was a lady who could not. 
herself so conveniently travel, and who had a 
smart handy enthusiastic young boy she could send 
in her stead, to use his eyes and pry about, and 
pick up facts to try and slander and ruin a man 
who has never done him any harm, eh ? Thais an 
honourable and a gentlemanly duty to be employed 
on. Eh, Mr. Brett?" 

Young Brett coloured. " I don't understand ; 
that is, I do understand," he added, hastily. " But 
I think you assume ^" 

"Assume?" said the major, excitedly. "You 
can't say that. I am behind the scenes. I know 
most of what goes on. You are a brave, honour- 
able, upright fellow, and I tell you I am grieved 
and ashamed to see you engaged in such a busi- 
ness." 

Young Brett waa in sore distress. His lips were 
sealed. " You make too much of this," he said. 
" I have private business which I am not at liberty 
to mention, and so- ^" 

" As I say," continued the major, " you are a 
gentleman, and have always been above dirty 
work. Your friend. Miss Manuel, hates me, and 
you know why. Because I interfered to save a 
friend from a match that I considered was unsuited 



74 Never Forgotten, 



for him. He would haye embittered the life of 
that poor girl. She would have been in her grave 
now; you know she would. The girl that he has 
married he is making wretched. And for this, 
Miss Manuel has marked me ; I know it ; she is 
determined to harass me in every way she can. I 
could not beKeve such vindictiveness in a Christian 
lady. I say it is shocking." 

Young Brett's cheeks kindled. " Do you speak 
of Miss Manuel!** he said. "Those words do met 
apply to her ; to her least of any one in the world. 
I can't sit by, Major Carter, and have her so spoken 
of; I will not, indeed. She is above all that . 
miles above it. If ever," continued Young Brett, 
with a trembling voice, " there was a woman 
noble, and generous, and devoted on this earth, it 
is she!" 

" I know she has a friend in you," answered 
the major, quickly, " and your defence of her is 
honourable to you. But teU me this : Is it noble or 
generous to lead astray a young girl . a yoimg 
wife . ^to put her in the power of a cold, scheming 
man of the world . ^hand her over to him . urge 
Mm on . all to punish the man who left her sister? 
Is this devoted or nT)ble ? I declare . and I don't set 
up to be squeamish . it seems to me devilish.'* 

Greatly excited, Young Brett said, " If you mean 
this to apply to Miss Manuel, in her name I deny it 
altogether. I could not believe that you could mean 



An Expedition. 75 



to titter such horrible slanders. I won*t have them 

. ^I won't hearth^n, Major Carter, and ^I must 

beg that this subject will not be pursued/' 

"With all my heartj'* said the other. ''All I 
say is, watch for yourself when you go back. Take 
note of a Mr. Komaine and of Mrs. Fermor. Ask 
Miss Manuel herself. There.'* 

^ I shall I " Young Brett said, in great heat, 
" and within an hour after I arrive." 

" Good,** said the major. " I am content. We 
will say no more about it, as you desire it. Your 
warmth does you honour. Of course it is excusable 
in her: she loved her sister; but I implore of you 
reflect a moment before you go on. I have had 
troubles enough in my life, and want to end my 
days peaceably. Good God I ** continued the major, 
walking up and down, "it is awful to think of. 
That any woman should venture on so terrible a 
track . and, my dear boy, I don't think you know 
the full force of what you are required to do." 

Young Brett looked at him wondering, and still 
in distress. He had some qualms of conscience, 
and the picture of the old soldier buffeting wearily 
through life, and wishing to end his days in calm, 
affected him a little. He was almost on the point 
of speaking out candidly, and relieving the major^s 
mind by telling him that all he had come down for 
was to hear something of " poor Mrs. Carter^s" last 
illness, when he suddenly thought of Miss Manuel. 



76 Never Forgotten. 



She was so wise, so superior, so good, that anything 
she ordered and ordained must be right. He rose 
hastily. " My dear major, this is a regular night- 
mare of yours. Have a glass of sherry.'' 

Carter^s face changed. A few people, on a few 
occasions in his life, had seen a strange fiendish 
contraction spread over that face. It came on this 
occasion. He stooped over. "Besides," he said, 
" you don't think of the danger there is in this sort 
of game. You won't take a friend's advice. No ? 
I am sure you won't. You would be led by a 
bright, flashing woman . ^just as all boys are led. 
Now take a friendly warning, don't run your head 
against a stone wall. There are people in this 
world, my dear child, who, as the phrase runs, 
stick at nothing. They would crush, stamp on you, 
destroy you, to save themselves. You are a brave, 
good little fellow . rather foolish, though . and I 
should not like to see you in trouble. Take care. 
Master Brett, and, as a general rule through life, 
leave other people's business alone." 

Young Brett laughed very good humouredly. 
Now that the major had dropped his character of 
the poor "buffeted" old officer, he was quite easy 
in his mind. " I am a stupid, foolish fellow," he 
said, " and they all tell me I want ballast. I am 
very yoimg, you know, and shall mend, major. 
Are you staying in this house t " 

Again the major's manner changed. He was 



An Expedition. 77 



the man of the world once more. " I have to go 
up by the night train. Lucky fellow 1 You will 
have a comfortable bed here, and a comfortable 
sleep. A capital house. I know it of old. Think 
of the poor traveller tumbling on the cushions, as 
you turn round on your side to go off into a com- 
fortable snooze. You are not angry with me? 
Advice from a man of the world, and from an old 
man of the world, is always useful. Good-by." 



78 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE NINTH. 

YOUNG BBETT DISCOTEBS ALL. 

Still under the impression that his office was a 
little " shabby," Young Brett had to reassure him- 
self pretty often. All that Miss Manuel wished 
was to hear how a quiet lady died. He spoke to a 
waiter that night about Major Carter. An adr 
mirable gentleman, said the gaiter, known and 
much liked in the place. They were all sorry 
when he left. He was so gay and cheerful, and 
could tell such nice stories. And Mrs. Carter? 
A good woman too, but " soft " and quiet . by no 
means to come near the major. What did she die 
of? O, ill for a long time; regular break up. 
Began with a cold. In fact, only for the major, 
who took such care and sat up and slaved himself 
night after night, she would have been dead 
months before. A good charitable man . gay and 



Toung Brett di/covers all. 79 

pleasant too. (As if the charitable were not 
nsnallj gifted with these qualities.) Where did 
he live, and the kdj die I A.t Griffiths's, in the 
main street 

In the morning he saw the little dun town 
better, its tiny street, its house or two, whose 
second stoxy projected over on pillars, and made a 
sort of summer-house below. He found that his 
hotel had one front which looked into the little 
main street, and another, heavy, massive, and of a 
chilling iron-grey, that made part of a terrace, and 
looked out across a little common upon the sea. 
This was now a cheerless [Hrospect; and the iron- 
grey face was as rough and well scored with ill 
usage from the weather, as that of an old storm- 
beaten pilot. 

He set ofif to GriflSths's. There were miniature 
shops, where they seemed to sell nothing but glass 
pickle-bottles full of sweets and lozenges, and 
in which articles a brisk trade must have been 
done. He found his way to a narrow yellow strip 
of a house, in the front bedroom of which Mrs. 
Carter had died. He knocked. It was opened by 
a tall bony womaja. She stood with it half open, 
so that her figure, with the door, made up a pep- 
feet and satisfactory obstruction* Young Brett 
said cheerf uUy that he wished to see Mrs. Griffiths. 

" About what! " said the other, sharply. " On 
what?" 



80 Never Forgotten. 



"Well," said Young Brett, "say about lodg- 
ings. 

" There are no lodgings to let here, nor won't 
be," said the woman, preparing to close the door. 

" But," said Young Brett, " I want to see Mrs. 
Griffiths." 

"Well, what o' thatt" said the woman, yet 
more sharply. " I am her ; and I tell you we let 
no lodgings, and won't let them." 

Brett, still good humoured and never to be put 
out of temper, said how provoking this was, and 
that it couldn't be helped. That he was a stranger 
in the place, and could he . this he put at a ven- 
ture . ^see Mr. Griffiths I " 

" No you can't . ^no, nor him neither," she saidj 
not so sharply now. " We don't waste our time 
in this place, and you, young man, don't waste 
yours." 

"You won't let me in, that's evident," said 
Young Brett, laughing. 

" What is it ? " said a voice behind the woman, 
and a hard-lined face, that had been in the world 
some sixty years, appeared on the shoulder of the 
woman. Said the woman : " He wants lodgings. 
Only think I Why, there's the hotel 1 " 

The sixty years' face had sharp eyes and ragged 
hair. The sharp eyes twinkled. "Lodgings," it 
said. " Well, we might, you know. It ain't our 
custom. But if a good thing offered ^" 



Young Brett f covers all. 81 

The bony woman turned on him. ^' Always for 
money," she said, wickedly. "You would sell 
your soul, and all our souls, fpr a tester. I tell 
you .we won't." 

" You think money is to be picked up in the 
street," he said. " Here is a gentleman who will 
make us a good offer, I know he will. And it is 
hard, precious hard . ^in my own house, too." 

"Ah, go in," she said, with a rough good 
humour. " Don't let us be exposing our fights in 
the street. It can't be done," she said to Brett. 
" Very sorry not to have you, sir. But we don't 
like to put ourselves out. And I have a hun- 
dred things to do ; so.." She closed the door, 
making it finish what she was saying. 

Young Brett went his way a little gloomy. " I 
can do no more," he thought, " if they worit let 
me in, or tell me anything." But he felt a little 
ashamed of coming back to Miss Manuel so un- 
successful. So he set off to take a walk in the 
grounds of the old castle next the town. 

Some one "showed" it to him; i.e. received a 
shilling. And Brett was walking briskly about to 
warm himself, when he came suddenly on a woman 
with two children. He recollected the woman at 
once. 

" O, sir," she said, " I came to look for you. I 
heard a gentleman had been at our house, and I 
was sure it was the same." 

VOL. III. G 



82 Never Forgotten. 



"What, at Griffiths'sl" said YouDg Brett. 
"And this is the little woman that nearly fell 
into the water? .You must take care another 
time, little woman." He doted on children, 'and 
most children that he met were seen " toddling " 
to him with their Uttle hands extended. This 
little child of the red cloak he stooped down and 
kissed. The mother looked at him with beaming 
eyes. She was young and fresh, and had a soft 
interest in her face. 

'' O, indeed, sir," she said, " we are so grateful 
to you. And you thought so little of it." 

"Nonsense," said Young Brett, colouring, as 
he always did at praise. "You make me un- 
comfortable. So you were at GrifEth^s? " 

"I am their daughter-in-law," said she, "and 
Kre with them. My husband is dead. That little 
one there was his favourite." 

" Nice Kttle womian ! " Brett took her up, and 
put her on his shoulder. "What does she like? 
Go-carts and dolls, and Noah's arks ? I suppose 
they sell those sort of things someewfaere? " 

" O no, no, sir ; you are too kiiid. But," die 
went on, with some hesitation, "you wanted 
lodgings, you said J' 

" Why . er . ^no, not exactly," said Young Brett, 
setting the little girl down. " I wanted to . ^see 
somebody^ . or to hear something. you know . 



Toung Brett dif covers all, 83 

more than the lodgings. Wasn't there a Mrs. Carter 
staying with you f " 

The woman looked romid with alarm. "Ah, I 
thought it was that," she said. 

" Why ? " said Young Brett, wondering. 

"You wished to hear about all that. And I 
have been expecting it this long time back." 

" Then I dare say you know all about it," said 
he, eagerly; "that is^ if there is anything to 
know." 

She shook her head. " Something . ^not much. 
It is a long story, and a sad story, and a curious 
story, sir. If you wish to learn it all, you should 
stay here some time, and see people who ought to 
be seen. You should take our lodgings." 

Young Brett looked at her astonished. "This 
is all mysterious," he said. "I did want to take 
your lodgings, but they won't let me take them." 

"O, they will," she said. "He will. He is 
moaning over the loss of so much money at this 
very moment. If you come again, sir, in the 
morning ^ 

"But," said he, "this is all so odd; and if I 

were to go to your house, I don't know ^I ought 

to be back in London." 

" Some one should look to it," the young woman 



" It f What ? " echoed Young Brett. 
g2 



84 Never Forgotten, 



" Her illness," said she, mysteriously. " It was 
very long, and very miserable, and ^^ 

" How did she die t " said Yomig Brett, eagerly. 

She shook her head. " I was kept away . shut 
out. Poor gentle lady, she fancied me a little, and 
someway he took care always not to let me near 
her. He suspected me." 

" Suspected ! " said Young Brett, a little be- 
wildered. " Suspected what ? . and why should he 
suspect ? " 

The young woman shook her head and looked 
round. " He himself has been here, at our house. 
He knew that some one was coming, and told 
them. He has great influence with Mrs. GriflEiths. 
But I say," she went on, with greater vehemence, 
"some one should look after it! You should 
stay here some days. There are people to be seen 
that know a great deal. I can tell nothing, be- 
cause I know but little; but you are clever, and 
can use your eyes and head." 

" Who am I to see ? " said Yoimg Brett. 

They talked some time longer, and she told him 
. ^then went away. 

There was a dingy apothecary's shop there, 
languid as regards business ; its bottles, medicines, 
and apparatus appearing under a delicate film of 
blue mould. The dispenser himself, as seen through 
a dusty pane, seemed to be suffering under the 
same powdery mite-eaten blight. 



Toung Brett dif covers all. 85 

Young Brett walked into the shop briskly, and 
asked to see Doctor Jones. A boy came out from 
behind the dusty glass door of a back parlour, with 
hope in his face; but Young Brett, fresh, clean, 
and full of bright health, quickly dissipated all 
illusion. The boy's face fell. Doctor Jones ap- 
peared presently, a stooping, grey-haired, trem- 
bling old man, with a face of crushed and crum- 
pled parchment. It was turned very shyly and 
suspiciously on the young officer. With his oflf- 
hand way, Young Brett said he wanted a box of 
cough lozenges. He did not say for a cough. 
Some such old friable fossils were discovered in a 
pigeon-hole and given to him. Then he began to 
talk pleasantly with the old man about the place, 
and about those who lived there. 

There was a fire in the back parlour, and Doctor 
Jones, shivering a good deal, asked, "Would he 
come in and sit down ? " Brett went in gladly, and 
had soon, with his old charm, recommended him- 
self. Gradually he came to the subject that was 
in his mind, and cautiously mentioned the name of 
Major Carter. 

The old man started back, and looked at him 
steadfastly, with his hands clasping the knobs 
of his chair. " Why do you mention him ? " 
he said, quickly. " What do you want to 
know?" 

" 1 1 " said Young Brett. " I know him already 



86 Never Forgotten. 



. ^have known him ever so long. I knew his wife, 
too, poor lady!" 

Old Doctor Jones squeezed up his eyes to look 
yet more suspiciously at his visitor. " Why do you 
talk to me about her? " he said. "It is all so long 
ago : it is better to let the whole thing be forgotten. 
I don't want to think of it. That is . if I was to 
be thinking of all the people I have attended, and 
what they suffered, what pleasant thoughts and 
pleasant dreams I should have I " 

"So you attended Mrs. Carter?" said Young 
Brett, with blunt interest. " I want to hear about 
that illness. I am most anxious to know all about 
poor Mrs. Carter, and ho'w she ^" 

Suddenly the dirty glass door was opened by a 
fresh, pink-looking, red-haired young man, with 
quick eyes, who stood with his hand on the door 
looking from one to the other. "Mrs. Carter^s 
illness 1 " he said. " Well, what about it ? She 
was ill, and she died, and was buried, like a 
thousand other people. Who is this gentleman, 
father?" 

Young Brett answered promptly that they were 
merely talking over the town and the people who 
had lived there. 

" O ! " said the young man, with a half smile ; 
^^ that was all, was it ? How singular ! I am Doctor 
Watkyn Jones. I carry on the business. He is 
not able to go about and do the visiting. Father, 



Toung Brett dif covers all. 87 

you had better go up-stairs ; there is a better fire 
there." He held the door with a quiet look that 
seemed to amount to an ord^. Trembling and 
looking on the groimd with his parchment fax!, 
the old man tottered away. As soon as he was 
gone, the other sat down at the table, and began to 
talk with great frankness. " I know what this is 
about, sir/' he said, " perfectly well. The in- 
surance people had persons down here poking and 
prying ^.bout, trying to get up suspicions against 
honest folk. It is always their game. It is shame- 
ful ! As far as I am concerned, I am deter- 
mined they shall have no help ; nor from any one 
belonging to me. Every honest man must set his 
face against such proceedings." 

He spoke this so warmly, that Young Brett felt 
with him. "I assure you," he said, "I have no- 
thing to do with insurance people of any kind . 
never heard of them, in fact.'* 

" I hope you did not understand me so ? " said 
the other. " I have known Major Carter a long 
time. He is an honourable man, not rich, but 
wishing to do what is right and respectable. You 
will hear nothing but good of him in this place." 

^' Well, certainly," said Young Brett, " so far I 
have indee d . " 

"But he has enemies," continued the other. " I 
know he has. There is one powerful family up in 
London whom he has ofiEended, and who are lite* 



88 Never Forgotten. 



rally hunting him, for some fancied injury that 
they think he did to them. I know, sir, on good 
authority, instances of this persecution that would 
amaze you 1 " 

Young Brett, a Kttle confused and guilty, felt 
himself colouring all over. 

"I know this myself. This insurance business 
was all got up by them. The company were going 
to pay, and a lady of this family went to the 
manager, and put it all into their heads. Only 
conceive such a thing, sir ! " 

Young Brett was indeed a little shocked and 
ashamed. Miss Manuel's inquiries about the Irre- 
fragable all flashed upon him. 

" No, sir," said Doctor Watkyn Jones, confiden- 
tially drawing his chair closer, " you are a gentle- 
man, and I shall make no secrets with you. When 
these insurance people came with their mean, sneak- 
ing, hole-and-corner Inquiries, we met them openly, 
and sent them back to their London office without 
a scrap of information. If you care, I shall tell 
you the, whole thing." 

Young Brett said eagerly that he would like 
nothing so much ; and for nearly two hours . 
during which time not a single patient disturbed 
them . ^Doctor Watkyn Jones told him the story 
of Mrs. Carter's happy end, without pain, and in 
perfect peace. On Young Brett it left an im- 
pression of a very touching scene, and completely. 



Toung Brett difcovers al$. 89 

satisfied his honest heart. He had done the duty- 
he had undertaken, and was delighted to find that 
it was to be a very small duty after all. Coming 
away light hearted, and with general esteem for 
the local practitioner, he gaily passed to his hotel, 
then wrote a long letter to Miss Manuel, and took 
an evening train across country to his regiment. 

" I think," he wrote, " it has all turned out very 
well, and I begin to think myself quite a clever 
diplomatist. Do you not feel for poor Mrs. Carter? 
She was a good creature, and I am glad to think 
died so happily and with such comforts round her. 
Old Carter, you see, is not so bad, and with more 
heart than we fancied." 

Young Brett, however, did not see the incon- 
sistency between his earlier letters, describing what 
he had gathered from the young woman in the 
castle grounds, and his last. Miss Manuel did, and 
smiled to herself. " Poor honest boy 1 " she said ; 
*he is too trusting and open to deal with people 
of this sort. I ought to have foreseen this from 
the beginning." 



90 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEE THE TENTH. 

MISS MANUEL ON THE TRACK. 

Seen in the Park, waiting on his Mrs. Wrigley, 
Major Carter's face seemed to have recovered its 
old clear brilUance. There was triumph in his eye. 
At last he was walking on the mosses of life, and 
he found it very grateful for his feet, a good deal 
blistered with stony travel. Things were going 
well with him. He had suffered friendly and com- 
plimentary delving in the ribs from cheerful ac- 
quaintances, together with the sly wink of encou- 
ragement, and the knowing, "/ see, Oarter,my boy !" 
Mrs. Wrigley's face, too, wore the fat bovine smile of 
conquest. At her time of life such victories are 
welcome. Punsher Hill and Hoblush found them- 
selves drifting away farther and yet farther every 
day, and made desperate efforts. Major Carter, too. 



Mifs Manuel on the Track. 91 

had triumphed in another recent aif air, and knew for 
certain that Young Brett's expedition had failed-. 
failed hopelessly. It was indeed likely that, in a 
contest with a simple child, he should prevail. 
" Poor Miss Manuel ! " he said, at the window of 
Mrs, Wrigley's ancient chariot, playing all his 
veteran coquetries, "she is recovering slowly, I 
hear ; we shall not see her for weeks yet. Between 
ourselves, my dear Mrs. Wrigley, she tries too 
much . far too much. I don't like your manly 
women, ha, ha! No; when you are soft, and 
gentle, and feminine, and tender, and even help- 
less, my dear Mrs. Wrigley," and here the ancient 
chariot swung heavily with a sort of jerk, in ac- 
knowledgment of the compliment, " you make us 
your slaves." The voice of the major dropped 
suddenly into a low, sweet, and meaning key. 
From the chariot window full gelatine eyes swam 
and languished. 

" Come .and dine with me to-day," she said. 
"You must." 

" Too happy," said the major, with grateful hu- 
mility ; " but may I ask a favour ? Would you 
send Cards," he was fond of this old-fashioned ex- 
pression, " to Hill and Hoblush I " 

" Those odious clerical creatures 1 " said she, 
striving hard to recollect the mechanism of a 
"pout," but failing in the attempt. "How can 
you afik me. Major Carter? " 



92 Never Forgotten. 



" Dear Mrs. Wrigley," he said, " you don't know 
how wicked the world is, and how envious some na- 
tures are. Oblige me in this, will you? " 

And she did oblige him. There was a pleasant 
little meeting that night, when the two clergymen 
came, and the major was ^^ delightful" and in 
spirits, and enjoyed Mrs. Wrigle/s old claret, 
which she knew he liked, and which she ^^ spilled" 
profusely for him. After dinner, in the drawing- 
room, the major sat upon his chair, stirring his 
coffee, and profanely thought he was a sort of 
social Providence well able to control the little 
events and little worlds about him. And before 
that night was over, he . still holding his cup- 
had whispered some words to Mrs. Wrigley, which 
had suffused her bowl-shaped cheeks with the 
ghosts of ancient blushes, and she had lisped a 
faltering answer of delighted acquiescence. 

But, at that very moment of success and hap- 
piness, there was another scene going on down at 
the little Welsh town, which, had he known of, 
would have turned the majoi^s well-trained cheeks 
quite pale. 

Miss Manuel had decided on her course promptly. 
She took up the thread where good foolish Young 
Brett had dropped it. The gloomy brother won- 
dered why she was getting her things together, and 
where she could be thinking of going at that rough 
season. He looked on suspiciously, and with roving 



Mifs Manuel on the Track. 93 

eyes. " You are getting tired of the work," he said. 
" In good time you will forget herr 

Miss Manuel's face flushed up mth an intelli- 
gent look. "Ah, Louis," she said, "how little you 
know me. I am living but for that. And it is for 
this, and this only, that I go upon this journey to- 
night." That strange, moody, and injured manner 
was growing more and more upon him, and he 
was only half satisfied. 

She was to go with her maid, and on that night. 
All during her illness, Fermor had been at the 
door, restlessly coming to and fro. He was never 
allowed to enter. Day by day he had heard wel- 
come news of her gradual mending. Soon he 
heard of her being out, and of her driving about, 
and came hurriedly. He found a cab at the door, 
and luggage was being placed on the top. Wliat 
did this mean I 

Miss Manuel met him on the steps. " What 
does this mean ? " he repeated. " Going away ! 
Why, you are not fit to travel." 

He was struck by the change, and was almost 
pleased with himself for the romantic and quasi- 
paternal interest he was shomng. She was gay, 
and in spirits, and laughed. 

" What am I going for ? " she said ; " for a 
hundred reasons. Perhaps I want change of air . 
perhaps it is a mere whim. or perhaps I feel that 
I dare not trust myself here any longer, and that 



94 Never Forgotten. 

a woman's res<dutiGn is growing weaker every day. 
Is not the only course to fly t Adieu I " 

This speech, had it been written, would have 
thrown Fermor into a tumult of conceit. But as it 
was spoken, something scoffing underlaid it. He 
looked at her with doubt and trouble. 

" Don't go," he said ; " I want to speak to you. 
They would not let me in during your illness ; and 
I came day after day. I saw others let in. You 
should not treat me in this way. Don't go yet ; I 
have a thousand things to say to you.*' 

Agam Miss Manuel laughed. " A thousand 
things to say to me at a cab door! You should 
learn to be more practical in these days of railways. 
Good-by.'^ 

" But," he said, eagerly, "how long do you stay! 
Tell me. do. Where shall I write to '' 

^' Drive on," said she to the servant. " Every- 
thing is in, I believe." Then to Fermor : " Well, 
I believe a month, or six months . or perhaps only 
a week. It depends. Good-by." 

Fermor stood looking after the cab. This strange 
treatment chafed him; yet there was something 
pleasing under all. 

Early the next morning, a lady's maid in Beau- 
maris was asking at the mouldy dispensary where 
the maid's lady would be likely to find genteel and 
decent ^artments by the wedc A delicate lady, 



Mifs Manuel on the Track, 95 

. . . . . . . . 

iiewly recovered f rcmi sickness^ who had been re- 
commended bracmg air. This was spoken to a boy 
behind the counter, who went in mth the request 
to a back parlour, and came out again with an old 
man. The old man shaded his eyes with his hand, 
to look well at her. 

" I don't know," he said, in a trembling voice. 
" My son Watkyn is away, and he would not like 
it, perhaps. Still, my dear, Watkyn likes a little 
money.^ 

"But perhaps you know of someplace?" said 
the lady's maid. 

The boy said eagerly that their rooms were about 
the nicest in the place, and that the best quality 
came and stayed there. The maid then went away, 
and said she would report to her mistress. 

Later in the day a delicate lady, whose face 
looked as if it could be very brilliant when in the 
full colour and flush of healthy came into the shop, 
and the old man came out to her. He shaded his 
eyes as before, but looked longer and harder than 
before. Into that dusty powdery region she seemed 
to bring light, and fragrance, and brilliance. The 
boy stood helpless with his mouth open. The 
old man kept muttering, "Good gracious, good 
gracious!" 

" They told me," said Pauline, in her sweet 
voice, "that you had rooms* If yours are not to 
let, you might, perhaps^ know of others. There 



96 Never Forgotten. 



would be an advantage, I confess, being only 
just recovered, in having medical assistance so 
near." 

" Yes, yes," said the old man, hastily ; " that is 
all true. Watkyn is considered clever all round 
the country, O, for miles. I am sure he would 
not mind; he ought to like it, indeed he ought. 
It would be a surprise for him when he comes 
back. Heaven send we may all die in our beds !" 
Which odd speech, muttered to himself in a reverie, 
made Miss Manuel and the boy start. He started 
himself, and looked round nervously. 

The rooms were taken. Before the day was 
out it went through the town, where there was a 
perfect drought of news, that a " fine" l%dy had 
come down, and was staying at " th' old doctor's." 
Later, too, the fine lady was seen herself, walking 
about, in the green especially ; and she spoke to 
the children playing there, and found out a little 
girl in a red cloak. For the little girl in the red 
cloak soon came a fresh and handsome young 
woman, and with the fresh and handsome young 
woman Miss Manuel began to talk. 

The doctor^s lodgings were clean and bright 
enough. They had a bow-window, and muslin 
curtains in the bow-window, and would have been 
very bright and encouraging apartments, but for a 
dreadful male portrait or two, done in rich tea- 
board colouring, which, clad in inflexible coats. 



Mifs Manuel on the Track. 97 

with high collars apparently cut out of the hardest 
wood, and suggesting horrible associations of dis- 
comfort for the wearer, looked down with a mourn- 
ful ferocity on the tenants as they sat at tea. 

That night the doctor's son came home, and 
started as he saw a great box of Miss Manuel's 
in the hall. She heard his voice below, putting 
all manner of inquiries, half angrily, half suspici- 
ously. Very soon he was up in the drawing- 
room, on the pretext of seeing that all was com- 
fortable. 

This pink Welshman, so free of speech, talked 
gaily mth Miss Manuel, who presently set him 
quite at ease. One of her charms, which she could 
assume when she pleased, was a helplessness of 
manner, with a sense of finding strength and sup- 
port in the person she was talking with. He was 
at first half curious, hinting as to where she came 
from, and how long was she going to stay, and 
why, of all places in the world, she selected that 
cold bleak comer to repair her health in. Pauline 
scorned a falsehood, or even a semblance of one ; 
but someway a misty idea was left upon his mind 
that some one, say some visitor, had spoken of the 
superior medical advice to be found in the little 
town. He told her by-and-by all about himself, 
for she showed great interest in such personal 
details; how his practice was increasing, how he 
soon expected to have the whole business of the 

VOL. III. H 



98 Never Forgotten, 



place, and of the country rotui<L He was making 
great way. 

Said Miss Manuel, quickly: "And you have 
not long succeeded year father? He was prac- 
tising last yesar, was he not! " 

The other looked at her suspicioudy. ^^Well, 
yes," he said. "But how did you know! Thd 
news did not fly up to London." 

" O, I have heard a good deal ance I came . 
even abeady," said Miss Manuel, smiling ; hut he 
had become doubtful and silent, and as he left 
the room, cast back a sharp quick searching look 
at her. 

During these days Miss Manuel often went up 
and down, often went in and out, often looked 
wistfully at the glass door; but the son was 
always on quick sharp duty. She never saw that 
strange nervous old man who sat in the parlour 
over the fire . ^that is, could not see him alone, 
for when she met him, and tried to talk to him, 
the son stood by and watched jealously with his 
eye fixed on him. Under which eye old Doctor 
Jones always grew uneasy. 



A Stormy Night. 99 



CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH. 

A STORMY NIGHT. 

It went on, in this fashion, for a week . then 
for ten days . then for a fortnight. It was a jail- 
like existence. The lady who visited the watering- 
place out of the season, and at a cheerless season 
out of the season, was an inexhaustible source of 
wonder and speculation to the inhabitants. The 
town maid, cut off from her circle of friends and 
acquaintances (when her season, too, was rife), 
began to murmur at heart, to grow reserved, and, 
later, became charged with lemons and vinegar 
about her face. Pauline herself was fretting and 
growing impatient. At last, on the night of a cold 
miserable day, whose tone had been blue as steel, 
the sea taimbling sharply and bitterly up the straits, 
and sharp icy east winds gashing at human chests 
h2 



^^^2.^ 



100 Never Forgotten. 



and human eyes like cruel razors, an express came 
in from a neighbouring squire for young Doctor 
Watkyn Jones. Doctor Watkyn Jones's stories to 
Miss Manuel were, indeed, pure fables ; he was not 
often sent for, and a Welshman of grim humour 
said his patients were all of the " God reward ye" 
class. The express from the squire was for the 
squire's lady . the great country doctor was away, 
and Watkyn was the nearest medical man. With 
the squire's express came a gig to take away 
Watkyn Jones. 

At first he was dazzled and triumphant, and 
rushed to tell the London maid, who had been 
scornfully indifferent to him as an admirer, and 
who doubted his professional standing. " He was 
an imposture," she often said to Miss Manuel 
(thinking she was using the word "impostor"). 
Then his pink face became overcast. But it was 
late, ten o'clock, and he asked the London maid 
had her mistress gone to bed ? The London maid, 
with a toss of her head, said she would be in bed 
in ten minutes. The triimiph of the moment soon 
shut out every other thought, and he took his place 
in the gig with pride. " Go to bed, father," he 
said, sternly, fixing him with his eye ; " you sit up 
too late. It is not good for you. If I had a mo- 
ment, I should see you in bed before I left." 

" Indeed I will," said the old man. " But what 
a night for me to be left alone. Do you hear the 



A Stormy Night. 101 



wind ? Lord have mercy on us ! That we may 
all die in our beds ! " 

The son did not wait to hear the last of this 
speech, but grumbled as he took his place in the 
gig. " He does not think of me out here," he said. 
The razors were indeed darting about wildly. Miss 
Manuel up in her room, and just about going to 
bed, heard the gig wheels' and the voices below, 
and the news of Squire Morgan's wife being ill. 
She heard, too, the winds growling up the straits 
sulkily and sourly, as if they were coming up a 
tunnel. The London maid came in and told her 
all the details . ^with great zest, too, for she had 
now, like other prisoners, began to take interest in 
things like social prison spiders or Picciolas. Her 
mistress listened eagerly. 

" Is it far away ? " she asked. 

" O," the maid answered, " he will be away the 
whole night." 

" I shan't go to bed yet," said Miss Manuel. 
" Don't wait up." 

It was an old house, built when the little dun 
town was struggling out of being a mere village. 
The wooden bow-window rattled, as if the wind 
wanted to get in, and was in a fury at being kept 
waiting. Every one was keeping close, even to 
the old watchman who managed the " curfew" . 
for they had their curfew in the dun town . and 
he was snugly sitting in the public-house. Miss 



102 Never Forgotten. 



Mantiel, wrapping a shawl about her, came down 
stairs, and saw a light through the glass door of 
the parlour. She opened it softly. 

The old man was looking nervously at the clat- 
tering windows, shrinking away from each gust. 
He did not hear or see Miss Manuel's entrance. 
He was saying to himself, in his old formula, 
" Lord have mercy on us ! That we may all die in 
our beds ! " when he looked round suddenly and 
saw his visitor . ^that is, a tall flashing woman with 
a light in her hand . a spirit, surely, or an angel. 
For a moment he was terror-struck. Miss Manuel 
began to speak cheerfully to him and with encou- 
ragement. But he was scarcely to be reassured. 

" What a night ! " said she. " It makes one feel 
quite uncomfortable." 

"Ay I what a night," he said. " God Almighty 
be with us." 

" Not a night," said she, " to be sitting alone. 
We want company, and not to be left to our own 
thoughts." 

" No, indeed," said the old man, looking at 
her strangely, " and it was odd, wasn't it, that 
he should have been sent for to-night, when . 
when ^^ 

" When we would like the house to have all its 
tenants. Yes," she said, "it is odd. Yet it has 
happened fortunately for me. I wished to speak 
to you." 



A Stormy Night. 103 



" To me !" said the other, starting up. " Why 
to me ? What do you want to know ?" 

Miss Manuel smikd. "How odd, now I" she 
said. " I never said I wished to know anything. 
That would be accepted as suspicious elsewhere." 

" Suspicious ! . Who is talking, of suspicion?" 
said the old man, now very agitated. 

She fixed her eyes on him. " Why," said sh^ 
suddenly . " why is it that your son always watches 
you sol" 

" Watches me? No . ^he does not." 

" Yes he does," said she, quickly. "I have re- 
marked it. It seems as if you had 8(ne secret 
which he was afraid you would disclose." 

The look of stupid wonder and confusion the 
old man gave her, she recollected long afterwards. 
He could not answer. 

" Another question," said Miss Manuel. " Good 
gracious 1 what a gale. Did you feel the house 
rock then? What is the reason that you aie 
always talking of dying in our beds ? I have heard 
you say so many times." 

He looked at her now quite scared. " Why do 
you come to me in this way," he said, tossing his 
hands, " when there is no one in the house ? When 
he is away ? And on such a night, Lord deliver 
us ! What do you want ? You have some dreadful 
thing in your mind. And . I have said nothing 
and done nothing." 



104 Never For^en. 



She soothed him. " Don't be alarmed," she said. 
" I am very solitary up-stairs. The wind always 
frightens me. No wonder I should like a little 
company. You talk of dying in our beds, but 
think of any poor soul departing on such a night 
as this . ^rushing from the world in a storm ! Are 
there any now in Beaimiaris, I wonder? I passed 
a house this very day where there was a lady dying 
not so very long ago. Griffiths's they told me it 
was called." 

The old man was now standing up. " My son 
was right," he said ; " he told me so. He warned 
me. He knew it. Ah ! you have watched for this 
opportunity. You have got me here alone and 
helpless. It is unfair ; it is ^^ 

" Hush ! hush!" said Pauline, dramng herself 
up. " You will betray yourself. Suppose that I 
have? Suppose I have come down to seek and 
to discover and to bring the guilty to justice . to 
track out a foul crime ? Suppose I have watched 
for, and found an opportunity? Suppose I have 
found you here alone and helpless, as you say; 
you may bless your stars for it ! For it is the 
only chance that offers to save you from what 
you dread, and from what I can see is preying 
on your soul and on your conscience. And that 
chance is . ^I tell you openly and plainly . con- 
fession !" 



A Stormy Night. 105 



He was speechless with terror and astonishment. 

" Take care, take care," she went on, quickly. 
" You don't know what is hanging over you. The 
net is drawing closer every day. There is danger 
and ruin coming, and coming fast. You can save 
yourself by helping me. I know more than you 
think I know. Do you refuse or hesitate ? If you 
dare to tell your son when he returns, I shall go 
away at once, and let everything take its course. 
Shall I go now?" 

She took up her light, and stayed a moment 
with her hand on the door. 

At last he found speech. "But I have done 
nothing. I know nothing. I am so old. I 
have '' 

" No, no," said she, coming back with a reas- 
suring smile. "Who thinks so? No one. But 
still you know much, and know much that you can 

tell. Shall I sit down, or ^" And again she 

laid her hand on the candle. 

" But . ^but . my son . my son," said he, shaking 
his hands despairingly ; "what will he say ? " 

" What will he say when I go away . ^when the 
whole becomes public . when you are both dragged 
away as accomplices . ^when this town, and this 
principality, and this kingdom are ringing with 
the news of the cruel business that was done down 
here?" 



106 Never Forgotten. 



"Who are you?" he said, full of terror. "What 
do you want with me? I am a poor miserable old 
man, and must die soon. It is cruel. I have no 
strength. My son would protect me if he were 
here. I am a miserable creature that would not 
hurt a fly, and must die soon." 

Pauline started up, and stood before him like a 
destroying angel. " You are old," she said, " and 
miserable, and have the long, long days of a long 
life to count up. You must die soon. Yes, but 
how? There are other ways than that dying in 
your bed you are so anxious for. For all your 
years and all your misery, you may yet be dragged 
to a shameful end. He who looks on is as guilty 
as he who does the work." 

The old doctor shrank away from her, and 
tried to hide himself behind his hands. " Don't, 
don't speak so awfully," he said, trembling. "I 
am an old miserable creature who would harm no 
one." 

Pauline looked down on him for a moment. 
"Very well," she said. "Be miserable, then; I 
have done. On your own head be it. Do as you 

like : and I leave you now ^" 

She turned to go. At that moment the wind 
came with a fresh howl and a fresh fury down the 
street : there was a crash only a few houses away, 
as of a chimney hurled down into ruins. Them 



A Stormy Night. 107 



came silence; and the old man crouched and 
cowered into his arm-chair, as if it were a cave 
where he could hide his head. She had her hand 
on the door, and it opened noisily. 

"Don't. don't leave me," he said, piteously. 
" I shall be destroyed if I am left alone. There, I 
will tell you all . ^that is, all I know." 



108 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEE THE TWELFTH. 

FOREBODINGS. 

Miss Manuel had returned. She had been at 
Torquay, or at St. Leonard's, or at some of those 
sheltered winter comers where invalids go to find 
colour and strength. This her world supposed ; her 
court of writers and " clergy manical" reviewers, 
all knew this ; and when they made their congra- 
tulations on her return, never suspected that her 
fresh brilliancy was owing to the keen breezes of 
the little dun town so far away. She returned 
'wdth all the enthusiasm of triumph. 

Almost on the day of her arrival she met Major 
Carter. He had heard of her visit. He had fallen 
in with Fermor, who, in a pettish way, had told of 
her sudden departure. " She is gone, God knows 
where, and has told nobody." Which speech dis- 



Forebodings. 109 

turbed the major not a little. Now, as she passed 
him to enter a shop, there was a look of insolent 
Tictory in her face, which made him yet more 
imeasy, and sent him home thoughtful. If he had 
only watched her carefully for the rest of the day, 
he would not have slept that night. 

For early that morning Mr. Speedy had received 
a fairy-looking note at his Irrefragable office, and 
was almost intoxicated at finding in it a request 
that he would, after office hours, wait on Miss 
Manuel at her house. From that day he became 
generally superior to homely Mrs. Speedy. The 
note was long preserved in the Speedy archives, 
and it lay for many a day on the top of the other 
notes in the little basket. Major Carter was not 
passing, or he would have seen Mr. Speedy, with a 
new pair of gloves, going in ; and Major Carter 
was not Asmodeus Carter, or he would have fran- 
tically torn away the front of that house, of all 
houses in London, to see and hear Miss Manuel 
and the man of business sitting close, and talking 
with extraordinary eagerness. Major Carter did 
not watch the terminus at Euston-square for the 
night-train to start, or he would have seen a 
muffled Mr. Speedy drive up and take a ticket for 
Bangor, on " special mission," as it was said at the 
office, where he was missed next day. On this 
" special mission," sent by order of the directors, 
he was away more than a week. Thus over the 



110 Never Forgotten. 



head of unsuspecting Major Carter was already 
hanging a spectral sword of Damocles, and as it 
swung and shook, he felt himself brought within 
its cold shadow, and shivered ; but the world was 
going so pleasantly with him, that he shook off all 
disagreeable thoughts for the present. 

Mrs. Fermor, full of enthusiasm and yoxmg 
affection, had soon shut out the memory of what 
she had heard during her night-watch, and came 
eagerly to welcome her friend back again. She 
had worked herself into a sort of romantic love 
for this friend; and though she felt again, when 
ascending the stairs, something of her old recol- 
lections, when she entered and saw Miss Manuel 
sitting nearly as "bright" as ever, she forgot it, 
and ran forward to embrace her with real affection. 

"I am so glad, so delighted, to see you down 
again," she said, with a sort of punctuation, as it 
were, of kissing. 

PauHne tried to be cold, but her resolution gave 
way before the genuine delight of this faithful 
little woman. Then she turned from her suddenly 
and sharply, and she called herself (mentally) 
"She-Judas!" 

" I am so glad I " said Mrs. Fermor. " I never 
discovered until you were ill how much I liked 
you. I don't know why; we have known each 
other for so short a time ; and I dare say," she 
added, a little ruefully, for she again thought of 
what she had heard during the night-watching. 



Forebodings, 111 

"you do not care so much for me?" And she 
looked at her wistfully. 

"Why should you think that?" said Pauline. 
" You know I like you, and indeed I feel grateful 
for all you have done for me. I only learnt to- 
day how you nursed and watdied me. And it has 
distressed me more than you would suppose. I 
wanted nobody/' and she added, a little vehemently, 
" and you . not for the world. You might have 
caught it. But I am indeed grateful." And 
again she turned sharply, and called herself Judas. 
" I never thank," she went on earnestly. " They 
tell me I am cold, and do not feel obligations. 
So that you will und^stand . if I should ever 
appear not to value what you have done as it 
deserves to be valued, you will set it down to the 
right cause. Don't judge me too harshly; there 
may be moie behind than you know of. We may 
not all have our free will." 

Deeply mystified at the beseeching manner 
with which this was said, Mrs. Fermw knew not 
what to make of it. "I don't know," she said, 
" but I am smre you will be always kind and good." 
She added, piteously, " I seem to have no friends 
now. I have so few to care for me, and those 
few. ^;: . ^" She stopped. 

" But your husband," said Miss Manuel, '^ is not 
1 all in all, as th^ put it ? " 

The little lady's little brow contracted. Her 
eyes fell towards the ground. "I dare say it is 



112 Never Forgotten. 



my fault," she said. "It may be. I am very 
young and foolish. Perhaps if I had some one 
to advise and counsel me, some kind person that 
understands me, or would try and understand me. 
I thought of this very often during the night 
that I was with you. From the very first day 
I was attracted to you . ^I felt that you would aid 
and assist me in some difficulty. And now I 
am sure, if I were to put confidence in you and 
tell you my little troubles, you, who I think are 
beginning to like me . ^you who are so good and 
noble ^" 

Miss Manuel, who had been listening with 
eyes fixed on the other, turned hastily and rose. 
" No, no," she said, " not to me. To any one in 
the world but me. I am not fit to advise any one. 
Good and noble I No, no. Wicked, rather ! I 
have no will, no strength. I am a weak, miserable 
being. Leave me, leave me quick I I am ill still, 
I believe, and talk absurdly. Leave me now. I 
shall be better to-morrow." 

Mrs. Fermor departed, sad and wondering. 
When she was gone, Pauline fell upon and buried 
her face in the cushions of a sofa, sobbing wildly. 
" Good God ! good God ! what am I coming to ? 
What devilish task is this I have plunged into ? 
Destroying the innocent . poisoning the pure I No, 
no . save me, save me ; and spare that poor, gentle, 
tender, confiding thing 1 " 



Forebodings. 113 

She felt a hand upon her shoulder, and she 
started up. "Whom would you spare?" said 
her brother, scornfully; "that girl who has just 
left you ? Never, by my soul ! never I not while 
I live! If your hand fails, then is mine ready 
. ^far rougher, and far more deadly. So choose. 
I am growing impatient. It is too long. Ah, 
Pauline I you treat an oath lightly. Your 
memory is growing weak. To me it seems 
but last night, and that our darling Violet is 
lying in the next room. Come, take a serious 
warning, or, as sure as I live, I go out into the 
open roads and make shorter work of it. I shall, 
surely as I live ! " He then looked round and 
round the room with a suspicious glare, as if some 
one was concealed. " How can you want me to 
tell you of these things ? / want no promptings. 
My heart carries me on only too fast. You are 
forgetting, and will soon have forgotten. I never 

can forget. I saw her last night ^" He stopped, 

looking round wildly. 

She was frightened, and soothed him. " Now, 
Louis," she said, "depend on me. Leave all to 
me. Indeed I have not forgotten, and never, 
never shall." Those words of his often repeated 
themselves ; but latterly she had noticed they grew 
more intense, and lasted longer. 

" No," she said, " I must go on. He is right. 
The guilty still flourish, and shall be overtaken." 

VOL. III. I 



114 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE THIETEENTH. 

LADY LAURA STILL WORKING. 

The glowing cheek and rich red lip for which 
Mrs. Fermor was noted, were paling off into lighter 
tones. A wrung and wistful look was in her bright 
eyes. In her little soul, a stiff strong stubborn 
pride was working. It had worked its way, like a 
strong current through the earth of an embank- 
ment ; and the ^^ breach," as it would be called, 
between her and her " lord," was widening with 
every fresh day. 

She went out a good deal into " society," where, 
like many wandering married ladies, whose lords 
do not choose to wander with them, she found 
plenty of pleasant friends and strangers to chatter 
with, and even . ^to use the good-natured word 
which conveniently cloaks up so many derelictions 
. even to " flirt" with. Had a friendly lady on an 



Lady Laura Jiill Working. 115 

ottoman close by introduced that word to her, she 
would have coloured up, and gathered in the folds 
of her dress with noisy rustle, and indignantly 
played the respectable young woman outraged. 
With her it was all homage, and intellectual talk 
with clever men . ^the old moral spring-guns and 
" gins" of fatal power and mischief. Mrs. Fermor, 
therefore, was seen at many parties, and the ob- 
servant remarked that " that Mr. Romaine" was 
at nearly all the houses where Mrs. Fermor was 
seen. 

There was an intimate air in his manner, the ob- 
servant observed, which she herself was conscious 
of, and struggled against. He had the look of 
coming with her there, and of taking her away, 
though in effect he did neither. He saw her down 
to halls, and there imperiously took her cloak from 
another holding it for her to put on. And though 
he did not go near her much in rooms, she had a 
feeling that she was always under his eyes. She 
began to feel, indeed, that this must not go further, 
and had determined that, as soon as the holy work 
in his regard she had put her hand to was satisfac- 
torily accomplished, it should cease. Poor quick, 
vivacious, little soul I impetuous, aggrieved, with a 
sore heart under her tulle, she was kept up by her 
pride. That " holy work" she had undertaken was 
pretty near to being accomplished. It was said 
that Mrs. Massinger's marriage had made no such 
i2 



116 Never Forgotten. 



brilliant impression as was reckoned on (one of her 
professional critics said she was " curdy "), and the 
Town resented it as if it were her fault. The noble 
earl who looked to those matters, and "rated" 
lelles as seamen are rated, before and after the 
mast, had smiled contemptuously as he looked 
down on her through his gold "pinchnose," as the 
French call it. " Blancmange, my good Fitzroy," 
he said, shutting up his "pinchnose." "Blanc- 
mange, and no more. There are people, of course, 
who like blancmange." 

The neophite was behaving valiantly. It did 
seem as though he would be firm in his faith. 
But already the Fiery Cross of Scandal had been 
softly passed round by the full fat fingers of dowa- 
gers, and the irrevocable " coupling " of her name 
with that of Mr. Eomaine had taken place. Poor 
foolish, little, innocent, helpless married woman! 
The turbaned vultures were already fluttering 
heavily in the air overhead. 

Fermor, the "fallen-short man" . ^homme manque 
. ^was still wrapped in his moodiness as in a cloak. 
There was bitterness in everything he chewed. 
Presently, a good-natured elderly man, with grey 
whiskers and a gold double eye-glass, with a 
ribbon and square glasses, came up to him con- 
fidentially one evening, and laying the gold glasses 
on Fermor's shirt, said : " My dear fellow, I know 
you are a man of sense, and will not take ill what 



Lady Laura Jtill Working. 117 

is said by a man old enough to be your father . 
but . er . ^I want to speak . about" (cough) "Mrs. 
. er . ^Fermor." 

Fermor looked at him sharply, and grew hot. 
" What would you say about Mrs. Fermor? " 

" Well/' said the other, " it is merely as a friend, 
you know, and ^^ 

" O, of course," said the other, bitterly, " it is 
always d friend who brings us good news. Weill" 

" You see, the world," said the other, stretching 
out his glass in the direction of the world, but 
being brought up suddenly by the shortness of the 
ribbon, "you see, the world, my dear fellow, is 
censorious, and I do think, if you went a Iktle 
more out with Mrs. Fermor, especially to those 
parties which that half-savage fellow Romaine fre- 
quents ^" 

This came as news indeed for Fermor. " This, 
then, is the game?" he thought. "I am to be 
ridiculous through Town ; the mari complaisant ; 
the easy-tempered jackass. Le]t her treat me as 
she pleases at home, but I wUl not be pointed at." 

To the next party. Captain Fermor announced 
sullenly that he was going. " With all my heart," 
said Mrs. Fermor, gaily. " I hope you will go to 
others too." 

Fermor laughed scornfully. " We shall see." 

Lady Laura was still fighting the fashionable 



118 Never Forgotten. 



" good fight." She was labouring on with her old 
constancy, and seemed to have gained fresh spirit, 
though not fresh strength. The face was growing 
yet longer ; the worn cheeks yet more worn ; but 
the eye had the old keen wary ken, and swept the 
line of men with the nicest appreciation, like a 
general's. Yet there were many things to damp 
and discourage her. 

Though successful with Alicia Mary,' whom, 
with infinite pains and struggling, she had made 
Mrs. Onslow Piper, still that alhance had brought 
with it serious charges, and some terrible expenses. 
Trousseau and breakfast were the least of these ; 
but at the last moment young Piper, with an 
aggrieved manner, as though he were making this 
proposal a test for whether he had been " taken in " 
or no, " struck," and bluntly and suspiciously said 
it was due to his self-respect to " get something ;" 
that his friends said it was "a shame." And 
though the poor lady-captain did what she could, 
^he odds were too great, and she had to wring out 
of her own allowance something that would satisfy 
the greedy youth. There was the London house 
too, and the London carriage, and London riding 
horses' on job, and the London milliner, Madame 
Adelaide: but months ago the job-master had 
talked to Lady Laura in her own hall as if she 
had been one of his stable-boys; and Madame 
Adelaide, once sweet and full of lively compli- 



Lady Laura JiUl Working. 119 

ments, was now showing her teeth, and snarling 
about " her attorney." Yet she fought on, laboured 
on, for there was hope. Blanche, younger and 
fresher than Alicia Mary, had somehow been at- 
tracting that young Lord Spendlesham, just burst 
from his guardians, and who, in truth, fancied 
Blq.nche. Actually " the thing*' was making pro- 
gress, and Blanche, wearing always a look of 
devout adoration, and following the noble youth 
with steady eyes wherever he moved, conveyed the 
idea of a hopeless idolatry not unpleasing. Lady 
Laura had friends . good faithful contemporaries 
. ^who gave the boy a smile of encouragement, and 
remarked to him the " fine girl there" who never 
took her eyes off him. 

Young Spendlesham . unconsciously selfish . 
threw out carelessly many whims and wishes, 
which were gratified at great cost to the family. 
He was passionately fond of dancing, and when 
there was a gap in his programme, outside he 
would say to Blanche, " Get Lady Lau to give a 
dance. / dote on dancing." And Lady Lau bowed 
her head with Spartan courage, and was abroad for 
one half the day in a cab, and for the other half in 
her room doing common millinery-work with des- 
perate but skilful fingers, striving hard to avoid 
drifting away on the rocks of Madame Adelaide. 
Whence she wrung out money for these works, 
and how she faced the rude job-master and the 



120 Never Forgotten. 



insolent Frenchwoman, and with dignity made 
them (for the time) ashamed, and how she screwed 
a little delay out of both job-master and milliner, 
were things to be admired and compassionated. 
" If I had only time to breathe," she thought often, 
"and a little space in front clear I But they come 
on me all together, and from all sides." 

" Ask the Ferniors," she said to her daughter. 
" I hate having aggrieved relations going about." 

And this was the party to which Fermor had 
said so sullenly that he would go. 



A Cloud no bigger than a Hand. 121 



CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH. 

A CLOUD NO BIGGER THAN A HAND. 

While Miss Manuel was away, the town had 
something to talk of. It was soon pretty well 
known and pretty well talked about, how " that 
sucking young Spendlesham" was about to make 
"a greater fool of himself" than ever. His own 
contemporaries told him, in their friendly way, " not 
to be an ass," and seriously wondered among them- 
selves what he could see in so plain a virgin, who 
was almost old enough to be his mother. But 
among the long tribe of dowagers the attempt was 
most deeply resented. Had they got her among 
them in some private place, they would surely have 
sacrificed her. The fury of this elderly populace 
knew no bounds, and they almost thirsted for her 
blood. 



J 



122 Never Forgotten. 



It was wonderful indeed. Alicia Mary had been 
difficult to " placer ;" but her incomparable mother 
had brought her in a winner, as the skilful jockey- 
does the indifferent horse, simply by splendid riding. 
But what was difficult with Ahcia Mary seemed 
almost impossible with Blanche, who was raw, help- 
less, and without any fertility of resource. " Splen- 
did riding^' was here profitless ; but Fortune took 
pity on this gallant Lady Laura, and, by some 
combination of accidents, fascinated the young 
Spendlesham with the charms of Blanche. The 
" finest woman" he had ever- known was a fresh 
barmaid at a fishing inn in the country, for whom he 
had had an agonising attachment. But the barmaid 
had long since married respectably . i.^. into an 
opulent butcher interest. The features of Blaoiche 
recalled the old romance, and the fresh barmaid 
seemed to ^ve again in the person of Blanche. 

But young Spendlesham was not yet sui juris. 
The law had furnished him with some odious janis- 
saries called guardians, who were wary and watch- 
ful. One of these was happily an old admirer of 
Lady Laura's, Sir John Westende, of Westende 
House, who, as young Sir John, clapped and ap- 
plauded when she, as young Lady Laura, wafi 
flying round in tulle and flowers on her bare-backed 
steed. These were the delightful days when we 
had "figure," and a "neck," and col<mr, and light 



A Cloud no tigger than a Hand. 123. 

in our eyes, and all the ambrosial charms of youth. 
Sir John, it was thought, was sure to " come 
forward;" but he was irresolute, and went back 
again timidly when he had advanced. 

The young Sir John of those days had not the 
Westende property, which came in late. He had 
a modest but suflScient patrimony, and was deeply 
in love with Lady Laura. The latter, if ever she 
liked any man, might be said to have liked Sir 
John, and told him so. But sentiment, with her, 
could only be indulged in where it was to be had 
gratis ; any laying out of money on it was out of the 
question. Young Sir John went away happy, to 
travel for two months, and when he returned found 
that a personal friend had been invited to take his 
place ; a personsU friend, too, whose prospects were, 
if anything, only a shade better than his own. The 
skilful who managed her affairs thought they were 
bound to give her the benefit of ever so trifling an 
advantage ; and, considering that the Westende pro- 
perty had not then come in (it eventually " came 
in" by an aunt), it was only natural that they should 
act as they did. The balance, which took the 
shape of sentiment, could not be reduced into 
moneys numbered ; and was, of course, left out of 
the reckoning. Sir John waa put back; the friend, 
who was shy and retiring, received notice that it 
was now Aw turn. This caused a breach. Young 



124 Never Forgotten. 



Sir John, after some excited expostulation, retired 
to Westende, while Lady Lanra married Mr. 
Fermor, 

On this step he was furious, got a severe illness, 
recovered, and went away to the Continent. By- 
and-by the aunt died, and the Westende property 
"came in" unexpectedly. The news gave a 
dreadful pang to Lady Laura ; and later Sir John 
married handsomely. The lady he married was 
the well-known Miss Chedder, of the banker's 
family, with, as some of the elder ladies put it, 
" sixty thousand pounds to her back, my dear," 
but who had also sixty thousand tongues. She 
was a stalwart lady, and brought with her to the 
family the whole story of the Termor affair, which 
she kept alive and fresh by constant daily allusion, 
rubbing salt into an old sore. For sixteen years 
Sir John led a miserable life, with the Lady 
Laura business flourished in his face, hurled at his 
back as he left the room, tumbled about his ears 
like broken crockery, dashed on his cheeks like 
hot scalding tea . imtil the famous Miss Chedder 
died, and left him a widower, with two good-looking 
daughters. 

Young Sir John by-and-by thus became a 
fatherly Sir John, later on a middle-aged Sir 
John, and was now a fresh and elderly Sir John. 
But he had never forgiven the Termors. He 
had grey whiskers and a roimd clean face, with a 



A Cloud no bigger than a Hand, 125 

light-blue tie and white waistcoat. For him was 
the handsome carriage with the bays seen waiting 
at the foot of the steps as the train halted at 
Westende ; and to him porters and station-master 
at Westende obsequiously touched their caps. 
Then, as the train passed over the viaduct, its 
passengers saw the bright carriage and brighter 
horses below, rolling along the winding road, 
dipping into the clumps of trees, and reappearing 
in the sun, making the mile and a half or so of 
journey which lay between Westende House and 
the station. 

Sir John's sister had married a brother of the 
late Lord Spendlesham, so that it was quite fitting 
that he should be appointed one of the guardians. 
Sir John himself having the two good-looking 
daughters, it was natural that he should begin 
to associate his ward and his daughters together, 
in a tranquil and prospective manner. Though he 
always said that his ward was not worth his 
salt, and had no wit, and never would have any, 
and the sooner he made 2^ fool of himself the 
better. 

This at least was his tone until suddenly, one 
day, a co-guardian came down to the station and 
took the pleasant road that led to the park, spe- 
cially to communicate the news that young Spen- 
dlesham had announced that he was going to 
marry on the very day he came of age. Sir John, 



126 Never Forgotten. 



who was in his garden with his bine tie on and a 
grey " wide-awake " hat, took this news savagely . 
his face grew pink with rage and excitement, and 
he threw down his stick npon the gravel walk. 

" It shan't be 1 By it shan't be ! " he said ; 

"curse their impudence." (Sir John swore on 
great occasions.) " What do they mean ? They 
have done this on purpose. That woman has laid 
it all out ; I know her." 

For an hour he was in a fury, then ordered his 
carriage, and drove into the country town, six miles 
off, to see Padgett, the country attorney and coal 
agent. Having seen Padgett, he posted up to 
London and saw his ward. He came in on him 
very hot, and very incoherent. The boy wrapped 
an imaginary toga about him, and drew himself 
up to meet the storm " I don't believe it," said 
Sir John, injudiciously, " not a word of it. They 
have been making a fool of you, sir. I wonder 
you have not more sense. You must be watched 
like a child in the nursery. Pack up your things, 
and come down with me to the country. PU 
expose these people," 

" Never 1" said the young lord, still in his 
toga; "my word is pledged . the wprd of a 
peer." 

" The word of a noodle," roared Sir John. 
" Don't spout in that fashion to me 1 Ah ! I am 
ashamed of you. An old stale bit of crust like that. 



A Cloud no bigger than a Hand. 127 

tibat hfts been kicking about the ball-rooms for 
years." 

" It's a shame to speak of a lady in that way," 
said the youth. " She loves me. I shall be of age 
in a few months, and can do as I like." 

With this tone in the discussion, of course no 
progress was made. Sir John went away foaming, 
and determined to expose " those people." 

He was at a dinner-party that night, and, after 

the dinner-party, " went on" moodily to some 

*^rout." There he saw Miss Manuel, who had 

always a, regard for " oldish" men. She was al- 

'ways thus protesting against the cold and Pagan 

system of modem manners, which carries out the 

aged of the tribe and exposes them, as they get 

telpless, on mountains, with a pot of rice. She 

always fought the battle of the old, and said how 

grateful they were for any consideration, and how 

anxious to fit themselves to the times that had left 

them behind, if the world would only let them. 

This night she was flushed with victory, having 

just returned from her Welsh expedition. 

Sir John told her his troubles, working himself 
into a perfect heat as he did so. " They are a mere 
set of adTentnrers these Termors," he said, " that 
should be exposed. I don't see why I should be 
keeping them up. They have^ always treated me 
scurvily, from the father downwards. I was very 
near being taken in myself by that scheming 



128 Never Forgctten. 



woman. She did her best to catch me, but I had 
wit enough to escape her." (It was so long ago, Sir 
John might safely give out this new version.) " She 
was a fine woman then, and I had a raging school- 
boy's fancy for her ; and, ma'am, behaved nobly . 
nobly, as it seems to me now . ^when she found she 
could not get me, and took up with that stupid 
blundering Fermor. I could have broken the thing 
off in ten seconds ; but I didn't. I said nothing ; 
no, not a word, and they were married." 

Sir John had worked himself into a perfect heat 
as he thought of his treatment. 

Miss Manuel listened eagerly, and then said sud- 
denly, " But I never heard. Do tell me. Sir John." 

But Sir John had repented on the spot. It 
was so long ago, he said ; it was a mere story of 
the day, and he wasn't sure that it was a story at 
all. " Look at their ingratitude," he went on, in a 
fresh burst; "that poor devil, Pocock, who has 
helped them through many a business, they will do 
nothing for him . ^nothing whatever." 

" It is very hard," said Miss Manuel ; " you 
know they are not friends of mine. It is no harm 
to say that we have cause to regret an acquaintance 
with that family. I am told it is not considered a 
very serious thing now, and that the young men of 
the day mean it for mere amusement. But still, I 
cannot bring myself to know Lady Laura, or to 
like her." 



A Cloud no bigger than a Hand. 129 

The allusion to Sir Hopkins made a deep im- 
pression on Miss Manuel. She almost despised 
that restless, plotting spirit, and could scarcely 
bring herself to think him of sufficient dignity to 
be the object even of punishment. She had 
avoided him almost with contempt. Now she 
sought him. She was struck by the decay and 
bUght that had settled on his face. "You have 
quite given me up. Sir Hopkins," she said to him. 
" There was a time when you used to come and see 
me, and talk about your travels, and the treaties, 
and wild natives. Come and see me to-morrow." 

The old intriguer, whose diplomatic heart was 
made sick to death by hope deferred, and who had 
furrows of sickly f retfulness and anxiety marked 
on his cheeks, was glad to have an opportimity to 
air his grievances . and came. 

His hair was scattered and thin. " It is the way 
of the world," he said, nervously (hg was only now 
finding out that way of the world) . " always the 
way they use you when they don't want you." 
(But had it not been Sir Hopkins's own way to the 
world?) "I am sure a man who had composed 
those Waipiti troubles would have a claim. Why, 
old Lord Boldero said to me, only this day, ^ No 
fellow like you, Pocock, for handling the natives 1 ' 
BKs very words. Miss Manuel ! And that young 
conceited Harding Hanaper, who can sit in an 
office easily enough, and give pert answers easily 

VOL. III. K 



130 Nmer Fargetten. 

efkough too, lie tells me that he is afraid nothing 
can be done for me.*' 

"But," said Misa Manuel, g^n-tly, "you should 
get your friends to work for you . ^the Fermors, for 
instance." 

"The Fermors!" said Sir Hopkins; "I would 
die sooner than ask th^n for anything. You don't 
know all I have done for those people . fthe sacrir 
fices, the trouble . and I have aaked tiiem to use 
some little interest (and they can work the Buiy- 
shaf t influence weU), and they refused. Yon don't 
know what obligations they are under to me." 

^ It is very hard," said Miss Manuel. 

"Hard, it is monstrous!" he said, piteously. 
" They talk of being old ! Look at Boldero, he is 
ten years oLdesr than I am, but th^ sent him out. 
Of course they did. He has married into the 
office, and they will do any job for him. But it is 
always the way . and the way of the world." 

It was 'pitiable to hear this worldling so severe 
on the world he had loved and served. As Miss 
Manuel looked at him, she wondered at the change 
that had come on him. He seemed to have grown 
old and aknost drivelling. A year or two of 
chafing and importunity and anxiety had brought 
this aU about. He was no long^ the pleasant Sir 
Hopkins, who gave dinners and who ate them, and 
who went along the highways of life in listen shoes. 
No wonder the young flippant children of F. O. 
said he had quite " broken up." " I don't speak 



A Cloud no bigger tian a Hand. 131 

to tbe Fermors now,^ he went on. " All I asked 
her was to go to the old duke, who nsed to admire 
ter so long ago. He couldn't refuse. I hnxyw he 
couldn't. Th^^ is a histcwy about that. Then I 
said, a letter, a few lines. She wants to nurse her 
interest for hr family. Carter, too, who did dirty- 
work enough for the family . ^they have treated 
him just the same." 

Miss Manuel's eyes flashed. ^ Dirty work, in- 
deed," she said; ^^but he will find his account. 
As they all wiU." 

Sir Hopkins looked a little confused. " I meant," 
he said, "that old business, long ago. As for 
Eastport, I give you my word of honour. Miss 

Manuel ^ 

"I have heard of that Id affair," said she, 
eagerly ; " but never the details." 

" O, it's an old story," he said, " forgotten now. 
I mean tJmT ingratitude ; is it not very bad ? " 

Said Miss Manuel, suddenly: "I have some 
little influence in the direction you speak of. An 
official friend told me lately that he could help a 
friend of mine, in a small way; that is, I could 
speak to him, you know." 

"(7ottWyouI O, cottZc? you T" said Sir Hopkins, 
in the fervour of senile gratitude. *^How kind, 
how good, how generous ! O, Miss Manuel, I shall 
never foi^t it; never, never! Anything, you 
know, will do." 

k2 



132 Never Forgotten. 



" It is difficult," she said ; " but I can promise it 
to you. There was an island . ^Prince Somebody's, 
I think." 

" Yes, yes. Lee Boo's. How did you know ? " 
he said, in astonishment. 

"I know many things," said Pauline; "more 
than ever a diplomatist would suppose ; and I am 
curious to know more. I have a woman's taste for 
gossip, Sir Hopkins. Sit down there, and tell me 
your little bit of ugly family business . ^to amuse 
me. 

Instantly he became the old sly-looking Sir 
Hopkins, and glanced at her sideways, as he would 
have done long ago at a Waipiti trying to take him 
in. "I am not to be entrapped or seduced," he 
seemed to say. What he did say was, " O, it is a 
stupid old story, Miss Manuel ; would not interest 
you in the least. But," he added, nervously, 
"about Harding Hanaper. He has influence 
iliercj which he ought not to have, and a word 
from him " 

" And a word from me to him ? " said Pauline. 
"No, I am afraid. You see, I must keep any 
little trifling influence I have for my own family, 
like Lady Laura, and for my slaves, who work for 
me and gratify my whims." 

Sir Hopkins looked at her piteously. He under- 
stood perfectly. "I shouldn't have alluded to it; 
I was irritated, you knowy^ he said, almost im- 



A Cloud no bigger than a Hand. 133 

ploringly. " Family honour and chivalry. No, it 
would not be right, indeed." 

Miss Manuel burst into a fit of laughter. " What 
heroics ! " she said. " Who dreams of touching the 
family honour? Not I, indeed, I assure you. But 
I was only joking, Sir Hopkins. Poor me to have 
influence with Harding Hanaper, or with any one 1 
They only laugh at us weak women." And she 
stood up. "I have heaps of letters to write. By 
the way, I have just written to Harding Hanaper." 
And she pointed to a note in the distance. 

Miserable irresolution was in Sir Hopkins's 
anxious face. But he could not resist going out 
with pride and dignity, and doing a bit of the old 
Waipiti intrigue. "You are very cruel to me, 
Miss Manuel," he said. " You bear malice, I see. 
Good-by." 

Miss Manuel stood in the same attitude for many 
moments, watching the door by which he had passed. 
" I hold him," she said, triumphantly, " in the 
hollow of my hand. The wretched creature would 
sell his soul for office." She was turning to go to 
her desk, when the door was opened softly, the 
worn face was put in again, and Sir Hopkins said : 

" If you are not busy now. Miss Manuel ^" 

" Busy," said she, "not at alll We can have 
an hour's comfortable chat, and tea . I know you 
like your afternoon cup of tea . and, shall I tell 
them to let in no one ? " 



J 




134 Never Forgotten. 



Sir Hopkins lodked aver irresokrtely in the direc- 
tion of Mr. Harding Hanaper^s note. It was not 
gone. He drew in his cbair^ laid his hat on the 
ground beside hm, as he always did, and said, 
" Shall I tell you a story-^ f " 

^ I see I shall ha^e to re-write my letter," said 
Miss Manuel, tearing up Mr. Hanapei^s letter. 

^ So you see," said Sir Hopkins, with his old 
Walpiti smile, as he rose to go away, having quite 
talked himself into a fluent di|^omatie vein, "so 
you see it is nothing but a bit of old family 
scandal. Such things gather at the skirts of every 
respectable house in the country. Where there 
are young men, there wiU always be a little folly 
of this kind. Miss Manuel, I believe Mr. Harding 
Hanaper is still in town, and ^" 

" And this is all ? " said Miss Manuel, with her 
eye fixed coldly on him ; " this is all I " 

" This is all," Sir Hopkins said, going away. 

" Very well," said she ; " I shall go to my letters.^ 

When he had gone. Miss Manuel said to herself, 
^ He has not told a quarter of tibe truth ! He 
thinks he can keep his wretched old hand in prac- 
tice on me ! If he chooses to play th^se tricks, he 
must pay the penalty. I gave him one chance, 
and he has thrown k away." She then sat down 
to her letters. She did not write to Harding 
Hanaper, but to her fresh eld^ly friend, Sa* John, 



A Cloud fie Hgger than a Hand. 135 

" Deab Sib John,. As you mentioned that you 
were anxious about that foolish ward of yours, who 
is so determined to become a husband, I am Sama- 
ritan enough to let you know that I am likely 
enough to know something that may be useful. 
You seemed annoyed about the business, and I 
could not help taking this trouble to assist you. In 
the mean time, I would advise your not going to 
liady Laura Termor, as you seemed to think of 
doing, until we hear something more. 

^ Pauline Manuel." 

Sir Hopkins, passing again, saw the messenger 
go with the notes in his hand. He chuckled and 
becama two yeacs yoimger on tike spot. ^ I can 
manage the Waipiti yet, thcmgh they talk of 
superannoating me. You did not get much out of 
me. Miss Manuel, and I shall be ^ His ExcdUency ' 
very soon I " 



136 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH. 

THE CLOVEN FOOT. 

At Lady Laura's entertainment was seen Mr. 
Eomaine and the "blancmange-faced" new Mrs. 
Massinger. There were others, too, of good 
quality ; for young Spendlesham had said that he 
did not like being " put down " with all sorts of 
low people. He had his dance, and his many 
dances, with other young ladies besides Blanche : 
but he used to come up with his handkerchief to 
his face, saying, " Well, this is wonderful fun 1 " 
Before the night was over he was beside " Lady 
liau," pouring into her ear details of a new 
scheme. 

" I say, we must indeed. These things are so 
easy to get up, and you can hire dresses and pro- 
perties." The youth was alluding to the enter- 
tainment known as Tableaux Vivans. " How we 



The Cloven Foot. 137 



used to get them up at Spendlandsl I was 
Cardinal Wolsey, I could get the dress again, I 
know." 

The veteran's heart sank within her at the 
costly nature of this species of show, and some 
faint protest escaped her, something about the 
"smallness of their house." The youth, sensitive 
and selfish, laughed this off pleasantly. " Small ! 
Not a bit of it," he said ; " we shall squeeze them 
all in. It will be splendid. Leave it to me." 
Lady Laura, who felt that this, indeed, if laid on, 
would be the last straw upon the sadly worn 
and strained camel's back, in these desperate 
straits thought of a dismal ruse. She was look- 
ing round mysteriously, and putting her face 
close to Young Spendlesham's with marvellous 
significance. " It would be charming," she said ; 
' " such a treat for the girls I But you know old 
Lady Bowler . next door, you imderstand . she 
would let loose her whole conventicle on the poor 
children, and then, you know, she is dreadful, my 
dear. Lord, you don't know how she embitters 
our life." 

This social exhumation of Lady Bowler had its 
effect, and silenced the youth. But he was sullen 
and aggrieved. "Very well," he said; "just as 
you like. It makes no matter, none in the world. 
The Chillingworths said something to me about it 
yesterday, and they have mcA a ^ jolly room.' " 



13o l!HtV.T roTgpttitt* 



Lady .Laura had still her amile ^^ on ; " but it 
was a sickly smile* At thb moment came mp 
Blanche, with an officer in custody. The bright 
young cMature, full of natural wazmth and ani- 
matioin, was eager for news. 

^' You have settkd it all,'' she said, eidari^g the 
officer, ^^ I see you have. . Isn't it ddightful, 
mamma? Lord Spendlesham says I am to be 
Pomona, and be all over gold apple&f' 

The youth's hands found their way gloomily to 
the depths of his podbets. ^^ O no I No, no !" he 
said, ^it's all given up; that is, at your house.; 
and there's some tract woman or Methodist that 
won't have it. But it makes no matt^. I shall 
get it up at the Chillingworths'w" 

The look of reproach and silent agony tiiat the 
dutiful child flung at her mother, would be hard 
to describe. ^ It is all a mistake," she said. ^ Non- 
sense. Mamma ddesn't mean it." 

Lady Laura saw by this time that delay would 
be fatal; so she bent down her poor overloaded 
worn bkeding camel's hump, and took up this last 
burden with assumed cheerfulness. 

The whole was settled that night. Young 
Spendlesham lakl out reckless schemes of expense. 
He enlisted arbitrarily a whole corps before the 
night was over; ^^ I ixil jovl who I have made up 
my mind to have ; that little Mra. Fermor." 

^^ Charles's wife ?" csied Blaodbe, faintly. 



The Cloven Foot. 139 



'' Do you know, I like Charles's wife," said the 
young lord, pleasantly. " There is something so 
smart and quick about her. I am sure she is good 
fun. Yes, we shall have Chai4esfs wife, but not 
Charles himself. There's HomaiiKe. I must speak 
to him." 

Fermor . the poor pariah of the party, the in- 
terdicted from the fire and water of cimyersation . 
kept at the door. He had bow grown sensitive, 
scorning to intrude himsdf or his gifts upon 
mammas with absently roving eyes and business- 
like daughters. 

Standing in this mood^ he saw Hanbury come 
up the stairs. -the new and changed Hanbury, 
with his curious moamful manner. He seemed to 
bring with him all the old Eastport associations, 
and Fermor walked hastily away. '^ He will be 
coming to me," he thought, ^* and playing off his 
new Werner character. He means all tie women 
to be pointing to him, and wanting to know the 
story of his blighted heart. I wish to Heaven I 
was out of this place, and oat af the whole 
concern !" 

In a few minutes Hanbury was beade him. " I 
am so glad, Fermor," he said. "It is so long 
since I have seen you." 

"You come out to parties, it seems I" said 
Fermor, with a half sneer. 

" Not often," said Hanbury, sadly. " I never 



140 Never Forgotten. 



cared for such things, as I dare say you recollect. 
What brought me here to-night was the hope 
of meeting you. I had something to tell you. 
Just come out here on the stairs." 

" Why not here ?" said Fermor, more and more 
resenting the " Werner manner." 

" I know," said John Hanbury, interpreting all 
this, and coming back the little way he had gone, 
." that I never succeeded in making myself a friend 
of yours, and that by some unfortunate mistake 
we never were sa well known to each other as we 
might have been. Something came in the way. 
I did not understand you ; very likely you did not 
understand me. I know I am rough, and have 
my faults. Perhaps, if we had both tried sincerely 
to be more at one, a hundred things might not 
have happened. But that is all past." 

Again this tone grated on Fermor. Had Han- 
bury said merely that he could not imderstand 
Fermor, and that if he had tried to do so, he could 
not, it would have been more deferential. 

" I never try to understand any man," said Fer- 
mor, coldly. "It is too much trouble. I take 
what is on the surface. But this business, as you 
say . ^what do you wish me to do for you I" 

John Hanbury shook his head, as though he 
said, " You vnll not understand me. Very well," 
he said ; " it is about yourself, Fermor. You know 
there are not many things in life that I have much 



The Cloven Foot. 141 



interest in now. The Mannels and their happiness 
IS all I think of. What they love and have loved, 
I care for. There was one, Fermor, whom we 
knewj and whose dear memory we cling to, and it 
is for her sake, and for the sake of what I know 
were her last wishes, that I lipw ^" 

" I don't know what object you have," said Fer- 
mor, colouring, "in making these allusions, or in 
bringing up this subject; but I must tell you, 
plainly I do not like to discuss it." 

" This is the way," said John Hanbury, hope- 
lessly. " I always say more than I mean, and I 
know I am blunt and rough in approaching sub- 
jects. But, Fermor, listen to me. I say I would 
do anything for the Manuels. And you, Fermor, 
do not see the world so much now . ^at least, have 
not the opportunity of hearing what I can hear. 
Do forgive me if I speak too plainly; but it is 
indeed for your interest. I don't know how to ap- 
proach it, and I am sure you will not like it, but I 
must speak. I know it would be her wish. Mrs. 
Fermor is so gentle, so trustful, so.." 

" Now, Mr. Hanbury," said Fermor, his voice 
trembling, " I must request that this subject will 
not be pursued. You are, as you say, well mean- 
ing, though unfortunate in your manner. I don't 
want to hear about it. I don't want advice from 
any man. I can manage my own house. Every- 
body seems to think they can lecture me about 



142 Never Forgstten. 



my own concams; and I tell you again^ I don't 
require it, and worCt have Ur 

"But you dcHi't know the danger," said Han- 
buiy, desperately. " You don't see what is coming. 
I know more than you think. It is my duty to 
warn you, no matter how you may take it. That 
Bomaine, I tell you, is not the man to be so inti- 
mate at your house, and you should look after it. 
Forgive miB, but every one is talking of it." 

" Once more," said Fermor, excitedly, " I tell 
you to stop this, Mr. Hanbury. I won't take it. 
So you wish to be an adviser! You must excuse 
me for saying that I shall not come to you for 
assistance. Your counsels, as regards your own 
interest, have not been so very successful." 

"No, indeed," said he, sadly; "you are right. 
But I must tell you this, at all risks. I know your 
affairs. There is that Sir John Westende : he is a 
dangerous man. You should go to him, and con- 
ciliate him. Ask Lady Laura, and she will tell 
you the same." 

This was past endurance. 
* " You won't take a hint, Mr. Hanbury?" said 
he, struggling to be calm. " Let me ask you, do 
you wish to quarrel, or to hear something from me 
that I should be sorry to have said?" 

" O, you shall not quarrel with me," said Han- 
bury, calmly, and turning away. " Nothing that 
you could say," he added, solemnly, "shall ever 



The Cloven Foot. 143 



offend me. Tliere are reasom why you should be 
privileged. You seem hHnded, Fermor : you will 
not be guided ; but I shall not desist. I shall help 
you in spite of yourself." 

The state he left Fermor in may be conceived. 
He always felt agony under the sense of this air 
of what he took for superior patronage* 

He then saw Eomaine come over to Mrs. Fermor, 
and pitch his chair close to hers, as it might be a 
tent. She was in a comer, and Mr. Bomaine's 
tent quite cut her off from the company. He then 
began to talk with great earnestness. Fermor's 
falling on this new, situation, and Fermor's memory 
suggesting to him the stories the good-natured 
friend had told him, the effect was as of scarlet 
cloth tossed and shaken before him. 

" Look at Orson," said Mr. Eomaine, moodily, 
" how he is glaring at us J " 

Mrs. Fermor looked up innocently, but did not 
see which face he meant. 

" Orson 1 " she said ; " whom do you call by that 
ugly name?" 

" Don't you see," he said, " your conjugal Orson ? 
You know what I mean." 

Mrs. Fermor, colouring as she always did, moved 
back her chair a little, and half rose. 

" You can't mean ihat^^ she said ; " I am sure 
not. At least, if you do, I must go to the person 
you mention so disrespectfully." 



144 Never Forgotten. 



" Exactly/' lie said, without moving. " Always 
the way. every little idle word caught up and 
registered. Why, I call every husband Orson. 
What are they all but Orsons . ^brutes . ^irreclaim- 
able savages? What am I myself? And what 
do y(m think me in your heart of hearts, but a 
wild, untamed Orson, fresh from the woods?" 

Mrs. Fermor felt a twinge. She felt for this 
poor rude man, who had no friends ; no kith nor 
kin, and who was grateful for a little sympathy, 
and over whom she held such a secret power. So she 
said, quickly, "No, no, I don't agree to that. You 
are not quite so bad." 

"How good you are," he said, with grateful 
eyes. " I am but an acquaintance, but those who 
know you better, how they must appreciate; for 
instance, your husband, whom I so thoughtlessly 
and irreverently called * Orson.' How he must 
pyize and cherish, how * uxorious' . is not that the 
word? . ^he must be, even to fatigue ; he must play 
the doting husband to perfection ! Eh ? " 

Again the old doubting look came on Mrs. Fer- 
raor^s face. She did not answer. A pink, hand- 
some, and rather foolish face then came to Mr. Eo- 
maine, and said : 

"I say, Bomaine, why don't you come? My 
wife has sent me for you. She has all sorts of 
secrets, and has been signalling this half-hour." 

Romaine threw Mrs. Fermor a look of signi- 



The Cloven Foot. 145 



ficance^ as who should say, "You see." He 
stooped over and said, in a low voice, " Do'you know 
what is behind all .this ? Biding to-morrow in the 
Park . 2k pic-nic the day after . then a three weeks' 
visit down at Massinger. They are filling their 
house, and she says they can't get on without me. 
These are the little secrets. Give a poor outcast 
your advice . come." 

Mrs. Fermor, with glowing cheeks, could not 
restrain her little smile of pride. She had the 
bold dangerous man completely in her power, to 
mould him for his own good. " You will not go," 
she said. "You must not go; at least, I have no 
influence, I know, but ^" 

" No influence ! " he said, and paused. " Well, I 
say nothing of that. They will have their plays . 
^ amateur theatricals ' as they call them. They will 
make me the ^ premier amoureux.' Why, even that 
donkey Spendlesham is getting them up. Ta^ 
bleaux, he calls them. They are to have you. He 
has just asked me. Ah ! you could act I What 
parts shall we choose . ^Alexander and the two 
Queens, or Petrarch and his Laura ? " 

A little bewildered at this rambhng speech, 
Mrs. Fermor could only say, "O no, indeed I 
could not." 

" You no influence ? " he went on. " Yes, you 
have. I confess it. I have felt it for weeks back 
growing steadily every day. I cannot trust myself, 

VOL. III. L 



146 ' Never Forgotten. 



but I can trust you. Don't think that your life is 
not known to me, and that I cb Bot feel for you. / 
know what goes on in your house. I know . and 
f orgire me for saying so . ^that there has been <me 
nnxe f aital mistake added to the tremendous list of 
mistakes, now nearly full ^' 

" Mr. Romaine," she began, much frightened. 

" Stay. I confess," he went on, ^ at first I met 
you with that indifference which I feel for every 
woman. But this has been wearing away. It is 
altogether worn away now. O, you might do 
much with me. much more than you have done. 
But things cannot go on always as they go on now. 
My heart bums to see one that I call Orson so cold 
and neglectful, when there is one as you know and 
understand ^ ' 

'^ I do understand," said she, in a perfect tumult 
of terror and surprise, and trembEng with agita- 
tion. ^ At last . ^O let me omt . let me go ! 
You shouldn't have done this, Mr. Romaine . ^for 
shame, for shame I O let me out quick . ^let me 
pass!" 

He never moved. " That is well done," he said. 
" Now /go on: ^ O lovely Laura ! what rage in 
those flashing eyes ! You cannot conceal the flut- 

terings of your heart,' and so on We shftJl do 

it very well together on Spendlesham's boards." 

For a moment she was astounded at this readi- 



The Cloven Fwt. 147 



mess and coolness; but in another moment the 
earnestness of his first speech came haa^ upon her, 
and she said again^ ^^ O or shame, for shame I It 
was very cnxd of you I O, what do yon mean ? 
Now let me go ; and you mast never, never speak 
to me again." 

At this moment Former esme striding up. He 
had been looking on. He pushed past Bomaine 
rather rudely, put oat his arm for his wife, and 
said, in a fierce whisper, '' Come away at once. 
You seem lost to all shame I You are making me 
the talk of the room. Gome at onoe. Come home. 
You shall answer to me for this I " 

The little woman, so wacm and impetuous, had 
behaved nobly and chivalronsiy, as she fancied. 
She was firmly determined never to open her lips 
to Somaine again ; and yet Aia was her reward ! 

Fermor saw die resentment in her face. "I sup- 
pose you mean to brave me here, before all these 
people 1 " H was beside himself with rage. " Come 
away, I say . ^have at least some semblance of re- 
spect and decency." 

" Respect and decency!" said Somaine, laughing. 
" What odd words you use, my good Fermor." 

"Would you allow us to go by ? " said Fermor, 
with forced poGteness. 

"With all my heart," said the other. "But 
you gave us such a start. We were talking of 
l2 



148 Never Forgotten, 



such interesting things. But all secrets, remember, 
Mrs. Fermor ; or your husband will have me out 
the first thing in the morning." 

This, though spoken gaily, contained a hint for 
Mrs. Fermor, which she could not but take. 

Fermor made no reply, but hurried her down 
stairs. " We must see about this," he said, under 
his breath, " and settle the thing one way or the 
other. You are at perfect liberty to consult your 
own reputation as you please, but I am determined 
I shall not be made the laughing-stock of the town. 
/ am not to be compromised." 

He felt her arm trembling on his, but she said 
nothing. Here was injustice . ^monstrous, killing, 
injustice. Something like the shade of a blight 
flashed across her. 

As they went home in the little dark brougham, 
there was one of the old stormy miserable scenes. 
" You can have no respect for me, and none for 
yourself," said the little woman, trembling, " to say 
such things publicly." She was about to add, " If 
you only knew ;" but she was checked, for she felt 
that she dare not even hint at Romaine's behaviour. 
" You never speak to me kindly ; you never take 
me anywhere ; you never encourage, never protect 
me, as I see other husbands treat their wives. No, 
but you are too cold, and care for nothing in the 
wide world but for yourself. As, indeed, Mr. 
Eomaine says"-. -and she was about to quote that 



The Cloven Foot. 149 



.speech of his about " fatal mistakes/' but she 
stopped in alarm. 

" Go on," said he, with forced calmness ; "pray 
tell us what Mr. Romaine says. So it is come to 
this," he said, with a new burst. " But it serves 
me right. They warned me in time, but I foolishly 
would not listen." 

With quivering lip Mrs. Fermor retorted . ^she 
was very quick of temper, it must be repeated . 
"And I was warned too. But I should like to 
know who has gained most by the affair. I tell 
you, you will not dispose of me as you did of 
others. My heart shall not be broken, nor shall I 
wear myself into the grave to suit your plans." 

" No fear, indeed," said he, with a trembling 
voice. " She was an angel, a gentle, quiet, sweet, 
angel. God forgive me for that crime, it was the 
great mistake of my life. I did not know what I 
was doing. I must have been mad." 

" And you speak of it in this way to me," said 
Mrs. Fermor, beside her little wits,' from grief, and 
wounded vanity, and rage. " Ah ! you will tell me, 
next that you married me for papa's money. Go 
on and finish; we may as well hear it all out 
now I" 

" Suppose I say I did," replied he, unable to 
resist the taunt ; it was now a battle k outrance. 
" Suppose I say that I did. It was what they 
called a good match. It is not the first thing of 



150 Never Forgotten, 



the kind &at hA been done I IX was au unfor- 
tunate day for me, God knows! I might have 
hdexk happy and peacefii now. in my proper 
statioQ in society wMch I have lost, instead of 

beix^ Confusion!" he added, in a freah 

burst, as he thought of aU his wrongs and insults. 
-" I^av^ been^^(K>lrand lajiimdm t^L _ 

yo^ I sbftll see to all this, and it sAo^ be changed. - 
They shan't point to me as a cypher, nor shall any 
jf Ae^rude kw admkers youxskioae jte encqgacage 
make me fteir butt Sterorl^Tie add^^vete- 
mently. '^ So, as a beginning, I insist and require 
and command that you Bever e&chsas^ a word in 
future with that man Bomaine." 

" How dare you speak in this way to me I " said 
she, hysterically. 
;;--^Jf^Mind what I have told you; and I shall see 
_ Aat'~yDurtla^3rat^;ymi-_ai^^ to do. I shall see 

^ . K^jt^^^Wprd-siore^^a&^goken ofi~tl^t-di^n^^ 
passage homeT'^Wken^ibe^^^^^^e-Jl^ up- 
-stairsj-and^ruihed mto her f ati^"ri3DEi*^.^!^'^. ^ 



A Difcovery^ 151 



CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH. 

A DISCOVEBY. 

Grim Mr. Carlay was reading when his daughter 
entered, and flung herself down at his knees^ sob- 
bing and crying hysterically. Her rich long hair 
had broken from all f astening, and came tumbling 
about her in a shower. 

" My heart is breaking," she said ; " help me, 
papa. He is killing me ! " 

A spasm of pain passed over his face for a mo- 
ment, and he drew a deep sigh. 

" My pbor child," he said, with wonderful affec- 
tion for so grim a being. "The old story ; I knew 
it was hurrying on to this. We try every one else, 
and, after all, we come back to the old father or 
mother." 



152 Never ForgpUen. 



" But O ! " continued she, " he has dared to 
slander me ; to insult me publicly. He is killing 
me. This very night ^ 

"I understand," said he. "I know it all. I 
have at last come to know him thoroughly. He is 
a wretch without a heart ; faithless and unworthy 
of you and your affection." 

" He has insulted me ! " she said, starting up 
with a fierce pride. " I shall never forget it. I 
shall never forgive it. If he only knew that at the 
very instant he was accusing me . at that moment 
I was behaving in a way that he should have been 
proud of I But let he* himself take care. He talks 
about being sensitive of his own reputation, and 
about being pointed at. I say, papa, let Mm take 
care!" 

" These are no discoveries to me," said her father, 
sadly. 

" Ah ! then why," said she, turning round, " why 
did you let me be sacrificed? He tells me now 
openly that it was your money he wanted, an6 
that he sold himself. Why did you allow this sale, 
if you knew so much, papa f " 

" My darling," said he, " I thought your heart 
was set upon it, and I wished to gratify you in 
every way. I was foolish . stupid, but," said he, 
rising and stalking to the door, ^* it is not too late 
yet. I have worse to tell you, darling; things 
which it is right that you should know . ^things 



\ 



A Difcovery. 153 

that I have discovered. For I have not been shut 
lip all day and night among musty books. I have 
l)een searching, watching . spying, some would say 
- . but all for you." 

" Yes," said she, eagerly ; " tell me all, papa ! " 

He went on hurriedly : 

" I suspected him from the beginning. Men do 
not forsake their homes and always be found 
abroad, or be harsh to their wives, without some 
outside reason. I know the world pretty well. 
These things repeat each other every day and 
every hour. What would you say if that friend 
of your heart . that bright, noble Miss Manuel . 
the heroine . ^whom you watched in sickness, and 
have almost worshipped, who has kissed you, as 
you told me, over and over again ^^ 

Mrs. Fermor started back. " Impossible ! " she 
said. "You don't know her, father. What has 
she done, then ? " 

" She is your enemy. She it is who has drawn 
away your husband from you. This is the secret 
of his absences. She has been trading on the old 
miserable vanity with which he is stuflfed. He 
nas been there day after day. Nights, when he 
was away till three and four, he was at her suppers. 
He was watching for her in the Park;^, hanging 
about her street, about her carriage. And all 
because she made some speech that has set his 
pride rampant. And she your friend, whom you 



154 Never Forgotten. 



almost sayed from death. In this way she repays 
you!" 

Mrs. Fermor was looking at him quite scared. 
" O no, no," she said, in a low voice, and drawing 
back ; ^^ thds is not so. You don't know her." 

^^ Ah, listen ! " he said, catdiing her by the hand. 
^^ How could she like you ? You are in her sister's 
place. It is not in human nature. You had 
better know the worst, darling. Look here ! " and 
he opened his dsesk, and took out some half a dozen 
letters, which he opened slowly, one after tibe other. 
"Would you not know her writing? Look at 
this," and he showed her first that old letter of 
Miss Manuel's, m which ^ had invited Pehnor 
to her supper, and then others in the same strain ; 
notes, notelets, long, short; on large paper, on 
small paper, and on tiny scraps, signed only with 
initials; all the tokens, in short,, of an intimate 
relation. " Here are answers," he went on, " and 
you will know this hand." And he thread out 
Fermor^s notes in the sam^ way. Mrs. Fermor 
looked from one to the other of them, and back 
again, very wildly and distractedly. "This is," 
he said, " what the world would call shabby and 
dishonourable. BuJ; I lov my child and her 
happiness, and scruple at nothing to effect that." 

" My liappiness ! " she said^ sadly. 

"Yes, your hapjriness," he answered, quickly; 
" it will all lead to thaL The first step is knowing 



A Difcovery, 155 

. 
the worst. The next is, to look out for a remedy : 
and we must have done with this man . done with 
him for ever." 

"Done with him for ever?" she repeated, me- 
chanically. 

"Yes," he said; "he is not worthy of you. 
We shall leave this miserable country, and leave 
him. It was a wretched mistake from the very 
beginning. Once freed from him, we shall begin 
to be happy together again. You will get ill, my 
child ; already I find your cheeks pale and worn. 
Abroad, there is joy and happiness and comfort in 
store for us yet. If you remain, you die." 

"Leave him here with her? Never, papa, 
never, while I live ! " 

" He is net iimrth a thought," said he, hastily. 
" We nmst go. It is the only oourse." 

" And leave htm behind freed from me, whom 
he haites, to enjoy hknself, aaid leave her no 
poaishzEient? J^'ever, papa. Let me stay and 
die." 

"Who fcoows?" said her father, gloomily; 
"we may punish him before we leave. But aU 
m good time ; depend on it^ the guilty shall not 
escape." 

"And O!" biHwt out Mml Fennoir, giving 
way suddenly to a paeoxysin of tean, " she, that 
woaian wh(n I tried to make my friend ; whom 
Ilaved!" 



156 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH. 

" OLD FOLEY.'' 

Sir John Westende, though a sqnire, was 
crafty enough in his generation. He thought Miss 
Manuel's counsel good as to the secresy, and did 
not show his hand too soon. He was even friendly 
with his nephew, and said to him in his rough way, 
" Well, if you will make a bom ass of yourself, 
you must." But at home he indemnified himself 
by swearing and railing at his daughters, telling 
them they were " a hopeless, helpless pack," and 
that he was " sick of the whole lot ; " ending gene- 
rally with a violent question as to "what were 
they staring at him in that way for ? " and finally 
bidding them "get out of his sight, for he couldn't 
stand them I " And the poor frightened motherless 
girls, who had this paternal food served to them 



''OldFoleyr 157 

every day, with the regularity of meals, fled away 
from his presence like a flock of sheep from the 
shepherd's dog. 

Lady Laura, too, had a consciousness of a. 
danger. For the first time in her life she began 
to give way to a sense of hopelessness, and to give 
entrance to the grim and gloomy visitors called 
forebodings. As she turned round to north, south, 
east, and west successively, and saw the passage 
growing blocked in each direction, she began to 
feel sudden sinkings of the heart for the first time 
during her fifty or sixty years' struggle. These, 
however, might have been the natural weakness of 
coming age. She had fought, suiBfered, and re- 
ceived such cruel scars, that it was no wonder she 
should feel pains. 

From the first she had divined the opposition 
from Sir John Westende, and had tried to bring him 
over. But she well knew he had never forgiven 
her . ^not so much for the mortification, as for the 
years of tyranny which she had indirectly brought 
on him. For he was one of those ferocious wild 
animals who roar, and tear, and even devour the 
spectators, but who are surprisingly tame and 
docile under the eye of the keeper. She even 
tried to. stir the cold ashes of the old romance, 
with her fan, and let a few of the white particles 
float in the air, but this she saw was only a further 

stimulant. She then wisely gave up all attempts 



158 Never Forgotten. 



at conciliatioii, and determixied for fighting in the 
open field. 

He went to consult Miss Manuel again. He 
.burst into his old complaint& ^^Is it not shame- 
ful?" he said. * There shodd be m act of Par- 
liament to protect boys against these women. Til 
show the whole system up^ if I die for it. On my 
soul^ I believe she will put him in a coach some 
night, and marry him before the child knows what 
he is doing. The worst is, I don't see my way. 
Can you think of something ?" 

Miss Manuel thought a moment. " You know 
Sir Hopkins Pocock ?''' she said. " Very well. A 
wretched, restless, agitating creature, who would sell 
his soul for place. GK) to him, and talk of your 
influence. That private family sdseleton we spoke 
of the other day," she said, smiling, ^ is in some 
museum, in the countiy somewhere. It has been 
smuggled away, but can be recovered." 

Sir John, a country gentleman^ did not quite 
follow. " What about skeletons I " he said. 

" I mean," said Miss Manuel, ^ the little secret 
story you hinted at the other day. It may be 
worth nothing: but still, where the interest of a 
child, your ward, is concerned^ everything is fair. 
You might use this as a lever.** 

" A lever! yes," said Sir John, still doubtful; 
" but where did you get about the skeleton f" 

" A mere figure of speech/' said she; "a way 



''OUFoleyr 15 

people have of talking. Or stay," she said ; " there 
is Major Carter, who knows all the world, and is 
flattered by atteirtion. Ajsk him to dine, and he 
may help yon." 

Sir John Westende took both courses. From 
Sir Hopkins, who cringed to him with senile 
homage, he heard of an old Peninsnlar colonel 
whom he himself had known, and Major Carter, 
who knew all the world, was likely enough to have 
fallen in with him. 

" If I could only light on that old Foley now," 
he thought. "He knows and knew everything, 
and every story. But he is dead long ago ; had to 
live at some of those wretched half-pay French 
foreigneering places." (Sir John took the true 
squire's view of Boulogne and other foreign ports, 
as being solely created for English gentlemen of 
limited means.) He asked Major Carter about it. 

" The old colonel dead?" said the major. "Not 
he ! Lives at Dunkirk, of all places iq the world ! 
But he says he gets his rubber there. He was here 
last week, but has gone back, I am afraid. The 
colonel's purse is not very deep, unless, indeed, he 
has made something out of his whist here. Shall 
we go and see him. Sir Johnt By the way, I 
forget. Did you know him 1 " 

" Not met him for years," said Sir John. " But 
I hanTe a particular reason for wishing to meet him 
now." Then he told Major Carter (whom he said 



160 Never Forgotten. 



he saw was " a inan of the world") what this 
reason was. 

" Just the man !" cried the major. " You have 
a surprising instinct, Sir John 1 Why, he could 
write a book, the most delightful work of our times, 
all the scandal, all the divorces, all the esclandres . 
the true history, you understand. Sir John ! He 
has them all at his fingers' ends. It would be the 
most fascinating book." 

The old Peninsular colonel must have made 
profit out of his whist ; for he was still in Town, in 
the bay-window of his club, with his newspaper 
attached to a stick, which he handled as if he were 
a pointsman signalling a train. He had a yery 
large hat on. The blood in his face was so marbled 
and extravasated that it seemed as if made out of 
good Bologna sausage ; while his stock was so stiff 
and straight that it seemed as if he were always 
looking out of an iron chimney-pot after having 
newly swept a gigantic chimney. He was glad to 
see Carter, and was glad to see Carter's friend, for 
he had just done with his pointsman's flag, and was 
thinking of sherry. "Have something?" he said. 
"No?" And having "had something" himself, 
the marbled Bologna sausage surface seemed to 
become illuminated from within, and glowed. 

The major very soon led them across France into 
the Peninsula, and took them back some thirty or 
forty years, and called up Lord Wellington and 



''OldFoleyr 161 

Pack, and Beresford, and that ^^chicken-hearted" 
scoundrel, Joseph. "Why, dammy !" roared the 
colonel, the Bologna sausage distending alarmingly, 
"we had a little drummer that would have stood 
up to him, and made him run." 

" You had queer days in Madrid that time, 
colonel," said the major. 

" Ay, ay," said the Peninsular colonel, " both 
then and later. I was there in 'twenty-five, too, 
and met some of the old set. What times we 
had, sir. Dammy, sir, there are no men on earth 
now. No men, sir, with real heads and stomachs. 
They don't know how to drink ! It ain't life now ; 
at least, it ain't life as it used to be " . ^then added 
the colonel, as a dropping shot after a volley . 
"dammy!" 

" The colonel," said Major Carter to Sir John, 
with great approbation, "knows, and has seen a 
great deal. It is really instructive to hear him." 

"Bless you!" said Colonel Foley (using the 
benediction precisely in the same meaning as he 
did his favourite malediction) . " Bless you I I 
could tell you stories by the yard ! Ay, sir I and 
stories that would take your wind away, sir ; and, 
sir, about some of the . ^ve-ry . ^first . ^families in 
the country," added he, stooping forward, and 
speaking slow ; "the very first. Ay, sir, and some 
of your fine high women," he continued, glowing 
at the recollection of some neglect, " who now give 

VOL. III. M 



162 Never Forgotten. 



themselves airs ; I could have them at my knees^ 
dying, ^ JFor God's sake, don't expose ns I Danmij, 
colonel^ don't I'" 

" Did you ever," said Sir John, a little impatient 
at the colonel's reminiscences, '^ fall in with a person 
called Fermor?" 

"Fermor? Fermor?" said the colonel, search^ 
ing his memory* " Ah, to be sure ! I suppose 
I didn't know Lady Lanra . a fine spanking 
creature she was ! I could tell you some of her 
games. By the Lord, sir, the night of the fresco 
business down at the what-d'ye-call-em villa on the 
Thames,, and we had the walks lit up, excepting 
the arbour, which was forgotten,, dammy, sir, if I 
didn't '' 

Major Carter here nervously interposed, " Our 
friend. Sir John, is connected,. I believe ^ 

"No, no," said Sir John, hotly. "I have no- 
thing to say to them. And I don't care what is 
said of them. There was a story, Colonel Foley, 
some thirtyyears aga; as a club man you knew it. 
we all knew it ; I should know it myself, but some- 
how my memory does not help me now. I want 
to find that story. You remember a scampish 
fellow they had among them, Fermor^s brothei^ 
that went to the dogs ? " 

"Ah! you're right, you're right," said Cdonel 
Foley, with great enjoyment. " Ah, Jack Fermo]^ 
I knew him, sir ! I once lent him ten pounds^ and 



''OUFoUyr 163 

dammy, sic^ if I wasn't the only man he ever 
paid ." 

" But what was the business ? " asked Sir John, 
impatiently ; '^ it was cushioned in some wonderful 
way. 

"Blesa your soul," said the colonel, with the 
same absence of spiritual meaning, " that was Aer, 
all her ! She managed the whole of it. She had 
the spirit of ten men. Did you ever know that she 
went over herself, and settled it all ? " 

"Ah I " said Sir John, with great interest, " that 
was the way it never got out." 

" Exactly^ sir. It was the middle of winter, too, 
with ice, sir, as thick as that book, sir," pointing to 
a London Directory. " And up-on my soul, sir, 
she was expecting to be confined of her first child. 
That I know. And I call that a fine plucky, 
spanking thing of her. As for the quiet sneak 
Fermor she married, he wasn't fit to sweep that 
crossing, sir." 

" He was a poor creature," said Sir John, cor- 
dially. 

" She settled the whole business, sir. Saw the 
consuls, ministers, every man Jack of them, talked 
to them, bought them . seventeen and sixpence 
went a long way then in those forrigneering 
courts . ^and brought off her man ! What was 
better, sir, not a soul could make out what it was 
all about." 

m2 



164 Never Forgotten, 



" Precisely," said Sir John. " / never could get 
at it." 

" That was her^ you see," said the colonel. " If 
I didn't admire her for it ! I was one of the few 
that knew about the business, and, dammy, if she 
didn't bring me round . round and round again, 
sir. Now, is she going on still? " 

"What did I tell you. Sir John?" said Major 
Carter, in delight. " Is not the colonel pleasant ? 
We ought to get him to come and fix a day before 
he goes back to Dunkirk." 

" Ah, yes," said Sir John, eagerly, " the very 
thing. You must dine with me, colonel ; a little 
snug private dinner . only ourselves." 

"Dammy," said the colonel, "how gluey I feel. 
They swindle us at this place with their infernal 
bottles . they don't half fill 'em. Here, waiter, 
soda. They keep the worst lot of servants in 
the kingdom. Well, where was I ? I could talk 
this way until midnight. Here, you! bring that 
after me to the^ smoking-room. You don't mind 
coming there, eh?" 

Sir John was a man of business, and had his 
time pretty well filled up. "I tell you what, 
colonel," he said, looking at his watch, " dine with 
me to-day . ^you and Carter here . at my club. A 
snug little thing. Only ourselves." 

" I will, upon my soul," said the colonel, eagerly, 



''OldFoleyr 165 



and almost ferociously. "That will be more like 
it. Good Lord I " he said, by no means conscious 
of any devotional appeal, "what things I could 
tell you, if I only could collect my wits. Talk of 
old What-his-name's Kecollections, which I'm told 
they're all reading now ! Why, dammy, I could 
beat him against a wall, story for story. Why, 
they're nothing but slops, mere slops, sir 1 " 



1^ Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH. 
COLONEL Foley's reminiscences. 

That evening, at Sir John's club . ^the Country 
Gentleman's . which, the colonel said, he was 
glad to see had none of their "eternally lost" 
gewgaw "sugar-stick" stuck over it inside and 
out . ^none of your "sickening theatrical scene- 
shifting places . all windows," where you caught 
your death of cold, but a snug, old-fashioned 
place, where all the high-priced papers were taken 
in, and where brass buttons and yellow trousers 
were familiar to the eye : at this |club, then, in 
a private room, the three gentlemen had a pleasant 
little dinner. 

"This is something like," said the colonel. "I 
call this a place for a gentleman! Dammy, I 
don't want to be stuck up in a plate-glass case, 



Colonel Foley^s Reminiscences. 167 

like a dried fish in a nmseum, so that the people 
in the streets maj staie up at yoiu I don't call 
ikut sort of thing a club. And the stuff they 
give you! You might as well put a file down 
my throat as the liquor we had to-day." Which 
community in the participation of the brandy 
w^ a pardonable delusion on the colonel's part. 

He was very amusing, this old colonel. But 
some of his stories were frightful. He did not 
deal in what he called " slops." Men and women 
. ^widows, virgins, and wives . he slaughtered 
wholesale . like the great Human Sacrifices at 
Dahome. Later he came back to the subject of 
the morning. 

^^ I never saw such a wild scamp of a creature as 
that Termor. . Our wine merchant . ^indeed, every- 
body's wine merchant; and gave capital wine, I 
must say. Gave more for nothing than he did for 
money. No fellows were entertained better. That 
was 'twenty or 'twenty-five. Let me see, now, 
which was it, dammy? " and the Peninsular colonel 
began to rumini^ over this point, for Ms old 
memory, like his old eye, was getting v^ dim. 
" 'Twenty-five it was. I have it now, the year I 
got my captaincy (Sergeant, who was before me, 
was shot in a duel by the Spanish minisWs son). 
Well, that Fermor soon, as you may imagine, found 
the wine business not to answer. He was so ex- 
travagant . ^nothing could stand him . and as wild 



168 Never Forgctten. 



as a hare. Very thick with the governor, and the 
governor's wife, too . a fine woman, though . but 
so stuck up, you know. Dammy," said the colonel, 
excited by the memory of repulse, " there was no 
going within a mile of her. Why, I dined there 
four days in the week. Well, when I came back 
again, dammy if the winje business hadn't all broken 
up ; and what do you suppose my friend was at, eh, 
now ? What do you say, now ? " 

Neither Carter nor Sir John could say ; nor, if 
they could, would they. 

"Why, he had set up a little play; nothing 
short of that. Instead of the wine, we got . ^you 
understand . cards and chicken hazard. It was 
great fun. He got a lot of money out of us. He 
made it pay, sir. But there was always plenty to 
eat and drink, too. I never enjoyed myself so 
much." 

Again the colonel took in sherry, and again the 
colonel's cheeks fired out with the suddenness of 
the illumination of St. Peter's at Rome. 

'^ Where was I ? Well, Jack Fermor went ahead. 
There were some businesses took place, I can tell 
you. Bless you, I could sit here until midnight, 
and be not half done. There was a good pigeoning 
. ^in fact (of course excepting some old friends 
like myself), it was all pigeoning. That was the 
way young Ascot Price was finished off. They 



Colonel Fole^s Reminiscences. 169 

got five thousand out of him, and he shot himself 
next day. O, Jack Fermor, he was a wonderful 
scamp I Wonderful ! " 

There was a tinge of regret in the tone with 
which the colonel spoke of his old friend . ^regret 
mingled with admiration at perhaps the general ill 
success of such gifts. 

" Dammy/' said the colonel, apologetically, " I 
believe it was a queer state of things from begin- 
ning to end ; but, you see, there was nothing on 
the surface a gentleman could object to, and it 
seemed all quite square. A gentleman must find 
some way of filling up his time in a place like 
that." 

Vice having paid this little act of grateful 
homage to Virtue, the colonel went on : 

" But if Jack ^ was a lad,' " went on the colonel, 
^* what do you suppose his friend was ? Now, what 
do you suppose his friend was?" No one, of 
course, could say. " We were a queer lot out at 
that time, I can tell you, I suppose never was 
there such a set got together since the days of 
Babylon!" (Sir John shivered a little at this 
unpleasant allusion.) " Well, sir, he had a friend 
. a quiet soul, with a wife and three little children, 
a decent, quiet, thoroughly good fellow, in the wine 
business too ; and, dammy I if he didn't want to 
stay quietly in his wine, if he was only let. But 



170 Never Forgotten. 

he wasn't. Jack Fenmn:^ sir, had a trick of making 
other fellows as like hmiself as two peas. WeU, 
sir, this quiet sheep of a Manuel ^ 

^ Manueli'' said Garter, starting. 

^ Maimel ! '' said Sir John, thinking of Miss 
Mannd; ^^how odd." 

" So it was," said the coloneL " But it was 
odder when Jack got this creature weU into his 
hands, and got his nmnej and his savings into 
his hands too. He did it uncommon clerer, did 
Jack. He was training him, he said. Well, 
there was another man," he went on, " who came 
out there on business, who had a young girl of 
a wife, whom he was so fond of. Dammy," said 
the colonel, laughing, " how we used to laugh at 
him. He was a Scotchman, and set up to be a 
cautious, quiet, calculating rascal. But I used to 
go and see him veiy often, and so used our set, for 
reasons that you will perhaps understand. Eh! 
What d'ye sayl" 

And the colonel here half closed one of his 
odious old eyes with exquisite meaning. 

" There was about twenty years between him 
and this child he called his wife. She might have 
been his daughter five times over : so what do you 
snppose this stupid set himself to do? Why, be 
set up for being the old fellow, the fatherly dodge, 
and kept trying to amuse her in every way, and 
kept coming to us andbotliering-, ^Now do come 



Colonel F(defs Reminiscences, 171 

and see that poor child, and talk to her. She 
wants amusement, and I don't know Tiaw to amnse 
her.' And didn't we go? O, not at all." And 
here again the Peninsular half-closed his odious 
old eye with extraordinary significance. " And one 
day," he went on, ^ we took it into our heads to 
bring that wild scamp Jack Fermor. And Jack 
Fermor took it into his head one day to bring our 
soft friend Manud. And our soft friend . ^leaying 
his own lady^ and his two girls and one boy, at 
home . came very often to talk to her. Do you 
see what is coming now ? " 

The major did, or conveyed by his manner that 
he did. Sir John did not quite follow. 

" H. was the queerest young old fellow I ever 
saw, this Dr. Meadows (that was the Scotchman's 
name). He must have been close to forty then, 
and as stiff and hard as a ramrod. We never saw 
him bend, and we used to call him ^ Rod Meadows,' 
or Roddy Meadows. But it was plain that he was 
wild about the little white child he called his wife 
. ^infatuated, in fact ; and it was plain, too, liiat 
the* little chit did not care particulariy for him. 
I may say, without vanity, she liked the com- 
pany of your humble servant a deu-z<fe deal better," 
added the colonel, with his favourite objectionable 
motion of his eye. " A lot of us used to come and 
sit with her for hours, and make her laugh ; and I 
must say your humble servant didn't sit for the 



172 Never Forgotten. 



shortest time ; no, nor he didn't drive out now and 
then, and walk a little on what they call their 
Prado ! Dammy, sir, those were the days for real 
life.  

" Well, sir, I know the game old Roddy Mea- 
dows was at. It was the gratitude dodge, and 
the regard, you know, ripening, as they call it, 
into affection. I have seen life," said the colonel, 
laughing heartily, ^' and I never met that sort of 
ripening yet. It didn't ripen with him, my boy, 
at any rate; but," added the colonel, with a 
dramatic slowness and significance, " it was ripen- 
ing with somebody else. 

" O," continued the colonel, beginning to ramble 
a little, his fishy eye staggering somewhat, as it 
were, " I could go on from this till morning about 
those days. There's nothing like them now. These 
ain't what you can call days I As for that fellow 
who writes books about Recollections" (this was 
always an irritant with the colonel), " what can he 
have to tell, dammy ? Stirabout, sir ! Tapioca I 
Gruel, gruel, sir I Ah I " said the colonel, looking 
almost ill with disgust, "how I hate such slops !*" 

Most of the colonel's friends knew that about 
this period he strengthened the weaker portions 
of his conversation with oaths more strong and 
frequent. They were a relief, and sent him on 
the faster. 

"Well, about that scamp Fermor. He was 



\ 



Colonel Foley^s Reminiscences. 173 

soon at the end of his tether. He had got all he 
could get, all that was to be begged, or borrowed, 

Or ^No," said the colonel, closing the eye 

that was in liquor with some diflBculty, but with 
a grotesque humour . "no; he was now coming 
to ihaC 

" I see," said Carter, smiling. 

Sir John, being a country gentleman, did not 
see nearly so quickly. " Coming to what ? " 

"Dammy!" Colonel Foley went on, "if I 
believe he had only the coat on his back left. 
He was always in and out of the Scotch fellow's 
house. I believe he got round the creature a 
good bit, and got some dollars out of him. As 
for the Scotch doctor's money, I needn't tell you, 
who are a man of the world. Carter" (Sir John 
moved a little uneasily in his chair at this rather 
pointed exclusion of himself from that class), 
"that he was not likely to pay that up in a 
hurry. And why the devil should he? But the 

worst was, he didn't stop there This sherry, 

here, is Uke mother's milk to me. I am scalded 
with the stuff they give us at Dunkirk. As for 
their clarets and * ordinary,' by the Lord, sir, 
it really scrapes me here . ^here, sir," said the 
colonel, laying his palm on his watch-chain. 
"Well, to be short about it, the Scotch fellow, 
who had gone to the coimtry and wasn't to be 
back for a week, came back one night quite sud- 



174 Never Forgotten. 



denly, and found ^Damvij^ now, wliat d'ye sup- 
pose he found!" And the colonel, stretching 
over for what he had called mother^s milk, lei- 
surely filled himself a great glass, as it were to 
fill up the time while the others were husy specu- 
lating. " By Jove ! if he didn't find our friend 
Jack at his desk, stuffing his waistcoat with his 
notes and gold. Flat burglary, sir! All regu- 
larly planned I A most outrageous business. You 
see it was flag-delic; no getting over it. There 
was the real awkwardness." 

" And this was Fermor ? " asked Sir John, 
eagerly. 

" No one else. The Scotchman had him pinned 
by the throat in a second, and was calling in the 
watch. But the other was on his marrowbones 
whining for mercy, and I think the Scotchman 
would have killed him. But . and here was the 
best of this con^founded joke ; I declare I went 
near to bursting with laughter when I heard it" 
(and his sausage skin went near to rupture at the 
bare recollection). " Jack, with wonderful pre- 
sence of mind, said if he would let him off, he 
would tell him something about his wife. He 
didn't know at the moment that something else 
had been packed up and carried off, you see ! " 
added the c(donel, making his jelly eye tumble 
backwards and forwards with extraordinary meanr 
ing. "But he did in an hour. Dammy, sir, if 



Colonel Foley's Reminiscences* 175 

that smootli pious fellow Manuel hadn't gone off 
with the wife I and had her waiting ready at an 
inn outside the town. A few of the longheads 
had a notion of what was coming." And the 
colonel hinted with his awful old eye that he was 
one of these. "It was veiy bad," he went on, 
** very bad ; for you see Manuel left his own wife 
and three children, and I must say," added the 
colonel, in a tone of moral censure, " he had no 
excuse, literally, tw excuse. Positively a fine 
iT^man. Well, when the Scotchman found all 
this out, he was near going mad. I never saw 
snch ridiculous nonsense. ^Dammy,' I said to 
him, ^ what are you about ? Don't make a snivelling 
donkey of yourself before the town. Take my 
advice, and say nothing about the business.' But 
no. I believe he wanted to cut the f elloVs throat, 
axid his own afterwards. He went after him for a 
week, hunted him, caught him, and brought him 
bacL Dammy I I think he wanted to cut him up 
into coDops, and fry him slowly. Sir, you don't 
know what that family owes to me, and how 
they treated me! Who was it brought them 
through that business, that kept the thing quiet 
and comfortable, but Tom Foley, and perhaps 
Johnny Adams? The fool would have gone into 
the street, and poked his injuries into any man's 
face. I never met such a bom donkey. I kept 
the thing down, and wrote to his relations. He 



176 Never Forgotten. 



swore he would have the lives of the two . and 
clapped them into jail. I declare to you, that 
gamey woman, Lady Laura, was out with us in a 
week, with the ice like half a foot of cold iron 
on the ground. Yet the fellow was no relation of 
hersy you see . no more to her than Adam. And 
up-on . my . salvation, sir," added the colonel, 
mysteriously, " Sir Thomas Dick, the Queen's 
own medical fellow, told me often, he didn't know 
the minute the thing would have come off ! Well, 
sir, she came. She saw the Scotchman privately, 
was on her knees to him privately, got round 
him some way, told him lies, and, what is more, 
got him to swallow them. And I can tell you, 
as I am a living man and hope to be saved . 
dammy ! " added the colonel with curious self-con- 
tradiction, " she worked the thuig, sir, so that she 
got the ministers, and law, and all those infernal 
things out of the affair. I never heard of Manuel 
after. I believe he got off to America, and his 
widow or wife and her three brats would have 
starved, if the English hadn't made up a subscrip- 
tion for them. They got a pound of my money, I 
know. You have to put down, you know, when 
everybody puts down. I heard they went to Eng- 
land afterwards. And didn't she get round Adam* 
and me ! She was a splendid woman <Aen," added 
the colonel, with ruminative admiration. ^^ Quite 
thrown away on the poor creature they married 



Colonel Folefs Reminiscences. 177 

her to I Well furnished, sir, liere^^ said the colonel, 
with increased relish, and laying his old hands on 
his shirt front. " She swore both me and Adams 
solemnly," he added, with winey reverence, 
" never to breathe a word of the business. Ton 
my soul ! " said the colonel, getting more and more 
excited, " if I had only worked my chances, I 
should have done well in that quarter. But the 
fellow that boasts of his affairs is a sneak. Still, 
I could tell my say as well as most men. Though," 
added the colonel, thoughtfully, " I f oimd her out 
afterwards in a clever trick. She got me a ma- 
jority in a regiment, and, dammy, sir, if I didn't 
find out, just in the nick of time, that they were 
sending it to the African coast. I should have 
been dead in a week. But she caught poor Adams 
in the same way, who was not so knowing as Tom 
Foley. She got him on some swamp duty, which 
made short work of him. But, after all, she was a 
deu-sed clever woman. O, deu-sed / " 

Colonel Foley had not much to say on this 
point, and his face seemed to have grown so 
strained, and tightened, and inflamed . so reeking 
with hot vapours and turpentine spirit . ^that it 
seemed dangerous to go near him with a light. 
His voice, too, was growing thick, and seemed to 
be fighting its way to his throat through a crowd. 
Keverting indignantly to the military colonel who 
had written the Recollections, he characterised 

VOL. III. X 



178 Never Forgotten. 

tlieia onoe mare, widi bitter oonteampt, as ^ Slops 
. gmeir' and was pteai^j: aasistBd to a cab, 
and sent liame. 

Sir John Westende flew to Misa: ManneL ^ I 
har^e Ladjr Laura now/' lie said. ^Knowing as 
abe is, sIib sliali be no match for me/' 

Qe liien tdid her as much of the stoij as applied 
to the Fennors. ^ I managed: it nncommonljr 
deverly," he said.* ^I wormad it out of an o3d 
fellow who knows eyeiything." 

^ Yoa should be a detectiye, Sir John," she said, 
as though she were patting a horse's neck. ^ Thej 
siioold pnt you in the force. I shall be qnite 
afraid of yoa." 

^ NfMuense," he said, much pleased. ^' But let 
her look out. She'll find me a policeonan, I can 
toll her. As sure as I am a living man, I shall ex- 
pose her. If it comes to that. Til go to the chnxch 
door and toll the whole thing out, I wilL" 

^^ She won't let it go to that," said Miss ManudL 
^ She is too clever. You have the game in your 
<wn hands now. Sir John, and can play that poor 
woman like a fish in one of your own ponds down 
at Westonde. How cruel yoa are. I am in terror 
of you." 

^ By Jove I that is what I shall do," said fie, 
thinking he was deriving a new idea from his own 
mind. ^ I have a plan of my own. Mass Manuel. I 
AsSL play her. There is no hurry. Til give a 



Colonel FoU^ s Retmniscences. 179 

little more line. That's what I shall do ; and pull 
her up with a jerk. Ha, ha I Pll teach her ! " 

Sir John, grumbling, and lashing himself in a 
sort of mulish fury, presently rose to go. When 
lie was gone, her eyes flashed. "They are all 
working for me," she said; "unclean spirits all; 
but no matter. They are all converging to the 
one point. The end is not far away, and it will be 
soon time to gather up the threads." Then she 
thought tenderly, but exultingly, of the loved and 
lost darling that she fancied was looking down on 
her as she advanced on this course, and whose soft 
gentle soul she strangely believed would be soothed 
and prc^itiated . like some cruel heaidren idol . by 
bloody human sacitfices. Presently another visitor 
entered, when a soft Kght passed ovr her f ace^ 
and the ruthless spirit she was fondling in her 
arms disengaged itself and fled away. It was 
.Young Brett. 



n2 



180 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH. 

A MESSAGE FROM THE DEAD. 

Young Brett had got np once more to Lon- 
don, and had driven from the train to his lodgings, 
and from his lodgings straight to Alfred-place. 
He was delighted to see Miss Manuel once more, 
and almost gambolled romid her like a faithful 
terrier, as he was. " I am so glad to see you - 
again," he said, "and to see you so well. Our 
colonel has given me a month. Some of our fellows 
were making a jolly party to go over and see the 
French at ChSlons, and the col(Jnel wished me to 
be with them, but I begged hard to come here, and 
I am 80 glad, dear Miss Manuel." 

She was quite touched at this friendly interest. 
" You are a good dear boy," she said. " You have 
been true to me all through . ^yes, all through, and 
I never shall forget it . ^never I" 



A MeJJagefrom the Dead. 181 

There was a litde falter in her voice, and 
Young Brett darted away from the subject ob- 
streperously. 

" The worst is," he said, wistfuUy, "I am so 
stupid, I am getting so stupid . ^I am not clever at 
doing things. I don't know the way. But now, 
dear Miss Manuel, here I am. I want to be trained. 
It will be a charity and a kindness to use me, it 
will indeed; just to send me about, you know, of 
messages, and that sort of thing. I delight in the 
excitement, 'pon my word I do I" 

Miss Manuel smiled on him. "I have given 
you enough work for this year, after that Welsh 
expedition." 

" Well," said he, " I don't think I managed that 
so badly. 'Jove ! when I came down first I thought 
there was a regular mystery, but it turned out 
very pleasantly. Even that, however, I can take 
no credit for, for it was really an accident. By 
the way, that Carter," and Young Brett began to 
grow hot, and colour at the mention of the name, 
" what has become of him I I never told you the 
things he said . ^though, indeed, I ought not to 
mention it now." 

Her eyes glittered. " / know what he said to 
you vas well as if I was standing by and listening. 
I know what vile things he could say and do. 
But his time is shortening." She got up and 
began to walk. "There are people on his track. 



182 Never Forgctten. 



It is too soon to tell you everything; but tliis I 
will say^ that though it seems long since our darling 
left us, still no one has been sleeping, nor have we 
forgotten this vile cruel heart, who helped to send 
her so early to her grave. I am weak, I know, 
and only a woman, but trust me. I have said it 
should be Never Forgotten, and it shall be ! And 
I tell you all is nearly ready, and the moment is 
fast drawing on I" 

For the first time she looked steadily at Young 
Brett for enthusiasm and eagerness, but instead, 
she saw blank dismay and a sort of hopeless grief. 
This youth showed everything in his face. " Yon 
dcyrit tell me this. Miss Manuel," he said, im- 
ploringly. " O no I Why, this w what he said, and 
dared to say of you." 

" He did ! " she said, triumphantly. " Ah ! then 
he has instinct already of what is coming. But 
he shan't escape. Never! Neither he, nor the 
other, the real murderer, nor the real murderer^s 
wife ! We can reach them all, are reaching them, 
and shall overtake them in a very little time ! You 
can help me stiU, as you have helped me so well." 

Again she gave him that triumphant look, ex- 
pecting encouragement. But Young Brett's eyes 
were on the ground, and there was a sore wounded 
expression id his face. 

" O then it is true, it is all true 1 " he said, 
mournfully. " O, Miss Manuel, I could not have 



A MeJJageJrom the Dead. 183 

beliefved this ! And it has come like a blow upon 
me. I told him to his face that it was all falser. 
and indeed I loisA it had been all false." 

^^What," said Miss Mannel, ^^and would you 
haive me sit down quietly and submit? I should 
have died a year ago if I had Are there laws and 
punishm^its to meet crimes like this % No. We 
nmst take it into our own hands, and punish for 
oursdives." 

^ But you don't mean it," said Young Brett, in 
a sort of agony. " No, I know you don't* It is 
so dreadful to think of. And the poor girl, who 
has done no harm in the world, and done us no 
harm. O, there is something shocking in it. And 
you who are so noble, and so much above us all, 
and whom I would do anything in the wide worid 
for, to have such an idea, I cai^t believe it." 

Miss Manuel looked at him scornfully. " Are 
you beginning to be like the rest?" she said. 
"Very well. It is only being deceived in one 
more." 

" I know I am very stupid," said he, still in this 
tone of despair, " and very usdess. I only mean 
well, and do my best. But, in this sort of thing, I 
should be miserable all my life, I know I should. 
It is awful to think of. A young wife. Miss 
Manuel, to be ruined in this way ! O, you must 
think again, do, do think again, dearest Miss 
Manuel, and say . you are joking." . 



184 Never Forgotten. 



Miss Minuel did feel a sort of self-reproach then. 
She was silent for a few moments. " Ah, you have 
not lost a sister, and cannot feel. No matter. I was 
only misttfiken. I thought I was SQCure of you, at 
least. You were faithful to me. Now I must only 
go on by myself." Suddenly her voice changed ; 
there came a touching sweetness and affection into 
her tone. " Ah I But I understand, and do not 
mean what I say. It is natural in you. You are 
too noble, and too good for this vile pursuit. It is 
horrible. But it is my life. I have lived for no- 
thing else. I may as well go on now. 1 7ntist go 
on, even if I sacrifice everything that loves me, or 
cares for me." 

He shook his head sadly. He seemed to stagger 
under some blow. " I would do anything for 
you. Miss Manuel," he said, sadly, " anything. I 
think at this moment, if you wanted it, I would 
go into a house on fire, or . anything of that sort. 
But this young girl . ^to destroy her, or stand by 
and see it . O! it would be before me day and 
night." And Young Brett mournfully took his 
' hat. " And that man Komaine, your friend . O, I 
am afraid. Miss Manuel, I see it all now." 

" Don't leave me," said she. " Ah 1 don't give me 
up. Tliat is only wanting to finish it. Though, 
perhaps, it is better to have done with everybody 
that is good." 

" I know I am not," said Young Brett, in grow- 



A Mejfagejrom the Dead. 185 

ing excitement, " as good as I ought to be. And 
I don't set up as being anything of a saint, like 
some of our fellows; but . ^but . ^if this is . to 
go on . ^I must . ^I mmt O, Miss Manuel, if 
you will only promise me to give up this dreadful 
scheme . . " 

" Very well," said she, proudly, " you worCt un- 
derstand me, then. Well, I am grieved ; but no 
matter. As for giving up . ^no, no. You would 
have me give up my life. Give up my prayers. 
Give up the only atonement I can make to our lost 
darling. Ah ! no, no ! " 

" Atonement to Ar," said Young Brett, more 
excitedly, " why, it is enough to bring her sweet 
soul back again to earth. Why, you know, 
Miss Manuel, it is in defiance of her last sweet 
prayers and wishes, on the very morning that she 
left us." 

Miss Manuel stopped suddenly in her walk, and 
came up close to him. 

" Her last wishes ! " she said. " VSTiat do you 
mean I " 

" You know," he said ; " of course you do ! 
What she sent to Hanbury." 

"Sent to Hanbury?" she said, turning pale, 
and her large eyes straining at Young Brett, 
" What did she send to Hanbury ? " 

" Ah, Miss Manuel," he said, " you would not 
go in the face of her last dear piteous words^ 



186 Never Forgotten. 



written that very Sunday morning. He showed 
them to me before he sealed them up and sent 
them to you." 

"What is all this?" said Miss Manuel, I 
know nothing of it. There is some dreadful thing 
that has been concealed from me. Tell it to me 
all . ^tell it to me all . at once, and quickly 1" 

She was so frantic and agitated, that he became 
alarmed and agitated too. He told her how, about 
a week after diat Sunday, Hanbury had come to 
him with a letter of Violet's, written on the morn- 
ing of her death, begging forgiveness for the suf- 
fering she had caused him, and hoping that Fermor 
and his wife, should he ever choose one, would 
live happily ; and conjuring him, as a last favour, 
never to think of doing anything in the way of 
avenging her trials or her death. And further, to 
see that no one else did. This was the substance 
of Violet's last letter. 

" Good God !" said Miss Manuel, sinking into a 
chair. " This was never sent to me, never told to 
me. Where is it ? Who has it ?" 

" Hanbury. He gave it to me to send to you 
the very morning I saw him off at the docks. 
And indeed I am sure I posted it : indeed I am. 

Though I am so stupid and clumsy sometimes ^^ 

And he stopped and looked round ruefully as this 
suspicion crossed him. 



A Meffagejrom the Dead. 187 

" Eun to him 1 fly to him!" said she, starting 
up. ^^ Bring him here. Don't lose a moment 
Bring him here at once." 

He rushed away. By a cruel perverseness, he 
could not find [anbury, though he sought him all 
day long. He left a note for him at a dub ; and 
there, late in the afternoon, when Hanbury was 
^ancing at a paper with a dull interest, a servant 
came, and said a lady was at the door in her 
carriage, and wished to see him. 

By an instinct, he knew that it was Miss Manuel, 
and came out quickly. 

^^ Will you get in?" she said; "I want to talk 
to you." 

He was struck with the sudden look of anxious 
inquiry that had taken up its place in her face, and 
got in without a word. They drove away. " You 
are doing too much," he said ; " you will make 
yourself ill again." 

" The letter r she said, suddenly. " What about 
this letter? I never heard of it. You never spoke 
of it. Why didn't you ? Show it to me." 

He knew at coice what she meant. For him, as 
there had been but one Violet, so there -was but 
one letter, and that associated vdth her. 

" Why I sent it to you the morning I sailed," 
' he said, hurriedly. 

" Never reached me, never," she said, wringing 



188 Never Forgotten. 



her hands despairingly. " O, where is it I Drive 
to your house." 

" I have it here," said Hanbury, sadly, taking 
out his pocket-book. " What I sent was a copy. 
Here is her own dear writing, soft, sweet, and de- 
licate, like herself." 

His voice was trembling, and his fingers were 
trembling yet more, as he put the writing into her 
hand. It was as though her gentle spirit had risen 
up between them. Pauline's eyes swam as she 
looked on the little pale characters. It may be 
given here . ^her last appeal, written on that last 
Sunday morning : 

" Dear John Hanbury, . They are gone out 
this morning for a few minutes. I feel happier and a 
little stronger. I have never been able to tell you 
how miserable I felt at all the suffering I caused 
your kind and generous heart; but I was a foolish, 
thoughtless girl, not so wicked as perhaps I seemed. 
I saw in your eyes yesterday that you had forgiven 
me. Let me ask something else, too. Charles will 
marry and be happy. I so wish, dear John Han- 
bury, that he and she whom he shall marry may 
continue happy, and that no wish of punishment 
or retribution shall ever interfere with them. I 
know you will do this for me, and add to the* 
proofs of that love you have shown me, and which 



A Mejfagefrom the Dead. 189 

I have so unworthily But I must stop here ; 

and, dear John Hanbury, God bless you for ever ! 
as you deserve. 

"Violet." 

Streaming eyes read this letter. The sweet 
name Violet was written faintly, and in letters 
that tottered. Her spirit seemed to flutter gently 
across the paper. Miss Manuel kissed it franti- 
cally, and the next moment it fell from her hands. 

" My God I" she said ; " it is all too late.'' 



190 Never Ftnrgottm. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH. 

CATCHING AT STRAWS. 

She first flew to Mrs. Fennor, but found tha. 
she was out. They did not know where she had 
gone. Never were there such agitated moments. 
"Drive quickly, drive quickly 1" she cried out to 
her coachman. But whither? She knew not 
whom to look for, or whom to find. Eomaine, 
the Destroyer . ^whom (as she thought with a sort 
of stab at her heart) she had turned loose . he 
must be found. He was not at his club, not 
likely to be at his house, was at Eichmond, per- 
haps. She drove to his chambers . ^he actually 
woB in. 

She flew up-stairs into his room. 

" Here is a surprise 1" he cried out; " I should 
rather say an honour, should I not ? Though the 



Catcbiag at Straws. 191 

other daj yaoar Toung friend, that pretty little 
wife, pzesented herself, and ^Why^ has any- 
thing happened ?" 

2^0 wondeir he pot the question, for she looked 
ia. deep distress. ^^It is about hec^" she said, a 
iittibiTTildly;. ^^ and I have comQ to you to appeal 
to you . to your generosity. I have been very 
oolish, very wicked, I shoidd say (that is to say, 
I did not know then what I know now). And I 
want you to do me a favour, the only one I have 
ever asked you." 

Mr. Bosnaine shook his head and smiled. ^^I 
never make wild pioaiises. But let us hear. We 
duOlsee." 

^' But you must ; you won't refuse," said Pauline, 
desperately, seeing in this answer a hint of what 
she was to expect. " It is too serious to be trifled 
with. It will be dreadful if something is not 
done ; and O, Bomaine, I conjure you listen to 
me ; I tell you I want to repair a wicked folly 
of mine, and you only can do it. You must never 
see this poor child again, or, at least, not speak to 
her." 

^^My dear Miss Manuel," he said, "let me 
remind you of the century we live in. Think of 
tiie railways, and the telegraph, and Exhibitions. 
We can't do these sort of things without being 
ridiculous. Think, I beg of you." 

" O, but you must not talk in this way," said 



192 Never Forgotten. 



she, half frantically. "You don't know what is 
coming, or how it will end. Do promise me. You 
must." 

"How it will end?" said he, musingly; "no, I 
don't. Though I may guess. Why, how unrea- 
sonable this is. Was it not you I . or, who was it 
that first pointed me out this little woman, and 
spurred me on with some of those little sharp 
satirical speeches, for which Miss Manuel is so 
deservedly admired? Upon my word, it almost 
amounted to a challenge." 

" It did, indeed," said Pauline, covering her face. 
" I own it. It was 'wicked, horrible, but I thought 
I was doing right. I did indeed. I want to make 
reparation, and you must let me, before it is too 
late." 

"Too late?" he said, gloomily; " it is too late. 
You should have come before. These are danger- 
ous games. Miss Manuel. I say it is too late. I 
have no power in the matter; I cannot stop my- 
self now ; a week ago perhaps Yes, my life has 

been hitherto rough and cold, and perhaps heart- 
less. Nowj I feel a glimpse of sunshine. I have 
not a strong will. I can't do these violent heroic 
actions, and I don't want to, now . I confess it." 

He spoke sternly and excitedly, and in his face 
she read there was no hope for what she prayed. 
In great agitation she cried out : 



Catching at Straws. 193 

" You cannot mean this . so frightful . ^so wicked 
a thing 1 O, think what a judgment will come on 
you if . . " 

" I tell you, Miss Manuel, this wickedness is not - 
mine. I should never have dreamed of it. On 
their heads be it who forced it on me. I am a 
selfish, common sort of human savage. I can't do 
these fine things. I could, perhaps, ten years ago. 
What made you defy me ? No one ever did that 
without danger. Don't be angry if I tell you I 
saw your skilful game." 

" O," said Pauline, with a half groan, "what am 
I to do? WhatshaUIdo?" 

" It is too late," he went on, gloomily. " And I 
don't see how she can be saved. He h dL low 
brutal fellow, and has dared to give me some of 
his airs. I see he will be insolent in a few hours, 
and I must give him a lesson. Like the true 
savages that we are, he is ' taking it out ' of her. 
He will cringe before me. Poor helpless child. 
She says she has not one to look to. A ruflBan 
husband, a cold father, and the friend that she 
loved, and watched over, turning out to be . shall 
we say, a secret enemy? Is it any wonder that 
she should come for assistance to the only one 
who, in his rude way, seems to have some regard 
for her, poor little soul? No, you can't, Miss 
Manuel." 

VOL. III. O 



194 Never Forgotten, 



^O, what diall I do?" said Pauline, in a tem- 
pest of agitation. " O, if on my knees.." 

"Hush, hush I" said Mr. Romaine, rising up. 
" Think of the nineteenth century, I beg.. Why, 
we seem to be on the boards of the Porte St 
Martin. Come, come. Miss Manuel, pull down 
your veil, and let me see you down respectably 
to your brougham." 

He did see hw down. " God give me strength^ 
and quick intelligence," she said . almost gasped . 
to herself as she drove away. "Sweet Violet, 
look down and pray for me. We shall help her 

yet." 

Alas! It seemed that supernatural aid were 
indeed required ! 

Th^i Miss Manuel drove away to try again i 
if she could find Mrs* Fermor. She went up-stairs 
with a fluttering heart. Mrs. Fermor was sitting 
alone, with pale cheeks^ and eyes that seemed 
to " stare " a little from wakefulness. She 
had long beeai expecting this moment . panting 
for it. 

Miss Manuel ran up to her.. The hand she took 
in hers was damp and cold. " You are ill," she 
said, alarmed ; "what is the matter?'' 

The cold little hand drew itself away hastily. 
"Fow ask," said Mrs. Fermor, with a trembling 



Catching at Straw f. 195 

voice. "Is. this what you have come to ask 
about ?" 

" O, indeed it is," said Miss Manuel, hurriedly, 
" and I don't know how to begin. I have come to 
.accuse myself, and to throw myself at your feet, 
and beg your forgiveness for what I have done. 
I was mad. I knew not what I was doing. I 
conjure you not to mind what I said and what I 
did. It is my own work, I know, but I may still 
save you." 

"Save me!" said Mrs. Fermor, bitterly; "this 
is indeed good news. And how are you to do that, 
pray?" 

"-^, you suspect me!" said Pauline, sadly. 
"No wonder. No one seems to heed me now. 
But I must speak, and speak out. Fly I shun him. 
Never speak to him again. I know him, and know 
what he means." 

"Whom do you mean?" said Mrs. Fermor, 
astonished. 

"Romaine! I conjure you never speak to 
him again. / understand his hints, for I know 
him well ; and I have come straight to you 
from him, to put you on your guard against 
him." 

"Ah, now I understand you. Miss Manuel," 
said Mrs. Fermor, with flashing eyes. " Now I 
see. So you come to lecture me, tooj about that* 
o2 



196 Never Forgotten, 



But I can understand who has inspured you. You 
follow your instructions to the letter. Mr. Romaine ! 
With what face can you come and speak to me in 
this tone? Ah, I know you now, Miss Manuel! 
There are other people I am to be on my guard 
against. God help me ! God help me I I have 
no friends." 

"Dear, dear girl!" said Pauline, rushing to 
her, " some one has been poisoning your mind 
against me. I know I was wicked at the be- 
ginning, but I have repented. O, you know not 
how I have suffered. But whatever suspicion I 
bring on myself, I say again solemnly, and conjure 
you solenmly, shun that dreadful being, whom I 
know means you harm !" 

" I know those who mean me harm," said Mrs. 
Fermor, with trembling voice. " I know them well. 
I know who are my friends, too. I want no advice. 
I am glad you have come, so that I can tell you 
so. Henceforth I can stand by myself. I shall be 
independent of friends and of the world. I want 
no false ones. So now leave me, please, Miss 
Manuel." 

She stood up. Pauline came towards her and 
tried to catch her hand. 

" Don't, don't," she said ; " for Heaven's sake, 
don't take this tone ! Think of me, speak to me 
as you will, but take care, I conjure you. Do 



Catching at Straws. 197 

let me know that I have repaired what I have 
done." 

The little lady, with heaving chest and quiver- 
ing Up, looked at her with scorn. 

" If you do not go, I must," she said. "It is 
not fit that you should come to this house." 

At this moment her servant opened the door, 
and announced "Mr. Eomaine !" 



198 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST. 

REAPING THE WHIRLWIND. 

He entered with his old easy air, and never even 
started as he saw the two ladies together. 

" Ah, this is a surprise," he said, taking his low 
chair. " Two visits rolled into one. Miss- Manuel, 
you must know, did me the unexpected honour of 
a call not an hour ago, and we meet again here !" 

What with confusion and grief. Miss Manuel 
was not herself any longer. She had lost her old 
readiness and her old sharpness of retort. Not 
so Mrs. Fermor, who displayed a wild and flurried 
coquetry. 

" I am so glad you have come in, Mr. Romaine," 
she said. " I was expecting you." 

, " And I have been looking up a dress for you," 
he said ; " for you must go to this show of Mamma 



Rec^gtbe Whirhvind. 199 

Fennor^s. I brought some pictures from that shop 
in the Haymaxket. Here is a Spanish Ballerina, 
Mary Queen of Scots . ^the old story . and a Cot 
lean Bawn. Or, what do yon say to a genuine 
pair, Petrarch and Laura f" 

With her eyes fixed defiantly on Miss Manuel, 
and her lips brought close, Mrs. Fermor answered 
her rather than Komaine. 

" Whatever you like ; ycm will settle it for me." 

" Well," he said, carelessly, "I am for Petrarch 
and Laura. I can get this made for myself. It 
wiU suit me famously." 

"Anything you like," said she, vacantly, still 
answering Miss Manuel. " Choose for me." 

" Well, I do choose," he said. " But first, what 
does Miss Manuel say ? " 

With a helpless despairing look she turned from 
one to the other. 

" What can I say ? " she said ; " I know nothing 

of what you mean. It cannot be serious ^" 

And she almost wrung her hands. 

" It is serious," said Mrs. Fermor, looking at her 
fixedly ; " all real and earnest. Childish days are 
over. Miss Manuel. I feel more and more like a wo- 
man every day. I want to be a woman of the world* 
I am panting to begin. A real, cold, heartless 
woman of the world, that has got rid of foolish 
affection, and of love and scruples, and all that old 
, absurdity. I must begin to live now," added the 



200 Never Forgotten. 



poor little Mrs. Fermor, with a piteous desperation, 
and almost with tears starting to her eyes, " if ever 
I am to live 1 " 

" And let it he my task, O divinest Laura,*' said 
Mr. Bomaine, starting up into a theatrical attitude, 
" to teach thee this new art. Thy Petrarch is in- 
differently skilled in worldly politics, and will he a 
guide, philosopher, and friend. There, Miss Ma- 
nuel. Not so had, I think. We shall make a 
sensation in our new parts at Mamma Fermor's." 

"No, no," said Pauline; "this is all folly, 
mere childish folly. You do not see the danger. 
Come 1 come ! " she half whispered to Mrs. Fer- 
mor, " ah ! come with me. You won't refuse me 
that little favour! I implore you. I have some- 
thing to say to you. Come out and drive." 

Mrs. Fermor hroke from her. " That is all over 
now. I shall not go to you, nor do I want you to 
come to me. I know you. You have cured me, 
indeed." 

" I tell you it will he ruin, misery, degradation,'' 
said Pauline, frantically. 

He caught the last words. "What, y(m re- 
hearsing too, Miss Manuel f " he said, with a sneer. 
" Has Lady Laura secured you, too I How strongly 
cast we shall he. But come, no tampering with 
the lovely Laura. / know what Miss Manuel is 
whispering. She has played the same part with me 
this morning already." 



Reaping the JFhirlwind. 201 

" I dare say ! " said Mrs. Fermor, with cheeks 
kindling afresh. " I have lived but a short 
time, but I have learnt enough to see what the 
world is." 

" Well ! I started," said he, " with the assump- 
tion that every friend was false, every truth (that 
is, eveiy worldly truth) a lie . and every profession 
a humbug. You have now convinced me that it 
was so. Sometimes you meet with an agreeable 
surprise, but ninety-nine times out of a hundred 
I am right. You must come to school to mey my 
dear Mrs. Fermor." 

There was a passion and a tragic intensity 
in all that the two women spoke and did, that 
would have mystified any one else. Mr. Bomaine 
knew what was on foot. For him the situation 
was delightful. Mrs. Fermor, so full of indignant 
warmth, her cheeks glowing with wounded pride 
and defiance; Miss Manuel piteously imploring, 
both in looks and voice. 

Her last hope was to be alone with this young 
creature; then she could tell her all, and make 
even an abject submission. She would do any- 
thing to stop thLs horrible mischief, which now 
seemed to her to be spreading every hour like 
some virulent plague. But Eomaine seemed to 
understand this also. 

" This is one of my idle lounging evenings," he 
aid, looking at her steadily; "for a wonder, I 



202 Never Forgattm. 



have notMng to do. Business, tbank God, I 
never dirty my fingers with. But there are a 
hundred Kttle gnats -which come buzzing at me, 
nearly as bad as business . notes and the like. 
But this afternoon I am free; Come, Mrs. Feiv 
mor, shall we order tea ? Let us drown our cares 
in a cheerful bowl." 

Mrs. Fermor flew to comply with his wish with 
an artificial alacrity . still looking at Miss Manual. 
The other saw there was no hope, and went 
away full of sadness, something like despair. 
Never was there such a changed being. She had 
sprung back over the wide crevasse that lay be- 
tween her and the old Eastport times, and was 
the gentle loving upright Pauline again. What 
she had been doing seemed to be the blackest of 
crimes, a spotted leprosy. "O, what am I to 
do ! " she said aloud, in her carriage. " And I can 
do nothing.'* 

At this moment she saw Fermor sauntering 
along moodily. This was now the shape in which 
most people saw him. In an instant she had 
stopped her carriage by the pathway, and called 
to him. He was at her window in a moment. 
This was on the aide next the Park rails. 

" O, Captain Fermor I " she said, and he re- 
marked her excited manner, "I have just been to 
your house, and I want to speak to you, to tell 

you ^And yet,"' she added, striking her dress 

passionately, " I don't know how I am to begin 



Reining the Whirlwind. 203 

where ^But you will grant me this one 

favour. I know . ^I am nre you will f " 

The old complacent smile was rising on the 
Fermor lips. Passers-by, reading his face, thought 
what a pleasant little interview was going on at 
the window of that little brougham boudoir. 

"Anything you wish," he said. "You have 
only to ask. Come, what is it ? " 

" You don't understand," she said, in the same 
passionate way. " Something must be done, and 
done at once, or we know not what mischief may 
come. I am accountable for it all ! I have been 
guilty and wicked; but I declare solemnly I knew 
not what I was doing. You will be generous, 
and save me, I know. Fly ! leave this country ! 
leave me. Put the seas between us. It is the 
only chance. And take her with you. She must 
not be sacrificed." 

He was amazed. " Put the seas between us," 
he said. " And you ask me to do this ? " 

"I do ! I do ! " she said. "I would repair the 
mischief I have done. I should have kept away 
from your household, but some miserable fate has 
driven me on. I thought I was doing what was 
right ; but I was blind . stone blind . and I was 
wicked, too. But you will go ? " 

(Other passers-by now looking in curiously, and 
seeing Pauline's sparkling eyes, said within them- 
selves, " Here is a gallant little quarrel going on 
in this public-private place.") 



204 Never ForgUten. 



He shook his head. There was a bewildered 
pleasure beaming in his eyes. "Anything but 
that," he said. " You can't ask me that. I could 
not do it. It is hard to ask me. Now, too, when 
we are beginning to know each other, and to 
understand each other." 

" Ah, that is it ! " she said, with a groan. " Ym 
don't understand me. No one does. No one 
knows what I am, or what I have been doing. 
I dare not even hint it to you. But I tell you, 
it is the only chance for me. You will go, will 
you not ? " 

Again the look of triumph was in his eye. 
" You know," he said, " my position. I am only 
a slave in that house. I can neither go nor stay. 
They bought me, and I must stand by the terms 
of the bargain." 

She seemed to see .this, and covered her face 
up in her hands. A man passing, who had 
read a good deal of French romance at his club, 
looked back with extraordinary interest, and 
thought it very like a scene in the " Ames Perdus,*' 
by Charles Loupgarou. 

" Then we are lost," she said, despairingly, 
"all of us!" She told the coachman to drive 
on. 

" Wait, wait," said he, hastily ; " we shall see. 
We must talk of this . ^I must see you ^" 

"Think! Talk!" she said, angrUy. "There 



Reaping the Whirlwind. 205 

has been too much of that. We must do now . 
act. But it is all too late." 

Miss Manuel went home miserable, and almost 
distracted. In her drawing-room she flung herself 
on the sofa with her face to the cushions. " What 
am I to do f " she groaned. " Some curse is on 
me. Some fury is driving me onward." 

So it seemed, indeed. She was so bound up, 
so encompassed about. She could dare turn back. 
An iron fate, cruel and pitiless as ever was in a 
Greek tragedy, was hurrying her on. She thought 
of the soft suffering face of her lost sister, as it lay 
before her on that final Sunday morning. 

" Fool that I was," said Pauline, in , a fresh 
agony, "wicked fool! to have thought that so 
sweet a soul could have required to be soothed or 
laid by savage and unchristian vengeance," and 
she shuddered as she thought of the awful cha- 
racter of the retributioa she had heaped on the 
head of that poor artless, impetuous, but innocent 
Mrs. Fermor. " What is to be done ? " she said, 
distractedly. " Who is there to help me ? " Who 
indeed ! Not one in that house, not her Brother, 
who was watching jealously, suspiciously, and now 
panting for prompter vengeance. 

There was scarcely any equivoque here, such as 
takes place in a play, because Pauline could not 
bring herself to tell Fermor how she had been 
behaving to his wife. Nor, in fact, wouLd ibie 



206 Never Forgstten. 



have cared now^ had she even suspected the view 
he took of her agitated requests. Every other 
consideration was sunk in ihe one aim and object 
. ^the undoing of what she had done. A skeleton 
in a cupboard I Here was a decaying, mouldering 
corpse, locked up decomposing, and mottled over 
with the black spots of a plague. Day and night 
she could not shut out the image of that pretty, 
impetuous, fresh young creature^ whose ruin she 
nad so craftily . " devilishly," she said to herself . 
planned. 

Motion . ^action was her only resource. At home 
there waa no hope. Those gloomy eyes of her 
brother . ^now more gloomy and more truculent 
than ever . were upon her. They were suspi- 
cious, and brought her to account. Hanbury she 
saw again. 

" What can you do for me ? " she said, almost 
on her knees. ^' Help me ! Save me ! You once 
loved us, and loved her^ O, / dare not tell you 
what I have done. You cannot guess it even, and 
. you will not ask it. But you. will help me . help 
her . s*ve that poor child ! " 

In such wild accusations John Hanbury had no 
faith. She was one of his Saints. He thought 
bng and wistfully of what he was to do* 

" I would give the world," he said, earnestly, 
"and not tiirfi world only . for ilmt would be no 
sacrifice . ^but my blood, heart, life . everjthing for 



Reaping the Whirlwind. 207 

yon ! But I am not quick at planning. If I saw 
her . that poor girl " 

"Ah, yes!" said PauHne, eagerly, "she will 
trust youj she will listen to you. Speak to her in 
your own natural honest way, and she will Hsten. 
She has not this horrible distrust of you, though, 
indeed, it is not her fault. It is only natural that 
she should shrink from me." 

"Ah!" said Hanbury, sadly, "if she only 
knew her interest, she would fly to you, she 
would " 

" No, no," said she, hastily ; " she is right there. 
You do not know me either. I am not a woman 
for the young iand innocent to fly to." 

Hanbury's eyes were turned on her, wondering 
and inquiring. This was the too-scrupulous self- 
accusation of hia Saint. 

" You will go to her," went on Paulme. " Get 
them away . secretly; get them to leave this 
dreadful London. All of them . father, husband, 
all. It ia the only chance. I know that wicked 
Romaine; his Will gives him power. He has 
done everything that he has laid out, and he has 
laid this out. Go quickly/' she said, hurriedly, and 
in terror^ as if it might be already too late. " Per- 
suade her. See her father. He wishes to leave 
this place. Conjure her, and she will heed you." 

John Hanbuiy left her, and, fidl of ardour, flew 
to caoy out his new mission. 



208 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND. 

fermor's next move. 

Two approaching events were now mildly agi- 
tating the society of which Major Carter and Lady 
Laura Fermor were members. One was the mar- 
riage of the major with Mrs, Wrigley, the other, 
the festival Lady Laura was about to give. In 
conversation, the first was despatched with many 
sneers. Eyebrows were elevated together, with 
the accuracy of drill, as the subject was introduced. 
Webster, with his face to his plate and never sacri- 
ficing a mouthful to his joke, snapped off his shai^p 
petards, aiid said he was glad of it, because now 
their united weight would break down the old 
chariot. Another time he said suddenly, when he 
was helping himself to trujffles, " Carter and Mrs. 
Wrigley to be married I Marry a Mogul plum to 



Ferments next Move. 209 

a stick of cinnamon !" Still there were not a few 
who growled, and who said " that Carter " was a 
" something" lucky fellow, that he had fallen on his 
legs, that he knew (satanically) well where a good 
thing was to be got, and how to get it, with more 
in the same key of approbation. 

No wonder the latter was a little elated, the 
world was ^^ going so pleasantly" with him. He 
was cleaner and crisper and brighter than before. 
The moment of his happiness was not ten days off. 
Lady Laura's festival was a day or two later, 
which he lamented much. "We shall be miles 
away," he said, half sadly, " by that time. We 
shall be at Dover, or perhaps at Calais. 1 am 
sorry to miss it ; indeed I am." This he said to 
Fermor, whom he met in Pali-Mall. "The world," 
he went on, " has been going very well with me ; 
better, indeed, than such an old sinner as I deserve. 
But the world is an old sinner too, my dear Fermor, 
and I suppose has some reason." 

Fermor was in one of his fits of irritation. 
During these latter days he was in a strange ex- 
citement. He had just come from Miss Manuel's, 
where he had not been admitted. "Going plea- 
santly with you?" he said; "it is more than I can 
say. I am crossed and worried at every turn. 
Not but that, if I chose, I could be independent of 
it, and right myself." 

The major laughed good humouredly. "We 

yoL. III. p 



210 Never Forg9ttm. 



poor genteel paupeifl must take what oomes ^in our 
WHy, and be glad. But, my dear boy, to hear ymi 
railing at the world, with a goose full of golden 
eggs at home . ha I ha ! . and yourself in the hest 
society; and that charming, piquant Mrs. Fermor 
(I am an old fellow, you know, and may speak), 
why really ^^ 

Fermor bit his lips several times before he could 
speak. ^ Charming and piquant ! " he said, scorn- 
fully.  O, of course." 

" I declare I am so grieved," went on the majoi, 
" at having to go, and at not being able to -see her. 
She will make a genuine sensation. Mark, I say 
so . Si succfes ^clatante." 

'' Sensation ! where ? " said Fermor, absently. 

" In the tableaux at Lady Laura's. That rough 
fellow, Komaine, is at work night and day orgaih 
ismg it. 

Fermor stopped short in the street and looked 
at the other. " Who told you this f " he said. 

" The world," said the major. "The town. Ah! 
my dear friend, I see ! A Uttle secret from the 
husband. A surprise on the night itself." 

" This is monstrous ! this is outrageous I" he 
muttered. 

The majoi^s face suddenly altered. " Forgive 
me," he said ; " I speak of these things too lightfy. 
I did not mean it. Seriously, I am sorry about it. 
We are old friends, and I am an ^old boy,' as they 



Femwr^s next Maeue. 211 

call me, so you won't mind me. Bat you know 
these young creatures are always a little giddy, 
until they settle down." 

" What am I to do ? " asked Permor, walking 
on. '' I think I shall go straight to that ruffian's 
house, and strike him across the face. I i^ould 
like to maik him. His insolence is tmendxErable." 

" He 18 overbearing," said the major, warmly, 
" and a low fellow. But, my dear Fermor, you 
must not do anything extravagant. There is really 
no haran in the business." 

" No harm," said Fermor, fiercely, " in being 
. talked of by the low gossips of the town, and being 
pointed at, and shrugged at? I won't stand it. I 
am putting up with too much. lEJverybody thinks 
they can treat me as they please. I tell you, since 
this marriage of mine, I have never had a da/s 
comfort, and I beHeve I have to thank you and 
other good friends for it." 

" Don't say that," said the major, calmly. " I 
think you do me injustice. A little reflection will 
show that you do. I put myself a good deal out 
of my way to help in that business; and, do you 
know, I trace a chronic rheumatism I have in 
this left arm to that cold night^s journey up to 
London 1 " 

Fermor was a little ashamed. "I know," he 

said, " and of course I did not mean ^But it 

would have been better, after all, to have kept to 
p2 



212 Never Forgotten. 



that poor girl. She would have adored me, I be- 
lieve, and have made me very happy/' 

The major shook his head. 

" Never would have done," he said. " That you 
know yourself. All very well for the romantic 
part ; but otherwise ^^ 

" Well, otherwise," said Fermor, impatiently. 
"Why not?" 

" Society, I mean," said the major. "There's 
the droll thing of Miss Manuel, with her parties 
and her followers, and all the world . ^that is, a 
certain set of the world . struggling to get to them. 
But have you ever remarked, no ladies, eh ? " 

" Yes," said Fermor, "I have. But why not! 
She does not care for ladies." 

" Ah ! all very well," said the major, whose face 
was gradually contracting, and assuming a sharp 
and malicious expression. " That does to give out, 
you know. People find these things. She has 
taken some dislike to me, mainly, I believe, because 
I did conceive it to be my duty, in that affair of 
her sister^s ; and I cannot describe to you the un- 
christian attempts she has made to injure me. 
Thanks to Providence, I have been enabled to 
defeat them without much exertion. But of course 
I am under no obligation to cushion the thing, and 
when asked, therefore, I always tell the thing 
openly." 



Fermors next Move.^ 213 

"But what thing?" said Fermor. "What do 
you mean t " 

" Did I never tell you ? " said the major. " No, 
I believe jiot. You never heard such a story, such 
a business altogether. You know I make no pro- 
fession of being a friend of the Manuels. I always 
had the one opinion. I am, therefore, under no 
restraint. Such a disgraceful affair . ^very bad in- 
deed ! Let me see. The old colonel is in Town 
now. We are sure to find him, for he lives all day, 
and nearly all night, at his club. He would tell 
you the whole story in half an hour, and would 
like to tell it." 

"And I should like to hear it," said Fermor, 
bitterly. "The Manuels give themselves great 
airs, and Miss Manuel, latterly, if she had been a 
princess, could not behave more haughtily." 
. " Exactly," said Major Carter, vindictively. " I 
don't dislike her, though she has injured me ; but 
then I am under no obligation to go out of my way 
to bolster up her family affairs ;" and the major at 
that moment, thinking of Miss Manuel's persecu- 
tion of himself, and of his own trouble to defeat it, 
was actually colouring, and contorted in his face. 
^^ I will introduce you to Foley . ^you would like to 
know Fx)ley . and lie has heard of you." 

Major Carter, in a day or two, brought Fermor 
and Colonel Foley together, the latter of whom had 



214 Never Forgotten. 



bis sheny over again, and his abnse of liie servants 
over again, and his " dammys " over again, and his 
stories over again. 

" Would yon believe," said Colonel Foley, wind- 
ing up his narrative, " not two months ago I was 
going down a street, and who do you suppose I 
came full on, going up the steps of a house, but 
my Scotch doctor. Meadows . a very old Scotch 
doctor now, but stiff as ever. I never forget a 
figure, I can tell you. I picked out a fellow of 
ours in Liverpool one day, ten years, sir, after he 
had deserted from us. I did, upon my soul ! It's 
all eye . every bit of it eye. And, sir, I went up 
straight to my Scotch doctor, and, dammy, if he 
didn't pretend not to know me 1" 

" Ha ! very good," said the major, "very good 
indeed ! Of course, naturally." 

"Of course, naturally!" said the colonel, sud- 
denly illuminating his Bologna cheeks with interior 
rage. " And wasn't it good of me to notice such 
a disreputable old broken-down scamp as thati 
He had his key in the latch, and he looked round 
at me with the most natural air in the world, and 
said something about * having the advantage of' 
him.' ^Advantage!' I said to him. ^By Jove, 
yes ! and so had Manuel . ^a pretty good deal, I 
should say. You recollect those times, doctor?' 
A good hit, I say, but he brought it on himself . 



Fertmr^s. next Move. 215 

dfimmy I" This strengthening tonic for the sen- 
tence he added after, a. short panse^ as if he was a 
little doubtful about the propriety of his conduct; 
but it quite reassured him. '^ About more sherry 
.I don't know . what d'ye say?" This he ad- 
dressed, as it were, with the pressuDe of hospitality, 
as though he had been treating hanxlsomely all 
round, and all the time. 

When they were in the street^ the major found 
that he had forgotten one of his gloves, in his " old 
stupid way." " Just like me," he said, and went 
back hastily. He had left his glove, but as he took 
it, he said to the colonel carelessly, " Where was 
it that you met that doctor?" 

The other told him. " Clarges-street . didn't I 
say so?" 

"Ah, yes, to be sure. And on the right hand 
side, you said, too." 

" Yes," said the colonel, gruffly.. 

The major joined his friend, and put his arm in 
his. "A most curious bit of history," he said; 
" just like a romance. But you see it bears out a 
little what I said." 

Fermor^s mind was on* another view of the case. 
" So 8he dares to treat me in this Jofty way. I can 
bring her to her senses now. This will level her a 
little." 

" And that doctor, that stiff, grim, iron-looking 



2 1 G Never Forgotten. 



doctor," said the major, in a ruminating way, " with 
the daughter, now of course grown up, whom the 
colonel met in Clarges-street." 

" Clarges-street," said Fermor, starting. *^ I 
wonder! Good gracious! such an idea occurs 
to me ! Why, it must be the same." 

" The same ! " said the major, in astonishment. 

"Yes, of course," said Fermor ; " it quite tallies. 
The description . everything." 

" I don't follow," said the major, hopelessly. 

"Don't you seel" said Fermor, impatiently, 
"it is he . ^that Meadows is Carlay. Everything 
corresponds ; I see it all. But I am not sorry. I 
am noty indeed. We must make more of this," he 
added, excitedly, " and find more out." 

"Good gracious!" said the major, in unfeigned 
astonishment, " how you put two and two together. 
Wonderful! Wonderful!" 

"I can see my way," said the other, with the 
old air of superiority. " But I am glad of it, very 
glad of it. They fancy they have me in their 
power ; but I have themJ^ 



A Warning on a Door-Jiep. 217 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD. 

A WARNING ON A DOOR-STEP. 

During these days Miss Manuel, in a strange 
state of mind, felt herself drawn in the smooth 
current on to the rapids. She seemed to be catch- 
ing at the branches and stones as they passed her. 
It was of no avail. She went abroad to the shows 
and amusements, not from any love of such attrac- 
tions, but because they might offer opportunities 
of undoing her fatal work. But it was going on 
too surely and rapidly. Once during these days 
she met Mrs. Fermor, and, with a wistful and 
imploring look, ran to her; but, trembling and 
flushed, the other turned from her. Much oftener 
she met her with Mr. Eomaine . ^Romaine the 
Victorious. Him, at some ball or theatre one 
night, she caught hold of and talked to hurriedly. 



218 Never Forgotten. 



"What do you mean to do?" said she. "How 
IS this to end?" 

"How can I tell?" he said, calmly. "You 
know me sufficiently by this time to guess that 
what I mean to-day may not be what I mean to- 
morrow. But this I am certain of: what I feel 
at this moment to that young girl." 

" But you have conscience . ^you have honour/' 
said she, almost frantically. "I cannot believe 
that you would go so far ^" 

" Ah, yes !" he said. " That is not the difficulty. 
I don't care to boast, but I have lived stormily . 
according to the odd French expression, have had 
a jeunesse orageuse. I could count on my fingers 
certainly three or four instances nearly the same, 
and I knew what 1 meant then, and how far I 
intended to go. Apply that to the present instance. 
I am a hard, cold, selfish being, I confess it. For 
years I have not known what it is to live or love. 
Now, when I feel the rays of the sun upon, me, 
you would push me into shade. Nonsense. My 
dear Miss Manuel, you are laughing at me . 
behind your cards . ^behind you^ fan. You threw 
down a clever challenge ; you are beaten, and now 
you want to try another system. It will not do. 
I have but one thing in my head now, and I shall 
follow it out to the last, as I have done everything 
else in my life." 



A Warmng on a B^or-jlep. 219 

She almost groaned. " O, HJeavn help me, and 
forgive me I BEeaven help Aer,. as indeed it will !" 
But her rash purpose was^ being worked out without 
her, and in spite of her : the old wrong would find 
a punishment for itself, and would be^ indeed 
Never Forgotten. 

These were weary miserable days. She lay 
under a load of remorse. All the time her strange 
brother kept her imder his eye suspiciously. "What 
is this change ?" he said. " You do not see people. 
Why do you not let tiiem come ? Why do you 
not see him as you used to do ? Take care, Pau- 
line ; I am getting tired. I don't follow these fine 
schemes of yours." She felt that she dare not tell 
iim what she knew, or dream even of changing 
lis purpose ; so she could only plead for delay, for 
a little longer time. " A week or two more," she 
said, "and you shall see. I conjure you do nothing 
of yourself. You promised, you know, to leave 
aU to me." 

" Ah, Komaine," said he, with some satisfaction, 
" he is doing his work. You have managed that 
well. I must give you so much credit. But Feiv 
mor, the guilty miserable creature, we are far too 
slow with him. I cannot bring my eyes to look at 
him when we meet. I find this growing on me 
every day. He is a standing reproach tome. You 
remember what you called him that night, when 



220 Never Forgotten. 



she was still in the house . a murderer. It was the 
exact description, and now, go where I will, by 
night or by day, I always have him present to me 
as a murderer," 

Miss Manuel groaned to herself, and covered up 
her face. She was thinking how every step had 
plunged her deeper ; every move had been but too 
fatally calculated to prevent her going back. The 
only course now was to prevent this wild excitable 
brother from taking things into his own hands; 
and she therefore, with a desperate hypocrisy, con- 
jured, implored him to leave all to her. 

But all this time there was a great manly heart 
bound up in the Manuel family by all the ties of 
strong grief, and tender regrets, and softest associa- 
tions, and whose state was as miserable as that of 
Pauline herself. The tones and colouring of 
the younger Hanbury had faded with that deep 
trial and the schooling of rough travel ; the old 
dream of the goodness of all men, and the unsus- 
pecting trust, which at times looks like folly, had 
been scorched out. A graver, sadder, and more 
practical Hanbury had come home. Now it seemed 
to him that old wounds were opened afresh. Yet 
he knew not how to meet the evil. At devising he 
had no skill ; yet one evening, relying on his own 
honest instincts for assistance, he thought he would 
go straight to the bright impulsive little woman, 
whoi^i he always looked at with a strange sai 



A Warning on a Door-^ep. 221 

interest, from her having stepped into the place of 
one he could never forget. 

He was coming down the street, when he saw 
Romaine standing on the steps, looking in his 
direction. Eomaine waited for him. "My good 
Hanbury," he said, " I have an instinct you are 
coming in here. Am I right? I thought so. 
Now, what can ydu want in this galley ? I give 
you fair notice I am come for a private audience, 
and you will only be in the way." 

Hanbury said to him, sadly, " Ah I why do you 
come here ? It is not prudent nor right. Surely 
you, who are in the world, know how the world 
talks. I know I have no title to speak to you, 
but ^" 

"Well," said Eomaine, "you have saved me 
from some embarrassment by that speech ; some 
such misty notion was in my head, but I was too 
polite to utter it. Seriously, my good friend Han- 
bury, what are you at on these hall-door steps ? Only 
that I know you to be a good sort of well-meaning 
fellow that intends no harm, why really I should 
be inclined to " and he nodded his head signi- 
ficantly. " But the point now is, I am going in 
here, and I trust you will have the good taste not 
to come in too." 

"I say again," said Hanbury, firmly, "this 
should not go on. It is unworthy of you, Eomaine 
. ^unworthy of any man of honour, especially when 



222 Never For^atUn. 

you know the state of tilings in this house. Come 
away with me down^ and let us talk over it quietly. 
Come.*' 

The look of calm insolence that Somsdne ga\ce 
him was imsurpassed. ^^ I am b^inning to under- 
stand you, Mr. Hanbury;; and it is time that you 
should imderstand me. Let me remind you that 
our acquaintance does not quite warrant this tone 
of confidential remonstrance. I once ^went oul^' 
as it is called, with a benevolent Frenchman . a 
religious man, too . ^for a similar friendly remon- 
strance, which, not being a friend, he had no 
business to make. You understand. Religious 
man as he was he did meet me, and recollected it 
well afterwards.' 

"This sort of tone has no effect on me," said 
Hanbury; "I have been in situations where I 
have shown no regard for life. It has often been 
a burden to me. I want no quarrel with you ; but 
I tell you plainly, this must not go on 1" 

" This is far more rational," said Eomaine, good 
humouredly; "much better than the platitudes 
you began with. Now, I tell you it shall go on. 
That is, I shall take no interference." 

"I shall find means," said Hanbury, lookmg up, 
" never fear 1 Too many hearts are interested in 
this young creature, to let her be lost without an 
effort." 

"Ah I" said Komaine, "twi^ we have it all. 
The good, faithful, well-meaning friend has let it 



A Warning m a Door-flep. 228 

out I Well, go back to your employer, Mr. Han- 
bury, and tell her from me that it will not do. It 
has failed, and vnll fail. Her own persuasion was 
of no use, and intimidation will turn out equally 
profitable. There!" and he rang the bell. "I 
am quite serious in this ! Look you, I shall be 
interfered with by no woman, and certainly by no 
man. Mind ! And as you are a friend of the 
family, perhaps you will hint to them that if this 
becomes a matter of serious interference with my 
affairs, it may turn out rather a dangerous game 
for them ! I know a good deal about most families, 
and what most families would not wish to be 
known ! Just hint that to your friend, and, if you 
can recollect them, in those words. There ! " 

"Then," said John Hanbury, slowly, "you have 
quite decided you will do nothing?" 

" Quite, my dear friend," he said, smiUng ; 
"you, at last, understand me, I see." 

"What could that heavy creature mean?" 
thought Mr. omaine. "He had a mulish look 
as he went away. I think he hinted that he 
would try and give me trouble. Dumpkoff, as the 
Germans say.: a regular dumpkoff. Confound 
him!" he said, suddenly, "if he attempts any of 
his high moral interference with me^ or, in his 
clumsy way, tries to give me any annoyance, I 
shall yi&tmaah liis big figure into a pulp. Clumsy 
clown ! I wonder I listened to his prosy rubbish so 
long!" 



224 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FOURTH. 

MB. BOMAINE AND HIS " NET." 

That afternoon the little lady was keeping a 
lonely watch in her drawing-room. Since her 
marriage, her grim father had felt that he was 
not the same company for her that he was of old. 
Perhaps he did not like to chill her new existence 
. which had now, he supposed, been bound up 
with youth and pleasure . ^with the frost of age. 

In all concerning her he had a sensitive delicacy. 
She took it, that he had devoted himself so long to 
her interests as a sort of sacrifice, and now that she 
had found a more suitable companion, was glad to 
be restored to his books. She was sitting there 
alone, neither reading, nor writing, nor working, 
but simply thinking. Now in a hopeless dejection ; 
now lashing her little soul into fury, with dwelling 
on what she thought her wrongs. She was deter- 



Mr. Romaine and his "Netr 225 

mined to die sooner than " give in." Her dress . 
the dress of Laura . ^which she was to play to Mr. 
Komaine's Petrarch^ had come home not an hour 
ago^ and lay upon a sofa near her. Madame Gay^ 
who had come in person to see the effect^ and to 
lay on "a touch" here and there, was in French 
ecstasies at the result. It was magnificent, divine, 
"ravishing." Madame took away the light of her 
eyes! "And monsieur . ^Monsieur Romaine" . 
added Madame Gay, with a " fin " air, and a recol- 
lection of her Paris training . "how he will be 
pleased !" 

Mrs. Fermor coloured. She was not skilful at 
the right reply or at the right manner. " He has 
brought this humiliation on me I" she thought, 
meaning Fermor. ^^He exposes me to the remarks 
of such people as these." 

Madame Gay saw the blush, and, still following 
her Paris instincts, took it for a blush of pleasure. 

"Ah," she went on, " such a gay, gallant gen- 
tleman, and he admires madame so. H souffre. 
I know it well. Mon Dieu I comme il souffre." 

Mrs. Fermor turned on her with flashing eyes. 

" What do you mean ?" she said. " You forget 
yourself. I don't want to hear such things. How 
dare youl" and she stamped her foot angrily. 

Madame Gay was contrite and deeply penitent. 
"Elle me boudait," she said afterwards, telling 
the story to a lady of her own country. 

VOL. III. Q 



226 Never Forgotten. 



" Oiel ! comme elle me boiidait. But all the 
time, elle s'y prenait bien, voyez vous. She is a 
charming little coquine." 

Presently the Frenchwoman, accepting this in- 
dignation as an invitation, came back to the 
subject. 

" If I dared," she said, " if madame would not 
be angry, I would tell her a Uttle secret about this 
very dress. I will tell it in a Httle whisper. It is 
all paid for ! M. Fairmore ^" 

With doubt, and eagerness, and pleasure in her 
eyes, Mrs. Fermor turned round hastily. " Yes," 
she said ; " go on. Tell me quick ! " 

Under the rich material of Laura's dress a litde 
reproach was working. 

" M. Fairmore is not to know a word," went on 
Madame Gay, with mystery. " It is a cadeau, a 
surprise from a true chevalier." 

"Take it off, take it off!" said Mrs. Fermor, 
hurriedly ; " quick, quick ! Don't lose a moment ;" 
and, to the astonishment of the Paris lady, she 
began tearing at the rich laces and ribbons of 
Laura's dress. 

" Madame will destroy it all," said Madame 
Gay, distractedly, catching her arms. " Take care, 
for the love of God ! There, that is better." 

" Go away," said Mrs. Fermor, distractedly ; 
" leave this house. Never come here again. Don't 
pay me any of your horrible compliments." 



Mr. Romaine and his ''Net:' 227 

^' Madame is ill," said the Frenchwoman, calmly. 
" Here is the eau-de-Cologne. I shall come to- 
morrow evening at the same hour." 

When she was gone, Mrs. Fermor threw herself 
back in deep affliction. " He has brought this on 
me," she said ; " my name will be in everybody's 
mouth. This dreadful woman will go round and 
tell her fine ladies ! I shall be spoken of, pointed 
at, and I have no one to help or advise me. No, 
no, not one." Then she started up suddenly : "If 
the world thinks so . ^let it think so. It will wring 
his heart. He will know too late what he has lost. 
He is sensitive about being pointed at ; so am I. 
When he shall see me admired, with all the world 
at my feet, with the great and the noble worship- 
ping me, he will, perhaps, regret what he has lost." 
She walked to her glass. Laura's dress became 
her wonderfully. The excitement in her eyes and 
cheeks became her yet more. She walked before 
her glass. " Ah I It will do," she said. 

" Indeed it will do," said a voice at the door ; 
*^ it is superb and dazzling. Petrarch admires I" 

** Go away," said she, in a frightened voice, 
going to the other room. "Why do you come 
here at this time? You should not . ^you know 
you should not. Go away . quick . ^I implore of 

you." 

'' If you act like that on the night," said Mr. 
Romaine, plaxung a chair for himself in the middle 
q2 



228 Never Forgotten. 



of the room, " it will be the success of the 
season." 

" You must go," she said, more excitedly, " or I 
shall ring, and send for some one." 

" Hush I" he said, rising. " I am sure you are 
top sensible to make a noise, or bring in people 
from the streets, or do anything of that sort. No, 
no. Listen to me. I heard that the dress was 
to be home at this hour, and merely looked in to 
see the effect. I have seen it, and am going. 
There." 

" Ah I the dress. Yes," said Mrs. Fermor, more 
excitedly still. "I shall never put it on again," 
repeated Mrs. Fermor, passionately. " Never I" 

" That would be foolish," said he, calmly, " at 
now three-quarters past the eleventh hour. I had 
no idea the effect would be so good. Let us be 
rational. You are displeased, and I believe you 
are right. I am hasty sometimes. I shall go and 
get my money back from that French creature, 
and you shall pay her." This was reasonable, and 
Mrs. Fermor had no answer ready. He went on : 
" A charming dress . (I am really going now). 
And all my design, recollect. Why, that wandering 
husband of yours, when he sees you in it, will go 
down on his knees like a prodigal. I know these 
Orsons well. He will be your slave for the rest of 
his life. I have known many cases. Do you see 
my plan f Isn't it wonderful, in a wild ogre like 
me. But I want to do a little good before I die." 



Mr. Romaine and his "iVrf." 229 

Mrs. Fermor sighed, and shook her head. " I 
don't know whether to believe you or not. I can 
trust no one now. He is too fond of the world," 
she said, " and I am too prosy for him." 

" You talk of his indifference," he said, and 
went walking up and down. "I don't believe in 
it. He is acting a part ; I know it. He is burning 
to love you, but his cursed pride is in the way. 
Else he must be the stupidest, vilest, most insen- 
sible block that ever came into this world. Else 
he has dull eyes. Else he is a mere savage and 
brute beast. Else he is so wrapped up in his 
own vanity and selfishness . ^his own utter heart- 



" Mii Komaine 1" said she. 

" No, my dear Mrs. Fermor," said he, in another 
voice, " trust me, a man of the world. You will 
see a marvellous change after the night. I am like 
the man on the branch sawing it away stupidly. 
Under the new regime, I shall, of course, be turned 
out, never admitted again. That I expect. It is 
always the case vdth me. I believe I must be going 
to die, I am getting so good. All my friends are 
cutting me. Good night." 

He went away at once . went away singing and 
beating the rails down the street with his stick. 
*^ Poor little soul 1" he said ; " how she lets the net 
wrap round and round her again." 



230 Never Forgotten. 



I 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIFTH. 

A BEMONSTBANGE. 

We are now hurrying on to a crisis. It was 
better, indeed, that it should come to a crisis; 
for the demoralisation in the Fermor household 
was growing day by day. With such cold defi' 
ance, such quick temper, on both sides, it was 
not improbable that, to gain an advantage in 
the struggle, and secure a humiliation for an an- 
tagonist, one or other might forget decency, 
and make a confidant of that cruel gossip, the 
Public. 

One night, Fermor, just going out, was sum- 
moned down to see a gentleman "in the hall.'* 
He came down impatiently, with the words, "I 
am busy. I really have no time now," on his Ups. 



A Remonflrance, 231 



It was Hanbury. ^* WeD," said he, coldly to him. 
"Whatisitwotr?" 

" Can I speak to you I " said the other, 
earnestly; "five minutes is all I want. It is 
about yourself, too." 

The servant was standing by, and hindered 
Fermor^s ready and angry answer. 

" Go down, sir," he said. "What are you wait- 
ing there for?" 

" Come in here a moment," said Hanbury ; " I 
will not detain you. It is something that you 
should know."" 

" Now," said Fermor, as he closed the door, " I 
thought, on the last occasion, I had made myself 
understood. If this is on the same topic ^" 

"It 18 on the same topic," said Hanbury, 
firmly. " It is not for me to mind how you take 
it. To-day I have heard something which it is 
right you should know. Something which it 
would be a crime to conceal 1 " 

This word stopped something in the nature of a 
protest against " interference." 

"Ah, Fermor, get rid of this wretched sensi- 
tiveness, this terrible pride, which is destroying 
you. What infatuation is this that prevents you 
from listening to those who mean well, and would 
do you no harm ? I must speak plainly to you ; 
especially as I must tell you that the world is 
speaking plainly of you, and is busy with your 



232 Never Forgotten. 



name and affairs. O, Fermor, do listen to m^*^ 
now, without any of this absurd feeling. It is ^^ 
friend who speaks to you." 

This tone actually took Fermor^s breath away . 
He had no reply to make. 

"It is about Romaine and . ^Mrs. Fermor," h^^ 
said. "It should be looked to at once. I wil^ 
tell you what occurred to-day. I was at our club^ 
looking over a paper (though I don't care much f or* 
news), and there was a lot of young fellows about^ 
an old red-faced officer who was telling theuL 
stories. I heard the name of Romaine, and coul(L 
not help listening. The old man was telling them 
some of his horrible old stories, and lamenting' 
what he called the ^ decay of f ellow^s ' at this day, 
and said that Romaine was the only man that had 
a spark of * pluck.' And then one of the young 
fellows, whom I knew a little . and think of thfs, 
Fermor, in a public room I . ^laughed, and said that 
he knew what he was after, and that in a short 

time ^You can guess, Fermor. And the old 

man laughed and enjoyed it. O, Fermor, you 
would not take my advice I I warned you in 
time." 

The feehng in Fermor^s heart was still not mor- 
tification, but anger, bitter anger, at one, a mere 
untrained fool like Hanbury, setting up to be wise 
and worldly. "You always come charged with 
good news," he said. "And how kind of my 



A Remonftrance. 233 



friends there to allow my concerns to be spoken of 
in a public place that way. I suppose ^t was 
friendly, eh r 

He had now caught Hanbuiy. 

" I knew the man," said Hanbury, calmly, " and 
I went up to him, and asked him, before the others, 
had he authority for what he said, or did he merely 
repeat what he heard ? He said it was merely a 
vulgar Town story that ^ some fellow ' had told. I 
said that I knew both Romaine and you and the lady, 
that the whole was perfectly false from beginning 
to end, and that I knew it, and had opportuni- 
ties of knowing. That Mr. Eomaine was a friend 
. alone in the world with few friends . and that 
it was cruel and vdcked to put such a construction 
on what was only good nature and kindness." 
(John Hanbury did not tell all he had really said 
or done, or how calmly and temperately he had 
brought the "young fellow " to account before the 
rest. How he had quietly asked him, was he sure 
about liis information, and did he think it right to 
bring a mere vulgar rumour like that to the public 
room, and injure an innocent young girl in that 
way? "For my part," said John Hanbuiy, "I 
know all the parties, and see them almost every 
day, and I say the whole thing is false . false in 
every particular; and I am sure after this you 
will not repeat it any more." The "young fellow," 
who had not yet lost the virgin bloom of youth. 



234 Never Forgotten. 



nor had learnt to consider Eepntations to be mere 
low delf figures, with which he could play at 
" knocks " and " smash " at so many shots for a 
penny, became a little ashamed, and said he was 
sure it was a mistake. But the old colonel looked 
on with disgust, and repeated, that though he knew 
nothing of the parties, he was "cursed" sure it 
was no mistake, and that everyone of "the lot" . 
meaning ladies . were "skittish," and "up to that 
game," if you only "knew how to take them, 
dammy 1") 

But Permor, as he listened, grew furious. "And 
do you mean to tell me you did this . made me and 
her the talk of a coffee-room! It will be all over 
the town ! I tell you, I don't want this champion- 
ship, or patronage either." 

" Patronage !" said John Hanbury. 

"I don't, I tell you!" the other went on, with 
increasing excitement. " I suppose it is well- 
meaning, and all that sort of thing. But I don't 
want it. I wish to God you would leave me and 
my concerns alone. I don't want any man to be 
defending my wife in coffee-rooms." 

"But can you wonder at other people," said 
Hanbury, quietly, " when you do not seem to care 
to do it yourself? Surely when you, who should 
naturally protect and watch over her ^" 

" That is my concern," said Fermor, " quite my 



A Remon/lrance. 235 ' 



concern. Upon my word, it is coming to a pretty 

pass ^But I must now request ^^ 

"I am astonished," said Hanbury, "I am shocked. 
I could not believe it of you. Such utter and 
miserable infatuation. It is charitable to suppose 
you do not see the danger. It is coming nearer 
every moment. What do you suppose is my con- 
cern in this matter! Do you fancy if it were any 
one else I should expose myself to what might be 
said ? Ah, I may not tell you all. But there is 
one to whose name I am bound for life, in whom 
all that I can do or live for is centred. You know 
who that is as well as I. She has appointed me to 
this task. Her heart is set on it. And through 
me she tells you, fly, fly fipom this place, from this 
country, and take that poor girl with you. It is 
the only chance I" " 

During this speech, wonder, almost stupefaction, 
and rage, succeeded each other in Fermor. Won- 
der at the superior tone and weight Hanbury was 
assuming ; stupefaction at the message he brought ; 
and, finally, rage at the confidence and undertaking 
it implied. 

" I am very glad you tell me this," he said, with 
trembling Ups. " That shows me how I can trust 
the rest of your advice. Miss Manuel . ^think of 
such a thing ! . send me such a message, and by 
youT^ He laughed aloud at the notion. "My 



' 236 Never Forgotten. 



good Hanbury, don't come advising me again. 
Fly indeed ! You don't know the world, I can see 
very clearly." 

"I tell you it w so, on my word of honour," said 
the other. " She loves Mrs. Fermor. She would 
help and save her. Listen to me, listen to her, 
Fermor. Only yesterday she conjured me to per- 
suade you. She would give the world that you 
would go away, and take her advice. Do 1 I im- 
plore of you, Fermor." 

"How little you know," said Fermor, strug- 
gling with the superiority. "Poor Hanbury. 
Women can easily persuade you. Ah, my good 
friend, in time you will come to learn that there 
is more meaning behind what women say than 
what you would fancy. Often the very contrary 
to what they say. Well, Hanbuiy, you are not 
QUITE in her councils, / can tell you." (The 
opportunity was overpowering, and could not be 
resisted. He went on :) " I only say this much : 
she has her reasons, of course, for speaking to 
you; but, I can tell you, I am about the last 
person in Town she would wish to leave it." 

Tlie triumph in his eye was so intelligible, 
the flush of vanity to his face so marked, and the 
miserable egotism of the man so naked, that the 
whole truth came upon Hanbury like an inspira- 
tion. He started back, as though some one had 



A Remonjirance. 237 



suddenly whispered in his ear, " That weak, blinded 
Fermor believes Miss Manuel to be in love with 
him." 

"O, Fermor!" he exclaimed, almost vrith con- 
tempt, " to see you sunk so low as this ! " 

Fermor coloured. 

"You are indeed blind," Hanbury went on. 
"I was not prepared for tlm. I now see it is 
hopeless. It explains all. Be a man ! Get rid 
of these delusions! It is laughable. She who 
so lived for and loved that sister ! Why, if there 
was one whom she should dislike and punish, and 

whom, indeed^ I hiow she ^But forgive me. I 

am speaking for your good, you know." 

Fermor^s fury and mortification combined were 
now at their height. " You come to insult me," 
he said. "I don't want you. Don't interfere 
in my concerns again ; I shall take it up seriously, 
if you do. It is going too far. Never interfere 
with. me again. I warn you." 

" Very well," said Hanbury, sadly ; " you must 
take your course. I now see it all. It is the old in- 
fatuation, and you are scarcely accountable. You 
shall not offend me, Fermor, and I shall help you 
yet, in spite of yourself." 

Fermor, was left in a state scarcely to be de- 
scribed. It was the insufferable air of patronage 
and of superior information and wisdom that 



238 Never Forgotten. 



galled him more than anything in the world, and, 
above all, that sort of privity with Miss Manuel. 
For the first time, too, an uneasy suspicion flashed 
upon him as to there being some truth in what 
that " stupid, lumbering, blundering fellow " had 
hinted. 

From this moment, a bitter, fretful desire entered 
into Fermor to meet with Bomaine and quarrel 
with him. This was indeed but a disguise for 
that wish to punish some one for the mortifica- 
tions that were being heaped on him. Fighting 
was exploded, and not to be dreamed of ; and he 
knew very well that the cool Bomaine would 
not suffer it to come to that. So he racked his 
brains to discover some way by which he could 
effectusdly outrage and insult him. In this mood, 
he unluckily came face to face with Mrs. Fermor. 
Here was the opportunity. She was the Christian 
thrown to the lion. She was not a cold, skilled 
hand that could retort upon him or repulse him. 
At the sight of her, the lecture he had suffered, 
the mortifications, the suspicions about Miss 
Manuel, all came rushing on him. Here was a 
fit whipping-post ready to his hand. 

She was in a gentle humour. The sense of her 
loneliness, and the feeling of desertion, was growing 
upon her. Perhaps, after all, she had been think- 
ing, she had not been making allowance. Perhaps, 



A Remonftrance. 239 



with a little advance ^But Fennor burst on her: 

^' It seems we are now the talk of clubs and coffee- 
rooms, and strange gentlemen take up the cudgels 
for you good naturedly, and say you mean no harm. 
Cheerful news, eh I However, that is no matter, 
as it will all soon end . must end." 

This made her as defiant as he was ; as wounded, 
as rebellious, perhaps as vindictive. " As soon as 
you please," she said ; " perhaps sooner. Do you 
wish the servants to hear as well as the gentlemen 
in the clubs?" 

"This tone won't do," said Fennor, with a 
trembling voice. " Pve had too much of it. Most 
luckily, it is not too late." 

During this speech Mrs. Fermor had thought of 
a famous retort. She would not have repressed it 
for the world. "I am glad," she said, her little 
heart beating fast, " that there are gentlemen who 
take up my cause, and have remarked the treatment 
I am subject to. I am very glad." 

" Gentlemen or no gentlemen," said he, with a 
heart beating as fast, "these goings on must be 
stopped, and stopped promptly. As a beginning, 
I require peremptorily that you do not exhibit 
yourself at this foohsh show of Lady Laura's. In 
fact, I shall take good care that you do i^ot go." 

"And what if I (fo go?" said Mrs. Fermor, with 
sparkhng eyes. 



240 Never Forgotten. 



" We shall see," said Fermor, scornfully. 

"And we shall see/' repeated Mrs.Fermor, as 
scornfully. 

Yet only a few minutes before, during that 
interval of softness, she was thinking whether, 
after all, it would not be better to go to him and 
make this little sacrifice, as a sort of opening to 
reconciliation. But now that was all over for ever 
and ever. If she was to rft>, she would go. 



Fowler and Bird. 241 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SIXTH. 

FOWLER AND BIBD. 

Poor Mrs. Fermor! All helpless, and cast 
entirely among "gentlemen friends/' she had no 
one to rely upon or look to for aid or counsel. 
Men, after all, with their free manners, were true 
beings. Not so faithless, she thought, as women. 
A hot spirit was working in her veins, a strange 
excitement, and pride was carrying her forward in 
this path. She had no time to think. Everything 
seemed to conspire cruelly to hurry her into that 
crooked course. Thus she gave directions that 
Mr. Romaine was not to be let in ; ioj^ she had 
begun to shrink from the calm, collected air of 
direction and authority which he had latterly 
begun to assume. When he sauntered up the 
stairs, in defiance of these orders, her face flushed, 

VOL. III. R 



242 Never Forgotten. 



and she drew back. "I am not at home," ^ie 
said, excitedly. ^^I don't want to see people. / 
said that you were not to come in. You must go-^' 

" A gkl feebly tried to stop me," he said, " but 
I saw the lie on her lips. Surely I know that yoa 
are always at home at this hour. WhaJt is the use 
of this little artifice with me ? " 

" It is very wrong," she went on, passionately, 
for she felt her own helplessness. "You think 
you can do as you please here. I won't permit it," 
she added, with a little stamp ; " you come here too 
often, and I have told you so." 

"Perhaps sol" he said, looking at her with 
genuine astonishment, as it seemed to her. "I 
am sure I do. I must try and mend, though. 
You tell us these harsh truths a little roughly. 
You should break the fall, and prepare us. Last 
day you were kinder. Well 1 it is only one more 
like all the rest!" And, taking his hat again, 
added, "Good-by." 

There was such a wounded hurt air in his 
manner, that her heart smote her a little. 

" I always say more than I mean,'* she said. "I 
have no choice of words. You understand me, I 
know. I am worried and miserable. No one stands 
by me, or, I believe, cares for me now." 

" A discovery ! " he said, bitterly. "But that is 
the old song from the beginning of the world. Who 



Fowler and Bird. 248 



cares for me, I should like to know ? Who has 
ever cared? I have given up looking for that sort 
of article. Only I did suppose," he went on, ex- 
citedly, " like one of the great dolts which all men 
are, that you had a sort of toleration for me . a 
good nature, a sympathy for the poor rough crear 
ture who has had his troubles, and whom you en- 
couraged, I say, for some purpose of your own, 
into a dream that tliere was something like heart 
left on the earth. For a moment I believed in 
you, Mrs. Fermor! I supposed that you would 
not descend to the tricks and deceits of other 
"women."^ 

"Tricks and deceits? " she repeated. " O no." 

" Using me," he went on, more excitedly still, 
^^ for the virtuous end of stirring up the slumbering 
fires of Im affection. / see. O, of course," he said, 
" I am taking a liberty in making these speeches. 
But it is the truth." 

"You do me injustice, indeed yon. do," she said. 
" I never dreamed of such a thing," 

She felt, iu penitential confusion, that she had 
behaved harshly . coarsely even. She would have 
done anything for an opportunity . to show how 
sorry, she was. "Sit down," she said^ "won't you? 
If you go away at once, I shall know that you are 
offended." 

"Offended?" he said. "No. It is more in 
E.2L 



244 Never Forgotten. 



son'ow than in anger . as men* go away in the . 
novels. And yet I don't know what to make of 
you/' he said, sitting down. " I ought to go. And 
with it all I dovit hate you, as I ought to." 

She laughed and tossed her head, as any other 
woman, the most prudish, might have done in the 
same case. 

"I have no sense," he said, impatiently. "I 
have an odd stupid notion, or have dreamt it, that 
you are a littU like myself : that you find that no 
one understands you, no one cares for you ; that 
you are alone on an iceberg. It is a mere fancy, 
but it is in my head. No matter whether it be 
true or not." Mrs. Fermor sighed. ^ Well, I 
came to-night, merely because I heard that you 
were going . going at once. My sin was coming 
to say good-by." 

"I . ^we . ^never thought of going," said Mrs. 
Fermor, wondering. " Who told you ? " 

" Well ; one who is supposed to be a very great 
friend of yours and of mine . ^Miss Manuel. She 
was very eager about it, and wished me to per- 
suade you to go. Why, I wonder ? " 

" Why t " said Mrs. Fermor, suddenly flashing 
out. " Ah I you can't guess ; but there is a reason 
for all these things." 

" It is a good reason, I suppose? " he said. 

"Is it?" said she. "Ah, you who know the 
world so well have nauch to leaxn ; and so have I. 



Fowler and Bird. 245 



O," she said, almost crying, " I don't know where 
to turn to. Every hour brings out some new 
treacher3\" 

" Exactly," said he, quietly. " We are wonder- 
fully like, I see. Just what I find. But, dear 
Mrs. Fermor, it grieves me to see you in this way ; 
you who are so young, and fresh, and fair, and 
who ought to be very happy. / can't be acting 
shams ; I don't care to take the trouble. I tell you 
plainly I have seen that there is trouble on your 
mind which I may help. Forgive me, if I say 
what I should not say, and give me but a hint, 
and I stop. But where I have a deep, earnest, and 
sincere interest in one who so brusquely turns me 
into the street " 

" I do indeed believe you to be a friend," 
said she, piteously. "And I should be ungra- 
cious if I did not understand your good will; 
but ^" 

" Now," said Eomaine, drawing his chair closer, 
" I see most things, and where I don't see, I have 

an instinct. There is Fermor, your husband 

May I go on I " 

She looked at him irresolutely, and tried to call 
up her faithless pride, which was hurrying away 
to the rear. " I think on this subject ^" 

" Exactly," he said, pushing his chair away again. 
" I knew it. Poor Romaine 1 he is always going 
through the ice." 



246 Never Forgotten. 



" O, go on," she said, a little fretfully ; " tell me 
what you mean." 

" Well," he said, gravely, " Fermor, our friend, 
your husband . a good deal of allowance is to be 
made for him. He was a beau garon once. His 
head was turned. (Don't be angry.) He has been 
humoured . ^perhaps spoiled. This I mean in his 
relation to the conmion world outside, walking 
the streets. Well, he treats that world with some 
airs, and how is that world ciuing him ? How do 
you suppose ? By leaving him altogether to him- 
self. The treatment has already had a wholesome 
effect. It will do him good ; it will soften him in 
time. You see, the world is the best mistress in 
the world. You could not, my dear Mrs. Fermor, 
go to a better school." 

She looked at him wondering, yet comprehend- 
ing perfectly. 

"Ah, my dear Mrs. Fermor," he went on, 
eagerly, " we are all too much humoured . ^we men, 
I mean. You, I fear, are an angel of sweetness" 
. she started . "women, I mean. It does us no 
good. The more we get, the more we want. We 
are not a bit obliged for the homage. There is 
some vile, overbearing dross in us. Keep us at 
the grinding-stone, and we love you all the same. 
The sweet suffering wife is only a drudge, and 
made a drudge." 

She looked at him still with dilated eyes, but 



Fowler and Bird. 247 



his words broTight conviction. A new light had 
flashed upon her. Long after he had gone, she 
sat pondering on them. At last she said aloud, 
"How rude and brutal I was to him, and how 
gently he bore my pettishness. I begin to think 
he w my only friend in this world. And all he 
says is so sensible." 

Never waa she so confirmed in her resolution of 
"dying first" before giving up going to Lady 
Laura's. 



248 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SEVENTH. 

A BRAVE STRUGGLE. 

Lady Laura's festival was now fast hurrying 
on. Once she had determined on it, she went to 
the task with truly Spartan energy. And, indeed, 
there was much to encourage her. Though her 
worn and jaded limbs tottered as she struggled up 
the steep and stony mountains, still she flourished 
up on her poor old shoulder a banner with the 
device of Excelsior. She seemed to force on 
events by her indomitable will. And it had 
actually come to pass just a few nights before at 
old Lady Tozer^s, that Young Spendlesham, ar- 
riving about one A.M., very pink and dewy about 
his face, and very rich and thick about his speech, 
and full of kindness and good will to all men and 
women in his sentiments, had fallen into the meshes 



A Brave Struggle. 249 

1 . 

of a Calypso, who had been looking out for him 
for hours, and had been led away to her island . a 
greenhouse upon the stairs . ^where he long sat in 
a wine-y rapture. Sometimes Calypso made as 
though she would seek Calypso's mamma, but was 
checked by Ulysses, who, in his deep rich voice, 
said, " Don't go yet ;" or, with deep and burning 
reproach, " You w-ant to go . you d-oo. you know 
you do. wharserfellarsname?" conveying indis- 
tinctly that he dreaded the influence of a rival. 
On which the gentle Calypso began to pry 
curiously into the joinings of her fan, and asked 
with gentle suffering where had lie been all the 
night ? On which Ulysses began to protest hotly, 
"Nownedeed I But you . ^you want to go . ^I knowte 
. Issashame, I say I Tell me now . ^wharserfel- 
larsname . ^I mean," he added, correcting himself, 
"wharseru/ferfellarsname? No, no," he added, 
gloomily, "you won't tell me, I know you won't I" 
Later, an hour later. Calypso whispered softly 
to her mamma, and the worn lines of mamma's 
face were lit with a flush of hope. She had la- 
boured through the heats, and had quarried iron 
rocks, and had found what had repaid her. She 
hurried at once to secure the young lord. She took 
him captive, wisely and warily, on the spot. "I 
am so glad," she whispered to him. " This is a 
happy moment for me. The happiest moment of 
my life." Had she been at all familiar with Holy 



2 50 Never Forgotten. 



Writ, she would have quoted Nunc dimittis. And 
then she led him to this person and to that, and 
exhibited her prize. " Lady Tozer," she said, " you 
know Lord Spendlesham ; Blanche and he have 
been settling something together. Most suitable 
in every respect," she whispered. My lord, still 
dewy . about as rich and thick in his voice as 
curafoa . ^and swinging back and forward to the 
banister, as if preparing for a spring, said some- 
thing about a " sharmigirl." Lady Laura kept to 
him fast, and went through the rooms, dragging 
him at her car, so that presently everybody, in- 
cluding some safe business-like friends, became 
acquainted with the joyful news that young Spen- 
dlesham had proposed for that second Fermor girl. 
Thus inspired. Lady Laura toiled up the heights 
with renewed energy. Was she at all mortal, or 
did she find sleep or support from^ such things as 
breakfasts and dinners, from meats or wines! 
Night and day it was all one; she worked and 
toiled with head, heart, and hands. She should 
have been a general in the field. She found 
everything; she thought of everything; for 
Blanche and her sister were poor helpless crea- 
tures. Yet at this time the tradesmen and trades- 
women were coming thick and fast to the door; 
were pressing and loud voiced ; and, once in the 
hall, refused to depart without audience. The job- 
master was heard below, turbulent and insolent. 



A Brave Struggle. 251 



Lady Laura, above m her bedroom . where a 
" cheap Dorcas woman" was at work under super- 
intendence, and where her own worn fingers la- 
boured at tulle and silk . came down courageously 
and calmly to meet these rude Troopers. The job- 
master she worsted easily ; with him she took the 
high tone. She whipped him across the face with 
" My daughtei^s marriage with Lord Spendlesham." 
" His lordship," she said, " will be mounting his 
establishment when he returns from his wedding 
tour, and I should like to have mentioned your 
name to him. He will want hunters and carriage- 
horses, and aU sorts of things. But now you have 
been so troublesome to me, that really," said Lady 
Laura, smiling, " I don't see how I can reasonably 
mention you to him." The job-master was re- 
pentant in a moment. " You see 'ow it is, my lady," 
he said; "we as keeps 'orses find it very 'ard to 
make the thing go." And then he said it was of 
no consequence, and retired. 

With Madame Adelaide her encounter was of a 
different nature. That shrill and feline miUiner 
had taken off her gloves, which every Frenchwo- 
man wears to hide claws, and had long since been 
" spitting" and screaming at her debtor. She had 
dared to send an " Attorney's letter " to Lady 
Laura. Lady Laura drove to her boldly in the 
job-master's carriage, and courageously strode in 
to her den. " Where is madame I" she said to the 



252 Never Forgotten. 



neat PhylHses who were scattered among the bon- 
nets and " dummies." " Send her here, please." 

Madame came^ with the feline tusks displayed, 
and the whiskers almost visible. " I have received 
Mw," said Lady Laura, showing the letter. "I 
shall take no notice of it whatever. You have in- 
jured yourself more than you fancy. My daughter 
shall not get so much as a bonnet for her trousseau 
from you." 

" I do not care," said the milliner, " but you sail 
pay me all de same." 

" At my convenience," said Lady Laura. "I 
have it here," she said, showing some notes, " but 
you shall wait. I shall take care that my daughter, 
who is to marry Lord Spendlesham, shall not deal 
with you. I have shown Lady John Villiers this^ 
and she says it is outrageous. If I was to tell this 
generally, I could ruin you." 

Lady Laura drove away . ^in the job-master's 
carriage . again victorious. The milliner made a 
degrading submission. She found money, too, 
did Lady Laura, just as skilful spendthrifts find 
money, and perhaps in the same way. She may 
have been to a dirty snuffy Jew in a dirty snuffy 
back parlour, and have raised it on a bill, as well 
as the clever spendthrift. She may have taken 
her grandmother^s heavy silver teapot and sugar 
bowl under her cloak, and gone down a remote 
street in the City, to a silversmith where such 



A Brave Struggle, 253 

things were bought, and where she would have 
made a good bargain and got more money than 
another man or woman. There were old diamond 
eanings, too, which her father had given her when 
she was a girl, centuries ago, when there were 
such things for her in the world as affections, and 
sympathy, and associations, and hearts, before the 
frosts of fashion had set in and killed every plant 
and flower. When she took these trophies out of 
their worn velvet-lined case, something like a faint 
breath of warmth and softness seemed to come out 
with them. She handled them with reverence. 
These, it was well remembered, disappeared about 
this time. 

Workmen were in the house, busy in the draw- 
ing-room constructing a stage, under Mr. Ro- 
maine's superintendence. Fine scenery was being 
painted, musicians were secured to play suitable 
music, and the light green vans of Deval, the well- 
known monopolist pastrycook, had been seen oc- 
casionally at the door. These splendid auxiliaries 
happily requireU no ready money. The coming 
alliance, belled about in the fashionable papers, 
was accepted as a note of hand, and readily dis- 
counted. Madame Adelaide, deeply repentant, was 
permitted, at her own urgent entreaty, to prepare 
a gorgeous fancy dress of richest texture and ma- 
terials, to set off Blanche's charms. The house 
was in possession of visitors and strangers all day 



254 Never Forgotten, 

long. It was upside down, topsy-turvy, on its side. 
There was no breakfast, no dinner, in regular 
fashion. Nor did the relations with the aervants*- 
at all times peculiarly delicate . pennit of any de- 
spotic manners. It was imderstood, however, that 
they too were to share in the general largess that 
was approaching, and during the interval sus- 
pended all hostile action. Wonderful old Spartau! 
she controlled everything, and found everything, 
and thought of everything, and brought everything 
gradually into shape. There are many such wives, 
widows, and martyrs, labouring about us, who do 
more in their own way than the most slaving 
lawyer who ever struggled to earn his bread, or to 
become Attorney-General and Chancellor. 



A Warning. 253 



CHAPTEE THE TWENTT-EIGHTH. 

A WAHNINa. 

The eve of Major Garter^s marriage had now 
arrivedL A few stray questions had come^ Uke 
" dropping shots/' from a few inquisitive persons. 
That awkward and ugly challenge, " Who is he ? " 
was of course varied ; some putting it in this form : 
" Who the deuce is he I" " Who the d. 1 is this 
Garter I " But the replies were satisfactory always ; 
and, better than all, Garter was seen quartered with 
Sir John. Westende, that baronet leaning on his 
arm. A respectable and even brilliant company 
had been asked, and really secured by the major's 
exertions, to do honour to his nuptials^ 

The universal feeling about Mrs. Wrigley was 
that she was making '^ a wretched old fool of her- 
self ;" but that about the major was as tibough he 



256 Never Forgotten. 



had performed a clever feat, like one who had 
made a successful adventure in cotton or indigos, 
or had happily run a blockade. " Of course he'll 
choke off the poor old soul after a time," said 
Colonel Foley, in a spirit of rude jest, and leaning 
both hands on his stick, as if it were a spade. 
" Carter is a little impatient, AeursideAj impatient, 
I can tell you, and will not wait long for any man 
. or woman either." 

The major was coming home that afternoon, 
looking down on the flags with a complacent smile 
of pleasure . for he had happily made sure of a 
young lord out of a cavalry regiment, who would 
be as good as a pine-apple for the feast . when he 
happened to pass near the top of the street, where 
the Irrefragable had its office. He thought that 
as he was now going away on this delightful 
wedding . ^beginning a new life, as it were . ^he 
might as well give them a last injunction. He 
walked in and put his usual question, gaily adding, 
that he supposed he would be paid some day . say 
about the time of the final redemption of the 
National Debt. come now? Mr. Speedy had not 
yet returned, but would most likely be home the 
day after to-morrow. ^^And tAen," added Mr. 
Speed/s locum tenens, " you shall hear from us." 

"You must direct, then," said the major, still 
gaily, " to the Great Hotel in Paris, or to the Hes 
Britanniques at Rome ; and I declare I had rather 



A Warning. 257 

you would not, for I don't want to be worried with 
business now. You don't know, perhaps, that I 
am going to be married to-morrow morning ? We 
go across to Calais to-morrow night." 

" You do ? " said the locum tenens, astonished. 
And there was a general up-turning of faces in the 
oflBce. 

When Major Carter left it, his reflection was 
the old reflection . how ready the world is to 
do homage to what is flourishing in the world. 
The manner of these fellows "is quite changed 
to me," he said, " now that they see I am bettering 
myself." 

In the office, the locum tenens said hastily to his 
deputy, " We must have Speedy back at once ! " 
And in a few seconds the messenger was hurry- 
ing to the telegraphic-oflfice with a written scrap 
of paper. 

Still smiling, and still moralising on this "cring- 
ing" character of the world, the major walked 
on towards the fashionable quarter. He was 
painting in for himself this breakfast on the 
next morning, with the fashionable faces he had 
secured to grace it. He was reading, in anticipa- 
tion, the fashionable journal of the day after, 
and its select list. He grew soft and tender 
over himself, as he thought of the battle of life 
he had fought, and fought so successfully. "I 
had only myself to help me," he said, looking 

VOL. If I. s 



258 Never Forgotten. 



back. ^' I bad to fight my own way, and I 
think I have done very fairly. Always been 
with the best, and have doe them no dis- 
credit. This is not so bad a finish.** He was 
still smiling to the flags as he walked, when a 
carriage, which had passed him, stopped suddenly, 
and a lady called to him. The major^s fingers 
went to his hat by a sort of instinct. 

Miss Manuel had been driving here and there, 
in fact, she knew not whither, still pursued by 
the eager wish to do something towards stopping 
the great evil. She suddenly saw Major Carter 
smiling to the flags (and sometimes tapping them 
playfully with his stick), when the thought flashed 
upon her, "This poor wretch I I have been labour- 
ing to do him mischief. At this moment judg- 
ment may be gathering over his head. He is un- 
worthy of serious punishment for what he has 
done to us . ^at least others may hunt him down 
if they will . ^and a word to him will be no harm." 

The major^s smile passed away as he saw who 
it was. 60, nlie was also of that world who 
came cringing to him as his prospects brightened I 
But the game she had played with him was too 
serious, to be condoned so readily. 

" Major Carter," she said, " I have just stopped 
to tell you something. I know all sorts of people, 
and hear all sorts of things. I am told that 
you are about bevag m^arried one of these days. 



ji Warning. 259 

Let me advise you . ^look carefully to yourself. 
There are dangers that perhaps you have not 
thought of. Do not think of marriages, or such 
things. I confess I am no friend of yours, but 
still I give you this friendly warning." 

For a second a shade of anxiety and alarm came 
into his face. Then it was all clear, and he 
laughed. 

" I know that you are no friend of mine, Miss 
Manuel," he said. " But I can't be angry with 
you. You are very clever. I really admire you. 
But I am not angry with you. We have had our 
little game out, and it is not for me to say who has 
been the winner. But you are welcome to the 
title, with all my heart. I am in good humour 
with all the world to-night. So, thanks, a thou- 
sand thanks, for your very melodramatic warning." 

He was indeed in good humour that evening. 
As he walked away, he was greatly amused. 
"What a clever creature," he thought, "and how 
well she did it. For the moment she almost took 
me in. Another man would have been frightened, 
and perhaps listened to her. Her last move has 
failed. I should not be surprised if she went mad 
one of these days.*' 



s2 



260 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH. 

MAJOR carter's WEDDING-DAY. 

The following morning . the day of the Carter 
wedding . was a bright one, with plenty of sun. 
There was great flash and bustle in the httle 
square where Major Carter lived. Nearly every 
one round knew of the solemnity. Many were 
at the windows, and a few on the steps. A series 
of expresses seemed to be flying backwards and 
forwards between the major's house and other 
quarters. He himself, bright and shining as a 
new suit and the very closest shaving and pohsh- 
ing could make him, was seen in glimpses and 
flashes, as it were, now flinging himself into a cab 
and disappearing, now dashing out of a cab on to 
the steps, into the house, as though he had come 
with a reprieve for a criminal. 



Major Carter's Wedding-Jay. 261 

So with Mrs. Wrigley, the widow, on whose 
figure workwomen and maids had been at work 
from an early hour. She was in a sort of fat 
flutter and trepidation. As she said often, " the 
moment of her destiny was drawing on." They 
had invested her with the richest, stiffest, white 
satin, which was as inflexible as milled board, 
and dressed her in it, as though she were an idol. 
Her neighbours knew of it, and were out on 
their steps ; and a great carriage . not the chariot, 
which was wanted for another purpose . ^waiting 
at the door, with a huge display of favours and 
ribbons, proclaimed through the street the general 
notion of Marriage. 

She was presently at the church, where there 
was a block of carriages already, belonging to the 
gay company that Major Carter had so carefully 
recruited. It was a fine fashionable temple, where 
the thing was done in a highly fashionable way, 
and by a highly fashionable incumbent. Where 
the cushions showed the impressions of select 
elbows and select knees ; and where the letters of 
the Commandments ' seemed to run indistinctly 
into the characters of the Court Guide. In such a 
temple the rite received extra solemnity ; and the 
fashionable incumbent was " assisted" by the Rev. 
Alfred Hoblush. Thus, standing at the rails, in 
this atmosphere of Belgravian sanctity, with the 
crowd of ladies and gentlemen of good dagc^^ 



262 Never Forgotten. 



looking on, Major Carter was united to has bride. 
The fashionable incumbent almost chanted the 
words of the rite, bleating them, as it were, plain- 
tirely; and to his song the work was accoiu- 
pliahed. 

It was a happy moment for the major. Bride 
and bridegroom came out together on Ae top of 
the little steps in the srtr of little slam at the 
back of the fashionable tempku But many select 
rites had glorified the slum. Their carriage was 
Aere, and the crowd, who lived in the back lane, 
and whose life was to see marriage driving away^ 
in inexhaustible variety. The major and his bride, 
enshrined in this carriage as in a casket, drar^ 
away in a tumult of happiness. 

At Mrs. Wrigle/s mansion was the breakfast, 
and the company. Such a company! It did 
honour to the major's recruiting powers. It had 
cost him infinite pains and trouble. To some he 
had to give "bounties;" others, who might be 
called "bringers," he had to supply with "head- 
money ; " but still there were the ranks full, and a 
goodly show. There was a nice leavening of aris- 
tocracy . ^Lord Putnenham, and the Honourable 
Mr. and Mrs. Brownbill, being present; there 
were some "nice girls," in that gay and gKttering 
plumage which is only seen at weddings and 
flower-shows; there were oflicers for the nice girl% 
men whom Ma^or Gaictet took pleasantly by die 



Major Carter^s Wedding-day. 263 

ann or shonlder; thtere was "Old Foley," tight- 
ened almost to gasping ; Young Brett ; Lady Laura 
Permor and her daughters, who had been persuaded 
to come with some pains. Young Spendlesham 
had agreed to come too, but, at the last moment, 
had sent a note with an excuse about* important 
business. Many and many times did Lady Laura's 
eyes wander wistfully to the door; 

The feast was sumptuous indeed. The arch- 
pastrycook had looked to it. Everything rich, or 
delicate, oar coady, was spread out- The bride and 
bridegroom sat side by side. The fountains of 
champagne were flowing briskly, and faces framed 
in white boaanets began to acquire the heated 
flush which always attends on this morning feast- 
ing. It is a proud hour for Major Carter. He 
thinks again,, as he looks down the table, and 
reciprocates tibe fat. smile of his bride, how he 
has fought his way, single-handed, through life, 
without aid from any one, and is now ending so 
respectably. 

Now we must- have some speeching. It is rather 
a nuisance: . ^perhaps a httle old fashioned; but 
where Lord Putnenham has kindly ecxpressed a 
wish to air his rhetoric, such considerations must 
be waived. He does it very neatly, and dryly . ^in 
chips, aa it were. A little attempt at: humour, 
which, we may be sure, is not allowed to miscarry. 
It was an./'auspiciomr" day, he said. His friend 



264 Never Forgotten. 



Garter, he was sure, had made a judicious choice. 
He was sure to make the lady he had selected 
happy, though his friend Carter, he must say, had 
one fault . ^he was one of the most unmusical men 
he had ever met with. (This allusion produced 
extraordinary merriment.) Yes, his friend Carter, 
he would do him that justice, did not know a 
crotchet from a quaver, though he sincerely hoped 
that in their married life there would be an absence 
of crotchets of a particular sort. (Roars and ap- 
plause.) Perhaps that was the reason that he 
himself (Lord Putnenham) had never married . 
he was too musical. (Amusement.) The man 
who had not music in his soul, or would not appre- 
ciate a posthumous quartet of the immortal Beet- 
hoven's, he would say was fit for treason and 
stratagem, and all that sort of thing. Though he 
was quite sure that his friend Carter would not 
indulge in any stratagems as regards Mrs. Carter 
. (Great amusement) . whose health he would 
now propose, &c. 

It was a happy moment, one to look back to, 
when Major Carter rose, with half a glass of cham- 
pagne in his hand. His white crisp face was a 
little flushed with other half glasses. He was in- 
clined to say, "God bless you all," many times 
over. At least, he thought he was affected. The 
image present to his mind was that of labouring 
through a hard life, and having now finally come 



Major Carter^ s Wedding-Jay. 265 

into a port of ease and quiet. This he expressed, 
Mrs, Carter looking up at him with the soft gelatine 
eyes. " I have fought my way/' said Major Carter, 
with the half glass of champagne in his hand, 
^^ through diflficulties. I am not ashamed of it. I 
have made friends for myself, and I hope and 
believe they are not ashamed of me. I have had 
troubles, and I am not sorry to have had them. 
It has shown me the value of friends. of such 
friends as I now see sitting round me. We are 
now going away," continued the major, "I and 
the lady whom I am proud to call my wife. But 
we shall return soon, I hope. We shall see . and 
enjoy, I trust . ^the pleasant seductions of foreign 
countries. We may stay a long time or a short 
time, according as we find it ; but believe me," and 
the major^s voice faltered a little, " whether long 
or short, we shall both look forward to the time 

when we shall return once more and meet ^" 

Just at this moment, when Major Carter was 
raising his champagne-glass again, Major Carter's 
son, who had not been missed at the feast, entered 
hastily, and hurried down the room, behind the 
chairs, to where his father was standing. This 
was an interruption. Every one looked at him, 
and saw in the son's face a strange and frightened 
expression. His father, thus checked rudely, and 
yet seeing that he was making for him, stopped, 
and looked angrily at him. Every one felt that 



266 Never Forgotten. 



this was a most awkward ganehe treature^ and that 
the major was to be rather pitied. 

In a second he was at his f athif's ear^ and gave 
him a short whisper; ** What ?" said Major Carter, 
laying down his glass quickly. People at the end 
even seemed to be straining their ears to listen. 
The son repeated his agonised whisper. The 
marjor's head shot round suddenly to a door behind 
him. When it was seen again, the champagne 
flush was gone, aoid there was a twitching and 
i^asm in the region about his lips. 

A mixed company^ is quick at reaiding signs* 
"What tiie; deuce is it?" said Lord Putnenham, 
putting up his ey-glass; "The naan is ill, or has- 
heard some bad news.?' Mrs. Wrigley, heaving in 
a frighty said anxiously, "O, what is it t" 

The series of ghastly twitches that shot across 
the major^s face were recollected long afterwards. 
So, too, was tile worn and agonised face of his son. 
More terrible, too, was it when the major, steadying 
his face, as. it were,, by his hand, forced a smile, 
and brought out a few words. 

" A little matter . aan siiffe you will excuse me a 
moiKientt . shall not be away long." 

Again his head turned round to thedoor behind 
him . ^f or there; were two to the dining-room . and 
by this one dinners^ entered. The white bon- 
nets . and tiie faces flushed witii heat inside . 
began to : turn t^ otiier white bonnets. Such do 



\ 



Major Cartef^s Wedding-day. 267 

not. like any " tmpkasantness." "Is it an illness ? " 
it was asked; " or what is it ?" 

Major Carter had gone to that door behind him, 
opened it, but had shut it hastily, and seemed to 
put his foot against it. He hurried down the 
room to the other, that twitch in his face working 
all the time,^ and strange falterings coming from 
him, which seemed to say, " Back in a moment . 
so sorry . a little business." In a second he had 
shot through the folding-door at the end. 

"Dammyl" said Colonel Foley, who had fol- 
lowed all his motions critically, addressing his 
neighbour, " it must be bailiffs I" The son with 
the miserable face followed him out. 

Outside,, in the street, the accustomed crowd 
were waiting . ^the carriages for the flushed faces, 
and the old-fashioned swinging chariot (the coach- 
box removed), with postilions and posters, to take 
away "the happy pain" The curious were ex- 
pectant. It was known that "she" was an "old 
woman." Public sympathy was for Aim. 

The gentlemen attached to the carriages were 
talking together in a group, and such of them as 
had canes leant on them. 

Suddenly . about, the time it was known that 
the major was addressing the company . a cab 
drove up, and two plain, blunt-looking men jumped 
out, hurried up the steps, but had rung the bell veiy 
quietly. As soon as the door was opened, they 



268 Never Forgotten. 

had stepped in promptly, without telling their 
business, and one of them, taking hold of the 
handle, had shut the door to, himself, very quickly. 
The gentlemen outside with the canes assumed 
them to be connected with the feast. They asked 
for the major. The servants of the house were all 
about the hall, some at the door listening (with the 
freedom pardonable on such an occasion) to the 
major's speech. 

The hard-working faithful son, who was up-stairs 
looking to the last preparations for his father^s 
departure, came down to them. One of the hard, 
plain men, with a sort of tap on his arm, took him 
aside, and gave him a short whisper, finishing off 
the whisper with a sharp nod. The son gave a 
gasp and a half cry, and looked at them with a 
wild, stupid stare. 

"Better you tell him," said the plain man, "than 
we . more decent of the two. Ah! two doors, I 
see." 

And he walked down the passage to the door by 
which the dinners made their entrance. 

On him had looked out for a second the white 
twitching face of the major. To the other, who 
waited in the hall, the white twitching face also 
presently showed itself. 

" Now, now," it said, " what is this ? At such a 
time, too ! Eeally, most inconvenient 1 Now, take 



Major Carter^ s Wedding-day. 269 

care," said he, dropping his voice; "is there no 
mistake V 

"On my word, Major Carter, no," said the 
blunt man. 

"Most inconvenient," said the other, rubbing 
his white fingers over and over each other. " At 
such a time, too. Come up-stairs with me to the 
drawing-room for a moment, will you?" 

The two rough men agreed, and they went up ; 
Major Carter, in his bright wedding finery, a little 
in front. Menial eyes wondered exceedingly. The 
hall door was now open, and the gentlemen on the 
steps (with the canes) looked in eagerly. There 
was quite a perspective of menial faces and canes. 
The two men and the major shut themselves in the 
drawing-room, and locked the doors. 

A few minutes later, the son, with a miserable 
and despairing face, looked into the dining-room, 
where was the feast in all its magnificence, and the 
flushed faces, and he whispered to the person 
nearest, imploringly, "Do go away, and get them 
to go away. O, something terrible has hap- 
pened ! " 

This was but a whisper, yet somehow every one 
in the room had an instinct of what was said. 
There was a sudden rustle of ladies rising, a 
sound as of chairs pushed back. Even the newly- 
made Mrs. Carter . ^in an agitation she had not 



270 Never Forgotten. 



kncrwn for years . hurzied to the door. The 
ladies fell back from her . ^the female public was 
outraged at haying been aeduced into this un- 
pleasantness. 

^^But what 15 it?" said the young cavalry lord. 
^'No one seems to know." 

"BaiUffs, as I hope to be saved," said Old'Foley. 
"I know the look of the thing. I r^nember 
Tommy Jackson, at a dinner he was giving to a 
few fellows ^ 

In a few moments, by some mysterious means, 
the word "Police^' had got into the room. No 
one could tell how, for no one could know. Per- 
haps th^ read it in guilty characters on the mise- 
rable son's face ; perhaps it was in the air, and had 
forced itself on every one present. Then it was, 
sauve qui pent. 

" Come, Blanche," said Lady Laura, gathering 
up her skirts as if she were in the ward of a Fever 
Hospital. " Let us get away from this dreadful 
place. Good gracious ! Never mind calling up 
the carriage . ^they will keep us hours . ^we can 
walk to it." She was thinking of young Spendle- 
sham. 

At the door, the old chariot and the posters 
were waiting in stupid immobility. The news had 
not reached the crowd outside. But there was a 
perfect rout. The gentlemen with the canes were 



Major Carter^ s Wedding-day. .271 

:biisy. The caoriages were planging and converg- 
ing to the door, while the old chariot stood waiting 
for its tenants, as if they were really to come out 
together. The crowd, thinking so too, gathered 
snore and more on ihe steps, and looked eagerly 
into the hall. 

They were never to come out together. Mrs. 
Wrigley was in her bedroom in fits, with a chari- 
table lady or two trjdng to help her. One gentle- 
man or two, whose sister or mother or wife had 
left a shawl or a parasol in the drawing-room, 
hurried up, and, trying the doors, found them 
locked. 

Inside, the miserable Carter sat handcuffed 
between two oflficers. They were waiting . chari- 
tably . for the house to be cleared. 

Finally, it was cleared. There were wild stories 
among the neighbours, and a small knot kept 
about the door for the rest of the day. In a short 
time arrived Mr. Speedy, who went in. Then the 
drawing-room doors were unlocked, and a cab 
called. Then the hall door was opened quickly 
and a short thin figure, with a white face, muffled 
in a great cloak, ran down the steps with a blunt 
man on each side, and got into the cab. " There 
he is ! " said the little knot. There was no glow- 
ing list of fashionable company in the morning 
papers; but in the evening papers was to be read 



272 Never Forgotten. 



for a penny an account of the whole. One called 
it " The Interrupted Wedding," another, the 
"Esclandre in Fashionable Life." It furnished 
abundant talk and discussion for a week, and 
every one who had luckily been at the breakfast 
was at a premium. 



Cafe againjl Major Carter. 273 



CHAPTER THE THIRTIETH. 

CASE AGAINST MAJOR OAKTER. 

While the hubbub goes on, and people are 
stopping each other in streets and clubs, asking, 
^^I say, what's this business about Carter?" we 
may look back some weeks to that stormy night at 
Bangor, when young Doctor Jones was away, and 
Miss Manuel, like an avenging angel, sitting before 
the old man, who was crouching in his chair. 
She literally wrung the whole story from him in 
"bits and patches. 

First, he recollected Major Carter, with his 
wife, coming to the place, and had seen them 
walking about very often. She, he had noticed, 
was so quiet and white, and always had her timid 
eye fixed on the major, as if expecting something. 
Her voice was gentle, and she feared her husband. 

VOL. ni. T 



274 Never Forgotten. 



The major very often, said the old man, came into 
the shop, and talked, and talked pleasantly too, but 
not so much to him. It was delightful to listen to 
him ; he knew the world so well. He was above 
them all in this place . miles above them. 

The old man's son had just then come home, 
and had begun to help in the business; and the 
major fancied him a good deal more tlian his 
father. His reverence for the major far exceeded 
that of the old man's. "He can do anything, 
that man," he often said to his father. "He 
could be prime minister. He can turn you and 
me round his. finger. We are mere babies to 
him." As indeed they were. And with Dr. 
Watkyn, Major Carter sometimes took a walk, 
though in a private direction, for he was careful, 
and saving of his dignity. And young Dr. 
Watkyn was heard to say often, that he would to 
Heaven that man could stay for years in the place. 
His words were like gold. 

Presently, Mrs. Carter, always ailing, began to 
become ill regularly, and the major became 
changed into the most devoted of nurse& 

" I was brought to see her," said the old man, 
"and my son was brought too. And I will con- 
fess that, being accustomed only to the plain,, in- 
telligible sicknesses of our rough countiy peopl% 
Mid ray son having mucL the same sort: of exr- 
perience, we ccnM ivotmaki& nmchof tfae^ martti^ 



Cafe againft Major Carter, 275 

The major had all the feeling in the world, and 
tried to help us as well as he could; but whajb 
could be made of a lady who was wasting and 
wasting, and growing sick, and then, growing well, 
and then wasting again? We could only call 
it consumption. At last, on one Sunday night, 

when we had been at meeting Must I tell 

you?" 

Miss Manuel, with her eyes on the coals, said, 
impassively, " Go on." 

Those Welsh coals, long imdermined like a little 
quarry, suddenly crumbled down and made him 
start. "Go on," she said again. "Finish." 

"Ah, begin, you. should say," he replied, "for it 
is all to come yet. That night I' had been rum^- 
maging among our old jars and drugs, looking for 
some calomel, and found, as you have often found, 
perhaps, a heap of things that I had no idea I had. 
As I was rummaging and dusting, the major came 
in and sat down despondingly upon a chair. ' Worse 
to-night, Jones,' he said. ' Only think,, the faithful 
partner, who has held to me, come weal, come woe, 
for so many years I ' 

" At this moment, a neighbour came in with a 
long story about his wife, Jenkin, who was lying 
ill, and could get no sleep at night from a herd 
of cats who had. their meetings at the back of his 
house. ^ Give me some poison, doctor,! he siiid* 

" I recollected finding among the other things a 



276 Never Forgotten. 



little strychnine, which got there I don't know 
how. I gave him some, and went out to the 
door with him to talk over the state of his wife, 
leaving the major behind leaning his head on his 
hand." 

Miss Manuel slowly turned her face away from 
the coals, and was looking eagerly at him. 

" I only say this," said the old man, looking rest- 
lessly from side to side. "Two days later, the 
neighbour came back for more of the poison, which 
had done good work, and I never could find it. 
Even that night I missed one of the bottles, but I 
did not know it was tliat one. When the neigh- 
bour came again I could not find it, and something 
whispered me that the major had taken it. It 
seemed unjust . ^unreasonable . wicked; but the 
idea took possession of me." 

The wind, long kept waiting, was now thun- 
dering at the old bow-window, as if it had sud- 
denly found a shoulder, and was driving furiously 
with that shoulder against the door. 

The old man shrunk away in terror, and stopped 
for a moment. 

" The neighbour came pretty often . for he was 
anxious about his wife . to see if I had found it, 
and came often, too, when the major was sitting 
in the parlour. ^ What a fuss,' he said one day, in 
a pet, * about that wretched stuff. I never come in 



Caje againft Major Carter. 277 

here but you are harping on it. Give that fellow 
something else, and have done with him.' 

" ^ Well/ said I, * major, it was very odd the way 
it disappeared/ 

"^Very odd?' he said, impatiently; ^in this 
wild nest of confusion, it is a wonder you can find 
anything.' 

" My son had to go up to the major^s wife the 
next night, who was very ill indeed, in something 
like catalepsy. ^ A new shape, father,' he said to 
me, when he came home. ' That woman is running 
the round of every sickness in the Clinical Medi- 
cine. I can make nothing of her. There she is 
now chattering and trembling, and her spine going 
like a pendulum ^ " 

"What idle stuff this is," said Miss Manuel, 
suddenly. " All foolish dreams I And this is your 
story? You mislay a dusty old bottle, and you 
talk of poisoning 1 A nightmare." 

"Ah I I wish it were," said he, crooning the 
words out sorrowfully. "But my son, a week 
later, searching in a cupboard in her room when 
the major had gone down, found the very bottle 
(for it had a special make) . I wish that had been a 
nightmare I" 

Again Miss Manuel's eyes sparkled with interest. 
She said, " You know something more." 

"Ay," said he, "and that she herself told us. 



278 Never Forgotten. 



That is her scared looks at him.- Never for a 
single moment . and this I remarked . did he allow 
any one to be in the room with her without being 
there himself. He was on guard always. Once 
she half whispered to me, ' For God's sake send me 
no more' (drugs, she meant), *they are killing 
me ;' and that moment he came with some cooling 
drink for her. . 

" ' No, no I no more,' she said, half rising up in 
her bed. * I will have nothing else. Ask these 
doctors. I shall die soon ; but not by ^ 

^' ' Hush, hush I' said the major, laying his hand 
on her shoulder. ^This is for your good, dear* 
You must take the things. Look ! I should ask 
nothing better myself.' And he drank some of it 
with relish, and with his eyes fixed upon her. She 
hung down her head and took it silently. * Ah,' he 
said, with a sigh, ^someway we two have never 
imderstood each other through our lives, and never 
will. It is too late, I fear, now.' I believed in 
the major that night. 

"Two nights after, Mrs. Carter died. They 
came running for me (I was stronger then than 
I am now) about eleven o'clock, and I went up. 
She was shaking and chattering with her teeth 
clenched, and the major and his son holding her 
by the wrists. I never heard such shrieks and 
such signs of agony. Her eyes were starting 
out of her head. But we could do nothing. 



Cafe againft Major Carter. 279 

Towards morning she got quiet, and by six, when 
one of those spasms was coming on again, went off 
with a shriek, and a sort of jump into the air. 

" Two days after she was buried, the major 
came to me in my parlour. He was in deep grief, 
and wanted a certificate of her death, and the 
cause of her death. It was a matter of form. I 
was very, silent, and, I si;ippose, suspicious. *Why 
do you want this ? ' I said. 

^^ ^ As a matter of form,' he said. ' I must look 
to these things for the soke of my son. It is 
odious to me at this time, when I should be at the 
grave of my wife; but some one must look to 
these things. We must have this, to get some 
little property to which she is entitled.' 

" ' How ? ' I said. ' Through a will ?' 

'' ' O, that is no matter,' he said, shortly. * All 
I want is the formal paper, just to satisfy those 
insurance people.' 

" I started up. ^ O, it was an insurance, then ? 
Ah, Major Carter ! ' 

" He stamped his foot. * What do you mean I ' 
he said, turning on me. ^ Take care 1 No tricks 
of this sort. I warn you it will be dangerous 
trying them with me.' 

"*But I don't know,' I said (he had quite 
scared me), ^ what I am to sign. I know no cause 
of death. It seems all mysterious.' 

"^Then,' said he, promptly, ^try your "post 



280 Never Forgotten. 



mortem." Look for yourselves, both of you. I 
give full permission. If you doubt your own skill 
in these matters, get some one else that has skill, 
and I will pay. What is it you are at ? ' 

" My son here came in, and Major Carter ad- 
dressed him. 

" * What is this humour your father has got 
into ? ' he said. ' I can't follow him. He is 
hesitating about giving the plain formal thing 
always given. God knows I have trouble enough 
without having old men's scruples to remove. See 
to it, Watkyn, do. I am tired and sick.' 

"I am weak, I am afraid, but my son spoke 
with me, and reasoned with me, and showed me 
what he thought was the folly of these scruples. 
Later, too, when the major's cold eye fell upon me, 
it quite terrified me. That night he came back 
when my son had just gone out, stayed exactly 
a minute, but during that minute fixed that 
dreadful eye upon me, and said, coldly and dis- 
tinctly, ^Mind what you are about, and take a 
friendly hint. I have crushed many as obscure, 
as an obscure country doctor. Take care I don't 
stamp you under my foot. Be wise ;' and he threw 
the paper down on the table ; ^ make up your weak 
mind bofore the night is over ! ' 

" Well, I signed that night, and . and have had 
a weight upon my conscience ever since. It has 
put ten years to my sixty years, and has made 



Caje againft Major Carter. 281 

me decrepit and miserable. These stonny nights, 
-which come so often, make me tremble. Listen ! 
there it goes; and I often think, if I were to 
be called away in one of these wild hurricanes . 

^hat '' 

. For more than an hour he sat and cowered 
Tinder Miss Manuel's eye, sometimes shrinking 
away in alarm, and stopping short in what he was 
telling; refusing, in abject terror, to say more. 
Then would come a burst of the wind, and a 
sudden howl from the storm outside, and he would 
shrink and fling his head into the cushions of his 
chair, as if it were the earth. When he looked 
up again, he would see the calm face of Miss 
Manuel opposite to him, like a judgment. He was 
driven on. When all he had to tell had been 
wrung from him, one of the wild hurricanes came 
down the street, and brought with it the clatter 
and the roar and the metallic jingling of dislodged 
slates cantering down the street on their edge. 
With it, too, came the sound of horse's feet and of 
wheels, which stopped suddenly at the door. Then 
there were voices. The old man was on his feet 
in an agony of terror. 

" It is a judgment on me," he said. " He is 
come again, and he will tell that man, and I shall 
be destroyed. Go ! go quick I leave me here. O, 
if he should find you ^" 

" Hush !" said Miss Manuel. " You may trust 



282 Never Forgotten. 



me. No one shall know a word, nor even the 
whisper of a word." And she had flown to the 
door, and was upnstairs in her room in a second. 

It was the son come home. The eminent country 
doctor had by some accident been beforehand with 
him. The pink Welshman was sonred. He started 
when he saw his father at the door. "Not in 
bed!" he said, roughly. "What work is this? 
What have you been at? Come 1" 

The old man quavered out some excuse about 
having fallen asleep. But the son was suspicious, 
with the suspicion, too, of ill humour, and went 
away lowering at the pale and trembling father. 
He was yet more suspicious when Miss Manuel 
announced that she was going away, and took an 
early train to London. Most jojrful was the nuud 
in whose service she was. 

Later, Mr. Speedy, and, later still, the Crown 
solicitors came to gather up yet further details. 
They groped and ferreted here and there, but 
they found the scent had grown cold. There were 
terrible gaps, and a dozen links wanting here and 
there, and no dexterity of the legal whitesmith 
could join them. Still, there was " a fair case" to go 
to a jury on . ^a case handsomely suspicious. But 
misfortunes came thickly. Old Doctor Jones died 
suddenly; and though his testimony, such as it 
was, was forthcoming in another shape, still it 
would not have Such, axi effect " with the jury." 



Cafe agmnft Majwr Carter. 288 

An eminent Nisi Prius advocate had been secured 
for the prisoner, who would "knock to pieces" 
the " wretched case for the Crown/' made up, as 
it was, of "old medicine bottles," and of the 
damaged capacities of a miserable old dotard, who 
** crooned" all day and night over a fire, and who, 
his neighbours would show, had not been in his 
right mind for years. Claysop, M.P., " in his place" 
in the House, put a question to the Home Secre- 
tary, and threatened to move for papers and corre- 
spondence, and the Home Secretary said he would 
communicate with the legal advisers of the Crown. 
In various newspapers there were articles headed 
" Major Carter^s Case." It was taken up so warmly, 
and every day grew so weak, that presently all pro- 
ceedings were dropped. It was spoken of by Major 
Carter^s "friends" as "a conspiracy." But Mr. 
Speedy and the insurance office kept him at bay ; 
and certainly Major Carter . ^never attempted to 
enforce his claim by process of law. 



284 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST. 

THE " moderates' CLUB." 

The town still talked for some days of this 
" painful" business, and a morning penny journal 
had a gaudy leading article, worked in all the rich 
colours of word painting. At the Moderates' Cluh, 
Sir Hopkins Pocock, now become faintly queru- 
lous, and with a grievance in his pocket which he 
took out to show every one that he met, acquired 
some little importance by his patent rights in pre- 
vious portions of the major^s history. " I knew all 
about him ; I know all about him," he said, push- 
ing himself into a knot of Moderators. " Bless you ! 
there was a very curious business at Monaco, long 

ago. I never told of it before; but now ^* 

And then Sir Hopkins began a calumnious little 
history about a bill, and the clergyman of the 



The ^'Moderate/ Clubr 285 

place's son, who was only fourteen, sir, and looked 
welve (" quite a child ! O, it was very bad ! "); by 
eason of which adventure the major had to hurry 
,way precipitately from the place. Into which little 
tory, however, he managed to introduce so many 
ngenious references to his own hard condition, 
md to the cruel way in which his public services 
lad been acknowledged, that the more youthful 
Moderators yawned in his face, and, going away, 
old other Moderators that " Old Pocock was at it 
igain. 

To this society belonged Romaine and Fermor, 
ind many more of the same standing. It was a 
little select, more fashionable than political, and 
toRomaine's exertions Fermor had indeed owed 
bis entrance. This obligation . ^with some more 
Df the same social cast . ^he was now carrying 
about like a coal of fire on his head. On this 
night Fermor was dining by himself at a lonely 
table, full of bitterness. The club joint was taste- 
less to him ; for, close by, with his back to him, 
was Romaine with three others dining in great 
spirits, and Romaine, more sarcastic, boisterous, 
noisy, and even insolent, than usual. Old gentle- 
men, busy with their newspapers, protested with 
fierce looks against his merriment. They were 
talking of the wedding. 

" I knew it all along," said Romaine, in a noisy 
burst. " I told every man I met it would come to 



286 Niver Forgotten. 

a business. Ask. Wallis I And yet a good fellow! 
I am Sony forhim^ I am indeed.. ELe was always 
civil to me. I believe: it. isa conspiracy; or, if 
if s not, it's all one. I like him die b^ter for it. I 
vnah. all the old wives in; the worid could be got ni 
of in the same way. I do, on my soul ! But he 
had enemies. dozens of them. I have reason to 
know it." 

^ Tell us about it, Bomaine," said some of the 
otiierSi "Do now.'* 

" O, it will all come out by-and-by," said he. 
"They want to turn him into a felon. I suspect 
a certain lady-friend of ours to be at the bottom of 
it ; one of your fine flashing Judith-and-Holof ernes 
pattern. 

"Bet you a sovereign I. name her," said a man 
opposite him. " Alf red-^lace ! eh ? " 

" Keep your sovereign for your tailor, my 
friend," said Komaine, contemptuously, " For a. 
wonder, you have made a guess. You all know," 
he said, dropping his voice, "that Miss Manud!' 
She has done the thing, I'll swear! I know her 
touch ! It's so shabby, and so like a woman : all 
about a sister of hers.'' 

" She's a fine woman, though," said the " man" 
who had offered the sovereign. 

" Fine woman I " said Bomaine, with disgusts 
" I hate to hear fellows talk in that way, as if they 
were speaking of joints of meat; Fine or not fine, 



The ''Moderate/ Clubr 287 

I dislike her. She is dangerous and spiteful. I 
recommend all here to keep clear of her." 

Eermor listened, and heard all this with tingling 
cheeks. Her name to be bandied about in this low 
way in a public room^ before waiters and " men ! " 
Long he had been watching for an opportunity of 
some q^uarrel with Eomaine ; some reasonable open- 
ings when he could "put him down*" It seemed 
to be now hurrying on. 

omaine had turned suddenly, and had seen 
Fermor. " O, ho I " he said, " we must mind what 
we say. How de do, Fermor? He is one of her 
sacred band. Don't, denounce ui^ Fermor." 

There were a dozen feet betweaQ Fermor and 
the others. Over Mich a space he could not bring 
himself to hurl back the retort he wished ; so he 
made no answer. The other gave a significant 
glance at his fellows. He was rampant with mis- 
chief and i^irits. " I can't imderstand," he went 
on, "such a thing in nature as strong-brained 
single women who can go about like single men. T 
i^uM like to have it explained to me. The idea 
of having, a club at one's house, and taking in all 
the men of the town 1 You talk of a fine woman ! 
now I like something petite . something pretty,. 
and soft, and dainty," and: he looked over to Fermor. 
The "men" laughed, and Fermor thought it waa 
because they kaew to what Eomaine wa alluding; 
He would have given the world to have grappled 



288 Never Forgotten. 

with him on the spot ; but he did not know how to 
begin. 

Presently Romaine and his men went away 
noisily to the smoking-room, and then to the 
biUiard-room. Fermor got up promptly and fol- 
lowed them. He never took his eyes off Romaine. 
The other seemed to understand him perfectly, and, 
as he smoked and played, kept up a running fire of 
strokes at him all the night ; " nagging," it would 
be called in poptdar slang. Young Brett promptly 
dropped in and looked on. 

" Thais the style," said Romaine, pocketing a 
ball with extraordinary violence. " Look at that, 
Fermor! That's the way / treat any man, 
woman, or child, that interferes with my play. 
Pocket them, eh f " 

He looked at Fermor insolently as he walked 
past him to make a fresh stroke. 

" Let them get out of my way, I warn them. 
There again I" and he executed a vindictive cannon. 
" I say, now, Brett, we'll call the white ball Fermor. 
There he goes. Pocket again." And he walked 
round once more. " Red ball. Now, Fermor, you 
know who the red ball is for. There she goes. 
No ; not quite, this time I " He missed his stroke. 

Fermor sat on the benches with compressed lips. 
He was waiting till the room cleared a little more. 
There were only half a dozen men there. 



Under a Lamp. 289 



CHAPTER THE THHtTY-SECOND. 

UNDER A LAMP. 

" Who is going to the fancy ball, rout, what- 
ever it is?" asked Romaine, again stooping to 
play. " I am, I know. I have arranged a tableau 
for myself . my own actors. Ring, Brett, like a 
good lad, for brandies and sodas. I wish there 
was a company to lay on soda in the streets like 
a main. Fd pay what rates they asked. I hear 
Fermor here is going with a lantern and cloak as 
Guy Fawkes . ^ha, ha ! There we go again ! No- 
thing like it. What dress is your fine friend 
going in, eh, Fermor ? The Queen of Sheba, eh? 
I should like to tell that lady some home truths. 
For the world I would not breathe her name in a 
mixed company, of course; but Fermor under- 
stands perfectly." 

Three of the men suddenly went out. Fermor, 

VOL. III. u 



290 Never Forgotten. 



boiKng furiously at the recollection of past injuries, 
thinking, too, of the rebellion at home, thought 
the moment was .come. He had a thought, too, 
of some false chivalry, as he fancied himself the 
champion of Miss Manuel. He jumped from his 
place. 

" I have put up with this too long," he said. "I 
won't bear it. You have laid yourself out the 
whole evening to insult me. I tell you I won't 
bear it." 

"Well, don't," said Romaine, getting his cue 
into position. " Just stand a little away, my friend, 
and continue your remarks at the other side of the 
table." 

" I will not listen to your slanders. on a lady, 
that is. It is infamous, unworthy ! Before leaving 
this roomy you must retract, sir. I tell you, you 
shall." 

Eomaine laughed loudly and good humouredly. 
" We have stirred you up," he said . " with a bil- 
liard cue. However, let us hear you out. Go on. 
Well?" 

" I say, Fermor, Fermor," said Young Brett, 
anxiously, " what are you at ? " 

" He must retract," said Fermor, excitedly. '^Tfl 
have none of his insolent speeches at me ! I shan't 
be made the butt of his smart words. You heard 
him. Every one here heard him. I have long 
been wanting the opportunity." 



Under a Lamp. 291 



" Nonsense," said Young Brett. " Don't you see 
it is all a joke ? " 

"Don't interfere with me, Mr. Brett," said 
Fermor, turning on him. " This man, Romaine, 
understands me perfectly; it is a long account. 
He has other things to reckon with me for. He 
knows it." 

"Well," said Komaine, suddenly becoming 
grave, and resting on his billiard cue. "WeD, 
here I am now, and here is the opportunity. 
Shut the door, Brett, like a good boy. Now, let 
us hear all about it. I am now before you, Mr. 
Fermor, or Captain Fermor. I only give you a 
caution in the friendliest spirit imaginable ; don't 
try anything of this sort," he said, doubling his 
fingers. " I never boast ; but I give you my word 
of honour, I broke a man's skull in a fall, who did 
try it. I didn't intend it. Now, what is it you 
want?" 

Fermor glared at him. . "Not boast!" he said. 
"I am no match for you at that, I know. 
But " 

" No, you are not," said the other, " nor at any- 
thing else. Do you want pistols, and police on the 
ground, and aU London laughing at us ? A cheap 
way of getting a reputation for bravery. Are you 
for a theatrical duel, with the principals arrested 
and bound over ? A pubKc challenge in the public 
room of a club I Not a soul to know of it I I ad- 
u2 



292 Never Forgotten. 



mire you . ^upon my soul I do. Now what else do 
you want, Mr. Fermorl " 

More " men " were dropping in now, brought by 
that curious instinct which leads men to the scene 
of a commotion. There was a sort of a little 
audience. Eomaine's eye rested on him, and Ro- 
maine's hand rested on the cue. 

Termor did not feel easy under that eye. He 
tried a poor abortion of a sneer. "I have no 
knack," he said, " at those smart words. I am not 
a match for you at ^" 

Again Romaine laughed with noisy good humour. 
" Indeed you are not. Termor. Neither at billiards, 
nor at the gloves, nor at the tongue, nor at any- 
thing else in the world." 

" I thought you never boasted !" struck in Ter- 
mor, bitterly. 

" O, sometimes . a little," said the other. " We 
are all weak, you know. Now, my friend, while 
you are making up your mind as to what you are 
going to do, pray let me go on with my game. 
There I the old story. Pocket again. Ha, ha ! " 

Termor almost ground his teeth with rage 
But he had a curious shyness, which in presence 
of a crowd, palsied his wits, if not his tongue. 
He could have readily found such rough stock 
words as, "you are a ruffian, a coward," and the 
like. But, to do him justice, he shrank from such 
Billingsgate. The "men" looked on, wondering. 



Under a Lamp. 293 



If faces could stab, wound, beat, scourge, then 
was Somaine tied to a stake, and gashed and 
scourged thoroughly. But, as it was, he saw that 
he had the victory. 

.^ What is it all about ? " said the " men." 

" We have been having an argument, Fermor 
and I," he said, " and I believe I have the best of 
it. Another good stroke." 

At last the games ended, the night ended, the 
"men" dropped away. "Now to get our great- 
coat," said Romaine. " I have made a very good 
night's work of it, beaten everybody all round,'' 
and he looked at Termor. He lit a cigar at the 
door. Fermor followed him close. 

"Well," said an old member, "well, Fermor, 
you are about the most even-tempered man I 
ever came across. Hang me! but I would have 
slapped him in the face . I would." Fermor flew 
out after Romaine. 

" You don't mean to tell me you are coming my 
way ? " said Mr. Romaine. " Well, well." 

"You shan't escape me now," said Fermor, 
walking hurriedly beside him. "You have no 
audience here. Once for all, you must accoimt to 
me for your behaviour. I have you now." 

"Beginning again?" said Romaine, buttoning 
Tip his coat, and puffing his cigar. " Hints, lessons, 
all thrown away, I see." 

" It is unbearable," said Fermor, walking f uri- 



294 Never Forgotten. 



ously. "You have no spirit. Any other man 
would have ^You are a ^^ 

"Hush, hush, nonsense," said Romaine. "I 
don't think you know the full force of what you 
are saying. As you say, there is no audience 
here, and you are getting courage. My good 
friend, it is well you did not bring out that ugly 
word that was on your lips. I tell you calmly and 
candidly, if you had ^" 

" Well ? " said Fermor, trying a sneer. 

" Well ? I should have waited until we came 
to this lamp-post, seized you so, and I fear . ^broken 
your spine." (In a second he had Fermor pinioned 
by both arms, with his spine to the "shoulder" 
of the lamp-post.) " If you doubt me, just as an 
experiment try and say it. Come ! " 

Under the lamplight came from Komaine's eyes 
such a sharp, wicked flash, and there was such an 
Indian savageness about his hps, that Fermor saw 
in a second that he was in earnest. 

Luckless Fermor! it was the deepest humilia- 
tion. But there was a ferocity in the other^s face 
that could not be trifled with. Already he saw 
his knee half bent, ready to be raised to lay upon 
his chest. As it was, he could hardly gasp. There 
might have been a temptation in the other's mind 
to use this tempting opportunity to rid himself of 
one who was in his way. 

Writhing, groaning, frantic with helpless fury, 



Under a Lamp. 295 

he thought he would have gone mad. He could 
not speak for mortificatian. The eyes of Eomaine 
were a few inches from his own eyes, looking at 
him with malicious eagerness. The cigar of Eo- 
maine was close to his cheek. Some one passing 
by, stopped a moment and laughed. But some 
one else stopped suddenly under the lamp, started, 
and spoke : 

^^FermcMr!" he said, "here, and in this way! 
What is this about ? " 

"Ah, Hanbury!" he said. "I am so glad. 
Come and look. Look at our friend. He has been 
a little pettish to-night . given me all manner of 
trouble." 

This was, indeed, humiliation. Hanbury felt 
for him. 

" Come, come," he said, " this is the public 
street. It is very boyish, I must say. Come, let 
him go. Do, now." 

^^ It is the public street, my friend," said the 
other, gaily. " That is just the reason." 

" You must. Here, I want to speak to you, 
Bomaine. Look . suppose some of the club men 
were to pass ? Nonsense. You have had enough 
axnusement." 

He was v^ strong . ^stronger than Romaine . 
and gently and good humouredly drew him off. 

He let Fermor go. " It won't do after all, Fer- 
mor ! You will have to pay a fellow, as they do 



296 Never Forgotten. 



in Ireland, and get him to do the job. There's 
your hat. Don't try that again, I would advise 
you. It was too tempting. You haye no idea 
what a little pressure of the knee will stave in 
the chest in that position. Now don't persist in 
seeing me home. In fact, my good Fermor, as a 
general rule, don't think of interfering with me." 

Fermor was now free. All his fury burst out. 
He drew back, and was going to fly at Eomaine, 
but the latter threw his cigar on the ground, and, 
raising his arm, said, in a tone there was no mis- 
taking, " Take care, take care ! Hanbury, I give 
you notice, I shall not put up with any tricks of 
this sort. Take care, now. I warn you." 

Hanbury stepped between them. He saved 
Fermor. " Go home," he said, " Fermor ; it is all 
a joke." 

Romaine walked away very fast, and even siDg- 
ing, and left the unhappy Fermor glowering, 
almost moaning, with rage. But he was half 
tamed. " This man has a spell over me," he said, 
passionately. The moment Romaine was gone he 
felt a frantic impulse to rush after him, and again 
" bring him to account." He went home that night 
degraded to himself, and the men at the club were 
very jocular over the "devilish diverting way" 
that Romaine had handled him. 

The spectacle had, however, troubled Young 
Brett, that excellent Samaritan, not a little. He 



Under a Lamp. 297 



understood what was in Fermor^s mind, and he 
began to pity him. He was his old friend, and 
his old friend he had admired so. " He was no 
match," he thought, " for that rude rough man." 
So this honest boy was with Miss Manuel next 
day, telling her the whole. " I am sorry for him, 
indeed I am," he said. "I wish I could help 
him. And indeed. Miss Manuel, you have a friend 
in him, for he was fighting your battle like a 
trump. Not, indeed, that any one was saying 

anything . ^that is ^" And he stopped in some 

confusion. 

Pauhne smiled. " Do you think I mind ? You 
may tell me the truth. They were abusing me, 
and he defended me. Well ?" 

" Defended you," said Yoimg Brett, with en- 
thusiasm, " it was regular championship. He would 
have fought Eomaine for you. Really, he wanted 
to have him out at once. You ought to like him, 
I say. Miss Manuel." 

After Young Brett was gone. Miss Manuel 
thought of this with softness. " It is something 
to have a friend," she said, " and if I had any in- 
fluence with him for her sake, I might use it to 
bring him back to that child who hates me so." 
Later, she sat down and wrote, and directed a 
letter to Captain Fermor. 



298 Newr Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE THIRTY-THHiD. 

NEWS FOR LADY LAUIU. 

This was now the day of Lady Laura's great 
festivaL Everything had been hurried on, and 
everything was ready . ^under her captaincy. She 
had found money, time, stage properties, people, 
everything; for, even in their own department, 
Blanche and Laura junior were to all intents and 
purposes utterly helpless. She would have turned 
out the same in any department. Had she been 
suddenly appointed to the commissariat in the 
Crimea, she would have found a sudden instinct 
for the duties, and have performed them quite as 
well as the men of the regular service. She now 
showed that she knew about scenes and about 
painting, and with good sense directed the working 
hands whom she was obliged . alas I at great cost. 



News for Lady Laura, * 299 

to have in. She even trained Xiaura junior and 
Blanche, and taught them some happy and effec- 
tive poses. She found time for all this, and it was 
not known that the channing Swiss shepherdess 
dress, in which Laura was to appear, had been pri- 
vately put together by those old, and worn, and un- 
tiring ^gers, though popularly believed to be a 
triumph of Madame Adelaide's skill. She had 
been a little disturbed at Young Spendlesham's 
absence from the wedding breakfast ; but she soon 
discovered that he had been called away suddenly 
to the country, but would be back that evening 
positively. For the moment she had been dis- 
quieted, but this news set everything straight. 

On this last day she was everywhere . in work- 
ing clothes, as it were. She overlooked the men 
putting up a canopy at the hall door, and others 
busy forming the balcony into a temporary chamber, 
which she knew would be valuable for the purposes 
for which she had lived. These were sad expenses ; 
but they were of the last necessity, and she had 
got them put up far cheaper than any man or 
woman in town could have had them put up. 
Nor was she without hopes of profit for her outlay; 
for already she seemed to detect on the edge of the 
web she had spun round Laura junior (Laura 
junior was incapable of forming a web for herself), 
a figure of fair proportions looking in curiously. 
That night might see him floundering helplessly 



300 Never ForgtAten. 



in the net. Success brings success, just as eating 
brings on appetite. 

To this day, too, many had been looking forward. 
But in the Fermor house it was to bring on a 
crisis. The unhappy man had come home. de- 
graded it may be . ^but full of miserable pique and 
rage, that could not find the object it desired, but 
thirsted for a victim. He associated Mrs. Fermor 
with his treatment. "If I die for it,'' he said, 
"she shall not have this opportunity!" It was 
remarked by the ladies and gentlemen below, that 
the lord and lady of the house "did not speak" 
now. News of the family emeutes had penetrated 
to neighbouring areas. Mrs. Fermor . ^to whose 
injuries every da/s neglect added . met his treat- 
ment with stem defiance, and was girding herself 
up for this last struggle. 

Not, indeed, that she cared for that wretched 
show. She shrank from it, and from the unknown 
issues that rested on it. But her coral lips, a little 
thinner than they had been, were pressed together 
with the tightness of defiance. One soft word, 
and they had been relaxed ; but she only saw cor- 
responding defiance, and a sort of unconditional 
hostility. 

It was a gloomy day, and seemed charged with 
presentiments. Later on, towards the evening, 
came the servant to know at what hour the carriage 
would be wanted. Mrs. Fermor was passing up- 



News for Lady Laura, 301 

stairs, and she heard her lord in the hall below, 
saying in a loud sour voice, " It is not wanted to- 
night. Who said it was ? What does the fellow 
come worrying here fori He will be sent to if 
required." 

" He was told to call up, sir. Mrs. Fermor sent 
me. 

"I tell you he is not wanted," said Fermor, 
furiously. 

And the serving gentleman, at the evening tea, 
informed his friends below that up-stairs they 
would be " Hat it again afore night !" 

Mrs. Fermor, on the stairs, heard this interdict 
of the carriage. "So he wants to drive me to 
extremities," she said. "Let him, then. Here, 
John !" she called out, " don't let the man go yet." 
And she stepped down excitedly . to battle. 

She shut the study door. " What is this about 
the carriage?" she said, trying to speak calmly. 
" I shall want it to-night." 
" Is it to go to this thing?" he answered her. 
" No matter for what purpose," she replied. 
" I am entitled to it. I am sure you don't intend 
to expose our affairs to the talk of the people 
below." 

"Not for that. I told you before I don't choose 
you to go to this place. I am determined, I know, 
and I want no argument about it." 
"That remains to be seen," she said, her foot 



302 Never Forgotten. 



beating the floor. "I am going. Fortunately, 
there are other carriages to be got." 

" Mr. Eomaine's, I suppose?" he said, with a 
sneer. 

" Mr. Romaine is a gentleman, and a true friend 
to me," she answered, with trembling voice. "He 
would not expose me in this way." 

"You had better go with him in a cab, I 
suppose," said he. " Don't talk to me about him. 
I don't want it. I have made up my mind, 
and I have told you so, and I give no reasons. 
There!" 

" No wonder you don't like to talk of him," she 
went on, quite flaming with excitement ; " you are 
brave to me, but I know you are in terror of him." 

Fermor turned white. This allusion was but 
an accident, but it seemed as though she had 
heard about that night, and was taunting him. 
He started up, and pointed to the door. "After 
fAz5," he said, almost choking, "leave me. Now 
we understand each other. Go away, I say. I 
shall end this in some way . and before long, too. 
It's all over now." 

He did not know what he was saying or what 
he was doing. She was a little scared, because 
not understanding the real reason of his fury, and 
let tlie man go without a word about the carriage. 
But wlien she was alone, the original defiance- 



News for Lady Laura. 303 

returned, and, according to the old formula, em- 
phasised with a little fierce stamp, "if she was to 
die for it," she would not yield. 

It was now past six o'clock. Fermor was still 
raging in his study. He heard voices in the hall, 
and burst out: "What is this? What is this 
noise?" It was another "man" with a message 
from Madame Ga/s. The grand dress would be 
home at eight, punctually ; it might be depended 
on. There were some alterations; but a dozen 
hands were working on it simultaneously, like 
slaters on a roof. Fermor retreated into his study, 
trembling, but with a grim idea in his head. 

At Lady Laura's house the moment was draw- 
ing on. By incredible exertion everything had 
been got ready, and the "men" happily out of 
the house. The last touches had been given, 
and we know by whom. Indeed, the first and 
middle, as well as the last touches, had all come 
from the same hand. Tired, fagged, but dressed 
in her finery (the first "down," too, for Laura 
junior and Blanche were always late), she was in 
the field, walking round her rooms, now clear, 
clean, fresh, and lighted. Here, in the drawing- 
room, was that pretty stage at one end, and the 
flowers, and the lights ; and here, below, was the 
supper set out, under the same superintendence, 
with a small corps of select and steady waiters. 



304 Never Forgotten. 



who were known to be equal to more work, at 
the same tariff, than their fellows. The women 
were waiting to take the cloaks . in fact, all was 
ready. She went up again after this final sun^ ey, 
and stood at the fire alone in her room, trying 
to warm her weary foot upon the fender. As 
she looked down on that weary foot, and then 
looked into the coals, perhaps she saw there, in 
the little fiery crags and gullies, scraps of that 
weary panorama she called her life, the course 
that she had worked out with weariness and 
buffeting. Perhaps, too, she was longing that, 
just as the little fiery craters and precipices crum- 
bled down upon one another, so her life, too, might 
end at last ; and perhaps she was wishing for some 
final repose . ^just as her worn and aching head 
was then longing for some physical repose upon a 
pillow. It was noted how in those days the people 
under her found her softer and less imperious and 
fretful. 

The clock on the chimney-piece had struck 
nine. Every one had been enjoined to be there 
early, on account of the dramatic part. The 
company were about due now. Hark to the 
rolling of the carriages. Whatever she had been, 
thinking of, whether sad or hopeful, she now with- 
drew the weary foot from the fender, and " reco-' 
vered " herself. Who would come first ? for ther^ 
was the thunder of wheels at the gate, and the 



News for Lady Laura, 305 

quick plunge of horses suddenly checked; and 
here was the smile of reception snatched hurriedly, 
as it were, from her pocket, and fitted on. Behind 
it was, perhaps, a real smile, for she was thinking 
of Blanche's or Laura junior^s lovers. 

As she took her post at the door (the arrived 
were undraping below, and receiving a scrap of 
visiting card as a token), the select waiter came up 
with a note on a salver. An apology, of course, 
which was welcome ; for she always left a margin 
for such things, and room was sadly wanted. She 
thought she knew the hand. It was from Sir John 
Westende. 

"I never asked Aim," she said, wondering. 
Then she read it with a strange stare, that mys- 
tified the waiter, who was standing by, salver in 
hand: 

" Dear Lady Laura, . ^My duty to my ward. 
Lord Spendlesham, has compelled me to take a 
course I much regret. For many reasons I could 
not approve of the alliance he was about making, 
but in a conversation which I had with him yester- 
day, I prevailed on him to take the view which is 
best for his own interest. The thing, as you 
will admit, is wholly out of the question. He is in 
full possession of all the details . quite takes the 
view that I take, and is now down at my house in 
the country. But, with a generosity which does 

VOL. III. X 



306 Never Forgotten. 



him honour, he has proposed to let you take the 
business of breaking the affair off cm yourself. 
And if you think fit to adopt this course, you will 
write to him to-night a letter to that effect. It 
is a very painful and unfortunate business al- 
together, but you wiU see, with your usual good 
sense, that it was impossible it could go on. 
" I am, dear Lady Laura, 
" Yours truly, 

" John Westende." 

Did she utter a sound beyond a sigh, or did the 
"steady" waiter see pass across her face more 
than a short spasm? He was now chanting "Mr. 
and Mrs. Henry Wandesforde ! Miss Wandes- 
forde." And those guests were defiling up the 
stairs, Mr. Wandesforde pulling hard at his gloves. 
Mrs. Wandesforde's wrists chinked with the sound 
of rattling bracelets as she received the hostess's 
warm welcome. Mr. Wandesforde's figure, in a 
sort of annular eclipse, and partially in shadow 
from clouds of tulle in front, bowed from a dis- 
tance. He did not suspect what ghastliness was 
behind the smile that greeted them. Then the 
stream set in, and began to ascend steadily. 

Now came Laura junior rustling down (Blanch 
was above, in the Swiss peasant's dress). Th 
mother went through all the routine dutiei^ 
earnestly and with activity. She was in motion- 



News for Lady Laura. 307 

always . ^in the motion of speech when not in 
that of figure. She went through all the iPeatures 
of the part without omitting a single thing. She 
had a word for all. She carried on the thing 
" behind the scenes." She flew up to her daughter 
. ^poor Blanche, in the Swiss peasant's dress . 
and encouraged her kindly, and with sympathy, 
to do her part well. Those words fell strangely 
on Blanche's ear. 

" Has he come, mamma f " she asked, settling 
the " bands " of the peasant dress. 

^^ By-and-by, love," said mamma. " I am afraid 
he will not be here till late . ^he has written to say 
so. But that makes no matter, you know., You 
are looking charming, dear, in that dress." 

And Blanche, a good girl, perhaps, after seeing 
a patch of warm sunlight . a sunlight something 
like afiFection . on that worn, broken landscape, 
put up her lips and kissed her. Talk of the Greek 
play-writers and their terrible element of fate and 
necessity, here was as fine a bit of tragedy as they 
could have thought of. 

The show began, and the show went on. She 
never relaxed. Mr. Bomaine had come to the 
front, anxious to consult her about Mrs. Fermor. 
She had not come. " We could not begin without 
her, you know," he said. 

" O, we can send for her, to be sure," said Lady 
Laura, with alacrity. 

x2 



308 Never Forgotten. 



" And Spendlesbam," said Bomaine^ " what is 
he about? No one seems to be in time." 

"Later . all later," said Lady Lam*a, with a 
smile. " There is no hurry, you see." 

" Well, then, we may begin," said Mr. Bomaine, 
" and I myself will go for . ^the Fermors." 

John Hanbury was there beside him, and almost 
heard his speech. Romaine gave him a bitter 
look of impatience. He was caring very little for 
the show of that night. He was thinking of some 
other place. 

It began with the Parting of Hector and 
Andromache, the Trojan hero, in fine foil armour, 
depicted by yoimg Wainwright; the tearful wife 
by the lovely Cecilia Towler, Lady Towler^s 
eldest. There was appropriate music, suggestive 
of Troy and the hostile Greeks ; and the " Part- 
ing," lasting about a minute, the tableau was over. 
Lady Laura was seen applauding. They all 
thought how she was enjoying it. Mr. Eomaine, 
out on the landing, and biting his nails, was rest- 
less and impatient. Finally, he " plunged " down 
stairs angrily and left the house. John Hanbury, 
who had been watching his motions quietly, very 
soon after glided down stairs, and also left the 
house. 



Danger. 309 



CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FOURTH. 

DANGER. 

In Fermor's house, with Fermor sitting in his 
study as in a den watching jealously for something, 
the same state of things continued on that dismal 
evening. Some one else was watching as feverishly 
up-stairs. 

"So he has told her," he thought, pacing up 
and down, " and she dares to taunt me. I shall 
hreak her yet." He stopped, for he heard a 
sound of feet and shuffling in the hall. It was 
the sound he was looking for. A man had come 
with a great black box, a huge casket, containing 
the treasure. 

The dozen hands simultaneously busy on the 
dress had it finished to the moment . some one 
Mralking up and down, and urging them on as an 



310 Never Forgotten. 



overseer does the galley-slaves at the oar. It was 
sent home to the minute, for Madame Gay was 
nice about her reputation. Fermor came out of the 
den. This night he was sadly excited . ^so excited 
as to do what at another time he would have thought 
ungentlemanly. 

" Bring that in here," he said. 

Mrs. Fermor^s own maid was tripping down to 
welcome the treasure, to take it out into her own 
arms. There was great curiosity in the house as 
to how " missus" would look in the " playacting" 
dress. 

" Bring that in here 1 " repeated Fermor, " box 
and all. Do you hear me ? Must I tell you every- 
thing in this house twice over ? " 

It was brought in without a word. The lady's 
maid flew up-stairs to her mistress with the news. 

" Nowj^ thought Fermor, locking the door, and 
getting his hat, "we shall see." Madame Gay's 
great black box lay there . imprisoned . an un- 
accustomed atmosphere. To the old sane Fermor 
of years back it would have seemed, perhaps, a 
pitiful, mean, little, and imworthy trick. 

As he went out, a man came up the steps with a 
note. It was Miss Manuel's note. He knew the 
handwriting at once, and hurried to the light in a 
flurry ; he read it imder a street lamp. nread it in 
a wild tumult of agitation. 

Miss Manuel had written : 



Danger. 311 

" I cannot delay thanking you for a kindness, 
the news of which has just reached me. I mean 
the way in which you took my part yesterday. 
Such behaviour is like heaping coals of fire on my 
he^d. I do not deserve it . ^indeed no . for if you 
knew what I dare not tell you, but which is yet 
a vile hypocrisy not to tell you, you would, I fear, 
despise me. Some of these days, perhaps, you 
shall know. And yet I shall venture to ask a 
favour when I see you again, one that concerns 
yourself and your interests." 

His head seemed to swim with wild triumph as 
he read. " It is true, then," he thought. " She 
owns it ! It is what I have long suspected. She 
loves me ! She has been struggling with it. I am 
the old Fermor still." 

The quietness of home was ungrateful to him . 
its fierce rebelhon it was misery and pain to think 
of. Here was hope, brightness, and a sort of ghost 
x)f the old pride and elation. 

" She loves me," he thought, walking fast. " She 
esteems and values me. With her I can feel hope, 
and joy, and love, and happiness. She cannot sup- 
press what she feels." Suddenly a wild impulse 
seized him. He had thought of answering the 
letter at once, in a sort of rapturous tone ; but it 
Would be better to go to her straight himself. Li 
a moment he was in a Hansom cab, galloping to- 



312 Never Forgotten. 



wards Alfred-place. The driver did not know that 
the wild heart of his fare was travelling faster than 
the good horse in the shafts. 

Mrs. Fermor, told by her maid of this last blow, 
sat on her chair before her glass in her bedroom. 
"You may go down, Wallace," she said. "Or 
stay, bring me up my papers and pens." She was 
almost stupified at this last stroke of poor impotent 
spite, but more mortified at the whole house being 
made parties to the quarrel. " To disgrace me in 
this way I " she said, in a frantic burst of tears. 
" But I will baffle him yet. Noto he shall find that 
I can meet him. God help me! he is driving 
me to this." And she wrote a hasty note to Mr. 
Eomaine : 

" Come to me quickly. I want to see you and 
consult you. 

. "M. F.' 



Mr. Romain^s Propofals. 313 



CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIFTH. 

MR. ROMAINE's proposals. 

M. F. ! even in these initials there was an un- 
lawful confidence. As she was folding the note, 
her "own maid" appeared at the door, and said 
that Mr. Romaine was below in the drawing-room. 
Mr. Romaine's cab was waiting at the door. He 
had come post from Lady Laura's. 

Her hair was down on her shoulders. She 
hastily " turned it up " in some fashion . in any 
way. She looked beautiful, brilliant with the 
sense of suffering outrage, and suppressed grief 
and anger. For the moment it seemed to her . 
poor little soul! . that Providence had sent her 
this man to be her protector and friend. " Heaven 
has raised me up this true friend," she thought, 
with an odd perversion of devotion. "I shall 



( 



314 Never Forgotten. 



cling to him now." She flew down, and ran to 
him like a bird fluttering. He started back, she 
looked so bright and engaging. 

" O/' she said, " Mr. Romaine, I am so glad you 
have come to me. I was writing to you, to beg, 
to implore, that you would ^" 

"Good gracious 1" he said, "what has happened? 
Tell me everything." 

" You are my friend," she went on, hastily ; " at 
least, I have begun to think you are ; and I don't 
know what to do. I am miserable, wretched, un- 
happy. I have no one to help me, no one to care 
for me," and bright tears began to gather in the 
bright eyes. 

Eomaine was looking at the soft helpless crea- 
ture with pure sympathy and admiration. "Do 
you tell me," said he, with contracting brows, 
" that he has been at his work again ! It is insuf- 
ferable. I thought I had given him a lesson last 
night that would have lasted him for years." 

" O," said she, bursting out helplessly, ^' he does 
not know me. He treats me cruelly. He does 
not understand me." 

'^ Indeed he does not," said Romaine, moodily; 
" not he. No teaching will do him good. Never, 
I see. What do you suppose he was doing last 
night ? Championing Miss Manuel before a whole 
club ; trying to quarrel with me about her. I had 
to give him a lesson. Dearest Mrs. Fermor, I do 



Mr, Rumainis Propofals. 315 

feel for you. I wish to Heavea I could show you 
how I do feel. What is this business now ? I can 
^ess. This tyrant will not let you go. I know 
it ! What a mean, pitiful, unworthy spite ! Good 
Heavens I what a shame ! what a sin !" he went on. 
'' My heart bleeds for you ! But what shall I do, 
what would you like me to do?" 

"No, no," she said, hurriedly. *^I suppose he 
does not think or know what he is doing." 

" He does. He does," said Bomaine, savagely. 
"Where is he now? Ah, I could guess. But 
look, dearest child, you will not submit to this. 
Your life will become a slavery worse than they 
have in Siberia. He will encroach every day 
more and more. If you yield to him, he will only 
require more. My dear, dear Mrs. Fermor, I 
know you, I know your heart, and all that you 
have suffered. I do indeed. I am a rough, rude, 
travelling fellow, but I feel. I shall not let this 
go on. I can't see a sweet, charming, lovable 
creature trampled into ruin. We must save you 
at every risk." 

"Save me?" she said, wondering. "How? 
Do you wish me to go to this place ? He has my 
dress locked up in his room." 

''This place?" he said, impatiently. "I have 
forgotten it. I am not thinking of that. What 
does that concern us ? I am thinking of your life 
and happiness. How are you to stay with this 



316 Never Forgotten. 



man, who will only live to persecute and harass 
you ! Listen to me. We are alone here. Now 
is the opportunity. Long, long, I have known you 
. esteemed, admired, loved you . ^yes, loved you . 
and never so much as to-night. My heart is 
bleeding for you. Come, let us leave this house . 
this house, this country, this mean, miserabky 
degraded man, whom I all but flogged last night." 

She started back from him with a cry . as far 
back as the curtains, which she caught at and clung 
to. " What dreadful language is this ? " she said, 
frightened. " What do you mean f " 

"I do mean it," he said, advancing to her. 
" I do mean . that I have long seen and loved you 
. yes, loved you. And I tell you it is no crime, 
or sin, as the cold world would make it. You are 
not to be sacrificed to a wretch . a monster Uke 
that. Heaven has sent me to save you 1 " 

Mrs. Fermor shrank away from him over to the 
wall. "O, go away," she said, in horror. "O, 
God help me. I am betrayed by every one." 

"Dearest Mrs. Fermor, not by me," he said, 
coming still nearer. "I am serious. I am in 
earnest. I have never cared really for any woman 
yet. But in you, for the first time, I have seen, 
what I can love and adore. The sufferings yoii- 
have borne ^" 

"Go away, do go away," said Mrs. Fenuor^ 
shrinking still, and clinging to the curtains . 



Mr, Romainis Propofals. 317 

"I did not think you would be so cruel, or so 
wicked! O, this indeed opens my eyes. I am 
betrayed by every one. O, Heaven help me ! I 
have brought this on myself ! O ! O ! " And 
she fell upon the sofa in despair and grief. 

Komaine looked at her with gleaming eyes. 
Miss Manuel's wish was bearing fruit. He had 
advanced towards her, when a heavy step was 
heard beside him, and a heavier grasp was laid 
upon his arm, and a steady, solemn voice rang in 
his ear, 

" This is manly ! Go away ! Leave this house." 
" You here ! " said he, in a fury of impatience. 
"What cursed business makes you come intrud- 
ing?" 

" Ah ! Mr. Hanbury," said she, rushing to him. 
"Help me I help me I All the world is turning 
against me." 

" You may rely upon me^ at least," said Han- 
bury, sadly, "for such poor help as I can give. 
First, do you wish this man to remain ? " 

" No, no, no ! a thousand times no ! " she said. 
'' But I have brought it on myself. I have been 
foolish and wicked. I have indeed. And I don't 

know where to turn to ^" 

"No, no," said Hanbury, "you are only too con- 
fining and unsuspicious ; but there are plenty of 
^cked men abroad ready to take advantage of it 
^or their own vile ends." 



318 Never Forgotten. 



" How?" said Bomaine, furiously, and advancing 
on him. 

"This is a drawing-room, recollect," said Han- 
bury, with contempt. "I do not leave unless 
Mrs. Fermor requires me. Do you?" he said, 
turning to her. 

" No, no," she answered him, hastily. 

" Do you wish him to go ? " he asked, pointing 
with his finger to Bomaine. 

" O yes," she said, as eagerly. 

"Now," said Hanbury, " you are a gentleman, I 
believe, and have experience in the world, and I 
am sure will understand a hint. You will not 
intrude in a lad/s house ? " 

In a few moments Hanbury was alone with Mrs. 
Fermor. " O, I have brought this all upon my- 
self. It is my own doing." 

" Where is Fermor ? " said Hanbury. " Shall I 
bring him.- . ^" 

" But will he save me, or protect me ? " she 
said, wringing her hands ; " all . ^all are the same." 

" You must see him," said Hanbury, " and trust 
to him alone. Ah ! it was a pity you cast off 
Miss Manuel. Hers was a true heart, that loved 
you, that yearned after you. But you would not 
trust her." 

"She!" said Mrs. Fermor, her face full of 
doubt. " Why, she is at the bottom of all. She 
has stolen my husband from me I " 



Mr. Romainis Propofals. 319 

Hanbury almost laughed. " Miss Manuel ! 
How little you know her. Can you trust me? 
Then I solemnly declare to you some one has 
been leading you astray for their own views. Ah ! 
it is a pity not to have an instinct for true friend- 
ship. Where shall I find Fermor ? " 

" I don't know, I don't know," she said, dis- 
tractedly. 

Hanbury left her. Some astounding instinct 
whispered to him, "Alfred-place." At the best, 
he thought of Miss Manuel as being the one who 
should come and give confidence to the poor de- 
serted girl. 



320 Never Forgotten. 



CHAPTEE THE TfflETY-SIXTH. 

NEMESIS. 

Fermor had got to Alfred-place. While there 
was a block of carriages and cabs at his mother's 
house, while the people in the street were stopping 
to see the shadows cast upon the canvas of the illu- 
minated balcony, and the little procession of ladies 
flitting from their carriages up the steps into 
what seemed an open and refulgent furnace, door, 
he was hurriedly getting out of his "Hansom," 
and entering Miss Manuel's. Could she see him 
for a moment ? he sent up word. She was above 
all conventionality, and saw him. 

He entered in a wild tiunult, his eyes flashing. 
There was the old trouble on her face in perma- 
nence ; but on this night he thought her dazzling 
and splendid. 



Nemefts. 321 

" I have come," he said, closing the door. 

" What," said she, " you not at the festival to- 
night?" 

" I don't care for such things," he went on, 
" you know I don't. I got your note. TJiat was 
festival enough for me." 

^' And your wife . ^that poor gentle thing, who 
somehow hates me so . she is there, I know, glit- 
tering like a star. Who can have filled her little 
soul with such cruel prejudices ? I would give 
the world to be loved by her, and that she would 
let me love her; but she seems to fly from . to 
shrink from me." 

At the first part of this speech Fermor^s brow 
was contracted, but at the second some com- 
placency came upon his face. He could give a 
hint of the reason of this repulsion, but he made 
no answer. 

" It was good of you to come," she went on. 
" I waifted to thank you. I heard of your gene- 
rous conduct. Any one else would have kept 
back. I did not expect it from any one, and not 
from you." 

" What," said he, " do you not know me yet?" 

" I begin to do so," she said, "but, alas! you 
have not begun to know me. It is late for one's 
eyes to be opening, yet not too late, I hope. O, I 
could tell you such a sad history of humiliation, 
which you have a right to know. But you will be 

VOL. III. T 



322 Never Forgctten. 



generous,. and spare me. I thought I was doing a 
holy thing . canying out what would Jiave been 
the dear wish of another ; but now, not too late, 
I have discovered that I was in a false, wicked 
track. O, I hae suffered," continoBd Mks Manuel, 
" and paid a heavy penalty iar my folly. 'a heavy, 
heavy penalty indeed." 

Fermor, who followed but imlistinctly, for he 
was only thinking of :the general .purpcnrt of this 
confession, said, eagerly, "Ah, iit is easy for meto 
f oygive. So you <ask .me ? " 

" Yes," he.-8aid, " I do. And liave somfithing 
else to ask, which you will not refisse. I am ^d 
you have^eome <to.me to-night. You would save 
me, I know, dreary hours of remorsB.^wliat would 
be .a. life of miserable rregret. You jdo not know 
what I ha^e suffered during these few days. I 
have seen misery, wickedness, guilt, miin, all 
coming on fast, and whioh I know has been my 
own doing, hut which I have >flaoat :power *o tcq). 
O, Fenwir, think what it must be for me to look 
on while the innocent are hiEcrying cto destruction 
. ^to think that this is my own doing. I have mot 
slept ; I have not lived. I have ^Nsnt these days 
rushing through *this great city, crying rfor help to 
this person :and that, ,and now find that you are 
my last chance." 

*" What can I ^do?" said Fermor, hurriedly; 
"say it. Can 3 refuse anything that you ask?" 



Nemefts. ' 323 

" Then, save her. That soft, lovable, tender 

thing, that I O, I can't think of it. I cannot 

speak to her. Every step I take towards her only- 
fills her with suspicion. It is you who must act. 
Take her away 1 Fly this mifierable place ! Be- 
gone yourself ! You don't know the dangers. 
Why, even at this moment while we italk ^" 

A light came into Termor's eyes. "Ah, you 
don't know the whole of that story," he said. 
"Gentle and tender! Why, I have left a hell 
behind me at home. I have made the great 
mistake that so many make, and have found it 
out too late. Fly with her ? Never ! You talk of 
suffering; you don't know what /have suffered. 
I havje been vilely deceived. deceived in every 
way. On their heads be the consequence of their 
own imposture ! But I hope to have done with 
them from this night." 

"Howl" said Miss Manuel, with wondering 
eyes. 

He went on, with a voice almost breathless from 
agitation : "Don't think that I have not been able 
to translate your words, and your letter; that I 
have not seen enough of men and women, and the 
world, not to know what is behind, and what is 
unknown even to yourself. I know what is 
struggling in your mind, what is the meaning of 
those griefs and this remorse, as you think it. I 
shall not go back to that Inferno ! Never !" 
y2 



324 Never Forgotten. 

"What?" said Miss Maiiuel, starting up. 
" Ah I you begin to understand now/' said he, 
still more agitated, " I think we both begin to see 
the light at last. Brighter days shall come for both 
of us. You talk of flying. Yes, let us fly; let 
us leave this vile place, this vile country. I have 
seen your struggles, your noble struggles, and 
shall help you by this confession. Come; what 
do you say?" 

He waited, almost panting, for an answer. Miss 
Manuel had listened, with a strange wonder at 
first, with eyes distending gradually, and then 
herself rising slowly from the chair, until she was 
standing her full height, looking down on him. 
Not long had he to wait for an answer. It was 
already written on her curling lips. He had 
almost a presentiment of its tone. 

" You say this to tw^/" she said at last, with a 
scorn that seemed to blight and blast him. "And 
this is your confession!" 

He passed his hand over his eyes, a little stag- 
gei-ed, and drew back. " You understand me," he 
faltered. " We understand each other." 

"/ mjderstand you," she said. "Aow I do. 
God forgive my blindness for not understanding 
you before ! God forgive my weakness and fool- 
ish repentance I God forgive me for taking you to 
be a weak, foolish, empty coxcomb, and not the 



Nemefts. 325 

mean . coldnsouled . heartless . ^^black-hearted . 
villain that I now find you !" 

The words were like a shower of blows, and he 
seemed to totter back imder them, and with his 
hand vainly tried to clear his eyes. The utter 
surprise had almost taken away his wits. 

" Unworthy of pity 1" she went on ; '' unworthy 
of all grace I Now, indeed, the light has come ! 
Now I see with what cold calculation you took 
away the life of the darling we lived for! And 
yet she prayed for you . thought of you in her last 
breath. Now you are destroying another poor 
child, whose only sin has been trusting too fondly, 
to you. And you dare," she went on, with some- 
thing like fury, "to come to me with your vile 
raptures, and your odious devotion. We under- 
stand each other! I want no such communion, 
indeed. Go away ! Go out into the street . any- 
where! Go back to your hell, as you call it! 
Leave me quickly ! I can't breathe while you are 
here. Go!" 

She kept her arm steadily pointed to the door. 
To the wretched Fermor, beaten, humiliated, 
grovelling, she seemed to be standing over the 
^couch of the lost Violet, like an Avenger. With 
his hand still before his eyes he shrank to the 
door. And as he crept away out to the street, 
so degraded that he loathed his own personal con- 



326 Never For^en. 



sciousness, curiously the idea that was- hauntmg 
him^ and the gnawing reproach that rung in his 
ears like a knell, was that that foolish, blunder- 
ing, awkward Hanbury, superior in this, had given 
him warning. This was, indeed, the last stroke 
of his humiliation. 

He did not know at the moment^ as he stx>od on 
the steps, looking up and down to both ends of. the 
street, how near that unselfish Hanbury was to^ 
him. Hanburjr had hurried fromv Mds. FermoD 
eagerly, and now at the upper end of that, quiet 
thoroughfare^ saw some one come out of Miss Ma*- 
nueTs house.. There was a lamp at the door, and 
Under this lamp he saw Fermor's white face and' 
yellow moustache,, as it looked wildly up and dowm. 
He did not care to meet him then^ and he revolitedi 
at the inEU;uation which took him there; so he 
stopped, and then he saw Fermor turn vacantly,, 
and take the direction up the end which led away 
from Town. He noted his imcertain, tottering 
walk, and his figure get gradually lost in Ae 
darkness. Hanbury was about crossing the street, 
when he saw Miss Manuel's door open suddenly,, 
and another figure burst out,, and hurry up the 
street in the direction. Fermor had taken. He 
knew the coal-black eyes and the dark beard o 
Miss Manuel's brother, and the same lamp wJbich 
had shown him Fermor's blank pale face and 



Nwttfis. 327 

yellow mQustache, showed him* t^e wild, excited 
features and fieroe eyes of Louis Manuel. 

John Hanbury was slow of thought ; conclu- 
sions did not ordinarily flash upon him as they did 
upon other men* Manuel's figurs had passed into 
the distant darlmess, and EDsinbury had hi hand 
upon the doop4>ell before the idea had occurred to 
him to question why Louis Manuel should rush out 
so excitedly after Fermor. Then something like 
an instinct of the^^ scene above described, bs it 
liad really QGasorred, came upon him, and with 
something like terror he went down the steps 
again, and followed hastily. 

The mis^radble Fermor, shrinldng from himself 
as if he were spotted over with some disease, kept 
wandering on throagh that dark night. He 
scarcely Imew- where he was* going. He shrank 
from, taking a direetion which could- lead in any 
way towards- his- home. From Alfred-place was 
not far to that broad district where were the 
spreading clay^ fields, not yet built upon, where 
in a year or so the monster building for the Exhi- 
bition was to rise^ and a new town of plaster man- 
sions. Fashion, on this night, had not quite made 
up her mind, uor gathered up her skirts, for a race 
in this directioji. The clayey fields were only cut 
up here and there by a stray row of houses, and lit 
by a stray lamp; and into this lonely district 



328 Never Forgotten. 



Fermor found himself suddenly plunged. The 
openness and loneliness gave him relief. He was 
recovering a little from the awful blow- . the 
blow to his pride. To what had been the pur- 
pose of his later life? A stroke to his overpower- 
ing vanity, and to that vanity which was so mixed 
with selfishness as to be more selfishness than 
vanity, was to him like a physical stroke or dislo- 
cation. A sense of dull pain was in his head, and 
the cool of the fields seemed to relieve his moral 
sufferings. Luckless, miserable, degraded Fermor 
almost deserved pity. 

In a dull sort of fashion, he began to " see it 
all," as it is called : the whole course of later 
events, with the secret of Miss Manuel's calcu- 
lating plans, which his own blind infatuation had 
prevented him from'comprehending. Beyond that, 
too, his mind travelled back, and that strange ex- 
pression of hers, " taken away the life of Violet," 
brought up the old Eastport times again. The 
soft gentleness, the quiet suffering, the grateful 
tender worship . these were things that some one 
seemed to whisper to him for the first time. Rough 
hands were levelUng the rude stone wall of stolid 
vanity . as iron as that stone wall against which he 
had dashed on the Eastport race-day, now so long 
ago. and he was seeing things with wonder he had 
never seen before. 

A dull crash about his head . physical . and 



Nemefts. 329 

really like that crash at the Eastport wall . a flash of 
stars . a dull thunder in the ears . a fierce cry like 
a threat, mixed up with a sound like " this from 
Violet ! " . and Fermor's humiliation and degrada- 
tion, his dreams of Eastport and of the past, were 
battered into insensibility. He was on the ground, 
with his back on the clayey soil, the white face 
turned to the sky, and a figure over him, fiercely 
beating and mashing; pounding that white face 
with something held in its hands. Some half- 
dozen terrible strokes in all. And there would 
have been but one more to finish the work, but 
for a strong man who came rushing and shouting 
across the field, and who caught the wild, frantic 
figure by the throat, and, after a struggle, flung 
him to a distance. 

Miserable Fermor was breathing still. 



330 Never- Forgotten. 



CHAPTER THE^ THIETY-SEVKNTH. 



At LadjT Laua> Fermor^s^ the eatextainmeBt 
went forward. The carriages came and went. 
From the street, the shadows q Captain Yansit- 
tart and Miss Egerton of Rushley were seen out- 
lined on the illuminated balcony, as if "projected" 
from a magic lantern. Sounds of muffled music 
came from within ; of the stirring horn and tinkling 
harp. For the tableaux were over now, and the 
dancing had set in. 

There had been unavoidable omissions in the 
little show. Mr. Romaine had been seen to go, 
but had never returned. His dress, a rich one, 
was lying there. Mrs. Fermor had not come at 
all. Here was the most effective scene spoiled. 
The rest were, in truth, a Uttle halting. In 



An, Old Soldier^ s End. 331 

short, it came upon the actora and audience with 
a surprise that there should have been so small 
a result, after all tiie extraordinaiy cost, and 
trouble, and expense. It was a relief when "the 
decks were cleared," and Revel's band began to 
wind out music, and the company to float on the 
soft billows of a divine Starauss valse* 

Lady Laura, at the door, working the fan in 
her pale fingers, still kept to her duty. At times^ 
during the night, Blanche had come to her 
privately, in some little trouble about the absent 
Spendlesham. The mother reassured her. "He 
has missed a train. He has sent. He will be here 
in the morning to apologise; Go and dance noWy 
dear, and enjoy yourself." The well*-traiiied Blanche 
always reflected her mother^s tone of mind, and 
saw that there wasF not a cloud of doubt in the 
air. With a smile she tripped away, and was 
presentiy flying round, supported by Captain 
Singleman's strong arm, to the celestial air of the 
" Wien mein sinn " valse. The same strain had 
drawn many more from their seats, and absorbed 
them into the mM^e. 

Lady Laura looked rather tired. She gave her- 
self no rest. She found partners for the destitute. 
This night she did not care to receive any scanda- 
Jous stories from some of her favourite worldly old 
men. It was a long and weary night. A young 
destitute giri, sadly unprepossessing . for whom 



332 Never Forgotten. 



she had provided . ^said to her gratefully, "Dear 
Lady Laura, you should sit down. You are tiring 
yourself." But she did not sit down. She worked 
on, and looked for plenty of physical action. How 
many spectres had she dancing before her eyes 
that night, besides her company f Almost ever}^- 
thing there furnished her one : Blanche's silken 
slip, the temporary stage, and Blfevel's fine Strauss 
music. There was besides, up-stairs, and outside, 
Blanche's trousseau, newly come home from that 
terrible Madame Adelaide ; and above all, in- 
distinct, and in the distance, but not less terrible, 
the inide and furious job-master. No wonder that 
old heart was chilled . chilled even to death. 

By Jialf-past two they were going. There was 
the departing chorus of the "delightful evening," 
and the " so pleasant." The ghosts of the Strauss 
melodies still floated in the air. The rooms were 
cleared with a rush, as it were, just as they had 
filled with a rush. The waxed floor shoue and 
glittered under the lights . here and there was 
a flower, a bit of swansdown, a bit of lace . 
waifs or strays of the wreck. Below, they were 
long getting on their wraps. And Lady Laura, 
leaning on the chimney-piece, heard the Lojirse 
cries in the street, and the hum of voices in the 
hall, and the happy salutations of lingering men. ^ 

" It was a delightful party," said Laura junior, 
in great spirits. " They were all pleased." 



An Old Soldier's End. 333 

" Yes, dear/' said Lady Laura, in the new soft 
tone which mystified her daughters. "I am so 
glad you enjoyed yourself. Go up and go to 
bed as quickly as you can. You look tired, and 
we have to be out again to-morrow night." Poor 
working soul, she could not forget duty ! 

The two girls went together, meaning' to have 
a short comparing of notes on the triumphs and 
joys of the night. Lady Laura stayed behind, 
her foot on the fender, with the job-master and 
Madame Adelaide and the other spectres for com- 
pany. 

Presently she went up to her room. During 
that latter part of the night, staying so much at 
the doors, she had put on an old scarlet operas-cloak, 
and wrapped it about her neck. Not that she cared, 
or found much comfort in it, but she did not forget 
that there was to be duty on the next night. 

The girls, rapturously photographing the joys 
of the night, heard Lady Laura call softly to 
Blanche, who came in. Lady Laura, still in the 
opera cloak, shut the door, and then said, " Blanche, 
I want to tell you something . can you bear a little 
disappointment! " And then, making as light of it 
as she could, told all. about Lord Spendlesham. 
Blanche burst into passionate tears. Her mother 
consoled her, and even mth effect. 

" I am not sorry," she said. ^'He was a foolish 
creature, and you would have had great trouble 



334 Never Forgotten. 

with him. He was a mere boy. There were great 
obstacles from the beginning, in fact. I never 
reckoned on it regularly. Now go to bed, dear, 
and put it out of your head. I shall put it all out 
of my head. To-morrow I shall see him and 
manage him, dear. Some wicked people have got 
round him ; or, if the worst comes to the worst, we 
shall think of something else, and, I suppose," she 
added, with an odd smile, "shall begin it all 
again in the morning I " 

The brilliancy of the night was already before 
Blanche's eyes, and made her receive the artificial 
encouragement. She had never fancied young 
Spendlesham, and there had been a handsome 
baronet that night, single, and with the other 
virtues. She had more faith in thai: dismal 
anthem of her mother's, " Begin it all again in the 
morning !" She was struck, too, by the unwonted 
softness of that consolation, and coming back, 
when half way from the door, kissed her mother . 
an unfrequent ceremony, for which there was 
rarely time. When she was gone out, h^r mother 
dropped wearily into a chair before her dressng- 
glass, and then the old favourite spectres . headed 
by furious Madame Adelaide. all poured in afresh. 

Blanche went in to her sister to find sisterly 
sympathy. She told her all her mortifications 
and sorrows, and found -some comfort. The single 
and handsome baaronet hovered in the distance, as 



An Old Soldier^ s End. 335 

a ^ort of transparency. Tor more than an hour 
.they talked of it, and of a hundred other things, 
taking off their finery as they went along. Laura 
.junior, full of her hopes and prospects, told her 
fltory. Alt last they heard four strike, and with a 
start they thought of "Duty for the next night, and 
-Laura junior laid her head upon the pillow. 

"Mamma has some plan, I know," said BlancTie, 
"for she said ishe would begin it all again to- 
inorrofw. She will manage Spenfllesham, I dare 
ay. I am strre she lias some clever thing in her 
head. I shtfcll just xun in and see. Is she in 
bed?*' 

'She went in softly. " Why, mamma '^ she 

said, for Lady Laura was still sitting before the 
glass, with the flowers on her head, and the red 
opera-cloak still about her. She was sitting, as 
she had sat many times before, waiting for her 
maid to come and begin to do her hair, when going 
out to the old call of Duty. " Why, mamma," 
said Blanche . and, running up, gave a cry . ^rather 
a shriek. 

At least she was at her post, and in her old uni- 
form. After all, it is at his post, and in the field, 
that the veteran should most of all choose to meet 
his death. That notion of "beginning it all again 
to-morrow," had sent a chill to the nerves and 
muscles of the heart. The old spirit was there, 
and she would have been at the front again on 



336 Never Forgotten, 

the morrow, " beginning all " once more ; but the 
old strength had at last given way. She was 
not built of iron. " Begin again to-morrow !" 
She had often done ilmtj under circumstances as 
hopeless; but now it seemed to be shouted at 
her by the hoarse voices of the spectres. And 
so the heart of the poor struggling gallant sol- 
dier cracked, and in her flowers, and in her cloak, 
and before her dressing-glass, she slept off into 
quite another and more awful world, where she 
was " to begin again in the morning," and where 
there were happily no balls nor dresses, no struggle, 
no flowers, no fans; no battling with bills, nor with 
infuriated milliners, nor job-masters ; but where it 
is to be hoped she found at least rest. 



L Envoi. 337 



L'ENVOL 

We draw an to the end. Now that some years 
are between that night and this^ time, we see some 
of the figures^ in this story in conditions such as 
the intelligent reader of stories can almost fancy 
for himself. About the next day or so after that 
unhappy party of Lady Laura's, we can, see the 
worn and spent old diplomatist. Sir Hopkins, 
who for weeks was iSitting and fluttering about 
offices and ante-rooms, totter down eagerly to a 
cab. * Foreign OflBce," he calls out, " and as quick 
as you can." That morning he has heard of the 
death of the governor of the Lee Boo Island. "It 
is very hard," he thinks to himself. "They treat 
me any way ! They^ forget my old services. It is 
shameful ! And now to put me off' with that 
wretched place I I suppose I must take it." And, 

VOL. in. z 



338 Never Forgotten. 



grumbling and indignant, he sent in his card to 
Harding Hanaper. " I shall try for something 
else," said Sir Hopkins, "before I consent to 
thitr Poor soul ! his heart was in office . office 
of some shape, and sort . Foreign Office " candle 
snuffing, even," if there was such employment. 

Harding Hanaper was very busy. A mail was 
going out that night. " Good God, how that man 
plagues us." (Yet it was more than a month since 
Sir Hopkins had seen him.) " I can't see him ! I 
won't see him I What does he want I Tell him 
to put it in writing." But Sir Hopkins was not to 
be put off like the common petitioners. His worn 
face found its way in. "The Lee Boo Island," 
he said, panting aloud, "is vacant. They have 
kept me so long, and altogether treated me so 
badly, so I suppose, Hanaper, I must be content 
with that . faute de mieux, as old Pichegru used 
to say." 

"Where's Eidley's last paper?" said Harding 
Hanaper, with his face bent over documents, as if 
he was going to cool it in copious cold water. 
" Send down for it. Have a copy made of this . 
quick. 1 well, what is it now, Pocock?" 

" You know, of course you do, the Lee Boo 
Island is vacant. Baines died there last April." 

" Ah, yes, to be sure. You were asking for it 
. ^I remember . ^I dare say. But you should think 



L'Envot. 339 

about it . a man of your time of life, you know . 
climate, and all that ^" 

" O, I have considered that," said Sir Hopkins. 
" So, if there is nothing else going, I am sure, after 
all my long services, and really after having ar- 
ranged those Waipiti troubles ^" 

" Ah, exactly," said Mr. Hanaper, wearily ; 
" that's a long time ago. Besides, they broke out 
again the other][day, you know. By the way, about 
the Lee Boo Island. The chief was down himself 
here last night, asking about it. What was that, 
Manning ? Now, Sir Hopkins, I am up to my eyes 
. mail going out, you know . ^Manning will tell 
you everything." 

Manning said to Sir Hopkins, " Sorry, sir, about 
the Lee Boo, but the chief said he was keeping it 
for Mr. Trail. In fact, he has given it to him." 

" Given it to him ! " shrieked Sir Hopkins. 
" What is the meaning of this ? It is shameful, 
disgraceful! TU expose the whole system. PU 
bring it before Parliament ! What do they mean ? 
What do you mean?" 

And with his face contorted and crumpled into 
lines of piteous agony, he looked from one to the 
other. 

" Hush, hush ! " said Mr. Hanaper ; " recollect 
the office. Sir Hopkins." 

" PU bring it before Parliament," said the un- 



J 



340 Newr Fargattau 

happT diplomatist ^m ^Bffftal te tlie ooantiT. 
This is the war old and futhfol ati i a nts aie 
treated. It shall be taken ufy J can tell yim. 

m . ^ 

^ Now, Sir Hopkins, we aze bnsj, as yoa see. 
We can't have this sort of thing. Please let ns go 

to business.'* 

^ And Miss MarnieJ telling me. She promised 
. ^jron knowahe did." 

Hanaper wniiAH. 

'' If that was yonr prop. Sir Hopkins, it was a 
reed, and a broken one. I don't think yon are 
number one there. JBetter to tell yon, for the next 
time." 

Wretched Sir Hopkins went his way ahnost 
staggering . all crow's feet, as it were. From that 
little churchyard at Eastport a skeleton hand 
seemed to reach him. 

We can see Major Carter, older and more worn 
and not so crisp. with a Mrs. Carter . flitting 
roimd the watering-places he loTed, making ac- 
quaintances. Some powerful friends had come 
forward on that expose, and the words, ^^ Shamefid 
conspiracy," were used pretty frequently. It was 
found by the Crown ofScials that the capital case 
was very weak indeed . o weak, that it was not 
advisable to think of a trial. It must be said, too, 
that the shareholders in the Irrefragable were dis- 
satisfied with the expose. Yet Major Carter, hand- 



VEnvd. 341 

somely cleared, and gone abroad, wisely forbore 
to press his chdm on the company.; .and, by a sort 
of 'mutual compromise, the dead past 'was lallowed 
to bury its own dead. J^aithful, trusting Mrs. 
Wrigley believed in him all the time, and went 
abroad with him. And, it must be said, that Major 
. Carter could always appeal to his treatment of the 
second Mro. Carter as a sufficient refutation of the 
'^ foul slanders" that had been heaped upon him 
in reference to the iBt. 

Now, too, is JPauline Manuel at rare intervals 
on English ground: when she comes to see a 
brother, who is placed in a quiet asylum, where 
his wildness is soothed and tempered on the 
gentlest principles. At other seasons, she too 
hovers about the foreign world, and, wherever she 
goes, people wonder at her sad handsome face, and 
think there must be 0me story connected with her. 

Now, too, at a quiet cathedral town, on the grass 
and walks of the close, under the friendly skirt of 
the cathedral itself, live three persons together. 
The cathedral is not rich, nor has it a numerous 
ecclesiastical chapter. A railway has not touched 
it yet : so very few remark the grim voldman and 
his daughter, and the feeble husband, whom they 
both support. The feeble husband walks as 
though a false step would jshatter his frame like 
glass or china. The feeble husband's eyes are 
dim, and grow dimmer each day, and round and 



342 Never Forgottetu 



about the eyes his face has been crushed and 
bruised out of shape through an old and terrible 
accident. A skilful doctor did wonders with that 
f ace, raising it, and piecing it, and restoring it (he 
wrote "a case" on it for some Medical Transac- 
tions) ; but he could not "raise" or restore the 
quick intuition and ready appreciation, and so 
every one in the cathedral town knows that the 
feeble husband's words come from him more slowly 
than he walks (as though they run risk, too, of 
being shattered), and that it takes a long time to 
follow a question or a remark. 

Of this old and dreadfiil accident he ought to 
have died properly, but the skilful doctor saved 
him. As his eyes grow more dim, so does his in- 
telligence ; keeping pace with the failing of the 
eyes. It seems long, long ago. Sometimes, no 
doubt, the dull thickness clears away . ^the murky 
vapours in his brain dear away ; and perhaps he 
then, for a moment, sees the old soft days down at 
the watering-place, when he seemed to be young, 
and airy, and elegant, and happy ; and these bright 
figures moved to and fro before him. It was 
another Fermor then, different from the Fermor 
who came later, and who, in its turn, was different 
from the old young man, and the bruised, beaten 
Fermor, whose dim eye was, as it were, at the glass 
of a stereoscope. These were but sudden glimpses 
. but short glimpses too. Then the clouds would 



VEnvoi. 343 

come rolling in from side to side. Local doctors 
give him but a few years. Then there will be a 
choral service in the cathedral, with minor canons 
chanting seraphically, and a tablet on the aisle-walls 
with the inscription " Charles Fermor," with birth, 
death, and all the rest. But not a word, of course, 
of the old vanities, and selfishness, and weakness, 
and the poor old mauled ro cy, or ^' le moi." On 
those Kensington fields it was battered out of all 
shape. When the men of his regiment come to 
hear of that demise, some of them will say, " Poor , 
Fermor." They will balance his character, and 
some good will be discovered. It will be univer- 
sally agreed "it was all that infernal conceit of 
his." The military vefdict would be about right. 
That ludicrous vanity was at the bottom of all. 
It might have been " drawn " when he was a boy, 
just as his double teeth might have been drawn. 
But there was no one to think of taking him to 
the moral dentist's. 

Young Brett, faithful to him to the end, often 
made trips down to the cathedral town, and 
walked by Fermor's side round the close, and 
spoke to him with an assumed gaiety and cheer- 
fulness as " old fellow." And the dim dull 
eyes from which the colour of conceit had been 
long washed out, rested on the honest boy with 
a greater intelligence, and much comfort. Per- 
haps it was at such moments that the clouds 



344 Never Forgotten. 



broke, and the old Eastport sim came out for 
a few seconds. The yornig* wife found inexr 
pressible comfort when she saw Brett'* brave face 
near them. He knew the^ art* of manly comfort^ 
and could impart it. He always- went away him*- 
self in deep distress, but left a little che^ulneas 
behind. 

He could take a kind' and gentle view of Fei*^ 
mor's course . ^afr least a pitying one . a^ indeed, 
perhaps the kind reader, who has listened to this 
story so far, may perhaps be inclined to do. Poor 
miserable foolish Fermor I Even here, looking 
back on this story, we may think of him gently, 
with some allowance, and at least draw a moral from 
his course. * 

Sometimes his faithful wife hears him articulate 
with difficulty the name of Violet. Far away on 
the coast of Eastport, which is thriving, and gor- 
geous with plaster palaces 'and assembly-room^, 
and has its bathing machines, and pony carriages, 
with infant postilions, in whose social warp and 
woof gold pieces seemed to be woven in . which 
has its two seasons, its express trains from Town 
for business men . ^to which doctor? order patients 
. at Eastport, so flourishing, so magnificent and 
pampered, strange to say, this little romance has 
been kept alive. It has not been choked out by 
the briars. The story is as well known as that of 
ToUa at Rome. The tradition is loved, and fami^ 



VEnvd. 345 

liar to tte bathing-women on the beach. And 
most young girls, having heard the outhne from the 
maid in the lodgings, or from the women on the 
beach, find their way to a sheltered comer of the 
now crowded graveyard, where charming flowers 
come up thickly, watched periodically by a plain 
good honest country gentleman, and tended care- 
fully by a professional gardener of reputation, 
in the pay of a lady abroad . ^where there are 
rings and bands of choicest colours, and where, 
on a simple granite headstone, is carved the pretty 
name of 

"Violet." 




THE END. 
