BELLA DONNA. 



BOOK I. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE SUNDAY FEAST. 



Not on the high road, with two mounted tra- 
vellers of elderly or youthfiil aspect trotting 
leisurely along; nor yet at the inn-door, or 
inn-window, where the gallant Alexandre the 
Elder sets his boisterous Gentlemen of the 
Guard ; not by the death-bed of the lady of 
high degree, who has just brought our hero 
into the world ; and not in my lady's boudoir, 
where she is gossiping pleasantly with her 

VOL. I. B 



I BELLA DONNA. 

female friend and counsellor, a secretis. Not 
with any of these traditional precedents does 
this chronicle set out upon its march. It may 
not boast the Lord Mayor's show, and gor- 
geously appointed procession, to which ro- 
mances of grander lineage are entitled as of 
right. This is but a simple narrative, which 
must be helped along without such brilliant 
properties and decorations. So it starts off 
one Sunday afternoon, when the Franklyn 
family are giving a sort of sober Sunday ban- 
quet in the dining-room of their old mansion 
down at Grey Forest. 

At this sacred festival were assembled the 
whole Franklyn family then on the premises, 
as well as such neighbours whose function or 
position gave them a title to hef present. The 
room which was the scene of such delightful 
intercourse, took up the whole lower front of 
the right wing, which bulged out in a cor- 
pulent bow, running full up to the roof, which 
overshadowed it, like the flaps of an old- 
fashioned waistcoat. And there being another 
wing also suffering from dropsy, and perfectly 



THE SUNDAY FEAST. 3 

symmetrical,, furnished also with its waistcoat 
and flaps, the two were joined together by a 
central strip of building, much like that band 
of flesh which united the two Siamese gentle- 
men who visited this country many years ago. 
It was, in fact, a sound, old-fashioned country- 
house, not nearly old enough to be shown, or 
to have priest's hiding-places, or embayed 
windows, or any of the theatricals of old 
mansions ; but of sufiBcient antiquity to be un- 
comfortable, and so far advanced in life as to 
be old-fashioned. 

This parlour, where the decent Sunday revel 
was going forward, was painted in a tawny 
bufi^, which intruded wherever the pictures did 
not hide the walls. These were but feeble 
ancestors at the best . in bottle but a genera- 
tion or two . with a coloured coat and a wig 
or so among them, yet scarcely of the proper 
ancestor pattern. The furniture, too, was of a 
bald meagre order, with sharp edges, and vast 
expanse of rude horse-hair ; while at the upper 
end of the room in the archway, was erected 
a sideboard structure, whose superincumbent 



4 BELLA DONNA. 

weight, furnished with abundance of brass rail- 
ing, was supported on thin insufiBcient spikes, 
by way of legs, which seemed to push vindic- 
tively into the carpet, like a row of single 
elderly ladies' parasols. This piece of archi- 
tecture will be a key to the whole tone of the 
other decorations of the apartment. A key, 
too, to the tone of the Pranklyn family, which 
came of that decent country-house stock, which 
is always a few hundred yards, or so, behind 
the rest in the great procession of civilization. 
Mr. Franklyn . Joseph Franklyn, Esquire, 
of Grey Forest. sits at the head of the table, 
in one of the skeleton arm-chairs, whose arms 
curl under his elbows, like rams' horns. He is 
a widower, and there is no Mrs. Franklyn. A 
quiet gentleman, timorous, not 'overloaded with 
language, and enjoying habitually a steady 
flow of low spirits. Present, also, were his 
two daughters, pleasant elegant castings from 
the average young-lady mould ; his son, Cap- 
tain Charles Franklyn . a soldier, home on 
leave after a three years' service in India . a 
youth with curly hay-coloured hair, a fair face, 



THE SUNDAY FEAST. 5 

and sly retiring moustaches, who would be 
come more brazen by and by . rather tall and 
thin, and a little loosely put together. Pre- 
sent, too, Miss Jenny Bell, a distant and very 
indistinct relation, who has been with the 
Franklyn family some months, on a delicate 
debatable footing. Present, also, a loose mis- 
cellany, medico - venatico - ecclesiastical ; the 
Venerable Archdeacon Dilly, Doctor Splorters, 
the Eeverend Henry Blowers, M.A., Incum- 
bent of Grey Forest, with his curate, the 
Eeverend Charlton Wells ; young Tilbury, the 
Gentleman-Q-razier ; and "Bobus" Noble, as 
he was called, who lived astride of his horse, 
during the day bodily, and at meal-times 
metaphorically, nearly all the year round.. 
Thus it will be seen here was the chief, sitting 
at the head of his wigwam; and, to put it 
delicately, there was an air of official con- 
nection between the chief and the gentlemen 
collected at his board. They were cheerful, 
and, perhaps, ever so slightly, uproarious. 
For their hearts were glad, and the week's 
labour was done, and the day*s sanctification 



6 BELLA DONNA. 

was happily through, and the chief had gra" 
ciously bidden them to his wigwam. There 
was another Miss Franklyn, eldest of the girls, 
who was not present, but away on a visit, but 
would be home again in a few days. 

The ministering menials tramped round and 
about, in and out of the room, with much good- 
will, and, perhaps, still more noise. They 
came in somewhat unruly procession, bearing 
the huge " pieces of resistance," which were 
to make the parasol legs of the sideboard 
quiver uneasily. There was much shifting of 
these burdens from arms awkward to arms less 
awkward, with attendant perils, and hasty 
clutchings and shiftings of the huge cover, 
with noisy metallic din. For even in these 
elements and personnel of the retainers were 
found more helps to that tone in which the 
Franklyn family lived. For here was the 
septuagenarian butler, much bent, and gene- 
rally decayed, and even indistinct of utterance, 
yet jealous of his dignity, and intolerant to his 
coadjutor, who had been artfully and bene- 
volently furnished to him. Here was this 



THE SUNDAY FEAST. 7 

bony pink-cheeked menial, whose coat of office 
came in flowing folds about his knees . ex- 
ceptionally tolerated at these feasts of greater 
grandeur, as a useful supernumerary, yet, per- 
haps, more at home upon his box, with whip 
and reins in his hands. Yet he is willing, and 
even eager ; and with no special duty allotted 
to him, carries on a guerilla and predatory 
warfare of his own, swooping down upon loose 
plates, and knives, and glasses. 

On the outskirts hover beings of question- 
able shape and figure, mortals but ill at ease 
in their adventitious trappings, and whom even 
the charitable must dimly associate with the 
ostler interest. These cagotSy whose position is 
undefined, are victims of a monstrous and gall- 
ing tyranny ; and from behind the parlour- 
door are wafted at times, sounds of suppressed 
suflfering and hostile altercation. 

Grand heir-looms of the Franklyn family 
decorated the table. An ancient epergne of 
solid silver, and a little stooped and bent, like 
the septuagenarian butler, glorified the centre. 
To it nodded homage, a series of chandeliers. 



8 BELLA DONNA. 

with twisted and curled branches, also un- 
steady and precarious in their balance. On 
the sideboard, stately pillar-lamps diffused a 
sickly gloom, not unmingled with a suspicion 
of oily infragrance, owing to some interior 
irregularity. 

Mf. Archdeacon was pleasantly shouldering 
his ecclesiastical crutch, and showing how cle- 
rical fields were won. A dry caked face, that 
had been weU in the ovens of human life, with 
sharp eyes, that were always peering and 
looking diligently after his men. He was 
always trudging diligently round his sacred 
preserves, poking the covers with his foot, and 
keeping a wary eye upon his under-keeperS. 
He was always on the beat, as it were, carry- 
ing a loaded * charge ' upon his shoulder, 
which he let off in print annually. At this 
moment he was, by anticipation, exploding 
some of its contents directly into Mr. Joseph 
Franklyn's person; while the Reverend Mr. 
Blowers, seated close by, looked on and lis- 
tened with delight. 

Archdeacon Dilly can be heard lamenting 



THE SUNDAY FEAST. 9 

the alarming spread of dissent-rampant. For 
of the gentle passive shape of difference from 
the Establishment, he was amiably tolerant ; 
but for these rude and boisterous anarchists he 
had no love. They were the disreputable 
game-stealers, the brazen poachers of society, 
who cast on the authorized keepers thQ dis- 
agreeable duty of awkward encounters and 
violent scuffles. *We cannot be too much 
on our guard, my dear Blowers,' said Mr. 
Archdeacon, again directing a portion of his 
* charge' full into the bosom of his subor^ 
dinate, * against these ravening wolves. The 
hydra head of dissent is again lifting itself; it 
grows apace in strength, and will tax all our 
energies. I cannot, therefore, caution you too 
much, my dear friends, to be on your guard 
against this dangerous monster who now walks 
abroad with an astonishing eflfrontery.' With 
the close of these remarks the Archdeacon, 
with a gentle pressure, cracked a walnut with 
the proper instrument, as though it had been a 
dissenter's head. Then delicately picking out 
the crushed portions of the brain of the un- 



10 BELLA DONNA. 

happy dissentient, he consumed him with relish, 
leaving the fractured portions of the cranium 
on his plate. 

Later on we see the quiet head of the 
Franklyn family drawing over his chair nearer 
to Mr. Archdeacon. *I wished to consult 
you/ he said, a little nervously, * about a 
rather important matter. You have such an 
aptitude for business, and know the world so 
well, whereas I am as helpless as a child.' 

* Do you speak of the Endowment ? It is 
sadly wanted, and your neighbourhood is des- 
titute.very destitute;' and with the word 

* destitute' another dissenting skull was frac- 
tured, *and ' 

* No, no,' said the other ; * we are too 
poor for that as yet. But there is a young 
person staying with us, a sort of a . kind of a 
relation, who has been left an orphan. And 
you know something is expected to be done 
under such circumstances.' 

* I understand,' said Mr. Archdeacon ; 

* wishes to earn her bread, as it is called.' 

* No, no,' said Mr. Franklyn, hastily, * not 



THE SUNDAY FEAST, 11 

quite that. You see she wishes to go out into 
the world, and be with a respectable family, on 
a peculiar footing, you understand/ 
Mr. Archdeacon shook his head. 

* There is no debatable ground in these 
matters. Let her subscribe to the formularies 
or not ; but let there be no reservation.* 

* But this is not a question bearing on the 
Church/ said Mr. Franklyn, timorously. 

'I was speaking figuratively/ said Mr. 
Archdeacon; 'possibly you misapprehended 
me ; possibly / failed to convey myself.' 

*We had great hopes/ said Mr. Franklyn, 
*that something was going forward between 
her and Doctor Blower's young curate. At 
least, until lately, A most desirable thing it 
would be.' 

*Do you mean young Wells?' said Mr. 
Archdeacon. * Surely no; you can't mean 
that unbeneficed young clergyman. Surely 
not. I hope not . I sincerely hope not. It is 
not at all desirable, let me tell you, Mr. 
Franklyn, that these sort of impoverished 
alliances should be encouraged in the Church. 



12 BELLA DONNA. 

It don't do, sir ; and I must speak with young 
Wells on the subject, without loss of time/ 

* It has not gone so far as that,' said Mr. 
Franklyn, with much trepidation, * Dear me, 
no. It is only some of the foolish stories of 
the parish, and ' 

'There should be no foolish stories in the 
parish,' said Mr. Archdeacon ; * I don't con- 
sider a parish healthy where there are foolish 
stories.' 

*I was saying,' said the other, *that has 
not gone beyond our own house and family ;* 
at least, it is from the girls only that I have 
heard it. Dear no I there can be nothing in it 
.nothing.' 

* Where is she ?' said Mr. Archdeacon, 
abruptly. * Did I see her when I came in ?' 

*She is sitting,' said Mr. Franklyn, myste- 
riously, *low down towards the end of the 
table on this side, next my son ;' and the two 
heads, the lay and archidiaconal, bent over and 
looked down the sweep of the table, across the 
twisted arms of the ancient epergne, to the 
place indicated. 



13 



CHAPTER II. 



JENNY BELL. 



This was the figure they saw at the bottom of 
the table, sittmg next Mr. Franklyn's son. 
That lively and engaging youth was fighting 
his tropical battles over again, and the face of 
Miss Jenny Bell, his neighbour, with eyes cast 
down, was turned towards him, absorbing every 
word of the magic tale. This was a round, 
blooming, fresh face, with brown hair, brought 
very low upon the forehead, and laid on, as a 
painter would, in rich underflakes, as low in- 
deed as is seen in a westerly Irish peasant girl. 
The light from the crane necks of the old 
twisted chandeliers, seemed to fall on it, and 
glisten like delicate splashes of molten silver. 



14 BELLA DONNA. 

Mr. Archdeacon, though a spiritual man, 
and with something of the appreciation of the 
oyster in all matters sentimental, took notice 
of her full sleepy eyes, brown also, and (this, 
of course, privately within himself) of a round- 
ness in the figure of Miss Jane Bell. For she 
is not of the company of immaterial virgins, 
who are spiritualized away by the macerations 
of romance, and who, by an unaccountable 
prejudice, are always sought out to play ' first 
woman' in five-act dramas of Delia Crusca^ 
She was no misplaced angel, who had been 
shifted by cruel mistake into these pastures of 
earth; who was in daily protest against the 
unspiritual blessings of sound health and en*' 
joyment, or was revelling in the blessings of a 
weak sickly frame and feeble constitution. 
Jenny Bell was piquant, fresh, and fair. 

Had that soldier boy of the House of Frank- 
lyn, beside her, been merely an absorbed curate, 
or the transaction at all savoured of the eccle- 
siastical, so as to make it worth the trouble to 
consider it seriously, Mr. Archdeacon might 



JENNY BELL. 15 

have abstracted himself temporarily from his 
Preserves, and bethought himself seriously 
what absorbing matter they could be so busy 
with. But it would have been poor matter for 
clerical digestion, being merely a stream of 
speech from the young soldier, who prattled 
with aU the ingenuous ardour of fighting men 
of tender years,^ and with that personality for 
which they are remarkable. She listened de- 
voutly, with downcast eyes, and with glowing 
cheeks. In that light from the twisted chande- 
liers, she looked a refreshing bit of colour, 
beside whom the others seemed faded, insipid 
sketches, washed in with water colours. She 
was round and fresh as a piece of ripe fruit. 
Long had it been since he had found so rapt 
a listener for those empty narratives of his, 
which were of the common pipe-clay order, 
and not worthy of embalming in any shape. 

But there was a tone and enthusiasm in this 
military improvisatore, which lifted it above a 
mere vulgar yarn. For him the tawny walls 
of the ancient dining-room, with its spindle 
fomiture, was filled with floating clouds of a 



\ 



16 BELLA DONNA. 

golden glory. With the gay scene spread out 
behind, and the players all in their theatrical 
suits, and ladies all decorated with flowers and 
ornament, and rising from a delicate white 
froth of muslin, with a little sparkling mousseux 
stream flowing steadily, sufficient to raise hu-. 
man pulsations a little above the cold orderly 
motions of common life . with these adjuncts 
the Sunday festival in the country-house be- 
comes a welcome gala ; the tongue begins to 
dance, yet not in the vulgar sense ; and that 
little boy, whom we hear so much of in the 
mythology, if by any chance he be lodging in 
the mansion, begins his wildest tricks. Into 
this house of Grey Forest, seat of Joseph 
Franklyn, Esq., it was very plain he was resid- 
ing, a welcome and an honoured guest. 

This sort of duet or fantasia of the aflTections, 
is sweet music enough for the two performers ; 
but others, who sit at a distance, and see that 
there is music going forward, yet cannot hear, 
are usually by no means warm dilettanti. 
Save, indeed, the virtuous, aged, and 'noble 
fathers,' who look with the professional smile 



JENNY BELL. 17 

of benignity, on the tender gambols of the 
* young people/ In the country districts, there 
is a pastoral simplicity which is not too nice in 
construing the formalities of the ars amoris; 
and a greater licence is tolerated, as, perhaps, 
outside the jurisdiction of the court of Hymen. 
Perhaps it was from some such feeling, or 
from a dulness induced by association with the 
flocks and herds, and properties of nomad life, 
that the Franklyn family took no special heed 
of this relation between their humble cousin 
and their brother. 

But there was another, who sat just opposite 
. a pale, yet manly face, willi a high forehead, 
from which, at one corner, the hair was wear- 
ing slowly away ; from whose cheeks blossomed 
out a rich underwood of dark whisker ; one of 
those faces we see sometimes in the ranks 
barristerial, and but rarely growing from the 
calyx of the white-tie professional. His sharp, 
piercing eyes, roamed to and fro uneasily, but 
usually returned to settle in a steady painful 
gaze ui)on the two delighted and unconscious 
musicians before him ; and though he shammed 

VOL. I. c 



18 BELLA I>ONNA. 

a poor sort of make-believe, as if in lively and 
animated talk with a Franklyn girl who sat 
next to him, still there came uneasy twitches 
about his mouth, and sudden catchings at 
the table-cloth, as some fresh burst of har- 
mony from the orchestra opposite was borne 
to him. For the width of a dining-table is 
a strait almost as fatally impassable, at least 
as concerns time, as that of Dover. And this 
figure, thus standing on the shore, at the edge 
of the damasked sea, looking over so wistfully 
at the Promised Land, was the clergyman at 
whose proceedings the archiadiaconal brow 
had contracted, and who was labouring under 
the disability of impoverishment, and the rich 
emoluments of a pauper curacy. This was the 
Reverend Henry Charlton Wells. 

Perfectly true was the household legend 
rehearsed by timorous Mr. Franklyn to the 
Archdeacon . ^perfectly true in all details. The 
whole Franklyn family, but specially the girls, 
to whom it had been a pet trouvaille, welcomed 
it with inexpressible delight. For, however 
reasonably may be questioned the ungallant 



JENNY BELL. 19 

aphorism, that every woman is a rake at heart, 
it is to be feared that they are walkers in the 
feith that lives by making of matches matri- 
monial ; and, however mixed the common mo- 
tives of human actions, here at least is a whole 
army of virgins and female confessors, perhaps, 
beyond the age of a tender female virginity, 
busy unselfishly with their neighbours' good, 
and preaching the sweet, sweet gospel, that it 
is not good for man to be alone. 

This poor ecclesiastic . who had tramped 
through the usual university round laid out for 
promising ecclesiastics, of scholarships, prizes, 
senior wrangling, and such honours, with a dash 
of vigorous boating and muscular pastime ; 
who had been known as ** Wells of Mac- 
cabeus " . had happily reached to the goal of 
Orders, like many more of his brethren. Then 
felling to the Eev. Dr. Blowers as his clerical 
freedman, he might have been a happy Hod- 
man-in-orders, labouring, not indeed in the 
heats and rains, but with a calm tranquil 
round of duty, not by any means too distress- 
ing, beating the fields of his parish, with a 



20 BELLA DONNA. 

tranquil energy ; dining at this house and 
that, made welcome in squires' society, and 
deeming, in his simple faith, that individual 
books upon his shelves were as much as 
friends, and had as complete an individuality as 
many of the parishioners, in which perhaps he 
was not wholly astray. So that in this simple 
religion he might have lived for years, as well 
known along the district roads as was Parson 
Yorick ; doing some little fishing, both in 
trout streams and in the greater human river 
(which latter was, however, the more profit- 
able), until there came, in due course, the 
tegular aureole, and he would be assumed into 
the seventh heaven of full Eectorship. In 
short, a bright, healthy, vigorous, young cleric, 
who might go on, careless and incurious, 
satisfied that Europe, Asia, and the other 
quarters of the globe, lay within his cure. 

Suddenly, that distant connection of the 
Franklyn family, that bright and dangerous 
Miss Bell, who by deaths of proper guardians 
and reverses had become " chargeable to the 
parish/* in a genteel way, was thrown upon the 



JENNY BELL. 21 

inhabitants of Grey Forest. The luckless 
curate came direct in her road. Loud was the 
twang of the bow. She did not very much 
mind what particular game was struck, so it 
might be called properly a random shot. 
Then was heard the crashing in the bushes, 
and down came the noble animal on its fore 
feet, stricken sorely. That was about twelve 
months before the Sunday Festival which 
brought 4x)gether that company at Grey 
Forest, of which we now know something. It 
is not so difficult to see how matters stand 
during that ceremonial, looking at the way the 
parties are seated. The soldier has entered 
upon this garden of Eden, say a month before, 
and yet here all the flowers have been tram- 
pled under his ugly hoof. And yet not by 
any means one of the professional captains, 
fitted out with letters of marque, among the 
gentler craft. Bather a poor frail barque, 
whom a skilful brother of his own cloth would 
have shattered and sent to the bottom very 
speedily. Perhaps it was the flag, the scarlet 
flag, he carried at the fore, and the golden 



22 BELLA DONNA. 

cordage, that bore him through so triumph- 
antly. In a few hours, the plain, heavy, sail- 
ing lugger of clerical build, was miles astern. 
It was cruel, but it is the story of every day. 



% 



23 



CHAPTER III. 



CROSS PURPOSES. 



There they sit, the soldier and the lady who 
is " on the parish," side by side, and the poor 
ousted curate looking on from across the 
dining-room table. By the college of sur- 
geons of the art of love, this sense of "eject- 
ment," this " eviction," and feoffment to a 
new tenant is held to be the most acute suf- 
fering, and the most difficult of treatment. On 
one side of him sits a girl of the house, Mary 
Franklyn, on whom he has been playing a sort 
of ghastly animation and strained gaiety ; so 
that this undeveloped creature, some sixteen 
or seventeen years old only, thinks her fasci- 
nations have on a sudden prematurely burst 
out, and that she is already skilful with her 



24 BELLA DONNA. 

gun. Some say that fine plump ecclesiastical 
bird, the curate of whatever degree and sti- 
pend, has ever a strange fascination for the 
female fowler. And this young country-house 
child could not but feel a pardonable pride at 
the thought of ensnaring her clergyman, which 
was pleasant sport enough. Sweeter still, 
however, to the female breast is that sense of 
helping one's self to a neighbour's property. 

But under Mr. Wells' spasmodic merriment 
was an utter weight of what might be called a 
spurious despair ; for the crisis was not yet 
serious enough for the presence of the genuine 
passion. And at every fi-esh symptom of in- 
timacy opposite, a hand seemed to gripe his 
heart with a sudden clutch which made him 
sink and collapse interiorly; yet that Miss 
Jenny Bell, still glowing with her electric 
light, was not cruel or barbarous. Often she 
turned to him with a look of encouragement ; 
very often she appealed to him, and took him 
in graciously into her talk ; yet these are but 
poor plasters to one with the clergyman's 
malady, which renders its victim marvellously 



CROSS PURPOSES, 25 

quick-sighted, and had turned this " evicted '* 
one, naturally simple, into a perfect Talleyrand. 
He saw through that complaisance of hers, 
which was done out of charity and sweet com* 
passion, and it only wounded him more. 

Hearken yet again to Mr. Archdeacon, far 
away at the top, now taking say his last round 
of claret before the ladies shall go. 

* And so you like your new man of business,* 
says he, * Suitable and satisfactory ?* 

* Perfectly,' says Mr, Franklyn; *most 
wonderfully intelligent ; has set all my affairs 
right ; looks into everything ; in short, I am 
quite pleased with him,* 

*Did I see him when I came in,* said Mr. 
Archdeacon, again raking the table inquisi- 
tively. * Ah, I see, next young Wells. Ah, 
very good, v-e-ry good,' 

The new man of business was next Mr. 
Wells, but on the other side ; a man of busi- 
ness about whom there was nothing remarkable^ 
saving, perhaps, his extreme youth for a man 
of business. But such a ^gay, light-souled, 
jocund creature, just, as we might say, let 



26 BELLA DONNA. 

loose from his day-school, as innocent as a 
child, lively as a kitten, and positively stored 
to the brim with jokes, riddles, coqs a Vdne^ 
and absolute nonsense, in which latter depart- 
ment he excelled ; that was his main charm. 
Delightful man, Mr, Crowle . people said . 
charming man, Mr. Crowle. 

So his little congregation found him ; those 
tiiat figuratively ' sat under him,* and, accord- 
ing to the flesh, sat about him. Another 
Franklyn girl, who had a distrust of him at 
first, was forced into indecent bursts of merri- 
ment by his legends. And yet so young . 
only four or five-and-twenty, and looking not 
so old. And this man, such a profound man 
of business, closeted for these few days back 
with the head of the Franklyn family. 

This jester did not move our pair by his 
antics beyond a polite smile, out of mere 
compliment. Our curate relished them with 
an overdone and obstreperous merriment, truly 
melancholy to hearken to. He talks nonsense, 
rhapsody, and runs fragments of the dismal 
protests running Fin his head into the speeches 



CROSS PURPOSES. 27 

which he pours out upon the Franklyn girl 
beside him ; a piteous exhibition throughout. 

And now the ladies glide away; and an 
eager, gentleman, agile beyond the rest, holds 
the door handle, and smiles on the troop 
passing by him with a conscious smirk. This 
oflBce does someway bring with it this little 
' pride, as though it had been won by personal 
prowess, and the fair, passing by, were to drop 
wreaths upon his lance. Now do the surviving 
men, left with awkward gaps in the ranks, 
through their devotions, look round them 
doubtfully, and survey each other distrust- 
fully, as is the manner of men who shall now 
have to form new connections. Slowly, how- 
ever, they gather, as the head of the Franklyn 
family nervously invites his guests to * close 
up.' Then he accumulated his decanters 
upon Mr, Archdeacon, hampering that gentle- 
man's movements by a disorderly gathering 
of promiscuous vintages. Then he and Mr. 
Archdeacon fell again into confidential talk, 
on the outskirts of which Doctor Blowers 
skirmished uneasily, while the rest of the com- 



28 BELLA DONKA. 

pany, led by * Bobus ' Noble and Mr. Crowle 
. Philip Crowle, Esquire . chorussed it bois- 
terously, and made of the claret jug a perfect 
vicious Wandering Jew, never suffering him 
to rest his weary foot an instant The poor 
^evicted' curate, though actually between these 
two vociferous talkers, sat as it were apart, 
and smiled vacantly, where all the world was 
laughing boisterously, * Bobus' Noble had 
his heavy weight carrier, so weU known with 
the Furzeby hunt, brought round, not actually 
in the flesh, but a sort of spectral steed ; and 
mounted him there and then, and before the 
eyes of the company took him over the great 
* Ha, ha !' down at Qogby Comer ; not content 
with which feat, he went through the whole of 
the events of that remarkable day, and insisted 
on the spectators riding with him over many 
miles of country. 

Naturally the young man of business was 
indignant at being thus forced into the chase 
at so unseasonable a time. Nothing is so 
justly odious as this hunting despotism, which 
justly rouses the abhorrence of every well- 



CROSS PURPOSES. 29 

ordered mind in the community ; and yet the 
lively young man of business did not protest . 
did not struggle to fling off the yoke, but en- 
tered into the exciting incidents of the chase, 
with true relish. This young man of business, 
though naturally anxious for his share of con- 
versational glory, still had a wonderful sense 
of self-restraint, almost premature for his years. 
And so Mr. Tilbury and *Bobus' Noble to- 
gether * took ' that jump and this, * flew ' that 
ditch, got ' pounded,' sir, by Jove, and * dead 
beat,' sir; and *then,' continues Mr. Noble, 
branching off into an amusing incident of the 
field, * when I got up to the fence just by the 
hollow, who should I see but Biggs, the cotton- 
spinner, on that square chestnut of his, right 
at the fence. My beast was dead lame, so I 
pulled up short; and there, sir, would you 
believe it. Biggs, who gives any figure for a 
horse/ &c. There is a curious similarity in 
these legends of the hunting field ; so not very 
much is lost by suppressing the embarrassment 
of Biggs. 



30 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 

In the drawing-room all the Penelopes wait 
their lords patiently. These noble seigneurs 
arrive presently, and graciously partake of 
coflFee. Mr. Archdeacon . measuring the com- 
pany round with a quick suspicious eye, as 
though he were uncertain whether he should 
get them there and then into the Court of 
Arches . selects the elder of the Franklyn girls 
for his prey, and swoops down upon her, coffee- 
cup in hand. * Why is your sister away ? when 
is she to be back ? what keeps her ?' said he, 
examining her himself before the Court. * She 
will be back the day after to-morrow. She is 
staying with the Cravens.' * I see . I see,* 
said Mr. Archdeacon. *At Sir Welbore^s. 



m THE DRAWING-ROOM. 31 

Very good . ve-ry good; quite proper. And 
now, Mr. Crowle there, . IVe not seen him . 
I've not met him I How's that now ? Been 
here long ?' 

Mr. Franklyn here glides up quietly. 

* We are talking of Crowle, your new man 
of business. A rather agreeable person . that 
is, 05 a man of business.' 

' He is not to be judged by his years,' said 
Mr. Franklyn, * for he knows . let me see. he 
knows as much as . a man of double his age. 
So sharp. so wise. so brilliant I' 

*A very singular person,' said Mr. Arch- 
deacon, looking over to Mr. Crowle, who was 
now performing a legerdemain trick with no 
other property than a pocket-handkerchief. 
' Pity he didn't take orders. These sort of 
versatile talents are what we want in the 
Church,' said Mr. Archdeacon, a little rue- 
fully. 

Mr. Crowle came over presently, having 
finished his trick, and was presented in due 
form to the admiring dignitary. 

* If,' said Mr. Franklyn, * you should ever 



32 BELLA DONNA. 

have need of a person to set your house in 
order ' 

*That belongs to our profession,' said Mr. 
Archdeacon, with a smile. 

*And lands/ added Mr. Franklyn; *and 
in fact I may say, to help you generally out 
of confusion and embarrassment, let me advise 
you to think of Mr. Crowle. I have known 
him but for a short time unfortunately; but 
during 'that period he has been of enormous 
assistance to me . enormous! He has set an 
estate free from a load of encumbrance.' 

* But young Mr. Charles,' said Mr.; Crowle, 
gaily, * will do the rest. A good prize in the 
marriage lottery will be worth all my poor 
labours.' All three, standing together at that 
moment with their coflfee-cups in their hands, 
looked towards the quarter of the room where 
young Mr. Charles was. A few moments 
before they would have seen young Mr. Charles 
sitting on a sofa, beside the fresh girl who was 
dependent on the family, apparently busy 
looking through a little miniature gallery of 
photographic portraits, studying them with that 



IN THE DRAWING-EOOM. 33 

deep earnestness, which shows that the mind 
had travelled far away. But now, when that 
tripod of human figures which stood together 
in the centre of the room, each busy with a 
coflfee-cup and spoon, turned towards that sofa 
to look, it was empty. There was a green- 
house beyond, dimly lighted up, and two figures 
were seen indistinctly standing among the tiers 
of flower-pots. 

*He will make the best of husbands,* said 
Mr. Franklyn, with a gentle enthusiasm, ' he 
is so affectionate, so good-natured. Now that 
relation of ours, Mr. Archdeacon, whom I was 
speaking to you of, she has need of every 
comfort and sympathy, poor child. And 
you cannot conceive his kind and respectful 
attention to her ever since he has been 
here.' 

* Ve-ry good,' said Mr. Archdeacon, ' quite 
proper.' 

* She naturally feels the delicacy of her 
position,' said Mr. Franklyn ; *and I must say 
fpr Charles, he has done everything to make 
her feel at ease.' 

VOL. I. D 



34 BELLA DOXNA. 

* Quite so/ said Mr. Archdeacon, coughing, 

* He has a good heart has Mr, Charles,' said 
Mr. Crowle. ' Though I have had the honour 
of knowing Mr. Franklyn's family but for a 
short time, I said so from the beginning/ 

*He is always full of that nice careful 
thought, which is not to be expected in a boy 
of his years . for he is only a boy/ 

'Quite so,' said Mr, Archdeacon. *And 
you think of marrying him soon, I think a 
very wise resolution.' 

' Why,' said Mr. Franklyn, looking around 
timorously, * he has come home partly for his 
health, and partly for that. The first reason 
he knows ; the second he does not suspect . as 
yet. He will do anything for us . for his 
femily ; and I have some one already marked. 
You see I' 

' Oh,' said Mr, Crowle, wisely, * I see. Ex- 
cellent ! Capital ! How clever !' There was 
nothing in the scheme worthy this panegyric, 
yet the praise made Mr. Franklyn look wise in 
his turn. And on that Mr. Crowle looked 
wiser again than he. Mr. Archdeacon looked 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 35 

neither wise nor foolish, but coughed again 
with much dubiousness. *Yes/ said Mr. 
Franklyn, * there is a young lady, very beautiful 
. but that is no matter . and very well off; 
very splendidly off, I may say. Something is 
on foot in that direction. It would be prema- 
ture to say more now. You understand ?' 
* ^ Perfectly, perfectly,' said Mr. Archdeacon. 

' Ah ! that is the true way to retrieve an 
estate,' said Mr. Crowle, perfectly lost in admi- 
ration. ' All our English estates are more or 
less dipped. In fact, it is the proper condition 
of a really healthy estate, A little retrenching 
here and there ; a little looking into matters ; 
and then sweep all clear at once with a good 
bold stroke. Marry your eldest son to an 
heiress, that is the mode in fashion now. Ah ! 
Mr. Franklyn, you understand these things, 
I see.' 

But the grand topic that day, both at dinner 
and all through the evening, was a certain 
local bazaar, to be held within two days, for 
certain local charitable purposes. There were 
collieries near the Franklyns,^. huge profit- 



36 ^ BELLA DONNA. 

able collieries, that burrow away underground 
in all directions, and even under the Franklyn 
lands. Not, indeed, that the Franklyns were 
blessed enough to possess any of these English 
gold mines: they were unlucky enough to 
have parted with the Royalties, at a time when 
it was thought it would be a vain speculation. 
Directly they were parted with, a vein was lit' 
upon and worked with gigantic profit. This 
was quite a type of the Franklyn * luck ' through 
life. They always acquired blessings and 
parted with blessings at the wrong time. This 
bazaar, under the most distinguished patronage, 
was for the benefit of The Distressed Colliery 
Orphans, and all the Franklyn girls were to 
hold tables. 

Presently comes in from the greenhouse, 
from among the leaves and flower-pots, that 
bright dependant of the Franklyn family, float- 
ing in a cloud of muslin ; her round face glowing 
as though lit up fi'om within ; her figure bring- 
ing colour in among the sombre neutral tints 
scattered over the scene by Mr. Archdeacon 
and the rest of the company. The other girls 



i 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 37 

were with her in a moment, and she was 
presently sitting between them with an ann 
round each of their waists ; for* she was very- 
affectionate, this relation of Mr. Franklyn's, 
and demonstrated her regard in this way by a 
hundred little manifestations of this sort She 
was charming to talk to in this sort of dear 
and confidential fashion, about things not by 
any means confidential ; and these children . 
for they were next to children . delighted in 
this kind of private whispering, coram publico. 
They worried her now very gaily as to what 
she had done with Charles. Had she buried 
him in a flower-pot, or changed him into a 
scarlet geranium ? 

' Jenny, dear,' said one, ^ what do you and 
Charles make out to talk about ? You know 
he is the stupidest creature on earth ; and we 
are sick of mess and parade.' 

' And he hates ladies,' said the other ; ' but 
he likes Jenny, I think,' 

* Likes me," said Jenny, with a half-melan- 
choly burst : * not at all. You have no idea 
the sharp, cruel things he says to me. But I 



38 BELLA DONNA. 

hope, dears, he will get over his prejudice $ 
time works wonders, they say.' 

' I know,' said the first, * what Jenny is 
thinking of; she is making poor Mr. Wells 
jealous. He doesn't know what he is doing to- 
night. Look ! he has been staring at " The 
Vernon Gallery" for the last half-hour, and 
never turned over a page,' said Charlotte. 

The other sister looked at him a little wist- 
fully . she was thinking of his devotion at 
dinner, and her little conquest. 

' Poor fellow !' she said, * he suffers.' 

' Let us plague him a little,' said the younger 
sister. * He preaches too long ; do make him 
more jealous, that's a dear Jenny, and to- 
morrow we shall have a grand making-up.' ^. 

* Seriously,' said the other, 'how I am long- 
ing for it ; you must just plague him a little 
more, and then give in . it will be charming. 
And papa says when that odious old Blowers 
" turns up his toes " ' 

*Hush, hush,' said the other sister; *for 
shame, Charlotte.' 

All three then laughed secretly at the in- 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM, 39 

cumbent, who, utterly unconscious, stood not 
many yards away, expounding parochial matters 
to the Doctor. 

*Papa says he will give Mr. Wells the 
Hectory. But, Jenny, for how long more 
shall you tease the wretch? Only fancy 
your being settled only a mile from the 
house.' 

* You are all too kind, too good to me/ said 
Jenny Bell, with an earnest wartnth ; * you 
two darlings, you know, are the only things that 
would make me think of such a thing at all . 
for people in my place there is no choice ; and 
yet, he is far above me, and you are all too 
kind to me . too kind.* 

Tears stood in the gentle Jenny Bell's eyes, 
as she thus hinted at her really desolate posi- 
tion ; and the two sympathising sisters were 
presently cheering her with their traditional 
caresses. 

The poor wounded curate at his table . who 
has been staring with strained eyes at the view 
in *The Vernon Grallery,' with a steadiness 
with which that view was never contemplated 



40 BELLA DONNA. 

before . steals a look across, and wonders what 
is this sorrow. Who knows . perhaps he has 
unconsciously, and by some action unknown to 
himself, outraged . for he is a little rough and 
uncivilized in his ways and manners . that 
tender heart He has been conscious, too, of 
what he interpreted as appealing looks, en- 
treaties for mercy directed towards him from 
that sofa, where she sat the centre figure of the 
Three Graces. And so the injured curate, 
softening every moment, and becoming a small 
Magdalen in his penitence, is about rising up 
preparatory to casting himself at her feet, 
when he finds the room become of a sudden all 
disorganized, and every one making ready to 
depart ; a clearly inopportune moment for any 
pathetics. There are a tribe of unlucky beings 
on this earth who are specially marked out for 
these crosses and contradictions, who, after 
prodigious argument and hesitation, select the 
most awkward hour of the whole twenty-four 
. and the most awkward minute of the awk- 
ward hour . for their plunge or purpose. 
Mr. Archdeacon's one-horse carriage has now 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 41 

come round, and wishing * good night ' to all 
heartily, he trips away as though word had 
been brought to him that there were poachers 
in the preserves of the Church, and he was 
anxious to get his ecclesiastical gun down, and 
go out and find them. 'Bobus' Noble re- 
luctantly dismounts from that wonderful weight- 
carrier, for which he gave One eighty . *'pon 
my soul, sir, not a pound less' . and goes his 
way, drawn by an ordinary hack, of low price 
and mean power by comparison. 

So with the Doctor . so with Eeverend 
Doctor Blowers. so with the crushed curate, 
who, utterly wrecked and without the common 
decent aid of ordinary dissimulation, could not 
disguise his grief and his disappointment. 

They were gone, and the drawing-rooms were 
left in that sort of waste and desert usually 
seen after guests have departed. Lights still 
burning, and without purpose ; furniture disor- 
dered ; and a few survivors standing scattered 
here and there, looking to each other to have a 
sort of lonely air. Mr. Franklyn stands upon 
his own rug, the Selkirk of the place. Usually 



42 BELLA. DONNA. 

when his compaDy went their way, a new train 
of disagreeable guests arrived in their room, 
and gloomy thoughts and anxieties only tempo- 
rarily dislodged (just as people of the house 
give up their rooms to strangers) came hurrying 
back promptly^ But to-night he was thinking 
of the orange blossoms and the grand heiress 
he had in his eye. And he saw Mr. Crowle> 
the new man of business, skilfully co-operating 
. clearing one field after another of the estate ; 
and the heiress doing the rest all in one coup. 
Full of which agreeable thoughts, he took his 
candle, and leaving the three twined together 
still as the Three Graces, passed down, as he 
always did of a night, to his study. For he 
generally took a short spell with spade or hoe 
among his papers and figures before going to 
bed. As he stood, candle in hand, wishing 
them all good-night, he said to Jenny Bell, 
encouragingly . 

* What is the matter to-night, Jane ? I 
have hardly heard your voice. Not low- 
spirited, eh ? Never mind ; all will go straight 
yet.' 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 43 

He looked meaningly at them all round, 
alluding, no doubt, to that lovers' little diffi- 
culty, as he took it to be, then passed away 
quickly to the sacred study, and was presently 
shovelling up the marl of dockets and figures 
down below. 

Then they all went up to bed ; that is, carried 
out the pleasant young ladies' fiction of going 
to bed : which in this instance signifies going 
up to dear Jenny's little room, to talk over the 
whole night again. It was plain that this duty 
<5ould have been gone through with more conve- 
nience by that famous drawing-room fire, still 
blazing merrily; yet it was held to be altogether 
a different thing. There was a cosiness and com- 
fort about the dressing-table which set the whole 
course of events in an utterly different light, and 
lit them up so to speak with fresh colours. And 
so the young ladies being gathered here again, 
released the zones of the girdles in concert, 
and enacted the whole of that night's scene 
over again. 

One of them would rally Jenny pleasantly 
upon the love-sick curate, the other joining her, 



44 BELLA DONNA, 

yet not with the same enthusiasm, for a reason 
we know. 

*It will be delightful/ said the one; 'we 
will get papa to build you a house, and he will 
easily get the bishop to make up a new living 
for him near the house/ (The girl's notions of 
the extent of episcopal power were, it will be 
seen, a little loose and erroneous.) 

* Yes,' said her sister, * you must leave us, 
Jenny. We must see you every day ; we will 
go and take tea with you.' 

Jenny humbly deprecated this brilliant pro- 
spect. *My dear children,' she said, *you 
think of poor Jenny's powers of fascination too 
highly. I am a very plain ordinary creature, that 
must try and please everybody. But, darlings, 
you are mistaken about poor Mr. Wells. At 
most, it may be a foolish passing fancy ; but to 
dream of me as a partner to a good clergyman, 
in his holy round of offices, darlings, it is a 
terrible responsibility to think of.' 

' What nonsense, Jenny !' laughed the girls ; 
* everybody marries a parson without thinking 
twice about it/ 



IN THE DRAWING-ROOM. 45 

* Indeed,' said the other, ' there is one thing, 
the odious white tie, . "choker," Charles calls it* 

* It is the sacred symbol/ answered Jenny, 
* which marks him out from other men. But 
it is only a dream,' said Jenny, gaily. *I 
have a life of work before me : you^ dears, may 
think of such things.' 

Then they came to talk of the bazaar . the 
coming bazaar . the absorbing topic : how 
they would dress ; how much they would sell ; 
how their stall would look; and how kind it 
was of Lady Lambkin to help them. That 
noble person was indeed going to assist them ; 
and was kind enough to allow the stall to be 
labelled Lady Lambkin's stall, and kinder still 
not to contribute a single article : but to hold 
herself out to the public as the registered 
proprietress of the shop. These acts of kind- 
ness are happily not rare. 

Then the hair came down en masse^ and they 
talked of many other things, and finally went 
to bed. 



46 BELLA DONNA, 



CHAPTER V, 

THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 

AsHTON was the county town of the county in 
which the Franklyns lived, and Ashton was 
the place where the scene of the great bazaar 
was to be laid. 

All religious denominations. Everything 
sectarian rigidly excluded. Under distin- 
guished patronage. Analysed, the distin- 
guished patronage comprised the following 
elements : . 

Paironesses. 

The Lady Mantower. 
The Lady Ringtail, 
The Lady Moleskin. 
The Lady Margaret Tilbury. 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 47 

The Hon. Mrs. De Bloom. 

Mrs. Maindrum, 

Mrs. Peekes. 

Mrs. Welbore Craven. 

Mrs. Eoan Philips. 

Mrs. Tidyman. 

The Misses Franklyn. 

&c. &c. &c. 

Mbst of these ladies had kindly signified 
their intention of holding stalls, and for the 
last two months the air of the county had 
rung with the din of preparation, and the faint 
tinkling of the various instruments in the great 
armoury of crochet and knitting-needles. 

It is not too much to say that close upon 
one hundred sofa cushions of graduated sizes 
were known to be in progress ; on which 
were displayed every variety of human pat- 
tern: diaper, lozenges, crossbars . also speci- 
mens of the great animal family, the dog (lap 
and other kinds), the dog's head, with a letter 
in the mouth, the dog couchant, and the dog 
rampant. What was known as *the banner 



48 BELLA DONNA, 

screen ' was largely run upon, and innumerable 
specimens of that form of ornament were 
known to be well forward; and the * banner 
screen/ . in most instances, meant to be a proud 
shape of decoration when mounted in a costly 
manner, . usually resulted in an article of a 
spare and spindle look, generally shrinking 
away into poor, not to say mean proportions, 
as though there had been some mistake in the 
cutting out. Every proprietress of a * banner 
screen* invariably determined to ejsploit^ her 
work by the agency of the lottery-ticket, half 

4 

a crown each. 

But it would not be fair to pass over 
without notice, the very meritorious labours 
of one special family, Mrs. Eyder and her 
daughters. After all, given the unlimited 
command of costly materials, it is easy to 
produce a dazzling effect. This is an un- 
fair competition. The skilled workwoman 
is at a disadvantage. And yet not in the 
least disheartened, Mrs. Eyder and the 
Misses Ryder carried on their labours, and 
by the mere agency of such simple mate- 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 49 

rials as card, Bristol board, a little gold 
paper, a little coloured paper, some glass, and 
I believe a small mixture of bran (used, how- 
ever, with judgment), and gum, which is the 
basis of all, produced the most marvellous 
results. A little fur from a decayed boa, and 
fi, glass bead, were surely poor materials to 
work with ; and yet with this frayed scrap of 
fur and the beads, and it must be added a 
little gum, the basis of all things, Mrs. Eyder 
in person produced a wonderful likeness of a 
little dog, on a little scarlet cloth rug, 
perfect in ears, tail, nose, and everything 
a dog should have. The fame of Mrs. 
Ryder for these little creatures was naturally 
spread far and wide, and it was known that for 
the coming show, bazaar that is, all hands 
were at work night and day to furnish a 
supply of the mimic animals adequate to the 
anticipated demand. Nor was it in dogs 
merely that the art of these skilful ladies 
was conspicuous. With versatile talents they 
were owned to be unapproached in the manu- 
^ture of little card-boxes, watch-stands and 

VOL. I. B 



50 BELLA DONNA. 

cases (wonderful to say, of the same simple ma- 
terial, gum of course being the basis) ; dressing- 
boxes ; anything, in short, to which that uni- 
versal material could be made to lend itself. 
The Eyder family confined itself exclusively 
to this branch of the profession. Every- 
body laboured industriously in the good 
cause. 

It was a fine day. It was a festival for the 
county, and a gala for the little town of 
Ash ton. The great room in the Market-house 
had been kindly lent by the authorities, and 
had been decorated 'with much taste and 
elegance/ said the local paper, *by Mr. J. 
Ramsbottom, the eminent upholsterer of our 
town.' It must be said that Mr. J. Ram^s- 
bottom s exertions were bounded by a sort of 
general distribution of blue and pink calico, 
wherever that material could be conveniently 
introduced ; still the effect was gay and striking. 
In an adjoining chamber was the band of the 
Ashton Rifles, who, by the ' kind permission * 
of Colonel Dutton, were allowed to perform 
.some of the beautiful airs' . ^I quote again 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 51 

fix)m the local paper, . 'for which this corps 
is so justly esteemed/ 

The Pranklyn family went in their carriages. 
All the county families went in their car- 
riages. The dresses were of the gayest. No 
distinction of creed or politics. Mr. Hounhym, 
Lady Moleskin's son, was there, and Lady 
Moleskin herself held a stall. So, too, did 
Lady Margaret Tilbury. And yet it was 
well known that the relations of these two 
families had been much embittered by a recent 
election struggle in which Mr. Hounhym and 
Mr. Tilbury had lately been engaged. Mr. 
Hounhym was even seen, amid breathless admi- 
ration, to purchase a smoking cap from Lady 
Margaret Tilbury, and went through the cere- 
mony with smiles, and much good humour. 

It was a very gay sight. The wares were 
crowded together, and the sellers of the wares 
performed their function with * engaging grace 
and propriety' (words taken from the local 
journals). The matrons stood behind as pre- 
siding shopwomen ; notorious by very new 
bonnets secured with a gala tightness under 



52 BELLA DONNA. 

the chin. They were to be recognised as ap- 
pointed lady-shopwomen, even outside the marks 
and tokens about them, by the flushes and 
heats of oflBce. They were supported, each 
matron, by a fascinating daughter . inexperi- 
enced, blushing, unused to trade . falling into 
unshopwoman-like mistakes every moment. 
They engaged Captain Tidyman and Major 
Hoskyns at short range, and seduced those 
oflBcers into heavy purchases. But the matrons 
never lost what might be called their business 
eye^ and took a strictly cash view of the 
whole. 

The Franklyns' stall was kindly presided 
over by Lady Lambkin, there being no matron 
in the Franklyn family. Eound her clustered 
the girls. Charlotte, the eldest, should have 
been there, but Miss Jenny Bell took her 
place ; not by any means intrusively, but 
keeping studiously in the background, a course 
to which she was indeed almost driven by the 
strange behaviour of Lady Lambkin, who kept 
sniffing at her from her throne in a disdainful 
fashion. If she were snorting fire from her 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 53 

nostrils, she could not have more eflFectiially 
scorched away Jenny. The Franklyn girls . 
gay, natural, joyous things . went to their work 
with spirit, and really did a surprising amount 
of business. They did not scruple to accost 
strange persons passing by, and with importu- 
nity forced sales ; yet never overstepped the 
Kne of a modest persecution. But there were 
other hoydens loose in the room confined by 
no stall or counter, who had broken fi'om their 
halter and scoured the plain. They had their 
hands fall of tickets . tickets invariably for * a 
banner screen * . ajid presented their cards at 
the head of the passer-by like a pistol. Other 
wayward coquettish skirmishers had built for 
themselves a delightful little post-oflQce, with 
a letter-box and an inquiry window ; with a 
guerilla skirmisher of adroit and insinuating 
address in front. She played the part of 
* bringer ' in military language, and led up the 
captive postulant to the window, where a voice 
proceeding from a new and elegant London 
bonnet wished to know the name of the person 
expecting a letter; and where,, after a short 



54 BELLA DONNA, 

delay, a letter was found, actively directed as 
desired, which on payment of only one shilling 
was handed out to the amazed inquirer. 

It was altogether a very pleasant scene. 
The unholy rattle of the dice was heard even 
above the imperfect musical accomplishments 
of the Ashdown Eifles; and gaiety was en- 
hanced by the spectacle of tall men carrying 
helplessly about with them unwieldy cushions, 
which they pressed tightly to their bosoms like 
infants, because they knew not how to carry 
them in any other fashion. 

And yet Miss Jenny Bell, while shrinking 
out of the direction of Lady Lambkin's hot 
and disdainful blast, could not bring herself to 
overlook the meritorious ends of the charity. 
In her modest retiring way she tried to en- 
gage buyers. She was not very skilful at her 
needle, but had contrived to put together a 
sort of nondescript little bag of simple shape 
and pattern ; which was a bag for no special 
purpose, but which Jenny fancied in her help- 
less way was *a tobacco pouch.' She clung 
to this article tenderly, and put it forward 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 55 

with every advantage; but someway it did 
not seem to attract. Elderly gentlemen passed 
it by almost with contempt, . passing by, too, 
Jenny's shrinking introduction of it to their 
notice, which in itself was worth money. 

The curate, the Eeverend Mr. Wells, had 
known of this precious work long before; in 
fact, through all its stages of production. He 
had offered almost a year's stipend for i V-im- 
plored that it might be his. But Jenny was 
good-naturedly obdurate, protesting that she 
would not let her friends waste their money on 
such a humble, homely thing ; he must buy 
some of these other pretty things. *Come 
now,' she would add with mystery, *he should 
have these charming slippers for a guinea. 
No ?' and the pretty shopwoman sighed. 

Major Carter and Captain Manger, quartered 
in the town, had lounged in, and were soon at 
Lady Lambkin's, inquiring the latest market 
quotations with a great deal of interest. That 
noble lady heaped her wares upon them pro- 
fusely, . a purse, a cigar-case, a large cushion, 
a bag and a handkerchief, . but failed to suit 



56 BELLA DONNA. 

them. They lounged away gradually towards 
the left, and began to enter into treaty with 
the more piquant shopwomen. 

These gentry are never profitable customers ; 
for it is part of their faith that some gracious 
notice, and possibly a crude compliment or 
two, is excellent coinage and fair payment for 
all goods. Jenny said to her neighbours, 
*Now, dears, we must make these creatures 
buy;' and with this end proceeded to lavish 
all her attentions on an elderly lady who was 
then cheapening a sixpenny doll. The mili- 
tary gentlemen asked the price of this and 
that, and everything, which she reluctantly . 
reluctant at being interrupted . told them, and 
returned to her elderly lady. This abstinence 
has a curious eflfect always. *Was there no- 
thing they could raffle ? Come ! This lady's 
work-bag, for instance?' taking up Jenny*s 
own work. 'That was a tobacco pouch,' said 
Jenny; and had cleverly in her own mind 
organized a raffle on the spot. * Tickets two 
shillings and sixpence each, please.' 

She had those two soldiers throwing dice for 



THE ASHTON OOUNTT BAZAAR. 57 

at least a quarter of an hour for her tobacco 
ponch ; throwing in a half-provoked, half* 
amnsed &shion, and bringing out wretchedly 
low figures. Jenny seduced them on and on 
like a Circe. * Oh, how near !' she said in deep 
grie^ as one gentleman threw twenty-one. * Oh, 
do try again ; you must try again.' But when 
they finally desisted, she became cold and in- 
different, and eventually wholly absorbed in a 
gentleman who was turning over a cigar-case. 
This is the morality of bazaars. 

But young Mr. Franklyn from India had not 
as yet come to the table. The curate had 
hovered about it in agonies, while the officers 
were making their advances ; and was much 
relieved by the way in which they were dis- 
missed. He kept coming back and coming 
back, but still was useful; for he was sent 
away to dispose of tickets, and charged not to 
come back without money; which last, he 
sometimes, to purchase smiles of approbation, 
supplemented out of his own means. But 
young Mr. Franklyn had not come up as yet. 
This was the reason. 



58 BELLA DONNA, 

Mr. Franklyn, senior, had gone in himself to 
the festival. He never indulged in treats of 
this sort ; but this was pure business. That 
Mr. Marley, who possessed a large estate not 
very far away, but whose father had been in 
a manufecturing walk of life, where he had 
picked up funds to purchase the estate, . 
that Mr. Marley should have been at the 
bazaar, was a matter of no very great concern 
to any one. But he had brought his only 
daughter, Miss Marley, which did greatly con- 
cern Mr. Franklyn. This was the young lady 
about whom he had consulted Mr. Archdeacon. 

To this young person was young Franklyn 
led. She was tall and pleasant to look on; 
she was gracious too, and hec natural guardian 
was encouraging. Young Franklyn was charged 
to lead her about to various stalls, which he 
did chafing and reluctant, . ^a foolish, stupid 
child of a soldier, who did not know what was 
good for him. Mr. Franklyn talked to Mr. 
Marley, but watched the pair from afar with a 
wistful eye.' No wonder ; for as they receded, 
he saw fading out of sight his long train of 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 59 

mortgages, bonds, and charges, which this 
happy alliance would remove for ever. 

Soon, however, on some pretext, young Mr. 
Franklyn shook himself free ; he had pre- 
sently, with true fraternal instinct, glided over 
to his sisters' table. The curate felt his pre- 
sence by an utter blankness at his heart. Jenny 
was suflfering from the heat, from fatigue, from 
her labours, and more than all from Lady 
Lambkin's fiery blasts; whose formal pride 
had been wounded by the felonious abstraction 
of many valuable customers. The girls felt for 
their friend. Would Charles take her away 
and get her some refreshment? The curate 
writhed. 

They went. Charming Mrs. Welbore Craven, 
a youngish married lady with an oldish hus- 
band, stood behind a stall selling cakes and 
ices, like a real confectioner ! It was exqui- 
site the grace with which she went through 
her ftmctions . gave and received change . and 
asked the special character of ice wanted, in 
the true confectioner's key. Her dress, exqui- 
sitely in character, heightened the effect, and 



<',' 



60 BELLA DONNA. 

excited universal admiration. Gentlemen clus^ 
tered round and gave large orders. Ices two 
shillings and sixpence each . but then, consider, 
in the sweet cause of charity ; and a large sum 
handed in to the committee from the sale of 
ices, would be an advertised testimonial to the 
power of Mrs. Welbore Craven's charms. It 
is well known that old General Bulstock, who 
has to visit Vichy and other waters every year 
-for a generally disorganized interior-was 
well-nigh reduced to death's door from eating 
three of these delicacies in succession; and 
thus purchased three of Mrs. Craven's smiles 
and three pretty speeches. 

Young Mr. Franklyn took Jenny up to this 
lady's stall, and gave her an ice. He then 
walked round the rooms to give her air and 
general relief. They saw the little sucking- 
pig tied up with pink ribbon, which Miss 
Boleshiver was raffling ; they saw the post-oflBce 
in brisk work, and inquired for letters directed 
to Charles Franklyn, Esquire, and received one. 
Then they talked of the sales, and curious to 
say, with an absence of mercantile morality to be 



THE ASHTON COUNTY BAZAAR. 61 

. paralleled only at scenes of this kind, the little 
tobacco pouch became the property of Charles 
Franklyn, Esquire, under earnest protest from 
Miss Bell, who indeed gave no consent; think- 
ing of a sort of implied contract with various 
* rafflers,' civil and military, with whom a sort 
of faith should be kept. But young Mr. 
Franklyn had it all his own way. 

Then they went into the next room to sit 
down ; few came that way, so they excited no 
attention. But the curate of the anxious 
wistfiil face, who had missed them at once, 
soon began to seek after them with a raging 
jealousy, and peeped in with a secret conspi- 
rator-like fashion. He saw them talking very 
earnestly. I suppose there was at least an 
hour consumed in the operation of getting 
that ice. 

Presently they came forth, the youth with a 
flushed cheek and a sort of triumph in his eye.^ 
The curate marked them nervously. Then 
came up Mr. Franklyn, senior. He had been 
looking for his son everywhere, having missed 
him, and found him absent from the rich Miss 



62 BELLA DONNA. 

Marley. The youth went back at once, 
eagerly. He was in high spirits, and exag- 
gerated in his devotions to Miss Marley. That 
young lady was pleased and very gracious. 
Her father looked on with a kindly eye, for he 
respected the old blood and good lineage of the 
Franklyns. Mr. Franklyn looked on too, from 
afar, and was glad in his secret soul. 

It was altogether a most successful gala day, 
to be long after talked of by country firesides* 
The Franklyns drove home all in spirits, most 
of all Mr. Franklyn ; for he had engaged to 
dinner, for next Thursday, Mr. Marley and his 
daughter, Miss Marley, who had both accepted 
with empressement. He scarcely spoke going 
home; and was even complimenting himself 
upon his own sagacity and skill in conducting 
his business thus far, so successfully. 



63 



CHAPTEE YI. 

MR. FRANKLYN's visitors. 

At dinner it was a perfect Babel. Everyone 
told their adventures ; everyone spoke together. 
There were a hundred droll little scenes 
rising out of buying and selling experiences. 
How old Lady Mantower had waited to the 
very end, and then had gone round, shabbily 
buying up really good articles at a frightful 
depreciation. How that stingy ' Bobus ' Noble, 
with all his free speech and his promises yester- 
day, could with difificulty be persuaded to part 
with one shilling, which was wrung from him 
with inconceivable pains and difificulty. How 
one old gentleman had set his eye on a special 
cushion, for which he had thrown a high 
number, and kept jealous watch and ward 



64 BELLA DONNA. 

over it the whole day, coming back every five 
minutes, and demanding to know the state of 
the dice poll . as though he suspected foul 
play, which indeed he might have done reason- 



ably ; for such wa8 intended . one of the girls 
wishing that a certain young Alfred Carter . 
who generously spent his little all among them, 
taking ticket after ticket . might, by some 
pardonable hocus-pocus, have the prize shuffled 
over to him. But what could be done ? He 
perversely threw the most ridiculously low 
numbers. This wretched old gentleman watched 
them narrowly. 

Jenny Bell had in truth the greatest tri- 
umphs of all to record, and yet she was pensive 
and silent. Q'hey thought she was tired, or 
perhaps that she was annoyed by the noble 
Lady Lambkin's behaviour. Young Charles 
Franklyn was not so lively, or even boiste- 
rous, as customary ; but that did not seem re- 
markable. At the close of a long day, gentle- 
men are sometimes silent, or even moody, 
without ostensible cause, and there is always 
indulgence. 




MR. FRANBXTN'fl VISITORS. 65 

It was a perfect series of comic sketches, 
and they were yery merry over them the 
whole evening. But the most fascinating part 
of the whole, was the counting over the gains 
of the day. A little money-box, bursting with 
shillings and sixpences and sovereigns, was 
emptied out on the table; and being labori- 
ously counted, was found to amount to the 
grand total of twenty-five pounds six shillings 
and sixpence. It was marvellous, and yet, 
strange to say, a little margin had to be 
allowed for bad money: even in this sacred 
cause the corruption of human nature was 
found to enter. 

So the evening passed away. Mr. Franklyn 
went down to his study as usual, but a good 
deal later than usual: 

While he is thus busy, therp is a light trip- 
ping step in the gallery, and some one taps 
very gently. He is down with his head bent 
into a low drawer, and does not hear. So the 
door is softly opened, and that round figure of 
Jenny, bright as ever, stands nervously on the 
threshold, with a timorous . 

VOL. I. F 



66 BELLA DONNA. 

* Might I speak to you, sir ?' 

The loud crash of the drawer closed violently, 
and the Franklyn face, lifted hastily, and 
seeming a little pale and nervous, is the 
answer. He stands up, entrenched behind his 
desk and papers. 

' Well,' he said, ' what is it ? What do you 
want ? I am rather busy now.' 

' Oh nothing, nothing, sir. I beg your pardon 
. indeed I do. I do not intend it, I assure 
you/ 

And our poor frightened Jenny, utterly ^ 
scared, does indeed seem ready to sink into 
the earth. Naturally the slightest rebuff was 
to her the stroke of a flail. 

*No, don't go away,' said Mr. Franklyn. 
' Come in, Jenny, and tell me what I can do 
for you. There, sit down,' he added, kindly. 
*Now ' 

Still shrinking, she says . 

'Oh, sir, I intrude upon you; I have 

disturbed you. It was only to tell you, 
sir ' 

* Now sit down,' said Mr. Franklyn, taking 



MR. pranklyn's visitors. 67 

her hand in his, ' and let me hear this impor- 
tant communication. You wanted to tell 
me ' 

* Sir . dear sir . ^you won't be angry, but I 
must go away.' 

* Do you mean, leave our house ?' said he, in 
astonishment. 

*/ muLst go home,' she said. 'You have 
been so good, so kind to me . but I must go ; 
it is better that I should . far better.' 

* Why, I can't comprehend,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, looking at her, a little bewildered. * You 
seemed so happy to-night, and to like us all 
so.' 

*I know, I seem ungrateful . ungracious, 
she continued, not bursting into tears, but 
agitated ; ' but you, dear . dearest sir . will 
ujiderstand me, when I say it is better that I 
should go. Ton know how happy I have 
been. Oh I too happy.' 

All doubt and gravity passed away from 
the head of the Franklyn family in an in- 
stant. 

* Oh . oh 1. I see . I see,' he said ; * I am 



68 BELLA DONNA. 

getting old and stupid ; and perhaps thinking 
too much of my own business. I should have 
known . of course I should. Cheer up, my 
little girl, . don't be thinking of such desperate 
measures. We shall set it all straight in the 
morning.' 

And the head of the Franklyn femily looked 
at her with knowingness and encouragement, 
showing that he understood the whole em- 
barrassment He had seen and remarked the 
curate's wan and dejected &ce. It had crossed 
him many times during the day, looking out 
wistfully for something. It was too plain. A 
lovers' quarrel. Poor Jenny, poor child ! 

But our Jenny could not comprehend him. 
She was so simple, so full of childish gaiety, 
that she would accept a statement with the 
plainest sincerity, but meanings that were 
undercurrents she could not reach to. So her 
round eyes opened and her round cheek glowed 
again. 

*I owe it to your goodness, dear sir, to 
leave. I shall find a home somewhere. But 
let me not take with me the thought that I 



MR. franklyn's visitors. 69 

have ia any way taken advantage of your good- 
ness. It was not my fault . indeed it was 
not/ 

And Jenny sought the hand of her protector, 
and gently pressing it in her own, devoutly 
raised it to her lips; with the light of Mr. 
Franklyn's lamp quite close, and playing on her 
fece, it looked a perfect bit of Etty handling. 

Mr. Franklyn cheered her as best he could. 
He still thought of the clerg^Tuan. 

*My little girl/ he said, 'we will talk it 
over to-morrow, when I shall settle everything 
to please you. There is one thing you must 
put out of your head. We won't let you go. 
There, good-night.' 

She was ^one some ten minutes, and Mr. 
Franklyn was again deep in his mystic drawer, 
when another tap is heard at the door, and the 
drawer is again closed smartly. His son, 
Charles, the youthful warrior, entered. He 
was agitated, and closed the door with some 
solemnity. Mr. Franklyn was a mild patient 
man, and not likely to protest against such 
interruptions. 



70 BELLA DONNA. 

* Well, Charles/ he said, kindly. 

' My dear father,' said the youth, hurrfedly, 
' I must speak to you/ 

Another parent would have testily sworn 
the whole world wanted to speak to him that 
night, but Mr. Franklyn was very gentle. 

' Ah, I know/ said he, drily. ' Well, I am 
very glad you have come down. I want to 
hear about it all . from beginning to end. 
Give me your hand. I was delighted with you 
to-day.' 

H 

The youth was confused, and gave his hand 
in a dull, guilty way. 

* She's a fine girl, Charles,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, ' and one we should like if she hadn't a 
penny. But shall I tell you what her father 
said to me ? Now, I think, coming from him, 
it was very encouraging. He said ' 

' Oh, sir,' .said Charles, interrupting, ' it is 
not that. It was not about this . I wasn't 
thinking of it ; but about ' 

* Well, all in good time,' said Mr. Franklyn, 
poking the fire. ' Draw your chair in, Charles. 
Money, I suppose ? Don't be afraid. I don't 






MR.- franklyn's visitors. 71 

mind now. How mnch? Come, don't be 
afiuid.' 

* No I no I no !' said the young man, eagerly. 
* Nothing of the kind. You have always, sir, 
been so . ^so . ^affectionate to me, gratifying all 
my desires, that ' 

* Well, Charles, what do you wi^h for ?' 
*Yes, sir. And I think you would not 

make me miserable . ^unhappy . ^wretched for 
life ' 

* Good gracious, no, Charles ! Why '^ 

*You would not see me ill . sick . dying, 

perhaps; for you know, sir, I am not strong, 
and ' 

* Gk)od heavens I Charles, speak out What 
do you want ?' 

* Sir, sir, forgive me. I don't know how to 
tell it to you . ^but . but ' 

A strange paleness suddenly came upon 
Mr. Franklyn's face, and he looked down me- 
chanically at the drawer, where he had been 
digging.' 

*I don't understand you. Speak out,' he 
said, thickly. 



72 BELLA DONNA. 

* Oh, sir/ said the youth, covering his face, 
* I LOVE Jenny Bell, and am utterly miser- 
able, and I shall die if you do not let me 
marry her !* 




73 



CHAPTER VII. 



JENNY BELL OUTCAST. 



The next day gloom overcast the Franklyn 
mansion ; a grim ogre had stepped in, and was 
walking about. It was as thoagh a funeral 
were about to be, and the body were lying up- 
stairs. 

Such a blow had never fallen upon a simple 
family. It reacted on the whole house. 

Mr. Franklyn was as though he had been 
seized on by a stroke. He sat stupified, in 
solitude . ^barricaded in his study. A weak, 
timid man, with no trenchant argumentative 
powers of storm and attack, he had no influ- 
ence, for terror or otherwise, in his family. It 
had fallen on him like a bolt, for none knew so 
well as he what tremendous interests depended 



y 



74 . BELLA DONNA. 

upon a sort of commercial marriage being 
brought about in his family. So that at first 
taking his son in with much nervousness and 
trepidation . for he always dreaded scenes, . he 
spoke to him as though the thing were a mere 
theory, utterly puerile, and not to be thought 
of for an instant. 

To him, the son, in a sort of heroic rant and 
declamation ; that he must die ; that his health 
was poor ; that he would never get over it ; 
and that, to live at all, he must marry this 
surpassing Jenny. The father then tries duty, 
aflfection, and the simple, autocratic ^moije le 
veux.^ It couldn't be, . it was not to be 
thought of, . ^but with equal success. Then, as 
is usual with weak minds, flies off into a poor, 
frothy passion, . threatens, . tries a poor make- 
believe of wrong, without any bottom to sup- 
port it, . sets the other on his mettle, . who 
becomes defiant, heroic, positive, and inde^ 
pendent ; . will go forth upon the world. Let 
the Franklyn estate be sold ; let them dispose 
of it as they will, without reference to him. 
There is his commission still left ; let that be 




JENNY BELL OUTCAST. 75 

sold too. He will face the world, he and his 
Jenny. He will work for their common sub- 
sistence ; with more of the like extravagance. 

As for the condition of our Jenny, it is 
truly piteous. Everyone must do her this 
justice, that she could not have foreseen this 
complication; or, that when she did see, she 
nobly went to the head of the house, and 
would have denounced the mischief. The 
tears, the floods of tears she shed that day! 
The way she outpoured her sorrows, first into 
this, aien into that, sympathising heart. She 
wept, and was wept with, upon the stairs, in 
the passages, in the boudoirs, dining-rooms, 
gardens. The whole female world condoled 
with her. But to go away she was determined. 

Upstairs in her little room the packing went 
forward diligently. The small black trunk, 
which took all her little moveables, . there was 
not much heavy porterage in those worldly 
eflFects, a simple wardrobe, in good taste and 
suflScient, . was the whole. A dreary cere- 
monial that ' packing,' at which assisted mourn- 
fully all disengaged females of the house. 



76 BELLA DONNA. 

The head of ihe family did not, indeed, 
regard her savagely, but looked on her with 
suspicion and distrust. It was enough that 
she should have that destiny of domestic ex- 
patriation before her ; but most cruel of all . 
as she must have felt it . was that coldness 
and injurious suspicion from one she loved and 
respected. The whole house joined in this 
view. The gay laugi, the joyous spirit, in 
which they delighted was not heard. The 
bright eyes, . the lamps of the house, . were a 
little dim. 

Dinner was an awful ceremonial, . long re- 
membered. The soldier, who was in mutiny, 
kept away. Jenny sat there, a dull statuci 
but did not eat. Before the end she flew 
away precipitately, having previously answered 
some questions a little hysterically. Reproach- 
ful glances were all focussed directly upon the 
head of the family, who grew red, and hot, and 
uncomfortable. For surely, of all the harmless, 
cheerful, engaging things to have in a house, . 
a kind of social light to the eyes, and a gentle 
stove for the heart, one who furnished the 



i 



JENNY BELL OUTCAST. 77 

merriest music in the orchestra all the year 
round, . ^was this Jenny Bell. That was the 
popular sentiment. The girls, to be snre, 
were little more than advanced school-girls, 
the age wherein an extravagant ^ heroine wor-* 
ship' is developed; and that youth in his 
military sait about as much a man as little 
Tommy, who is girt about with a cheap tin 
sword, a sham cartouche pouch, and a light 
wooden gun. But this is the stuff of which 
admiring multitudes are made. It did not 
make much matter, for our poor Jenny was 
resolved to go out upon the world with to- 
morrow's dawn, early, before anyone was up 
(this carefully stipulated), unbreakfasted, un- 
anointed, unannealed. Was not the little 
trunk lying upstairs ready corded ? 

The gaiety of Mr. Crowle, . who was of the 
party, . ^was likewise damped. That exuberant 
man of business was, as it were, turned in 
upon himself. He looked with interest over 
at the poor victim, . this self-devotion and 
social Sutteeship, . and seemed to compas- 
sionate. Coming from him, who had looked 



78 BELLA DONNA- 

forward to rich nuptials as the best pumps and 
engines for clearing the flooded district, and 
who had been diligently employed in getting 
things ready for setting up such useful ma- 
chinery, . it was more than could be ex- 
pected. 

So the gay man of business, . whose gaiety 
had been so much damped by this mournful 
state of affairs, . came over to Jenny that 
evening, in the drawing-room, before dinner, 
where all were sitting like a company of 
ghouls, and talking in whispers, and sat down 
opposite to her, with whom two female friends 
were sympathising. 

. ' This is sad news,' he said, * Miss Bell ; 
weary news. Still fixed on going to-morrow ?' 

* Yes,' she said ; * alas ! I must/ 

* And yet,' said Mr. Crowle, */ don't see the 
necessity ; of course, that is no reason why 
there should not be a necessity, or why you 
djLOuld stay, or why you should go ; but, still, 
it seems to me very curious.' 

Miss Bell made no answer ; but it was plain 
that this merely touching on the subject was 



JENNY BELL OUTCAST. 79 

distressing to her, for her fingers were busy 
with her pocket handkerchief. 

* I think it a pity/ continued Mr. Crowle, in 
a ruminative way, 'you are so liked in this 
house. But, of course, that is no reason; I 
mean, whether / think it a pity or no.' 

Miss Bell answered devoutly, *Ah, you do 
not know me ! I cannot tell you how I feel, 
and what it will cost me to part. Oh I to- 
morrow I to-morrow !* 

And Miss Bell, scared at the prospect of 
that terrible morn, covered up her face. The 
girls who supported her gave soothing comfort 
and consolation. 'Dear Jenny!* * Darling 
Jenny !' were heard amid their caresses. 

Mr. Crowle was much interested. 

/And yet, it is very hard that this penalty 
should fall on you, . you personally, . who 
are as innocent in the matter . if I may 
be pardoned the expression . as the child 
unborn.' 

* Yes, indeed, Mr. Crowle,' say the two girls, 
in chorus. 

^Ym never thought, dreamed, that Mr. 



80 BELLA DONNA. 

Charles had sach a thing in his head; yow 
never gave this perverse young gentleman 
what is called encouragement. No wonder it 
burst upon you like a thunderbolt/ 

Miss Bell let her handkerchief drop from 
her face, looked at Mr. Crowle, and then said, 
* Ah, you at least understand me/ 

*I can conceive the surprise of such a thing/ 
he went on, 'your wonder, your stupified 
wonder at the discovery. Your thoughts, 
perhaps, all the while in another direction, . 
forgive me the remark, . in possibly a sacred 
direction.' 

' Mr. Crowle !' 

* I only wish to illustrate my meaning. Let 
me say, in any direction. I only wish to con- 
vey my notion of the surprise and astonish- 
ment which must have fallen on you. It is 
certainly hard for one so perfectly innocent 
to have to suflfer.' 

This gentleman's thus harping upon an un- 
pleasant subject, naturally troubled our Jenny 
a little. She fixed her roimd, imploring eyes 
upon him for a moment, then rose and went 



JENNY BELL OUTCAST, 81 

over to one of the girls. Dinner then came, 
and Mr. Crowle, the gay young man of busi- 
ness, went down last of all, rubbing his 
hands. 



VOL. r. G 



82 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



DOMESTIC BATTLE. 



A GLOOMY evening. Mr. Franklyn, with the 
mark of a sort of domestic Cain upon his brow, 
and clearly uncomfortable, retired promptly 
to his fastness in the parlour, and entrenched 
himself there. Mr. Crowle went now and 
again into the library, read a newspaper or 
book, and came back again shortly, drawn, as 
he said, by an irresistible fascination. For 
Jenny Bell, instead of * giving way,' afe many 
a girl of her age would have done under the 
dispiriting influences of the occasion, strug- 
gled, . not manfully, which is sometimes bu 
a poor shape of struggle, but womanfully^ . to 
keep up the spirits of her friends. She even 
affected a sort of gaiety, a sham imitation o 



DOMEBTIO BATIXE. 83 

her own nataml gaiety ; she went to the piano, 
and sang some of her favourite songs, which 
had been wont to plunge the curate into a 
delirium of mournful admiration ; for * it was 
the last night/ as she said many times over, 
* and she must go in the morning.' The little 
modest trunk already packed, &c, ; . and now 
that she thought of it, it would not be, per- 
haps, too much to have the . carriage . might 
she ? Surely it would not be too early. The 
evening after, at four o'clock, she would be at 
home . as she must now call it . with a be- 
nevolent aunt, who would harbour her a 
few weeks, until it would be seen what re- 
sults advertising in the Times would bring. 
A very brave and resigned little Jenny . so at 
least she seemed to those in that room ; and 
presently the clouds began to gather, and the 
rain to drop in heavy showers of grief. So 
these obsequies went on on that dismal night 
that Jenny Bell was talking of going away. 

About ten o'clock a step was heard on the 
stairs, tramping down hurriedly, and one of 
the Pranklyn girls said nervously that it was 



84 BELLA DONNA. 

Charles. The trepidation of the circle in- 
creased prodigiously when the door of the 
fastness below was heard to open and then 
close again, with a stern and defiant bang. 
There was a solemn interview, then, going on 
between father and son. What a moment of 
trial for our Jenny Bell ! And yet, was not 
the result for her utterly indifferent ? for it is 
known that it was her firm purpose, no matter 
what reconciliation was arrived at, to quit the 
mansion. Such a course was only due to her 
sense of self-respect. 

It was a long and painful struggle. She 
had announced it to the girls, who were first 
aghast, then indignant. The next question 
was, where she was to go to, or could go to ? 
That was not of so much concern, she had a 
little money put by; the world was happily 
suflSciently wide. At all events, in that house 
at least was not her place, bearing discord and 
miserable estrangement between dear members 
of the same family. 

The way in which our Jenny spoke of these 
matters was truly piteous, and the* light she 



DOMESTIC BATTLE. 85 

set them in very forcible. So, as may well 
be conceived, ^he took all hearts with 
her. 

More than half an hour was spent in that 
nnseen struggle below. Finally, the door was 
heard to be flung open, and Mr. Franklyn 
came tramping in, very heated and very wild, 
and trembling all over, followed, too, by his 
son, with flaming cheeks, and a general flavour 
of stem heroics over him. 

* I take you all to witness,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, in a loud quavering voice, *what this 
foolish, headstrong boy is bent upon. Let 
Mm take his own course, and carry out this 
precious bit of insanity. Let him marry a 
beggar if he like, and make himself . me . you 
all . ^beggars, too !' 

In justice to this excited man, it must be 
said that he did not see Jenny Bell at that 
moment . she was sitting rather in the shadow, 
and he took her for one of his own daughters. 

So gentle was she that she made not the 
slightest protest at this cruel epithet, but was 
presently struggling with hysterial sobs. For 



86 ^BELLA DONNA. 

these are a sort of emotion it is impossible to 
disguise. 

Wounded and reproachful glances were bent 
upon him from many quarters. Even he was 
touched, and began in a sort of fashion to 
excuse himself. 

* You know, yourself,' he said, eagerly, ^ we 
are not rich. You know this, . you came to 
me yourself to tell me as much. It is a 
miserable thing, and will be our ruin. Of 
course beggar is . is . scarcely the proper 
word ; and . and . I did not see you here ; 
but /can't help speaking out plainly, when I 
hear of such utter folly and insanity ' 

* Beggar, then, let it be,' said the youth, 
still flaming in his heroics ; ' she has no need 
to be ashamed of it. How, sir, could you 
be so cruel ? But to me it is a prouder title 
than if she were Queen or Countess, and I 
should have more joy in linking my fortune 
to hers, in this. indigence, than if she had 
millions.' 

The youth's voice trembled as he sent forth 
tikis splendid sentiment. The female by- 



DOMESTIC BATTLE. bi 

staoders, thoagh filled with terror at the 
tragic significance of the drama, were over- 
flowing with secret admiration, and even awe, 
at this magnificent chivab-y. 

And yet, Mr. Franklyn was not a sort of 
patemalJove Tonans, thundering forth male- 
dictions with foiy aud menaces. He was more 
agitated than angry, and was really a prey to 
fright and confusion of mind. 

Jenny Bell came forth from her shadow, 
and with trembling limbs advanced into the 
middle of the room, possibly making for the 
door. She fixed her large full eyes upon 
the enraged lord of the castle . thev were 
swimming in tears . 

* Indeed, sir,' she said, * I, and I alone, am 
to blame for this. Unfortunate, wretched 
creature that I am, to bring such trouble into 
the house of my best friend and benefactor.' 

* No, no,' said he, * I don't blame you . that 
is, I do you injustice, . ^you could not help it . 
certainly you could not.' 

* Why did I ever enter this house ?' broke out 
Jenny, now in a torrent of tears. * Why was 



S8 BELLA DONNA. 

I not left in the obscure station that fitted me, 
and go down at once into the rank that best suits 
one of my reduced means ? But to be guilty, 
to appear to be guilty of such ingratitude to 
the fi-iend that raised me up, the benefactor 

that cherished me ' And here Jenny could 

not go on further, getting almost hysterical 
with her emotions. 

She was standing in the middle of the room, 
tottering almost. that poor friendless orphan. 
Some one humanely rushes with a chair, 
barely in time. The girls group round her. 
The youth stands over her with an air of pro- 
tection. Mr. Franklyn, naturally a just and 
humane man, feels strangely uncomfortable. 
The hands of all present, children of his as 
they are, are against Him. He goes up to her, 
and takes her hand : 

* Jenny,' he says, *I acquit you; indeed I 
do. Do not set me down as so harsh. These 
things sometimes cannot be helped. there is a 
fate in them. But I say, indeed, I do acquit 
you of all share in this.' 

Jenny had glided down upon her knees, and 



DOMESTIC BATTLE. 89 

had now his hand in hers, pressing it to her 
lips. 'Thanks, thanks,' she said, in a low 
Yoioe, 'what goodness, how gracious I Now, 
ihcfui I can go away; yon have taken a load 
from my heart.' 

* No, no,' said Mr. Franklyn, raising her up, 
* there is no need of that. Let us look at the 
thing rationally. Charles here knows . hnow^ 
. ^he must see it cannot be . it is out of the 
question* He might as well send mo to a 
prison.' 

The youth smiled, 

* You were talking to me, sir, only a week 
ago of our flourishing condition, of cheque- 
books and balances. I was given to under- 
stand the estate was getting cleared/ he 
added, scornfully. 

* I said it would be cleared,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, warmly, * subject to your marriage. Be- 
sides, I am not to be brought to account for 
every careless word. I tell you again, you 
can't afford to marry in this sort of way. 
Charles, listen to your poor father ! I did not 
mean to speak harshly to you, indeed I did 



90 . BELLA DONNA. 

not. But we must have money. We stand 
in a frightful way. Miss Marley's fortune ' 

* I don't want wealth,' said the youth, ' nor 
estates. All I care for is the girl I love, 
and ' 

Mr. Franklyn, for about the second or third 
time in his life, tried a sneer. 'And a cot- 
tage,' he added. 

^ Yes, sir,' said the youth, (All the parties, 
during this distressing interview, were on the 
verge of explosion at any instant.) * Yes, sir,' 
broke out the youth, * in a cottage. I am not 
ashamed of such a wish. It is no discredit to 
me. I have never, thank Grod, been a blind 
worshipper of money. That is not my creed, 
I assure you. I shall ' 

* Hush, hush !' said Jenny, supplicating, for 
the voices were getting loud; *do not, I be- 
seech you. Let me go. Vet me leave at once ; 
I never thought of this/ 

'Courage, Jenny,' said the youth, taking 
her hand ; * and if you do go, there shall be 
one to comfort and protect you. Look up !' 

' No, no,' said Jenny, releasing herself. * He 



DOMESTIC BATTLE. 91 

is your father. my benefactor and your father ; 
you must oonsalt him . hia wishes before all.' 

' I am tired of all this,' said poor worried 
Mr. Franklyn. * Take your own course, go on 
in your infatuation and folly ; see what it will 
lead you to, . be a beggar if you will.' 

* Oh, sir I do not speak in that way,' said 
Jenny, very generously interceding, though 
she did not know but that she would bo draw- 
ing, down wrath upon herself. But it was not 
her way to heed such considerations. 

* Let him do as he pleases,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, about leaving the room, ' but he will rue 
it. Let him disobey his father, and bring me 
to a gaol. ^ What does he care.' 

* No, sir,' said the youth, again in a hot fit 
of heroics. * I know my duty as well as most 
sons. I thmk you have never had much to 
complain of in me. It is ungenerous. But as 
you thwart me in the dearest wish of my heart, 
what I have dreamt of for years . for months, ' 
he said, correcting himself; in fact, it was 
strictly but a couple of months . 'I shall be 
passive, quite passive in the business. You 



52 BELLA DONNA. 

shall send me back at once to India, to my 
regiment, to that climate which agrees with me 
so well. I shall go to-morrow, and leave a 
country that is odious to me.' 

At the news of this dreadful determination, 
consternation fell upon the entire assembly. 
It was known that a board of Indian doctors 
had sat upon the person of the youth, and had 
pronounced that the climate of that country 
would be utterly fatal . that he must get home 
with what convenient speed he could. The 
youth had, therefore, in so many words calmly 
announced that he was going back to certain 
death. 

Mr. Franklyn abruptly quitted the room, 
and after a few seconds the door below was 
heard to shut with a reverberating echo. The 
remaining actors in this distressing household 
piece stood regarding each other. It was a 
grim, horrid night . looked back to for long 
after as to a nightmare. The youth strode up 
and down, pacing defiance, and repeating his 
grand determination of self-murder. Jenny 
Bell lay back on her chair staring vacantly, 



DOHfiSTIO BATTLE. 93 

and almost stupified. Poor child! innocent 
fans et origo of all these troubles. Even the 
sympathising sisters had fallen away from her 
with a species of dread, for they felt that it was 
coming to extremities. 

It was long past midnight, and time for the 
scene to close. 



94 BELLA DONXA, 



CHAPTER IX. 



SURRENDER. 



In the grey of the morning candles were 
lighted, and a straggling hand-to-mouth sort of 
breakfast set out in the back parlour . hot and 
yet cold, raw and uncomfortable, . all for Jenny 
Bell, now departing. Even to the last the 
girls conjured her to stay, . these sad difficul- 
ties would pass by, but she was sternly in- 
flexible. They wept profusely. She did not 
shed a tear, but was remarked to have a stony 
fixed stare, almost unnatural. She said it was 
her duty to go ; her heart might break, as in- 
deed it was likely to do, but go she must. 
After all, it was a * trying pass to come to, ' for 
our Jenny was, indeed, next door to a pauper, 
and had scarcely a place, according to the 



BUKREXDER. 95 

hackneyed fonnnla, where she might lay her 
head. These people, too, had been kind to 
her, and otherwise she might have had a home 
here for Heaven knows how long. So that this 
exodus was indeed a practical piece of heroism, 
for which she must have credit. Poor Jenny ! 
Mr. Franklyn was not seen or heard of. He 
was supposed to be up, for a note was brought 
in from him and given to Jenny, Poor child, 
she opened it eagerly. It contained best 
wishes, and so forth, with a very handsome 
money present, very princely indeed consider- 
ing the fortunes of the family. Jenny said 
merely, *How good;* but did not, as might 
have been expected, make any noisy disclaimer. 
But it was found after she was gone, that it had 
been left behind on her table, with a grateful 
note for Mr. Franklyn. Oh, such a grateful 
note ! She was to write, write often ; they 
were to write, write very often. For the pre- 
sent she was only going to a town some fifty 
miles away by rail, where was some fossil rela- 
tion.bones, as it were, in the drift. That was 
all that was known for the present. He in 



96 BELLA DONNA. 

whose hands she was would direct all for the 
best. 

The carriage was at the door. A cold, raw 
blueness was seen over the trees. The candles 
burned with a melancholy flare. A single 
maid was up, and, pattering up and down, be- 
stowed the last final offices . not, indeed, 
with enthusiasm, but with faint hopes of pecu- 
niary comfort firom the departing lady. The 
male servant was on duty, but with reluctance 
. for he, too, with a profounder knowledge of 
human nature, had but poor hopes. There was 
but a low estimate of Jenny, in this respect, 
through the establishment. And yet they mis- 
judged her. Jenny was very sensible. She 
knew that no capital is laid out at such judicious 
interest as when placed in the Securities known 
as * Servants' Vails.* She astounded the menial 
at the door with a handsome honorarium. 

At last it has come. See Jenny going forth 
upon the world; . see her, a young Roman 
matron, sacrificing herself for a family ! In 
our century these instances are uncommon. 

Young Mr. Franklyn has asked for a few 



8URREXDEB. 97 

moments' speech in priTate. But Jenny thinks 
it more delicate firmly to decline. Her ad- 
dress and place of abode is, as it were, wrung 
from her. 

* I will write to yon, Jenny,' said the frantic 
yomig officer. * That cannot be prevented . 
and. add . I will be true to you for ever !' 

She shook her head sadly. Better strive 
and forget her, for both their sakes, . far better. 
One last fevour . try and carry out his dear 
Other's wishes. Would he promise her ? 

Anything but that. He takes ber down to 
the carriage, supporting her on his arm. He 
walked with pride. That last office, at least, 
they should not take from him. 

The girls followed behind, admiring his 
chivalry with a secret admiration. Some one 
carried a flaring light at the tail of the dismal 
procession. The male servant stood, ' carrying 
arms,' as it were, at the open hall door, out of 
respect for the liberal view taken of his ser- 
vices . but shivering. It was very cold in- 
deed. 

Embracing them all round . a clutch rather 

VOL. I. H 



98 BELLA DONNA. 

than an embrace, . ^a close adherence, as though 
they were never to be parted again. The 
youth took her out to the carriage. 

* Ah, darling Charlotte ! I had forgotten 
her/ said Jenny. * Give her my love . be sure 
you give her my love. And now, good-bye, 
dear Mr. Franklyn I Your kindness, and . 
and' . Jenny hesitated . * generous partiality 
. I shall never . never forget.* 

* Angel !' said the young man, half in at the 
carriage, * you shall hear or see of me again, 
before long.' 

Jenny shook her head sadly, and drove 
away into the darkness. 

Another wretched day, a day of gloom and 
misery, looked back to with a shudder by the 
family. Poor feeble-minded Mr. Franklyn 
was at his wits' end secretly^ yet outwardly 
was wrapped up in a paletot of moodiness. 
For there was another departure getting 
ready. 

Tin cases were in the hall, and that special 
pannier-shaped baggage, which is for the Over- 
land, rested ominously on hall chairs ; sticks^ 



SURRENDER. 99 

umbrellas, sword, fishing-rod, all strapped 
tc^etlier like a Boman Lictor's fasces, . ^bundles 
of plaids ^and general wrapping, as though it 
were Christmas, and a blanket distribution 
among the poor were speedily to take place. 
Yes, yomig Pranklyn was going away tragic- 
ally, like a transpontine hero . rushing to cer- 
tain death in the country of Curry. He 
was calm, and made no speeches ; his sisters 
regarded him with awe, and even terror, but 
they did not dare to address him. Mr. Frank- 
lyn, too, did not appear, but kept himself 
secret, like a Grand Llama. Wretched day, 
indeed ! 

It came to dinner time. The chaise was to 
be at the door at 7 p.m., the same chaise that 
had taken away our poor Jenny Bell. The 
hero snatched a few mouthfuls, . ^he did not 
care to eat. What indeed was eating as a 
function of life, to one who was rushing to 
certain death? Certain death it was, say 
within eight or ten months . Porson had said 
so . our liver, my dear sir, you understand. 
The frugal banquet was washed down with 



100 BELLA DONNA. 

r 

tears and sobs, and the youth then got up 
hastily to get ready the last few preparations. 

All then met in the hall. 

Then forth came Mr. Franklyn, really 
ghastly pale and tottering . the first time he 
had been seen that day. He met his son full 
at the door. The son started back. 

* You are going then, Charles,' said he. 

* Yes, sir,' said the other. 

* Determined to . to . break my heart, to 
carry out yoiir own views.' 

*N6, no, sir,' said his son. * Don't misun- 
derstand me. I am doing all that you wish, 
sacrificing everything, even life itself, to ' 

* I understand. Of course,' said Mr. Frank- 
lyn, smiling bitterly, ^you must have your 
way. Stay then. Do as you please ; marry 
whom you will; I have no more spirit to 
oppose you.' 

* No,' said thfe hero. * You shall find me 
dutifiil. Let me go back to the Indies ; an 
unwiUing consent ' 

* I am serious,' said Mr. Franklyn. * I 
had no aim in the world but your good . 



SURRENDER. 101 

none, upon my soul ! Our good, I should say. 
My dear boy, you know not what is involved 
in this step. I am no family tyrant ; but 
pause, I do conjure you, before you take this 
wretched, &tal step !' 

* I can say no more,' said the son, coldly. 
* I can do no more than obey you.' And he 
pointed to his mails ready packed in the hall. 

Mr. Franklyn looked at him a moment 
sadly, then said, ' Take these things up to the 
rooms again.' 



REXLA DONNA 



CHAPTER X. 

jenny's wandeeinqb. 

Wb may well fancy what a miserable, desolate 
sort of a journey was that made by Jenny Bell 
aU that day, and what a cold, dejected heart 
she mnst have taken with her. It was at best 
a decent sort of expulsion ; and unless she was 
supported by the conscious rectitude of the 
step she was taking, and that grandest of all 
moral sustenance, principle, it is hard to say 
how she would have got through at all. Only 
consider, a lonely, impoverished, young crea- 
ture, without a fiiend, without comfort, and 
with a blank waste of a future before her, 
hurrying away to a sort of fossilized relation, 
to a dry, prison sort of -household, where she 
would be treated like a sort of Magdalen. All 



jenny's wanderings. 103 

the soft, Tvann colours of life were fast fading 
out ; she was every instant leaving a greater 
span between her and her dear friends. 

Towards evening she came to the town 
where she was to halt for the night . ^a rude, 
raw, grimy place of abode, manufacturing 
through and through, and with a general tone 
of dull Indian red. Not a zephyr of sympathy 
fluttered down those grim gaol-like streets. It 
seemed a gathering of vast walls and a whole 
army of windows. It was all duress and re- 
straint . all cold, hard, ironed . mechanical, 
monstrous, regular, noisy . unsavoury and 
sombre, with not a glimpse of anything soft, 
gracious, natural, or human. Men and women 
who were machines, like the machines thej' 
looked after, crowded at corners . heavy hulk- 
ing figures, who now that work was done, began 
to live in their own stagnant way. The manu- 
fecturing town was beginning to draw a sort 
of languid material breath of life, as lonely 
Jenny Bell drove through its streets, to the 
* Queen's Hotel/ a clean, bright, white house of 
, , entertainment, actually reeking of fresh plaster. 




104 BELLA DONNA. 

A new, cold, Hotel Palace . Limited: very 
white inside . very rich in cornices, pillars, and 
entablatures, all in the most solid confectionery 
plaster that could be got. There was a hoist 
for taking up luggage to the diflferent apart- 
ments, and electric telegraphy for communi- 
cating with the servants ; a spacious * Ladies' 
Coffee-room,' a library, and other inventions. 
Yet, someway, it was a cold, cheerless, fac- 
tory sort of hotel, quite in keeping with the 
factories among which it was set down. 

A dreary welcome for a young creature. 
We may well conceive what an evening she 
passed; how she watered her simple crust . 
that is, the plain delicacies sent up to her from 
the ' Queen's ' kitchen . with tears. We may 
fancy what a night she spent, and how sadly 
she sat in her chamber, and waited for the hour 
when she was to go forward another stage. 

What time that was fixed for, did not appear 
very clearly. ' It was not known to the ser- 
vants of the house, nor to the landlord of the 
house, who had not been told to send in that 
Very modest account, run up from the day 



jenny's wanberinob. 105 

before, and whose extent did not tend to pre- 
serve that sense of honour and respect which 
in the Inn world is only to be acquired by 
large and liberal outlay. Possibly this in- 
definite date was not known to herself; but 
this is certain, the whole of that weary day she 
sat patiently in the manufacturing hotel, in the 
manufacturing town, perched high in a sort of 
eyrie or roost, known as No. 160, and attain- 
able only by Alps upon Alps of stairs. There 
was a printed tariflf, with the various ' Scales 
of Booms ' set down ; and Jenny had^chosen the 
most lowly. The waiter mountaineers made 
the ascent with ill-concealed disgust. There 
she sat the whole day, at the little window, 
looking down on the wains of wool crawling by 
^ith the solemn gait of elephants, and the rude 
iron natives, trudging past roughly, and on the 
bare red brick opposite, and the stiff, gaunt, 
soulless houses. It was a dreary wait for that 
poor outcast girl, yet who might, indeed, be 
there as well as elsewhere. 

Evening then came on, and a reasonable 
speculation was abroad in the crypts below as 



106 BELLA DONNA. 

to whether there would be any strain put upon 
their resources for No. 160. 

, Towards six o'clock, she still sitting in soli- 
tary retreat, a waiter mountaineer struggled 
up to her Grand Mulcts, and tapping at the 
door, said there was a lady and gentleman in 
the * Ladies' Coflfee-room' who wished to see 
her. Our patient JeriHy did not start, but said, 
* Thank you,' very sweetly, raised her eyes to 
Heaven with utter thankfulness, and, when the 
door had closed, jstole over to the chimney- 
piece, and vacantly smoothed down her hair, 
with that almost instinctive prompting of the 
woman nature whenever she is suddenly drawn 
before the public. This unfriended outcast 
had, indeed, need of every weapon in the whole 
armoury of female trickeries. 

And who could these strangers be, waiting 
in the * Ladies' Coflfee-room ?' The poor un- 
friended girl, tripping down slowly, may well 
speculate who could want her in the dreary 
manufacturing town. Who, indeed ? 

Standing in the * Ladies* Coflfee-room,' whiere 
happily at this moment there are no ladies, is 



jenny's wanderings. 107 

the faithfiil knight, so true, so trusting, and so 
loving . the brave young Charles . and his 
sister. 

She gives a little scream as she sees him : it 
is so sudden. For a friendless girl, here is one 
friend at least ! . and then falls on the neck of 
the sister. 

Jenny put out her hand, while a flush came 
to her cheek. 

*This is kind,' she said, in her low, soft 
Toice, for she was agitated, * very kind. I did 
not expect this.' 

The youth stammered and coloured, him- 
self; for he had all the engaging unsteadiness 
of youth, and the * ingenuus pudor,' and was 
not quite prepared for the situation. 
; *So,' murmured Jenny, *you have wished 
to see me once more 1 This is kind . oh, most 
kindr 

* Jenny,' said the youth, with a blunt rough- 
ness which became him wonderfully, * you are 
coming back, you know. That is, it is all set- 
tled ; and . and . you are to come back.' 



108 BELLA DONNA. 

^ Yes, dear/ said the girl, *you are to come 
back. Papa wishes it.' 

She looked at them with wonder, scarcely 
following their meaning, then shook her head 
sadly and slowly. From those divine tresses 
were shaken forth upon the worshipping youth 
a sort of ambrosial essence. 

* No, no,' she said, * those happy times are 
gone for ever. It is very good of you . oh, so 
good of you . to wish it ; but you know after 
what has passed, it may not be I I must go 
my own way, out into the desert; while 
you ' 

* Dearest Jenny,* said the youth, in an ardour 
of enthusiasm impossible to describe, * you do 
not understand. It is all settled . all forgiven 
. ^you are to come back.' 

' Yes, darling Jenny,' said the sister. * Papa 
has agreed ; so pack up your things at once. 
We are all dying to have you again.' 

Over Jenny's face played a smile of affection 
inexpressibly sweet. Once more their mutual 
feelings found a happy issue in a strict em- 



jennt's wanderings. 109 

brace. But raising herself from the girl's 
shoulder, Jenny said, sadly but firmly . 

*You are all too good . far too good! I 
knew dear Mr. Pranklyn would do me justice 
when his noble heart had leisure to think of 
it. But it cannot be, . it must not !' 

*How do you mean?' said the two to- 
gether. 

* It is impossible that I should return, after 
. after . what has occurred. I . I . to bring 
confusion and discord into your united family 1 
Never! The worst is over now. Better a 
thousand times that I should starve 1' 

It struck the youth that there was an air of 
noble resolution in her face, such as he never 
could have conceived. He surveyed her with 
wonder and admiration. 

They were with her for more than an hour, 
wearying her with affectionate importunity. 
There was not an abundance of argument, for 
they were very young. But she was inflexible 
. almost sternly inflexible. They had actually 
to go their way at last, wringing from her a 
promise . to her a meaningless promise, given 



110 BELLA DONNA, 

out of love for these two aflfectionate souls 
. that she would tarry there . thinking it 
over . until the morrow's evening. Even 
of this little favour she made much, but 
she could not refuse these faithM, generous 
creatures. And so she agreed to tarry at the 
manufacturing town, in the blank manufactur- 
ing hotel, one day, for some indistinct whim of 
theirs. 

They departed. The next day went by 
slowly, and our Jenny kept lonely watch up in 
her eyrie hour after hour. Never was so 
patient a scout. Late in the evening a cab 
drove up; and word was brought that there 
were parties in the * Ladies' coflfee-room * once 
more . an elderly gentleman, and the same 
parties that were there the day before. 

Down came our Jenny . as to impending ex- 
ecution. Here was Mr. Pranklyn, not austere, 
or stem, but gentle and forgiving, and melan- 
choly. She was ready to sink down at his 
feet, but he caught her with both hands, barely 
in time. 

* It seems you must come back, Jenny,' he 



JENinr'S WANDERINGS. Ill 

said. * I have come for you myself. Charles' 
heart is so set upon it, that I will not oppose 
him any further. I don't think it a very wise 
step, but I consent. So, in God's name, 
come, and let us try and make the best of it.' 

* He is the best of fathers,* said the youth. 
*He has forgiven everything, and has con- 
sented: so come.' 

The scene that followed it would be hard to 
describe. 

Our Jenny was stern and inflexible, not to 
be swayed by arguments or entreaties. She 
held out nobly; and really won over Mr. 
Franklyn in what was with him a faint reflec- 
tion of enthusiasm. He at last was actually 
joining in the other entreaties; and finally, 
after more than an hour, she gave way, and 
reluctantly went up stairs to put back her 
slender wardrobe into her modest chest. 

The poor outcast was brought away, and re- 
entered the old mansion of the Franklyns with 
a sort of triumph . for her, that is ; for the rest 
of the family now seemed to welcome her with 
a sort of awe and mystery, and even shyness 



112 BELLA DONNA. 

This was hard, for she had indeed been brought 
back under pressure. But she was now a sort 
of mistress of the house in posse; and in a 
week's time it was understood over the neigh- 
bourhood that she was the aflBanced bride of 
young Mr. Charles Franklyn. 



113 



CHAPTER XI. 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 



The whole country, in amazement and yet in 
delight, welcomed the story. It was sent 
round in an incredibly short space of time, like 
the Fiery Cross. We are to love our neigh- 
bours, and search our consciences at night, for 
anything contrary to that precept of charity. 
Still, how welcome the news . not of his mis- 
fortune. Heaven forbid . but of his merely 
tripping over a stone, and stepping into a social 
puddle and being splashed ! 

People had been to the house of the Frankly ns 
and seen Jenny Bell there. Some had always 
thought her a forward person ; some a retiring 
creature, so sly and quiet, and just the one to 
accomplish such a stroke. Some, smarting 

VOL. I. I 



114 BELLA DONNA. 

under that universal wound, which the with- 
drawal of a desirable single man from the com- 
munity always induces . even where there has 
been no individual loss or chance of loss . were 
loudly indignant, and made no secret of their 
wrongs. A pert, brazen creature . an adven- 
turess . an artful minx . a privateer : these 
awful words were heard through some country 
houses. 

Elderly persons now whispered to other 
elderly persons, with complacent condolence, 
that it was a great pity, a very great pity ; for 
Franklyn had been gradually getting straight, 
but that he would never get over this. One 
special elderly person knew his property, sir, 
about as well . as . anybody ; but depend upon 
it this unlucky business would swamp him. 

It was notorious in, the country that the 
Franklyn barque was gotten among the shoals 
and breakers of pecuniary difficulty, and had 
there strained her timbers seriously, and was 
otherwise distressed. No one had, indeed, 
official notice of any such casualty out on the 
social high seas ; nor had the agents for gossip 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 115 

at the parish Lloyd's yet received information 
of any misfortune. Still, there was that 
mysterious instinct abroad . akin to those 
rumours of defeat and misfortune, winch un- 
accountably fill the air long before telegraphic 
wires have brought in the news, . that there 
was rottenness somewhere in the fortunes of 
the Franklyn family, and the neighbours were 
looking greedily for the waters to come rush- 
ing in. 

It was the old story. The good old family 
barque had been floated down from genera- 
tion to generation, but with every voyage 
was getting more and more * fouled ' with the 
Crustacea of mortgages and heavier charges. 
Each successor was more or less blameless, 
but was obliged to make fresh incumbrances 
to meet the existing burden of incumbrances 
that already weighed on him. It was the old 
story. There was nothing to show for all this 
expenditure ; and those who were reputed to 
have spent most money, had the least enjoyment 
of any while they spent. Mr. Franklyn did 
not game, or race, or keep hounds, or even 



116 BELLA DONNA. 

ride to hounds. Yet he was growing more 
and more terribly embarrassed every day. 
There is no more dispiriting spectacle than 
this of a genteel family wasting by a slow but 
sure decay, with a sad pilot at the helm, who 
is struggling ineflfectually. 

Up at the Franklyns' there was a cloud of 
gloom and oppression, impossible to describe. 
The members of the family moved about as 
though there had been some recent domestic 
affliction, and the * remains' were lying in 
state in every chamber in the castle. When the 
first short burst of enthusiasm on our Jenny's re- 
turn was past, this dreary tone gradually took 
its place. It was felt universally that some 
terrible misfortune had overtaken them; and 
yet, than our Jenny's deportment, in her most 
trying position, nothing could be more delicate 
or appropriate. She kept very retired and to 
the full as dismal as the rest, wept regularly 
for several hours during the day, and conveyed 
the idea that she was a fatal, yet unwilling 
instrument in the hands of stern Ananke, or 
the pagan Necessity. Poor child, of that 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 117 

terrible power, or its great name, she know 
nothing. 

The youth deported himself curiously, and, it 
must be said, with not nearly her delicacy. 
He seemed conscious of the troubles his 
foolish purpose was to bring upon the familyi 
and looked no one in the face, relapsing into a 
dogged demeanour ; but he haunted his Jenny, 
and found indemnity there. He fastened on 
one of his hapless sisters, and outpoured upon 
her daily rhapsodical panegyrics of the virtues 
and beauties of his dear charmer. The child, 
for she was not very much more, had to listen, 
wanting heart even to protest. In short, the 
sum and compliment of gloom and apprehension, 
and heavy weight upon the heart, if added up, 
according to arithmetical rule, would have 
made a very serious total. 

There was one thing they were all looking 
forward to, which was to be a relief and a kind 
of cheer. The eldest sister of the house was 
coming home . was, in fact, to be home to- 
morrow. Charlotte, the good Queen Charlotte 
of the mansion, upon whom, since the night 



118 BELLA DONNA. 

Mrs. Franklyn had left the Franklyns for ever, 
the head of the house leant aflfectionately, for 
all purposes of serious government. 

A girl of ' great sense,' everybody said ; 
thoughtful, firm; one as against whom the 
waves of society would be broken into spray. 
One, too, that reflected a second or so before 
she spoke, and measured what might be the 
purpose of the speaker. This was the girl that 
came home of the Saturday night (about seven 
days after Jenny's return), from her visit at 
the Cravens' . Sir Welbore Craven of that ilk ; 
returned with all her baggage, matSriel^ and 
munitions of war. 

A letter had told her what had befallen her 
family in her absence. Mr. Franklyn had 
written a bitter, almost despairing note, on 
which she quickened her departure. 

Her welcome was universal . some cheer was 
spread abroad. It seemed to be understood 
that mind and stability were come back once 
more into the mansion. Faces lightened as she 
entered, and a sort of public confidence was 
restored. They would not be wholly wrecked. 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 119 

The sensible girl accepted the situation 
readily, and said, * We must all make the best 
of it now/ She had a long talk with her father 
in the study, and reassured him. A short 
series of encouraging looks, and very few words 
indeed, more than reassured the girls ; it was 
enough that she was with them. But to her 
brother, who stood off at first shyly and almost 
guiltily, she conducted herself with a tender- 
ness and delicacy that was wonderful, and 
finally gained him to her. She was the uni- 
versal peacemaker. 

To Jenny Bell, who was now so humble, so 
grateful, so obliging, so imploring to every 
single person in the house, from chief to scullion, 
she was especially gracious and encouraging. 
She seemed to ask her confidence, and no doubt 
felt for the delicacy and awkwardness of her 
position, being forced by an unwilling family to 
enter their mnks. Yet, some way in Jenny's 
demeanour towards her there was a constraint 
. an overdoing of the humilities. For, per- 
haps, she felt that the plain, sensible girl, who 
was so calm and straightforward, would put an 



120 BELLA DONXA. 

Ugly construction on her conduct, and miscon- 
strue cruelly her own really fair and upright 
behaviour. It is not known whether this was 
indeed the secret feeling of the * sensible girl, ' 
but she was strictly just, and behaved to her 
with perfect impartiality. 

No day was fixed for the marriage as yet ; 
for, to say the truth, there was no very marvel- 
lous enthusiasm in the family to hurry it on. 
The youth, Charles, his transports being now 
more or less satisfied, had delicacy enough not 
to importune them too eagerly. There was no 
need for haste. And as for that poor suffering 
Jenny, it was obvious she was least likely of 
the whole company to be eager for any special 
time to be named. 

In this way the time passed by for a week or 
more, and all in the house seemed to have 
grown used to the idea of what was now an 
inevitable necessity. 

The Eeverend Charlton Wells, the lovesick 
curate, lived in the little town in lodgings, over 
the shop of the local apothecary, . for the pre- 
sent, at least. The rector was getting altera- 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 121 

tions done at his honse, ' throwing out' rooms, 
and had no accommodation for him at present 
The little town was good three miles away 
from the honse of the Franklyns, so he lived a 
very dreary, lonely existence in that dead-alive 
comitry town, over the apothecary's shop. 
This was his normal view ; but when he fell 
into that peculiar frame of mind in reference 
to Miss Bell, this sense of abandonment and 
desolation increased to a degree that the inte- 
rior became of a sudden dismantled utterly, the 
walls stripped and barren, and the whole 
turned into the best reproduction conceivable 
of a prison cell. He himself, too, became a 
reproduction of a prisoner dwelling in the pri- 
son cell, and looked out from its mean windows 
on the country-town^ street with the weariest 
heart. He viewed with a sort of loathing 
the dwarfed economy, the mere elementary 
traffic of the little community, the balls of 
string, the salt boxes, the open sack of flour, 
the starch and soap, and other insignificant 
items of traffic which constituted the stock of 
the leading establishment. The Franklyn 



i 



122 BELLA DONNA. 

Arms, next door, was no more than a misera- 
ble public. These features had strack his eye 
long, long before, but were endured with 
rational and pious toleration. But the whole 
was but a development of prison life and 
cellular system, and genuine back-of-God-speed 
existence. 

Since the eventful night at the Franklyns' 
house, when the Archdeacon had dined there, 
and which, when the guests were gone, had 
wound up so dramatically, the Eev. Charlton 
had been away at the furthest corner of the 
county for a few days, . had gone with reluc- 
tance and returned upon wings. Then it was 
he heard of the break-up, and heard, too, of 
Jenny's departure. Then his parochial duties, 
his fishing duties, his fine broad healthy enjoy- 
ment of country life . in fact, life itself gene- 
rally . became utterly distasteful. He was 
crushed and almost desperate. 

Joy came with Jenny's return. But with 
her came also the nuptial news, and the curate 
was crushed down once more. 

On the Sunday came round his turn to 



A DISTRACTED CLERIC. 123 

preach ; but a wretched performance he made 
of it. He came forth from the vestry all 
drooping and deranged, as though his eccle- 
siastical plumage were draggled and rufllcd. 
He saw Jenny very distinctly below in the 
&mily pew, sitting there in a sort of modest 
tribulation, yet clearly with the halo or nimhtis 
of affianceship about her head. With this en- 
oouragement, he took his rustic hearers, very 
indiflFerently, through some poor religious 
maunderings . the Gospel - and - water, as it 
were. Theologians of the congregation 
thought it miserable doctrine, and did not 
know what was coming over Charlton Wells. 

That Sunday, after lunch. Miss Bell had 
stolen away to the garden, to the summer- 
house for solitude, as was, indeed, her wont . 
for some way, since the arrival of the sister, 
there had grown up a gradual constraint be- 
tween her and all the members of the family. 
She sat in the summer-house thinking . who 
shall divine what she was thinking of? . when 
in a moment the figure of the Eev. Charlton 
Wells, with much agitation and a little wild- 



124 BELLA DONNA. 

ness in his face, came round a turn in the walk, 
and stood before her. 

She started. No wonder; an agitated cleric 
like this was disturbing. 

* Mr. Charlton !' she said, * I am so glad . 
that is . it is some time since we have seen 
you.' 

* Miss Bell,' said he, * I wished to see you . 
to speak with you. I hear such strange 
things ; . that you had left . that you are to 
be married.' 

Jenny hung down her head in the summer- 
house. She must have long ago divined that 
here was one of those hapless mortals whom 
it was to be her destiny to distress . Heaven 
knows how unwillingly. 

*I want to know, the truth,' said the agi- 
tated clergyman, * from yourself . that is. 
Speak to me . tell me all . for you do not 
know how deeply interested I am.' 

Jenny half rose up to go away. 

* One moment/ said the Eeverend Charlton. 
* You would not be so cruel ?' 

* Cruel!' said Jenny, again drooping her 



A DISTRACTED CI.ERIC. 126 

head. * How little you know me ! Ah, you 
are outside; you go about the world . the 
world of your parish, mix with men, and are 
busy with the holy concerns of your sacred 
calling. Ah, you cannot so much as guess at 
owr sorrows . we who are within in a genteel 
prison . ^how we suflFer, and must not com- 
plain.' 

The Reverend Charlton answered bitterly . 

'Suffer? Yes; what tremendous griefs 

these are, which consist of station, wealthy 

position, and a good alliance. Then it is 

true ?' 

' Oh,' said Jenny again, * how little do you 
know me, Mr. Charlton ; me, the poor, humble 
outcast, dependent on others' bounty. To 
think that such vile seductions would tempt 
me. I say again, you know not what is pass- 
ing . what has passed within. What has been 
my life, what must be the life of such as I am, 
from the beginning? Sacrifice . nothing but 
sacrifice . a wholesale strangling of our will, 
inclinations, and affections.' 



126 BELLA DONNA. 

Jenny's eyes flashed, Jenny's cheeks flamed 
with colour, Jenny herself sank back upon the 
rude rastic bench of the summer-house, and 
once more hung down her head. 

The clergyman exclaimed with rapture . 

* What ! do I understand that ' 

*No, no, no,' Jenny said, eagerly. 'You 
are to understand nothing. I have said too 
much. Oh, forget, forget these words; I did 
not mean to be so open ; I did not indeed.' 

* I know, I know/ said the curate, raptur- 
ously. * It escaped you involuntarily . I sus- 
pected it. Dear, dearest Jenny, let me ' 

* Hush, hush,' said Jenny, rising in much 
alarm ; * I must go . they will be missing me 
. ^asking for me. I must be at my post . you 
understand . you know what is expected from 
me. Oh, but you must forget those incautious 
words ; never think of them again.' 

* Never think of them again 1' said the 
clergyman, with feiTour. *No, anything but 
that ; thanks, a thousand thanks, for this con- 
fession. It has taken a load off my heart.' 




A DISTRACTED CLERIC, 127 

The eyes of Jenny sought him with a sort of 
wonder. 

* Confession ?' she said; *you must have 
misunderstood ' 

* Thanks ; I see/ he said. * I am not quick ; 
I do not take a thing quickly, but I mean 
well; I do, indeed. But . but this sacrifice 
must not be allowed to go on. They . these 
people, must not be suffered to take advantage 
of your gentle and too-yielding nature. Some 
one must interfere ; I will. They would not 
dare ' 

'Hush, hush, hush!' said Jenny. ^What 
wildness is this! Take care, I conjure you. 
You know not what you are doing. A touch, 
an incautious breath, and I am ruined . lost 
for ever. No, no, no,' said Jenny, in the 
deepest despondency ; ' it is kind, most kind, 
but unavailing. The hand of man cannot help 
me now. The only possible course left is to 
. wait, to watch; to wait and watch. And 
you,' added Jenny, devoutly looking up to the 
rude bark branches which formed the roof of 
the summer-house ; ' you will pray.' 



128 BELLA DONNA. 

She put her fingers to her lips and passed 
out, leaving behind her the figure of the 
clergyman, wondering, perplexed, and yet, on 
the whole, much relieved. 



129 



CHAPTER XII. 



MR. CROWLB. 



That Sunday there was the family dinner- 
party. Mr. Crowle, who came out by railway 
from the manufacturing town where poor 
Jenny had spent such mournful hours, dined 
also. He arrived about half an hour before 
dinner, found no one in the drawing-rooms, 
and amused himself making exploring expe- 
ditions through that unknown country, turn- 
ing over books, unscrewing puzzles, unlocking 
caskets, and, on the whole, amusing himself 
very pleasantly. Presently, he hears a step 
approaching, and drops into an arm-chair, and 
is found very busy with a large quarto photo- 
graphic album. 

Miss Bell was never late, and never kept 

VOL. I. K 



130 BELLA DONNA. 

any one waiting. She always, therefore, al- 
lowed a margin, for fear of an accident. It 
did not do, she was accustomed to say, for 
people in her station to run any risks. Here 
she was, dressed, and a full half an hour before 
the rest. Their margin would be on the other 
side, but, of course, they were in a diflferent 
station. 

'Ah, Miss Bell, Miss Bell,' said the young 
man of business, gaily. ' You have been just 
looking out on me from a little cardboard win- 
dow, here,* and he held up the quarto photogra- 
phic missal ; * and now you rise before me, as 
if I had called you up by an incantation. Let 
me congratulate you heartily, sincerely, on the 
joyful event.' 

Jenny looked at him reproachfully, as who 
should say, * Have I not sufficient misfortunes 
without this cruel raillery ?' 

' Congratulate T she said, appealingly. (It 
was a favourite mode with Jenny of carrying 
on a conversation, to repeat the last word of 
the preceding speaker, with a diflTerent intona- 
tion.) ' Congratulate ?' said she, reproachfully. 



MR. CROWLE. 131 

' Yes,' said Mr. Crowle ; ^ why not ? Why 
not, now ? Here is a suitable alliance . what 
is called "a good match," . all the neighbours 
call it so, and consider Miss Bell fortunate. 
Why not ? Let me offer you a chair/ 

There was something in Mr. Crowle's manner 
which seemed to say, * I wish to talk to you ;' 
and there was something in Mr. Crowle's man- 
ner which seemed to say, * You will please to 
obey me/ Jenny Bell looked about her 
anxiously, as though for an opportunity to 
flutter away, but sat down upon a sofa, obe- 
dient. 

* Why not ? I say again,' asked Mr. Crowle 
nursing his knee, and looking quite a boy^man 
of business. 

* Oh,' said Miss Bell, * I'm sure I should be 
so grateful . so thankful . it is far too great a 
blessing for me ; but, Mr. Crowle, it is the . 
the . intrusion into a kind, amiable family . ^a 
family that has loaded me with benefits that ^ 

* I see,' said Mr. Crowle, positively looking 
no older than the cherub of one of the old 
masters ; it was wonderful how persons could 



132 BELLA DONNA. 

have any confidence in one of his years. ' T 
see. No wonder, Miss Bell ; a most natural 
feeling. Of course you like our young friend ?' 
Miss Bell looked up to the cord of the lustre, 
as to heaven . an answer uncertain, and void, 
as the lawyers say, for generality. 

'He worships you with a strong passion; 
you return that aflFection . why not? He is 
good-looking, young, generous, brave, and 
what not/ 

Jenny again looked at the lustre-cord in the 
same general fashion. 

'You love him, in short,' continued Mr. 
Orowle ; * you are not indisposed to the alliance 
itself, which is reputed a good one . mark, I 
say, reputed a good one, and yet you are ready, 
at this moment,' to sacrifice all . I am sure you 
are. all . prospects, . the youth, station, every- 
thing, . sooner than wound this amiable family. 
Most generous and most noble on your part, 
and, I must say, but seldom witnessed. I 
should not believe it if it was told to me.' 

Our Jenny surveyed the young man of busi- 
ness a little uneasily. 



MR. CROWLE. 133 

'Oh yes!' she murmured, devoutly, 'will- 
ingly, cheerfully.' 

' It was the strangest thing from the begin- 
ning,' said Mr. Crowle, thoughtfully; 'so 
sudden . so unexpectedly, so mysteriously 
forced upon you.' 

' Oh yes,' sighed Jenny. 

'You had been pursued . captured, as it 
were . ^brought from a neighbouring town ; so 
I am given to understand ?' 

' Oh yes,' murmured Jenny. 

' And yet,' added Mr. Crowle, as if he was 
adding another to the Eochefoucauld maxims, 
'sudden things are often as precarious as 
sudden. There is no knowing what is in the 
future. I should be afraid lest your darling 
wishes should, after all, be gratified, and this 
odious alliance averted.' 

Jenny started . gave, in fact, a violent con- 
spicuous start. 

' Don't die of premature joy,' he said, smiling. 
' I fancy you think that news too good to be 
true. No . I know nothing. I have no right 
to say anything. I don't say what I might 



134 BELLA DONNA, 

do/ he added, actually smiling himself into 
infancy, * if I were your enemy.' 

*If you were my enemy I' said Jenny, timor- 
ously, clasping her hands, and getting seriously 
alarmed at this strange mood of Mr. Crowle's, 
. ^ if you were my enemy !' 

* If I was your enemy !' said he. ^ Does not 
the supposition amuse you? I am merely 
putting a case. You must know that a person 
in my position towards Mr. Franklyn and his 
affairs . a sort of genteel scavenger, in fact . 
must have a certain power. Any family 
arrangement could scarcely go forward without 
my . say my report upon it, which in this 
case would be unfavourable . if I were your 
enemy.' 

* Oh Mr. Crowle,' said Jenny, ' you are hint- 
ing at something dreadful.' 

* Dreadful !' said the other ; * of c6urse it is 
for the advantage of the family. What are 
riches compared with domestic happiness ? Of 
course. What is vile lucre . is not that what 
they call it . what is vile lucre to the woman 
we love ? A cottage before a palace any day. 



MR. CROWLB. 135 

Home before the world! And so I, of 

course ' 

Miss Bell was looking at him doubtfully, 
her eyes widening, and really not knowing 
how to answer. 

* But I am Miss Bell's friend. I know she 
will make the young man happy. The only 
thing I fear is one thing. People in new 
stations are apt to forget old friends. You 
will grow proud, haughty, and, as Mrs. 
Charles Franklyn, keep Mr. Crowle at a dis- 
tance.' 

* Oh no, no !' said Jenny fervently, * never, 
never ; you do not know me ; you do not know 
me yet. You do not know Jenny Bell. In- 
gratitude is not part of her nature.' 

* Still,' he added, musingly, * in your new 
position, you will want friends. No one can 
hold their own without friends ; even an attrac- 
tive young married woman.' 

* Oh,' said Jenny, earnestly, * all his friends 
shall be mine. It shall be part of my duties 
to study that they shall like me, . if they 
would only,' Jenny added, modestly, ' be good 



136 BELLA DONNA. 

to teach me, to instruct me. I want advice 
sadly/ 

*But I must have security/ said Mr. Crowle, 
gaily ; ' material guarantees, as they say in the 
treaties, both from you and Mr. Charles. We 
will talk it over together again. Meanwhile, 
as one who is interested in you, and really 
wishes you well, I will tell you one thing : you 
are likely enough to be freed from this hateful 
alliance. You know that dear girl who has 
just come back . so sensible . so shrewd. Well, 
I half suspect she would be inclined to try and 
help you in the matter.' 

' Help me,* said Jenny ; * how ?* 

' How ? In furthering your dearest wishes. 
in putting an end to the whole affair. This is 
merely my idea. I merely mention it as the 
result of my imperfect observation. Dear me,' 
he added, * it is wonderful the way people come 
to me. What can they see in me ? I have so 
little experience . I want advice myself.' 

* No, no, no,' said Jenny, * you are so wise, 
so far-seeing.' 

*Well, so our kind friend Mr. Franklyn 



MR. CROWLE. 



X37 



fancies ; and tells me so. But that is his par- 
tiality. It is ridiculous^ my dear Miss Bell, 
the way he depends on me. In this little busi- 
ness of yours, he came to me. " I leave it all 
with you," he said ; " tell me what I am to do." ' 

* Yes ?' said Jenny, a little nervously. 

* I said, " Let the young people have their 
way." To-morrow he will come to me and ask 
me, " Crowle, tell me what to do. Are we to 
let it go on ?" and I shall tell him . . ' 

* Yes V said Jenny, anxiously. 

*Well,' said Mr. Crowle, Hhat depends . 



upon events. Conscientiously one must be 
guided by events, you know/ 

' I have very few friends/ said Jenny, sadly. 
*I want them sadly. I wish . I wish . you 
would be my friend, dear Mr. Crowle/ 

^ Well, it is a great honour ; we shall see. 
I must try and deserve your friendship. Oh, 
here they are at last. Miss Charlotte, how do 
you do ? Come back again ? We have not 
seen you, I don't know when.* 



138 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER Xm. 

THE * SENSIBLE GIRL.' 

In they all trooped for the grand family meal. 
And there was welcoming and hand-shaking, 
and benevolent Sunday geniality. The family 
was plainly putting a constraint upon itself, 
and making believe in neighbours' eyes to be 
content with the match, and nothing could be 
more delicate than the way in which Mr. 
Franklyn behaved to Miss Bell. The misfor- 
tune, for so it was considered by them, was 
still remote, indefinite, and all these poor con- 
demned ones had still what is called a * long 
day ' before them. 

There was present the lovesick curate and 
his rector, the former something less dismal. 
There was present the family doctor and Mr. 



THE * SENSIBLE GIRL/ 139 

Crowle just mentioned. Miss Charlotte, the 
newly-returned daughter, was the conversa- 
tional centre to which the tongues and eyes of 
all present turned. Upon her was the bloom 
and fipeshness of the outer world; she was 
charged with such novelty as there was in the 
party. Even in the light world of talk, as in 
politics, that old law of the rising sun and its 
worship most strictly prevails. She sat next 
that brother she was so tenderly considerate to, 
and told her adventures partly to him, partly 
to the general world of the table. Mr. Crowle 
(considerately took all the gaiety on himself, 
and whipped up the flagging steeds of talk. 
He good-naturedly took office, for that night 
only, as the Wamba of the party. 

On the other side of Miss Charlotte was the 
Doctor and the Doctor's daughter ; and these 
two, with her brother Charles, she laid herself 
out to entertain. She painted for them in 
detail all the polite orgies of that pleasant 
month or so she had spent at Cravenshurst, the 
ancestral seat of Sir Welbore Craven^ ^Baronet ; 
she dilated on his glories, not for any self-glori- 



140 BELLA IX)NNA. 

fication, but because the simple minds of the 
Doctor and the Doctor's daughter relished such 
details hugely. Seventeen thousand a-year; 
prodigious state ; innumerable horses ; general 
magnificence. A genuine old place, with an 
ancient oak banqueting-hall, where men . that 
had been sleeping three hundred years in the 
parish, under what seemed to be monster 
hewn-stone caskets . had feasted. In the win- 
dows of that hall were mottled the gorgeous 
colouring of diaper; the chromo blazing of 
blues. Burgundy reds, and amber yellows and 
quarterings. Such quarterings! You could 
read the whole history of the family down in 
one of the windows! Such alliances . such 
choice streams of blue blood turned on to com- 
mingle with the family current from rich and 
invigorating sources. And now even a mere 
younger son of the house, with but a moderate 
patrimony, was eagerly sought by a neighbour- 
ing family, and the joint relatives were filled 
with joy. The Doctor and the Doctor's 
daughter were breathless with admiration. 
They feasted on these details. 



THE * SENSIBLE GIRL.' 141 

Noble people were coming from afar to 
assist at the function. Who were the noble 
people? Why, Lord and Lady Mount Ging- 
ham, and Sir Thomas Skelper of Skelper, in 
the North; old Lord Wigbury, and many 
more. And yet . he was but the younger son, 
which made it so curious. 

Had Charlotte heard what settlements were 
to be made ? (The whole table, even at a dis- 
tance, was getting interested in Charlotte's se- 
ries of clever pictures.) Well, they said. Sir 
Welbore was giving * the young people ' two 
thousand a year to begin with. Her fortune 
was twelve thousand pounds ; and on the joint 
amount, it was thought they would be able to 
get along comfortably, for a time. 

But the fun was the busy note of preparar 
tion . the fitting out of Craven Hall for the 
festival. . Charlotte was quite sorry to come 
away. Upholsterers . carpen ters . furnishing 
was to begin presently. Sir Welbore was so 
pleased with the match; and for a younger 
son it was very good. 

^Certainly,' said the Doctor's daughter 



142 BBLLA DONNA. 

fiuooily is a grand thing; blood is a grand 
thing ; nothing NOTHma like it !' 

Charlotte, no donbt feeling a little for her 
brother on the right, tarns to him good* 
natoredly, and says softly to him . 

'Blood is not everything. Those painted 
windows and splendid alliances do not always 
bring happiness. Courage, dear Charlie ; yon 
in your little cottage will be as content as the 
prince in his palace/ 

The youth had been listening a little ruefully 
to the gorgeous details, and he caught eagerly 
at what his sister said. 

'To be sure,' he answered, brightening. 
' But why a cottage ? Who was talking about 
cottages V 

*Why/ answered the sister, * surely with 
one you really love, and have chosen, you 
would not mind in what position in life you 
were I You know, my dear Charles, you will 
have to be thrifty, very thrifty. iBut what of 
that? I should not mind it if I was in your 
place/ 

Jenny Bell, opposite, was talking away gaily 




THE * SENSIBLE GIKL.' 143 

to her neighbour, yet moved a little restlessly, 
for she had a sort of instinct of what was being 
spoken ; but Charlotte left the matter there. 

The girls, however, were not inclined to 
leave the matter there, but came back to it 
with zest. They wished to know about the 
dresses, presents, lace veils, bridesmaids, and 
what not ; and Charlotte had to take up the 
narrative again. The presents filled a room to 
themselves, into which visitors were taken for 
private adoration and admiration. Dressing- 
case from military brother; onyx bracelets 
from military cousin ; exquisite Shvres^ an 
afternoon tea-service, from Viscount Hartletop ; 
enamel lockets, with initials worked in dia- 
monds, for the bridesmaids all round . these 
from the bridegroom. And Sir Welbore, so 
pleased was he with the alliance, had made 
a splendid settlement on the happy couple. 

This was all more or less mal h propos^ and 
half the company saw it ; but the girls were so 
eager and curious, it never occurred to them. 
But Charlotte was full of pity. Charlie had 
grown rueful again. 



144 BELLA DONNA. 

* We shall have none of these fine things/ he 
said in a low voice to her. 

* All vanities,' said his sister ; * all minister- 
ing to the pride of that family/ 

*Yes,' said he, *and I dare say a mere 
mercenary marriage, arranged, as they call 
it, without a scrap of tnie love on either 
side/ 

Charlotte shook her head. 

* I can't say that. No ; I never saw a pair 
so attached, not even you and poor little Jenny 
opposite. My dear Charles, it doesn't follow 
because they have all these worldly blessings 
they are to be denied the happiness of liking 
one another ; you are not to keep all the love 
for you and your Jenny. That would be a 
most unfeir monopoly, wouldn't it ?' 

Next day, after lunch. Miss Charlotte^. the 
steady, sensible girl, who looked after the 
house, cast up accounts, and took but little in 
the way of pleasure . said she would ride out, 
and would Charlie ride with her ? Charlie had 
but newly come in from a sort of duty-walk 
with his future bride ; but said gladly enough 



.% 



THE *SENSIBLB GIRl/ 145 

he would go. The future bride was up 
in her room writing, and from the window 
saw the pair ride by. The bright eyes 
shone brighter, and a curious distortion came 
upon the round, rosy fece. Jealous ? Jealous 
of the sister-in-law ? Absurd ! Yet there is 
no probing the mystery of these love emotions 
. ^its complications and entanglements. But 
she kissed hands to them sweetly, and nodded 
and nodded again with the perseverance of a 
porcelain mandarin, until they were well down 
the avenue, and out of sight. 

' Poor Jenny,' said Charlotte. ' She is very 
fond of you. You must try and make her 
happy, Charlie.' 

* Of course I shall,' said Charles. 

* She must be treated very carefully . (deli- 
cately, I should say,' continued Charlotte (they 
were walking their horses now). * You won't 
mind taking a little bit of good advice from me. 
the wise old lady of the family. Eh, Charlie ? 
You see her position is a peculiar one.' 

* How do you mean ?' said the youth. * You 
know as my wife^ ' 

VOL. I. L 



146 BELLA DONNA. 

* Oh, of course,' said she. * But you don't 
understand. If she is sensitive . as I know she 
is . ^there will be an awkwardness about her . 
her former position, you know. And these 
things someway are always borne in mind by 
the world, however insignificant the parties.' 

The youth got a little red. Charlotte saw 
the tip of the ear next her kindling. 

* I know all that very well,' said he. * I 
don't want to be reminded ' 

* My dear boy,' said she, * I knew you would 
be cross. But I mean it for your good . ^it 
will save you endless annoyance afterwards. 
A bold, manly course will be the best. Laugh 
at the world . make no affectation of glossing 
it over. Speak of it boldly, and never be 
ashamed of what you have done.' 

Again the tip of the youth's ear kindled. 
* But why should I be ashamed ?' he said, in- 
dignantly. *I have done nothing wrong. I 
thought, in these times, it was more to a fel- 
low's credit to pick out the girl of his ' 

* Of course,' said Charlotte, laughing. * The 
girl of his heart, by all means. And by the 




THE * SENSIBLE GIRL/ 147 

way . another little bit of advice, my own 
dearest Charlie. You know I mean it for your 
good, and I must speak, if you will eat me up 
for it after ' 

* Charlotte, dear, speak away. You have 
stuck to me all through like a brick, and I 
should be ashamed to say a word to you. Go 
ahead !' 

' What I wanted to say was . now don't be 
angry . that I wouldn't in public, you know, 
before people, be getting in rhapsodies about 
the girl of your heart. You are doing very 
well, and what is creditable to you ; but alas ! 
the world . the cold, practical world . only 
laughs at anything like sentiment; and I am 
afraid, according to its old, heartless creed, 
thinks you are making but a poor business 
of it.' 

There was silence for a long time. 

* There, ' said the sister ; ' I know you are 
angry with me. I was foolish to have men- 
tioned it.' 

* No, no,' said Charles ; * but I think you mis- 
take. The world is not quite so bad as you 



148 BELLA DONNA. 

make out. I have always been told that a 
generous action is sure in the end * 

* To be its own reward, like virtue/ she said, 
smiling, ' Is that it ? And so it shall, Charlie. 
And depend upon it, you will be very happy in 
the midst of little difficulties, and the pressure 
of a limited income. I am confident, Charlie,' 
she added, aflfectionately, *when you get a 
little older and steadier, you will battle very 
successfully against any little trials you may 
encounter/ 

Charlie said nothing for a full quarter of an 
hour. He looked gloomily down upon his 
horse^s mane. Coming near home, Charlotte 
said timidly . 

' Of course you will tell all this to the " girl 
of your heart" . eh, Charlie? . that I have 
been dispu'iting and discouraging you? . but 
I think it is better you should both be pre- 
pared.* 

' Not I,' said Charles, hastily. ' I shall say 
nothing about it. What's the use ? Jenny 
will only begin looking downcast, qr crying, 
perhaps/ 



THE * SENSIBLE GIRL.' 149 

Jenny was up in her room writing still, 
when the pair returned. And the same curious 
twitch passed across her round cheek. Charlie 
did not go into the drawing-room and lounge 
there, as was his habit, but lit one of his 
Indian cheroots and went out into the garden, 
where he paced for nearly an hour. Towards 
dinner, he heard a soft step on the walk, and 
there was his Jenny in the shepherdess' hat, 
stealing towards him. They walked together 
up and down, Jenny amusing her future lord 
as best she Qould. She dwelt on the happiness 
that would shortly arrive for both . of their 
plans for housekeeping and internal order . for 
she really had a very pretty talent for picture- 
drawing and castle-building. Thus she gra- 
dually warmed him up into something like a 
little enthusiasm. 

* Charlotte/ she said, when he proposed 
going in . it was he proposed it . * your sister 
Charlotte . she is very fond of you, oh, so fond 
. so good, so noble, so devoted !' 

* Yes/ said he ; * she does like me, I believe.' 

* Ah, she likes you^ said Jenny. 



150 BELLA DONNA. 

* And likes you^^ said he. 
Jenny shook her head. 

' Impossible/ she said ; * how could she ? 
She has grand ideas about the dignity of your 
family. She wishes to see them raised yet 
higher in the world, and [she looks on me, 
naturally enough, as one who has fatally inter- 
fered with that. Oh, dear Charles, I am very 
unfortunate, very unhappy !' 

Charles soothed her. 

* She is ambitious/ Jenny went on ; * natu- 
rally so. She would wish to advance your 
family, and cannot understand those who are 
content with a little, and mere domestic peace. 
I admire her splendid nature, and wish I could 
be like her ; but I cannot. I do not care for 
those things.' 

The youth was then thinking of what his 
sister had said during their ride. 

* Oh ! that is all very well, Jenny/ he said, 
^ but we shall have to rough it, they tell me . 
to save a little, you know, and look after every 
penny.* 

Jenny smiled, and gave a curious look. 



THE ^SENBIBLB GIRL/ 151 

She sighed. *No wonder they are cast 
down/ she said, * and take a gloomy view ; / 
should, were I in their place, and so would 
every woman. She is so fond of you, too,' 
continued Jenny. * She thinks naturally you 
are thrown away upon poor lowly Jenny. And 
indeed I begin to be afraid so.' 

* Afraid of what, Jenny ?' said he, curiouJily. 
*0h, you know it,' said Jenny, dismally. 

* She has always been accustomed to think for 
you . to guide the family . dear Mr. Franklyn 
being so busy. And this, this sad business, 
being done without . that is, when she was 
away, you see. Ah, you should have con- 
sulted her !' 

* Consulted her!' said the youth, a little 
scornfully. *I suppose, in an affair of this 
sort, I am old enough to choose for myself. 
Holding the Queen's commission, I should 
think ' 

* But dear Charlotte was not consulted.' 

* But why should she be, Jenny ? I am a 
man. I am not under petticoat government. 
I am not ' 



152 BELLA DOXNA. 

. Oh, I am very wretched/ said Jenny, with 
a sudden burst of grief. * It had much better 
not be ! Disagreements in families ! No ; let 
me go and earn my bread . my crust, by 
honest labour/ 

* Never!' said the youth, grandly. *My 
troth is plighted to you, Jenny. I am a 
soldier and a man of honour. You have a 
soldier's troth, Jenny !' And he led her in 
proudly, taking her arm in his, looking down 
on her to reassure her, much as the lovers lead 
off the stage the ladies they love. 

He was very affectionate, even demon- 
strative, all the rest of that day, to his love, 
and looked a little distrustftdly at the wise 
sister. To Jenny herself the wise sister was 
specially delicate, considerate, and attentive. 



1 1 

I 



153 



CHAPTER XIY. 



CHARLOTTE VERSUS JENNY ! 



After breakfast the next day, Charlotte 
called him over . ^* Papa wants to speak with 
yon/ she said, ' in his room. I am to go too/ 

* Oh I I know,' the yonth sighed, * you 
are going to sermonize me. Snrely, what is 
the use now V 

*Yon shall hear,' said the wise sister* 
* Come !' and they went out together. 

Jenny looked after them from her desk, and 
a quick flash of distrust passed over her face. 
And yet, how little she knew the wise sister I 

For she would have heard Mr. Franklyn 
saying to his son earnestly, * Charles, I want 
to speak with you. This business is going on 
a little too long. It is a very important 



154 BELLA DONNA. 

step you are taking, and must be treated 
seriously. I opposed it at first, but now 
that you have my consent, we must act like 
men about it. What day are you prepared 
to fix?' 

*Yes, Charles,' said the wise girl; ^you 
know papa has to arrange all his affairs, 
subject to this step/ 

* Would you like this day three months?' 
said Mr. Franklyn. *That would give you 
ample time.' 

There are some curious natures who do not 
like being pushed, ever so gently, into any 
step, even if they have an inclination for that 
step. The youth's countenance fell, for he had 
this special repugnance. 

*But surely,' he said, * father, there is no 
hurry.' 

* There is,' said his father. * Besides, it is 
only due to the person you have chosen. She 
is to be your wife, and we must show her the 
same respect as though she were chosen from 
the nobility.' 

Charlotte approved this speech, as being 




CHARLOTTE VERSUS JENNY I 155 

in exactly the key that she would haive 
put it. 

* We must treat her the same/ she repeated, 
* as though she were our sister.' 

* In fact, -I think three weeks would not be 
too soon, Charles,' said the father ; ' there are 
no reasons for delay, no heavy settlements- 
no. In fact, it will be quite private. There 
is no need for any state or flourish.' 

Here Charlotte sighed. 
*So, shall we say three weeks? I will 
engage that Mr. Crowle will not delay you.' 

* I see,' said the youth, bitterly ; ' you wish 
to 'huddle me out of the way, as quickly as 
possible . I and my marriage. You wish to 
get rid of us. And yet, let me teU you, it is 
your own fault . all . for you were always 
telling me not to value money for its own 
sake, and all that sort of thing, and here now, 
I choose a good and virtuous girl ' 

' My dear boy,' said Mr. Frankly n, mildly, 
*you have done well, and I admire you for it, 
. not as well as I could wish, but, I trust, still 
all will turn out well.' 



156 BELLA DONNA. 

* Then what are all these hints about ruin 
and misfortune? Fm sure I was always led 
to think w;e were well oflf . splendidly off; and 
now it turns out * 

*You were warned in time, Charles; it is 
too late now. Three weeks . this day three 
weeks. That is settled. Go and speak to 
Jenny about it/ 

* Stay, wait a moment, Charles. Could yod 
spare me a few minutes ? 

Charlotte passed out. 

* I wished,' said Mr. Franklyn, * to talk to you 
about the sum I can afford to give you. (I know 
you hate business, but Charlotte says, very 
wisely, I should speak to you about this matter.) 
We must look at things seriously now.' 

Young Franklyn was indeed looking as 
seriously as could be desired. 

* Charlotte says very wisely again, you will 
have to put your shoulder to the wheel, my 
dear boy ; but we must all strain a point to 
help you.' 

The youth said nothing, but kept his eyes 
on the floor. 



CHARLOTTE VERSUS JENNY I 157 

* You will have to pinch and save at first, 
until . until we get straight, if we ever do get 
straight. Of course we shall eventually. But 
I am afi^id, my dear child, three hundred a year 
and your pay is as much as we can spare 
you.' 

The youth's face grew more blank. * Why, 
I spend that myself,' he said ; /more than that. 
Why, I owe three times that. No person, sir, 
could keep his wife on such a sum.' 

* It is very hard, I know,' said Mr. Franklyn, 
mildly ; * perhaps with hard scraping we might 
get up a little more.' 

* But where is all the money ?' said the youth 
excitedly ; ' I thought I was told there was to 
be plenty of money presently.' 

'So I hoped,' said Mr. Franklyn, with a 
sigh; *in fact, Crowle had it all arranged, 
but ' 

* Why, there's Smith,' said the youth. * Look 
at Philip Smith. His father, . ' 

' Ah, yes,' said Mr. Franklyn, sadly, * I don't 
know how they manage it. But dear Char- 
lotte tells me she was an heiress.' 



158 BELLA DONNA. 

The youth took his hat and stick, and went 
out . wandered about moodily for some hours, 
slashing branches and bushes impatiently. It 
is wonderful what a world of destruction he 
did during that time. 

Two days went over from that day. The 
third broilght young Mr. Charles a letter from 
his army agent. Would he be inclined to 
enter into a treaty for an exchange ? There 
was Lieutenant Cogdyse, for whom the moral 
temperature of his own corps had grown too 
close, and which he was willing to exchange for 
the more stifling physical air of India. There 
were pecuniary advantages, too, in the trans- 
action on the side of the youth. It was very 
unexpected and very little looked for ; so hence- 
forth there was an end of going out to the 
tropics and dying there. This awkward alter- 
native was cut off, which was a relief. Yet 
strange to say, he did not mention the pro- 
posal to any one, for that day at least, but 
kept the letter carefully in his pocket. The 
&ct was, this Charles was no more than a boy 
. a mere boy. But half a dozen years ago he 




CHARLOTTE VERSUS JENNY I 159 

^as greedy for a toy, and within an hour was 
breaking it up. 

Jenny Bell, we may be pretty sure, asked 
him concerning that interview in Mr. Franklyn's 
parlour. There should always be strict con- 
fidence between lovers. He told her eagerly ; 
then seeing that he came out of it a little 
awkwardly, as one who was not too eager to 
hurry on the marriage, he stopped and grew 
embarrassed. 

*They were in such a tremendous hurry, 
Jenny, for it . you know there is no need for 
our rushing into a thing of this sort. I must 
look about me. I must have time . it's very 
hard ;' and he got red and confused. 

*And your sister,' said Jenny ; * she was natu- 
rally anxious we should wait a little ? So I 
thought.' 

' On the contrary,* said he, * she was most 
eager for it' 

'Ah,' said Jenny, *so I thought . so I 
thought ; naturally so.' 

The youth did not see this little contradic- 
tion in his Jenny's reception of his news, for. 



160 BELLA DONNA. 

to say the truth, he had not a very logical 
mind. 

* And don't you think, Charles, dear,* said 
Jenny, in a very wheedling way, *it would be 
about pradent to follow our dear Charlotte's 
advice, for your own sake, leaving me out of the 
question ? I can see, dearest Charles, that in 
this house, just at this moment, you are . what 
shall I say? . uncomfortable . in a sort of 
doubtful way. Consider it now, just for your 
cum sake.' 

The youth coloured up. * What, are you at 
it too ? What are you all persecuting me for 
in this way ? I must say I didn't expect it, 
after all the sacriJBces I have-^ . ' 

He stopped, and indeed would have been a 
brute to go on, for there came from the now 
outraged Jenny a sigh . mch a sigh! She 
sank down on a chair and turned away her face. 

The youth's heart was touched. * Forgive 
me, Jenny,' he said ; * they worry me so. 
There . there now . I didn't mean it.' 

Jenny got cheerful in a moment, for she had 
wonderful control in her emotions, and she saw. 




CHARLOTTE VERSUS JENNY ! 161 

perhaps, that the duty of soothing was fatiguing 
her young lover. They made it up, but he 
went his way thoughtfully, as was his wont, 
out into the open air, which had latterly be- 
come his fancy. 



VOL. r. M 



162 BELLLA DOXNA. 



CHAPTER XV. 

*BY LITTLE AND LITTLE.' 

When he was gone, our Jenny thought it over 
carefully for some time, and perhaps resolved 
not to let him be long absent out of her com- 
pany for the fiiture. She thought Charlotte 
was upstairs in her room. 

Charles, meanwhile, posting along the high- 
road, presently hears the clatter of horses be- 
hind him, and turning round is overtaken by 
the wise sister Charlotte, her hair swinging and 
tossing with the motion, and her cheeks 
coloured with the healthful exercise. Her 
groom rode as good a horse, so she pulled up 
suddenly and bade Charles mount; and on 
that, they both turned back into the fields. 

The wise sister was too wise for balls and 



' BY LITTLE AND LITTLE.' 1 63 

parties and the ordinary pasture-lands of female 
life, but she loved her horse. She would have 
hunted, only she feared to scandalize the 
neighbourhood. She now proposed a imous 
ride across country, which her brother accepted 
joyfully. Both horses were fresh, and went 
over hedges, and ditches, and smooth field, 
horsefully . (men do things manfully). 

The pair grew quite excited by their scam- 
per, and after an hour's work, walked their 
horses home slowly, by the high-road. 

' This is grand ^tuflf,' the youth said, having 
now quite got back his spirits. 

'* Delightful !' the sister answered ; * it is 
heaven on horseback. We must go out often 
together, Charlie, and make the most of our 
time. Poor Annie !' she added, stroking the 
mane of her horse. 

*Why, poor Annie?' said the youth. 
* What's the matter with her ?* 

' She is to leave us very soon. Poor Annie! 
You know papa is going to sell all the horses.' 

* Sell all the horses ! No more riding ?' 

* And the carriages. No more driving, too. 



164 BELLA DONNA. 

We are going to save, Charlie/ she said, cheer- 
fully. 

The youth groaned. * Surely this is penury, 
beggary, starvation !' he said. * I never 
thought * 

^ Oh, we shall do very well,' said she, with 
encouragement. ' Don't think of it, Charlie ; 
we shall get on very well at some cheap water- 
ing-place.' 

* Cheap watering-place ! What are you talk- 
ing about ?* said he, impatiently. 

^My dear Charles,' she said, *you must 
know very little of what has been going for- 
ward. Surely papa explained to you ' 

^ Oh, I see . I see,' the youth said, with 
something like a groan. 

' ^ut we make the sacrifice cheerfully. We 
can do very well without horses, and if we can 
save the place ' 

*Save the place! Oh, surely, Charlotte, 
you are not serious ?' ^ 

*My dear boy, as for the horses or the 
house, they are nothing. But let me tell you 
one thing . you never, never can be too grate- 



* BY LITTLE AND LITTLE.' 165 

ful to dear papa for all that he has given up to 
gratify your wishes in this respect: In fact, I 
ought not to tell you, but he has sacrificed 

. 

some of his darling plans for your sake ; so I 
think, my dear Charlie, you should try a little 
and show it to him in some way/ 

*But I never knew,' said the youth, much 
confounded. * I should . I should have ' 

' Ah, that was poor papa's delicacy. Now 
you must not pretend to know that I have told 
you. Did he ever speak to you of Lord Pork- 
chester's borough ?' 

*To be sure! He always wanted it for 
me. He means me to be in Parliament some 
day.' 

' Ah, some day. I hope so, Charles. You 
know Lord Porkchester had always refused 
him. Well, just as you were arranging . this 
. ^your marriage . there came a letter from 
Lord Porkchester . -.' 

* What I oflfering the borough ?' 

* Yes.' 

' To me ?' 



166 , BELLA DONNA. 

'To you!' 

*0h, by Jove!' said the youth, without a 
word more, 

* Father had done him some service, and he 
was grateful. I was in the secret. Lord Pork- 
chester's cousin told me of it over at Craven. 
Oh ! I was feasting on the notion. Our having 
a Member in our family at last ! It is the 
grandest of influences, when coupled with old 
blood. And as for dear father, you know how 
his heart runs upon that, and how he has toiled 
for it Yet he gave it up, I assure you, with- 
out a murmur.' 

* But why wasn't I told ?' said the youth, 
vehemently. ' Why wasn't ' 

* While you,' said his sister, * were to have 
been saved from that hateful India. Eternal 
leave of absence for Parliamentary duty.* 

* But why,' repeated the youth again, * why 
wasn't I told ? why wasn't I^ ' 

* My dear Charles, it is no use talking of it 
now. I only mention it to show how much we 
owe to dear papa, who has borne up wonder- 



* BY LITTLE AND LITTLE.' 167 

jfiilly. As for Paxliament, horses, and that 
sort of thing,' she added, pointing to the old 
housOy ' that is all over now. We must only 
try and make each other as' happy as we can. 
Above all, be attentive to Jenny. Yet I am 
sure you will tell her all this, and that I am 
putting you against her. Well, I say candidly, 
I am sorry you got into it, Charlie. We 
should have liked you to have made a good 
match. But now that it is done, we must all help 
to make it as pleasant as we can. And very 
often, my dear Charlie, we are foolish in our 
wishes, and these grand alliances turn out very 
miserably. You and Jenny will do very well. 
But you must work, Charlie. Will you take 
the horses round?' She slipped down, and 
walked soberly in. 

The rest of that evening the youth was very 
moody, and spoke very little. After dinner 
he lounged about recklessly, in and out. 

* Come and take a walk in. the hall,' he said 
to Jenny Bell. 

She laid down her work meekly ; and, with 
a smile ineffably sweet, arose to obey his com- 



168 BELLA DONNA. 

mand. The younger girls looked after them ; 
then looked at each other, as who should say, 
' They are gone for their accustomed meal of 
billing and cooing/ 



169 



CHAPTER XYI. 

THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME ! 

Charles walked up and down with her for 
some moments without speaking. She waited, 
and finding the duty cast upon her, as it now 
often was, said . 

* Well, Charlie, dear, what were you busy 
with all to-day? Were you laying out any 
more schemes for your new life . our new 
Ufe?' 

^ No . that is . not exactly,' he said, a little 

gruflSy. 

* Shall I tell you what I was thinking of?* 
she said, looking up into his face, and leaning 
on his arm. * Oh ! I have laid out such plans. 
First ' 

* Jenny,' said the youth, suddenly, and stop- 



170 BELLA D(iNNA. 

ping short, * I was thinking that . that all this 
is very absurd.' 

* Charles!' 

*I mean this hurry . this violent hurry. 
What's the necessity ? Surely there's lots of 
time : we are both young. And now, would 
you mind,' he hesitated and got red . * would 
you mind putting it oflF a year or two, or say 
two years or so, until we had time to . to look 
about us ?' 

Jenny did not answer, but fixed her round 
eyes on him with a deep searching look. She 
loosened her arm from his. The youth got 
redder^ and dropped his eyes guiltily. She 
still did not answer : he grew dreadfully un- 
comfortable. 

' I see . I see !' she said at last : ' I was sus- ' 
pecting this.' 

' Oh, no, no !' he said, timidly ; ' it was not 
that.' 

* Not what?* she said, scornfully, and in a 
voice so firm and strong it quite startled him. 
* See how you betray yourself. Come,' she 
added, more gently, * it is better to be candid, 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME ! 171 

and speak plainly. Tell me, is this some pre- 
text for breaking the fall . for going back? 
Come, Charlie; don't be afraid; speak out 
Surely you would have confidence in me . your 

Jenny T and she put on a coaxing air. * Come, 

 

let us have confidence in one another/ 

* Oh, Jenny !' said the youth, with eflfusion, 
* what will you think of me . what will yon 
say of me ? You are too good, too kind, and 
generous ; and I am a poor creature that don't 
know my own mind. Just think ; you know I 
am no more than a boy. I'm not accountable 
. ^indeed I'm not.' 

* Ah !' said Jenny, again flashing out. ' So 
now the truth is out. This is what you have 
been hatching and plotting, you and your sister, 
these days back. Eh ?' 

The youth trembled. * No, no ; indeed^ no. 
It was not my fault/ 

* Your feiult ! No, indeed, you are not ac- 
countable. My poor Charlie, they have been 
tampering with yoii. Your poor, weak nature 
could not think of such a thing. But it can't 
be, my dear child. Things have gone a little 



172 BELLA DONNA. 

too far. You must try and reconcile yourself 
to the notion, however distasteful.' And she 
nodded and smiled on him as sweetly as before^ 
and took his arm. 

The youth had the sort of courage weak 
people sometimes have, when they find the 
worst is over. He freed himself gradually, 
and began with an aggrieved tone, almost 
whimpering in its key. 

* It is, very hard,' he said ; ' very hard. Why 
should this be forced on me ? I'm very young 
. ^too young . quite a boy, in fact. You must 
let me oflF for a time ; indeed you must.' 

The gradually deepening look of scorn with 
which she was regarding him was indescrib- 
able. * Come/ she said, * this is too serious a 
thing, Master Charles. I can't afford to release 
you. No. When you think it over, you will 
see it in the proper light. Come, be sensible 
for once. Go to bed now, and speak to me 
again in the morning.' 

The youth was getting more courageous 
every moment. * I can't indeed,' he said. * It 
was a foolish thing from the beginning ; and, 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME I 173 

as they all say, there was an unfair advantage 
taken of my youth/ 

*What!' said Jenny, starting back, and 
raising up her hand. 

The youth cowered. 

* You know I was a boy, and it was a shame 
. and they say so. And ' 

* Gk) on,' said Jenny, still looking at him 
with such contempt. 

He did go on. ' And I needn't go to India 
now ; for I can make an exchange. I have the 
papers upstairs.' 

* Oh !' said Jenny. 

' It is very hard to expect that I should 
ruin my family, all for a stranger. And it 
would ruin them, and you know it would. Why 
should I reduce them to beggary, and make 
them sell off the hunters, and let the place T 

The aggrieved manner in which the youth 
made this declaration was really indescribable. 
He was getting bolder every moment, as he 
thought he saw signs of weakness in Jenny. 

Jenny listened with curiosity ; nay, gave a 
sort of little start. ' They have been frighten* 



174 BELLA DOl^NA. 

ing you, poor boy . things are not quite so bad 
. I know it. Ah !' she went on, mournfiilly, 
* what a mournful lot mine is ! And yet I have 
done nothing to her. I would not be anybody's 
enemy, . no, indeed !' 

* And who says you have an enemy T said 
the youth, sulkily. ' Do you mean Charlotte ?' 
He was thinking how exactly had come out 
what Charlotte had told him. 

* Ah ! you don't understand me/ said Jenny, 
measuring him, coldly. * You are thinking of 
the childish stories of ruin they have been tell- 
ing you.' 

* I tell you, it is true,' said he. ' I know it. 
Papa showed it to me in black and white . I 
know he tells the truth. You don't think he 
tells lies, do you ? He says we must work, 
and what not, and can only spare me three 
Jiundred a year. Why, it is beggary . starva- 
tion. Then I had a letter this morning. I 
thought they would send me to India; . I 
couldn't stand that. I needn't go now. I 
shall go to-mortow to London, and settle all 
about the exchange.' He stopped then, and 




THE CROSS KEFORB THE NAME I 175 

lodked at her. * I say, Jenny, don't h^ angry 
with me. I can't help it . I can't, indeed. I 
know it looks.Shabby ; but . but>. I . I should 
be tcr etched if it went on. There I I know I'li 
aever like ajiy one 90 well/ He was almost 
going to whii3Qpei* again. 

*Poor child,' said Jenny; *poor, weak, 
feeble child! None of this is your doing. 
You've been tampered with. Never mind. 
Don't be frightened. You shall have your 
wish. You shall not be dragged to the altar. 
There.' 

' Jenny, Jenny,' murmured the youth, 
* you are too . too good.' 

* There,' said Jenny, * go now. You must 
do one thing, however. Say nothing, for to- 
night, of this business . take care you do not 
I have a reason for it.' 

She quite spoke to him as a child, ^nd with 
an air of authority quite new. He answered 
her abjectly, that he would not. 

' Further, you must forget that we have had 
this conversation, mind. Never speak of it to 
anyone.' 



176 BELLA DONNA. 

He answered in the same abject way, that 
he would take all care. 

*Gk)od night, then,' she said. *You shall 
be free. I have seen the change coming, and, 
you see, was prepared. After all, it would not 
have done. I have other views. Go to bed 
now, and sleep well.' 

He slunk away, upstairs, inexpressibly re- 
lieved. He was a mean, weak creature, indeed, 
as she said; but only consider, he was very 
young. 

Miss Bell went slowly back to the drawing- 
room, sat down again, and took up her work. 
Charles was gone to his room. Headache. 

Then she talked with them pleasantly, and 
in quite an unconcerned way, even with Char- 
lotte. To her she was specially affectionate ; 
and the sensible girl reciprocated. Then, when 
it came to bed-time, she kissed them all round 
with such aflfection, and with such a soft air of 
sweetness and suflfering resignation, that they 
began to think with self-reproach they had not 
been near cordial enough to her, and would be 
better for the fixture. 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE N^AME I 177 

She then took her candle and went to her 
room . ^her little room . fetched out her small 
travelling blotting-book, and began to write. 
Such a simple noble letter, without pomp or 
flourish of self-sacrifice. Indeed, it almost 
reached to the heroic. She calmly did the 
duty that she proposed to do, without loss of 
self-respect. She told him that she had seen 
from the beginning that the thing was unsuit- 
able : that he would, at least, do her justice to 
acknowledge that she had been reluctant 
throughout ; that it was only at their pressing 
instances she had consented. Fortunately, it 
was not too late. It was nobody's fault but 
hers. Nothing could have been kinder or more 
tender than their behaviour. Mr. Franklyn's 
she would never, never forget. But again she 
must repeat, no one but herself was to blame ; 
so that now, finally, she had determined that 
this business should come to an end. And this 
purpose of hers was irrevocable; nothing 
should change her. 

She was not too proud, however, she said, 
to ask their aid in another direction. Possi- 

VOL. I. . N 



178 BELLA DONNA. 

bly, Mr. Franklyn might not think it too much 
to help her on a little in her struggles through 
the world: such aid she would thankfully 
accept. She was not proud, thank Heaven, 
and could be grateful. 

This she directed to Mr. Franklyn. She 
then tripped down stairs with the note in her 
hand . met a stray servant . the last straggler 
of the tribe then up ; put it into his or her 
hands, with a gentle request that if they were 
going down that way, they would be so kind 
as to leave it at Mr. Franklyn's study. After 
that she returned to her room, went to her little 
hoard, and took out a little Letts' diary. 

She was always a remarkably business-like 
little woman, and used to say, in her quiet way, 
that nothing she would have so liked as to 
have been a merchant's wife, and kept the ac- 
counts and totted the ledgers. Merchants' 
wives do not ordinarily keep the accounts and 
tot the ledgers ; but we are not to be too strict 
with her little phraseology. Every day, how- 
ever, she posted her little ledger, and kept the 
diary with great strictness. She had reasons 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME ! 179 

for this exactness. She turned to the present 
day of the month, and began to fill in the 
space allotted in a fine composed little hand. 
She seemed to get a great deal into a line. 

Any one looking at her as she wrote, would 
have seen the round face grow sharp of a 
sudden . would have seen the full-coloured 
cheeks turn pale, and the lips be compressed 
sharply. 

For she was just then making a particular 
entry, which she did in a larger hand, giving 
herself more room, leaking care, also, to under- . 
line it heavily. This was the name she wrote 
so slowly and carefully : . 

* Mem. 

* * CHARLOTTE FRANKLYN.' 

And with great care she finished off a cross 
before the name. She thickened the strokes 
with love, as though she were doing a little bit 
of art. 

Having finished this little duty, she went to 
bed, and it is believed slept tranquilly. 



180 



BOOK 11. 



CHAPTER I. 

JENNY BELL IN SERVICE. 

A SPAN of say ten months is supposed to have 
passed by since that denouement down at the 
Franklyns', when our poor Jenny, so barba- 
rously treated by her weak lover, gave up her 
brilliant alliance, and so calmly made that little 
entry in her diary. The firmness of that poor 
lowly outcast was the admiration, not to say 
of the whole house, but of the whole county ; 
and she departed attended with a veneration 
that properly waits only on a saint. Her 
heroism was even more fruitful, for on the legend 
coming to Mr. Archdeacon's ears, he at once 
kindly thought of some London friends whom 



JEIS'NY BELL IN SERVICE. 181 

such a paragon would exactly suit, and pro- 
cured Miss Bell admission to a desirable family- 
circle. Her position was left in a happy duski- 
ness, shaded off from the deep hue of com- 
panionship into the subdued tone of tuition, 
from thence into the more unmistakeable do- 
main of defined friendship. This was for the 
world outside. But she, poor child, always 
called a spade a spade, and said in a low, sweet 
voice, but very plainly, that she was * going 
to be a governess.' 

And as governess she was already in- 
stalled at the mansion of ' Frederick Maxwell, 
Esquire, Q.C., Eecorder of Pennington, Stone 
Buildings, Lincoln's Inn, and Chesterfield 
Street, Mayfair.' Thus, at least, was he 
blazoned in the Books of Common Prayer 
which the bishops and priests of the sacred col- 
lege of heraldry had put together for the use of 
the fashionable pious. And at Chesterfield 
Street, Mayfair, in charge of three girls, of 
various ages, was our Jenny now residing, and 
making herself very useful ; for * the lady ' (to 
use a fine word of fashionable Scripture) . 



182 BELLA DONNA.- 

*the lady' of Frederick Maxwell, Esquire, 
Q.C., the eminent working barrister, was then 
lying grievously sick, and all the authorized 
incidents of a legitimate sick-bed were then 
enacting up-stairs. Frederick Maxwell, Q.C., 
might have been labouring down in a coal- 
mine, or digging at so many shillings a week. 
But here something must be said for Frederick 
Maxwell, Q.C., the eminent counsel. 

His father was Sir Charles Maxwell, of Bur- 
bage Hall, in a ripe old county, and the son 
would by and by be Sir Frederick Maxwell, , 
Q.C., or perhaps find himself some morning 
distributing rings and mottoes, and waken up 
as a Serjeant, newly born into brotherhood with 
the judges. How would his style and titles 
then ring out ? Serjeant Sir Frederick Max- 
well, Q.C. ? A tall, thin, and bent man, in the 
incidence of a human fishing-rod, with black 
hair, just silvering, black whiskers, silvering 
also, and a cold business face, sadly worn. 
He was in first-class Parliamentary business ; 
the vapours of hot committees were the air he 
breathed and loved, and the dull appreciations 




JENNY BELL IN SERVICE. 183 

of county members were his jurymen. His 
fees were Parliamentary, too, which Mrs. 
Maxwell took charge of, and flung about gal- 
lantly. He was worked, in short, not by any 
means like a horse, which is a very unsuitable 
comparison, but like a human beast of burden 
or intellectual hack, which is the true standard. 
Did the brutes compare notes wearily as to 
their sufferings, the favourite object of compa- 
rison with them, would be the Parliamentary 
lawyer, whom one of their brethren draws down 
every day to Westminster in his brougham. 

So Mr. Maxwell could scarcely be said to 
have eaten or drank (making merry was ludi- 
crous), or, indeed, lived at all; but he was 
always before the Committee. Life for him 
was a Bill, and a Bill only 1 It was not made 
up, as according to the vulgar notions, of sun 
and bright skies and light air, and the softer 
social duties, or of gladness or griefs. His 
world was a Committee-room . * standing 
orders ' his gospel, and when he had got his 
Bill through, he was saving his soul. When 
Mrs. Maxwell, therefore, grew sick, and as it 



184 BELLA DONNA. 

seemed, likely for a permanence, the three 
little girls were helpless. If he would, the 
Parliamentary gladiator could do nothing. It 
was too late to draw back, and he was bound 
to the Committee-Satan, body and soul. 

Helen, Grace, and Mary . twelve, ten, and 
nine years old . were the three little girls 
whom Jenny was looking after in Chester- 
field Street. It was wonderful how much she 
looked after . the sick woman, house, and 
girls, and apparently never absent from 
either ; looked after everybody but Mr. Max- 
well, who needed it more than any one in the 
world. He barely saw her, and when he saw 
her, barely knew her. She was not on a 
Parliamentary Committee. At breakfast a 
hand, Jenny's round, plump hand, set his cup 
of tea before him. For him, however, it 
was only a hand . possibly a servant's . for he 
had Sixth House of Lords Cases tilted up 
before him on the toast-rack, and was taking 
in Lord Wenslevdale and Mr. Justice Willes 
with his dry crust. The little girls sat round 
demurely and devoutly, and barely whispered 




JENNY BELL IN SERVICE. 185 

while Lord Wensleydale was crackling be- 
tween his teeth. So was it during dinner: 
House of Lords cases were not, indeed, set on 
a la Russe^ but Lord Wensleydale was still 
fermenting in his head. He hurried through 
the meal, and got back again to the Com- 
mittee-room, where his heart had been all the 
time. With one chief of the family sick, and 
the other virtually absent, what an invaluable 
person must our Jenny have been about a 
house ! A perfect treasure ! 



186 BETJA DONNA. 



CHAPTER II. 



A COUNTRY VISITOR. 



She had not been there a fortnight, when word 
was brought one day into the school-room that 
a gentleman was in the school-room for Miss 
BeU. 

Jenny lifted her eyes with wonder. What 
gentleman? There could be no gentleman; 
she knew of none. It was a mistake, Jenny 
firmly repeated. 

The menial said it was a clergyman-like sort 
of a person. 

Jenny shook her head sorrowfully ; why, it 
would be difficult to analyse. Yet it some- 
how appealed to Mr. Baker's heart, as who 
should say . * How were gentlemen or clergy- 



A COUNTRY VISITOR. 187 

men to come inquiring for me ?' Mr. Baker 
held a very favourable opinion of the new 
governess, as one who knew her place, and 
spoke of her in the crypts below with a tem- 
pered approbation, subject, of course, to be 
corrected by future conduct; and he went 
back for further information. He returned 
with the clerical gentleman's card, ' The Rev. 
Charlton Wells.' 

' Seeing gentlemen ' is the forbidden fipuit 
for the governess order . a suspicious transac- 
tion under all circumstances ; but the cloth . 
the clerical neckcloth . took it out of the rule. 
So Miss Jenny went down, fluttered and hur- 
riedly. 

The Reverend Charlton met her with a 
boyish agitation; torrents of blood streamed 
to his cheeks ; his fingers trembled ; his 
speech was incoherent. Not so our Jenny, 
who was obliged to put on .a demeanour quite 
foreign to her own native temper. She almost 
froze him up. But it was clear that any wild 
behaviour from this uncontrolled curate might 
be looked for; and such visits for a young 



188 BELLA DONNA. 

thing entering on life were highly compromis- 
ing. 

*I did not expect to see you here, Mr. 
Wells,' she said, coldly. *Have you any 
message or business ?' 

The curate's utterance staggered fearfully. 

'I came,' he said, confused,' to . to . see 
you!' 

*0h,' said Jenny, *you came up from the 
country expressly, I suppose.' 

* Expressly,' said the curate, eagerly ; ' for 
no other purpose in the world.' 

* I see,' she said. ' A costly journey.' 

' Were it ten times as much,' . he went on. 

* Stop,' said she ; ' stop there. I am afraid 
I see the whole depth of this infatuation of 
yours. I thought we had talked over this folly, 
and that you had seen it in a proper light. 
No ! no !' said Jenny, sadly shaking her head. 
* And the Franklyns, I suppose, told you where 
I was.' 

* No, indeed, I found it out myself. They 
refused. But I came up here ten days ago, 
and have hunted all London, I may say, day 




A COU^^TRY VISITOR. 189 

and night ; and at last, only this morning, did 
I succeed. And now, Miss Bell . dear Miss 
Bell . I mmt speak again. Now you are free. 
Then ' 

*Freel' said Jenny, with a dramatic tone 
and significance worthy of the stage ; ' free I' 

The curate understood her, and was de- 
lighted. He rose himself at once into melo- 
drama. 

* It is to rescue you that I have come,' he 
said; 'to cast off those fetters. Too well 1 
know what must be the degrading servitude of 
a . a ' 

'Finish,' said Jenny, smiling; 'I do not 
blush for my calling.' 

' Come with me,' he continued, rapturously ; 
' those comforting words you spoke in the 
garden have never been forgotten. Come 
with me, Jenny, my own Jenny; there are 
bright hopes before us . a glorious future ; we 
will link our fortunes together, and together 
walk through life.' 

Jenny was listening to this burst as calmly 
and as collectedly as she did to one of his 



190 BELLA DbNNA. 

Sunday sermons. But something at the close 
troubled her. All along she had heard the 
world . the world of the country parish . say 
that something was to be done for that excel- 
lent young man, Wells; and there was a 
belief that hands would be stretched out of a 
cloud to furnish him with a misty bit of pre- 
ferment . also, by and by. From his confident 
style of speech, perhaps, the blessing had al- 
ready come; and our Jenny wished to have 
the ground quite clear before she spoke. 

' But,' said she, gently, ' you talk of facing 
the world. Do you know what facing the 
world is T 

' Fighting the world . doing battle with the 
world . struggling valiantly to the front, and 
arresting the prize from the hands even of the 
unwilling !' said the curate, with flashing eyes. 

This seemed sufficiently plain, yet Jenny 
would hear a little more . would be certain . 
before she spoke. She shook her head sorrow- 
fully. 

' But until the prize is won,' she said, ' we 
must support the vulgar function of living.' 



A COUNTRY VISITOR. 191 

'Enough for me/ said the rhapsodical cu- 
rate, ' enough for me the presence of her whom 
I love; she would be the loadstar . perish 
wealth, perish ' 

Many other matters were to perish also, 
which Jenny did not take heed of. It was 
sufficient. There was no rectory as yet. He 
was only anxious to secure his loadstar first ; 
hereafter Providence might do the rest. Jenny 
might naturally be aggrieved by the eflfronteiy 
of such proposals; but from her manner no 
one could fetch an idea of what was passing' in 
her mind. She was no doubt too noble to 
wound so simple and trusting a heart. 

'These are all dreams,' she said, rising, 
'dreams of the wildest. Still, wishers like 
you and me may, at least, have the luxury 
of dreaming. But for any form of life to be 
based on these dreams ' . she shook her head 
sadly . 'it is not to be thought of. Not as 
yet, at least,' she added, with a glance at his 
blank, despairing face; 'not for years, at 
least, tiU the highway opens, and the land- 
scape clears.' 



192 BELLA DONNA. 

This was not Jenny's habitual tone of 
speech ; but she adapted- it to the occasion. 

*But,' said the curate, wistfully, 'we can 
work together . cast our lot together.' (It 
was quite certain about the rectory now.) 
' This strong arm ' 

Jenny's brow contracted; this strain was 
growing tiresome. She rose. 

* I am afraid,' she said, * I must go ; I am 
a genteel slave, and must go back to the 
galleys/ 

Suddenly an idea seemed to strike her ; a 
curious smile passed over her face . a flash of 

joy- 

' You are going down again to the country ?' 
she asked. 

* Yes,' he said, despairingly, * I suppose so. 
What does it matter where I go ?' 

' Because,' she said, * if it would not be too 
much; and, after all, it is asking a great 
deal ' 

The Rev. Charlton Wells grew eager again. 

'Anything, anything,' he said, 'only tell 
me.' 




A COUNTRY VISITOR. 193 

* Well/ she said, * you will be in the country ; 
you will be with those dear Franklyns, my 
best friends, my protectors ; you will see them 
often, every day; would it be too much 
trouble . would it be asking too much . ^to 
let me hear from you now and then about 
them r 

Again the curate's spirits leaped up. This 
was a blind, a poor pretence, for hiding a 
deeper interest in him. He saw it all. He 
answered, ecstatically, that he would write . 
write . write always, every day, and for ever. 

* They write, of course,' continued Jenny, 
ruminating . * they are very kind ; but I should 
love to hear of them from others . to hear 
about them . the minutest, the most trivial 
details will be welcome.' 

The curate, overflowing with joy, would fill 
reams of paper. 

' And that dear, sensible girl, Charlotte,' . 
and, as she mentioned the name, one of those 
curious twitches, before spoken of, contorted 
her face for the space of a flash, and which the 
Reverend Charlton Wells took for pain . ' that 

VOL. T. 



194 BELLA DONNA. 

dear Charlotte, all about her^ if y;ou please ; 
all that you hear : her little ways, and what 
she says. Oh, she was so kind to me in my 
trial ! you can have no idea how kind she was. 
She gave me this little bottle. It's a foolish 
wish; but you, your delicate nature will, I 
know, understand me.' 

She held out her hand. The curate, con- 
soled, proud, and overflowing, took it with 
effusion. He had got a commission. Skilful 
women, wearied with persevering lovers, who 
will not retreat without offence and sore 
wounds, often thus artfully pacify them. Then 
Jenny, suddenly discovering that she had been 
too long away, fled . rather floated . away like 
a vision. The curate's heart was sore and 
aching ; and yet she had laid some balsam, on 
it. That commission ! How woman-like, how 
gentle . how absurd, perhaps, if weighed criti- 
cally ; yet, how like her. 



195 



CHAPTER III. 



THE LOVESICK CURATE. 



The noble creature went back to her obscurity 
again, to the humdrum drudgery of child culti- 
vation; she had had a little glimpse of the 
world outside, which was not to be for her ; 
she had stood a moment at Eden's gate . a sort 
of governess Peri disconsolate ; and had even 
secured for herself, by this willing instrument, 
a sort of thread, ever so fine, to join her to 
those sweet old associations. Who could blame 
her for looking back through the bars of her 
prison-gate ? 

The curate went down exulting. He came 
home to his first floor over the shop in his 
mean country town, and it did not seem to him 
quite so blank, or so bare. The flavour of 



196 BELLA DONNA. 

provisions did not ascend to him quite so rank 
or strong. 

For the first night or two he had company 
over his little cottage grate . for it did not rise 
to much higher dignity. He lay back in his 
chair, and wasted many precious hours idly 
dreaming, and entertaining this profitable so- 
ciety. He constructed all manner of theatrical 
pictures, which seemed to him very sweet and 
soft . ^with figures in the centre; and one 
figure (arrayed in silken vestings and general 
clergymanical finery), doing much chivalry. 
He put this poupee into all manner of splendid 
situations, made its face impressive, its speech 
slow and grand, while its interior heart was 
being racked and wrung with agonies of love, 
jealousy, rage, and despair. He made it retire 
in noble situations, with digniiy and indiffer- 
ence, filling those who were left behind with 
wonder, curiosity, disappointment, and unspeak- 
able admiration. Miss Jenny Bell was always 
left behind under these emotions. 

In these proceedings in lunacy, were several 
useful nights consumed. There was a sermon 



 



THE LOVESICK CURATE. 197 

for the approaching Sunday lying on his desk, 
the first page of which had been ' got in,' but 
which he did not suflfer to interfere with his 
amatory meditations. He had now a curious 
repugnance to this setting together dry reli- 
gious bones into improving shapes; and it 
seemed the most dreary, dismal task, that man 
could conceive. Here, however, it was now 
come to Saturday morning, and the thing must 
be scrambled over somehow. 

He used to delight in his sermon-making. 
He used to touch and polish, and refine, and 
repair, and read choice passages to the young 
ladies, in anticipation. He was proud of the 
work ; and the young ladies used to talk over 
at dinner, little neat odd bits, small scraps of 
originality which struck them. His soul was 
then all in the parish. He was enthusiastic. 
Now, a spiritual dryness was come upon him. 

He leant a little to the new theology, and 
was fond . ^merely in an amateur way . of turn- 
ing over in his fingers, the prettier portions ; 
just as he would admire a little china teacup, 
or a bit of filigree. He and the young ladies 



198 BELLA DONXA. 

had ever so much aesthetic talk about the non- 
essentials. He had all the Oxford Fathers, 
bound in green, looking down from the shelves ; 
and was in the habit of saying, there was really 
much originality in some of Doctor Newman's 
writings. He wore, too, a lovely silk waist- 
coat, which seemed like a little black silk san 
henito, covering his chest altogether, with a 
hole to allow easy exit for his neck; 

The Sunday's sermon was not much. It 
was unavoidable that there should be marks of 
haste, which might be pardoned, as the mis- 
sionary work was heavy ; but it was short . . 
oflFensively short. Long sermons may be sopo- 
rific ; but there is a latent respect implied in 
their length. Brevity brings with it suspicion 
of a contempt or wish to be rid of the duty 
speedily, as being done per contract. It was 
said even there was loose, careless doctrine, . 
but these were the sectaries of Calvin. 

This unsteadiness, these irregular Sittings to 
London, had been noticed, and were spoken of. 
Very grateful were such topics to the parish, 
long hungering and athirst for some really good 



THE LOVESICK CURATE. 199 

substantial nutriment in that direction. Then 
he went over to the Franklyns to dine very 
eagerly. He was longing to begin his duties 
in that other more profane parish to which he 
had recently been appointed. 

The Franklyns were all there. Mr. Franklyn, 
was something more cheerful, but all the rest of 
the family were in very high spirits. There was 
sly and secret chatter, and quiet innuendoes, 
which mystified the Reverend Charlton Wells. 
But it was clear there was some good news 
afloat. Amiable family, always so kind to 
him, so thoughtful . he was glad of it, for their 
sakes ; and he was already composing the first 
sentence of his Jenny's letter . embodying his 
report. 

Mr. Archdeacon was there again. He was 
measuring Uhat young man, Wells/ with a 
cold and pearly eye. He took him in, as it 
were, surreptitiously across the bridge of his 
(Mr. Archdeacon's) own nose. Wells was pri- 
vately considered slack in reference to the 
Dissenters. He had not been beating the non- 
conformist thickets with Church horns and 



200 BELLA DOIWA. 

Church hounds. He was not a true religious 
sportsman. Mr. Archdeacon liked none but 
able-bodied workmen under him. He shook 
his head over * that young man, Wells.' 

The young man, Wells, did not heed him ; 
he was bold and careless, and did not, at any 
time, reverence ecclesiastical authority too 
much. It had been found out, with delight, 
that he, latest of all, had seen their dear Jenny, 
their noble Jenny . ^was fresh from her presence, 
and could give the newest details. He glowed 
up as though his cheeks had been stirred 
fiercely like a fire, but was not detected, as he 
was hardly full in the light. He then entered 
upon a minute narrative . delicious task-r. was 
stopped, made to stand and deliver, with ques- 
tion from this side and that pointed at him, 
and told the whole delightful story. No one 
more interested than the sensible girl. It was 
a charming evening. 

Mr. Archdeacon caught a word or two afar 
oflF, in reference to London. He heard his 
clerical chattel dwelling enthusiastically on each 
incident of the expedition. He dropped his 




THE LOVESICK CURATE. 201 

account of the last successful Dissenting battue^ 
and, contracting his archidiaconal brows, looked 
warily over across his own nose, as it might be 
across a hedge. On the first opening he raised 
his piece and fired . 

' So, it appears you were in London. Hey, 
Mr. WeUs ?' 

* Yes, sir,' said the other, * for a short time. 
Well, as I was saying. Miss Franklyn, I found 
out the house . was shown into a parlour. I 
really had no idea at first that she would see 
me' . 

' You enjoyed yourself apparently,' Mr. Arch- 
deacon struck in again ; ' I suppose you found 
time to attend that grand meeting of the Mis- 
sionary Feeder Society, Lord Buryshaft in the 
chair ?. I suppose one of the most magnificent 
organizations, as yet untainted by Dissent, the 
world has seen.' 

Mr. Wells was waiting in his London par- 
lour, and did not relish being checked on the 
verge of his interview, so he answered, a 
little stiffly: ^No, sir; I knew nothing of 
that valuable Society. I went up to London 



202 BELLA DONNA. 

with quite other views . for a particular pur- 
pose, in fact ' 

*Then I must take leave to tell you, sir, 
that you neglected a valuable opportunity . 
one that may never return. It is impossible 
to estimate the seriousness of such an auxi- 
liary engine as that. And I may remark 
that in these days, when IndiflFerentism is 
making such strides, and when there is a 
curious carelessness abroad as to the duties 
of the spiritual pastor, the wolf. the wolf, sir 
. is abroad.' 

The Archdeacon's eye at this moment fall- 
ing on the doctor of the village, with a sort of 
abstracted fierceness, that professional person 
said, timorously- 

' The wolf, sir ?' 

^ The wolf of Dissent, sir,' said Mr. Arch- 
deacon, savagely, and now for the first time 
seeing him . * of Dissent . howling Dissent. It 
is prowling nightly about our farms and home- 
steads. And no wonder, sir, when the shep- 
herds sleep. Sir, the Church of England, by 
its spirit and canons, is universally a mission- 




THE LOVESICK CURATE. 203 

ary cliurch. I have spoken to tlie Bishop 
about it. The Bishop sees it as I do. He 
joins with me in thinking that Dissent is howl- 
ing. You shall hear an allusion to it in his 
next charge. Sir, you did wrong to pass by 
so glorious an opportunity. You did wrong, 
sir !' 

Mr. Wells' cheeks were glowing at this pub- 
lic attack. It was, besides, undeserved; for 
he had done a good deal of fowling in the dis- 
senting direction. He was rather exulting on 
the strength and enthusiasm of his Jenny Bell 
attachment, and ecclesiastical concerns seemed 
very small and indifferent to him now. 

* There must be some mistake, sir/ he said. 
* This reprimand can scarcely be intended for 
me. Arising, too, out of a little harmless 
journey to London ! I think Mr. Archdeacon 
can scarcely be serious.' 

* Serious, sir, when the hydra of Dissent ' 

*Can scarcely be meant to entail eternal 

residence. That would turn us into white 
slaves in orders. As for that Missionary 
Feeder Society, I look on it q.s ' 



204 BELLA DOXNA. 

But the sensible girl, seeing into what fatal 
perverseness . ruin to his own prospects . this 
curate, barely fledged in .his Church, was 
hurrying, struck in . 

* You are not going to deliver the Bishop's 
charge to us now, Mr. Archdeacon,' she said, 
smiling. * Only consider ; what is the proverb 
about meat for strong babes ? We are all 
strong babes here.' 

'Strong meat for babes. Miss Frankly n,' 
said Mr. Archdeacon, much pleased to be 
allowed the correction. * That is the shape of 
the quotation. But Church discipline is always 
seasonable. I recollect so well the late Bishop 
Stinger remarking to me,' &c. 

The remark of the late Bishop Stinger was 
of that valuable sort which always leaves a 
sort of surprise on the hearer's mind, why it 
should have been rescued from obscurity, and 
then ventilated by the agency of frequent 
quotation. More useful was it on this occa- 
sion, for it turned away the wrath of an eccle- 
siastical Habakkuk, and prevented an unseemly 
dispute. But the clerical captain marked the 



THE LOVESICK CURATE. 205 

careless tone of his private, and registered a 
mental memorandum that for the future he 
would keep him specially in view, and if pos- 
sible have him conveniently on the hip. Any- 
thing like insubordination in the ranks would 
not do for him, in an enemy's . that is, in a 
dissenting country. 

The curate then resumed his London ad- 
ventures, for a select circle, and painted in his 
Jenny Bell with much warmth and force. The 
girls listened with devotion. Miss Franklyn, 
the sensible, showed the deepest interest . and 
kind and delicate interest. No wonder ; per- 
haps she felt compunction for the stem part 
which duty had forced her to take up. 

The flushed face of the Eev. Charlton Wells 
was turned towards her with a gentle sympathy. 
He was grateful, and already composing his 
bulletin . delightful duty, which would turn to 
Paradise the low chamber over the village 
huckstering shop . determined to give her a 
sweet and pleasant place in his first despatch. 

Through that domestic banquet lie was 
diligently taking notes all the while. Various 



206 BELLA DOISTNA. 

allusions, more or less intelligible and unintel- 
ligible, were shifted past his ears, . shafts from 
the family jokery, which were winged diago- 
nally across the table, back and forward, from 
side to side. These were in that sort of spoken 
cypher, the key of which is with the members 
of the family circle, and the use of which in 
presence of strangei's has even a sort of per- 
verse fascination. This was clearly pointed at 
the sensible girl, and took the shape of gentle 
banter in reference to some knight or cheva- 
lier, with whom there were indistinct relations, 
as to what Brantome would style de par 
amours. 

According to the mild and peaceable proce- 
dure of the present century, our forefathers de- 
lighted in this agreeable shape of baiting, and 
called it, in their old-fashioned dialect, ' rally- 
ing/ Eallied, then, palpably was Miss Frank- 
lyri, as it seemed to Mr. Wells, who, wrapped 
up in his own special de par amours^ as in a 
cloak, would otherwise have been indifferent, 
but beiug now accredited reporter, opened his 
ears. Some one after dinner . a confiding 




THE LOVESICK CURATE. 207 

junior girl of the family . unboundedly com- 
municative, and a chartered *ponduit.pipe ' for 
all manner of tattle, told him further particu- 
lars with delight. The fact was, * Young 
Craven ' rather admired Charlotte . had testi- 
fied this approbation rather publicly. Young 
Craven was lovely in the eyes of man, one of 
the Elderborn Heroes, a Sultan under an en- 
tail ; in short, ' desirable,' which is the most 
splendid encomium, and unites all the gifts. At 
various houses, he and the sensible girl had 
met, and mutually admired. He was brave, 
generous, noble, good, chivalrous, spotless, and 
deserved the fair, as none but the brave . that 
is to say, the Elder Brave of the family, who 
alone are brave, and deserve such fair as are to 
be prizes in the arena. This Mary or Jane, 
junior, so indiscreetly free of heart and speech, 
and rather flattered at being selected as the 
channel of information, told him many more 
particulars, what hopes they had, how * nice ' 
he was, what difficulties were in the way, which 
were few, and what encouragement, which was 
much ; and * what fun ' the whole thing was 



208 BELLA DONNA. 

generally. But the grander * fun ' of all was 
in the fact that * Young Craven * was coming 
there on a visit very shortly, and would stay 
a long time; when the amount of extra 
*'fun' that might be looked for was almost 
incredible. 

At the end of the night, Mr. Archdeacon 
went his way in a sort of archidiaconal gig . a 
simple and apostolic vehicle, whose horse had 
never yet crunched a morsel of Dissenter-grown 
oats. He shook hands dryly with ' that young 
man,' whose clerical temperament was of so 
low a tone, and wrote his pencilled mental 
mem. over again in heavy ink. The young 
man went his way with a sort of defiance, got 
home to his huckster's first floor, lit his lamp, 
and went eagerly to work. 

Before he went to bed, he had written 
abundant particulars. She would like to hear 
of Mr. Franklyn, head of her old home, so he 
sketched him with detail. More natural, still, 
she would love to hear of the dear female 
friend, nearest to herself in age, . of the sen- 
sible girl, in short ; so he dwelt on her portrait, 



I 



THE LOVESICK CURATE. 209 

with lavish finish. All she had said and 
done ; all she had looked ; and then, coming to 
details, enlarged fully on that sort of child's 
gossip, knowing how grateful it would be to his 
Jenny. * I have lost not a moment, dear Miss 
Bell/ he wrote, * in letting you know this 
happy rumour. I have no very great faith in 
their nuptial castle-building ; but I am sure 
you will be glad to learn even any fanciful 
speculations about our common friend. She is 
looking well . better than ever; intellectual, 
and . as some think . handsome. But person- 
ally, I want a sixth sense to admire her. She 
is not my style. I could, if it would not take 
up too much space, describe what is my style, 
I confess I am not for that utter spirituality of 
figure.' (Miss Franklyn was slightly made; 
our Jenny was round and sinuous.) * As we 
are doomed to earth, I am not for approach- 
ing the ethereal too prematurely.' An elegant 
conceit here suggested itself which he longed 
to set down; something about taking the 
trouble of going to the pier-glass, and that 
would save all description of his ideal. But, 

VOL. I. p 



210 BELLA DONNA. 

some way, it seemed to him to have a rustic 
flavour ; for the rest, it was a delicate bit of 
imagery . almost Elizabethan . but which he 
saw required desperate courage to carry 
through. With a sigh, then, he forbore the 
pier-glass and closed his letter. That delight- 
fal labour done, he slept very sweetly that 
night . the sleep of the just curate. 

Mr. Franklyn was still pursuing his melan- 
choly duties. He went down sadly into that 
hold of his, with a mournful regularity, striving, 
it would seem, to bail out his incumbrance 
with a sort of Danaid's pitcher. He was 
neither the better nor the worse for his 
labours. At most he only established a sort 
of desperate equilibrium, apparently only get- 
ting rid of what fresh water entered, and not 
letting it gain. 



211 



CHAPTER lY. 



A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 



The young man of business came very often, 
and was of great service disentangling accounts, 
raising, or more properly trying to raise, loans ; 
for money was terribly scarce, he saidj and the 
market was labouring under -an affection known 
as tightness. Yet, some way, it was loose 
enough for the rest of the world. For thai 
unhappy gentleman it was permanently con- 
stricted. Charges seemed actually to accumu- 
late. Interest on moneys had to be met at 
periodic times, which came so close that the 
whole year seemed as one periodic season of 
interest paying. Nay, there was one annual 
payment . interest from railway mortgages . ^ 
which merely glided through Mr. Franklyn's 



212 BELLA DONNA. 

hands, he being trustee, and which^ unaccount- 
ably, seemed to give him trouble and delay, and 
which at times he could not forward without 
receipt of pressing letters. It reached scarcely 
to five hundred pounds half-yearly, being in- 
terest on a sum of sixteen thousand pounds in 
the railway. And yet this mere clerical ofiBce 
caused him much trouble and even agony as 
the day drew near. Kindly did his invaluable 
friend beg him not to perplex his head, with 
the thought ; he would arrange it all ; . leave 
it to him. At most, signing a formal paper 
would be all that would be required. He, 
Crowle, was well used to business ; from which 
friendly and well-meant proposition, Mr. Frank- 
lyn literally shrunk away nervously. No, he 
must do all that himself . by himself. Still he 
fought on ; staved ofiF liabilities, one by one. 
It is wonderful how the evil day is so success- 
fully fought off, and for so long. 

Mr. Crowle meantime continued to come, 
and was really very agreeable in the house. 
He kept a good deal with the ladies; and 
young as he was with Mr. Franklyn in busi- 



tt 



A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 213 

ness, became specially younger with the other 
sex at moments of relaxation. It was wonder- 
ful that he should carry the whole stock and 
share lists, state of markets, even the Hono- 
lolu Fours, in his head, and he so young. He 
used to come twice a week, but now came 
three times. He played at small plays in the 
evening, and even the sensible girl, who pro- 
fessed never to relish him, owned that he was 
not nearly so bad, after all ; and consider this 
- . ^he was so young, said the sensible girl. 

Later on he began to drop in for two days 
running ; later on still even oftener. He was 
very welcome. A place at the hospitable 
board was always kept ready for him. At a 
country mansion, a cover more or less is im- 
perceptible. The dinner-table expands or 
contracts naturally, like caoutchouc ; and the 
company of all that he most affected was that 
of Miss Franklyn the elder, the sensible girl. 

Curious to say, she seemed to take much 
interest in the conversation of Mr. Crowle, the 
young man of business. She had a very prac^ 
tical mind, that Miss Franklyn, and delighted 



214 BELLA DONNA. 

much in the arcana and general mechanism of 
any special calling. And Mr. Crowle had an 
easy knack of popularizing stocks, their rise 
and fell; shares, bulls, bears, purchases for 
account, and other secret mysteries of the 
Exchange, in a fashion that was really enter- 
taining. And on this subject she used to get 
hijn to enlarge very copiously. 

This little train or chain of events continued 
to spread itself out continuously for a long 
time. Mr. Crowle came just as often, and 
almost oftenen One day he was in the gar- 
den pulling flowers carelessly, and in a pas- 
toral fashion, quite delightful for one of his 
nature, when one of the younger girls came 
bounding and scampering along the walks to 
meet him. She was a child of good humour 
and spirits; and when five or six years 
younger, had filled the awful function of 
enfant terrible. 

' Ah, Mr. Crowle,' she said, * tell me a secret ; 
who are the flowers for ? Come, now, you are 
getting quite a beau, Mr. Crowle ; every one is 
remarking it.' 




A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 215 

Mr. Crowle was anything but a man of 
business in his dress, and almost verged upon 
dandyism. This was his weakness . to be 
considered, in an innocent way, of course, 
a man of gallantry. He was enormously 
pleased. 

* Whom do you suppose they are for ?' he 
said, smiling. *For the old lady in Thread- 
needle Street?' 

' Nonsense,' the young girl said, gaily ; ' for 
some one a good many hundred miles nearer. 
Confess now ; we know all about it.' 

Mr. Crowle might, indeed, have been pulling 
them for the old dame just alluded to ; and if 
he had been pressed for the truth, would have 
to own that they were for his private dressing- 
table, it being part of his dandyism to love 
flowers, as a shape of decoration. He was 
curious about these hints, and suflFering his 
mouth to distend into a smile . 

'Ah! you are too wise, too wide awake! 
You are growing up now. Miss Adela, and 
we must look out if we want to keep our 
secrets.' 



216 BELLA DONNA. 

Delighted at this compliment, she came up 
to him confidently. 

* Such fun as it was/ she said. ' Last night, 
you know, we plagued Charlotte's life out 
about you, Mr. Crowle.' 

* About me,' said he, and then shook his 
head softly ; * I ! No, no ; always funning/ 

' But, oh yes, yes !' said she. ' And do you 
know what I said ? Guess now.' 

* Something wicked ?' 

* Yes ; I said she had now got a beau in the 
Three per Cents. Ha, ha ! Wasn't it good ?' 

Mr. Crowle said it was very good, and at 
the same time very wicked. He was, at 
heart, rather confounded by this disclosure. 
Still, with this little bit of nature before him, 
he might try all manner of experiments. 

*How full of fan you always are, Miss 
Adela,' he said I *I envy you your spirits. 
It is too much honour for me, poor Louis 
Crowle, to be named in the same breath; a 
knight, as you say so cleverly, of the Three 
per Centa' 

*And Beau in the Stocks, ha, ha, ha!' and 



A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 217 

the girl went off boisterously into peals of 
laughter. 

He relished it just as much, and went on 
sweetly . 

' Exactly ; and would a grand lady so wise, 
so good, so noble, so sensible, as she is . and I 
really, Miss Adela, have often wondered in 
secret at a woman being so sensible.' 

' Oh, Charlotte is very sensible,' said Miss 
Adela, growing grave of a sudden, as with 
the responsibility of the sentiment. * Every- 
body says so.' 

*Ah, yes,' said Mr. Crowle, in a gentle 
enthusiasm ; ' she is above us all. Ah, Miss 
Adela, she is not to be named with a Beau in 
the Stocks.' 

* Don't be so sure of that,' said this odd 
child. ^I could tell you something, but I 
won't. It would make you too vain.' And 
then bounded away. And by-and-by she was 
telling her junior sisters what fun she had with 
Mr. Crowle, and how she had humbugged 
him into thinking Charlotte was in love with 
him. 



218 BELLA DONNA. 

These juniors were all she- Arabs in the 
house, and, what is called, badly brought up. 

Mr. Crowle finished gathering his flowers, 
and thought how cleverly he had played upon 
this bi of nature. No one knew so well as he 
his chances and his station, and how almost 
ridiculous would be such an idea, when taken 
in reference to such a person as Miss Franklyn. 
He was a shrewd, sensible person himseK, and 
almost smiled at the notion. Still, he was not 
moving in the business ; and with the dilapi- 
dated fortunes of the house, who knows, but 
that this might be some fiimily scheme. He 
would welcome it with all heartiness. His 
lather was a currier . a living currier; and 
the currying process was every day spreading 
to his sensibilities. He would await events 
and make no sign; and so went in with a 
certain elation. Something had been sown 
which might come up years after. a very 
remote growth, but, still, something agreeable 
to speculate on. 

In the drawing-room he was marvellously 
agreeable, and the youngest young man of 



A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 219 

business ever dreamt of. As he ascended 
the stairs, he feasted on pleasing visions of the 
future. 

He was a very sensible * long-headed ' man, 
this young man of business, and there was no 
vulgar forwardness in his demeanour that 
night. If there was any change, he wa^ more 
retired. Still, the idea of purifying that 
currier streak out of his system came back 
to him very often* 

The evening post had just come in, and was 
opened greedily . ^like all posts, morning or 
evening. The letters were sorted and dis- 
tributed by unpaid oflBcials. Mr. Franklyn 
got his . a good many; the young ladies 
theirs . a few; Mr. Franklyn went through 
his slowly and without enthusiasm. No won- 
der, for they seldom bore him a horn of good 
news. Looking over one specially, he hemmed 
audibly twice or thrice, which was known in 
the family as a sign that he wished the atten- 
tion of the crowd to be directed to him. The 
crowd became silent and eager. 

^Dear me," said Mr. Franklyn, *this is a 



220 BELLA DONNA. 

little sudden, I had not expected him so 
soon.' 

* Who ? who, papa ?' 

' Young William Craven ; he is coming to- 

4 

morrow. Still I am very glad. A room can't 
take long to get ready.' 

This was supposed by the populace to be 
Charlotte's admirer, en titre. So, conscious 
glances went round, and the girl who had 
lately been in oflBce as a * terrible child,' but 
was still holding on, as it were, a minister 
without portfolio, jogged her neighbour and 
laughed aloud. The sensible girl was not the 
least perturbed. 

*The front room, I suppose, papa?* she 
said. 

^ How long is he to stay, papa, dear ?' said 
one of the family. 

*A week, he writes,' said Mr. Franklyn; 
* but of course we won't let him go so early. 
He is a most agreeable young man to have in 
a house. You will all like him.' 

The ex-terrible child said demurely, *0f 
course! What does Charlotte say? Eh, 




A VISITOR LOOKED FOR. 221 

Charlotte? She is the only one that knows 
him as yet/ 

* You will see to-morrow,' said the sensible 
girl ; * it will be a wholesome lesSon for you to 
curb your impatience/ 

* Something splendid !* 

' A noble youth, of course !' 
' All the virtues !' 

* Adonis ! Brave, haughty, gallant,' &c., 
&c. 

These were all so many shafts launched at 
Charlotte. Not one hit. 

^She is getting red . look!* said the ex- 
terrible. 

^Foolish children,' said the sensible girl, 
quite cool and unmoved', *you should be all 
sent up to your nurseries.' 



222 BELLA DOXKA. 



CHAPTER V. 



JENNY AT HOME. 



Up at Chesterfield Street, things were gloomy 
enough. The Jady of the house was to be ill 
in permanence, better one day, and more than 
worse the next. Doctors came in flocks . 
four at least . on the day fixed for a consulta- 
tion; and their four decent carriages, quiet, 
demure vehicles, kept about the premises, in a 
sort of procession, as though they had come 
already for the fiineral, and were waiting for 
the hearse. 

Two of the medical gentlemen wore white 
ties, and were about as clean and varnished as 
clergymen ; the others were rude, disorderly 
persons, not too nice with their razors. The 
sick lady upstairs was, metaphorically speak- 



JENNY AT HOME. 223 

ing, in the hands of one of the medical gentle- 
men, . she was the Case, and Ms Case. He had 
taken out his licence, and these were his shoot- 
ing grounds. He took his three friends up- 
stairs to exhibit his prey or quarry, not 
without a certain pride. He lectured over 
her fondly ; said now and then, * You see, eh ?' 
to which they answered in dry chorus, ' Ha, 
hem, quite so !' 

He took his stethoscope out, applied it to 
the chest of the patient, and for some minutes 
seemed to be looking with his ear through a 
sort of telescope. His brethren, then, all came 
in turn, and looked as though looking with 
their ears through a telescope. The profound 
wisdom and ineflfable depth of knowledge por- 
trayed in each professor's face, as he withdrew 
his face from the operation, it would be impos- 
sible to describe. This species of autopsy on 
a living subject being concluded, they then 
withdrew, gravely, and even sadly, and ad- 
journed to a private chamber below to consider 
their verdicts and take sherry and biscuits. 
That verdict was scarcely encouraging. Lungs 



224 BELLA DONNA. 

* touched ' . liver * touched ' a good deal . gene- 
ral interior economy all more or less ' touched ' 
^ . and, above all, heart ' gone.' 

* You see/ said Sir Hervey Parkes to Jenny 
Bell, trying to work his throat free, as it were, 
out of his white collar ; * you see, it is very 
critical, very critical indeed. Our patient's 
life is on a thread . on a thread . a breath . a 
motion . ^you understand. No agitations . no 
sudden shocks. everything soothing. ev-e-ry- 
thing soo-o-thing . you understand.' 

Jenny's mournful eyes fixed themselves 
wistfully on the physician-in-chief. Oh ! so 
sadly and wistfully. *What?' she said, and 
her round full fingers became clasped together ; 

* no hope, sir ? Do you mean that ? Oh ! 
sir.' The distinguished physician took her for 
the affectionate and best loved of all the daugh- 
ters. He had been pleased with her quiet 
manner all along. She deserved his appro- 
bation. *My dear Miss Maxwell,' he said, 
making an uneasy effort to work himself 
free from his collar, 'I don't say that. We 
may work through . for . oh, dear me, yes . 



JENNY AT HOME. 225 

an indefinite period. But we must have care ; 
an emulcient treatment . if you can follow me 
in the use of the term . strictly emulcient. I 
must speak plainly, and put no fine points on 
the matter . hem, you will understand. But the 
fact is . our dear parent . yours, that is . is in 

a critical way. A breath . a gust . and ' 

Here the eminent practitioner finished the 
sentence with a gentle snap of his fingers. 
* Still, with care . oh yes . with care, with 
kee-air,' and he finished this sentence with an 
up-and-down movement of his head, which, in 
the language of the human person, is signifi- 
cant of mild encouragement. He was very 
much pleased with Jenny, and went away 
saying to his brethren : and so * well regu- 
lated' (that was his word) a girl for a sick 
chamber he had rarely encountered. 

It was Jenny's function to press the daily 
fee into the reluctant palm, according to the 
surreptitious laws of the guild. She performed 
the unholy action with the conspirator-like 
stealth proper. Shall we live to see the time 
when the barristerial community shall accept 

VOL. I. Q 



226 BELLA DOXNA. 

their fees in a stealthy, skulking feshion, with 
averted eyes, and a hand protruding back- 
wards from the folds of the gown, into which 
adroit attorney shall chink his gold ? Is the 
Guild of Mediciners the only one whose delicacy 
is to be consulted ? 

The suffering lady, then upstairs, was to 
float on smoothly to the end of her days. 
Every nerve of the family was to be strained 
to ensure her quiet. Every one was to creep 
up and down and about the house with cat- 
like steps. The worst was, she was sharp of 
temper, testy, a faded fashionable lady,- long 
out of office, chafing against restraint, and 
eager for the fray again. She put no faith in 
these old lady stories of * heart gone,' and 
* touched lungs ;' she would be well in a month 
or two. So here was the problem, that ' emul- 
cient ' treatment it would be hard to fit to such 
a subject. 



227 



CHAPTER YI. 

THE * SCOUR VALLEY ' BILL. 

Mr. Maxwell was wholly outside such asso- 
ciations, yet not indififerent as a husband. He 
was more dull than indifferent. What could 
he do? He was being worked like a beast 
of burden; he was being driven round and 
round in a short of committee ring, performing 
legal * scenes in the circle,' from morning till 
night, with attorney gentlemen in the centre 
scourging him round and round. The com- 
mittee gentlemen sat in the boxes and looked 
on. He really would have grieved . grieved 
sincerely . had he been given time for that 
emotion. But his brain was greedily absorb- 
ing everything. feelings, emotions, sensibili- 
ties, even will. The demon of sixth House of 



228 BELLA DONNA. 

Lords' cases had entered into him, and had 
swept the whole premises clean. It had 
brought other demons' reports, and the statutes 
. terrible lodgers . who kept the House all to 
themselves. What could he do, save, indeed, 
furnish to Jenny, who gently suggested it to 
him in the morning, supplies of those golden 
eggs which the medical profession requires the 
patient-goose, or goose-patient, to have new 
laid every day. 

But besides, Mr. Maxwell, Q.C., was now 
plunged deep into a tremendous pool of rail- 
way battle, and was struggling across through 
heaps of floating, stagnant matter. There was 
now actually before the committee the Scour 
Valley Kailway Bill, promoted by the Monster 
Leviathan Line of the country, the huge 
Polypus Company, which was stretching out 
feelers north and south and west, and in those 
directions crawling over the face of the land. 
One of their feelers took a little bend, which 
on the map might be as the curve of the little 
finger ; and these giants now proposed sweep- 
ing direct through this lovely Scour Valley, a 




THE *SCX)UR valley' BILL. 229 

sweet pastoral nook, dear to anglers and trout 
lovers, in order to cut off about eight miles of 
country. As the grand Polypus flew scream- 
ing through the kingdom, express, this was 
supposed to save ten precious minutes of vast 
importance to commercial gentlemen of the 
bag. And yet, reasoDable as this project 
would appear, in those days when economy of 
time is so justly considered, it was opposed . 
opposed grudgingly, snarlingly, not with tooth 
and nail merely, but with claws, and fangs, and 
talons . opposed incomprehensibly by another 
monster society, a sort of Midland Polypus, in 
whose instance the Legislature, having made a 
clean cut transversely across the kingdom, gave 
them a sort of interest, which stretched away 
at both sides, and every year increased. These 
two grand Polypi, one crawling away northerly 
and westerly, the other diagonally, indirectly, 
as it were, shared the country between them, 
and in some way obstructed any smaller 
schemes which broke out in those directions. 
Welcome to each were their legitimate spoils. 
But there were angles where the Polypi came 



230 BELLA DONNA. 

near, and almost entangled their feelers ; and 
there were little choice and dainty spots over 
which the shadow of the Northern feelers 
hovered, and over which the Midland longed 
to crawl, and over these debatable bits there 
was terrible railway * bad blood ' and locomo- 
tive soreness. So was it with the Scour Valley 
line, for which, up to that moment, no one had 
been solicitous, and of which few had heard. 
A wretched little water-shed. The eight-mile 
saving of time was a pure blind. It was all a 
mere sham, and over that wretched little corner 
the two monster societies fought out their 
deadly quarrel. 

The committee room where the judges sat 
was as a sort of museum lecture-room, frame- 
work being introduced, on which were spread 
out plans, sections, elevations, a perfect acre- 
age of cartridge paper, as though that branch 
of the Honourable House had turned itself into 
a gigantic laundry, and was striving to get 
through a large order in the table-cloth direc- 
tion with as much speed as possible. Things 
were set out with a lavish effort at simplifica- 




THE * SCOUR valley' BILL. 231 

tion, a magnifying over and over again, so as 
to bring the idea (whatever idea it was) home 
to the meanest (committee) capacity. You 
could walk at an easy pace round the room, 
and follow the whole course of the Scour 
Yalley line, displayed in brilliant colours, and 
brought conveniently on a level with the 
human eye. This was on a scale of some three 
yards or so to a mile, which are magnificent 
proportions in engineering plans. But lest 
even this magnitude should not reach to the 
committee, there were elegant extracts, as it 
were, of the Scour Valley line portrayed in 
gigantic cartoons at higher elevations, like the 
full-length portrait of * a gentleman ' at exhibi- 
tions; to be reached and have its beauties 
expounded by the agency of a wand. These 
works of art were distinguished by monster 
lettering, and the flashiest of colouring, so as 
to reach speedily to the committee's intellectual 
level. Its easy lessons might have done for a 
metropolitan infant school, with diagrams hung 
round, speaking with a superfluous intelligi- 
bility to the eye. 



232 BELLA DONNA. 

Thus on the lower level was made out in- 
distinctly a little pale blue bridge which actu- 
ally crossed this notorious river Scour by two 
arches. Higher up, this bridge had of a sudden 
developed into Brobdignag proportions, and 
had every stone distinct and conspicuous. A 
little more to the right, in the same region, 
was the bridge again, only cruelly cut across 
from pathway to pathway, and labelled * sec- 
tion.' 

A good deal turned upon this bridge, and 
on the Scour generally. The bridge was of 
the Northern Polypi ; but in a handsome sort 
of way the Western Polypi were coming for- 
ward to protect the owners of the adjacent 
banks, fishing rights, and general privileges, 
and were even prepared with a plan of their 
own, which would take the line . their own . 
across the Scour at a high level through a lat- 
tice bridge. There were models, too, of both 
bridges, witnesses in platoons from the Scour 
Valley, squires and engineers in regular corps. 
There was what is called a * strong' bar for 
both sides. There was much printing, much 



n 



THE 'SCOUR valley' BILL. 233 

lithographing prettily donie and coloured, and 
bound up with counsels' briefs, and furnishing 
those gentlemen with some field for absent or 
vacant scribbling. Everything was lavish and 
of the best, the paper the very finest. The 
eminent parliamentary agents spared nothing, 
knowing pretty well that nothing would be 
spared to them. They showed all the con- 
siderate munificence of undertakers (as they 
were indeed in some sense) at a moment of a 
bereavement. 

Mr. Maxwell was on the opponents' side, 
the injured Westerns, who had been forestalled 
by the greedy Northerns. The fight was des- 
perate. No one would have known him : the 
absent, vacant, timorous man of domestic life, 
now became noisy, combative, and actually 
collaring Boggs, Q.C., with ferocity. The two 
rolled over each other, gripping their throats, 
with loud snarlings, many times in the day, 
until Mr. Marshley, M.P., came and tore therii 
asunder. They wrangled over witnesses as 
over bones. Mrs. Maxwell never knew the 
Maxwell of the committee rooms ; it was an- 



234 BELLA DONNA. 

other man. Had she heard his voice she 
would have passed by, and not owned him. 

The witnesses . such witnesses ! . who stood 
there, herded helplessly like the cattle which 
some of them drove; who hung about the 
galleries with a timid air . with a proud air ; 
who sucked sticks; who wore agricultural 
coats, with capes ; who hugged primitive um- 
brellas aflTectionately ; who seemed to have a 
vested property in the local solicitor, and clung 
to that unhappy oflBcer as with a sense that he 
was responsible for their maintenance and keep 
in the great Babylon ; who were getting lost, 
and being brought back ignominiously ; who 
were getting drunk and utterly helpless . a 
perfect burden on the wretched solicitor, who, 
besides the labour of telling over his men about 
a dozen times in the day, like a sergeant 
his soldiers, was besides incumbered with a 
helpless caput mortuum^ sadly gone in drink. 
This alcoholic aflBiction at times took the shape 
of frenzied violence, of loud screams, and 
general combativeness, which were, however, 
not to be controlled by the arm of the law, the 




THE * SCOUR valley' BILL. 235 

introduction of which would wound a witness's 
sensibilities, but had to be soothed into tran- 
quillity by the wretched local solicitor in 
person. 

The engineers were remarkable. On them 
seemed to rest the whole burden of the case, 
and they knew it. Four were marshalled on 
each side, . short and wiry engineers, tall and 
burly engineers, spectacled and unspectacled 
engineers, all fighting the battle with the zest 
and hostility which belongs to that and to the 
.medical* guild. 

When Mr. Tummins, C.E., the local profes- 
sional, was placed in the chair, to support the 
Northern Polypus view of the Scour Valley, 
and had his plans put into his hands, and was 
examined by Boggs, Q.C., with a skill and 
fluency, and familiarity with technical terms, 
which would have led a careless public to 
suppose he had handled theodolites in infancy, 
and had been busy taking levels all his life, 
four pairs of engineering eyes glared at him 
from the other side of the table, and at each 
answer four heads came together and tossed 



236 BEl.LA DONNA. 

contemptuously, and four mouths uttered dis- 
paraging whispers. But what was this to the 
time when Mr. Bagley, C.E., the 'eminent' 
engineer who had constructed the famous 
Bilston Eeservoir, and built that wonderful 
viaduct of fifty-six arches across the river 
Leathy, under which a seventy-four might pass 
with the greatest ease . which was justly the 
wonder of the empire, but had made the share- 
holders bankrupt ; wheu this gentleman took his 
seat in the chair, and with a calm, smooth im- 
passibility, gave liis testimony, the engineering 
eyes opposite were awed into respect. Only 
one, Mr. Cox, C.E., almost * eminent,' also 
associated with some * daring' bridges, which 
had excited wonder, but impoverished share- 
holders, was consumed with a secret gnawing 
envy, and turned yellow. His examination- 
Mr. Parsee, M.P., the eminent Parliamentary 
counsel, had reserved him for himself as a sort 
of legal tit-bit . occupied nearly two days, and 
when the committee rose, it was known that 
his cross-examination would be undertaken 
next morning by Mr. Maxwell, Q.C. 




THE *SCX)UR valley' BILL. 237 

These counsel of Parliament have wonderfdl 
gear and machinery, strangely universal. The 
wheels and cogs and drums of their brain fit, 
by a little adjustment, any description of mate- 
rial. They are omnivorous, and can take in 
and work up wheat and chaff indifferently, 
medicine and drugs, machinery and the nice 
laws of mechanics, mathematics and formulas, 
optics, refraction of lenses . as when dealing 
with a lighthouse patent, and all the niceties 
of poisons, so as to be fitted to do battle for a 
couple of hours with Doctor Taylor. Let all 
this multifarious range be once * briefed' to 
them, and it is ready for entering the machine. 
It is air one in the legal parlour the night 
before; a single handle sets all to work. 
Round fly the wheels with hum and burr. 
The properties of matter, the co-efficients, the 
densities of iron, the strain it will take without 
breaking, and such awful matter (awfiil, at 
least, in being played with vivd voce . reasoned 
upon coram publico) as the formula : . 



ah . . - = twige the focal distance. 
^ c 



238 BELLA DOXNA. 

These are wonderful magicians certainly. 
And such a magician certainly was Mr. Max- 
well, Q.C. ; and feeling the responsibility of 
Mr. Bagley, C.E., the ' eminent ' engineer who 
was held over for his special handling on the 

morrow, he was now down in his workshop 
digesting civil engineering and all its intri- 
cacies. 



239 



CHAPTER YII. 



jenny's help. 



Levels, gradients, one in thirty-five ; bridges 
* askew ' and otherwise ; traction ; these things 
fly off like sparkles. Still their briefs are 
barren enough, and he must have principles, 
broad and bold, which shall have a fine ringing 
sound in the committee-room, and confuse 
Bagley, C.E. 

For this end he bethinks himself of an an- 
cient Cyclopaedia (Britannica, or Scotica, or 
Hibernica), splendidly garnished with diagrams, 
gorgeous cuts, dotted lines, and what not. It 
had been useful on a former Bill. . By and by 
he rises, and begins to burrow among Measom 
and Welsby, Carrington and Payne, Tudor's 
Leading Cases, and Parkins' Appeal Cases. Do 



240 BELLA DONNA. 

what he will, however, he cannot find it, and 
stands with his hand to his weary forehead at 
about nine at night, in a cloud of dust. Sud- 
denly it occurred to him . the girls! They 
loved picture books, and it had been borne up 
stairs, subjected to rude usage, and converted 
into a toy. 

They were aghast at the apparition of that 
awful face ! On the little circle fell conster- 
nation, from gentle Jenny downwards, who 
presided. The girls were working ; Jenny sat 
in an arm-chair, a comfortable article, and read 
(to herself) out of an octavo volume covered 
with white paper. No doubt she was forti- 
fying herself for the next day's scholastic 
duties, for in shape it was like their French 
^Lecteur;' yet why cover up so useful a 
manual with this tenderness ? Jenny almost 
gave a little shriek or gasp, as the lord of the 
mansion stood before them with his pale face, 
then stood up respectfully, and slipped her 
handkerchief over the book. 

None of them had seen the book of plates. 
In truth they were not capable of that profa- 



jenny's help. 241 

nation. Bear away a sacred volume? No; 
indeed ! What if it should have turned out 
Parkins on Appeals ! Those volumes they re- 
garded as actually instinct with life, and had 
an undefined terror that those of the folio order 
would, on any insult, fall and crush them, like 
the helmet in *Otranto.' Timorous sounds 
from all sides repudiated the notion, and the 
apparition, with an audible and deep-drawn 
sigh, seemed to fade, out into darkness. 

This troubled him. The briefs were so very 
barren, an unusual blemish in documents of the 
sort, and he began once more delving, burrow- 
ing, shovelling, among Parkins and Co., toss- 
ing them out like clods of earth and lumps 
of clay. He was blinded with dust, and yet 
his labour was ineffectual, and the hours went 
by. With a sigh he gave it up, and went back 
to his briefs, as it drew near to twelve o'clock. 

Suddenly the door opened softly . very 
softly . and Jenny glided in ; the round, com- 
pact figure of our Jenny. He looked up fix)m 
his paper absently, yet was not astonished. 
He thought she had come to ask for something, 

VOL. I. R 



242 BELLA DONNA. 

and looked up inquiringly, with his pale face ; 
then, when he found she did not speak, dropped 
it again, and relapsed into the Brief worid. In 
a moment he had forgotten her. Our Jenny 
had a velvet foot, though so roundly made . 
tripped across to Parkins and Co., Measom 
and Welsby, . ^lying all tumbled and in con- 
fusion . and went down on her gentle knees 
like a maid-of-all-work. 

For three-quarters of an hour she mined and 
laboured in the dust, until the round fall hands 
became all grimed, and then, in a comer, lit 
upon the engineering quarto. She got up, 
captured him, drew him from his ambuscade, 
wiped him down with a cloth (poor Jenny knew 
little about proper dealings with the Book 
Family, who should have the dust blown ten- 
derly from them, or they become greasy), set 
it gently before Mr. Maxwell on the table, and 
floated softly from the room. Anything so 
considerate, so tenderly done, and with so little 
of pomp or flourish, it would be hard to con- 
ceive. 

He did not wake up into the world for a good 



 



JENNY*8 HELP. 243 

half-hour afterwards, when he was plunged sud- 
denly into an engineering slough, and thought 
again of the great Cyclopaedia as a sort of help- 
ing hand to draw him out. Then his eyes lit on 
the familiar chiel just beside him, blinking at 
him tranquilly. He was confounded . amazed 
. for he knew the space was vacant but a mo- 
ment ago. He puzzled over it a few seconds, yet 
without losing time, which was precious ; when 
the figure of our gentle Jenny rose before him 
. a picture, too, of her delving in the corner. 
Gradually it took shape ; and as he turned over 
the huge books, he said, quietly . * A thoughtful 
act. a very thoughtful act indeed/ 



244 BELLA DONJ^A. 



1 



CHAPTER VIIL 

THE STORY OF * A FINE WOMAN.' 

The early portion of the life of Frederick Max- 
well, Esquire, Q.C., would not bear much 
microscopic power. He sat lost in the wild 
prairies of embarrassments, bills, straitened 
means . in the district where no sun shines, 
and where the air is close and unwholesome, 
and where there are mephitic vapours rising 
from swamps, and where there are unclean and 
dangerous beasts of prey abroad. For long he 
had actually lived, helplessly, among these 
creatures. They had him in their power. He 
was ankle-deep in the swamps, and could not 
extricate himself. Finally, getting bound, as 
it were, to a curious ornithological development 



THE STORY OF 'A FINE WOMAN.' 246 

common to the bush . a sort of damaged 
attorney, clumsily repaired and restored . it 
came to be whispered that he had married 
the damaged attorney's daughter. These were 
mere vapours that floated out of the district of 
the dismal swamp, absolutely intangible, which 
no man could grasp in his hand, and so might 
have been inventions of those enemies who 
grudged to Frederick Maxwell, Esq., and to 
the lady of Frederick Maxwell, Esq., that 
weight of power and influence to which they 
afterwards attained. 

The damaged attorney, whose fingers were 
much stained and soiled with paddling in nasty 
waters, had been a flashy, pinchbeck man, and 
had a flashy, gaudy daughter, who was, as it 
were, a sign for his hbuse-of-call. There he 
gave flashy, gorgeous dinners, and with his 
stained fingers gave a sort of forced and hearty 
welcome to favourite comers. Mr. Maxwell 
was one of these ; with the cunning of the ser- 
pent in the committee-room, but with the help- 
lessness of infancy in his domestic life, he, in- 
deed, fancied this young person, and was rather 



246 BELLA DONNA. 

dazzled, as are contemplative men, by the 
general garishness of the effect. The details 
do not affect this story, so need not be dwelt on 
with particularity here. In some way it came 
about. At last it came round, that Mr. Maxwell 
 . not yet Q.C. . ^took with him to the altar the 
lovely and accomplished, &c., &c., according to 
the formula. A very unsuitable match, as 
indeed he half suspected ; and he, with a sort 
of relief, now that it was off his mind, went to 
his Year-books, while * the lady of Frederick 
Maxwell, Esq./ went back to her milliners, 
who were a dozen strong. 

These ex-flashy women, and old gentlemen's 
* fine women, egad !* are costly things in their 
kind. The damaged attorney's daughter was 
no exception. She rioted among fineries, and 
raged wantonly among silks and laces, and the 
general splendour of wearing apparel. Before 
half-a-dozen years were out, Frederick Maxwell, 
Esq., that rising barrister, was wakened up one 
morning from third Carrington and Payne, and 
second Clarke and Fenelly, by the presenta- 
tion of Madame Delphine's little account. 



i 



THE STORY OF *A FINE WOMAN.' 247 

which, for silkeries and general gauzy gear, 
stretched to a frightful extent. 

Wonderful, how the mere decoration of this 
clay tenement can reach to so much. F. Max- 
well, Esq., might have purchased a compact 
estate for the money, and turned , all the laces 
and ribbons into good substantial land. 
Moneys which the rising barrister had been 
coining surely and steadily, all sank into the 
millinery morass, and were swallowed up. 
Madame Delphine was easy, and even good- 
natured; took bills and paper generally for 
what could not be so readily furnished ; and, 
what was really more indulgent still, allowed 
the flow of articles to stream on simultaneously. 
But, in five or six years more the stream got 
choked and dammed up again. .Madame Del- 
phine of a sudden lost her soft and engaging 
manner, and became stern, hard, and almost 
ferocious ; and Frederick Maxwell, Esq., again 
found that another small estate might have 
been purchased with the silks. This time he 
was helpless. By desperate efibrts, and heavy 
mortgage for many years to come of brain, 



248 BELLA DONNA. 

time, health . everything, some arrangement 
was eflfected. But from that their life was 
altered. Mrs. Frederick Maxwell must cease 
to be flashy at such cost ; and had even some 
glimmering of sense to see the folly of such a 
course. Before this time, too, the damaged 
attorney, stepping carefully, and picking Ms 
steps across the Chat-moss of dark money 
transactions, had tripped and been smothered 
in a bog-hole, whence, long afterwards, exhaled 
gases of imposture or cheating, or, as some 
whispered it, forgery. 

All this while, too, when Frederick Maxwell, 
Esq,, was busy with his briefs down in the well 
he called his study, Mrs. Frederick Maxwell 
wore that splendid gear, for which he was re- 
sponsible, at public places, and moved along, 
escorted by maiiy gallant gentlemen ; for these 
gorgeous^ feathers which make such gorgeous 
birds, must have some more direct profit in 
the wearing, than merely feeling them on the 
human figure. Of this retinue was Colonel 
Fondleman, Captain Freelove, Carter Lee, and 
others. They walked behind her in a sort of 



THE STORY OF 'A FINE WOMAN.' 249 

procession. They grouped themselves about 
her throne, whence she talked foolish things, 
and voiced the loud laugh with a rather harsh 
and unfeminine voice. Ancients, bewigged and 
bedyed, looked on from afar, and mumbled 
their old chant about a * something' fine 
woman, . which she was, if largeness, volume, 
and general spreading expanse of figure and 
dress, make up that ideal. Carter Lee was, 
perhaps, some paces in advance of the others, 
and went about to the various entertainments 
the ' fine woman, sir,' attended, a sort of com- 
missioned admirer . ^just as the Italian gentle- 
men do. And Mr. Frederick Maxwell, the rising 
counsel, stayed at home, and worked in the 
legal galleys, morally blind, deaf, and, perhapSj 
indifferent; and a good-natured fashionable 
public shrugged its shoulders and looked funny, 
and infinitely knowing, as that ^ fine woman, 
egad, sir !' beat up the drawing-room, laboured 
heavily through doorways, with noisy rustling 
of stiff, crackling silk. 

Still, these * fine women ' are built of sadly 
perishable materials. They are showy plaster 



250 BELLA DONNA. 

edifices, which, after much wear and tear of tJie 
elements, begin to shrink and grow awry, to 
peel, and get smirched. Something could be 
done by way of temporary restoration, but 
not much. So, after a few years, very 
rapidly the * fine woman ' began to fall out of 
repair . to collapse, decay, and crumble; the 
oflScial admirers dropped away, one by one; 
and, what was worse, some of the inner stays 
and girders of the edifice began to give ; and 
hence came that ' gone ' lung and * gone ' liver, 
and very rapidly Agoing' heart. Yery soon 
the edifice was beginning to get ruined, and 
to be shored up by stout supports. It was all 
over ; the noon-day of fashion was past ; with 
it had sunk the homage, the worship, sham or 
real, the professional admirers, the rustling 
finery. Here was invalidship and strict con- 
finement at home. Presently, but how soon 
was quite uncertain . it would be night. 

The children which this estimable lady far- 
nished'to Frederick Maxwell, Esq., were eight, 
ten, and twelve years old. Ten and twelve 
were two dead-level species of girls . helpless, 



THE STORY OF ' A FINE WOMAN.' 251 

fat, timorous, useless, and never likely to be 
made much of; but eight was a boy, Jack or 
Jacky by name, of a very curious pattern. 
Not like his father, the very few people said . 
oh, no . who were privileged with a private 
view of him ; not in the least like his mother, 
oh ! dear, no, again. A strange boy and an 
ugly boy, with sharp, restless, travelling eyes, 
and a face like a nursery fire-shovel. Not by 
any means a boy whom charming ladies would 
woo over to their knees, with tender invoca- 
tion, would stoop or grow rapturous over, 
chatter to sweetly, with head bent down. He 
was a kind of decent domestic city Arab, not mis- 
chievous, or getting into dirt and trouble from 
breakage, or smearing his cheeks, but clever, 
silent, and wise. These three had Jenny now 
begun to govern. The pair of girls, below 
contempt in a governing sense, she found a 
very easy task, being poor, unintelligent souls, 
almost agricultural in mind; but this boy, 
Jack, she, somehow, did not relish from the 
beginning. It was hard, so young and fresh a 
creature as our Jenny should be set to the 



252 BELLA DONNA. 

pilotage of such a thing. Johnny, Jenny used 
to say, with a deep sigh, had, some way, never 
taken to her from the beginning. * One of the 
best children in the world ; a boy with a great 
deal of good in him, and great promise, except 
. except that one little fault, if fault it could 
be called, of not knowing who were his friends. 
A cold child, a reserved child . in fact, a very 
curious child generally.' And Jenny sighed 
again, and people said, 'What a task that 
pretty, fresh young governess must have with 
that loutish, mulish cub of a boy !' 

It was, indeed, trying to discover a pair of 
sharp, prying eyes fixed upon every little pro- 
ceeding our Jenny might be engaged in ; and 
it showed a very odd and perverse temper in 
the child. Sometimes, a little languid with the 
strain of training childish intellect, she would 
absently raise her eyes to a small glass, oppo 
site which the table for the books and general 
work happened to be placed, and for a second 
would absently contemplate her own round 
warm- coloured face, and, with a gesture almost 
instinctive, would smooth the outer edge of her 



THE STORY OF ^A FINE WOMAN.' 253 

hair, with great pains and diligence. On con- 
cluding this simple operation, it was annoying 
to find the ugly boy, Jacky, utterly abstracted 
from his * Pinnock' (Jenny always relished the 
simplicity of that once popular teacher, and his 
clear flowing method of question and answer^ 
which left so little to the caprice of the 
teacher), and gazing stupidly at her face. 

No less annoying was it, of a tranquil even- 
ing, when the day's labours were over for 
Jenny, and she was supervising their evening 
recreations, in a very ample and luxurious 
arm-chair, busy with a small foreign printed 
volume, whose cover was covered with white 
paper, to keep it from being soiled, to find this 
ugly child staring stupidly at the paper-covered 
book with a wonderful intensity. Jenny felt 
convinced he knew perfectly well what the 
character of the book was, and that if he could, 
he would have read it for himself. She, 
indeed, was only trying, at these little spare 
moments, to acquire a proficiency in foreign 
tongues, so necessary for a poor girl that has to 
do battle with the world; and had actually 



254 BEIiLA DONNA. 

waited one moraing oa Mr. Maxwell, rousing 
him out of Sixth House of Lords' Cases, to ask, 
very modestly and timorously, if he would 
object to her subscribing to M. Bemardi's 
foreign library for German works of a historic 
character, as her * little charges ' (so she always 
called them) must soon think of commencing 
that now necessary branch of modern education. 
Mr. Maxwell, with ghostly abstractions out of 
Sixth House of Lords' Cases still hovering 
between him and Jenny, grasped indistinctly 
that something was required for the house ; said, 
*Yes . certainly . of course;' and instantly, 
Serjeant Eooker's point bursting on him in all 
its splendid breath, flew back into House of 
Lords' Cases as though he were in a legal 
rabbit-warren, and became lost to the world. 

And, thus privileged, Jenny improved her- 
self in the French tongue ; the German she did 
not lay her mind to as yet. 

M. Bernardi, whom she visited in person, was 
really taken with her modesty and freshness, 
and remarked to his French foreman something 
metaphorical about her being a * dish ' rather 



THE STORY OP 'A FINE WOMAN.' 255 

* piquant et fort appetissant.' And he himself, 
in person, made her up little square chests of all 
the newest things by the best French chroniclers 
. that is to say, by the brilliant school of M. 
Soulie, M. Dumas, junior, the ingenious author 
of * Psalambo ;' and sometimes, by way of a 
makeweight, one of the diverting cabinet pieces 
of the late M. de Kock, of facetious memory. 
These latter, however, in the earlier days of 
her subscription, Jenny sent back, with a little 
note to * kind M. Bernardi ' . a little note thai 
actually blushed, and in which she said she 
could not follow M. de Kock, and did not under- 
stand him, and she was afiraid . in short, would 

* kind M. Bernardi ' send her something else ? 
And * kind M. Bernardi,' showing all his teeth, 
said with delight to his French foreman, that 
she was * coquine,' and that she * intrigued ' him 

* joliment ;' to whom the French foreman rasped 
a few complimentary consonants. And * kind 
M. Bernardi ' at once snapped up a bright, 
fresh, clean thing (outwardly, at least), in a 
shining pink cover, that was, twelve hours ago, 
on M. Amyot's counter, in the Eue de la Paix, 



256 BELLA DONNA. 

entitled *Nuit/ par Paul L'Ouregan; and 
' kind M. Bemardi ' put up with it a rather 
humorous thing, by a new writer . Julie 
Camache . rising fast into deserved popularity, 
entitled * Mon Bonnet de Nuit perdu !' 



257 



CHAPTER IX. 



jenny's persecution. 



Of nights, then, Jenny sat . rather nestled . in 
her arm-chair, very tired with her day's work ; 
one of her plump feet gathered up, very much 
as the gentlemen do in their easy attitudes, and 
improved herself in the French tongue. She 
made her * young charges ' improve themselves 
also as she read, and did not allow them to 
romp and make a distracting noise, like ordi- 
nary ill-bred children. She kept a special 
watch on Master Jacky, whom she posed some- 
times at the table, sometimes in a corner . in 
fact, more often in a corner. For she told him 
she was sorry to see in him * the seeds of a wil- 
ful and perverse temper,' which, unless they 
were * eradicated ' now with a firm hand, would 

VOL. I. s 



268 BELLA DOXNA. 

eventually be &tal to him, and bring him to a 
bad end. All which dreadful warnings he 
accepted placidly, and, as it appeared to Jenny, 
with a sort of secret contempt for her powers 
of forecasting the future, which indiflference, 
not by any means outwardly expressed, did, 
indeed, make Jenny very sad. 

Jenny, too, was very anxious about his de^ 
portment, and when she came to dull fade pas- 
:3ages in the * Lost Night-cap,' would bid him 
hold up his hands, or hold down his hands, as 
the case might be ; or to keep his chin up, and to 
* do try and learn to sit like a gentleman/ And 
he was so ugly, and rusted, and awkward, as 
it were, in his joints, he would succeed very 
imperfectly, and assume loutish attitudes in 
his attempts, being, at the same time, very 
often surprised guiltily in that private staring 
to which Jenny had such an objectioji. On 
this she would take the trouble of actually 
getting up from her arm-chair and going over 
to him pretty briskly, jerking up his chin, and 
jerking down his hands with a little tartness 
very justifiable with such an aggravating boy. 



I 



jenny's persecution. 259 

Once he told her, * You hurt me, Miss Bell, and 
pushed her arm away a little roughly; and 
Jenny, who was naturally of a fine quick tern-, 
per, and with nobody present, found the temp- 
tation irresistible, and the insubordination so 
gross, that, with that round, fleshy hand of 
hers, she gave him a smart, tingling little slap 
across the left ear. Our pretty Jenny was car- 
ried away for the moment. Strange to say he 
never cried, or even looked rueful, but turned 
away and fell to his book again. 

With the ex-offido invalid upstairs, he was, 
curious to say, the favourite of all the family. 
The flashy woman, now out of office, and wait- 
ing for the * heart to go,' as the mediciners 
called it, really had a niche or comer in that 
poor dilapidated organ for her boy ; and, it is 
believed, he, too, regarded her reciprocally. 

At least, it began to be a favourite motion of 

 

his, during those evenings when Jenny was 
getting more than usually persevering about 
his deportment, to say quietly . *Miss Bell, 
may I go up and sit with mamma ?' and Jenny, 
who suspected this artful boy's prodigious du- 



260 BELLA DONNA, 

tifulness, and saw, as she fancied, a spiteful 
twinkle in his eye, could not well refuse a 
willing assent . ^the inculcation of dutifulness 
being part of the governess' curriculum. Alto- 
gether, then, it may be conceived, this artful 
pupil did not very much gain our Jenny's 
aflfection. 

But what really was at the bottom of this 
unhealthy relation between mistress and pupil, 
was a little adventure arising out of some of 
M. Bemardi's books, and which indirectly 
brings us to Jenny's personal relation to Mrs. 
Maxwell, the ex-officio invalid upstairs, whose 
heart, on medical authority, was * going.' 
These details may, perhaps, seem a little too 
abundant ; but, as this is a sort of cabinet pic- 
ture and Dutch family piece, they become 
almost essential. 

Not very long after the visit of the 
Reverend Mr. Wells this very painful little 
incident had occurred :. One evening, about 
four o'clock, Mrs. Maxwell, now growing 
very querulous, and to be soothed in omni" 
bus by medical direction . for as the chief 



-^ 



jeiststy's persecution. 261 

mediciner remarked, *Our life hangs upon a 
mere thread' . sends down for an amusing 
book, with pictures, of which line of article 
the house is sadly destitute. An amusing 
book, *with pictures,' and Frederick Maxwell, 
Esq., Q.O., in conjunction, did seem a comic 
possibility. There was, indeed, a sort of 
ancient, old-fashioned collection, . which Mr. 
Maxwell's grandmamma had read out of and 
thought entertaining . novels such as *The 
Hermit,' *The Recluse' . each in three little 
volumes, Robertson's * Charles the Fifth,' the 
late Mr. Arthur Young's works, and such 
matter. There were also a few old-feshioned 
French works. 

But that Mr. Maxwell should be applied to 
for store of entertaining illustrated books was 
really entertaining. * Tenth Vesey, Junior,' 
gorgeously illustrated by Tony Johannot, 
would be about as droll a concatenation. 
Jenny is very eager about it, and distracted 
almost in her eagerness, and at last thinks of 
a sort of landscape annual, which one of the 
girls had been looking over the night before 



262 BELLA DONNA. 

on the sofa. She therefore bids Jack go up 
and fetch it . ^he will find it on the sofa. Jack^ 
who, but that he was commissioned from 
allove, would not have been despatched on 
this duty, goes upstairs. About a minute 
after a sudden idea flashes on Jenny, and 
jumping up, she flew to the drawing-room, 
ran to the sofa and turned back the cushion. 
Something she had placed there was gone. 
Our Jenny's fiiU round cheek turned pale, 
and her round foot, much regarded and com- 
mended as she picked her way through the 
streets, stamped upon the ground. In another 
instant she crept upstairs softly. But the bed- 
room door was shut, and she was not privi- 
leged, she knew well, to go in. 

In about a quarter of an hour the maid 
came down and said that^ please, Mrs. Max- 
well wanted to see Miss Bell, please ; and our 
Jenny thanked the maid sweetly for the 
trouble she had taken, and tripped upstairs 
at once. 

*Look here,' said the invalid, a little ex- 
citedly ; * look at this, please. These are nice 



jenny's persecution. 263 

studies for one of his age ;' and she held over 
to Jenny a thin octavo, bound in green mot- 
tled calf, and which was open at an engraving. 
Jenny took it, turned it over with wonder, 
and as she read the name, manifested a sense 
of sincerest horror. It nearly feU- from her 
fingers. It was a work called *The Adven- 
tures of the Chevalier Faublas,' by the late 
M. Louvet, a persecuted Girondin, and was 
prettily illustrated with charming etchings, 
done with the old marvellous French delicacy, 
which quality, it must be confessed, confined 
itself mainly to the engraver's touch ; . ^what 
would be called an * Edition of Luxury' . 
perhaps rather too much luxury on the whole. 
It is to be feared the Chevalier had been 
reposing himself behind the sofa cushion, when 
that stupid, bungling boy had been sent up to 
fetch the picture-book, Jenny put the work 
aside with a gentle repulsion. 

* How did he get this awful book,* said Mrs. 
Maxwell, excitedly. * He says ' 

* Indeed I found it behind the sofa cushion 
. indeed I did,' said Master Jack. 



264 BELLA DONNA. 

Jenny turned up her gentle, trustful eyes, 

* Don't agitate yourself, dear madam/ said 
she ; * don't now. You know what Sir 
Hervey said. Leave it to Mr. Maxwell.' 

^ But we must have the truth. He must be 
telling a lie,' continued the patient, getting 
agitated. * That dreadful book !* 

* It must have been curiosity, dear madam 
. mere childish curiosity. He saw it on the 
shelf, and saw there were prints, and all chil- 
dren love prints. I assure you, dear madam, 
there can be no harm in it. These terrible 
things should have been burnt long ago, but 
we shall have them destroyed at once.' 

*But the lie . the lie/ said Mrs. Maxwell. 
' Who hid it under the cushion ? To think of 
a child . such dreadful wickedness in one so 
young.' 

*I didn't, mamma,' said the boy, fixing his 
eyes, with the old stare, on Jenny. 

*0h John! Johnl' said Jenny, designedly, 

* don't . don't say any more. Don't add any- 
thing. There is no harm in what you have 
done beyond mere natural curiosity. Recollect 




jenny's persecution. 265 

what Mr. Eyder Rodgers preached so beauti- 
fully on truth. Dear madam, I have a duty 
here to you . ^you are not to flurry yourself . 
Sir Hervey said so. You must let me be free 
enough to say that this is too exciting for 
you/ 

' Oh/ groaned the patient, * I am very ill. 
It's like a knife through my side. Go down 
. tJiere ! . both of you. Leave me.* 

*Go, John; do you hear?' said Jenny, 
sternly, yet in soft suppressed sternness, and 
John went. * You must let me, dear madam/ 
said Jenny, going over to the chimney-piece, 
and selecting a special medicine bottle, with 
accompanying wine-glass and spoon. *It is 
the time . every three quarters of an hour. 
Sir Hervey ' 

'1 had it only a few minutes ago. I can 
help myself. There, leave it down . do . go 
away. Oh . oh . oh . this knife !' 

The expression of our Jenny's face at this 
moment was the very essence of universal pity 
and compassion developed to the highest de- 
gree. She crept softly, first going over to 



266 BELLA DONNA. 

;^, pick up the polluted volume for the iner 

1^ ; mation ordained for it. 

1,1 * 

I * Where are you taking that T said the su 

^ fering lady. * Leave it, can't you ? You don 

1 want to read it . do you ?' 

7 *No, no, no, dearest madam/ murmurc 

i.|' Jenny, and stole out finally. 

' j The sick woman's eyes followed her with 

.. fierce, doubting look. 

. I 

iif. 



h. 



if. 



i; 

I". 

I 

1: = 
I 

'_ 
\- 



267 



CHAPTER X, 



MORE OF jenny's THOUGHTFULNESS. 



That evening Mr. Maxwell heard some one tap- 
pin g at his door. His finger was travelling down 
Clarke and Fenelly . that is, down the work of 
those gentlemen . in a sort of exciting chase of 
'a point/ The 'point' was doubling like a 
hare . hiding here, there, in this bush and in 
that . over the page and over the page again, 
until finally, just as it was lost in a sort of 
thick undercover, Jenny's tap was heard at the 
door. It came at a convenient moment, for 
the legal hare could wait conveniently in the 
brushwood until he came to beat it at his 
leisure. 
Jenny entered, timorously, as she always 



268 BELLA DONNA. 

entered where there was one of the other sex 
present, 

' Well ?' said Mr. Maxwell, dreamily appre- 
ciating her presence, and still thinking rest- 
lessly of his legal hare. * Well, Miss Bell ?' 

' I am afraid, sir,* said our Jenny, * you are 
busy, and that I interrupt.' 

She might be perfectly sure, both that he 
was busy, and that she did interrupt, and she 
made as though she would retire in utter con- 
fusion. 

Suddenly, Mr. Maxwell, thinking of his legal 
hare, and where it might be hidden, by a 
natural association, turned back to the comnait- 
tee-rooms, and Serjeant Eebutter, and to the 
eminent engineer whom he cross-examined, and 
to the encyclopsediac book of engineering which 
Jenny had found. * Very thoughtful, indeed,' 
he summed up. And thus, more abstracted 
from Sixth House of Lords' Cases than usual, 
he made an effort and said, ' Well, Miss Bell, 
what can I do for you ? Pray sit down.' 

Timorously Jenny sank into a chair. 

*0h, sir,' she said, *you won't think me 



MORE OF jenny's thoughtfulness. 269 

troublesome . ^wasting your precious time ; but 
. but could you give me a little advice ? I am 
lonely and friendless; my position is . is . 
very peculiar/ 

A point of law, thought Mr. Maxwell, Q.C., 
wheeling his chair a little forward on its cas- 
tors, and preparing to listen. This was more 
in his line, 

* It is about John, sir.' 

*John!' said Mr. Maxwell, disturbed. 
* John ! Who,. what is John ?' 

* Jack . John, sir,' said Jenny. ' Oh, I am 
so nervous, so agitated about him. It is a 
tremendous, an awful responsibility.' 

* Oh yes, of course,' said he, a little wearily. 
*0h, sir,' said Jenny, 'I tremble for his 

future. He is good ; he has good intentions ; 
he is not radically wicked ; but . but ' 

* Good gracious !' said Mr. Maxwell, * I did not 
hear of this before. Why, what has he done ?' 

* Ah, sir,' said Jenny, hesitatingly, * as I 
heard you once say to a professional person in 
the drawing-room, " if we have truth in our 
case, we have everything.' 



95  






f 

t 






.r 



\\i 



270 BELLA DONNA. 

On the recollection of this profound observ 
tion Mr, Maxwell grew more interested, ai 
for thedSbrst time surveyed Jenny coriousl 
/ Again the same remark rose to his lips. ' 

- very thoughtfol act of her, indeed I' He wi 

becoming interested, and he at once made tl 
f room into a committee of the whole House. 

* So Jack does not tell the truth, it seems 
he said. 

'Oh, sir,' said Jenny, dropping her eye 
demurely, 'I hfww you think this childish- 
trivial . laughable.' 

'No, no. Why so?' said Mr. Maxwe] 
astonished. 

' You do,' said Jenny ; 'you who are alwaj 
^l busy with grand, with noble things . whos 

I minutes are guineas . who have all the worl 

rushing to you. But you know, sir, how del 

cate is my situation. But why should I troub] 

11 ^ you with these little details ? The fact is, I ai 

grieved to discover in Johnny a certain disii 
clination, and I would ask you, sir, to spea 
with him. He will attend to you^ sir.' 
i,;l ' What !' said Mr. Maxwell, ' do you mean t 

i 



li 
.i 



l3f 



l< 




MORE OP jenny's thoughtfulness. 271 

say he does not respect what you tell him ? If 
this be so ' 

*I have tried to make him love me/ said 
Jenny, sorrowfully ; ' but I am afraid . perhaps 
it is my fault ; in fact, I am sure it is ; . but we 
do not understand each other. I have not 
yet learned my trade ;' and Jenny smiled a sad 
smile, *I do not think anybody will ever 
love me !' 

Mr. Maxwell was growing interested. 

' But I had no idea of this ; I thought Jack 
. what I have seen of him . was a steady, sen- 
sible, open-hearted child ; not bright, certainly, 
but manly and honest.' 

' So he is ! so he is !' said Jenny, with enthu- 
siasm. * Indeed, it may be my fault. I am 
not fitted to manage him. He is of a good 
age ; naturally will have more respect for men 
than for a mere poor foolish woman.' 

' Ah,' said Mr. Maxwell, * very true ; he is 
getting on. I was just thinking now, it is 
time he should be sent to school. Yes, he had 
better be sent to schooL' 

Jenny gave a little start. What an idea ! 



t 



I . 

. r 



I 



r 



273 BELLA DONNA. 

She might have been thinking for days, po 
weak woman that she was, but the stroi 
intellect of man, how soon it resolved the dif 
culty. All this was to be read in bold text ( 
Jenn/s round face. 

' I hope, sir,' said she, timorously, * you wi 
forgive this intrasion on your precious tim 
You know I have no one else in the houfi 
and my situation is peculiar.' 

* Not at all,' said Mr. Maxwell ; * very go( 

of you. I hope you will always ' B 

mind now began to stray a little towards Six 

iii I House of Lords' Cases. ^ By the way, as y< 

found a book before, I suppose you couldi 
have . oh, no ! that is quite improbable.' 

' What, what ?' said Jenny, with surprisii 
eagerness, all the lamps in her face lighting i 
suddenly. ' Tell me, sir, do tell me, anythii 
I can do.' 

I i ^ * Oh no ; it is absurd. It was only a voIub 

of old reports . Salkeld. Things get so astn 
here, my poor head gets bewildered ; some wj 
I never can find anything. There, thank yo 



' 1 

1.1 "- 






h 



. f 



I Miss Beli; 



.ir 



:1 




MORE OF jenny's thoughtfulness. 273 

He was anxious to be back at that hare of 
Serjeant Eebutter's. Jenny gently glided 
away, but had taken a glance round, and saw 
how things indeed * got so astray/ Shelves of 
the dun-coloured infantry of the law ran round 
the room, with their name and number blazoned 
on the scarlet colour of their uniform. But 
the ranks were all gapped and broken, as 
though riddled and cut up by a heavy fire. 
Some were tottering over, leaning against their 
fellows, some lying flat; all were in sad dis- 
order. But the floor of the room was the most 
confused spectacle ; it being like a street 
broken up, with piles of books instead of 
paving stones and rubble . a distracting sight ; 
so that if a special work was wanted the seeker 
must take off his coat, and go down and labour 
like a workman. Altogether a wreck every- 
where of books tumbled, scattered, lying open 
and shut, with strained backs and tossed leaves 
lying under the weight of other books ; of briefs 
flung open, and sprawling over other books, in 
disreputable attitudes. In short, the whole was 
as though there had been a terrific a<5cident, 

VOL. I. T 



274 BELLA DONNA. 

and a train of Reports and legal incidents had 
been run into, and fatally smashed, and here 
was the debris lying in heaps. 

Jenny took note sadly of this confusion as 
she faded out into the passage, and formed a 
little scheme of a very delicate and almost 
tender character. Mr. Maxwell, hurrying 
back to the cover where he had left the hare, 
said once more, as he ran, * A thoughtful, sen- 
sible person . very thoughtful.' Salkeld, how- 
ever, was not to be found ; no, nor Ventris. 
And what was worse, a precious copy of Addi- 
son . not the ingenious essayist, who in this 
light is not by any means precious . but a 
gentleman of the same name who wrote matter 
upon * Contracts,' between the pages of which 
he had thrust some notes of a * rare ' case, pos- 
sibly 'unreported,' with valuable 'dicta' of 
Vice-Chancellor Owlet . this, too, he wanted 
for the Court or Committee. In short, every- 
thing was lost or going astray, and he had to 
hurry away, post down to Westminster or 
Lincoln's Inn, much fretted and put out. 

As soon as he was gone, Jenny called her 



MORE OF jenny's thoughtfulness, 275 

* young charges' together. *My dear girls,' 
she said, ^you are looking so pale and un- 
healthy, you don't walk enough. G-rammar 
and French is pretty well in its way, but health 
before all. Go out now together into the fresh 
breezes of Burleigh Square. We will put off 
lessons a little.' 

Where the fresh breezes of Burleigh Square 
circulated was a sort of large yard (as to size), 
and a patch of unhealthy and languishing ver- 
dure. Burleigh Square itself was an infant of 
but one year old ; in all the newness and raw- 
ness of reeking plaster, some of which had got 
down among the grass. ^ As for you,' she 
said, smiling pleasantly at Jack, 'you ought 
not to be allowed to go. Still, if you will try 
and be a good boy, and beg pardon in your 
prayers, we will try and pass it over. Truth, 
truth, my good children, should be the magnet 
of your existence ; without it you may never 
hope to be either great or good. Go now, my 
dear children, go for your walk.' 

The girls went out softly, impressed with a 
reverential feeling. The boy followed after 



276 BELLA DONNA. 

them more slowly. He presently stopped at 
the door, and fixing his curious eyes on her, 
said bluntly . 

^ You know you put the book there yourself, 
Miss Bell ; I saw you take it down on Tues- 
day, and you were reading it the other night 
after we went to bed.' He then shut the 
door and went down after his sisters. 

Jenny's cheeks kindled at the infamous 
charge of the little wretch. Her eyes flashed. 
What spite! It would have been a whole- 
some correction to have gone after him, 
dragged him in, and made his wretched little 
ears tingle. The honest nature of our Jenny 
. (it is no discredit to confess it) . burned to 
inflict that penalty on him. Poor unprotected 
thing ! it was unworthy . it was unequal. She 
with no Iriends! no one to trust to. No 
matter, he must be promptly sent to school, 
for his own good. Such a vindictive nature 
could be dealt with suitably only by men. 
So, for his own good again, must he be sent to 
school. 

They being gone forth to the sward of 



 



MORE OF jenny's thoughtfulness. 277 

Burleigh Square, Jenny flits down to Mr. 
Maxwell's study, and enters that sacred en- 
closure. What she was about was perilous 
. ^housemaids were charged under terrible 
penalties . hanging, forfeitures of goods, and 
what not . to abstain from laying even a 
finger on the hallowed disorder. It was con- 
secrated ground. And yet, here was our 
Jenny courageously breaking in, and laying 
out for herself the work of charity of bringing 
all things into smoothness again. She pitied 
. she compassionated that poor overworked 
hodman, with the dying wife and responsi- 
bility of children, absolutely a child himself. 

So she set to work with diligence and with 
judgment. Marvellous what a tact and instinct 
she had in the labour ! She seemed to hit on 
what books were more in request In fact, our 
Jenny, whatever she laid herself to, brought 
with her a very nice instinct, a sort of intel- 
lectual sqavoir faire ; and was pretty sure to 
make no conspicuous blunder. And so she 
smoothed away the heavy mounds of legal 
earth, levelled all things, brought together the 



278 BELLA DONNA. 

disunited family of Vesey . some twenty or so 
strong; gathered together ^ House of Lords' 
Cases/ which had a tendency to straggle to 
opposite sides of the room ; set in order the 
loose pamphlet Reports . Part one, two, three, 
according to the series ; and, by a better de- 
vice, actually stitched firmly together a bundle, 
whose viscera were all bursting out. Finally, 
she actually disinterred the lost Addison . much 
strained and disjointed about his back and 
spine, with aU muscular spring gone from his 
binding, from being kept too long open ; and 
found there also the precious dicta of Yice- 
Chancellor Owlet. Nothing could be nicer or I 
more symmetrical than the fashion in which she 
ranged these auxiliaries ; Vesey, Junior, went 
home to his shelves, and the more necessary 
books were ranged to the right and left on the 
table, in the order of their use ; while on his 
desk was set the recovered Addison, with the 
dislocations in his back skilfully . reduced,' and 
the precious note of Vice-chancellor Owlet 
supported on the convalescent Addison. Mr. 
Maxwell's ink was usually a sort of stagnant 



MORE OF jenny's thoughtoulness. 279 

pool, and his pens utterly disorganized. The 
process of writing was a sad discomfort and 
torture. But all this * service ' was now re- 
organized, and our Jenny, with much good- 
feeling, brought down pens from her room . 
things that would write . and set them there 
beside the desk. There was nothing prodigious 
in all this ; but, somehow, it is the fate of these 
helpless men ever to want these species of little 
helps ; and it must be said again, that it was 
delicate, tender, and considerate for a mere 
simple governess to put herself out of the way 
in this manner. 



280 



BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XI. 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 



Mr. Maxwell did not dine at home that day 
. if that was dinner which consisted in snatch- 
ing at a piece of meat more or less underdone, 
and complimentarily named *a chop/ and a 
glass of wine ; . but when he came home at night, 
ruminating and 'fretted' . for he had been 
* pressed ' during the day with a ' point ' which 
Vice-Chancellor Owlet's note would have settled 
. ^and entered his study ; even his absent mind 
was struck by the change . the marvellous 
change. He could walk, the road was clear ; the 
Fairy of Order had come down to earth. But 
when he saw Vice-Chancellor Owlet neatly 
folded on his desk, and the lost Addison, he was 
positively confounded. He first thought of 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 281 

the housemaids, who had feloniously dared to 
intermeddle ; but when he noted the method, 
the legal judiciousness of the handling . the 
Chancery-books set all together, and ^ House 
of Lords' Cases ' well forward . he knew that 
here were no housemaid's rude fingers. In 
fact, Frederick Maxwell, Q.C., with acute 
* lawyer's instinct, at once leaped to the con- 
elusion he should have done; and said . 
* Really a most thoughtful act ;' and repeating 
it again, added this . ' Really a most kind and 
thoughtful act.' 

At breakfast next morning he returned his 
acknowledgments in, perhaps, an awkward 
way, to the wonder of the family, who were 
unused to such an exhibition. Jenny grace- 
fully acknowledged it; and timorously said 
she was afraid she had been very meddlesome. 

' On the contrary, of inestimable service : I 
can draw breath now,' said Mr. Maxwell. ^ I can 
ride . I can walk . I can find my way. So kind 
and considerate. I am really much obliged.' 

At this moment Jenny noted Jack's eyes 
again fixed on her, with the old strange ex- 



282 BELLA DONNA. 

pression. She coloured, and one side of her 
nice full cheek went down with a sort of ghost 
of a contortion. 

Just at that moment, too, Mr. Maxwell's 
eyes fell upon Jack, and by natural association 
he thought of what Jenny had spoken yester- 
day touching his going to school. The equities 
of the case, as he would call it, required that 
this should be adjusted, and a person in her 
depending position, so * thoughtful, so kind, 
and so truly considerate . a really invaluable 
person ' to have in a house, should not be made 
uncomfortable. So, on the first opportunity, 
he went to see Mrs. Maxwell, to speak about 
Jack's removal to school. 

Jack was sitting with her, reading, which 
was a popular duty with him. It has been 
said he was the favourite, if there was any, of 
the sick ex-fashionable woman . at least, she 
tolerated him more than the rest. This poor 
soul ! with her warrant already in the sheriflTs 
hand, was, of course, busy doing what cleans- 
ing and burnishing she could compass with 
her poor, soiled, fashionable old soul. The 



JENNY AS 8ECRETARY. 283 

book in Jack's hands was, of course, the 
suitable book for the occasion. It was a lively 
thing, called ^Willis's Rooms,' in three vo- 
lumes . quite new, and said to be written by- 
Lady Mantower's second daughter. 

Jack was sent out with his book. The ex- 
fashionable lady . very wafti and attenuated, 
*and every day gradually assuming that pale 
lead tint which is the precursor of the great 
change, and was thrown out in a curious relief 
by the white linen . wondered at this unex- 
pected visit. 

Mr. Maxwell opened his subject timorously. 
Somehow, he felt there would be opposition. 
So there was. The sick lady's eyes flashed 
up, the cords in her wasted throat qui- 
vered. 

*He shall not go,' she said, tremulously. 
' I know very well who wants to get him out 
of the house ! . I know.' 

Mr. Maxwell recollected the doctor's in- 
junction and grew nervous, as he saw her 
agitation. He tried to calm her. 

*You know it is for his good,' he said. 



284 BELLA DONNA. 

* But don't agitate yourself now ; we will talk 
of it again/ 

' But we shall noty said the sick lady, * so 
long as / lie in this bed ! You think because 
you keep me shut up here in this room that T 
don't know what is going on. But I tell you 
who shall go ; she takes too much on herself, I 
can tell you. She ' 

^ There . there/ said he, seriously ; * every- 
thing shall be as you wish. He shall not go. 
There ; you know you are not to disturb your- 
self. I merely thought, as he was getting so 
big ; but there now, we shan't speak of it. Of 
course this is your house, and you are mistress/ 
And so he went down, wondering at the per- 
verseness of sick people, and at the strange 
distorted views they take of things. That 
Miss Bell, who was so obliging, so thoughtful 
. so anxious to please all in the house ; . such 
a ludicrously perverted view to take of lier ! 

While the sick Mrs. Maxwell . her heart 
thumping with the oscillations of a steam- 
engine . sank back, not without a certain glow 
of pride over her cheek. She was still mis- 



k 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 285 

tress, and acknowledged as such; and pre- 
sently the rescued Jack was sent for again, 
and recommenced reading, in his accustomed 
drone, the select views of life set out in 
' Willis's Rooms/ She presently told him the 
whole story. * They wanted to pack you off 
to a large school, Jacky/ she said. *You 
have to thank your friend, Miss What s-her- 
name, for that. She is not strong enough as 
yet for thai. I shall take care of you, Jacky, 
never fear. And you keep your eye on her. 
I shall live longer than they think.' Which 
facts Jack took in steadily, much as he drank 
his tea of mornings . with a slow, measured 
suction. He only answered, 'Yes, mamma.' 
Very shortly after, she began to grow sleepy, 
even in presence of Lady Mantower's younger 
daughter, and was nodding. Jacky's duty was 
then over, and he crept away softly. Coming 
down, he stood in the drawing-room doorway, 
where Jenny was working, and said, in his 
stolid way, ' Miss Bell, I'm not to be sent to 
school,' then disappeared. 

It was singular, indeed, the morbid feeling 



286 BELLA DONNA. 

with which the poor sick lady had begun to 
regard Jenny . the more extraordinary, too, as 
that young creature spared no pains, either of 
dutiful attendance or of delicate little soothing 
ways to win her over. The grimness of 
sickness or mere natural perverseness stood in 
the way. 

It is certain it grew and gathered strength ; 
and the sick lady grew pettishly curious about 
her and her movements, and magnified what 
were mere breaths and vapours into thick 
heavy clouds. It took the shape of a sort of 
intolerance . a sort of curious secret jealousy, 
utterly unaccountable. 

It must be said, in justice to our Jenny, 
never was there a more gracious indulgence to 
a sick woman's humour, or a more kindly 
allowance. One of another mould would have 
promptly resigned her place, and gone out 
from among them. But she felt how cruel 
would be such a step to so disordered a maniac, 
and how helpless she would leave all behind. 
What, indeed, upheld her, too, was the silent 
support extended to her by the lord of the 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 287 

mansion, wonderfully developed for one of his 
indifference to the world's ways . that is, the 
world outside the Committee . and which she 
acknowledged with silent gratitude. That this 

4 

feeling on his part was daily strengthened may 
be well conceived, for it was brought home to 
him in many silent ways. What effectually 
established her in his respect and esteem, akin 
almost to the feeling with which he would 
regard Serjeant Eebutter, were some little 
incidents which shall now be detailed. 

Being overworked . like the case of many 
overworked men . Mr. Maxwell began to 
break down in the eyes. These precious dar- 
ling auxiliaries, so worked, so driven, so 
galled, and so cruelly treated, and who yet 
work until they drop, as it were . these pre- 
cious things he found giving way. There were 
first clouds and floating specks . the usual 
forerunners ; then swimming and rawness, and 
general sensitiveness to night light. Still 
there was a fitfulness . one day mending, 
another growing worse. Besides, the work 
must be got through . some injunction to move 



288 BELLA DONNA. 

or oppose . and it is wonderful how this feeling 
supplies physical defects. It carried Mr. Max- 
well through, just as air does a fire. Dis- 
tracted people do feats of strength, and take 
wonderful jumps, which confound them as they 
think of it afterwards. But, finally, Mr. Max- 
well's eyes, now grown very hot and strained, 
came to closing up feebly as lights were brought, 
and could do very little work at all at night. 

Of course, he went to Bradshaw, the emi- 
nent oculist, who got him into a dark room, 
and made a servant hold a taper, while he, 
Bradshaw, stared with a wonderful magnifier 
right into the ball of Maxwell's eyes. The 
verdict was, * Chronic weakness, my dear sir ; 
the vascular tissues all overcharged witii 
blood ; inflammation, my dear sir,' with other 
particulars. There was also another * finding ' 
. cessation from all night-work; with which 
comfort Mr. Maxwell went away ; and with, 
also, a lotion. 

This was terrible news for him. Even that 
very night there was work not to be post- 
poned. An opinion set out in his own pale 



JENNY AS SEORETARY, 289 

handwriting, was about as illegible as a chart 
of the nervous system. Nobody had the 
knack of deciphering these signs . not even his 
own clerk, for they varied with every day; 
and he had no special character in his writing. 
His heart really sank at the prospect, for his 
legal occupation was to him food, meat, drink 
. life itself. The motion in this action was 
suspended. It was as though he were hurry- 
ing to decay. 

Who in the house had marked his trouble so 
well as our *thoughtfid' Jenny! She had 
noted even the first pale pinkness of those 
orbs, before it had been announced oflScially, 
as it were. Hers were the steady inquiries of 
the morning ; hers the gentle proffer of home- 
made lotions, not stamped ex cathedra, yet 
meant very well ; hers, too, were the gentlest 
and most timorous remonstrances, hoping that 
he would excuse the freedom, &c., but that she 
knew the danger from fatal family experience ; 
her own darling mother, Irom an over en- 
thusiasm for the labours of the needle, having 
brought on, &c. (Who was Jenny's mamma, 

VOL. I. u 



2^ BELLA DONNA* 

or was this ardour for sempstress's work some- 
thing more than merely amateur?) She 
would timorously implore him . if not too 
great a liberty . for the sake of his darling 
ones, to be a little discreet. 

But that night, when the * opinion ' was re- 
quired, our Jenny showed her thoughtfulness 
in a yet more practical way. She first said to 
Jack, * Go up to your dear mamma, Johnny, 
dear ' (she never could bring herself to adopt 
the vulgarism of * Jacky '), * and sit with her/ 
Then she set some picture-books before the 
girls, and tripped away down stairs. 

Below in his study, just beginning to try and 
copy out his * opinion,' he found that it would 
not do. A sharp pain, an inexpressible sink- 
ing, as though his eyes were slipping away 
inwardly. It would not do, and he looked up 
blankly. Just then our Jenny tapped ever so 
softly at the door, as she always did, and entered. 

It was on another * thoughtful' mission. 
Would he allow her to help ? Would he take 
her for his scribe? She was very patient, 
very industrious, would try and do her best ; 



JENNT AS SECRETARY. 291 

and besides this (she added a little timorously), 
thought she knew his hand pretty well. Might 
she, at least, make the attempt? . she eonld 
only fail. 

It was an enormous rdief. Yet Mr. Max- 
well could not believe, and shook his head 
sadly. Woman at this sort of work? No! 
no I She translated his thought for him at 
once. *You think, sir,' she said, * because I 
have not been trained . because I am not a 
man. I know we are poor, feeble creatures ; 
but, sir, we sometimes do our best.' 

Mr. Maxwell shook his head, but less posi- 
tively. He did not believe yet, but still he 
was pleased. He rubbed his hand across his 
poor, weak eyes. That, again, was another 
argument. * Well,' he said, with a smile, * we 
can only try. It is very charitable,' he added, 
with a dreamy air, being scarcely yet out of 
the Committee-room; *and very thoughtful, 
indeed. Would you sit down, then, here ?' 

He drew a chair over, shovelled away some 
of the heavy legal mould upon the table, to 
make a clear space, and set the * opinion' 



292 BELLA DONNA. 

before her, marked with all the straggling lines 
of the nervous system. But Jenny, whose 
innate ideas of delicacy were wonderful, hesi- 
tated a little. It was now gone ten o'clock. 
There was an awkwardness, in short, sir. 
Perhaps he would not have any objection, if 
one of the girls were to come down ? 

The girls come down! And he gazed at 
her in bewilderment. They could not write ! 
Jenny, much embarrassed, was banging her 
head. This dull Parliament man could not 
see it, until Jenny tripped away in confusion, 
and presently brought down *one of the girls,' 
who was amazed at the new function put upon 
her, and sat in a corner, with a heavy book on 
her knee . * Gilbert on Uses,' I believe . which 
Jenny, in a sort of absent way, had put into 
her hands. 

There was the new secretary, with Mr. Max- 
well now walking about, now standing over 
her for a moment. Jenny had taken the roll 
of cuneiform inscriptions, and was laboriously 
yet surely working it out in her own clear 
hand. He dictated alterations. New legal 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 293 

lights broke in on him. It was wonderful^ . 
extraordinary . the strange legal Argot and 
all. He was confounded, and stood beside her, 
following her flowing pen with wonder. 

But Jenny was very intelligent. She really 
was acquainted with that barristerial hand. 
She was very femiliar with Mr. Maxwell's . a 
familiarity no doubt acquired while she set his 
TOoux in order. Nay, as for this very docu- 
ment itself . but this is pure speculation. 

Speedily, intelligently, she did the work . 
the * opinion ' spread out neatly over the page. 
For a word here and there she paused^ looking 
up timorously to her director. It came to 
eleven. The child, who was supporting 
* Gilbert on Uses ' on her knee, dropped off to 
sleep, and suffered that defiinct Lord Chief 
Baron (for that was the quality of the late 
Gilbert) to slip to the ground, with loud noise. 
Both looked round. 

*Poor child,' said Jenny, with deep sym- 
pathy, *she has been kept up beyond her 
usual hour ; poor, poor child.' 

Mr. Maxwell Came into the world again. 



294 BELLA DONNA. 

'Poor child,' he said also . ^it was doubtful to 
whom he applied it * I am afraid I have been 
very selfish. This, I suppose, must do for to- 
night!' And he drew a deep sigh, for he 
thought of the welcome vigils he so loved, 
when at an hour or two past midnight he took 
his way upstairs, weary, yet with a grateful 
weariness. 

*I am not tired,' said Jenny. *I can write 
on for two hours to come. We must fiuish 
this to-night.' 

* But this child,' said he, looking over at her 
who had dropped the Lord Chief Baron. 

* To be sure ! She can go,' said Jenny, in a 
flutter. 

The girl, with weary eyes, stood up gladly. 

* Go to bed,' said her feither ; * you must not 
be kept up any longer.' 

* But,' said Jenny, timorously, ^I am afraid 
the opinion cannot be done to-night. / could 
not ' 

* What !' said Mr. Maxwell, almost despair- 
ingly. * You will not leave me. It must be 
done by to-morrow morning !' 



JENNY AS SECRETARY. 295 

The girl had fled away to her bed, leaving 
the Lord Chief Baron where he was, on the 
ground, 

*I must have it by the morning,' said Mr. 
Maxwell. * Oh, could you be so kind ? You 
have been of such aid to me, I never can 
sufficiently acknowledge.' 

Jenny had wonderful sense. She had the 
rare instinct for seizing the situation, where 
scruples would be impertinent^ and should 
give way. She thought of this poor, hard* 
working man-of-burden, and his trouble; his 
wistful look, his great sorrow, and the huge 
responsibility that rested on him. And was 
she, by childish humours and delicacies, to 
stand in the way ? 

Without a word more, she sat down again, 
took up her pen, and wrote on. In nearly two 
hours' time the whole was finished . a neat 
specimen of penmanship ; and when the last 
word was written, fled away, without waiting 
for the grateful thanks of her master. As he 
looked over her labour he grew very thought- 
ful. It was a Samaritan's work, . no wonder 



296 BELLA DONXA. 

he was grateful ; and as the hall clock was 
strikiog three, he passed upstairs, still romi- 
uant and thoughtful. 

Jenny that night, before retiring to bed, 
took out her little * Letts' Diary/ She wrote 
in it something that must have been pleasing, 
for she smiled as she wrote. Sometimes, as 
she ruminated, words would escape her, for she 
was of an enthusiastic temper ; and she really 
did murmur the name of a dear old friend, not 
seen now for a long time, * Charlotte ' was 
the name she murmured ; thinking, no doubt, 
of the old time, and the sweet, pastoral breath 
of the country, contrasted with her present 
servitude. She turned back to another diary, 
to a special month, and found out the record of 
the last days of her stay at the Franklyns' ; 
where, too, was that name of Charlotte Frank- 
lyn, with the cross + before it, and this she 
considered a long time very careMly. Sweet 
bygone times I She was not likely to forget 
them! 

There was a letter all this time on her 
dressing-table, which, strange to say, she had 



JENNY AS SECRETARY, 297 

never noted . a letter with the Franklyn post- 
marit. She opened it eagerly. This was our 
curate's letter . our distracted curate's letter . 
of which mention has been made, and a portion 
of which, as it were, read to the reader. This 
journal of the doings down there, and the 
pleasant little gossip anent dearest Charlotte, 
dearest Jenny's friend, the coming of young 
Craven, and the pleasant family rallying on 
that subject. 

Jenny was solitary . so there was no one to 
mark or be astonished at her reception of this 
welcome bit of news ; but as she stood there, 
in a dim light, in a white dressing-gown, hair 
cast .down, and universal deshabille^ did she not 
suggest the notion of a sort of domestic Medea ? 
And before she lay down to her soft, un- 
troubled rest, she wrote a letter to dear * Mr. 
Wells . an affectionate, grateful letter . thank- 
ing him, oh ! so profoundly, for his considera- 
tion for * the poor little exile ;' such was the 
pretty name she had devised for herself. 

She was longing, yearning, to learn more 
about her dear friend Charlotte ; would it be 



298 BELLA DONNA. 

too much to ask her friend . and she might, 
she thought, call him her friend . ^her friend, 
then, Mr. Wells, to furnish her with any ad- 
ditional particulars, and as speedily as possible. 
Might she rely on him ? 




299 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE DUNMOW PETITION. 

But presently Jenny was to assist at far more 
important business. About a fortnight later, 
when his sight had mended a little by rest, 
some large white bales of what looked like 
linen . thick, ponderous, and unwieldy . were 
brought in. They were fresh and fragrant, and 
their style and titles were marked in bright 
characters outside. In short, the Great Dun- 
mow Election Petition, after fluttering in all 
the uncertain balance of treaty, argument, feeble 
compromise, and even a little corruption, was 
now finally to go forward. The Hon. Noel 
Bashford, the sitting member, would defend 
his seat to the death; and Coxe, . Samuel 
Coxe, Esq., a local man of business . all efforts 
at amicable adjustment failing, was deter* 
mined, according to the local paper, * to wrest 



300 BELLA DONNA. 

the constituency from the corrupt fangs of the 
Bashfords.' The Bashfords were little known 
in the borough ; and it was said that frightful 
scenes of corruption had occurred during the 
days of the election. The Honourable Noel had 
money . Coxe had only principle. What was 
called * unblushing' bribery had taken place. 
On the Hon. Noel's side, public-houses had 
been purchased up wholesale, and the land 
made to flow, mysteriously, with beer and 
other drinks. Magic dinners were spread, at 
which those who entertained friendly feelings 
towards the Hon. Noel might sit and feast 
gratuitously. It was even said, that two con- 
scientious voters had been carried away and 
kept locked up in an old mill during the 
period they should have been exercising the 
privileges which a free country gave them. 
Altogether it was felt that the grand ' consti- 
tutional badge of freedom' had been scanda- 
lously outraged ; and rich and abundant details 
were looked for. The files of counsel drawn 
up on each side were crowded. For the sitting . 
member, Mr. Serjeant Eashley, Mr. Touch- 






THE BUNMOW PETITION. 301 

stone Shepherd, Q.C.,Mr. Martin Welles^ Q.O., 
and Mr. Folkstone and Mr, Prong. For the 
petitioner, Mr. Chetwood Smith, Q.O., Mr. 
Maxwell, Q.O., Serjeant Bendy er, and the 
great counsel, Mr. Edwin Bowles, Q.O., every 
minute of whose time weighed down a golden 
guinea in the other scale. 

Eetainers in proportion. Sums that made 
one gasp were ' on ' each brief, conveying the 
pleasant notion of Eastern ways : a huge purse 
of gold possibly being inserted between the red 
tape and the snowy paper. Sixty witnesses 
for the petitioner were already in London,^ 
living at suitable hotels, according to their de- 
gree, but under fierce espionage. A large com- 
mittee-room had been set apart 'for the inquiry. 

The petitioners congratulated themselves a 
hundred times in the day on having secured the 
services of Edwin Bowles, Q.C. The people of 
the sitting member, who were only late by 
some twenty minutes, had a corresponding 
gloom over them, and went into the battle 
with a sort of foreboding of defeat. Edwin 
Bowles had already made the petitioner and 



302 BELLA DONNA. 

his following this encouraging declaration : ' I 
don't undertake to seat you, but I will engage 
to unseat him,' Joy mantled in all their faces, 
and they became eager for the fray. Yet it 
was hard to conceive how this man could bring 
such valuable assistance to the side he chose to 
favour. His was a coarse, sensual face, sur- 
mounting a gross figure 'ran' in the most 
animal of all the British ' moulds ' kept in 
stock : a man, too, whose manners and morals 
were known to correspond with these faithful 
outside marks and tokens; who was said to 
^be a sort of legal Sybarite ; who merely flung 
his fees from one hand as fast as he received 
them in the other ; who was seen at the Isth- 
mian games, and at the haunts where sham 
judges and juries play out degrading copies of 
trials, over whiskies and strong drinks ; who 
loved the company of Phryne and Lais quite 
as well as that of Themis ; who was engulfed 
up to his thick throat in a miry pool of debts 
and embarrassments; and over whose golden 
gains an oflScial person was said to keep careful 
watch,^ . representing a whole guild of credi- 






THE DUNMOW PETITION. 303 

tors. This was the gay, boisterous, skilful 
practitioner who was friend to young Lord 
Splashley, and young Sir Thomas Baker, Q-re* 
nadier Guards ; who met those youths in cheer- 
ful private festivals, and fascinated them by a 
certain hearty jovial nisi prius : . a fascination 
that resulted in misty money transactions that 
were to be * impeached,' long after. Happy, 
then, in the learning of Edwin Bowles, Q.O., the 
petitioners prepared for battle. 

Mr. Maxwell caught some of the excite- 
ment of the coming fray, and trained him- 
self with ardour. Happy for him, he had found ^ 
an assistant in time. That first night, he 
unpacked the snowy bales with care and 
delicacy, and showed their beauties to Jenny. 
The mixture of corrupt humanity . the publi- 
cans, ostlers, beer boys, porters, and general 
broken-down auxiliaries . whose speeches and 
observations (some precious as the golden 
guineas which the other side indeed insinuated 
had purchased them) were here chronicled, was 
truly edifying. The fresh scent of the new 
crisp . to the barristerial nose more fragrant 



304 BELLA DONNA. 

than that of new-mown hay . was overborne 
by the fumes of unfinished quart pots, of 
straw, and of the fiaint air of stables, which by 

association seemed to exhale fi'om the entries. 

* 

But being * briefed ' to Mr. Maxwell, they all 
fell into one common mould. His mind saw 
but so many men in the ranks. There were 
conversations at inn-yard comers, in the back 
room of the public-house, on the railway plat- 
form . in which a mysterious being, called 
* Budge,' always figured, . a sort of election 
tempter, who tampered with all men ; and there 
was a butcher . a remarkable man, who seemed 
to have been the very incarnation of bribery. 

Jenny presently knew the whole history: 
about Budge ; about the publicans, ostlers, 
porters, and the remarkable butcher. This 
election element has more of the dramatic than 
other shapes of legal proceedings. It is more 
irregular, and to lay minds more comprehen- 
sible. The lawyers fling away their armour, 
and fight more in the guerilla fashion. Jenny 
read it all, and seemed to be amused by it. 
Mr. Maxwell was much pleased that she was 



THE DUNMOW PETITION. 305 

amused by his commentaries and explanations. 
Jenny was exceedingly sensible, and as she 
was to carry out a task or duty, tried to lighten 
by getting an interest in it. 

In a few days, Mr. Tandy, of the great par- 
liamentary firm of Bellarmine and Tandy, Old 
George Street, Westminster, came to wait on 
Mr. Maxwell, in reference to a consultation or 
some such arrangement, . a dry, quick man, 
that seemed to emit sparkles, and who would 
have to live in action for many weeks to come. 
Rooms had been taken close to the Houses, 
where Bellarmine and Tandy might keep a 
sort of dep6t, and have their forces in reserve. 

Jenny took interest in these preparations ; 
and Mr. Maxwell was much flattered by her 
questions. * Ah 1 sir,' said she, thoughtfully, 
one evening, * there shall come a day when 
you shall fill another office, and have counsel 
employed for you. I have often thought how 
you should be in Parliament. There is that 
Mr. Holyoake, whom you often told me of, 
doing very little, I think, sir, you said, at the 
Equity bar ' 

VOL. I. X 



306 BELLA DONNA. 

*I suppose not making eight hundred a 
year/ said Mr. Maxwell. 

* Oh, sir 1' said she, with sudden enthusiasm, 
* you must be in Parliament ; you are tending 
to it. I see it. I am sure . I am confident I 
shall see you elected very, very shortly.' 

Mr. Maxwell was charmed with this honest 
warmth. More delighted still was he with the 
allusion to Holyoake, which showed that she 
knew the inner details of the profession and 
recollected what he told her. 

At last the committee was struck ; Mr. Tar- 
tar Gibton, the well-known member for Staley- 
bridge, the chairman. The day was named 
and the case opened. Jenny wished, with 
delightful simplicity, that she could go down 
to the House and look on at the proceedings. 

It excited extraordinary interest. The large 
committee -room was always thronged. From 
the door barely a glimpse was to be obtained 
of the committee sitting calmly afar oflf,- and 
fenced carefully from the crowd. There was 
Mr. Gibton . a quiet man in a yellow waist- 
coat . steady, attentive, and keeping all things 






THE DUNMOW PETITION. 307 

straight. There were the other members of 
the committee . moustachioed young Lord 
Buckstone, Mr. Wells, Captain Bouchier, Mr. 
Finucane, the member for Avoca, who were 
very absorbed and diligent the first day, and 
took profuse notes ; who all gradually fell off 
into distraction, and wrote and sent away a 
good many letters on private business. 

There were the short-hand writers of the 
House, racing along at express speed ; there 
were the parliamentary agents; there were 
the counsel, whose heads seemed like a row of 
pianoforte dampers, * buffed ' with wigs instead 
of felt, and who shot up and down with all the 
jerking motion of those harmonious appliances. 
The long row was awe-inspiring. even ter- 
rible, when they fell to battle, and contended 

fiercely over the person of a witness. 

 

It was full of dramatic incident, duly re- 
ported by Mr. Maxwell, coming home flushed 
and excited when the day was done . photo- 
graphed, as it were, for Jenny, who hung sus- 
pended on his accents. She knew them all, the 
actors and incidents, from the butcher down- 



308 BELLA DONNA. 

wards. But the grand feature was when the 
- butcher had to be put in the chair for examina- 
tion, who could not decently be kept back, and 
when, at the close of his testimony, the com- 
mittee adjourned. It was known that the next 
day this dangerous butcher would be engaged 
in person by Edwin Bowles, Q-C, by way of 
cross-examination, who had kept himself ex- 
pressly in reserve for this stage of the fight. 

Such a crowd, and such packing close and 
squeezing of the human j^rm. Every one s &ce 
overlooked every one's shoulder. There were 
smiles, tittering, and loud laughter, . even 
applause, . until the chairman, Mr. Gibton, 
threatened to have the room cleared. It was 
protracted through the whole day. The 
butcher, . a truculent, greasy being, more in- 
clining to the horse and prize-fighting direction 
than to the harmless titular calling he pro- 
fessed . displayed matchless coolness, tact, and 
effrontery. Edwin Bowles closed with him 
many times, but was flung back without giving 
him a fall. Butcher calm and defiant ; butcher 
at times dealing Edwin Bowles a skilful side- 



THE DUNMOW PETITION. 309 

stroke, which raised much merriment and de- 
light. But it was this that eventually undid 
him. He became jocular and insolent from 
security. Edwin Bowles, calm, and waiting 
patiently for hours, at last saw the open- 
ing, rushed in, and flung him. Butcher was 
cowed, faltered, contradicted himself, became 
hot, surly, and confiised, and finally had the 
truth wrung from him. When the committee 
rose, Edwin Bowles sat down, heated, weary, 
but triumphant; and was felt by all in the 
room . there were some creditors present, too, 
struggling between a sense of pecuniary injury 
and admiration . to be unsurpassed in England 
as a cross-examiner. That night the Hon. 
Noel Bashford felt himself half slipping out of 
his parliamentary chair. 

For ten, fifteen days, it was protracted . 
days inexpressibly sweet to all . to nearly all 
concerned . sweet to the barristerial agricul- 
turists, who, with their legal sickles, reaped 
the high standing com of fees. The merest 
fledgling, who indeed sat diligently, and made 
one of the rank and file, but never spoke, could 



310 BELLA DONNA. 

not labour without being * instructed' and 
'refipeshed' to the song of fifteen guineas* 
For his six counsel, then, the Hon. Noel was 
disbursing about one hundred ^.guineas daily; 
and even for this outlay he could not secure 
their services. Mr. Touchstone Shepherd, 
Q-C, was 4n' two other * heavy* petitions, 
and at best could only come rushing in spas- 
modically to aid his client's interest ' for ten 
minutes or so, and sometimes, out of pure de- 
cency, examined a * short' witness . ^not in 
stature, but whose evidence could be com- 
prised within half an hour; and sometimes 
with much heat entered into an altercation 
with opposing counsel, to show that he was 
earnest and awake. So was it with Martin 
Welles, who rushed in and out also, sat un- 
easily for a few minutes, did a good deal of 
nodding and whispering, possibly examined 
another * short' witness, and then hurried 
away. But faithful and constant were the 
minor fledglings, who, unemployed in other 
cases, sat there without stirring. 

Sweet, pleasant days for the agents parlia- 



THE DUNMOW PETITION.. 311 

mentary. With them everything was grand, 
lavish, luxurious. A whole corps of shorthand 
writers, of copyists, were busy half the night 
with the day's evidence, so that every morning 
with the rolls and coffee, each of the six counsel 
had his copy, bright, clean, and new upon his 
table. Twopence per sheet or * folio * this cost 
the agent parliamentary ; but the agent parlia- 
mentary, in his * costs ' to the Hon. Noel, set 
each folio down at eightpence. Say three 
hundred and fifty folios for the day's work, and 
seven copies of the three hundred and fifty 
folios, and there will be a total in this mere 
mechanical direction of say fifty or sixty 
pounds' outlay for each day. 

More happy, however, were Binns and 
Barker, agents to the Huge Leviathan Bail- 
way Company, that meanders over half Eng- 
land, and who ' come in ' gigantically before a 
committee with. say fifteen counsel . for whom 
there must be fifteen copies of evidence, written 
out at a daily charge of a hundred and forty 
pounds or so. These are indeed the happy 
hunting-grounds of solicitors. 



312 BELLA DONNA. 

For twelve days the battle raged. Edwin 
Bowles performed prodigies. He was very 
often present. He bore down everything in a 
telling speech, mangling and scarifying the 
butcher in a way one of his profession was 
never dealt with before. He was vigorous, 
humorous, forcible, and sarcastic to a degree ; 
wonderful in one who had been up till dawn at 
- a * mess,* absorbed in chicken hazard ; won- 
derful, too, in one who had signed some heavy 
notes of hand, that would absorb the rich fee 
harvests he had been getting in these few days 
back. 

The committee deliberated for two hours and 
a half, and found according to the usual form. 

I*'. That the Hon. Noel Bashford was not 
duly elected to serve in the present Parlia- 
ment, &c. 

2\ That the Hon. Noel Bashford had, by his 
agents, been guilty of treating, bribery, ifec. 

3^ That there does not appear to be suflB- 
cient evidence to connect the Hon. Noel Bash- 
ford, &c., according to the usual form. 

Grand jubilee . almost osculation of Edwin 



THE DUNMOW PETITION. 313 

Bowles. The battle had been fought and won. 
Every one in the ranks . specially the youngest 
lawyer engaged . considered that he had minis- 
tered to the happy result. Mr. Maxwell came 
home triumphant, and, to the prejudice of his 
regular, talked it all over with Miss Bell, 
for three or four hours at least. The day 
was celebrated by champagne. Miss Bell 
was absorbed by the details. She heard Edwin 
Bowles's speech all through, at secondhand. 
She heard how the -committee looked. how it 
was doubtful at one time . ^how a member, 
called Bouchier, was long obstinate . how he 
gave way at last. In everything Jenny was 
absorbed. She delighted in it all, even to a 
dry point of law, which Mr. Maxwell, encou- 
raged by the fascination the subject seemed to 
exercise over her, was tempted into opening 2 
and so got down the Text Books and Reports, 
and went into it regularly. She said it was 
like a story-book, the point of law. 

It was past one o'clock that night before he 
had finished with the engrossing theme. 



314 BELLA DOXNA, 



CHAPTER XIII. 



THE KEW GUEST. 



Down at the Franklyns there was a certain 
tempered excitement . now unhappily but little 
usual with that family . consequent upon the 
arrival of the guest. Young Welbore Craven 
had come, had been established in the chamber 
garnished and set out for him, and was making 
his company very welcome to all. 

He was a tall, brave, bright, open creature ; 
with a fair face, and cheeks almost of a delicate 
pink. On this ground, a light yellow mousk 
tache bloomed efflorescent. He was broad- 
chested . ^yet not of rough animal proportions ; 
could walk a mountain, fly a gate of many 
bars, step deftly over a bog; in short, had 
graduated with distinction in the Grand TJni- 



THE NEW GUEST. 315 

versity whose curriculum lies in. field sports 
and open-air exercise. But he had no special 
inner gifts, beyond a fiind of tranquil good- 
humour . always * on,' as it were . not made to 
play on special and distinguished occasions, 
just as some men keep the grands eaux for 
festivals. This made him always welcome in 
every house, and more than supplied the want 
of those little cascades and devices which 
others exhibit. And in his absence was often 
heard the gratifying ejaculation delivered from 
female lips, *OhI I do 5(? like Mr. Craven.' 
The being the child of his father, and destined 
to bear a Eed Hand upon his sleeve, was, as it 
were, a sort of prism held between him and his 
virtues. It was wonderful how gorgeous was 
the refraction. The tints were multiplied pro- 
digiously . possibly, it will be said, wholly 
supplied by that medium. But no ; were he 
yet unfranchised, and walking through the 
world clanking the chains and fetters of a 
younger son, he would still have found a 
welcome. He would not indeed be coveted; 
but entering into another category, he would 



816 BELLA DONNA. 

be looked on with favour, and allowed to pass 
in with a smile at the gate of country-houses. 
The strict exclusives are not so wholly strict 
in this regard. Crowns and quarterings, acres 
and purses, are not the sole passwords. The 
natural qualities . provided all dross of vul- 
garity be skimmed away . of freshness, geni- 
ality, good-nature, have a magnetic charm of 
their own. So with young Welbore Craven. 

They were very pleasant down at the 
Franklyns. They disported together like chil- 
dren. The younger girls enjoyed it prodigi- 
ously, .the more, perhaps, because there had 
been universal fast of late from all such things. 
These pastimes were, perhaps, scarcely of the 
grave or dignified order suited to the ages of 
the persons engaged. There was a wild reck- 
less freedom, and a rare physical development 
about them, perhaps more suited to the school 
and to the age of school-time. 

But they were all born in the country . 
reared in the country . and, as seems to be 
the case in such instances, had never found 
their taste for the whole round of country 



THE NEW GUEST. 317 

associations . green fields, green trees, the 
running water, and the rest . grow enfeebled 
by satiety. Trite, but very true, is the re- 
marky that it is impossible to read through the 
grand green book of nature. We never tire of 
turning over its gorgeously coloured prints, 
and fresh bright stories. 

There was a lake close by the house of the 
Franklyns, with a little pier down to the water, 
and a goodly-sized boat. The Franklyn young 
ladies loved the water ; and when they were 
alone would come down chattering and laugh- 
ing, of mornings and evenings, and pull the 
oars with good skill and fair strength. Young 
Welbore Craven, now on this visit, would come 
down with them often, and they would put off 
together, a noisy joyous party . not indeed 
with any pure love of oarmanship, for little 
was done in that direction, but from the sheer 
*fun of the thing;' for the boat moved but 
lazily; and there was splashing and rocking 
from side to side, and entanglement of oars, 
and fictitious perils, and general confusion, to 
a loud cheerful chorus of unchecked laughter 



318 BELLA DONNA. 

and general frolic. The elder sister, who must 
not be taken to be too demure in her temper, 
and in her quiet way loved their droll ex- 
ercises too, attended, as it were, by way of 
general moderator. That strangely youthfiil 
young man of business had a sort of leaning to 
attach himself to these parties, . an odd feincy, 
for no one could be so utterly and hopelessly 
out of place. Yet for the young to consort 
with the young, what more natural ? Yet it 
may not be concealed that his company was 
by no means relished. He was a living incon- 
sistency . an anachronism among their sports. 
As discordant as the ideas of contingent re- 
mainders and a ball-room, a Hebrew root and 
a wedding, yet with that curious misappre- 
hension of the ends for which he was created, a 
strange fatality seemed to draw him to the 
young. He, too, went in the boat, and did 
splashing according to the infantine laws and 
canons. 

Young Welbore Craven did not relish him 
from the first. He made no secret of it. His 
fair open face would contract when he saw the 









THE KEW GUEST. 319 

young man of business approaching with light 
gay steps. *Why is this odious attorney 
always teasing us in this way ? Can't he stick 
to his law and bill of costs ? We don't want 
him.' And presently he had christened him 
(with a loud boisterous laugh) * Young Capias,' 
and the girls welcomed that sobriquet with 
delight, and by the name of ^ Young Capias' 
he was invariably known among them for the 
future. 

He was considered horribly intrusive, and 
was always introducing himself with a pleasant 
boyish degagS air into their amusements. He 
was agreeably free and easy with Miss Charlotte, 
who, strange to say, would appear to have 
accepted him on much the same footing. A 
blank would fall on the whole party when, 
some little congress of amusement being ar- 
ranged, the young man of business was seen 
tripping from the house, in a jaunty lounging 
fashion, to join their sports. A plot of smooth- 
shaven grass had been marked out, decorated 
with poles and flags, all for the now popular 
game of croquet; with deft delicate touches. 



320 BELLA DONNA. 

the blue, green, and black balls were all day 
long spinning along over the grass, and the 
sharp smart click of the spiteful roquet was 
heard through the air like dropping musketry. 
An uncharitable game . a malicious exercise, 
more or less vindictive, mainly on account of 
that roquet element. It scarcely evokes the 
charities of society. He whose green or yellow 
ball lies within a stroke of victory, but which 
is savagely shot away across a whole prairie 
into the remote desert, strikes the ground 
savagely with this implement, and. turns away 
to hide an impatient smile of vexation. 

Young Craven and Miss Charlotte usually 
played the field . the whole world, in fact* 
The sides were about evenly matched. They 
could not then relish the adhesion of the jaunty 
young man of business when he came tripping 
forth, swinging his mallet gracefully. Young 
Craven would fling down his, or send a ball 
skimming into the distance with a savage 
stroke. He would not speak, save in a short 
surly way. ' Jealousy/ thought Mr. Crowle, 
with a simper . and was hugely gratified. It 



THE NEW GUEST. 321 

was all atoned for by Miss ChaWotte's sweet- 
ness and attention. It was very marked . 
curiously marked . thought Mr. Crowle . and 
was very acceptable. 

Young Craven's views and * intentions ' were 
gradually becoming very significant; and it 
was plain, to common observers, would gradu- 
ally work themselves clear. Before * Young 
Capias ' he froze up. Presently, however, he 
grew sarcastic, at least as sarcastic as his 
rou^ open manly temper would let him, and 
directed a few crude scoflFs in the direction of 
* Young Capias,' it must be gaid to the infinite 
delight of the latter. * Jealousy/ thought he, 
and welcomed it with complacency. Some- 
thing, however, came about presently ; and at 
the end of the second week of young Craven's 
visit, which, as it were, cleared the air, but 
made the way very free and open for all 
parties, a very simple incident . unworthy 
and almost mean in a historic sense, but with 
curious results for the future direction of this 
narrative . took place. 

Down by the edge of the lake was a pleasant 

VOL. I. Y 



322 BELLA BONNA. 

little grove of trees, which stretched out in a 
sort of diminutive peninsula into the waters. 
The head gardener . an ingenious Scot . who 
had a fancy for training little conceits, in 
whatever resources were at his disposal, had 
cut out a sort of sheltered retreat among the 
trees . very grateful and acceptable during the 
hot summer days ; and it had become a fashion 
with members of the Franklyn &mily to lay 
out little expeditions to this spot . to have tea 
on the island, or strawberries on the island ;. 
in fact, when anything delicate or acceptable 
was to be taken, to have it, by any possible 
excuse, taken down for consumption to the 
island. The article, of whatever kind, was 
always held to acquire a richer flavour by the 
process. 

Since the coming of young Welbore Craven, 
this little retreat had acquired additional popu- 
larity. The ploughman, or other agricultural 
labourer who was ^homeward plodding his 
weary way, was often startled by the sounds 
of boisterous merriment proceeding from the 
depths of this retreat. 



THE NEW GUEST. 32S 

And here, towards five o'clock of one Thurs- 
day, were our party gathered; seated, it must 
be said, with discomfort about a little table, 
with the * sensible girl ' making tea. 

It was * jolly' . delightful . *such fun.' 
Everything, in fact. The fair youth, with the 
pink cheeks and saflFron moustaches, was seated 
on a smooth ruinous trunk of a tree, which would 
not remain steady (unavoidably from ite natu- 
ral formation), and that was * such fiin.' The tea- 
pot was overset, and that was still greater ' fun.' 
But the height of enjoyment was reached when 
young Craven built up some dried sticks very 
neatly together, under a little portable kettle, 
and drawing a Yesuvian from his cigar-case 
set the sticks on fire, and actually boiled the 
water . which, when poured out, made real tea, 
not very different from what was partaken of 
every morning at breakfest. 

The relish with which this ordinary beverage 
was consumed it is impossible to describe ; and 
the whole, it must be again repeated, was emi- 
nently *fiin' in the highest degree. And at 
the bottom of all the * fun ' was young Craven. 



324 BELLA DONNA. 

* I wonder/ said one of the girls, suddenly, 

* that he hasn't found us out here,' 

* We need not be too sure of that as yet,' 
said the other. 

* He .who ?' said the sensible girl. 

* Odious Young Capias/ said the first, smartly. 

* He was to be out to-day to see papa/ 

* What a creature it is !* said young Craven. 

* I am beginning to detest him. I can't bring 
myself to speak to him. And he is getting so 
forward and free-and-easy. I snubbed him 
finely the other day.' 

* But Charlotte likes him,' said one of the 
girls. * He is one of her pets.' 

The youth burst into loud peals of laughter. 

* I've remarked it,' he said. * She gets un- 
easy when we are rough to him. I assure you, 
she has a great interest in him.' 

There was truth in this, for the sensible 
girl knew, or believed that she knew, how 
useftQ a friend he was to her Embarrassed 
father. 

* No,' she said ; * I have no great love for 
Mr. Crowle. But I cannot conceive v^hy you 



THE NEW GUEST. 326 

all dislike him so. He is very good in his 
own particular line.' 

* That's it, exactly,' said the youth, noisily. 
*Why doesn't he keep to his ^ own particular 
line? His is not the line of ladies and 
gentlemen. He's a low creature . a low, 
crawling, slimy creature,' added he, with much 
disgust. 

* Oh !' said Charlotte, almost with alarm, . 
and yet smiling. * What a description I' 

*Just what he deserves,' said one of the 
girls. 

* Confound him,' said the youth ; * can't he 
drudge among his papers, and briefs, and six 
and eightpences? Why is he always hanging 
on to us ? He really puts me in such a rage. 
And then, when he tries to be sweet and 
smooth . confound him . why, I could just take 
him up by the back of the neck as I would a 
puppy dog.' 

* Hush I hush !' said the sensible girl. ' Poor 
wretch ! he can't help it.' 

*I tell you what . wouldn't it be a good 
Joke . a splendid idea, by Jove !' 



326 BELLA DONNA. 

*What, what?' said the younger girls, 
eagerly. 

* If he were to come poking after us to-day 
. which he will; . suppose we were ^1 to 
hide; we'll take away the sticks whicli join 
the island, make a little bridge of twigs, then 
cover it over with grass and sods. He will 
come across with his greasy simper, and go 
souse in.' 

They all laughed in exquisite delight at this 
notion . even the sensible girl. 

'Poor Mr. Capias,' she said, *what treat- 
ment you are laying out for him . but it is 
very funny. The idea of him splashing about 
there.' 

* Like an eel,' said one of the girls. 

* He will glisten like a snake in the water, 
you will see,' said young Craven. 

* He will change colour like a dying frog.' 

* For shame,' said the sensible girl. 

'Oh, I see,' said young Craven; 'this is 
private property. Miss Charlotte's own. We 
must take care.' 

' Not at all,' said Charlotte, colouring ever 



THE NEW GUEST. 327 

SO little; *I hate the creature too. He is 
odious in every sense ; but we mustn't plague 
him ; papa would be dreadfully annoyed.* 

It was agreed he should not be plagued, and 
perhaps the result was the same. 

It could not have succeeded ; for Mr. Crowle 
had actually, about half an hour before, arrived 
at the house on business . had, by way of 
commencing business promptly, asked for the 
young ladies . had been told they were down 
at the island drinking tea, and had set off 
smirking and smiling, and with a light step, 
to join the youthful party. What so natural ? 
The young should consort with the young. 
He had heard the chatter of their voices among 
the trees, and had stopped, anxious not to 
disturb them or come upon them with too 
much surprise. The young mau of business 
among the trees, listened to this idle chatter, no 
doubt, with unconcern ; but another ploughman, 
homeward plodding his weary way, met him 
suddenly, just as he began to move, and though 
generally careless of physiognomy, was struck 
by the savage smile and impatient gestures of 



328 BELIJL DONTSTA. 

the young man of business, who was, besides, 
talking to himself ; and the ploughman looked 
for a long while after hina, muttering something 
about * clean daft.* Mr. Crowle did not join 
the party of young people that day, though at 
dinner he was pleasant and agreeable as usual. 
No one would have detected any change in his 
feelings towards them all. He was a very skil- 
ful creature, this young man of business, but veiy 
vain . ridiculously vain . sensitive to a degree, 
and specially sensitive on his personal charms. 
Any affront therefore in that direction galled 
him sorely. The only thing observed, and 
observed too with delight, was that he fell 
away by degrees from that old association with 
the amusements of the younger people; and 
that he now and again gave out oracular utter- 
ances, curiously pointed and fiill of mystery, 
chiefly relating to the uncertain course of 
human affairs. These he would address to 
Miss Charlotte, with an attempt at fierce sar- 
casm ; and these were afterwards a source of 
intense amusement to the whole family, who 
would treasure them up, and have them re- 



THE NEW GUEST. 329 

peated over and over again by young Craven, 
in the tone and manner of the original. 

So the warp and woof of life at the Frank- 
lyns moved on slowly for a week or so more, 
and was working into a quiet pattern. The 
Crowle thread was gradually being withdi*awn, 
but two other threads were gradually being 
brought closer together. Finally, one evening 
the quiet girl came to her father's study, and 
without flutter or agitation, but just as though 
she came to tell him that Johnson, the steward, 
was waiting to see him, told him how young 
Welbore Craven had that very evening made 
her a most important proposal, one on which 
the whole wilderness of her life depended . 
hopes, fears, joys, and sorrows. 



END OP VOL. I. 
CHAPTER XIII, 



A DEFIANCE. 



Mr. Frankltn has sweet sleep that night. 
The sigh of joy and relief he drew, as the 
welcome news was told to him, was deep and 
refreshing. He had often dreamt of this event, 
but never thought it possible. He forebore 
delving among those wretched papers. Some- 
thing like hope was in store for him yet; 
clouds were clearing away a little . might 
wholly clear away, after all. Charlotte, the 

VOL. II. B 



2 BELLA DONNA. 

calm, steady, sensible girl, might save the 
family. His dear Charlotte . his good, faith- 
ful, comforting child. 

As a match, nothing could be better or more 
delightful. Sir Welbore, the father, was favour- 
able. There was title, fortune, station. Every- 
thing was favourable. There was ecstatic joy 
through the house . the boisterous girls could 
have tumbled and thrown somersaults on the 
floor, to show their delight. And that dear, 
honest, broad-chested, good, open fellow, who 
was now recklessly distributing golden presents 
up and down the house . was there one whom we 
would have preferred before him ? A darling ! 

It got about presently . was announced, as 
it were, officially. The county papers in- 
serted their paragraphs with the usual intelli- 
gible hieroglyphics. Mr. Crowle, who had 
been away, came back one morning, had his 
cold hand taken affectionately in Mr. Frank- 
ly n's, and was told the glad tidings. He 
winced, but broke out presently into affluent 
smiles and paroxysms of delight, and congratu- 
lated heartily. Going away . for he would not 



A DEFIANCE. 3 

stay to dinner . he met the curate, Mr. Wells, 
posting up to the house, radiant. 

4 Such good news,' said the curate. 'Did 
you hear, Mr. Crowle ? [Oh, I am so glad ! 
Are you not  

' Oh, yes ; charmed . delighted/ said the 
other. 'Such a pleasant piece of news . so 
agreeable for all parties/ 

' But how glad Miss Bell will be ! She will 
hardly contain herself. You know she was so 
fond of Miss Charlotte/ 
. 'Ah, indeed!' said Mr. Crowle. 'I never 
knew that. By-the-way, we have not heard of 
Miss Jenny Bell lately. Nice person she was. 
Who has heard of her  

4 1 have. I hear from her constantly,' said 
the curate, with a flush of pride. * I write to 
her regularly . she wishes to hear everything 
that goes on in this dear family, as she calls 
them/ 

4 Oh ! I see/ said Mr. Crowle. ' Quite so.' 

* And especially/ the curate went on, eagerly, 
4 about Miss Charlotte, her bosom friend. I 
think/ said Mr. Wells, 'I know nothing, or 



4 BELLA DONNA. 

have read nothing comparable to her affection 
for Miss Charlotte, who is now to be so happily 
married.' 

' Ah ! indeed/ said Mr. Crowle, showing all 
his teeth in one delighted smile. 'How cu- 
rious! And so you keep up a correspond- 
ence with Miss Bell ?' 

4 Oh, yes !' said the other ; . I must write by 
this very night's post to tell her the news. I 
am going to get all the particulars I can.' 

4 1 see,' said Mr. Crowle. 'Very good; 
quite right. Ah ! I see. I suspected it when 
Miss Jenny was here. Don't be angry ; but I 
did see she was very much grieved to go.' 

The curate's cheeks began to flush, but he 
was not displeased. 

' Nonsense/ he said, ' Mr. Crowle. A poor 
curate must not think of such things. Oh, Mr. 
Crowle/ he added, growing suddenly confiden- 
tial, * what a pity it was ; and such a charming, 
engaging creature. Her conduct was noble . 
noble ! I never heard of anything like it.' 

4 Noble, certainly/ said Mr. Crowle ; ' noble 
is exactly the word.' 



A DEFIANCE. 5 

* Who in her position would have done the 
like ?' 

' Who, indeed T said Mr, Crowle. ' Bv-the- 
way, what is her address? Somewhere in 
London T 

The clergyman grew suspicious. i Her ad- 
dress ?' he ^aid. * She is out somewhere as a 
governess/ 

' So I heard/ said Mr. Crowle, still smiling. 
4 1 suppose they will tell me at the house?' 

4 Oh, of course,' said the curate, hastily ; 
* Chesterfield Street, Mayfair.' 

4 Thanks . thanks . thanks,' said Mr. Crowle, 
very sweetly. 'What trouble I must have 
given you. Not that I want to write to her. 
I should like to leave my card when in Lon- 
don. Good-bye, good-bye.' 

And the young man of business went his 
way; and the road being lonely, began to 
smile and talk to himself, as was his indiscreet 
habit. 



6 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XIY. 



A SURPRISE. 



'Such joyful news,' wrote the curate, that 
very evening, over his huckster's shop, striving 
hard to gain the post. ' Such joyful news, my 
dearest Miss Bell, as I have to communicate ! 
I dare say you will guess already. Think of 
some one whom you love above all things; 
and every change in whose fortunes must be so 
dear to you. Not our common friend, dear 
Mr. Franklyn, but some one else. Think 
again. Ah, I see you know. Yes, my dear 
Miss Bell, it is all settled . was settled two 
days ago. Our dear Miss Charlotte is to be 
Mrs. Welbore Craven for the present ; eventu- 
ally Lady Craven. Splendid house, place, 
pictures, state, grandeur, and what not. Her 



A SUKPKISE. 7 

husband is all that is good. Every one loves 
him ; I don't know how you would like him ; 
he must have many virtues to please you. 
But he is to be her husband, and that is a 
character which, with you, will cover all im- 
perfections. They are all out of themselves 
with joy. Between ourselves, my dear Miss 
Jenny, it is believed that this happy step will 
put an end to the little pressure which has so 
long hampered the movements of this dear 
family. It is considered the most brilliant 
match known in this county for long ; and 
everybody says our bride is the happiest and 
most deserving of women. She bears her 
good fortune, I assure you, very well/ &c. 

The Rev. Charlton Wells received no an- 
swer to his letter; but four days afterwards, 
Mr. Franklyn, sitting in his study, received a 
letter in Jenny's little writing, and marked 
' private,' in letters as large as her little round 
fingers could form them. Mr. Franklyn read 
to this effect : . 



8 BELLA DONNA. 



' Private. 

' Chesterfield Street. 

* Dearest Mr. Franklyn, 

'I have just heard of the joyful news 
of dearest Miss Franklyn's marriage. How 
happy it must make you all ! How happy it 
will make him ; for though I have not seen 
him as yet, he must be good and brave and 
generous to have won her. You, too, dear 
sir, who have lived in the world and know 
men and women so well, will have read off all 
his virtues and good qualities ! 

* How happy you must all be ! I, dear sir, 
am getting accustomed to my new place. I 
even like it ; for they are very good to me ; 
but never do I expect to be so happy again as 
in dear Grey Forest. How my heart yearns to 
it ! I have not been well of late, for the duty 
is severe ; but am better now, thank Heaven. 
Once, indeed, I thought I could only live in 
the fresh breezes and green glades of darling 
old Grey Forest ; but I had strength enough 
given me to get over that foolish notion. 



A SURPRISE, 9 

Persons with the life I have before me, must 
learn to be independent of place, and even of 
affections. I remember, dear sir, your hinting 
this to me so kindly and delicately, just before 
I left ; and I cannot tell you how often that 
precious advice has comforted me, as I look to 
it in my diary. I repeat, dearest sir, I am 
now much better, and shall soon learn to smile 
at the notion of change of air, and such luxu- 
ries. I assure you, Chesterfield Street is coi> 
sidered a very good situation. 

' Let me again congratulate you, and dearest 
Miss Franklyn. Let me thank you again and 
again for all your goodness, dearest Mr. Frank- 
lyn, to the little exile, 

'Jenny Bell/ 

At the desolate tone pervading this simple 
letter, Mr. Franklyn was greatly moved. He 
had well-nigh forgotten the little exile by this 
time ; for little exiles, from the fact of their 
exileship, easily drop out of the memory ; but 
it brought back to him her brave, noble . yes, 
it was noble . behaviour in the affair of the 



10 BELLA DONNA. 

marriage. We are apt to accept such things 
as of course ; but really for one in her lonely, 
unfriended position, when we come to think of 
it, it was a very unusual bit of self-denial. 
He was touched as he thought of it . there was 
even a pang of self-reproach. Failing health 
. the drudgery of a governess. He started . 
the very thing ! 

He would write himself to Mr. Maxwell. 
Her poor, pale cheek should be freshened by 
the breezes of ' dear old Grey Forest.' How 
attached she was to the place ! Longing, 
yearning for it . beating against the bars of 
her cage. Yes, he would write to Mr. Max- 
well himselt Jenny's letter was marked pri- 
vate ; so hp would say not a word to the rest 
of the family. Besides, what a pleasant sur- 
prise for Charlotte . Jenny coming on a visit ! 

Before the week was out, Mr. Franklyn 
called in his daughter, with a smile on his face. 
4 Charlotte dear, a moment! I have such a 
surprise for you. Guess.' 

It took a great deal to surprise the sensible 
girl. But she was very amiable, and feigned 



A SURPRISE. 11 

a little excitement for the occasion. * Do tell 
me, dear papa.' 

i Do you know who is coming ? Guess, I 
say.' 

Charlotte thought, and shook her head. 
* Some aunt ?. some cousin ?' 

' There, Charlotte,' he said, putting * Mr. 
Maxwell's letter into her hand ; ' there . are 
you not glad ? I knew you would.' 

He passed again into his study; but over 
the placid features of the sensible girl some- 
thing like a spasm of consternation flitted, and 
she mechanically put her hand to her side; 
but it was only for a moment . something like 
a smile of quiet defiance took its place. 

Almost at the same instant our Jenny was 
at work in Chesterfield Street, up in her little 
room, exultingly turning over her little goods 
and properties. She was singing and she was 
dancing, and a more than usually brilliant flush 
was in her plump cheeks. Was not the pro- 
spect of getting down again to ' darling old 
Grey Forest ' enough to set her wild ? Her 
little Letts' Diary lay upon the table, and as 



12 BELLA DONNA. 

she looked at it her expression changed too . 
something like an electric challenge seemed to 
have passed between the two women. She is 
going down to meet her dear Charlotte once 
more ! What issue shall there be for this 
second struggle ? 



13 



CHAPTER XV. 



JENNY RETURNS. 



It is hard to conceive how the afflicted family 
in Chesterfield Street could have got on with- 
out our trusty Jenny. The mother, a wretched 
invalid, tottering over the edge of the Valley 
of the Shadow; the father, in the world and 
yet out of it, and in the matter of pounds and 
shillings, about as helpless as an infant; the 
lower members yet more disorganized; no 
head, no government ; how was that domestic 
craft to be piloted ? 

Mr. Maxwell found great profit in her kind 
services; slowly and by degrees his sight 
mended. Jenny was so quick . so ready . 
so open to the merest shred of a hint; so 
capable of absorbing new matter and ideas, 



14 BELLA DONNA. 

that she really seemed to Mr. Maxwell to do 
the work more deftly than his own clerk. The 

precious auxiliaries of his sight having gone 

. 

into hospital, as it were, were gradually getting 
back to health, from sheer repose ; Jenny, in 
her own delicate way, repressing firmly that 
idle longing of his to work them before they 
were yet strong enough to bear work. He 
was very grateful, and actually from habit 
began to like the joint labouring together by 
night. Suddenly arrived that letter from Mr. 
Franklyn, which struck him, as it were, all 
of a heap. 

At first he did not remember who Franklyn 
was. Then he called down Jenny. Jenny 
was working some little petticoat edging or 
fringing, but she gave it up cheerfully, though 
it was not her legitimate hour for labour. She 
would work the whole day long gladly ; any- 
thing to be useful. 

' Miss Bell,' said he, 'here is a most extra- 
ordinary letter. I don't understand it. Who 
are these people that want you ?' 

Jenny's eyes opened with a gentle wonder 



JENNY RETURNS. 15 

and speculation. She took the letter me- 
chanically, and gave a low tempered ejacu- 
lation of delight, a suppressed start, for hers 
was a very well-regulated mind. * Dear Mr. 
Franklyn,' she said, * that darling iamily !' 

i Then you know them ?' said Mr. Maxwell, 
uneasily. 

* Know them, sir !' said Jenny, again doing 
the eye movement; 'know them? Ah, sir! 
how kind of them ; how good ; how generous, 
to think in all their happiness of the little 
exile. So they used to call me/ 

'But you will not go?' he said, still more 
uneasily ; * you will not leave me. You know 
you have got quite into the way of the thing . 
in fact, you are quite indispensable to me. 
What am I to do V 

Jenny was touched. 

' Oh, sir/ she said ; ' oh, sir !' 

She was a little indistinct as to what she 
meant by this ejaculation, yet still it seemed 
to convey a good deal. 

' You are very well,' said he ; 'at least I 
hope so. Your health has not suffered; at 



16 BELLA DONNA. 

least, you will say so if it has ; and I'm sure 
if salary ' 

* Oh, sir !' said Jenny, with the gentlest in- 
flection of reproach, ' do I complain . would I 
complain? I am sure I would work in my 
small way for you, sir, and the dear family,' 
she added, ' if I was sick, if I was weary, 
if I was breaking down, and was at the last 
gasp ' 

4 But you are not ill,' said he, looking oti 
her round ruddy cheeks. 

Jenny was speechless a moment; gave a 
deep sigh . then paused . and finally said 
softly . 

' Ah, sir, I was reared, and brought up 
among the green fields, and the trees, and the 
brooks, the sweet smell of the hay, the fresh 
open country air. Is it unnatural that I should 
look back wistfully to those happy days ? Is it 
unnatural that I should pine to meet again the 
friends of my childhood ? Is it unnatural ' 

Here Jenny paused ; partly because she was 
not skilful enough to frame the same idea in a 
third different shape. Poor child, she was a 



JENNY RETURNS. 17 

little confused, too, having never, so far as her 
friends knew, been reared among that sweet- 
smelling hay, or green fields. She had con- 
founded her short residence at the Franklyns 
with the whole span of her youth, which, it is 
believed, was consumed in the unwholesome 
atmosphere of a crowded city. 

Mr. Maxwell accepted the position mourn- 
fully. He saw how cruelly selfish it would 
be to detain her. The long confinement, too, 
must have been prejudicial to one reared on 
the sweet breath of the country. Ill, too, she 
might have, been all this while ; for those 
round blooming cheeks were often anything 
but certain evidence of robust health. 'Of 
course,' he said, at last with a sigh, * you must 
go. It is quite right you should, and I was 
very thoughtless to dream for a moment of 
detaining you.' 

'Go!' said Jenny, opening her wonderful 
eyes once more ; ' go ! go where ?' she was 
amazed, confounded. 'Do you think,' she 
added, 'I would leave you in these straits, 
with dear Mrs. Maxwell so ill, and the dear 

VOL. II. c 



18 BELLA DONNA. 

children with no one to look after them, and 
you, dear sir* . she stopped . 'No, sir; you 
don't know me yet.' 

It went on for some time that little dispute. 
Mr. Maxwell was firm. Jenny was also firm. 
She would not go ; she would stay. If she 
was pat upon her honour, of course she could 
not strictly say that she felt as strong as she 
had felt, but still she was very strong, very 
strong, and could do a deal of work. There 
was Stoodly and Masham, . that injunction, 
wasn't it ? not half done ; and Jenny smiled. 
No, she must stay and do her work. 

But he was equally firm. Go she must. It 
flashed upon him that he had been all this 
time a little selfish and inconsiderate. I 
indeed, she could come back early . that is, 
without inconvenience to herself . she knew 
what invaluable assistance she could afford 
him, &c. 

But here was another difficulty. With re- 
luctance and infinite delicacy, with grief of 
mind, too, feeling inexpressibly for him, it 
was at last wrung from her . coy, reluctant, 



JENNY RETURNS. 19 

hesitating . that indeed, perhaps, it would be 
for the best that there should be a little tem- 
porary absence from the scene. Still, that was 
not it. She would gladly put up with all that 
. and more, for the sake of the family, oh yes ! 

Mr. Maxwell, now thoroughly outside the 
committee room . miles away, in fact . could 
not comprehend. Jenny again hinted ever so 
delicately. She would not for the worlcj bring 
discord into that family. But still she saw 

. she knew, she was unacceptable to . 

Perhaps it was her fault . no doubt it was. 

Mr. Maxwell, with counsel's instinct, leaped 
at once to what she was alluding. He sfcoofc 
his head sadly. 'We must make allowance 
for the sick/ he said; 'they are often un- 
reasonable. A little patience.' Jenny was 
all protest in an instant. She would bear, oh 
yes ; she could not say how much, all for the 
sake of that dear family. She had only 
mentioned it because of their sakes. Did she 
mind herself ? Oh no, no, no, &c. 

In short, it was debated with a spirit of 
much self-sacrifice on both sides. Jenny was 



20 BELLA DONNA. 

to go for her health's sake ; that health which 
was so much shattered, and needed restoration 
so sadly. She had, indeed, worked very hard, 
poor child. 

In two days' time the little trunk was 
brought down, and once more packed to go 
back again to . dear old Grey Forest/ Dear 
old Grey Forest, how the heart of the little exile 
yearned to it ! The place where she had been 
brought up, where as a child she had gam- 
bolled ! So fond was she of the place, it was 
natural that she should actually give way to 
this pleasant delusion. No one could well be 
angry with her for so affectionate a mistake. 

It was curious, that going back again once 
more ; especially to one looking back and 
thinking of the time the little black trunk 
was packed. And she took care to put up, 
among her other little properties, that Letts' 
diary which she always took about with her. 



21 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. 

At Grey Forest was a full house. The house- 
keeper had made an effort ; the cook had made 
an effort ; Mr. Franklyn himself had struggled 
to the surface of his papers, and taking breath 
for a few hours, had himself made a tremendous 
effort. But, in truth, the whole work fell upon 
the sensible girl . so calm, so business-like, so 
practical, so useful upon occasions of emergency 
like the present. She was Field-Marshal 
Domestic. Where there was strain and pressure 
.and there was strain and pressure in all 
manner of directions . she contrived to meet it. 
The legionaries had to be fresh drilled, new 
,ones recruited, and abundant victualling had 
to be got in. The whole being what a metro- 



22 BELLA DONNA. 

politan legionary, brought down especially to 
organize the waiting * service/ called * a state 
visit,' required all elements to be on a i state ' 
footing . men, women, fittings, provisions, and 
adjuncts of all descriptions ; the whole of which 
task fell specially on the shoulders of the 
sensible girl, who did not allow all that was 
already on her own shoulders . so interesting 
and so important . to stand in the way a 
nidment. All the house was in spirits. And 
hefe was Sir Welbore Craven, Baronet, and 
Lady Catherine Craven, wife of the above, 
with Sir Welbore'3 own intimate man and 
Lady Catherine's own woman d secretis, and a ' 
whole wain-load of luggage already established 
in the house. Already the professional lady, 
chartered specially to supervise the victualling, 
began to exhibit cheeks inflamed and angry 
from too prolonged contiguity to a raging 
furnace. The ordinary familiarity of pro- 
fessional intercourse was in her case found 
dangerous, and anything like reproof utterly 
fatal. She w&s not in fact to be addressed 
under the load of awful responsibility; and 



THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. 23 

ordinary men and women shrank away from 
her as from a cook more than mortal. 

For the festival, too, had come (this gather- 
ing was not for the ceremonial between the 
Houses which was to take place up in London, 
but to pay honour to the illustrious family of 
Craven) other distinguished guests. There 
was staying in the house the new Bishop, who 
had been lately appointed to the See of Leigh- 
ton-Buzzard, a person who has been before 
met at Mr. Franklyn's, an old friend of that 
family . Mr. Archdeacon Dilly, in short, who 
has just been measured for a mitre. That great 
Missionary Society, whose * perfect organiza- 
tion, whether we look at it in its ready capacity 
for expansion, or for its equal susceptibility of 
a judicious contraction according to the exi- 
gencies of the moment, must be looked on as 
one of the most wonderful organizations of this 
wonderful nineteenth century/ Charge oftheRev. 
James Wagthorne Bridles, D.D., Lord Bishop of 
Leighton- Buzzard, at his first Annual Visitation, 
pp. 1 66-7 . had borne fruit. In fact, it was no 
secret that it was the Foreign Missionary inte- 



24 BELLA DONNA. 

rest, with the silent yet powerful support of that 
well-known missionary nobleman, Lord Bury- 
shaft, who might be said to have never stirred 
out of the chair of a religious public meeting 
all his life, that gently propelled the Arch- 
deacon into the bishop's stall. Being, too, 
of the rough dragoons ecclesiastical, and, as 
it were, always in the saddle, scouring the 
country for Dissenters, he soon came under 
notice as an active trooper that deserved pro- 
motion. Being now in command, he was 
doubly active ; and presently had driven the 
wretched Dissenters of Leighton-Buzzard to 
their holes and caves in the mountains. His 
corps, stirred on by such a leader, became 
about as notorious and favourably known to 
feme as Probyn's or Fane's Horse in India ; 
and Leighton-Buzzard and -the diocese sui> 
rounding became presently blazing far and 
near with the flames of religious conflagration. 
The old friend and newly-frocked bishop had 
been invited to do honour to Sir Welbore and 
Lady Mary Craven. So had another friend 
. young Wells, the curate, as elderly people 



THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. 25 

of the parish called him, and who had literally 
4 put in ' piteously, and almost informd pauperis 
for the honour. He had nearly died of elation 
when the joyful news came to him, and he had 
to exchange his huckster's first floor for the 
solemn state of Grey Forest. Mr. Orowle also, 
though highly unsuitable as a guest in many 
senses, was bidden mainly at the instigation of 
the sensible girl, who had noted with misgiving 
the late change in his manner, and the strange 
defiant looks that at times shot from his eyes. 

He accepted with a joyful eagerness that 
she could not comprehend; and with new 
clothes and gayer and more satin manners, 
became more like a glistening snake than ever. 
There was also in the house a generic guest 
or two . the generic young guest, lawyer or 
soldier (' Privatman/ say the German Kttr 
lists); the generic middle-aged stout guest, 
who is good-humour and good-nature (with a 
firm belief in his own jocularity), walking 
about. Smith or Wilson will do as well as 
other names for these prevailing types. 

Sir Welbore was a type in his way : so was 



26 BELLA DONNA. 

Lady Mary Craven. He was tall, puffed, and 
fluffed, stiff, and of a gentlemanly stoutness ; 
more the fulness of port wine, than stoutness 
proper. He had a mild glow in his countenance 
of a tender pink . not the coarse exhibition of 
vulgar fat, but the more delicate pate tendre 
from the Sevres manufactory of nobility. He 
was always correctly and neatly dressed, and 
wore a pale blue neckerchief. He spoke in a 
solemn and sonorous voice, and always seemed 
to be striking his sentence on a domestic peal of 
bells hung somewhere within. His utterances 
were majestic and concerned his country's good 
. his country's corn . his country's politics; 
and, above all, his country's Times. He con- 
sulted that keeper of the nation's conscience 
far more frequently than any work in the 
world . not even excepting his banker's book 
and his family Bible. 

Lady Mary Craven was stately, too, and of 
full majestic proportions. She was of good 
ripe quality. 

But for rich and copious details of his mag- 
nificence we turn over the scarlet book of 



THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. 27 

glory, compiled by Ulster, and find the scroll 
of his titles there inscribed : 

< CRAVEN. 

* Sir Welbore Charles Hitchikbroke 
Craven, 4th Baronet, of Craven- Weldington, 
Suffolk, b. 1796; m. Mary, 5th dau. of John, 
6th Earl of Topplingstones ; and by her had 
issue: 

f 1. Charles Welbore, b. 1837. 
*2. Gwedolina-Matilda, b. 1838. 
'3. Pilaster-Gregory, b. 1839. 
' Crest . A Cat ramp. 

* Motto . Je tiem mes angles prits.' 

They were now firmly established in the 
mansion of the Franklyns, and cast an air of 
terrible formality over the modest establish- 
ment. For the view that was obtained of 
them was always a state view ; and the speech 
that was obtained of them was always a state 
speech, delivered, as it were, from the throne ; 
and common mortals had, to be more or less 
guarded in their choice of language, not 



28 BELLA DONNA. 

attempting any freedoms or pleasantries of 
diction, which would have been a gross out- 
rage, and pronounced Use-majestt. The whole 
mass, the stately and unstately, the lay and 
episcopal, were now all fused together, and 
the various particles working in detrition 
against each other for some days past. With 
the young people it was pleasant enough, the! 
social wheels moved on very smoothly. But 
with Mr. Franklyn it was sad up-hill work. 
Latterly he had got more or less out of the 
world. He knew not how to cast his thoughts 
and language in the mould fitted to great and 
stately people. The Cravens hung a good 
deal upon his hands. 

He stood much in awe of Sir Welbore. At 
breakfast, when that embodiment of state came 
down, his first act was to secure the Leading 
Journal (newly arrived by post), with some- 
thing that almost amounted to greediness. 
His prior claim being thus established, he 
addressed himself in a calm and leisurely 
fashion to his morning meal ; and when that 
was finished took out his gold glass, fitted with 



THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. [29 

a thick black ribbon, fixed them on leisurely, 
spread out the hugh amplitude of the Leading 
Journal, inhaled its fresh dampish flavour with 
a sort of relish, and began to read. This task 
helped him through the morning. He was 
seen moving about the house slowly, with his 
Leading Journal in his hand, spread out before 
him like a printed shield. He held slow con- 
versations reclined back in his soft arm-chair, 
and looking over the edge of the Leading 
Journal. He even wrote his letters politely 
accommodating the Leading Journal with a chair 
close beside him. But he surveyed that Power 
warily all the while, and said to any casual 
spoliator rather snappishly, ' I beg your pardon, 
for one moment, I am not quite finished with 
the Times as yet7 

It must be mentioned that there was rather 
a hostile feeling engendered between this 
potentate and the Lord Bishop of Leighton- 
Buzzard, who had also a sort of tempered 
thirst for public intelligence, and for the 
columns of the leading journal . which, though 
Arian and heterodox in every sense, was still 



30 BELLA DONNA. 

reliable as a channel of sure and easy commu- 
nication. The Lord Bishop, who was sharp 
and terse in manner and conduct, and who, if 
there had been no Dissenters on the mountains 
and moors of society, would have turned his 
fowling tendencies in another direction, rather 
resented this monopoly on the Baronet's part 
So when the Leading Journal is on the chair 
beside the Baronet, who is at the writing-table, 
the Bishop enters gaily in his full hunting 
costume, very neat-limbed below, and says, 
gaily, * Ha, ha ! so here we have the Times. 
To-day's Times, I believe;' and tripping up 
softly, as though he had * set ' a Dissenter, and 
were anticipating a pleasant shot. 

To him, Sir Welbore uneasily, and putting 
over his arm to guard his property : < In one 
moment, my lord, just finishing my letter. 
Hem! Most interesting article on the magis- 
trates. You shall have it when I have done.' 

* My dear Sir Welbore,' answers the Bishop, 
* don't hurry yourself, I shall skim it while 
you complete your voluminous correspondence ;' 
and the Bishop makes a sort of right skirmish. 



THE PARTY AT GREY FOREST. 31 

ing attempt to cut off the Leading Journal, 
taking an unhandsome advantage of both Sir 
Welbore's hands being engaged. Kuefully 
then, the Baronet, seeing he could not decently 
keep his ground, would throw down his pen, 
sacrifice his correspondence, and, with a dry 
smile, retire again into his soft arm-chair. 

* I shall not detain you long,' he would say. 

* Times really most interesting to-day/ 



32 BELLA DONNA, 



CHAPTER XVII. 



jenny's reception. 



Suddenly, while this * loose miscellany,' as one 
of our great but grotesque thinkers would put 
it, was working together, a little one-horse 
chaise, with a little shrinking black trunk, tied 
up with cord, placed beside the driver, was 
seen driving up the avenue to the distant 
crunching of wheels . a music which for those 
who live in country-houses is very welcome 
and exciting, and has a whole gamut of notes 
of its own. Nearly all were in their rooms 
dressing for dinner. Episcopus was donning 
his apron, in which he would descend glistening 
like a clerical snake. Baronettus de Welbore 
(so the pursuivants would call his style and 
title) was about getting into his evening 




jenny's reception. 33 

armour, the various pieces whereof . the coat 
of mail, the ankle-bits, and above all the rigid 
starched gorget, lay upon a chair ready. The 
curate, positively resplendent, was already in 
the drawing-room in a delirium of expectation. 
Fitfully, and off and on as it were, he had 
been dressing the whole day. And yet, save 
this poor faithful soul, there was not one in 
the house who looked forward to our Jenny's 
coming with delight. No one spoke of it, no 
one referred to it. It was not announced to 
bishop or baronet. The seusible girl never 
mentioned it . some way the younger girls had 
lost their old clinging fondness for their Jenny. 
It seemed a blue chamber for them, which 
they were not to look into. Mr. Franklyn 
was too absorbed to think of it. So here was 
cold and cheerless store of entertainment for 
our Jenny. Every one heard the crunching, and 
such, at least, as knew of her coming, started. 
And yet, Jenny was not down-hearted, 
though she had an instinct of what was waiting 
her ; but her brave little spirit rose with the 
danger. She had pluck, courage, and what 

VOL. II. D 



34 BELLA DONNA. 

not. She was smiling to herself all the way, 
as the little chaise took the bends and sweeps 
of the avenue. She was thinking of the happy 
days spent in Grey Forest ; of her childhood's 
happy hours ; her gambols in the grass years 
ago. (No ; by the force of imagination we 
always do fall into that mistake, and take 
Jenny back ever so many years.) Perhaps 
she was thinking . dreaming of such matters. 
Who can tell ? Here was the door ; the porch 
in its ancient cloak of ivy. There was the 
old servant opening the door, whom our Jenny, 
jumping out, recognises with delight. She 
shakes hands with him ; an accolade welcomed 
but drily by the retainer; and crossing the 
hall, coming from the housekeeper's room (she 
has not heard the wheels), is our dear, our 
darling Charlotte . friend of childhood, play- 
mate, intimate, everything; at whom our 
Jenny flies like a bird, winds her in her arms, 
and covers with kisses. Forgiveness to the 
injured, &c. ; and recollect how much Jenny 
had to forget. The sensible girl feels a sort of 
pang at this behaviour, so gracious and un- 



jenny's reception 35 

expected. A feeling, too, compounded of em- 
barrassment ; for, very honest and straight- 
forward, and in the habit of looking straight 
into other people's eyes, she knew in her heart 
that these were not the affectionate terms upon 
which they could be on for the future. She 
took, therefore, Jenny's endearments in a sort 
of undecided way, and asked her, would she 
like to see her room ? 

To them . all assembled for dinner, which 
some way acquired a sort of state imperial air 
from the presence of the Welbore Craven 
element, which insensibly awed every one 
present, and obliged them to comport them- 
selves as at a royal banquet . entered modest 
Jenny . not full into the centre, but skirting 
round by the corners. Mr. Franklyn whispered 
Sir Welbore Craven, who now, with all his 
armour on, and properly tightened and bur- 
nished, was on the rug for exhibition. He 
said, * Ha I hum ! I see ; quite right and 
proper ;' and then continued his synopsis of a 
4 remarkable article in the Times of this 
morning !' 



36 BELLA DONNA. 

Lady Mary Craven, who was sitting en- 
throned, as it were, sniffed the gale from afar, 
such as was wafted from the horizon to her, 
and did not seem to relish it. With her Jenny 
was ' a person,' or ' that person/ or ' the person 
I saw last night ' . in the dictionaries an in- 
offensive word enough, but about which, in 
common use, hovers an unpleasant flavour. 
The curate would have fallen at her feet, and * 
came up hot and awkward, and made Jenny 
awkward before a mixed company, by his 
spasmodic raptures. He was pouring out his 
welcome, when Jenny quietly smiled herself 
away from him, beaming on him ; yet steadily 
retreating into the bosom of the girls, where 
she became absorbed. Yet she did not offend 
him, for there was a glance of mystery which 
seemed to say, 'There is a secret between 
us.' 

Over on the ottoman sat young Craven and 
Charlotte. Jenny recognised him at once. 
She knew his quality. 

c So that is he, Mr. Craven, dears,' she 
whispered loudy to the girls. 'How noble; 



jenny's reception. 37 

how grand ; how handsome ; how happy our 
dear Charlotte must be !' 

The drawing-room at Grey Forest was not 
very large ; every one was pretty near to each 
other. Presently the procession was formed. 
They were marshalled two and two by the 
heralds according to their ranks, and moved 
on in order. Jenny and her curate walked 
together. 

By the merest accident Jenny got placed 
next the royalty of the banquet, gorgeous in 
his armour. On the other side of him was 
Charlotte ; and beyond Charlptte, her knight 
and own true love. Baronettus tolerated his 
future relation very handsomely for one he 
knew so little of; for every one that he knew 
little of, he looked on with suspicion. For 
a woman, if he was to find fault and be 
critical, he thought there was far too much 
independence. More reliance on the opinion 
of others, he thought, might have become 
her better; which translated into Craven 
dialect, signified more obsequiousness to the 
voice of the King of the Welbores. Epis- 



38 BELLA DONNA. 

copus was opposite ; he had the generic Smith 
on one side, Mr. Franklyn on the other; 
he was singing of the Dissenter to both. 
Baronettus looked down from over his mailed 
gorget on his future daughter-in-law. She was 
inclining her head to her true lover. He 
looked to his left, down upon Jenny, who at 
that second had been looking up to him with 
awe-struck, shrinking eyes, and had withdrawn 
them on being detected in the guilty act. He 
was not displeased ; secret homage, even fear, 
was welcome. This was a proper young person 
. not forward, but mindful of her station. It 
did not, besides, become the house of Craven 
to be silent. There was no harm in encourage- 
ing the lower ranks. So he said, with a sort 
of husky magnificence, s Came far to-day, Miss 
. Miss. er. Odell ?' 

Jenny expressed much trepidation and alarm 
at this condescension, which was perceived 
with gratification by the illustrious speaker. 
With falling voice, f Jenny said she had come 
'very far, indeed, sir . from London/ 

4 Ha, hum, quite proper/ said he, to reassure 



jenny's reception. 39 

her. *A tast city, London; the modern 
emporium of the world. I am not one of 
those who look upon our capital as outgrowing 
its vital energies . as absorbing too much from 
the extremities. No; centralization, under 
properly regulated conditions, I look on as 
good . more or less good/ 

Jenny was eating a little fish at the time, 
had actually a small portion of sole in her 
mouth, yet so absorbed was she in the surpass- 
ing interest of these remarks, that she suspended 
further deglutition, and with eyes fixed on the 
Baronet in devout admiration, remained im- 
movable "while he developed his theory. 

' You will say, how is this compatible . how 
is this consistent ? The vital forces must be 
either in the tree or the branches . in the heart 
or the limbs. Come, now ? . (Champagne, if 
you please.') 

Jenny took advantage of the moment, and 
by a hurried motion got her bit of fish down* 
She was then ready devoutly to receive more 
political economy. 

' I recollect old Lord Ploughshare,' continued 



40 BELLA. DONNA. 

he, wiping his mouth decently with a napkin, 
'who sat a long time for our county . but 
that's a long story . was quite nonplussed 
when I put that view of mine to him. " It's a 
paradox," he said ; "and yet there's common 
sense in it. How do you do it, Craven ?" he 
said. He was right. To most ordinary people 
it would seem a paradox.' 

Jenny lifted her eyes devoutly. ' Oh, how 
clever!' she said, softly. 'How wonderful! 
Oh, so clever I' 

Sir Welbore smiled on her. 'If you studied 
these things, they would not seem so difficult to 
you. . (Hock, please/) 

'They would kill me,' said Jenny, with 
terror. 'It must have taken you years of 
study, sir.' -And then conscious that this was 
not complimenting the Baronet's natural talents, 
she added again, as if in a reverie, 'Oh, so 
clever . how clever ! How wonderful !' 

Sir Welbore was much pleased with himself 
during that meal. He went to his mental 
desks and shelves and brought down some 
more little pet theories, about 'prices,' 'the 




jeistny's reception. 41 

poor,' and other matters. Between the courses 
he introduced these subjects to Jenny with a 
good deal of majestic waving of hands. 

* I do not show these views to every one/ 
he said, * and indeed I must beg of you not 
to mention them. You understand. Some 
of these days, perhaps; but no matter . 
h'm ' 

Poor Jenny ! There was no serious danger 
of her betraying these weighty theories. What 
a patient listener she was . all, too, in a spirit 
of self-sacrifice . for the lecturer was stern and 
tyrannical, and exacted the most unflagging 
attention when he expounded his views ! He 
fixed his eyes on Jenny when dealing with 
'prices,' and, morally speaking, seemed to 
require that she was not to eat while he spoke. 
Jenny, though hungry with her ride, and who 
sometimes lamented the good healthy appetite 
which nature had furnished to her, took in 
' prices ' very sweetly instead of the dainties 
flitting by her. 

' 1 cannot quite expect you to follow me,' 
said he, towards dessert ; (' fine peaches, these, 



42 BELLA DONNA. 

really fine peaches), but still I make myself 
intelligible. I think so, at least/ 

* Intelligible,' said Jenny, taking a peach 
that was offered to her, in the most noiseless 
way in the world ; * oh, it is wonderful ! I 
always thought they were dreadful things. 
But now, someway, I seem to get glimpses . 
little flashes of light, as it were, which ' 

' Ah, h'm . quite so/ said he, complacently. 
* They do give me credit for a certain lucidity 
in putting forward my views. Old Lord 
Ploughshare used to say, in his odd way, 
a Craven, there is no man who helps me to 
look through a milestone like you." It was 
his plain way of putting it. But he meant 
it as a compliment/ 

* Ah, sir,' said Jenny, peeling her peach in 
a surreptitious way, as if she was merely curious 
as to how a peach was constructed, * there is 
our dear Miss Franklyn, who is so shortly to 
be of your family, she. can understand these 
subjects ! How I envy her ! What an oppor- 
tunity for one of her tastes ! She can learn so 
much and enrich her mind. She will have 



jenny's reception. 43 

time to hear these marvellous theories at 
leisure. I do envy her/ added Jenny, in a 
little rapture, under cover of which she managed 
to get a small segment of a peach, long prepared 
for the first convenient opportunity, into her 
mouth. 

'She? . my daughter-in-law that is to be/ 
said he, with some constraint. ' Why, do you 
know that is the only point on which she has 
not quite come up to my views? Whether 
from a peculiar formation of mind, or perhaps 
from my imperfect manner of conveying myself, 
I can't say, but I was sorry to find a sort of 
indifference to these very important matters/ 

, The fact was, Sir Welbore, at the first 
opportunity, had tried to let off some of these 
political economy petards upon her, and she 
had said, with her natural truth and candour, 
' Indeed, Sir Welbore, I can't follow you ; we 
shall soon get into a regular fog.' Sir Welbore 
withdrew, hurt and a little confounded. 

< Dear me,' said Jenny, opening her eyes ; 
4 dear me ! and yet how she has studied, our 
dear Charlotte. She is so clever, sir ; such a 



44 BELLA DONNA. 

mind . quite a man's head. My poor little 
brain beside hers indeed ! She has read all 
the terrible books . Locke and Aaron Smith, 
and ' 

4 H'm . beg your pardon . Adam . Adam 
Smith.' She had unwittingly trod upon one 
of his mental corns, and he winced, yet the 
stately correction was like a salve, so he was 
pleased at the same time. ' You mean the 
author of the " Wealth of Nations ?" ' 

' Dear me, I am so stupid,' said Jenny. ' Oh, 
sir, forgive me.' 

'But I had no idea,' said Sir Welbore, 
looking stiffly over at Charlotte, 'that my . 
that Charlotte was so deeply read in these 
matters. I think you misapprehend. She 
led me to believe that " 

' She is so clever/ said Jenny, in her devout 
way. ' Look at her library. She has rows of 
those wonderful books, all marked and noted 
in pencil. She has wonderful genius and 
talent and cleverness, dear Charlotte, more 
than many men, sir, I assure you.' 

Sir Welbore looked distrustfully over at 



jenny's reception. 45 

Charlotte, now very busy with her true knight. 
He rather resented all the new theories of 
' women's work,' female law copying, and such 
like ; but in Charlotte's instance he considered 
himself a little aggrieved, as though some de- 
ception had been put upon him. 

Before the night was over he spoke in very 
flattering terms of the young person who had 
sat beside him at dinner, * A most suitable 
person,' he said to Mr. Franklyn, though for 
what suitable he did not mention. And Mr. 
Franklyn taking up the text, went more fully 
into the history of Jenny's list of self-sacrifices, 
which Sir Welbore considered 'very proper 
conduct indeed . does her great credit.' 

Jenny, whose eyes were always busy tra- 
velling round the table in a downcast, implor- 
ing way, at one time surprised the faces of the 
lovers turned directly towards her. Their faces 
were as promptly turned away, as it were, on 
being discovered. * Ah !' thought Jenny, ' they 
are talking of me . poor me.' They were talk- 
ing of her. Young Craven was asking about 
her, as he had asked about any new faces at 



46 BELLA DONNA. 



the table. He said he disliked her face more 
than he could say. There was something to 
him most disagreeable . something stealthy, 
which he could not endure. Perhaps he did 
the poor creature injustice. And so she was 

the one who was near being in their family 

 

(' our ' family, said young Craven, with mean- 
ing, and the sensible girl gave a tranquil 
blush), and who had made such a grand sacri- 
fice? Well it might be so, but still (and 
young Craven looked hard at Jenny) he did 
not like her . a dangerous creature, depend 
upon it. 

Jenny caught this expression of dislike, and 
dropped her eyes at once in a shrinking, de- 
precating way. * Our dear Charlotte,' she said 
to herself, ' is telling him about poor me. It 
is very odd how our dear Charlotte dislikes 
me. No matter . no matter.' 

Later that evening, when all were in the 
drawing-room, Mr. Franklyn went over to 
Jenny, who was sitting modestly apart, looking 
over some of the dear old music. (What 
chords were touched at every incident of that 



jenny's reception. 47 

night . the old house at home, the familiar 
furniture, &c.) Jenny said many times, to 
many different persons, that she felt as it were 
in a dream. Mr. Franklyn came over to her, 
and to him she said it was exactly like a 
dream. The old place, the old chair, the old 
faces, &c. 

And Mr. Franklyn, who had been just 
speaking of her to Sir Welbore, was really 
pleased with her grateful nature, and spoke 
very kindly to her of her prospects and life, 
and of how she was getting on at the Maxwells'. 

Presently came up young Craven. ' We are 
looking for a music book,' he said. * Charlotte 
is going to favour the company. It should be 
here on this chair. Could I disturb you a 
moment, Miss . Bell ? Thank you.' 

Jenny had glided off her chair in a second . 
had shrunk away with a sweetly resigned look 
and drooping eyes. Young Craven spoke in a 
blunt way. He stooped down and looked on 
the ground. 'Very sorry, indeed,' he said, 
. but this book must be here.' 

' By the way, Welbore,' said Mr. Franklyn, 



48 BELLA DONNA. 

*I believe you have not been introduced to 
Miss ' 

Young Craven, busy tumbling the books 
over, looked up a little surly from his work. 

' No,' he said, bluntly; 'these forms are 
scarcely necessary here. Everyone knows 
everybody in this house.' 

Jenny, scarcely daring to lift her eyes to 
him : * I seem to know you many years . so 
many years ! I have heard of you so much . 
it seems like an old friend.' 

Young Craven gave something like a laugh, 
and said again, ' Beg your pardon ! This is 
not the book yet ; sorry to disturb you, but 
Charlotte is waiting.' 

Jenny fetched a gentle sigh, then said, 'I 
could help you, I'm sure ; I know every song 
in these dear old books. Dearest Charlotte and 
I used to ' 

'Got it at last, for a wonder,' said young 
Craven, bounding, and leaving Jenny and her 
sentence abruptly. 

4 Used to play them over and over again,' 
continued Jenny, adroitly, as though she had 



jenny's reception. 49 

been relating the little incident to Mr. Frank- 
lyn. ' Ah, dear me ! how the old days come 
back upon me !' 

Jenny's heart was sorely wrung by this be- 
haviour of her friend's betrothed. He dislikes 
me, she thought. Some friend has been setting 
him against me. But she made a resolution of 
propitiating him by gentleness, and opposing 
to his prejudice a steady and unvarying sweet- 
ness. Later that night, Mr. Franklyn, who 
was determined to pay her all fitting attention, 
called to young Craven, 'Will you get Miss 
Bell some wine and water?' Young Craven 
did as he was bid, ungraciously enough . that 
is to say, as promptly as the office could with 
decency be got through. He had to wait by 
her until she had finished. Jenny sipped her 
wine leisurely, and pitching her voice in her 
lowest key, kept him prisoner by a series of 
little questions, chiefly concerning * dearest 
Charlotte.' She was so even, so equable, so 
steady, so calm, and so sweet; that was the 
only term . insipid and vapid as it was . that 
would express Charlotte. He would be very 

VOL. II. B 



50 BELLA DONNA. 

happy . oh, so happy . winning such a treasure. 
He might trust her. She knew Charlotte well. 
And Jenny sipped her wine leisurely, and 
looked radiant, as she dwelt on her friend's 
merits. 

But it would not do. That dull, insensible 
young Craven drummed with his fingers on 
the table, and spoke a few formularies of con- 
ventional assent, all the while looking first 
over at one quarter, and then measuring 
Jenny's tumbler with distrustful impatient 
eyes. 

*You live down at Craven,' Jenny said, 
looking earnestly at her tumbler, as though 
she were looking for marine objects. * I hear 
it is lovely . lovely V (Where bad Jenny picked 
up this assurance ?) ' Not one of your new 
places, but venerable. / shall never see it, 
but dearest Charlotte will. Describe it all to 
me . do,' continued Jenny, suppliantly, ' if not 
too much trouble. Give me a little sketch of 
it . Charlotte's future home. You can photo- 
graph well . well, I am sure. I know you can/ 

Young Craven lifted his eyes from Jenny's 



jenny's reception. 51 

tumbler and laughed loudly, almost rudely. 
' A good notion,' he said ; * beastly process . 
stain your fingers. Catch me at that sort of 
work. No, no !' 

'I mean,' said Jenny, with a little tremor, 
'description . verbal description, which I am 
sure . that is, I know, you can do it in the 
most life-like, graphic way possible. To-day 
at dinner, though I was a long way off, I heard, 
that is ' 

'There's my father going to bed. Beg 
pardon, but must go now. More wine ? Ex- 
cuse me,' and young Craven shot away, ab- 
ruptly leaving Jenny standing, and in the 
midst of her little narrative. She smiled after 
him and sighed. I daresay she set him down 
as ever so Uttle boorish ; but he was of the 
country. He was, besides, Charlotte's futur. 

No doubt she thought, too, within herself, 
'How he dislikes me! What have I done . 
the little exile who wishes well to all men and 
women, and is too humble not to be on sweet 
terms with mankind ?' Perhaps some one had 
set him against her. 'But really,' thought 



52 BELLA DONNA, 

Jenhy, or must have thought Jenny, 'it 
amounts to a marked, pointed dislike/ Still 
good-humour, sweetness, gentleness, would do 
much to remove this prejudice, and these ^urms 
only was one in her lonely position entitled to 
employ. 



53 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE LITTLE EXILE'S ' GAME.' 

Jenny had a certain pride of her own. She 
had made these little advances for the sake of 
her old friend and playmate of early years ; 
bnt she felt it would be unwomanly to do more. 
Young Craven was late the next morning at 
breakfast . rather had been out ranging the 
hills . and by a curious accident, the only gap 
or vacancy at table was to be found next 
Jenny. He drew in his chair with a sort of 
impatience, and a wry look, but half concealed. 
The Bishop was next him on the other side ; 
and though he disliked that prelate, and 
'chaffed' him secretly, and even in a sly 
manner to his face, he turned towards him and 



54 BELLA DONNA. 

became eagerly interested in the Dissenters 
and the * wonderful organization ' of the great 
missionary society. 

But the Bishop, who was always chary of 
his ammunition, and kept his conversational 
theories * in store/ as it were, not to be wasted 
on mere camp-followers and volunteers, did not 
enter eagerly on his favourite subjects. He 
was busy, too, with muffins, which he was 
cutting down fiercely, crosswise, as he would, 
morally speaking, and with the blade of con- 
troversy, a toasted Dissenter. 

But Jenny did not seize the opportunity, a* 
he had imagined. He was determined to be 
churlish if she should dare to address him . to 
'shut her up* curtly. It would be a useful 
hint for her future demeanour. But, strange 
to say, Jenny seemed to shrink away from him 
with a sort of a hint of a cowering glance. 
Once, indeed, she ventured to speak with him 
. to ask him if he would be so kind as to . to 
. to hand her the 

* Beg pardon. What Y he said. 

4 The cream . er; no, I mean the butter/ 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S 'GAME.' 55 

said Jenny, in great confusion, and looking as 
though she expected to receive a blow. 

Young Craven saw this, and laughed in- 
wardly. He was pleased at having this awe- 
inspiring power. ' She won't come teasing me 
again/ he thought. ' She will keep in her 
proper place.' 

* Why did you ask that curious thing down,' 
he said to Charlotte, 'when I was here, at 
least ? Something coarse about her. I can't 
get on with her at all.* 

' It was papa wished to have her here,* said 
the sensible girl, ' he pities her condition so.' 

' I can't bear her manner,' he went on, * it is 
so . so . creeping. And yet, she has good 
looks of her own. She would make a good 
flashy lady's-maid.' 

Jenny, with natural delicacy, took the rough 
hints given to her, and kept in retirement. 
Sir Welbore patronized her, and at his feet 
she drank in the waters of wisdom and the 
Welborian political economy. But young 
Craven she avoided, but not conspicuously. 
Mr. Franklyn, at dinner, one day, was about 



56 BELLA DONNA.  

bidding young Craven 'take in* Miss Bell; 
but Jenny with a hurried start caught him just 
in time, and said in a whisper, ' Oh ! no . no . 
no!' She was sitting next Mr. Franklyn 
afterwards, and she told him softly, that he 
must have thought her 'so odd.' But she . 
that is, persons in her dependent position were 
so unfortunate . sometimes they inspired dis- 
likes, repulsions . perhaps well deserved . in 
her case she knew it was so ; but the fact was, 
young Mr. Craven had taken a dreadful dislike 
to her . in fact, hated her. This was all in 
confidence . not a word to be breathed . as he, 
Mr. Franklyn, was her friend and benefactor. 
But, on the whole, she was most unfortunate . 
most unhappy . most miserable; and Jenny 
seemed that she could then and there have 
cried heartily, but for the publicity. 

Mr. Franklyn was confused, and puzzled, 
and grieved. He really liked Jenny . all 
elderly gentlemen liked Jenny) . and he 
thought of speaking to young Craven. How- 
ever, he told what Jenny had told him to one 
of the younger girls, and said he feared poor 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S ' GAME.' 57 

Jenny was very uncomfortable; and that it 
was a pity ; and that here was her little time 
of pleasure all turned into bitterness. She was 
in a very helpless, dependent position, and it 
was very unfortunate, on the whole. 

The younger girls were a little touched at 
this picture. grew suddenly very kind and 
tender to her . and even told young Craven* 
and said it was a shame for him. He laughed, 
but laughed complacently . he inspired such 
dreadful terror by the awful majesty of his 
demeanour. He was pleased at the notion. 
* What nonsense/ he said. What did he care 
about the girl, only he did not want to be 
persecuted. 

Jenny certainly was not persecuting him. 
That very day he spoke to her good-naturedly, 
but with patronage; but she, receiving it 
gratefully, and almost abjectly, still continued 
shy. She told the girls, who told him again, 
that someway she always felt a tremor when 
Mr. Craven came into the room. It was the 
most absurd, ridiculous thing in the world, and 
she could laugh at herself. But her nerves 



58 BELLA DONNA. 

were shaken, and latterly she had gone through 
a good deal of trial. And the girls, though 
boisterous naturally, suddenly recollected their 
brother's foolish adventure, and became grave 
and fall of pity. Then there came universal 
kissing, and Jenny's plump cheeks had to bear 
many of these tokens of affection. 

Full of tenderness they tell all to young 
Craven. * Now, Charles,' they say, ' you must 
try and be good-natured to her . poor thing. 
You know her dependent situation,' &c. c Good 
gracious,' Charles bursts out; 'what have I 
done to her ? Why, if anything, she stands off 
from me. She shrinks away as if I was going 
to eat her. I am not this rough sort of ogre 
that murders young women for breakfast, am 
I ? Someway she . I don't know what to call 
it . slides off, when I even say good-morning 
to her.' 

' Ah, that's it,' says the younger girl, ' she's 
afraid. She says there's something in your 
face so like the old Eoman busts . of Plato, I 
think . so cold and chilling. I don't see it, 
but she does.' 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S 'GAME.' 59 

'Gammon . nonsense/ said he, laughing 
loud ; ' what a little humbug she is !' But 
humbug or no, he was pleased. Hitherto he 
had always been complimented on his rude 
physical gifts. his shooting, hunting, and the 
mere savage accomplishments. But he thirsted 
for praise for gifts which he had not . the more 
intellectual line . in which, to say the truth, 
he was sadly deficient. This ' humbug,* then, 
came welcome. 

They were going out to walk . the two girls 
and Charles. Charlotte was to take a state 
airing in the carriage with her new mamma, 
an office which, it is to be suspected, she would 
hot have selected, but which, being part of her 
duty, she accepted with cheerfulness. Jenny 
was helping her in some little balancing of 
accounts, a department in which she was 
always useful. On the walk, the girls, who, 
like all young people, were subject to silent 
turns and revulsions of feeling, entertained 
their companion with the whole story of their 
brother's and Jenny's little affair, with all 
minute details ; giving all the dramatic busi- 



60 BELLA DONNA. 

ness and colouring. They took the tale out of 
each other's mouth as they, went along, and 
grew quite sympathetic over the incidents of 
the going away and the return. He had heard 
a meagre outline before . had picked up allu- 
sions and scraps at the family-table, but had 
never received it in this epic shape. He was 
rather interested . put some questions, and 
said, at the end, it was very interesting . like 
a story, by Jove ! Then they told him, with 
laughter, of her lover . of the curate, Wells . 
and the poor man's suffering, and how they 
were longing to make a match of it, and * what 
fun' it would be. They were all plotting, 
they said, to bring it about ; and papa would 
get the Bishop to do something for him, 
and they would make a very pleasant pair. 
Young Craven said it would be good fun for 
them all to join and make the fellow speak 
out. 

That evening he came up several times to 
Jenny, with as much graciousness as he could 
put on, asked her how she spent the day, and 
in the hope of avoiding the terrible Roman 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S ' GAME.' 61 

bust expression, tried to expand his honest face 
into an almost imbecile cast of meaning* Jenny 
expressed (by looks) the most intense grati- 
tude.it was too great kindness for such as her, 
the little exile . human kindness always affected 

her . she didn't expect . But in speech 

she kept reserved, and in a second shot away 
over to the * dear girls/ leaving young Craven 
a little amazed and a little provoked. ' What 
airs this creature is giving herself !' he said to 
himself. * Eeally, when one takes the trouble 

to conciliate ' He thought of the Roman 

bust expression again, and smiled. 'What 
could she be afraid of ?' 

It will be seen how curiously things had 
come * about in our Jenny's favour. Though 
not of the society, and odious, as she con- 
ceived, to one member, still she had come to 
be part of the dramatic elements of the scene, 
and was actually food for the thoughts and 
speech of many of the actors. It was some- 
thing for a poor outcast to reach even to this 
in such a company. 
. It has been mentioned, that young Craven's 



62 BELLA DONNA. 

weakness . rather one of his weaknesses . lay 
in struggling out of his own special accom- 
plishments, where he shone, into every other 
walk, where there was no probability of his 
shining. He was a noble savage . could read, 
that is to say, for ten minutes, but then got 
tired; and could write short, plain letters in 
an indifferent hand. But he pined to be 
thought clever, and actually wrote verses in 
secret. Like most of your rough, strong, 
country fellows, he was more or less ' soft/ 
and had a sentimental corner, to which he 
often retired. He actually wrote verses 
. tender, languishing, feeble stanzas, which 
appeared in an honoured place in the Dorking- 
shire Conservative (Sir Welbore's politics), with 
the initials, 0. W. C. It was whispered about 
whose property these letters were ; indeed, 
young Graven told the secret, with mystery, 
to every person who furnished a suitable 
opening for bringing in the subject. He had 
a half-dozen or so of these outpourings written 
to 'Ianthe,* to 'Juanita,' to ' Elvira/ to 
* Zitella,' and to other romantic beings, whose 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S * GAME.' 63 

names he had heard in plays, or seen in the 
music-books. 

One morning, when the post-bag came in 
at breakfast-time, and Sir Welbore was turn- 
ing over his letters, with a sort of over tasked 
Cabinet Minister air, he handed over two 
newspapers to his son. They were two copies 
of the Dorkingshire Conservative; and it was 
noted, that the youth opened them with a 
sort of bashful, foolish air uncommon with 
him, and at the same time with great flutter 
and eagerness. It came out after breakfast. 
It was the longest effort his genius had yet 
soared to. It was a poem 'To Medora,' 
which, bursting the modest limits of the 
* Poets' Corner ' of that journal, had spread 
like an inundation down three quarters of a 
column. It was in blank verse (the feet very 
imperfectly calculated), and was signed with 
the familiar letters, ' C. W. C He was bursting 
to show his labour, and got the three girls 
together in the garden summer-house to listen 
while he read. The two younger, sadly un- 
trained, listened, wondering. They would 



64 BELLA DONNA. 

have laughed, but young Craven was serious 
. too serious. It began . 

' Medora ! loveliest flower, where'er thou art ! 
Sweetest !. who dwells,' &c. 

He read it twice through, and then collected 
the voices. The younger ones said it was fine 
. very fine . as they conscientiously supposed 
it must be. The sensible girl said it was very 
fair. very good, indeed. 

4 But don't you like it . isn't it the best 
tiling I have done ? Come !' 

* The best thing you have done ?' 

' Yes . it is far better than the " Ianthe " . 
isn't it ?' 

'Well/ said the sensible girl, smiling 'as 
you do put it to me, I like the little short 
pieces better. I think blank verse is scarcely 
your line. You may call me Miss Candour if 
you like/ 

' Well, I must say,' said the youth, bridling 
a little, ' I can't see how you get at that. I 
know the editor said I had made " a gigantic 
stride " . those were his very words/ 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S ' GAME.' 65 

'My dear Charles/ says the sensible girl, 
laughing, * exactly. No one can make a more 
gigantic stride than you on terra jvrma. Keep 
to it, my dear Charles. This blank verse- 
making never answers, even in the most skil- 
ful hands. Gigantic strides ! What a funny 
editor . ha ! ha ! Not but that is very good . 
wonderful for you . it really is very good,' 
added the sensible girl, hastily. 

Young Craven was colouring pretty hard. 
He took back his paper, and crushed it up to 
put it in his pocket. 

'I was sure you would have liked it,' he 
said, with deeply wounded tone . ' for Medora 
was partly taken from ' 

c Oh, how nice . how kind of you !' said the 
sensible girl warmly. Though she was one of 
the truthful, candid people, she was more con- 
scious than they are, of the ungraciousness of 
speaking the plain truth . only she knew not 
how to take off the unpleasantness. She would 
have been grateful to be shown the way. But 
his withers had been sorely wrung. Yet all 
would have healed in an hour ; but just at that 

vol. n. F 



66 BELLA DONNA. 

moment Jenny is seen passing by among the 
trees, pensively pulling flowers. 

' I think you will allow the editor to be a 
man of judgment. It is one of the best-con- 
ducted papers in England. He is considered, 

I know Hallo ! there is Miss Jenny. I 

wonder is she a judge of poetry. By Jove ! I 
should like to ' 

The girls, too young to know the signifi- 
cance of what they were about to do, started 
up and cried, ' Oh, read it for Jenny . read it 
for Jenny ;' and without a second's delay called 
out, * Jenny, Jenny/ 

Jenny stopped, in, the act of pulling a flower, 
amazed . affrighted. The colour rose slowly 
in Charlotte's cheeks. Jenny looked round . 
hesitated . then moved swiftly away. The 
two girls started off in pursuit. * She must 
hear Charles's poem,' they said. 

Charlotte looked as though she suffered, but 
she was too proud to say a word. The youth 
was thinking complacently of the pleasure of 
reading it a third time aloud, and said nothing. 
Jenny was presently brought in, struggling 



THE LITTLE EXTLE's * GAME.' 67 

almost, and in custody. She was almost 
scared. 

* You foolish children/ she said, ' what did 
you do this for ? Mr. Craven here, and dear 
Charlotte. oh !' 

4 You must hear it, Jenny/ said the girls. 
'Oh, such a beautiful poem as Charles has 
written !' 

Jenny's face lighted up as with a flash. 

'A poem/ she said, with enthusiasm, as 
though the news were too good to be true. 
* A poem . Mr. Craven's !' 

'Written all by himself/ said the girls to- 
gether. ' You wouldn't believe it.' 

This, though a little uncomplimentary, was 
still genuine praise. Jenny shook her head 
sadly. She knew the marvellous power 
latent, perhaps undeveloped, behind the os 
frontis of the Koman bust ; she could believe 
much. Young Craven looked bashful, and 
fingered his newspaper. He was burning to 
begin. 

' It is only some ridiculous rhymes/ he said. 
' I am ashamed of them, and you must promise 



08 BELLA DONNA. 

mo not to laugh. Charlotte here says they are 
vary bad. I daresay she's right/ 

.fenny gave a start. 

1 V cry bad V she said ; theu checked herself. 
. Olit Charlotte is a great judge; she is so 
olevor \ has read such a deal. Haven't you, 
Charlotte* dear  

Charlotte still suffering, answered coldly . 

1 1 wild they were very good . very excel- 
lent, lijilwd. t am uo judge, as you know 

only ' 

1 ( Mi, 1 *aid J enny, in a lowly way, ' if it would 
not bo t\H> much trouble, tcould you . that is, if 
yon mvwM bo so kifltt. just to read. just a 
Utile iv fow lines/ 

Then, ottor many 'Ifs really not worth/ 
%% l\m my word* its the greatest stuff you 
ever/ Ai\ % the youth began . 

* MtnUvr*! loxvliwt flower! whe^er thou art, 

Who shall describe Jenny's delight . real, 
Uliaflfccted delight. during the recital of this 




THE LITTLE EXILE'S 'GAME.' 69 

performance ? Her sympathetic countenance 
expressed all the hopes and passions of 
the poet She marked the time, as it were, 
by little gasps and spasms of intense enjoy- 
ment. She looked from one of the girls' faces 
to the other in speechless rapture. Young 
Craven felt this encouragement, and pursued 
his task with fresh fire. He got to the end 
with immense spirit . was proud of himself. 
Charlotte looked at Jenny's honest enthusiasm 
with a curling lip and strange disgust. She 
was naturally of the ' lymphatic ' temperament, 
and was not easily stirred. She said nothing. 

4 You like it?' said young Craven, folding 
up his paper. 

6 Oh . oh . oh !' said Jenny three times, half 
closing her eyes, ' charming, charming !' Her 
eyes fell on Charlotte's look of scorn. ' That 
is . I'm not a regular judge. But I like it . 
oh, I do so like it ! It is all I can say.' 

' Well, that is very high praise. It is fair, 
I think, for a beginner. I assure you, a very 
experienced literary man ' (Ed. of Dorkingshire 
Conservative), spoke very highly of it. Of 



70 BELLA DONNA. 

course, he might be prejudiced. Charlotte 
doesn't like it . no, Charlotte austerely con- 
demns.' 

Jenny heard this statement with amazement. 
Charlotte, too proud, still said nothing. Her 
sister spoke for her. 

4 Indeed, Charles, she liked it. Charlotte 
never says what she feels.' 

They at last had an instinct that something 
was wrong. But their youthful minds didnot 
see that this attempt at justification was sug- 
gesting to him that there was something to be 
justified, and only magnifying a trifle. 

4 Not like it!' said Jenny, grieved, as it 
were. ' Not like it ! Oh, I know nothing of 
the rules/ she went on, smiling. ' I am one of 
the vulgar crowd, and it pleases me. But 
Charlotte is so clever, and has learnt all the 
rules.' 

Charlotte looked at her, scared, as it were. 
She had instinct of what Jenny was about, 
but seemed to be afraid to think it possible. 
Young Craven, now in good humour again, 
had rolled up his precious paper. 



% 



THE LITTLE EXILE'S ' GAME.' 71 

'Never mind/ he said, 'it is not worth 
talking about. I am a wretched rhymer, and 
shan't take to it as a profession, I assure you. 
Don't be afraid, Charlotte, I shan't discredit 
our establishment.' 

'Still,' said Jenny, with hesitation, 'it is so 
nice, so charming to be able to turn a few lines 
elegantly, if you wish. Oh, I would give, give 
worlds!' added she, clasping her hands, 'in 
the* lonely solitude of my little room, to be 
able to do so. How I envy those who have the 
gift to do so ! Don't you, dearest Charlotte T 

Charlotte, still scared, said it was very 
pleasant . that is . 

'Ah,' said young Craven, 'nothing under 
Milton for Charlotte . the best sort or none. 
Come now, let us get in to lunch. A race, 
girls . fifty yards' start for you.' And the 
three shot away. 

The two women, left suddenly behind at the 
door of the summer-house, looked suddenly in 
each other's face. Our Jenny's cheeks had a 
fine fresh colour, and her fine eyes sparkled; 
the other was pale. 



72 BELLA DONNA. 

r 

' I am not going in to lunch, dear,' said 
Jenny. ' I must get some more flowers. You 
will go, of course, and join that happy circle. 
Dear me, what a happy lot before you ! You 
remember, in the " Speaker," at school, " Happy, 
happy* h a PPy pair. None but the brave," &c. 
He is brave. By the way, you won't be 
angry, darling, if I give you one Utile bit of 
advice. You know I mean well ; but it just 
occurred to me,. May I ?' 

Charlotte, with her eyes still fixed on her, 
said abruptly, ' What have you to tell me ?' 

'You should praise his poetry . in fact, 
everything he does. Men expect it. / was 
genuine, because I really did like it. Oh ! 
they were lovely, beautiful verses. It really 
surprises me/ added Jenny, musingly, 'how 
you did not like them. Quite right, though, 
to tell the truth.' 

There was a strange air of independence in 
the way Jenny spoke, together with a tone of 
mocking good-humour quite unusual with her. 
The other remarked it, and seemed confounded. 

' 1 must go in,' she said, slowly. 




THE LITTLE EXILE'S 'GAME.' 73 

' Ah ! yes,' said Jenny, i I am detaining yon. 
' Good-bye, darling. You are not angry ? 
People in my situation are always privileged. 
Do you know,' added Jenny, in a half- whisper, 
'I think him charming. so gay, so natural. 
Oh ! you vM be so happy f 

And with a little pert toss of her head, 
Jenny moved away, singing. The other, as 
it were dreaming, looked after her long ; then 
suddenly seemed' to wake up. A quiet, re- 
solved expression came into her, with one of 
her old calm smiles. She walked away thought- 
fully, but with a firm step. At the end of the 
walk she looked back an instant at Jenny, 
who was stooping, pulling flowers. A little, 
light waggoner's straw hat decorated Jenny's 
head. No doubt she was singing at her task. 
A strange look of quiet scorn came into Char- 
lotte's face ; it was half defiance. She had 
picked up Jenny's glove. It was open battle, 
with pointed spears. No quarter. 

But they were not done with the luckless 
address 'To Medora,' as yet. Two days 
afterwards a stupid housemaid, in distress for 



74 BELLA DONNA. 

fuel, found the Dorkingshire Conservative drift- 
ing abopt as part of the flotsam and jetsam of 
the drawing-room. It had served its turn . 
local journals were not considered precious . 
and she did not know of the splendid treasure 
it contained. Accordingly, ' Medora ' was re- 
solved into wreaths of curling smoke, and 
floated gently up the dining-room chimney. 
Before long the youth had missed his treasure, 
and there was terrible hue-and-cry through 
the house. It could not be found ; and house- 
maid knew not, or declined to disclose, what 
she had done. The youth grew moody. The 
loss might be irretrievable, for local journals 
are not kept in stock. Suddenly he remem- 
bered there were two copies. What had 
become of the second Conservative? Fresh 
hue-and-cry. Up-stairs, down-stairs, and even 
in my lady's chamber ; when, lo, the youth's 
own hand delves out from among the music in 
the drawing-room the lost journal. We are 
are saved: there is great joy. But in the 
very heart of the Conservative is a long narrow 
gap, like the embrasure of a tower, clearly 




THE LITTLE EXILE'S 'GAME.' 75 

done with a pair of scissors. The precious 
rhymes 4 To Medora ' had been feloniously cut 
out! 

The family were out, scattered about. The 
youth, in a great fume, inquired of servants . of 
everybody . but was not displeased. Jenny 
was in her room, in retreat, working or 
braiding flowers for the waggoner's straw 
hat, or, it might be, praying. A maid came 
to tell her of the outrage, and presently Jenny 
entered into the drawing-room where the 
youth was looking vacantly through the win- 
dow in his newspaper. Jenny penitent . 
morally speaking, with her hair dishevelled 
and the whi^e sheet of Jane Shore on. she 
would have fallen at the youth's feet. She 
had been very wrong. She had no right to 
do so . none in the world. But where there 
were two copies she thought . no harm . 
indeed, meant no harm. In fact, she alone was 
guilty, and there . there (in trembling fingers) 
was the poem, cut out from the Conservative's 
bosom with Jenny's own little scissors . there 
. there. 



76 BELLA DONNA. 

Young Craven raised her (morally speaking), 
and, really flattered by this genuine unaffected 
homage to his work, glowed all over as he 
conveyed his acknowledgments. Harm ! there 
was none in the world. He felt it really as a 
great compliment that she should appreciate his 
little verses. * Some of these days/ continued 
young Craven, with an air of wise thought, * I 
mean to collect my little trifles into a small 
volume. Some literary people of judgment' 
(i.e. Ed. of Dork. Cons.) 'have strongly ad- 
vised me to this step. You shall certainly 
have an early copy, that is, if you will honour 
me by giving it a place among your books.' 

Jenny, overwhelmed by this favour, faltered 
out her acknowledgments. Wheels were heard 
on the gravel outside. 

' Here they are,' she said hurriedly, ' I must 
go. I have letters to write ;' and she fluttered 
away to her room again. 

Why must she go ? He was confused and 
pleased. ' What an enthusiast she is !' he said 
half aloud ; * and yet I like these natural cha- 
racters ; something Italian . something Spanish 




THE LITTLE EXTLE*S i GAME.' 77 

about her.' Then he thought of Charlotte, 
who had not privily cut them out to paste in 
her album, and ceased to smile. 

At dinner [that day the sensible girl, who 
had become of a sudden much more earnest in 
her attentions to him, and almost forced in her 
manner (which did not suit her), said sud- 
denly, ' Well, Charles ; no news of the verses. 
They have ransacked the house from top to 
bottom/ 

' Oh, they were found,' he said, carelessly. 

' Found/ she said, lighting up ; 6 1 am so 
glad ! And where T 

4 Oh, in the drawing-room, I believe, among 
the music.' He looked over furtively at 
Jenny, who was looking over furtively too, but 
dropped her eyelids the next second. Char- 
lotte saw it . not only saw, but understood 
the whole incident, as though it had been told 
her on the spot. There was a secret, or at 
least a tacit understanding, between them. 
The sensible girl turned pale again. Jenny 
was scoring rapidly. 



78 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XIX, 



JENNYS MORNING. 



Though somewhat distracted by his company, 
Jenny noticed that Mr. Franklyn used to 
retire, as of old, to his study, . going down 
the mine, as it were, very late of nights, to 
shovel among his papers. He was getting the 
old, anxious look back again . sadly worn 
about the cheeks . for business had been draw- 
ing in closer about him. Sir Welbore had 
announced to him one morning, in stately way 
(as from the ministerial benches) : . ' Mr. 
Franklyn, I have heard from Mr. Hodge . my 
solicitor, Mr. Hodge. He expects to* be here 
on Thursday next. Hum . and so . hum . I 
dare say you will find it convenient to have 
everything ready for him.' Mr. Franklyn 




jenny's morning. 79 

said yes ; he hoped so . in fact, he was quite 
sure so . and would send for Mr. Crowle at 
once. Jenny was by, in a corner, working 
embroidery . cutting out . with such a general 
mouse-like demeanour, that they virtually con- 
sidered her absfent. She was too lowly to 
listen. 

Jenny, however,' knew that this referred to 
darling Charlotte's fortune, which Mr. Franklyn 
was to find. For the great house of Craven, 
though abounding in wealth, considered it only 
due to its magnificence to have a proportionate 
sum laid at its door, by the family who was 
shortly to be allied to it. It would not do to 
have it go forth that a mere pauper was 
coming into the House, ' in her smock,' as our 
coarse old ancestors would put it. And so 
stately Sir Welbore, rising in his place on the 
Treasury benches, said, 'Mr. Franklyn, we 
shall say seven thousand pounds, if you please.' 
And Mr. Franklyn said, With all his heart ; 
that is, with all his hea^y heart. 

It was laid on the back of his young man of 
business, Mr. Crowle ; and for some weeks it 



80 BELLA DONNA. 

was believed that he had been striving in the 
market to get together this sum on the security 
of the estate, which seemed doubtful enough, 
for it was pasted over and over again with 
layers of mortgages, like an old dead wall. 
He went out every day, like a shipwrecked 
mariner on an island, ascending the rock, and 
came back with dismal accounts. Still there 
was hope. But now . the evening before Sir 
Welbore made his financial statement from 
the Treasury bench, he had written from 
London to say there was hope . more in his 
next. Which news produced a little exulta- 
tion and fluttering hope ; for it was likely that 
the dead wall would bear another mortgage 
poster. 

That morning, with the general Grey Forest 
postal delivery, came a letter for Jenny, from 
Mr. Maxwell, the first she had received. In 
the quiet retirement of her own chamber she 
read it. It ran : . 



.% 



jenny's morning. 81 

' Chesterfield Street. 

* Dear Miss Bell, 

. I hope your health is now quite re- 
stored, and that the air of Grey Forest has done 
you good. I am afraid I am more selfish in 
this wish than you imagine. You are wanted 
back here sadly; and, I must tell you the 
plain truth, we cannot get on without you. 
The house is in disorder; the poor children 
can do nothing, and their mother, who, I am 
sorry to say, did not know who was her secret 
and unseen friend, now begins to miss many of 
those little cares and attentions which we 
cannot supply to her. For myself, I am 
getting helpless again . eyes showing signs of 
revolt . in short, I want my faithful secretary 
again. 

4 This is the very effrontery of selfishness ; 
but what can I do ? Still you must not think 
of stirring, unless you are quite . more than 
restored. Only please mention some period 
about which we may look for you. 

* Your sincere Friend, 

' Frederick Maxwell. 

VOL. II. G 



82 BELLA DONNA. 

* P.S. . I may mention, lest you should be 
thinking of that little unpleasantness to which 
I fancied you alluded, before you left us, that 
I have taken steps to hare things put on a 
proper footing. 

' Forgive me. But may we say some day 
next week ? Suppose Monday ? Even now 
I feel that those vile labourers of mine are 
about striking work/ 

Jenny smiled a little as she read ; but the 
next moment her bright forehead contracted. 
Was she thinking how awkwardly this came . 
just in the middle of this little excitement . 
possibly, too, in the middle of some plans that 
had been working in her little head? This 
was an invitation that could scarcely be 
well resisted; and go she must the next 
week. The obvious course for Jenny was to 
crowd together all her little enjoyments, and 
whatever little prospectus she was turning 
over in her mind. And it did seem as 
though some one had whispered this prcjet to 
Jenny, for she left her chamber with a steady 




jenny's morning. 83 

step, and a smile of confidence on her rosy 
lips. 

Mr. Franklyn had grown very kind, and 
almost affectionate, to Jenny of late . since he 
fancied she was finding herself uncomfortable 
among them. He used to speak softly and 
graciously to her, as it were to encourage her, 
by way of counterpoise to any little prejudice 
the younger people might have against her. 
And now of this morning, when they were 
gone out, and Jenny was sitting quietly in 
the drawing-room, within the shadow of the 
great Sir Welbore's broad Times sheet, Mr. 
Franklyn came in, rubbing his head, in a 
troubled, questioning way, and said, * Jenny, 
I am going to try and get these papers into 
order. Will you come and help me, and make 
a day of it ?'. 

Jenny rose at once, with a look towards 
Sir Welbore of gentle suffering (the gold rims 
of the double eye-glass were scanning her, 
over the Times), and floated away to the door. 
* Ah, hum,' said Sir Welbore, * quite a sort of 



84 BELLA DONNA. 

secretary, I declare/ The girls and young 
Craven had talked of a party to their island, 
some time after lunch. She did not care for 
their sports. Besides, they would not want 
her ; would not miss her, perhaps. 

A wretched man of business . wretched at 
accounts . at arrangement . at seeing his way 
generally; and yet always groping and fer- 
reting, and shovelling, and i getting things 
settled/ which meant frightful disorganization. 
He was turning over tin boxes, emptying 
them, as into a gigantic dust-bin. He might 
have had a train of carts at the door to cart 
away all the stroddy or silt ; and still he was 
always settling. He had a genius for this sort 
of disorganization. 

Gentle Jenny sighed as she surveyed the 
dSbris. It was as though wreckers had got 
in. A safe, standing wide open, . boxes 
spilled, . and a round table to the left, over- 
balanced by the load of old law-papers, on 
its side on the ground, having come down in 
the night with a crash. Poor man ! He had 



i 



jenny's morning. 86 

thought to have everything orderly by Sir 
Welbore's coming. 

Jenny, after her plaintive way, soon struck 
out a plan. She was for action. She proposed 
they should do the sorting together, and that 
they should eliminate a good worthless pro- 
portion from the mass by wholesome destruc- 
tion, tearing up, &c. Of such sort were old 
tradesmen's bills, circulars, pamphlets, tracts . 
for there was a varied assortment. And very 
shortly Jenny was standing up to her knees in 
a heap of paper shreds. She was a brave work- 
woman. 

She found a little entertainment, too, in the 
matter. She whetted her woman's curiosity 
as she went along, taking quick, short glances 
at this and that paper, some of which set her 
wondering. She lightened the work for Mr. 
Franklyn by talking cheerfully, and getting 
him to talk about various private matters. 
He found a great relief in this sort of com- 
munion, and gradually, as he found himself 
better by the intercourse, spoke with her about 
this and that little matter according as a paper, 



86 BELLA DONNA. 

a bill, or application turning up out of the 
heap suggested the subject. This community 
of work* makes people strangely confidential. 
Jenny gave wise, sagacious replies . not very 
profound truly, but practical: at least they 
pointed to one distinct course to him, poor 
soul. Tossing between many, it was welcome, 
as something distinct and certain. 

*I wish/ he said at last, when they had 
already made surprising progress, . * I wish I 
had known of you before . that is, that yott 
were so clever and useful/ 

'But/ said Jenny, 'dear sir, you would 
never . if you recollect . let me . that is * 

4 Because/ he said, ' I never knew . I never 
thought. Perhaps, after all, if Charles had . 
but no matter now. I ought to be able to do 
these things. I was brought up to business. 
But someway there has so much come to- 
gether upon my poor head of late, all at once, 
that ' 

Some one tapped at the door. 

4 The steward, sir/ said the servant, * wants 
to see you particular/ 




jenny's morning. 87 

'Yes, yes/ said he wearily, and moved 
mechanically to the door. 

But Jenny jumped up, with something 
like a half shriek . 'Oh, sir, sir, you won't 
leave me here. Oh, I dare not! Indeed, 
it is impossible.. All these precious docu- 
ments ' 

Mr. Franklyn smiled. 'Ah, Jenny/ he 
said, 'I would trust you with . with . no 
matter, it will do another time. This is my 
life, you see. Always at call for this, that, 
and the other. A sort of gentleman-waiter, 
wanted by every one. No one to confide in . 
to help me . to advise me. The poor girls, 
what can they do ? There is this business of 
Charlotte's money. Crowle says it will all go 
smooth; but I have a presentiment that we 
shall not get it. Nothing goes smooth with 
me . never did. God help me !' 

He sat down in a chair, and passed his 
hands nervously over his forehead. He had 
quite given way of a sudden. Jenny had 
never seen him so before, but she said not a 
word either of comfort or consolation, but went 



88 BELLA DONNA. 

on with her work. Mr. Franklyn seemed to 
find a sort of relief in finding some one to con- 
fide his wretchedness to. 

'And poor Charlotte,' he went on . 'my 
true, faithful, working, unselfish Charlotte . if 
anything should . goodness! . I think, Jenny, 
I should die. The disgrace, the mortification, 
before those cold, proud people. I think . I 
think I never could get over it. More for her 
sake; for I am getting very used to blows 
and the degradations of debt. Poor, darling 
Charlotte ! No one knows what a comfort she 
has been to me/ 

'Dear me! dear me!' said Jenny, 'how 
surprising ! I thought all was arranged quite 
smooth; and that Charlotte was to be so 
happy. How odd, I am sure . they all think 
so . at least, Sir Welbore ' 

' Hush, Jenny,' said Mr. Franklyn, looking 
round nervously . 'exactly, exactly/ 

Jenny, very busy now tearing the papers 
vigorously, with her back to Mr. Franklyn, 
was calmly smiling to herself. She was no 
hypocrite, and she did not love Charlotte very 




jenny's MORNING. 89 

much ; so her most honest course was to re- 
main silent. 

Mr. Franklyn went on: 'If you were to 
know, Jenny, what I have suffered since you 
left us. No one knows it. But to be fighting 
off disgrace and exposure with all sorts of 
shifts, and even tricks . to be walking through 
our county pointed at as an embarrassed man, 
who has just escaped arrest by some ingenious 
trick, thought of by Crowle ; and our family 
as good . better than the rest of them . so 
proud. Oh, Jenny, Jenny, there is only one 
knows what I suffer . poor Charlotte. And 
yet she unconsciously makes me suffer more 
than anything.' 

Jenny said something now . but still coldly 
enough . 

'You shouldn't take these gloomy views, 
sir. This affair will go well enough, you'll 
see. Mr. Crowle will be back . when, sir ?' 

* To-morrow evening,' said he, with a smile 
. a very wan smile; 'we shall be out of 
suspense by that time. Even he, Crowle, I 
don't think is the same to us latterly . (nobody 



90 BELLA DONNA. 

is the same to us latterly). He has heard 
something, or somebody has told him some- 
thing.' 

'Told him something !' said Jenny. 'Oh, 
impossible, sir !' 

Jenny, being utterly ignorant of all the 
facts, was scarcely entitled to pronounce as to 
the possibility or impossibility, but Mr. Frank- 
lyn understood her. 

* Some foolish joke which these poor thought* 
less children played upon him. It has hurt his 
sensibility. I don't know, I'm sure/ 

' Oh, I am confident, I am certain ' . almost 
enthusiastically . * this is some mistake. Dear 
Charlotte, so steady, so quiet, so sensible, she 
wouldn't- ' 

' Ah, exactly,' said he, 'just what I would 
fcave supposed. Yet, some way, I think, he 
has got to dislike Charlotte, and before you 
would actually almost say he seemed to have a 
sort of partiality for her.' 

Jenny grew thoughtful on this, and smiled 
down upon a bundle of papers. 

' But he is a little changed. We are not 



.% 



jenny's morning. 91 

the same as another family/ continued he; 
* we are an unlucky generation. Even there's 
my cousin, John Hall, who lives at Dieppe, a 
wealthy man (we have all his papers here 
somewhere) . even he, an old bachelor, and we, 
his only relations, have nothing to expect from 
him. He has almost told me as much. We 
are different from other people, my dear Jenny, 
and always will be. And to tell you the truth, 
I wish the struggle was over, for I am, indeed, 
getting very tired.' 

He looked very tired, that poor, worn* wan 
creature, who had been battling now so many 
years. 

* These,' said Jenny, holding a loose bundle 
of law parchments, i What is to be done with 
these . they look new ?' 

Mr. Franklyn had lighted on letters or 
papers of his own, and scarcely heard her. 
Jenny looked up, and seeing him engaged, 
looked at this bundle again, and answered her 
own question for herself. They were new 
clean deeds, labelled outside "Sntenture of 
ittortgage," but there were blanks whereon the 



92 BELLA DONNA. 

names should have been. Jenny having a 
sharp instinct, at once saw the true conclusion, 
that this was an * arrangement ' which, like 
very many of the Franklyn arrangements, had 
proved abortive. So, when Mr. Franklyn 
came back into the world once more, and 
asked, * What did you say, Jenny 7 they were 
out of her hand, and buried under a heap of 
paper lumber. 

After an hour's more work, i Now go, 
Jenny/ said he. * You must be tired, and I 
am getting very selfish. Now go and get 
some fresh air/ 

Jenny did not want fresh air . would have 
laboured cheerfully in that vineyard for weeks, 
if necessary. To say the truth, she found it 
rather a piquant occupation, and used to dip 
now and again into letters, to see if they were 
of value and worth preserving. But at Mr. 
Franklyn's almost stern, peremptory bidding 
she stole away quietly, and passed through 
the drawing-room, to get her bonnet. She 
was a little heated with stooping, and looked 
really brilliant. She was going to the garden 



.* 



jenny's morning. 93 

to get a few flowers. She would soon be shut 
up in the grim wilderness of London, poor 
child! 

Here, bathing, as it were, in the bosom of a 
softly-cushioned arm-chair, was Sir Welbore, 
his gold double eye-glasses clinging to the 
bridge of his nose, with a gentle nip. He was 
travelling laboriously down the hard high- 
roads of the Leading Journal, and had scarcely 
made half his journey. He was delayed by a 
sort of political economy * rut ' that was full 
in his way. The Chancellor of the Exchequer 
had been speech-making at Paddington, and 
that brilliant financier had been dwelling in 
gorgeous rhetorical fireworks on the * buoy- 
ancy of the national resources,' and compli- 
menting the British tax-payer on his * elasticity/ 
Sir Welbore was a little bewildered by the 
glare, and, as it were, saw rings and stars 
before his eyes ; out of which chaos arose a 
complacent thought . more an expression than 
a thought . a rich sonorous platitude, which he 
mistook for a thought . something that jingled 
like ' expansion of the currency ' and ' depre- 



94 BELLA DONNA. 

ciation of paper.' He was addressing a spectral 
crowded meeting, with ' And, sir, when I see 
the glut of precious metals which must eventu- 
ally go near to the final depreciation of our 

paper currency, and I will add, our credit ' 

At this point Jenny glided through, with* her 
little waggoner's hat in her hand. 

A real audience . an * intelligent young 
person, too/ who took an interest in that sbrt 
of thing, was welcome indeed. 

* Strange . hum . Miss . er . Odell, you re- 
collect our little conversation the other night, 
what I was saying about the expansion of 
the precious metals?' Indeed, Jenny recol- 
lected it. The memory of that conversation 
would go down with her to her grave. This 
was conveyed in Jenny's expressive counte- 
nance. * Most singular the way things come 
out. Here is the right honourable gentleman 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer' (he loved 
these full-sounding dignities), * at the Padding- 
ton Operatives' Institute . hails . let me see . 
yes." I hail the introduction of a flood of 
specie into these countries as symptoms of the 



jenny's morning. 95 

healthy well-being of the State." Did yon 
ever hear such a doctrine ? Now I ask you, 
Miss . er . Odell, what did I say to you about 

the glut of specie ? What did ' 

Poor Jenny's memory was, naturally enough, 
a blank as to the glut of specie . as well might 
he have put to her Kepler's Laws, in their 
proper order. But, lost in a gentle wonder at 
the behaviour of the right honourable gentle- 
man, she murmured . 

* Glut of specie ! Ah, yes . yes, so true : 
exactly. How strange !' 

* Strange !' said Sir Welbore ; . did you ever 
know anything like it ? I tell you I am not 
one of those who believe in this man ; and I 
tell you, Miss. er . Odell . if I had been at 
that . er . Paddington meeting, I should have 
said to him . Sir, when I see . (pray, take a 
chair . I don't wonder you are interested in 
these studies) . I should say to him . Sir' . 
And poor Jenny sat down with all the gentle- 
ness of an angel, and heard out the whole of 
the observations which would have been ad- 
dressed to the right honourable gentleman who 



96 BELLA DONNA. 

directs the finances of this mighty empire. 
She listened in ecstasy ; when he had finished 
the meeting broke out into applause. 

6 How delightful ! It is so rarely/ she said, 
at the end, * that one meets a person at whose 
feet one can sit and listen in this way. It 
seems so easy, and yet so dreadfully difficult/ 

'It depends on the way these things are 
put/ said he, complacently. '1 don't think 
my friend Franklyn has much turn that way. 
He is content with leaving his gold locked up 
there, at his banker's, without ever him asking 
the famous question . What is a pound-note ?' 

Something flashed up in Jenny's full, round 
face . as though something had been whispered 
to her. She sighed very deeply, and then 
said, with mournfulest commiseration . 

'Poor, dear Mr. Franklyn! Ah, sir, he 
knows well the value of a pound.' 

i Oh . ah, of course, there were early difficul- 
ties in the family. He weathered them, I 
believe, with general skill.' 

' Ah,' said Jenny, ' indeed yes. He is a good, 
brave man . and has fought struggling, I may 



jentsty's morning. 97 

say, all his life. It really amounts to heroism/ 
Said Jenny, enthusiastically. 

* Of course . of course . and therefore he has 
succeeded. Any one that properly puts their 
shoulder to the wheel, you know ' 

4 Succeeded !' said Jenny, mournfully. ' Ah, 
sir, it "will never be known . it was not his 
fault. They have never yet dared to say 
thai j said Jenny, excitedly. 

' 1 believe him to be a very estimable 
person, indeed, but, er' . and Sir Welbore, 
bethinking him of a compliment that had been 
paid him by some one, who afterwards asked 
him for his interest and obtained it . that he 
was a first-rate cross-examiner, and should 
have been at the bar, thought how he would 
skilfully practise his wonderful gifts on this 
young person. 

'Yes . er . I have heard he managed his 
affairs . got them round, you know, wonder- 
fully r 

Jenny % sighed again. 

* We can't command success,' said the 
Baronet, uneasily, and forgetting his amateur 

VOL. II. H 



98 BELLA BONN A, 

wig and gown. 'He has been successful . 
at least . h'm,' he added, remembering his 
wig and gown; 'he has . er . positively 
extricated himself? 9 

* Oh yes ; oh, to be sure, of course/ said 
Jenny, hastily. * Quite, I believe, sir, alto- 
gether . entirely/ 

She was in sad confusion, for she saw she 
had been nearly betraying her benefactor. But 
Sir Welbore saw it too. 

'But I understood this family . er . were 
now, I might say, opulent. I don't exactly 
understand, or see my way. I think it scarcely 
above board, or ' 

'Oh, sir, sir/ said Jenny, piteously, ' if you 
were to know all the pains dear Mr. Franklyn 
takes . the weary nights, when we are all in 
bed. He is killing himself; indeed it is not 
his fault.' 

The Baronet smiled grimly. He thought it 
was his acute powers of cross-examination had 
brought all this out. # 

* Ton my word, really, I was not prepared ; 
that is . but no matter, Mr. Hodge, our profes- 



jenny's morning. 99 

sional adviser will be here on Thursday, and . 
er . my friend Franklyn will, of course, be 
prepared to meet him . will see that every- 
thing is explicit. You will excuse me, Miss . 
er . Odell. I have some letters . er/ 

Jenny took her way sorrowfully from the 
room, carrying her little hat reversed, as it 
were, as though she were at a military funeral. 
Sir Welbore looked after her, and thought of 
his own penetration. He said to himself many 
times, in a tone of pique . * Ton my word ! 
'pon my word !' This was Jenny's morning's 
work, and it was a fair instalment, considering 
the little time that was left to her. 



100 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTEE XX. 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 



Jenny went out to gather flowers. She took 
her way to the garden, her hat in hand, to 
allow the breezes jto fan her forehead. The 
truth was she felt she was a little heated about 
that region, for she was full of a rich generous 
blood ; and for the last two or three months, 
since she had begun her secretarial duties at 
Mr. Maxwell's, had been taking abundance of 
a generous port wioe, * ordered ' her by proper 
authority. Sometimes, therefore, this rich 
generous fluid rushed to her forehead, and 
would take up its abode there for an hour 
or more. 

She gathered her flowers ; then went forth 
to the fields, by the river, through the wood, 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 101 

and she felt the heat gratefully subsiding. A 
very pretty river it was, and she stood beside 
it for some time, mournfully watching the 
current pass by, and carry down the stray 
flower or two she cast upon its surface. So 
absorbed was she, that for several moments 
she did not perceive the sky was growing 
cloudy, nor did she hear a bold, hearty voice 
calling to her. more properly < hailing ' her. 
She looked up in affright. In a sort of bower, 
or natural alcove, which was on the river's 
bank, had been stretched out young Craven, 
taking his mid-day cigar, and reading the 
authorized Sporting Journal ; a combination 
of luxuries he was fond of. 

' Hallo P he cried again, 'Miss Bell . Miss 
BellP 

Jenny was scared. The privacy of her 
little meditation to be so rudely broken in 
upon. She was in a tremble, and instinctively 
turned to fly. She walked away quickly. 

' Hallo ! hallo P said young Craven, rising 
hastily, ' where are you going to, Miss Bell ? 
Don't run away, I say. Do wait.' 



102 BELLA DONNA. 

Jenny looked back indecisively, fluttered a 
moment, then went on. 

' Good gracious P said young Craven, testily, 
'what a creature she is! I can't make her 
out. I sat/, 9 he shouted, ' do stop. Well, then, 
we shall see who can go fastest . a race, then P 
And he started in pursuit. 

Poor Jenny ! . she stopped in one second . a 
frightened fawn, run down. The hunter came 
up, panting. The fawn was at his feet, with a 
piteous prayer for mercy in her eye. The 
hunter was generous. He took pity on that 
brilliant face, flushed with agitation, and put 
his knife back into its sheath. 

4 Well/ he said, * you have given me such a 
chase. What is the matter ? Why did you 
run away  

Jenny, barely yet recovered, looked round 
with alarm. 

' Oh, Mr. Craven/ she said, * you frightened 
me so ! I must go back . indeed I must/ 

'Must,' he said, laughing. 'Why, must? 
Are you on parole ? Are the gates of Grey 
Forest to be shut at mid-day . eh  



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 103 

Jenny raised her eyes and began to laugh. 

* Oh, Mr. Craven,' she said, and began to 
laugh again. 

The youth grew a little uneasy. 

* Something is amusing you,' he said; 'I 
hope you don't find any ' 

Jenny was serious in a second . nay, earnest, 
anxious. 

'No, no, Mr. Craven,' she said, 'I was 
amused at the strange, quaint way you put 
things. Out on parole ! That was, indeed, 
what I was laughing at . indeed it was. I am 
but a poor governess, and thrown with ordinary 
people, and never. scarcely ever . hear an 
original thought.' 

The youth smiled. 

'But, I say again, what are you in such 
a hurry about ? Why did you fly from 
me ? I know I am a rough bear of a crea- 
ture.' 

' Rough V said Jenny, demurely. * Oh, it's 
not that . that is, I mean . I like roughness . 
that is . no . I . I . don't . I mean : oh ! I 



104 BELLA DOXXA. 

must go back/ And poor Jenny, in hopeless 
confusion, turned again to fly. 

' Good gracious !' said the youth, unusually 
pleased. * Do wait . I have something to say 
. I have a message. Hallo ! there's the rain 
at last I knew it was coming/ And half-a- 
dozen rude, heavy splashes came down, as 
pioneers of a heavy drenching shower. 

' This way/ said young Craven ; * here's the 
smoking-room, as I call it, just at hand. How 
lucky! Don't lose a second. It will take 
hours to soak through these trees/ 

Jenny was aghast, and shrunk. 

* No, no,' she said, * it can't be/ And her 
face expressed * rather die first/ 4 Let me go 
home !' 

' What absurd nonsense !' he said, impa- 
tiently. ' It is three-quarters of a mile to the 
house. There it comes,' he added, as the 
sluices opened, and it began to descend like a 
cataract. 

Jenny still hesitated, but he took her hand 
decisively, and led her, half resisting, under 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 105 

the trees. There they were in shelter, while 
they heard the rain all round, pattering fiercely 
among the branches, as on the roof of a gigantic 
green-house. 

They were silent for a few moments. 

' By Jove !' said he, * it looks as if it were 
set in/ 

Jenny sighed and kept looking out nervously 
. perhaps for help. 

4 This is quite jolly,' said he . ' quite an ad- 
venture . ain't it V 
., But Jenny was in sore* distress. 

* Oh, let us go,' she said again . ' let us go ; 
I have done very . very wrong.' 

The youth laughed in his loud way. 

* I don't know what to think,' he said ; * I 
know that I am a rude ogrish fellow . at least, 
they all tell me so . but still, I must say, I 
never intend to frighten ladies, the way I 
appear to have done. I must be something 
awful in manner and appearance/ 

Jenny smiled; she was beginning to get 
confidence. 

* Indeed, no,' she said ; * I don't find that ; 



( 



106 BELLA DONNA. 

on the contrary . that is, I mean, there were 
other reasons.' 

* Other reasons,' said the youth ; ' come, 
come, this is getting exciting ; out with them, 
Miss Bell/ 

' I did not mean that/ said Jenny, 
haughtily. 

* But you said so/ said he ; ' come, I have 
you there. I insist on knowing. Indeed, you 
owe it to me . come/ 

4 Oh !' said Jenny, * I am ashamed to say it. 
But I assure you . you may believe me . it 
was not that' 

i Not what Y said the youth ; * we are all in 
confusion. Not what Y 

Jenny, pulling nervously at her gloves, and 
thus cruelly pressed, remained silent. The 
youth looked down at her, much amused. He 
was beginning to think he had strange powers 
of mind, which had hitherto lain dormant. 

' I mean/ said Jenny, desperately, and look- 
ing up with her most brilliant colour in her 
cheek (fruity) . 'I mean . at least thought . I 
believe you hated . that is, disliked me/ 



* 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 107 

* Dislike you/ said the youth, gravely ; 
* what put that into your head ?' 

'At first, I mean;* said Jenny (the first 
button of her glove coming off in her fingers). 

'At first, you mean/ said he. 'Oh, I see! 
No, no. what a delusion F 

'Oh, you did/ said Jenny, mournfully. 
' Tou read my face, and I know it . and you 
thought me . that is, you had an instinctive 
sort of feeling * 

' Good gracious F said he, * what an idea F 

'Oh, you know it is true/ said Jenny, 
mournfully. ' You always form a judgment 
when you first see a person. Ah, yes, and 
you said so . ah ! you know you did/ 

'Said so/ the youth answered, guiltily, and 

4 

his thoughts went back to that first dinner. 
He had said so. 

'And you don't mean to tell me/ he added, 
with a curling lip, ' that any one ' 

Jenny clasped her hands in affright. 

'Oh/ said she, 'no. no . don't think of 
such a thing ; I didn't say she did . I merely 
guessed . that is, I never meant to tell/ 



108 BELLA DONNA. 

'Oh, of course/ said he, smiling a little 
bitterly, ' I understand. But now/ he added, 
seriously, 'I will confess. You won't be 
angry with me. At first . just at first . 
I did feel a little bit, you know; I don't 
know why . it was the most unreasonable 
thing in the world. But I assure you, you 
may believe me, it was not for more than . 
really I believe not more than a day. And 
now ' 

He paused a second. The other button of 
Jenny's glove was nearly off. 

i Well, at any rate, we are made up now. 
You don't hate me ?' 

'No, no, no,' murmured Jenny (second 
button off). 

4 And I never did dislike you ; on the con- 
trary,' he said, hesitatingly, ' this explanation 
will put everything on a satisfactory basis. In 
fact, from the time I heard . forgive my 
alluding to it . of a certain little history . of a 
certain sacrifice, which was really, I must 
say ' 

* Oh, don't, don't/ said Jenny, with a soft 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 109 

smile, and pressing her hands to her side, as if 
from a sudden spasm . * please, don't !' 

4 Since I heard/ he went on, 'of such noble 
conduct, as I must call it ' 

. Oh/ said Jenny, * dearest Charlotte . I am 
sure it was she . she will always . I wish she 
would not. It ' 

4 No, no. It was not Charlotte ; at least, I 
think not,' said he, reflectively. 

Jenny sighed. 

4 Some way,' she said, * latterly, I am sure, 
dearest Charlotte does not like me so much. 
I don't know why ; but so it is. Perhaps she 
thinks I was wrong, and does not take so in- 
dulgent a view as you so kindly do. I have 
very few friends/ Jenny said, sadly,. 4 very 
few F 

The youth looked down on her with in- 
terest. Pity, as we know, is akin to something 
warmer. 

4 Some way/ he added, reflectively, 4 1 have 
remarked Charlotte is not exactly . that is, is 
not what you call an enthusiastic friend of 
yours.' 



110 BELLA DONNA. 

' And yet/ said Jenny, * if she only knew 
how I love and esteem her. Do you know/ 
she added, looking fixedly at young Craven, * I 
think she more nearly approaches my ideal of 
perfection in a human creature than any being 
I ever knew. She is so good, so grand, so 
calm, so quiet. There is a placid temper 
about her I really envy/ 

'Ah, exactly,' said he, 'that's just it. I 

almost wish she was a little more ' 

'Hush!' said Jenny, looking out anxi- 
ously. 

The rain was beginning to abate, and they 
both heard the sound of wheels. Then the 
rain came on more furiously, and the wheels 
seemed to come nearer. Presently they saw 
the little open basket-carriage rolling along the 
avenue, with Charlotte and one of the girls, 
the latter driving. 

The avenue wound very close by the river, 
and very close to young Mr. Craven's smoking- 
room; and to the surprise of the tenants of 
that apartment, the basket-carriage drove in 
upon the grass, and drew up under the outside 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. Ill 

shelter of the great clump of trees and bushes 
which made the walls and roof of the smoking- 
room. They were going to wait until the 
violence of the shower was somewhat abated. 
There was a smart page behind. They were 
so near they could hear them talking in the 
carriage. 

Jenny said softly, 'Let us go round and 
meet them. It is dear Charlotte P 

The youth coloured, paused a moment, and 
then said awkwardly . i Hush ! not a word. 
We will surprise them. A capital joke at 
dinner. See what fun we shall have P 

Jenny lifted her eyebrows inquiringly, and 
with a bright smile ; but the youth only 
pressed his fingers to his lips, and did not give 
further shape to his capital joke. And so they 
remained still without daring to move. . 
, The smart page, a quick, intelligent Irish 
lad, with a taste for horses, and ripening fast 
into a light jockey, had got down from the 
back seat for more convenient shelter, and 
walked up and down, trying to divert the 
tedium of waiting. The light jockey now stood 



112 BELLA DONNA. 

at the ponies' heads; now pitched a broken 
branch into the bushes ; now stamped up and 
down and warmed his hands ; and now ex- 
amined objects of natural history in the ground 
or in the trees. a very sharp, quiet, and discreet 
Irish youth. 

In a few seconds the rain abated, and the 
young girl gave her ponies one light lash of 
her whip, and drove off ; the wheels ran over 
the grass as on velvet. Just at this moment 
the little jockey, still busy with natural history, 
had come round to the Very entrance of the 
smoking-room, and looked in. He heard the 
young girl calling 'Now, Frank,' and was 
after them in a second, scaling the back seat 
very nimbly, but he looked behind him long. 

It seemed to the two tenants of the chamber 
that Jbe had not noticed them. Jenny was 
nervous. 

* I must go now,' she said ; ' not an instant 
more can I stay. I fear we have done wrong, 
very wrong.' 

The youth was awkward in his answer. He 
murmured something about * capital fun,' and 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 113 

c a joke at dinner.' But the clouds now break- 
ing, and the rain finally ceasing, Jenny gathered 
up her skirts, so as to avoid the wet grass, 
looked round, and said very sweetly, 'Now, 
you must not come with me. Good-bye ! We 
are friends now . at least I suppose I must 
believe that you do not quite hate me ; so for 
the few days I stay, we will live in peace and 
amity.' 

He started. 

. What ! Going ? I did not know this . are 
you serious V 

"Good-bye/ said Jenny; and shot away 
over the grass, very lightly, indeed, and grace- 
fully. 

The youth looked after her long, lit his cigar, 

and became pensive. 

'By Jove!' he said, at last, a little im- 
patiently. With whom he connected this 
heathen appeal is not known. Perhaps he was 
thinking of his Charlotte. 

His Charlotte was skimming along the wet 
gravel in the basket-carriage . and, it may be, 
thinking of him. 

VOL. II. I 



114 BELLA DONNA. 

The young girl who was driving presently 
spoke of him, and said, . 

' I wonder where Charles has hid himself all 
the morning ?' 

The smart jockey, whose seat brought him 
very close to the ladies, and who was always 
much entertained in these rides by the scraps 
of conversation that reached him, here broke 
in respectfully . 

' Please, ma'am, I saw Mr. Charles and Miss 
Bell behind the trees where we were waiting/ 
and he touched his hat again, by way of 
punctuation, or full stop. Was this Irish lad 
only following his nature, or was this a spice 
of malice? Neither of the ladies answered 
him ; but drove on in silence up to the door of 
the house. 

Mr. Franklyn passed a miserable day in the 
society of his papers. This had become a sort 
of mania with him, though perfectly bootless. 
Decency then required a certain amount of 
personal attendance upon his guest, the Baronet. 
But that potentate . who was put out, by 
having only imperfectly digested portions of 



THE SMOKING-ROOM. 115 

his Times . just as a cobra does half its blanket 
. was testy ; and besides, had clearly some- 
thing on his mind. 

They went out together, and after much dry 
clearing of his throat, and non-natural huski- 
ness, he said to Mr. Franklyn . 

4 You know . er . that Mr. Hodge will be 
here . er . on Thursday.' 

' Yes ; yes,' said the other, hastily. 

' He will bring with him all the papers. 
You know, Franklyn/ said the Baronet, stop- 
ping short, ' a thing of this sort is . er . hum . 
business, pure business. No compliments. 
'Xcuse me,' he- added, waving his hand im- 
patiently; for Mr. Franklyn, colouring much, 
was about to interrupt. 'You understand . 
two business men . hem . you and I . spade, a 
spade !' 

i Of course,' said Mr. Franklyn, with some 
dignity, 'there is no question about it. Mr. 
Crowle will be prepared to meet your man of 
business on Thursday/ 

' Exactly,' said Sir Welbore ; ' that's exactly 
the footing I wish it to be on . the . er . thing 



116 BELLA DONNA. 

done, you know. I shouldn't like to have it 
said that Charles married . er . without . you 
understand.' 

' My daughter,' said Mr. Franklyn, haughtily, 
6 has seven thousand pounds on the day of her 
marriage, down ; if you should require it, 
before/ he added, with an attempt at sarcasm, 
' of course ' 

'H'm! h'm! Very good . very good. quite 
proper, indeed,' said the Baronet; 'quite so. 
Between you and me, my dear Franklyn,' he 
added, confidently, but now in good-humour 
again, ' I don't quite like the look of . gold at 
present.' 

Mr. Franklyn looked blankly at him. 

' No, it's not healthy . glut of the precious 
metals . too much stock at the Bank. Between 
you and me the Chancellor is too fond of 
paradoxes and tricks. There will be a tight- 
ness . we shall be tight by and by, mark my 
words.' 



117 



CHAPTER XXI. 



jenny's evening work. 



Half an hour before dinner a chaise came 
driving up, and Mr. Crowle, the young man of 
business, jumped out, fresh from London. He 
sought Mr. Franklyn's room. When the whole 
party were gathering together for dinner, from 
azimuth and nadir, and trooping down re- 
splendent, Jenny, who was sliding in by her- 
self in simplest virgin white muslin, and with 
a crimson flower in her hair, was stopped on 
the stairs, not by the Mr. Franklyn, the miner 
of the morning, but by a man the same indeed, 
but ten years younger : he was bright, cheerful, 
happy. . 

i Jenny, Jenny/ he said, in a delighted 
whisper, ' good news. It is all settled . all but 



118 BELLA DOXNA. 

settled! Not only Charlotte's money, but 
double ; so that it will clear us a good deal. 
There is a load off my breast, and Crowle . 
good Crowle . has done it all.' 

Jenny smiled, pressed his hand cordially, 
but said nothing. She conveyed an immense 
deal of indefinite meaning in that squeeze. 
She passed in hurriedly, but bit her crimson 
lips as she entered. 

Before her was Charlotte, measuring her, 
not angrily . she was too tranquil for that . 
but with a shade of scorn and contempt. On 
our Jenny's active mind a light suddenly 
flashed. ' She knows all, and is harshly mis- 
construing our little innocent adventure of the 
morning.' And she glided straight up to her 
and took her hand, and said (Sir Welbore was 
standing beside Charlotte) . 

' Dearest Charlotte, I have such a business 
to tell you of. Such an adventure as we had 
this morning, shut up under a tree, dear 
Charlotte. Only think, while the floodgates of 
heaven . is not that right, Mr. Wells ?' added 
Jenny, demurely, to the curate, wishing to be 



jenny's evening work. 119 

set right in her Scripture . 'the floodgates of 
heaven were opened, and I thought would have 
swept us away into the river/ 

The hajf-defiant, half-insolent way in which 
our Jenny made this declaration, was, to use 
the French word, impayable. Sir Welbore, 
finance being off his mind, allowed himself to 
be interested. 

' Where . hum . wag this . er . unpleasant 
affair. under that shower. hey? Ton my 
word, very inconvenient.' 

'Indeed,' said Jenny, demurely, 'only for 
Mr. Craven ' 

'Indeed/ said the Baronet, with interest. 
4 And how did Charles help you ? Come now !' 

Jenny told it all with natural simplicity, but 
at the same time with wonderful confidence for 
her. But there was a pleasant gaiety in her 
tone when she addressed herself to Charlotte. 
Indeed, there was a curious change in Jenny 
this day or two back. She was gradually 
gliding ftito the centre place, and drawing most 
of the circle to her. Sir Welbore called her 
his 'financial pupil;' young Craven took in- 



120 BELLA DONNA. 

terest in her ; the curate worshipped ; and 
Charlotte . how was Charlotte inclined to her ? 
At this moment she was looking at her with a 
strange expression, half scared . almost breath- 
less, at what she thought this effrontery. But 
presently she grew defiant, and answered Jenny 
with her old calmness. 

Young Craven came down last, and in great 
spirits. Dinner was tljen announced ; and he 
took down, as was his duty, his affianced, 
Charlotte. There was a tone of joyousness 
over the whole party this day. Mr. Franklyn, 
filled with his good news, was cheerful, which 
in him was the same as the merriment of 
another person. Sir Welbore was complacent. 
He was thinking of writing a letter to the 
Dorkingshire Conservative, on the miserable 
fallacies of the Chancellor as to the expansion 
of the precious metals. Young Craven was 
boisterous . he knew why . Jenny, nearly op- 
posite, was bright, and sparkled and shone like 
a precious stone. Mr. Franklyn said gaily . 

' Well, Charles, I suppose you got through 
the morning somehow ?' 



jenny's evening work. 121 

Young Craven coloured a little. 

4 Oh ! I was out, sir.' 

4 What ! under that shower ?' 

'Oh! no, sir,' said the youth, with an in- 
telligent look at Jenny, which with stupid 
complacency he fancied was understood but by 
her. Charlotte's eyes were upon him. 

She dropped her voice . 

'You were not out in that storm?' she 
said. 

4 Oh ! no,' he answered in the same tone, ' I 
was in shelter . got home quite safe. By-the- 
by, what shall we do to-night ?' 

Charlotte's eyes were still upon him. 

* Why make a mystery ?' she said, mildly ; 
4 what a pity ! You are not beginning to be 
afraid of me, I hope ?' 

4 Afraid !' said he, confused. . What do you 
mean, Charlotte?' 

4 Oh ! Jenny . Miss Bell . has been amusing 
the company with your comic adventures. So 
you see ' 

His cheeks blazed up, and he threw a fierce 
look at Jenny. Jenny was delighted. She 



122 BELLA DONNA. 

was just opposite, and was legitimately in the 
conversation. 

'Good gracious!' she said, with a bright 
toss of her head, 'you don't suppose we are 
carrying on a conspiracy, Mr. Craven; you 
won't get me to join in manufacturing terrible 
secrets of that sort. No, no . quite a mistake, 
I assure you,' said Jenny, with an engaging 
smile. 

The youth was angry, and even bitter. He 
had been made ridiculous . even guilty-looking ; 
and I am afraid the dialogue between him and 
Charlotte in some degree reflected that tone. 
Jenny spoke on : . 

i Do you know/ said she, aloud, and in her 
new gay way . (she was picking a grape now 
and again) . ' I seem to have done something 
wicked . I feel like a . a . Sir Welbore, you 
can tell me ; what do they call the people at 
trials that appear against their companions, 
you know, Sir Welbore ?' 

'King's evidence, I er . believe,' said the 
baronet, pompously, for he loved to hear the 
chime of his own name oft repeated. 



jenny's evening work. 123 

Of this night Jenny, with new prerogatives, 
sat enthroned. She flitted about the drawing- 
room very brilliant, Charlotte watching with 
a curious look. With a strange confidence, 
Jenny came over to her, engaging as a child, 
and sitting down beside her, said anxiously, 
4 Dear Charlotte, you look so worn and ill ! 
quite changed, I declare. You must be ill.' 
Charlotte's was not a trained temper. She 
almost shook her off. Jenny lifted her eyes 
with gentle astonishment. Mr. Wells, the 
curate, was standing by and watching. 

'I am perfectly well,' said Charlotte. 'I 
am no actress. I speak what I feel/ 

Jenny smiled. Young Craven was in sight, 
affecting to talk earnestly to Mr. Franklyn, 
but looking over wistfully at them. The 
sensible girl's voice had a slight quiver. 

4 When do you leave here ?' said Charlotte, 
speaking quickly. ' I hear you speak of going.' 

4 Oh soon . soon . too soon,' said Jenny, 
speaking a little loud. ' I must quit this dear 
old house, and go back to . to school! A 
dream . such a dream !' 



124 . BELLA DONNA, 

'Not too soon,' said the other, looking at 
her stedfastly. 

Jenny laughed a silver laugh, with the 
feintest fringe of a scoff. 'One would say, 
dearest, you wished me away. How inhos* 
pitable ! Perhaps I am in the way . in your 
way . eh ?' 

This latter she said in a lower key. 

4 What can it be ?' she went on. * You are 
not afraid of anything ? Afraid of poor me f 
and again the mocking laugh furnished ac- 
companiment. No one would know Jenny to- 
night. 

Poor Charlotte seems to have been sadly 
unsteady and off her centre. ' Afraid P she 
said, colouring. ' No, indeed ! I am stronger 
than I seem ! and know more than I seem to 
know.' 

Jenny was lost in wonder at the poor weak 
declaration. She said, drily, to Mr. Wells, 
who was drawing near, and had only caught 
scraps of this curious dialogue, ' Shall we have 
a game to-night, Mr. Wells? Do get them 
together and make them play. Now, dear, 



i 



jenny's evening work. 125 

cross Charlotte, are you in the humour for 
that Y 

Young Craven was coming across eagerly as 
Jenny was speaking. 

'Do play/ said Jenny. % Play against jneV 

The sensible girl trembled. Her eyes lighted 
up. 

4 1 am not afraid/ she said, as she said before. 

Then said Jenny, as Mr. Craven stood beside 
them and listened . 

' Do you know, dear, I feel as if 1 had won 
already V 

She left the affianced ones together, as was 
her duty, and fled away. She recollected 
something, as she passed Mr. Crowle, who had 
been watching her, with something like a weak 
solution of admiration . at least, he was as- 
tonished at the change. The young man of 
business seemed to suggest something suddenly 
to her, for her. eyes flashed. She wandered 
into the greenhouse by herself to pick a flower 
(she humbly asked Mr. Franklyn's leave), and 
from the plants presently came a silvery voice 
. 4 Mr. Crowle I 



126 BELLA DONNA. 

He rose from his chair and obeyed the call. 
The curate would have rushed too, but was 
late. 

6 Could you help me down with that gera- 
nium pot? Thanks . there . now you can go 
back/ 

But Mr. Crowle was not inclined ; as yet, at 
least. 

' It is a long time since you have been here,' 
he said. 

c By the way, you go back to London to- 
morrow ?' said Jenny. 

< Yes/ said he, < early in the morning; the 
first thing.' 

' And why not stay ?' said she, with interest. 
' You are no sooner come than gone.' 

He laughed at what was not very clear. 

4 1 must go,' he said ; ' business . important 
business/ 

' Business . always business/ said Jenny, 
trimming a geranium with a little pair of 
garden scissors. 'Some little bill of costs; 
why can't you stay, then, but a few days . my 
last days ?' 



I 



jenny's evening work. 127 

4 It is the family business,' he said. 'You 
must have heard of that. We are trying to 
dig a fortune for Miss Charlotte out of Lom- 
bard Street.' 

' Trying!' said Jenny, with astonishment 
'Why, dear Mr. Franklyn told me, before 
dinner, it was all settled ; that it was all done. 
And I am sure,' added she, ' they all think so. 

'He is premature/ said he, impatiently. 
' How fond people are of chattering. Nothing 
of the kind. It may be done ; it may not be 
done. I may say it rests with me.' . 

' Ah,' said Jenny, with one of her old looks 
of intense, devout admiration; and laying 
down the garden scissors, the better to clasp 
her hands, * Ah, how good of you . how good !' 

Mr. Crowle smiled. 

fc You do everything,' she went on, ; for this 
family ?' 

Mr. Crowle smiled. 

'Our interest,' he said, 'very often goes 
beside our affection.' 

' Ah, yes,' said Jenny, with meaning, ; and 
our affection often rises above our interest: 



128 BELLA DONNA. 

even above what foolish people would be 
offended with/ 

Mr. Crowle looked at her, a little inquiringly. 

' Yes,' Jenny went on in a torrent of words ; 
'yes, that is true and genuine regard; and 
that is what they said was so generous, so 
noble in Mr. Crowle. Those two foolish chil- 
dren, they would laugh at anything; but I 
was amazed when I heard of it. But I call it 
real nobleness.' 

A slight little contortion passed over Mr. 
Crowle 's placid face. 

4 So they" tell everything in this family, it 
seems,' he said. ' No secrets.' 

< Poor children,' said Jenny, commiseratingly, 
' they want a little discretion. Even our dear 
Charlotte says things sometimes against her 
own interest/ 

' And she told you,' said he, ' about this . 
this ' 

' The little joke/ said Jenny, resuming her 
scissors and snipping away merrily. ' It was a 
little absurd ; and even Sir Welbore, who is a 
little dry . there, I declare, they want me. 



jenny's evening work. 129 

Mr. Franklyn says no one makes his evening 
cup like me/ and Jenny tripped in. 

Mr. Crowle followed slowly, looking round 
on all with a peculiar smile. * Told to a full 
dinner-table, I suppose. Ah ! very well ! very 
good.' 

'My dear Crowle/ said Franklyn, taking 
him affectionately by the arm, * we must be up 
for you in the morning. I shall see about your 
breakfast myself. It is so good of you. I 
feel a new man. Positively/ he continued, 
gaily, * I shall begin to have quiet nights again. 
You have taken millstones off my heart. How 
shall we all thank you ?' 

* You shall all thank me on my next visit/ 
said Mr. Crowle, with an agreeable smile; 
4 that is, when / deserve them. But you won't 
mind my stealing off to bed ; you know I have 
to be up in the morning/ 

4 My dear Crowle/ said the other, ' let me 
ring for a candle.' 

* No, no, let me go quietly . good night . 
good night. You may begin to sleep to-night.' 

In high spirits Jenny watched him dis- 
vol. n. K 



130 BELLA DONNA. 

appear, then tamed to take a glance round the 
company. She was standing at the green- 
house, and the natural glow of colour diffused 
over her stood out well upon the green back- 
ground, she thinking which of her slaves she 
would call next. 

Suddenly, Charlotte, who had watched every 
motion of her . who had seen her enter the 
greenhouse with Mr. Crowle, and come back 
again . who had seen him depart, and seen, 
too, Jenny's look, as he quitted the room . 
rose up suddenly and went over to Jenny. 
The sensible girl's intelligence, quickened by 
distrust, had a presentiment of what had taken 
place. 

She looked at her a moment wistfully. 

* Jenny,' she whispered, earnestly, 'be 
generous . forgive . forget the past.' 

' Dear Charlotte/ said Jenny, looking round 
on the company, 'what do you mean? . you 
frighten me/ 

' Yes,' said Charlotte ; ' I own it was wrong, 
and you suffered a great deal. I beg your 
pardon humbly . it was wrong. Forgive, not 



I 



jenny's evening work. 131 

for my sake, but for his ; and if you were to 
know how his heart is set on this how he 
lives but for us . oh, Jenny V 

Jenny's wonder was extreme. 

* Dear Charlotte, what riddles and mysteries 
are all these ? Goodness ! I am getting quite 
nervous. Poor me! a poor, dependent crea- 
ture, to forgive. to think of forgiving. Ah ! 
Charlotte, you are amusing yourself/ 

4 Listen to me . do,' said the other, more 
hurriedly, and catching her by the sleeve ; for 
Jenny was % moving away ; 4 any . any submis- 
sion, do you hear, for his sake ?' 

' I am getting bewildered, dear,' said Jenny, 
putting her raised hands upon her forehead ; 
4 don't talk this way any more . pray don't.' 

4 Is it possible ?' said the other, with a lip 
that was beginning to curl. 4 No ; I would not 
believe it . you are not so wickedly vindictive 
as ' 

4 Hush! hush! dear,' said she, looking 
round in alarm. 4 What odd things you are 
saying ! Take care, dear. No, no ; I am for 
going on icith our game? added she, with some- 
thing like a sudden flash of defiance . 6 with the 



\ 



132 BELLA DONNA. 

gentlemen, I mean. Just as I feel in a winning 
humour, too. No, no ; come, dear.' 

And she moved away, and went over to the 
gentlemen, and had presently started a very 
agreeable little round game* 

. . . * 

I 

'Good night, Sir Welbore . good night. 
See you to your room ? No ? Ah, you begin 
to know your way . ha, ha !' 

Sir Welbore remarked to Lady Welbore 
< that . that . er . Franklyn was a strange, in- 
consequential creature, and in . er . a flow of 
spirits that night.' 

'Good night. good night, dearest,' said 
Mr. Franklyn, at the foot of the stairs. ' Sleep 

well : I shall. No papers to-night, darling 

no, nor to-morrow night . ha, ha ! An heiress, 
I declare. quite an heiress ! Let me tell you, 
my pet, it is not every or any woman in the 
county can bring her husband seven thousand 
pounds. Good night. good night.' 



* 



In the morning came the mail. Mr. Frank- 
lyn got two business letters, which he laughed 
over. One from Dunton and Co. 



jenny's evening work. 133 

Dtmton and Co., much outraged with long 
waiting, and with patience generally exhausted, 
had reluctantly placed the matter in the hands 
of Dunton and Co.'s solicitor, who now respect- 
fully named a day, after which he had been 
instructed to proceed. 

Dart, Burton, and Co., an eminent firm of 
solicitors, with patience also sorely tried, were 
also on the eve of ' proceeding/ The camel's 
back, &c. 

Mr. Franklyn, after breakfast, went to his 
desk. With a light heart he wrote to both 
Dunton and Co., and to Dart, Burton, and Co., 
telling them that a successful arrangement had 
just been effected, and that he had written 
instructions to his agent, Mr. Crowle, now in 
London, who would wait on them forthwith. 
'A thousand apologies, my dear sirs/ wrote 
Mr. Franklyn, exuberantly, * for the incon- 
venience I have put you to. A thousand 
thanks, too, for your indulgence. But we are 
now, I am happy to say, getting straight, and 
shall shortly have the pleasure of enclosing 
you a cheque for your full amount/ 

He posted these two with great satisfaction. 



134 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XXII. 



JENNY WINS, 



Sir Welbore Craven and * Lady ' were pack- 
ing up already. They were going to-morrow. 
Reluctantly, too, was Jenny departing. With 
the kindest consideration, the baronet had, in 
a stately manner, offered Jenny the remaining 
seat in their grand coach which was to come 

. 

for them. Jenny, overpowered with gratitude, 
said, humbly, she thankfully accepted so kind, 
so considerate an offer. She looked over at 
dear Charlotte as she accepted it. 

Sir Welbore's man of business, Mr. Hodge, 
was to arrive that night, and wait a day or 
two to meet Mr. Crowle. * Now that every- 
thing is so satisfactory, you . er . see, I may 
as well . er . go.' 



JENNY WINS. 135 

4 1 am very sorry, Sir Welbore . very sorry, 
that we are to lose you/ 

'Crowle seems a very intelligent person/ 
said the other, approvingly. 'Crowle seems 
to know his business. Eh ?' 

4 Invaluable, Sir Welbore. He has been of 
inestimable assistance to me. Now, I don't 
mind saying to you, Sir Welbore, who knows 
everything, and hears everything ' (Sir Welbore 
laid his head wisely upon one side, as upon an 
aerial pillow, and waved his hand, as who 
should passezpour cela), 4 that I have had heavy 
. very heavy charges to meet upon the estate.' 

* Quite so/ said Sir Welbore. 

4 1 am not ashamed to own it,' said Mr. 
Franklyn, with a little state. 4 You know it 
. many know it/ 

Sir Welbore lifted his head suddenly from 
his pillow, not liking this community of know- 
ledge. 

4 Well, I don't scruple confessing that . ha, 
ha! . that even about Charlotte's money . 
ha, ha !. I was a little uneasy for a time, you 
know. Crowle is gloomy by nature/ 



136 BELLA DONNA. 

'Quite so,' said the other. 4 We all want 
money. Ton my word now, I myself shouldn't 
object to, say forty thousand pounds just now. 
There's the Dudgeley estate going for a mere 
song. But where is a pauper like me to look 
for it ? There was a time I could afford such 
things . ha, ha!' 

Thus pleasant were the two gentlemen. 

At night, when they were all gone to bed, 
arrived, in a chaise of his own, the baronet's 
man of business . a dry man, that seemed as if 
he was made of any other material in the world 
but human flesh and bone. By business habits 
he seemed to have worked everything w r arm, 
genial, or moist out of his system, just as 
racing and boating men do in their training. 
He appeared at breakfast in the morning, 
spoke scarcely at all, could tell no town news, 
ate very, little, and looked at his watch some 
dozen times. He looked out of the window 
occasionally, as if he was expecting somebody 
to pass by whom he might rush upon and stop. 
All through the day, he looked at his watch, 
consulted his pocket-book occasionally, looked 



JENNY WINS. 337 

at the door when he was not opposite a win- 
dow, as though the person who was to pass the 
window might slip by that way unawares. Sir 
Welbore whispered he was a most useful sort 
of person indeed. 

Mr. Crowle, Mr. Frankly n said, was at that 
moment (lunch hour) actually . let him see . 
at Bootham. The half-past eight train would 
bring him, or he would telegraph. Sir Wei- 
bore's train was half-past five. Great black 
plate chests, holding dresses instead of plate, 
were standing in the hall, and beside them 
Jenny's little trunk, modestly shrinking into a 
corner, corded neatly, but with economy of 
rope, and seeming to say piteously, like Mr. 
Sterne's famous donkey, * Don't thrash me.' 

It was growing dark. The light at the 
lodge window was lit, and could be seen 
twinkling. Coal had been brought up for the 
fires. Shawls, cloaks, sticks, and umbrellas . 
bound together like Eoman fasces . were being 
borne down from upper chambers. Sir Wel- 
bore was making stately progress up and down 
stairs with no declared object. 



138 BELLA DONNA. 

Suddenly the sound of wheels was heard in 
the avenue. Many people looked out of win- 
dows . thinking it Sir Welbore's great coach, 
now nearly due. It was only a gig. 

Sir Welbore and Mr. Franklyn were talking 
in the hall, and heard the wheels. 

' It is he,' said Mr. Franklyn, with a smile. 
f How lucky ; and before you are gone . I am 
so glad . you can spare us a quarter of an hour. 
It will be so satisfactory.' 

Sir Welbore inclined his head graciously. 

Mr. Franklyn went to the door himgelf and 
opened it. Through the gloom he saw a gig 
standing, and a person getting down who was 
. not Mr. Crowle. 

It was the station-master of the railway 
station. 

' Telegraph message, Mr. Franklyn,' said he, 
handing him the regular pale blue envelope. 
4 Thought I would take it myself . passing by : 
you would get it sooner, as it might be im- 
portant.' 

6 Very kind of you,' said Franklyn, a little 
disappointed. i Thank you.' 



^ 



JENNY WINS. 139 

4 No Crowle,' he said to Sir Welbore, open- 
ing the envelope. There was no light in the 
hall, so he turned straight into his study, where 
there was one. 

He came out in a second, and was passing 
by Sir Welbore, without speaking, when that 
gentleman called to him . 

4 Well? Can't come by this train . first 
train to-morrow.' 

* In a moment,' said the other, in a low 
voice, and passed upstairs. 

He came back in a few moments. 

' Just step in here with me into the study,' 
he said. The two entered, and the door was 
closed. 

Sir Welbore's great coach was now arrived 
. with its two lamps flaming like lighthouses. 
The great chests were hoisted up, and his 
servants began to fasten up the cloaks and 
shawls . Sir Welbore's man taking up the 
fasces on his shoulder, as though he were a 
real born Roman lictor. Jenny came tripping 
down, modestly attired for travel, and the hall 
filled in as with a crowd. The lamps were 



140 BELLA DONNA. 

now lit. A mild and dignified embracing set 
in. Now, where was Sir Welbore ? 

Out of the study came the two gentlemen . 
one a ghastly, pale, trembling creature; the 
other a hot, filming, excited person. 

Neither spoke. The hot, excited Baronet 
passed out to his coach, without addressing any 
adieus to the spectators. The other tottered 
upstairs. The family looked on with a little 
wonder. Then came more of a modulated 
accolade. Then Lady Craven entered her 
coach, with state. Then Jenny, who made as 
though she would have humbly ascended be- 
hind . a place, indeed, too superior for her. 
Then Sir Welbore entered with a jerk, and 
flung himself back, muttering; and finally 
young Craven, who sat next Jenny. 

They drove away* The great bee-hive 
reeling and swinging; maid and man poised 
boastfully behind. 

When they were gone, and all were turning 
away from looking after them, a white face 
was put out from the study-door, and it said . 

* Charlotte . girls . come in !' 



JENNY WINS. 141 

They came in, silent and cowed . they were 
wondering and afraid. He closed the door, 
and then the light fell upon his face. Then 
Charlotte rushed up to him, and put her arms 
round him. 

' Father, dearest father ! It is no harm ; it 
is not worth a thought, if you can bear it/ 

There was a white paper in his hand, which 
was fluttering as though it were being blown 
by a breeze. He put her back gently. 

' It is all over, dear children/ he said. 4 God 
help us . God help you !' 

He let Charlotte take the paper from him, 
and sank . rather fell . into a chair beside him. 
Charlotte calmly held it over the light, and 
read in the usual pencil character : . 

' Elec. Teleg. Co.'s Offices, 

Charing-cross, 4 o'c. p.m. 

. William Crowle to John Franklvn. 

* It is all off. At the last moment the party 
has refused. What am I to do next ? I don't 
know of any other quarter we can try/ 



142 BELLA DONNA, 

They all remained in silence, looking at the 
fatal piece of tissue-paper in Charlotte's hand. 
The younger girls understood it all, and stood 
there trembling and clinging together. 

Mr. Franklyn presently spoke to them in a 
low, broken voice . yet with an attempt at 
cheerfulness that seemed ghastly . 

. Come, dear children/ he said, * don't take 
it to heart. It is a blow . a great blow ; but 
we will weather it, as . as . we have done 
others before.' 

* Oh ! father, father/ they all burst out, with 
crying and wailing, and ran up to him. 

'Now, now, don't/ said he, mildly, 'this 
is foolish. Go upstairs now, like good children, 
and leave me here with Charlotte. We must 
only strike out some other plan, that's all. Go 
now, like dear, good children. It is not so 
bad as you think.' 

They went away sobbing and lamenting, 
and left father and daughter together. It 
seemed a lonely house that night . after all 
the late company and universal gaiety, so 
very desolate, as though it had been swept 



JENNY WINS. 143 

i 

and cleared to be a fitting tenement for ill 
news. 

Later, Charlotte came up, very quiet and 
calm, and cheered up the young girls, bade 
them be of good heart, and all would go well ; 
that Papa was very far-seeing and clever, and 
that he had already struck out a new plan, 
which, with their good friend Mr. Crowle's 
assistance, would help them out of this. 

Then the lamp was brought in, and there 
was an affectation of something being read and 
of something being worked. But it was 
wretched . altogether wretched . and long 
after, when those girls were grown up, they 
looked back to it with a tremble, as the most 
miserable night of their life. 

They carried out their little bit of acting 
laithfully for each other's sake ; and then, later 
than usual, went up to bed. Cells . cold, 
dreary cells . they seemed to them, for that 
night at least. Charlotte stayed up much later, 
possibly to talk with her father. 

The morning was dark and gloomy, and 
there were sheets of heavy rain descending 



144 BELLA DONNA. 

steadily, all about the house. It darkened the 
air of the breakfast-room additionally as they 
<*ame down. 

Charlotte came in with an air of cheerfulness, 
which they thought was the assumed one of 
last night continued. She came with a letter 
in her hand. 

4 Come!' she said to them, 'what did I 
say last night? There is something to en- 
courage us . a letter from an old relative . 
Cousin John Hall . who has not written these 
seven years. He talks of coming to England 
shortly ; and listen to what he says : . " I am 
curious to see my god-child, little Charlotte, 
again, and am delighted she is making so good 
a match. I mean to gratify myself by adding 
a good sum to her portion, if only to keep up 
the family credit. I am getting tired of these 
foreigners, and want to see my own flesh and 
blood again." There, children ! there's a bit of 
good news for papa. Which of you will run to 
the study and fetch him in to breakfast V 

Both ran gaily. Charlotte lifted her eyes 
to Heaven with a bright thankfulness. And 



JENNY WINS. 145 

in this acknowledgment there is nothing for 
herself; it was for the curse of moral squalor 
and utter desolation thus happily averted from 
their house. 

They came back. * Papa is not to be dis- 
turbed,' they say ; i but we told him through 
the keyhole/ 

* Quite right, dears/ said Charlotte. . He is 
busy. I may fill out his tea for him/ 

More of that welcome letter was read, and 
they wondered at what bounded extent Cousin 
John Hall would stay his liberality for Char- 
lotte. Then more of the letter was read, amid 
universal delight, and genial complacency on 
Charlotte's part. 

The tea was filled out and getting cold. 

c Run again, dear/ said Charlotte. * Stay, I 
will go myself/ 

She went herself ; tapped at his door ; tried 
the handle ; spoke through keyhole, but was 
not answered. She looked through the key- 
hole, for the key was away, and saw what 
satisfied her, for she went upstairs quickly to 
his bedroom. 

VOL. II. L 



146 BELLA DONNA. 

It was not locked ; but had not been slept 

in that night. 

* * # * 

The sensible girl was equal to the emergency. 
She became on the instant a captain in that 
disordered house. The true probability flashed 
upon her in a second ; he had hurried away 
himself by night to London, to settle that 
business himself. But still, while this was 
being set at rest, no harm to provide for the 
case of another issue. No confusion ; no 
flurry ; all private, and even secret. Steward, 
a steady, silent official, is called in ; he knows 
of other steady men that he can depend on ; 
leave it to him. 

Telegraph to London . quickly, too, to Mr. 
Crowle. Reply in three quarters of an hour. 
Not been seen there. 

All through that day, through the great, 
heavy sheets of rain, which hung about the 
house and plantations, like the folds of huge 
slate-coloured curtains, the steady man and his 
steady men pursued the task that had been 
put into their hands. All through the day 



i 



JENNY WINS. 147 

Charlotte acted a tremendous part, with con- 
summate bravery. It was a magnificent effort 
of mind ; little household concerns ; upstairs, 
down-stairs, speaking with this one and that, 
and all the time her heart in her mouth. Her 
younger sisters were actually imposed on ; one 
was heard singing in her room. These moral 
deeds are not weighed here . cannot, indeed, 
be known. Thrice noble girl ! true as steel, 
and good as gold. 

But it was a long day; as long, as dark. 
It rolled on heavily until five o'clock, when 
the door-bell rang gently, and Charlotte, who 
was in the study, came out hurriedly to open 
it. It was the steady man with a lantern, 
with his steady men behind him ; all three 
soaked and saturated with the day's rain. 
The steady man laid his lantern down on 
the step outside, and, motioning his men 
back, came in by himself. He said, clearing 
his throat : . 

' Miss, Miss, you mustn't . that is . we have 
. found him.' 



148 BELLA DONNA. 

In that little island, where they used to 
have their merrymaking teas, had they found 
John Franklyn, Esq., lying out on his back in 
the sludge, with his arms stretched out, and a 
little chemist's bottle of some cheap essential 
oil beside him. 



149 



BOOK III. 



CHAPTER I. 

jenny's welcome 'home.' 

Jennt was once more at her home in Chester- 
field Street. Mr. Maxwell was overjoyed to 
see his ' faithful secretary ' again. His 
whitened face lightened up, as she entered. 
* Oh, Miss Bell, I am so glad/ He took both her 
hands in his, and welcomed her like a father 
receiving back a dear and long-parted daughter 
. which was, indeed, a phrase we borrow from 
one of Jenny's letters, describing the scene. 

It was new life to him. A sagacious maid 
who had noted the influence of Jenny's natural 
character in the house, came good-naturedly to 
tell her of all that had gone on in her absence. 
Mr. Maxwell had, indeed, moped and moped . 
was not the same man. * It was a charity, 



150 BELLA DONNA. 

Miss, for you to come. And indeed, Miss,' 
adds the sagacious maid, 'you are wanted 
sadly. The house aren't the same since you 
was gone/ 

Jenny . overlooking the grammar . smiled 
approvingly on this well-meaning person. 

i Thank you, Rachel/ she said ; * it is very 
good of you to think so.' 

' And, oh, Miss, she . she's ' . this was the 
popular mode, below stairs, of referring to the 
mistress of the house . ' she's been dreadful bad. 
I don't mean, Miss, worse than is common . but 
in her ways. Her ways has got awful ; and, 
poor master, such a time as he has had of it !' 

' Rachel,' said Jenny, ' don't. We must 
recollect how much she suffers. If you or I 
were tried in the same way,' &c. From this 
confidential attendant a good many curious 
details were obtained, under protest, as it were, 
on our Jenny's side. 

Mr. Maxwell fluttered about her awkwardly, 
that day of her arrival. He was rejoiced, and 
came back from chambers much earlier. Pock- 
lington Minors (a case of heavy estates in 



i 



jenny's welcome 'home.' 151 

Chancery, with an application for increased 
allowance on the part of mother for the educa- 
tion and maintenance of Pocklington Minors) 
suffered a little in consequence. He had a 
feast that day, and the generous, fruity port 
'ordered' for her was supplemented by a 
more exhilarating vintage. He was longing 
for his study and the lamp-light . he told 
Jenny ; and for his faithful, patient secretary 
to be at her old post. 

The fetithful secretary, to say the honest 
truth, did not at all relish the resumption of the 
duty ; she would have preferred the fire in her 
own room . (she was also ' ordered ' this luxury) 
. with her feet upon the fender; . and one of the 
drawing-room easy-chairs, which had found its 
way there ; for her spine and back joints were 
delicate, and required care. And there was a 
pile of M. Bernardi's yellow French ' things,' all 
of the newest, which had accumulated in her 
absence. 

These were tempting enough : but self-sacri- 
fice (for self, ultimately) was one of Jenny's 
special features of character. So that night . 



152 BELLA DONNA. 

even that night of her arrival, fatigued as she 
wa3 with travel . she went down to work. But 
there had been provided for her here an easy- 
chair, very soft and billowy, which received 
Jenny like the lap of the sea, and a good glow- 
ing fire (which he never had for himself) ; and 
there stood close by, a flagon of that generous 
fluid, which had been ' ordered ' for Jenny, and 
which would be now useful as a sort of stimu- 
lant. 

The barrister's eyes were good enough by 
this time ; but he had got to look placidly on 
this joint fashion of conducting business. He 
kept her prisoner there till midnight . over 
Pocklington Minors. By this time, Jenny 
actually knew the mechanism of hunting up 
Cases, and actually was familiar with Measom 
and Welsby, and their families . with Yesey 
junior, and all his offsprings . with House of 
Lords' cases . with even the old Invcdides Hos- 
pital of Salkeld, Raymond, and such veterans. 
She could tell the shelf where they resided, and 
with a spring could lay her nice hand upon their 
calf shoulders. She was very quick and clever, 



jenny's weeoome 'home/ 153 

our Jenny, when anything had to fall within 
the purview of her scheme. And so she gra- 
dually fell back into the old walk. 

But there was a great change remarked in 
Jenny, . both below, in the charmed kitchen 
and pantry circles, and even in a slight degree, 
above. Our Jenny had been on a successful 
tour, as it were. She had asserted* herself, and 
left her mark. She had been courted and had 
received admiration. She had stolen upwards 
into position. Faces had been turned towards 
hers as to a centre . nay, had looked after hers. 
Above all, she had fought, not ingloriously, 
. and so far, she had believed, had conquered. 

These things were reflected in her carriage 
and manner. People in >the house felt some- 
how influenced by the change. She had lost 
the lowly dependent bearing, and looked for- 
ward with calm, straight superiority. She was 
indeed flushed with triumph, and sometimes 
wrote in her Diary ; often looked back . how 
for back now ? 

But she knew nothing of anything that 
might have taken place at Grey Forest since 



154 BELLA DONNA. 

she left ; and she was growing curious to see 
the issue. She did not know Mr. Crowle's 
address ; and she actually thought of writing 
down to Mr. Wells, the curate, for information 
about the dear Franklyn family, * their common 
friends.' But the day she came to this resolve, 
she learnt a little more than this ; and this was, 
about three weeks, or say a month, after quit- 
ting Grey Forest. 

It was about five o'clock, pretty dark, and 
Mr. Maxwell had not come home from his 
chambers. Jenny was in her room, at her fire, 
supported in the embrace of her chair, with her 
lower limbs folded comfortably over each other, 
much in the way gentlemen do ; and by the light 
of the lamp, was engrossed by a lively thing 
of Victor Cretin's, in a delicate peach-blossom 
cover, entitled ' Vous, Moi, et Elle ' (Collection 
Pasquier). The paper was beautiful, and 
though there were only a few lines in each 
page, Jenny found a surprising amount of dra- 
matic action, for such curtailed limits. ' Elle ' 
(Therfese) was attached with frightful warmth 
to 'Vous' (Hector), who did not reciprocate 




jenny's welcome 'home.' 155 

that passion, but was horribly infatuated by 
' Moi ' (Marie). Strange to say, by an unhappy 
complication, 'Elle' and 'Vous' have been 
secretly and mysteriously united (in a dark 
place) by the conventional rite, which civiliza- 
tion still tolerates, but neither are conscious of 
this fatal tie, which is so well known to be a 
final impediment to all real domestic happiness. 
Some one, well-meaning but foolish, reveals 
the secret to * EUe.' She, more well-meaning, 
yet more foolish, in a moment of confidence, 
betrays it to 'Vous,' who finds (naturally) 
his frantic love converted to frantic hate by 
the sense of this odious tie. 'Va-t-en,' lui 
dit Hector, avec une sourire am&re. ' Je te 
hais !' A cet accueil froide et cruelle, la mise- 
rable tomba k ses genoux, presqu'evanouie. 

Jenny's breath came and went. She held 
the book high and in a line between her and the 
chimney-piece. She felt inexpressibly com- 
fortable, and nestled, as it were, in her chair. 
. She was panting to know what shape the 
denouement would take, for she was naturally 
of a romantic turn, and loved to read of all the 



156 BELLA DONNA. 

turns and- perplexities of what is called 'the 
gentle passion.' At this critical moment, a 
voice of earth and sheer prose broke the spell. 
* There is a person in the hall, Miss, as wishes 
to see you/ 

Jenny let the peach-coloured tale fall on her 
lap. * What brings her at this hour T she said. 
i It is inconvenient.' (She thought it was the 
dressmaker.) 

Tin sure I don't know, Miss/ said 'Rachel, 
not knowing Jenny was thinking of the dress- 
maker ; ' but she wishes to see you particular/ 

Jenny said, * Yery well, Rachel ; thank you, 
Rachel ' . read a little more of the curious em- 
barrassments of Hector and Marie . got up 
with a sigh of deep interest, and went down. 

The lamp was lighted, and at the end of the 
hall, by the hall-door, there was standing . not 
a dressmaker, but a tall, dark figure, craped 
and veiled all over . a black marble statue. 
Jenny's instinct told her who it was in a second. 
She stepped back a little . then ran forward 
with a delighted cry of recognition. 

Charlotte raised her arm, and stopped her. 



jenny's WELCOME 6 HOME.' 157 

She spoke in a low, hard voice, unlike the old 
Charlotte tones. 

* Stay . stay there. Don't come nearer . you 
have done sufficient with your acting ' 

Jenny was wondering at the crape and the 
deep mourning, and did not much heed the 
speaker. 

* Won't you come in and sit down  she said. 
* Do, dear Charlotte ; and let us talk/ And 
she again offered to go up to Charlotte, in her 
old affectionate way. 

'Keep back/ said Charlotte, with something 
like terror in her face, and catching the handle 
of the door . * don't come near me, . Mur- 
deress !' 

Jenny gave a start, perfectly genuine. Char- 
lotte had spoken loudly, and Jenny, with a 
wisdom that never deserted her, turned round 
and softly closed a door that was between the 
two halls. 

'What do you mean/ she said, 'by this 
curious language ? You must be going mad  

Charlotte laughed a hollow laugh. 'More 
acting ! But I have not come to talk with you, 



158 BELLA DONNA. 

but to tell you something. You are a mur- 
deress, for it was your work.' 

Sincerely and candidly, Jenny could not un- 
derstand her. Who was murdered ? What was 
the meaning of the black and the crape ? 

She was not in the least angry at the lan- 
guage. She really thought Charlotte's brain 
was unsettled. 

* Yes/ said Charlotte, with excited voice ; 
'and you shall not escape. I humbled my- 
self to you, . meanly, I own ; but it was for 
his sake. You had no pity, you cold, heartless, 
cruel, savage creature V 

It was a wise precaution of our Jenny shut- 
ting that door, for Charlotte was raising her 
voice. 

Jenny's cheeks were beginning to colour a 
little. Without being conscious of having 
done anything, she did not relish being as- 
sailed in this personal way. 

' But,' said Charlotte, hurriedly, * you shall 
not escape. You think me a poor, weak thing, 
and not a match for you. But I have a will 
and strength that you little dream of. I am 




jenny's welcome 'home.' 159 

changed . I am Dot the same Charlotte. Take 
care. I warn. you/ 

The visitors' bell rang outside with a loud 
clang. Both women started. Charlotte swathed 
her face in her veil again. She advanced two 
steps, close up to Jenny, and said to her in a 
harsh whisper . 

* / shall hunt you down yet. There are but 
two things I live for . to take care of the 
fatherless, and to ' 

The door Jenny had shut so prudently opened 
suddenly ; and Kachel came to let in master, for 
it was he who was now returned. Jenny was 
scared and bewildered. She was frightened by 
this fierce language ; for though the other had 
not finished what she was saying, Jenny seemed 
to understand what she meant. 



160 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER II. 



THE INVALID'S GREETING. 



When Mr. Maxwell entered, the dark figure 
passed quickly into the street 

He saw Jenny in the hall, whose colour was 
quite gone. * You look ill/ he said, anxiously. 
'What is the matter? Quite cold, too,' he 
added, taking her hand. 'Come in here . 
warm yourself. You don't take half enough 
care, I always tell you.' 

It was not until some of the generous fluid 
she had been * ordered' had been taken, that 
Jenny was quite herself again. She hurried to 
her room as soon as she could. She did not 
read any more of the entangled amours of 
' Vous et Elle,' but lay back in her chair, with 
eyes fixed on the ceiling, thinking a good deal. 



THE INVALID'S GREETING. 161 

She was really shocked and frightened by 
the scene. She felt some terror of that infu- 
riated woman. ' She is reckless ; she has no 
command of herself ; she will not care how she 
will injure me, who have never' . Jenny was 
about to Add . 'have never injured her/ but 
stopped. She had quite collected the secret 
of her mourning, the implied death of Mr. 
Franklyn, the cause and its effect. The match 
is off, thought Jenny ;> there has been a general 
crash . sale . an ejectment and turn out. and 
cheap squalid lodgings. 

' Ah !' said Jenny, suddenly, standing up and 
stamping her raised foot, in a fury, 'she is 
strong, is she ? She will hunt me, will she ? 
Let her try it. She has not had the best of it 
as yet. And to come into this . into my hall,' 
said Jenny, proudly, * and address her insolent 
threats to me !' and Jenny walked up and down 
with flushed cheeks and flashing eyes. 

Later on she became dejected. Jenny was 
of a timorous nature, and trembled at the no- 
tion of the angry Charlotte walking about the 
world and tracking her. But she thought of 

VOL. II. M 



162 BELLA DONNA. 

Charlotte's training and of her own strength, 
and grew reassured. But as to the details . 
the break up . the ejectment . the sale, &c. . 
and even that death to which Charlotte alluded 
. ( 4 Ah ! I have made her feel/ thought Jenny, 
* as she made me . once') . she must learn these 
forthwith; and after a little thought, she sat 
down, and wrote a soft, kind letter to the Eev. 
Mr, Wells, begging earnestly for a line as to the 
dreadful rumours which had reached her about 
Grey Forest. She had put it into an envelope, 
and was thinking again of Charlotte . (fear was 
now added to dislike, and the combination made 
her regard her enemy with a curious intensity 
of feeling) . when she recollected something, and 
opening her letter again, added a postscript: 
'P.S. . Something dreadful must have oc- 
curred. I have just seen dear Charlotte, who 
is very wild and odd. Seriously, I fear her 
brain is permanently unsettled. She talked so 
incoherently. Do, do, write quickly, dear 
Mr. Wells.' Jenny, as she put up her letter 
again, said to herself, 'that Wells was a sad 
gossip.' 




THE INVALID'S GREETING. 163 

That night she got back her equanimity; 
and drawing her reading-table quite close (she 
always read an hour in bed before going to 
sleep), followed up the loves of Hector and Marie 
Ther^se for nearly a hundred pages. It was 
growing exciting, for Hector had proposed to 
the woman, whom he idolized until she became 
his wife, that she should asphyxiate herself over 
a charcoal stove. She owed him that amende, 
for the cruel tie which she had innocently fas- 
tened on him. 

The Curate wrote by return . four pages 
crowded close . the fourth crossed. He had been 
wounded, and sorely stricken by the neglect 
he had suffered latterly : for Jenny, engrossed 
by the attentions of so many people, had but 
little time to devote to him. Yet she had 
adroitly, at a spare moment, contrived to cast 
him a sweet morsel or twa which kept him from 
litter starvation. A smile . a look of deep 
meaning . a secret mystery and mutual confi- 
dence . sometimes even of being a victim and 
object of cruel persecution ; still the Curate felt 
it acutely. But now all was forgotten . for- 



164 BELLA DONNA. 

given : and he wrote in a tumult of joy and 
with profusion of details. 

The late Mr. Franklyn had committed sui- 
cide, his affairs had been left in extreme dis- 
order, creditors' demands were pouring in from 
all sides, and a sale of the furniture and effects 
of the family might be looked for with cer- 
tainty. 

Miss Charlotte's match was off finally, and 
he had it from the best sources that Sir Wel- 
bore had said, that after that * painful business,' 
it was wholly out of the question. Money 
might have been got over ; but * a stain* like 
that . it was wholly out of the question. 

Wholly out of the question certainly, with a 
poor, broken outcast and . ejected family. For 
they had all left. 

It was said, indeed, in the neighbourhood, 
that the dreadful thing khown as an execution 
might be put in at any moment. Perhaps this 
was the reason why the family had fled. 

The estate and mansion would, it was sus- 
pected, be sold eventually, not now, for there 
were some legal difficulties as to priority, &c. 



i 



THE INVALID'S GREETING. 165 

Sold they would be, however, and it was 
said among the neighbours that Huxley, the 
nauveau riche of the district, had determined to 
have it, as the last thing wanting to make him 
a gentleman, and would give a fourth mors 
than any other. The family were in some 
London suburb, . in some cheap lodging in 
some cheap street. He would try and ascertain 
their address if possible, and let dear Miss 
Bell know by next post. In short, a full and 
satisfactory document, which the Curate was a 
couple of hours writing, and for which, to save 
the post, it is to be feared he let old Nancy 
Holden, who was in extremis, and who had sent 
up for him, stand by a little. He, however, 
saved the post, and reached Nancy's bedside 
quite time enough to give her a good ten 
minutes. 

Mrs. Maxwell was just about a point between 
ebb and flow, neither better nor worse ; but 
more querulous, restless, noisy, troublesome 
than ever. This was the popular voice in the 
servant world. As she suffered more, she 
seemed to gather a sort of wakeful strength, 



166 BELLA DONNA. 

and she was always in motion with tongue and 
eye, asking questions about all things and per- 
sons, and nervously watching the door. Nor 
was she a person who could be a little awed to 
keep quiet by a gentle authority, as most sick 
people can, but when she was seized with a 
thought or notion, it took hold of her ; it de- 
voured her, and forced its way out in a thou- 
sand jealous questions, . and could only be laid 
but by reasonable satisfaction. Then her afflic- 
tioq. was developing ; a cold sword would be 
plunged in periodically, and made her shriek 
and scream with the fierce pain. The distin- 
guished physicians came regularly with decent 
routine, and accepted their reward in the old 
guilty, surreptitious way, as though they were so 
many new conscripts, and were being recruited 
afresh for the Queen's army every day. 

Every one in the house and out of it said 
that poor Mr. Maxwell was sadly to be pitied, 
he must have such a time of it, was sorely 
tried, &c. Every one said, that for herself, after 
all, it would be a happy release, . a view which 
often occurs to nearly every friend, but the 



THE INVALID'S GREETING. 167 

perstfn most interested. Men merely said it 
was a shame . the women saying it was going 
on too long . was too much of a good thing. 
The physicians said it was a thing that might 
go on for years, or * go out like that ! * said 
Sir Charles, imitating a zephyr us with his 
mouth ; and this statement produced a general 
impression abroad of her being on the whole 
very unreasonable. 

Jenny, out of her charity, took the earliest 
opportunity to tap at her door and go in to see 
her. The sick, restless woman, leaning on her 
hand upon a crushed and crumpled pillow, 
measured her with bright feverish eyes, that 
looked as though they never closed. They 
rarely did, for she had but little sleep. Her 
little guard, or watch-dog, Jacky, sat beside, 
and the two measured our Jenny hostilely as 
die approached. 

* So you have come back, my lady !'. (she 
sometimes called Jenny this name, fancying it 
sarcastic,) . "go away, Jacky dear; my lady 
and I want to have a talk together/ 

This was her invariable practice ; her sick- 



168 BELLA DONNA. 

woman's notion of a hint, that it would 
be a corruption for a child of tender years 
to hear Jenny's speech. She thought it a 
deep and cutting stroke. But Jenny only 
smiled within herself at the poor creature's 
fatuity. 

' So you have come back, my lady/ she said 
again, * to take your proper place in the house, 
eh ? He gives it to you . insists upon it, so it 
must be right, eh ? ' 

4 Dear madam,' said Jenny, gently, ' you 
misjudge me sadly ; time will help you to take 
a juster view of these matters.' 

* Time !' said the other, with a laugh ; * excel- 
lent, quite right : I know you are waiting to see 
what time will do for you . that is your game, 
eh?' 

* Dearest madam ' 

She was getting more excited. 

* You expect to tire me out, eh ? Time is 
your game, eh ? And you have him to back 
you, eh ? But I shall live, . yes, I shall live ! 
I'll make myself live if it costs me torture. I 
hear things . I know things . I ' 



THE INVALID'S GREETING. 169 

She was sitting up, tossing her head wildly, 
and worked herself into one of her old states 
of excitement. 

* Hush, hush, dearest madam I Take care. 
You forget what the physicians . I had better 
go, indeed I had. But somehow my presence 
always seems to have the effect of * 

Jenny stole out, and found Jacky coiled up 
like a dog at the top of the stairs. 

She was beginning to dislike this creature . 
a goad . he was so plainly ranging himself in 
the opposite camp. She looked at him sourly. 

* You have not said your spelling, sir, for 
some time/ she said ; * come down now.' And 
Jenny was laying out in her mind a good 
page of stiff shingly words, which he should 
walk over without a stumble, or let him look 
to it. 

* I must go to mamma/ he said, obstinately. 
'Not now, sir.' 

4 1 must/ said he, drawing away slowly, and 
keeping his eye on her like a mastiff in retreat, 
6 mamma says so/ 

Jenny's cheeks blazed up. 



170 BELLA DONNA. 

'Do you dare, sir?' and she made a step 
nearer, but he caught the handle of the door. 

' I shall call Aer,' he said. 

Jenny's fingers were longing to tingle on his 
ear, but the wretch would scream and cause a 
scene. So she went down determined to bring 
the matter before Mr. Maxwell. 



171 



CHAPTER HI. 



jenny's expedition. 



One of these nights she was well forward in 
the second volume of ' Yous et Elle,' and get- 
ting on, with spurring of her steed, to the 
close, when her hour came. She was expected 
below by Mr. Maxwell, in the legal workshop. 

The fire was bright, the chair within easy 
range, the cushions like down; and Jenny's 
limbs, crossed in her favourite gentlemanly 
attitude, seemed to enjoy an agreeable lassi- 
tude. 

With reluctance she rose . even with ill- 
humour. Another would have made excuse, 
but Jenny, Sybarite as she was, was too wise to 
let a mere temporary engagement stand in the 
way of a greater stake, so she went down in a 
little ill-hunour. 



172 BELLA D0XXA. 

We have mentioned that there was a great 
change observable in oar Jenny of late, . a 
greater calmness and self-possession. She had 
lost that little air of creeping she once had ; 
she was more independent. 

So with a sweet air she told him quietly 
what a sacrifice she was making, and how little 
she felt disposed for work and labour that 
night But she knew there were important 
duties to be got through . in short, she was 
Jenny h la victirne. 

He was shocked-, insisted there should be 
no work. He could do well . for one night 
it was no matter. and the rest of it. But 
Jenny was firm, sat at her little table, got her 
pens, and began with a calm resolution there 
was no opposing. 

But he felt that there was here a great 
stretch and compliment, and to accept as a 
special favour what he had hitherto begun to 
receive almost as a matter of course. But she 
did a little personal business that night, too. 

She again struck die old chord. her painful 
position in that house, the odium*and dislike 




jenny's expedition. 173 

that were accumulating on her, and the way 
the sick woman was treating her. In short, she 
would be wanting to her self-respect . she owed 
it to herself and dignity . to not expose herself 
further to these cruel misconceptions. 

' What, again ?' said he. ' 1 thought I had 
effectually stopped this. Sickness does not 
give these privileges of calumniating the inno- 
cent* 

$ Indeed/ said Jenny, * I had thought now 
that she was so much better ' 

4 Yes/ said he, reflectively, * I do think she 
mends, and is getting stronger every day . so 
that ' 

He felt suddenly that he was saying this in 
a tone scarcely of rejoicing at the happy 
change in Mrs. Maxwell's health. Jenny's 
eyes and his met . his were cast down. 

* I will speak to her again. Your position 
in this . in my house, must be regarded. You 
have laid me under obligations of gratitude, 
which I must not forget, never shall forget/ he 
added, a little fervently. 

' Still I tfm not going to turn myself into a 



174 BELLA DONNA. 

pack-horse/ said Jenny to herself, with a smile, 
as she resumed 'Vous et Elle,' 'for any of 
them. It is going on rather too long/ She 
finished it that night before she went to bed. 

So a month and more glided by, happily 
and peacefully. Jenny wrote many letters 
and received many, notably many, from her 
admirer, Mr. Wells. This gentleman furnished 
her with all details relative to the Franklvn 
family, and had just sent a choice morsel of 
news in a hurried postscript that had the air 
and spasmodic bearing of a telegram. The 
Franklyn estates were to be sold. The en- 
closed, a cutting from the local newspaper, 
to the effect that Mr. Popkins had received 
instructions to offer for unreserved public 
competition all the rich, rare, and costly fur- 
niture, selected by the well-known taste and 
feeling of the late proprietor, &c. Cards to 
view would be obtained at Mr. Popkins* es- 
tablishment. 

Everything would be sold, said the auc- 
tioneer, with his hand, as it were, on his heart. 
The old family plate: so many thousand 



i 



jenny's expedition. 175 

ounces of silver ; the ' rare ' marquetrie 
tables; the 'rich* buhl cabinets (in truth, 
these articles were of a character sadly worn 
and ill-used, and originally of a poor order) ; 
and even the old portraits . an original 
Oanaletto, c exquisitely ' painted; a 'choice' 
Wouvermans, . from the collection of the late 
Cardinal Fesch;' two heads, after Derrer, 
painted 'with great vigour;' and a portfolio 
of rare etchings and engravings. There wer-e 
also some choice bits of Sevres and Dresden 
. figures, two * crackled ' china jars, and some 
other odds and ends. In short, the attention 
of amateurs, virtuosi, and the cognoscenti gene- 
rally was respectfully called to this unique 
opportunity of enriching their collections, 
which might never occur again. 

This was all mere varnish, I am afraid. 
We have already seen specimens of the thou- 
sand ounces of plate in the twisted, spiral- 
shaped, wiry -looking branch candlesticks 
which ornamented the dining -table of the 
late Mr. Franklyn, at the first scene with 
which this story opened. There was an article 



176 BELLA DONNA. 

of furniture, too, partially described as a 
' massive ' sideboard by the same friendly 
hand, which we have also seen before; but 
which, with its sharp, spiked legs, seemed a 
lean and slippered pantaloon of a sideboard. 

Jenny read of all these articles, and recog- 
nized them; for Mr. Wells, the curate, had 
good-naturedly forwarded her a copy of the 
catalogue. The estates, with all the rpyalties, 
rights of fishing, hawking, turbary, and gene- 
ral 'easements' thereunto appertaining, were 
to be 'set up' in London by a grander 
firm than Mr. Popkins', . Messrs. Saltmarshe, 
Robins, and Co., whose programmes some- 
times covered a large space of ground in the 
leading journal, closely ranged in file. ' Un- 
less,' it was added, 'disposed of previously by 
private contract.' 

More news, too, concerning the family. 
Young Craven was considered by the neigh- 
bourhood to have behaved 'shabbily;' to 
have skulked out of his engagements under 
the paternal ^Egis. But it was known at the 
same time that the Baronet was in his house 




jenny's expedition. 177 

as the Autocrat of all the Eussias, and would 
send his son to the mines, or to Siberia, . that 
is,' would disinherit him ruthlessly, . if he dared 
to gainsay his imperial will. There was much 
excuse, therefore, for the young man ; since he, 
as the saying is, could not help himself. 

Another three weeks : . Mrs. Maxwell, still 
endued with an unnatural vitality, beginning 
to eat with a curious appetite ; and yet, in 
that heart direction, much the same. Some 
ligament or string was getting finer and finer 
every day, and would snap some morning. 
Still the day nor hour not known. 

Jenny beginning to find this life a little 
languid, after her late excitement, and grow- 
ing almost feverish in her wish for news of the 
Franklyn family. The Curate wrote; they 
were in London somewhere; still in an ob- 
scure suburb, but could not name it. He said 
it seemed to be made a mystery of. 

Jenny was not pleased; a new idea had 
occurred to her. She wrote him what might 
be called a lonely letter, in low spirits, as it 
were; no friends . cast adrift in the vast 

VOL. II. N 



178 BELLA DONNA. 

London world . with no one but him to lean 
upon. He very often came up, she was given 
to understand . passed through (where had our 
Jenny learnt this ?) . would he give her a call, 
as he had done once. It would be a charity, 
as she wanted him to help her a little, in one 
respect. 

What was the result? Enraptured Curate 
scrapes together his little money . borrows 
more from a parishioner, and flies up to Baby- 
lon by the night's train. It was his sermon 
day on the next Sunday, and this was Satur- 
day. But he wrote a hasty note to his supe- 
rior, excusing himself. 

He was in Chesterfield Street the next day. 
Jenny saw him in Mr. Maxwell's study . saw 
him for nearly an hour. She was delightful, 
and he was enraptured. 

How long would he stay ? Only a day or 
two ? Jenny's face fell. 

She had hoped . but no matter . it could 
not be helped. 

Enraptured Curate will stay any number of 
days . weeks . months if necessary. 




jenny's expedition. 179 

He had got traces of the Franklyns, very 
cleverly, and would work it all out. Return 
to-morrow. 

He returned on the morrow. The poor 
wretch had been about half the night in a 
drenching rain. He had heard of some line 
of country called Little Grosvenor Villas ; and, 
as he could not afford cabs, he had gone ex- 
ploring until near one o'clock in the morning ; 
splashing and paddling in mud and dirt, rain, 
and general misery. There were many Little 
Grosvenor Villas, all at opposite quarters; 
and the- poor . ordained tramp had a wretched 
time, but found it at last by diligent inquiry 
at a small grocers shop. 

He came the next day to Jenny, husky 
and coughing, . his throat lined with files, . 
but triumphant. 

i I have found them,' he said. 

Jenny's face lightened with joy, and her 
hands moved instinctively under her chin, as 
though she were tying the strings of her 
bonnet. 

He came back in the evening by appoint- 



180 BELLA DONNA. 

ment, and Jenny, already dressed, went out 
with him. 

Little Grosvenor Villas was miles . literally 
miles . away. Jenny was no tramp, so Curate 
calls a cab. * A Hansom !' murmurs Jenny ; 
and they get in and roll away. Hansom 
bounds and springs along with the easy motion 
of a cricket-ball. Poor Curate I he is silent 
for a time, thinking how this jaunt will con- 
sume such little silver as he has. 

It takes them an hour . through the City . 
through blocked streets . with ten minutes of 
patient waiting, at a time.' Jenny is. pleasant 
and amusing on her journey, lolling back, with 
Turkish ease, and says she could live in a 
Hansom. 

At last they are set down in the district. 
Curate is fumbling for his little silver; but 
Jenny says, sweetly, * Let him wait. Pay him 
now, dear Mr. Wells . but let him wait. But 
stay . * and she made as though she would take 
out her purse ; at which the Curate, in eager 
protest, poured out his silver desperately into 
Hansom's hand, and walked away with Jenny. 



.f 



jenny's expedition. 181 

They found the house . lodgings . mean gen- 
tility lodgings . clean, but reduced. The house 
had the same air of secret suffering under re- 
spectable clothing, that a reduced person . 
say a lady turned governess . has under a 
genteel suit of apparel. It was small and con- 
tracted. 

Jenny drew near cautiously, and stood before 
the hall-door. It was growing dark, and they 
were lighting the street lamps. She looked up 
to the first-floor windows. There were no 
blinds ; then she crossed over with the Curate, 
and stood on the opposite flagging to get a 
better view. 

She could see into the drawing-room, for 
there were candles lit, and she could make out 
black figures sitting hopeless at the fire. Jenny 
looked very long, and never answered her com- 
panion when he spoke to her. 

4 We ought to go in,' he said ; ' poor things, 
they would take it as a charity.' 

i Would she ?' said Jenny, coldly ; she did 
not say i they.' i We haven't time, we must 
get back; let us find out the number.' And 



182 BELLA DONNA. 

she crossed the street again, and went up to 
the little door . Ten was the number. 

As they were turning away, the door sud- 
denly opened, and some one came out. Jenny 

 

hastily walked on, but the gentleman followed 
them a little way, and then, as it were satisfied, 
turned away in a secret manner down another 
street. Jenny, deeply veiled, said softly to 
her friend, 'He knows us*, it is young Mr. 
Craven. How stupid ! he will tell them.' 

Jenny was really provoked, and said this a 
little testily, and, by a tone in her words, seemed 
to convey that it was his fault. Here was the 
Hansom waiting, and Jenny's sweet voice came 
back to her. She enjoyed her ride, so * Make 
him drive fast, dear Mr. Wells/ said she. . Isn't 
the motion delightful?' And the driver aloft 
scourged his beast with his long whip. At the 
top of the street, Jenny stopped it, and tripped 
out. * She was so obliged. Oh, could he come 
again some other time ? It was moh a treat to 
her. She was so lonely. He must come to Ches- 
terfield Street. He should know Mr. Maxwell 
. would he dine with them some day ? No, no,' 




jenny's expedition. 183 

added Jenny, dismissing* the idea sorrowfully, 'it 
would be no use asking you ; we won't mention 
that again/ added Jenny, with meaning, as 
though there was some old legend or history 
which effectually barred Mr. Wells being asked 
to a family meal. 

She left him to adjust the fare with the 
Hansom driver, who, seeing that he had to do 
with a soft-minded clergyman, played the 
bravo and bludgeon man. He got down 
fiercely, when the Curate mildly demurred. 
'What, do you suppose I'm to be distressin 
my 'oss for you and your young 'oman, all for 
this ? You ought to be ashamed on yourself to 
offer it.' Becoming more furious, our Curate 
gave way, and presented him with a very large 
testimonial. Poor soul ! he would make it up 
by a slender repast . a ghostly ^dinner at a 
counter . a fiction of a dinner, whose proper 
name was lunch. 

Jenny seemed to be sadly disturbed by this 
visit. At home she sat long before the fire rumi- 
nating, and beat her foot impatiently. She had 
thought all was over with that Craven alliance ; 



184 BELLA DONNA* 

and here was this manly youth, under cover of 
night, and, no doubt in defiance of his family, 
skulking away to see the impoverished family 
and their pauper house. Were Jenny older 
and more mature she might have thought it her 
painful duty to put his relations on their guard* 
But to do her justice she did not entertain the 
notion a moment. Perhaps it was because 
something else occurred to her. 



185 



CHAPTER IT. 



AN INTEBVIEW. 



Jenny had made a few friends for herself in 
this vast lonely, lonely London. Among others 
she had attracted the notice of the Reverend 
Hewlett Pole, M.A., vicar of the parish church 
which Jenny frequented. This gentleman was 
struck by her devout bearing on Sundays, and 
the beautiful * abstraction,' as he called it, 
which characterized her manner of devotion. 
He knew something of Mr. Maxwell, and hoped 
that she would ' assist them ' with the catechism 
and other parochial matters. The Reverend 
Hewlett had, indeed, a sort of private legion of 
parish virgins under his command, whom he 
was fond of 'training/ and he promptly en- 
listed Jenny. 



186 BELLA DONNA. 

The work, I am afraid, was scarcely suited 
to one of Jenny's temperament. She had been 
in the habit of devoting her Sabbaths to strict 
retirement in her chamber ; for on Saturdays, 
usually, came home one of M. Bernardi's de- 
lightful boxes. A Sunday or two she did go 
and parade at the Reverend Hewlett Pole's 
morning drill ; but it did not suit. She told 
her clerical colonel very gently and plaintively 
that she was afraid she could not come very 
often, and when pressed by that officer, hinted 
that the ladies of the regiment made her feel 
uncomfortable. Perhaps they did. And the 
statement was, in fact, true ; for during the 
exercises Jenny did feel uncomfortable. 

Mr. Maxwell knew of it, and approved of her 
going ; but Jenny, when she had suspended her 
duties, did not care to mention it to him. She 
therefore went out every Festival very much 
about the old hour . as if to the old place. At 
dinner, sometimes, Mr. Maxwell asked her how 
she had got on . a question she either did not 
hear, through a fit of coughing, or through a 
sudden question of her own occurring to her ; or 




AN INTERVIEW. 187 

if these two resources failed her, by a sweet and 
mournful shaking of her head, and a sudden 
change of subject. This mode of reply often 
mystified Mr. Maxwell, who used to translate 
it into something unpleasant having occurred, 
which it would be too painful to dwell upon 
further. 

On many little expeditions therefore went 
Jenny, even on week-days, which were under- 
stood to have reference to the Kev. H. Pole, 
arid his parish business. Jenny tripped away 
lightly, at all hours deeply veiled and alone, 
and was often looked long after wistfully by 
predatory gentlemen as she floated by them. 
On the morning after her little expedition with 
Mr. Wells, she went out betimes, that is, be- 
tween eleven and twelve, stepped briskly across 
the park, got into St. James's Street, and 
fluttered about the region found at the bottom 
of that settlement of clubs. She looked at those 
stately buildings with wonder and curiosity. 
Eor she had heard voung Craven describe their 
interior state and splendour, and more specially 
dwell on the private magnificence of his own, 



188 BELLA DONNA. 

the Junior Conservative, . their marbles and 
mirrors, ottomans and velvets, and smoking- 
rooms, and cook, M. Salmi, whom the 'Rag* 
had tried to steal from them, by dishonourable 
private offers. 'The Rag?' said Jenny, be- 
wildered, and wished the origin of that curious 
and rather degrading sobriquet, to be ex- 
plained to her. Explained to her also, was 
the system of young Craven's club life. How 
he had lodgings just by . ' the finest ' in the 
quarter. 4 01d Venterby wrote from the 
country, just a day late! Jove! I heard he 
nearly burst a blood-vessel with rage T 

Jenny thought of this little legend, as she 
wandered about listlessly. She kept close to a 
cab-stand, and held her little purse in her hand. 
Suddenly, and with a little hurry, she accosted 
a driver of one of these vehicles, and timidly 
asked the fare to Temple Bar. Curious to say, 
as she put this question, a gentleman who had 
been coming along the street, stopped beside her, 
and called out, 4 Halloo ! Miss Bell taking a cab !' 

Jenny was near fainting, and dropped her 
little purse. The youth picked it up. 




AN INTERVIEW. 189 

'Well, Miss Bell/ said young Craven, 
- where do you wish to go to ?' 

'Oh, it's no matter now,' said Jenny, 
hurriedly . she was quite scared, poor child! 
4 1 must go home . good-bye, Mr. Craven !' and 
Jenny began to move. 

4 Must you go ?' said he. 4 Very well . glad 
to have seen you. I have not breakfasted 
yet.' 

His manner was cold, and Jenny said within 
herself, that something had changed him. She 
bit her lip, and walked away hastily, and with- 
out turning her head. Her cheek flushed, and 
she spoke to herself, as she walked fast. As 
she turned into the park, she heard footsteps 
behind her, as of some one running: . young 
Craven was beside her. 

4 1 . I . wanted to ask you,' be said, . 4 it is 
so curious not having seen you for so long . 
how you have been, . what has become of 
you?' 

Jenny looked round, with mystery and alarm, 
as though they were engaged in a deed of 
guilt. 



190 BELLA DONNA. 

4 Oh, Mr. Craven ' she said. 

He looked round also. * Well !' he said . 
then went on. c I saw you last night,' he said, 
' though you didn't see me. I was seeing that 
poor family, and that brave girl Charlotte/ 

He looked steadily at Jenny. Jenny cast 
down her eyes. 

' Poor . poor girl !' she said. 6 Though she 
does hate me !' 

He gave a curious smile. * I believe/ he 
said, * on the contrary ' 

i Do not let us speak of it,' said Jenny, with 
growing agitation. * I shall never forget it . 
that scene . that terrible scene !' 

* Scene ! . what scene V 

4 Oh, she told you/ said Jenny, nervously . 
i of course she did. She tells you everything. 
It shattered my nerves dreadfully. Let us 
speak of something else . quickly now . ' 

' No ; but tell me/ he said : ' have you seen 
Charlotte ?' 

i She came to our house/ said Jenny, in a 
low trembling voice, ' and there . sent up for 
me, and in the hall . our own hall . assailed me, 




AN INTERVIEW. 191 

oh, so cruelly . so grossly . so unjustly. Oh ! 
oh P said Jenny, trying with her round hand to 
shut out the picture. 'But I should inake 
allowance. I think she knew not what she was 
doing.' 

4 1 never heard of this/ said young Craven, 
musingly. 

4 She thought,' said Jenny, excitedly, ' that I 
was, in some remote way . that seemed to be the 
delusion . the cause of dear darling Mr. Frank- 
lyn's end . my kind friend . my best bene- 
factor!' And Jenny lifted up her eyes de- 
voutly to heaven. ' But,' she added, sweetly, 
4 you always said so . you found it out, I don't 
know now, the first day . I did not believe you. 
I confess it now . I did not know of your pene- 
tration. You told me . you warned me !' 

4 Well,' said he, complacently, 'I thought I 
saw some little prejudice against you.' 

4 Oh, had I taken your advice in other things. 
But no matter now/ (What was this precious 
counsel given by young Craven ?) 4 I have no 
one here in vast weary London to counsel or 
direct me. Happy those who have. Happy 



192 BELLA DONNA. 

those who are spared the cruel stroke of secret 
slander. Yes/ said Jenny, vehemently, 'she 
has slandered me to you. You know she has. 
She has repeated those vile things. I am no 
hypocrite. I do not like her. I can see that 
she has turned you against me. Naturally you 
trust her. You are guided by her ; why not ? 
She is to be your bride. But I am no hypo- 
crite, and cannot forgive her/ 

All this Jenny poured out in a vehement 
stream of mingled agitation, and at the end 
even of hysterical sobs. 

i Don't, don't,' said young Craven, looking 
sound. * I assure you, you are mistaken, you 
are indeed. You take this matter far too 
seriously. I am in the habit, as you know/ he 
added with pride, * of judging for myself. I 
don't take my opinions second-hand.' 

' G-ood-bye/ said Jenny, hurriedly, * I must 
go. I dare not wait. Good-bye. I shall not 
see you again, for years perhaps. But if I 
thought you had so base an opinion ' 

4 1 assure you/ said he, * it is quite a delusion 
on your part. But tell me, where do you ?' 




AN INTERVIEW. 193 

1 1 must go, I must go,* said Jenny, releasing 
herself. They were close to the Park gate 
now. * Only tell me this. If ever . if ever . I 
have no friends, you know . if ever I should 
want a little advice, to direct me in an emer- 
gency . may I . may I . just write, and . 
could you spare me one line ? It would be so 
precious.' 

< Good gracious, yes,' said young Craven, im- 
petuously, 4 to be sure. But I shall see you 
again before long. Tell me, where do you ?' 

6 Hush, hush,' said Jenny, * I dare not. And 
promise me this . if I may exact a little pro- 
mise . I shall not see you again ' 

' Certainly,' said young Craven ; ' but good 
gracious, I tell you I shall.' 

* Promise me not to speak of me to her. It 
someway degrades me. I can't bear to think 
of it after the dreadful scene . now good-bye. 
Thanks !' 

And Jenny fluttered away. 

Young Craven stood looking after her till 
she had crossed the street and turned out of 
Piccadilly. He then looked round him, hesi- 

VOL. II. o 



194 BELLA DOtfNA. 

tated a moment, and followed cautiously. 
Jenny could not see. 

But she could not see also some one that 
was running home before her, a little boy, who 
suddenly turned down by the Mews behind 
Chesterfield Street, and got into Mr. Maxwell's 
house by the stables. 

When Jenny entered, she was met at the 
door by her maid Rachel. 

'0 Miss! Miss!' said that attendant, 
4 such a business. Master was looking for you 
everywhere.' 

Jenny was perturbed. 

4 What is it, Rachel ? anything happened  

'Didn't you hear, Miss . not expected to 
live out the day ?' 

4 What ! what ! ' said Jenny hastily, a curious 
light coming into her eyes. 4 I must go up/ 

4 No, no, it's master's father, Miss. He was 
telegraphed for this morning, and is gone away 
half-an-hour ago ; just caught the train.' 

Stupid maid ! and yet it was not her fault. 
Jenny was in a flutter. She presently was 
told more particulars, and found a little hasty 



AN INTERVIEW. 195 

note directed to her by Mr. Maxwell. His 
father, a man nearly eighty years old, was in 
extremis. In the course of nature, he could 
not be expected to last more than a few days. 
He hoped she would take care of herself during 
his absence, and deny herself nothing. He 
would telegraph to her any news. 

That very night at ten o'clock, when she 
was thinking of retiring to rest, a telegram 
came. All was over. At seven o'clock the 
old man had expired, and the sender of the 
message was now Sir Frederick Maxwell, Q.O., 
Bart., and ihe sick lady upstairs was Lady 
Maxwell. 

Jenny looked at the characters with addi- 
tional interest and reverence. Her eyes 
sparkled, her cheeks flushed up, and she began 
to pace the room, as she always did when she 
was castle-building. She did not go to bed for 
an hour later, and when she did, it was with 
a pleasant smile on her lips. Her dreams were 
very light that night. 



196 BELLA DONNA, 



CHAPTER V. 

' ADVICE AND OPINION.* 

Next day, towards evening, returned Sir 
Frederick Maxwell, Bart. He had a ' heavy ' 
Case, which he dare not neglect, for any filial 
or mortuary duties, and had arranged to go 
back for the funeral. That ceremonial took 
place in due course, and with befitting state, 
down at Brighton, where the old Baronet had 
died. It was conducted with a weight of crape, 
and abundance of odious sweeping brushes, 
disguised in black, and the scorbutic mourning 
mutes, which decency and grief insist on. 
Thus matters fell into the old channel, and Sir 
Frederick, who made no pretence of deep grief, 
was at his law labours again. 
Jenny, it was noted by Rachel the maid 




4 ADVICE AND OPINION.' 197 

and others, seemed to be more assiduous than 
usual after the ministrations of the Reverend 
Hewlett Pole ; going up, as it was believed, 
every second or third day in that parochial 
direction. She took the Park road, but gene- 
rally strayed off a little down in the direction 
of the palace, and which was indeed the road 
that led towards the Rev. H. Pole's district* 
Somewhere in this direction she found her 
field of missionary labour, performed it, what- 
ever it was, and returned home. The time 
selected was usually in the grey of the winter 
evening, between four and five o'clock. And 
curious to say, almost always a young boy 
took advantage of her absence to steal out by 
the back of Chesterfield Street, by the Mews, 
and was home always a few minutes before her. 
Jenny was not so diligent in her legal clerk- 
ship as of old* Her master's eyes had mended 
prodigiously, and he was growing strong. Still 
he insisted on her old service in the study, and 
Jenny's protestations were overruled. The 
old form of having one of the children down as 
watch-dog was jealously insisted on by Jenny,. 



198 BELLA DONNA. 

at least up to ten o'clock at night, after 
which hour the formula was dispensed with, 
and her scruples seemed satisfied ; she called 
it, however, 'the Drawing Room' . a cha- 
racteristic little salvo, and it quieted Jenny's 
conscience. 

But it has been mentioned that Jenny had 
grown more independent and composed in her 
manner. She and Sir Frederick Maxwell very 
often suspended legal labour altogether for an 
hour, and the man of law took counsel of the 
girl of sense. She gave it cheerfully and with 
surprising wisdom. He said she had more sense 
than half the fellows at * the Bar.' There was 
Boljoye, a Queen's counsel, with a bag dis- 
tended as was his own person ; and Boshley, 
and Rasher, who had got, Heaven knows how, 
to be a Serjeant ' I declare, Jenny,' said he . 
he had come to call her Jenny. 'I would 
sooner have your view than the whole of theirs 
put together.' 

There was no affectation of grief for the old 
baronet. Within a week the new one was 
talking him over with Jenny in his study. 




'ADVICE AND OPINION.' 199 

c He left us very little/ he said ; 4 he had 
not much to leave, though. Ten thousand 
will be the outside. You know, though we 
are baronets, we are landless . not a rood. My 
poor father was sold out forty years ago. That 
is the reason I am here in this study with 
these papers before me.' 

Jenny sighed. 

4 By the way, you must advise me with tbat 
long, sensible, little head of yours. How much 
do you suppose I have put by ? I tell you 
everything, you know.' 

Jenny smiled, but could not tell . could not 
even dream . could not guess. 

4 Well, say eight thousand pounds.' This 
was said with great hesitation, as if fearful of 
offending. 

Mr. Maxwell laughed. 

4 You must think me a very poor young 
man,' he said, 4 not to have more to show than 
that. No. I have laboured hard and spent 
little. The house costs next to nothing, 
thanks to the thrifty mistress . I mean house- 
keeper.' (Jenny confused at this mistake.). 



200 BELLA DONNA. 

' No ; what would you say to five-and-twenty 
thousand ?' 

Jenny gave a little scream ; it really took 
her by surprise. 

* What a deal of money !' she said, artlessly. 
6 Oh dear, what a deal !' 

' Now/ he said, i the question is, what is to 
be done with it ? It has been resting in the 
funds long enough, I'll not wait any longer 
to add more to it. What do you say ? Case 
for Miss Bell's advice and opinion! Fee, a 
new shawl. What do you say to a new India 
shawl ?' 

Jenny took no notice, but began to reflect. 
She took up a stray roll of briefs and wrote on 
its face carelessly, then handed it over to him. 

He read, . ' Buy an estate' 

i Excellent,' said he. ' Basher often gets 
twenty guineas for a worse opinion/ 

4 For, say forty thousand pounds/ said Jenny, 
with an air of quiet reflection, ' a fair bit of 
land could be got. An old baronetcy and no 
land is a gentleman without a coat. It is 
incomplete/ said Jenny ; ' it has no root.' 



1 ADVICE AND OPINION/ 201 

' No settlement, as we say in the law. Ex- 
cellent ! I'll do it' 

* You can add to it as you get more money. 
Buy bits here, and bits there, as the fees in- 
crease, then get into Parliament ; no barrister 
is in full practice unless he is retained by a 
constituency; 

4 Good,' said he, stopping before her and 
taking her hand* * You are a very clever crea- 
ture, Jenny/ (Jenny released herself hastily.) 
4 1 have made up my mind ; it shall be. We 
shall buy our land; we shall look out for a 
suitable thing; we shall go down; we Shall 
build there ; you shall choose the furniture ; 
you shall choose the county, the town, every- 
thing ; you shall ' Suddenly he stopped. 

Jenny rose up. . 

' It is time to say good night,' she said, and 
fluttered away like a dove to her nest. 

Next morning, when the Barrister was gone 
to court, a clergyman, who had been skulking 
suspiciously about the street, came up, and 
asked to see Miss Bell . * Please say, the Rev. 
Charlton Wells; He was shown into the 



202 BELLA DONNA. 

* drawing-room/ and Jenny came down to him. 
She was sweet and affectionate. 

4 You have news for me, I know/ she said, 
with simplicity. i You have heard something 
more about them. Dear Mr. Wells, you are 
80 kind . so good-natured/ 

He was gratified with these praises . the 
poor clerical jackal ! . and proceeded with com- 
placency to tell his story. He had seen the 
girls yesterday . Charlotte was out. They k 
were delighted, poor things! and were very 
open and confiding. Charlotte, they told him, 
had great hopes that something was going to 
happen. Old Cousin John Hall had written 
kindly, and would soon be coming over. They 
had got a benevolent man of law, who was 
looking into their affairs, and would try to set 
them straight ; and Charles . dear Charles . 

Jenny started from her seat. 

4 Does he go much to them ?* she asked, with 
a curl upon her lip. 

He had been there only the evening before. 
He had told them, he was sure, in time Sir 
Welbore would come round . that is, in time. 



i 



1 ADVICE AND OPINION.' 203 

Jenny beat her foot upon the ground, 
and did, not speak ; then got up and began 
to pace the room, according to her favourite 
habit. 

' You . you told me/ she said, a little tartly, 
' that it was all at an end for ever. How could 
you have made such a mistake ? You see 
there is- nobody I can depend on . not one . 
all the same P 

The Curate was confounded at this attack. 
' I thought/ he faltered, * you would be de- 
lighted. Your friend, you know. and ' 

Jenny laughed. * Of course . of course/ she 
said, 'we understand that. But I am very 
much harassed on all sides. Dear Mr. Wells, 
forgive me. You who are so good, so gene- 
rous, so useful to me.' 

The poor jackal took her hand reverently, 
and bent his glowing cheek over it. He was 
overcome by these "praises. Jenny dismissed 
him, for she had a little scheme in her restless 
head she wanted to carry out forthwith. But 
mind . he must come and see her again. 

Poor jackal ! His money was gone, and he 



204 BELLA DONNA. 

was in debt for lodgings. He had made a faint 
resolve to rush home on the morrow, for his 
superior was calling for him imperiously, but 
he now must stay. 




205 



CHAPTER VI. 



. THE FRANKLYNS* PROBATION. 



The poor outcast Franklyns . in all the 
misery of grief and straitened means com- 
bined . were wretched enough in their mean 
lodgings in the London suburbs. Grief makes 
no account of surrounding luxury ; the softest 
pillows, to moisten with tears, and the most 
delicate and soothing ministrations . these are 
about as little regarded as the gilding and 
mirjors of a transatlantic steamer in the agonies 
of sea-sickness. And yet take these comforts 
away, and how much the bitterness of private 
sorrow is intensified. And this is the special 
misery that generally waits upon a father's loss : 
for, usually accompanying the natural grief, 
comes a crowd of sad troubles . a general up- 



206 BELLA DONNA. 

rooting . a rush of demands, and possibly a 
sudden bursting out of a whole conflagration of 
difficulties and dangers, smouldering for years, 
and which the skilful hand, now motionless, 
was alone able to control. 

In their little lodging, and with a little 
purse, which was running out as steadily and 
inevitably as sands in an hour-glass, were the 
Franklyns, miserable together. They were 
about as wretched as they could well be. Over 
them hung the memory of the late dreadful act, 
like a mephitic exhalation . that dreadful end 
which, not many years before, would have 
been marked for public reprobation by a stake, 
and bed of quicklime, at cross-roads. They had 
no hope. Their dear loved Grey Forest was to 
be sold . sold, with all the attendant roughness 
to be expected from men who knew that it 
could not meet their just demands. These 
poor girls themselves had to come in contact 
with rude surly men of law, and with, to them, 
the dreadful courtesies of sheriffs' men, and de- 
moralized executives of the civil power. There 
was no one to help them. Their brother had 




THE FRANKLYNS' PROBATION. 207 

been long in some foreign settlement, and would 
not hear the news for a month to come. Mr. 
Crowle, the late man of business to the family, 
Charlotte had dismissed, with a shudder. She 
had a dim impression that he was some way 
associated with the late catastrophe, and could 
not endure his presence. He had suddenly 
cast his smooth, glistening skin, and assumed 
a new manner of insolence. But Charlotte 
did not fear him. Still, he was a large credi- 
tor of the late Mr. Frankly n. 

Every one knew that the Craven alliance 
was now at an end: that Sir Welbore had 
solemnly and decidedly pronounced that * the 
thing could not be . was out of the question . 
was . er . most inconvenient . but, still, not to 
be thought of. There was something . er . 
really . so unpleasant in that . er . affair . of 
the late Mr. Franklyn's. No . it could not even 
be thought of. And so,' said the Baronet to 
his son, * you will be good enough to . er . wipe 
the whole thing out of your mind.' 

That son was of a curious temper. He had 
a kind of chivalrous sense in him, which I 



208 BELLA DONNA. 

believe came of reading modern novels ; and, 
just as he could write fine adoration 4 To Ianthe ' 
and ' To Medora,' there was sometimes a poetic 
chord touched among the motives which di- 
rected his actions. And thus the idea of he . 
the brave, gallant Squire Craven, standing by 
that gentle, stricken girl in her distress. - 
soothing and comforting her, in despite of all 
the menaces of a despotic father, seemed some- 
thing noble ; indeed, it quite filled the mind of 
that brave knight. And so he paid them con- 
spirator-like visits, and was really kind and 
enthusiastic, and helped them in many ways. 

Charlotte was a firm woman ; she knew the 
dangers and difficulties, the hopeless obstacles, 
and plainly told him it was all at an end. He 
was distracted for the time being, and thought 
himself miserable : but was very happy. That 
little tendency towards our Jenny was but a 
spasm, as indeed was his present emotion. And 
it is to be suspected Charlotte had this impres- 
sion. And indeed, it may be said, that although 
she liked him with but a mild and subdued 
regard, and in a great measure inclined to him 




THE FRANKLYNS' PROBATION. . 209 

lint for the sake of heir family, his was a 
mind, as has been seen, infinitely below hers. 

On Charlotte's brain rested the whole bur- 
den. They had now a little store of money,, 
but that would be soon washed away. She 
wrote to the ' Cousin Hall,' at Dieppe, who had 
spoken so generously, telling him of their state 
. wrote, it must be said, with repugnance, but 
she was making many more bitter sacrifices, 
and told* him of their state. But it would 
seem that the news of their misfortune had 
damped his sympathies . an effect not uncom- 
mon with such news . and he never answered. 
An old bachelor, fond of comforts, he had of 
course naturally reckoned on the arm-chairs 
and firesides of Grey Forest . on the gardens 
and glades of Grey Forest . on the old wines of 
Grey Forest . and not on the meagre accommo- 
dation of small hired lodgings. This was but 
human nature, and human nature sent no 
answer, and perhaps changed its mind. 

Charlotte thought of the old universal plank 
in woman's shipwreck . the genteel spar the 
suddenly distressed girl clings to . taking office 

VOL. II. p 



210 BELLA DONNA. 

as a governess. The delusion is, that no quali- 
fications are required, save having possibly 
been under a governess. Any gentle girl, who 
can dress neatly, write a little pale, neat hand, do 
a little German, a little French, and much piano 
. here are all the qualifications. Any one can 
teach. The old infatuation goes on, and when 
,the family in sad solemn council have debated, 
and with tears and much grief have determined 
that one at least . not more . shall be sacrificed 
to this cruel trade, the whole is considered as 
accomplished. 

Charlotte, with far better qualifications than 
many of her kind . and who would really have 
grown into an admirable teacher . turned her 
mind seriously to this plan. Poor child! 
What a world of flutter and anxiety she made 
of these little rooms ! For she went through 
the old procedure . a little squeezed and wrung 
from daily wants, and expended in advertising. 
Advertising in the great leading journal, who 
huddled away her modest statement of her 
qualifications among a whole mob of such 
things in the great Champs de Mars of the 




THE FRANKLYJSTS' PROBATION. 211 

Supplement. It brought her no profit ; she was 
lost, swallowed up . but they watched the 
post anxiously. Charlotte tried again : couched 
it . much against her will . in a more dramatic 
shape, and received two proposals : one, no 
salary, but board ; to find herself in washing, 
&c. ; scrupulously clean ; attend family prayers : 
. after a few years (possibly, when the educa- 
tion was finished) a salary might be thought of. 
The other was wholly unsuited. Poor Char- 
lotte ! 

She struggled on, however, and the severest 
struggle of all was the shamming of hope and 
cheerfulness for the sake of her sisters. But 
her heart was sinking, for she absolutely saw 
no issue. She wrote again to Cousin Hall . 
and again there came no answer. She looked 
at her little purse, and saw the yellow waters 
oozing away slowly. That little well would be 
dry in another week. Add to this, she had a 
dreadful presentiment that she was going to be 
ill. For, at times she felt strange shiverings, 
and an odd sense about her head. This thought 
filled her with alarm, and then, only then, did 



212 BELLA DONNA. 

her spirits really sink, for an illness would in- 
deed be her final crushing blow. So, desperately 
and in despair, she, as it were, scourged all 
such symptoms away, and refused to entertain 
them. But it was no use. 

She had given up the advertising, and had 
taken to walking over London. She had con- 
sulted those strange offices where they send home 
such things as teachers to order, as other shops 
do other articles . and furnished with references, 
had been calling at houses, and walking miles 
m dirt . very often in rain. That is, coming 
back ; for on goings it would have interfered 
with a genteel appearance. These things re- 
peat themselves over and over again . and will 
repeat themselves to the end. We know how 
she fared about as well as though she came in 
and sat down and told the whole story : the story 
of the timid knock, the suspicious servant, the 
gentle voice trembling as it states its ' business,' 
the interrogation in the drawing-room, and the 
4 sorry it won't do,' and final retreat down 
stairs in the humiliation of repulse. Charlotte 
went through all this until her sense of shame 



THE FRANKLYJSTS' PROBATION. 2 13 

* 

became blunted,, and came home every evening 
wet, sinking, beaten, hopeless, and despairing. 
Worse than all . she was growing ill . the 
symptoms would not be scourged away. Worse 
than all . she was losing heart and vigour to 
repel them, and finally one evening gave in 
utterly . became formally ill. A sort of low 
heat or fever which she said only required a 
little rest, and upon the sofa she proceeded to 
take that rest. 



214 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER VII. 



AN APPARITION. 



That evening, at the other side of London, 
when Jenny went down to her work, she found 
Sir Frederick Maxwell looking into a tin box 
of papers that had just arrived ' for advice and 
opinion/ 

' Here is something that will interest you/ 
he said. 'You will be sorry to see these. 
Here are the Franklyn mortgages which a cre- 
ditor's solicitor has sent me to look over.' 

Jenny sighed and looked sad. 

' I knew/ he said, ' you would be grieved, 
but what can we do ? We are mere workmen, 
and must take every " job " that is offered to 
us.' 

'Oh/ said Jenny, 'how dreadful; and . 



AN APPARITION. 215 

what are you to do with these?' she asked, 
curiously. 

i Why, it seems,' he said, ' that the place is 
to be sold.' 

( Sold !' said Jenny in despair. 

' Yes ; and when an estate is to be sold, in 
rush the creditors from the east and west, and 
struggle who shall be first . legally, I mean. 
This fellow is a mortgagee, and wishes to be 
first; and when I say fellow, I believe it is 
some widow in France.' 

He then sat down aud began to go over the 
papers, and Jenny, who had proclaimed that 
she was ' suffering ' (in some direction not dis- 
tinctly announced), drew her chair close to the 
fire, looked at the coals and thought . thought 
deeply. Many shades of expression passed 
over her face, and a dozen sarcastic phrases 
seemed to have been uttered by her lips. 
Those had a language of their own. The 
Baronet, who at first looked over at her now 
and again, gradually got absorbed in his work. 

What was Jenny busy with ? Was she doing 
battle . moral . with a secret enemy? Was 



216 BELLA DONNA. 

she crushing that secret enemy, or being 
flung back in her turn? Now hoping, now 
despairing; now triumphant, now defeated. 
There was, indeed, a desponding expression in 
her face, and perhaps she thought she was far 
away from victory. But she loved excitement, 
and, above all, the excitement of a battle. 

4 Very strange, and really most curious!' 
came from the study table, of which Jenny 
took no notice, being busy with her conflict, 
and taking it as some exciting light on, say the 
theory of remainders. There was an interval 
of a quarter of an hour more. The barrister 
was flinging over the stiff crackling parchment 
sheets hastily, taking a compendious view of 
it all. He then stood up. 

4 It is so . exactly what I thought ! What 
do you say to this, Jenny T 

Jenny looked round. 

4 There has been some strange work here/ he 
said. ' I hope it won't do harm to your friends, 
but there is something very queer about these 
papers. Some of these deeds seem to be 
manufactured.' 



AN APPARITION. 217 

Jenny gave a cry . of surprise perhaps. 

4 Manufactured ?' she said. 

4 Manufactured, or spoliated, or forged,' said 
he. ' It is an ugly word. Tell me,' continued 
he, * your friend, Mr. Franklyn, was in difficul- 
ties before his death, was he not V 

4 Oh yes . yes,' said Jenny, mournfully, ' all 
his life.' 

' Ah . thought so . always raising money.' 

4 Always, always/ said Jenny, still sadly. 

* Found it hard to get latterly, I suppose.' 

4 Exactly,' said Jenny; 'in fact could not 
get it/ 

' Oh, it is quite plain. I am afraid I see 
the whole thing. He must have had some old 
deeds by him, and got some friendly person 
who did not care about the exact legal part of 
the transaction to lend him the money on the 
security of these old papers. See, Jenny/ he 
added, opening one out, 4 these sheets in the 
middle are mere sheets taken at random ; they 
don't even follow ; and he had the first pages 
engrossed freshly . a most clumsy thing alto- 
gether/ 



218 BELLA DONNA. 

4 Oh yes/ said Jenny, 'I recollect now . per- 
fectly,' and she did recollect the bundle of clean 
deeds with the blank spaces she had lighted on 
the day they were turning over the papers at 
Grey Forest. 

4 What do you recollect, Jenny ?' said the 
barrister, with interest. 

4 So clever! such an instinct!' said Jenny, 
as though the praise escaped her; and with 
difficulty the story was wrung from her. 

4 It just confirms my view,' said he. * The 
wretched man was driven to extremity, and 
then ventured on this rash step. Possibly it 
was the fear of detection drove him to his fatal 
act.' 

4 Oh yes,' said Jenny, 4 how dreadful ! And 
his poor family !' 

4 Yes, and the poor . widow I think she is 
described,' said she, looking at the back of the 
deed . 4 Hannah Martin, who advanced her 
three thousand pounds on that worthless se- 
curity. That is very dreadful too, dear Jenny/ 

Jenny was accabUe . prostrated . at the 
image of the widow. 



 



AN APPARITION. 219 

' And the person whose *ame has been used,' 

he went on . 'let me see . Long Colonel 

Long, of Barrow Hall, Northamptonshire, and 
now living at Avignon, France. He took care 
to lay the venue/ said the barrister, using the 
phrase of his profession, ' a long way off . the 
poor miserable man. Well, it must all come 
out now.' 

Jenny gave a spasm and a short cry. 

4 1 am truly sorry,' he said, compassionately, 
4 as they are your friends. I know you will 
feel it as acutely as any one of them. I must 
send for the solicitor . the solicitor of the un- 
fortunate widow . to-morrow/ 

Another spasm escaped Jenny. 

' It looks/ he went on, 4 as if they had some 
suspicion, or were uneasy about it, . by their 
sending it to me.' 

He tossed the papers back into their tin case 
again, and took up another bundle. He spread 
it out with the usual barristerial artistic touch, 
and began to read. But he was absent. He 
was a quarter of an hour over a page. Jenny 
was smiling to herself at the fire. 



220 BELLA DOXXA. 

Suddenly he turned round. 
* * You have been at Grey Forest,' he said, 
4 and know it well Y 

' The sweetest, loveliest spot in the world ! 
But I shall never see it again,' said Jenny, 
hopelessly. ' Never ! Oh, that is all over !' 

'There is no knowing, ' he said, smiling, 
'Now . prepare for a surprise . what would 
you say to buying it . to our buying it Y 

'Buying it!' said Jenny, starting from her 
chair. 

4 Yes,' he continued, still smiling, ' absolutely 
buy it, in fee, with all the rights, easements, 
and appurtenances. It would just do . would 
suit us, I think, exactly ' (he leant a little on 
the word us), 4 And then I was thinking also, 
as they were such dear kind friends, this 
awkward business of the deeds would be staved 
ofl, and they would be saved from exposure. I 
knew it would delight you/ 

But Jenny, who had looked delighted at the 
first part of the plan, became desponding at 
this second view. She shook her head mourn- 
fully. 4 It would not do; there were grave 



AN APPARITION. 221 

objections. Such a sacrifice for her. Oh, 
never V 

He became earnest. 

' Yes, Jenny, it must be so. I have taken 
a fancy to the place. You like it, and I am 
sure I shall. I dare say it will be got cheap ; 
and you shall have these horrible deeds handed 
over to you to bring to your friends, to burn 
together, and do what you like with? 

Again her face brightened; this was more 
feasible. 

6 They are to be given to me. Oh! how 
good ! how kind ! how generous !' 

' Not at all. I would do,' added he, in a 
low voice, * far more than that for you, and I 
hope eventually ' 

He stopped. Jenny kept her eyes on the 
ground cautiously, and waited for more, but 
he did not go on. 

' Yes,' he continued, 'we shall all go down 
to Grey Forest ; build a fine mansion ; shut up 
this odious workshop ; and be gentlemen and 
ladies.' 

Jenny smiled sadly.. 



222 BELLA DONNA. 

4 You will all be very happy.' 

' We ! Yes ; and you, too, Jenny.' 

4 No, no !' said Jenny, lifting her eyes, * no, 
no, no ! . my path must be in another direc- 
tion . that Paradise is not for me.' 

4 But it shall be for you . it is all for you . 
it is ' 

4 All for me ?' said Jenny. 

4 Yes, all for you. You shall be queen, and 
reign at Grey Forest. It shall be your king- 
dom. Truly, it is no sin to lay out a little 
happiness for ourselves at one time of our 
lives. You know what mine has been . what 
a slave's life. In bondage to this master' 
(touching some law books), ' and to ' 

He pointed up. Did Jenny understand 
him ? But she never lifted her eyes. 

4 Why should I conceal it ? Surely that 
poor, delicate, ailing woman upstairs, who has 
lain all her life at the very edge of a grave . she 
has not been a wife to me. Is it so wicked to 
look forward to a time when she shall be 
released from a tie that has been misery to 
her and wretchedness to me ? I have borne 



i 



AN APPAKITION. 223 

it patiently. I have never risen up against the 
yoke. Even now I can wait, and look for- 
ward, as I ask you to do, Jenny, that is ' . and 
he paused . * if you have . if you can feel as . ' 

Jenny was scared, fluttered, frightened, as 
she heard this disclosure. He, too, was agi- 
tated, and was waiting for her to speak. 

Jenny's voice took the shape of a murmur, 
rather than of words. Just at that moment the 
door opened suddenly, and a strange, ghastly- 
looking figure, with a light in its hand, stood 
in the doorway motionless. 

She was wrapped in a shawl. Her hair 
was disordered, and her eyes had a strange 
light in them. Her lips and cheeks were 
moving in spasms, as if she was trying to 
speak. The pair trembled before her. 

She lifted her long, wasted arm, wrapped in 
the shawl's fold, and it fell again to her side. 

4 1 have heard you,' she said at last, 'I 
have been listening . I have heard it all. 
This is your plan . is it?' and the wretched 
lady, who seemed as if she were wrapped in 
grave clothes instead of a shawl, looked from 



224 BELLA DONNA. 

one to the other, with wild eyes, and a chest 
that sank and heaved with strange rapidity. 
4 This is your plan!' she repeated, in a key 
that rose steadily . ' her scheme too ! . But I 
know it . I know it.' 

The two had not courage to say a word. 
They were trembling. 

6 So you were settling it all together ! 

. 

Which of you was to do the work? Oh, 
Heaven help me . at your mere}' here . miser- 
able creature that I am! But I shall never 
sleep . never ! I shall watch all night long ; 
and if you come . if she comes, I shall scream, 
and rouse the whole city.' 

She was, indeed, doing that at the moment ; 
and the barrister, recovering himself a little, 
made a step forward . 

6 Come, come,' he said, gently, 'you are 
exciting yourself; it is dangerous, you know. 
Do go up again, dear . do ' 

She laughed. 

1 Do, dear/ she repeated, ' and . leave her' 

As she pointed, Jenny shrank away in real 
terror. 



AN APPARITION. 225 

4 Look at her!' said she, advancing on her 
. ' an artful, designing, false, deadly jade. / 
know her, / have heard about her. / have 
people that care about me, and tell me things. 
Come to my room, you poor deluded soul, and 
I will tell you things about her. Why, you 
don't know that shes ' 

Jenny, visibly alarmed, turned to the 
Baronet. 

4 Oh! sir, this is dreadful . the poor lady! 
Shall I ring ?' 

' Shall she ring !' shrieked the sick woman. 
4 Do you hear her? Does she dare to give 
orders in my house? Shall she ring for her 
servants . ha! ha! . to drag the wretched, 
miserable Lady Maxwell upstairs ? Oh ! oh ! 
I have come to this V And she barst into a 
flood of tears and hysterical sobs, under cover 
of which Jenny did ring the bell. 

Jenny was trembling, though, like an aspen 
leaf; she looked cowed and guilty. Suddenly 
the other began to shriek, and caught her side-r 
It was a fit of spasms in the fatal heart direc- 
tion. It nearly brought her to the ground. 

VOL. II. Q 



226 BELLA DONNA. 

She was lifting herself in agony . striving 
upwards, as if to escape it. But women and 
men servants, some of whom had indeed been 
nearer than was supposed, came crowding in ; 
and the unfortunate lady, now helpless; was 
removed gently upstairs. Jenny followed, 
and passed to her own room. It was a pain- 
ful and disagreeable scene, and had best be 
forgotten by all sides. 

The eminent physician was sent for hur- 
riedly . came . and said it was a bad business, 
and a miracle how she had survived it It 
was the old story . a soothing and composing 
elixir; and 'we must be cautious, my dear 
sir . a breath! you understand.' And, as 
usual, the physician illustrated his meaning 
by making himself into a temporary ^Eolus ; 
then passed through a painful pecuniary pro- 
bation, and went his way. 



i 



227 



CHAPTER VIII. 



AN APPOINTMENT. 



Jenny's nerves were in a strange flutter. 
She had so trained herself to the pleasant 
swards of life, that any rough, stony places 
completely unhinged her. Every pulse was 
quivering. She was even a little terrified. 
But presently she got composed, and a feeling 
came uppermost of bitter anger at the out- 
rageous language that had been applied to 
her. 

* How dare she speak to me in that style !' 
said Jenny, pacing up and down. * How dare 
she vent her insolence on me ! What does she 
know ? And he . the poor, cringing creature, 
that stood by and listened! He's afraid of 
her . I am not, and never shall be ! 



228 BELLA DONNA. 

* Let her take care ! ' continued Jenny, 
speaking aloud, * I shan't be attacked in that 
way before the house. Disgraceful ! But if 
that man had the heart of a man, or- was even 
like Welbore Craven, he would have sent her 
shrinking to her room with a look.' 

Jenny was really in a little fury. Presently, 
however, came a gentler tone. She thought of 
that musical peal, Queen of Grey Forest. That 
Queen of Grey Forest kept chiming in her ear 
like the village bells of the place. Queen of 
Grey Forest . Lady Bountiful . possibly Lady 
Maxwell . for Jenny Bell. She began to walk 
with pride . seat in the church . carriage . 
companionship with the highest . for Jenny 
knew what she could do in that direction ; . and 
sweeter than all, to reign where her enemy, 
Charlotte, had reigned . the evicted pauper, 
who had once evicted her! Was this not a 
strange retribution ? 

But something stood between her and that 
vision, more tremendous miles than lay be- 
tween London and Grey Forest itself. 

Charlotte, the calm but resolute, she had a 



AN APPOINTMENT. 229 

certain instinct, was busy ; and that woman, 
who had slandered her so vilely, might live for 
years to come. Jenny's lips curled acidly, and, 
as usual, she stamped her foot. 

She read no French novel that night, but 
went to bed, and lay awake in a flutter . a 
thing that had not occurred for years to her. 

But next morning Jenny was the same 
again, and to her was restored her old sweet- 
ness. Not so with the barrister. 

He came in with a conscious, shrinking look, 
as though he was ashamed to face his children 
seated round. His eyes dropped guiltily, as 
they fell on Jenny opposite. But her calm 
presence of mind survived all his awkwardness 
very handsomely. She was kind, gentle, and 
affable to her pupils. She just stole a look at 
the servant, whom, she fancied, bore a knowing 
air, as though he were behind the scenes. Sir 
Frederick hurried away down to his business. 

Jenny was left to her duties. As she was 
going upstairs, she heard him call her to his 
study. 

' You don't, of course/ he said, awkwardly, 



230 BELLA DONNA. 

'feel anything about that . that unpleasant 
scene of last night. You are too sensible ; and 
she, poor woman, did not know what she was 
saying.' 

' Oh ! no, sir . dear, no/ said Jenny, sadly ; 
'but it is very distressing . most painful for 
me. I think . I think it must end . I cannot 
endure it/ 

i So it shall/ said he, hurriedly, * so it shall. 
Only have patience . we are all more or less 
tried, in this life. But if you have thought over/ 
he added, meaningly, ' what I said last night 

 

with favour, I can wait, and cheerfully too. 9 
He passed out, and left Jenny reflecting. 
Two days after, the solicitor of Sir Frederick 
Maxwell, Bart., Q.O., had entered into the pre- 
liminaries for the purchase of Grey Forest. 
There were the usual pourparlers, but it was 
understood that the Baronet would not drive a 
very hard bargain. At the same.time, a com- 
munication was made privately to the solicitor 
who had sent the deeds, that there was some- 
thing a little suspicious about these documents. 
As Jenny passed through the hall one morn- 



t 



AN APPOINTMENT. 231 

ing, she glanced, as she always did, at the letter- 
box, and saw, sleeping within the bars of its 
cage, an imprisoned billet. It was always a 
pleasant amusement for her, this rifling of the 
letter-box, and she found entertainment in 
turning over and searching the physiognomies 
of all the despatches which arrived for the 
barrister. She swooped, as it were, on the 
new prize, and plundered the cage. 

It was for her . a square, official-looking, 
rather club-looking envelope ; and when Jenny 
came to study the seal, she read 4 United Con- 
servative Club* upon it. Besides, there were 
two initials entangled together in the corner, 
like a pair of wrestlers, and these were * C. C* 

Jenny took it up to her room, with a flutter- 
ing heart. Here was something like progress ; 
here, too, which was better still, was homage 
to those little powers of attraction which she 
possessed, and which she was humbly thankful 
that she possessed. Besides . shall it be con- 
fessed? . our Jenny began to look upon this 
youth with a sort of interest. She was a 
woman ; and he began to strike her as bold 



232 BELLA DONNA. 

and a little handsome, and she was pleased that 
he admired her . her . the lowly Jenny. He 
was of good rank, and as school life and law 
was monotonous, it filled in the hours agree- 
ably. Yes, Jenny began to dwell upon the 
image of young Craven with something like 
pleasure. This was the letter : . 

'Dear Miss Bell, . I have not seen you 
for a long time now. What are you doing ? 
Where have you been? I wish to see you 
very much, not to tell you anything unplea- 
sant, but to have a talk, one of our old talks. 
Do you recollect " the smoking-room ? " The 
park is now my smoking-room, where I take 
my morning " weed," betweeij ten and eleven. 
You may be shopping, or visiting, or anything, 
and I hope will have to cross it about the same 
time. Don't, of course, let me interfere with 
that ancient Sir Frederick Buzzard, who, if 
he requires your attendance, must have it. 

4 Yours, 

< W. 0/ 



AN APPOINTMENT. 233 

Jenny read this document several times, and 
admired it much. She grew a little excited. 
' Ah ! Miss Charlotte ! ' she said, and smiled. 
Jenny's future path did, indeed, seem smiling 
enough. Here were two matrimonial alleys 
leading . both dimly . to baronetcies. Who 
could tell ? 

Sir Frederick Maxwell was gone to his court, 
and Jenny went to the study, sat herself down in 
his chair, drew it in, got out his pens, his ink, 
and paper . all which articles were on a scale 
of abundance and luxury, each the best of its 
kind, and over a soft handsome bed of red blot- 
ting paper, began to write. 

Jealous, too, she thought, with a smile, as 
her eye fell on the allusion to ' that ancient 
Sir Frederick Buzzard.' She was in merry 
mood, things were going so smoothly, and 
wrote merrily. 

/Dear Mr. Craven, . You have not seen 
me because I have been very busy, as indeed I 
always am. You know in what a genteel sort 
of slavery I live, though my master, " that 



234 BELLA DONNA. 

ancient Sir F. Buzzard," as you call him so 
funnily, is not a tyrant. Can I understand you 
about the park and my walks ? How did you 
find out that I would ha^e to go to the Eev* 
Mr. Pole's female class at that hour? I am 
afraid you are very sly and too wise, or is it 
a sort of instinct ? Do I recollect the smoking- 
room ? Do I forget how your skill and calm 
sagacity saved us at a moment when- my firm- 
ness, I confess, deserted me ? Do we ever for- 
get, dear Mr. Craven, the happiest days of our 
lives ? No, as a certain poet remarked in a 
charming little poem. To Miriam, was it not ? . 

" The brighter chaiins that bind us, 
We never leave behind us." 

Those lines cling to my memory. Yes ; if I 
can escape my gaoler's vigilance, I suppose I 
must be in the new smoking-room to-morrow. 

1 Ever yours, 

' Jenny/ 

Jenny left a blank where the two lines 
occurred, and when she got upstairs, after some 



AN APPOINTMENT. 235 

half an hour's rummaging among her little 

* 

effects, she stumbled on the old newspaper 
cutting from the Dorkingshire Conservative; 
and then, selecting two that seemed to suit the 
Situation, copied them in accurately. 

When she rose from the desk, and went to 
the door for this office, which she did a little 
suddenly, she heard a sound in the hall, and 
saw Master Jack skulking up the stairs. ,Of 
late a suspicion had once or twice flashed 
across Jenny that this odious urchin might be 
watching her . employed, perhaps, so to do. 
She called to him sharply. 

6 Come here, sir/ 

He answered, doggedly, * Mamma wants me/ 

* I don't care/ said Jenny, her colour mount- 
ing. i I don't care who wants you. Come down 
here/ 

He did so, slowly. And Jenny caught him 
by the ear . her favourite spot. 

' Come in here, sir/ said Jenny, leading him 
by that delicate organ, and shutting the door. 

4 Now/ she said, 'have you learnt the six 
pages of grammar you got yesterday  



236 BELLA DONNA. 

'No/ 

4 No ! and why didn't you . eh ?' said Jenny, 
sweetly. 

' Mamma wanted me to stay with her/ 

* Take that/ said Jenny, giving him a fine 
full slap, that embraced the whole side of his 
cheek. ' So you won't learn your lessons, you 
odious, insolent, disobedient brat ! You go up 
to your mamma now/ 

He gave her a scowl, and turned hastily to 
go. 

' And look here/ and Jenny's brow assumed 
a menacing look, * I warn you not to come spy- 
ing on me. Mind, if you are caught again, 
I'll have the coachman in, to flog you while 
he can stand over you/ 

This threat did not seem to affright him, for 
he was staring doggedly at the blotting-paper 
on Jenny's desk. 

< Go, sir,' said Jenny, giving him a push in 
the direction of the door. He disappeared, but 
slowly, and taking his own time. 

Jenny was pleased with this encounter, and 
went back to her writing. She did not like the 



1 



AN APPOINTMENT. 237 

first draft . she thought it scarcely arch or 
piquant enough ; so, she tore it across, and again 
across, and flung it into the basket under the 
table . the Barrister's dust pit. She wrote 
another, much more to her mind, got her 
bonnet, and took it herself to the penny post, 
just a street away. 

As soon as the door was heard to slam, the 
urchin, Jack, his cheek still smarting, stole 
down to the study, and began to pry and poke 
about as secretly as a mischievously inclined cub 
would do. He turned the blotting-book inside 
out. looked under the desk, and even into the 
waste-paper basket. He was heard not long 
after asking the housekeeper had she any gum ? 
He got the gum, and he went upstairs to his 
mamma's room. 



238 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER IX. 

'THE smoking-room.' 

i 

The next day when the Barrister had gone 
down to court in his cab, Jenny tripped up- 
stairs to her room, and descended shortly in 
her brightest and most brilliant walking dress. 
She had taste, had Jenny ; and on this occasion 
she fringed her round, radiant face in a delicate 
horse-shoe bonnet, with deep crimson ribbons, 
which set her off prodigiously, and which was 
ept for special festivals. She also indulged 
herself in a pair of pale French gloves, and 
though her size was a little large for a lady's . 
a large ' seven '. they fitted her exquisitely. 

But as she was going down the steps, a cab 
drove up, and the face of Sir Frederick ap- 
peared at the window. He had forgotten a 
paper, or some notes, and had driven back 




'the smoking-room.' 239 

post. He jumped out hastily. He was struck 
by Jenny's magnificence. 

'Where are you going?' he said. 'I can 
set you down anywhere.' 

4 Oh, no,' said Jenny, hastily, * I am going 
that way' (pointing indistinctly in a direction 
that took in many quarters of the compass). 
* Thank you a thousand times. Dinner at half- 
past six to-day.' And she was moving away. 

6 Oh, I see,' he said. ' The Reverend Mr. 
Pole. That is so. Come, tell me, am I right ?' 

Jenny moved her head sweetly, with a mo- 
tion that partook both of assent and negation, 
and again moved to go. 

i But how far is Mr. Pole's ? I can leave 
you there,' he said. 

' Oh, no,' said Jenny, ' I can walk.' 

6 And how long will you stay ?' said he. 

' Oh, not long,' said Jenny, with a gentle and 
resigned smile, as though Mr. Pole and his 
ladies were one of her trials ; and then at last 
she got away. 

She took a little detour and came into the 
park from the other side, and there upon a 



240 BELLA DONNA. 

bench, under a tree, she saw young Craven, 
enjoying his new smoking-room . that is, she 
did not see him for a long time, but wandered 
about distractedly and helpless, until he . who 
had seen her long before . came good-naturedly 
to her aid. 

* This is very kind of you . most kind/ he 
said. ' How shall I thank you ?' 

Jenny, who all through the interview main- 
tained a frightened and suspicious manner, 
looking round, as though police might be seen 
on the horizon at any moment, answered him 
hurriedly. 

4 Not at all . not at all, Mr. Craven ; but I 
dare not stay long/ 

4 To be sure, to be sure/ he answered. i And 
now, how have you been ? . tell me all about 
yourself.' 

4 Oh/ said Jenny, sadly, 4 that would be a 
dull subject. The same monotonous round 
every day ! What is to vary the course of my 

working life . unless, indeed " And she 

lifted her eyes, with a sidelong glance at her 
companion, dropped them again, and coloured. 



. 



'the smoking-room/ 241 

Our Jenny, it will be seen, was latterly 
getting bolder in her play, and risking more 
at each move. 

But he passed by this charming opening, 
like a stupid country fellow, as he was. 

I wonder did the word * bte/ and the image 
it represents, rise in Jenny's brain. Nay, he 
seemed to be eager not to take it, for he went 
on with haste. 

' Well/ he said, ' and what are you doing ? 
. I mean your friend, the new Baronet . old 
Sir Frederick Buzzard, ha ! ha !' 

The painful struggle on Jenny's lips, between 
respect for her employer, and the rich sense of 
the ludicrous engendered by this happy con- 
ceit, was really amusing. But she gave way 
at last to uncontrollable laughter. 

'Old Buzzard/ said he, relishing his own 
wit. ' And what is he doing ? What will he 
do with his money ? I hope he will leave you 
a handsome legacy, Miss Bell. But somebody 
told me he was buying an estate/ 

This was meant to be brought in with an 
easy digagi air, as a mere careless observation. 

VOL. II; R 



242 * BELLA DONNA. 

It was clumsily done ; but Jenny's mind was 
sailing away on another point. Though he 
laughed at ' old Buzzard,' you see, this was 
all a little secret jealousy. 

* Yes,' said Jenny, smiling, and busy with 
her glove, 'he is talking of it. Indeed, he was 
good enough to consult me on the subject. 
And I suppose you have heard,' said Jenny, 
' the poor Franklyns' dear, darling Grey Forest 
is to be sold. They won't have an acre left . 
poor, poor children !' 

' Yes,' said he, ' I knew that And do you 
mean to say that he is talking of buying it ?' 

'He says so,' said Jenny, looking down, 
and still on the jealousy point. 'Someway, 
he has taken a fancy to it; having, I be- 
lieve, some ridiculous, foolish idea, that I, 
being a friend of . the family . would . would 
like it/ 

Jenny brought this out with great hesitation, 
and meant it for a skilful move. 

But he took his less hastily. ' Exactly,' said 
he, eagerly. 'And you put him off it? Of 
course you did. Quite properly. No; it 



'the smoking-room/ 243 

wouldn't do. You thought of your old friends, 
and dissuaded him.' 

' I ?' said Jenny, looking at him with natural 
wonder. 

' I tell you what,' said he, 4 it must not be. 
The truth is, we don't want it to be sold. I 
knew it. I said you would help us. If we 
could only just stave it off for a month or 
two.' 

1 We ?' said Jenny, % looking at him with a 
slight tinge of distrust. 

'Yes,' said he, going on. 'I don't mind 
letting you into our little secrets, though they 
said I wasn't. The truth is, we expect that old 
Cousin Hall will, do something . matters are ill 
train, you see. But all we want is a little de- 
lay . not to be pressed, you see . and then 
everything will come straight/ 

Jenny's lip was curling. The little furnaces 
in her eyes were being kindled. 

6 1 do see/ she said. * And I suppose it was 
for this you wished to see me to-day ?' 

'Well,' said he, awkwardly, 'partly. No- 
thing like candour, Miss Bell. I thought that 



244 BELLA DONNA. 

if we could get your attractive influences on our 
side, everything would go well/ 

He bowed, to emphasize this clumsy compli- 
ment. 

c Of course F said Jenny, coldly . * of course ! 
But why should you come to me? Why 
should I interfere ? I think you know that the 
Franklyns have not treated me very well. 
Would it not be a little too generous ?' 

4 Ah, but you are ' so generous . so high- 
minded . I know you would recollect nothing 
So, indeed, I said to them ; but she ' 

He stopped. 

* Go on !' said Jenny, with a scoff ; c let us 
hear it all. What did she say ? Then, I pre 
sume, the old attachment goes on ? Ah, Mr. 
Craven, Mr. Craven,' added she, suddenly as- 
suming her old manner, i how sly . how dread- 
fully sly of you ; and not to tell me, your old 
friend, poor little Jenny/ 

She had twanged the string of his self- 
sufficiency, and he smiled. 'Why,' said he, 
' you are wonderful at guessing. Poor Char- 
lotte, she has made a noble, valiant battle of 



i 



'THE SMOKING-ROOM.' 245 

it, I never saw such a girl. She has fought 
through it all . alone/ 

4 Indeed/ said Jenny, with great interest; 
4 and I suppose Sir Welbore, like a true, hon* 
ourable man, will not stand in the way/ 

4 Why, you see/ said he, with importance, 
'there is a little mystery here. There are 
mysteries on all sides of us/ 

'So it appears/ said Jenny. 'And I sup- 
pose this has been going on all the while . pri- 
vately  

4 Well/ said he, with great complacency, 4 I 
may say, it has. To see a brave, noble girl, 
to whom I had plighted my troth' . he gave 
out these words with great satisfaction . 'to. 
whom I was bound by all the laws of honour 
and morality . to see her struggling on nobly, 
without a sigh or a complaint, and cheerfully 
resigning * 

4 The brilliant prospect that was before her ! 
Of course, I understand/ said Jenny. 

He did not perceive the manner in which 
this was said. 

4 But I don't mind saying to you that obsta- 



246 BELLA DONNA. 

des are passing away. In a short time . a 
very short time . we expect my father will 
come round . in fact, is coming round. But, 
mum, you understand ?' 

* Perfectly !' said Jenny. 

. Everything will go smooth/ he said, warm- 
ing. ' And I may say I have had a good share 
in it. I know a thing or two/ 

Jenny laughed a little harshly. i You are 
very wise, Mr. Craven ; I always said so. But, 
in a serious step of this sort, one should look 
carefully on all sides. Even the wisest of men, 
like young Mr. Craven, may not see some* 
thing.' 

He did not like the tone of Jenny's voice. 

4 Oh ! I have provided for everything, Miss 
Bell.' 

. Of course anything I may say will be re- 
garded with a natural suspicion . from the 
peculiar relation. I make no secret of it . I 
have no strong affection for Miss Frankly n, nor 
she for me ; but, as a sort of friend I tell you, 
I think you should look well into the matter 
before taking any serious step.' 



4 THE smoking-room/ 247 

There was such an unconcealed sneer in 
Jenny's voice, that he was nettled, and 
answered with an attempt at a sneer also. 

' This seems a little wicked, Miss Bell/ he 
said, in a wounded tone. ' I am afraid I can 
guess the motives that are at work/ 

Jenny laughed again. 

' Accept my congratulation/ she said; 
' you are making a brilliant match, in every 
light you can look at it/ 

He coloured. * These little remarks have 
no effect on me/ 

' Of course not. You have the satisfaction of 
doing what is right. Yet/ said Jenny, sud- 
denly changing her voice into a key of great 
tenderness, 'we were once great friends. You 
used to advise me to let me consult you in my 
little difficulties. Our acquaintance has fur- 
nished me with some delightful memories, 
which in my lonely hours ; . but no matter. I 
must speak . it is only fair to warn you, Sir 
Frederick Maxwell has heard strange rumours 
about your friends . something about deeds of 
trust have turned up, and which are suspected 



248 BELLA DONNA. 

not to be all right. I can say no more. Good- 
bye/ 
He was confounded, 

4 Stay . stay/ said he, * tell me more. I 
want to know * 

. I dare not/ said Jenny, sweetly. i I can- 
not . I am bound up. Good-bye. There may 
be nothing in the rumour. But still it is right 
you should know it. Curious, they should not 
have told you !' 

She left him looking after her and wonder- 
ing . speculating, in his mind, what she could 
have alluded to. He then went his way 
slowly. 

Jenny went home in a curious frame of 
mind. Latterly things were going not quite 
so smoothly as she was accustomed to make 
them go ; and she even felt a presentiment that 
they might be worse yet. She seemed to be 
losing the spring and spirit of victory which 
had been carrying her forward. i She is plot- 
ting/ said Jenny, to herself, walking very fast. 
4 1 am sure she is plotting in secret against me. 
The smooth, cunning piece of virtue 1* said 



'THE smoking-room/ 249 

she, with disgust, c with her quiet air of suffer- 
ing. And that. -fool, to be caught by her !' 
Jenny was posting along at a fierce rate. * But 
I shall beat her yet. She shall be no match 
for me. She shall never get back to Grey 
Forest, if I die for it/ 

The mention of that sweet name had a 
soothing effect on Jenny. i Queen of Grey 
Forest,' and * Lady Maxwell/ again began to 
chime in her ears. Never were there such 
musical bells. Still she had the sense of a pre- 
sentiment hanging over her ; and compressing 
her lip, she entered the house, determined not 
to be too leisurely, and to hurry on matters. 



250 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTEE X. 



JENNY WORKS. 



But, alas for our Jenny! that fatal assigna- 
tion in the Park was destined to accumulate 
very many heavy stumbling-blocks in her road, 
more than her poor weak shoulders could get 
out of the way. The Barrister, when Jenny 
was gone about two minutes, recollected some- 
thing he wished to ask her, and seizing his hat, 
ran out after her. He followed down to Pic- 
cadilly, and saw her crossing to the Park. This 
was not the road to Mr. Pole's chapel. So he 
stopped suddenly, and an idea occurring to 
him, followed slowly, and at a distance. He 
was a lawyer ; and what to other men was an 
inequality in the sand, was to him a footprint. 
He saw it all . nay, heard some of it ; saw 



JENNY WORKS, 251 

Jenny return ; . saw the whole, with the anger 
of a vain, weak man, discovering that he has 
been duped. Poor Jenny ! It is to be feared 
that half-hour's work has placed the charming 
castle of Grey Forest upon a magic carpet, and 
transported it through the air into another 
quarter of the globe. She does not know it or 
suspect it. 

She will have hard labour to set things 
straight, for he was an odd man; and once 
touched in his vanity, never forgave or forgot. 

Scarcely in the best of humours, Jenny went 
to her room, and cast aside her decorations. 
She sat by her fire, and cast up her accounts . 
her moral accounts. In ten minutes she had 
mapped out a scheme. She must strive and 
act speedily and with decision. 

' She was thinking of her friend, Sir Welbore 
Craven, Baronet ; and how jealous and strict 
he was about family honour. She was thinking 
a little pettishly of the perverse turn things 
seemed to be taking latterly. However, as she 
before thought, precious time was being fritted 
y. She dawdled rather too much. If 




252 BELLA DONNA. 

she but had an Archimedean spot to stand on . 
a secure vantage-ground of fixed station and 
commanding elevation . not the slippery foot- 
ing of a mere governess, she would move the 
earth. 

At dinner, strange to say, the Barrister was 
moody and out of humour. He scarcely spoke 
to Jenny . a thing she had never known before ; 
and Jenny detected his eyes roaming to her 
secretly, with a glowering, moody expression. 
At times he would by an effort shake this off, 
and put a sort of constraint upon himself 
making an effort at being good-humoured ; but 
presently the original moodiness returned. 

4 Some of these Court creatures/ thought 
Jenny, *had treated him roughly. He had 
broken down in a case. But why should he 
vent it on me V thought Jenny. Why, indeed ? 
Why vent it on that gentle imploring face, who 
now so piteously deprecated his wrath ? She 
did all she could ; but he was an odd man, and 
had odd ways. 

That evening, as Jenny was thinking of 
going down to the study as usual, she.. 



JENNY WORKS, 253 

heard a step on the stairs, and looking over 
the bannister cautiously, saw young Jack 
descending very softly. This was an offence 
against school-room laws; but Jenny won- 
dered what he was going down with such 
secrecy for; and then she heard him tap at 
the study door, and go in. It was altogether 
a proceeding of complete indifference, yet she 
did not like it. This wretched cub she de- 
tested. He stayed there a full quarter of 
an hour. Jenny would have given a good 
deal to have been invisibly present; or, in- 
deed, to have been merely separated by the 
ordinary partition of door or wall. In default 
of better modes of hearing, such would have 
been welcome; but it was dangerous and 
impracticable. 

Fully a quarter of an hour was the cub 
closeted with his father. 

Jenny then thought she heard a noise, and 
began to move upstairs again. But at the 
sick woman's door a wan face was peering out, 
and part of a long, shrunk figure. To Jacky 
it said, c Come here ; tell me what he said/ 



254 BELLA DONNA. 

Jenny had begun to look on this woman as 
her enemy. She felt within her a carious 
dislike, which was strengthening every day. 
Some way she had a notion that this weak 
dying woman was dangerous, more or less 
dangerous. Jenny did not care to conceal 
herself, but boldly confronted her. 

'Oh! it is you,' said the withered lips. 
Jenny thought how like a ghastly hag or 
witch her figure looked. ' Oh ! Miss Bell, I 
am very well, you see !' 

* I am glad to hear it, madam/ said Jenny, 
looking at her, coldly, and conveying how re- 
pulsive was the figure she saw. 

' No, you are not/ said the other, quickly ; 
i no, you are not. Don't give yourself the 
trouble of telling what is not true to me. But 
I am very well . I am getting better every 
day. The doctors say so. Now !' 

*I don't want to dispute with you/ said 
Jenny, in the same hard tone. *I have no 
object in setting you right/ 

* Haven't you!' said the other, as usual 
getting excited. 'No, of course not. No, 




JENNY WORKS. 255 

you haven't. You feel quite secure, no 
doubt! Ah! but take care, my fine lady! 
You don't know everything . you don't know 
all that may be going on, wise as you be. 
Ah! there's my Jacky coming. Come in, 
come in, Jacky, and tell mamma all about it* 
You and I, Jacky dear, weak as we are, will 
be a match for her yet.' 

The cub gave Jenny a look of defiance, 
thinking, no doubt, of the slaps on his cheek, 
and the door shut them in. 

Jenny trembled with rage and fury, to be 
bearded by these two miserable creatures, 
whom she despised. 

Worse than all, she feared they might in- 
deed be plotting ;to bring ruin on such an 
innocent head as hers. Such creatures often 
had a secret strength. She trembled. But 
she did not fear them. But towards the 
miserable lady, who could be so insolent to 
her, she felt a feeling of something like hate, 
that intensified every moment. 
*:< She went down hurriedly to the study. 
The Barrister looked at her steadily as she 



256 BELLA DONNA. 

entered, then cast down his eyes upon his 
books a moment, then spoke to her with all 
the old cheerfulness. The clouds had passed 
away. He was himself again. What tricks 
does imagination play us, thought Jenny, 
wisely. She had conjured up a whole night- 
mare of plots and conjurations. 

Never was she so winning. so gentle . so 
seductive! It would have been hard for 
mortal to resist her. She was soft and en- 
gaging . melancholy and pensive, and some- 
way conveyed, by mysterious process, that 
this tone of mind was associated with a deep, 
passionate, but, alas! unrequited attachment. 
She was only a poor governess; the green 
places of life were not for her. So she must 
only suffer in silence, and without complaint, 
though her heart might break. 

The Baronet listened, and in his own way 
tried some comfort . still scarcely received it 
with the raptures that might reasonably have 
been expected from one of his weak character. 
But he was an odd man . a very odd man ; . 
a vain man, too. 



JENNY WORKS. 257 

Jenny found a letter in the letter-box that 
night. It was from the Kev. Mr. Wells, 
whom she had quite forgotten. It was in a 
wounded, broken tone. He must leave, he 
said, to-morrow. His rector was deeply- 
offended, and he must hurry back. He had 
waited from day to day, in the hope of hearing 
from her. He had thought he was an old 
friend . one of the few that she honoured with 
some little degree of liking. But no matter 
now ! He was going away. Perhaps it had 
been better if he had never come. But no 
matter now. He had called repeatedly, but 
could never get jp. The unhappy Curate had 
indeed called many times. The fact was, 
Jenny was getting sadly bored with his ob- 
scure hints of a deep passion, and his more 
open rhapsodies. She had, in truth, a supreme 
contempt for him and his nature. She never 
liked these whining men, as she called them. 

She went on with his letter. He had made 
it his business, he said, to inquire after their 
common friends, in whom he heard she was 
so interested. He had met Mr. Craven that 

VOL. II. s 



258 BELLA DONNA. 

evening, who had told him there was good 
news for the Franklyns. some very good 
news . something, as he (the Curate) gathered 
it, about money. But young Craven would 
not say anything more explicit. * Perhaps,' 
added the Curate, ' our dear children may be 
back in old Grey Forest again, and we may all 
meet there, as of old. I am very wretched and 
low spirited. May I call to-morrow, to bid 
you good-bye ?' 

Back in Grey Forest, thought Jenny. Never. 
And she turned hastily round, and entered the 
atudy again, where was Sir Frederick, still 
with his briefs. 

She came back to look for something. She 
could not find it. The Barrister watched her 
movements. Then she asked him carelessly 
when dear, dear Grey Forest was to be bought 
. * by the way/ she introduced it. 

He said he could not tell. There were 
difficulties. 'I am not so enthusiastic about 
that purchase as T was/ he added. 

'What! give it up,' said Jenny, clasping 
her hands. 'Oh! sir, if you were to know 



JENNY WORKS. 259 

how I have been feasting on the idea. Only 
the other night I had such a sweet, delicious 
dream. I thought I was wandering in its 
gardens.' 

' I am sorry/ said he, gravely . * very sorry. 
But, however, it is not given up as yet.' 

* But, I thought,' said Jenny, with a deep 
sigh . 'I thought it was something like a 
promise. I thought you had so kindly in- 
tended But no matter; I am used,' she 

added, with a gentle smile, 'to these little 

< 

disappointments. It will be all the same in 
a hundred, perhaps in a dozen years.' 

She said this in so plaintive and touching a 
manner . in a tone so exquisitely mournful, 
that the Barrister raised his head, and said 
softly . 

' Oh, Jenny ! I don't know what to think. 
If I only knew . if I could trust you . any- 
body ; . but no matter. We will see about it. 
There. Good-night.' 

Jenny tripped away with a light step. 4 1}; 
is done !' she said, exulting. But no time was 
to be lost. Her confidence in her own powers 



260 BELLA DONNA. 

was restored. i After all,* she said, smiling, * who 
can help Jenny like Jenny ? AH their castles 
would soon be tumbling about their ears.' 

At once she sat down and wrote a note to 
the Curate . a gentle, tender note. Could he 
put off his sad journey for one day? She 
wished to see him . to consult him, . to have 
his advice. Don't let her, however, interfere 
with his plans . no, not for the world. Even 
he, she was grieved to see, did not understand 
her. No one, indeed, properly understood 
her ; but she had thought that he, from their 
old friendship ; . it was not much matter. 
There were many things one was obliged to do, 
which, if the true secret were known ; . but 
no matter about that, too. Action, action, 
thought Jenny, as she lay down to rest. 



261 



CHAPTER XI. 



AN EMBASSY. 



He came the next day. He, too, strange to 
say, was moody and injured. He was very 
sorry. he must go; delighted to help her 
any way, but could not stay longer. 

Jenny heard him calmly. She had no 
notion of having to take trouble with so con- 
temptible an instrument as this, and her first 
impulse was to dismiss him at once ; but she 
wanted him. 

' Go, then,' she said, with her old, sad 
manner. 'Of course, you must go. Your 
interests, indeed, I should be sorry to stand in 
the way of. Some one else will help me. 
Thank you a thousand times for all your 



262 BELLA DONNA. 

goodness. Good-bye, dear Mr. Wells; think 
of me sometimes.* 

He was taken back by this ready accept- 
ance of his declaration. He coloured, he stam- 
mered. 

i Could I do nothing for you, dear Miss 
Bell ?' he said, hesitatingly. 

' Nothing/ said Jenny, with a smile. 
'nothing that I would ask you to do. I 
shall find some one to help me; in fact, I 
have found.' 

He grew disquieted. 

4 1 am sure,' he said, * if I thought . that is . * 

'Do you think/ said Jenny, earnestly, 'I 
would put a kind friend's sympathy to such a 
test ? Never ! Good-bye, dearest Mr. Wells.' 

He was very much troubled. 

4 What can I do ?' he said, distractedly. * I 
would give anything . I would give the world 
to show what I feel. Tell me what you ' 

. 

4 No !' said Jenny, firmly ; * I have consi- 
dered: Perhaps you have been too kind to me 
to let you run any risk for me. Perhaps . but 
no matter. We will think of it no more/ 



i 



AN EMBASSY. 263 

' This is cruel. this is unkind/ he said, 
bitterly; 'you won't trust me, I see. 
There is some one else. I knew it. The old 
story.' 

' Ah,' said she, ' if you only did know.' 
i I will stay,' he said, desperately. * I will 
write to him to-night. He could not grudge 
me a few days. No, he is not such a tyrant !' 
he added, excitedly. 

* Impossible,' said Jenny ; ' it is too painful 
a duty . more fitted for his hands.' 

' Whose hands ?' said the other, quickly. 

' Ah r said Jenny, ' you would nevfer go to 
Sir Welbore Craven. He will be in town to- 
morrow. See him at his club; speak with 
him . tell him . ' 

4 Is that all?' said the Curate. *I know 
him very well. To be sure ' 

* It is a dreadful duty, but must be done. 
How shall I speak it ? You will prejudge me, 
of course. You must warn him against this 
marriage. Ah, pity me, pity me, dear Mr. 
Wells r she added, sinking into a chair. 

.' Against CharlQtte's marriage ! Good 



264 BELLA DONNA. 

gracious! Why? wherefore?* he said, be- 
wildered. 

* Pity me ! pity me !' continued Jenny, rock- 
ing herself. * My friend, my childhood's friend ! 
But,' she said, starting up, 'I dare not let 
it pass. It would haunt me to my grave. 
Forgery I A good man to have his house dis- 
honoured ! No, no !' 

'Forgery! dishonoured!' he repeated, me- 
chanically. 

* We have the papers in the house, sent to 
Sir Frederick. There could be no conceal- 
ment,' said she, speaking in a very hurried 
manner. 'Conscience! conscience! Mr. Wells. 
And that it should have come upon me . their 
childhood's friend! Is it not a terrible 
trial V 

' Oh, oh, Miss Bell!* he said, reproach- 
fully, ' from you . her friend. You must get 
some one else. I cannot, indeed.' 

1 So I said,' said Jenny, scornfully ; ' and so 
I told you. It is to be done, nevertheless. We 
have consciences . some of us, at least. You 
don't understand me, Mr. Wells ; I did not 



i 



AN EMBASSY. 265 

expect you would, and there are few who 
do. You jump at the harshest construction. 
Naturally. No matter, I must write now. I 
have many letters to get through.' 

' And you want me to betray, to denounce 
my old friends . my kind good friends ? Why, 
I heard Sir Welbore was relenting. Ah, don't, 
don't !' he added, piteously . ' don't make me 
do this, please don't.' 

'Make you do it,' said Jenny, with flashing 
eye. ' Who talks of making you ? You are 
incurable, I see. Take your own view of this, 
and leave me, sir, I beg.' 

' Oh, Miss Bell I' said he, with a groan. 

i Do you suppose it is a pleasant task for 
me V said she, turning sharply on him. * Of 
course / feel nothing !' 

But he shook his head sadly, and took 
up his hat in silence. Jenny watched him 
anxiously. 

' You are right,' she said, at last ,' Go down 
to your parish again. Self is the first instinct. 
Do not forget, however,' she said, i that it was 
you who betrayed me into this confidence. I 



266 BELLA DONNA. 

confess I thought. but no matter. Good- 
bye.' 

There was a strange expression of anguish in 
his face. * I dare not,' he said. ' Those poor 
orphans . I could not bring myself to it.' And 
then, opening the door slowly, he stood looking 
back wistfully. Jenny never looked at him. 
Finally he passed out. 

Jenny stamped her foot impatiently, and let 
her hand and arm fall upon the table. 

4 Fool !'* she said ; 4 weak, empty fool ! How 
could I have wasted time on such a creature ! 
Ah, this is the way they all fail me ! The 
trouble I have had with this crawling Curate I 
But no matter. I shall find better instru- 
ments.' 

The door was opened softly, and he appeared 
again, laid down his hat, and said, mournfully, 
* I will do whatever you want.' 

4 Ha/ thought Jenny, 4 every obstacle gives 
way . queen of Grey Forest before a month/ 

The miserable Curate slunk about the ap- 
proaches to Sir Welbore's club the whole of 



AN EMBASSY. 267 

the next day, but could not see him. Two 
days after he did meet him, and' in a guilty 
way imparted to him what he had heard, first 
binding him to solemn secrecy as to the chan- 
nel through which it reached him. 

The Baronet went nigh to fainting in the 
street. It was as though some one said, ' The 
person you have been sitting next in the rail- 
way first class carriage for the last six hours is 
just out of a plague hospital/ He shrunk 
away, and had to get wine at his club. 

There was a frightful scene at his home that 
evening. The Baronet, Sir Welbore, had in- 
deed showed signs of yielding. A stout, tall, 
hale elderly gentleman, who had lived at 
Dieppe, had waited on him, and made some 
offers that really made him gasp. The words 
that fell from the tall, hale, elderly gentleman 
seemed like a stream of gold pieces falling 
down and clinking on each other. The Baronet 
told the gentleman he did him a great deal of 
. er . honour, and he should be glad . er . 
to hear again. rer . from him. 

These melodious offers quite drowned the 



268 BELLA DONNA. 

unpleasant sound of the word ' suicide,' but it 
could not drown the louder and uglier cry of 
Forgery. Jenny's fate was dancing up and 
down in the scales. 



i 



269 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE EMISSARY AND HIS MISSION. 

That evening came the Curate to wait on his 
mistress, to recount his mission. Jenny met 
him eagerly on the stairs, and found him very 
downcast. ' Well/ she said, impatiently ; 6 oh 
come in here,' and she brought him into the 
study. 

He told his story in an excited sort of way. 
He had met young Craven not long after, and 
tried to avoid him. But he then caught hold 
of him. 

* " They have told my father," he said. " I 
know whence that move came.*' And then/ 
said the Curate, ' he became outrageously in 
solent in his language about . about . ' 

4 About poor me/ said Jenny. * Of course. 



270 BELLA DOXNA. 

I expect it. Ever since I was a child it 
has been the same,' added she, mournfully. 
* Nothing but harsh cruel words from all 
sides. Even my friends . friends whom I love 
. even they/ said Jenny, looking musingly 
at Mr. Wells, ' fall naturally into the same 
strain.' 

Much excited, the Curate made a motion to 
catch her hand, and protested earnestly that she 
did him wrong . that he would fly to the ends of 
the earth to help her. ' Why/ he added, rue- 
fully, ' am I here ? Am I not running a dreadful 
risk by staying ? As it is, I have nearly un- 
done myself; but ' 

* And what did he say,' said Jenny, coming 
back to business, ' this kind friend ?' 

' He talked of a plot,' answered the Curate, 
4 and a conspiracy; said he would baffle it; 
and then he dared to speak about some one 
being vindictive, malicious, and ' 

'Go on,* said Jenny, smiling; 'I can bear 
it all/ 

'But I stopped him quickly/ added the 
other, with fresh excitement. 'I told him 



THE EMISSARY AND HIS MISSION. 271 

I would not listen to him ; that it was 
cowardly . mean . to speak so of an unpro- 
tected girl/ 

' Unprotected,' said Jenny, holding out her 
hand with enthusiasm. 4 No, no ! not while I 
have such hearts that can love me as I know 
I have.' 

4 So I told him/ said the Curate ; * and that 
you, and that I, qnd every one, scorned his 
vile slanders/ 

4 Noble, brave, generous !' murmured she. 

4 1 could have struck him,' said the excited 
Curate, now hurrying on in a torrent of words. 
4 1 could have ' 

4 No, no, no/ said Jenny. 4 It were best to 
bear these things in charity. And what did 
he tell you about the Franklyns ?' 

4 Yes,' said the other*. 4 They are doing well, 
he said. Oh, I recollect . Grey Forest is not to 
be sold. It is finally settled/ 

4 Not to be sold ?' said Jenny, hastily. 

4 No ; it has been saved. A friend or rela- 
tive has come forward . a cousin living in 
France. All the incumbrances are to be paid 



272 BELLA DONNA. 

off; and as soon as Charlotte is well, they are 
all to go back. ' 

Jenny's eyes lighted up with rage. Here 
was her kingdom of Grey Forest . the Spanish 
Castle . all destroyed in a second. 

' She is ill, is she ?' said Jenny. i I didn't 
know that . So they go back to Grey Forest, do 
they? Perhaps you have more good news 
still,' added Jenny, sarcastically. 

* Yes, I think he said something else/ said 
he, dreamily ; ' something about these deeds . 
these so-called forgeries !' 

c So-called,' said Jenny, with a sneer. 

'That was his expression,' said the Curate. 
' He asked where they were. He said they 
must get them up. I told him Sir Frederick 
had them.' 

' What made you do that ?' said Jenny, with 
sudden fierceness. 'It was a pity . I mean/ 
she added, changing her tone, ' a misfortune.' 

In short, he left Jenny with this good news 
in a sadly disturbed state of mind. He went 
away himself in a stranger state of distraction. 
He thought he had never seen Jenny looking 



THE EMISSARY AND HIS MISSION. 273 

so dazzling. But he felt he ought to leave this 
fatal London in the morning, and he half deter- 
mined on a desperate extrication . to fling 
himself suddenly into the train, and be borne 
away from this seductive Circe. 

Jenny, however, actually lay awake for a 
couple of hours. She was really disturbed. 
Her cruel enemy was gradually drawing to 
the front. But before she dropped off to sleep 
something occurred to her. 'Ah,' said she, 
raising herself on the pillow, ' that will do it.' 



VOL. II. 



272 BELLA DONNA. 

off; and as soon as Charlotte is well, they are 
all to go back.' 

Jenny's eyes lighted up with rage. Here 
was her kingdom of Grey Forest . the Spanish 
Castle . all destroyed in a second. 

' She is ill, is she ?' said Jenny. ' I didn't 
know that . So they go back to Grey Forest, do 
they? Perhaps you have more good news 
still,' added Jenny, sarcastically. 

* Yes, I think he said something else/ said 
he, dreamily ; ' something about these deeds . 
these so-cailed forgeries !' 

* So-called,' said Jenny, with a sneer. 
'That was his expression,' said the Curate. 

'He asked where they were. He said they 
must get them up. I told him Sir Frederick 
had them.' 

' What made you do that ?' said Jenny, with 
sudden fierceness. 'It was a pity . I mean/ 
she added, changing her tone, ' a misfortune.' 

In short, he left Jenny with this good news 
in a sadly disturbed state of mind. He went 
away himself in a stranger state of distraction. 
He thought he had never seen Jenny looking 



A MISSION. 275 

' Then,' said Jenny, with a noble and heroic 
burst ; ' there, now, you belong to your friends. 
They must watch over you. Those who have 
long loved you . secretly, but long . it will be 
their duty to comfort, to console, to watch 
over. Yes, dearest Mr. Wells, away with all 
delicacy . we can speak out now/ 

The Curate sprang to his feet with rapture. 

' Are you serious ?' he said. * No, no, you 
are deceiving me. It is too blessed news to 
be true/ 

4 Can you not have guessed T said Jenny, 
with a smile. 'Oh, dull, incredulous men! 
You make us poor women, with blushing and 
confusion, tell out our most darling secrets/ 

' Divine girl !' murmured the Curate, looking 
at her in rapture. ' What are their wretched 
offices after this ! I despise them ! Oh, Jenny, 
Jenny, you have changed despair into joy! 
But tell me . you must tell me ' 

'Hush, hush,' said Jenny, looking round, 
and speaking very fast. ' We will talk of this 
again in a few days. But now I am going to 
put your devotion to the test . to such a test P 



276 BELLA DONNA. 

4 Name it! . anything! Say, you wish me 
to sail for China . America . anywhere !' 

' No, not so far as China ; but a long way/ 

'Ah, Jenny,' said he, 'I am so glad . I 
would travel whole continents for you.' 

Jenny gave him her hand . that round, 
plump, little hand . perhaps as a stimulant or 
cordial. He took it, exactly as a thirsty man 
would a stimulant or cordial, 

'Strange things have taken place/ said 
Jenny, still speaking very fast. ' Strange, 
mysterious complications have come about. 
There is danger menacing me. I have secret 
enemies !' said Jenny, excitedly. 

* Secret enemies,' said he. ' No . such good- 
ness, such sweetness . impossible.' 

'It is so,' said Jenny, sadly. 'They are 
plotting all about me to ruin me. I have no 
one to aid me . no one to look to, except ' 

She gave him a look of angelic sweetness. 
Again he seized her hand. 

' But if they plot, we must counterplot. We 
must scheme in self-defence. She I have dis- 
covered . Charlotte . would destroy me !' 



A MISSION* 277 

He was amazed. 

'Oh, no/ he said, doubtfully .  impossible. 
She seemed so good, so amiable/ 

4 Ah ! she always pleased you. But / know. 
Recollect^ she once ruined me, and she will do so 
tzgain, if she can V 

This seemed to make an impression on the 
Curate. There was a long pause. 

4 Where do you wish me to go for you T he 
asked. 

* A long journey/ said Jenny, sadly. * Across 
to France, then down all France, to Avignon/ 

 Is that all V he said. ' Why, I could be 
there to-morrow night. What am I to do? 
When am I to go ?' 

4 There is a small packet . very precious, 
and of the greatest importance . which we are 
going to intrust to you. There is a family called 
Hall, living there. You must find them out, 
give them the packet, and open it before them. 
I shall give you a letter, which you shall open 
when you get to Avignon; and you will pro- 
mise me to carry out all the instructions con- 
tained in it/ 



278 BELLA DONNA. 

' But ' said the Curate, hesitatingly. 

* When you return/ said Jenny, with a 
bright, beaming face, k ihm we shall talk of 
what is near to both our hearts. After toil, 
pleasure. You shall tell me your story, and, 
perhaps . I shall tell you mine/ 
. . Angel !' murmured the Curate, and finally, 
for the last time, kissed her hand. 

Jenny returned triumphant for the moment, 
yet presently began to despond. It had been 
a terrible blow. The crown of Grey Forest 
was gone from her ! No matter. She should 
not wear it, if the heavens and earth were to 
be moved. What about this Cousin Hall ? 

When she came in, she made breakfast 
The Barrister, and his son, when the bell rang, 
came in from the study together. Jenny looked 
at them suspiciously. The cub looked at her 
with his usual insolence, but the clouds had 
passed away from the Baronet's brow. He 
was himself again. Jenny raised her eyes to 
Heaven in unspeakable thankfulness. She 
laid out, how, later on, she would gently and 
sweetly remonstrate with, and have a formal 



A MISSION. 279 

reconciliation, with all the flourishes and ac- 
companiments. 

But Sir Frederick told her how he was 
obliged to go away for a day or two, a little 
suddenly . a case down at Liverpool. He 
would be up again shortly. He said good- 
bye to her, warmly, and Jenny got up a little 
bit of mournful demeanour expressly for 
the occasion. He went away about twelve 
o'clock. 

Events now began to crowd themselves. 

These were, perhaps, some of the most exciting 

> 

days in Jenny's life. 

She was fluttering about the house in a fever 
of agitation. His departure was the most 
strangely opportune thing. When his cab had 
driven away, she waited a quarter of an hour 
or so, then went down softly to the study, ran 
to the tin case which contained the Franklyn 
deeds, chose out the suspicious instrument, and 
saw that there could be no mistake; then 
began to pack it up carefully. 

She sealed it, and tied it round with cord ; 
then wrote a letter on Sir Frederick's sta- 



280 BELLA DONNA. 

tionery, and sealed that Then she went to 
her room. 

It was, indeed, an exciting day for her, and 
her cheek glowed. 

Then, about four o'clock, she got her bonnet 
and went down stairs to go out. Out of the 
study came the cub, Jack, and met her. 

He put a pencilled note into her hand. 

' Papa wrote this at the railway/ he said, 
' and said particularly, you were to give what 
he mentions there to me/ 

There was a dogged look about the boy 
which Jenny did not like, and she thought 
of taking her accustomed enjoyment on his 
cheek, but her mind was too full of more im- 
portant things. The pencilled scrap was as 
follows : . 

L. & N. W. Railway. 

i Dear Miss Bell, . I want the Franklyn 
deed I spoke to you about the other night. 
I stupidly forgot it, and it is of the last im- . 
portance. Give it to Jack, and he will send 
it by next train. It is marked "A-D." 



A MISSION. 281 

You are the only one who knows its appear- 
ance. 

< f. m; 

The cub had such a look of insolent meaning 
that Jenny again thought of her favourite 
punishment, but she forbore. 

* I know nothing about it,' she said. * How 
can I find deeds ? I shall write to him/ 

' But you were to give it to me/ said the 
boy. 'And you do know where it is, Miss 
Bell. You know you were searching there just 
now.' 

Jenny instantly grasped the packet she had 
tied up so carefully. The boy's eyes were 
upon it. 

'It is false, you wretched little imp!' said 
Jenny, in a fury. ' And, let me tell you, if 
you go spying on me, Til ' 

' Give it to me,' said the boy, * they will all 
know you have it ; it's a shame.' 

Jenny's palm descended fiercely. The 
stroke resounded loudly. Some one had been 
listening over the stairs, for there came a 



282 BELLA DONNA. 

shriek, i Let the child alone. How dare you, 
woman, lay hands on my boy !' And my boy, 
crying, ran upstairs, threatening Jenny fiercely, 
and giving her at parting such a look of rage 
and vindictiveness. 

Jenny was terribly excited. She was chafed 
and harassed ; but ever ready to do battle with 
all the world. She had a wonderful spirit, that 
rose in the struggle. 



283 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A SUDDEN PURPOSE. 



At the lodgings of the Franklyn family there 
was indeed a change. Hope had some way made 
its way in, and there were now cheerful faces 
to be seen. But Charlotte was still ill and de- 
pressed, and lay on a sofa in the drawing-room, 
doing battle with her malady, and affecting a 
light heart and light spirits, for the sake of 
those all round her. 

The cousin who had lived all his life abroad, 
had indeed stepped on the scene like a good 
male fairy. Cousin Croesus he should have 
been called, but that he had not any of the 
flash and spangles which usually attend the 
entrance of such beings. He was a plain, hale, 
tall, blunt old gentleman, wo seemed to be 



284 BELLA DONNA. 

always associated with his stick, which he leant 
on and brandished, and struck emphatically 
on the ground. This is all the outline needed 
for so useful, yet, as to mere detail, so unim- 
portant a character. 

The evening of the day on which we last saw 
Jenny, the family were together in this way. 
They were in a few days to leave their mean 
lodgings, and in a few weeks were to be down 
at Grey Forest, back again at the old plaofr 
Cousin John Hall had brought in his man of 
business, a skilful head and a delicate hand, 
who was disentangling their affairs slowly but 
surely. They were turning out to be not 
nearly in so distracted a state as was supposed ; 
but above all, at the potent spell of some bags 
of gold, the twisted cords began of themselves 
to get free. 

This evening then, at about four o'clock, 
came in young Craven, to ask after Charlotte* 
For one of his temper, he had behaved with 
marvellous constancy all through. # To-night 
he entered with a troubled air. Charlotte 
noticed it at once. 



A SUDDEN PURPOSE. 285 

* You may go, dears/ she said to her sisters ; 
' I want to speak to Mr. Craven for a moment/ 

Although she had been firm in dealing with 
their engagement as broken off, she did not in- 
deed order the door to be kept rigorously barred 
in his face, as some sterner and colder virgins 
might have done ; but he knew her character 
well, and that there was a barrier between 
them as impenetrable as any iron bar known. 
Now, however, the clouds were breaking, and 
there was hope. 

* You have something to tell me,' she said. 
' More bad news ? I am always prepared.' 

With much hesitation young Craven owned 
that it was so ; and then, with a wonderful 
delicacy for one of his nature, told her of the 
ugly story he had heard, relative to her father. 

Charlotte rose up excitedly. 

' It is false !' she said, * I know it is false ; 
some vile invention of our enemies/ 

* I don't know,' said he, gloomily, * I trust so. 
But, dear Charlotte, it seems a little probable, 
and the person that told my father ' 

< Who ? Who ?' said Charlotte. 



286 BELLA DONNA. 

4 Your old friend/ he said, ' who could have 
no interest . Wells, the curate/ 

* Ah/ said Charlotte, * do you not see it now ? 
Her finger . she has been at work. I know it ; 
that wretched man is enslaved to her. She 
has set him on this vile calumny/ 

Charlotte was growing very excited. He 
tried to calm her. She even got up and began 
to walk up and down. 

* You must find him out. Help me to find 
him out . wring a confession out of him. He 
is a weak, good-natured creature, but powerless 
in her hands. Not a moment must be lost If 
ever,' she said imploringly, 'you would wish 
to do me a kindness, help me now/ 

Young Craven was in his element. He 
liked to be of importance, and rushed away. 
The girls, to their astonishment, found Char- 
lotte very pale and walking about. 

Young Craven hurried away. It was now 
past five o'clock, and he went to seek him at 
his lodgings. He did not find him there. He 
came back again later, and was told that the 
Rev. Mr. Wells had left town. 



A SUDDEN PURPOSE. 287 

But Charlotte continued her nervous and 
excited walk up and down her room. Though 
she had repudiated it so scornfully to Mr.. Cra- 
ven, she had a terrible instinct that there was 
truth somewhere. That weight of anxiety that 
always hung over her father, seemed something 
more than the mere burden of pecuniary em- 
barrassment. It always seemed like the ner- 
vo 8 dread of .t,M. ludeed she 
knew, as well as if she had seen the fatal 
parchment, that something of the kind had 
been done. She never gave way until this 
moment. The old, honourable house, and 
her dear father's name, to be sullied by this 
foul charge. Everything else she had borne ; 
want, grief, and general misery ; but this terri- 
ble phantom of disgrace fluttering and flapping 
over their heads, was more than she could en- 
dure. She would give worlds to have gone 
forth in some direction, and have taken action 
in some shape ; but, unhappily, she knew no 
special direction in which to move. It was all 
a wilderness round her. But no answer came 
to her from young Mr. Craven. Just after six 



288 BELLA DONNA. 

o'clock, when the lamp was being brought in, 
a letter, in a strange hand, was given to Char- 
lotte, A young boy had left it, and there was 
no answer. # She opened it and read : . 

* Sir Frederick Maxwell sent back to-day for 
one of your family deeds ; but she said it could 
not be found. She afterwards packed it in a 
yellow sheet of paper, and gave it to Mr. 
Wells, the curate. He is going away with it 
to-night, to Avignon, in France, where he is to 
show it to some people called Long. 

' Yours, 

* A Secret Friend/ 

It was written in trembling, shaking cha- 
racters, like the hand of a sick lady. 

Now she saw it all, and the direction she | 
was praying for became suddenly revealed. 
The knowledge of whose handiwork was here 
discovered, gave her sudden strength. She 
kindled with anger and defiance. She now 
knew it was a base, vile plot. She felt a sud- 
den strength imparted to her weak frame. 



A SUDDEN PURPOSE. 289 

She had her whole plah mapped out in a few 
seconds. Action . quick> firm, and determined 
. was necessary. Everything depended on 
destroying this rumour and its evidences before 
it had time to spread. 

It was now past seven o'clock. She called 
in her sisters. There was no use entering into 
elaborate explanations with them . and they 
were not too curious. 

Something had happened . nothing to alarm 
them . which rendered it necessary for her to 
go away for a short time only. 

'Go away!' they said in astonishment. 
' Where . when . for how long ?' 

4 There ! ' said Charlotte, with a smile, * I 
knew you would be frightened. What is there 
in a little trip into the country for two or three 
days ?' 

4 But you are so ill!' both said together 
4 so weak . so delicate.' 

' It will do me good,' said Charlotte, still 
smiling. (She was obliged to sink on the sofa 
at that moment.) * Change of air ! Why, it 
is the very thing !' 

VO T . IT. u 



290 BELLA DONNA. 

i But where are you going, dear Charlotte V 
they said again. 'Tell us. Oh, it is very 
wrong of you. You are not fit. Yon ' 

4 Hush ! hush !' said Charlotte, ' only a day 
or two. I will write every day. Now help 
me to get my things together. Stay, dears, 
one moment. Not a word to any one, of my 
being away. You know not how much depends 
on this. Promise me.' 

They did promise with wonder and a sense 
of mystery. In twenty minutes she was ready 
. in five more she was in a cab, speeding away 
to London Bridge. 



291 



CHAPTER XV. 



A JOURNEY. 



At London Bridge were many gathered, con- 
verging from many quarters of London; a 
stream, a turgid, swollen stream of brawling 
men and women, barrows of luggage, trundling 
porters, children, cloaks, capes, umbrellas in 
bundles, like faggots . all pouring in through the 
entrance, as through a burst sluice. There were 
Paris men, hurrying back to Paris, and London 
men, hurrying from London ; for India, mili- 
tary men, now at their very last day's leave, 
and who have to count the seconds to save dis- 
tance ; brides and bridegrooms, tourists, fathers 
of families, with all their household regiments, 
and the baggage and ammunition of their 
household regiments . in short, the whole 



292 BELLA DONNA. 

motley, polyglot, parti-coloured cosmopolitan 
assemblage . the true citizens of the world, 
who are to be encountered every night at that 
wonderful station. 

Yet the weakest and most fragile of all was 
the veiled lady, in mourning, who was scarcely 
able to totter from her cab, and had but three 
minutes to spare to save the train. 

Ill and weak as she was, she took a hasty 
glance down the long series of well-lighted bine 
cabins which, with doors open, stretched down 
the platform. They were all full, rank after 
rank, row after row, of tenants . some reading, 
some patient, and in attitude of expectancy . all 
duly draped, and made taut, compact and com- 
fortable. There was a ten hours' night before 
them . a night of swooping through many 
counties, leaving a trail of sparks behind, like 
a locomotive comet. Still, swiftly as she was 
hurried down the platform by a bearded con- 
ductor, who affected a foreign air, she was able 
to mark a face she knew peeping from a blue 
cabin, Number 90. The oil lamp above sent 
down a dull yellow glare upon him, and re- 



A JOURNEY. 293 

vealed the Reverend Charlton Wells. But the 
Reverend Charlton Wells knew not who was 
the veiled lady in mourning that looked in so 
curiously, down through the night. 

The Paris express went on its way. The 
series of bright blue chambers swooped down 
towards the sea, like a swift bird. The land 
cabin passengers sat within, muffled, and read, 
and talked, and nodded drowsily. A clergy- 
man, in Number 90, with a little hand-bag 
on his knee, did not . he was too excited. 
He was laying out pictures of his future life 
. of a nuptial crown, blessings, favours, and 
exquisite bliss. He chafed against the de- 
lay, and thought the great bird upon whose 
back he was borne moved its wings too 
slowly. In a blue chamber lower down, the 
muffled lady carried on a stronger contest, but 
a victorious struggle, over weakness, sickness, 
and an unutterable anxiety . yet, over all 
three, by the force of will, she triumphed. 
This she was determined would carry her 
through. A soothing comfort happily came 
to her aid : the unfamiliar motion . the exer- 



294 BELLA DONNA. 

tion she had gone through . all made her 
drowsy, and .she had uneasy snatches of sleep* 
five minutes long each. 

Ten, thirty-five . Dover. The great horse has 
stopped at the edge of the sea, panting, spent, 
and breathing hard. Muffled passengers stream 
forth, leave behind the long row of blue cham- 
bers, lighted, warm, and comfortable, at which 
they look back wistfully. Before them is raw 
discomfort . the indistinct shape of the great 
ocean, the cold night. Here are the twinkling 
lights of the little port, the obscure inns with 
open doors, and half-lit up ; and the indistinct 
dark outline of the sea monster which is wait- 
ing alongside. Very clear, however, is the 
wreath of white steam against the dark air, for 
the monster is blowing impatiently, like a whale 
in agonies. 

In that rueful procession is the tenant of 
No. 90, with his hand-bag in his hand, and not 
very far behind, the muffled lady. All are 
presently got in, and battened down below. 
They are presently at sea. 

Not a stormy passage . but fresh and breezy 



A JOURNEY. 295 

. all stretched below, like Moslems upon their 
carpets. One, thirty a.m. . Calais . lights pass- 
ing by at each side, the long wooden arms of 
Calais piers enclosing them on both hands. 
Calais Customs, muffled soldiery, standing high 
up on a wooden framework, which is the pier ; 
Calais porters, and what seems a gigantic hearse 
waiting ready to carry away the luggage. 

Passengers stream out: Calais all asleep, 
or at most blinking drowsily. French steam- 
roc ready waiting, with wings furled, and fresh 
French blue cabins ready waiting, with open 
doors. Passenger array is all disorganized, 
scattered here and there, but mainly busy, in 
a brilliant glass temple, where meats and wines 
are being had. The late tenant of No. 90 is 
there, cheerful and talking jocularly to a stout 
Briton. He has his sack in his hand . and the 
muffled lady is not far away in the crowd. 

There are now military French guards, with 
waists like ladies, ' circulating ' busily, and 
chanting 'En voiture, Messieurs!' Away 
flutter * Messieurs,' with unfinished sandwiches 
in their hands. The gentleman with the hand- 



296 BELLA DONNA. 

bag enters voiture Numero Trente, where there 
is only one passenger, and immediately after 
him enters the muffled lady, and sits down at 
the far end. Then the great iron-bird lays its 
breast to the wind, and begins to swoop 
through the French country. The cabin pas- 
sengers drop away gradually into a weary 
sleep, for by this time they are very tired. But 
two of the tenants of Numero Trente are wake- 
ful. Four, twenty-five . Amiens. Day begin- 
ning to break . greyness in the east. French 
country begins to open gradually. Drowsy 
passengers lifting their heads, look about them 
with a shiver. Seven, twenty . Full daylight 
. Paris. Place Roubaix, great hall of North- 
ern Railway station . douane . blue-frocked 
porters, and general disorder. Gentleman with 
the hand-bag drives away in a cab, and the 
muffled lady, taking another, bids them drive 
with all speed to the Boulevard Mazas, the 
station of the Great Lyons and Mediterranean 
line. 



297 



CHAPTER XVI. 

A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 

Express at eleven; so there is ample time. 
She takes stimulant of some kind, does the 
muffled lady; and, strange to say, feels sur- 
prisingly strong, something. 

The muffled lady waited, waited patiently 
the hour there was to wait. The Mazas station 
is the great threshold of the foreign world, the 
huge terminus whence all men and women turn 
their faces to the east and west. There the 
muffled lady saw natives of every clime and 
quarter pouring in at the gates as the hours 
wore on. But there was one whom she waited 
for anxiously who did not come. It was 
within twenty minutes. The iron horses were 



298 BELLA DONNA, 

already harnessed. It now wanted but fifteen 
minutes, . now ten. All voyagers were bidden 
to 'mount/ The muffled lady looked out 
wistfully. At last, a light fiacre, without 
luggage, is seen hurrying up at full speed. 
He has come ventre a terre y says the driver, 
pressing for an extravagant compensation. 
Barely in time. 

The huge tribes of pilgrims have drifted 
away out of the huge salle, in upon the plat- 
form. The mountain of luggage, which had 
been piled up like rocks upon rocks by the 
waves, has again been swept away. Every 
one is settled in the carriages, save a few 
stragglers, . notably the figure with the hand- 
bag, who rushes in panting, and who enters 
a blue chamber, ' Numero Y.,' where there is 
no one sitting, and establishes himself in a far 
corner. Five minutes . Arrives a French lady 
. enters the same carriage . and an officer, 
going to his regiment. One minute . and a 
muffled lady enters quietly, and shrinks into 
the shadow next the open door. The militaire 
already lays out pleasant pasturage for himself, 



A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 299 

and considers the ennui of the journey already 
far away. Eight, thirty . they are gone. 

It is the old routine over again. The plea- 
sant French country, the pleasant French 
names, which sound in rich, mellow, fruity 

tones, like the old wines they stand for. A 

 

sort of bouquet seems to exhale from them. 
Montereau, St. Florentin, Tonnerre, Nuits, 
Dijon, Beaune, and Macon. Buffets here, 
there, and everywhere in delightful succes- 
sion. From the windows the pointswomen, 
in uniform, in broad-leafed shiny hats, with a 
belt slung across like a cartouche-belt, and a 
flag in a scabbard at their side, like a sword, 
are seen to present arms as the train passes 

by. 

At Dijon the militaire departs reluctantly 
to join his garrison. He has made adroit 
efforts in the direction of the veiled lady, 
but without profit. He is more successftd 
with the lady of his own nation. 

The day goes by slowly. 

It is now night . ten o'clock ; and here is 
the grandest of provincial towns . grand in its 



300 BELLA DONNA. 

open places, its rivers, bridges, and tall houses 
. Lyons. Three hundred and sixteen miles. 

Half an hour delay, and then go forwards, 
still flying to the south, to the great Italian 
sea. In the same cabin are the same pas- 
sengers, . the English clergyman, with his 
little hand-bag, the muffled lady, and the 
French lady. A French commis voyageur 
gets in later, but passes away in an hoar or 
so at Montelimar. 

Midnight. Train. An illuminated palace, 
which is the first buffet The French lady 
descends. And the French lady does not 
return. She lives a few miles out of Tours. 

Remain only the muffled lady and the 
figure with the little hand-bag. 

The muffled lady had not reckoned on this. 
She had looked up from an uneasy doze, and was 
bewildered. She rubbed her eyes. Train 
again rushing through the night. Now was 
the moment for action. But the door opens, 
and, in company with a cold, searching draught, 
enters the guard, asking for tickets. He is 
gone in a moment ; and then the muffled lady 



A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 301 

throws up her veil, and moves over to the other 
end. The other was sleeping . enjoying de- 
lightful dreams. He was fatigued, exhausted, 
and slept very profoundly. In his hand, and 
on his knees, was the little hand-bag he had 
carried so far. 

Charlotte stooped down and looked at it 
closely. She saw that it was secured by but 
a spring. Yery cautiously she leant lightly 
upon it, and it opened. And inside could be 
seen the precious packet. Quietly she drew 
it forth, put it by carefully in her bag, and 
closed it carefully. Nor must it be fancied 
that she did this with any air of guilty pur- 
loining ; for as soon as it was done she leant 
over, and said, loudly, . 

< Mr. W.ells !' 

He started. For a moment he was bewil- 
dered ; then gradually collecting his faculties, 
he looked at her, and said with a scared voice . 

4 Miss Charlotte !' 

He was confounded at this appearance. But 
his first instinct, Charlotte remarked, was to 
grasp tightly his bag. 



302 BELLA DOXNA. 

* You here, Miss Charlotte ? What is the 
meaning of this ?' 

1 I have followed you? said Charlotte, calmly, 
' in the same ship, in the same train. 9 

* Followed me,' said he, dropping his eyes ; 
* why should you do that V 

' To save you,' said she, ' from a great dis- 
grace, and to hinder an infamous errand/ 

He coloured. ' These are harsh words,' he 
said. * I know what my errand is ; it is merely 
a commission with which I have been entrusted 
. nothing to be ashamed of.' 

'You are reduced low indeed,' said Char- 
lotte, sadly, ' to become a slave, a tool in the 
hands of a cruel woman, and then to be driven 
by this miserable infatuation, to plot the ruin 
of a family that never did you any harm/ 

He turned pale. i You speak in riddles.' 

i Ah,' said Charlotte, 'do you venture to 
say that it is a mere innocent object that is 
taking you down to Avignon ?' She paused. 
' What have we done to you ? Was not my 
father always good to you? Were we not 
always ' 



A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 303 

' She never told me what this contains/ said 
he, touching the bag, * or what it is for/ 

' But you know it. You suspect it. This 
miserable infatuation has blinded you. It has 
made you forget decency, gratitude, every- 
thing. Dear Mr. Wells, I know you are good 
and honourable. Renounce this degrading 
mission while it is time.' 

He stopped irresolutely, then shook his head. 
4 1 dare not. I have promised. I must go 
on.' 

'It will ruin us, blast my poor father's 
memory.' 

' 1 tell you I dare not,' he said in much con- 
fusion. 'Oh, Miss Charlotte, I am very 
wretched . a poor, weak, miserable creature/ 
he said, after a pause, 'but you must pity 
me. But I . in fact . I could not return to 
her . I dare not . without doing what I under- 
took.' 

4 And,' said Charlotte, 'you will perform so 
base, so unmanly a part ?' 

' No, no, dear Miss Charlotte, you misjudge. 
She is good, she is noble. She has suffered, 



304 BELLA DONNA. 

but you must make allowance. I bound my- 
self solemnly . indeed I did.' 

'Then/ said Charlotte, slowly, 'this is 
indeed infatuation. I could not believe you 
would have fallen so low. But you are scarcely 
accountable, and should be thankful that vou 
have still friends who have saved you from 
this last degradation.' 

6 Saved me ?' he said, doubtingly. 

' Yes, saved you, and saved us. Your errand 
is at an end. You will never deliver your 
packet, and . thank Heaven, that you have 
been preserved from such a foul disgrace/ 

He gave a cry, and hurriedly opened his 
bag, and saw that his treasure was gone. 

* Robbed !' he said. ' Miserable man, what 
am I to do ? You could not have done this ?' 

She did not answer. 

'Ah! it was you I Come, come/ he said, 
excitedly, 'it must be given up. This is no 
child's play. I am serious, I can tell you, Miss 
Franklyn. Give me back my papers.' 

* I did not say I had taken it/ said Char- 
lotte, calmly. 



A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 305 

* It won't do !' he went on, with increas- 
ing excitement. *I swore I would carry 
out her wishes, and I shall. I undertook it, 
and shall do what I undertook. Come, Miss 
Charlotte Franklyn, I am not the old, quiet 
creature you took me for. No trifling with 
me, now.' 

Indeed, he did not seem like one that was. 
Never was any one so changed as this simple 
country curate. There was a fierce, rude 
manner about him, that seemed to Charlotte to 
reach almost to ruffianism. 

She had gone back to her end of the car- 
riage. He went over to her. There was a 
truculent menace in his eye. 

* I tell you I have no choice in this matter. 
I promised her. I am hers. For ever! I 
would go to the end of the world for her ! I 
don't care who knows it, but I do love and 
worship her above every one! Oh, Miss 
Franklyn, forgive me! I know it is a 
wretched infatuation . it is making me mi- 
serable . and I speak to you like a ruffian 
. but . but . I must have that paper !' 

vol. u. x 



306 BELLA DONNA. 

Charlotte surveyed him with a look of d6ep 
contempt. 

* I could not have believed this,' she said . 
4 such a change !' 

There was a strange look in his eyes. 

4 Come/ he said, * we can have no more of 
this. Grive me back my paper at once. Take 
care/ he added, getting up, 4 1 am not to be . ' 

i Stop,' said Charlotte ; 4 you shall be spared 
the indignity of taking it from me.' 

She opened the bag slowly. In an instant 
he was changed. 

< Oh, Miss Franklyn V he said, falling back 
and covering up his face in his hands. 4 1 am 
a wretch . a monster! I blush for my own 
degradation. I am a lost, ruined creature, 
whom you are too good to speak so kindly 
to, but ' 

Charlotte took out the roll of paper slowly. 

4 There,' she said. 

But in a second she had the window down, 
and the packet was plunged into the black, 
murky, roaring ocean of night below. ' Now !' 
she said. 



A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY. 307 

He gave a wild cry of rage and despair, 
and rushed to the door. Charlotte long after 
recollected the look of fury he cast upon 
her. But it wa& only for a moment. He had 
presently flung himself into his corner, and 
was giving way to passionate exclamations of 
despair. 

* Oh ! oh ! How can I go back ? how show 
myself to her ? You have ruined me ! She 
will cast me off, for her heart was set on this, 
and she had promised me to ' 

Then he became furious again. 

' What right had you ? how dare you ? It 
is open robbery. No matter, the law can 
reach you. Ah! what made you do it? 
What harm have I done to you ? I shall 
never raise my head again.' 

Suddenly the train began to slacken its 
speed; it was going to stop. It was barely 
three or four minutes from the time the packet 
had been cast forth. 

He checked the torrent of his reproaches. 
He could scarcely trust his senses. 

' It seems like a providence/ he said. ' Ah, 



308 BELLA DONNA. 

you have failed! You did not think of this. 
My dear Jenny will have her wish yet/ 

Charlotte was quite unmoved. She listened 
to him calmly. They were entering an ilhfr 
minated temple, lights flashing, and sleepless 
men standing along. The little telegraphic 
gong was tinkling merrily . as they are always 
tinkling in France . and a sickly yellow light 
played on the clock Two, forty-five . Orange. 

He had * descended ' in a second, and in 
another was telling his story to the station- 
master. Valuable papers dropped from the 
carriage window . Keward. The first portion 
was listened to with polite abstraction, the 
second with eager attention. Antoine should 
get a lantern forthwith, and should walk back 
with monsieur. Such things often happened ; 
they always found them again. 

The up train was due in twenty minutes, 
and when it arrived the muffled lady took a 
fresh ticket, and went, back towards Paris. 
At the very first station, however, she got 
down and went to some rustic railway inn, 
where she slept very sweetly. 




A STRUGGLE AND VICTORY, 309 

But the Curate and Antoine the porter 
trudged wearily back with the lantern, and 
sought for an hour or more. They could find 
nothing. They did indeed discover a large roll 
of English newspapers, which some English- 
man must have flung out, and at the sight of 
which Antoine raised a joyful cry of discovery. 
But the precious packet they could not light 
on. It was no wonder ; for the English news- 
paper was Charlotte's, and the packet was miles 
away under a certain pillow in a little rustic 
railway inn. ' 



310 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XVH. 

THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME. * 

Jenny was mow alone in her castle in Ches- 
terfield Street, of which she was queen* All 
that day, it has been mentioned, she was in a 
marvellous state of excitement. She felt, as it 
were, at the last moves of a great game of 
chess . though, indeed, Jenny was likely to find 
that pastime insipid. She made some rapid 
play these last few days, and they seemed to 
promise successfully. She passed from the 
various chambers in her castle restlessly, and 
composed herself to steady sitting down, for it 
was now eight o'clock. 

'He has left London Bridge/ said Jenny. 
< He is on his road.' 

She was pleased with herself for this bold, 




THE CR0S8 BEFORE THE NAME. 311 

dashing stroke, and was almost glad that the 
difficulties had arisen, which she could sur- 
mount so brilliantly. 

4 They don't know Jenny Bell quite, as yet,' 
she said. ' Yet, why could they not leave me 
in peace ? I molest no one. It is their own 
concern, if they meddle with me.' 

Then she thought of Charlotte. 

1 She chose to fight for Grey Forest with 
me! So be it. Let the best man win, as 
that foolish young Craven used to say.' 

In Jenny's private ledger there was a long 
row of figures, standing under that gentleman's 
name. Jenny felt herself ill-treated by him . 
insulted, and, what was worse, deceived. She 
laid out a pleasant plan for the future, when 
she should have the pleasure, one of these 
days, of reckoning with him. Not just at 
present, for she had too many threads in her 
hand to wind off. But all in good time. She 
felt, indeed, like a little domestic sort of 
Napoleon, dealing with subordinate monarchs, 
all of whom she would deal with in their turn. 
It was only a question of time. 



312 BELLA DONNA. 

She passed a pleasant evening castle-build- 
ing, and even followed her emissary as far as 
Calais. Then she went to bed, and slept 
sweetly. 

The next day was a day of action, and 
seemed very long. She wanted news. She 
wished to hear of something . of somebody; 
but patience was the only thing. She went 
out to walk . came in again* . went out to 
walk again. Her envoy was far down the fair 
land of France by this time. Great issues 
seemed to hang suspended in the air all round, 
and she felt their weight upon her breast. The 
evening drew in . four, five, six, seven . dinner. 

It grew dark earlier than usual, for the day 
had been gusty and stormy; and the skilful 
Admiral who divines the coming of winds and 
tempests had been busy telegraphing to all the 
coast By dinner-time it had pretty well set 
in: blasts were sweeping round the corner, 
windows were beginning to clatter, and stray 
slates to tumble into the street with a musical 
jangle. There were all the pronounced symp- 
toms of a rough night. 




THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME, ^13 

Jenny noted these, as she tripped in to 
dinner, and gave a little shiver. She was very 
thankful. She was not exposed to the fury 
and discomfort outside, like the poor people 
whose proper lot it was. There was an excel- 
lent fire in the dining-room, and perhaps on 
the whole she would as soon have the storm 
continue ; for, by the contrast, her own sense 
of comfort was wonderfully increased. 

As this was a sort of festival time, a little 
feast was not inappropriate. A light German 
wine, sparkling, something French from the 
French cafS, in the next street, and a pigeon. 
Jenny enjoyed it, but someway was growing 
nervous. She soothed herself with agreeable 
images of dominion. She thought how she 
would have a conservatory on her stairs, new 
curtains, and some French furniture . a Louis 
Quatorze clock. How she would gradually, 
too, work her way into a certain order of 
society. not so much the richer cream, but the 
lively, the witty, and artistic. Men of this 
stamp she would gather about her . little 
suppers . she the Recamier . queen of the 



314 BELLA DONNA* 

society. Every one should talk of the piquant 
Lady Maxwell. This speculation brought to 
her mind a person upstairs, who rather stood 
in the way of those pretty pictures* Jenny 
sighed. Patience was the only thing. 

It camB to ten . to eleven, Jenny stirred up 
the fire, and cast on a log. She always had 
logs: she thought it so much more cheerful* 
She determined when Grey Forest was being 
properly refitted, she would have handsome 
mediaeval ' dogs/ for the better burning of 
wood. 

That led her on into the most delightful of 
speculations. It was a very capable mansion, 
and offered opportunities for the most pictu* 
tesque decoration. She thought how pleasant 
it would be to put it altogether in the hands 
of Brackets, the great Birmingham medievalist, 
who would hang up his coronas, and put in 
armorial shields in to windows. Jenny had 
the greatest taste for this sort of thing, and 
had actually, for her own private amusement, 
purchased all the colours and models for the 
pleasant pastime of Illumination ; though it 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME. 315 

must be said, she was not skilful at the work. 
Grey Forest had great capacities. It might be 
lard out in terraces, . little bit of ornamental 
water . f6tes. ah, yes . the very thing ! Some- 
thing new for these old-fashioned fogies of the 
country. Lady Maxwell's Fete ! . what music 
in the words ! 

Then she thought of Charlotte. ' Poor little 
Jenny P said poor little Jenny to herself, 
in a sort of tranquil admiration, 'you are 
very, very clever . you are a match for all 
these good and noble people. No money, no 
friends, no help, and yet little Jenny has done 
all this for herself. She has fought her battle 
with men and women, and has beaten/ 

Her round eyes kindled ; she gave a start* 
for the wind came bursting violently round the 
chimney, like the fall of a heap of stones . it 
Woke her from her reverie. She went over to 
a little drawer, and took out one of her ' Letts' 
Diaries,' an old one. She had to search for it. 

4 It is a long time ago now, but it is a won- 
derfttl deal to have done in the time. I can 
scarcely believe it. The whole tribe of them 



316 BELLA DONNA. 

 

pulled down . she . all of them . on the 
ground !' Jenny turned back the pages, until 
she came to one on which her eyes rested 
tranquilly. 4 That little cross/ she said ; ' I may 
almost take it out, now, or write " paid " oppo- 
site . like a bill/ The humour of the notion 
pleased her, and she actually wrote 4 paid * oppo- 
site this entry, whatever it was. ' A long time 
ago,' said Jenny, shaking it to and fro so as to 
dry it . * a very long time. And yet I have 
had wonderful patience . suffered too/ added 
Jenny, pensively ; ' suffered a good deal. And 
yet I feel no bitterness-none in the world. I 
can afford/ said Jenny, with a pleasant laugh, 
' to be indulgent. Why not ? Everything is 
coming oat exactly as I wished it to come out 
I think that pauper creature has often repented 
the hour she interfered. and thought she in- 
terfered so cleverly . with poor, helpless little 
Jenny.' 

It was twelve o'clock. She heard the chime 
of a fashionable chapel close by, giving out 
that hour. But the notes came to her through 
a terrible hurley-burley of boisterous storm, 



\ 



THE CROSS BEFORE THE NAME. 317 

i 

and tumbling slates, and clatter on the win- 
dows, as though some one were lashing them 
with awful whips. It was a wild night. The 
meteorological Admiral had forecasted rightly. 
The black ' Drums ' were up at every port, and 
the next day, the leading journal had a dismal 
series of reports, headed 'Deal,' *Holyhead,' # 
* Dover/ all chronicling a dismal story of 
ravages and wrecks. Jenny thought of her 
messenger. * Poor Wells V she said, with a 
smile ; * this will be in waiting for him when 
he returns/ But it was not so much matter 
now. For his work must have been done by 
this time, and done successfully. 

She thought of the packet of M. Bernardi's 
novels, the string of which had not yet been 
cut. .She opened them abstractedly. The 
old story, ' La Femme du Diable,' * Le Man- 
age et la Mort !' i Aspasie/ * Les Amours de la 
Comtesse <T * * * ,' and the rest. The 
banquet was more than usually piquant, and 
yet Jenny was not hungry. The meats lay 
there untested. It came to half-past twelve. 



318 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



jenny's last battle. 



Jenny now thought she would go to bed. She 
lit the candle tranquilly, and went upstairs. 
She thought of the sick lady, as she came near 
to her own door, and counted her among the 
enemies who were banded against her. Jenny 
thought how she would reckon with all, in the 
fulness of time. She felt her strength and 
passed on. 

The wakeful lady heard every step. The 
door opened softly, a few inches wide. The 
long wasted face peered out curiously. 

4 Well, Jacky,' she said, in a whisper . her 
eyes were growing dim latterly . ' Jacky dear, 
what was she doing ?' 

So the miserable cub was below stairs, 



jenny's last battle. 319 

spying on her again . listening . watching ! 
Jenny now, long outraged, blazed into a fury. 
She went boldly to meet her enemy. 

 Oh, ho P said the lady. ' Miss Bell, is it ? 
What have you come from doing now ?' 

* Ask your son, your precious,' said Jenny, 
halting before her. i Nice offices you set him 
to I You bring him up nicely! But I tell 
you, ma'am, I won't put up with it. When 
the master of this house comes back ' 

The wife of the master of the house burst 
, into a loud fit of laughter. ' Oh, listen to her. 
How grand ! What a deal of power you have 
here, to be sure ! Take care, my good girl.' 

The sneering way of this woman latterly, 
always made Jenny's blood boil. Latterly, 
too, she had begun to think her dangerous, and 
not to be despised. 

* What do you mean ?' said Jenny. ' Do you 
think I mind your threats ?' 

Again the other laughed. 

* You feel quite secure. Of course you do. 
You know everything that is going on. Of 
course you do P 



320 BELLA DONKA. 

*I do,' said Jenny, 'and shall match you 
all yet/ 

Again the other langhed. 
' Of course you think he is on your side. 
You know what he is gone away for. Of 
course ! And he will come back and take the 
governess's side. Of course. But I can tell 
you, my good girl, yowr day is over. He shall 
know you by and by.' 

Jenny trembled all over with rage. But 
with the rage was a sort of terror. She always 
thought this creature was dangerous. 

' What fine threats ! This is all false,' she 
said . i false every way.' 

* Is it ?' said the other, with something like 
a shriek . 'is it? I know what you think. 
You have planned it all ! I am a weak, ailing 
creature . dying every day. Half out of my 
senses, too. I know your game. But I am 
strong . strong enough to match you. I tell 
you I have watched you all along, and know 
everything you have been about.' 

Jenny was besidi herself with fury. The 
lamp she held in her hand showed the lines of 



jenny's last battle. 321 

her round face, working in a sort of contortion. 
She had strong passions, had Jenny. She 
would hardly trust herself to speak. So she 
walked straight from the landing into the 
room, and confronted her enemy there. 

'Infamous creature/ she said, 'I tell you 
these are calumnies . false, every one of them.' 

4 They are true,' said the other, fiercely. 
* Who was it stole the deeds, this very day ? 
Ah ! you see ! Who was it sent away that 
wretched tool of yours over to France ? You 
see we know everything! The despised sick 
woman ! Who was it used to steal out into 
the park and meet gentlemen ? Who wrote 
gentlemen letters, ridiculing their master . the 
master of this house . whom they were cring- 
ing and flattering the next moment ? Oh, we 
know all about you. The game is up, my 
lady* you have been very sly, but there have 
been others as sly. Your hand is spoiled, my 
fine young lady. All your little arts and 
tricks have been seen. And the poor crea- 
tures that have been thought so stupid, all 
along . one sick, another a child . they have 

VOL. II. Y 



322 BELLA DONNA. 

been able to match this very clever lady. It 
is capital ! Look here,' she said, with a glance 
of fierce triumph, taking something from under 
her pillow. ' Look here . you know this /' and 
she waved a strange mosaic-looking letter, all 
patched, and pieced, and pasted across . indeed 
no other than Jenny's own note to Mr. Craven, 
rescued from the basket, its shreds carefully, 
and with infinite pains, put together. The 
note, alas! in which she had spoken so un- 
guardedly of her patron . Sir Frederick. 

' Ah, my lady V the other went on, furiously, 
4 we have you trapped now, and as sure as Sir 
Frederick Maxwell comes back to-morrow, he 
shall have this in his hand, and a whole journal 
of your doings day by day Oh !' 

She caught her side with a sudden start. 

4 Oh, this heart/ she gasped. ' Never mind,' 
she added, ' I can bear it. I shall live to see 
you ejected yet, my fine Miss Bell.' 

Jenny's lips moved, but she could not speak. 
She was confounded, overwhelmed, and seem- 
ingly scared. The sick la* 3 ^ revelled insolently 
in her triumph. 



JESHST's LAST BATTLE. 323 

Jenny then turned away, and looking at her 
with a sort of terror, left the room, slowly. 
She descended the stairs as slowly, and seemed 
almost stunned. At the first landing she 
stopped, and remained, with her eyes fixed 
steadily on her lamp. 

As she stood there, she might, indeed, have 
felt that all her castles were tumbling down in 
ruins about her. The game did, indeed, seem 
4 up/ and Captain Jenny's army was getting 
into a rout. 



324 BELLA DONNA. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



DEFEAT ! 



She went back to the dining-room slowly. 
The storm was still raging. Rain and wind 
beat furiously against the great window on the 
landing. Jenny fell into her chair quite scared. 
She was terrified . confounded. Here was 
failure at hand, in that very council chamber, 
where only a few moments before all was suc- 
cess. Worse than that, not only failure but 

exposure. 

* * * * * 

For a quarter of an hour she sat there with 
her eyes on the glowing logs. Failure, certain 
failure it was ; and a certain exposure she could 
not get beyond. There had been a plot . a 
hideous, unmanly plot . in which all had been 
concerned . the wretched boy . the wretched 



DEFEAT ! 325 

woman . (Jenny stamped her foot furiously) . 
and that . yes . she . that hateful Charlotte, 
too . she was at the bottom of it all. And was 

she to win at the end ? 

* * * * * 

. Suddenly she recovered herself. A strange 
light flashed, in her eyes. She lifted her head. 
She hurried upstairs swiftly. 

The windows on the landing clattered ac- 
companiment as she passed. 

She entered her enemy's room again. 

The sick woman was lying down. panting, 
exhausted, and the smile of victory was on her 
lips. A dull lamp was upon the drawers. 
Jenny measured her, and drew her lips into the 
coldest and bitterest shape. 

4 Come back again!' said the sick lady. 
' What do you want here ? What ! not heard 
enough ?' 

* They are false,' said Jenny, speaking with 
a deliberate slowness, and keeping her eyes 
fixed steadily upon her. 4 False, infamously false 
. everything you have said ; and you, and those 
who are working with you, know it to be false.' 



326 BELLA DONNA. 

The other glared at her. * Ah ! wait until 
to-morrow/ she said, 'and you will see !' 

* Aye, so we shall !' Said Jenny, in the same 
tone. ' You have told me what you have been 
doing to ruin me.' 

' Ah, exactly,' said the other, eagerly. 

' Well and good. But,' said Jenny, ' do you 
suppose I have been idle ? Do you suppose 
/ have worked for nothing, or have been 
scribbling away whole nights long for nothing 
. for the pure love of law ? Ah ! my good 
lady ; do you follow me ?' 

The sick lady said nothing. Shebegan t o 
breathe a little. 

' Those long nights,' continued Jenny, with 
the same cold eyes still upon her, 'in your 
husband's study . how were they spent, do you 
suppose ? Do you imagine I have not been 
putting my labour out to interest? Do you 
fancy I have not made myself secure ? Am 1 
like a mere drudge ? What do you say, my 
good lady ?' 

The other raised herself upon her elbow, and 
began to look at Jenny much in the same wild 




defeat! 327 

astonished way that Jenny had done at her. 
But she was pressing her hand tightly to her 
side, which Jenny had not done. 
. ' Do you suppose I am a sort of fool ? I 
tell you/ said Jenny, drawing a step nearer, 
and speaking the words as though she was dis- 
charging a series of arrows, * I am not to be 
stirred. I laugh at your poor, feeble, little spy 
system. I am safe, secure . immovable, whether 
you live or die' 

The wretched lady, now sitting quite up, and 
gasping terribly, was trying to speak. But 
Jenny . 

4 They have deceived you. Poor miserable 
imprisoned woman, what could you expect to 
do ? My security is in the folly of weak man. 
He is my slave. Do your worst,' said Jenny, 
drawing nearer, and putting her face quite 
close, and stabbing her with her words ; ' Sir 
Frederick knows me, and / tell you, 9 said 
Jenny, bending close down to her and tipping 
what she spoke with a cold venom, 'we can 
bide our time /' 

The other started into the air with a shriek 



328 BELLA DONNA. 

and a sudden spasm. She sank back and 
rose again with shriek after shriek. She rolled 
and grovelled on her pillow in agonies. 

Jenny rang the bell and went to the door. 
4 On her own head be it. It is her own 
work.' 

' Now, 9 she said, as she opened the door, ' I 
may be the queen of Grey Forest yet.' 

Standing there was Sir Frederick Maxwell 
and his little son. Jenny's heart sank, for 
there was a stern purpose in his face, which 
showed that he knew all. 

4 Wretched girl,' he said, hurrying past, 
i what have you been doing V 

The unhappy Lady Maxwell was still writh- 
ing and shrieking in terrible agonies. It was 
as though some one were stabbing her and 
stabbing her again; for she seemed to be 
striving to catch at the spectral sword that was 
entering her side. Winged messengers went 
off to the east and to the west for doctors, and 
presently came a plunging of horses ; and the 
great physician, disturbed at a fashionable 
feast, came hurrying in. Later, too, another 



ft 



defeat! 329 

great physician came, with reeking horses, 
sprang from his carriage, bounded upstairs, 
and met his brother. They gave some weak 
lenitives. The wretched lady was still being 
stabbed. But even while they stood there the 
sword was driven in, as it were, up to the hilt ; 
and with a gasp, and a shriek of agony, the 
soul of Lady Maxwell passed away. 

That was about two o'clock in the morning. 
No one in the house took rest that night/ Miss 
Bell had not witnessed the last agonies of the 
lady of the house, but kept within her room. 
She, too, did not sleep, nor indeed go to bed. 
But early, when the morning was breaking, a 
servant came to tell her softly that she was 
wanted in the parlour. He found her cold, 
shrinking in a corner, scared and frightened. 
Sir Frederick wished to see her in the parlour. 

The morning was gloomy and miserable. 
The wax-candles on Sir Frederick Maxwell's 
desk, by which he read his briefs, were lighted. 
He sat there like a judge. 

'I know all,' he said, 4 and suspect more. 
Knowing so much as I did, I was guilty myself 



330 BELLA DONNA. * 

in leaving this house. I should not have been 
away half an hour. Heaven forgive you !' 

He paused a moment, then added, ' and for- 
give me too.' 

Jenny was settling rapidly in an attitude of 
piteous grace and entreaty. Yet she was not 

the old Jenny. 'Sir * she said in a 

mournful cadence, exquisitely touching. 

< Sir . said Jenny. 

'Hush! hush!' he said, waving his hand 
impatiently. ' It is useless trying more of this 
imposture. It is profanation to the dead. 
You must leave this house within an hour. 
You are a terrible creature. I don't know how 
to speak to you . but go P 

Jenny bowed her head, and retired without 
a word. She silently went to her room, and 
in half an hour had got her things together. 
In the grey of the morning a cab was brought 
to the door, and she was driven away from the 
house of death out into the world. 

It was hard upon that poor outcast. She 
had fought courageously, and should have won. 
Still she is young, and has the world before her. 



defeat! 331 

A month will help her over this repulse, and 
put her in heart for fresh battle. 

It is easy to speculate how it is to fare with 
the other characters in this little play. Charlotte 
and her young Craven, stately * coming round/ 
as it is called, within a few months ; and Cousin 
John Hall, the Deus ex machim, or rescuer, 
watching the settlements. Franklyns' home 
again at Grey Forest, beautified and full of 
glory. Bells ring out, and villagers harness 
themselves to the coach of this blissful pair. 

There were but two with whom it has fared 
ill. The rejected Curate, now on the verge of 
starvation, skulking about ; and poor, luckless 
Jenny Bell, who has been plunged into the 
dark, surging, London waters. This was but a 
passage from her youthful life. She has the 
will for many more adventures. But she is 
sure to emerge later . on the surface too . 
with the same old spirit, and a memory keen as 
ever. 

THE END. 
