A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



CHAPTER I. 



A CONFESSION. 



As for Lotty and the doctor, as they were about 
a good work, they lived naturally in charity with 
all men; and even the slight feud which Mrs. 
Lapis would have willingly kept warm between 
herself and Miss Morton, since she had been 
pushed from her seat and pride of place by that 
lady, was allowed to grow cool. 

Upon the Sunday on which the Rev. John Ban- 
gles exhibited his eloquence, and, as he woujd have 
said, '^ improved the occasion,^' Mrs. Everingham, 

VOL. II. B 



Z A SPLEXDID FOBTUXE. 

althongli yery weak, showed more oonscionsness 
than nsoal; and Lottj, whose cariosity was not 
nnnatnral, felt that the time was coming when 
some question might with delicacy be put regard- 
ing the patient's position. 

The poor lady herself gare occasion for this 
hope by looking at the baby and declaring that it 
was not unlike its father. She said this very 
calmly^ and without hesitation. 

Lotty, who heard her slightest whisper, could 
not forbear to say, ''Yes, dear; like whom?^' 

" Like his father . like Mr. '^ Here she 

looked suspiciously at her questioner, and was 
silent. Then she heaved a sigh, and, with a 
quick-coming tear^ said she had now no friend 
in the world. 

" I am sure you must not say that, my dear 
lady,^^ said Lotty. '' Both I and my brother love 
you like our own sister; as dearly almost as our 
sister who is dead,'^ 

*' That can never be," said Emmy, solemnly . 
*' never, never be/^ 

** reriiaps not for me/' answered Lotty, always 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. O 

trutliful, and always in earnest; **but, poor fel- 
low 1 men love differently from women/' 

She was half sorry for having said this a mo- 
ment after she had said it. Mrs. Everingham, 
however, did not mistake her words, because she 
did not heed them. . She was thinking of her own 
sad loss. 

'^ He was very handsome and very good/' she 
added, looking again at baby, ^'and would not 
have lost his life if it had not been for me," 

" You mean Lord Somers," said Lotty, quickly. 

Mrs. Everingham blushed scarlet. " You know 
my secret, then,'' she said, after a pause, 

" Of course, my dear lady : was not my brother 
a friend of Lord Soraers? Did he not visit you 
at your house, the Woodbines ? Did he not meet 
you at Mr. Colquhoun's, and dance with you, before 
you became " 

Here Lotty paused involuntarily. She would 
not have done so for the world, but she was really 
at a loss what to say. She could not use the title 
^* Mrs. Everingham " . she knew it was a false one 
. and she had not for five years gained her own 

B 2 



4 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

living without knowing that such sort of connec- 
tions as that which most people would presume 
this one was, existed. 

To her delighted surprise, however, her patient 
herself took up the thread of the conversation. 
"Before I became his wifb," she said. 
Lotty ran to her and kissed her, crying out . 
" I am so glad to hear you say that word.^* 
It was all out now. The title was given in a 
way not to be doubted, and Lotty would have 
sworn to the truth of Eramy^s word at once and 
without hesitation. She knew very well what a 
hard world it was, and not only how prone it is 
to put bad constructions upon matters, but, alas ! 
how often those bad constructions are the true 
ones. That was her difficulty. If the sordid, cruel 
suppositions which people make regarding others 
did not oftentimes turn out true, how much happier 
we should all be ! 

Lady Somers . Mrs. Everingham no more . did 
not seem, however, to view the matter quite in 
Lotty 's light. She returned the kiss but coldly, 
and said . 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE^ 5 



" You did not doubt me ? " 

Lotty shook her head. 

" Your brother, at least he did not doubt me, 
I am sure,'' said the lady. 

^^ There you are right, madam,'' said Lotty. 
" He never has for one instant doubted you. He 
saw there was some secret, a necessity for one, 
and he always spoke of you with as much respect 
as he would of his own mother." 

*^ I was sure I was right there," said the young 
mother, calmly. 

Then she lay back and was silent. She was 
hurt, and perhaps, in her case, not without a 
reason, at Lotty's unexpressed doubts. She felt . 
as a sick man in a warm chamber may feel the cold 
draught of air from without . for the first time, the 
chilling doubts of her acquaintance, the trouble, 
anxiety, and coldness which she should meet with 
from her great connections and from the world. 

So she lay back and was still, pressing her baby 
closer to her breast, and closing her eyes as if in 
sleep. 

Lotty crept softly to her, divining her object, 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



and, kissing her softly on the forehead, withdrew 
from the room and ran down to her brother, who 
was in his little study, reading a book, lively at 
least to him. Burton^s " Anatomy of Melancholy/' 

" Oh, Keith ! oh. Doctor ! '' said Lotty, for she 
sometimes addressed her brother by his title, *' I 
am so glad. Our patient is so much better. I 
have been talking to her auite cheerfully." 

" I am glad to hear it. You did not overtax 
her strength, I hope, or excite her by talking to 
her about any private affairs ? " 

Lotty felt she had been guilty in this way, and 
did not answer. 

" Because,*^ said the doctor, " if you did, Lotty, 
it is ungenerous, and, I am sorry to say, it ex- 
hibits a curiosity only worthy of a woman." 

"You are complimentary to your mother and 
sister, Keith, at least." 

" Truth, my dear sister," said the doctor, " is 
not always complimentary to us. Women are 
naturally gifted with curiosity, and when there is 
a mystery they will try to find it out." 

" No wonder: you men occasion these mysteries 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 7 

five times out of six, and we women naturally 
want to discover the truth of the matter. Now, 
about Mrs. Everingham, Keith, there is not any 
doubt but that there is a little secret '^ 

"Which it is not our business to fathom, 
can partly guess what it is : I believe that it was 
necessary. Some time ago I was led to think 
otherwise, and I was bitterly unhappy. I doubted 
one whom I never ought to have doubted, and I 
was punished for it by the misery that doubt 
occasioned.'* 

" Eh, bien I my dear brother,** returned Lotty, 
taking his hand, " you are like me. Had any one 
put that doubt plainly before me, I should have 
rejected it with eagerness and warmth ; but still 
I felt it, and still its presence occasioned me 
sorrow and discomfort. At present it is at rest, 
and for ever.** 

" Has she told you anything?** 

" She has told me that she was the wife of Lord 
Somers ; that is all, and that is enough for me.** 

" Enough for you, perhaps, Lotty,** said Keith, 
giving his sister a kiss ; " and enough for me too, 



8 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

more than enough : what did I want with any 
assertion from the lips of that pure young mother^ 
whom but to see was to love? and to love^'^ he 
added, appropriating unconsciously a beautiful 
thought from Sir Richard Steele . '' and to love 
her was a liberal education/' 

*' Such power has beauty over the minds of 

men '^ says Burton, in his " Anatomy ; " but 

we need not continue the quotation. There can be 
no doubt that the doctor was in love ; nor can 
there be a doubt that, with his usual want of 
luck, he had been forestalled in his love-making 
by a more fortunate rival. 

''Yes,*' he contiuued, ''it is enough for you, 
but it will not be enough for the people at Broad- 
acres, and for those amongst whom she should 
take her natural and lawful place.'' 

" Ah, Keith," said his sister, " that is what I 
fear. How will she establish her rights ?" 

" Not only hers," said the doctor, " but those 
of her child. Were they only hers, I should 
hardly advise her to claim them. Of what use 
would an empty title be to her, save to remind her 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. \f 

of her loss ? But it is not only her own rights 
that she has to establish, but those of her son^ and 
of his son too/^ 

He said this almost with a pang, as he thought 
of his own disappointed love. He continued, 
however, firmly and quietly . 

" A lawyer will set this all right. There is the 
certificate, together with the usual witnesses of the 
marriage, no doubt; and although, when a great 
property like this is at stake, witnesses have been 
spirited away and certificates destroyed, yet the 
Earl is still alive. Lord Somers was, and very 
rightly too, his favourite son; a noble young fellow, 
who has never disobeyed his father, save in the 
instance of this secret marriage ; and I do not for 
a moment doubt that, when everything is put 
plainly before the Earl, the lady up-stairs will be 
at once recognised as Lady Somers ; and then,*' 
added the doctor, with somewhat of a sigh . " then 
there will be an end of our friendship. Miss Lotty ; 
for I have no doubt that Lady Amethyst, and her 
little eniouraffe, will take her in hand.*' 

"Well, from what I have heard of Lady 



10 A SPLEXDID FORTUXE. 

Amethyst/' said the doctor's sister^ ''the less she 
has to do with our patient the better/* 

'' It will be a bitter disappointment to her . to 
Lady Amethyst, I mean/' said the doctor ; '' for, 
on the day of his funeral, she began to lord it at 
the Abbey. Her husband is a poor creature by 
the side of his imperious wife." 

'' Ah, me !" said Lotty, '' what a deal of trouble 
our poor patient will have to go through ! " 

** So we all have in this world," said the doctor, 
patting his hand on his heart, as if to feel an old 
scar. 

'' But we must bear these troubles," said Lotty. 
'* If we face them, they run away from us. Trouble 
is like a London fog, quite local : if we move a 
very little way out of its range, we shall find a 
bright sunny day with blue sky, and the birds 
twittering and singing, maybe, in the autumn 
warmth." 

^' A very pretty simile ; but about our patient : 
you, I am sure, were not so unfeeling as to ask 
her anything directly." 

" No," said Lotty, promptly ; " it came out in 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 11 

conversation, what I told you ; and then the poor 
lady closed her eyes and slept. She is very weak 
and ill, Doctor/' 

^' Sadly so/* said Keith. *' She has not much 
more life in her than the baby has, and that is, 
indeed, little. Both mother and child hang 
together by a thread. Oh, if Lady Amethyst 
knew this ! I believe, now, that a thoroughly 
strong-minded woman, with vigorous determina- 
tion and cruel mind, could commit two murders 
by bouncing into our patient's room and frighten- 
ing her, or scolding her out of her life; and, if 
she died, farewell to the babe's life too.*' 

" Luckily," said Lotty Morton, " there are two 
or three persons here who will prevent any intru- 
sion of that sort. Lady Soraers is quite safe under 
your roof; but you, my dear brother, have a very 
unpleasant duty to perform." 

"I know I have," said Keith, shrugging his 
shoulders. 

" You have to go and see Lord Bradstock." 

" Yes ; I know that well enough ; and to tell 
him and the amiable Lady Amethyst that he has 



12 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

a grandson and heir bom to the earldom. That 
will be pleasant.'* 

"Nevertheless, you must do it; and, as poor 
papa said so often, when was there a Morton who 
ever shrunk from his duty?*' 

"Don't mention his name, Lotty, I know I 
should like to shrink from mine, in many in- 
stances, but I must go forward. In this case, now, 
I am waiting for information, and for proofs of my 
assertions, and here is my patient so ill that I 
dare not say anything to her. When I go to 
Broadacres what am I to say when his lordship, 
as he very naturally will, demands a copy of the 
marriage certificate ? " 

" It's plain you cannot go yet, Keith,'' returned 
his sister, after a pause, dm'ing which she had 
been thinking very seriously. " We must possess 
our souls with patience : that's the only cure for 
it. Thank God, we have a good cause." 

" The best of causes," said her brother ; " the 
cause of the orphan and the widow." 

That was all that was said about the matter then. 
Brother and sister thoroughly understood each 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 13 

other, and were determined to do their best to 
aid one so friendless as the poor lady up-stairs. 
Keith, on his part, resolved to go as soon as he 
could to Lord Bradstock, and acquaint him with 
the fact that his son was married. He did not 
think for a moment that his lordship was in 
ignorance of some kind of connection existing 
between Lord Somers and the lady for whom he 
had perilled his life. In the country rumours are 
sure to fly about; but, with a curious inconsis- 
tency, these rumours reach the ears of those whom 
they most immediately concern last of all. Keith 
Morton felt that he had thrust upon him a diflS- 
cult task, and that he should need all his thoughts 
and diplomacy to manage it. 



i 



14 A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 



CHAPTER II. 



AT SPES, NON FRACTA. 



Caosbie Vivyan Hope, Vivyan Crosbie Hope, 
Hope Crosbie Vivyan, lastly, Sir Crosbie Vivyan, 
Bart. The family had married cousin and cousin, 
and had kept the property in a ring-fence . a ring- 
fence, that is, made by one small gold circle . 
unbroken and unchanged. 

To say it was an old family, in the sense applied 
by some novelists, would be to say that which is 
untrue. As regards thorough antiquity, a Jew, 
a Switzer, a Welshman, a Cornish miner, or a 
Wallachian peasant would each have exceeded it 
in its unbroken descent. English descent and 
English heraldry are, after all, not such great 
things as some people take them for. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 15 

Nevertheless, as the world goes, this family was 
old, and prided itself on its antiquity. 

It gave proof of being old by eveiy now and 
then being unproductive and childless in its male 
line ; then a cousin of the family would take the 
descent, put one name before the other, and con- 
tinue in a different line. 

It was a proud family, this three-twisted knot 
of the Hopes, Crosbies, and Vivyans, which for 
years had been so tightly tied ; simply proud, not 
good. It had continued to exist from the time 
when, by a lucky chance, it had been able and 
willing to buy its baronetcy of King Charles, and 
had settled down in the country, scarcely ever 
stirring from its seat, and certainly never re- 
generating the nation with poets, statesmen, or 
philosophers. It was, perhaps, too lazy to mingle 
in politics, perhaps too poor. 

There was another cause for retirement. In its 
own little village its word was law. The old place 
of the Crosbie Vivyans, with its grand avenue, its 
chestnut-trees, its peacock, small fountain, and 
cool lawn, were, in the eyes of the countrymen. 



16 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

and in their simple eves alone^ as grand as a king's 
palace; and all those born at Crosbie confessed 
that, in after*life, they never met with any place 
which pleased them so much. The Queen's castle 
at Windsor sunk into insignificance, in the sage 
estimation of these happy villagers, when compared 
with the curious old trim gardens and quaint and 
quiet manor-house at Crosbie. 

Aboutone hundred and fiftyyears before the com- 
mencement of our story one Crosbie Vivyan, born a 
Hope, took it intohis head to study heraldry. Whilst 
the English nation was fired by the continued vic- 
tories of Marlborough, somewhat to the neglect of 
the true heroes of the country, such as Sir George 
Rook and his blue-jackets, this Crosbie Vivyan 
was deep in the art of blazonry. By the time 
that the Duke had ratted from the Tory interest to 
that of the Whigs, Crosbie Vivyan, in his quiet 
retreat, began to understand what a chevron, a 
bend, a sinople, or a bezant meant. He then went 
into colours, fiirs, and tinctures, and the hidden 
meaning of the wondrous art, and by the time of 
the Union found that he was a very fair herald. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 17 

The use to which he applied his knowledge of 
this science was peculiar. He wanted to leave his 
mark on the house, and so, hired a carver from 
London, and stuck about the old walls of Crosbie 
the products of his labours ; these products gene- 
rally being large copies of the crest and motto of 
the Hope family, which he, as a Vivyan, had as- 
sumed. It was . 

'' A globe fracted, azure, and above it a rain- 
bow, proper, terminating in clouds. Motto : 
' At spes, non fracta.' ^' 

So, according to this proud cognizance, the 
globe was to be broken, but the Crosbie hopes 
and Hopes could not be broken. In the carving 
the fracture was represented as having taken place. 
A huge piece out of the arctic region, carrying 
away even Spitzbergen and an ice-island or so, 
had disappeared, but still the rainbow of hope 
shone above it. 

The globe, with its parallels of latitude and 
longitude, with its zones and tropics, shone out 
carved and varnished over doorway and mantel- 
shelf, above windows, in the centre of panels, over 

VOL. n. c 



18 A SPLENDID FOBTUNE. 

archways in the gardens and gateways in the 
courts of Crosbie. Above it was the rainbow^ 
beneath it the motto of the family; a brokea 
globe, bufc even then unbroken hope. 

It really seemed that the spirit of the motto had 
communicated itself to the Yivyans. Man and 
child, by looking upon it and repeating it, be. 
came wonderfully hopeful. They lost their quiet 
country repose; they launched out into specula- 
tions, and they found, as the result of these specu- 
lations, that field after field disappeared from the 
estate. 

What remained of it was mortgaged; servant 
after servant was sent away ; horses and carriages 
were sold ; and at last the baronet, with his hope 
perfectly unbroken, but his own little world com-^ 
pletely smashed, left Crosbie Vivyan, having had 
it let to strangers and the proceeds paid into law- 
yers' hands, and departed Heaven knew whither. 

The place of the baronet's present dwelling was 
a mystery at Crosbie. If *a king makes a small 
hole in this world and falls through it, we gene- 
rally trace his majesty after his sad faU and: 




A SPLENDID fortune; W 

momentary disappearance. Sometimes he is a 
schoolmaster; sometimes a saint^ living at the 
expense of the monastery he adorns ; sometimes 
a wretched exile^ who lives at the expense of 
another monarchy whom he gets into trouble. The 
first is the most honourable and rare. It is very 
seldom that a king will do anything for himself, 
and in this respect baronets resemble kings. They 
will not work, if they can help it; therefore it was 
that good folks in the neighbourhood, with some 
knowledge of such facts, were divided as to the 
method of living adopted by Crosbie Vivyan, Bart. 
One said that he was a billiard-marker ; another 
said that he drove a coach in the north of 
England; another that he had gone to India and 
had entered the army, but then he was too old for 
that active occupation. 

Neither of these reports was true; and, as a 
reader is always allowed to know more than the 
rest of the world, my readers shall see what has 
become of the baronet. 

Lying to the back of the New Road, and running 
in the direction of the place where the once famous 

c 2 



*20 A 8FLEia>ID FOBTUNK. 

Belle Isle existed^ bat whicli now is blotted ont of 
everybody's recollection by the Great Northern 
Railway, is a neighbourhood qoaint in its nature 
and in its name. It is called the '' Brill/' 

At the time the reader is expected to visit it^ it 
wore something of mrality about it stiU. It pos- 
sessed an Oval and a Crescent or so^ and at short 
intervals were semi-detached houses with back to 
back^ and^ consequently, with their neat little 
gardens lying in front of the houses^ sideways to 
the spectator. A single pear-tree^ now and then an 
apple-tree, or, it may be, a poplar, or, in rare cases, 
an almond- tree, formed the chief ornament in the 
garden, in which, however, the proprietor, with a 
still juvenescent hope, would every spring place a 
few geraniums and calceolaria, which the proximate 
winter would systematically and utterly demolish. 
It was, of course, in the Belgravia of the Brill 
that such eccentricities on the part of the in- 
habitants took place. eccentricities for which we 
must pardon them, as they prove their irrepressible 
love of nature. 

Nearer towards the New Road, and forming 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 21 

part . as, indeed, we believe the Brill does . of 
Somers Town, ran a narrow street with small 
houses ; a street which does not now, nor did it 
then, bear the best reputation. The most respect- 
able houses were let to proprietors of certain shops, 
to which, from unknown reasons, the north-country 
name of "tiddleewink^^ has been given. The 
articles sold in these establishments were various in 
quantity and bad in quality. The lady of the house, 
had she been asked, would have described herself 
as being in the "general way;" and, if that were a 
true description, the natural deduction was thai 
the ''general way'' was a bad one and one that 
did not flourish. Indeed, the police-magistrates 
seemed to fall into this deduction very readily. 

*' She sold this silk gownd,'' or dripping, or sheet- 
lead, or, in fact, anything the reader can imagine, 
the policeman would depose, holding up the article; 
upon which the magistrate would say to a person 
living in the Brill . 

"Oh, you are the person, eh?'' 

" Yes, your worship." 



^CV^i, Ir^A^ « *> 



You keep a- 



'22 



A SPLENDID FOBTimB. 



'^ General shop, your worship; in the general 
line^ that's what I deals in/' 

It is to be noted that the witness was generally 
in a hurry to supply this kind of information. 

'^ I suppose that means a 'fence?''' his wordiip 
would immediately say^ and the attendant satellite 
in the blue coat and stiff stock would at once 
corroborate his worship's suspicions. 

It was over a " general shop," in that part of 
the house dignified as a second floor, but in reality 
nothing more than the garret, that an old and 
important acquaintance of ours is foimd lodging. 
It is no one less than Pegwell Bay, Esq., formerly 
attache of the great Warlock of the South. 

Pegwell, as the Warlock moved northward in 
his triumphant career, had had yearnings for his 
home, yearnings which every good man has or 
ought to have, and had at last deserted the 
conjurer, bringing with him a purse, for Pegwell, 
munificently furnished. Pegwell, as we know, was 
valuable in his way, but he was not everybody's 
money. 

The two rooms wherein he dwelt were very 



A SPLENDID FORTXmE. 23L 

neat and dean^ and Fegwell was not alone. Nor 
was one of the gentler sex his companion; for 
Pegwell had long ago ceased to dream of it; 
but one of his own rough, rude . you may 
apply as many vituperative terms to th^ai as 
Lady Clawpole does to her uncongenial husband . 
one of his own sex, represented by a gentle boy. 

A gentle boy, with a fine, handsome, thoughtful 
face, not unlike Pegwell^s, but as much more 
handsome as it was younger. The very hair, which 
grew long and fell upon the shoulders, was gentle 
in its character ; the eyes were gentle, the mouth, 
the nose, the texture of the skin as gentle as a 
lady^s; the forehead gentle too, and, as our 
novelists are fond of describing foreheads, ^* fiill of 
thought.'* 

Pegwell seemed delighted with the boy, and . it 
was his first morning at home . showed the lad, 
upon a map, the various counties he had travelled 
thrbugh, with what he called a commercial specula- 
tion. He then examined him in a few scraps of 
Latin, which the boy answered well for his age, 
which was no greater than fourteen. Pegwell next 



24* A SPLENDID FOBTTNE. 

presented him with the large sum of five shillings, 
all new and bright^ and told him to spend them 
like a gentleman. The poor old fellow kissed his 
son^ and seemed as delighted with him as a child 
would be with a new toy. 

" What did you when I was out, my child ? You 
must have been very lonely. Did you think I 
was long ? I thought of you after every night^s 
work, and prayed for you too/* 

" You were very long," said the boy ; " but I 
stayed at school as long as I could, then I came 
home and ate some bread-and-milk for tea ; my 
dinner I had, as you know, at school, and very good 
it was ; and then I quietly put myself to bed, say- 
ing my prayers first, and I need not say I prayed 
for you. But I was very happy, that T was." 

*' Poor little chap ! poor little lonely chap !" said 
Pegwell, patting the little thoughtful fellow's head. 
''You have pluck, sir; you must have pluck. 
You are a gentleman. So you know Latin, eh ? 
Look here." The old gentleman stumped to his 
sanctum, which was merely a pretty large cup- 
board, and brought out something like a large dish. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 25 

but which proved to be a wood carving of a broken 
globe^ with a motto under it. '^ Bead that^ and 
construe it/' 

** ' At spes, non fracta/ But hope, not fractured 
. is that it?'' Boy-like, he took the nearest 
word to the Latin. 

** ' The world may break : our hope remains/ " 
said Pegwell, theatrically, as he patted the boy's 
head in recognition of his scholarship. *^ It is the 
motto of our house, my boy ; one of the oldest 
families in Europe. Your name is the same as 
mine. When I die, my boy, you will succeed at 
least to the title, and become Sir Crosbie Vivyan, 
Baronet, of Crosbie, Sussex." 



« 



Unbroken hope ! xmbroken hope !" 



From his depth of degradation and poverty the old 
baronet flashed up, and he walked before his son, 
transformed to a better man, dreaming on his 
motto. 

Who shall say there is no virtue in pride of 
race, or no good in heraldry? This poor old 
gentleman, who, in addition to the ancient blood 



26 . SPLENDID FOBTTNE. 

of the Crosbie Vivyan Hopes^ had isherited a great 
deal of their laziness^ and a slight inclination for 
what the teetotallers call stimulating drinks^ had, 
when he found that he could not live another 
year^ hardly another months in the old house, 
quietly taken counsel with himself and departed. 
He had a little son with him from whom he would 
not part, and for whom he had vowed to rebuild 
the old house of the Vivyans. 

But, as we know, or ought to know, country 
baronets are not much clearer in their ideas than 
country farmers : the squire has often more brains 
than the knight. Bemused and troubled, the old 
baronet did not know which way to turn. He 
was not able to get any place, for he had dropped 
his rank, and really, in his pride, stood a very fair 
chance of being starved. In his wanderings he 
had the misfortune to be run over, and his leg 
broken so severely that he was obliged to consent to 
amputation. He then took himself and his son to 
the sea-side, where he let lodgings, but found it a 
losing speculation ; and, what with very little money, 
a wooden leg, and a young son, whom he had 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 27 

placed at school^ the present representative of the 
Yivyans stood a chance of selling the old place 
right ont or being ruined. 

He was in this dilemma when the Warlock and 
his crew came down to a neighbouring watering- 
place to exhibit their wonders^ and^ finding the 
town rather fvR, took up their lodgings with 
Mr. Palmer^ as he styled himself^ in his neat little 
house at Pegwell Bay. 

The free-living and ofi*-handed Warlock was mak- 
ing plenty of money, and the poor lodging-house 
keeper was making none. Mr. Palmer came to a 
crash, and his goods, much to the Warlock's in- 
convenience and his own grief, were sold off. In 
his distress, having, indeed, but very few shiUings 
in his pocket after the sale, Mr. Palmer applied to 
the man whom he had seen apparently so well 
supplied with money, and told him part of his 
story, concealing, however, his name; and the 
Warlock, who was a very good-tempered fellow, 
agreed to employ the old gentleman, who had 
fallen desperately low down in the world. 

To the varying fortunes of the Warlock, Pegwell 



28 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

Bay . such was the name bestowed on him by the 
conjurer . clung for about three years, during 
which he managed to scrape and save a fair sum 
of money, with which he returned to London , 
determined to place his son in some large office ; 
that of an engineer being not only his ambition, 
but his son^s choice. If the boy turned out a 
genius, the fortunes of the house would be once 
more raised ; for, during the whole time he was 
away, it is needless to say that the rents of the 
few acres and the old house, which alone remained 
of the once large estates of the Crosbie Vivyan 
Hopes, had remained untouched in the hands of 
the solicitors of the last of the family. 

To those gentlemen, in the morning, the old 
baronet, dressed in a shabby suit of black, but 
looking very much more like an ideal baronet than 
on the day when first we met him, went, and in a 
long conversation unfolded his plan. 

Happily for him, the solicitors, who knew the 
rank of their old client and his true worth . for had 
he not determined to sacrifice himself for his child ? 
. ^very readily entertained his projects. A large 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 29 

firm of practical engineers^ who were nndertakin 
some very extensive works^ had become^ as many 
other firms do become^ under an obligation to their 
solicitors^ and these gentlemen knew that they 
could place any protege of theirs with them. So 
Crosbie Hope Vivyan went away comforted and 
pleased^ and in a few days had the happiness of 
seeing his gentle son in the office of Messrs. Sims^ 
Braithwaite^ and Co.^ blimdering over large plans^ 
studying engineering and mathematics, and, as 
he fondly hoped, in a fair way of rebuilding, by 
the time he should arrive at middle age, the 
fortunes of his fallen house. 



30 A SPLENDID FOBTUSTB;. 



CHAPTER in. 

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 

While our good doctor and his sister are medi- 
tating how they can best serve the young widows 
and her little son^ and time flies rapidly over the 
heads of all the persons in this story, we will turn 
backwards to take up a tangled thread in the 
history of Herbert Stannard. 

It was not without a certain delight that this 
jealous and morbidly minded young man felt that 
he could leave a blood-spotted handkerchief in his 
wife^s room as a testimony of his health. 

'^ She will think/' said he to himself, " that she 
has killed me, or that I am about to die ; but I 
will not : I will live on, to spite her.'' 




A SPLENDID FOBTUKB. 31 

It was curious that he never distrusted her in 
the very midst of his jealousy^ and that he formed 
a very fair estimate of her all the while she was 
playing with his feelings. The real difference 
between the two . a very great difference^ to be 
sure, between any husband and any wife . was a 
want of love on the wife's part. It is more com- 
mon than is generally admitted. We have, in nine 
cases out of ten . ^for such is the practical working 
of the plan in society . debarred women from 
making any selection in their husbands ; and the 
consequence is that many, a great deal too many, 
marry for position and not for love. 

Such was the case with Safta. 

'^ Bah I" said her husband^ as he struck across 
the New Boad, and, calling at the " George/' in 
Shouldham Street, Bryanston Square, relieved 
himself with a dram and lighted his never-failing 
pipe . " Bah ! the woman cares no more for that 
old put of a captain than she does for me. She 
will fool him in the long-run: I know her little 
game/' 

He sat there, in the tap room, mjeditating his 



32 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

wrongs^ and chewing the cud of a sweet and bitter 
tancy, in which the bitter very greatly predomi- 
nated. He never doubted his wife's yirtne for a 
moment. 

" Love I" he cried, indignantly . "Love ! there's 
no more love in her than there is in the heart of 
a cabbage. Besides, she would not love such an 
ape as the captain.'^ 

He was quite right. Miss Safta's vice was 
ambition. She had married her young husband 
because she knew him to be clever, and she 
believed that he would raise himself in life. Had 
he done so, she would have applauded him to the 
echo, and have made him work like a horse. Our 
excellent young fnend preferred, like many an- 
other capable man, loafing to working. He had, 
moreover, indulged deeply in that vice of indolent 
men, smoking ; and even while he sat there, medi- 
tating his great revenge, and turning over in his 
mind the best way of burning down the captain*s 
house or his theatre, the nicotine had an effect on 
him, and he became quiet and almost contented. 

"Well/' he muttered to himself. " Well, 




A SPL£NDID FORTUKB. 33 

perhaps I am well rid of that unquiet woman. 
I never was happy with her; and 1 must say*'. - 
he added this after a pause . "I never shall be 
happy without her. But, bah I what is happi- 
ness?" 

He gave a great puff of smoke as he said this^ 
a turbid ejaculation which marked his approval 
of the conclusion that he had come to, and 
the fact that he considered happiness as a 
mere myth, an abstraction which could neve) 
be realized. Presently he grew a little more 
sedate, from the effects of his pipe and his pint 
of porter. 

" If I were sure I could burn down the house 
and reduce the captain to a cinder, I would do 
it/^ be muttered ; " but I would not risk my neck 
to do it. Punishment of vice," said he, after an- 
other pause, as he put both of his feet on the hob, 
*^ is sure to follow its practice. By jingo, that 
sentence would do for a school-girl's copy-book I 
What a fancy it is that the wise ones have of 
setting them moral copies ! I declare I never 
pass a string of school-girls but I think of the 

VOL. II. D 



84 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

misery the little chits will occasion* And yet^ if a 
man killed them^ he wonld be hanged. Why^ we 
ought to crush them like a nest of cockatrices/' 

After giving vent to this mild sentence and 
coughing a little^ he put his hand to his pocket for 
his handkerchief^ and recollected that he had left it. 
A shade of real pain passed over the young fellow's 
moving and expressive face. He loved Safta truly, 
and, had he had but a wise guide, a calm^ good 
companion in her, would have been a good man. 

He had not taken more than two or three more 
puffs at his pipe when a shaggy dog shufl9ed into 
the room, and, looking up at the young man's 
face, in which he recognised that of an old friend, 
gave a short "yap" to wake him up from his 
abstraction. 

Tlie dog was a long-haired fellow of the colour 
of whity-brown paper. He was not of exactly 
pure breed, but it is but justice to him to say that 
both his parents had been of rank amongst their 
kith and kin, and were highly intellectual indi- 
viduals, and that their son had inherited the 
greater part of their accumulated intellects. As 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 35 

male creatures take mucli after the mother^ I am 
inclined to think that his estimable mother was of 
Scotch extraction^ her ancestors probably being 
''located'* at an early period in Shetland, while 
the father was an old English terrier of sterling 
staff and good courage. The son, who in the lamp- 
light looked somewhat like a rather dirty white 
mnff on four legs, wore whiskers, moustache, and 
very shaggy eyebrows, after the fashion of his 
mother's family, and had a great deal of long hair 
about his body and a perfect plume of hair upon 
his tail, which he elevated, as a proud dog who 
had nothing to be ashamed of might do. 

He was the most familiar and affectionate of 
dogs to all gentlemen within the circle of his 
master's acquaintance, but to others beyond that 
large coterie he was insultingly supercilious. He 
would station himself on sunshiny mornings at the 
gate of the forecourt of his master's town house, 
which we have before described as being in the 
Brill, and look at all dogs and men with a know- 
ing, but contemptuous air. Now and then he 
would haul up a smaller or bigger dog, as the case 

D2 



36 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

might be, and^ after exchanging a growl or two, 
and walking round him on the points of his toea, 
would let him go. It was supposed by those who 
knew Trim best that he did this to manifest to the 
world the fact that the other dog was a suspicions 
character; but beyond this he never interfered 
with street dogs. 

He did not rely much upon his master, and was 
independent enough to take his walks by himself; 
principally confining himself to making calls upon 
the butcher and other tradesmen, the boys em-* 
ployed by whom he condescended to know, on th6 
understanding that they now and then pampered his 
appetite . for he was a dog of taste . with a few tit- 
bits. He was well known to the many children in 
the neighbourhood, some of whom he was very 
partial to ; and those he was fond of he would see 
safely to school when the morning was fine. With 
the others he was only coldly polite. He recognised 
the fact that they were children, and, as such, not 
so objectionable to him as grown-up people ; but 
that was all. When he was tired of their society, 
or careless of the bit of cake which they carried to 



A SPLEKDID FORTUNE. 37 

school^ he wonld turn round and walk back silentl j 
and with an air of dignity to his door. 

He was^ above all things, a dog with a purpose, 
a happy fellow with an eye to business. He never 
lost time like Stannard, never smoked pipes till 
he was bemused and stupid, sddom put himself into 
rages . causeless, bitter intoxications of passion . 
never went out, even for his constitutional walk of 
a morning when the door was first opened, with- 
out an evident knowledge of purpose. *' He 
was going somewhere, and he went; and he 
knew,'' said an admiring butcher to a green* 
grocer^s assistant, ''where he was going as well 
as a Christian.'' 

''Well, he ain't werry 'andsome," said the green- 
grocer. " He's too big for my fancy ; he's too big 
for a spannel, more approaches the size of a setter ; 
he ain't short-'aired, an' he ain't quite long. If 
he was one or f other, I'd steal 'ira." 

"Steal 'im, would you?" said the butcher. 
" He'd steal yer. Trim ; d'ye hear that ?" 

Trim looked at one and then the other, and 
knowingly protruded his tongue, whether as 



38 A gPLESDW FOBTCSSE. 

a hint for a piece of meat^ or in diadaioi at the 
proposition^ it was hard to say. 

" There, now, blessed if he don't know what you 
say ! He's a clever dog, he is : perhaps he wouldn't 
win a prize at Jemmy Shaw's show, but he's aa 
wise as one of the 'postles. Steal him ! I should 
like to see yon steal Trim." 

As the dog's name had been twice mentioned, 
and he presumed the conversation was becoming 
personal, he quietly wiped the butcher's sawdust 
from each of his four feet in succession, and de- 
parted. To steal him certainly was a vain boast. 
Trim's affections were firmly fixed upon his two 
masters, the gentle boy and our old friend Pegwell 
Bay, with whom he had condescended to dwell 
ever since he was a puppy. 

When the d(^ had given the short " yap " which 
called Stannard's attention, he immediatelv turned 
round and went to meet his master, to notify the 
fact that in the little parlour there was an acquaint- 
ance, or friend, perhaps, of both of them. 

Stannard on his part recognised the d<^, and, 
changing almost immediately his downcast look. 




A SPLENDID fortune/ 39 

cried out in a congratulatory tone some sort of 
greeting to Pegwell Bay which had reference to 
his being a " gallant charger/^ and, indeed, put 
into his words a great deal more warmth than 
casual friends in society put. There is this 
good in Bohemianism, that they who are imbued 
with its spirit long remain boys. There is no stiff- 
ness, no hauteur ; although, when required, Bohe- 
mians can assume those unpleasant qualities, as some 
dear friends who have trod the magic shores of Bo- 
hemia, and have since risen in the world, have shown. 
Both Pegwell Bay and Stannard were by force 
of nature Bohemians. Some men are so, and some 
of the best and worst fellows the world has known : 
some Bohemians are blackguards, some are gentle- 
men. Harry Fielding was a specimen of this class ; 
and, with all his faults, Charles Churchill too; 
whilst Savage, in whose honour our young litterO' 
teurs have named a club of Bohemians, was, from 
top to toe, from outside skin to hearths core, a 
blackguard. So, in the little parlour of the public- 
house in Shouldham Street, there were the two 
sorts very strongly marked. Pegwell Bay was tha 



40 A SPLENDID FORTtnnS. 

gentlemanly Bohemian, ^ving way to his old lazy 
tricks of haunting taTems and oheenring human 
nature with that half-pensiTe, half-forgetfbl air 
of melancholy which was so sweet to the laxy old 
man; while Stannard, in spite of his handsome 
face, noble forehead^ and delicate make, was nothing 
less than the blackguard Bohemian meditating 
revenge for his wrongs in a dirty way. 

Pegwell, following his d(^, which took a pretty 
fair estimate of his master and his friend, came in 
hearily, but, to Stannard's surprise, without the 
stumping of a wooden leg. A rather shapely limb 
. in fact, a little too shapely to be real . ^in an 
uncreased boot, accompanied his live leg and 
brought him into the parlour. 

The old gentleman had been to visit his son^ 
who lived with his master in Montague Place, and 
who had already given proofs both of diligence 
and capacity. Pegwell, or, more properly, Crosbie 
Hope Vivyan, looked very much better than when 
Stannard last saw him. 

His ample head was surmounted by very sleekly 
brushed hair; his eyes were brighter and more 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 41 

hopeful^ his bearing erect^ and his clothes fairlj 
worn, but good in make and fashion. 

^' Hallo, Peggy 1'^ cried Stannard. *' Why, how 
now? The earth hath spirits as the water hath I " 

" We will mix them," said the baronet, taking 
off his low-crowned hat and drawing a Windsor 
chair to the fire. *' I hope the Warlock is making 
his fortune in his native country. I saw 'The 
Era* the other day, and he was at Perth.'* 

"Ay,** said Stannard; " at Aberdeen now. He 
talks of going over to Glasgow, and thence making 
his way to Dublin, and, via Cork, to the United 
States. That is the place to make a fortune.** 

*' You must be a conjurer to make one anywhere 
now,** said Pegwell, lighting a pipe, which he had 
filled previously. " Do you go with him ?** 

" No ; he wants me to do so ; but I have other 
fish to fry.** 

As he said this a dark shade passed over the 
fece of the young man, and he looked wearied 
and ill. 

" Nothing serious, I hope ?** asked the baronet, 
giving his first puff. " They sell good beer here. 



42 A SPLEXDID FOBTUKB. 

I think, and. I've had a long walk . ^I think I will 
take a little. I couldn't resist dropping in^ for 
I've been playing respectability for some few hoars, 
and I wanted to nnbend a bit. It was Incky I did, 
for I wanted to see yon or some old friend.^' 

'' Very kind of you to say so, Peggy,** returned 
Stannard ; " and I want to see you too. I have a 
lot to tell you ; only I can't, I really can't." 

'' Well, I will not press you to do so. I've seen 
that you have been ill at ease for some months. 
Skittles, you know, hinted that you were not quite 
well situated at home ; and home is a sacred place, 
which no curiosity has a right to invade." 

"By Greorge, Peggy," said Stannard, looking 
into the old man's kindly face, '^ one would swear 
that you had been bom a gentleman !" 

''Perhaps I have," said his companion, with a 
smile ; '' and, if so, perhaps you will allow me to 
ask what is a poor gentleman to do if he wants to 
get his living honestly, and don't know what to 
work at?" 

" Ah, I see you're apologizing for joining ns : 
you are not ashamed of us, I hope?" 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 43 

Stannard said this with something of a sneer. 

" No ; once a Bohemian, always one/^ returned 
Pegwell. "On the contrary, I wanted to see 
you/' 

"I thought something had turned up when I 
saw you," said Stannard. " You are like a man 
with a landed estate" (here he pointed to 
PegwelFs new leg) : " 1 see you\e cut your tim- 
ber to clear a mortgage." 

" Not a bit," answered his companion, with a 
smile : " this is only my town and Sunday leg. I 
can't do rough work, such as canvassing for the 
Warlock, in it. But when I call upon swells 
I put it on. Rather a handsome afifair, is it 
not?" 

He lifted the leg carefully and crossed it over 
his knee^ much as Mr. Punch does in his theatre, 
when, as the beholder may notice, that gentleman 
has a little difficulty in getting his small but 
shapely legs in the front of his stage. 

" Now," said he, kindly, " I am a little better 
off than I was, and I don't think I shall join our 
little party again. It was all very well when we 



44 A SPLEin)ID FORTUNE. 

were together; and the wizard saved me at a 
critical period; but the trial ia to a certain 
extent over." 

Stannard yawned. He was thinking of his own 
trials and^ being a very selfish person indeed^ he 
was so full of his own troubles that he seldom 
thought of any one else's; whilst Pegwell, with a 
heart open as the day, quite forgot personal griefs 
in thinking of those of others. 

^'But," continued the elder Bohemian, "it is 
not about myself that I want to speak. I have a 
commission for you, which will take you out of 
town some few days, perhaps." 

" What is it ?" said Stannard, pricking up his 
ears, like Trim under the table, who was listening 
to the people who "dropped" into the bar for 
pints of beer or " goes" of gin, whose legs he could 
see through the half-opened door, and to the 
patterns of whose trousers he now and then took 
a violent objection. " First we are captain, and 
then we are reduced to the ranks, in Bohemia, my 
gallant boy. I recollect that one of my literary 
friends used to tell me that one day he would be 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 45 

editing a journal and exercising the most tyrannical 
superyision over a friend who contributed, and 
that the next he would be^ with bated breath and 
whispering humbleness^ seeking admission as a 
casual contributor/' 

" Very likely/' said the baronet ; " but this, my 

. 

dear young sir'' . the old gentleman h^d the 
advantage of age over the younger one, and read 
him like a book . ^'this is not a commission from 
me '' 

'' Which I should be proud to execute," whis- 
pered Stannard, who was nevertheless greatly 
relieved. 

" But a speculation," continued Pegwell. 

'^ Aha !" cried the other, assuming a theatrical 
air; ''methinks I like this better. 'Twill be 
well. When shall I start and do my 'spriting 
gently ?" 

** Oh, when you like ; but I must consult you 
first about it. You remember the last place we 
put up at, the 'Falcon,' at Bilscombe Regis?" 

" Perfectly," answered his friend. 

''And also, of course, the sad termination of 



46 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

that grand day^ ^hen the king of the county had 
the heir-apparent slain^ to the great grief of most 
of us, and of his subjects/' 

'* Well," said Stannard, philosophically, '' I can't 
say it was much to my grief. It broke up our 
campaign. I dare say it was grievous enough to 
the young fellow who was killed. It is not very 
pleasant, when one is so well placed in life, to have 
to lose it all. Now, a poor fellow like I am, or 
an old chap like you-. that is, if you have not 
come into your fortune with your cork leg . it 
would be diflFerent with us/' 

" Precisely so,'' assented his companion ; " but, 
you see. Fortune, or Providence, does not see things 
in the view which we take of them. You remera- 
ber how, after seeing the young lord borne off the 
field, we watched the cause of all the accident 
brought to condign punishment and very justly 
slaughtered." 

*^ I'm sure I thought so," said Stannard, re* 
ferring to the justice of the case. " I remember, 
however, that you had not cause to be entirely 
grateful, for you were knocked head over heels 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 47 

and nearly trampled upon by the hob-nail shoes of 
the country yokels/' 

" Precisely so. Now that is the little incident 
that I want you to recollect. Bear that in mind^ 
and all will go well in my narrative. I am not 
a very good one at telling a story. You will 
please to think of me as upon the ground ; not a 
very nice position for a one-legged man, to be 
sure. Well, my natural impulse was to stretch 
out my hands, and one of the first things I caught 
hold of was a purse.'' 

" By Jove !" said Stannard : " I should like to 
be knocked down every day at the same price; 
that is, supposing the purse had anything in it." 

'* Well, I very naturally put it in my pocket to 
examine it at my leisure. It was a lady's purse." 

" That's bad," said Stannard : " they don't very 
often have much about them. They carry a few 
shillings, a fourpenny-piece, and a crooked six- 
pence ; all the weight in the purse is halfpence ; 
and then such purses snap unpleasantly with a steel 
trap, which breaks your finger-nails and sets your 
teeth on edge. What fools women are !" 



48 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



t( 



But they don't make the purses/' 

" No; but they buy them when they are made : 
they have not sense enough to make even such 
things. It is the folly of their choice which dis- 
gusts me" 

The old baronet looked at his companion, and 
thought that he was a '^ cad/' although the word 
was^ perhaps^ at that time hardly in fashion^ and 
then continued . 

" I am sorry you dislike women so, because it is 
to serve one even more than to serve yourself that 
I want you to travel down to our old place. 
The purse was a leathern purse . a, purse and 
pocket-book too . a pretty toy, which one would 
only buy for a lady. It contained no money, but 
it contained what is worth infinitely more, a copy 
of k marriage certificate." 

'* Hey-day ! then it fell out of the young lord's 
pocket. You know they did say something down 
there about his unwillingness to marry ; not that 
I pay much attention to these things." 

'* Nor I. It struck me, however, that some one 
may be in great trouble about this, I don't know 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 49 

whether it be the case or not, but, at any rate, it is 
worth while going a trip there and seeing Lord 
Bradstock about it/' 

''Perhaps he wonH thank me for it. Was 
there not a second son ?" 

*' Yes ; Andrew. You remember a young fellow, 
not very handsome nor very aristocratic, who 
lounged in and out of the ' Falcon' when we were 
there ? That was Andrew Bradstock ; and, if there 
be no use for this, he is now Lord Somers, and 
heir-apparent to an earldom/' 

'^ Then that dear document would be cheap to 
him for a hundred pounds ; or, if the screw were 
quietly put on, five hundred?" asked Stannard, 
his cupidity aroused, and looking very much like 
a rogue. 

" Look you, Mr. Stannard," said Peggy, sternly: 
" you and I do not well understand each other. 
You are now my inferior : a little while ago I was 
yours. I am one of those persons who believe that 
honesty is the best policy all over the world . ^ay, 
and under it too." 

''Of course. of course," said his companion, 

VOL. II. E 



60 A SPLENDID FOKTUNB. 

quickly changing his tone': ''yon want me td 
take the document to the right person. Now^ 
perhaps^ you will tell me who he or she is/^ 

*' That's just what I don't know. Tve found 
something: somebody has lost it. There is no 
legal receptacle for cosi perdtUi, or we might place 
it there; but it seems certain to me that some 
one may be grieving for the loss of this^ and I 
want you to find out who that som one is, and td 
share the reward with me. As for keeping you 
quite honest, Mr. Stannard^ in this matter/' said 
Peggy, looking at the young fellow's clever, yet 
roguish eyes, " I've been and examined the 
original. The church is not a hundred miles from 
here, and I dare 'say half a crown would get me as 
good a copy as this is; so we will not think, if you 
please, that it is more valuable than it is in reality, 
although the poor young wife, or widow, will be 
very glad to see it again. There are one or two 
letters, and a little miniature portrait, for which 
she may reward you." 

The old gentleman took, as he spoke, the red 
morocco pocket-book purse from his pocket, and. 



A SFLEXDID POBTCKX. 51 

opemn^ it, took from it a small miniature painting, 
set for a broocii or bracelet, of yonng Lord Somera. 
There was the &oe, brilliant in colonr^ fnU of life 
and health, the face npon which Emmy had ao 
often gazed in the absence of the originaL He 
then opened the copy of the certificate and 
showed it to Stannard. 

" Now/' said he, '' look here at the witnesses ; 
the clerk of the chnrch and the pew-opener, no 
donbt. This was a marriage done in a hnny 
and secretly. No one woold think of going to 
St ^the-Martyr, Bloomsbury, for a fashion- 
able wedding. Well, I have foond out that all I 
presomed is true, and it only remains for me to 
send this little purse and its contents back to the 
owner : will you take it ?" 

''To be sure I will," said Stannard; ''but 
Where's the ready to come from ? I got a letter 
from my patriotic friend, but money does not last 
"fOTf long with you and me, Pe^y." 

To the infinite astonishment of his friend, the 
elder Bohemian, looking round him carefully, 
took oat an apparently well-filled pocket-book, 

B 2 



52 A SPLENDID FOETUNE* 

and gravely taking out a five-pound note, whieb 
he carefully selected as if he had others of more 
magnitude to choose from, and shaking it so 
as to make the crisp paper rattle, put it into 
Stannard's hands. 

The recipient was so astonished that he looked 
at the donor with some curiosity, 

" By Jove," Peggy, said he, " something won- 
derful has happened ! Has some rich relation 
died? have you robbed a bank? or have things 
taken a turn ?" 

**My dear young sir," said Pegwell, tenderly 
taking him by the hand, '^ I am not so flush of 
money that I can afford to throw away five-pound 
notes, and I shall look to you for repayment if all 
turns out well. But, in addition to this, I may 
tell you one thing. Things have taken a turn: 
they are not now what they were. In the good time 
coming it is probable that, if the turn continues, 
Richard will be himself again. Here is my card : 
I hope to hear from you soon. Adieu ; that :4s, 
good evening." 

He took off his hat like the most polished 



A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 53 

gentleman in Europe^ and bowed gravely, and, in 
company with his four-footed friend, withdrew, 
leaving Herbert Stannard very much astonished, 
and somewhat conscious of ^'playing second 
fiddle," as he called it, to Pegwell Bay. 

The young man looked after the old one with 
some surprise, as he and his dog walked away in 
the direction of the New Boad. " I never quite 
could understand that old gentleman,' ' said he 
to himself, ^' and I think I am further off than 
ever now, I wonder whether he has come into 
a fortune ! Well, be it what it may, something 
has turned up which may put a little money in my 
pocket ; and I will try to divert it thitherward, at 
all events, in spite of our friend's scruples/' 



it 



64 A SPLENDID FOKIUNE. 



CHAPTER IV. 



A COUNCIL OP WAE. 



While the pocket-book purse of Mrs. Everingham 
had been lying perdu in the pocket of the eccen- 
tric old baronet, the little garrison of Cold Blow 
were in a terrible way about its loss. 

Mrs. Emmy had recovered, bodily, and was well 
enough in health to walk about the very un- 
horticultural-looking square yard which the doctor 
dignified as a garden, but her mind was by no 
means so strong as it should be. She had grown 
suspicious of everybody, and fancied that she had 
been robbed of her little red book-purse, which 
contained a document so precious and a portrait 
which she loved so much. She had had every 




A SPLENDID FOETUNS. B5 

iiook and corner of the Woodbines searched^ but 
the book was not founds and its owner first let her 
suspicions fall upon the old cottager who once lived 
at that now desolate place^ and next upon poor Mrs. 
Lapis^ who was as innocent as a sucking dove. 

As the suspicions grew up in the gentle^ weak, 
and timorous mind, and vague doubts circulated 
in her brain, the poor lady began to doubt 
even her kind friends at the refuge they had so 
kindly provided for her ; and, at the same time, a 
phenomenon took place which is, I believe, well 
known to all those who study the human mind : 
she lost her memory, not of things passing around 
her, but of those which had happened antecedently 
to that great event which made her life a blank. 

Had her memory remained clear, it would have 
been easy for her to have recalled that, on the day 
of the accident, she held in her hand, so careful and 
so jealous was she of them both, the certificate of her 
marriage and the portrait of her husband. In the 
rapid race which she had run to escape from dan- 
ger she had held her treasure tightly enough ; but 
when she saw, with a great terror which paralysted 



56 A SPLENDID FOETTJITE. 

'her, her hasband fall, she had unwittingly fiang 
the little book-purse from her, and it had fallen, 
as we have seen, into the hands of Pegwell Bay. 

Anxious as he was, for his own purpose, or from 
some fear which he entertained of bis father, to keep 
his marriage secret. Lord Somers had still been 
more anxious to provide against any shame or 
trouble falling on his wife, either in his absence, or 
in case of an accident in the hunting-field occur- 
ring to himself. He had, therefore, procured the 
marriage certificate, and had given it to Emmy, 
telling her to be most careful of it. 

Satisfied with his love, and knowing him, as she 
often repeated to herself in his absence, to be the 
most generous and best of men, the young wife 
was ready to do anything which he suggested. 
She had, like most women, a profound respect for 
rank and position in the world ; and the notion 
that the young Jupiter of Broadacres Park should 
have descended to her sphere and caught her up 
to his own filled her with such an intense respect 
for his generosity and munificence of spirit, that 
even a hint from him was law to her. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 57 

She never quite comprehended why her marriage 
had been a secret one. She knew that the heir 
to the great Earl was, to be sure, hardly to be 
married off like a mere, commoner, without any 
preparation, and she knew also the impetuous and 
hasty disposition of her husband. Had she put 
those matters together, she might have arrived at 
the right conclusion. Felix Lord Somers was a very 
good young man in many points. Ijike all young 
men, however, he liked to please himself more than 
any one else in the world, although he never 
owned this to himself. Some things which the 
world can guess easily enough remain profound 
secrets during life to those most concerned about 
them. The young lord had been such a favourite 
with fortune and with nature, and presented such 
a favourable contrast to his brother, that all around 
him, and the very centre of the circle, namely, 
himself, gave him credit for being quite incapable 
of doing a selfish or an ungenerous action. 

In marrying Miss Everingham he obeyed the 
dictates of his passion, and, as he thought, pru- 
dently concealed his marriage from his father for 



SB A fiFLERBID JtHei'UiLfi. 

a good purpose, llhane wai no one m fte worid 
wliom lie would not lisve aSended jw&et liwi 
that £Eitlier who liad, during Ins idude life^ 
deavonred to give bim luijipnien md 
Had heatcm« toldLordBrBdrtoAofliispMSMgi, 
and introdoced the object of it to \im, it is pro- 
babk that he would liave gained his end just as 
easilT. Neither the citisen-mamage of conveni- 
ence nor the more aristocratic nnion was greatly 
to his lordship's taste, and he wonld liave done 
very much indeed to make his son happy. But it 
was preciselT the timidity arising from the fear of 
making his father nnhappy which made Lord 
Somers take the hasty step he did ; and yet, with 
a blind indulgence of the love he bore his wife, be 
brought her to a little cottage on the very borders 
of his father's estate, where, of course, whispering 
tongues spread sad stories, whidi in dne time 
reached his father's ears. 

As these stories came unofficially, the old lord 
took no notice of them. Had he spoken to his son, 
an explanation would haTe occurred, and all would 
have been well; but Lord Bradstock was too proud 



A fflPLENDID FOETUNE. 69 

to notice common rumours^ and much too proud 
to stoop to inquire of any underlings of the mode 
of life lead by his son* Nor, indeed^ in those days, 
if all that he heard whispered had been the truth, 
would the matter have occasioned much surprise 
or regret to his lordship. Young men of estate 
and fashion were young men, and a liasion of the 
sort hinted at rather added eclat to them than 
otherwise ; so, unhappily, things were allowed to 
remain as they were. The father and son knew that 
there was something between them which should 
have been explained, and which grew every day 
more difficult of explanation, until the fatal acci- 
dent on the Ryde took away from one of them, for 
ever, the possibility of explanation. 

Lord Somers had more than once hinted to bis 
wife this difficulty, and she, to whom experience 
as a governess had not given a very high opinion 
of great people, had with a timid dread put off any 
explanation, and had remained satisfied with her 
sweet country, home and the love of her husband. 

There was indeed in it something beautiful and 
Entrancing. There was there no intrusion of the 



m 



io^ren, as fill! of iiwiiiff j as Acy coald 
£itUBj wtM VwfAtf widi entioiB mbAbb^ who 
would, if tbey anif eoold, tadse vmrnj her Ci^id 
from her ; and CufUt, who came in at all time^ 
when be was taking long rides^ or wlieii lie 
managed to get lost in coming home from tiie 
htmt, anatdied all his blives with a kind of fiearfiil 
joj, beUenng in the ntter secrecy of lus men, and 
fancying that, like another king, he stole nn- 
obterred to the bower of £ur Bosamond ; to him, 
indeed, a fioaa Mondi, the rose and flower of the 
world. 

So the time passed. Every day was to be the last 
of this indulgence, and at each approach Emmy and 
her husband both drew back. When anything 
has been done in secret it is not very easy to bring 
it to light. Lord Somers had some idea, even 
when riding so swiftly to defend his wife, of brings 
ing her back in triumph, and presenting her to his 
father. We have seen the result, of his good 
intentions. 

The widow felt all this, and felt that, although 



A SPLENDID FOETUNE. 61 

she was mach to blame for this concealment^ yet 
that^ after all^ the indulgence of her husband was 
but a cruel kindness. Things had happened so. 
She had desired too selfishly to keep him to her- 
self; and now she did not even possess the benefit 
of his name^ at any rate in the opinion of the 
world. 

The very joy which Lotty Morton and her 
brother suffered to become apparent when she 
said she was married was a proof that they held it 
possible that she was not so. She felt that she 
was now single^ against the world. 

In this state the loss of her little book was a 
great blow to her^ and more than ever because it 
was accompanied by that suspense of memory of 
which we spoke. 

She searched and searched again^ without hope 
and without system. Then she sat down quietly, 
to remember, or, rather, to try and recall the name 
of the church where the marriage took place. 

But all efforts were unavailing. She failed to 
recall the name of the church so completely that 
she doubted if she had ever heard it. She remem- 



^ 



Mipipd- ttf^ itfoott 




ViL ufiiiiff mc It 

-in^ tior ti»»£m^ marmii g ^ sac adoBt soxif^ 



.It S»i««- ^^ 



W:r b.uAlr*ii3 jtfi ^ pii^'^ ^K3kd fJTepJTrgqr, sad vfcal 

^b^ \$iAf ther^^tore, newer dioa^t of anr doubt 
//r {/r<fi:x@sMitiof:i ajT^fuit deceit. 
. K^^ e^/ul4 ooljr recnember that die krred him. 
Wli4^ I»fi4$ tried to recall a loeafitj she onlj saw 
UU ftntA fu$A loring face; when she wished to 
mimf$i(ni up tlie face of the clergTman she only 
r^rrmrri W($d the feeling of awe which took posses- 
Minn nt httr during tlie service, and the prayers she 
tfif^la with liiru m tbey knelt together. In fact^ 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 63 

80 intensely had she felt the responsibility of her 
situation that she had failed to note anything that 
passed around her. 

No; to think any more was useless. The 
young widow rose and went to the window and 
opened it^ looking over the beechen woods which 
lay at the bottom and climed half-way up the hill. 
It was a peaceful autumn afternoon ; the sun was 
shining on the soft landscape, and everything 
seemed happy ; everything except one person . no- 
body less than Doctor Sangrado . ^who was pacing to 
and fro on the little gravel walk which ran round 
his house, his head bent, and in deep thought. 

He was thinking of the young widow. She 
knew that well enough. She knew also that he 
loved her and was entirely devoted to her, and she 
received his love as a property to which she was 
bom, and had a perfect right to ; just as some 
proud monarch might look upon the devotion of a 
poor vassal to his high and mighty person. 

She had no idea of pitying him, or, indeed, of 
doing anything to return that love. Her heart 
was entirely another's. But it struck her that 



64 A SPLK5DID FOBTCinL 

Doctor Sangrado miglit be estremdj naefol to her 
and that other monarch who laj peaoefioDy deep* 
ing in the cradle^ and who had succeeded to the 
throne of her heart as soon as his Cither had died. 
Le roi est mart : vtoe le rtdl Mrs. Emm j was 
one of those ladies who are so thorooghly loyal that 
they snbmit easily to tyrants^ especially if the 
tyrant be of the right line. The baby, in the 
little rude bassinet which the doctor had smuggled 
into his house^ and which Lotty Morton had 
decked up and lined with pink glazed calico, was 
the king, in esse, in passe, and tn fuiuro, over the 
heart of his mother. It was his rights, his posi- 
tion in the world, of which she was thinking, and 
not her own. 

Mrs. Emmy, after watching the doctor some 
time, and, of course, divining that it was about her 
that he was thinking, saw him turn round slowly 
and sadly, and approach the house. She ran down 
into the parlour and met him. 

He looked surprised and pleased at her eager- 
ness, and asked her about her health. '' Are you 
well, my lady ?'* he said, courteously. 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 65 

She noticed the title he applied. " Very well/' 
she said, " Doctor, thanks to your goodness, and 
that of your sister. I am getting quite strong, too. 
But I need strength. I must go to the Abbey/' 

Lotty, who was sitting down to an interminable 
piece of work for some recondite female adornment, 
a piece of work which was never finished, looked 
up to her brother with a meaning smile. 

" It will be hardly right, or, indeed, possible, for 
you to go in the first instance, madam,'' he said. 
''Lord Bradstock certainly should have sundry 
matters explained to him. His position as your 
most powerful connection demands it. Remember, 
you bring him an heir to his titles and estates." 

" They will receive me, of course, and entertain 
me as becomes the wife of Lord Somers," said 
Emmy, half proudly, half timidly. 

*' Undoubtedly," answered the doctor ; although 
he spoke hypocritically, for he very much doubted it 
himself; " but yet" . here he paused . ''but ^" 

" But what, sir ?" she asked in an almost angry 
tone; for doubt and alarm had long ago taken 
possession of her breast . "but what? Why 

VOL. II. F 



66 A SPLEKDID FOBTUVE. 

should not my rdatioiui receive me as they 
should do?'' 

''Alas!" thought the doctor^ looking at Mrs. 
Emmy somewhat piteomly, '' what does this poor 
little soul know of the interests of others ? She 
only thinks of her own. Her very innocence 
would be ccmstrued by some as extreme cunning 
and guilt. What can I do to awaken her to her 
position ? .' 

Then, presuming that a pious fraud would be 
the very best oigan for working upon her, he con- 
tinued^ '' You must at least concede^ my lady, that 
one should be prepared to meet every investigation, 
and that it is incumbent upon you to be able to 
overthrow every doubt.'' 

'^ Doubt t" answered Emmy. She herself had 
an exaggerated idea of the difficulty in which she 
was placed, uid the tone of the doctor did not go 
very far to reassure her. There was a delioaey and 
a reticence about him which she did not like, and 
fj( which, indeed, she felt half afraid. As Emmy 
looked from brother to sister with that suspicion 
which extreme weakness always iMreeds, or by which 






Jl BPI.BNDID rOETUNE. 67 

it ifi, at least, alwayi) aocompamed^ the latter took 
^p the speech. 

Will you pardou me, my lady ?" said Iiotty, 

My brother, here^ is about as innocent of the 
ways of the world as yourself, and perhaps I am 
not YQry much wiser than either of you ; but it 
does seem to me that you have really a difficult 
task before you, and that looking on one side of 
it, ov^ it, behind it, or any way else but foil in 
its face, will not do you any good whatever/' 

*' Bravo, Lotty V' said her brother, his face 
beginning to dear. ^^Pray, Lady Somers, if you 
are strong enough to favour us with your company, 
ait down, and let us hold a council of war/' 

Emmy did as she was required, looking cautiously 
again from brother to sister with that same kind 
of suspicion which the poet tells us *' always haunts 
the guilty mind,*' but which, under some circum- 
litances, will also accompany the most innocent. 

Mias Lotty again took up the thread of the 
diaoourse. '^My brother/' said she, waving her 
hand towards him, as- to one in whom she placed 
extreme oonfidence-i-'' My brother ju«t now used 

V 2 



should not mjr relatims zecdve .:Lve grated 
should do?" .ire no one is 

"AluT' thought the doctov,. ' 
Emmy somevlMt pteondT', "v:.^ die tpeaktx 
little KHil know of the interc^ 

only thinks of her own. j.:er all, be ased. 

wonld be oonatrned by sou. .j, idesB yoQ are 
and gnilt. What oau I liy ,;m :. da ao. That 
poeitioa ?" cMetnUy, whose life a 

Then, presuming tL;4. .^ i ^. ^Bn^^ a mistake, 
the -rerj beat organ fo . ^ '^ at end to, will 
tinned, " Ton must l.^ ;. iii^ «fiites> titles, and 
oneabonldbe prepa.^^ . .^. . idMm . who now live in 
and that it ia incu., irwM ''-*. ', to what they 
oreithiow every f. .^^^^ -^ ( A a miity . Can yon 

**Doabtf* au. .j^n^ saljenly upon them 
an esuggerated : .^ *%iwrirf dnnbt yon?" 
was plaonl, *J}^^^imli^^ apixonj^y, as one 
f for t>in^_^»^ 1^ wear had packed the 
itthbi ddicacy, had 
^ JB. SB neat a case 

^0 ^ renewed all thia 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 69 

plainly enough in solitude, merely looked rather 
more alarmed. . 

''You frighten me. Dr. and Miss Morton,'* 
she said; and then she looked up to the ceiling, 
not, indeed, in any prayerful ejaculation, or in 
calling for help from above, but with the timid 
fear of the mother, which had made her cast her 
eyes in the direction in which the helpless child lay. 

"But," said Lotty, again coming to the charge, 
''if we frighten you, you must, at least, concede 
that your claims will frighten others ; others, too, 
who will oppose you." 

" Yes," added the doctor; " and, as their interest 
leads them, they will believe you wrong. Re- 
member that outside the martyr's pile there have 
stood many good, earnest believers, as well as 
inside it." 

" That is to say," said Lotty, translating her 
brother's simile into plain prose, " that both sides 
believe themselves to be in the right. Now let 
us presume that they who will oppose your claim 
demand, as they surely have a right to demand, 
and will do, the proof that you are what you. 




70 A SPLEKBm FORTUNE. 

represent yourself to be^ the wife of the late 
Lord Somers: have you the neceaaary docn^ 
ments ?" 

'' No/' said Emmy, Uankly ; '' I have loat them 
in some mysterious way, and, as you know, I have 
not been able to find them/' 

Lotty looked disappointed; but the doctor, 
whose spirits rose with a difficulty, said, wisely 
and boldly enough . 

^* Well, then, that is not irremediable. Let me 
know where the church is. I can write to the 
clergyman, and, if I send him his fee, by return of 
post we shall have a copy of the certificate. It is 
merely a job for the derk.'' 

But, although merely a job for the derk, it 
seemed to affect Emmy very considerably. She 
looked confused and anxious, and her face fell again 
into that blank, meaningless expression which 
more than once had alarmed the doctor. 

''Pray,'' said he, anxiously, ''do not trouble 
yourself now; merely give me the name of the* 
church and the parish, and at another time we 
can finish our little debate." 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 71 

The young widow looked hopeless enough^ and 
remained silent. 

" The fact is/' said Lotty, who was one of the 
most downright souls in the world, ** we have liot 
one moment to lose. Of course, if you are all right, 
as I know you are, in this matter, we shall establish 
your rights easily. I, for one^ do not believe in 
innooenoe that is always trampled upon, nor in 
wrong wbicli is for ever on the throne whilst 
right is On the scaffold. But I am for instant 
action. Let us go forward. Let the doctor write, 
as he says : where is the church ?" 

Emmy, looking straightforward into the doc* 
tor's face^ and answering him rather than his 
sister, told him that her memory was helplessly 
confused ; that they were married, that was all she 
knew, under the surname of her husband, whom 
she had met in London by appointment ; that it 
was in some little^church near a square of old« 
£Ashioned buildings ; that the entanglement of her 
mind grew closer and deeper the more calls she 
made upon it ; and she wound up her appeal by 
putting her two pale, thin himds together^ and 



72 A SPLENDID FOETUNB. 

looking up into the feice of the doctor as if to plead 
with him and ask him if he doubted her. 

Much as he loved her before^ the good doctor 
loved her then more than ever. In after-years he 
never forgot that pleadings gentle attitude. He at 
once gave up his whole faith to her; or, rather, in 
that dark moment, the doetor's faith in the woman 
whom he had loved through disappointment, in 
trouble, in sickness, and in the disdain even in 
which it was sadly evident she held him, rose in the 
darkness, and shone more brightly. Emmy's eyes 
filled with tears as she looked upon his open, 
manly face. 

" You are the best friend, I believe, that I have 
in the world, doctor. I shall never forget your 
generosity. I will always love you as a brother ; 
indeed I will." 

This was exactly the love the doctor did not 
want; bat Emmy's situation was too critical, and 
her loss too recent, for him to dream of any other 
love at the time; so he answered by remaining 
silent and bowing respectfully. 

" But," urged Lotty, who, like Lady Amethyst, 




A SPLENDID FOETUNB, 73 

was a woman of business . '^ But what are we to 
do P As I said^ I am for action. If the doctor 
cannot find out where you were married, we, at 
least, believe that you are the wife of Lord Somers, 
and that the little boy up-stairs is the heir to 
Broadacres. Now, the question arises," continued 
the doctor's sister, who had had the advantage of 
being governess for some time in a most systematic 
family . " the question arises as to the best plan 
of proceeding. What do you say. Doctor P" 

" Let me go to town and find out the church. 
It will not be difficult. You were married by 
license, as I take it, in the diocese of London.'' 

"Yes," said Emmy; "I think so." 

She said this half-dreamily, and in doubt. 

" Well, but, during the time that you are away. 
Doctor, what is to become of us? Lady Somers 
may fall ill. At any rate, had we not better give 
Lord Bradstock notice? Do not his position, 
his age, and the very relationship in which he 
stands towards Lady Somers demand it ?" 

"There is something in that, certainly," said 
the doctor. " Even if we are not prepared, 



74 A spL£2a)n) fo&tunb. 

Lord Bradstock can only ftsk us for the 
proofB.'* 

'^ I am decidedly for an open coarse of action/' 
said Lottj. *' The time which has elapsed since 
the fatal day . now some three months . <5an be 
easily accounted for. Yoa were nearly all that 
time in attendance on her ladyship, whose health, 
even now, is hardly re-established/' 

^* Let us see : what is to be said on the other 
side?'' asked the doctor, looking up to his sister 
for advice, whilst the young widow turned from 
one to the other. 

'^Well/' said Lotty, after a pause, "I am, I 
repeat, for a decided and open course of action. 
Let us presume that you go to town and bring 
back the certificate: what is to prevent the 
Honourable Andrew and his clever wife, who 
have already assumed the title which, by courtesy, 
belongs to this lady and her little one, fVom 
declaring that, to serve your own purposes, you 
have concocted a conspiracy?" 

Mrs» Emmy jumped up at the word, and looked 
boldly defiant. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 75 

"Let them say so!" she said, clenching her 
little fist : " I will maintain my right. Dieu et 
mon droit /" 

The action was somewhat theatrical, but emotion 
is essentially so. A period of doubt and trial 
had come, and the young mother felt she had to 
meet it. Her trial had brought her face to face 
with harsh reality, and, for the moment, she was 
equal to it. 

The doctor, gazing admiringly on, thought 
that she looked as noble as Joan of Arc. He 
willingly persuaded himself that the most open 
action was the best^ and willingly^ therefore, 
undertook k very difficult mission, which others 
Would have shrunk from. It was agreed between 
them that the doctor should seek out Lord 
Bradstock, and inform him of the surprise which 
Providence, or fate^ had laid in store for him. 
Doctor Sangrado, who knew that since Lord 
Somers's death his father had hardly held up 
his head, fondly persuaded himself that the old 
lord would welcome the news with joyt 



76 A SPLENDID POETUNE. 



CHAPTER V. 

LADY AMETHYST^S HENCHWOMAN. 

Amongst the many devotees who rejoiced at Lady 
Amethyst^s good fortune when Lord Somers was 
killed^ and who upheld her state upon all occasions^ 
none was more prominent than Miss Nightley; 
and^ although an ex-governess and at present a 
companion^ she deserves an introduction to the 
reader. 

She was a fine woman^ and one of those well- 
grown women whom everybody allows at once to be 
" fine/^ but of whose personal appearance very little 
else is said. Little else, indeed^ could be said. The 
figure of Lady Amethyst^s companion was superb ; 
she was five feet eight inches in height, and well 



A SPLENDID FOBTUXE, 77 

made withal ; but her face was nothing. It was not 
ugly^ but low and coarse in expression. Her hair was 
of a dark red^ her eyebrows white^ her eyes of a deep, 
sad brown^at suitewith her hair. Had herface been 
beautiful, she would have been queenly. As it was, 
her face lost her all her advantages . all but one : 
under those white eyelashes, and in those brown 
eyes, proceeding from that lofty, capacious fore- 
head, was power, undoubted power. 

Everybody felt it, and none more so than 
Miss Nightley herself. It made her ugly, she knew. 
Her forehead was a great deal too high for her 
face to be pretty, even supposing her hair had not 
been red ; but what did she care for good looks ? 

This knowledge of herself added to the effect 
she created. She was so thoroughly conscious of 
her weight and worth, that, like an actress who 
fills her part well, she moved about easily, and so 
gracefully that she attracted little attention, and 
yet grew upon everybody's acquaintance. Even 
great lords and ladies asked, "Who is that person ?'' 
when she entered the room, and, when told who 
she was, said, " Ha, indeed ! a very proper person, 



78 A SPLENDID FOETtJKE; 

no doubt; a most valuable penon; one who knows 
her place.'' 

Thej were^ further^ not surprised whm they 
heard that this person was very accompUabod ; 
nay^ even more than that^ she was learned. CSon" 
ceding these as possibilities to be achieved by 
very common-place people^ although never so 
thoroughly achieved as by one of their own order, 
the nobility in question were agreeably informed . 
no, not informed ; they seemed to know things by 
instinct . agreeably instructed, or, rather, instilled 
with the fact that Miss Nightley was a person of 
very high birth, but that a series of misfortunes 
had obliged her to gain her living in a capacity 
. we quote here her own phrase . " a little less 
than menial/* 

In this capacity, however. Miss Nightley did as 
she would have done had she been a prima donna, 
a housemaid, or a queen ; that is, she managed to 
hold her own. She had seen many cities and 
many people. There were few places whereto she 
had not travelled, and wherever she travelled she 
acquired more than the tongue* She had chano;^ 



A BPLENDID FOETUNE. 79 

the celebrated Buesian Prince Bobrinski, by talk- 
ing Polish as fluendy as he spoke English. She 
had attracted the notice of a Neapolitan prince^ and 
had talked a semi-philosophical infidelity with more 
than one Romish cardinal. It was in this sort of 
conversation^ indeed^ that she excelled ; for Miss 
Nightley, amongst many other amiable qualities 
engendered by her consciousness of power, pos- 
sessed a kind of spiteful Atheism, not unfrequently 
indulged in even in the best society. " Le bon 
Dieu" she said, patronizingly, *'has really done so 
very little for me : what should I do for him ?" 

*^ Indeed," said the Abbe to whom it pleased 
her for the hundredth time to make the confes*- 
sion, '^ I should rather say, so muchi. . '' 

'^Ah, mio padre, non: in France it might be 
much, but in our frozen England, our land of 
moral and social icicles, our favoured Protestant 
country, it is not so. Beauty, talent, high birth, 
and power are nothing without money, and money 
itself is second to position. Therefore, I repeat," 
and again she used the wickedly patronizing tone 
and expression, with a hot pride about her heart, 



80 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

" since le bon Dieu has done so little for me^ it 
would be unfair if I did much for him/^ 

" Behold," said the Abb6, in his own epigram- 
matic tongue . " Behold a woman, an English miss, 
who is, it would seem possible, more thoroughly 
devoted to the lower regions than our good John 
James himself. Truly she is a woman bien dan^ 
ffireuse, formidable even to herself." 

She was dangerous to other people as well as to 
herself, as many found out. 

She was dangerous even to M. FAbbe, who 
found that, when playing with her, he was playing 
with edged tools. She exposed his sham cynicism, 
his mock Atheism, his stupid French hatred of 
everything decent and orderly, his constant in- 
surrection against what his own heart felt to be 
true. But it is not with the Abbe that the 
present story has to do. That unfortunate 
ecclesiastic perished in the Revolution of 1848, 
and died, as many of his Church have died, in a 
perfect storm of doubt as to whether the religion 
he had for so many years openly professed and 
seoretly maligned might not be true at last. 



A SPLENDID FOBTUXE. 81 

Miss Nightley never had any doubts; at any 
rate^ if she had^ she drove them back with a strong 
hand. At the time we introduce her to our 
readers she was at that period of life when a wise 
man is said to ''suspect himself a fool/' Miss 
Nightley had made up her mind upon that pointy 
we need not say, in the negative. 

She was the companion of Lady Amethyst, and 
the teacher infuturo of her son, that is, if she should 
ever have one. She taught the mother as well. 
She had fixed herself for life. She early abandoned 
youth, and would cry, " A woman of my years, 
sir, is not to be deceived,'^ and then propound a 
startling subject, enough to silence a whole dinner- 
table of gentlemen. She had set herself to win 
by force that which she knew she could not gain 
by favour. 

The second son of the Earl of Bradstock, the 
husband of the Lady Amethyst, and the heir to 
the title and estates, was, as we have long since 
seen, one of those young fellows who bid fair to 
give little satisfaction to their families^ It had 
been the pride of the Bradstock family, that 

VOL. II. G 



82 A SPLBiroiD FORTUNE. 

although the heads of the honae had^ now and then^ 
been t^rouS, and aometimea not conspicuous for 
plain dealing nor fpr honesty, yet there had nerer 
been an actual fooL Thia> by the death of Iiord 
Somers, seemed to be rerersed. The Honourable 
Andrew was» as we haTe already been told, a fool 
in more senses than one, and his wife knew it. 

In the first pla^, he did not appreciate his 
position, and, in company with a celebrated 
marquis of the day and one or two other choice 
spirits, set himself to imitate, as far as he was 
able, the actions of cab and coach-men. As the 
imitation comprised the Yices, and not the virtues of 
the class, it is not to be wondered at if the attempt 
was not very gratifying to his relations, especially 
as, by the elegant means employed, he accumulated 
those debts which Mr. Naylor had to settle. 

Nor did the Honourable Andrew wholly appre- 
ciate his wife. As there was a certain novelty in 
the position, and as it placed him in possession of 
some thousands in ready money, and, m<Nreover, 
.as he knew her to be a woman of business, who^ 
for her own interest, would keep him pretty 



A 8FIX5DID itnrrss. 83 

stndglit, he had gone through the ceremony at 
St. George's, HanoTcr Square, with even some 
deoonim. £Ten after the ha^y ooaple left in 
their chariot foot one of the Eari'a country seats, 
the young fellow behaved for some few days, 
a long period for him^ decently. But Lady 
Amethyst, beautiful, cold, and calculating as she 
was> bom to govem and to form a household^ 
found that she was sometimes powerless with 
Andrew. He now yery often left her alone for 
the more congenial society of his grooms. 

The termination of the matter was this : the 
lady retired to live with her father-in-law, but 
took care to take with her her husband, whom she 
looked pretty sharply after, although when he 
could he escaped, he pretending an immense love 
for hunting, shooting, or some new acquaintance. 
The wife, therefore, naturally fell back on her old 
companion Miss Nightley, and, nursing her own 
ambition^ appeared to retire from the hopeless task 
of cultivating her husband, and to console herself 
with the bright future which seemed about to 
open for her children and herself. 

g2 



84 A SPLENDID FORTUNE* 

MissNightley liked her place. She admired the' 
oldEarl^ and she hated Lady Amethyst^ apparently 
for the simple reasou that the former was much 
richer and more highly bom than she. She 
despised the heavy country gentleman Andrew^ 
who occasionally would spend an hour or two with 
her and his wife; but^ by great tact^ by flashing 
out the points, the very points of certain secrets 
which she had gleaned from the servants, she at 
once established a great interest in the husband's 
breast, 

*'By gadP' he swore . '''fore gad, sir, that 
woman has a headpiece V^ and, being cloyed with 
beauty, he began seriously to think of falling in 
love with the ugly governess merely to pass the 
time in the dull country. 
. It was all she wanted. Her place was formed. 
She would rise early and meet Andrew about the 
stables or park, and talk to him learnedly and in- 
terestingly of horses, plants, rocks, seaweed, or any- 
thing she wished. Her quick mind would master a 
subject overnight, to speak with him in the mom- 
ing. She would forerun his thoughts, tell him of 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 85 

his behaviour to his father, to his wife, and make 
him act for the time better. He begged a lock of 
her red hair, and she gave him one, and a slight 
pressure of the hand, and told him to '^ be a good 
hoj." She then looked a world of love, and 
laughed when he drew nearer, adroitly turning the 
subject. Samson was caught and sported with by 
this ugly Delilah. 

Few knew her secret, but all at Broadacres 
confessed her power. She would go away for two 
or three days purposely, and, returning, find the 
family "at sixes and sevens,^' as she phrased it. 
She was like oil on the waters. 

'* 'Fore God, marm, you know the length of my 
foot, and the governor's too, and the missus's,'Vas 
he sometimes pleased himself by calling his wife. 
"What should we do without you? You set us 
all to-rights/' 

. " I am so glad you are come, my dear,'* said 
Lady Amethyst. " I have written to the jeweller's 
for a present for you: here it is, a turquoise 
bracelet; it will suit your complexion. Keep it 
for my sake : you are invaluable to me.'' 



86 X SPLEICDID FOKTtJKS. 

She buckled it on her «rm« 

''No one gives a present without hoping for an 
equivalent/' thought the astute companion as she 
grandly thanked her friend. ^'Am I to be the 
bear-keeper ? or what is itj eh ? Time/^ she said, 
looking at her little watch^ a present from the 
Abbey . " Time will show/' 

Miss Nightley was one of those ladies who always 
gain presents. There are two sorts of people in 
this world: people who give^ and those who receive. 
Smithy who is a generous fellow and wants now 
and then a lifting hand^ never gets it^ but con- 
tinually buys some little fond testimonial to pre- 
sent to Jones^ who^ twice as well off as his friend, 
is yet always in luck^s way* A presentation to the 
Blue-coat School falls due. Smith has ten children 
and would be much benefited by it^ but, of course^ 
he never gets it : it falls to the lot of Jones^ who 
has perhaps only one son^ whom he can afford to 
educate. 

The like happened to Miss Nightley. She was 
certainly not very poor^ and yet people were always 
giving her presents^ which she wore for a day or 



A SPLEKDIB FORTUKE* 87 

two aud then quietly put away in her little hoard. 
Sometimes she wisely sent them back to the 
jeweller's whence they came ; and^ being a woman 
of power with these timid tradesmen, would get 
the full price in money returned to hen Alto- 
gether, mademoiselle knew very well how to feather 
her little nest^ and feathered it accordingly. 

''I wonder/' she said to herself, *'what Lady 
Amethyst wants with me. By the pricking of my 
thumbs^ it is something wicked^ I will swear/' 

The companion knew her friend pretty well. 
In the course of the next mornings when the two 
ladies were walking in the park^ Lady Amethyst 
told her companion that she wanted her to do her 
a favour. 

"I thought so/' said that lady, quietly. **I 
have noticed that your ladyship is generous when 
you want anything done/' 

Miss Nightley knew how to hit out. Part of 
her power was, perhaps, derived from that fiict. 
Caesar, in one of his battles, told his troops to 
strike at the faces : they did so, and won the day* 
Miss Nightley never spared anybody's beauty, and 



SS A SPLSNDID FORTUNE. 



had probably based her line of action on this very 
plan of Csasar's* She carried too much heavy 
metal for Lady Amethyst^ who^ woman of business 
as ahe was, answered, meekly . 

'* I am sorry you put such ian interpretation on 
my present, and, if you please, I will do what I 
want myself/' 

Now this was precisely what Miss Nightley did 
not want. She was, perhaps, hardly a "perfect 
woman, nobly planned,^' because all perfect women 
should be without curiosity, and this lady had 
plenty. 

"Oh, my lady,*' she said, as if she were the 
injured party, "pray don't speak like that in 
return for my harmless badinage. I will do, as 
you well know, all I can to serve you." 

Lady Amethyst had her own opinion about the 
sincerity of this answer; but she knew that no 
one could so well serve her as her companion. 
Therefore she said, with a sweet smile, " My dear 
Nightley, I meant nothing : you shall execute my 
little commission ; it is only a trifle." 

" A trifle !" said her companion to herself. 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 89 

" She calls it a trifle, does she ? Then it is some- 
thing important/^ She said aloud, however, '' If 
it were the weightiest thing on earth, and I could 
do it, I would. I suppose it is one of your lady- 
ship^s pensioners to visit/* 

"No,'^ said Amethyst; "it is nothing of the 
sort.*' 

She looked round to see that no one followed 
her or was in ear-shot. 

"We are quite alone,'* said the companion, to 
show that she interpreted the look. 

"Well,** commenced the wife of the Honour- 
able Andrew, " you, my dear, are, I am sure, well 
acquainted with the world.** 

" Pretty well,** was the answer. '^A woman of 
my age and of my experience, who has lived in 
some of the very best families of England, ought 
to know it . and its wickedness.** 

Lady Amethyst again left the sneer unanswered. 

"Well,** she said, "it is something about the 
world*s wickedness that I am about to tell you. 
Poor Lord Somers was not so good as he should 
have been.** 



90 A SPLENDID MBftTKE. 

" We none of us are/' « 

''Andy unliappy yomig man, lie had formed a 
eonnection with some young lad y . . . ' * 

'* A gOTerness^ like myBolf* I have heard the 
story, my lady/' 

''Then you know more than I do. I merely 
heard a hint from our legal adviser. that is, 
Andrew's solicitor. a gentleman, I believe, well 
acquainted with the doings of young men of 
fashion. Alas that the world should be so wicked ! 
Now, my dear Miss Nightley, I cannot help 
sympathizing." 

Her companion caught at the word. 

'^ Sympathizing, I think you said. Ah, I can 
understand your feeling : it does you honour/' 

" With this poor young creature ; and I should 
like you to visit her, and ascertain whether she is 
in any want, or " 

"Whether there might have been a secret 
marriage. I suppose that fact would be useful/' 

The lady was silent. 

"When I say secret of course I mean false," 
continued Miss Nightley. "Men of your class, 




A SPLENDID FOBTUNE* 91 

mf lady^ are so generous^ so cidyalric to women of 
ours; they consider them fair game for their 
deceit and entanglements ; but then..'' 

*' But what ?'' 

^'They sometimes get entangled themselves^ do 
they not?'' 

''Alas 1" said Lady Amethyst, with a Tcry well- 
executed sigh . '' Alas I sometimes the wicked 
man is caught in the nets which he has spread 
privily for others." 

** And serve them right too/' said Miss Night- 
ley, with great emphasis and earnestness ; for she 
felt what she said. She hated men^ and despised 
them. Perhaps she was right. ''The vain, 
empty puppets 1 to be caught by merely pretty 
faces, and to neglect . as, alas ! they too often do 
. women of spirit and mind." 

"Yes, it serves them right," said her ladyship; 
'^ but at present we will not think of that. Here, 
his lordship has died, and suddenly. He has left 
no will. He was too young to think of doing that 
which most men put off to the very end of their 
lives. In the full career of life and youth. and, 



92 A SPLENDID foetunb; 

alas! vice . he is suddenly cut oflF. He is heire 
to-day '^ 

"And there to-morrow P' said her companiquj 
finishing the quotation. 

The two ladies had reached the artificial water- 
fall in Broadacres Park, by which the waters of 
the Slugg fell with an artificial haste and ardour 
which they did not usually possess down some 
manufactured rocks of an almost preternatural 
wildness. 

" Here is a pretty place for a suicide, if any one 
were crossed in love, now,'' said Miss Nightley, 
aloud ; and then she added to herself, " And I 
dare say she wishes this poor creature, this possible 
rival to her ladyship, would take advantage of it/' 

Lady Amethyst looked at the quiet pool, which 
was indeed very quiet, beyond the little roar which 
the small cascade made. It was a dreary little 
place even in the daytime. One or two rocky 
caves had been formed at the side, and there was 
a little path made, so that they who were adven- 
turous enough might, by stepping-stones, reach 
the very rock whence the stream fell, and stand 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 93 

UT^er the splashing waters. Bittern and wild- 
fowl built their nests in the long reeds on the 
other side^ and pendant trees dipped their branches 
in the stream. 

The two ladies did not look long upon the waters. 
Lady Amethyst was silent^ and turned to walk 
back to the house. 

" Breakfast is ready by this time. These early 
walks will do us good.'^ 

*'Yes . give us quite a brilliant complexion/' 
said her companion, gaily. '^I think I under- 
stand your ladyship, and I will, in my own way, 
set about executing your commission.'' 

And this was all that was said about the 
business. 



94 A SPLENDID FOBTUNE. 



CHAPTER VI. 

IN WHICH THE EARL IS SURPRISED. 

On the following morning, while Emmy and her 
baby were employed in that sweet occupation of 
dreaming, which, it is supposed, the youngest share 
with the oldest. Doctor Sangrado was up and early 
out, looking over the woods towards the park, and 
wonderiug how he should execute his difficult 
commission. 

Over the beech-woods the soft breeze blew, 
bringing up from the town the pleasant sounds 
of activity and labour, and from the fields now 
and then the call of the bird-boy, or the report of 
a gun, as the keeper, or some young Nimrod, 
" popped'* at a rabbit. The skylark sang high 



. SPLENDID FOETUNB. 96 

above the woods in the bright autumnal tkj, the 
wood-pigeon was cooing away pleasantly enough^ 
and the wood-lark was singing gently to its mate^ 
whilst linnet and finch chirped and twittered in the 
hedges. Presently, in the doctor^s early house^ a 
casement opened, and the venerable head of Mrs. 
Lapis was popped out, looking all the fresher and 
brighter for a thorough ablution and polish. 

''Good morning, madam/' said the doctor, 
politely. Mrs. Lapis withdrew her head hurriedly, 
and seemed to scuttle down«stairs in acknowledg- 
ment of the fact that it was quite time to get the 
doctor's breakfast, 

Sangrado was walking across his yard to the 
stable of his gray mare the " Countess.** There 
was an obscure legend that this fabrse, when in the 
pride of youth and beauty, had formed one of a 
pair belonging to one of the most beautiful and 
dashing of countesses, who used to surprise the 
whole of the Ring in Hyde Park with her mettle« 
some steeds. Sangrado was proceeding to his stable 
when another window opened, and Miss Lotty put 
forward her head . a comely one, to be sure . and 



96 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

was rude enough to whistle to her brother as she 
would to a dog. 

''Ah!^' said the doctor; "we are all alive this 
morning. I wonder what that old proverb means 
about a whistling woman and a crowing hen being 
neither good for God nor men. I suppose it is 
some of us men^s girdings against that sex we 
cannot' do without.^' He looked up to Lotty and 
bade her cheerfully good-morning. 

*' You are going to ride early, Keith/' she said. 
'* Give my compliments to the Countess, and give 
her that.'' She cleverly threw across the little 
yard an apple. *' Was there ever a horse that did 
not like apples, or a woman who did not like 
flattery ?" 

''I don't know,'* answered Keith, laughing: 
" come down and look at the mare, and mind you 
don't waken any one else." 

He opened the stable-door and went to the 
horse, which was standing, as was her wont, 
as far from her rack as her halter would let 
her. She had already been groomed, and looked 
in fine condition. " Come, old girl/' said her 



. 



. A SPLENDID FOETT7N2. 97 

master^ giving her the apple on his open hand ; 
''come, we shall have to go to the Ahhey this 
morning.'* 

The Countess ruhhed her nose fondly against 
the doctor's sleeve, as if to show that she was 
quite ready to go anywhere; and very quickly 
munched the apple, crushing it in pieces with 
her front teeth, for the side teetl^ had long 
since disappeared. 

'* Well," said Lotty, who had joined him, *' the 
Countess is a beauty, although she is old. Oh, this 
time, this time! how can any one of us stop it? 
Why, Keith, I declare, there are two or three gray 
hairs in your head !*' 

''Nonsense,'' said the doctor, laughing. "It 
is all the effect of the light. Come, let us have 
breakfast : Lord Bradstock is an early man, and 
I shall have to be early to catch him. Pray 
Heaven I may succeed !'* said he, piously. 

"Indeed, Keith, I hope you may," said his 
sister, and that was the last sentence said about 
the matter. After breakfast. Dr. Morton mounted 
and rode seriously forward* 

VOL. II. H 



'98 -A SPLElirDID FORTUNlS. 

Here was lie about to deal a mortal thrust at 
his best^ perhaps his otily friend in the world. 
Lord Bradstock^s patronage and countenance had 
won for Sangrado a great many more patients 
than did his own talent ; for it is a curious enough 
"bet, that the people of the small towns^ like thosie 
of the larger^ are so very modest that they seldom 
judge for themselves^ but take upon trust every- 
thing^ from fashion to physic^ which is adopted 
by the great man. 

Once upon the main road of Bilscombe Regis, 
the doctor's gray mare went tit-up and tit-up 
upon the gravelly road to such purpose that in a 
very short time she brought him near the park 
gates of Broadacres. 

The gate-keeper's children, with whom he was a 
favourite in spite of his physic, ran to throw open the 
heavily carved and studded gates, and the gray mare 
and her rider went on, past the artificial waterfall, 
built many years ago, and now so overgrown with 
brushwood and verdure that it looked more and more 
natural every year ; past the little artificial island, 
upon which stood a temple to Fortune, wherein, after 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 99 

.the fashion of Pope's time, "the mob of gentle- 
men who wrote with ease '' would scribble their 
foolish effusions, and called it worshi()ping the 
" Muses j'' past the ircm gate which, opened 
with the doctor's crop whip, swung backwards 
and forwards half a dozen times with a metallic 
creak till it was caught and held fast by the 
hasp; past the few deer, which bounded off in 
the distance as the doctor approached; past his 
lordship's &vourite breed of Scotch cattle, a few 
of which raised their long-horned heads and re. 
warded the doctor with a stare ; and, finally, past 
Lady Amethyst's polled Suffolk, which, with the 
lazy, overfed exterior of a favourite, whisked the 
flies from her sleek skin, and continued her rumi- 
nation without even staring at Saugrado . past all 
these, till he slackened his pace at the hard gravel 
which surrounded the Abbey. 

The Abbey had no doubt been an " abbey " in 
by-gone days, but upon the foundations of the 
holy house a more modern building, after the ap« 
proved taste of Horace Walpole, Strawb^ry Hill, 
and the Castle of Otranto, was raised. It had 

h2 



100 A SPLENDID FOETUNB, 

plenty of " rich windows wluch exclude the light^'^ 
and boasted of at least two '' galleries which led to 
nothing/' To the doctor's eyes there was some- 
thing terribly grim and dreadful in the dull gray 
stone^ the trimly kept garden^ and the cold, dean 
hall. 

The bright suits of armour, scrupulously dusted 
every mornings which stood round this hall seemed 
to wink and blink with innumerable eyes, and to 
peer at him from shut vizors as he entered afler a 
dreadfully loud bell had clanged, when stirred by 
him, and re-echoed over the whole Abbey. 

His lordship. Lord Bradstock, is he at home ?'* 
Thefam'lywas at home; leastways, he b'lieved 
so," returned John Thomas, superciliously. 

John Thomas, a London J. T., was in black. He 
looked quietly at the sky, the waving trees, and 
the cawing rooks as he said this. He yearned in- 
wardly for London habits and haunts, for his car- 
riage exercise and his magnificent plush, and felt 
mourning to be unbecoming to his figure. 

'' I should wish to see his lordship.** 

'' The fam'ly was strictly privut . doesn't see 



« 



c< 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 101 

nobody, leastways, no pusson *cept connected 
fvith the fam'ly, since the infliction *' 

" His lordship will see me : Dr. Morton." 

'^ P'raps he would/' returned J. T., again in- 
specting the rooks. " He would gow, an' see. 
Didn't know his ludship wanted a medicul man. 
Would 'oo walk in 'ere ?" 

Dr. Morton followed the menial . literally a 
menial in this case . into a small room indicated : 
it was that devoted to the waiting of undignified 
strangers, and wherein John Thomas himself often 
sat when expecting with well-bred indifference the 
return of the carriage and the other footman. A 
small and old-fashioned mahogany table, the cards 
of one or two advertising tradesmen from London 
yet littering it, and the equally old-fashioned 
chairs, which had long ago been turned out of the 
Abbey dining-room, formed the furniture of the 
place. The doctor, who had tied up his gray mare 
to a ring outside the stone porch, sat down in one 
of these chairs, sadly enough, waiting till super- 
cilious J. T. should return. 

J. T. was not long before he did return. He 



102 A SPLEXDH) FOBTUXE. 

was altogether more respectfiiL He had yawned . 
in a polite and snbdned way . ^his message into the 
private room where '* the famHy '* were assembletl, 
expecting to meet with a flat denial to the doctor, 
when he was told to admit him instantly. Im- 
pressed with the idea that he mnst be some one of 
consequence^ but yet not being quite satisfied with 
the country exterior of the ^'medicul man," he 
altered, as we have said, his manner, and ushered 
Sangrado to the family. 

The Abbey had been, as we hare said, altered at 
rarious times, and consequently in yarious styles 
of architecture. The style of the sitting-room in 
which Dr. Morton found the "famly" was 
Palladian. Over the door were busts of the Brad- 
stocks d la Romain, The windows were in the 
recesses of Roman arches, and festoons of flowers 
with knots of ribbons drooped from above the 
lintels and the windows. Books in low cases 
lined the room ; heavy curtains swung gently in 
the wind ; gilding and picture, lustre and mirror 
added to the sombre magnificence of the cham- 
ber. And yet the doctor felt that, had it been 



4 SPLENDID FORTUNE. 103: 

hung with black, it could not have been m6re 
sadly melancholy. 

The old lord sat in an easy-chair, which became 
I^im like a throne. He was proud of bearing and 
bold even in his grief, and looked a "lord*' to 
the life. He was b^e of those who never bend to 
the stroke, and who, to follow the words of the old 
motto, would be broken sooner than bend. Not 
far from him aat Lady Amethyst and her friend 
and companion . ^like the footmani from London^ 
in deep mousing . ^Miss Nightley. The ladies 
returned the. doctor's salute somewhat coldly. 

" Well, Doctor," said he, extending his hand,, 
but not rising, " you are come to see me in my. 
trouble. Welcome, welcome: you were a friend 
of his.'' 

He indicated, partly with his finger, partly with 
his head, a portrait before which hung a curtain. 

''Why veil it. Amethyst?" he said, almost 
angrily. " Draw the curtain, and let me see my. 
son's face." 

Lady Amethyst rose, and, drawing back the 
curtain, let the sunshine fall upon a bold, forcible 



4 



104 A SFLEIiDID POBTUNE* 

portrait^ so lifelike^ indeed, that Sangrado started 
as if his friend's face looked upon him from the 
grave. 

*^ He was/' retomed the doctor, with a pause, 
looking blankly at the picture . ** He was a very 
good friend and patron of mine/' 

Lord Bradstock smiled, as if pleased with the 
deferential word, and returned . 

" Ah, Doctor, Doctor, he will be no one's friend 
or patron now I" 

"There are no patrons up there," whispered 
Miss Nightley, somewhat bitterly, to Lady 
Amethyst, pointing with a spiteful finger up 
through the ceiling and roof to the sky above. 

Lady Amethyst looked daggers, but used none. 
There was no possible way in which she could 
answer Miss Nightley: that lady was too 
valuable to be entirely dispensed with, and she 
knew her value, as, indeed, most of us do, ahd 
should do in this world of worldlings. 

The old lord, who had let his thoughts run 
quietly on, broke out suddenly with a burst of 
natural grief. 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 105 

" Ah," said he, ** I am alone now, quite alone ! 
I shall have no male heir to my estates " 

Lady Amethyst looked astonished, 

"At least, none whom I can love. My boy left 
no son. I had often urged him to marry, but he 
would not. Oh that he had done so, and that I 
might clasp to my bosom some living likeness of 
my boy !" 

Miss Nightley's eyes, which were very pecu- 
liar, and possessed of something like the chatoyant 
lustre of a moonstone, darted a glance of fire into 
those of Lady Amethyst. Lady Amethyst cast 
down her eyes. Doctor Sangrado, to whom an 
imexpected opportunity had occurred, at once 
took it and spoke out- 

" My dear lord," said he, taking the old man's 
hand, '^ my kind patron, the news which I have to 
tell you will make you happy; will be some 
return for the kindnesses received at yonr hands. 
In a few hours you shall see your son's son and 
your heir. Your son was married, though secretly, 
and, as I know, unknown most certainly to you. 
His wife, an honour to him and your family, my 



106 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

lord, lives . I had thought she would have died . 
and has brought you a son and heir to his father's 
virtues and your lordship's name/' 

*' Good God! what is all this?" cried Lord 
Bradstock : ^^ an heir to Sroadacres . a boy be- 
longing to my son ! How is this V 

" Can you prove what you say. Doctor V* whis- 
pered Lady Amethyst, as pale as death. 

''Almost a miracle; quite romantic, indeed," 
said Miss Nightley, looking at Lady Amethyst. 

How rejoiced your ladyship must be !" 

Will your lordship see this lady and your 
grandson?" said Dr. Morton, addressing his 
patron, and putting aside the question put so 
earnestly by Lady Amethyst. 

'' Bring him to me, quickly ! . ^no, in a day or 
so : I cannot see her now." His lordship covered 
his eyes with his hands. " Put the curtain before 
that portrait. Amethyst," he said. 

''And," said Lady Amethyst, as she did so, 
"we will write. Doctor, for you and this . this lady. 
Our legal adviser will be here; and, when you 
produce the wife, pray do . I am sure you will not 



It 



A SPLENDID portune: 107 

forget to produce all the necessai7 proofs. Need 
I say more ?^* 

The doctor bowed. He coald not well trust 
himself to answer anything; and he felt that 
his position was such that the less he said the 
better. 

'^I presume/' said Lady Amethyst, looking 
first in the face of the doctor, and then at Lord 
Bradstock . '* I presume that the lady who claims 
to be Lady Somers is the same for whom his 
lordship so generously lost his life.'' 

The doctor again bowed. 

Lord Bradstock started up. 

" Was she the cause of his death ? Then I will 
never see her : keep her from me ! I renounce my 
words. She kiUed him . ^killed my son !" 

*'My lord/' cried the doctor, "she was as 
innocent as the unborn babe." 

All his love for the young lady beamed from the 
doctor's face as he said this. Lady Amethyst and 
Miss Nightley noticed the sudden enthusiasm. 

" She might be innocent/' said the father, 
again sitting down; "but, innocent or guilty. 



108 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



she took my son's love firom me for many days, 
and when he dies she comes, by her deputy, to 
claim the position of his wife/' 

"A startling claim, certainly, to Lord Broad- 
acres and the family/' added Miss Nightley ; *^ a 
claim which, if I were permitted to say anything, 
should certainly be substantiated by every possible 
means. There can be no uncertainty allowed in 
such a casCj surely/' 

tjord Bradstock was a gentleman, but he was, 
also, a man of pride. He did not like to hear a 
governess or companion give her opinion on a 
matter of such importance to the family, and it 
irked him somewhat sorely that there should be 
any necessity for her to do so, or, rather, that any 
question should occur which should give her an 
opportunity to offer her advice. He had, more- 
over, that instinctive dislike to Miss Nightley 
which an open and transparent nature has for one 
which is secret and cunning. 

So, when his lordship spoke, it was in reproof of 
Lady Amethyst's henchwoman. 

"Madam," he said, with a stately severity, "I 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 109 

Jim sure our family is mucli obliged by your 
interference on its behalf, but I believe that 
interference was scarcely needed. Dr. Morton 
we have known for some time; he was a 
personal friend of my son's ; and I am sure that 
he would be the very last man to approach us 
with any story that was not strictly true *' 

Dr. Morton bowed at this well-deserved com- 
pliment. Even in that solemn moment he felt 
that 'Upraise from Sir Hubert Stanley'' was 
praise indeed. 

The nobleman continued . 

*' I confess that this news came very suddenly 
upon me. The very sad bereavement which we 
all feel so much was of itself so sudden that it 
was, perhaps, impossible for my dear boy to have 
acquainted me with that which, alas I from some 
misunderstanding of his father's heart, he had 
hidden from me." The old gentleman's voice 
faltered as he spoke. " But I do believe that, had 
the Almighty given him only a few minutes to 
live, he would have told me all. What we have 
to do now is to respect the rights of every one and 



i 



110 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

* 

to obey the law. If matters be as Dr. Morton 
represents them to be^ then I may say that 
none of our family will be found to be wanting in 
its duty. Dr^ Morton, good morning/' 

With a stately bow Lord Bradstock gave our 
friend his conge, leaving him divided between a 
feeling of admiration for the old nobleman's 
character, and of perplexity as to what his next 
step should be. 



,A SPLENDID FORTtJNlK. Ill 



CHAPTER VIL 



UNDER THE TREES. 



Whilst the doctor, in a very perturbed state, was 
trotting al(Hig the road towards Bilscombe Regis, 
the party in the Palladian parlour was not quiet, 
but was, at least a portion of it, already in arms 
against him. It is said that there is not a sug- 
gestion thrown out in conversation but that it 
divides the hearers into two parties, the one for, 
and the other against the speaker. If this be the 
case in common conversation, how much more is 
it when a startling commimication is made which 
very narrowly affects those to whom it is made ! 

"An extraordinary tale,'* simpered the Lady 
Amethyst, as if she did not even heed it. She 



112 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

was an adept in tones^ and the inflection was care* 
fully managed. 

"Most extraordinary/' said the old lord, 
motioning with his hand to the curtain of the 
picture. 

Miss Nightley rose, and, withdrawing the 
curtain, let the light fall on the picture of the son 
so suddenly taken away and so much beloved. 

'' Most extraordinary,'* said he again, looking 
earnestly at the portrait. The voice was deeper 
this time, and Lady Amethyst, who seldom 
mistook anything, read rightly when she inter- 
preted a wish to believe in the marriage in its 
tones. 

" We must remember,*' said Miss Nightley, in a 
manner which showed that her opinions would be 
listened to in spite of the temporary check she 
had received, "that Dr. San . Dr. Morton, I 
mean, is a very peculiar man: he is easily led 
away, and very easily imposed on. He evidently 
believes what he says, but that is hardly a reason 
why we should do so/* 

" Possibly,** said Lord Bradstock. 



^ 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 113 

''And, upon my word/^ returned the lady; 
coming to the relief of her. friend and patroness, 
" one does read such tricks in the newspapers . I 
am obliged to read them to your lordship. ^such 
instances of cunning even in the innocent and 
the young, that women of our age grow to doubt 
everything and to credit almost every rascality/' 

Lady Amethyst winced* She did not like to 
be bracketed amongst " women of our age/' 

Miss Nightley became lively. Ta dictate opin-» 
ions to a lord and lady was, to her, something ; 
and, moreover, she was determined to show that 
she could not be hurt by reproof, but had an! 
elasticity of mind equal to the occasion. To be 
able occasionally to drive a pin into one of 
her listeners and patrons was something more. 
Strong-minded as Miss Nightley undoubtedly 
was, she loved the society of great people. There, 
was polish, quietude, ease, everything, in short, 
which that worldly woman liked. 

Lord Bradstock, after looking very long and. 
earnestly at the picture, turned away from it with 
a sigh. ''After all,'' said he, " whatever the reaL 

VOL. II. I 



114 A SPLENDID FORTOOL 

trutli of this story may be^ one thing is certain^ 
the doctor is convinced. His known honesty, his 
love for my son, his talent and integrity, nay, the 
very earnestness of his voice when he told us of the 
matter, and everything connected with the strange 
story, forbid any possibility of coUosion. Nor is 
it easy to convince a man of his capacity. He 
may be simple, but he is wise, and has been 
seriously through the evidence, no doubt, before 
he came here. We must examine matters before 
we pass judgment.^' 

''Eh, bien! how delightful it wiU be,'' cried 
Miss Nightley, as she arose from her chair, '' to 
find, all of a Sunday, an heir male to the estates of 
Bradstock, and a child, too, of your favourite son !" 

The lady intended this congratulatory speech 
to act on her Mend, and it took effect. Lady 
Amethyst looked aghast at her companion. 

''1 suppose," continued the companion, ''that 
the heat of the morning has an effect on her lady- 
ship. 1 myself am indifferently well. Shall ve 
take a walk in the park, whilst his lordship 
remains here to think over this romantic story V* 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 115 

Before she had finished the sentence Ladj 
Amethyst had risen^ and, with a slight, inclination 
of her head, had left the room. The companiou 
fdlowed her, and the two ladies, in charming little 
country hats and strong walking-boots, sallied 
forth into the park. 

*' Miss Nightley," said her ladyship when fairly 
out of ear-shot, ^^ I am surprised you can speak 
of this trumped-up story of the wretched doctor 
in the way in which you do.*' 

" Trumped-up story I'' returned Miss Nightley, 
with surprise. 

'^ Yes ; trumped up.'* 

''An elegant expression for your ladyship to 
employ,^' said the companion, with a sneer. 

" Elegant ! what do we care ?'^ returned Lady 
Amethyst, fiercely. *' We must sometimes speak 
as we hear our governesses, our nurses, our com* 
panions . the creatures about us . speak« "We speak 
in earnest sometimes.^' 

*'Yes; to the creatures,^ retorted Miss 
Kightley. 

'' To any one; to oiirselves, to our husbands and 

1 2 



llB A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

fethers. It is time to speak. Every one is 
against ns. 'Tis only to have a title, a place, a 
name, a fortune, and all the world will be ready to 
cheat and deceive you. Those below you combine, 
by fair means or foul, and the fairest sometimes the 
foulest, to dispossess, rob, and cajole you/' 

"You speak too forcibly, Amethyst,^' said 
Nightley, patronizingly . " too forcibly, but with 
some truth, for you feel as you speak. In return 
for this, do not these people cringe to you, give you 
title, place, respect, and flattery? You are made 
to pay . and, my lady, 'tis the only way to make 
you pay . for this by the method you speak of. 
But this has nothing to do with the question/' 

"It has," said Lady Amethyst, sharply. " Some 
one would rob my husband and my children." 
Of the latter she spoke, of course, as in the 
future. 

" It would not matter were it only the first," 
retorted the companion : " the others will surely 
be more worthy and more innocent than he." . 

" It would," returned the lady. " I would see; 
no one the victim of a conspiracy." 



i. SPLENDID FORTUNE* 117 

*^ It is none/' 

" None V^ gasped tte lady, 

" None. Who told you that it was one ? You 
sometimes speak roughly, votis autres / you some- 
times follow nature, my lady; so. do your 
brothers, in another way. What had the dead lord 
to do ? The young ladies his equals tried to makd 
him love them, but he declined the offer with his 
brother, whom fortune brought to you. To do you 
justice, he found you the most available creature 
offered to him. Toil were the finest odcdisqn^ 
in the slave-^market. The others were simply 
spindly, thin, high necked and shouldered girlsj 
with Roman noses and pale cheeks, whom neither 
the lying brush of the fashionable painter nor the 
black and white falsity of the engraver to th^ 
'^Book of Beauty'' could make good-looking, 
.He would not marry amongst his own class. He 
had an alternative : a little house in the suburbs, 
a lady, a family of children finer and more beau* 
tiful than his legitimate offspring of the future^ 
but who would be an immense burden on the 
.estate, and whose commissions would burden his 



118 A SPLENDID FORTUNE* 

purse, and to push on whom in the Government 
offices would mortgage his votes. I know the 
iort of thing pretty well/' 

"You know everything wicked/' said Lady 
Amethyst. 

*^ I have lived long amongst lords/' was 
the retort. "Yoiiir late brother-in-law was too 
good, I fancy, for that kind of work ; or perhaps 
he did not find a syren ready to hand, and dis- 
dained seduction. He was a man of honourable 
mind, and I honoured him." 

Miss Nightley drew herself up to her full 
height, expanded her chest, and looked down upon 
Lady Amethyst like a tragedy queen upon her 
victim. They had reached an elevated spot in the 
park, where some fine lime-trees grew, scenting 
the morning air, and the companion had taken the 
highest ground. ''Well, as I said, these spindly, 
aristocratic girls (frequently the sisters to idiots : 
I know three of a family^ and so do you, and 
pretty creatures they would be to marry !) not 
suiting his lordship, he found some one whom he 
could love and honour. Some beautiful girl, a 



JL SPLENDID rORTUNEv 119 

cottager or a farmer's daughter^ or, let us Say, 
the daughter of a man of talent and a gentle- 
man, prettier. Heaven knows, and educated more 
soundly and as well as you, but not of your 
caste, a lower caste, my lady, he did find. He 
loved and married her. Children are plentiful 
from such unions ; one of them enough, perhaps. 
Do you like the picture ?'* 

Lady Amethyst was carried away by the 
narrative. She had so long, believed in Miss 
Nightley's divination that she listened to it as a 
truth. She was pale as death, and put out hor 
gaimtleted hand to grasp the bole of a tree. Miss 
Nightley stood above, her, her red hair falling 
over her shoulders, her hat in her hand held in 
mockery above her head, and bowing to her as if 
to beg applause. 

"Plaudite dves! as the actor-boys cry after 
the Westminster epilogue,'* said she. ''But you 
look ill. Amethyst, The truth is, you want me to 
help you. Well, only put out a signal of distress, 
and I'm your man, or woman, rather. I wish I 
had been of the male sex.'' 



120 A SPLEHBm FOBTUNE^ 

Amethyst did pat oat a signal of distress. She 
fdt she was in the power of that mocking^ coarse, 
mascnline woman : ererything seemed to combine 
Sigainst her. The signal she pat oat was to close 
her eyes and to reel half backwards ; for, indeed, 
(die nearly fainted* 

Miss Nightley stepped qoickly firom her 
eminence and with a s^ng arm held her roond 
her waist. She smiled, half in triamph, half at 
her own solecism. ^Tm your manP' she said 
again. '' How these colloqaialisms gain on ns ! 
Well, well ; I am nearly a man, very nearly as 
itrong, and twice as clever. Look up. Lady 
Amethyst: there's always a way out of the 
thickest wood, and Til pilot you.'' 



A SPLENDID FORTUNB. 12X 



CHAPTER VIII. 

STANNABD IN BOW STREET, 

After the departure of the eccentric baronet and 
"^ his dog^ Mr. Herbert Stannard, like ^Sneas on a 
certain occasion^ sat by himself^ revolving many 
ideas in his mind. He had^ as most of ns have^ 
many good qualities and many bad ones ; and per- 
haps the worsts certainly the most dangerous of 
these bad qualities was a certain irresolution which 
had dogged aU his steps, and which had rendered his 
fairest promises without result and his fairest hopes 
of little avail. 

Had he had but determination and principle, the 
young man might have risen in the world and have 
achieved anything. He knew this very well him- 
self, and yet he would waste hour after hour, and. 



122 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

although the very dogs of an unperformed task 
were upon his heels^ he would not work with a will, 
or, indeed, at all. 

After Mr. BrawFs election, that gentleman, with 
the pertinacity which distinguished him, had pro- 
ceeded to London, begged some friend to propose 
him at the Reform, had entered into correspondence 
with several newspaper editors, and had invited 
many people to his town house or hotel. He had 
picked up ideas, and intended to make them serve 
him for a parliamentary reputation^ just as he 
made the beech-woods of Bilscombe Regis serve 
him for chairs. 

" Now, Mr. Stannard,^^ he said in his downright 
way . ''now, sir, you have been, on your beam 
ends, and know what poverty is. Now, I am going 
in as a friend of the poor man. Tell me, what 
grievance has the poor man ?" 

" None,'' answered Stannard, " that I know of, 
I never was poor. I always had enough to eat and 
drink, and read with the best, and thought with the 
best. Poor living and high thinking, that's my 
motto,'' 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE^ 123 

" It's the way for a man to be healthy, at any 
rate/^ returned his patron ; " but what you say is 
wrong. I want to know what prominent grievances 
the poor have, so that I may go in to redress them." 

" None,*' said the secretary, bluntly . " None, 
both ways.'' 

'^ How both ways ?" asked the radical patron, 
with some dignity. He was hurt at the tone of 
his secretary, although, being a generous map, he 
was ready enough to own that but for him he would 
never have been M.P. for his native borough, 

" Well, in two ways, at least/' said the imper- 
turbable young fellow, " The poor Englishman has 
not one evil which he cannot himself redress *' 

'* Pshaw P' cried the radical ; " you said very 
different the other day.'* 

"Yes ; because it suited me; but, look you, if yoi; 
don't want to make yourself a fool in Parliament, 
you must talk sense. The working man is be- 
ginning to awaken, and will no longer trust dema- 
gogues. He knows very well what I say. There 
is no evil in England that a working man cannot 
redress. If it be want of education, look at Gifford, 



124 A SPLENDID FORTUKS; 

editor of the ^ Quarterly/ a very pretty scholai'^ I 
assure you ; if it be fortune^ look at Hudson^ now 
the king of railways ; if it be position^ look at Peel ; 
if it be all these, my dear sir/' said the secretary^ 
with cutting sarcasm^ ^' look at yourself/' 

There are people who do not love satire, and who 
are bitterly moved by it. It is precisely because 
they do not comprehend it that they are so quickly 
hurt. Had they the humour to see and understand 
those delicate and sharp passes, they would surely 
forgive the satirist. Mr. Brawl was one of those 
who looked upon a satirist as a most dangerous 
animal, and he had begun to suspect, for some time, 
that his secretary had a tendency towards that dan- 
gerous weapon; dangerous, perhaps, more to him 
who uses it than to him who suffers, but oftentimes 
unpleasant to both. 

Mr. Brawl made a mental note of this one, and 
then, after a little pause, asked, " But what would 
you have me do ? My constituents will not expect 
me to sit in mum-chance. They will look for my 
name in the papers.^' 

" Will they V^ said Herbert Stannard, in a tone 



> 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE^ 125 

pf deep pity; precisely the tdne which, as a secre- 
tary to a rising man, he. never ought to hav0 
assumed. 

''And being disappointed," said the M.P., in 
a tone of distress and commiseration . " And 
being disappointed, they will very likely seek for 
another Member." 

''Now, my dear sir," said the secreta5*y, " whtn 
I consented to become your servant, in which I 
did myself great honour" . ^here he bowed gravely . - 
" I determined to give you the best advice that I 
could. I liked your ways: you seemed honest and in- 
dustrious. I don't exactly know that I am. either." 

" Well, to be sure !" said Mr, Brawl, with an 
indignant laugh. 

. " It is quite true ; but I will be honest in this^ 
X have told you one reason why you can do nothing 
for the working man. If I am wrong in saying 
he has no trouble to redress, no wrong to remedy, 
I am right, at least, in telling you the second 
reason, which is more true than the iSrst. It is 
this : if there be a wrong to be redressed, you are. 
not the man to do it." 



126 . SPLBNDIl) PORTTTKK. 

" Why not, sir ? why not ?*' cried the new M.P.y 
indignantly starting up. 

'^ Simply a philosophical reason. Toia have 
energy, I grant you ; and if yon are wise, yon can 
bny brains and understanding . there is plenty of 
the former to be sold . ^but, remember, you are an 
employer of labour. You know that any man 
who will lay his bones to, and has health and 
brain, can do well with you ; therefore you do not 
believe in these panaceas which the demagogues 
declare to be necessary, and, moreover, everything 
you said would be used against you iu your 
factories. No, Mr. Brawl; it may be a noble 
ambition to get into Parliament for you gentle- 
men who make money : I think it a foolish one ; 
however, you have gratified it. Now you want 
me to advise you more, and all I say to you is. 
Shake down." 

" ' Shake down V what do you mean by ' shake 
down?*'* 

*' Just this : when people are travelling in an 
omnibus, more get into it than can sit comfort- 
ably. The conductor calls to the driver to 



A SPLBNDID FORTUNE^ 127 

drive tn, and the people gradually sh^e. 
down.'' 

'* And how does that apply to me, sir ?^' 
''Why, you are in the popular omnibus. You 
cumnot all have front places : there are too many 
of you already. You cannot all be speakers ; so 
just follow the men really fitted to be your leaders, 
and shake down, sit quiet. If there is an oppor- 
tunity to make yourself heard, you will take it.^' 

"Very well, sir; very well," said Mr. Brawl: 
'' I shall not come to you for advice again." 

" Very good : I aril very «orry, I am sure. Per- 
haps you will not want me any more this even- 
ing, sir." 

" No ; certaiidy not : you may go." 
Both secretary and principal had become tired 
of each other. Great men's secretaries generally 
grow disgusted at the service, and in a very short 
time too» Mr« Brawl made a secret determination 
to ''go in" for the working classes and. the wholesale 
redressal of their wrongs^ and to get rid as soon as 
he could of his secretary. Mr. Stannard, as lie 
smoked his pipe, voted Mr« Brawl an old " pump," 



12S A SFtENBID FORTUKm 

and determined to get ricl of him by quietly goin^ 
away^ and leaving a note to the effect that he had 
done so. 

Mr. Brawl^ who let his temper ferment more 
quickly than the philosophic, and changeable 
Bohemian^ anticipated him. 
. '^ It is evident," he said . " It is evident, sir, that 
you and I no longer agree with each other/^ 

^' I am sorry to hear it,'^ said Stannard, with a 
smile which he did not take the trouble to conceal. 
" I always thought that it would be so. We are 
very dissimilar in disposition." 

''Then the sooner we part the better; and I 
must say that it seems to me that you have taken 
unwarrantable liberties with me in intruding your 

advice so unpleasantly. It seems to me " 

Mr. Brawl here fell into a trick common enough 
with angry men, of repeating himself. 

'*^^Well, it does not seem so to me," returned 
the secretary. '^ I have merely a little common 
sense which I sell at so much per quarter. You 
have agreed to buy it. In the exercise of that 
coipmou sense, I have told you that you had much 



A SPLENDID FOBTUJfE, 129 

better hold your tongue in Parliament. You 
cannot find a ready-made evil to redress every day 
in the week ; and if you take . according to the 
Mayor of Harwich, who used the phrase to her 
Majesty Elizabeth . ' the wrong sow by the ear/ 
farewell to your parliamentary reputation." 

. 

Mr. Brawl would have willingly submitted to 
this advice from any of his friends, but to be thus 
patronized by his secretary was too much ; beyond 
this, he had a lurking suspicion in his own breast 
that Mr. Stannard was quite right in his conclu- 
sions, and this, it may be, irritated him the more. 

" Pray let me have no more of your opinions^ 
sir," said the new Member. " I dare say I can trust 
to myself, or find advisers of a higher standing in 
society, at least, I shall be glad if you wish me 
good morning : any claim you may have upon me 
wiU be duly honoured.'' 

''Very capitally said," answered the secretary, 
carelessly. '' Sits the wind in that quarter? then 
we must be packing ;" and the young fellow took 
up his hat and, with an easy nod, departed. 

Mr. Brawl was glad to "see the back of him," he 

VOL. II. K 



130 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

said; and he called him a conceited puppy and 
many other pretty names. Stannard was alto- 
gether too independent for the chair-maker, who, 
having commanded carpenters, did not unnaturally 
believe that he could also command secretaries. 

The offer of the patriotic gentleman to settle 
" any claim" which his secretary might have against 
him might just as well have never been made. 
Mr. Stannard had an awkward habit, prevalent 
with Bohemians, of anticipating these claims in an 
extraordinary manner; and, indeed, the money 
he thus obtained from Mr. Brawl went very 
quickly with him, for he had a heavy back-way to 
pull up, and to replenish his wardrobe as the gentle- 
man needed required some little money and con- 
siderable management. When Herbert Stannard, 
therefore, sauntered down the steps of the town 
house of the new Member for Bilscombe Regis, one 
need hardly assure the reader that the eccentric 
young man had not a five-pound note in his pocket. 

" Well," said he to himself, confidently clinking 
the few. remaining pounds and shillings, which 
were all in one pocket, ^' here am I again on the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 131 

world. Let us see how the world looks. I rather 
like it : there is such a precious freedom about 
not knowing what to do. Now I am in a really 
much more noble position than when with that 
wretched old chair-maker. I have no doubt I 
shall fall upon my feet. At any rate, the world is 
a wide one, and will serve." 

He did not continue his sentence, but walked 
rapidly away from Bryanston . Square eastward. 
Crossing Oxford Street, and sauntering down the 
wicked side of Regent Street, the young gentle- 
man passed quickly and jauntily along, noticing 
many people as he went ; and it was to be observed 
most of these were of that peculiar order which 
equally excludes men from being either thorough 
gentlemen or thorough tradesmen. They had, as 
Stannard owned, " a betwixt and between look.'' 
There was plenty of intellect, and even " breed " 
amongst them ; but ther6 was a wandering, rest- 
less, sharp eye which the gentleman has not. 
Some were very handsome, most of them clever 
. all, to a certain degree, and some exceedingly 
. ^vivacious, and intellectual. 

K 2 



4 



132 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

Striking across the Haymarket and Leicester 
Square^ and calling at the south-eastern corner 
thereof, at the Sablonniere Hotel, Mr. Stannard 
had an interview with a young Frenchman, who 
. wonder of wonders! . spoke very sound English, 
and carried on a conversation with him in two 
languages, changing &om French to English and 
English to French, in the most rapid way, as the 
ideas struck them. 

'^ Eh, mon ami \" cried the Frenchman. 
"Here he is again. Come, sit down; make 
yourself, as you say, comfor-table.^' 

"Very good,^' said the other, sitting; "and 
how long have you left Paris, Gerard?^' 

"Depuis huit jours; mais reviens-nous dire 
comment se porte M. Herbert.'* 

"Well, he carries himself pretty well,*' 
answered Stannard, with a smile, as he took 
from his pocket a handsome cigar-case. " Fumez- 
vous encore, Gerard ?" 

" Qui, certainement,** answered the other, taking 
a cigar. "C*est un epreuve de civilisation.'* 

Umph !** grunted Stannard : " perhaps of 



(( 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 133 

ftavagery, so far as I know. On dit qu^en 
Amerique les sauvages foment depnis la Creation.** 

*' Eh ! Us ont restes sauvages toujours/' added 
Gerard. " Now what do you want ?" 

On this his friend told him that he was on his 
beam ends, and that he wanted something to do. 
He had been in a confidential situation with a 
'*Membre du Parliament Britannique,'' but the 
''Membre'' was "un bSte," and that he left him. To 
all this M. Gerard a&sented, telling him that he was 
philosophical and quite right. But it seemed that 
with our lively M. Gerard matters were very bad 
too. He had certainly put one or two managers 
on to two or three French plots ; but nowadays 
English authors were beginning to learn '^ the 
magnificent language of the beautiful France/' and 
every day his chaaces of employment in that way 
grew less. He was now engaged in carrying 
forward the proposals of an English manager for 
the engagement of a French premQre danseuse ; 
but the dancer was too eager to come to England, 
which she believed was a land flowing with bank 
notes and ruby brooches : hence he believed that he 



134 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

should not make the excellent terms he believed 
he otherwise could. The manager was a man who 
believed so thoroughly in the attractions which the 
first female dancer would offer to the British public, 
that he was willing to give almost anything. 

" Well, it's a queer case : you must put Mr. 
Manager off. Who pays commission? both of 
them, I suppose.^' 

"I shall try the matter,^' answered Gerard. 

''And who is the manager?*' 

"No one less than Mr. Dunne, who is with 
Captain Tophill.'' 

" Eh !" answered Stannard, shutting his teeth, 
'' I think I know him." He had already heard 
rumours, he said, about Miss Montague and the 
captain, but he seldom gave any heed to them. 

M. Victor Gerard might have been about to 
enlighten the young fellow a little more on the 
subject, when that gentleman rose to go. He said 
that he had an engagement, and hoped to find 
some of his old friends down Bow Street. 

Gerard the vivacious embraced him, called him 
a brave boy, and let him part. *' Hang it," said 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 135 

Stannard, when he got out of the vast and rambling 
hotel again . an hotel which sempiternally smelt of 
garlic and stale tobacco . "how very near he was 
coming upon my skeleton ! Ugh ! I wish I could 
bury it, bury it alive, too 1^^ Then the idea of a 
live skeleton struck him as being ridiculous, and 
he sneered at himself for making use of the 
expression. 

He soon found himself in Bow Street, and in a 
neighbourhood which deserves some attention. 

A theatre, a police-court, one or two taverns 
thoroughly theatrical, and a hundred shops more 
or less theatrical, in one irregular street, would be 
enough to make it remarkable, had it not, in its 
determination to be the most original street in 
London, possessed itself of a fire-engine maker at 
the top, and on certain days a lively assemblage 
of greengrocers^ carts, traps, trucks, barrows, and 
other vehicles in the middle. It also boasts of one 
or two musical shops; the first floors of the houses 
in which these shops are being let to gentlemen 
who are " musical and dramatic agents,^/ and who 
have, or are supposed to have, constant engage- 



136 A SPLENDID FOETTJNE. 

ments open for first old men^ soubrettes, first 
oomicSj second juveniles^ walking gentlemen^ 
second old men^ singing chambermaids^ and those 
who '^do the heavy business." 

Up and down this street parade^ at certain por- 
tions of the twelve hours^ gentlemen and ladies of 
whom it may universally be said that they look much 
better by night than by day. The gentlemen and 
ladies are equally destitute of any complexion to 
speak of^ and the latter supply the defect by pearl- 
powder and a little rouge; whilst the gentlemen^ 
disdaining anything but the puff-ball and powder, 
and^ moreover, shaving with such ferocity and 
determination that they seem to'have scraped their 
beards up by the very roots, present a bare-cheeked 
appearance such as is presented by no other class 
of men in existence; the theatrical barber, for 
the benefit of his own wigs, being in the habit of 
shaving his victims close up to the ears and 
under the base of the skull ; so that every actor 
who wears his own hair labours under the serious 
imputation of having somebody else^s wig on his 
head. 



. SI^LSKBID FORTUKE. 137 

The peryersity of nature^ of which a certain 
French author has written very learnedly^ is seen 
in Bow Street to perfection : the light comedy 
man is very often fitted^ and always presumes he 
was intended for heavy tragedy; the tragedian 
has a vivacity which plainly bespeaks comedy; 
and each of the professors of the mimic art firmly 
believes that he alone wears the mantle of Kean^ 
which has fallen upon his shoulders^ only that the 
public^ and a venal press^ have entered into 
a tacit arrangement not to see this very patent 
hd. Even in smaller things than this nature's 
perversity can be here studied. As there is such 
need of shavings one would hardly have presumed 
that every actor has a beard so strong that it looks 
like a chevaux de Jrise, composed of black hedge- 
stakes, in a few hours after it has been cut; nor 
that^ having submitted to the cruelties of the 
barber so long, each histrio was not to the man- 
ner born. This is, however, so far from being 
the case, that, immediately an actor is out of an 
engagement, he commences to grow, and the 
beard, as we know, has an eagerness to ^'pousser,'' 



138 A SPLENDID FOETUNE. 

as the Frencli say; so that in a very few days there 
may be seen some extremely rough chins down the 
busy side of Bow Street, and by these chins are 
known, it is supposed, those gentlemen who are on 
their own resources. 

Gorgeous dresses of cloth, of gold and silver, 
helmets, hats with feathers, crowns, stars, garters, 
jewelry of the most terrific description, fill some 
of the shop-windows of the street; and at these 
windows announcements, seldom seen elsewhere, 
from theatres beyond the general knowledge of 
mankind, hang dangling in proud prominence. 
These bills generally record the triumphs of some 
gentleman of great ^^ provincial,^' but small London 
celebrity, and the keeper of the shop is not un- 
frequently a personal friend and admirer of the 
actor whose fame he thus zealously forwards. 
Now and then an autograph letter from the great 
actor himself is exposed, hanging, possibly, from 
the spur-rowel of a theatrical buflF boot, in which 

" Dear S '^ is informed that " the business is 

glorious . money turned away by hatfuls,'' and 
that ^' my Don Ccesar has taken the town by storm. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 139 

I never had suet an ovation, except at Edinburgh, 
in my great part Sir Giles.'' 

Other shops there are in this magic neigh- 
bourhood where the fairy foot of the queen of the 
ballet is filled with a white or pink satin shoe, 
the sole of which, a very small one, has the pecu- 
liarity of ending where the toes begin, thus 
enabling the fair dancer to exercise those terrific 
jumps, and yet to fall on the ball of the foot. A 
theatrical shoemaker has a shop-window which is 
worth studying. Great splay-footed, puflFed velvet 
shoes for King Henry VIII., boots with square toes 
for Charles II., and red-heeled straights for the 
comedies of the last century set out the window ; 
and the shoemaker is so accustomed to different 
fashions that he can make you a shoe of any 
period you like to name, and is not the obstinate 
and unteachable fellow that the ordinary shoe- 
maker is. The theatrical jeweller's is also worth a 
peep, as many little boys, who flatten their noses 
against the glass windows, think. Diamonds 
larger than the Koh-i-noor, rubies as big as 
raspberry tarts^ and emeralds the smallest of 



4 



140 A SPLENDID FOBTUKE. 

which is the size of a Brussels sprout glitter in the 
sunshine or gaslight, and dazzle both the young 
and the old. 

The great attraction, however, to the juvenile 
population of this prolific neighbourhood is the 
armourer^s shop, where swords, axes, helmets, and 
other of the stock and provender of theatrical 
battles are to be found. Here is the crusader's 
sword; and that golden*hilted weapon, with an 
emerald as big as a pigeon's egg, which the lover- 
prince of mediaeval tragedy is always tied to, but 
with which he never fights. The prince's sword, 
which is as bright as a piece of looking-glass, when 
drawn, has lying at its point a humble weapon of 
the same kind, with basket hilt and blunted edge, 
known as a combat-sword. Hence, when the rich 
villain challenges the virtuous prince, and the 
virtuous prince, after disdaining to stain his sword 
with the villain's blood, is taunted into accepting 
the challenge, the curious may observe that, 
previous to fighting, the combatants approach 
the wings and exchange their fine swords for 
two working-day " combats," held ready by the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 141 

convenient prompter. With these swords the he- 
roes wage hot war^ striking sparks of fire from the 
ill-used blades, to the great delight of the gallery. 
The boys of the neighbourhood, who gaze on 
these treasures, bring down juvenile friends to 
behold such sights as must infallibly delight 
every boy's heart; and if, whilst gazing at the 
wondrous blades and guessing their value . which 
they imagine to be enormous . a gentleman 
with a tragedian's strut, prominent chest, and 
large person, enter the shop, he is pointed out 
with much jubilation as the reigning favourite in 
tragedy, and his young admirers are rendered 
exceedingly happy, and far more delighted than 
if they had seen the Queen herself, or the Lord 
Mayor of London, attended by those knightly 
persons in armour of whom his lordship is very 
proud in his out-of-door progresses, but whom 
he, with the unfeeling heart of a nouveau riche, 
never invites to his feasts, and always leaves out 
in the cold. 

As Stannard was sauntering up and down this 
fairy street^ on the pavement of which so much 



142 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

Heaven-gifted genius (in its own opinion) daily 
walks neglected and unknown^ he met with a 
gentleman with a limp moustache and pale coun- 
tenance, exceedingly like those of the third person 
in the little group to which the reader was intro- 
duced in the beginning of this history. What he 
had to say we will reserve for another chapter. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 143 



CHAPTER IX. 

A MEETING AND A JOURNEY. 

The professional gentleman who met our friend no 
sooner saw him than he threw himself into an 
attitude expressive of greeting on the stage, but, 
happily, nowhere else, and, in a voice of anxious 
inquiry, also existing only on the stage, asked . 

" Ah, ha ! and so at last we meet again !" 

" Well, it seems so," returned our young friend, 
with alacrity. " How are you, my boy ? and how's 
the Warlock ? Making his fortune, as usual ?'^ 

" Have you not seen the papers ?'' 

" No j at least, not any purely theatrical papers, 
I have been immersed in politics." 

" Poor young fellow 1 and you have let the wine 



144 A SPLEXDID FOKTUXE. 

of life pass throngh yonr lips untasted. Gracious 
heavens !" said Skittles^ looking up to that smoky 
and too generally cloudy covering which serves 
Londoners for a sky, '' can any man be so lost to 
propriety as not to take in * The Era?^ " 

" Well said. Skittles," returned Herbert ; *' so 
you are still in your old lunes, I see. As to the 
paper, you remember what Liston said to the 
doctor, who did not know him, and who advised 
him to cure melancholy by going, looking, and 
laughing at himself. 'Alas,' cried he, '/ am 
that unhappy man V So, with regard to ' The 
Era :' you ask if there be any one so blind as not 
to see that admirable print ; I answer yon, I am 
that deplorable individual/^ 

" Well, we each move in our own circle, don't 
we? We mount our dunghill and fancy it all the 
world. Now, I do not care a halfpenny for 
politics. How do they agree with you?" 

*' Not at all : I have cut them." 

" What ! and the fine prospect promised you by 
the independent Member ! By the way, I think 
that, if we had only votes, he would have taken 



A SPLENDID FOETUNE. 145 

Drury Lane, for the wizard. Would-be Members 
are good ones to promise, are they not ?'^ 

"Yes; and, for what I know, good ones to per- 
form. Mr. Brawl, at least, did not break any 
promises with me. I found that we could not 
agree, and so left him.'* 

" And cut the concern ?" 

" Exactly ,'' returned Stannard. 

" And what do you mean to do? Will you join 
the Warlock again ? There is plenty of fun in our 
little camp.'* 

"Well, I don't know what to do at present. 
Come and have a glass of wine at the ' Harp,' or, 
if you like it better, more familiar beer.'' 

" Very good, since you are so pressing. By the 
way, will you forget the name of Skittles, and our 
little antagonism? I am no longer under that 
name. I have revived my own illustrious cog- 
nomen. ' My name is Belville : on the Grampian 
Hills ' . I dare say you are familiar with the quota- 
tion, so I will not continue it." So saying, the two 
young men, with the friendly and familiar manner 
which distinguishes all true Bohemians, strolled 

VOL. II. L 



146 A SPLENDID FORTUXB. 

into the " Harp/' an ancient house given thoroughly 
up to players and their likes, in the parlour of 
which, a dingy place enough, redolent of stale 
tobacco and staler beer, the great Edmund Kean 
was accustomed to preside at a free-and-easy, and 
set the table in a roar with his wit. 

" I don't know how you feel,'' said Stannard to 
his friend, as they lighted, one a cigar, and the 
other his never-failing pipe, " but I never enter 
one of these places but I feel degraded." 

"What places . public-houses, taverns?" cried 
Mr. Belville, with astonishment. " Why, you 
might knock me down with a feather. This comes 
of the study of politics !" 

" No, n03 you mistake me," returned Stannard. 
" I only mean those places devoted to theatrical 
people. There is such a sordid appearance, so 
many circumstances about them which must abase 
tho pride of the most aspiring of the neophytes, 
such meanness, dirt, and squalor about the whole 
matter '* 

** Well, you're right there, Stannard," said 
BolvillCj philosophically. ^'Wash the paint off 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 147 

our faces, and we are pretty fellows; but '^ 

He then, without finishing the sentence, con- 
soled himself with his pipe. 

" Yes; and the worst of it is that the illusions 
must so soon fade. Look at the bright dresses, 
the glitter, the order on the stage, before the cur- 
tain, and then consider the turmoil, dirt, misery, 
hatred, envy, vice, and bickering behind those 
scenes, and you will have enough to make you 
wonder that any decent people continue on it. 
Now, there's my unhappy wife '' 

^^Oh, by jingo!'' said Mr. Belville . we will 
call him by his assumed name . " there, now the 
secret 's out. I wondered why you were abusing 
the blessed boards, and I see now very well. You 
have reason, as the French say, or did say when I 
was at school : I don't know what they say now. 
By the way, have you seen that talented young lady 
lately? for she has a genius, and a true one " 

" No," said Herbert, unhappily; "nor do I want 
to." 

He said this in a weak, undecided tone, which 
told his friend that he did not mean what he said. 

L 2 



148 A SPLBNDED FORTUNE. 



.( 



Well, you know where she is?^' asked Mr. 
Belville, with more delicacy than one would have 
expected of him. 

" Not I/' said Stannard : " the young lady is 
too independent to let me know where she is/' 

'^ She has been engaged by the celebrated Mr. 
Dunne, who is manager for Captain Tophill in his 
grand speculation of playing one great theatre 
against another. He is a wiseacre, is he not? 
one who will ruin himself.'^ 

'' And serve him right too.'' 

" I presume that your wife will make a name iu 
the world/' said Belville; but, seeing that his friend 
winced, and evidently did not like the conversation, 
he did not continue it. 

" The Warlock, where is he ?" asked his com- 
panion, reverting to something else. 

"In Glasgow, doing wonders. I am up here 
for him, getting some apparatus. If you have left 
your Member of Parliament, why not come and 
jom us r 

"Well," said Stannard, "I will think about it. 
In the meantime, let us go: I have a call to make." 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 149 

The young fellow was uneasy about that wife of 
hisy whom he loved^ although she despised him. 
After parting from the companion of the Warlock 
in fiiendly terms, he went over to the stage-door 
of the Theatre Royal, Brydges Street, and, giving 
a shilling to the stage-doorkeeper, to whom he 
was not unknown, inquired the whereabouts of his * 
wife, although he knew well enough where she 
lived, more from an uneasy feeling which he could 
not control, which was analogous to that which 
retains a rabbit in the immediate vicinity of its 
living tomb. 

Unable to fix himself to any purpose, burning to 
revenge himself both on his wife and on Captain 
Tophill, who, although very willing to do him an 
injury, had not succeeded, and probably never would 
succeed in doing it, Herbert Stannard determined 
that the way to win back his wife and to revenge 
himself on his enemy was to get money. 

'^ Money,*' he said, as he walked to his humble 
lodging not far from the New Road, after parting 
from Pegwell, '^ is the root of all evil, as we well 
know. Not that I am quite sure of that. To 



160 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

some of us it is the root of all blessing. I wish I 
had more of it. There was precious little of it to 
be got out yonder/' he said, apologetically, tossing 
his head and long hair backwards in the direction 
of the patriotic Mr. Brawl; ^^but there may be 
something to be picked up in this little job. Fll 
go down to-morrow.^' 

In pursuance of this purpose . for when he fixed 
upon a purpose he was very energetic in carrying 
it out, at least for a short time . ^he turned back 
and walked to the '^ Black Bull'* in Holborn, and 
inquired about the Bilscombe Regis coach. 

" It leaves at ten in the morning . at ten sharp, 
sir," said the boots. " Shall I keep a place for 
you V 

^^Yes, do,'* returned Stannard, walking oflf. 
" I will be here in time." 

Ten o'clock came, and with it the coach, one of 
the few which had not, even at that time, been 
driven oflf by the railways. But Bilscombe was a 
little place, always destined to be somewhat behind 
the age, and has only within these five years been 
blessed with a branch line, which does not pay the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 151 

sbaieliolders^ and has cut up a great deal of the 
quiet and romantic beauty of the little town. 

The coach was a delusive affair, which started 
and went to the end of the first stage only with 
four horses^ and before a quarter of its journey 
had been gone through came down to two. The 
coachman was but a shadow of the grand coach- 
men who had been driven into despair, bankruptcy, 
and suicide by the railways, or, if they escaped 
the latter fate, had taken refuge on the boxes of 
London cabs and omnibuses. The travellers were 
few. An old lady in a brown silk dress, very much 
faded, was the only " inside.'^ The outsiders con- 
sisted of our friend Stannard, who occupied the 
box-seat, three travelling bagmen, each in a very 
small way, who sat immediately behind him, and 
a stout cook, who was going down to visit her 
&mily,was exceedingly nervous about an enormous 
box on the top of the coach, and who was honoured 
by having a special ladder brought out for her to 
ascend. Behind the coach, and causing great 
anxiety to the motherly apprehensions of this good 
woman, who was in a continual state of tremor 



152 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

lest they should fall off^ were two little boys^ who 
were bound to a cheap school in the country. 
Happily for them, the cook left the uncongenial 
society of the commercial travellers, who smoked 
bad cigars and talked continually about their 
business, and sat opposite these poor litt)e fellows, 
whose feet, not being long enough to reach the 
foot-board, rolled about, at each jerk of the old 
coach, like little Chinese mandarins, and, to keep 
each other warm, stuck as closely together as a 
couple of lore-birds. 

Providence is generally very kind to these 
callow fledglings, and had, no doubt, sent the cook 
to do her duty by them, which she did nobly, 
stuffing them with currant buns, and warming 
them with a pleasant drink somewhat stronger than 
tea, a good supply of which she carried in a black 
bottle artfully concealed in wickerwork and further 
disguised by an old newspaper. 

Wrapped up in a handsome coat with a fur 
collar. for, as we have said before, or ought to 
have said, Herbert Stannard was somewhat fond 
of adorning his thin, and elegant figure . our young 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 153 

Bohemian sat by the driver moodily enough, and 
hardly enlivened by the bright and beautiful 
autumn morning, which, although bright, was 
sharp, and, indeed, somewhat cold. 

He was stamping his feet with impatience, when 
the coachman crawled up to his perch, reins in 
hand, and, giving them to Stannard to hold, 
covered up h^s legs like an old stager, and made 
himself as comfortable as circumstances would 
jpermit. 

"What time do we reach Bilscombe,^' asked 
Stannard . "eh, coachey?^* 

"Well, I should say about two, maybe. The 
roads are not very heavy now/' 

" Six mortal hours V* said the impatient young 
man. " I suppose we shall be half-dead by that 
time." 

"Maybe," returned the coachman. "I've 
known the time, when we had four good 'uns all 
the way, that we did it in four and a half. But, 
Lor' bless you, sir '* 

" All right !" cried the ostler, starting the horses 
by taking their cloths oflP. 



Ifl4 A 81U.ENDID FORTUNE. 

Tho <H>Aoh (lid not even boast a guard ; so tbe 
Ariyt^t Un^kcHl round to see all rights and then set 
utf with a littlo dash of spirit; a spurt, or, rather, 
ythivit of a »purt» which the solid old horses, stifiF 
iu tht>ir joints and disgusted with their position, 

'' Tht'Y will be all the better when ther be a 
)xlU<^ warm in ihe collar/^ said eoacher, toodiiii^ 
lip the n#ar k«der : a proceeding at whidi thax 
usi^Uup aninwd oot;^ wag^^^i h» tail^ and fiv 
%)uo^ W vtiFi^Uaiu^ iv> wii»ki h» pace. 

-'^ WiU tW^r^ re«t»t3«d Uetbirni: *aai I sUl 
W jt^ srf i^^ Ate Aey k«^ ciesbre db«- © 

^ \V^^ v^ bu^ ;ttit*t ^ toon bs»oed » 
* $»^^i 5:^/^ » w;ttar ^i?m» ;aac ic iu^^"^ 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 155 

The coachman, with a gloomy imagination, and 
certain thick-coming fancies of present, and 
probably perpetual ruin staring him in the face, 
was not a very merry companion for Stannard, 
and he turned for relief to the commission-agents 
behind him with but very little success. Before 
he reached Uxbridge he had ascertained the price 
of dry goods of various sorts, had heard that 
cotton was a drug on the market, and how old 
Tinpan, the jeweller, who died worth a mil- 
lion of money, had started in life; how he, 
Tinpan, had, with indomitable perseverance, 
hawked oranges and lead-pencils from door to 
door, until some gentleman set him up with five 
shillings, and his fortune was made. 

"All," said one of these shrewd gentlemen, "it 
is very well to say that his fortune was made ; but 
he made it." 

"Why, o' coorse: nobody said that he didn't 
go to do it. He made it, sure enough : no one 
else could make it for him." 

" Ah, but what I mean to say is," persisted the 
other, " that old Tinpan used, when he was 



156 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

thirty year old, to sleep under his counter in a 
mere dog-hole of a place ; that he never left off 
work till twelve o'clock at night; that he never 
took no pleasure, except at his company's dinners 
and city feasts; and that he never got drunk, 
leastway unless it was at them ; that for the last 
thirty years of his life hard work had knocked 
him up, and he couldn't live on nothing stronger 
than oatmeal." 

'' And yet he died with a million, or, it may be, 
half a million o* money,'' said one of the bagmen. 
" What a wonderful man !" 

'^ Say, rather," interrupted Stannard, breaking 
in, '^ what a wretched old hunks ! Why, I declare 
the life of a convict or a galley-Save is worth such 
a life ten times over." 

''Well," said the other, with something like pity 
on his countenance . an inexpressive plane of hu- 
man flesh surrounded by a ring-fence of brown, 
stubby hair, and stumpy whiskers . " Well, diflfer- 
ent 'pinions, different people. With all his misery, 
he died worth a sackful of money." 

" And much good did it do him," said Stannard. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 157 

Then he '^ pulled himself up short/^ as the bagmen 
termed it^ asking himself of what possible use it 
would be to argue with such fellows. 

'^ All their ideas," he reflected to himself, as he 
lighted a cigar . "All their ideas are set upon 
money . Now, there is just as much diflference 
between one of these fellows and a noble-minded 
man who gives himself up to hard work for the 
mere duty as there is between a pig and a race-* 
horse. Why, I would rather have the tinsel am- 
bition of Safta, with her paltry belief that, when 
one hears the clapping of gloved hands and the 
music of applause, one is in Paradise.'^ 

Having by the time he had drawn the first few 
whiffs of his Havannah, composed himself, and set 
himself to think out the business he had in hand, 
he again reverted to the constant talk of the young 
and middle-aged men behind him on money. It 
was nothing but money with them, except that 
now and then their erratic speech touched upon 
the beauties of certain barmaids at the hotels 
and taverns they passed. To men who are in the 
pursuit of golden riches perhaps nothing is more 



158 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

pleasant . at any rate, if we judge from their con- 
versation . ^than a perpetual flow of talk as to the 
best way to amass them. To others this kind of 
talk is very annoying, and to a poor man some- 
times dangerous. It was so in this case. 

" Money, money, money V^ said Herbert to him- 
self : '^ what a powerful god it is !^' 

It is noticeable that he did not add. And what a 
dirty set of worshippers it has amidst the motley 
crew who bend to it ! 

" Money ; always money ! Why, those wretched 
fellows behind there would think more of a mil- 
lionaire than they would of Sbakspeare. Well, 
it is very pleasant to have, at any rate : when 
we want it we find out that secret. I wish I could 
get some ; but how to do so, except through this 
litfie pocket-book, I don't know. I wonder whether 
the secret be worth buying. I dare say not ; but 
if anybody tries to purchase it, I do not see why I 
should not sell it. Old Pegwell will not know any 
better ; and if I could only get a hundred pounds 
or so, why, then I might secure an American 
engagement for Safta, and, getting into the New 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 159 

World, get rid of this wom-oat, wretched old 
country/' 

People who have thrown away time, talent, and 
one or two good opportunities in life may be 
excused if they are somewhat dissatisfied with 
their surroundings. Such was the case with Mr. 
Stannard; and, to say truth, the little exercise 
of ingenuity he contemplated rendered his stay 
in his own country unwise on his part. 

Before he reached Uxbridge he had settled within 
himself to do the best he could for himself, and to 
do so by the aid of the document he held. And 
when he arrived at that town he strengthened his 
resolution by one or two glasses of mm- and- water 
and a light and sportive conversation with the 
cook, to whom he handed up a glass of ale, not 
only to warm herself, but also for the benefit of the 
two little children who were balancing themselves 
as well as they could on the basket of the coach. 

So, while poor Doctor Sangrado and his sister 
Lotty were troubling themselves for the lost certi- 
ficate, and poor Mrs. Emmy, puzzled beyond con- 
trol, was allowing herself to fall every moment into 



160 . SPLENDID FORTUXB. 

a state of worse coniusion and mental irritatdon, 
Mr. PegwelFs messenger was making a bargain 
with himself to gain as mnch as he conld hj their 
loss. 

''Upon my word, Doctor/' said Lotty to her 
brother, after a long talk npon their best mode of 
acting, ^'I do not know what yon should do 
now, unless go to London.'^ 

" I was quite right in what I did ?'* asked the 
doctor, apologetically. He was a man whom many 
disappointments had taught to distrust himself, 
and, moreover, he liked to be backed up . which 
of us does not? . by one whom he esteemed and 
honoured as much as he did his sister Lotty. " I 
was quite right in what I did?" He repeated 
this because the young lady was musing. 

"Oh, quite right. There is no doubt about 
that, no doubt. What there is doubt about is the 
future. Had we have kept this very important an- 
nouncement from the Earl, we should have been 
culpable. As it is, we are somewhat troubled. 
Having commenced the business, we must go 
on with it; and I do not see anything else 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 161 

for you to do but to run up to London, as they 
say, and find out the church where the marriage 
took place." 

'^ Well, there is some difficulty about that," said 
the doctor. 

'^ Difficulty or not," answered Lotty, ^^ things 
cannot remain as they are. The marriage must, 
I suppose, have been registered. A lawyer would 
put you on the right scent at once if you told him 
the day and the year. We can ascertain at least 
that much from Lady Somers. Her mind is not 
too hopelessly confused for that." 

^^ It has had a severe shock, and has hardly yet 
had time to recover. We must give it time, at least, 
and must not trouble her too much, or I don't 
know what will be the consequences. But I think 
with you. We must have at least some excuse for 
my absence from the Abbey. I will write to his 
lordship and say I am unavoidably called up 
to London upon business of much importance; 
only, by the way, he will not unnaturally imagine 
that the business of the greatest importance is that 
which concerns himself only." 

VOL. II. M 



163 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



CHAPTER X. 



A MODERN MISSIONARY. 



It was, indeed, quite possible that the Earl ot 
Broadacres should think that his own business was 
of the utmost importance. 

Ever sine the death of the elder of his sons he 
had been very mournful and sad; for he was a 
shrewd, clever man, and knew the measure of 
Lady Amethyst and Mr. Andrew Bxadstock as 
well as any one. The doctor's strange announce- 
ment brought hope itnto his breast, and, far from 
being angry with his son for his marriage, or 
irritated at the announcement of a son and heir to 
his estates, he was really very gUd about it. 

Lady Amethyst, on the contrary, was very sadly 



A SPLENDID rORTTTNE. 163 

annoyed. She had, in some way which she could 
not very well account for, a presentiment that 
Lord Somers was married ; a presentiment which 
she had long endeavoured, but very vainly, to stifle. 
She did not exactly know how to act, and she, 
therefore, fled for refuge to Miss Nightley ; for, 
although Lady Amethyst was a very good woman 
of business, there were some businesses in which 
she felt it diflScult to act. Perhaps even more 
than with men it is true with women, that 
there are times when they can act better by 
others than by themselves. She knew that the old 
lord was neither very cordial to her nor to her 
husband, and she also knew, even more acutely 
than he did himself, that he would welcome such 
an announcement as the doctor had made. 

So Miss Nightley and the lady had taken sweet 
counsel together under the lime-trees in Broad- 
acres Park, and the governess had found herself 
''detached,'^ to use a military phrase, with a 
roving commission to make herself useful in any 
possible way that she could against the enemy. 
With this she was delighted, being of a deeply 

M 2 



164 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

satirical nature, and, rather than otherwise, fond 
of hunting and worrying humankind whenever she 
could. What had humankind done to her to de- 
serve this treatment ? Well, not much. It was 
precisely because humankind had not done much 
that she so cried out against it. She was a woman 
of very irregulated ambition, and she had been, 
unfortunately for her, bom in a position much too 
low for the fanciful exercise of that ambition. 

Being proud, and of a nature which possessed a 
considerable deal of that which its owners call 
emulation, and plainer people, envy. Miss Nightley 
disliked the aristocracy and the rich, because they 
were above her; but, much more than these, she 
detested persons of her own class who raised 
themselves, either by merit or fortune, over her 
level. To keep these down, to keep servants in 
their proper places, and to snub the bold and am- 
bitious of her sex who by a lucky marriage were 
better oflF than she was, formed a peculiar delight 
to this good woman, and one so keen and enjoyable 
that she seldom missed an opportunity of seizing it. 

With great willingness, therefore, this lady 



A SPLEXDID FORTUNE. 165 

undertook to find out all the holes in the coat of 
Mrs. Everingham ; and to do so she made her way, 
one morning, towards the house of a gentleman 
who, she thought, would prove her ally. 

This gentleman had been in the Church of 
England, but was so no longer. He was a man of 
nearly fifty years of age, of tall and commanding 
stature, somewhat bent by study. He had a pale, 
observant face, a high forehead, on which he some- 
what prided himself, and restless and piercing eyes, 
which at the same time interested and puzzled 
those who looked at them. 

His career, up to the time at which Miss Night- 
ley first met him, had not been without interest. 
He was a man of merit and note, and would have 
been so in any company, and also of that restless 
ambition which urged him to do extraordinary 
things which set the world talking about him. 
When he came down to a little mission in the 
midland counties, which enabled him to take a 
house not far from Bilscombe Regis, he was known 
as the Reverend Father Gargle. But he had not 
always borne that honoured title. 




166 A SPLENDID FOBTUKE* 

He came of a good bat poor family ; a family bo 
poor that^ after giving a good education to its 
8ons^ it was obliged to leave them to make their 
own way in the world with as little help from the 
foontaia-head as need be. But this had the effect 
of making the boys work^ and Fen. Gargle . ^his 
Christian name was Feniston . had an immense 
deal of work in him. Few men were so restless 
and active^ few men so fond of being everywhere 
in the very first rank, or as near to it as he 
could get. 

Mr. Fen. Gargle soon became noted as a hard- 
working man in his college^ and the reputation he 
gained not only smoothed his path, but cheered 
him on in it. Every one acknowledged his capacity; 
and, with all the kindly help which a man of repu- 
tation makes, it was much to bis credit that he 
seldom made an enemy. He was soft in his 
demeanour, kindly, and very much of a gentleman. 
If there was any want about him, it was that he 
wanted a certain manliness ; but this did him more 
service than he was aware of. It is the strong 
and independent men in life who make enemies : 



A SPLIMDIB FORTUNE* 167 

it is the tnen who seem to ask and to seek help 
who gain friends. Society is^ after all^ much more 
generous than we take it to be. 

And so^ as an undergraduate^ with a deputation 
of having read more Greek plays than many others 
had heard of^ and of spending his vacations in 
London^ reading in the British Museum^ and 
studying the Semitic languages^ Mr. Fen. Gargle 
was backed by enthusiastic friends of his college 
to come out a double-first^ and did not wholly dis- 
appoint them. Double-first is not a position 
achieved every day; and if Pen. did not gain it, he 
came very near it^ and lyhen he set up himself as a 
college tutor he had the very pick of the young men 
to enter his classes. When a fellowship in his 
college fell vacant, universal acclaim shouted . if it 
could ever be supposed to shout at Oxford . the 
name of Gargle, and to Mr. Pen. Gtirgle it fell. 

In his place he might have been happy ; but 
college dons are not very happy men generally. 
If they stay in the gentle and peaceful shades of 
Alma Mater, they have the reputation of getting 
fatter and more stupid every year; a reputation 



168 A SPLEXDID FORTUNE. 

\i hich did not suit the thin^ studious^ mild^ but 
ambitious Pen. Gargle. 

Had he only have kept quiet, he would, no doubt, 
have been presented with the most presentable 
college living which should fall vacant ; for he was 
that sort of man to whom the world does not care 
to offer little favours; and he might then have 
married well, and gradually risen from rural dean 
to archdeacon, employing his learned leisure in 
editing Greek plays, or translating German meta- 
physics, until he stepped into the throne of a lord 
bishop of the English Church. 

As a bishop Mr. Pen. Gargle would have had 
employment, and would have shone. He had a 
capital way of dealing with men, and was of 
sufficient learning to have come down with a heavy 
hand upon any innovating or recalcitrant curate 
who might have entered, as some unwise curates 
will do, into a paper war with his diocesan. 
The bishop in nubibtis would have had the world 
on his side. He was just the man to have a cer- 
tain portion of that vast assemblage on his side ; 
but his fault was a very general one. "All think,'* 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 169 

wrote a clever lady . "All think their lictle set 
mankind;" and Mr. Pen. Gargle was no exception. 
Success to a great extent spoiled him, or, rather, it 
spoiled the little caution which had room to reside 
in that clever, restless brain by the side of so many 
talents. 

And so, when Mr. Pen. Gargle became a tutor, 
although men flocked to him, he was not content 
solely to wait at the gate of knowledge. His busy 
brain was continually delighted in broaching new 
subjects and coming in contact with many 
fresh minds: it soared high into the regions of 
novelty. His ambition was to fill other people's 
minds, and to occupy and distract other brains 
besides his own. 

It was a stirring time at Oxford when Mr. Pen. 
Gargle, to show his devotion for the Church to 
which he hoped to owe much, took orders. The 
celebrated " Tracts '^ had appeared, and they were 
acknowledged to be so full of novelty, so clever, 
alive, and earnest, that many men were glad to 
bear even the reputation of having written them. 
Mr, Pen. Gargle bore more than the reputation : 



170 A SPLENDID PORTtJNE. 

he actually was a Tractarian, and one not unknown 
or unhonoured. 

He bad read patristic divinity to some purpose^ 
and his opponents^ and these were many^ had to 
wade through ponderous volumes^ with which he 
was familiar enough^ before they could answer 
him. Many went down before the strong steel 
pen of Gargle^ and the reputation of this literary 
Churchman increased on all sides* 

It would have been well^ perhaps^ had he stopped 
there; but Fen. had not a mind that he could 
easily pull up. Delicate^ leai^ned^ and with a fine 
appreciation of beauty^ he became enhanced in 
the study of architecture^ carried his Bloxam with 
him^ went into the country and rubbed brasses^ 
made sketches of sedilia and piscinas^ and finally 
grew to ask himself, as a very natural sequence, 
why he was not of that Church which had power, 
beauty, and a purpose for all those antiquities 
which he loved and reverenced. 

Other people had asked themselves the question 
long before. Enthusiastic young pupils who had 
followed the road which their tutor pointed out 



A SPLENDID FOKTTINE. 171 

had^ to their great surprise^ perhaps^ and certainly 
to the surprise of their relatives^ foand themselves 
in Home. When they were safely landed in that 
Church of which I am speakings and not the city^ 
they saw plainly enough that the resting-place 
they had chosen was an ineyitahle conclusion^ and 
they wondered^ perhaps with some bitterness, why 
Gargle did not take the steps they had taken. 

But for a long time Fen. Gai^le hesitated. His 
was an honest mind, although eager Protestant 
papers called him a Jesuit. He was really ena- 
moured of beauty, and his mind was finely touched 
with the art element and art worship which 
underlie religion. But he loved his friends, his 
companions, his Church. Success and applause 
may have turned his head, but they never cor- 
rupted his heart. Urged, at last, by one side to 
speak out, and plainly; urged by the other side to 
declare himself . for many a Christian brother sent 
to him letters full of Christian love . Pen, Gargle, 
his thin, commanding form bent lower, his fine, 
delicate, if somewhat weak face looking more 
wearied than ever, and his hair getting early thin 



172 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

and gray, met with an old pupil of his own who 
had entered the service of the proud Church which 
claims the sovereignty of the world, and had with 
him a long, long talk. 

Gargle, his mind torn with doubt, was no match 
for the younger man, who had seen some months 
of service, and who had all the ready confidence of 
a convert. There was no doubt about him : it was, 
he said, all peace within. He was like the man 
who, iu the lines of Lucretius, sat upon a bank 
and saw others struggling in the stream beneath 
him : he»wondered what they struggled for. 

Is not this the old story ? Is there not a good 
deal of truth mixed with the exaggeration of these 
men? Do not the bathers at Brighton and 
St. Leonards, as well as the little vulgar boys in 
Leeches caricatures, assure the gentleman in the 
machine that he had better tumble in at once . ^it is 
so nice and warm . all the time they are trembling 
with cold? Is it so nice and warm, after all? 
Perhaps not ; but we are all glad when the plunge 
has been taken, and the shock is over. 

So in went the Rev. Peniston Gargle, head over 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 173 

ears. There was great rejoicing in the Protestant 
Church when this incubator of so many ducks . 
who, by the way, men could not say belonged to 
the water or land . ^plunged boldly in and swam 
after his brood. 



" Out goes the parson, illustrious spark ; 
And, scarce less illustrious, follows the clerk. 



» 



wrote Cowper. In this case the most illustrious 
followed last, and the "Record" sang paeans, 
intimating that the last of the band of spies had 
returned to the camp which sent them out. 

In calm truth, it was probably nothing of the 
sort. Poor Pen. Gargle, when he took this plunge 
into the sea, felt very cold and miserable, and shed 
many bitter tears ; but he struck out boldly and 
soon reappeared swimming. He was, in good truth, 
of too much consequence and too great an activity 
to lie concealed ; and if the Church which received 
him had no hand in enticing the deserter, she did 
not fail to profit by his talent. 

And so the literary Churchmen on the other 
side . those gentlemen who print their efiiisions 



174 A SPLENDID rOKTITNE. 

on such bad paper^ and who edit organs which 
always seem to be in a chronic state of that which 
our American friends^ not brothers or cousins^ call 
indebtedness . sang their little songs of triumph. 
Why should they not? These gentlemen^ too, 
believed that they were fighting and writing for 
the truth. They pitied the darkness of the 
benighted Protestant just as heartily as the more 
vigorous Anglican and Protestant Dissenter did of 
the benighted Romanist t 

So, for awhile, Father Pen. Gargle . ^he had, of 
course, joined what the Rev. Tubbins called, in 
his presence, the ministry . had plenty to do in 
answering congratulatory, angry, threatening, de- 
clamatory, minatory, laudatory, and consolatory 
letters. He adopted the tonsure, and felt cold 
and uncomfortable on the top of his head. He 
found that he could not kick about half as much 
as. he had done, and that the Church which was so 
full of ease, comfort, and delight held, as Mr. 
Skittles or the Warlock would have said, a pretty 
tight hand over him. " Hey-day \" thought he : 
" I suppose it is all right. We want authority ; 



A SPLENPID FORTUNE. 175 

we want a rule of faith; we must subordinate our 
human understanding to the Church.'^ 

And so this restless^ unquiet spirit became still. 
But he had, and he enjoyed^ his consolations. 

These chiefly arose from the articles, printed^ as 
we have said before, on thin paper and with shabby 
type, and with much inferior spirit in the writing 
than our worldly papers have, which reminded 
the world of the learning, piety, and grace which 
Father Gargle possessed, and of the sacrifice he had 
made. 

Sometimes a devotee of the female sex, who 
took care to let the readers know that she could 
not be the bride of such a saintly man now that he 
was a priest, would address a somewhat weak and 
flabby set of verses to him. Sometimes a letter 
would thank him for having sacrificed position, 
luxury, and wealth, to become a follower of the 
poor fisherman. 

Nor did, as has been before hinted, his new 
Church forget to reward him. He was made head of 
the Piscatorians, a company of very active fathers, 
who set up their mission in the midland counties. 



176 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

who had a very pretty church . all painting, glazing, 
and gilding inside . and who sang beautifully and 
looked very romantic and novel to English eyes. 

Yes, the return had come at last. Ultra-Pro- 
testants shuddered : some of them even wept. We 
of England, who had been so often foremost in the 
fight against ignorance, superstition, and cruelty, 
&c., &c., who had bearded the intolerance of the 
Pope, and who had . as everybody knows we have 
. ever so many thumb-screws and iron gags in 
our Tower; we, who had sent missions to the 
heathen, flooded the Continent with tracts, and 
had cast sackfuls of Bibles over benighted Spain 
and darkened Portugal ; we, who had even sent to 
lecture the Pope himself, and had built a church, 
very much like a stable, outside the gates of Rome 
. ^we had, at last, not one, but many missions sent 
'^ into our midst;" and at the head of one of these, 
the most active and dangerous . alas ! the most 
talented and seductive too . at the head of these 
Piscatorians, was Father Pen. Gargle, a pervert. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 177 



CHAPTER XI. 



STANNABD^S MISSION. 



Doctor Sangrado was a simple man. In saying 
this one is not to suppose that he was one without 
talent, or, indeed, that highest kind of talent which 
approaches so nearly to genius. Indeed, in his 
own profession he had, at the time spoken of, sent 
certain observations to medical journals which did 
him the highest honour, and which won over 
certain deep students to entertain the highest 
opinion of his patient observation and acute 
analysis, and consequent bold suggestions. 

But in the ways of the world he was very simple. 
Mr. Richard Stephen Naylor, who was, as far from 
a genius as a man well could have been, might have 

VOL. II. N 



178 A SPLENPII) FOBTTXB. 

pnt in an afl^avit^ and have possibly got Dr. Morton 
to swear to^ things which he did not quite belieye^ 
or upon which he had not yet made np his mind. 
He was so simple that the difference between the 
men may be thus stated : Keith Morton believed 
in goodness^ and Mr. Naylor did not. Morton was 
a disciple of what he thought or knew to be truths 
and Mr. Naylor scorned to recognise the existence 
of any such quaUty. 

Of course it happened^ as it frequently does 
happen^ that the only man thoroughly devoted to 
her cause and determined to serve her was^ perhaps 
in this case the least adapted to do Truth service. 
If Mr Naylor, who was a cunning, but not a very 
clever lawyer, had taken Mrs. Emmy's suit iu 
band, he would have proceeded in a way very 
different from that of Dr. Morton, and would have 
brought the matter very shortly to a successful 
issue. As it was. Dr. Morton was her only 
champion, and, possibly at the very time he should 
have stayed at home, he went to London in great 
haste, and was on the top of the coach which, 
within two miles on the other side of Uxbridge, 



A SPLENDID FORTUNES 179 

passed Mr/Herbert Stannard, culmly smoking his 
cigar on the Bilscombe coach which brought hiux 
from London. 

Stannard^ who had a capital memory for faces, 
and a very bad one for names^ an arrangement 
far from uncommon with busy men, recognised 
that of Dr. Morton. 

. " I have seen that face before/* he said to the 
coachman : *' whose is it ?'* 

" It^s a gentleman who is well known in Bils* 
oombe/* answered the driver, "and should be 
better. It^s the best doctor i' the place.** 

This coachman had reason to know : he was 

> 

a family man, who had been physicked and fed 
out of a bad fit of rheumatic gout . not an imfre-^ 
quent ailment with hard drinkers who live in the 
open air . ^by our good doctor. 

'^ That's all very well,** returned Stannard, " but 
you forget that I do not live at Bilscombe. What 
is his name ?** 

" Dr. Keith Morton. He lives on the side of 
the hill. They calls his place Cold Blow.** 

Umph !** answered the cudevant secretary ; " I 

N 2 



i< 



180 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

don't remember the place. He didn^t vote for 
Mr. Brawl/' 

" No ; he is hard and fast true blue with the 
rest of us/' answered the coachman. '^ We have 
known the old family for many years, and we 
don't put up for no innovationers." 

He had indeed lengthened the word by a sylla- 
ble, but what he meant lay in the right direction. 
The coachman and those about him, especially 
those who lived under the wings of the " Falcon,'' 
believed in "the old family" and were true to 
them, and looked upon the election of the chair- 
maker as an innovation hardly to be understood. 

"Him 'twas," volunteered the coachman, jerking 
his whip back to the flying coach, now fast dis- 
appearing along the level road . " Him 'twas as 
brought home the young lord when he had abroke 
his neck, along o' his foine lady here." 

'^Oh, indeed! I recollect the incident well 
enough. Will you take a cigar, coachman ?" 

u 'Twill be soon in now, an' 'twont let 'un smoke 
in the *^ Falcon,' more by reason that a stupid 
groom, years agone, set fire to a stable with his 



.A. SPLENDID* FORTUNE. 181 

poipe. Nevertheless, I^U take 'un, and thanks for 
her. She wUl do to-morrow momin\ Momin' 
air's uncommon raw to th' throat at this time o' 
year.'' 

Coaehey took the cigar and carefully put it 
away in the fold of his large sleeve, on the top of 
his wrist, where he could not easily break or 
damage it. 

" I did not hear anything about the fine lady," 
said Stannard, who found in the driver's talk some 
little hint upon which he might act. " I thought 
that Lord Somers was thrown merely in driving a 
bull away from a young lady who got very in- 
opportunely in the way, as, to say the truth, they 
most of them do." 

'' You be right there," said his companion on 
the box, who was himself a woman-hater of no 
ordinary force ; ^' right enough, sir. No ; it wur 
all along o' Farmer Groughem's bull. And a 
werry good bull he was; leastways, he made a 
decent piece of beef. We had a bit on him up at 
the ' Falcon.' " 
> Mr. Stannard was delighted to hear it. But 



182 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

be would have rather heard about the young lady; 
80 he continued the conyersation^ looking at the 
Coachman with a pitying ftuperiority^ and now and 
then prompting him to speak. 

'' And who^ pray> might this young lady have 
been^-a cousin of my lord*« V^ 

The coachman looked on him with much con«- 
tempt. What ! not know that Lord Somers had 
no fetnale cousins ! Here was a cockney indeed ! 

'^No; not a cousin/^ he said with emphasis* 
''Lord Bradstock didnH have no female sisters^ 
as he knew on^ and therefore didn't ought to have 
iko cousins. Some people said ^twas my lord's 
lawful lady^ and others said that it was his unlawful 
lady. Coachey's nephew, who was a very impudent 
boy, was took on as ps^e-boy by his lordship, and 
brought down from Lonnon to look after the pony^^ 
because his lordship did not want any one about 
the town to know of his goings on. But, Lord ! 
how things do happen I" 

Upon this profound reflection, one, indeed^ 
sufficient to make us all pause, because things do 
happen in a very strange way, the coachman fell 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE* 183 

into a brown study^ and^ flicking his boi^es in a 
meditative way, passed by the first straggling 
houses which formed the suburb of Bilscombe 
Begis« 

^'Yes; they do happen very strangely/* said 
Stannard, quietly swearing at the man^s slowness. 
^^ And how, then, about this lady? She was not 
his cousin, nor his wife?*' 

" Well, some on *em say not. Some do say as 
she was his miss. But Jim swear, he do, that she 
was his lawful own wife, and had the marriage 
lines too. But Jim was such a conceited chap, h6 
wur : he (the coachman) would not believe him on 
his testamentary oath.*' 

" Jim is, however, in the right, though,** said 
Stannard to himself. 

He did not whisper this to the coachman, 
because he saw thdt the matter of opinion had 
resolved itself into a quarrel between the uncle 
and nephew; the latter looking down upon the 
former, and the former despising the latter; a 
pleasant arrangement, which will sometimes takd 
place in the best-regiilated families. 



184 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

'^Ah/^ the passenger continued^ in a reflective 
way^ adopting the old man^s side that he might 
get the more out of him, " some young men are 
awfully conceited, and fancy they know as much 
as the old ones/' 

"As conceited as pison/* said coachey. 
'* Farmer Groughem's bull cost Jim a good place, 
though. He'' (it was Jim, and not the bull, to 
whom he alluded) " stood at the head o' the pony 
when the bull lep' the fence and runned at the 
soldiery. When madam caught sight on 'im** 
(the bull, and not Jim) . "she was awful frightened 
o' them animals, as a*most all women are ^" 

Here the coachman broke off, to say, in 
parenthesis, " cussed fools !" 

"I donH know that,'' said Stannard, who was 
weak and nervous himself. " A bull like that is 
no joke, you know, coachman." 

"No; 'taint," answered that dignitary; ''but 
Fm speakin" o' cattle in general. They'' (he 
dwelt upon the pronoun with great contempt) 
" are just as afraid of a great cow as of a tearin', 
flyin', roarin' beast of a bull." 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 185 

" Well, they don^t know any better/' returned 
Stannard, " and so I pardon them for once." 

*^Ah, so say I, when I'm good-natured, you 
know, not when I isnH. But, as I was saying, 
madam, when she see the bull, whips pony like a 
wild thing, and oflF he bolts, upsetting Jim and 
rolling 'im over like a ninepin. Then comes 
bull " 

'^Ah, I saw what afterwards happened. Poor 
thing, it was a sudden blow !'* 

" It was a blow to Jim ; for doctor comes and 
fetches the lady away from the Woodbines up to 
Cold Blow, and there she a' bin ever sin\ Jim 
lost his place, and has bin up to London to get 
another . a fool.'' 

" Well,'' said Stannard, perceiving that nothing 
Jim could by any means do would please the old 
driver, ^' he could not have gone to a better place, 
could he . that is, if he wanted to get into work?" 

'^Many peoples likes Lonnon, and many does 
not. Now, I'm amongst those as does not, and 
I don't see much good as Jim can do with it. 
Wo-ho, will you, now ?" 



186 A SPLENDID rORTTTNB* 

The horses^ which had put on a little spurt of 
extra speed as they neared the "Falcon," now pulled 
up. The landlord, who had for five-and-twenty 
years stood ready to receive any guest who might 
arrive by coach, stood there now. The one stable^ 
man tried to make himself as active as two ; and 
the waiter, who, with a white handkerchief, had> 
in the exceedingly awkward way which only 
country waiters can achieve, whisked his napkin 
under his arm, opened the coach*door to the single 
female passenger, who, received the attention in a 
somewhat testy way, as tired passengers are wont 
to do. 

The old coachman gave up his reins and his 
whip, and hobbled down the side of the coach very 
stiffly, as if his legs were badly fitted on to the 
upper part of his body, and he was not quite sure 
they would not come off at the hips. The land- 
lord, a staunch old boy, who still kept up his spirits, 
tried to give a thin gilding of cheerfulness to the 
proceeding by asking each passenger whether he 
would stay to dinner, generally without the 
remotest hope that he would do so, always except- 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 187 

ing the commercials^ who, as they were them- 
-selyes basied with their packages, met with but 
buffliness-like courtesy. 

"Dinner, ma'am?'* said the landlord to the 
inside passenger. " Have soup, ma^am ? Dinner 
or luncheon ?'' 

''A biscuit and a glass of wine will be enough,'' 
«aid that lady, haughtily. ^* I expect a conveyance 
for me soon» I will wait a little." 

She hesitated to call a rattling tax-cart, drawn 
by a little shambling pony, a carriage, although 
she would have been delighted if she could have 
done so; and, after rustling in her faded silks, and 
tmpacking herself from the mouldy inside of the 
.oach, which her presence seemed to make even 
more faded and mouldy than it was, she shuffled in. 

*' George, see the lady into the coflFee-room. 
.Biscuit and a glass of wine, George." 

"Yezzir," said George, in a feeble imitation of 
« London waiter. 

. "Here, waiter, 'ave you got the steps for me 
and these young gentlemen?" cried the cook. 
^^And 'as anybody called for a Mrs. Brown?" 



188 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

''Not at present, ma^am." 

'' George, fetch the ladder. Two young gentle- 
men from Chiswell Street. All right. The tutor 
of Dr. Gradus is in the coffee-room waiting their 
arrival.^^ 

Stannard had descended, and stood under the 
doorway of the '' Falcon/' looking like a gentleman 
of small fortune and much dissipation, his hand- 
some face puckered into a somewhat puzzled 
expression ; for he did not know what to do next. 

"Hang it!" said he at last to himself. ''If 
that doctor had only been too late for the coach, 
or I had come down yesterday instead of to-day, I 
reckon that it would have saved one of us a 
journey. Now, how am I to set about this 
job?" 

"Dinner, sir? dinner or luncheon?" said the 
polite landlord. " Soup, sir ? Hare soup ; nice 
kidney potato, and a mutton chop." 

* " Not a bad dinner, landlord," said Stannard. 
" I won't affect to call it luncheon, for I always 
dine early." 

" Yes, sir," said the landlord, looking across the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 189 

yard to an old turret clock which ornamented a 
small belfry in the centre of a handsome set of 
stables now going somewhat to decay. '^ It^s half 
past two, sir : it will be three before you sit down; 
and that's too late for luncheon and too early for 
dinner; an awkward time, sir/' 

" Maybe/' returned Stannard, with a smile : 
" it is not so to me. I will have what you say at 
three : hare soup, and a mutton chop, and some 
dry sherry. You have very good wine here." 

" Oh yes, sir," said the landlord. ^^ I see you 
have been here before. Why, you were the gen- 
tleman with the great Warlock of the South, to 
be sure. You carried Mr. Brawl's election ; and 
how is he, sir ?" 

"Mr. Brawl, or the Warlock? You have 
mentioned both of them." 

" Mr. Brawl, sir. I understood you were going 
to join him in London. He was on the wrong 
side ; but still one likes to hear of an old fellow- 
townsman. Many a good pound has Mr. Brawl 
and his spent in this old house." 

"I have no doubt of it," returned Stannard. 



190 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

''"Well, he was very well when I last left him; 
We didn't agree about his line of conduct. He 
wanted to do wonders all at once; and I^ believing 
that he had better be still ^' 

During this conversation Dr. Gradus's tutor 
came out of the coffee-room. He was a melan- 
choly young gentleman, with a thin white hand^ 
long fingers, with almond-shaped nails, which he 
kept busily employed in picking numerous pimples 
on his chin ; pimples which he seemed fondly to 
believe took the place, and usurped the dignity, if 
not the beauty of a beard. 

This young gentleman took charge of the two 
little boys, who, finding themselves in a strange 
town and amidst people they did not know, 
were huddled together, and looking around them 
piteously in the hopes of gathering some crumbs 
of comfort to sustain them in their new situation. 
The good-natured and stout cook had given them 
the remains of a plum cake, and, with this in their 
hands, they were consigned to the safe keeping 
of the melancholy young fellow, who did not look 
on them over kindly, seeing possibly in them more 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 191 

occupation for the limited and overtaxed quantity 
of brains of which he was possessed. 

*' Now, boys/' said the young gentleman, " leave 
your boxes and your names with the waiter ; Dr. 
Gradus will send over his cart and horse for them ; 
and, if you please ^' . ^he said this in a dignified 
way, as if he knew very well that if they pleased or 
not it would be the same thing . '^ we will walk 
across the park to the Doctor's.^' So saying, he 
marched off with his two little pupils, who had 
been parting with their kind companion, trotting 
behind him, and also rather admiring his stifi' walk 
and authoritative way. 

"Yes, sir,'' continued the landlord; "and what 
you thought was surely right. Bless you, Mr. 
Brawl won't make no figure in the House. He 
ain't a orator." 

" Well," said Stannard, " whether he be one or 
not, he knows his own business best." 

" As long as it was confined to his own business, 
no doubt, sir," said the landlord. " The mischief 
of it is when we take up a business that we don't 
understand. I think you said dry sherry, sir?" 



192 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



ic 



Exactly; and, landlord, after I have done din- 
ner, I shall be glad if you will come and finish the 
bottle with me/' 

Stannard said this for more reasons than one. 
He was fond of company, and did not like to be 
alone ; and then, moreover, from the landlord he 
could very easily find out how the land lay. 

He was not disappointed. After a very good 
dinner in the coflee-room, which was a much 
superior apartment to the sanded parlour in which 
we first made his acquaintance, the ex-secretary 
was soon joined by the landlord, and enjoyed a 
very good glass of sherry, with a very excellent 



cigar. 



Cf 



This is very sound," said he to his host, 
looking at the wine; '^a nice light colour, 
too." 

'^ It ought to be good, sir," returned the land- 
lord : " I laid it down fifteen years ago, when 
there was a great deal more drunk at this house 
than there ever will be again. I don't like to use 
it at market-tables and elections. Some of the 
people in this town, sir, don't know what sherry 



A SPLENDID rORTTJNE. 193 

is. They like the rich brown-red fiery sort, sir; 
something that bites/' 

''And which will make you feel bilious for a 
week/' returned Herbert. '' Ah, I know it welL 
Now, this is capital. I think we could manage a 
little bottle more ; just a pint, in a black bottle." 

''Will you allow me to order?'' said the land- 
lord, pleased with his guest. 

Stannard bowed. The wine was brought. The 
landlord opened the pint himself, and showed the 
cork with decent pride ; and then, lighting a cigar 
which Stannard offered him, the two sat down 
very amicably together. 

"It is a glorious afternoon," said Stannard. 
" How sweet and peaceful this country town looks 
after great noisy London !" 

^' Ay, sir, it does, indeed. I only wish, 
though, we had a little of the bustle and the 
business. It is a deadly-lively look-out here 
during the winter months." 

"No doubt; but if you had the bustle and 
business, you would soon have the smoke and the 
dirt. Sometimes I like quiet myself, and hate 

VOL. n. o 



94 A SPLEXDID FORTUXE. 

London turmoil; and, at other times, I feel 
that I could not live out of the little village^ as 
we^ call it. Now, does your great family ever 
leave this part for long? I suppose, like other 
great families, it spends the best part of its time 
in town. And, with such a splendid park, too . 
such beautiful trees ! . ^it seems almost a pity^ 
does it not V^ 

"Ah, sir,^' said the landlord, '^you are wrong 
there. They don't leave us for long. All the 
families down here stick to us pretty well, the great 
family best of all ; and, since the loss, sir, I think 
that the Earl will go away even less than he did/' 

Of course Stannard, after this, found the road 
open to him. The landlord had been nnder- 
butler in the family when a very young man, and 
his father ^* before him," he said . as if a man's 
father could, by any possible means, commence 
his existence after him . had known the old lord 
and the young lord, who was now the old lord, 
very well. He told Stannard how secluded Lord 
Broadacres had kept himself, and that he had 
never lifted his head up after his son's death. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 195 

Perhaps he told him even more than he knew. 
He gave rather a graphic sketch of Andrew 
Bradsto6k . ^the Honourable Andrew . and his 
wife, and seemed to entertain a very wholesome 
dislike to that gentleman^ who had, in his younger 
days, borrowed money from him as if he was 
doing him a favour, and had left his debts to be 
settled in a very summary way by Mr. Naylor, 
from London. It seemed to the landlord that, if a 
settlement was to be made, the family solicitor, 
who was, indeed, the solicitor to the " Falcon'' and 
its proprietor, should have been consulted. 

"Yes, landlord; you are right there," said 
Stannard; '^but this gentleman now, I presume, 
has got money: he had some with his wife, of 
course?'' 

"Very little," answered his companion; and 
then he told Stannard that Lady Amethyst was, in 
his opinion, a Catholic, and had a Catholic com- 
panion, and that they both went to confession to a 
little town some miles away, where Father Gargle 
and the Piscatorians were seated. It grieved the 
innkeeper sorely that this Catholic lady's husband 

o 2 



196 A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 

should take the title of the young gentleman who 
died^ and that Andrew should stand next to Lord 
Bradstoek, " and him so worn and feeble, too !** 
For rumours had travelled from the Abbey of 
Lord Bradstock's illness ; and they who love news 
often are glad to make some in anticipation, and 
to moan over evils which they go out to meet long 
before they are coming that way. 

From the landlord, also, before the wine was 

finished, Stannard heard enough to satisfy himself 

that the very best person to apply to was Miss 

Nightley, of whom the servants at the Abbey, 

who kindly took upon themselves, in the absence 

of a local journal, to convey news to the "Falcon,*' 

had reported that she was the mistress of Lady 

Amethyst just as the latter was of the Honourable 

Andrew. Indeed, the landlord took upon himself 

to add that this remarkable woman knew the 

length of everybody's foot in the family. 

Of this Stannard made a mental note, 

^' She may be of some use to me," he said to 

himself. "At any rate, I will apply there first, 

and then go up to the doctor's. But he has left 



. .8FLEKDID FORTUNE. 197 

no one at home^ I suppose^ but an assistant^ or 
some old woman. A pretty thing for him to 
neglect his patients and go running up to town 
just as he might have been useful ! Never mind^ 
he must take the conseiquenees. I hate dealing 
with anybody but principals^ or as near to the 
principals as I can get. Miss Nightshade, or 
Nightley, or whatever her name is, is the woman 
for me.'' 

As they had finished the wine, and this reso- 
lution was fresh upon his mind, Herbert Stannard, 
after ordering a bed, went to take a walk in 
Broadacres Park. 



198 A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 



CHAPTER XII. 



TOWN AND COUNTRY. 



" She can take care of herself; she can take care 
of herself/' said Herbert Stannard, thoughtfiilly 
and rather bitterly, as he walked over the yielding 
tufted grass of Broadacres Park, towards those cele- 
brated cedar-trees, the Sisters, of which mention has 
been made in the first volume. The sun was al- 
ready low in the horizon; the autumn tints had 
made more beautiful than ever the forest trees, 
and in the fading year the two cedars had grown 
darker in foliage and more massive than ever. 
There they stood, seeming to stretch their branches 
over the land with a solemn protective beauty 
which struck the weary, listless, and unhappy 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 199 

young man, and, with the calm peace of the 
evening, sunk into his heart. 

He stood for some little time looking at those 
trees, marking the sky-outline and branch beauty of 
them, and still repeating those words, '^ She can 
take care of herself/' 

Now, to take care of one's self is a very neces- 
sary matter, and the person who can do so need 
not call for any exceeding bitterness of remark. 
But when men apply the phrase to woman they 
always use it as a term of reproach ; as if the ideal 
woman should be weak and unable to help herself; 
an ideal which is soft and effeminate, and well 
enough for Mr. Stannard and those Romans of 
the Lower Empire of whom we have too many. 

And who was able to help herself? Not Lady 
Amethyst, for of her Stannard knew nothing ; and 
certainly not Miss Nightley, for of that estimable 
woman he was not fitted to pronounce. The truth 
is, the young man was thinking upon his wife, 
and of the situation in which he had left her. 
'* That captain,*' he said, '' will find himself fooled, 
as I have been, and serve him right too. The 



200 . SPLENDID FOBTUNS. 

best thing I can do is to look ont for myself too ; 
but I am a child to that woman. She has the 
innocent look of Eve and the cunning of the 
serpent. 

^^ Now^ if I am able to make a little money by 
this job here, I will go to America, out of the way 
of all this nonsense, and take her with me or leave 
her to her fate ; or, just to plague her, I will send 
her a letter, to say that I have made a hole in the 
water. Though, upon second thoughts, I am afraid 
that might please rather than displease her. I 
had better say nothing about it.^ 

So he walked onwards, not at all satisfied with 
himself or his fate, and very much inclined to 
mischief; and, unfortunately for our poor little 
Emmy, he arrived at the Abbey and discovered 
Miss Nightley very opportunely for his business. 

In the meantime the doctor arrived in London, 
not having the slightest notion of his best method 
of proceeding, but very willing to do his best for 
the widow and child whom he had taken under 
his protection. 

^' My best plan,'' said he to himself, ^f is to do 



. SPLBNDID FORTUNE. 201 

the thing respectably. A good place to put up at 
is essential enough, that I do know ; and then I 
must contrive to get hold of a good lawyer/^ 

Good lawyers are not always to be found when 
you want them, although I have been assured that 
they undoubtedly do exist somewhere ; but good 
hotels are easily found in London, and at Brown^s 
Hotel, in Dover Street, Dr. Keith Morton found 
himself as comfortable as one can well be who is 
not at home. 

The doctor^s next expedient was to find out 
" Jack f^ and this Jack, it would appear, was an 
old school and hospital friend of the doctor, of 
whom Sangrado had the highest opinion. So, like 
Stannard in the country, the doctor in town sat 
himself down to a mutton chop and a glass of 
wine, and passed the time, as every healthy English- 
man must do, in the pleasant occupation of eating. 

After dinner the doctor lighted a cigar, and 
went forth to meet Jack ; and as, in doing so, he 
had to walk through Seven Dials . Jack living in 
LamVs Conduit Street . ^the pockets of the kind 
doctor^ which he had filled with a sufficient 



202 A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 

quantity of halfpence, were empted quickly : no 
pitiable object, and there were many, was sent 
away without some kindly word from this good- 
natured and somewhat stout gentleman, who^ as 
he strode over the pavement, looked by far too big 
a man for any garrotter to tackle. 

"'Tis a desperately wicked place, no doubt, this 
London; but yet, somehow or other, I like it. I 
should not mind living in it. There would be 
more excitement than at Bilscombe, after all,'* 

It was one of the crazes of the good-natured 
doctor that he wanted excitement. He was 
always laying himself out for more work than he 
could well get through, and his benevolent schemes 
for the improvement of society covered a vast 
amount of ground, and had taken up a great deal 
of the doctor's time and a considerable quantity of 
paper. He was a reformer in the most vigorous 
sense of the word : there was to be no unhappiness 
and not even a trace of tears in his scheme of 
regeneration ; but, although upon the threshold of 
commencing this vast crusade, Keith Morton was 
kept from promulgating it by a shrewd suspicion 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 203 

that a much wiser intelligence than that of man 
had some concern in the sorrows and troubles of 
the world, and had, at any rate, for some wise 
purpose, never put a stop to them. 

But although he acquiesced in the proposition 
suggested to him, that sorrow and tears might be 
for our good, and, indeed, did fit us for something 
higher and better than mere enjoyment, tears and 
sorrow so touched this soft, good creature, that he 
never saw any approach to them without exciting 
his brain with fervent recollections of his old 
schemes. 

" Dear, dear \" said he, putting sixpence into the 
hand of a poor woman, with a poorer child : ^'go 
home, or go somewhere, my good woman, and feed 
yourself : that child should never be out on such a 
day as this.'* 

The woman replied, with a miserable whine, that 
she had no home, and the doctor hastened on. 
He had a delicate ear for voices, and the doubt 
struck him, as he passed onwards, whether that 
whine was not, after all, too professional ; at any 
rate, it was not in good taste. The woman having 




3M A BnXSDtD FOKTTJUE. 

got OTp eace out of tbe eoonti; ^eatieman, wk« 
bj bis boob^ hat, tnd coot, ibe knew veil was i 
s dweller in Bibjloo, abe b^ given, acoording to ~ 
tbe bert of ber art, an ezUm Borrow to the voice, 
.o M to euate |atj, petiiapB to tbe extent of a 
ihilliiig. Tbst was the a<%x>UDt whicb Jack 
gave of tbe matter, vben the doctor foimd 

Jade JmupCT, tbe fondeat and beat Giend of tbe 
doctor, waa a doctor him.If He bad been tbe 
wit of the hoapital, firiendlr with all the men of 
hia time, tbe hardest worker, the bardeat drinker 
. ^let oa Bay, only aa far as beer and pale ale went 
.tbe most enthtuiaBtic, cleverest, and crotchety of 
a nnmber of men to each of whom the doctor's 
good-nature endowed with great genins. 

Jack waa pounding some medicines with great 
enei^, and giving directions to his boy in bnttons, 
wbo stood by assisting him, so far as putting labds 
on bottles and pouring in some drops of aqiut pura 
went. When Jack was tired, buttons went on, 
fetched down his bottles, weighed tbe medicineB, 
and, in short, waa a double right-band to bis 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 205 

master. Sangrado^ who had stolen in on them, 
watched the operation for some time before 
Juniper, who was very busy, looked up. 

When he did so his round and somewhat red 
face beamed with delight ; he gave a kind of fra- 
ternal howl, pushed away the mortar to buttons, 
and then, coming with a big jump over his little 
counter, fairly hugged the doctor, after the manner 
in whic^L Mr. Keeley on the stage was wont to hug 
a brother performer whom, in the play, he had not 
met since childhood. 

" Come in, Sangrado. Where did you drop from? 
Of all men else, I have avoided thee ; at least, I 
should have avoided, for I am dreadfully busy, and 
I know now that I shall not get any work out of 
myself. Come along in. Sam, get along with 
that prescription, you rascal, and look at the book, 
will you ? There^s Mrs. Smithes child, with the 
bad eyes . you know what to put up . and there's 
Mr. Robinson's lumbago: don't forget the lumbago, 
or he will throw his wife out of window. And, 
Sam, when you've done that, go and put the mare 
to : she hasn't had half enough rubbing down, you 



206 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

lazy beggar. Her coat ought to shine like a new 
piece of oiled silk." 

With this professional simile, he led the way 
through the little shop into a consulting-room at 
the back, where the " Medical Times/' " Lancet/' 
and some of the newest works on surgery and 
medicine were ranged. Jack was a desperate 
reader, and knew more than most men, because 
he worked more, which is, perhaps, a general case. 
He was a good mechanic also, and, in a little third 
room beyond his consulting-room, had a lathe and 
a small carpenter's shop, neatly fitted. 

*^ Now, I say, Jack/' remonstrated the doctor, 
" don't let me take you away. I want only to 
consult you on a case." 

" Bravo ! What is it like ? A consultation I 
anything acute, now . brain fever, for instance ?" 

" No, no ; it's a law case." 

'^ Law !" returned Jack, with his face consider- 
ably longer. " Don't touch it. I never prescribe 
in those cases . sure to dodge you and to become 
chronic." 

Sangrado laughed. " Well, we shall see. But, 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 207 

I say. Juniper, you donH want to poison anybody, 
do you?'' 

^' Why, you wicked wretch, can't you do it in 
the country ? must you come to town for it? Well, 
if you are hard pushed, I don't mind helping you. 
M. Baspail has a notion here of a new and subtle 
poison that absolutely evades discovery." 

" Then he ought to be shot for suggesting it : it 
will set people thinking. But I did not mean that. 
I meant, did you want to poison any one by your 
boy Sam ? because I think you are taking a very 
good way to do so." 

" Oh, Sam," said Juniper, with a laugh : " he 
is the cleverest boy in London . such a chemist ! 
I created Sam. I took him on to clean boots, and 
then taught him to read ; through which, penny 
numbers will be the ruin of him. He is already deep 
in the mystery of *Ada the Betrayed; or. The 
Murder of the Old Smithy.' Here's a number I 
took from his pocket. But the boy has really a 
genius for chemistry, and understands drugs by 
intuition. He can prepare a prescription as well 
as I can; only he is so terribly conceited." 



208 A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 

Sam went on with his work^ pounding away in 
the little shop, which was attached only to Dr. 
Juniper s establishment for his own use, and didn't 
boast any red or blue bottles. And the country 
doctor, after taking a glass of ale, poured the whole 
of his story into the sympathizing ear of Juniper, 
interrupted now and then by the most admiring 
and sympathetic exclamations of . 

" Grod bless me V^ " Well, we will see to this." 
"I know your man, Morton, that I do!" the 
last having reference to an eccentric lawyer, an 
acquaintance of Mr. Juniper, who certainly had 
not much practice, but who somehow had acquired 
the reputation, with gentlemen who were not of 
his profession, of being the cleverest fellow in the 
world. 

'* Hallo, Sam," shouted the town doctor to his 
helpmate, "just you finish that job, and bring 
round the mare. Sangrado, you will go my 
rounds with me ; you can talk as we ride along ; 
and, when we come back from Barnsbury, we can 
.all upon Mr. Hosier . that's the lawyer, I mean 
. he will settle it all in a twinkling. There's 



^ SPLENDID FORTUNB, 209 

pothing like going to the right person. Sangrado, 
you have shown infinite sense and discernment in 
coming to me, and at the right time." 

Sam, who had packed up the physic very neatly, 
and was checking oflF the bottles and pill-boxes 
from a long day-book, summoned an inferior boy 
of much smaller dimensions, and selected his 
portion, which was hastily glanced over by Juniper, 
dismissed him, and then disappeared himself. 

"Quick boy, that," said Sangrado, who had 
watched him : " why, he would beat a dozea 
country boys to fits. He is safe, you say ?" 

*'Safe as houses," answered Jack; "only he 
knows his value. He went away from me for two 
months, a short time ago, and came back a 
deplorable jobject. The fact is, he is too clever: 
people inri>n*t believe him. And then, Sam is 
such a {nreciously conceited fellow. I had to give 
him a good licking, t'other day ; and . would you 
believe it? . he wouldn't take it quietly, but stood 
up to me." 

At the picture of the burly Juniper setting to 
fisticuffs with the clever boy, in the little shop 
VOL. n. p 



210 A SPLENDID FORTUXE. 

where Jack received his patients from ten to four, 
Sangrado laughed outright^ and Juniper joined 
him. 

" Bless you, he was as quick as an eel," said 
Juniper, his face beaming with delight at the 
recollection. " He turned very pale when I 
clouted him, and, having his sleeves already up at 
the pestle and mortar, he stood out just here and 
put himself in position. *Do you mean it?' 
said I. 

" ^ You do it again,' said he, ^ and I'll show you.' 

*' I will say that he was respectful enough not 
to hit his master without due provocation. Of 
course I couldn't stand that, you know." 

"You discharged him there and then?" sug- 
gested Sangrado, with a smile. 

" Not a bit of it," said Juniper : " I was not 
going to balk his inclination. I jumped over the 
counter and gave it him. He was, as I have said, 
as quick as an eel, and just grazed my chin; but I 
gave him a poult of the head with my left, and he 
dropped into the patients' chair. He is a sensible 
lad, Sam, and saw when he had had enough. He 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 211 

shook hands^ and he begged my pardon. He has 
been more humble ever since. There is nothing 
to take the conceit out of a man like a good poult 
of the head.'* 

'^That was a Bedfordshire word, was it not, 
Juniper?" said Sangrado, smiling at the incor- 
rigible doctor, who carried out his ideas of 
equality so far as to have a turn-up with his 
servant. 

''It might have been, or might not; at any 
rate, we said it at Aspley ; I recollect that very 
well. You must know," he continued, "that Sam 
is not an every-day bird. He is a match for any 
of us. Only let him drop his conceit, leave off 
horses and betting, and stick to medicine, and he 
might rival Astley Cooper himself." 

The future rival of Astley Cooper, as Juniper 
said this, came round in a smart phaeton. He 
was dressed as a groom, drove with a light 
hand, and looked a beauAdial of a gentleman^s 
servant, smart, active, and willing. 

" There," said his master : " when you see him 

like that you think it is a pity to spoil him by 

p2 



212 A SPLENDID FORTUNEi 

making him mix physic. He is a wonderful 
feUow." 

Sam jumped down and held the reins for the 
doctor; and Sangrado and his firiend baring 
nicely filled the front seat^ Sam, with his arms 
crossed in the true professional style, sat in the 
very middle of the seat behind, to give a good 
balance to the doctor's spider phaeton. As he sat 
there he seemed to have forgotten all dreams of 
physic, and to be only engaged in glancing with a 
knowing eye and the judgment of a horse-dealer 
on the various animals that passed, and summing 
up in his mind their value to a shilling. 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE.. 213 



CHAPTER XIII. 
LOTTY Morton's fears. 

Poor Lady Somers^ when left alone with Lotty. 
and Mrs. Lapis, felt very lonely and deserted. A 
fear stole upon her that her baby would be taken 
from her, and vague dreams of her own guilt, even 
in marrying the man she loved so much, grew 
gradually upon her. 

The conversation of Miss Morton did her some 
good; but she had been from childhood accus-> 
tomed to attach much importance to the actual 
presence and advice of a lord of the creation, and 
she missed the kind doctor as she would have 
missed a brother. 

She was not a strong-minded woman. , She 



214 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

would have no more gone to a social science 
gathering than Miss Blueskin would have kept 
away from it ; and yet she was '^ all a woman^'' a 
woman to the very tips of her fingers; and now she 
had completed her womanhood in its most sacred, 
significance : she was a mother too. 

The way in which she regarded her baby^ as 
being hers and yet not of her^ as something more 
than she was^ and as having greater hopes and a 
greater destiny than she had^ was very indicative 
of her timidy retiring^ and yet gentle nature. The 
boy was to her everything in the world : it was for 
him that she had to live and had to struggle ; and 
there seemed to her fancy a significance in the fact 
that the baby was a boy and not a girl ; that he 
was to succeed his father as a great person^ a pro- 
prietor of one of the ancestral estates^ a bearer of 
one of the great names in the first country of the 
world. Had it been a girl^ she would have been 
less careful or less jealous about it. Had it pleased 
God to have taken her husband from her and have 
left her childless^ she would have gone silently 
away^ have forgotten her rank^ and have yielded 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 215 

up her property; and in resuming, if she could, 
her humble sphere as a teacher, a sphere which 
she hated, and for which she was not fitted, she 
would have lived in perpetual widowhood and have 
died alone. 

When we are utterly alone in the world it is 
difficult to speculate on our actions. A man's 
countenance is not only brightened by a friend, but 
his whole manner is altered by the knowledge that 
he has iriends about him . friends who will judge 
him rightly, believe in his honesty, applaud his 
actions, if good, and, if not, at least speak up for him 
to the world and defend him. It is just the same 
with boys at school, or with a potentate in Europe. 
If a big boy, in fighting with a little one, whom he 
may have but led into a frantic resistance, finds all 
his companions against him, he will soon "give in.'* 
If a dog finds himself alone in a battle, he will 
soon give it up. He looks up to man as his 
melior natura, and ma^n, if not to a higher nature, 
to his friend. Men deserted by all, in London, and 
worn out with want and trouble, will retire to die 
alone and without spirit, and broken and hopeless. 



IJiit Uie cfiief feeling wbieli friendlesmess breeds 
\n tliHt of iitUjf ftiifipicion. Many women, immedi- 
nioly i]u*y hcjcomc mothers, grow violently dis- 
iriiMifMl. Kcmale prcgudices . feelings which never 
vuivr into th(5 hcadH or hearts of men . crop up and 
Urow ftlMnuhmily in the lone heart of a widow. 
Nc»t witliout cause do many of their own sex dis- 
llUn ih(^ni. 'I'hoy arc often exiffeantes, grasping, 
ovon uvnrioiotin, not to bo daunted or put back in 
thoir dtnuiuuU, and all for their children, the 
iU^uvr half of thomsolves, upon whom they fancy 
{\\f> whulo world kniks coldly, 

Tpou tUU ohftrmcHl st^ige in her progress our 
I^H^i' l^il^ruu h«d cuterctl. She was already in the 
y^i\n\UvU vxf I Vub: lit j: CasUo, and had be^nm to look 
\^ UK «\^u<^ ^ii^^uoivvx u(x>u Mrs^ Laprs^ ^^(>a^ l^fottj, 
hs^r uur^ai\ auvl fr>rtt the $ood dvxtor huKcI^ 
^l<t^sH,^K *^v* iv^tt^^^xl hw abiseace. aai realbr 

)IL»^ ti^iMt <^^."t xtt^> v^or a<iji3$ asil buenrts we see 

V(^ X^it^ <rt:(;^ vW^^iil h'i: ;*4:$c wa<:ii 1j£c gmh^rpr 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 217 

" It is a very curious thing. Miss Morton," she 
said, after watching the baby being dressed and fed : 
it had a prodigious appetite, and "throved,'* as 
Mrs. Lapis said, " to the wonder/' although of a. 
silent nature, not at all lively, and somewhat unob- 
servant . ^^ It is a very curious thing. Miss Morton, 
that your brother should have been in such a hurry 
to leave us." 

\ Lotty bit her lips, with some vexation. Leave a 
woman alone to Understand another, and she will 
do it. She saw how much Keith loved this woman, 
and how totally indifferent he was to her. The 
very woollen shoe of the baby . a shapeless, utterly 
inartistic thing, which was always dropping oflF its 
fat foot . was dearer to Lady Somers than the 
heart of Keith Morton. 

" You don't answer me," said the widow, in a 
little alarmed tone. "Don't you hear me say 
that I think it was very curious for Dr. Morton to 
leave me and the baby . especially the baby, who 
is ailing with the thrush . so early in the morning, 
without saying good-bye, and going up to London 
too ? He might, have consulted me, I am sure." 



\ 



218 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

She said this very petulantly. She was by no 
means sure that it was what she wanted to say^ or 
ihat it was the very best thing she could have 
said. She wanted to say somethings to blame 
somebody for the terror, alarm, and suspense that 
she felt. 

Now all this feeling, natural enough with the 
widow, so suddenly bereft of one to whom her 
whole life was devoted, was rather incomprehensible 
to downright Lotty Morton. And, inasmuch as 
Keith Morton's heart and character were perfectly 
transparent to his sister, but very opaque to the 
other lady, it was natural that Lotty should feel 
offended at any tone which seemed for a moment 
to reflect on her brother. 

But when she looked on the pretty puzzled face 
of the young mother, clasping the baby so closely, 
and even somewhat too tightly, to her breast, 
Lotty's bett3r nature triumphed, and she forgave 
her her suspicion even against Keith. 

" My dear Lady Somers, will you recol " 

Here she was interrupted by an alarmed cry from 
Mrs. Lapis. " Now, my lady, my lady," she said. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 219 



it 



you will kill that baby ! just look how the poor 
thing is kicking and plunging^ to be sure. Poor 
duckey-darling ! do give it me.^' 

It is with women with babies as it is with 
men in regard to poking fires : each believes that 
no one can handle and dandle the poor crea- 
tures so well as herself. Mrs. Lapis was of this 
opinion) and if she compared herself to the young 
mother, she was undoubtedly in the right. But 
Lady Somers must be excused from holding a 
directly contrary opinion. 

" No, Mrs. Lapis,'^ she answered, sharply, lifting 
the baby up and patting his lordship^s back with 
gentleness, a proceeding which brought him round 
after a slight fit of coughing . " No, Mrs. Lapis. 
I have heard say . I have heard my mother say . 
that no woman could nurse a baby so well as its own 
dear mother could ; and I am sure she was right.'' 

This appeal to her mother was, with Emmy, final. 
She referred to that parent as a master in Israel, 
one of the scribes, would have referred to the 
Rabban or Right Reverend Rabbi; whereas, in re- 
gard to this belief, Mrs. Lapis was a very Colenso. 



220 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

" Oh, it's all very well, my lady," she answered ; 
" I dare say those used to be the ideas ; but many 
mothers never nurse or touch their babies now/' 

" Shame on them, then !" said Emmy. *' But 
that will do, Mrs. Lapis : he is all right now. And 
now. Miss Morton, perhaps you will favour me 
with your opinion about your brother's absence." 

Thus appealed to, Lotty had no alternative but to 
draw her sword and stand on the defence. Perhaps 
she had better have held her tongue and have left 
matters as they were ; for the true way to cultivate 
suspicion is that which gardeners employ to a 
grass-plot : to press it down and roll it. 

''Keith," said Lotty, "quietly consulted with 
me, and we thought that the best thing he could 
do was to go up to London. You are not yet 
prepared with your proof " . 

Emmy, at these words, again fell into that 
vacant look she wore before; a look which had 
alarmed and frightened both Keith and his sister. 
Miss Morton, however, aflfected not to notice it, 
following out her brother's advice to the letter. 

"And," continued Lotty, "he is gone up to 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 221 

London to consult some solicitor about the 
matter.'* 

''And what were the last words he said to 
you about me ?" asked Emmy, suddenly, with an 
increased spirit and vivacity, as if the light of her 
recollection had flashed up as brightly as ever. 

''He told me especially to take care of you,'* 
answered Lotty, quietly. " He need not have said 
that, poor dear fellow, for he knew very well that 
I should do so.*' 

Lady Somers looked with increased suspicion 
on Lotty, and said . 

"Miss Morton, he said something more than 
that; something, too, which struck me as more 
important.*' 

" Indeed, then, I cannot remember it. It 
must be very stupid of me to forget it.'* 

" Shall I recall it to you?" asked Emmy. 

"Pray do," said Lotty, looking witli astonish- 
ment at the young widow, and wondering to what 
point the conversation would tend. Then, as 
Emmy was about to speak, she seemed to read 
the sentence in her face ; for she. said, quickly. 



222 A SPLENDID FOKTUNE. 

" Oh yes ; I remember now. He said some- 
thing about your not going to the Abbey. I did 
not remember it, because I thought it of little 
importance/' 

" Of little importance V said Lady Somers, 
with hauteur. " I can repeat every word he said. 
'Mind and keep her from going to the Abbey. 
If she once gets there, all our plans will be 
spoiled : it is of the utmost importance that 
she should be kept in.' '' 

'^ Poor dear fellow ! yes/' answered Lotty. '' I 
know how anxious he was about your health ; and 
I know that I thought, at the time, that he was 
wandering. What should you do at the Abbey, 
my dear lady, until you go there armed with all 
proofs of your right to be there as the wife of 
Lord Somers and the mother of the heir to the 
peerage and the property ?'' 

That a little patience would be the better policy 
seemed so incontestably plain to Lotty Morton, 
that she did not waste a further thought upon it. 
But it seemed by no means so plain to Lady 
Somers. It is not only your dreadfully dark and 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 223 

secret nature which grows suspicions. The most 
sweet and gentle, guileless and innocent, will, when 
left helpless and alone, turn to suspicion as if it 
were some guard to their weakness. 

Lady Somers had been pondering over her 
situation for a very long, sad time ; and, having 
heard her husband always speak with the greatest 
affection of his father, she very naturally imagined 
that the best way in the world for her to proceed 
would be to walk to the Abbey, ask for Earl Brad- 
stock, tell him who she was, and, in the middle of 
the interview, put the baby into his hands, and 
fall upon his venerable neck in a flood of tears. 

" It is so easy to do right," she thought. " No 
one could for a moment suspect her story. The old 
nobleman would ring the bell for Lady Amethyst, 
beg her to admire the very fine boy who was to 
replace his lost son, kiss his daughter-in-law upon 
both cheeks, and insist upon one of the best, if not 
the very best, bed-rooms in the Abbey beinggot ready 
for the invading lady, and turned into a nursery.'^ 

To those who know anything of romantic people 
it will not seem strange that, with this idea in her 



224 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

heady Mrs. Everingham did not wish to be checked. 
The weakest and most foolish of us are often 
the most obstinate; and I see no reason why 
Mrs. Emmy, who is pretty and young, and very 
innocent, should be differeDt, because of those 
charming qualities, from other people. Weak as 
she was, she had a will of her own; not a very 
strong one, except in spasms, but certainly spas- 
modically strong, and therefore dangerous. 

Moreover, in her weakness and want of judg. 
ment, there had arisen an idea that she must hurt 
somebody who was, in one particular, weaker than 
herself. Do not women pinch babies and make 
them cry, and hurt those who love them, and then 
try and console the weeper? Do not we all 
behave worst to those whom we love best of all ? 
I am afraid we do ; and our heroine was certainly 
no exception to the rule. She knew that 
Dr. Morton loved her, and she knew very well 
that she did not love him. And she reasoned 
thus within herself: . 

*' Men have done strange things for love ! Why 
may not this simple doctor, who appears so open. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 225 

« 

80 innocent, and so quiet, be working out his own 
ends here ? Why should he hinder me from seeing 
Lord Broad acres? To go forward is now the best 
policy, and he wishes to keep me back. I will 
disappoint him: I will be very obedient, no 
doubt; but I will keep my own way. I will hold 
my own, for myself and for the baby.'' 

She put this baby forward as an excuse, and she 
needed to make one for anything she was about 
to do against Keith Morton. She did not love 
him; but she honoured him, and felt herself power- 
less against his constant upright endeavour; and so 
she determined to hurt and pinch him, as we may 
sometimes find women will do. 

Lotty, who was herself a woman, but of a very 
different calibre, read a great deal of this feeling 
in the face of Lady Somers, as it was lighted up 
by the flickering firelight, and she watched the 
emotions which played over it as the light and 
shadow play over a landscape. 

'^ She suspects us,'' said Lotty to herself. " I 
fear this suspicion : I have heard Keith say that, 
when the mind begins to wander, suspicions arise." 

VOL. n. Q 



226 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

"What would you have Dr. Morton do, my 
dear lady ?'^ said Lotty^ tenderly^ after a long and 
awkward pause. 

" I do not know. How should I know ? Men 
know most about business. They keep us blinded 
and shut up all our lives^ and when we most want 
knowledge we are left without it.'' 

" That is very true of many of us/' returned 
Miss Morton ; " but, remember, my poor dear bro- 
ther had nothing to do with this. All he has done is 
to endeavour to put your business on a firm footing. 
He wishes you to approach the Abbey as the future 
mistress, and that those who are interested 
against you should be able to satisfy their doubts." 

Lady Somers was silenced, but not convinced, 
and she took an opportunity of withdrawing early, 
in company with the baby, who formed a very excel- 
lent excuse for withdrawal. As she went away she 
had that resolution about her which convinced 
Lotty that she distrusted all the inhabitants at 
Cold Blow, and that the doctor's love-suit, even if 
he could have or wished to press it upon her at 
such a time, was not likely to make much headway. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 227 

" She will be after some mischief, Mrs. Lapis,'^ 

said Lotty^ as she took her solitary supper of bread- 

and-milk by the parlour fire. 

Lotty had been employed all day in dusting 

and arranging the doctor's study. 

^' Law, bless you, no, ma'am I'* said Lapis, 
who stood opposite to her, gazing into the fire 
with a fixed stare. " Law, bless you, she is like a 
dove ! only young mothers, ma^am, ^as their little 
ways : they thinks their oflspring is alius the 
eighth wonder of the world/^ 

" I can quite understand that, but I donH quite 
understand the suspicion with which she regards 
us-r-and you most of all.'' 

Lotty said these last few words with emphasis, 
since she had been betrayed into thinking aloud. 
It was quite true. Our excellent Mrs. Lapis was 
a subject of much dread to Emmy, of much very 
unjust and suspicious dread, of which, luckily for 
the peace of mind of the old lady, she was quite 
unconscious. 

" If it's suspicion,'' returned the innocent Lapis, 
" I don't wonder at it, not for a moment of my life. 

q2 



228 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

My dear departed, who was one of the freest and 
noblest hearted of men, and who you don't no 
how recall, seeing that he used to be acquainted 
in the character of regimental servant with Dr. 
Morton, when he was in the 50th, and you was 
only six years old ; about which time, coming out of 
a hay-loft when he was not steady on his legs, and 
always weak upon one^ ankle, in which there was a 
bullet, which was never extracated, he made a false 
step and turned over, and, being a heavy man, my 
dear, and forty-two inches round his chest under 
his arm-pits, he naturally fell head foremost, and 
upon the back of his head too, which was a frac- 
tured skull. He never recovered from that fall 
exactually, and all the time that he lay ill and 
moaning he was the most suspicious of men, and 
couldnH abear me for a moment out of his sight. 
Oh, I don't care for suspicions, not one bit.^' 

Poor Mrs. Lapis did not add, as she might 
easily have done, that her good husband not only 
could not abear her out of his sight, but had also 
taken a great dislike to her when in his sight. It 
was to the last illness of this exemplary man that 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 229 

she referred in all her troubles^ and from his 
cracked head or his weak ankle that she drew most 
of her experience in nursing. 

In his wanderings of mind . and what little 
mind he had was quite right in going out of doors 
after being so badly treated by its owner . ^he had 
said many bitter things of his wife, and had made 
that lady the subject of sundry grievous and un- 
founded imputations^ which she had borne ^' like a 
lamb/^ as she said. She was a woman of faded 
individuality, but of good intentions; but her 
peculiar mental capacity was not calculated to be 
of much service to Lotty. 

" Well, never mind, dear Mrs. Lapis/' said Miss 
Morton, with a puzzled air, which she always wore 
after for some time trying to dodge after the 
housekeeper's confused meaning. ^'I hope you 
sleep lightly.'' 

" Bless your heart," said the person addressed, 
" I am awake every blessed hour of the night, and 
hear all the sweet bells chime, as the song says, 
which Lapis sung well, being bass and very tender 
in his every expression. I can call you at any 



230 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

time you like, bar none, which was also a terra 
which he picked up from a sporting veterinary 
surgeon, who he attended to mostly on intimate 
terms when he was in the Scotch Grays, which is 
calvalry." 

'* Then I don't want you to call me at all. I 
am pretty wakeful myself. But if you should 
hear anything stirring in the lady's room, pray 
come to me." 

"The child sleeps like a top, mostly, day and 
night," answered Lapis, "which is considered a 
good sign by some, mostly bad. I don't like it 
myself, though the child grows stout on it, and 
Lapis, when his brain could not well move, was 
very quiet and noways abusive nor suspicious. I 
likes a lively child, which is not pleasant to mothers, 
but gratifying to young mothers, who is made for 
such by nature." 

" Remember what I have said," returned Lotty, 
thinking not of the child's restlessness, but of the 
mother's. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 231 



CHAPTER XIV. 

IN WHICH MISS NIGHTLBY STRIKES A BARGAIN. 

When the Abbey bell had done clanging, which 
it took some time to do, being a bell of importance, 
and lately not being so often put in motion as it 
could have wished, the supercilious footman opened 
the glass door in the hall and admitted Stannard. 
" An' what," said he . '' what individual may you 
please to want ?" 

Herbert had taken care to make himself ac* 
quainted with the names of the persons with whom 
he had better occupy himself, having noted them 
down as they fell from the lips of the landlord of 
the " Falcon -/* and so he told the footman that he 
wished to see Miss Nightley on especial business. 



232 A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 

^' Well, if you do,'^ answered the footman^ curtly 
. for it must be borne in mind that Herbert, 
althoQgh well dressed, had not arrived on horse- 
back or even in a gig, not to mention a larger 
and more imposing carriage . '^Well, if you 
do, you must wait a little. Will you walk in 
here and favour me with your kiard ?" 

That passport to respectable society was just the 
thing which Stannard had not got. He therefore 
took an -extraordinary liberty with the footman by 
putting his finger on the right side of his nose, tak- 
ing a shilling from his pocket, holding it delicately 
between his finger and thumb, and then putting it 
into the footman's open palm ; after which he said, < 
solemnly, as if nothing had passed between them, 
.'I must see the lady, and at once. I have 
exhausted all my cards, and have not time to send 
to the printer. Will you tell her, my good man, 
that Mr. Stannard, from London, wishes to see 
her especially ? Mind you do not forget my mes-^ 
sage : tell her, ' especially,^ from London." 

This proceeding certainly did not elevate him in 
the servant's opinion, but it put him on a powerful 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 233 

level with him^ and^ instead of letting him remain 
kicking his heels for half an hour in the waiting- * 
room^ John promised at once to tell the lady. 

'^ I will go to her, you know/' said he, compre- 
hending at once that magic sign which Stannard 
had so opportunely exhibited to him ; " but, you 
know, she is rather a Tartar when she is disturbed, 
and she is now with Father Gargle. I think you 
said from London ? '' 

'* From London especially ; don't forget that," 
answered Stannard as John creaked away. '' I 
always make a point of being mysterious to this 
sort of cattle on a point upon which no mystery 
can exist. Now I have fixed that in that fellow's 
dull brain, and he will go and find a mare's nest 
through it, I will be bound." 

With all his fine contempt of those below him, 
Stannard was not always a match for his friends. 

"J don't believe he comes from London," said 
John. " Just as likely to come from Birmingham. 
He looked like a traveller from a button manu- 
facturer, soliciting orders about my lord's crests 
on his dies. From London ! and what does he 




> 



234 



want with her ? He is too well dressed for a real 
gentleman in the country, and looks like a Bir- 
mingham traveller, or some actor. Lord, Lord ! 
what a terrible aet she have got round us !" 

Jiifit as he approached the door of the little 
green drawing-room iu which Miss Nightlej aud 
Lady Amethyst were, m company with their 
spiritnal adviser Father Gargle, that genUeman 
came out, with a soft, gentle step, and a bent and 
reverend head, looking something so different from 
the worldly people round him, that even the foot- 
man bwoed his head with involuntary respect. 

"John, I will show the reverend gentlemaa 
down-stairs," said Miss Kightley, tripping after 
the priest graciously, and somewhat gracefully too. 
"Yes, mum," answered John. "There is an- 
other gentleman from London as wants to see 
you, 'special. He is quite in a hurry, mum." 

" He can wait for a moment, at least," 

"No; pray go to him, my de« Miss Nightly," 
said Father Gargle, in the softest voice. " Pray 
make no ceremony with me. My order is bound 
to rqect any ceremony." 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 235 

'* A noble order, monplre^ said the lady, looking 
at him with feigned admiration. '' However, I 
will obey you." So saying, with a courtesy, made 
in a capital style, and as lowly in its bending 
obeisance as if to a monarch. Miss Nightley 
withdrew. 

The door being open, Mr. Herbert Stannard had 
a very good opportunity of seeing all this little 
pantomime. He was struck with the father, with 
his noble yet gentle bearing, and with his long 
coat, high waistcoat, and plain linen band round 
his throat. Father Gargle would have been a 
remarkable man in a large company, whence any 
one would have singled him out as different from 
all the rest. In the quaint old house, in the midst 
of a glorious park, bowed to by a lady of the noblest 
proportions and the softest voice, moving himself 
majestically and noiselessly away, he seemed even 
more remarkable. " By Jove !" said Stannard to 
himself; "here we have gone a hundred years 
back. We have Jesuits and deep plotters here. 
We shall soon have the secret doors, with the 
sliding panels and strange staircases built 'in the 




236 A SPLENDID rORTXJNE. 

tliickaeas of the Avail,' as novelists vrho are some- 
what too ignorant of architecture describe thein. 
Well, truth h strange, stranger than fiction ! " 

The gentleman from London started rather 
sharply, and fancied that indeed the " secret door 
busiQeBB " aa the Warlock and his disciples termed 
it, had been applied to him personally, when i 
deep and stately voice said to him, "Well, sir, 
may I ask to what I am indebted for your kind- 
ness in calling on me?" 

The voice spoke from a corner of the room at 
his back, and Stannard smiled at his own sim- 
plicity when he saw the half-opened door through 
which Miss Kightley had approached. She was 
fond of creating sensations either lai^e or small, 
and BO had come upon our friend suddenly, 
especially as she saw him staring, with some 
. admiration, at her clerical adviser, 

" Keally," said Stannard, smiling, " you most 
excuse my trepidation. You startled me, that 
is all. My brain is somewhat used to caatle* 
building, and I let it occupy itself in that useless 
work, partly, I suppose, because I was surrounded 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 237 

by a strange mixture of antiquity. I was thinking 
of other things, and did not hear you approach.'' 

Miss Nightley bowed her consent to this ex- 
planation but very curtly, as one who should say, 
'' This is all very well for your startled appearance, 
but it will not do for your visit.'* Stannard, in 
the meantime, was looking at the lady, and calcu- 
lating upon her power in the house, and whether 
it would be better to trust all his secret to her, or 
to wait and endeavour to have an interview with 
some one her superior. But this man was of a 
tortuous nature : he never cared to go the direct 
and straightforward way, but was one of those 
.persons who, had they to go from one point to 
another in a direct line, would still deflect and 
vary the route as much as they well could. 

After some little pause upon each side, as skilful 
fencers indulge in, trying the strength of each 
other's guard, or measuring each other with their 
eyes, Miss Nightley again commenced : . 

" I quite understand your starting when spoken 
to in this old house and in the waning light, 
especially when awakened from a reverie ; but I 



A SFLESDID FORTUNE, 




don't think you have yet told me why you ] 
called upon me." 

"Well," said Stannard, with a smile . for 1 
Nightley'a directness of purpose had rathe 
upon him, and he was Bomewhat more inclined 1 
trust her . " I came all the way from London to 
inquire whether you had lost a pocket-book puree." 

Miss Nigbtley was puzzled. She had not lost 
a puree, and Lady Amethyst certainly had not ; 
and so she told the gentleman from London. At 
first she did not quite credit hira, and put aside 
the question by remarking that it was a curious 
matter to journey all that way for, when the 
family, too, was in deep affliction, and when a 
letter, with a description of the article, woold 
have served. 

" It was precisely because the family was in 
this deep affliction that I came down," said the 
gentleman ; " and I did not like to trust my 
message merely to the post." 

"Was the matter of such great importance, 
then?" asked the lady. 

Now, unfortunately, Stannard did not know of 



r 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 239 

the importance that the pocket-book purse pos« 
sessed in the eyes of Lady Amethyst ; nor did the 
old travelling baronet himself suspect its value, 
or he would, perhaps, have trusted it to some one 
of more honesty of purpose than Stannard. So 
the messenger, in the absence of knowledge, 
thought it best to take a very high hand, and 
answered firmly enough . , 

"Yes; the article in question contains some- 
thing of great value: it may be, indeed, of 
inestimable value to the family." 

" And so it might, by jingo !" thought the Bohe- 
mian, " if a fire were to burn down the church." 

Now a family jewel or a will may be of great 
value, or a ring containing the last remaining 
shred of hair of a dear departed parent may be 
richer than a big diamond in the eyes of a daughter 
or a son ; but Miss Nightley's mind did not for a 
moment rest on these. 

Giving credit to this young gentleman from 
London for really more knowledge of the matter 
than she had, she asked herself what could be 
called of inestimable value, to that family, which 




3l0 A SPLENTHD FORTCXE. 



oonld be contained in a parse. She knew thai 
none of tlip family jewels were missing, because 
they were locked ij|i ia a wainacot-oak ease, with 
iron clasps, and large, curious, locks, in the eellars 
of the family bankers; ao she rejected any idea of 
a jewel. She knew, alw, that Litdjr Amethyst ' 
was completely at peace with regard to any of her 
possessions, about the loss of which her ladyship 
would have made a great cry ; and bo she aban- 
doned the idea, in a moment, of anything being 
in a purse of much importauce, and her active mind 
looked at once to the pocket-book portion of the 
little morocco souvenir. 

Miss Nightley was a very good hand at cha- 
rades. All women are, more or less, actresses ; 
and Miss Nightley was much "more" than "less," 
But it was not her exceeding aptitude for acting 
that jitted her for being good at charades : it was 
that she was really so excellent at guessing. She 
had a quick, active, vigorous mind, osed to all 
sorts of surprises, and dashed or defeated by no 
disappointment. It is not to be wondered at, 
therefore, that the lady divined Mr. Stannard's 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 241 

secret a little more quickly than he would have 
supposed. She made a jump at it just as she 
would have jumped to a conclusion in regard to 
the proper word of three syllables about which 
sundry people in a drawing-room had been 
making fools of them.selves for an hour or so 
before. 

" It's a certificate/' she said to herself. " It is 
what Setty Overman^ down in the almshouses^ 
would call the marriage lines ! I must get hold 
of it somehow." 

The game began to be interesting; and it was to 
some advantage to the lady that she sat with her 
back to the waning light, and Mr. Herbert Stan- 
nard with his face to the window and in the full 
soft glow of it. Miss Nightley wanted exceedingly 
to know if the messenger knew the value of the 
document. 

*^Well, sir/' she said, cautiously, ^^ I presume 
you have lived long enough in the world; for, 
although apparently very young, you seem to have 
seen a good deal of it " 

"You may well say that, madam," interrupted 

VOL. II. R 




242 A SPLENDID FOETUSE. 



Stannard, with a smile, which shoned the latiy tliat 
her complimcQt had pleased him. " I have seen 
a good deal of the world." 

"In that case, sir, you know very well that 
matters conuected with such a family aa this are 
not done in a corner, and that, unless the very 
title-deeds are lost, nothing can be lost which may 
be termed ' inestimable.' Even if a large bank- 
note is lost, it may be stopped at the bank, and 
any one who is found dealing with it may be 
severely punished, unless he gives a very straight- 
forward account of the manner it came into his 
possession." 

" Exactly so," said Stannard, carelessly. " If it 
had been merely a note, you would not have seen 
me here," 

" What IS true of a note is true of a document," 
said the lady, with an emphasis on the word. " I 
have heard that after Lord Somers's death some- 
thing of that sort was missing, but I was quite 
careless concerning it. 1 did not even inquire what 
it was, and I can assure you that I have not heard 
a sellable of conversation about it." This was quite 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 243 

true ; for when no one knows what is lost it would 
be hard to talk about it. 

Some such conviction seemed to be carried to 
Stannard's mind; but he failed to read Miss 
Nightley completely. If he had done so, he would 
not have shown the eager trepidation which he did 
in negativing the next question from the lady's 
lips. , 

" But in all these matters it is very much better 
to consult principals. Shall I call Lord Sroad- 
acres. Lady Amethyst, or her husband ?^^ That 
unfortunate husband always came last, under any 
circumstances, and very naturally so, for Andrew 
Bradstock could not well be first even in the mind 
of his wife's companion. 

"By no means," said Stannard, starting up. 
" I am afraid I am mistaken. What I speak of 
could not have been lost here. I will call upon 
some one else in Bilscombe. Dr. Morton, I 
believe, knows a good deal of the domestic losses 
and gains of the inhabitants of this pastoral town, 
and he may be able to set me right." 

As he said this Stannard rose, and, giving a 

r2 



244 A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 




very graceful bow, begged pardon of the la^ 
for occupying her Toluable time, and bade 1 
good-day. 

Lady Amethyst'a beuchn'oman saw that she h 
lost a move. 

"Pardon me, sir," she cried: "do not be in 
Bttch 8 hurry. Perhaps I do not knov all that 
concerns the family. May I ask them ?" 

" Oh dear no," said Stannard. " I am quite 
on the wrong scent. If it had concerned yonr 
house, you would have known it. I had better be 
returning to my hotel." 

" But at least you can let me look at it. The 
honour of a lady in such a hou!>e as this is to be 
trusted. It is not to be supposed that, if it do not 
belong to this house, I will cl^m it." 
Stannaid shook his head. 
" No, madam," he sud ; " not for a moment } 
although in real life, with which I have been 
acquunted for some few years, things which are 
quite as strange have been done. But, unfortu- 
nately, I am so good-natured, and so much in the 
habit, when I play a game of whist, of showing 



V 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 245 

my opponent my hand, that^, in order to guard 
against tbat^ and without any possible suspicion^ 
latent or otherwise, I have left the precious 
pocket-book in London V' 

Miss Nightley was foiled. If she were right in 
her conjecture, that certificate would be worth 
something to her. Lady Amethyst, had she 
known of it, would not perhaps have carried it at 
once to Lord Bradstock; but, after a short con- 
cealment, would have told the old nobleman the 
truth; but, really suspecting, as it was her interest 
to do so, the marriage spoken of by the doctor, 
and the legitimacy of the chUd, she might, if in 
MissNightley's power, be ready to do many things 
which would place her further in the hands of her 
companion. Stannard's last move had somewhat 
discomposed his companion. He had played a 
trump : the lady determined to trump higher. 

" Ah, sir,'' she said ; " I see how it is : you are 
determined to sell your secret at a good price. 
Now, I want part of that secret, and therefore you 
will perhaps not be unwilling to share it with me. 
Will you tell me the price ?'' 




346 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

This direct attack somewhat puzzled Stannard.^ 

" HaDg thia woman 1" he said to himself: 
is too plain for me." Then he spoke aloud : "We 
most Qot call it a secretj madam, or assume that it 
n mine." . 

" Call it by any name, I mppoee it ia the same?" 
Kud the lady, iatern^tJTely. 

" Names make a very great alteration in all of 
US, and in all things," he answered. 

"I will call it a secret. Women are fond of 
secrets," said the lady, with a smile. 

" Iiet me, then, call the money a reward," smd 
Stanuard. " Men are fond of rewards, and I want 
to gain one from the accidental posBesaion I and 
my &iead have in this." 

" Then there are two persons who know all V 

" Yes, two ; but only two : I will give you my 
word of honour. Yon are dealing with a gentle- 
man," The yonngman did not feel the deep satire 
that his words were npon his deeds: very few 
of ns do, althongh we are constantly speaking 
sentences which, if properly emphasized, would 
scorch and bum. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 247 

"And this other person, can you answer for 
him . answer for him truly, certainly, and without 
doubt V' 

" I can, madam. He himself will know only a 
portion of the value of what I hold ; and after I 
have arranged with you I shall leave the country 
as quickly as I can. I am tired of England, with 
its false ways and its social laws, which hurt and 
gall all true men.'' 

There was a great deal of earnestness in the tone 
of Stannard's voice, and earnestness also in his 
feelings. He believed what he said, and was un- 
doubtedly irritated at the vices of others; but it 
would not be too much to say that he, like the rest 
of us, cared very little for his own. 

" It will be worth at least something to Ame- 
thyst,*' thought the companion within herself; 
" and if she will not repay me, why, I can repay 
myself. Why, the reward,'' she said aloud, '^for 
so important a document ought to be of itself of 
some importance. I shall be happy to make you 
a present of one hundred pounds when you place 
it in my hands." 




248 



"Will you, madam;" cried Stannard, "Then 
I will do so at ray earliest convenience." 

Hia notions of a reward had been running up 
and down thu scale in a very strange way during 
tbe last five minutes. At one time he imagined, 
from the self-possession of the lady, that he should 
get nothing; at another he thought that forty or 
fifty poundB perhaps might be her oltimatam. 
When, however, he heard her mention one hun- 
dred he was delighted, and his quick mind imme- 
diately formed a resolution what to do. He would 
enclose to his old friend Pegwell, say, thirty pounds, 
which would handsomely reward him for his 
trouble, and with ten pounds more he would, in 
Liverpool, rig himself out with a kit sufficient for 
a short voyage, and take his passage in a sailing- 
vessel for New York. Once there, he did not 
doubt that, either on the newspapers or in con- 
nection with the stage, he should find snfficient 
employment for his fertile hrain. 

Miss Nightley was equally well satisfied with 
her bargain. She was a lady who, as the reader 
is aware, was careful of her pence, and therefore 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 249 

always able to command her pounds. " She told 
Stannard, therefore, that if he would, by striking 
across country to the nearest coach-town, get a 
night- coach and by it get up to London that night, 
he might bring the precious document to her at 
the end of the long walk near the waterfall, 
where tbere was a little Roman temple, wherein a 
faun, a copy from the antique, upon two brown 
stone and shaky legs, was perpetually grinning 
and holding aloft his Pandean pipes. If by to- 
morrow afternoon Herbert Stannard could produce 
the purse, pocket-book, and its contents, at that 
.place, one hundred pounds in notes and gold would 
be ready for him. 

"That^s a nasty lonely spot, madam,'' said 
Stannard. 

'* If it be so, it is I who should be afraid, and 
not you. I am a single woman, and I trust myself 
to you.'' 

"Well, it is all very well if you are single," 

returned Stannard ; " but sometimes ^" Then 

he paused. He would have added, that sometimes 
people seeking rewards for lost property had been 




250 

intimidated by the awkward interference of the 
police to give up their prize without any pecuniary 
benefit accruing to theniselves. 

"But sometimes what, sir?" aaid the com- 
panion, who, to do her jnstice, wna far from 
contemplating the cunning trap into which Stan- 
Dard's imagination had pluoged him. 

"Well, never mind. I will not finish my 
sentence. I can only aay that I would rather 
meet you here, or in the park in the open." 

" To come again here would create suspicion. 
Servants in great houses poke their noses into 
everything," said the lady, more earnestly than 
elegantly; "therefore that will not do. I will 
meet you, if you like, just outside the park at the 
lodge-keeper's cottage." 

Stannard saw the same objection to that place. 
A man on the wateh in the lodge cottage might 
observe him, mark him, and in due time nab him. 
He was by far too cunning a bird to be caught 
with chafi'. " No," he said, " madam ; I think if 
we were in the open road, about a mile from the 
lodge-gate, I could drive np, meet you at four 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 251 

o'clock^ if that time would suit^ place the purse 
in your hands . . " 

'^And allow me time to examine it^ to see if it 
be of value,", said the lady. 

'' Exactly : a glance will do that; and then, if 
you give me the money, in small notes and gold, 
fifty pounds each way, we could bid each other 
good-bye, never to meet any more.'* 

''That will do, sir,'' said the lady, rising and 
ringing the bell. "At the park palings under 
two spreading beeches, a mile, or about a mile, to 
the right of the lodge : you will not fail ?" 

Stannard bowed and took his hat, and the foot- 
man, who had been wondering at the long inter- 
view given to the gentleman from London, appeared, 
to show him to the door. 

At the appointed time Stannard, who, of course, 
did not come from London, although he had quitted 
the " Falcon " and made his way to a neighbour- 
ing town, met Miss Nightley imder the two 
spreading beeches. He was in the yellow-bodied 
light gig of a commercial traveller, and the man 
who drove him boasted that he had a fast horse. 



252 




. SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



It was not, Iiowever, needed. Miss Nigbtley was 
too full of her own schemes to pay much attention 
to Stannard's. She received the purse, opened it, 
took out the copy of the certificate, looked at it 
hastily, and then placed the money in Stannard's 
hands. That gentleman counted it carefully, put 
it in his trousers' pocket, raised his hat gracefully, 
and drove o£F as rapidly as the fast horse could 
carry him. 



V 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 253 



CHAPTER XV. 



AN HONBST LAWYER. 



Mr. John Juniper, Doctor of Medicine, and, in 
Sangrado's opinion, one of the best fellows in the 
world, did that which he was always ready to do 
when a friend from the country called upon him; 
that is, he *' knocked off his calls " in double- 
quick time. As country friends were very fond of 
calling on Jack Juniper, and he was equally fond 
of receiving them with all the jolly acclamations 
of good fellowship, which were equally sweet to 
the young man from the country and the hard- 
working town doctor, it is perhaps to be doubted 
whether his patients much benefited by the practice. 
Perhaps, indeed, it was because Dr. Juniper 



254 A SPLENDID FORTT^TE. 

occasionally " knocked oflf '' some of his patients 
that his practice did not grow so large as it should 
have done^ or as^ indeed, it would have done had it 
been in anybody else's hands. When people get 
on in the world, and are rich, they like some little 
attention from the medical man; and^ possibly^ 
as useful a quality as any professor of the heal- 
ing art can possess is that which enables him to 
retail the latest news, and to give a new turn to 
the last bit of newspaper scandal. When a lady- 
patient of this sort, who was not acutely ill, but 
merely ailing, had been waiting for some hours 
for Jack, expecting to be revived and comforted by 
the visit of a healthy, cheerful, chatty doctor, with 
a few new notions of things, and a determination 
not to be hypochondriacal himself, it was naturally 
somewhat of a disappointment if he did not come. 
Nor did he mend the matter when he called the 
next day, and, after listening somewhat impatiently 
to the record of ills which the particular piece of 
female flesh was heir to, interrupted her with, 
" Now, my dear madam, let me tell you that you 
are mending rapidly. I shall soon have you out of 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 255 

my hands. You don't want a doctor : what you 
want is a cheerful companion and a glass of wine." 

^^But, Doctor, I must tell you I was so ill: I 
thought I must have died ; the pain was so great 
that I really thought I should have given up the 
ghost long ago." 

'^Pray do not give it up yet, madam," Dr. 
Juniper would answer, cheerily. ^' You will be well 
enough in a day or two ; and if you give life up 
now, I don't know when you will be able to catch 
it again.^^ Jack was ever imperturbably good- 
natured with his patients, but he hated anything 
like sham or pretence ; and when doctors want to 
make their way in the world they should be able 
to put up with a good deal of both. 

With his poor patients Dr. Juniper was always 
kind. Poor people have their vices and follies as 
well as the rich ; and the sick poor are sometimes 
very obstinate and foolish, as the doctor well 
knew; but they had not time to give up to any 
vagaries of the sick, and, when ill, found the 
amusement too expensive to indulge it.' It was 
not to be wondered,^ therefore, that Juniper's rich 



256 




k SPLESDID FORTUNE. 



patients somctimeB fell off, while his poor ones 
BtQck to tim with a fidelity that gave him plenty 
of hard work, if it brought him little pay. He 
was, however, one of those kind, eameat men who 
are Bometimcs to be found, who really seem to care 
less for making a fortune than for doing their 
duty, and who flourish upon a very little with a 
good-nature and a complaisance which others find 
hard to understand. 

Upon the morning in question Pentonville, 
Holloway, and Gray's Inn Road witnessed the 
doctor dashing about in great vigour. 

" We shall have done work by about one o'clock, 

I should think, and then we can take a cab and go 

and see my honest lawyer." 

" Very good," said Sangrado. " I suppose that 

will do well enough; but pray don't hurry 

yourself." 

"It is astonhhing what some of these poor 

people endure," said Juniper. " That poor man 

with whQm I have been is down with a slow fever. 

I don't exactly know what to call it : I only know 

it will kill him. It has taken two children out of 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 257 

seven lately ; and I believe it all comes from his 
poor, wretched house. He is a greengrocer, you 
see; and how they manage to make a living by 
turning over that poor little insufficient stock of 
his, I can't say.'* 

Sangrado looked at the place. It was a poor 
holding enough : just one back room and a shop. 
The upper rooms of the house were let off, or, had 
they not have been, the whole of the profits would 
have been eaten up, as Juniper exclaimed when 
he came out after making a somewhat long call. 

'^He's no better,^' he said, shaking his head; 
" and if he continues much longer, he will infect 
his wife. The poor woman does not look very well. 
A good dinner off a nice roast leg of mutton would 
do them all good.'* 

Sangrado had marked the pale, anxious face at 
the door, and said . 

" Well, Jack, I'm good for the leg of mutton, at 
any rate.'' 

" And I for a IjflMie of port. We will send up 
Sam with it when I get home. If I could have 
only got him into the hospital in good time, it 

VOL. II. s 



S58 



I 




i SPLENDID FOKTTNE. 



would Lave been all well; but those people, yoa 
know, have their prejudices. And now for home." 

The fast- trot ting mare and spider phaeton, an 
nndoctorlike turn-out, which savoured rather more 
of the sporting drag than anything else, soon 
brought them to Juniper's door. Dr. Jack was 
fond of bargains, and had boaght both " trap" 
and horse from a publican whose &niily he had 
attended. But, while fond of bargains, he was 
altogether too regardless of appearances, and it 
was not until he had lived a few jears longer tiiat 
he bought his first brougham, and condescended 
to listen patiently to the invalid bores who make 
the fortunes of physicians. 

Sam, after he had put np the mare, was duty 
intrusted with the bottle of fruity port and the 
money for a leg of mutton, and sent on his errand 
of charity; and then, after a luncheon from S^toa 
cheese and Dublin stout, which was quite a treat 
for Sangrado, the two sallied forth. 

" We can very well walk," Juniper, said Keith 
Morton: "Gray's Ian, or Lincoln's Inn, is not 
far from here, I am sure." 



A SPLENDID FORTUISE. 259 

" Bless your innocent heart, Sangrado !" said 
Juniper, beaming on him with great affection ; 
*^you won't find my honest lawyer in either of 
those places. I don't say, mind you, that honest 
lawyers are not to be found in those vast assem- 
blages of useless people who inhabit those emi- 
nently respectable quarters. I would only go as far 
as to say that, if they be, they are greatly in the 
minority; one to a hundred or so. My phoenix 
would get corrupted if he went up there. No, 
sir; he lives in a fashionable quarter of the 
town ; but then he is an eccentric." 

" What ! to live in Tybumia ? why, that is a 
nice fashionable quarter, is it not ?" 

'^ Oh yes, nice enough, to be sure, if a man 
had fashionable clients ; but our friend, who exists 
on the outskirts of it, hardly numbers a client 
with three hundred a year. His practice, I 
believe, should be found in the neighbourhood of 
Portugal Street, or near one of those newly 
established county courts ; but he, happily, has no 
children, and supports himself partially by lite- 
rature. He is such a jolly bird, to be sure !*' 

s2 




260 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



At a small house in one of the streets which rati 
from Cambridge Terrace to the Bayswater Road, 
the cab whicli Juniper hailed deposited the two 
docton. A scrubby little fellow of about forty, 
who might have passed for some years younger, 
opened the door and showed the two triends into 
a back parlour, which had been fitted up in aa 
eccentric way aa a lawyer's office. The two stoat 
doctors seemed to fill it very foirly, whea they 
had, with some difficulty, found themselves chain 
and sat down. That " Mr. Frederick Hosier, 
Solicitor," as his door-plate described him, was at 
home was mifficiently apparent; for from the 
closed folding-doors which shut off the back 
parlour from the front issued a melancholy 
sound, which proceeded, whispered Juniper, from 
the honest lawyer amusing himself by playing on 
a fourpenny tin whistle, which he did execrably, 
bat which Jack assured Dr. Morton that he coold 
do to admiration. 

" Give him this card," said he to the dark : 
" I dare say you know me." 

The attendant satellite to the honest lawyer^ 



) 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 261 

who looked, by the way, very dishonest himself, 
gave a grin as he took it, and said, '^ Yes, sir;" a 
grin which was meant for the eyes of Mr. Juniper 
himself, and was caused by the side-splitting 
remembrance to the clerk of an evening which 
the doctor and a few choice spirits, the friends of 
Mr. Frederick Hosier, had lately spent, at which 
the doctor immortalized himself by playing the 
tambourine with the office-ruler and a tea-tray, 
in accompaniment to Mr. Hosier's fantasia on the 
fourpenny whistle, which was blown by being 
inserted in one nostril. For Mr. Hosier himself 
had attended one or two lectures on anatomy, and 
was a dabbler therein, as he said it might be of 
use to him if he ever became a coroner. And it 
may be as well to remark here, that that unpleas- 
ant occupation of sitting in company with twelve 
fellow-citizens properly empanelled was Mr. 
Hosier's chief ambition. 

The musical lawyer had no sooner read Jack 
Juniper's card than he threw away the tin whistle 
and gave a frantic yell of delight, as he called out 
his name, and, opening the door, embraced him. 



262 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 



"Beg your pardon, Fred," said the doctor, 
" but I have a friend to introduce to you." 

Dr. Morton stood up, looking with a pleased 
face at the two men, who, with the hearts of boys 
inside their stout bodies, greeted each other in 
this exceedingly unbusinesslike way. 

Mr. Frederick Hosier, solicitor, drew himself 
up to his full height, which was not very much at 
its utmost, and said, cordially, and with the manner 
of a gentleman . 

"I beg pardon, sir, I'm sure. I did not ask 
my clerk whether Dr. Juniper had any friend 
with him, and he is such a very old crony that 
we sometimes forget ourselves." 

"We do indeed," said Juniper, laughing 
heartily, in which Hosier joined . " We do 
indeed; and, what is more, I think my friend, 
Dr. Keith Morton, is one who will readily forgive 
us for doing so. Let me introduce you." 

The introduction passed, Jack said that Morton 
was one of the right sort, and that he had a little 
difficulty about which he wished to consult a 
solicitor. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 263 

"Then I'm sorry for him," said the honest 
lawyer, very heartily. "I don't shout it out on 
the top of Tower Hill, but I tell it, Jack, here, 
and I will repeat it to you, as his friend, that 
the very best thing a man can do is to keep out 
of the hands of the lawyers. I have kept out of 
law as much as I could, myself " 

"That you have, Fred," said Juniper, inter- 
rupting him ; " and a great deal too much so, I 
think, for the good of your fellow-men.'* 

"Well, I believe that," said Hosier, plumply. 
"I have prevented many an honest fellow from 
being ruined ; but that does not make one's for- 
tune. And really I am sorry, knowing what 
English law is, and how far equity and law are 
kept asunder, when I hear of any good men 
having aught to do with it." 

" Why, I thought," said the simple Sangrado, 
" that the grand old maxims you have about Law 
and Justice being one were quite true." 

" Law and Justice being one !" said Hosier, with 
an honest scorn on his square brown face : " tell 
that to the marines. Why, a poor man cannot 



264 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

get his rights without ruining himself. No one 
but a rich man should go to law; and he will keep 
out of it, if he be not a fool. If you want to spend 
your money, sir, give a guinea to Juniper as my 
fee. He has my permission to pay it into the 
nearest police-court poor-box, and the presiding 
Beak will see it well bestowed ; and, in return for 
that guinea, I will give you a piece of advice as 
old as the Scriptures, as well known as Temple 
Bar, and yet worth ten guineas, although never 
acted upon." 

" Oh, indeed," said Sangrado, smiling : " I 
suppose it is a caveat against law, and a strong 



one." 



" That's just it," ejaculated Mr. Hosier. 

" Then I cannot take it," answered Sangrado ; 
'* for I really do come for your advice and assist- 
ance; however, I must say, luckily, not for 
myself, if you pity me." 

He gave a great sigh as he said this ; for his 
heart went back to the poor young widow and 
her baby, whom he had left at home under the 
guardian care of Lotty and Mrs. Lapis. 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 265 

Mr. Hosier took the sigh for one of relief, and 
beamed up again. 

" Oh, very good/' he said. '^ I see you are a 
determined man ; so come into the spider's web, 
and I will do my best. Mr. Parkins, tell 
Mrs. Hosier who is here, and tell her to send 
up any quantity of pale ale. Dr. Juniper, pray 
retire from the meshes with which I shall 
surround my client, and make yourself com- 
fortable. Don't tread on Venus, there'' . he 
pointed to a dog . " she went out for unwonted 
exercise, and is tired. Come along, sir." 

He quietly opened^the folding-doors and shut 
Juniper out, although Sangrado protested that he 
had no secret from him, and that he knew all 
about the case; and then, getting behind his 
table, sat down in his chair, and, taking out a 
pen and note-book, prepared to listen. 

Mr. Frederick Hosier, the honest lawyer, was a 
very diflferent person from our friend Naylor, 
and, if he did not look so much like a lawyer, wa^ 
a far abler man. But then it requires an able 
man to be thoroughly honest in life and to make 



266 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

it pay, in spite of the old proverb about honesty- 
being always the best policy ; and, if people would 
only consider it, a career of turning, twisting, and 
chicanery, which always takes what it considers 
immediately best for itself, does not require 
either talent or genius to indulge in. 

As Mr. Hosier had determined to conduct his 
business with perfect peace to his own conscience, 
and as he found that a wearying Chancery suit 
would often render him sleepless and ill for weeks, 
in answering the untruth of his brethren of the 
law, he troubled himself with as little business as 
he could undertake ; but this business he did well. 

When he entered the " spider's web," as he had, 
nicknamed his office, and sat down in his chair, 
he was an altered man. His voice, which at other 
times had in it a jolly tone, enlivened by a fre- 
quently exuberant fun, which would break out in 
boyish remarks and more boyish laughter, assumed 
the severity becoming a solicitor ; and he opened 
his note-book, and entered name, question, and 
date with a precision which would have done 
honour to the driest old stick of a solicitor that 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 267 

had ever conned Noy's '' Maxims *' and laughed 
in his inky sleeve at them. 

As he was of a sanguine temperament, and a 
good, hopeful man himself, he did not make 
much difficulty of the case of Lady Somers, but 
he was careful to inquire as to the person most 
interested in the discomfiture of Emmy and her 
son. 

" Let me see/' said he: "the ^Peerage '? Thank 
you, I can find it. I have not many law books 
here, Dr. Morton : I hate them." 

Having found the book, he looked at it care- 
fully, for his own satisfaction. 

" Oh, I see," he said : *' second son, the Honour- 
able Andrew; and, I find, married, too. His 
children, therefore, as well as himself, will be 
shut out from the title and estates, should this 
claim be made good." 

'^^xactly so," said Dr. Morton ; " that is in 
the nature of the case. I am very sorry for 
Lady Amethyst. She has no children at present, 
but she has not been married very long." 

" Lady Amethyst; yes, I see : a daughter of the 



268 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

Viscount Stormore, a very nice nobleman, tliat is * 
quite a flower in the cap of Britain^s nobility/' said 
Mr. Hosier, as if he were familiar with the Viscount, 

and with the slightest possible inflection of satire. 

« 

" The lady, as the daughter of a Scotch nobleman 
should be, is, no doubt, ambitious, and will be 
bitterly disappointed if you succeed.'' 

" If we succeed !" said Sangrado. "Why, surely, 
Mr. Hosier, while there is law in England you 
cannot doubt our success?" 

"My dear sir, pray let the ^if stand. Have 
you not heard of the glorious uncertainty of the 
law? Were a man to die and leave me ten 
thousand pounds to-morrow, and another maa 
were to say to me . ^without the shadow of a right, 
mind you . ^ Mr. Hosier, that money is mine, and 
I shall contest its possession with you,' 1 would say 
to him, ' Pray, my dear sir, do not trouble your- 
self : I will give you half not to go to lav ; ' and, 
if he consented, I should think I had got oflf very 
easily. Bless your innocence 1 if he still continued 
the fight, he might take all and be welcome. 
Have you not heard of great estates melting to 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 269 

mere pittances, and of certain firms of solicitors 
living entirely upon suits in Chancery, which have 
descended like heirlooms from father to son V^ 

Dr. Morton looked very blank, and confessed, 
with a sigh, that he had heard such tales. 

'' Tales, my good sir !^^ said the solicitor : '^ they 
are not tales; they are truths . facts, absolute facts, 
God bless your innocence I how do you think we 
all live? Not by conveyancing, or by looking 
over leases and drawing up agreements, or by 
making wills. We may, and do certainly depend 
very much upon wills, we lawyers, who are so 
powerful in the country and everywhere else ; but 
it is by drawing them up in so nonsensical a style 
that our fellows make their fortunes in trying to 
understand what we have written, and the legatees 
spend their last farthing in quarrelling for a few 
hundreds left them in such obscure language that 
no two judges can understand it alike : at least, 
they aflfect not to understand it,'' said Mr. Hosier, 
a little more coolly, 

*' But is not some of this obscurity owing to our 
language?" 



270 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

" Bless me, no, sir!" said Hosier. '^ If you have 
studied our great writers, you will find that it is 
the plainest, most direct, and most copious lan- 
guage in the world. There is a word to every 
shade of meaning, and there is not a loophole for 
a lawyer who understands his own tongue to escape. 
But there is the mischief. Few lawyers do under- 
stand English. The utmost they strive at is to 
comprehend law jargon. The Norman tyranny, 
after eight hundred years, still oppresses us.'' 

" However,^' the lawyer continued, after a pause, 
'^ that is neither here nor there. How about the 
marriage certificate? and where was it solemnized?" 
" Alas !" said the doctor ; " this is what I have 
called about. It is lost, irretrievably lost, and we 
only know that it took place in London. As for 
Lady Somers, she seems too ill, too anxious, and 
really too weak to afi'ord us much information. 
It was a hurried marriage. The parties met by 
appointment, and were taken at once to the church. 
I doubt whether, in the fear, hurry, and excitement 
of the scene, the lady knew where the church was ; 
and the carriage in which they drove away was 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 271 

with closed blinds. But, surely, this is an easy 
matter. We have only to get the proximate date, 
and advertise.^' 

" Yes ; so as to give your opponents warning : 
no, that will not do. Very extraordinary, this 
lapse of memory.^' 

"Not so much as you may think, in my 
experience," said Sangrado. 

" Well, well, there are only a certain number of 
churches in London, and a sharp clerk would soon 
find the right one out, if necessary. You do not 
know at present whether the marriage be legal ; 
whether Lord Somers did not really deceive this 
girl as he had deceived his father; whether the 
license were taken out in a feigned name. At 
any rate, her name remains : I have a note of it, 
and we can find out. I happen to know a gen- 
tleman who is Lady Amethyst's solicitor: at least, 
he boasts that he is so. If it be so, then all I can 
say is, that he will fight us with some queer 
weapons, and we shall have an exceedingly tough 
job. And now let me finish my notes, and let us 
join Dr. Juniper." 



272 A SPLENDID PORTTKB. 

The Honest lawyer rapidly entered what he 
wanted to know^ patting down one or two notes 
and here and there asking a question^ and then^ 
throwing the law to the dogs, he opened the 
folding-doors and greeted Jack Janiper witb a 
shout of relief, in which feeling Dr. Keith Morton 
did not by any means share, being still timidly 
fearful as to the result of the inquiry Hosier was 
about to undertake. 



A SPLENDID fortun;?. 273 



CHAPTER XVI. 



A MEETING IN LONDON, 



The honest lawyer, after he had closed his oflSce^ 
which he did by shutting the folding-doors of 
his back parlour, seemed greatly relieved. The 
spider's web, he said, was vacated, and now the 
spider himself would come out and feast on the 
blood of his victims. 

" You will have something to eat, I am sure,'^ 
said he. '^Men with sound consciences can eat 
at any time ; can they not. Dr. Juniper T^ 

" You can ask Morton as well as me. He, also, 
is in our profession. Yes, sir ; he has the happi- 
ness of belonging to a noble order in which a 

VOL. II. T 



274 A. SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

man is called upon every day to use the noblest 
charity '* 

'^If he choose to do so/* interrupted Mr. Hosier, 
cynically. 

" Of course, that is granted ; and to put up 
with a mere pittance for pay. It is true there are 
some weighty prizes in our profession ; but the best 
men do not get them, I think." 

" I do not suppose they do. You want a courtly 
man for a doctor, just as you want not exactly a 
genius, but a gentleman, to be president of the 
Royal Academy,^^ said Hosier. ^' Lord bless us ! I 
can understand all about that. You don't expect the 
right men to be in the right place in this world, 
do you? It's all nonsense . all terrible nonsense ! 
You had better get that idea out of your head at 
once. Why, if every man who did a good thing 
was to be ticketed, and docketed, and packed in 
tissue paper, and rewarded, as they do good little 
boys at school . why, we should be little boys at 
school still; should we not? Now, you and I, 
Doctor, and, I dare say, our good friend here, to 
whom you have introduced me, are determined to 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 275 

make our best in this world. I don't want to be 
made a knight ; do you? I think that the Prime 
Minister is quite right when he advises the 
Queen only to knight and ennoble rich grocers, 
aldermen, successful merchants, tea-dealers, and 
lord mayors. Now and then a doctor is made a 
baronet; and, if any great swell takes to literature, 
and gets a great name by pleasant Review- writing, 
he may be made a lord. But the rank and file 
of the professions have to fall in and do the fight- 
ing and starving, and endure hardness, like good 
soldiers ; and that's what I take to be my duty." 

Jack Juniper was radiant with delight. 

^' Morton," said he . " no, I must call you 
Sangrado. : that will be more familiar ; will it not, 
Hosier ?" 

" To me, certainly. I knew his immortal 
namesake in * Gil Bias,' " said the solicitor. 

''Very good. Well, then, Sangrado, have I 
not introduced you to the eighth wonder of the 
world? Is it not delightful when a solicitor 
talks like this one ?" 

Keith Morton, who was, as we know, innocence 

t2 



276 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

itself^ said that he was happy to hear the character 
given of Mr. Hosier, and very proud to make his 
acquaintance ; but that, for his part, he did hope 
that there were many more honest lawyers in 
the world. 

*^Then,'^ said Hosier, clearing his throat and 
looking very fiercely . " Then, Dr. Morton, let 
me beg you to disabuse yourself at once. Come 
out of that opinion, sir: it is a dangerous one. 
Don't believe in goodness where it cannot well 
exist. Of course, I am an exception : I do not 
say it with any spirit of exaltation ; but I say this 
fairly, that I am an exception ; and, in the eyes 
of my uncle, who is a solicitor, and some of my 
wisest friends, I am a fool. I would rather make a 
pound by literature than twenty by law. Our 
laws are made purposely obscure. They are 
framed by those who do not know their efifect, 
and cut and hacked so in their passage through 
both Houses, that a new Act of Parliament 
often permits the wrong it was intended to 
remedy. Then, they are so vast that no one 
man can master them; and there is no one to 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 277 

codify ot arrange them. What is all men's 
interest is no man's business. Can you imagine 
anything more insane than paying for law, not 
by the job, but by the folio, so that incom* 
prehensible verbosity is called in to confuse, 
irritate, and to rob? No, doctor; lawyers are 
like the sepia, or cuttle-fish : try to catch them, 
and they eject a cloud of inky words, and so 
confuse and darken the sense that the brightest 
understanding in the world cannot pierce their 
meaning." 

The warmth of feeling in this gentleman against 
his own class was curious, and delighted Jack 
Juniper amazingly. Indeed, that worthy had 
whispered to his friend from the country, that if 
he could succeed in drawing out Hosier against 
the law, he would. 

" It is a pity,'' said Juniper, caressing Venus, a 
black Newfoundland dog of much beauty, who was 
a constant companion to Hosier . "It is a pity 
that, feeling the necessity of a reform so much, 
you do not try to remedy it.'* 

Then it was that Fred. Hosier burst out into a 



278 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

discordant laugh^ which quite startled Doctor 
Sangrado. 

'^ By jingo. Juniper/' said he, '' you know I am 
a little mad upon some points/' 

'^ There are very few of us/' said Jack, '' but 
who are so. I hold that the generous man who 
thinks deeply must be now and then a little cranky 
. ^just a little, you know. There is a great deal 
of occult madness about . a great deal." 

" Well," continued his friend, " mad as I may 
be, I am not prepared to run a muck against those 
gigantic windmills, Chancery and Common Law. 
They would smash and pound to atoms half a 
thousand such Quixotes. No; I justify myself to 
myself by keeping poor, and advising every man 
to have as little to do with law as he can. I 
would advise, as a Christian man . and I am a 
Christian, although I do not go to church so often 

m 

as I might do . every mother, as she values her 
son's welfare, not to bring him up to the law. In 
short, I do all a man can do singly against this 
giant ; but I cannot be expected to go in single- 
handed against it, or I should be mad." 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 279 

Mr. Hosier meant what he said^ and looked as 
if he meant it. 

'^ Come, come/' he continued, good-humouredly ; 
^^life is too short for such long 'jaws.* Let us 
think what we shall do, lads. Will you dine with 
me at live ? Hot mutton, potatoes nicely boiled, 
Dublin stout, and a glass of port. No kickshaws 
for me or from me.'' 

The two doctors said they desired nothing better; 
and that being agreed upon, the three gentlemen 
separated, Sangrado feeling as much at home with 
the honest lawyer after speaking with him for a 
few brief moments as he would with most men 
after an acquaintance of several years. 

'' That is a curious friend of yours/' said he to 
Jack Juniper, as they left the street : '^ he is even 
more eccentric than yourself." 

'^ He may be," said Juniper : " he is a rare 
bird, as honest as the day, and as full of talent and 
kindheartedness," 

" Is he clever in his profession ?" 

" Immensely so," said Jack, who always praised 
his friends, and in this instance with truth and 



280 A SPLENDID FORTUNE, ^ 

reason . "Immensely so. He very seldom un- 
dertakes a cause without gaining it^ and perhaps 
more especially for this reason; namely^ that he 
never undertakes one in which he does not believe 
he has justice on his side/' 

"Very good/' said Sangrado; "then he is the 
very man for me/^ and the doctor's thoughts wan- 
dered to his little woodland house upon the hill 
at Bilscombe, where lay the poor helpless widow 
and her orphan child. Surely there is justice," 
said the doctor to himself . " Surely there is justice 
on our side. Surely, too, I feel very certain, our 
cause will be opposed. I dread Lady Amethyst 
and her party ; and if we have the slightest flaw 
in our documents, they will take advantage of it. 
Perhaps they are quite right. We must not blame 
them too much because they are against us. Poor 
Emmy ! her fate is a sad one that it should be so.**^ 

"Now, what are you musing about?" said 
Juniper. " I have got to call in this street, and I 
want to show you a piece of mechanism. Wo-ho ! 
driver." 

The cabman pulled up at a shop, of which there 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 281 

are always to be found one or two in the neigh- 
bourhood of hospitals, devoted to the sale of 
surgical instruments, the very sight of which is 
enough to make the heart of the stoutest patient 
quail within him. Here are knives, saws, scissors 
. everything calculated to rip, tear, cut, or pinch 
the quivering flesh. The collection of wrenchers 
and pincers for tooth-drawing alone is curious; and 
the high state of polish and finish in which those 
instruments, made to alleviate rather than to cause 
pain, are kept often attracts wandering boys to those 
mysterious windows . for boys are naturally fond 
of cutlery . where they gaze and gaze, and relate 
bloodthirsty stories to each other with a wild, and 
to them not unnatural delight. 

"Mr. Faber/' said Jack Juniper, who had a 
word of praise for everybody, and, curiously enough, 
never one word of blame for anybody . "Mr. Faber 
is one of the most intelligent men I ever knew. 
You have only to hit out an idea, and he will carry 
it out. His splints are wonderful. He has in- 
vented a machine which very nearly supersedes the 
human vertebrae " 



282 A SIXSND FOKirXE. 

'^yaw, don't, JadL," said Morton ; ''don't let 
nt bear any more. Of ooone lie is a good feDow, 
or Jim, would not know bim, and a derer cme, I 
daresay; but lie ean't pot a hac^-bone into a man^ 
anybow. Tbat is one <rf'tbe finest oi tbe Maker's 

and '' 



" Bless you, I was only ^[leaking of a steel cradle 
wbicb sapports the sboulders and depends upon 
the hips. Bat you should see my 1^ : now, do 
come and see it." 

Morton could not resist this appeal, and followed 
his friend. If Mr. Faber were only half as clever 
as he was meek, mild, and obliging, he must have 
been a very clever man indeed. He bowed down 
to the doctors, and stood rubbing his bands in a 
most slavelike and Eastern fashion; a fashion 
which^ in his youth, he had caught from a cele- 
brated West-end surgeon, who owed his immense 
success to the fact that he could more readily put 
on the manners of a flunkey than any other medical 
man in England. In the days of George IV. this 

brought him into repute; and, as he very frequently 

. 

employed Mr. Faber, then quite a boy, the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 283 

mechanician had almost imperceptibly caught his 
fine style. 

" Now, Mr. Faber/' said Jack, " let me intro- 
duce to you a friend of mine . a gentleman from 
the country, Mr. Faber; in the profession, too. 
The news of your skill has reached him even in 
the depth of his native wilds ^^ . Jack, in an aside, 
whispered to Morton, ''because Fve just told 
him ^^ . " and he wishes to see some of your pretty 
things.'^ 

"I am sure,^^ said Faber, in a tone of the 
utmost humiliation . " I am sure anything that I 
can do in my humble way to please either of you 
two gentlemen I will, sir. Dr. Juniper is so good 
that '' 

"He always speaks well of everybody," said 
Keith, interrupting the speaker; for his deferential 
tone was somewhat painful to him. " He tells me 
that you are an admirable mechanician; and that I 
can readily believe. However, I do not want any- 
thing for any of my patients just now : when I do 
you may '^ 

" Oh, Fm sure, sir," said Faber, with a little 



.^ 



5?4 A ^TLiajLi 2»Tar: 



ai:!-!^ , "^ iSii .!:£: sail I lo 



kszLta ^^ftX2ftr!K £sc zac:! ^3 w^sh to be ram 
of 'n Vr '^ sscafskSf 3Ls5e to sZicrare it." 

"TTeil, ywi trasit see =t \ez, Sansndo," 
Jia^ : « if i. a* «« ««>&Hbl duns going. 
I aabd F23>er kzw been Ivrin^ our heads tcgedier, 
vA we hare a fjiseai of spring and joiiits about 
the thing that vill torpaas erery leg erer made in 
tibe W4>rld« Faber vill make his fortime with it/' 

^ If you were to do his advertiaiig,*' said Krith, 
frith a laugh : ^ at any rate;, I donH mind looking 
at It/' 

'* Is it done^ Faber ?'* said Juniper. '' By jingo, 
it seems as if I were speaking of a leg of mutton !'' 

'' Well, my young person is just putting its 
black silk stocking and pump on. It's a very neat 
thing, sir . a very neat thing. It ought to do 
Dr. Juniper infinite credit for his suggestions. 
Ah, here it is." 

The leg was brought in very carefully by one of 
the workwomen^ and a very good leg it was. It 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 285 

had the benefit, as Mr. Faber explained, of feeling 
like flesh and bone; and it could be pinched by the 
curious . of which, of course, Sangrado was one 
.".without the wearer feeling it, it is needless to 
say, but also without the too curious person being 
deceived. 

"The fact is,^^ said Juniper, putting the leg on 
the counter and lecturing about it, *^ I and Faber 
here have found out the grand secret. We follow 
Nature as our only guide. We cannot put flesh 
and bone in this stocking; but we have done what 
we could, and have put iron joints at the ankle. 
We have imitated the foot : we have an os calcis 
and a curious spongy ligature which somewhat 
resembles the flexor poUicis; so that my friend will 
be able to point his great toe. Then we have not 
quite the metatarsal bones, but nearly so ; and the 
foot can bend : look here V' and the doctor, full of 
delight, moved the limb as if it were walking up 
and down the counter. 

The piece of mechanism was, indeed, clevejrly 
made, and Juniper's praises of Mr. Faber were 
well deserved. Jack became so ardent in its 



286 A SPLEXDID FOKlLMi. 

admiration, that he proposed at once trying it 
on his patient, or otherwise wanted a one-l^ged 
man to trr it on« 

''We shall have time before dinner, and can 
get back to Tybumia again," said Juniper: 
*' come along. Doctor." 

So, after the leg had been carefully packed by 
Mr. Faber, who parted with it as a father would 
from a very fine boy, of whom he had great ideas 
and large hopes, the two friends took it in the cab 
and drove oflF with it to our friend Pegwell at the 
Brill. 

The truth is, that everything had been prosper- 
ing with that eccentric individual. One of the 
numerous branches of the family, one of the 
Crosbies of Yorkshire, who had in his youth been 
wise enough to enter trade, had lately died, and 
had left his ample fortune to the head of the 
house ; so that Pegwell was now rich enough to 
come out of his hole-and-corner retreat; only he 
contemplated still adding guinea to guinea for the 
sake of the gentle boy. But, although almost 
penurious, and living in his humble, but com- 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 287 

fortable and pretty house in Somers Town, our 
old friend had determined to treat himself to a 
new leg, and, having taken a fancy to Dr. Juniper, 
had given him the commission. 

How this commission was executed one need not 
say. The only person who took any umbrage at 
the new leg was Mr. Trim, the dog, who, having 
walked round and round it, hardly forbore giving 
it a very serious bite, probably with a view of 
ascertaining whether the elastic substance of 
which it was formed, so praised by Dr. Juniper 
and Mr. Faber, was, in reality, flesh and blood, 
or not ; for the shape was really so excellent, and 
the lightness and strength, as the wearer declared 
with vehemence, so remarkable, that we may for- 
give a dog even so sagacious as Trim having his 
canine doubts about it, and expressing them with 
a low and continuous growl. 

^^ I hope your dog, sir," said Keith Morton to 
Juniper's patient . " I hope your dog, sir, has not 
taken any dislike to me. I am proud to say that 
I am, in a general way, a friend and a favourite 
of dogs. I should be especially with this one, for 



288 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

I had an old favourite for many years just like 
him. Poor old Boxer ! he grew into the vale of 
years, lost his teeth, his health, and his good 
looks, and became, poor old fellow, a nuisance to 
himself and to everybody." 

"And what was his end, sir?" said Pegwell, 
smoothing down the black silk stocking of his 
new leg, and expressing his admiration of that 
felicitous limb to Dr. Jack Juniper in dumb show. 

'' Well, I was obliged, at last, to give the poor 
fellow a few drops of prussic acid on a lump of 
sugar. It was the most merciful way, sir." 

"Well, you need not provide for my dog in 
that way, sir, said the baronet : he shall die of old 
age, and be buried at my place in the country, sir ; 
Crosbie Place, sir; a very fine old place, every- 
body tells me. I mean to invite you down. 
Doctor, some of these days, when I get it to-rights 
again. You see Trim has got used to it . the leg, 
I mean . and is quiet now." 

The tone of the old man's voice recalled some 
recollections to Doctor Sangrado, but what they 
were he could not well make out. He was mys- 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 289 

tified at the old gentleman's confident bearing, 
his talk about his seat in the countrj, and his 
face^ which Doctor Sangrado was certain that he 
remembered. But it was in a very different 
scene ; and Keith Morton, though he once called 
up the great night of the Warlock at Bilscombe 
Regis, failed to connect the face of Pegwell Bay 
as there seen with that of the mannerly, well- 
dressed old gentleman who was trjing on the 
^^ newly invented succedaneum for the human 
leg and foot" which had just been so success- 
fully turned ouli by Mr. Faber. Moreover, Dr. 
Morton had in Bilscombe but hastily noticed Mr. 
Pegwell Bay; and indeed the old baronet looked 
very different from the Bohemian attendant on 
the travelling conjurer. 

" I am certain," he said to himself, '^ that I 
have seen that old gentleman before, but where I 
don't know, nor can I recall his name." 

On the other hand, our eccentric baronet, who 
had no spark of pride about him, and, as we have 
seen, was, in the midst of his misfortunes^ not 
ashamed to turn his hand to anything, recollected 

VOL. II. u 



290 A SPLENDID FORTUNE, 

the doctor's face very well, and also the place 
where he met him. But, perhaps unfortunately for 
the heroine of this story, he was, on this occasion, 
and for sundry good reasons of his own, very 
unwilling to refer to the scene where he last 
met him ; so, having paid Dr. Juniper for the 
" newly invented succedaneum," and having 
warmly thanked him into the bargain, repeating 
his invitation, but without fixing any date for his 
visit, the old gentleman bowed his visitors out, 
and bade them good-morning. 

*^Now, Morton, come along," said Juniper: 
" we shall have just time to drive round home 
and wash our hands, and then we will dine with 
our honest lawyer.^' 

The cab was waiting at the door, and Trim, 
who, at the garden gate, had quietly super- 
intended the departure of the two doctors, strolled 
in an unconcerned way to his master's door-step, 
and let off one or two short barks, expressive, 
probably, of his delight at having got rid of his 
visitors. 

"That's a curious old fellow," said Keith 



A SPLEiraiD FORTUNE, 291 

Morton to his friend, raising his voice above the 
unpleasant rattle of the cab windows. I am sure 
I have seen him somewhere." 

" Well, perhaps you have, or perhaps you have 
not : there are so many faces alike in London, 
and we see so many people in our profession, 
that you may be mistaken. He is a queer old 
fellow. He strolled into my place, some months 
ago, and asked me to attend to his son, who was 
ill of some childish ailment. I think he is rich, 
although why he buries himself in that queer 
little house and obscure neighbourhood I cannot 
imagine. Quite an eccentric old gentleman, I 
can assure you.'' 

"Rich!" said Sangrado; "then it can hardly 
be the same ; and yet I could have sworn that I 
saw him in company with a travelling conjurer 
down at Bilscombe Regis/' 

The only answer which Dr. Juniper vouchsafed 
to this wild assertion was a loud laugh. 



u2 




292 A SPLEKDID FORTUNE. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



TACTICS. 



''The partisans of a more liberal philosophy, who 
could not suppress the consciousness of humane 
and benevolent dispositions in themselves or the 
proofs of them in others, but yet knew not how 
to reconcile these feelings with the supposed self- 
ishness of human nature, have endeavoured to 
account for the different impulses of generous 
affection, from habit, or the constant connection of 
the pains and pleasures of others and our own, by 
which means we come at last to confound our own 
interests with theirs, and to feel the same anxiety 

« 

for their welfare, without any view to our own 
advantage/' 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 293 

Those readers who are students of human nature 
may read over again that somewhat long-winded 
sentence from William Hazlitt^s "Argument in 
Defence of the Natural Disinterestedness of the 
Human Mind/' and reconcile, if they can, the exist- 
ence of that disinterestedness with the known fact 
that a great many persons really do seem to employ 
themselves chiefly in hurting and annoying others, 
without any, or with very little apparent cause. 

If, however, some readers believe in the natural 
disinterestedness, many others believe that human 
action, about which Hazlitt has undoubtedly talked 
with much less than his usual grasp or clearness, 
arises from many motives, some of which are based 
upon the principle of self-interest. 

Miss Nightley had been soured in the course 
of her life ; and she was, moreover, of a disposition 
naturally envious; a kind of mind very frequently 
found in the subordinates of great families, and in 
servants who have the hard task allotted to them, 
in this life, of looking on while others enjoy, or 
apparently enjoy, all the good things. Hence 
Lady Amethyst's henchwoman was "free to 



294 A SPLENDID I-ORTtTNE. 

confess/' in her cynical moods^that^ if she had been 
consulted in the disposition of certain honours and 
rewards^ she would have acted very differently to 
the great Ruler. She saw no reason . even on the 
grand system of compensation . why coronets 
should almost universally fall on heads unfitted to 
wear them^ nor why the mouths which are popu- 
larly supposed to be bom with silver spoons in 
them should be only fitted for wooden ladles. 

This kind of railing against Providence^ which 
some people have thought to be very witty, and 
by which a man or woman will often raise a more 
applausive laugh than by anything much more 
profound and a little more good-natured, was a 
favourite exercise with Miss Nightley ; and it so 
happens that the mind will fashion itself to the 
words which the mouth utters; or, if we take the 
matter the other way, " out of the fulness of the 
heart the mouth speaketh/' 

Miss Nightley, in attaching herself to Lady 
Amethyst, undoubtedly found something congenial 
in that lady, who, as we have seen, was something 
of a woman of business, but had neither brain nor 



A splendU) fortune. 295 

courage enough to stand against the superior 
cleverness of her companion. So, as the lady 
managed her husband, the companion managed 
the lady, and, even in her.meanest moods, found her 
more liberal of her money and kinder towards 
herself than any one else did. 

When the doctor, after very foolishly breaking the 
ice without being provided with any such apparatus 
for saving and extricating those who should tumble 
in as the Royal Society furnishes, left the little 
party in the Falladian parlour, Miss Nightley sat 
herself down and gazed at a bust of Claudius 
Caesar over the door, with a feeling of triumph 
about her heart which was very delightful. Here 
was her friend and patroness let down very con- 
siderably. '^ Of course," si e said to herself, " this 
doctor may be the dupe of some designing woman . 
some men are such fools . but, on the whole, I am 
inclined to think it true ; and, if so. Amethyst, my 
darling, farewell, a long farewell, to the favourite 
scheme of your lifetime. A countesses coronet 
shall never grace your back hair at a coronation^ 
my dear.'* 



M 



296 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

You see Miss Nightley was not one of those 
whose benevolence is directed by an involved and 
curious combination towards the good of others. 
The evil which others endured pleased her: she 
was like the philosophic seaman in Lucretius^ who 
was delighted in sitting on a promontory after 
escaping from a shipwreck and seeing his mess- 
mates go down. 

Lady Amethyst was the first to break the silence, 
which was becoming painful to her, 

" What do you say," she said, softly laying her 
gentle hand on the old lord^s arm, as he sat still, 
looking on his son^s picture . " What do you say, 
my lord, to this sudden revelation, this strange 
story ? " 

The old nobleman looked coldly round. He 
never liked Lady Amethyst, and since his son's 
death he had liked her even less, and, by a 
haughty toss of his head towards the companion, 
plainly hinted that it would be better if she with* 
drew. That lady was one to whom a nod is as 
good as a wink; and, rising very gracefully, so as 
to put the exclusion, as it were, in the light of a 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 297 

voluntary act on her part, she said, '* I think, my 
lady, I have something to do for you up-stairs : if 
you will allow me, I can withdraw/^ 
. *^ Ay ; she can turn and turn/^ thought the old 
Earl, to himself; then he said, aloud, " That woman 
is a discreet and valuable companion. Amethyst ; 
she is well broken to harness ; but it is just as well 
that she should know as little of our family affairs 
as possible." 

" I am sorry she stayed when Dr. Morton was 
here," she said, apologetically. *^ I really was so 
surprised that I quite overlooked her presence, or 
I would have told her to withdraw." Thus much 
Lady Amethyst ; and part of thus much was untrue. 

" Oh, that don't matter," said Lord Bradstock, 
haughtily. " She may as well know what will be 
all over the town and in part of the newspapers 
soon. It will make a paragraph in ' Fashionable 
Litelligence/ It is the price we pay for pride and 
place . ^that eternal, silly gossip about us." 

" It is, indeed, my lord," said the lady, who, 
however, did not agree with him, she having in- 
herited a great deal of the spirit of her father, 



298 A SPLENDID FORTUNE* 

Lord Stormore^ who^ as we have seen^ liked to be 
talked about . "it is, indeed. But surely Dr. 
Morton will not be so indiscreet '' 

" I don't know, Amethyst,'^ said the Earl, cynic- 
ally. " Morton is an honest man . I have found 
him so, and my son who is dead found him so. 
and you know that honest men are generally in- 
discreet : at any rate, the world calls them so, 
truly or not.'* 

Amethyst did not like the answer, but yet she 
saw in it something which she might turn to her 
own advantage. 

"If you think Dr. Morton so indiscreet, my 
lord, don't you think that he may have been mis- 
led in the report he brought us? I confess that 
what httle I have seen of him impressed me with 
the idea that he is singularly hasty in forming 
conclusions.^' 

Earl Bradstock gave a curiously sharp look at 
his interlocutrix, and read her with the practised 
eye of a man of the world. " Ha, ha !" said he 
to himself; "her idea of the matter is not mine* 
This little babe, ever so young though it be, will 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 299 

unseat Andrew and my lady, will lie ?'^ Then he 
gave a sigh and leaned back in his chair. For him- 
self, he wished most heartily that the whole story 
were true. Next to having his dear son alive, the 
fact that a son of his shoold be living, for him to 
dandle and to nurse, seemed the most charming 
thing in the world. But, although he felt this, he 
determined not to let his wishes be seen, nor, 
indeed, to allow them to have any external effect 
on his action; for he was a just man in his deal- 
ings, and not to be put aside even by his own 
interest or wishes. 

*^ Dr. Morton, Lady Amethyst,'' said her father- 
in-law, slowly, ^^ is a man who would be hasty in 
forming conclusions, and in many things, no 
doubt, would be led by his heart rather than his 
bead. But then he is a man of clear judgment, 
and an able man not very likely to be deceived. 
We may depend upon this, that he believes the 
story he has brought to us, and that it has a sub- 
stratum, at least, of probability in it. Whether the 
fact of the marriage be true, I do not know : that, 
of course, remains to be proved.'^ 



300 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

Poor Lady Amethyst's heart sunk at this ; and 
Miss Nightley, who was listening outside, shook 
her head meaningly, and hastened up-stairs. 
'^ The old man wishes it were true ; a haughty old 
fool ! and I believe it true. I wish it naay not be 
so, that I do.'' 

Amethyst, when she came away from the Pal- 
ladian parlour in which the old Earl still sat, but 
spoke little after his oracular sentence, ran up- 
stairs to her friend and counsellor, and unburdened 
her heavy heart ; but Miss Nightley held her peace, 
except in administering the discomforting assurance 
that the old lord, it was evident, was not un^ 
willing that the story should be true. She held 
back that which would have been sweet to the wife 
of Andrew Bradstock ; namely, that she well knew 
that, however much his lordship might wish that 
the matter were true, he would let justice be done; 
for, as the motto of the Crosbie Vivyau Hopes, 
engraven upon their spoons and their hearts, in- 
dicated a belief that all the world might go to 
rack and ruin^ but that yet their hope would 
shine over all, sq that of Lord Bradstock, the 



A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 801 

bead of the family^ was that heaven itself might 
fall . their heaven^ that is . but justice should be 
done. 

"And now, my lady/* said the ex-governess, 
leaning against the comer of the mantelshelf 
in an easy way, "I should look out for 
myself/^ 

"Look out for myself!" thought the puzzled 
woman of business . "Look out for myself! Have 
I not been looking out for myself ever since I took 
the management of my father^s house ? and a pretty 
pickle I've brought myself to here, as I often tell 
Andrew/' 

Pretty as the pickle was, it was infinitely pre- 
ferable to the cold Scotch home, or to those 
dreadfully mean Italian and German dwellings in 
which one sat down to a Barmecide feast of pride 
and state, and always got up hungry and dissatis- 
fied as a matter of course. Amethyst felt this, and 
so did her friend ; but the lady felt also that it 
was very unpleasant to have her hopes dashed aside 
so unceremoniously as they had been. 

"If I were you," said the henchwoman, "I 



302 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

would go up to your confidential lawyer, Mr. 
Naylor, and see how matters stand. Where did 
Lord Somers live?'* 

*' About six miles from here/' said Lady 
Amethyst. ''Why do you want to know?**' 

*' In what direction ?'' said the other, shortly. 

*' Towards London^ on the Oxford road.'' 

*' Then that is not far from Father Pen Gargle's 
retreat. I dare say he confesses half the people 

9 

about there. Country bodies are just as fond of a 
novelty as town people, and I hear they have taken 
to him immensely. He is a mild sort of a genius^ 
but I dare say he knows a thing or two. Had you 
not better take a drive out to his retreat . what 
do they call it? . the 'Piscatory;' a good name for 
his crew : ' Be ye fishers of men.' Well, he won't 
catch me, that's all I can say." 

" Oh, Ellen !" said the lady, calling her by her 
Christian name, a great condescension on her 
part ; " how you do talk 1 Why, when you were 
with the father you said very difierently. He is 
a perfect geutleman, and, I think, as nearly a saint 
as a man can well be." 




A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 303 

" Well, he is a gentleman/' said Miss Nightley, 
with a smile . even her bitter tongue could say 
nothing against the gentle father . "and I am 
fond of drawing him out. But now what do you 
say to my plan ?" 

^' It is a very good one, and ought to be acted 
upon/' returned the lady; " but I've two objections 
to it : in the first place, I cannot go, or rather I 
would stay here in preference with my lord; and, 
in the second. Father Gargle may confess some of 
the people about there, but he is as secret as the 
grave. The confessional is never violated." 

" Pish ! " said Miss Nightley, with great con- 
tempt : '^ we Protestants know better than that." 
The fact is the lady was one of those Protestants 
who protest against any good or any honesty exist- 
ing in any religious orders, and who consequently 
believe all the scandalous stories told against each 
and all. " Pish ! " she repeated : " an hour's con- 
versation would bring a great deal out of the holy 
man, I am thinking." 

"Well, Ellen, will you try, if I furnish you 
with the means ? Take one of the park phaetons. 



304 A SPLENDID FORTUNE. 

and take a drive out there^ and try what you 
can find out. If any one can serve me/ you 
can.'^ 

" Oh you flattering dear, you V said Ellen, in 
imitation of a school-girl. ^' Well, FU try. At 
any rate, I can inquire about there, and find out 
something.*' 

So away went the spy against the fortunes of 
Emmy and her baby ; but, in spite of an interview 
with Father Gargle and many other persons, 
after being about four hours absent, she returned 
with nearlv as little information as she went. 



END OF VOL. II. 
